AN ACCOUNT OF THE English Dramatick POETS.

OR, Some OBSERVATIONS And REMARKS

On the Lives and Writings, of all those that have Published either Comedies,
Tragedies, Tragi-Comedies, Pastorals, Masks, Interludes, Farces, or Opera's
in the ENGLISH TONGUE.

By GERARD LANGBAINE.

OXFORD, Printed by L. L. for GEORGE WEST, and HENRY CLEMENTS.

An. Dom. 1691.

To The RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES, EARL of ABINGTON, Baron NORREYS, of RICOTT:
Their MAJESTY'S Ld Lieutenant of OXFORDSHIRE.
MY LORD,
I Should not have presumed to have prefixed so Great a Name to so mean a Work,
had I not been sufficiently assured that Candor and Goodness, are not the
least of those Excellent Qualities, which have acquired You the Love and Esteem
of all that have the Honor to know You. It Is this Consideration, joined with
the Experience of Your Lordship's former Favors, which raised me to the
Confidence of expressing my Obligations to Your Honor, by dedicating not so
much the following Sheets, as My Self, the Compiler of them, to Your Lordship's
Service. But I am afraid both the Piece and its Author, are so inconsiderable
in themselves, and so unworthy of Your Lordship's Eye and Regard; that my
Offering will seem to most Men, to have more of Presumption than Gratitude in
it. And truly, MY LORD, I am so sensible of the Objection, That though I would
willingly shroud my self under Your Lordship's Patronage, yet I dare not in the
least implore it for the Essay itself; which has so many faults, that some may
be apt to censure the whole Undertaking as an unpardonable One: and I am
unwilling that Your Lordship's Name shoud be used, in the defense of a Trifle,
which it might have been perhaps more for the Author's Credit to have concealed
than published.

And now having said thus much in Excuse of my self, I must confess I was never
under a greater Temptation, to say something, according to the Modern Custom
of Dedications, in Praise of Your LP; but that I fear I should need another
kind of Apology, should I attempt to give a Character of Your Personal Worth
and Excellency; or enlarge upon those Eminent Services, with which You have
obliged both Your Prince and Country, in the most hazardous Trials of Your
Loyalty and Affection to each, when either the rights of the Crown, or the
Liberties of the People called for your Assistance: Your Lordship being still
one of the First, that was content to have these Your Obligations cancelled and
forgotten; and who never suffered either the Caresses of the Court, or the
Applause of the Populace, to tempt You from Your Duty, or Your Post: But having
adorned the Great Office You undertook, and nobly defended the Religion You
professed, (by steering betwixt the hot blasts of Zeal, and the colder calms of
Indifferency) You generously declined to make Your Services appear mercenary,
or by raising Your Self to a higher Station, give the World occasion to suspect
that You courted Virtue and Religion for any other than their own Rewards:
Which that Your Lordship may happily enjoy is the Constant and Affectionate
Wish of

YOUR LORDSHIP'S Most Obliged, Faithful and Humble Servant, GERARD LANGBAINE.

The PREFACE.
MY former Catalogue of Plays, in spite of the Malice and poor Designs of some
of the Poets and their Agents, to destroy its Reputation, (by printing a
Spurious Title Page, and an uncorrected Preface) has notwithstanding found so
kind a Reception from the Generality of Unbiased Judges; that I thought my
self obliged by Gratitude, as well as Promise, to revise it: though it were only
to purge it of those Errata's contracted in the former Edition. I am so far
from relenting what I have enterpris'd, (as some have been pleased to report)
that I am only sorry that my Power is not equal to the Zeal I have for the
Memory of those Illustrious Authors, the Classicks, as well as those later
Writers of our own Nation, Mr Shakespeare, Fletcher, Johnson, Cowley, etc. that
I might be capable of doing them better Service, in vindicating Their Fame, and
in exposing our Modern Plagiaries, by detecting Part of their Thefts. I say
Part, because I cannot be supposed to have traced them in All: And having no
Partners in my Discovery, it cannot be expected but that many things will
escape my Observation. However, this may serve for a Hint to others; who being
better versed in Books, may build upon the Foundation which is here laid. And
who ever peruses the following Sheets, will find the Observation of Paulus
Jovius, to be very applicable to most of the Poets of this Age; Castrant alios,
ut Libros suos per se graciles, alieno adipe suffarciant.

But how just soever my Design may seem to unprejudiced Readers, I must expect
to be loudly exclaimed against, is not openly assaulted by those Poets, who may
think themselves injured in their Reputation by the following Remarks: But I am
already prepared for the worst; having learnt from the Author of Absalom and
Achitophel In the Epistle.
, That how honest soever the Design be, he who draws his Pen for One Party,
must expect to make Enemies of the Other; and every Man is a Knave or an Ass to
the contrary side. I shall therefore leave the Poets to their own Management,
whilst I address my self to my disengaged Reader; whom I hope to find
Favorable, to One who aims only at his Diversion; and intends never to trouble
the World again on this Subject.

I have endeavored to make this Piece as useful as the Subject would bear, or
my Abilities reach; and I am almost confident, that they who were satisfied
with my former Catalogue, will be much more favorable to This Account of the
Dramatick Poets: since they will find This so different from That, both in Form
and Matter, that it may justly be styled A New Book.

In the First place then I have given a succinct Account of the Time in which
most of the Ancient Poets lived; the place of their Nativity, Quality, Death,
Writings, etc. in a larger manner than either Mr. Philips or Mr. Winstanley;
and have collected all the material Passages of their Lives, which I found
scattered in Doctor Fuller, Lloydd, a Wood, etc. into One Volume, for the
greater Ease of the Reader, and Advantage to the Work. I have not indeed always
cited my Authorities, to avoid loading the Page; though I here once for all make
my public Acknowledgment to the Forementioned, as well as other worthy
Writers, to whom I have been obliged in the compiling this Treatise. Neither
have I omitted to apply my self to several Persons now living for Information,
some of which promised me great matters; which occasioned my deferring the
Publication for some time: but I found that the Memoires I expected from
London, were like to arrive with Cardinal Perron's Manuscripts from Rome, which
he was to make use of in his Vindication of Henry le Grand: and that should I
have stayed for the completion of these Promises, the Louvre would have sooner
been finished than my Book.

Secondly, I have in this Edition, given the Reader a large Account of the
Title Page of each Play which I have seen, as the Double Titles; the Place
where acted, the Date when printed, and the Person to whom Dedicated; with
other Observations, which might obiter occur or relate more immediately to each
Play.

Thirdly, As to those Plays founded on History, instead of One or Two, (as
formerly) I have cited most of the Historians that have treated on that
Subject, that the Reader might compare the Play, with the Original Story. I
have not mentioned so many Authors, out of hopes of being counted Industrious,
or to beget an Opinion in the World of my Reading: Though as an Ingenious Author
observes Fuller's Chr. Hist. p. 43.
, This Humor possesses many Men, that brag of many Books Coming under their
Discovery: as if not only with the Mice they had crept through the Crannies of
all Libraries; but also with the Mothes, had got betwixt the Leaves of all
Treatises therein. I am so far from affecting Title-Learning, in which every
Bookseller would perhaps excel me, that I am willing to acknowledge to the
Reader, that I am owing to the Compendious Collections of Historians and
Chronologers, for their Directions, to find any Story or Action in the Original
Author; and therefore shall account it no lessening to my Reputation to be
traced in Calvisius, Spondanus, Lloyd, Moreri, and the like.

Fourthly, As to the Drammas, which are founded on Romances or Foreign Plays,
I have much enlarged my Remarks; having employed a great part (if not too much)
of my Time in reading Plays and Novels, in several Languages; by which means I
have discovered many more Thefts than those in the former Catalogue; and have
(for the Readers Ease, as well as my own Vindication) cited the particulars of
each Plagiary, to obviate an Objection of a certain Poet, who professes he has
not stolen half of what I then accused him of.

What Reception this Piece may find in the World, I am not very sollicitous,
nor greatly concerned: since (as the Judicious Sr. Robert Howard has observed
Pref. to 4 Plays Fol.
) Things of this Nature, though never so Excellent, or never to Mean, have
seldom proved the Foundation of Men's New-built Fortunes, or the Ruin of
their Old. I am so far from valuing my self upon this Performance, that if
there be any thing in it worth Commendation, the Poets are at liberty to father
it upon whom they please, or claim it as their own, without my taking any
offense at it: And if I can but be so happy as to obtain a Pardon from the more
solid part of Mankind, for having misspent my Time in these Lighter Studies, I
promise for the future, to employ my self on Subjects of more Weight and
Importance.

GER. LANGBAINE.
The AUTHORS Names.
A.
WIlliam Alexander E. of Sterline. 1 Robert Armin. 6
B.
Abraham Baily. 6 John Banckroft. 6 John Banks. 7 Barnaby Barnes. 9 Robert
Baron. 10 Lodowick Barrey. 14 Francis Beaumont. 14 Capt. Will. Bedloe. 15 Mrs.
Astraea Behn. 17 Dabridgec. Belchier. 24 Richard Bernard. 24 R. Boil E.
Orrery. 27 Mrs. Fran. Boothby. 26 Samuel Brandon. 30 Anthony Brewer. 30
Alexander Brom. 31 Richard Brom. 33 Fulk Lord Brook. 38 Henry Burkhead. 41
Henry Burnel. 42
C.
Lady Eliz. Carew. 43 Thomas Carew. 43 Lodowick Carlell. 45 James Carlisle 49
Richard Carpenter. 50 Will. Carthwright. 51 Rob. Chamberlain. 56 Will.
Chamberlain. 56 George Chapman. 57 Sir Aston Cockain. 67 Edward Cook. 71 John
Cook. 72 John Corey. 73 Charles Cotton. 74 Abraham Cowley. 77 Robert Cox. 89
John Crown. 90
D.
John Dancer. 97 Samuel Daniel. 100 Dr. Chapter Davenant 116 Sr. Will. Davenant.
106 Robert Davenport. 116 Robert Dabourn 117 John Day. 118 Thomas Decker. 121
Sr. John Denham. 125 John Dover. 129 John Dryden. 130 Thomas Duffet. 177 Thomas
Durfey. 179
E.
Edw. Eccleston. 185 Sr. Gec. Etheridge. 186
F.
Sr. Fr. Fane, Jun. 188 Sr. Rich. Fanshaw. 190 L. Visc. Falkland. 197 Nathaniel
Field. 198 Richard Fleknoe. 199 John Fletcher. 203 John Ford. 219 Thomas Ford.
222 John Fountain. 223 Abraham France. 223 Sr. Ralph Freeman. 226 Ulpian
Fulwel. 227
G.
George Gascoigne. 228 Henry Glapthorn. 231 Thomas Goff. 233 Robert Gomersal.
237 Franc. Goldsmith. 238 Alex. Green. 241 Robert Green. 241
H.
Will. Habington. 243 Peter Haustead. 244 Richard Head. 246 Will. Hemmings. 247
Jasper Heywood. 248 John Heywood. 253 Thomas Heywood. 256 Barten Hollyday. 270
Charles Hool. 272 Edw. Howard. 274 James Howard. 275 Sr. Rob. Howard. 276 James
Howel. 277
I.
Thomas Jevorn. 280 Thomas Ingeland. 280 Benjamin Johnson. 280 Thomas Jordan.
306 William Joyner. 308
K.
Henry Killegrew. 309 Thomas Killegrew. 311 Sr. Will. Killegrew. 314 Thomas
Kirk. 315 Ralph Knevet. 316 Thomas Kyd. 316
L.
John Lacy. 317 John Leanard. 319 Nathaniel Lee. 320 John Lilly. 327 Thomas
Lodge. 330 Sr. William Lower. 332 Thomas Lupon. 334.
M.
Lewis Machin. 334 John Maidwell. 335 Dr. Jasper Main. 336 Cosino Manuch. 338
Gervase Markham. 340 Christoph. Marloe. 342 Shakerley Marmion. 345 John
Marston. 347 John Mason. 352 Phil. Massinger. 352 Thomas May. 360 Robert Mead.
365 Matthew. Medhourn 366 Thomas Meriton. 367 Tho. Middleton 370 John Milton. 375
Walt. Mountague. 377 Will. Mountfort. 378
N.
Thomas Nabbes. 379 Thomas Nash. 382 Alex. Nevile. Ib. Robert Nevile. 384 Duke
of Newcastle. 385 Dutch. Newcastle. 390 Thomas Newton. 394 Thomas Nuce. 395
O.
Thomas Otway. 395
P.
John Palsgrave. 400 George Peel. 401 Lady Pembroke. 402 Mrs. Kath. Philips.
403 Sam. Pordage. 406 Henry Porter. Ib. Thomas Porter. 407 George Powel. Ib.
Thomas Preston. 408 Edm. Prestwith. 409
Q.
Francis Quarles. 409
R.
Thomas Randolph. 411 Edw. Ravenscroft. 417 Thomas Rawlins. 424 Edward Revet.
425 Nath. Richards. 426 William Rider. 427 William Rowley. 428 Samuel Rowley.
430 Joseph Rutter. Ib. Thomas Rymer. 433
S.
Tho. St. Serf. 434 William Sampson. 435 George Sandys. 436 Charles Saunders.
438 Elkanah Settle. 439 Tho. Shadwell. 442 Will. Shakespeare. 453 Lewis Sharp.
469 Edw. Sharpham. 470 S. Shepherd. 471 Ed. Sherbourn. 472 Tho. Shipman. 473
Hen. Shirley. Ibid. James Shirley. 474 Sir Charles Sidley. 485 John Smith. 488
Will. Smith. Ibid. Tho. Southern. 489 Tho. Stanley. Ibid. Sir Rob. Stapleton.
491 John Stephens. 492 Will. Strode. Ibid. John Studley. 494 Sir John Suckling.
496 Gilbert Swinhoe. 499
T.
Nathaniel Tate. 500 John Tateham. 502 Robert Taylour. 503 Tho. Thomson. Ibid.
Nich. Trott. 504 Rich. Tuke. Ibid. Coll. S. Tuke. 505 Cyril Turneur. Ibid. John
Tutchin. 506
W.
Lewis Wager. 506 Edm. Waller. 507 Geo. Wapul. 508 Will. Wayer. 508 R. Weaver.
508 John Webster. 508 John Watson. 510 -- Whitaker. 511 Dr. Rob. Wild. Ib.
Leon. Willan. Ib. George Wilkins. 512 Rob. Wilmot. Ibid. John Wilson. Ibid.
Rob. Wright 514 Will. Wytcherley. Ib.
Y.
Rob. Yarrington. 516
The Names of the Authors in the APPENDIX.
Joseph Harris. Tho. Sackvile, and Tho. Norton. Mr. Wilson.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Dramatick Poets.
A.
William ALEXANDER, Earl of Sterline.
OUR Alphabet begins with this worthy Nobleman, who was a Scot by Birth; and
lived in the Time of King James the First of England, and the Sixth of
Scotland. All that I am able to acquaint my Readers with, concerning his
private Affairs, or Family, is only this short account; that he was much in
Favor with his Sovereign, and Father to the present Earl of Sterline.

The Occasion of his being mentioned in our Catalogue, is, from four Monarchick
Tragedies, (as he styles them,) which are in Print under his Name, viz. The
Alexandraean Tragedy, Croesus, Darius, and Julius Caesar.

These Plays seem to be writ with great Judgment, and (if I mistake not) the
Author has proposed the Ancients, for his Pattern; by bringing in the Chorus
between the Acts. They are grave, and sententious, throughout, like the
Tragedies of Seneca; and yet where the softer, and more tender Passions are
touched, they seem as moving, as the Plays so much in vogue with the Ladies of
this Age. The greatest objection that I know against them, is the Choice the
Author has made of his Verse, which is alternate, like the Quatrains of the
French Poet Pibrach; or Sr. William Davenant's Heroic Poem, called Gondibert.
This measure of Verse has lately been found fault with by an Eminent Critic
Mr. Rymer's Pref. to Kapin's Reflections on Aristotle's Treatise of Poetry.
notwithstanding what Sr. William Preface to Gondibert.
has urged in its Defense: I shall not pretend to decide the Controversy, but
leave it to my Reader, to peruse both their Arguments at leisure. It may
possibly be objected that his Style is not pure, but as the Author has already
pleaded his Country, Epistle to Darius 4o. Edin. Edingh. 1603.
so he ought to be excused by all English Critics, having given the preference
to our Tongue, as exceeding the Scotch Dialect, both in Elegance and Perfection.

His Tragedies, are all of them founded on History, and he has so strictly tied
himself to it, that even his Episodes, (which usually, are the sole Invention
of every Author) are founded on Truth likewise.

The Alexandraean Tragedy is a proof of this for after the First Act, which is
wholly employed by Alexander's Ghost (possibly in imitation of Seneca's
Thyestes) the rest of the Play is wholly circumscribed by History. The The Play
is built upon the Differences about the Succession, that arose between
Alexander's Captains after his Decease. The Second Act begins with the Council
held by Perdiccas, Meleager, and the rest of the Commanders. The Author has
chiefly followed Q. Curtius lib. 10. cap. 6. and seq. and Justin lib. 13. But
there are other Authors that have touched upon this Story, as well Annalists as
Historians; which for the Reader's satisfaction I shall set down. Such are,
Diodorus Siculus lib. 18. O^osius lib. 3. cap. 21. Josephus lib. 12, cap. 1
Appian de Bellis Syriacis. -- Saliani Annals Ecclesiastici A. M. 3730. Number.
30. etc. Torniel A. M. 3730. N. 5. etc. Raleigh's Hist. lib. 4 c.3 Heylin 's
Hist. of Greece, Howell, etc.

Croesus, is chiefly borrowed from Herodotus, See lib. 1. sive Clio. You may
consult likewise, Justin lib. 1. cap. 7. Plutarch's Life of Solon, ^ee besides
Salian. Torniel. A. M. 3510. In the fifth Act there is an Episode of Abradates,
and ^anthaea, which the Author has copied from Xenophon's Cyropaideia, Or the
Life and Institution of Cyrus, Lib. 7. and the Ingenious ^^cudery has built
upon this Foundation, in that diverting Romance, called Grand Cyrus, See Part
5. Book 1. I leave it to the Readers, which Romance is best, the Copy, or the
original.

Darius, was the first Present our Author made the world, at which time he was
Lord Menstrie. He printed this Tragedy at Edinborough, in quarto 1603. and
dedicated it to K. James VI, by a Copy of three Stanzas. It was first composed
in a mixed Dialect of English and Scoth, and even then, was commended by two
Copies of Verses. The Author has since pollished and corrected much of his
Native Language, and even the Play it self is altered, and it is now reprinted
with the Rest of his Works. For the Plot of this Play, read Q. Curtius, lib. 3,
4, and 5. and Justin, lib. 11. cap. 5. etc. See besides Diodorus lib. 17 Arrian
de Expeditione Alexandri lib. 2. Plutarch's Life of Alexander Salian. A. M.
2719. etc.

Julius Caesar is founded on History, and the Reader may find many Authors that
give an account of his Actions, particularly Plutarch and Suetonius, each of
which writ his Life See besides Appian de Bellis Civilibus, lib. 2 Florus lib.
4. cap. 2. Salian. Torniel etc.

Besides these Plays, he writ several other Poems, of a different Species, viz.
Doomsday or the great day of the Lord's Judgment; Poem divided into Twelve
Books which the Author calls Hours. A Paraenaesis to Prince Henry, who dying
before it was published, he dedicated it to Prince Charles, afterward King and
Martyr. Jonathan, an Heroic Poem intended; but the first Book only extant. He
writ all these Poems in the Ottava Rima of Tasso, or, as Michael Drayton calls
it, Epistle to Baron's Hars.
A Stanza of Eight Lines; Six interwoven, and Couplet in Base. I shall leave
their Excellency to the judgment of Critics, who may view them at leisure; his
Plays and Poems being all printed together in Folio, under the Title of
Recreations with the Muses: printed at Land. 1637, and dedicated to His Sacred
Majesty K. Charles the First, of Blessed Memory.

This being all the Account I am able to give of our Author and his Works, I
must have recourse to an old Copy of Verses styled The Censure of the Poets,
which though mean in themselves, show the Opinion the unknown Author had of our
Poet: Part of which Copy take as follows; So Scotland sent us hither for our
own:
That Man whose Name I even would have known
To stand by mine, that most ingenious Knight,
My Alexander; to whom in his right
I want extremely, yet in speaking thus,
I do but show that Love that was 'twixt us,
And not his Numbers, which were brave, and high,
So like his Mind was his clear Poesy.


I have likewise seen an Anagram, written by One Mr. William Quin, on our
Author's Name, which being short I will transcribe.

GULIELMUS ALEXANDER,
Anagramma.
I, LARGUS MELLE EXUNDA.
Tetrasticon.
Cum tibi det Genius, Musa ingeniumque Poesis
Floribus e variis Attica mella legas;
I, largus melle exunda. Mell taque funde
Carmina: sic facias nomine fata jubent.
Robert ARMIN.
The Author of a Play called The Maids of Moor-clack; styled in former
Catalogues, a History. I am able to give no Account either of the Author, or
his Play, having no knowledge of either. All that I can say, is that I have
seen a Book written by one of the same Name, called A Discourse of Elizabeth
Caldwell, who with some other accomplices, attempted to poison her husband.
This Book is in quarto, printed in London 1604.

B.
Abraham BAILY.
A Gentleman of whom I can give no other Information, than that he has extant a
Play called The Spightful Sister, printed in 4o; but where or when, I am not
able to give an Account; the Title Page, Dedication and Preface (if there be
any) being deficient in my Copy. But if I may be permitted to speak my
Sentiments of the Play it self, I believe the Author has stolen neither his
Characters nor Language from any other; and I presume, those that have read the
Character of My Lord Occus in particular; Winifred, and the rest in general,
will be of my opinion.

John BANCROFT.
A Gentleman, who is the Author of a Tragedy called Sertorius, acted at the
Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants; printed in quarto Land. 1679. It Is
dedicated to Captain Richard Savage; and the Epilogue was writ by Mr.
Ravenscroft. The Elder Corneille has writ a Play on the same subject, which I
have read; but shall leave it to the decision of better judgments to determine
which is best. Those who would read the foundation of this Play may consult
Plutarch's Life of Sertorius: Velleius Paterculus lib. 2. Florus lib. 2. c. 22.
etc.

John BANKS.
A Person now living, and if I mistake not, a Member of the Honorable Society
of New-Inn: One whose Genius to Poetry led him to make several Attempts on the
Stage, with different success: but of whom I may say with justice, that if he
be not accounted a Poet of the first form, yet he bears up with his
Contemporaries of the second. His Genius lays wholly to Tragedy; and he has had
the Fortune to please the fair Sex in the Earl of Essex, and Anna Bullen. He
has five Plays in print, of which in their Alphabetical Order.

Destruction of Troy, a Tragedy, acted at his Royal Highness the Duke's
Theater, printed in quarto Land. 1679. and dedicated to the Right Honorable
the Lady Katherine Roos. If this Play fall short of Shakspear's Troilus and
Cressida, at least it surpasses Heywood's Iron Age; and how unkind soever the
Critics were to it, I believe they have seen worse Tragedies on the Stage.
Various are the Authors that have touched on this subject, as Homer, Virgil,
Ovid, etc. but none more fully than Dares Phrygius, and Dictis Cretensis:
though Learned Men suppose those pieces we have under their Names, to be
spurious: yet Natalis Comes has turned Daxes into Latin Verse: and our
Countryman Lydgate into old English Meetre.

Island Queens, or The Death of Mary Queen of Scotland, a Tragedy: published
only in defense of the Author and the Play, against some mistaken Censures
occasioned by its being prohibited the Stage, printed in Quarto Land. 1684. and
dedicated to the Illustrious Princess, Mary Duchess of Norfolk. Most
Historians of those Times have written her Story, as well Foreigners, as our
own: See Buchanan, Speed, in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, Camden, Du chesne,
Brantome's Memoirs, Causin's Holy Court. Nay even Writers of Romances have
thought her Story an ornament to their Work; witness the Princess Cloria, where
part 2. her Story is succinctly related, and she pourtrayed under the title of
Minerva Queen of Mysta.

Rival Kings, or The Loves of Oroondates and Statira; a Tragedy in Heroic
Verse, acted at the Theater Royal; printed in quarto 1677. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable the Lady Katherine Herbert. The Play is founded chiefly on
Cassandra, a famed Romance in Fol. As to what concerns Alexander, I refer you
to Curtius, and Justin.

Virtue betrayed, or Anna Bullen; a Tragedy, acted at his Royal Highness the
Duke's Theater; printed in quarto Land. 1682. and dedicated to the Illustrious
Princess Elizabeth Duchess of Somerset. The Author has followed a little Novel
translated from the French; and called The Novels of Elizabeth Queen of
England, containing the History of Queen Ann Bullen. For the Story, most of our
Chronicles relate it: See Speed's Chron. in the Reign of Hen. VIII. Ld.
Herbert, Duchesne, Dr. Burnet's Hist. Reform Book the 2. etc.

Unhappy Favorite, or The Earl of Essex; a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal
by their Majesty's Servants; printed in quarto London 1682. and dedicated to
the most High and most Illustrious Princess the Lady Ann, Daughter to his
Royal-Highness (the present Princess of Denmark.) This Play was acted with good
success: The Prologue and Epilogne were written by Mr. Dryden: and the play it
self founded on a Novel called, The Secret History of the most Renowned Queen
Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex, printed in 120. Land. 1680. For the true
Story; see Cambden's Elizabeth, Speed, Duchesne, Stow, Baker, etc. in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth. There have been two French Plays, one by Monsieur
Calpranede; the other by the Younger Corneille; which I have read, and am of
opinion, that the English play is not short of the French, notwithstanding the
high commendations given it by the Mercury Gallant, January 1687.

Barnaby BARNES.
This Person lived in the Reign of K. James the First: and writ a Play called
The Devil's Charter, a Tragedy, containing the Life, and Death of Pope
Alexander the VI. played before the King's Majesty, upon Candlemas Night, by
his Majesty's Servants; printed in quarto Land. 1607. and dedicated to the
Honorable and his very dear Friends, Sir W. Herbert, and Sir W. Pope Knights,
Associates in the Noble Order of the Bath.

This Tragedy seems to be written in imitation of Shakspear's old Play of
Pericles Prince of Tire: for as Shakspear raises Gower, an old English Bard,
for his Interlocutor or Introductor, in that Play; so this Author revives
Guicciardine for the same design. This was the common practice of the Poets of
the last Age, as Shakspear, Heywood, etc. at which time they frequently
introduced dumb Shows, which took much with the Spectators of those times.

It Is evident the Author followed Guicciardine, who has largly treated to this
Pope, in his History of the Wars of Italy; see the first six Books. Other
Authors have likewise treated of him, as Du Preau, Hist. de l'Estat and succes
de l'Eglise, tom.2. p.293. and seq. Vollateranus, tit. 22. sub fine, Massonius
de Gestis Pontificum Romanorum, etc.

This Author has extant besides, four Books of Offices about Princes, how they
ought to be administered, printed fol. Land. 1606.

Robert BARON, Esquire
This Author was a young Gentleman, bred first at Cambridge, and afterward
brought up in the worthy Society of Gray's Inn: During his abode there, he writ
a Romance called The Cyprian Academy, printed octavo Land. 1647. He dedicated
it to the famous Traveller Mr. James Howel, in particular, and to the Ladies
and Gentlewomen of England, in general. In his Romance, are included two
Dramaticks, which Mr. Kirkman has inserted in his Catalogue, though they are not
entire Tracts of themselves, nor of any signal Eminence; but since they have
been mentioned in former Catalogues, I shall not omit them.

Deorum Dona, a Masque presented before Flaminius and Clorinda, King and Queen
of Cyprus, at their Regal Palace in Nicosia. Part of this piece is borrowed
from Mr. Waller's Poem to the King on his Navy.

Gripus and Hegio, or The Passionate Lovers; a Pastoral, acted by the Lady
Julio's Servants, for the Entertainment of Flaminius. This Play consists but of
three Acts, and is borrowed very much from Waller's Poems, and Webster's
Duchess of Malsy; which is excusable only on the account of the Author's
Youth, he being but 17 Years of age, when he composed that Romance, which was
the reason that it was so highly commended by twelve Copies of Verses writ by
his Friends, and printed with his Book.

Mirza, a Tragedy, really acted in Persia, in the last Age: Illustrated with
Historical Annotations, printed octavo Land. -- and dedicated to his Majesty,
by a Copy of Verses. This Play is much beyond either of the former, and has the
repute of a good Play. It is commended by five Copies of Verses, written by the
Author's Cambridge-Friends. On this very Subject, the famous Denham, had before
writ a Play called The Sophy, Though our Author Epistle to the Reader.
had finished three complete Acts of this Tragedy, before he saw that; nor was
he then discouraged, seeing the most Ingenious Author of that, has made his
seem quite another Story from this. Mr. Baron has followed not only the
Honorable Sr. Thomas Herbert's printed Account in his Travels, but likewise
made use of a Manuscript Letter, which Sr. Dodmore Cotton, (Ambassador to Abbas
King of Persia, from King Charles the First in the Year 1626.) sent to a Friend
of his in Cambridge, according to which Letter, he prosecuted the Story
throughout.

The Author seems to have proposed for his pattern the famous Catiline, writ by
Ben Johnson: and has in several places not only hit the model of his Scenes:
but even imitated the Language tolerably, for a young Writer. Whoever pleases
to compare the Ghost of Emirhamze-mirza, with that of Scilla, may easily see
his Imitation, but that being too long to transcribe, I shall set down the
first words of Catiline, in that admirable Play; and afterward those of Abbas,
and then submit my opinion to my Reader's judgment.

Catiline, Act first.
It is decreed: Nor shall thy fate, O Rome
Resist my Vow. Though hills were set on hills,
And seas met seas, to guard thee; I would through:
I Will plough up Rocks, steep as the Alps, in dust:
And lave the Tyrhene waters into clouds;
But I would reach thy head, thy head, proud City.
Mirza, Act first.
The vow is made, nor shall thy flattering Fate,
O Mirza, contradict it; though thy Troops
Stood like a wall about thee, nay though Jove
Press all the gods to guard thee, and should arm
Them every one with thunder, I would through:
I Will tear the groundsells of thy Towers up;
And make their nodding Spires kiss the center,
But I will reach thy heart, thy heart, proud Victor.
This is the first Author taken notice of, either by Mr. Phillips page 16^.
in his Theatrum Poetarum, or his Transcriber Mr. Winstanley, in his Lives of
the English Poets: page 113.
and though neither of them give any other Account of our Author, but what they
collected from my former Catalogue printed 1680. yet through a mistake in the
method of that Catalogue, they have ascribed many Anonymous Plays to the
foregoing Writers, which belonged not to them: and thus have committed mistakes
in almost all the Dramatick Writers they have handled, To give an Instance in
this Author: they both ascribe to him Don Quixote, or The Knight of the
ill-favored Countenance, a Comedy, I know not whence they had their
Intelligence: but I never heard or read any such Play, nor do I believe there
is any other Book which bears that title, except the famed Romance, written by
the admirable Pen of that famous Spanish Author, Miguel de Cervantes. They have
likewise ascribed several other Dramatick Pieces to this Author, which I dare
be confident, are not of his Writing; as Dick Scorner, Destruction of
Jerusalem, Marriage of Wit and Science, Masks, and Interludes; and have
omitted two other Pieces written by him. viz. Poems, octavo, and a Book
entitled, An Apology for Paris. Neither do I believe Mr. Phillips's Account,
that any of his Pieces appeared on the Stage. I shall conclude all with the
following Anagram, written by his Friend Mr. John Quarles, sometimes of St.
Peter's College in Cambridge.

Anagram ROBERTUS BARONUS. Anagram RARUS AB ORB NOTUS.
Rarus, haud cuiquam peperit Natura secundum. Notus es, and scriptis (Baron) ab
orb tuis.

Lodowick BARREY.
An Author that lived in the middle of the Reign of King James the First: who
writ a Play called Ram-Alley, or Merry Tricks, a Comedy, diverse times
heretofore Acted: by the Children of the Kings Revels; and printed in quarto,
Land. 1611. The Plot of Will Smallshank's decoying the Widow Taffeta into
Marriage, is borrowed (as I suppose) from the same Author, from whence Kirkman
took the Story which is to be found in the English Rogue, Part the IV, Chap.
19. and is an Incident in other Plays besides this; particularly in Killegrew's
Parjon's Wedding.

Francis BEAUMONT.
See Fletcher.

Captain William BEDLOE.
A Person so remarkable in this Nation not many years since, on the Account of
the Popish Plot; that few are ignorant of his part of the discovery. I shall
not pretend here, to give you an account of his Life, but refer you to that
which was written by an Unknown Hand, entitled, The Life and Death of Captain
William Bedloe, printed in octavo, Land. 1681.

The Reason why we mention him in our Catalogue is, on account of a Play writ
by him, called, The Excommunicated Prince: or, The false Relick: a Tragedy
Acted by his Holiness's Servants: being The Popish Plot, in a Play, printed in
folio, Land. 1679. Dedicated to his Grace the Duke of Buckingham. I must
confess, I was very desirous to read this Piece for the sake of the Title Page,
and came to it with great expectations; but found them altogether frustrated,
and only a Story which I had formerly read in Dr. Heylin's Geography, described
in it. But afterward when his Life came out, I was satisfied with the Account
the Publisher gave of it: which for the Readers Information, and the
Justification of the Deceased, I shall quote word for word.

See his Life, page 110.
In the next place, I desire leave to speak something of his Dramatick Poem,
called The Excommunicated Prince, or, The False Relick. As to the worth of the
Play, I do own my self so unskilful in Poetry, that I will not rashly pretend
to give my opinion of it. But that which I know, let me assert in its
vindication, viz. That it was both began and finished in the space of two
Months, which every one must needs acknowledge was but a very short time,
considering the great business that then more earnestly employed his thoughts,
which must necessarily be a weighty clog to the ablest Muse. Whereas some of
the chiefest Poets of this Age have thought it no disparagement to confess,
that a correct Play to be perfected, will require at least twelve Months time.
And I remember in some Prologue, I think in that to the Virtuoso, I have read
this Distick to the same purpose.

A Play, like Ground, must a Year Fallow lie,
E're it can ripen to good Comedy.
This considered, (and it being the first Essay he ever finished of this
Nature) what few mistakes are found in his Play, may be easily excused. But
besides its real faults, the errors of the Press, and what it suffers through the
prejudice and malice of the Author's Adversaries, I do not at all wonder if
even the most impartial Reader too, should look severely on it, seeing he is
promised in the Title Page, what he can never find in the Book. It would fain
cozen him to believe that he shall meet with the Popish Plot represented in
that Play, though I have heard Mr. Bedloe often say he never intended any such
thing. The History he designed, may, as I am informed, be read in several
Authentic Authors; but in Heylin's Geography I remember I met with it my self.
So may any that will peruse his History of Georgia. Mr. Bedloe well knew it was
against his Interest so for to ridicule the Plot, as to compose a Play of it;
and he had more judgment in Poetry, than to imagine that such a new thing would
please in Tragedy. And least any one should suspect that his design did in the
least incline that way, he writ an Epistle to assure his Reader of the
contrary. Which the Stationer, (supposing under that pretense the Play would
vend much better) thought it his interest to stifle, and added these words to
the Title Page ( Being the Popish Plot in a Play) without the Author's consent
or knowledge.

Mrs. Astraea BEHN.
A Person lately deceased, but whose Memory will be long fresh amongst the
Lovers of Dramatick Poetry, as having been sufficiently Eminent not only for
her Theatrical Performances, but several other Pieces both in Verse and Prose;
which gained her an Esteem among the Wits, almost equal to that of the
incomparable Orinda, Madam Katharine Phillips (of whom we shall speak
hereafter). Her Plays are Sixteen in number, having therein exceeded any of the
Poets of this Age, Sr. William Davenant, and Mr. Dryden, excepted. Most of her
Comedies have had the good fortune to please: and though it must be confessed that
she has borrowed very much, not only from her own Country Men, but likewise
from the French Poets yet it may be said in her behalf, that she has often been
forced to it through haft: and has borrowed from others Stores, rather of
Choice than for want of a fond of Wit of her own: it having been formerly her
unhappiness to be necessitated to write for Bread, as she has published to the
world. Pref. to Sir Patient Fancy.
It Is also to her Commendation, that whatever she borrows she improves for the
better: a Plea which our late Laureat has not been ashamed to make use of.
Pref. to Mock Astrologer.
If to this, her Sex may plead in her behalf, I doubt not but she will be
allowed equal with several of our Poets her Contemporaries. I shall now give an
Account of her Plays in an Alphabetical Order, as follows: viz.

Abdelazer, or The Moor's Revenge; a Tragedy Acted at his Royal Highness the
Dukes Theater, printed in quarto, Land. 1671. This Play is originally an old
Play of Marloes, called Lusts Dominion, or The Lascivious Queen, a Tragedy
written above Forty years ago, though printed in octavo, Land. 1661. She has much
improved it throughout.

Amorous Prince, or The Curious Husband, a Comedy Acted at his Royal Highness
the Duke of York's Theater, printed in quarto, Land. 1671. The Plot of Antonio,
the curious Husband's trying his Wives Chastity by his Friend Alberto's means,
is founded on a Novel in the Romance of Don Quixot, called The Curious
Impertinent: See Part 4. Chapter 6, 7, 8. The City Nightcap is founded on the same
Story, though Mrs. Behn has much outdone that Play, and improved the Novel
itself.

City-Heiress, or Sr. Timothy Treat-all, a Comedy Acted at his Royal Highness
his Theater, printed in quarto, Land. 1682. and Dedicated to the Right
Honorable henry Earl of Arundel, and Lord Mowbray. This Play had the luck to
be well received in the Town: yet I cannot but take notice that most of the
Characters are borrowed; as those of Sir Timothy Treat-all and his Nephew, from
Sir Bounteous Progress, and Folly-wit, in Middleton's Mad World my Masters: and
those of Sir Anthony Merrywell, and his Nephew Sr. Charles, from Durazzo and
Caldoro, in Massenger's Guardian. Part of the Language in each Play is likewise
transcribed. As for the Plot of Sir Timothy's endeavoring to supplant his
Nephew of his Mistress, it is the same Design with other Plays, as Ram-Alley,
and Trick to Catch the Old One.

Dutch Lover, a Comedy Acted at the Duke's Theater, printed in quarto, Land.
1673. The Plot of this Play is founded on a Spanish Romance, written by the
ingenious Don Francisco de las Coveras styled Don Fenise, see the Stories of
Eufemie, and Theodore, Don Jame, and Frederick.

Emperor of the Moon, a Farce, Acted by Their Majesty's Servants, at the
Queen's Theater, printed in quarto, Land. 1687. and Dedicated to the Lord
Marquess of Worcester. This Farce was originally Italian, and Acted in France
Eighty odd times without intermission, under the Title of Harlequin l' Empereur
dans le Monde de la Lune: but much altered, and adapted to our English Theater.

Forced Marriage, or The Jealous Bridegroom, a Tragi-Comedy; Acted at his
Highness the Duke of York's Theater, and printed in quarto, Land. 1671. This,
if I mistake not, was the first Play that our Authress brought on the Stage.

False Count, or A New Way to play an Old Game, a Comedy Acted at the Duke's
Theater, and printed in quarto, Land. 1682. The Hint of Isabella being deceived
by Guillaume the Chimney-sweeper, is borrowed from Molliere's Les Precieuses
Ridicules.

Feigned Courtezmis, or a Nights Intrigue, a Comedy, acted at the Duke's
Theater, printed in quarto, Land. 1679. and Dedicated to Mrs. Ellen Guin. This
Comedy I take to be One of the best she has written.

Luckey Chance, or an Alderman's Bargain; a Comedy acted by Their Majesty's
Servants, printed 4o, Land. 1687. and Dedicated to the Rt Honble Laurence Ld
Hyde, E. of Rochester. Though some Critics decry'd this Play, yet whoever will
consult the Author's Preface, will find the Objections fully answered: however
I must observe that the Incident of Gayman's enjoying the Lady Fulbanck, and
taking her for the Devil, is copied from Mr. Alexander Kickshaw and the Lady
Aretina, in the Lady of Pleasure.

Rover, or The Banished Cavaleers, in two parts, both of them Comedies, Acted at
the Duke's Theater, and printed in quarto, Land. 1677, and 1681. the Second
Part being Dedicated to his Royal Highness the Duke. These are the only
Comedies, for the Theft of which, I condemn this ingenious Authoress; they
being so excellent in their Original, that it is pity they should have been
altered: and notwithstanding her Apology in the Postscript to the first part; I
cannot acquit her of prevarication, since Angelica is not the only stolen
Object, as she calls it: she having borrowed largely throughout. The truth is,
the better to disguise her Theft, she has (as the ingenious Scarron observes of
the Writers of Romances,) City Romance, page 2.
Flayed the Eel by beginning at the Tail; yet notwithstanding, what she has
omitted of worth in her first part, she has taken into the second; and
therefore could not justly call these Plays her own.

Roundheads, or The good Old Cause, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater,
printed in quarto, Land. 1682. and Dedicated to the Most Illustrious Prince,
Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Grafton. A great part of the Language of this Play, is
borrowed from Tateham's Rump, or a Mirror of the Times; but yet she has a
better Title to this Play, than the former, having much improved the Humor of
the Roundheads.

Sr. Patient Fancy, a Comedy Acted at the Duke's Theater; printed in quarto,
Land. 1678. The Hint of Sr. Patient Fancy, is borrowed from a French Play
called Le Malade imaginaire: and the Characters of Sr. Credulous Easy, and his
Groom Curry, are stolen from Sr. Amphilus the Cornish Knight, and his Man
Trebasco in Brome's Play called The Damoseille.

Town Fop, or Sr. Timothy Tawdrey, a Comedy, acted at his Royal Highness the
Duke's Theater, printed in quarto, Land. 1677. The foundation of this Play, is
a Comedy writ by George Wilkins, called The Miseries of enforced Marriage; from
which not only the Plot, but a great part of the Language is stolen.

Widow Ranter, or The History of Bacon in Virginia, a Tragi-Comedy acted by
Their Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto, Land. 1690. and dedicated to the
Much Honored Madam Weldon by G. J. a Friend to the Authress, by whom this Play
was published after her Decease. I refer the Reader to this Epistle for the
Plays justification: only I cannot but observe, that the Prologue was written
Ten years since, and published before Mr. Shadwell's True Widow: and if I
mistake not the Epilogue is Old likewise. For the Story of Bacon I know no
History that relates it, but his Catastrophe is founded on the known story of
Cassius, who perished by the Hand of his freed-Man Dandorus, believing his
Friend Brutus vanquished.

Young King, or The Mistake, a Tragi-Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater,
printed in quarto, Land. 1683. and dedicated to some Gentleman her particular
Friend, under the Name of Philaster. The Design of this Play is borrowed from
Monsieur Calpranede's Cleopatra, see the History of Alcamenes and Menalippa,
Part VIII.

Besides these Plays this Ingenious Woman has published several other Works,
both in Verse and Prose. As a Collection of Poems in octavo, Land. 1684. and a
Collection of several Others in octavo, Land. 1685. Another Volume in octavo,
Land. 1688. amongst all which are many of her own Composures. Her several
Versions from the French are commended by those who think themselves Judges of
Wit; amongst which the chiefest are, A Voyage to the Island of Love; Lycidas,
or The Lover in Fashion; and The Lover's Watch. These Pieces in the Original
may be found in the second and third Tomes of Le Receueil des Pieces Gallantes,
en Prose and en Verse, 8o Paris 1684. Those who will take the pains to compare
them, will find the English rather Paraphrases, than just Translations: but
which sufficiently show the Fancy and excellent Abilities of our Authress.

She has written other Pieces in prose, which have had the fortune to please,
as The Love Letters between a Nobleman and his Sister, in Three Volumes, octavo
Land. 1684. etc. Three Histories, printed in octavo, Land. 1688. viz. Oroonoko,
or The Royal Slave. The fair Jilt, or Tarquin and Miranda. Agnes de Castro, or
The Force of Generous Love. There are two other small Novels under her Name,
viz. History of the Nun, or The fair Vow-breaker, 120 London 1689. The Lucky
Mistake, 120 Land. 1689.

What Opinion the Wits of the Age had of her, may appear from several Copies of
Verses written before her Translation of Monsieur Bonnecorse's La Montre, or
The Watch: amongst whom Mr. Charles Cotton, who was no contemptible Poet, gives
her the following Character.

Some hands write some things well, are elsewhere lame:
But on all Theams your power is the same.
Of Buskin, and of Sock, you know the Pace;
And tread in both with equal Skill and Grace.
But when you write of Love, Astrea then
Love dips his Arrows, where you wet your Pen.
Such charming Lines did never Paper grace;
Soft as your Sex; and smooth as Beauty's Face.
Dawbridge-court BELCHIER.
An Englishman, who lived in the Reign of King James the First, but one, who
was an Inhabitant of the Town of Utreicht in the Low Countries; at the time of
his writing an Interlude, called Hans Beer-pot, his invisible Comedy of See me,
and see me not; acted by an honest Company of Health-Drinkers, printed in
quarto, Land. 1618. and dedicated to the Honorable Sr. John Ogle, Colonel of
our English Regiment of Foot, under the Lords, the Estates General of the
United Provinces, and Lord Governor of the Town and Garrison of Utreicht. This
Piece See Epistle Dedicatory.
is neither Comedy nor Tragedy, as wanting First the just number of Speakers;
Secondly, those Parts or Acts it should have, which should be at the least
Five; but a plain Conference of so many Persons, consisting of Three Acts, and
no more.

Richard BERNARD.
This Person flourished at Epworth in Lincolnshire, in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, and was (as I suppose) the first Translator of Terence's Comedies
entire: which tho'not so well translated into English, as into French, by the
famous Abbot de Villeloin, Monsieur de Marolles, or by Monsieur de Martignac;
yet certainly it is passable for the time in which he lived. Besides the bare
Translation of the whole Six Comedies, viz. Andraea, Adelphi, etc. he has taken
notice in each Scene of the most remarkable forms of Speech, Theses, and moral
Sentences, in imitation possibly of an old French Translation, printed at Paris
in octavo, 1574. This Version is printed with the latin, 4o. Cambridge 1598.
and dedicated to Mr. Christopher Wray, Son and Heir to Sr. William Wray, and
his Brothers. Having given this short account of the Translator and his Work,
give me leave to speak somewhat of the Author.

Publius Terentius, was a Native of Carthage; but being taken Prisoner, when he
was very young he was sent to Rome. He was brought up in Literature, and all
good Education, by his Patron Terentius Seneca, and afterward freed by him, on
account of his Wit, and good Mien. He luckily found the best way of writing
Comedy, and he left some Pieces in that kind, that few Persons have been able
to imitate. He was in great Esteem, not only with the People in general, by
reason of his Dramatick Performances; but particularly beloved and cherished by
Men of the best Quality, as Publius Scipio, Laelius, and others. His purity of
Style, was so conspicuous, that his Adversaries endeavored to persuade the
People, that he was assisted in his Plays by great Men, which he handsomely
takes notice of, in his Prologue to the Adelphi.

Nam quod illi dicunt malevoli, homines nobiles
Eum adjutare, assidueque una scribere;
Quod illi maledictum vehemens esse existimant,
Eam laude^ hic ducit maxuma^; cum illis placet,
Qui vobis universis, and populo placent;
Quorum opera in bello, in otio, in negotio,
Suo quisque tempore usus est sine superbia.
The Plots of these Comedies he borrowed from the Greeks, the Four first from
the Comedies of Menander; and the Two last from Apollodorus. He was beholding
to Menander likewise, for some other Comedies, which in his Return from Greece,
by Sea, were lost with himself: in the Year of Rome, 595, and the second year
of the 155th Olympiad. Some say that he Died in Arcadia; but the former Account
is confirmed by Volcatius, in the following Verses.

Sed ut Afer sex populo edidit Comoedias,
Iter hinc in Asiam fecit: navim cum semel'
Conscendit, visus nunquam est, sic vita vacat.
Consult further Crinitus de Poetis Latinis.
Scaliger in Poetic. Lilius Gyraldus Hist. Poet.
Vossius de Poetis Latinis, etc.
Mrs. Frances BOOTHBY.
The Authress of a Play called Marcelia, or The Treacherous Friend, a
Tragi-Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's Servants, printed in
quarto, Land. 1670. and dedicated to the Honorable, and most Accomplished Lady
Yate, of Harvington in Worcestershire: to whom she was related.

Roger BOIL, Earl of Orrery.
An Irish Nobleman, whose Abilities in Arts and Arms, have rendered him better
known to this Nation, than any Character I can give him, so that I may justly
say of him with Madam Phillips; Poems, page 151.


Of him I cannot which is hardest tell,
Or not to praise him, or to praise him well.
However I must observe, that he is not only a Poet himself, but a Patron of
Poets likewise, as Mr. Dryden, and Mr. Crown must acknowledge: so that methinks
his Lordship's Reputation, joined with the Earl of Roscomon's, might be
sufficient to atone for their Country's Character in point of Wit. He has
published Four Plays in Heroic Verse; wherein not only the true English Courage
is delineated to the Life: but likewise the very Infidels and Barbarians, are
taught by his Pen, not only Humanity, but the Highest Morality and Virtue. But
his Wit is as far above my Abilities to describe, as to imitate; and therefore
I shall hasten to give an Account of his Plays, viz.

Black Prince, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, printed at Land. folio,
1672. Though this Play in the Title Page be called a Tragedy, yet it ends
successfully: and therefore I presume was rather styled so by the Author, from
the Quality and Grandeur of the Persons in the Dramma, than from any
unfortunate Catastrophe. For the foundation of this Play, as far as it concerns
History consult Walsinghami Historia Angliae. Florentii Monarch. Wigorniensis
Chronicon. Pol Vergilii Historiae Angliae. Froissard Croniques de France, and
d'Angleterre. Du Chesne, Speed, and other English Historians in in Reign of
Edward the Third.

Tryphon, a Tragedy acted by his Royal Highness the Duke of York's Servants,
and printed in folio, Land. 1672. Of this Usurper you have an account in
Maccabees lib. 1. See besides Josephus lib. 13. Appian de Bellis Syriacis etc.
These two Plays are printed together.

Henry the Fifth, a History, acted at his Highness the Duke of York's Theater,
printed in folio, Land. 1677. For the Plot see the Chronicles of England in the
Reign of that King such as Walsingham, Polydore Vergil, Hollingshead, Speed,
etc. and the French Chronicles in the Reign of King Charles the Sixth, as Les
Chroniques d'Enguerrand de Monstrelet. Jean Juvenal des Ursins, L'Histoire de
Charles VI. F. de Belleforest, L'Histoire de neuf Roys Charles de France,
Mezeray, etc.

Mustapha Son of Solomon the Magnificent, a Tragedy, acted at the Dukes
Theater, printed in folio, Land. 1677. See Paulus Jovius lib. 40. Thuanus lib.
12. Tho. Artus la Continuation de l'Histoire des Turcs. Knolles's Turkish
History.

Besides these Plays, there is a Comedy lately published, though writ as I suppose
some years ago, under the Title of

Mr. Anthony, a Comedy acted by Their Majesty's Servants, and printed in
quarto, Land. 1690. This Play I believe was acted formerly, at the Dukes
Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, because I find Mr. Angel, and Mrs. Long amongst
the Actors Names, who if I mistake not, have been dead some years. The Prologue
to this Play, is the same with that of The Fool turned Critic: but whether it
be borrowed, or genuine, I know not.

Besides these Plays our Author has writ a Romance, called Parthenissa; which
yields not either in Beauty, Language, or Design to the Works of the famous
Scudery, or Calpranede, however Eminent they may be amongst the French, for
Pieces of this Nature: and what Mr. Davis of Kidwelly says of Scarron's Comical
Romance, may with more Justice be applied to our Illustrious Author, and this
Work. Pref. to Scarron's Novels.
It Is a thousand pities, That the Author (prevented by death) has left the
Work imperfect; so that we are, and ever shall beat a loss, to know, what
period he might bring so many noble Adventures to. He his written a Treatise in
Folio, called The Art of War. I have been told, it has been commended by many
expert Captains, for the best Piece extant in English: but this I must leave to
the judgment of others, more experienced in the Art Military.

I know not where, or when, our Noble Author Died: but those who would view his
Character more at large, must read Sr. William Davenant's Poem to his Lordship,
Davenants Poems p. 275.
which will make them regret the Loss of so great a Man.

Samuel BRANDON.
This Author lived in the later part of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and published a
Play called The Tragi-Comedy of the Virtuous Octavia, never acted, but printed
120. Land. 1598. and dedicated by a Copy of Verses, to the Right Honorable,
and truly Virtuous Lady, the Lady Lucia Audelay: accompanied with two other
Copies in commendation of the Play. It is writ in alternate Verse, with a
Chorus at the end of each Act. For the Ground of this Play read Suetonius's
Life of Augustus. Plutarch's Life of M. Anthony. Dion. Cassius, etc. At the End
of this Play are printed two Epistles between Octavia, and her Husband M.
Anthony, in imitation of Ovid's Style, but writ in long Alexandrins. They are
dedicated to the Honorable, Virtuous and Excellent Mrs. Mary Thin. The Author
had that good Opinion of his Play, that besides his Prosopopeia al Libro, at
the beginning of his Book, he has concluded with this Italian Sentence.

L'aqua non temo de l' eterno oblio.
Anthony BREWER.
A Writer in the Reign of King Charles the First, to whom is ascribed by Mr.
Kirkman, two Plays, viz. The Country Girl, and The Lovesick King: though I
question whether the former belong to him, it being ascribed to T. B. in the
Title Page. However I am sure Mr. Winstanley, is much mistaken in the Account
that he gives of our Author, Lives of the Poets, p. 114.
That he was One who in his time contributed much toward the English Stage by
his Dramatick Writings, especially, in that noted One of his called Lingua: for
neither was that Play writ by him, nor Love's Loadstone, Landagartha, or Love's
Dominion, as he and Mr. Phillips affirm: Landagartha being writ by Henry Burnel
Esquire and Love's Dominion, by Flecknoe. But I shall proceed to give an Account of
those Plays, which are ascribed to him by Mr. Kirkman, who was better versed in
Writings of this Nature.

Country Girl, a Comedy often acted with much applause, and printed in quarto,
Land. 1647. This Play has been revived on the Stage under the Title of Country
Innocence, or The Chambermaid turned Quaker.

Lovesick King, an English Tragical History, with the Life and Death of
Cartesmunda the fair Nun of Winchester, printed in quarto, Land. 1655. This
Play was likewise revived by the Actors of the King's House in the Year 168c.
and acted by the Name of the Perjured Nun. The Historical part of the Plot is
founded on the Invasion of the Danes, in the Reign of K. Ethelred, and Alfred;
which the Author calls Etheldred and Alured. See the Writers of English
Affairs, as Polydore, Vergil, Mathaeus Westmonasteriens. Gul. Malmsburiensis,
Ingulsus, Ranulphus Higden, Du Chesne, Speed, etc.

Alexander BROM.
This Author flourisht in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, and was an
Attorney in the Lord Mayor's Court. He was Eminent in the worst of Times for
Law, and Loyalty, and yet more for Poetry. Though his Genius led him rather to
Lyrick than Dramatick Poetry, yet we have One Play of his extant, viz.

Cunning Lovers, a Comedy, acted with great applause, by Their Majesty's
Servants at the private House in Drury Lane, printed in quatro, Land. 1654.
Part of the Plot is borrowed; as the Duke of Mantua's shutting up his Daughter
in the Tower, and his being deceived by her, and Prince Prospero, is taken from
a Story in the Old Book of the Seven Wise Masters; but which the Reader may
find better related in the Fortunate Deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers: in the
Fifth Novel of the Deceived Lovers.

Although our Author, has himself made but one Attempt in this Kind, yet we are
indebted to him for two Volumes of Mr. Richard Brome's Plays in octavo,
especially One of them, since 'twas by his Care, that after the Author's Death
they were preserved and published. On which account One T. S. Volume the Second.
amongst other Commendations given our Author in Verse, says thus; Nor can I
tell to whom we are more bound,
Or to Brome's Wit, or You that have it found.


Our Poet is chiefly famous for his Odes, and Dithyrambs, which he composed
during the late Troubles, together with his Epistles, and Epigrams translated
from several Authors, all which were printed together at the King's Return in
octavo, and Second Edition. Land. 1664. Nor was he less eminent for his Version
of Horace; which though not wholly his own, yet having supplied his Verse from
the Stores of Sr. Richard Fanshaw, Dr. Holliday, Sr. Tho. Hawkins, the
Ingenious Mr. Cowley, the Admirable Ben Johnson, from which great Master, he
borrowed the Version of the last Epistle, De Art Poetica, to crown the rest
(tho'it is since left out for a new Translation, done by S. P. Esquire which I take
to be Samuel Pordage) he has gained to himself a Reputation, which will not
speedily decay: though the late Version of Mr. Creech, seems somewhat to obscure
it Luster. I cannot but inform the Reader, that he had once an Intention to
translate Lucretius; Cockain's Poems, p. 204.
as I learn from an Epigram writ by Sr. Aston Cockain; but this great Work
notwithstanding what he designed, and Mr. Evelyn performed, was reserved for
the management of a nobler Pen, that of the much Admired Mr. Creech.

Richard BROM.
This Author lived in the Reign of K. Charles the First, and tho'of mean
Extraction (being Servant to the famed Ben Johnson) Writ himself into much
credit. His Subject for the most part was Comedy, according to the usual Motto
out of Martial, which he placed before most of his Plays.

Hic totus volo rideat Libellus.
As to his worth in Comic Writing, it is not only asserted by the Testimony of
several Poets of that Age, in their commendatory Verses before many of his
Plays, as Shirley, Decker, Ford, Chamberlain, Sr. Aston Cockain, Alexander
Brom, and others: but even Ben Johnson himself (who was not over-lavish of of
Praise) bestowed the following Copy on his Northern Lass, which will weigh
against all the Calumnies of his Enemies.

To my Faithful Servant, and (by his continued Virtue) my Loving Friend the
Author of this Work, Mr. Richard Brom.

I had you for a Servant, once, Dick Brom;
And you performed a Servants faithful parts,
Now you are got into a nearer Room
Of Fellowship, professing my old Arts.
And you do do them well, with good Applause,
Which you have justly gained from the Stage,
By observation of those Comic Laws
Which I, your Master, first did teach the Age.
You learnt it well, and for it served your time
A Prentice-ship, which few do now a days:
Now each Court Hobbihorse will wince in Rhyme;
Both learned, and unlearned, all write Plays.
It was not so, of Old: Men took up Trades
That knew the Crafts they had bin bred in right;
An honest Bilboe-Smith would make good Blades,
And the Physician teach men spue and sh --
The Cobbler kept him to his Aul; but now
He Will be a Poet, scarce can guide a Plow.
Though the later part of this Copy be an imitation of the following Lines of
Horace, yet I doubt not but the Reader will pardon Ben for his ingenious
Application.

Horatii Epistolarum, Lib. 2, Epist. 1.
Navem agere ignarus navis timet: abrotonum aegro
Non audet, nisi qui didicit, dare. Quod Medicoru^ est
Promittunt Medici: tractant fabilia fabri.
Scribimus indocti doctique Poemata passim.
In imitation of his Master Mr. Johnson, he studied Men and Humor, more than
Books; and his Genius affecting Comedy, his Province was more observation than
Study. His Plots were his own, and he forged all his various Characters from
the Mint of his own Experience, and Judgment. It Is not therefore to be
expected, that I should be able to trace him, who was so excellent an Imitator
of his Master, that he might truly pass for an Original: so that all that I can
inform my Reader of his Plays, is that he has Fifteen in print, most of which
were acted with good Applause, and that several of them have been thought
worthy to be revived by the Players, (to their own Profit, and the Author's
Honor) in this Critical Age. Nor are several of his other Plays less worthy of
Commendation: of which Alphabetically.

Antipodes, a Comedy acted in the year 1638. by the Queen's Majesty's Servants,
at Salisbury Court in Fleetstreet, printed in quarto 1640. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable William Earl of Hertford.

City Wit, or The Woman wears the Breeches, a Comedy printed in octavo Land.
1653.

Covent Garden weeded, or The Middlesex Justice of Peace, printed in octavo
Land. 1658.

Court Beggar, a Comedy acted at the Cockpit by His Majesty's Servants, Anno
1632. and printed in octavo, Land. 1653.

Damoiselle, or The New Ordinary, a Comedy printed in octavo Land. 1653.

English Moor, or The Mock Marriage, a Comedy often acted with general
applause, by her Majesty's Servants, printed in octavo Lon. 1659.

Jovial Crew, or The Merry Beggars, a Comedy presented at the Cockpit in
Drury Lane, in the year 1641, printed in quarto Land. 1652. and dedicated to
the Right Noble, Ingenious and Judicious Gentleman Thomas Stanley Esquire This Play
was revived by the Actors at the Duke's Theater, and reprinted 1686.

Lovesick Court, or The Ambitious Politic, a Comedy printed in octavo Land.
1658. What Opinion the Author himself had of this Comedy may be gathered by the
following Distick, prefixed in his Title Page.

Nil mea, ceu mos est, comendes carmina curo,
Se nisi comendent carmina dispereant.
Mad Couple well Matched; a Comedy printed in octavo Land. 1653. This Play was
revived on the Stage by the Duke's Actors, under the Title of The Debaunchee,
or The Credulous Cuckold; and reprinted in quarto Land. 1677.

New Academy, or The New Exchange, a Comedy printed in octavo Land. 1658.

Northern Lass, a Comedy acted with great Applause at the Theater Royal, by His
Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto Land. 1663. and dedicated to the Right
Worthy, and no less Judicious than Ingenious Gentleman Rich. Holford Esquire.
This Play is commended not only by the abovementioned Ben Johnson, but by Five
other Copies of Verses printed before the Play. This Play was revived by the
Players, since the Union of the Two Houses, and reprinted in quarto Land. 1684.
with a new Prologue and Epilogue, the former written by Jo. Haynes the Comedian.

Novella, a Comedy acted at the Black-friars, by His Majesty's Servants Anno
1632. and printed in octavo Land. 1653. This I take to exceed many of our
modern Comedies.

Queen and Concubine, a Comedy printed in octavo Land. 1659.

Queen's Exchange, a Comedy acted with general applause at the Black-fryars, by
His Majesty's Servants, and printed in quarto 1657.

Sparagus Garden, a Comedy acted in the year 1635. by the then Company of
Revels, at Salisbury-Court, printed in quarto Land. 1640. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable William Earl of Newcastle, etc. Governor to the Prince his
Highness. This Comedy is applauded by Two Copies of Verses writ by two of the
Author's Friends.

He joined with Thomas Heywood, in a Play called The late Lancashire Witches:
an Account of which see in that Author.

Ten of these Plays are printed in two Volumes in octavo, each under the Title
of Five New Plays by Richard Brom.

Mr. Phillips, Theatrum Poetarum, page 157.
I know not for what Reason, has omitted several of our Authors Plays, viz.
Damoyselle, New Academy, Queen and Concubine, Queen's Exchange, and Lancashire
Witches.

Fulk Grevile Lord BROOK.
This Honorable Person was Son to Sr. Fulk Grevile the Elder, of
Beauchamp-Court in Warwickshire; and after having been Educated some time at
Cambridge, he removed to Court in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: and in the
Seventeenth year of King James the First, he was made a Baron. He was eminently
Famous for Learning and Courage. He was bred up with the Famed Sr. Philip
Sidney, and in his youth writ several Poems of different Kinds, amongst which
are two Dramatick Pieces, viz.

Alaham, a Tragedy printed in Folio 1633. This Play seems an Imitation of the
Ancients. The Prologue is spoken by a Ghost, one of the Old Kings of Ormus, (an
Island Situate at the Entrance of the Persian Gulf) where the Scene of the
Dramma lies. This Spectre gives an Account of each Character; which is possibly
done in Imitation of Euripides, who usually introduced one of the chief Actors,
as the Prologue: whose business was to explain all those Circumstances which
preceded the opening of the Stage. The Author has been so careful in observing
the Rules of Aristotle and Horace, that whereas Horace De Art Poetica.
says -- nec quarta loqui persona laboret.


He has in no Scene throughout introduced above two Speakers; except in the
Chorus between each Act: and even there he observes all the Rules laid down by
that great Master, in the Art of Poetry, part of whose Directions to the Chorus
are as follows: De Art Poetica.
Ille dapes laudet mensae brevis: ille salubrem
Justitiam, legesque, and apertis otia Portis.


For the Plot of this Tragedy I know not whence it is taken, neither can I find
the Name of any such King as Alaham, amongst those Princes that Reigned there,
which are enumerated by Mr. Herbert See his Travels, third Edit. p. 114.
in his Account of Ormus.

Mustapha, a Tragedy printed in Folio 1633. What I have spoken of the former,
may be applied to this Play likewise, as to the Rules of the Ancients: since
both seem to be built on their Model. All I have to say further is, that an
imperfect Copy of this Play appeared in print in quarto Land. 1609. though I
suppose without his Lordship's Knowledge, since it may rather be styled a
Fragment, than a Tragedy. But those Imperfections are amended in the Folio
Edition.

As to the Foundation of the Play, it is the same with that of my Lord Orrery's
Tragedy: therefore I refer you to the same Authors, viz. Paulus Jovius,
Thuanus, etc.

Both these Plays are printed together in Folio Land. 1633. with several other
Poems, as A Treatise of Humane Learning. An Inquisition upon Fame and Honor. A
Treatise of Wars. All these are written in a Stanza of Six Lines; four
interwoven, and a Couplet in Base; which the Italians call Sestine. Caelica
containing One Hundred and Nine Sonnets of different Measures, on different
Subjects. There are in this Volume two Letters, the One to an Honorable Lady;
the Subject of which is, how to behave her self in a Married State: The other
written to his Cosen Grevil Varney then in France; containing Directions for
Travel.

His Lordship has other Pieces ascribed to him, besides these published under
his Name; as the Life of his Friend and Companion, Sir Philip Sidney, printed
at the beginning of the Arcadia, under the name of (...). His Remains, or Poems
of Monarchy and Religion, printed in octavo Land. 1670. and other Pieces which
because of their uncertainty I omit. Only, I cannot pass by a Mistake committed
by Mr. Phillips, and Mr. Winstanley; who ascribe another Play to him called
Marcus Tullius Cicero's Tragedy. This Play was not written, at least not
printed, as I suppose, till long after his Lordships Death, who was unhappily
killed by an ungrateful Servant, who afterward to avoid the Sentence of the
Law, made his own Hand the Executioner of Justice, making Death his Choice,
which should have been his Punishment.

This Worthy Nobleman lies Buried (as Dr. Fuller Worthies, Warwickshire. page
127.
says) in Warwick Church, under a Monument of black and white Marble, whereon
he is styled, Servant to Queen Elizabeth, Councellor to King James, and Friend
to Sr. Philip Sidney: Dying Anno 16 -- without Issue and unmarried. Those who
would read his Character more at large, may have recourse to that excellent
Author abovementioned.

Henry BURKHEAD.
This Author lived in the Reign of K. Charles the Martyr, being a Merchant in
Bristol. He writ a Play in the year 1645. called Cola's Fury, or Lirenda's
Misery, a Tragedy, dedicated to the Right Honorable Edward Somerset, Lord
Herbert. The Subject of this Play, is the Irish Rebellion, which broke out the
twenty-third day of October 1641. It Is couched under feigned Names; as Osirus
for the late Duke of Ormond, Berosus, for Sr. John Borlace, etc. the other
Characters are easily discovered by reading Sr. John Temple's History of the
Irish Rebellion, printed Land. 1646. and Sr. John Borlace his History on the
same Subject, Folio Land. 16 --. This Play was never acted, but introduced into
the world by two Recommendatory Copies of Verses, written by his Friends: both
which may seem to the Reader, to be too partial in their Judgments; as may be
judged by the following Lines, which are part of a Copy writ by Mr. Paul
Aylward.

What though of Terence, Seneca, we hear,
And other modern Scenicks, in our Sphere;
You I prefer. Johnson for all his Wit
Could never paint out Times as you have hit
The Manners of our Age: The Fame declines
Of never enough praised Shakespeare if thy lines
Come to be published: Beaum and Fletcher's skill
Submits to yours, and your more learned Quill.
Henry BURNEL, Esquire
This Gentleman lived in Ireland in the Reign of King Charles the First. He
writ a Play called Landgartha, a Tragi-Comedy, presented in the New Theater in
Dublin, with good applause, being an ancient Story, printed in quarto, Dublin
1641. and dedicated To all Fair, indifferent Fair, Virtuous that are not Fair,
and magnanimous Ladies. This Play is ushered into the world with Four Copies of
Verses, three Latin and one English, but being guilty of the same partiality
with the former, I shall omit to insert any. The Play it self was first acted
on St. Patrick's-day 1639. with allowance of the Master of the Revels. The
Author it seems, miscarried in a former Play, and therefore in imitation of Ben
Johnson See Prologue to Poetaster.
(whom he styles The Best of English Poets) he has introduced his Play, by a
Prologue spoken by an Amazon, with a Battle-Ax in her Hand; which succeeded to
the Author's satisfaction. The Plot is founded on the Conquest of Fro, (which
the Author calls Frollo) King of Suevia, or Suethland, by Regner (or as the
Author calls him Reyner) King of Denmark: with the Repudiation of Landgertha
Queen to Regner, See Krantzius, lib. 4. c. 6. Saxo Grammaticus, lib. 9. Jo.
Magnus, lib. 17. c. 4, 5. etc.

C.
Lady Elizabeth CAREW.
A Lady that flourisht in the Reign of Qu: Elizabeth, of whom I am able to give
no other Account, than what I collect from the Title Page of a Play, called
Mariam the Fair Queen of Jewry, her Tragedy, written (says the Publisher) by
that Learned, Virtuous, and truly Noble Lady, Elizabeth Carew, and printed in
quarto Land. 1613. The Play is writ in the same measure of Verse, with the
Tragedies of the Earl of Sterline, viz. in Alternate Verse, and the Chorus is
writ in Settines, or a Stanza of Six Lines, four interwoven and a Couplet in
Base. For the Play itself, it is very well Penned, considering those Times, and
the Lady's Sex: I leave it to the Readers to compare it with that modern
Tragedy of Herod and Mariamne. Her Story is written at large in Josephus his
History of the Jews. See lib. 14 and 15. Salian. Tom. 6. A.M. 4012. etc.
Torniel. Tom. 2. A. M. 4026.

Thomas CAREW.
A Courtier much in Favor with K. Charles the First, being One of the
Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber; and Sewer in Ordinary. He was the Author of a
Masque called Coelum Britanicum; which was performed at White Hall, in the
Banqueting House on Shrove-Tuesday Night, the Eighteenth of February 1633. by
the King's Majesty, the Duke of Lenox, the Earls of Devonshire, Holland,
Newport, etc. with several other Lords and Noblemen's Sons. He was assisted in
the contrivance by Mr. Inigo Jones, that Famous Architect; and all the Songs
were set by Mr. Henry Laws, Gentleman of the King's Chapel, and one of the
private Music to King Charles the First. It being written by the King's
express Command, our Author placed this Distick in the Front, when printed.

Non habet Ingenium; Caesar sed jussit: habebo;
Cur me posse negem, posse quod ille putat.
He writ besides, several Poems, Songs, and Sonnets which are received with
good Esteem by the Wits of this Age, and are printed with the foregoing Masque.
These Poems have been several times Reprinted, the Fourth Edition being printed
in octavo Land. 1670. This Masque is not mentioned by either Mr. Philips, or
Mr. Winstanley, because it was formerly, through a mistake, ascribed to Sr.
William Davenant.

Sr. John Suckling, that gay Wit, who delighted to Railly the best Poets, and
spared not Ben Johnson himself, has thus played upon our Author in his Sessions
of Poets. Poems, page 8.


Tom Carew was next, but he had a Fault
That would not well stand with a Laureat;
His Muse was hide-bound, and the issue of's brain
Was seldom brought forth but with trouble and pain.
All that were there present did agree,
That a Laureat Muse should be easy and free,
Yet sure 'twas not that; but 'twas thought that His Grace,
Considered he was well, he had a Cup-bearer's Place.
But this is not to be taken for the real Judgment of that Excellent Poet: and
he was too good a Judge of Wit to be ignorant of Mr. Carew's Worth, and his
Talent in Poetry, and had he pleased he could have said as much in his
Commendation, as Sr William D'Avenant in those Stanzas writ to him, See
Davenant's Works.
with part of which we shall conclude: Not but thy Verses are as smooth and high
As Glory, Love, and Wine from Wit can raise;
But now the Devil take such Destiny!
What should commend them, turns to their dispraise.
Thy Wits chief Virtue, is become its Vice;
For every Beauty thou have raised so high,
That now course Faces carry such a Price,
As must undo a Lover that would buy.


Lodowick CARLELL, Esquire
This Gentleman flourisht in the Reigns of King Charles the First and Second.
He was an Ancient Courtier, being Gentleman of the Bows to King Charles the
First, Groom of the King and Queen's Privy-chamber, and served the Queen Mother
many years, His Plays (which are Eight in number) were well esteemed of, and
most of them appeared on the Stage, at the Private-house in Black-friars,
notwithstanding the prohibition of the Stage in those days. The Names follow.

Arviragus and Philicia, a Tragi-Comedy in two parts, acted at the
Private-house in Black Friars by his Majesty's Servants, and printed in octavo
Land. 1639. This Play was since revived on our Stage, a new Prologue being writ
by Mr. Dryden, and spoke by Mr. Heart. See Dryden's Misc. Poems, p. 281.
there is another Prologue printed in London Drollery, page 10. Several of our
Historians speak of the Actions of this Illustrious Prince. See Matthew.
Westmonast. A.D. 44. page 93. Galf. Monumentens. lib. 4. c. 16. Pol. Vergil.
lib. 2. Grafton. Part 7. p. 77. These all agree, that he Reigned in the time of
Claudius Caesar, but Mr. Speed L.5. c.6.
will have it, that he lived in the time of Domitian Caesar, from Juvenal Sat.
4.
who introduces Fabritius Vejento a Roman Senator flattering Domitian, at the
Council held about the Turbot, as follows, Regem aliquem capies, aut de Temone
Britanno
Excidet Arviragus, --
But in this he is mistaken, for Arviragus was dead before the Reign of
Domitian, so that the Sycophant could not mean that he should overcome Him, but
some British or Foreign Warrier, as stout as that Arviragus subdued by his his
Father Vespasian.

Deserving Favorite, a Tragi-Comedy presented before the King and Queen's
Majesty's at White Hall, and very often at the Private House in Black-friars,
with great Applause, by King Charles the First his Servants, printed in octavo
Land. 1659. and dedicated to his very Noble and Approved Friends Mr. Thomas
Carry Son to the Earl of Monmouth; and Mr. William Murrey: both of the
Bedchamber to His Majesty.

Fool would be a Favorite, or The Discreet Lover, often acted by the Queen's
Majesty's Servants with great applause, and printed in octavo Land. 1657.

Osmond the Great Turk, otherwise called The Noble Servant his Tragedy: acted
by the Queens Servants with great applause, and printed with the former, octavo
Land. 1657. The Action of this Play, is the taking of Constantinople, in the
year 1453. I know not why the Author has altered his Scene, from Greece, to
Barbary; or the Names of Mahomet, and Irene, for Melchosus, and Despina: except
in imitation of Beaumont, and Fletcher, who have transferred the Names of Rollo,
and Otto, on Antoninus and Geta, and degraded those Emperors of Rome, by
Creating them Dukes of Normandy. Many Authors have treated of this Story, in
the Life of Mahomet the Second, consult Chalcocondylus lib. 8. cap. 6.
Knolles's Turkish History. This Story is likewise in Bandello's Novels; see the
French Translation by Belleforest, Tome 1. Hist. 2. See Painter's Palace of
Pleasure, a Book of Novels, printed in quarto Land. 1566. Nov. 4o. For the
Underplot of Orcanes, Calibeus, and Ozaca, it is founded on the Story of
Mustapha, Son to Mahomet the Second, Achmet Bassa, and his Wife. See Lipsii
Monita. lib. 2. cap. 9. page 125. Artus le Contin. de l'Hist. des Turcs. L. 11.
Knolles, etc.

Passionate Lover, a Tragi-Comedy in two parts, twice presented before the King
and Queen's Majesty's at Somerset House, and very often at the Private-house in
Black-friars, with great applause, by King Charles the First's Servants,
printed in octavo Land. 1655, and Dedicated to the Illustrious Princess Mary
Duchess of Richmond, and Lenox, by the Publisher Mr. Alexander Goughe. On this
Play the ingenious Alexander Brom has writ a Copy of Verses, which seem to
reflect on the Character of the Passionate Lover, and may be found by the
Curious, in his Poems 8o. page.256. Edition the Second.

Heraclius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy translated from the French of
Monsieur P. Corneille, and printed in quarto Land. 1664. This Play was never
acted, though intended by the Translator for the Stage: but another Translation
formerly designed, (after this seemed to be accepted) being perfected was
preferred by the Players, and this not returned to the Author until the very day
the other was Acted. But notwithstanding the Preference given to the other,
certainly this Version is not contemptible; at least if the Author's Reasons in
the Prologue make take place: All things have proper Idioms of their own,
Their Elegance in Ours is hardly shown;
This, but a Copy, and all such go less,
Great Beauties may be altered by the Dress.


Having given you the Author's Excuse for his Translation, let me give you his
Opinion of Translations in general in the following Distick.

Those who translate, hope but a Labourer's praise,
Who well invent, contrive; deserve the Bays.
In the design of this Play, the French Author follows Baronius's
Ecclesiastical Annals, but does not (as he himself acknowledges in his Examen
of this Play) strictly follow truth in many things. See Le Theater de
Corneille, tom. 3. Je n'ay conserve icy pour toute verite Historique que
l'ordre de la Succession des Empereurs, Tibere, Maurice, Phocas, and Heraclius,
etc. Many are the Historians that have treated on this Story, as Nicephorus
Calistus Eccl. Hist. Cedreni Annal. Zonaras, Annal. Baronius etc.

Mr. Phillips has omitted Three of these Plays, viz. Deserving Favorite, Fool
would be a Favorite, and Heraclius: the later is forgot likewise by Mr.
Winstanley, who has in requital Fathered another Play on him, which belongs to
Dr. Lodge, viz. Marius and Scylla.

James CARLISLE.
A young Author now living, who has lately published a Play, called The Fortune
Hunters, or Two Fools well met: a Comedy acted by his Majesty's Servants,
printed in quarto Land. 1689. I know not how it succeeded on the Stage, but if
it be considered as the First Play of a young Poet, I think it deserved
Applause, and exceeds several Comedies printed in this Age. Only I think the
Author's, as well as Mr. Spruce's Brains were a little Doz'd when he writ the
end of the Second Act: where he mistakes young Wealthy's Hand for the Handle of
the Pump, and the Orange-flower-for Pump-water.

Epilogue to the Play.
That he meant well is all he has to plead;
Faith then be kind, and let his Play succeed,
And take for once the Good Will, for the Deed.
Richard CARPENTER.
The Author of a Play, called The Pragmatical Jesuit new leavened; printed in
quarto, but when, or where I know not through the defect of my Copy. All that I
can acquaint the Reader with, is that it is a very instructive Play, chiefly
tending to Morality; showing the difference between true Religion, and
Hypochrisy. The Author has made it his business to expose all the Subtleties
and Inventions of the Romish Clergy to gain Proselites, and promote their
Religion. I know not whether or no, it might not be writ by a Divine of that
Name, the Author of several Sermons, particularly Three, of keeping a good
Conscience, printed in quarto Land. 1623.

William CARTHWRIGHT.
A Person as Eminent for Loyaty and Learning, (his years considered) as any
this Age has produced. One, whose Character has been written by several Pens;
and therefore has afforded me, (who fetch my knowledge from Books, more than
verbal Information) the larger subject to expatiate on.

The Place of this Author's Nativity, the time, and his Father's Name, are
differently represented by those Authors that have mentioned him. Mr. Lloyd
Memoires, page 422.
says that he was the Son of Thomas Carthwright of Burford in Oxfordshire, and
Born Aug. 16. in the year 1615. Mr. Wood. Antiq. Oxoniens. p. 274.
says that he was the Son of William Carthwrigth, and Born at Northway near
Tewskbury in Gloucester-shire, in Sept. 1611. and Christened the 26th day of the
same Month. That his Father had dissipated a fair Inheritance, he knew not how,
and as his last Refuge turned Innkeeper at Cirencester. This Account
contradicts the Publisher of his Poems, who says that he Died at Thirty. But
however uncertain the place and time of his Birth be; certain it is, that he
was bred a King's-Scholar under the Reverend and Learned Dr. Oldbaston: and in
the year 1631 was chose Student of Christ-Church College in Oxford, and placed
under the care of Mr. Terrent. He took his several Degrees, of Bachelor and
Master of Arts, and afterward was chosen by the House as Proctor, and admitted
as Junior to Mr. Wake of Magdalen College by the University, the Twelfth of
April 1643. and the same year, viz. on the 29th of November, he Died of a
Malignant Fever, which then reigned, and was that year Fatal to others of his
Contemporaries, as Mr. Masters of New-College, Mr. Diggs of All Souls, and
others both Men of the Gown and Sword. He was Buried the first of December in
the South-Isle, being lamented not only by all good and learned Men, but even
by Majesty it self: the King and Queen having anxiously inquired after him all
the time of his Sickness, and showed themselves much afflicted at his Death. On
the Ninth of December Mr. Maplet of the same House, was chose to supply his
Place the remaining part of the year.

He was extremely remarkable both for his outward, and inward Endowments; his
Body being as handsome as his Soul. He was an expert Linguist, understanding
not only Greek and Latin, but French and Italian, as perfectly as his
Mother Tongue. He was an excellent Orator, and yet an admirable Poet, a Quality
which Cicero with all his pains could not attain to. Nor was Aristotle less
known to him than Cicero and Virgil: and those who heard his Metaphysical
Lectures, gave him the Preference to all his Predecessors, the present Bishop
of Lincoln excepted. His Sermons were as much admired as his other Composures,
and One fitly applied to our Author, that Saying of Aristotle concerning
AEschron the Poet, that He could not tell what AEschron could not do.

In a word he was of so sweet a disposition, and so replete with all Virtues,
that he was beloved by all Learned Men that knew him, and admired by all
Strangers: and to close all with the Character the Reverend and Pious Dr. Fell
(sometime Bishop of Oxford) gave of him, Carthwright was the utmost Man could
come to.

To speak of his Poetry, there needs no other Character of it in general, then
that the ablest Judge of Poetry at that time, I mean Ben Johnson, said with
some Passion, My Son Carthwright writes all like a Man.

He writ Four Plays besides other Poems, all which were printed together in
octavo, Land. 1651. accompanied with above Fifty Copies of Verses writ by the
most eminent Wits of the University, every One being desirous to appear in the
Number of his Friends, and to give a public Testimony to the world of the
Value they had for his Memory.

Ordinary, a Comedy: I know not where this Play was acted, but I remember part
of the second Scene of the first Act, between the Widow Pot-luck, Slicer, and
Hearsay, is transcribed by the Composer of Wits Interpreter, in his
Love-Dialogues, under the Title of the Old Widow. page 81.

Lady Errant, a Tragi-Comedy, of which I can give no Account where acted, only
that it is esteemed by some a good Comedy.

Royal Slave, a Tragi-Comedy; presented to the King and Queen by the Students
of Christ Church in Oxford, Aug. 30. 1636. Presented since to both Their
Majesty's at Hampton Court by the King's Servants. This Play gave such Content
to Their Majesty's, and the whole Court, as well for the stately Scenes, the
Richness of the Persian. Habits, the excellency of the Songs, (which were set
by that admirable Composer, Mr. Henry Laws, Servant to his Majesty King
Charles the First; in his public and private Music:) as for the noble Style
of the Play it self, and the ready Address and graceful Carriage of the Actors
(amongst which Dr. Busby, the famous Master of Westminster School approved
himself a second Roscius); that they unanimously acknowledged that it did
exceed all things of that Nature which they had ever seen. The Queen in
particular so much admired it, that in November following, she sent for the
Habits and Scenes to Hampton Court: she being desirous to see her own Servants
represent the same Play, (whose profession it was) that she might the better
judge of the several Performances, and to whom the Preference was due. The
Sentence was universally given by all the Spectators in favor of the Gown:
though nothing was wanting on Mr. Carthwright's side, to inform the Players as
well as the Scholars, in what belonged to the Action and Delivery of each Part.

Siege, or Love's Convert, a Tragi-Comedy; where acted I know not, but it is
dedicated by the Author to King Charles the First, by an Epistle in Verse. The
Story of Misander, and Leucatia, is founded on that of Pausanias and Cleonice,
in Plutarch's Life of Cymon. The Injunction which the Rich Widow Pyle laid upon
her Lovers is borrowed from Boccace's Novels. Day 9th, Nov. 1.

Amongst his Poems, there are several concerning the Dramatick Poets and their
Writings, which must not be forgot: as those two Copies which he writ on Mr.
Thomas Killegrew's Plays, The Prisoner, and Claracilla; Two Copies on Fletcher,
and One in Memory of Ben Johnson, which are so Excellent that the Publisher of
Mr. Carthwright's Poems speaks as in a Rapture in the Preface; viz. What had Been said, had he read his own Eternity in that lasting Elegy given him by our
Author.

Besides these Poems, our Author has extant other Pieces on different Subjects,
as a Sermon, printed Land. 1652. and a Book which I never saw, but is mentioned
by Mr. Wood Antiq. Oxoniens. page 274.
under this Title; Dies in Mense Novembri maxim notabiles Coronam nempe and
familiam regiam spectantes. Land. 1671.

It Is not possible for me in this place, to enumerate all the Praises given him
by the Learned of those Times in which he lived: only give me leave to insert
part of one Copy, by which the Reader may judge of the Rest. The Lines were
writ by John Leigh Esquire to the Stationer (Mr. Mosely) on his printing Mr.
Carthwright's Poems. After he has named all the admirable Poems, set forth by
the aforesaid Bookseller; with the just Commendation of each Author, he says
thus of Mr. Carthwright; But after all thou bring'st up in the Rear,
One that fills every Eye, and every Ear,
Carthwright, rare Carthwrt to whom all must bow,
That was best Preacher, and best Poet too;
Whose Learned Fancy never was at rest,
But always laboring yet labored least:
His Wit's Immortal, and shall Honor have,
While there is or Slavish Lord, or Royal Slave.


Robert CHAMBERLAIN.
A Gentleman that flourisht in the Reign of King Charles the First, the Author
of a Play called The Swaggering Damsel, a Comedy printed in quarto Land. 1640.
I know not whether this Play was ever acted, but it is ushered into the world by
Three Copies of Verses, one of which was writ by Mr. Rawlins, in requital of a
Copy writ by our Author, in praise of his Tragedy called The Rebellion. A
Complement which has in this Age been practiced by Mr. Dryden, to Mr. Lee's
Rival Queens, in Return of that, past by him, on Mr. Dryden's State of
Innocence.

Mr. Phillips, and Winstanley have ascribed to our Author a Play called
Sicellides, which they style a Pastoral, tho'it is distinguished (by the
Anonymous Author) by the Title of a Piscatory, the Dramatis Personae being most
of them Fishermen.

William CHAMBERLAIN.
A Dorset-shire Gentleman, who in the Reign of King Charles the First, lived at
Shaftsbury, a Market Town of sufficient Note for giving the Title to the famous
Lord Cooper, first Earl of Shaftsbury. He writ a Play called Love's Victory, a
Tragi-Comedy printed in quarto Land. 1658. and dedicated to the Right
Worshipful Sr. William Portman. He writ this Play during the late Troubles, and
designed to have it acted, but the Powers then in being having suppressed the
Stage; he contented himself with Printing it: though it has since appeared, (at
least a great part of it) upon the Stage in 1678. under the Title of Wits led
by the Nose, or A Poet's Revenge.

This Author writ besides, an Heroic Poem called Pharonnida, in Five Books,
printed in octavo Land. 1659. and dedicated likewise to Sr. William Portman.
This Poem though it has nothing extraordinary to recommend it, yet appeared
abroad in Prose 1683. under the Title of a Novel called Eromena, or The Noble
Stranger.

George CHAPMAN.
A Gentleman of no mean Repute for his Poetical Writings and Versions, amongst
the Wits of the Age wherein he lived, to wit, in the later part of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and that of King James. I can give him no greater
Commendation, than that he was so intimate with the famous Jhonson, as to
engage in a Triumvirate with Him, and Marston in a Play called Eastward-Hoe: a
Favor which the haughty Ben could seldom be persuaded to. I might add to
this, that he was so much valued in his time, by the Gentlemen of the
Middle Temple and Lincoln's End, that when those two Honorable Societies
agreed to Present Their Majesty's with a Masque at Whitehall, on the joyful
Occasion of the Marriage between the Princess Elizabeth, only Daughter to King
James the First, and Frederick the Fifth of that Name, Count Palatine of the
Rhine, and afterward King of Bohemia: they chose Mr. Chapman for their Poet,
to suit Language to the Occasion, and Mr. Inigo Jones for their Ingineer, to
order the Machines, and Decoration of the Scenes.

He has writ many Dramatick Pieces, to the number of Eighteen: besides several
other Poems and Translations: of all which his Tragedy of Bussy d' Amboise has
the Preference. I know not how Mr. Dryden Pref. to Spanish Friar.
came to be so possessed with Indignation against this Play, as to resolve to
burn One annually to the Memory of Ben Johnson: but I know very well that there
are some who allow it a just Commendation; and others Pref. to Reasons for Bays
Changing his Religion.
that since have taken the liberty to promise a solemn annual Sacrifice of The
Hind and Panther, to the Memory of Mr. Quarles, and John Bunyan: so that should
this last Humor continue, The Hind and Panther would grow as scarce, as this
Old Tragedy is at present. But I leave this Digression to give the Reader an
Account of his Plays in order.

All Fools, a Comedy presented at the Black-friars, and afterward before his
Majesty King James the First, in the Beginning of his Reign: and printed in
quarto Land. 1605. This was in those days accounted an Excellent Comedy, and
will still bear Reading: it seems to be built in part upon the same Fabric
with Terence's Heautontimorumenos, as those who will compare the Characters of
the two Fathers Gostanzo, and Mar. Antonio, with Chremes, and Menedemus; and
their Sons Valerio, Fortunio, and Rynaldo, with Clinia, Antipho, and Syrus, may
easily perceive. The Prologue and Epilogue (writ in Blank Verse) show that in
those days, Persons of Quality, and those that thought themselves Judges of
Wit, instead of sitting in Boxes, as now in use, sat on the Stage: what
influence those Sparks had on the meaner Auditors, may be seen by the following
Lines; Prologue to the Play.


Great are the Gifts given to united Heads;
To Gifts, Attire, to fair Attire the Stage
Helps much; for if our other Audience see
You on the Stage depart before we end,
Our Wits go with you all, and we are Fools; etc
Alphonsus Emperor of Germany, a Tragedy, very often acted (with great
Applause) at the Private-house in Black-friars, by the Servants to King Charles
the First; printed in quarto Land. 1654. This Play, though it bear the Name of
Alphonsus, was writ (as I suppose) in Honor of the English Nation, in the
Person of Richard Earl of Cornwall, Son to King John, and Brother to King Henry
the Third. He was chosen King of the Romans in 1257. and Crowned at Aix the
Seventeenth day of May, being Ascension day. About this time Alphonsus the
Tenth King of Castile, (the subject of this Tragedy) was chosen by other
Electors. Tho'this King was accounted by some a Pious Prince, yet our Author
represents his as a Bloody Tyrant, and contrary to other Historians brings him
to an unfortunate End, he supposing him to be killed by Alexander, Son to
Lorenzo de Cipres his Secretary: in revenge of his Father, who was poisoned by
him: and to complete his Revenge he makes him first deny his Savior in hopes
of Life, and then stabs him, glorying that he had at once destroyed both Body
and Soul. This Passage is related in several Authors, as Bolton's Four last
Things, Reynolds of the Passions, Clark's Examples, Wanley's History of Man.
For the true Story consult Mariana de Reb. Hisp. Lib.13. C.10. etc. Louis de
Mayerne Turquet. Hist. Generale d' Espagne Lib.12. Bzovius An. 1257, etc.

Blind Beggar of Alexandria, a Comedy, most pleasantly discoursing his variable
Humors in disguised shapes full of Conceit and Pleasure: sundry times
publicly Acted in London, by the Right Honorable the Earl of Notingham, Lord
High Admiral his Servants, printed in quarto Land. 1598. This Play is neither
divided into Acts nor Scenes.

Bussy d' Amboise, a Tragedy often presented at Paul's, in the Reign of King
James the First: and since the Restoration of King Charles the Second acted at
the Theater Royal with good Applause. For the Plot see Thuanus, Jean De Serres,
and Mezeray, in the Reign of King Henry the Third of France. The Intrigue
between Bussy and Tamyra is related by Rosset in his Histoires Tragiques de
notre temps, under the feigned Names of Lysis and Silvie. Hist. 17. page 363.

Bussy d' Amboise, his Revenge, a Tragedy, often presented at the Private-house
in the White-Friars, printed in quarto Land. 1613. and dedicated to the Right
Virtuous and Truly Noble Knight, Sr. Thomas Howard. This Play is far short in
value to the former, and was not received on the Stage with that universal
Applause, Neither is it so strictly founded on Truth as the other: though the
Author Epistle Dedicatory.
calls them poor Envious Souls that cavil at Truth's want in these natural
Fictions: Material Instruction, elegant and sententious excitation to Virtue,
and deflection from her contrary, being the Soul, limbs, and limits of an
Authentical Tragedy.

Conspiracy and Tragedy of Charles Duke of Byron Marshal of France, in two
Plays, acted at the Black-friars in the Reign of King James the First, printed
in quarto Land. 1608. and Dedicated to his Honorable and constant Friend Sr.
Thomas Walsingham, and to his much Loved from his Birth, the right Toward and
Worthy Gentleman his son, Thomas Walsingham Esquire This Play is founded on History
in the Reign of Henry IV. of France: and many are the Authors that have
mentioned the Marshal's Story. See Davila's Civil Wars of France, Montluc's
Memoires, Mezeray's Chron. Pierre Mathiew's Contin of De Serres, Thuanus,
Anselmus Gemblacensis, Scipion Du pleix, P. Mathiew, etc.

Caesar and Pompey, a Roman Tragedy declaring their Wars, out of whose Events
is evicted this Proposition, Only a Just Man is a Freeman, printed in quarto
Land. 1631. and Dedicated to the Right Honorable, his exceeding good Lord, the
Earl of Middlesex. I cannot pass by that our Author has here laid down the same
Rule with Father Le Bossu, the Learned regular Canon of St. Genevieve, Trane du
Poem Epique, lib. 1. cap.7.
That the Moral ought to be the foundation of a Play: Instruction being the
chief design of a Poet. As he says; La premiere chose par ou l'ou doit
commencer pour fair une Fable, est de choisir l'Instruction and le point de
Morale qui luy doit servir de fond, selon le dessein and la fin que l'on se
propose. This is that Passage which Mr. Dryden hints at in his Grounds of
Criticism in Tragedy Pref. to Troilus and Cressida.
and though he takes the French for his Guide, I believe there have not been
wanting those of our own Countrymen, who have been able to decide all
Controversies in Dramatick Poetry, as well as Strangers. Many Authors have
treated on this Story: See Suetonius's Life of Julius Caesar. Plutarch's Lives
of Pompey, Caesar, and Cato, Velleius Paterculus, Florus, Dion, and Lucan, who
by some is rather accounted an Historian than a Poet.

Gentleman Usher, a Comedy printed in quarto Land. 1606. I know not whether
ever this Play was acted, but I have heard it commended by some, for a good
Comedy, though if I may presume to give my Opinion, it is but indifferent.

Humourous days Mirth, a Comedy printed as I am told in quarto, and a passable
Play: but this I must leave to those who have read it.

Masque of the Two Honorable Houses or Inns of Court; the Middle Temple and
Lincolns Inn: Performed before the King at White Hall, on Shrove-monday at
Night, being the fifteenth of February 1613: at the Princely Celebration of the
Most Royal Nuptials of the Palsgrave, and his thrice Gracious Princess
Elizabeth, etc. With a description of their whole Show; in the manner of their
March on Horseback to the Court from the Master of the Rolls his House: with
all their Right Noble Consorts, and shewful Attendants. Invented, and
Fashioned, with the ground and special structure of the whole Work-by our
Kingdoms most Artfull and Ingenious Architect Inigo Jones. Supplied, applied,
digested, and written by George Chapman, printed in quarto Land. 1614. and
dedicated to the most Noble and constant Combiner of Honor and Virtue, Sr.
Edward Phillips, Master of the Rolls. At the end of the Masque is printed an
Epithalamium called a Hymn to Hymen for the most time-fitted Nuptials of our
Thrice Gracious Princess Elizabeth, etc. I leave it to their Judgments who have
perused this Piece, to determine whether it answer the swelling Title Page, or
whether the Authors Defense before the Masque, be just and solid.

May Day, a Witty Comedy, diverse times acted at the Black-friars; and printed
in quarto Land. 1811.

Monsieur d'Olive, a Comedy sundry times acted by her Majesty's Children at the
Black Friars, printed in quarto Land. 1606.

Revenge for Honor, a Tragedy printed in quarto Land. 1654. This Play I have
seen acted many years ago at the Nursery in Barbican.

Temple, a Masque which I never saw.

Two Wise Men, and all the rest Fools, or a Comical Moral, censuring the
Follies of that Age, diverse times acted, and printed in quarto Land. 1619. The
Prologue and Epilogue to this Play are writ in Prose, which was practiced
formerly by several of the Poets, as William Lilly, in his Court Comedies, and
others. But there is One thing in this Play, far more remarkable; that it is
extended to Seven Acts: a thing which I never saw in any other, either in our
own, or Foreign Languages, and which is directly contrary to that Rule of
Horace De Art Poetica.


Neve minor, neu sit quinto, productior actu
Fabula, quae posci vult and spectata reponi.
But I suppose this might rather be the Printer's Ignorance, than the Poets
Intention; for certainly Mr. Chapman better understood the Rules of the Dramma:
tho'I am led only by Tradition to believe this Play to be his; since it is
published without any mention of the Author, or the Place where 'twas printed.

Widow's Tears, a Comedy often presented in the Black and White-Friars: printed
in quarto Land. 1612. and dedicated to the right Virtuous and truly Noble
Gentleman John Reed of Mitton, in the County of Gloucester, Esquire. The Plot of
Lysander and Cynthia is borrowed from Petronius Arbyters Satyricon, being the
Story of the Matron of Ephesus related by Eumolpus: a Story since handled by
several other Pens, as Janus Dousa the Father, in his Notes on this Story, and
Gabbema in the last Edition of Petronius: who observe, That it was translated
into Latin Verse by Romulus, an Antique Gramarian; that it was translated from
the German Language into Latin: and into French Rhyme by Hebertus. We have it
not only in the Seven Wife Masters, a Book vulgarly known, and which, if I may
believe my Author, is a translation of Modius, who new modeled the Story, and
published his Version under this Title Ludus septem Sapientum, de Astrei regii
adolescentis, educatione, periculis, etc. But also I have read the same Story
with little alteration in the Cento Novelle Antiche di Carlo Gualteruzzi, Nov.
51. We have it likewise much improved, with a Philosophical Comment upon it, by
a Countryman of our own, under the Title of the Ephesian Matron, printed in
octavo Land. 1668. and others.

These are all the Plays which I know of, that are published under our Authors
name, except a Play which I have already mentioned, viz.

Eastward-Hoe, a Comedy played in the Black Friars, by the Children of her
Majesty's Revels: made by George Chapman, Ben Johnson, and John Marston,
printed in quarto Land. 1605. This Play was writ shortly after Decker's
Westward Hoe, as you may see by the Prologue which is writ in Blank Verse. The
Play it self has lately appeared on the present Stage, being revived by Mr.
Tate under the Title of Cuckold's Haven.

Mr. Phillips, I know not why, has omitted half this Authors Plays, as you may
see in his Account of the Modern Poets, p. 53.

Having given an Account of his Plays, I am now to speak of his other Works
which were not in those days accounted less eminent: particularly his Version
of all Homer's Works; viz. His Illiads, Odysses, and what he calls The Crown of
all his Works, his Batracomyomachia, or The Battle of Frogs and Mice, together
with his Hymns and Epigrams. If it be urged by some that he has been since
outdone by Mr. Ogleby in the Two former, it is chiefly to be ascribed to the
ill choice of his measure of Verse, and the obsolete Expressions in use in his
time, and besides Translation was then, as I may say, in its Infancy. However I
think Mr. Ogleby himself has since been as far exceeded by the exact and
curious Pen of Mr. Hobbs: and for for his Minor Poems, they have never been
attempted by any other Pen that I know of. To these I must add his Translation
of Hesiod; his finishing Musaeus his Erotopaenion, or The Loves of Hero and
Leander, a Piece begun by Christopher Marloe; his Andromeda liberata with a
Vindication of the same; all which speak his Industry at least, if not his
Ingenuity: and how slight an Opinion soever this Age may entertain of his
Translations, I find them highly extolled in an Old Copy called a Censure of
the Poets: which having spoke of the Eminent Dramatick Poets, as Shakesprear,
Johnson, Daniel, etc. it adds of Translators as follows, placing our Author in
the first Rank.

Others again there lived in my days,
That have of us deserved no less Praise
For their Translations, than the daintiest Wit,
That on Parnassus thinks he high does sit,
And for a Claim may amongst the Muses call,
As the most curious Maker of them all;
First reverend Chapman, who has brought to us
Musaeus, Homer, and Hesiodus,
Out of the Greek; and by his skill has reared
Them to that height, and to our tongue indear'd,
That were those Poets at this day alive;
To see their Books, that with us thus survive;
They Would think, having neglected them so long,
They had been written in the English Tongue.
Sir Aston COKAIN.
A Gentleman that in the Reign of K. Charles the Second, lived at Ashbourn, a
Market Town An Darby-shire, (situate between the River Dove and Compton). He
was of an Ancient Family, as Mr. Cambden observes in the Entrance of his
Description of Darby-shire. Nay further Mr. John Cokain of Rushton (our Authors
Kinsman and Cousin-German to the Lord Obrian Cokain, Viscount Cullen in
Ireland) had an Ancient Evidence to prove that Sr. -- Cokain their Predecessor
was anciently allied to King William the Conqueror, and in those days lived at
Hemmingham-Castle in Essex. See Cokain's Epigrams, l. 2. Ep. 7.
But whether our Author fetched his Pedigree from so Ancient a Stock or no;
certain it is, that he was well descended, and had a Liberal Education bestowed
on him, being in his youth bred in Trinity College, in Cambridge, and when he
was about Four and Twenty years of Age, he was sent to make a Journey through
France and Italy, which he completed in a Twelve-months space, An. 1632. an
Account of which he has writ to his Son See his Poems. p. 93.
. He was very much addicted to Books, and the study of Poetry; spending most of
his time in the Muses company. Amongst his other Poetical Productions, he has
written Three Plays, and a Masque which are in print; of which take the
following Account.

Masque presented at Bretbie in Darby-shire, on Twelfth-Night 1639. This
Entertainment has hitherto been omitted in all former Catalogues, as I suppose
through an Oversight, it being but short, and printed in the body of the
Author's Poems, See page 118.
amongst others of a different Nature. It was presented, (as I find upon
perusal of it) before the Right Honorable Phillip the first Earl of
Chesterfield, and his Countess, Two of their Sons acting in it. The diversion
terminated in a Ball.

Obstinate Lady, a Comedy printed in octavo, Land. 1658. This Play, with other
Poems were left in the Custody of a Friend, at the Author's Removal from
London, who dying, they were dispersed into several Hands. One Mr. William
Godbid, (a Bookseller as I suppose) got this Play into his Hands, and though he
found it imperfect, the last Leaf being wanting, wherein were the Authors
Conclusion and Epilogue: he procured some of his Acquaintance to supply that
defect, and so printed it. And though this Comedy were very much of it writ in
Number (as the Author calls it) he put it forth as if the most part of it were
Prose. In this Edition you have that defect much amended, and the Authors own
Conclusion, and Epilogue added. Sr. Aston's Obstinate Lady, seems to be
Cousin-German to Massinger's Very Woman; as they that will compare Don John,
Antonio, and Almira, with Carionil and Lucora in this Play, may easily perceive.

Ovid's Tragedy, printed in octavo Land. 1669. This Play was printed since the
rest of his Works, tho it is frequently bound with them. I know not why the
Author gave this Play the Title of Ovid's Tragedy, except that he lays the
Scene in Tomos, and brings him to fall down dead with grief at the News he
received from Rome, in sight of the Audience: otherwise he has not much
business on the Stage, and the Play ought rather to have taken the Name from
Bassanes Jealousy, and the dismal effects thereof, the murder of his new Bride
Clorina, and his Friend Pyrontus. But this is an Error which Beaumont and
Fletcher have heretofore committed, (as Mr. Rimer Page 57.
has observed.) in the King and no King, and therefore the more excusable in
our Author. The passage of Captain Hannibal's inviting the dead Carcass of
Helvidius to Supper, is possibly borrowed from the Italian Play called Il
Atheisto Fulminato, to which Language our Author was no Stranger; and on which
Foundation the Catastrophe of the Libertine is built.

Trapolin creduto Principe, or Trapolin supposed a Prince, an Italian
Tragi-comedy, printed in octavo Land. 1658. The Design of this Play, the Author
borrowed from One which he saw, or rather heard, twice Acted in Venice during
his abode in that City; since he built this on that Foundation: So that as he
pleads in his Proloque it is no Translation. This Play was revived on our Stage
since the King's Return, and a new Prologue writ by Duffet, printed in his
Poems page 82. and has since that, been altered by Mr. Tate, and acted at the
Theater in Dorset-Garden 1685.

Mr. Philips Page 13.
and Mr. Winstanley Page 163.
have committed mistakes in this Author, having omitted the Tragedy of Ovid,
and placed two anonymous Plays to him, which I dare be confident are none of
his; viz. Thersites, and Tyranical Government. All his Poems being collected,
and published together, in octavo Land. 1669, by Mr. Kirkman, who knew Plays far
better than either of these Authors.

Having given you this Account of his Plays, I am next to speak of his other
Poems, and Pieces, but since the Author has reckoned them up in Verse, in an
Epigram Epigr. L. 2. Ep. 124.
directed to his Honored Friend, Major William Warner, I shall transcribe his
own Lines, which may inform the Reader of his Style, as well as his Poems.

Plays, Eclogues, Songs, a Satyr I have writ,
A Remedy for those in the amorous Fit,
Love Elegies, and Funeral Elegies,
Letters of things of diverse Qualities,
Encomiastick Lines to Works of some,
A Masque, and an Epithalamium,
Two Books of Epigrams: All which I mean
Shall (in this Volume) come upon the Scene;
Some Divine Poems, which when first I came
To Cambridge I writ there, I need not name;
Of Dianea, A Romance Translated from the Italian of Giovanni Francisco
Lovedano.
neither my Translation,
Omitted here as of another Fashion.
For Heavens sake name no more you say, I cloy you,
I do obey you; Therefore (Friend) God b'wy you.
Edward COOK Esquire
A Gentleman of whom I can give no other account, than that he has published a
Play called Love's Triumph, or The Royal Union, a Tragedy in Heroic Verse,
never acted, but printed in quarto Land. 1678. and dedicated to her Highness,
the Most Illustrious MARY Princess of Orange. This Play is founded on
Cassandra, a famed Romance, as you will find by reading Part 5th, Book 4th, to
the End.

John COOK.
The Author of a Play called Green's Tu Quoque, a Comedy printed in quarto
Land. -- I cannot tell the Date, or the Place where 'twas first acted, the
Title Page of my Copy being lost, though I suppose at the Red-Bull, by a Passage
in the Play; but I can inform the Reader, that it is commended by Thomas
Heywood, who purposely writ an Epistle to gratulate (as he says) the Love and
Memory of his Worthy Friend the Author, and his entirely beloved Friend the
Actor. He says further, That it past the Test of the Stage with general
Applause: And I have seen it acted since the King's Return, at the Playhouse
(as I think) in little Lincolns-Inn-Fields with good success: though the printed
Copy be not divided into Acts. The Plot of Spend-all's gaining the Widow
Raysby, has a near resemblance with that of Will. Small shanks and Widow
Taffety: though I think the Design is better wrought up in this Play, because the
Widow by a Counter-plot frees her self from Spend-all, and after having made a
Trial of the Sincerity of his Love, consents of her own accord to Marry him.

This Play had its Title given it by the Author, in respect of the admirable
Comedian, Thomas Green, who acted the part of Bubble, whose universal Repartee
to all Complement is Tu Quoque; Mr. Heywood Epistle to the Reader.
gives him this Character, That there was not an Actor of his Nature in his
Time of better ability in performance of what he undertook, more applauded by
the Audience, of greater Grace at the Court, or of more general Love in the
City.

At the Entrance of this Play is a Distick, which Mr. Winstanley applies to Mr.
Robert Green, (of whom I shall give an account in his proper place:) though had
he put on his Spectacles he would have found it printed thus;

Upon the Death of Thomas Green.
How fast bleak Autumn changes Flora's dye,
What yesterday was ( Green) now is sear and dry.
W. R.
John COREY.
A Gentleman who is pleased to style himself the Author of a Play called The
Generous Enemies, or The Ridiculous Lovers, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal
by his Majesty's Servants, and printed in quarto Land. 1672. Tho'he has so
little share in it; that we may justly say of him, as Appolodorus the Athenian
said of the Books of Chrysippus: If a Man should extract the things which he
has borrowed from others, the Paper would be left blank. To prove this I am to
acquaint the Reader, that this Play, like a Botcher's Cushion is made out of
several Pieces; he having stolen from Four Eminent Poets; Fletcher, and
Randolph; Th. Corneille, and Quinault. The chief Design of the Play, that of
the Generous Enemies, is borrowed from Quinault's La Genereuse Ingratitude, as
will be evident to those who will compare the Characters of Don Alvarez, and
Signior Flaminio, with those of the French Zegry and Abencerage; Semena in
Disguise under the Name of Lisander, with Zelinda under the Name of Ormin, etc.
For the Ridiculous Lovers; it is chiefly borrowed from a Comedy of Th.
Corneille's called D. Bertran de Cigarral, which Play is founded on a Spanish
Comedy written by D. Francisco de Roxas, and styled, Enter bobos anda el juego.
The Quarrel between Bertran and Robatzy in the fifth Act, is stolen verbatim
from Love's Pilgrimage, Act 2. Sc. 1. and Act 3. Sc. 3. The testy Humor of
Bertran to his Servants in the third Act, is part of it taken from the Muses
Looking-glass. Act 2. Sc. 1. Act 3. Sc. 3. and 4.

Charles COTTON Esquire
An Ingenious Gentleman lately (as I am informed) Deceased, who sometimes dwelt
at Beresford in the County of Stafford. He was an excellent Lyrick Poet, but
particularly famous for Burlesque Verse: but mentioned here on account of a
Translation of his called,

Horace, a French Tragedy of Monsieur Corneille, printed in quarto Land. 1671.
and dedicated to his Dear Sister Mrs. Stanhope Hutchinson. This Play was first
finished in 1665. See the Epistle to the Reader.
But neither at that time, nor of sevaral years after, was it intended for the
public view; it being writ for the private divertisement of a fair young Lady,
and ever since it had the honor first to kiss her Hands, so entirely hers, that
the Author did not reserve so much as the Brouillon to himself. However she
being prevailed upon though with some difficulty to give her consent, it was
printed in Octo. 1670.

I shall not extol, or particularise the Excellencies of this Play in the
Original; it is sufficient to tell you, that the French Author thought it might
pass for the best of his Productions if the three last Acts had been equal to
the two First: and this he says was the general Opinion, as you may read in the
beginning of his Examen of this Play. See Theater de Corneille. tom.2.
As to the Performance of this our Countryman, notwithstanding his Modesty, and
Generosity in giving the preference to Madam Phillips her Translation, I think
it no ways inferior to it, at least, I dare aver that it far transcends that
Version published by Sr. William Lower.

The Plot of this Play, as far as it is founded on History, may be read in
several Authors. See Livy, lib. 1. Florus, lib. 1. c. 3. Dionysius
Hallicarnassaeus, etc.

There are other Works of this Author's writing, which speak him a great Wit,
and Master of an excellent Fancy and Judgment: Such as his Poem called The
Wonders of the Peak, printed in octavo Land. 1681. His Burlesque Poems called,
Scarronides, or Virgil Travestie, a mock Poem, on the first and fourth Books of
Virgil's AEneis, printed in octavo Land. 1678. Though the Title seems to imply as
if this Poem were an Imitation of Scarron, who has translated. Eight Books of
Virgil in the same manner: yet those who will compare both these Pieces, will
possibly find that he has not only exceeded the French, but all others that
have attempted in that kind, to the reserve of the incomparable Butler, the
famed Author of Hudibras: and I think we may with little variation apply the
following Tetrastick written by Scarron's Uncle to this our Author.

Si punctum omne tulit, qui miscuit utile dulcis
Ludendo scribens seria, quid meruit?
Virgilii miranda legens, ridere jubetur
Hoc debet, Cotton, Anglica Musa tibi.
There are several of Lucian's Dialogues put into Burlesque Verse, printed in
octavo Land. 1675. under the Title of The Scoffer Scoft, which are said to be
writ by our Author, but whether this be true, I must leave to those who were
better acquainted with him. However I must acquaint the Reader, that there was
not long since published a Volume of Poems on several Occasions, with his Name
prefixed, which was printed in a large octavo, Land. 1689. Amongst which is a
Copy called The Anglers Ballad, which puts me in mind of another piece writ by
him in Prose, called The Complete Angler, being Instructions how to angle for a
Trout or Grailing in a clear Stream, being a Second Part to Mr. Isaac Walton's
Book on the same Subject, printed in octavo Land. 1676. ABRAHAM COWLEY
and dedicated to that Virtuous Man, the common Father of all Anglers. This
Book is not unworthy the perusal of the gravest Men that are Lovers of this
innocent Recreation, and those who are not Anglers, but have a taste of Poetry,
may find Mr. Cotton's Character better described by himself, in a Copy of
Verses (printed at the end of that Book) called The Retirement, than any that I
might present the Reader taken either from Colonel Lovelace, Sr. Aston Cokain,
Robert Herrick Esquire or Mr. Alexander Brom; all which have writ Verses in our
Author's praise, but in my poor judgment far short of these Stanzes
Irreguliers, where (as Mr. Walton See his Letter to Mr. Cotton, at the end of
the Complete Angler.
truly says) the Reader may see so good a Picture of our Author's mind, that if
he be blessed with a generous Soul, it will cause him to love him, (and his
Memory) the better.

Abraham COWLEY.
I have generally hitherto contented my self with giving a succinct Account of
each Authors Affairs of Life, or Family: and chose rather to enlarge on their
Works: but Mr. Cowley was a Person of so great Merit and Esteem in the world
when Living; and his Memory so fresh in the minds of Learned Men, that I am
obliged not to pass him slightly over. It Is true my Predecessors in this Work,
I mean Mr. Phillips and Mr. Winstanley, have given but an imperfect account of
Him, or his Writings: but as I propose not them for my Pattern in this Subject,
so I must publicly own, that I have so great a Veneration for the Memory of
this great Man, that methinks his very Name seems an Ornament to my Book, and
deserves to be set in the best Light I can place it. Wherefore I shall be as
careful in copying his Picture from his Writings, as an Artist would be in
hitting the Features of his Sovereign.

To begin first with his Birth; the place of his Nativity was London, and the
time which made his Virtuous Parents happy in him, was the year of our Lord
1618. Though his Mother had no prescience like Maia the Parent of the great
Virgil, (who the Night before her delivery dreamt she brought forth a sprig of
Laurel, which upon the setting forthwith became a Tree;) yet it may be said,
that this our English Maro, grew ripe with equal speed, as that famous Poplar
Bough planted at the Roman Poets Birth, sprung up into a beautiful tall Tree,
which overtopt several others of far riper Age. Virgil at Thirteen years of Age
began his Studies at Millain; but this our Author writ his Tragical History of
Pyramus and Thisbe, when he was but Ten years old; his Constantia and Philetus
at Twelve; and at Thirteen had published not only these but several other
Poetical Blossoms, The Title of his Book.
which sufficiently proved the pregnancy of his Wit: and all this, whilst he
was yet but a Westminster Scholar; before he could say with Juvenal, Sat. 1.


Et nos ergo manum ferulae subduximus --
Nor is the Character he gives of himself less full of Admiration; Essay of
Himself, page 143.
That even when he was a very young Boy at School, instead of running about on
Holidays, and playing with his Fellows, he was wont to steal from them, and
walk into the Fields, either alone with a Book; or with some One Companion, if
he could find any of the same Temper.

His first Inclinations to Poetry, proceeded from his falling by chance on
Spencer's Fairy Queen, Idem p. 144.
With which he was so infinitely delighted, and which by degrees so filled his
head with the tinkling of the Rhyme, and dance of the Numbers, that he had read
him all over before he was Twelve years old, and was thus made a Poet as
immediately as a Child is made an Eunuch. Thus he gradualy grew up to that
maturity both of Fancy and Judgment, that (in the opinion of a great Man now
living, Dr. Sprat. See his Life; in the last page.
Whoever would do him right, should not only equal him to the principal Ancient
Writers of our own Nation, but should also rank his Name amongst the Authors of
the true Antiquity, the best of the Greeks, and Romans. Nor is this the sense
only of this Worthy Person, and Excellent Poet, but the general Opinion of the
Wits of both Universities, and which will appear obvious to All that shall
diligently read his Works: most of which were writ, or at least designed whilst
he was of Trinity College in Cambridge, and of which I shall give a succinct
Account, beginning first with his English Plays, which are Three in Number, viz.

Guardian, a Comedy printed in quarto Land. 1650. Made (says the Author Preface
to his Works, Page 2.
) and acted before the Prince, or rather neither made nor acted, but
rough-drawn only, and repeated; for the have was so great, that it could
neither be revised, or perfected by the Author, nor learned without Book by the
Actors, nor set forth in any Measure tolerably by the Officers of the College.

This Mr. Cowley thought fit to acquaint the Prince with, in the Prologue which
was spoken to him at that time: as the Reader may see by the following Lines,
being part of it.

Accept our hasty Zeal; a thing that is played
E're it is a Play, and acted e're it is made.
Our Ignorance, but our Duty too, we show:
I would all ignorant People would do so.
At other times, expect our Wit and Art;
This Comedy is acted by the Heart.
After the Representation (the Author tells us Idem.
he began to look it over, and changed it very much, striking out some whole
Parts, as that of the Poet, and the Soldier; but he having lost the Copy,
durst not think it deserved the pains to write it again, which made him omit it
in the publication of his Works in Folio; though (at that time he acknowledged)
there were some things in it, which he was not ashamed of, taking the Excuse of
his Age when he made it. But as it was he accounted it only the hasty
first-sitting of a Picture, and therefore like to resemble him accordingly.

This Comedy, notwithstanding Mr. Cowley's modest Opinion of it, was acted not
only at Cambridge, but several times after that privately, during the
prohibition of the Stage, and after the King's Return, publicly at Dublin, and
never failed of Applause. This I suppose put our Author upon revising it; and
there being many things in it which he dislik't; and finding himself at leisure
in the Country, he fell upon altring it almost throughout; and then permitted
it to appear publicly on the Stage, under a new Title, as indeed 'twas in a
manner a new Play, calling it

Cutter of Coleman-street, acted at his Royal Highness's Theater, printed in
quarto Land. 1663. This Play met with some Opposition, at its Representation
under this new Name, from some who envyed the Authors unshaken Loyalty to the
Prince, and the Royal Cause, in the worst of Times; but afterward I suppose
the Authors Preface (to which I refer the Reader) dispelled all those Clouds
raised by the Faction; and I have seen it acted with universal Applause: and I
believe generally speaking, all unbiased Judges that have read, or seen it
acted, will give it the Approbation of an excellent Comedy: and for those who
are unsatisfied concerning his Fidelity to his King, I must refer them to that
admirable Defense writ by the Reverend Bishop of Rochester Life; page 6.
in behalf of this excellent Man, it being too copious to be inserted here.

Love's Riddle, a Pastoral Comedy, written at his time of being King's Scholar,
in Westminster School; printed first with his Poetical Blossoms, in quarto
Land. 1633. but since printed in the Second Volume of his Works, in Fol. Land.
1681. and dedicated by a Copy of Verses to the truly Worthy and Noble Sr.
Kenelm Digby. If this Play be considered, according to the Authors years at
that time, 'twill certainly be allowed standard; or at least needs no other
Apology then what the Author makes for it in his Dedication to his Patron: Take
it as early Fruits, which rare appear,
Though not half ripe, but worst of all the year,
And if it please your Taste, my Muse will say,
The Birch which crowned her then, its grown a Bay.


It might be expected that I should give some Account either of the Plots of
these Plays, or whence he has borrowed: but let those that think so, be
satisfied from the Famous Denham's Character, That he is no^ an Author of that
Stamp. I hope it will not be thought Foreign to my purpose, to transcribe part
of that Copy which he writ on this Admirable Poets Death and Burial amongst the
Ancient Poets. The whole Copy deserves to be engraved in Brass; but I shall
here transcribe only what is to our purpose; Denham's Poems, p. 90.


Old Mother Wit, and Nature gave
Shakespeare, and Fletcher, all they have;
In Spencer, and in Johnson, Art,
Of slower Nature got the start;
But both in him so equal are,
None knows which bears the happy'st share;
To him no Author was unknown,
Yet what he wrote was all his own;
He melted not the ancient Gold,
Nor with Ben Johnson did make bold
To plunder all the Roman Stores
Of Poets, and of Orators:
Horace his Wit, and Virgil's State,
He did not steal, but emulate,
And when he would like them appear,
Their Garb, but not their Clothes, did weas.
As to his other Works in English, they consist both of Verse and Prose:
amongst which are his Love Verses, called The Mistress; which were first
printed in octavo Land. 1647. from a Correct Copy written by the Author
himself, and since they are printed in Folio, with several of his other Pieces.
These Poems are highly applauded by the generality of judicious Men, and
notwithstanding the nice scruples of some, it is an undeniable Truth which the
knowing Writer of his Life lays down, See his Life, p. 11.
That never yet so much was written on a Subject so Delicate, that can less
offend the severest rules of Morality.

I dare not persume to give a particular Character of his Works: therefore I
shall refer them to the large Account of his Life, written by the exact and
ingenious Author abovementioned, or to the Readers own judgment. They consist
of Miscellanies, Anacreontiques, and Pindariques; or some Copies of Verses
translated Paraphrastically out of Anacreon and Pindar: on the later he has
writ Notes, as replete with Learning, as his Odes with Wit and Fancy, and which
most admirably explain the most difficult and abstruse Passages.

Besides these he has published an Epique Poem called Davideis, a Sacred Poem of
the Troubles of David, in Four Books: though designed by the Author to be
continued and extended to Twelve; not for the Tribes sake, but in imitation of
Virgil. As it is a great grief to the Lovers of Poetry, that he lived not to
finish the Work; so it is the Opinion of an eminent Critic, Mr. Rymer's Pref.
to Aristotle's Treaty of Poesy.
That as it may be lamented, that he carried not on the Work so far as he
designed, so it might he wished that he had lived to Revise what he did leave
us: I think the Troubles of David is neither Title nor Matter proper for an
Heroic Poem; seeing it is rather the Actions than his Sufferings, that make an
Hero: nor can it be defended by Homer's Odysseis, since Ulysses's Sufferings
conclude with one great and perfect Action. Yet notwithstanding, this judicious
Author allows, That in the Davideis (Fragment and imperfect as it is) there
shines something of a more fine, more free, more new, and more noble air, than
appears in the Jerusalem of Tasso, which for all his care, is scarce perfectly
purged from Pedantry. And after all says, That in the Lyrick way however Cowley
far exceeds him, and all the rest of the Italians. Though Jacobus Philippus
Tomasinus, Laur. Crasso, and other great Men give Tasso an extraordinary
Character. But to return to our Author, whatever faults Mr. Cowley may have
committed in the Economy of his Poem, (as Mr. Rymer reckons up others) if it
be considered, That he writ the greatest part of it, (as the Author of his Life
observes) whilst he was a young Student in Trinity College in Cambridge, and
withal, reflect on the vastness: of the Argument, and his manner of Handling
it, he may seem like one of the Miracles he there adorns, like a Boy attempting
Goliath. The rest of his Verses are written on several Occasions, and for what
remains unspoken of in his Second Volume, they are Verses which he made when he
was a King's Scholar, and to which he gave the Title of Sylva.

As to his Pieces in English Prose, they are Discourses by way of Essays, upon
grave and serious Subjects; where he gives the truest and best Character of
himself, and his thoughts during his Retirement. These, with several others
which he designed to add; he intended had not Death prevented him, to have
dedicated to his old Patron the Earl of St. Albans, As a Testimony of his
entire Respects to him: and a kind of Apology for having left humane Affairs in
the strength of his Age, while he might still have been serviceable to his
Country. But not withstanding his Death, his intentions are made good by his
worthy Friend the careful Overseer to his Writings, who has paid in this Legacy
according to the will and intention of the deceased Testator.

His Latin Works contain the two former Books of his Davideis; a Latin Comedy
called Naufragium Joculare, which was acted before the University of Cambridge
by the Members of Trinity College, the second day of February 1638. and his
Poemata Latina, printed in octavo 1668. consisting of Six Books of Plants, and
One of Miscellanies; of whose several Character, you will find an account in
his Life; where you may likewise find a description of his Temper,
Conversation, etc. which would swell this Volume beyond its designed Bulk, to
relate. All that I shall acquaint you further with is, that this best of Poets,
that ever our Nation produced, and a Man of so excellent a Temper, in the
Opinion of King Charles the Second, that he was pleased to say of him upon the
news of his death, that Mr. Cowley had not left a better Man behind him in
England. This Excellent Man I say, Died after a Fortnights Sickness, of a
Stoppage in his Breast and Throat, accompanied with a violent Defluction. He
was Buried at Westminster Abbey, near Two of our most eminent English Bards,
Chaucer, and Spencer; his Corpse being attended with a numerous Train of Persons
of the most eminent Rank, both for Birth and Virtue, The late Duke of
Buckingham his Noble Friend and Patron, has erected a Magnificent Monument over
his Ashes in testimony of his Affection; whose Sculpture you may see at the
beginning of his Second Volume. Though I take it for granted that every Lover of
Poetry has the Works of this Worthy Ornament of our Nation: (since in my weak
judgment, what was said of d'Urffe's Astraea, by the great Cardinal Richlieu,
may more truly be said of our Authors Works, That he was not fit to be admitted
into the Academy, who had not been before well read in Astraea:) yet since his
Epitaph may prove an Embellishment to this Work, I shall transcribe it.

ABRAHAMUS COWLEIUS,
Anglorum Pindarus, Flaccus, Maro,
Deliciae, Decus, Desiderium AEvi sui,
Hic juxta situs est.
Aurea dum volitant late tua scripta per orbem
Et Fama aeternum vivis Divine Poeta,
Hic placida jaceas requie, Custodiat urnam
Cana fides vigilentque perenni lampade Musae;
Sit sacer iste Locus, Nec quis temerarius ausit
Sacrilega turbare manu Venerabile Bustum.
Intacti maneant, maneant per secula Dulcis
COULEI cineres, serventque immobile saxum.
Sic Vovet
Votumque suum apud Posteros sacratum esse voluit,
Qui viro Incomparabi possuit sepulcrale marmor:
GEORGIUS DUX BUCKINGHAMIAE
Excessit e vita An. AEt. 49. and honorifica pompa elatus ex AEd.
Buckinghamianis, viris Illustribus omnium Ord. exsequias celibrantibus,
sepultus est die 30. M. Aug. A.D. 1667.
I forgot to acquaint the Reader, that there have been two Pieces falsely
ascribed to this Author, One a Poem called The Iron Age, which was published
during our Authors residence in France, on which he himself has sharply
reflected at the Entrance of his Preface to his Works. The other Poem is
fathered upon him by Mr. Phillips and Mr. Winstanley, which they call Antonius
and Mellida, which in truth is not a Poem, but a Play in Two Parts, written by
John Marston. Though I can give no Account how Mr. Phillips fell into this
mistake, yet I know very well, that the little Poem he speaks of Modern Poets,
p. 1.
is called Constantia and Philetus. As for Mr. Winstanley, he like blind Bayard
boldly follows the former at a venture; but he may by this learn the truth of
that old Proverb; Mali Corvi malum ovum, Like Carpenter, like Chips. There is
an Ode written by Mr. Cowley for her Majesty, Queen to King Charles the First,
printed in the beginning of Mr. Tate's Collection of Poems on several Occasions,
printed in octavo Land. 1685. There was a New Edition of his Works with a
Table, and the Verses that were made on his Death, by the Wits of the Age,
printed in Fol. Land. 1688. I shall close all with the Commendation given him
by Mr. Evelyn, in his Imitation of Ovid's Elegy ad Invidos. Tate's Collection
of Poems, p. 45.


So long shall Cowley be admired above
The Crowd, as David's Troubles pity move,
Till Woman cease to charm, and Youth to love.
Robert Cox.
An Excellent Comedian that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, One,
who when the Ringleaders of the Rebellion, and Reformers of the Nation
suppressed the Stage, betook himself to making Drolls of Farces; such as were
Actaeon and Diana; Oenone, with the Humors of Bumkin; Hobbinal; Singing
Simkin; and Simpleton the Smith; which under the Color of Rope-dancing, were
allowed to be acted at the Red-Bull Play house by stealth, and the connivance
of those straight laced Governors. These Parts he usually acted himself, and so
naturally, that once after he had played Young Simpleton at a Country Fair, a
noted Smith in those parts, who saw him act, came to him, and offered to take
him as his Journey-man, and to allow him Twelve-pence a Week more than the rest.

Nor was it in London only, but in the University likewise, that our Actor was
applauded: insomuch that a Poetical Butler took such a Fancy to his Acting,
that he was pleased to oblige him with a Prologue, that he might appear in
form, as he had seen the Members of the College he belonged to, at the Acting
a Play in Christmas; part of which, for the Readers Diversion, and as a Sample
of the Talent of this Chip of Pernassus, I have set down as follows: Courteous
Spectators, we are your Relators,
Neither Tylers, nor Slators, nor your Vexators:
But such as will strive to please, will you sit at
your Ease,
And speak such words as may be spoken,
And not by any be mistoken; etc.


These Drolls were printed in quarto Land. 1656. Second Edition, but first
printed by Tho. Newcomb for the use of the Author. They are since printed in a
Collection of Drolls, called Spart upon Sport, for Kirkman, in octavo Land.
1673.

John CROWN.
A Person now living, who has attempted all sorts of Dramatick Poetry, with
different success. If I may be allowed to speak my Sentiments, I think his
Genius seems fittest for Comedy; though possibly his Tragedies are no ways
contemptible; of all which, in my weak judgment, his Destruction of Jerusalem
seems the best. He has written Fifteen Plays, of which Alphabetically.

Andromache, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and printed in quarto Land.
1675. This Play Mr. Crown claims no farther share in, than the turning it into
Prose, it being translated from the French of Monsieur Racine, by a young
Gentleman, who had a great esteem for all French Plays, and particularly for
this; but whose Genius in Verse, it seems was not very fortunate. In a word,
Mr. Crown has written as Epistle to clear himself of the Scandal (as he terms
it) of so poor a Translation. This Play tho well esteemed in the Original, had
not its expected success on our English Stage.

The French Author has followed Virgil, in his Story. See Lib. 3. He
transcribes the Passage beginning at Verse 292.

Littoraque Epiri legimus, portuque subimus

Chaonio, and celsum Buthroti ascendimus urbem. And then skipping seven Verses
which relate to her Marriage with Hellenus, he ends with the death of Pyrrhus
by Orestes at the Altar of Apollo, or as some would have it, One which he
erected in memory of his Father Achilles. The Author has followed Euripides his
A(...) in the Character of Hermione, and her jealous Transports: but in that of
Andromache, he rather chooses to show her on the Stage, as the Widow of Hector,
than Pyrrhus, and sollicitous to preserve the Life of Astyanax, than Molossus:
this being conformable to the general Idea which People have of Andromache.

Ambitious Statesman, or The Loyal Favorite, a Tragedy acted at the Theater
Royal, by his Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto Land. 1679. and dedicated
to her Grace the Duchess of Albermarle. This Play is in the Poets Opinion, the
most vigorous of all his Labors, but born in a time so unhealthy to Poetry,
that it met not with the Applause which some people thought it deserved. I know
not what Author Mr. Crown has followed, or whence he has taken his Plot: but I
suppose by his Ambitious Statesman, he means Bernard d' Armagnac the seventh,
Comte d' Armagnac, and Constable of France in the Reign of King Charles the
Sixth. My Reason for this Conjecture is, that he speaks of Henry the Fifth's
Landing in France, which was in the time of that King. Those Authors who have
treated of his Reign, are J. de Laboureur, Hist. de Chapter VI. Enguerand de
Monstrelet Chron. J. Froissard. Chron. de Fr. and de Angleterre. Memoires de
Mart. du Bellay, Jean Juvenal des Ursins Hist. de Chapter VI. De Serres, Mezeray,
etc. to which I refer the Reader for better satisfaction.

Calisto, or The Chaste Nymph; a Masque at Court, frequently presented there by
Persons of great Quality, with the Prologue, and the Songs between the Acts:
printed in quarto Land. 1675. and dedicated to her Highness, the Lady Mary,
Eldest Daughter of his Royal Highness the Duke. This Masque was writ at the
Command of her present Majesty: and was rehearsed near Thirty times, all the
Representations being followed by throngs of Persons of the greatest Quality,
and very often graced with their Majesty's and Royal Highnesses Presence. The
Play was altered by the Poet from what it was at first; that which remains of
the first design, may be known by its being written in the Pindarick way: that
which has been altered being in Heroic Verse. The Plot is founded on a Story
in Ovid's Metamorphosis, see Lib. 2. Fab. 5, 6.

Charles the Eighth of France, or The Invasion of Naples by the French, a
History writ in Heroic Verse, acted at his Highness the Duke of York's
Theater; printed in quarto Land. 1680. and dedicated to the Right Honorable
John Earl of Rochester. This Play notwithstanding the Patronage of his
Lordship, could not escape his Railery; for in his Imitation of Boyleau's third
Satyr he brings in Mr. Crown as follows; Rochester's Poems, p. 109.


Kickum for Crown declared; said, in Romance,
He had outdone the very Wits of France.
Witness Pandion, and his Charles the Eight;
Where a young Monarch, careless of his Fate,
Tho foreign Troops and Rebels shock his State,
Complains another sight afflicts him more.
( viz.) See the Play, p. 16.
The Queens Galleys rowing from
the Shore,
Fitting their Oars and Tackling to be gone
Whilst sporting Waves smiled on the rising
Sun.
Waves smiling on the Sun! I Am sure that is new,
And 'twas well thought on give the Devil his due.
For the Plot of this Play, as far as it concerns History, consult those who
have written the Affairs of Charles VIII. as Philip de Commines's Memoires,
Robertus Gaguinus Rer. Gal. Annal. Guillaume de Jaligny Hist. de Chapter VIII. F.
de Belleforest l'Hist. de neuf Roys Charles de France, Andre de la Vigne,
Guicciardine, Mezeray, etc.

City Politiques, a Comedy acted by his Majesty's Servants; printed in quarto
Land. 1683. This Play (which I have seen acted with Applause) is a severe Satyr
upon the Whiggish Faction: but though the Author was accused for abusing an
Eminent Sergeant at Law, and his Wife, under the Characters of Bartoline, and
Lucinda, and a certain Doctor under the Name of Panchy, yet he has sufficiently
cleared himself self in his Epistle to the Reader, to which I refer you.

Country Wit, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater, printed in quarto Land.
1675. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Middlesex. This
Comedy is of that Kind, which the French call Basse Comedy, or Low Comedy, one
degree removed from Farce. This Play, notwithstanding the Faction against it,
passed the Test, and was approved by his Majesty King Charles the Second, whom
the judicious part of Mankind will readily acknowledge to be a sovereign Judge
of Wit. Part of the design is borrowed from a Comedy of Molliere's called Le
Sicilien, ou l'Amour Peintre; and I must take the freedom to tell our English
Author, that part of the Language, as well as the Plot is stolen from that
Play. Witness Rambles turning Picture-drawer to gain an Opportunity to
discourse Betty Frisque: which the Reader may be pleased to compare with the
Intrigue between Adraste, and Isidore Act. 1. Sc. 10. etc. besides other
places. I shall leave it to those, who understand French, to judge whether our
Author has put in practice the Rule which he has laid down in his Epistle to
the Destruction of Jerusalem; That all Foreign Coin must be melted down, and
receive a new Stamp, if not addition of Metal, before it will pass current in
England, and be judged Sterling.

Darius King of Persia; a Tragedy acted by their Majesty's Servants, printed in
quarto Land. 1688. and dedicated to Sr. George Hewytt Baronet, One of the
Lieutenants of his Majesty's Horse-Guard. If I mistake not the Author has
copyed, or at least imitated Euripides his Hippolitus, and Phaedra, in the
Characters of Memnon and Barzana. For the Plot as far as it concerns Darius, I
have already mentioned in the Account of the Earl of Sterline, page.4. as Qu.
Curtius, Justin, etc.

Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, in Two Parts; acted at the
Theater Royal; printed in quarto Land. 1677. and dedicated to her Grace the
Duchess of Portsmouth. These Tragedies are written in Heroic Verse, and were
acted with good Applause. As to the Authors Character of Phraartes, I leave it
to the Critics, and refer the Reader to his Epistle for satisfaction. The
Historical part of these Plays, may be read at large in Josephus de Bello
Judaico. Other Authors have likewise touched upon it: as Baronius Annal. Tom. 1.
A.C. 72. Eusebius l. 3. c. 6. Xiphilinus Epitome Hist. Dion. in Vit.
Vespasiani, Suetonius Life of T. Vespas. Tacitus Hist. l. 5. etc.

English Friar, or The Town Sparks; a Comedy acted by their Majesty's Servants,
printed in quarto Land. 1690. and dedicated to the Right Honorable William
Earl of Devonshire. What Success this Play met with, the objections against it,
and the Authors defense, the Preface will inform you.

Henry the Sixth the First Part, with the Death of the Duke of Gloucester; a
Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater, printed in quarto Land. 1681. and
dedicated to Sr. Charles Sidley. This Play is (if I mistake not) very much
borrowed from the Second Part of Shakespeare's Henry the Sixth; though Mr. Crown
with a little too much assurance affirms, that he has no Title to the Fortieth
part of it. This Play was opposed by the Popish Faction, who by their Power at
Court got it suppressed: however it was well received by the Rest of the Audience.

Henry the Sixth the Second Part, or the Misery of Civil-War; a Tragedy acted
at the Duke's Theater, printed in quarto Land. 1681. Part of this Play likewise
is borrowed from Shakespeare. For the Plot read the Chronicles of those Times,
writ by Graston, Hollingshead, Trussel, Martin, Stow, Speed, Biondi, Du Chesne,
etc.

Juliana, or The Princess of Poland; a Tragi-Comedy acted at his Royal Highness
the Duke of York's Theater: printed in quarto Land. 1671. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable Roger Earl of Orrery. This was the first Play this Author
writ, which if it be not so well penned as several of his later Productions, it
does but verify his own Observation, Epistle Dedicatory.
That there are few Authors but have had those slips from their Prune, which
their riper Thoughts either were, or at least had reason to be ashamed of.

Sr. Courtly Nice, or It cannot be, a Comedy acted by his Majesty's Servants,
printed in quarto Land. 1685. and dedicated to his Grace the Duke of Ormond.
This Play was written at the Command of his late Majesty K. Charles the Second,
who gave Mr. Crown a Spanish Play No pued eser: or It cannot be; out of which
he took part of the Name, and Design of this. This Comedy, or at least the
Plot, as far as relates to the Spanish Plot, has formerly appeared on the
Stage, under the Title of Tarugo's Wiles. Sr. Courtly's Song of Stop Thief, is
a Paraphrase of Mascarille's Au Voleur in Mollier's Les precieuses Ridicules.
This Play is accounted an excellent Comedy, and has been frequently acted with
good Applause.

Thyestes, a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants;
printed in quarto Land. 1681. The Plot of this Play is founded on Seneca's
Thyestes, and seems to be an Imitation of that Play. I know not whether our
Author ever saw the Italian Play on this Subject, written by Ludovicus Dulcis,
which is commended by Delrio; or the French Tragedies of Roland Brisset, and
Benoist Bauduyn: but I doubt not but this Play may vie with either of them: at
least the French Plays, which in the Opinion of some, are very mean.

I know nothing else of our Authors writing, except that Romance
abovementioned, which I never saw.

D.
John DANCER, alias DAUNCY.
AN Author of whose place of Nativity, or other passages of Life I am able to
give no Account. All I know of him is, that he lived in the Reign of King
Charles the Second; and that his Translations show him well versed in the
French, and Italian Tongue. He has obliged us with Three Dramatick Plays,
translated from the Originals of three Eminent Poets, viz. Tasso, Corneille,
and Quinault.

Agrippa King of Alba, or The False Tiberinus, a Tragi-Comedy in Heroic Verse;
several times acted with great Applause, before his Grace the Duke of Ormond,
then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, at the Theater Royal in Dublin; printed in
quarto Land. 1675. and dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lady Mary
Cavendish, Daughter to the Duke of Ormond. This Play is traslated from the
French of Monsieur Quinault, an Author well known amongst those that are
conversant in French Poetry, several of whose Pieces have appeared on the
English Stage; as La Genereuse Ingratitude; L'Amant Indiscret; Le Fantosme
amoureux; etc. I know not whether this Translation be equal to the Original,
having never seen the later; neither can I give any account of the Plot, which
I take to be fictitious.

Aminta, a Pastoral printed in octavo Land. 1660. and dedicated to his much
Honored and truly Noble Friend Mr. R. B. Who is meant by those Letters I will
not be so bold as to conjecture, because our Author has concealed his Patrons
Name in obedience to his Commands. This Play, is a Translation of that famous
Piece writ by that celebrated Wit, Signior Torquato Tasso, born at Sorrento,
bred up at Padua, and the Favorite of Charles IX. of France. He was (as I may
say) the Father of Pastorals; being the first that transferred them from the
Eclogue, to Dramatick Poetry: and his Aminta is esteemed by Foreigners, a
Masterpiece of Pastoral Comedy: and has been translated into the French,
Spanish, English, German and Dutch Tongues. This was the Pattern which the
admired Guarini proposed for his Imitation, when he writ Il Pastor fido; and
our Author has since endeavored to imitate his excellent Translator, the Lord
Ambassador Fanshaw. If it be objected by some that this Translation of Tasso,
is far short of that of Guarini; we may however with justice affirm, that at
least this Translation exceeds that printed in 1628, if we allow some
consideration for his being clogged with Rhyme, which forces him more upon
Paraphrase, and withal that it was his first attempt to Poetry. With this Play,
are printed several Poems of different Subjects, amongst which are Love Verses,
which seem as is they were writ in imitation of Mr. Cowley's Mistress.

Nicomede, a Tragi-Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal in Dublin; printed in
quarto Land. 1671. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Ossory.
This Play is translated from the French Original of Monsieur Th. Corneille, and
is One of those Pieces which he himself most valued. There are a great many
Beauties in it which he enumerates in the Examen. He says the Story is taken
from the Fourth Book of Justin, though I suppose this is an Errata of the Press,
the Story being in the last Chapter of the Thirty-fourth Book.

He writ besides there, several other Pieces; as a Romance called the English
Lovers, printed in octavo Land. -- which however commended by Mr. Winstanley,
the Contrivance is due to Heywood's Play called The Fair Maid of the West in
Two Parts: from whence our Author borrowed the Story. Two other Pieces are
mentioned by Mr. Winstanley, viz. A Complete History of the late Times, and a
Chronicle of the Kingdom of Portugal: neither of which I have ever seen.

Samuel DANIEL Esquire
A Gentleman living in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King James the First:
and One, whose Memory will ever be fresh in the minds of those who favor
History, or Poetry. He was born near Taunton in Somersetshire, and at Nineteen
years of Age, in the year 1581. he was entered Commoner of St. Mary Magdalen
Hall in Oxford: and after having three years exercised himself in History, and
Poetry, he left the University. His own Merit, added to the Recommendation of
his Brother in Law, the Resolute John Florio (so well known for his Italian
Dictionary) preferred him to the Knowledge of Queen Ann; who was pleased to
confer on him the Honor of being One of the Grooms of her most Honorable
Privy-Chamber: which enabled him to rent a Garden-house near London, where in
private he composed most of his Dramatick Pieces. At last being weary of the
world, he retired into Wiltshire; where he rented a Farm near the Devises,
according to Dr. Fuller, Fuller's Worthies. Somersetshire, p. 28.
though Mr. Wood Antiq. Oxon. p. 372.
says that his retreat was to Beckington, near Phillips-Norton in
Somersetshire, where he Died in October 1619. being about Four-score years of
Age, and was Buried in the same Parish Church, where a Monument was erected at
the sole Bounty of the Lady Ann Clifford, Heiress of George Earl of Cumberland,
and afterward Countess of Pembroke, Dorset, and Montgomery, whose Tutor he was.

Having given this Account of his Life, I am now to speak somewhat of his
Writings; and it being at present my Subject, I shall speak first of his
Dramatick Pieces, which consist of Two Pastorals; Two Tragedies; and a Masque,
viz.

Cleopatra, a Tragedy printed in quarto Land. 1623. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable the Lady Mary Countess of Pembroke, by a Copy of Verses written in
Stanzas of Eight Lines, which the Italians (from whence we took the Measure)
call Ottava Rima. This Play was first printed in octavo Land.. 1611. but this
later Copy infinitely differs from the former, and far exceeds it; the Language
being not only corrected, but it having another advantage in the Opinion of a
Modern Poet, Mr. Crown's Epistle to Andromache.
since that which is only dully recited in the first Edition, is in the last
represented. for the Foundation of the Story, consult Plutarch in the Lives of
Pompey, and Anthony, Florus, lib. 4. c. 11. Appian de Bellis Civilibus, Lib. 5.
and a new Book translated out of French by Mr. Otway, in octavo Land. 1686.
called The History of the Three Triumvirates, where the Story is related at
large.

Hymen's Triumph, a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy, Presented at the Queens Court in the
Strand, at her Majesty's Magnificent Entertainment of the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, being at the Nuptials of the Lord Roxborough, printed in quarto Land.
1623. and dedicated by a Copy of Verses to the most Excellent Majesty of the
Highest born Princess Ann of Denmark, Queen of England, etc. This Play is not
printed in the Octavo Edition. It Is introduced by a pretty contrived Prologue;
Hymen being opposed by Avarice, Envy, and Jealousy, the Disturbers of quiet
Marriage.

Philotas, his Tragedy, printed in quarto Land. 1623. and dedicated to the
Prince afterward King Charles the First. Both this Play, and Cleopatra were
much esteemed in their time; they are both written with the Chorus between each
Act; according to the manner of the Ancients. This Play indeed found some
Enemies, not on the score of the Wit, or Conduct of the Design; but because it
was reported, that under the Character of Philotas, that Great but Unfortunate
Favorite of Queen Elizabeth Robert d'Eureux Earl of Essex was portrayed: but
the Author in his Apology at the End of the Play has sufficiently cleared
himself from that imputation. This was the first Play that our Author writ; as
for the Plot it is founded on History. See Q. Curtius, lib. 6. c. 7. Justin,
lib. 12. c. 5. Plut. in Vit. Alex. Arrian, etc.

Queens Arcadia, a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy, presented to her Majesty and her
Ladies, by the University of Oxford in Christ-Church, in Aug. 1605. printed in
quarto Land. 1623. and dedicated by a Copy of Verses, to the Queens most
Excellent Majesty. Whether the Scene Act 1. Sc. 2.
between Carinus and Amyntas the Lovers of Cloris be borrowed from any ancient
Poet, I know not, but sure I am that in Monsieur Quinault's La Comedy sans
Comedy there is a Scene betwixt Filene and Daphnis in a manner the same Act.
2. Sc. 4.
. As the Two next Scenes between these Shepherds, and their Mrs. Clomire,
exactly resemble the Scene Act. 2. Sc. 7.
betwixt the Swains, Damon and Alexis, and the inconstant Nymph Laurinda; in
Randolph's Amyntas.

Vision of the Twelve Goddesses, presented in a Masque the Eighth of January,
at Hampton Court, by the Queens most Excellent Majesty, and her Ladies, printed
in 4o. Land. 1623. and dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lady Lucy,
Countess of Bedford. This was printed without the Authors leave, by the
unmannerly presumption of an indiscreet Printer, without warrant; and so
imperfect, that the Author to prevent the prejudice, which both the Masque, and
the Invention suffered, published it from his own Copy. His Design under the
shapes, and in the Persons of Twelve Goddesses, was to present the Figure of
those Blessings, which this Nation enjoyed in peace, under the happy Reign of
King James the First: by Juno, was represented Power; by Pallas Wisdom and
Defense; etc.

All these Pieces are printed together in 4o Land. 1623. under the Title of The
Whole Works of Samuel Daniel Esquire in Poetry, by which I suppose his other
Poetical Works, which were printed with his Plays in octavo Land. 1611. are
inserted in this later Edition, though that Volume I have by me, want them. The
Names of them are, An Epistle from Octavia to M. Anthony in Egypt; dedicated
to the Lady Margaret Countess of Cumberland, and writ in Ottava Rima: Complaint
of Rosomond; in Stanza's of Seven Lines. Musophilus, and containing a general
Defense of all Learning, written Dialogue-wise, between Musophilus and
Philocosmus; and dedicated to Sr. Fulk Grivel. A Funeral Poem upon the Death of
the late Earl of Devonshire: Delia, containing Fifty Seven Love Sonnets. He
writ besides, an Heroic Poem of the Civil Wars between the two Houses of York
and Lancaster, in which he endeavored to imitate Lucan's Pharsalia, and
Succeeded so well in the Opinion of Mr. Speed, that he is by him called the
English Lucan.

These are all the Poems that our Author has published that ever I heard of: but
however his Genius was qualified for Poetry, I take his History of England to
be the Crown of all his Works: It was first printed about the year 1613. and
was dedicated to Queen Ann. It reaches from the state of Britain under the
Romans, to the end of the Reign of King Edward the Third, An. Dom. 1376. Of
this History a late Writer Mr. Bobun's Translation of Mr. Whear's Meth.
Legendi. Hist. 8o. p. 171.
has given this Character, It is written with great Brevity and Politeness, and
his Political and Moral Reflections are very fine, useful, and instructive.
John Trussel continued this History with the like Brevity and Truth, but not
with equal Elegance, till the end of the Reign of Richard III. A.D. 1484.

I have never seen any Copies made on the old Poets, but Mr. Daniel is therein
mentioned with Honor. One Author Choice Drollery, 8o. Land. 1656. p. 6.
styles him in a Copy on the Time Poets, The Pithy Daniel, whose Salt Lines
afford,
A weighty Sentence in each little Word.
Another Author in a Copy called A Censure of the Poets Sportive Wit, 8o. p. 70.
says thus; Amongst these Samuel Daniel, whom I
May speak of, but to censure do deny.
Only have heard some Wise men him rehearse,
To be too much Historian in Verse;
His Rimes were smooth, his Meeters well did close,
But yet his Matters better fitted Prose.


Having given you the Sense of the Poets of those times, concerning this
excellent Author, give me leave to transcribe an Epigram written in his
Commendation by his Friend Mr. Charles Fitz-Geoffry Epigram, 8o. Oxon. 1601.
, with which I shall conclude.

Spenserum si quis nostrum velit esse Maronem,
Tu Daniele mihi Naso Brittannus eris.
Sin illum potius Phaebum velit esse Britannum,
Tum Daniele mihi tu Maro noster eris,
Nil Phaebo ulterius; si quid foret, illud haberet
Spenserus, Phoebus tu Daniele fores.
Quippe loqui Phoebus cuperet si more Britanno,
Haud scio quo poterat, ni velit ore suo.
Sir William DAVENANT.
A Person sufficiently known to all Lovers of Poetry, and One whose Works will
preserve his Memory to Posterity. He was Born in the City of Oxford, in the
Parish of St. Martins, vulgarly called Carfax, near the End of February in the
year 1605. and was Christened on the Third of March following. He was the
Mercurial Son of a Saturnine Father, Mr. John D' Avenant, a Vintner by
Profession: who lived in the same House, which is now known by the Sign of the
Crown. He was formerly of Lincoln College, and instructed in Logic and
Physics, by his Tutor Mr. Daniel Hough, Fellow of that Society; though his
Genius rather inclined him to walk in the more flowery Fields of Poetry, in
which he made a Prodigious discovery: advancing even without any Guide, but his
own Wit, and Ingenuity, as far as the Herculean Pillars (if any such bounds are
to be set) of Poetry. He was Poet Laureat to Two Kings, whose Memory will
always be Sacred to all good, loyal, and witty Men; I mean King Charles the
First, the Martyr for, and King Charles the Second, the Restorer of the
Protestant Religion, according to the Church of England. During this Honor, of
which his Wit and Parts rendered him Worthy, he writ (as I suppose) his
Dramatick Pieces, of which I shall give some Account.

To speak of them in general, I need only say, that most of them have appeared
on the Stage with good applause, and been received with like success in Print:
the greatest part published in the Authors Life time in Quarto, and all since
his Death collected into one Volume, with his other Works, printed in Folio
Land. 1673. and dedicated by his Widow to his Royal Highness, the late King
James.

Albovine King of the Lombards his Tragedy, printed first in quarto, and
dedicated to the Right Honorable the Duke of Somerset. This Play is commended
by Eight Copies of Verses. For the Design, it is founded on History. You may
read the Story in several Historians: See Paulus Diaconus de Gestis
Langobardorum, lib.2. c. 28. Gregorius Epise. Turonensis Hist. Francorum, lib.
2. c.28. Heylin's Cosinoraphy, Part 1. Book 1. p. 57. This Story is likewise
related at large in a Novel by Bandello, which is translated by Belleforest;
See Histoires Tragiques Tome 4. Nov. 19.

Cruel Brother, a Tragedy printed first in quarto, and dedicated to the Right
Honorable the Lord Weston, Lord High Treasurer of England.

Distresses, a Tragi-Comedy printed in folio, Land. 1673.

First-days Entertainment at Ruthland-house, by Declamation, and Music, after
the manner of the Ancients. The subject of the former of these Declamations is
concerning Public Entertainment by Moral Representations; the Disputants being
Diogenes the Cynick, and Aristophanes the Poet. The later Dispute is between a
Parisian, and a Londoner, who declaim concerning the Pre-eminence of Paris and
London. The Vocal and Instrumental Music was composed by Dr. Charles Coleman,
Capt. Henry Cook, Mr. Henry Laws, and Mr. George Hudson.

Fair Favorite, a Tragi-Comedy printed in Folio, 1673.

Just Italian, a Tragi-Comedy printed first in quarto, and dedicated to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Dorset, and commended by the Verses of his
Friends, Mr. William Hopkins, and Mr. Thomas Carew.

Law against Lovers, a Tragi-Comedy made up of two Plays written by Mr.
Shakespeare, viz Measure for Measure, and Much Ado about Nothing. Though not only
the Characters, but the Language of the whole Play almost, be borrowed from
Shakespeare: yet where the Language is rough or obsolete, our Author has taken
care to polish it: as to give, instead of many, one Instance. Shakespeare's Duke
of Vienna says thus Measure for Measure, Act. 1. Sc. 1.
; -- I love the People;
But do not like to Stage me to their Eyes:
Though it do well, I do not relish well
Their loud Applause, and Aves vehement:
Nor do I think the Man of safe discretion,
That does affect it.


In Sr. William's Play the Duke speaks as follows Law against Lovers, Act 1.
Sc. 1.
; -- I love the People;
But would not on the Stage salute the Crowd.
I never relisht their Applause; nor think
The Prince has true discretion who affects it.
For the Plot, I refer you to the abovementioned Plays, in the Account of
Shakespeare.

Love and Honor, a Tragi-Comedy which I have several times seen acted with
good applause; first at the Playhouse in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and since at the
Theater in Dorset-Garden. This was first printed in quarto.

Man's the Master, a Comedy which I think I have seen acted at the Duke's
House; however I am sure the Design, and part of the Language is borrowed from
Scarron's Jodelet, ou Le Maistre valet; and (as I remember) part from
L'Heritier ridicule, a Comedy of the same Authors.

Platonic Lovers, a Tragi-Comedy, which was first printed in octavo with The
Wits.

Playhouse to be Let. I know not under what Species to place this Play, it
consisting of several Pieces of different Kinds handsomely tackt together,
several of which the Author writ in the Times of Oliver, and were acted
separately by stealth; as the History of Sr. Francis Drake expressed by
Instrumental, and Vocal Music, and by Art of Perpective in Scenes, etc. The
Cruelty of the Spaniards in Peru. These two Pieces were first printed in
quarto. They make the third and fourth Acts of this Play. The second Act
consists of a French Farce, translated from Molliere's Sganarelle, ou Le Cocu
Imaginaire, and purposely by our Author put into a sort of Jargon common to
Frenchmen newly come over. The fifth Act consists of Tragedy travestie, or
the Actions of Caesar Antony and Cleopatra in Verse Burlesque. This Farce I
have seen acted at the Theater in Dorset-garden some years ago, at the end of
that excellent Tragedy of Pompey, translated by the incomparable Pen of the
much admired Orinda.

Siege of Rhodes, in two Parts. These Plays were likewise in the times of the
Civil Wars, acted with Stilo Recitativo, and printed in quarto, but afterward
enlarged by the Author, and acted with applause at the Duke of York's Theater
in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. It is dedicated to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Clarendon Lord High Chancellor of England. For the Plot, as far as it is
founded on History, there are several Historians have writ of it in the Life of
Solomon the second, who took this City in the year 1522. See Thomas Artus
Continuation de l'Histoire des Turcs. Giov. Bosio. L'Istoria della Sacra
Religione and Illma Militia di San Giovanni Gierosolimitano, lib. 29. Boissardi
Icones and Vitae Sultanorum Turcicorum, etc. in Vit. Solym. 2. Knolles History
of the Turks, etc.

Siege, a Tragi-Comedy.

News from Plymouth; a Comedy formerly acted at the Globe with good success,
and was printed (as I believe) in quarto.

Temple of Love, presented by the Queens Majesty, [Wife to King Charles the
First] and her Ladies at Whitehall: viz. The Lady Marquess Hamilton; the Lady
Mary Herbert; Countess of Oxford; Berkshire; Carnarvan; etc. The Lords, and
others that represented the noble Persian Youths were, The Duke of Lenox; the
Earls of Newport; Desmond; etc. This Masque (says the Author) for the newness
of the Invention, variety of Scenes, Apparitions, and richness of Habits, was
generally approved to be one of the most Magnificent that has been done in
England.

Triumphs of the Prince d'Amour, a Masque presented by his Highness at his
Palace in the Middle Temple. This Masque, at the Request of that Honorable
Society, was devised and written by our Author in Three days; and was presented
by the Members thereof, as an Entertainment to the Prince Elector. A Lift of
the Masquers Names, as they were ranked by their Antiquity, in that noble
Society, is to be found at the end of the Masque, to which I refer the curious
Reader. The Music of the Songs and Symphonies were excellently composed by Mr.
Henry, and Mr. William Laws his Majesty's Servants.

Wits, a Comedy heretofore acted at the Black-friars, and since at the Duke's
Theater; printed both in octavo, and quarto, before this New Edition, and
dedicated to the chiefly beloved of all, that Ingenious and Noble, Endimion
Porter, of his Majesty's Bedchamber. This Play is commended by a Copy fo
Verses written by Mr. Thomas Carew, and has often appeared on the Stage with
Applause

Having done with his Plays, I am now to speak of his other Works, which
consist of Poems, of several sorts, and on several Occasions, amongst which
Gondibert an Epick Poem has made the greatest noise. This Poem was designed by
the Author to be an Imitation of an English Dramma; it being to be divided into
Five Books, as the other is into Five Acts; The Canto's to be the Parallel of
the Scenes; with this difference, that this is delivered Narratively, the other
Dialogue-wise. The Reader may find a long account of the Author's design, and
his Reasons in the Preface, which is directed to his Friend, the so well known
Mr. Hobbs; who not only approves his Design, but in the Close of his Letter
fixes an extraordinary Complement upon him: viz. The Virtues you distribute in
your Poem, amongst so many Noble Persons, represent (in the Reading) the image
but of One Man's Virtue to my fancy, which is your own. Nor was Mr. Hobbs the
only Person that commended this Poem: for the first and second Books were
ushered into the world, by the Pens of two of our best Poets: viz. Mr. Waller,
and Mr. Cowley; which One would have thought might have proved a sufficient
Defense and Protection against the snarling Critics. Notwithstanding which,
Four Eminent Wits of that Age, (two of which were Sr. John Denham, and Mr.
Done,) published several Copies of Verses to Sr. William's discredit, under
this Title, Certain Verses written by several of the Authors Friends, to be
reprinted with the second Edition of Gondibert, in octavo Land. 1653. These
Verses were answered (as Mr. Wood says Antiq. Oxon. 2. 168.
) by the Author himself, with as much, or rather more Wit, and little or no
concern for their Raillery, rather seeming to sport at, and pity their want of
Sense. The Title of his Answer is, The Incomparable Poem Gondibert vindicated
from the Wit-Combats of Four Esquires; Clinias, Dametas, Sancho, and Jack
Pudding, printed in octavo Land. 1655. The Books being scarce, I shall for the
Readers diversion, choose one out of each of these, as a Sample of the rest: and
amongst the former I shall pitch upon that Copy which reflects on the
Commendations given by those great Men abovementioned Page 5.
.

The Author upon Himself.
I am Old Davenant with my Fustian Quill;
Though skill I have not,
I must be writing still
On Gondibert,
That is not worth a Fart.
Waller, and Cowley, it is true, have praised my Book;
But how untruly
All they that read may look;
Nor can Old Hobbs.
Defend me from dry Bobbs.
Then no more I Will dabble, nor pump Fancy dry,
To compose a Fable,
Shall make Will. Crofts to cry,
O gentle Knight,
Thou writ'st to them that shite.
Sr. William's Answer Page 14.

The Author upon Himself.
False as Foolish! What turn felo de me?
Davenant kill Davenant!
No, the whole World does see
My Gondibert,
To be a piece of Art.
Waller and Cowley, true, have praised my Book,
And deservedly,
Nay I did for it look;
He both us robbs,
That blames for this Old Hobbs.
Write on (jeered Will) and write in Pantofle,
That Is over Pump-ho,
And for Will Crofts his baffle,
Thou may long write,
That writ'st to them that shite.
Many other Railleries were broacht against him by his Enemies, as those Lines
in Sr. John Sucklin's Session of the Poets; the Ballad entitled How Daphne pays
his Debts Wits Metriment, 8o. p. 20.
, and others which I might insert; but I think it is time to leave these
trifles, and acquaint my Readers, who are delighted with Criticismes, that they
may find more serious Animad versions on this Poem, in the English Preface
written by that admirable Critic Mr. Rymer, to his Translation of Monsieur
Rapin's Reflections on Aristotle's Treatise of Poesy, printed 8o Land. 1674.

This great Man Died on the Seventh day of April 1668. Aged 63, and was Buried
amongst the Poets in Westminster-Abby, near to his old Antagonist, and Rival
for the Bays, Mr. Thomas May. 'Twas observed, that at his Funeral his Coffin
wanted the Ornament of his Laureats Crown, which by the Law of Heraldry justly
appertained to him: but this omission is sufficiently recompensed by an Eternal
Fame, which will always accompany his Memory; he having been the first
Introducer of all that is splendid in our English Opera's, and it is by his
means and industry, that our Stage at present rivals the Italian Theater. I
shall conclude his Character, with that Account which Mr. Dryden has formerly
given of him, which is the more valuable, because the commendation of his
Predecessors is seldom the Subject of his Pen. In the time Preface to Tempest.
(says he) that I writ with Sr. William Davenant, I had the opportunity to
observe somewhat more nearly of him, than I had formerly done, when I had only
a bare acquaintance with him. I found him then of so quick a Fancy, that
nothing was proposed to him on which he could not suddenly produce a Thought
extremely pleasant and surprising: and those first Thoughts of his, contrary to
the old Latin Proverb, Were not always the least happy. And as his Fancy was
quick, so likewise were the Products of it remote and new. He borrowed not of
any other; and his Imaginations were such, as could not enter into any other
Man. His Corrections were sober and judicious: and he corrected his own
Writings much more severely than those of another Man; bestowing twice the
labor and time in Polishing, which he used in Invention. Si sic omnia
dixisset, --

Dr. Charles DAVENANT.
This Gentleman (as I suppose) is now living: being Son of the abovementioned
Sr. William Davenant, and Dr. of Laws. He has (as I have been informed) a share
in the present Theater, in right of his Father; and is jointly empowered with
the Master of the Revels, to inspect the Plays designed for the Stage, that no
Immoralities may be presented. This Gentleman has writ a Play called

Circe, a Tragedy acted at his Royal Highness the Duke of York's Theater,
printed in quarto Land. 1677. The Prologue was writ by Mr. Dryden, and the
Epilogue by the late Earl of Rochester. This Play I have seen acted with good
applause. The Plot is founded on Poetical History. See Ovid's Metamorph. lib.
14. See besides Boccace, Phil Bergomensis, Not. Comes, etc. The Scenes and
Machines may give it a Title to that Species of Dramatick Poetry, called an
Opera.

Robert DAVENPORT.
The Author of Two Plays in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr; though not
published till the Reign of King Charles the Second: viz.

City Nightcap, or Creed quod habes, and habes. a Tragi-Comedy, acted with
great applause, by her Majesty's Servants at the Phoenix in Drury Lane; printed
in quarto Land. 1661. The Plot of Lorenzo, Philippo, and Abstemia, is borrowed
from the Novel of the Curious Impertinent in the Romance of Don Quixot, Part 4.
Ch.6, 7, 8. and that of Lodovico, Francisco, and Dorothea, from Boccace's
Novels, Day 7. Novel 7. on which likewise part of Mr. Ravenscroft's London
Cuckolds is built.

King John, and Matilda, a Tragedy acted with great applause, by her Majesty's
Servants at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, printed in quarto Land. 1655. and
dedicated to the Right Honorable Mountague Bertie Earl of Lindsey; by the
Publisher Andrew Pennycuicke, who acted the part of Matilda, Women in those
times not having appeared on the Stage. For the Plot read the English
Chronicles that have given an account of the Reign of King John; as Matthew
Paris, Polydore Vergil, Hollingshead, Grafton, Danyel, Martin, Stow, Speed,
Baker, Churchil, etc.

Robert DABORN, alias DAUBORNE.
This Gentleman lived in the Reign of King James the First, and was a Master of
Arts, though of which University I am uncertain. He writ Two Plays, viz.

Christian turned Turk, or The Tragical Lives and Deaths of the two Famous
Pirates Ward and Dansiker: a Tragedy printed in quarto Land. 1612. For the
Story I refer you to a Piece called Barker's Overthrow of Captain Ward and
Dansiker, two Pirates: printed in quarto Land. 1609. from which Narrative, I
suppose our Author borrowed the Story.

Poor Man's Comfort, a Tragi-Comedy diverse times acted at the Cockpit in
Drury Lane, with great applause, and printed in 4o Land. 1665.

Though this Author in his Epistle to his Christian turned Turk, speaks of his
former Labors; It has not been my fortune to have seen any of them. There is a
Sermon written by One Robert Daborn, on Zach. 11. 7. printed in octavo Land.
1618. whether this were the same with our Author I know not, but it is probable
it might be, and that he was a Divine, by this Distick which I find in an old
Copy on the Time Poets; Dawbourn I had forgot, and let it be,
He died Amphibion by the Ministry.


John DAY.
This Author lived in the Reign of King James the First, and was sometime
Student of Cains-Colleage in Cambridge. He has written Six Plays, if his
Parliament of Bees may pass under that Species; as the Authors of all former
Catalogues have placed it.

Blind Beggar of Bednal-Green, with the merry Humor of Tom Stroud the Norfolk
Yeoman, diverse times publicly acted by the Princes Servants, printed in quarto
London 1659. For the Plot as far as it concerns History, consult the Writers on
the Reign of King Henry the Sixth: as Fabian, Caxton, Du Chesne, Pol. Vergil,
Grafton, Stow, Speed, etc.

Humor out of Breath, a Comedy said to be writ by our Author, but which I
never saw, and therefore can say nothing of it.

Isle of Gulls, a Comedy often acted in the Black Friars, by the Children of
the Revels, printed in 4o Land. 1633. This is a good Play, and is founded on
the incomparable Sr. Philip Sidney's Arcadia: A Romance of that esteem, that
besides the frequent Editions of it in English, I have seen it translated for
the use of Foreigners, both in the French and Dutch Tongues.

Law Tricks, or Who would have thought it, a Comedy diverse times acted by the
Children of the Revels, and printed in quarto Land. 1608.

Parliament of Bees, with their proper Characters, or A Bee-hive furnished with
Twelve Honey-combs, as pleasant as profitable: being an allegorical description
of the Actions of good and bad men in these our days, printed in quarto Land.
1641. and dedicated to the Worthy Gentleman Mr. George Butler, Professor of the
Arts Liberal, and true Patron of neglected Poesy.

Travels of the Three English Brothers, Sr. Thomas, Sr. Anthony, and Mr. Robert
Shirley; a History played by her Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto Land.
1607. and dedicated to Honors Favorites, and the entire Friends of the Family
of the Shirleys. In the Composure of this Play our Author was assisted by Mr.
William Rowley, and Mr. George Wilkins. The foundation of it may be read in
several English Writers, and Chronicles; particularly I have seen it in Dr.
Fuller's Worthies, in his Description of Sussex Page 107. etc.
. Where the Author speaking of the subject of this Comedy says thus: As to the
Performances of these Three Brethren, I know the Affidavit of a Poet carries
but a small credit in the Court of History, and the Comedy made of them is but
a Friendly Foe to their Memory, as suspected more accommodated to please the
present Spectators, than to inform Posterity. However as the belief of Mitio
(when an Inventory of his adopted Sons Misdemeanors was brought to him)
embraced a middle and moderate way, nec omnia credere, nec nihil; neither to
believe all things, nor nothing of what was told him: so in the List of their
Achievements, we may safely pitch on the same Proportion, and when abatement
is made for Poetical Embelishments, the remainder will speak them worthy in
their Generations.

When our Author Died I know not, but I have read an Elegy written on him by
his Friend Mr. Tateham Fancy's Theater.
, which begins thus; Don Phoebus now has lost his Light,
And left his Rule unto the Night;
And Cynthia she has overcome
The day, and darkened the Sun:
Whereby we now have lost our hope,
Of gaining Day in's Horoscope, etc.
At this jingling rate he runs on the end, much after the rate of a Gentleman
of Lincolns Inn, who writ a more ingenious Poem, upon the Transactions between
a Landlord and his Tenant Day, who privately departed from him by Night;
printed in a single Sheet, Land. 1684. To show the Parallel give me leave to
transcribe the first six Lines, by which the Reader may guess at the Rest.

Here Night, and Day conspire a secret flight;
For Day they say is gone away by Night.
The Day is past, but Landlord where is your Rent,
You might ha'seen, that Day was almost spent.
Day sold, and did put off what e're he might,
Though it was never so Dark, Day would be Light.
Thomas DECKER.
A Poet that lived in the Reign of King James the First, and was Contemporary
with that admirable Laureat, Mr. Benjamin Johnson. He was more famous for the
contention he had with him for the Bays, than for any great Reputation he had
gained by his own Writings. Yet even in that Age, he wanted not his Admirers,
nor his Friends amongst the Poets: in which number I reckon the Ingenious Mr.
Richard Brom; who always styled him by the Title of Father. He clubb'd with
Webster in writing Three Plays; and with Rowley and Ford in another: and I
think I may venture to say, that these Plays as far exceed those of his own
Brain, as a platted Whip-cord exceeds a single Thread in strength. Of those
which he writ alone, I know none of much Esteem, except The Untrussing the
Humourous Poet, and that chiefly on account of the Subject of it, which was the
Witty Ben Johnson. He has had a Hand in Twelve Plays, Eight whereof were of his
own Writing. Of all which I shall give an account, in their Alphabetical Order,
as follows;

Fortunatus, a Comedy; of which I can give no other account than that I once
barely saw it and is printed in quarto.

Honest Whore, the First Part; a Comedy, with the Humors of the Patient Man,
and the longing Wife, acted by her Majesty's Servants with great applause;
printed in 4o Land. 1635.

Honest Whore, the Second Part; a Comedy, with the Humors of the Patient Man,
the Impatient Wife; the Honest Whore, persuaded by strong Arguments to turn
Curtizan again: her brave refuting those Arguments; and lastly the Comical
passage of an Italian Bridewel, where the Scene ends: printed in quarto Land.
1630. This Play I believe was never acted, neither is it divided into Acts. The
passage between the Patient Man, and his Impatient Wife's going to fight for
the Breeches, with the happy Event, is expressed by Sr. John Harrington in Verse.
See his Epigrams at the end of Orlando Furioso, Book 1. Epigr. 16.

If this be not a good Play, the Devil is in it, a Comedy acted with great
applause, by the Queen's Majesty's Servants, at the Red Bull; printed Land. 16
-- and dedicated to his loving, and loved Friends and Fellows, the Queens
Majesty's Servants: by which he means the Actors. The beginning of his Play,
seems to be writ in imitation of Matchiavel's Novel of Belphegor: where Pluto
summons the Devils to Council.

Match me in London, a Tragi-Comedy often presented, first at the Bull in St.
John's Street, and lately at the Private-house in Drury Lane, called the
Phoenix; printed in quarto Land. 1631. and dedicated to the Noble Lover (and
deservedly Beloved) of the Muses, Lodowick Carlel Esquire. Some account this a
tolerable old Play.

Northward-Ho, a Comedy sundry times acted by the Children of Paul's, printed in
quarto Land. 1607. This Play was writ by our Author, and John Webster. The Plot
of Greenshield and Featherstone's pretending to Mayberry that they had both
lain with his Wife, and how they came to the knowledge of each other by her
Ring, Act 1. Sc. 1. is founded on a Novel which is in the Ducento Novelle del
Signior Celio Malespini, Par. 1. Nov. 2.

Satyromastix, or The Untrussing the Humourous Poet, a Comical Satyr presented
publicly by the Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain's Servants, and
privately by the Children of Paul's, printed in quarto Land. 1602. and dedicated
to the World. This Play was writ on the occasion of Ben Johnson 's Poetaster,
where under the Title of Chrispinus, Ben lashed our Author, which he
endeavored to retaliate by Untrussing Ben under the Title of Horace Junior.
This Play is far inferior to that of Mr. Johnson, as indeed his abilities in
Poetry were no ways comparable to his: but this may be said in our Author's
behalf, that 'twas not only lawful, but excusable for him to defend himself:
pray therefore hear part of his Defense in his own language, and then censure
as you please. Horace (says he See Epistle Dedicatory.
) trail'd his Poetasters to the Bar, the Poetasters Untruss'd Horace; how
worthily either, or how wrongfully, ( World) leave it to the Jury: Horace
(questionless) made himself believe that his Burgonian-wit might desperately
challenge all Comers, and that none durst take up the Foyles against him. Its
likely, if he had not so believed, he had not been so deceived, for he was
answered at his own Weapon: And if before Apollo himself (who is Coronator
Poetarum) an Inquisition should be taken touching this lamentable merry
murdering of Innocent Poetry: all Mount Hellicon to Bun-hill, would find it on
the Poetasters side se defendando.

Westward-Ho, a Comedy diverse times acted by the Children of Paul's, and printed
in quarto Land. 1607. This was writ by our Author and Mr. Webster.

Whore of Babylon, an History, acted by the Prince's Servants, and printed in
quarto Land. 1607. The design of this Play is under feigned Names to set forth
the admirable Virtues of Queen Elizabeth, and the Dangers which she escaped, by
the happy discovery of those Designs against her Sacred Person by the Jesuits,
and other Biggoted Papists. The Queen is shadowed under the Title of Titania;
Rome under that of Babylon; Campian the Jesuit is represented by the Name of
Campeius; Dr. Parry by Parridel, etc.

Wyat's History, a Play said to be writ by Him and Webster, and printed in
quarto. Though I never saw this Play, yet I suppose the subject of it is Sr.
Thomas Wyat of Kent, who made an Insurrection in the First year of Queen Mary
to prevent her Match with Philip of Spain: but as this is only conjecture, I
must rest in suspense till I can see the Play.

Besides these Plays he joined with Rowley and Ford in a Play called The Witch
of Edmonton, of which you will find an account in William Rowley.

There are Four other Plays ascribed to our Author, in which he is said by Mr.
Philips Modern Poets, p. 116.
and Mr. Winstanley Lives of the Poets, p. 137.
to be an Associate with John Webster; viz. Noble Stranger; New Trick to Cheat
the Devil; Weakest goes to the Wall; Woman will have her Will. In all which
they are mistaken; for the first was written by Lewis Sharp, and the other by
anonymous Authors.

Sir John DENHAM, Knight of the BATH.
A Poet of the first Form, whose Virtue and Memory will ever be as dear to all
Lovers of Poetry, as his Person was to Majesty it self; I mean, King Charles
the First, and Second.

He was the only Son of Sir John Denham of little Horesly in Essex, but Born at
Dublin in Ireland. His Father being at the time of his Nativity a Judge of that
Kingdom, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. But before the Foggy Air of
that Climate, could influence, or any way adulterate his Mind, he was brought
from thence his Father being preferred to be One of the Barons of the Exchequer
in England. At Sixteen years of Age, in the Year 1631. he was taken from
School, and sent to the University of Oxford, where he became a Member of
Trinity College. In this Society he spent some years; after he was removed
again to London, and followed the Study of the Civil Law.

The Civil War breaking out, this Honorable Person exerted his Loyalty so far,
that upon the voluntary offer of his Service, he was entrusted by the Queen, to
deliver a Message to his Majesty, See his Epistle to King Charles the Second.
Who at that time ( viz. in 1647.) was in the hands of the Army. By Hugh
Peters's Assistance he got admittance to the King, who was then at Causham, and
having delivered his Instructions, his Majesty was pleased to discourse very
freely with him of the whole state of Affairs; and at his departure from
Hampton Court, he was pleased to command him to stay privately in London, to
send to him, and to receive from him all his Letters from and to all his
Correspondents at Home and Abroad; and he was further furnished with Nine
Ciphers in order to it: which Trust he performed with great safety to the
Persons with whom he corresponded; but about Nine Months after, being
discovered by their knowledge of Mr. Cowley's Hand, he happily escaped beyond
Sea both for himself, and those that held Correspondence with him. He got safe
to His Majesty King Charles the Second, and during his Attendance on the King
in Holland and France, His Majesty was pleased sometimes to give him Arguments,
to divert and put off the evil Hours of their Banishment, which (as he modestly
expresses himself) now and then fell not short of His Majesty's Expectation.

At His Majesty's departure from St. Germains to Jersey, he was pleased without
any solicitation, to confer upon Sir John, the office of Surveyor General of
all His Majesty's Royal Buildings; and at his Coronation, created him Knight of
the Bath. This Honor he enjoyed Eight years, and then surrendered up his Honor
with his Soul, on the Tenth day of March in the Year 1668. at his House near
White Hall, and was Buried the Twenty-third Instant at Westminster, amongst
those Noble Poets, Chaucer, Spencer, and Cowley.

After this Abridgment of his Life, I am next to give you a Summary of his
Works. They consist of Poems, part of which are Translations; as The
Destruction of Troy, an Essay on the Second Book of Virgil's AEneis, The
Passion of Dido for AEneas, being the later part of the Fourth Book; Sarpedon's
Speech to Glaucus, being part of the Twelfth Book of Homer; Two Pieces from the
Italian of Mancini, upon the two first Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, and Justice,
etc. Others, are his own Productions, amongst which his Coopers Hill is most
commended; A Poem, which (in the Opinion of Mr. Dryden Ep. Ded. to Rival Ladies.
, who is without contradiction a very able Judge in Poetry) for the Majesty of
the Style, is, and ever will be, the exact Standard of good Writing. His Verses
on Sir William Fanshaw's Translation of Il Pastor Fido, and his Preface to the
Destruction of Troy, show sufficiently his Judgment, and his Translations
themselves his Genius, for Peformances of that nature: and admitting it true,
that few Versions deserve praise; yet His are to be excepted from the general
Rule. His Elegy on Mr. Cowley, (part of which we have transcribed already in
the Account of that great Man See Page 83.
, will make his Name famous to Posterity: and there wants nothing to eternise
his Name, but a Pen equal to his, (if any such were to be found) to perform the
like Friendly office to his Manes.

He has writ but one Play, but by that Specimen we may judge of his ability in
Dramatick, as well as Epick Poesy; this Play being generally commended. It Is
called The Sophy, a Tragedy, acted at the Private-house in Black-friars with
good applause: 'Twas first printed in quarto Land. 1642. but since published
with his Poems and Translations; all which are dedicated to King Charles the
Second. The last Edition being printed in octavo Land. 1671. For the Plot of
this Play, it is the same with that of Baron's Mirza, (which Story you may find
in Herberts Travels) though differently handled by each Poet: and though it has
been objected by Mr. Baron, that our Author kills Abbas in this Tragedy, who
really survived some years after the Murder of his Son; it may be answered,
That he did only Poetical Justice, and took no other Liberty than what is
allowed by Horace De Art Poetica.
: -- Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlihet audendi semper suit aequa Potestas.


John DOVER.
A Gentleman of whom I can give no other account than what I learn from a Play
he has written; viz That he was of Gray's Inn; and that to divert himself after
the Fatigue of the Law, he employed himself in Reading History, the Effects
whereof produced The Roman Generals, or The Distressed Ladies, a Play written
in Heroic Verse, printed in quarto Land. 1677. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Robert Lord Brook. The Plot, as far as it concerns History, may be
read in Plutarch's Lives of Caesar and Pompey; see besides Suetonius, Lucan,
etc. But the Author has not (as he himself owns Epistle Dedicatory.
altogether followed, nor yet declined History, least by the one, his Play
might be took for a Piece translated out of Livy, or Lucan, or by the other for
an idle Romance; but like the Traveller for Delight, he has sometimes followed
and sometimes quitted his Rode. This Play, as I conjecture from the Prologue
and Epilogue was never acted, they being rather addressed to the Stationers
Customers, than the Audience.

John DRYDEN, Esquire
A Person whose Writings have made him remarkable to all sorts of Men, as being
for a long time much read, and in great Vogue. It is no wonder that the
Characters given of him, by such as are, or would be thought Wits, are various;
since even those, who are generally allowed to be such, are not yet agreed in
their Verdicts. And as their Judgments are different, as to his Writings; so
are their Censures no less repugnant to the Managery of his Life, some excusing
what these condemn, and some exploding what those commend. So that we can
scarce find them agreed in any One thing, save this, That he was Poet Laureat
and Historiographer to His late Majesty. For this, and other Reasons, I shall
wave all Particularities of his Life; and let pass the Historiographer, that I
may keep the closer to the Poet, toward whom I shall use my accustomed
Freedom; and having spoken my Sentiments of his Predecessors Writings, shall
venture without partiality, to exercise my slender Judgment in giving a Censure
of his Works.

Mr. Dryden is the most Voluminous Dramatick Writer of our Age, he having
already extant above Twenty Plays of his own writing, as the Title Page of each
would persuade the World; though some people have been so bold as to call the
Truth of this in question, and to DRYDEN.
propogate in the world another Opinion.

His Genius seems to me to incline to Tragedy and Satyr, rather than Comedy:
and methinks he writes much better in Heroicks, than in blank Verse. His very
Enemies must grant that there his Numbers are sweet, and flowing; that he has
with success practiced the new way of Versifying introduced by his Predecessor
Mr. Waller, and followed since with success, by Sr. John Denham, and others.
But for Comedy, he is for the most part beholding to French Romances and Plays,
not only for his Plots, but even a great part of his Language: though at the same
time, he has the confidence to prevaricate, if not flatly deny the Accusation,
and equivocally to vindicate himself; as in the Preface to the Mock Astrologer:
where he mentions Thomas Corneille's le Feint Astrologue becaus'd 'twas
translated, and the Theft proved upon him; but never says One word of
Molliere's Depit amoreux, from whence the greatest part of Wild-blood and
Jacinta, (which he owns are the chiefest parts of the Play) are stolen. I
cannot pass by his Vanity Preface to Mock Astrologer.
in saying, That those who have called Virgil, Terence and Tasso, Plagiaries
(though they much injured them) had yet a better Color for their Accusation: nor
his Confidence in sheltring himself under the protection of their great Names,
by affirming, That he is able to say the same for his Play, that he urges for
their Poems; viz. That the Body of his Play is his own, and so are all the
Ornaments of Language, and Elocution in them. I appeal only to those who are
versed in the French Tongue, and will take the pains to compare this Comedy
with the French Plays abovementioned; if this be not somewhat more than Mental
Reservation, or to use one of his own Expressions, Love in a Nunnery, p. 59.
A Sophisticated Truth, with an allay of Lie in it.

Nor are his Characters less borrowed in his Tragedies, and the serious parts
of his Tragi-Comedies; as I shall observe in the sequel. It shall suffice me at
present, to show how Magisterially he huffs at, and domineers over, the French
in his Preface to the Conquest of Granada. I shall never (says he) subject my
Characters to the French Standard; where Love and Honor are to be weighed by
Drams and and Scruples: yet, where I have designed the patterns of exact
Virtue, such as in this Play are the Parts of Almahide, of Ozmyn, and Benzaida,
I may safely challenge the best of theirs. Now the Reader is desired to observe,
that all the Characters of that Play are stolle, from the French: so that Mr.
Dryden took a secure way to Conquest, for having robbed them of their Weapons,
he might safely challenge them and beat them too, especially having gotten
Ponce de Leon The Chief Hero in a Romance called Almatride.
on his side, in disguise, and under the Title of Almanzor: and should Monsieur
de Voiture presume to lay claim to his own Song L'Amour sous sa Loy etc.
Poesies de M. de Voiture, p. 457.
which Mr. Dryden has robbed him of, and placed in the Play of Sr. Martin
Marr-all, (being that Song which begins Blind Love to this Hour etc.) our Poet
would go nigh to beat him with a Staff of his own Rimes, with as much ease, as
Sr. Martin defeated the Bailiffs in rescue of his Rival.

But had he only extended his Conquests over the French Poets, I had not meddled
in this Affair, and he might have taken part with Achilles, and Rinaldo,
against Cyrus, and Oroondates, without my engaging in this Foreign War: but
when I found him flusht with his Victory over the great Scudery, and with
Almanzor's assistance triumphing over the noble Kingdom of Granada; and not
content with Conquests abroad, like another Julius Caesar, turning his Arms
upon his own Country; and as if the proscription of his Contemporaries
Reputation, were not sufficient to satiate his implacable thirst after Fame,
endeavoring to demolish the Statues and Monuments of his Ancestors, the Works
of those his Illustrious Predecessors, Shakespeare, Fletcher, and Johnson: I was
resolved to endeavor the rescue and preservation of those excellent Trophies
of Wit, by raising the Posse-comitatus upon this Poetic Almanzor, to put a
stop to his Spoils upon his own Countrymen. Therefore I present my self a
Champion in the Dead Poets Cause, to vindicate their Fame, with the same
Courage, though I hope different Integrity than Almanzor engaged in defense of
Queen Almahide, when he bravely Swore like a Hero, that his Cause was right,
and She was innocent; though just before the Combat, when alone, he owned he knew
her false: Act. 5. Sc. 1.
I have out-fac'd my self, and justified
What I knew false to all the World beside.
She was as Faithless as her Sex could be;
And now I am alone, she is so to me.


But to wave this digression, and proceed to the Vindication of the Ancients;
which that I may the better perform, for the Readers Diversion, and that Mr.
Dryden may not tell me, that what I have said, is but gratis dictum, I shall
set down the Heads of his Depositions against our ancient English Poets, and
then endeavor the Defense of those great Men, who certainly deserved much
better of Posterity, than to be so disrespectively treated as he has used them.

Mr. Shakespeare as first in Seniority I think ought to lead the Van, and
therefore I shall give you his Account of him as follows Postscript to Granada,
page 146.
: Shakespeare who many times has written better than any Poet in any Language,
is yet so far from writing Wit always, or expressing that Wit according to the
dignity of the Subject, that he writes in many places below -- the dullest
Writers of ours, or any precedent Age. He is the very Janus of Poets; he wears
almost every where two Faces: and you have scarce begun to admire the One, e're
you despise the other. Speaking of Mr. Shakespeare's Plots, he says they were
lame, Ibid. page 143.
and that many of them were made up of some ridiculous, incoherent Story, which
in one Play, many times took up the business of an Age. I suppose (says he) I
need not name Pericles Prince of Tire, nor the Historical Plays of Shakespeare;
Besides many of the rest, as the Winters Tale, Love's Labor lost, Measure for
Measure, which were either grounded on Impossibilities, or at least so meanly
written, that the Comedy neither caused your Mirth, nor the serious part your
Concernment. He says further, Preface to Mock Astrologer. B. 4.
Most of Shakespeare's Plays, I mean the Stories of them, are to be found in the
Heccatomouthi, or Hundred Novels of Cinthio. I have my self read in his
Italian, that of Romeo and Juliet; The Moor of Venice, and many others of them.

He Characterises Mr. Fletcher, who writ after Mr. Shakespeare Postscript, p.
144.
, As a Person that neither understood correct Plotting, nor that which they
call The Decorum of the Stage: of which he gives several Instances out of
Philaster, Humourous Lieutenant, and Faithful Shepherdess; which are too long
to be here inserted. In another place he speaks of Fletcher thus Ibid. p. 146.
; Neither is the Luxuriance of Fletcher a less fault than the Carelessness of
Shakespeare. He does not well always, and when he does, he is a true
Englishman; he knows not when to give over. If he wakes in one Scene, he
commonly slumbers in another: and if he pleases you in the first three Acts, he
is frequently so tired with his Labor, that he goes heavily in the Fourth, and
sinks under his Burden in the Fifth. Speaking of his Plots, Pres. Astrol. B. 4.
he says, Beaumont and Fletcher had most of theirs from Spanish Novels: witness
The Chances, The Spanish Curate, Rule a Wife and have a Wife, The little French
Lawyer, and so many others of them as compose the greatest part of their Volume
in Folio.

As to the great Ben Johnson he deals not much better with him, though he would
be thought to admire him; and if he praise him in one Page, he wipes it out in
another: thus tho he calls him The most Judicious of Poets Postscript, p. 146.
, and Inimitable Writer, yet, he says, his Excellency lay in the low Characters
of Vice, and Folly. When at any time (says he) Ben aimed at Wit in the stricter
sense, that is sharpness of Conceit, he was forced to borrow from the Ancients,
(as to my Knowledge he did very much from Plautus:) or when he trusted himself
alone, often fell into meanness of expression. Nay he was not free from the
lowest and most grovelling Kind of Wit, which we call Clenobes; of which Every
Man in his Humor is infinitely full, and which is worse, the wittiest Persons
in the Dramma speak them.

These are his own Words, and his Judgment of these three Great Men in
particular, now take his Opinion of them all in general, which is as follows;
Postscript, page 143.
But Mance and Partiality set apart, let any Man, who understands English, read
diligently the Works of Shakespeare and Fletcher; and I dare undertake that he
will find in every Page, either some Solecisme in Speech, or some notorious
flaw in Sense. In the next Page; speaking of their Sense and Language, he says,
I dare almost challenge any Man to show me a Page together which is correct in
both. As for Ben Johnson I am loath to name him, because he is a most judicious
Author, yet he often falls into these Errors. Speaking of their Wit, he gives
it this Character Ibid. p. 148.
, I have always acknowledged the Wit of our Predecessors, with all the
Veneration that becomes me; but I am sure, their Wit was not that of Gentlemen;
there was ever somewhat that was Illbred and Clownish in it: and which confessed
the Conversation of the Authors. Speaking of the advantage which acrues to our
Writing, from Conversation, he says Ibid.
, In the Age wherein those Poets lived, there was less of Gallantry, than in
ours; neither did they keep the best Company of theirs. Their Fortune has been
much like that of Epicurus, in the Retirement of his Gardens: to live almost
unknown, and to be Celebrated after their Decease. I cannot find that any of
them were Conversant in Courts, except Ben Johnson: and his Genius lay not so
much that way, as to make an Improvement by it. He gives this Character of
their Audiences Ibid. 144.
; They knew no better, and therefore were satisfied with what they brought.
Those who call theirs The Golden Age of Poetry, have only this Reason for it,
that they were then content with Acorns, before they knew the use of Bread; or
that (...) was become a Proverb.

These are Errors which Mr. Dryden has found out in the most Correct Dramatick
Poets of the last Age, and says Ibid. p. 148.
in defense of our present Writers, That if they reach not some Excellencies of
Ben Johnson, yet at least they are above that Meanness of Thought which he has
taxed, and which is so frequent in him.

After this he falls upon the Gentlemen of the last Age in a Character, which
(as Bays says) is sheer point and Satyr throughout Ibid. p. 144.
; for after having Droll'd upon them, calling them Old Fellows, Grave
Gentlemen, etc. he sums up his Evidence, and sings an Io Triumph; ascribing
his Victory to the Gallantry and Civility of this Age, and to his own Knowledge
of the Customs and Manners of it.

I must do Mr. Dryden this justice, to acquaint the World, that here, and there
in this Postscript, he intersperses some faint Praises of these Authors; and
beggs the Reader's Pardon for accusing them Ibid. p. 149.
, Desiring him to consider that he lives in Age where his least faults are
severely censured, and that he has no way left to extenuate his failings, but
by showing as great in those whom he admires.

Whether this be a sufficient Excuse or no, I leave to the Critics: but sure I
am that this procedure seems exactly agreeable to the Character which an
ingenious Person draws of a Malignant Wit, Dr. Charleton's Different Wits of
Men, p. 120.
Who conscious of his own Vices, and studious to conceal them, endeavors by
Detraction to make it appear that others also of greater Estimation in the
world, are tainted with the same or greater: as Infamous Women generally excuse
their personal Debaucheries, by incriminating upon their whole Sex,
callumniating the most Chaste and Virtuous, to palliate their own dishonor.

But it is not the Poets only that Mr. Dryden attacks, for had I time, I could
easily prove he has Almanzor-like fell foul upon almost all Religions, Parties,
and Orders of Mankind; so that whilst he was Apollo's Substitute, he has played
as odd Tricks, and been as Mad as his own Wild-Bull which he turned loose in
Sierra Ronda Conquest of Granada, part 1. Act. 1. Sc. 1.
; Whilst Monarch-like he ranged the listed Field,
Some tossed, some gored, some trampling down he killed.


And as if by being Laureat, he were as Infallible as St. Peter's Successor;
and had as large a Despotick Power as Pope Stephanus the Sixth to damn his
Predecessors; he has assaulted with all the Bitterness imaginable not only the
Church of England, but also ridiculed the several Professions of the Lutherans,
Calvinists, Socinians, Presbyterians, Hugonots, Anabaptists, Independents,
Quakers, etc. though I must observe by the way, that some people among the
Persuasions here mentioned might justly have expected better usage from him on
Account of old Acquaintance in the Year 1659. But this being at present Foreign
to my Subject, I shall not after an Act of Oblivion revive forgotten Crimes,
but go on with the Thing I have undertook, ( to wit) The Defense of the Poets
of the last Age.

Were Mr. Dryden really as great a Scholar, as he would have the World believe
him to be; he would have called to mind, that Homer, whom he professes to
imitate, had set him a better pattern of Gratitude, who mentions with Respect
and Kindness his Master Phemis, Mentor of Ithaca, and even Tychius, the honest
Leather-dresser. Had he followed Virgil, whom he would be thought to esteem;
instead of Reproaches, he had heaped Panegyricks, on the Ashes of his
Illustrious Predecessors: and rather than have taxed them with their Errors in
such a rude manner, would have endeavored to fix them in the Temple of Fame,
as he did Musaeus, and the Ancient Poets, in Elisium, amongst the Magnanimous
Heroes, and Teucer's Offspring; stiling them, AEneid, hb. 6.


-- Pii Vates, and Phoebo digna locuti.
Had he observed Ovid's Elegy ad Invidos Amorum, l. 1. El. 15.
he might have found that good humored Gentleman, not only commending his
Predecessors, but even his Cotemporaries. But it seems he has followed Horace,
whom he boasts to have studied Pref. Relig. Laici. last Paragraph.
, and whom he has imitated in his greatest Weakness, I mean his Ingratitude: if
at least that excellent Wit could be guilty of a Crime, so much below his
Breeding; for the very suspicion of which, Scaliger (who like Mr. Dryden
seldom spares any man,) has termed him Barbarous Poet. L.3 C.97.
. Ingratus Horatius, atque animo barbaro atque servili; qui ne a Mecenate
quidem abstinere potuit: siquidem quod aiunt, verum est, Malthinum ab eo
appellatum, cujus demissas notaret tunicas Malthiaus tunicis d^missis ambulat:
Satyrar. L.1. Sat.2.
Mr. Dryden having imitated the same Fact, certainly he deserves the same
punishment: and if we may not with Scaliger call him Barbarous, yet all
ingenious Men, that know how he has dealt with Shakespeare, will count him
ungrateful; who by furbishing up an Old Play, witness The Tempest, and Troilus
and Cressida, has got more on the third Day, than its probable, ever Horace
received from his Patron for any One Poem in all his Life. The like Debt he
stands engaged for to the French for several of the Plays, he has published;
which if they exceed Mr. Shakespeare in Economy, and Contrivance, it is that Mr.
Dryden's Plays owe their Advantage to his skill in the French Tongue, or to the
Age, rather than his own Conduct, or Performances.

Honest Shakespeare was not in those days acquainted with those great Wits,
Scudery, Calpranede, Scarron, Corneille, etc. He was as much a Stranger to
French as Latin, (in which, if we believe Ben Johnson, he was a very small
Proficient;) and yet an humble Story of Dorastus and Fawnia, served him for A
Winter's Tale, as well as The Grand Cyrus, or The Captive Queen, could furnish
out a Laureat for a Conquest of Granada. Shakespeare's Measure for Measure,
however despised by Mr. Dryden with his Much Ado about Nothing, were believed
by Sr. William Davenant, (who I presume had as much judgment as Sir Positive
At-all See Sullen Lovers, p. 5.
) to have Wit enough in them to make one good Play.

To conclude, if Mr. Shakespeare's Plots are more irregular than those of Mr.
Dryden's (which by some will not be allowed) it is because he never read
Aristotle, or Rapin; and I think Tasso's Arguments to Apollo in defense of his
Gierusalemme Liberata may be pleaded in our Author's behalf. I Ragguazli di
Parnasso di Boccalini, Ragg. 28. Or Boccalini's Advertisements from Parnassus
Advertis. 28.
Che solo havea ubbidito al talento, che gli havea dato la Natura, and al
inspiratione della sua serenissima Calliope; che per cio li pareva di
compitamente haver sodisfatto a gli obblighi tutti della Poetica, nella quale
sua Maesta non havendo prescritto leg alcuna, non sapea veder con qual
autorita Aristotile havesse publicato le Regole di essa: e ch' egli non may
havendo udito dire, che in Parnasso st^desse altro Signore, che sua Maesta, e
le sue Serenissime Dive, il suo Peccato di non havere ubbidito a' commandamenti
d' Aristotile era proceduto da mera ignoranza, non da malitia alcuna. The Sense
of which is thus; That he had only observed the Talent which Nature had given
him, and which his Calliope had inspired into him: Wherein he thought he had
fulfilled all the duties of Poetry, and that his Majesty having prescribed no
Laws thereunto, he knew not with what Authority Aristotle had published any
Rules to be observed in it: and that he never having heard that there was any
other Lord in Parnassus but his Majesty, his fault in not having observed
Aristotle's Rules, was, an Error of Ignorance, and not of any Malice.

As to Mr. Fletcher, should we grant that he understood not the Decorum of the
Stage, as Mr. Dryden, and Mr. Flecknoe before him in his Discourse on the
English Stage, observe; his Errors on that account, are more pardonaable than
those of the former, who pretends so well to know it, and yet has offended
against some of its most obvious and established Rules. Witness Porphirius
Tyranick Love.
his attempt to kill the Emperor whose Subject he was, and who offered to adopt
him his Son, and give him his Daughter in Marriage. Philocles Maiden Queen.
joining with Prince Lisimantes in taking the Queen Prisoner, who raised him to
be her chief Favorite Postscript, page 144.
. If to wound a Woman be an Indecency and contrary to the Character of Manhood,
of which he accuses Philaster, Philaster.
and Perigot: Faithful Shepherdess.
than Mr. Dryden has equally offended with Mr. Fletcher, since he makes
Abdelmelech kill Lyndaraxa Conquest of Granada, II. Part.
. If it be contrary to the Decorum of the Stage for Demetrius and Leontius to
stay in the midst of a routed Army, to hear the cold Mirth of The Humourous
Lieutenant Postscript, p. 144.
it is certainly no less, to stay the Queen and her Court, to hear the cold
Mirth of Celadon and Florimel about their Marriage Covenants, whilst the main
Action is depending Maiden Queen.
. If Mr. Fletcher be taxed by Mr. Dryden Postscript, Ibid.
for introducing Demetrius with a Pistol in his Hand (in the Humourous
Lieutenant) in the next Age to Alexander the Great: I think Mr. Dryden
committed as great a Blunder in his Zambra Dance Conquest of Granada, part 1.
, where he brought in the Mahometans bowing to the Image of Jupiter. I could
give you several other Instances, but these are enough to show, that Mr. Dryden
is no more Infallible than his Predecessors.

As to his failing in the two last Acts, (a fault Cicero sometimes alludes to,
and blames in an Idle Poet; Tall. lib. de Senect. [non procul ab initio] a qua
sc. Natura non verisimile est, cum ce:erae parts aetitis been descriptae sint,
extremum actum, tanquam ab inerti Poeta, esse neglectum.
) its more to be imputed to his Laziness, than his want of Judgment. I have
either read, or been informed, (I know not well whether) that 'twas generally
Mr. Fletcher's practice, after he had finished Three Acts ^f a Play to show
them to the Actors, and when they had agreed on Terms, he huddled up the two
last without that care that behoov'd him; which gave opportunity to such
Friends as Mr. Dryden to traduce him. This, though no just excuse, yet I believe
was known to Mr. Dryden before, and therefore ought not as an act of Ignorance,
to have been urged so fiercely against him.

As to his Plots being borrowed, it is what is allowed by Scaliger, and others;
and what has been practiced by Mr. Dryden, more than by any Poet that I know:
so that He of all Men living had no Reason to throw the first Stone at him. But
Mr. Dryden is of the nature of those Satyrists described by Scaliger Poet. L.3
C.97.
; Commune est omnibus profiteri sese omnium pene hostem; paucissimorum
parcissimum laudatorem: Se quoque vulnerare ut alios interficere liceat; nam ne
amicis quidem parcunt.

To come lastly to Ben Johnson, who (as Mr. Dryden affirms Pref. Mock Astrol.
,) has borrowed more from the Ancients than any: I crave leave to say in his
behalf, that our late Laureat has far outdone him in Thefts, proportionable to
his Writings: and therefore he is guilty of the highest Arrogance, to accuse
another of a Crime, for which he is most of all men liable to be arraigned.
Juv. Sat 2.


Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querenteis?
I must further allege that Mr. Johnson in borrowing from the Ancients, has
only followed the Pattern of the great Men of former Ages, Homer, Virgil, Ovid,
Horace, Plautus, Terence, Seneca, etc. all which have imitated the Example of
the industrious Be, which sucks Honey from all sorts of Flowers, and lays it
up in a general Repository. 'Twould be actum agere to repeat what is known to
all Learned Men; that there was an Illiad written before that of Homer, which
Aristotle mentions; and from which, (by Suidas, AElian, and others,) Homer is
supposed to have borrowed his Design. Virgil copied from Hesiod, Homer,
Pisander, Euripides, Theocritus, Aratus, Ennius, Pacuvius, Lucretius, and
others; as may be seen in Macrobius, and Fulvio Ursini, which last Author has
writ a particular Treatise of his Thefts. Notwithstanding he accounted it no
Diminution to his Worth, but rather gloried in his Imitation: for when some
snarling Critics had accused him for having borrowed his Design from Homer, he
replied; It Is the Act of an Hero, to wrest Hercules's Club out of his Hand.
Besides he not only acknowledges in particular his making use of Hesiod, Geor.
L. 3.


Ascraeumque cano Romana per oppida carmen: But extremely glories in his being
the first Latin Poet that had treated on Country Affairs:

-- Juvat ire jugis, qua nulla priorum
Castaliam molli diducitur orbita clivo.
Ovid not only took the Design of his Metamorphosis, from the forementioned
Parthenius: but even Horace himself notwithstanding his Hypercritical Sentence
against such as undertook that Province, and did not well acquit themselves,
stiling them Epist. L. 1. Ep. 19.
. -- Imitatorum stultum pecus, --
Yet, I say, He himself not only imitated Lucilius in his Satyrs, and followed
Aristotle in his Epistle De Art Poetica: but also translated Verbatim those
Fragments of the Greeks, which in some Editions are to be found at the End of
Pindar's Works, and inserted them in his first Book of Odes, as might be easily
made appear, were it not too long a Discursion.

For this Reason I shall only speak succinctly of the Latin Dramatick Poets,
most of which were Imitators at least, if not wholly beholding to the Greek
Poets for their Productions. Thus Seneca in his Tragedies imitated Euripides,
and AEschylus; Terence borrowed from Menander, and in his Prologue to Andria,
quotes Naevius, Plautus, and Ennius for his Authority. I could enumerate more
Instances, but these are sufficient Precedents to excuse Mr. Johnson.

Permit me to say farther in his behalf, That if in imitation of these
illustrious Examples, and Models of Antiquity, he has borrowed from them, as
they from each other; yet that he attempted, and as some think, happily
succeeded in his Endeavors of Surpassing them: insomuch that a certain Person
of Quality Poems and Essays, By Mr Edw. Howard, p. 24.
makes a Question, Whether any of the Wit of the Latin Poets be more Terse and
Eloquent in their Tongue, than this Great and Learned Poet appears in ours.

Whether Mr. Dryden, who has likewise succeeded to admiration in this way, or
Mr. Johnson have most improved, and best advanced what they have borrowed from
the Ancients, I shall leave to the decision of the abler Critics: only this I
must say, in behalf of the later, that he has no ways endeavored to conceal
what he has borrowed, as the former has generally done. Nay, in his Play called
Sejanus he has printed in the Margent throughout, the places from whence he
borrowed: the same he has practiced in several of his Masks, (as the Reader
may find in his Works;) a Pattern, which Mr. Dryden would have done well to
have copied, and had thereby saved me the trouble of the following Annotations.

There is this difference between the Proceedings of these Poets, that Mr.
Johnson has by Mr. Dryden's Confession Pref. Mock Astrol.
Designed his Plots himself; whereas I know not any One Play, whose Plot may be
said to be the Product of Mr. Dryden's own Brain. When Mr. Johnson borrowed,
'twas from the Treasury of the Ancients, which is so far from any diminution of
his Worth, that I think it is to his Honor; it leastwise I am sure he is
justified by his Son Carthwright, in the following Lines Carthwright's Poems,
p. 315.
: What though thy searching Muse did rake the dust
Of Time, and purge old Metals from their Rust?
Is it no Labor, no Art, think they, to
Snatch Shipwracks from the Deep, as Diverse do?
And rescue Jewels from the covetous Sand,
Making the Seas hid Wealth adorn the Land?
What though thy culling Muse did rob the store
Of Greek and Latin Gardens, to bring over
Plants to thy Native Soil? their Virtue were
Improved far more, by being planted here:
If thy Still to their Essence does refine
So many Drugs, is not the Water thine?
Thefts thus become just Works; they and their
Grace
Are wholly thine; thus does the Stamp and Face
Make that the King's that is ravished from the
Mine;
In others then it is Oar, in thee it is Coin.


On the contrary, though Mr. Dryden has likewise borrowed from the Greek and
Latin Poets, as Sophocles, Virgil, Horace, Seneca, etc. which I purposely omit
to tax him with, as thinking what he has taken to be lawful prize: yet I cannot
but observe withal; that he has plundered the chief Italian, Spanish, and
French Wits for Forage, notwithstanding his pretended contempt of them: and not
only so, but even his own Countrymen have been forced to pay him tribute, or to
say better, have not been exempt from being Pillaged. This I shall sufficiently
make out in the Examen of his Plays; in the mean time, give me leave to say a
word, or two, in Defense of Mr. Johnson's way of Wit, which Mr. Dryden calls
Clenches.

There have been few great Poets which have not proposed some Eminent Author
for their Pattern, (Examples of this would be needless and endless.) Mr.
Johnson proposed Plautus for his Model, and not only borrowed from him, but
imitated his way of Wit in English. There are none who have read him, but are
acquainted with his way of playing with Words: I will give one Example for all,
which the Reader may find in the very entrance of his Works; I mean the
Prologue to Amphitruo.

Justam rem and facilem oratum a vobis volo:
Nam just ab justis justus sum Orator datus.
Nam injusta ab justis impetrare non decet:
Justa autem ab injustis petere insipientia'st.
Nor might this be the sole Reason for Mr. Johnson's Imitation, for possibly
'twas his Compliance with the Age that induced him to this way of writing, it
being then as Mr. Dryden observes Postscript to Granada; p. 148.
the Mode of Wit, the Vice of the Age, and not Ben Johnson's: and besides Mr.
Dryden's taxing Sir Philip Sidney for playing with his Words, I may add that I
find it practiced by several Dramatick Poets, who were Mr. Johnson's
Cotemporaries: and notwithstanding the advantage which this Age claims over the
last, we find Mr. Dryden himself as well as Mr. Johnson, not only given to
Clinches; but sometimes a Carwichet, a Quarter-quibble, or a bare Pun serves
his turn, as well as his Friend Bur in his Wild Gallant; and therefore he might
have spared this Reflection, if he had given himself the liberty of Thinking.

As to his Reflections on this Triumvirate in general: I might easily prove,
that his Improprieties in Grammar, are equal to theirs: and that He himself has
been guilty of Solecisms in Speech, and Flaws in Sense, as well as Shakespeare,
Fletcher, and Johnson: but this would be to wast Paper and Time: and besides' I
consider that Apollos Laws like those of our own Nation, allow no Man to be
tried twice for the same Crime: and Mr. Dryden having already been arraigned
before the Wits upon the Evidence of the Rota, and found Guilty by Mr. Clifford
the Foreman of the Jury: I shall suppress my further Evidence, till I am served
with a Subpaena, by him, to appear before that Court, or have an Action clapped
upon me by his Proctor, as guilty of a Scandalum Archi-Poetae; and then I shall
readily give in my Depositions.

For these, and the like Reasons, I shall at present pass by his dis-obliging
Reflections on several of his Patrons, as well as the Poets his Cotemporaries:
his little Arts to set up himself, and decry others; his dexterity in altering
other Men's Thoughts, so as to make them pass for his own; his Tautologies; his
Petty-Larcenies, which notwithstanding his stiling of himself Saturnine, show
him sufficiently Mercurial, at least, if Plagiaries may be accounted under the
Government of that Planet. In fine, (if Old Moody will allow me to borrow that
word) he resembles Vulgar Painters, who can tolerably copy after a good
Original, but either have not judgment, or will not take the pains themselves
to design any thing of value. This will easily appear in the following Account
of his Plays, of which I come now to speak. Viz.

Albion and Albanius, an Opera performed at the Queen's Theater in
Dorset-Garden, and printed in Folio, Land. 1685. The Subject of it (as the
Author says) is wholly Allegorical; and the Allegory it self so very obvious,
that it will no sooner be read, than understood. I need not therefore take the
pains to acquaint my Reader, that by the Man on the Pedestal, who is drawn with
a long, lean, pale Face, with Fiends Wings, and Snakes twisted round his Body:
and incompast by several Phanatical Rebellious Heads, who suck Poison from him,
which runs out of a Tap in his Side, is meant the late Lord Shaftsbury, and his
Adherents. I shall not pretend to pass my censure whether he deserved this
usage from our Author, or no; but leave it to the judgments of Statesmen and
Politicians. How well our Author has drawn his other Characters, I shall leave
to the decision of the Critics: as also whether Monsieur Grabut, or our Poet
deserves the preference; or either of them merit those Applauses which Mr.
Dryden in both their Names challenges as their due; since I find an Author of a
different Opinion, who thus describes them.

Grabut his Yoke-mate never shall be forgot,
Whom the God of Tunes upon a Muse begot.
Bays on a double score to him belongs:
As well for writing as for setting Songs.
For some have sworn, (the Intrigue so od is laid)
That Bays and He mistook each others Trade
Grabut the Lines, and He the Music made.
All for Love, or The World well Lost; a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal;
and written in imitation of Shakespeare's style, printed in quarto Land. 1678.
and dedicated to the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Danby. That our Author has
nearly imitated Shakespeare is evident by the following Instance. In the Comedy
called Much Ado about Nothing Act 3. p. 101.
the Bastard accuses Hero of Disloyalty before the Prince, and Claudio her
Lover: who (as surprised at the News,) asks, Who! Hero? Bast. Even she,
Leonato's Hero, your Hero, every Man's Hero. In this Play, Act 4. p. 54.
on the like occasion, where Ventidius accuses Cleopatra, Antony says, Not
Cleopatra! Ven. Even she my Lord! Ant. My Cleopatra? Ven. Your Cleopatra;
Dollabella's Cleopatra: Every Man's Cleopatra. Ex homine hunc natum dicas. Our
Author with justice prefers the Scene betwixt Antonius and Ventidius in the
first Act, to any thing he has written in that kind: but as to his defense of
the Scene between Octavia and Cleopatra, in the end of the third Act, there are
some Critics who are not yet satisfied, that it is agreeable to the Rules of
Decency and Decorum, to make Persons of their Character demean themselves
contrary to the Modesty of their Sex. For the Plot see Plutarch in Vit. M. Ant.
Suetonius in Aug. Dion Cassius, Lib. 48. 51. Orosius, Lib. 6. Cap. 7. Florus,
L. 4. C. 11. Appian de Bellis Civilibus, L.5.

Amboyna, a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal; printed in quarto Land. 1673.
and dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lord Clifford of Chudleigh. The Plot
of this Play is founded chiefly on History, being an Account of the Cruelty of
the Dutch to our Countrymen in Amboyna, An.Dom. 1618. There was a Book
published by the East India Company, which I never saw, but I have read a
Relation extracted from thence by Mr. Purchase, and printed in his Pilgrimage,
Vol. II. L. 10. Chapter 16. There are several other Authors that have mentioned
this Story, as Sanderson's History of King James, page 577. Stubb's Relation of
the Dutch Cruelties to the English at Amboyna, printed in quarto Land. 1632.
Wanley's History of Man, Lib. 4. Chapter 10. Ex. 1. The Plot of the Rape of
Isabinda, by Harman Junior, is founded on a Novel in Cynthio Gyraldi, Deca 5a.
Nov. 10.

Assignation, or Love in a Nunnery, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal,
printed in quarto Land. 1678. and dedicated to his most Honored Friend Sir
Charles Sidley Baronet. This Play was Damned on the Stage, or as the Author
phrases it Epistle Dedicatory.
, it succeeded-ill in the Representation. I shall not pretend to determine, any
more than the Author, Whether the fault was in the Play it self, or in the
lameness of the Action, or in the number of its Enemies, who came resolved to
damn it for the Title: but this I know, that his Reflections on Mr. Ravencrofts
Play, called Mamamouchi, provoked him to a retort in another Prologue Careless
Lovers.
to a new Play of his acted the Vacation following, part of which as relating
to this Play, I shall transcribe.

An Author did to please you, let his Wit run
Of late, much on a Serving-man, and Cittern,
And yet you would not like the Serenade,
Nay, and you damned his Nuns in Masquerade.
You did his Spanish Sing-song too abhor,
Ah! que locura con tanto rigor.
In fine, the whole by you so much was blamed,
To act their parts the Players were ashamed;
Ah! how severe your Malice was that Day;
To damn at once the Poet and his Play.
But why, was your Rage just at that time shown,
When what the Poet writ, was all his own?
Till then he borrow^d from Romance, and did translate,
And those Plays found a more indulgent Fate.
But in this Mr. Ravencroft is very much deceived, for most of the Characters,
as well as the Incidents are borrowed from French Romances; as for instance,
The Characters of the Duke of Mantua, Prince Frederick and Lucretia, are
borrowed from The Annals of Love, 8o in the Story of Constance the fair Nun,
page 81. but as to the Scene of the Petticoat and Belly Ache Act4. Sc.1.
so much commended by Mr. Bays Rehearsal, Act.3. p. 33.
, I believe 'twas Mr. Dryden's own Contrivance. The Characters of Aurelian,
Camillo, Laura, and Violetta, are taken from Scarron's Comical Romance, in the
History of Destiny and Madam Star. See Chapter 13. page 43. The Humor of Benito's
affecting Music, to the prejudice of his Carcass Act.1. Sc.1.
, is borrowed from Quinault's Character of Jodolet, in the beginning of his La
Comedy, sans Comedy. The passage of Frontona's throwing water upon Laura and
Violetta Act 3. p. 22.
is taken from Les Contes de M. de la Fontaine. premiere party, Nov. 11. p.
74. There are other French Authors that have handled the same Story, as Les
Cent Nouvelles Nouvelles. La Damoiselle a Coeur ouvert etc.

Aureng-zebe, a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal, printed in quarto Land.
1676. and dedicated to the Right Honorable John Earl of Mulgrave. The Plot of
this Play is related at large in Tavernier's Voyages into the Indies. Vol. I.
Part 2. Ch.2. Our Author is not wholly free from Thefts in this Play, and those
who have ever read Seneca's Hippolitus, will allow that Aureng-zebe has some
resemblance with his Character, and that Nourmahal, is in part copied from
Phaedra, which will the better appear, if the Reader will compare the following
Lines. Hippolitus, Act 2. Sc. 3.


Hip. -- Thesei vultus amo
Illos priores, quos tulit quondam puer;
Cum prima puras barba signaret genas,

Aur. Aurengzebe, Act 4. Sc. 1.
I am not changed, I love my Husband still;
But Love him as he was when youthful Grace
And the first bloom began to shade his Face.

Hip. -- Magne regnator Deum,
Tam lentus audis scelera? tam lentus vides?
Ecquando Saeva fulmen emittes manu,
Si nunc serenum est?
-- Me velox cremet
Transactus ignis. Sum nocens; merui mori;
Placui novercae.

Aur. Heavens can you this without just vengeance hear,
When will you Thunder, if it now be clear!
Yet Her alone let not your Thunder seize:
I too deserve to dye, because I please.

I could cite other passages in this Play borrowed from Seneca, but this is
enough to convict our Author of borrowing from the Latin Poets, now give me
leave to give you one Instance likewise of his borrowing from Mr. Milton's
Sampson Agonistes. Sampson Agonistes, p. 108.


Dal. I see thou art implacable, more deaf
To Prayers than winds and seas, yet winds to seas
Are reconciled at length, and sea to shore:
Thy anger unappeasable still rages,
Eternal Tempest never to be calmed.

Emp. Aur. p. 8.
Unmoved she stood and deaf to all my prayers,
As Seas and Winds to sinking Mariners;
But Seas grow Calm, and Winds are reconciled:
Her Tyrant Beauty never grows more mild.

There are many other Hints from this Poem, that are inserted in this Play by
Mr. Dryden, and which I should not have laid to his Charge had he not accused
Ben Johnson of the same Crime.

Conquest of Granada, by the Spaniards, in two Parts, acted at the
Theater Royal, printed in quarto Land. 1678. Third Edit.
and dedicated to his Royal Highness the Duke. These Plays I have seen acted
with great Applause, which so pufft up our Author with vanity, that he could
not refrain from abusing his Predecessors, not only in the Postscript already
mentioned; but even in a detracting Epilogue to the second Part, which I shall
leave to the Readers perusal. I have already hinted, that not only the
Episodes, and main Plot, but even the Characters are all borrowed from French
and Spanish Romances, as Almahide, Grand Cyrus, Ibrahim, and Gusinan: so that
Mr. Dryden may be said to have made a Rod for himself, in the following Lines;
Prologue, First part.


And may those drudges of the Stage, whose Fate
Is damned dull Farce more dully to Translate,
Fall under that Excise the State thinks fit
To set on all French Wares, whose worst is Wit.
French Farce worn out at home, is sent abroad;
And patcht up here is made our English Mode.
How much Mr. Dryden has borrowed from the French in this Play, cannot be
comprehended in the compass to which I confine my self; and therefore I shall
only mention some of the most remarkable Passages which are stolen. I am
therefore in the first place to begin with the Persons represented: The
Character of Almanzor is chiefly taken from Ponce de Leon in Almahide; from
Ozmin in Gusman, and Artaban in Cleopatra. His other Characters of Boabdelin,
Almahide, Ferdinand and Isabella, Duke of Arcos, Ozmin, Hamet, Gomel, etc. are
taken from Almahide. The Characters of Ozmin and Benzaida, are borrowed from
Ibrahim, in the Story of Ozmin and Alibech, and Lyndaraxa, are copied from
Prince Ariantes, Agathirsis, and Elibesis; See Grand Cyrus, Part IX. Book I.

I am now to give some Instances that may make good my Assertion, That Mr.
Dryden has borrowed most of his Thoughts, as well as his Characters from those
Authors abovementioned, tho'he has new clothed them in Rhyme. In the beginning
of the First Act, he has borrowed the Description of his Bull-feast, from
Guzman's Juego de Toros and Cannas: See the Story of Ozmin and Daraxa, part 1.
page 82. and 85. The Description of the Factions page 4 is borrowed from
Almahide p. 1. The next four Lines spoken by the King is taken from Prince
Mussa's advice in Almahide, p. 6. The King's Speech in going between the
Factions, page 5. is borrowed from Almhide, Part 3. Book 3. p. 63. The
Description of the Quarrel between Tarifa and Ozmin, is founded on Abindarrays
his Speech in Alm. p. 2. The Rise of the Families, p. 6. from the same.
Almanzor's killing Gomel, from Alm. p. 64. His quelling the Factions, from Alm.
p. 64, 65. In the second Act, Almanzor's Victory, and his taking the Duke of
Arcos Prisoner, p, 12. is copied from Almahide, p. 65. The Scene between
Abdalla and Lyndaraxa, p. 13. is stolen from Alm. p. 62. and from the Story of
Elibesis in Cyrus, Part 9. Book 1. p. 20. Zulema's Plea for Abdalla's right to
the Crown, p. 17. is copied from Alm. p. 62. His tempting him to Rebellion,
from Cyrus in the place abovementioned. In the Third Act, Almanzor's going
over to Abdalla, on the Kings refusal to grant the Duke of Arcos his Liberty,
page 18. is taken from Alm. p.55. etc. The Alarm after the Zambra Dance from
the same page. The first meeting of Almanzor and Almahide, p. 27. from Alm. p.
69. Of Abdalla and Almanzor, p. 30. from Alm. p. 71. The Controversy between
Almanzor and Zulema, p. 31. from the same Column. In the Fourth Act, Almanzor's
going over to Boabdelin's Party, p. 34. is taken from Alm. p. 72. Abdelmelech
his coming to visit Lyndaraxa in Disguise, p. 35. is stolen from the former
Story of Elibesis in Cyrus, p. 25. etc. Abdalla visiting her, being Royally
attended with Guards, p.39. from the same, p.67. Almanzor's freeing Almahide
from Abdalla's Captivity, p. 45. is copied from Alm. p. 73. The beginning of
the Fifth Act, viz. The Scene between Abdalla, and Lyndaraxa, under the Walls
of the Albayzin, immediately after his Defeat, p. 48. is stolen from Cyrus in
the Story aforesaid, p. 61. His flying to the Christians, p. 50. from Alm. p.
72. Ozmin and Benzaida's flight, p. 62. from Ibrahim, p. 8.

I might proceed through the Second Part, did I not fear the Reader to be
already as tired as my self. I shall therefore only acquaint him, that most of
that Play is borrowed as well as the former: So that had our Author stolen
from others, in none of his Labors, yet these Plays alone argue him guilty of
the highest Confidence, that durst presume to arraign the Ancient English Poets
as Plagiaries, in a Postscript to two Plays, whose Foundation and Language are
in a great measure stolen from the Beginning to the End. I would therefore
desire Mr. Dryden henceforth to ponder upon the following Epigram, which seems
to give him better Advice. Owens Disticha Ethica, and Politica; Ep. 31, p. ^1.


Cum fueris Censor, primum te crimine purga,
Nec tua te damnent facta ne sanda reum.
Ne tua contemnas aliena negotia curans;
An tibi te quisquam junctior esse potest.
There are several Authors that have given an Account of this famous Action, as
Mariana, L. 25. C. 18. Mayerne Turquet, L. 23. Thuanus, L. 48. Guicciardine, L.
12. Luc. Marinaeus Sic. L. 20. Car. Verardus. Domingo Baltanas, etc.

Don Sebastian, King of Portugal: a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal, printed
in quarto, Land. 1690. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Philip Earl of
Leicester. This Play is accounted by several One of the best of Mr. Dryden's,
and was as I have heard acted with great Applause. The Foundation of it is
built upon a French Novel called Don Sebastian, How far our Author has followed
the Frenchman, I leave to the Readers of both to judge. Only give me leave to
take notice of that passage in his Epistle to this Play, where he endeavors to
clear himself from the charge of Plagiarie. He says, The Ancients were never
accused of being Plagiaries, for building their Tragedies on known Fables. To
prove this assertion he brings several Instances; Thus (says he) Augustus
Caesar wrote an Ajax, which was not less his own because Euripides had written
a Play before him on that Subject. Thus of late years Corneille writ an Oedipus
after Sophocles; and I have designed one after him, which I wrote with Mr. Lee,
yet neither the French Poet stole from the Greek, nor we from the Frenchman.
It Is the Contrivance, the new turn, and new Characters which alter the
Property, and make it ours.

I have not that I know of, any where accused the Poets in general, or Mr.
Dryden in particular, for borrowing their Plots; knowing that it is allowed by
Scaliger, M. Hedelin, and other Writers. It Is true I have showed whether they
were founded on History, or Romance, and cited the Authors that treat on the
Subject of each Dramma, that the Reader, by comparing them, might be able to
judge the better of the Poets abilities, and his skill in Scenical
Performances. But though the Poet be allowed to borrow his Foundation from other
Writers, I presume the Language ought to be his own; and when at any time we
find a Poet translating whole Scenes from others Writings, I hope we may
without offense call him a Plagiary: which if granted, I may accuse Mr. Dryden
of Theft, notwithstanding this Defense, and inform the Reader, that he
equivocates in this Instance of Oedipus: for though he stole not from Corneille
in that Play, yet he has borrowed very much from the Oedipus Tyrannus of
Sophocles, as likewise from that of Seneca.

For the Plot read the French Novel called Don Sebastian Roy de Portugal
translated into English. Vasconcellos his Anacephalaeosis, sive Summa Capita
Actorum Regum Lusitaniae, Anacaeph. 20. See besides other Writers of the
Affairs of Portugal about 1578, in which year Sebastian was killed.

Duke of Guise, a Tragedy acted by Their Majesty's Servants, written by Mr.
Dryden, and Mr. Lee, printed in quarto Land. 1683. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Laurence Earl of Rochester. This Play found several Enemies at its
first appearance on the Stage: the Nation at that time being in a ferment about
the Succession, which occasioned several Pamphlets, pro and con, to be
published. The main Plot is borrowed from Davila, Mezeray, and other Writers of
the Affairs of Charles the Ninth, as P. Mathieu, Memoires de Castelnau. See
besides Thuanus, L. 93. The Story of Malicorn the Conjurer may be read in
Rosset's Histoires Tragiques en la Vie de Canope,80 p. 449.

Evening's Love, or The Mock Astrologer, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal by
His Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto Land. 1671. and dedicated to his
Grace William Duke of Newcastle. This Play is in a manner wholly stolen from
the French, being patcht up from Corneille's Le Feint Astrologue; Molliere's
Depit amoreux, and his Les Precieuses Ridicules; and Quinault's L'Amant
Indiscreet: not to mention little Hints borrowed from Shakespeare, Petronius
Arbiter etc. The main Plot of this Play is built on that of Corneille's, or
rather Calderon's Play called El Astrologo fingido, which Story is likewise
copied by M. Scudery in his Romance called Ibrahim, or the Illustrious Bassa in
the Story of the French Marquess. Aurelia's affectation in her Speech p. 31. is
borrowed from Molliere's Les Precieuses Ridicules. The Scene between Alonzo and
Lopez p. 39. is translated from Molliere's Depit amoreux, Act 2.Sc.6. Camilla's
begging a new Gown of Don Melchor p. 61. from the same. Act 1. Sc. 2. The Love
Quarrel between Wild-blood and Jacinta; Mascal and Beatrix; Act 4. Sc. the
last: is copied from the same Play, Act 4. Sc. 3, and 4. The Scene of
Wild-blood, Jacinta, etc. being discovered by Aurelia's falling into Alonzo's
Arms, p. 73. etc. is borrowed from Quinault's L'Amant Indiscreet, Act 5. Sc. 4.

Kind Keeper, or Mr. Limberham, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater, by his
Royal Highness's Servants; printed in quarto Land. 1680. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable John Lord Vaughan. In this Play, (which I take to be the best
Comedy of his) he so much exposed the keeping part of the Town, that the Play
was stopped, when it had but thrice appeared on the Stage; but the Author took a
becoming Care, that the things that offended on the Stage were either altered
or omitted in the Press. One of our modern Writers in a short Satyr against
Keeping, concludes thus; Cleve's Poems, p. 94.
; Dryden good Man thought Keepers to reclaim,
Writ a Kind Satyr, called it Limberham.
This all the Herd of Letchers straight alarms,
From Charing Cross to Bow was up in Arms;
They damned the Play all at one fatal Blow,
And broke the Glass that did their Picture show.


In this Play he is not exempt from borrowing some Incidents from French and
Italian Novels: Mrs: Saintlys discovery of Love-all in the Chest, Act 1. is
borrowed from the Novels of Cynthio Gyraldi; see prima part Deca 3a. Nov. 3.
The same Story is in The Fortunate Deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers, see Nov.
7. Deceived Lovers. Mrs. Brainsicks pricking and pinching him, Act 3. Sc. 2. is
copied from the Triumph of Love over Fortune, a Novel writ by M. S. Bremond, or
else from Zelotide of M. de Pais: but these are things not worthy to be urged
against any One, but Mr. Dryden, whose Critical Pen spares no Man.

Indian Emperor, or The Conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards, being the Sequel
of the Indian Queen, printed in quarto Land. 1670. and dedicated to the Most
Excellent and most Illustrious Princess Anne Duchess of Monmouth and Bucclugh.
This Play is writ in Heroic Verse, and has appeared on the Stage with great
Approbation, yet it is not wholly free from Plagiarie; but since they are only
Hints, and much improved, I shall not mention the Particulars. It Is sufficient
for me to observe in general that he has borrowed from Plutarch, Seneca,
Montagne, Fletcher, etc. Mr. Dryden in the Second Edition to this Play, prefixed
a Piece entitled, A Defense of an Essay of Dramatick Poesy, being an Answer to
the Preface of The Great Favorite, or The Duke of Lerma: but upon some
considerations our Author was obliged to retract it. For the Plot of this Play
it is founded chiefly on History. See Lopez de Gomara Hist. General de las
Incas, and de Conquista de Mexico. De Bry Americae Pars 9. L. 7. Ogleby's
America, Chap. 3. Sect. 10. Mariana de Reb. Hisp. L. 26. Cap. 3. Four Letters
printed in several Languages.

Marriage A-la-mode, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal by Their Majesty's
Servants; printed in quarto Land. 1673. and dedicated to the Right Honorable
the Earl of Rochester. This Play though styled in the Title Page a Comedy, is
rather a Tragi-Comedy, and consists of two different Actions; the one Serious,
the other Comic, both borrowed from two Stories which the Author has tackt
together. The Serious Part is founded on the Story of Sesostris and Timareta in
the Grand Cyrus, Part 9. Book 3. and the Characters of Palamede and Rhodophil,
from the same Romance, Par.6. Bk 1. See the History of Timantes and Parthenia.
I might mention also the Story of Nogaret in The Annals of Love, from whence
part of the Character of Doralice was possibly borrowed: and Les Contes D
Ouville party premiere p. 13. from whence the Fancy of Melantha's making Court
to her self in Rhodophil's Name is taken; but this is usual with our Poet.

Mistaken Husband, a Comedy acted by His Majesty's Servants at the
Theater Royal, and printed in quarto Land. 1675. This Play Mr. Dryden was not
the Author of, tho 'twas adopted by him, as an Orphan, which might well deserve
the Charity of a Scene which he bestowed on it. It is of the nature of Farce,
or as the French term it Basse Comedy, as Mr. Bentley the Bookseller has
observed Epistle to the Reader.
. It Is writ on the Model of Plautus's Maenechmi: and I have read a Story
somewhat like it in L'Amant Oysif. Tome 2. p. 297. Nouvelle intitulee D. Martin.

Oedipus, a Tragedy acted at his Royal Highness the Duke's Theater, written by
Mr. Dryden and Mr. Lee, printed in quarto Land. 1679. This Play is certainly
one of the best Tragedies we have extant; the Authors having borrowed many
Ornaments not only from Sophocles, but also from Seneca; though in requital Mr.
Dryden has been pleased to arraign the Memory, of the later by taxing him
Preface.
of Running after Philosophical Notions more proper for the Study than the
Stage. As for Corneille he has scouted him for failing in the Character of his
Hero, which he calls an Error in the first Concoction: though possibly 'twas so
in him to fall upon two such Great Men, without any provocation, and to whom he
has been more than once obliged for beautiful Thoughts. As to the Plot it is
founded on the Tragedies of Sophocles and Seneca.

Rival Ladies, a Tragi-Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, printed in quarto
Land. 1679. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Roger Earl of Orrery. This
Dedication is in the Nature of a Preface written in Defense of English Verse.
The Authors Sentiments were afterward controverted by Sr. Robert Howard, in
the Preface to his Plays: to which Arguments Mr. Dryden replied, toward the
end of his Dramatick Essay. Sr. Robert made a Rejoinder, when he published his
Duke of Lerma: and Mr. Dryden answered him again in the Preface to his Indian
Emperor, as I have already observed.

I beg leave of my Reader, to make one Remark on this Preface, to Rectify the
following mistake committed by our Author. He says, That The Tragedy of Queen
Gorbuduc was written in English Verse; and consequently that Verse was not so
much a new way amongst us, as an old way new revived: and that this Play was
written by the late Lord Buckhurst, afterward Earl of Dorset.

Mr. Dryden, as well as Sr. Fopling, notwithstanding his smattering in the
Mathematics, is out in his Judgment at Tennis: for first (though His Majesty's
late Historiographer) he is mistaken in the Title Page: and I must crave leave
to tell him by the by, that I never heard of any such Queen of Britain, any
more than he, of any King that was in Rhodes. Nay further had he co^^^^
Milton's History of England, or any other Writers of Brute's History, nay, even
the Argument of that very Play, he would have found Gorbuduc to have been the
last King of that Race, at least the Father of Ferex and Porrex, in whom
terminated the Line of Brute: and consequently would not have permitted so
gross an Error to have escapt his Pen for Three Editions: though it may be Mr.
Dryden's Printer was as much to blame to print Queen for King, as he ironically
accuses Sr. Robert's for setting shut for open. There are other Errata's in
History, which I might impute at least to Mr. Dryden's Negligence; but I shall
at present wave them. In the mean time I must acquaint the Reader, that however
Mr. Dryden alleges that this Play was writ by the Lord Buckhurst, I can assure
him that the three first Acts were writ by Mr. Thomas Norton: and that the Play
it self was not written in Rhyme, but blank Verse, or if he will have it, in
prose mesuree, so that Mr. Shakespeare notwithstanding our Author's Allegation,
was not the first beginner of that way of Writing.

As to his Economy, and working up of his Play, our Author is not wholly free
from Pillage, witness the last Act; where the Dispute between Amideo, and
Hippolito; with Gonsalvo's fighting with the Pirates, is borrowed from
Petronius Arbyter, as the Reader may see by reading the Story of Encolpius,
Giton, Eumolpus, and Tryphaena, aboard Licas's Vessel Not. Var. p. 360. etc.
To say nothing of the Resemblance of the Catastrophe with that of Scarron's
Rival Brothers, Novel the Fifth.

Secret Love, or The Maiden Queen; a Tragi-Comedy acted by His Majesty's
Servants at the Theater Royal, printed in quarto Land. 1679. I have already
made some observation on this Preface, p. 143. and cannot pass by his making
use of Bayes's Art of Transversing, as any One may observe by comparing the
Fourth Stanza of his First Prologue, with the last Paragraph of the Preface to
Ibrahim. As to the Contrivance of the Plot, the serious part of it is founded
on the History of Cleobuline Queen of Corinth, Part 7. Book 2. The Characters
of Celadon, Florimel, Olinda, and Sabina, are borrowed from the Story of
Pisistates and Cerintha in the Grand Cyrus, Part 9. Book 3. and from the Story
of the French Marquess in Ibrahim, Part 2. Book 1.

Sir Martin Mar-all, or The Feigned Innocence, a Comedy acted at His Highness
the Duke of York's Theater, printed in quarto Land. 1678. This Play is
generally ascribed to Mr. Dryden, though his Name be not affixed to it. But in
reality the Foundation of it is originally French: and whoever will compare it
with M. Quinault's L'Amant Indiscret, and Molliere's L'Etourdy, ou le contre
temps, will find not only the Plot, but a great part of the Language of Sr.
Martin and his Man Warner borrowed. There are several other Turns of the Plot
copied from other Authors; as Warner's playing on the Lute instead of his
Master, and his being surpised by his Folly; See Francion written by M. Du
Pare Lib. 7. Old Moody and Sr. John being hoisted up in their Altitudes, is
taken (at least the hint of it) from Shakerly Marmion's Fine Companion, Act 4.
Sc. 1. The Song of Blind Love to this Hour, (as I have already observed Poestes
de M. Voiture, p. 457.
) is translated from a Song made by M. de Voiture: though I must do Mr. Drydeu
the Justice to acquaint the World, that he has kept to the Sense, and the same
Measure of Verse.

Spanish Friar, or The Double Discovery, a Tragi-Comedy acted at the Duke's
Theater; printed in quarto Land. 1681. and dedicated to the Right Honorable
John Lord Haughton. Whether Mr. Dryden intended his Character of Dominick as a
Satyr on the Romish Priests only, or on the Clergy of all Opinions in general,
I know not: but sure I am, that he might have spared his Reflecting Quotation
in the Front of his Play: Ut melius possis fallere sum togam.
But the truth is, ever since a certain Worthy Bishop refused Orders to a
certain Poet, Mr. Dryden has declared open defiance against the whole Clergy;
and since the Church began the War, he has thought it but Justice to make
Reprisals on the Church. Mr. Dryden who is famous for collecting Observations,
and Rules for Writing, has learnt this great Arcanum from his Brother Poet, the
Tutor to Pacheco in the Comedy of the Reformation Act 4. p. 8.
; That this one piece of Art of Reflecting in all he writes, on Religion and
the Clergy, has set off many an indifferent Play, by the titilation it affords
the Gallants, who are sure to get those Verses all by heart, and fill their
Letters with them to their Country Friends. But whatever success this way of
Writing may find from the Sparks, it can never be approved on by sober Men: and
there are none who have any sense of Religion themselves, that can without
concern suffer it to be abused; and none but Apostates or Atheists will be so
impudent to attempt it: and the real cause of their Envy and Malice is the same
with that of the Emperor to his Son Aureng-zebe Aureng-zebe, Act 1. p.10.
, which with Reference to the Clergy may be thus applied. Our Clergy's sacred
Virtues shine too bright,
They flash too fierce: their foes like birds of night,
Shut their dull Eyes, and sicken at the sight.
The Comieal Parts of the Spanish Friar, Lorenzo, and Elvira, are founded on
Monsieur S. Bremond's Novel called the Pilgrim.

State of Innocence, or The Fall of Man, an Opera written in Heroic Verse,
printed in quarto Land. 1678. and dedicated to Her Royal Highness the Duchess.
Whether the Author has not been guilty of the highest Flattery in this
Dedication, I leave to the Reader's Judgment; but I may presume to say, that
there are some Expressions in it that seem strained, and a Note beyond Ela; as
for Instance, Your Person is so admirable that it can scarce receive addition,
when it shall be glorified: and your Soul, which shines through it, finds it of
a Substance so near her own, that she will be pleased to pass an Age within it,
and to be confined to such a Palace. This Dramma is commended by a Copy of
Verses written by Mr. Lee; and the Author has prefixed an Apology for Heroic
Poetry, and Poetic License. The foundation of this Opera is fetched from Mr.
Milton's Paradise Lost. How far our Author has transcribed him, I shall leave
to the inquiry of the Curious, that will take the pains to compare the Copy
with the Original.

Tempest, or The Enchanted Island, a Comedy acted at His Royal Highness the
Duke of York's Theater, and printed in quarto Land. 1676. This Play is
originally Shakespeare's (being the first Play printed in the Folio Edition) and
was revised by Sr. D'Avenant and Mr. Dryden. The Character of the Saylors were
not only the Invention of the former, but for the most part of his Writing: as
our Author ingeniously confesses in his Preface. It Is likewise to his Praise,
that he so much commends his deceased Predecessor. But as to his Reflections on
Mr. Fletcher, and Sr. John Suckling for having copied, the One, his Sea Voyage,
the other, his Goblins, from this Play; I believe were Mr. Dryden to be tried
by the same Standard, most of his Plays would appear Copies.

Troilus and Cressida, or Truth found out too late; a Tragedy acted at the
Duke's Theater, to which is prefixed a Preface containing the Grounds of
Criticisme in Tragedy, printed in quarto Land. 1679. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Thomas Earl of Sunderland. This Play was likewise first written by
Shakespeare, and revised by Mr. Dryden, to which he added several new Scenes,
and even cultivated and improved what he borrowed from the Original. The last
Scene in the third Act is a Masterpiece, and whether it be copied from
Shakespeare, Fletcher, or Euripides, or all of them, I think it jnstly deserves
Commendation. The Plot of this Play was taken by Mr. Shakespeare from Chaucer's
Troilus and Cressida; which was translated (according to Mr. Dryden) from the
Original Story, written in Latin Verse, by One Lollius, a Lombard.

Tyranick Love, or The Royal Martyr, a Tragedy acted by His Majesty's Servants
at the Theater Royal, printed in quarto Land. 1677. and dedicated to the Most
Illustrious Prince James Duke of Monmouth and Bucclugh. This Tragedy is writ in
Heroic Verse: and several Hints are borrowed from other Authors, but much
improved. Only I cannot but observe that whenever the Critics pursue him, he
withdraws for shelter under the Artillery of the Ancients; and thinks by the
discharge of a Quotation from a Latin Author, to destroy their Criticisms.
Thus in the Preface to his Play, he vindicates the following Line in his
Prologue; And he who servilely creeps after Sense
Is safe; --
By that Quotation of Horace, Serpit humi tutus.
So he justifies the following Line in the end of the Fourth Act: With Empty
Arms embrace you whilst you sleep,
From this Expression in Virgil, -- Vacuis amplectitur Ulnis.
I could cite you other passages out of his Conquest of Granada, Indian
Emperor, State of Innocence, etc. but these are sufficient to show, how much
Self-justification is an Article of our Author's Creed. As to the Plot of this
Tragedy it is founded on History: see Zosimus, L.4. Socrates, L.5. C.14.
Herodiani Hist. L.7. and 8. Jul. Capitolinus, in Vit. Max. Jun.

Wild Gallant, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal by Their Majesty's Servants,
and printed in quarto Land. 1669. This Play though the last mentioned, by reason
of the Alphabetical Order throughout observed, was yet the first attempt which
our Author made in Dramatick Poetry; and met with but indifferent Success in
the Action. The Plot he confesses was not originally his own, but however
having so much altered and beautified it, we will do him the Honor to call him
the Author of the Wild Gallant, as he has done Sr. Robert Howard, the Author of
the Duke of Lerma Defense of his Dramatick Essay, p. 5.
: and by way of Excuse I shall transcribe his own Lines in behalf of a New
Brother of Parnassus. Miscellany Poems, 8o. 1684. p. 292.


It Is Miracle to see a first good Play,
All Hawthorns do not bloom on Christmass-day;
A slender Poet must have time to grow,
And spread and burnish as his Brothers do.
Who still looks lean, sure with some Pox is cursed;
But no Man can be Falstaff Fat at first.
I am next to give the Reader an Account of his other Writings and
Transactions, as far as they are come to my Knowledge, and I shall begin with
those in Verse, because nearer allied to my present Subject. There are several
pieces of this Nature said to be writ by him; as Heroic Stanzas on the late
Usurper Oliver Cromwell, written after his Funeral, and printed in quarto Land.
1659. Annus Mirahilis, The Year of Wonders 1666. An Historical Poem describing
the Dutch War, and the Fire of London, printed in octavo Land. 1667. Absalom
and Achitophel, printed in quarto Land. 1682. This last, with several other of
his Poems, as the Medal, Mack Flecknoe, etc. are printed in A Collection of
Poems, in octavo Land. 1684. Sylva, or a Second Volume of Poetical
Miscellanies, in octavo Land. 1685. Religio Laici, printed in quarto Land.
1682. Threnodia Augustalis, or a Funeral-Pindarique Poem on King Charles the
Second, printed in quarto Land. 1685. Hind and Panther, in quarto Land. 1687.
Britannia Rediviva: a Poem on the Birth of the Prince, in Fol. Land. 1688.

In Prose he has writ An Essay of Dramatick Poetry, in quarto Land. 1668.
Vindication of the Duke of Guise, in quarto Land. 1683. The Life of Plutarch,
in octavo Land. 1683. And some Theological Pieces which I have not by me at
present. He has translated The History of the League. The Life of St. Xavier,
etc.

Now that Mr. Dryden may not think himself slighted in not having some Verses
inserted in his Commendation; I will present the Reader with a Copy written by
Mr. Flecknoe, and leave him to Judge of his Wit, and Mr. Dryden's Gratitude, by
comparing the Epistle Dedicatory to his Kind Keeper, and his Satyr called Mack
Flecknoe, with the following Epigram.

To Mr. John Dryden.
Dryden, the Muses Darling and delight,
Than whom none ever flew so high a flight.
Some have their Vains so drossy, as from Earth,
Their Muses only seem to have taken their Birth.
Other but Water-Poets are, have gone
No farther than to the Fount of Helicon:
And they are but airy Ones whose Muse soars up higher
No higher than to Mount Pernassus top;
Whilst thou with thine, do seem to have mounted
Than he who fetched from Heaven Celestial Fire:
And do as far surpass all others, as
Fire does all other Elements surpass.
Thomas DUFFET.
An Author altogether unknown to me, but by his Writings; and by them I take
him to be a Wit of the third Rate: and One whose Fancy leads him rather to
Low-Comedy, and Farce, than Heroic Poetry. He has written three Plays; Two of
which were purposely designed in a Burlesque Style: but are intermixed with so
much Scurrility, that instead of Diverting, they offend the modest Mind. And I
have heard that when one of his Plays, viz. The Mock Tempest was acted in
Dublin, several Ladies, and Persons of the best Quality left the House: such
Ribaldry pleasing none but the Rabble, as Horace says; De Art Poetica.
Offenduntur enim, quibus est equus, and pater, and res:
Nec si quid fricti ciceris probat, and nucis emptor,
AEquis accipiunt animis, donant-ve corona.


Mock Tempest, or The Enchanted Castle, a Farce acted at the Theater Royal,
printed in quarto Land. 1675. The Design of this Play was to draw the Town from
the Duke's Theater, who for a considerable time had frequented that admirable
revived Comedy called The Tempest. What success it had may be learnt from the
following Lines; Boylean's Art of Poetry, p. 5.
The dull Burlesque appeared with Impudence,
And pleased by Novelty for want of Sense.
Ali except trivial points, grew out of Date;
Parnassus spoke the Cant of Billingsgate:
Boundless and Mad, disordered Rhyme was seen;
Disguised Apollo changed to Harlequin.
This Plague which first in Country Towns began,
Cities and Kingdoms quickly overran;
The dullest Scriblers some Admirers found,
And the Mock-Tempest was a while renowned;
But this low stuff the Town at last despised,
And scorned the Folly that they once had prized.


Psyche Debauched, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, and printed 8o Land.
1678. This Mock Opera was writ on purpose to Ridicule Mr. Shadwell's Psyche,
and to spoil the Duke's House, which, as has been before observed, was then
more frequented than the King's. This Play is as Scurrilous as the former.

Spanish Rogue, a Comedy acted by His Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto
Land. 1674. and dedicated to Madam Ellen Guin. Though this Play far exceed either
of the former, yet I cannot commend it, neither do I think Comedy a fit subject
for Heroic Verse; few of them being writ in Rhyme, in our Language; and those
few, scarce any of them have succeeded on the English Stage.

Our Author has writ nothing else that I know of, but a Book of Poems, Songs,
Prologues, and Epilogues, printed in octavo Land. 1676.

Thomas DURFEY.
A Person now living, who was first bred to the Law, but left that rugged way,
for the flowery Fields of Poetry. He is accounted by some for an Admirable Poet,
but it is by those who are not acquainted much with Authors, and therefore are
deceived by Appearances, taking that for his own Wit, which he only borrows
from Others: for Mr. Durfey like the Cuckoo, makes it his business to suck
other Birds Eggs. In my Opinion he is a much better Ballad-maker, than
Play-wright: and those Comedies of his which are not borrowed, are more allied
to Farce, than the true Comedy of the Ancients. The Plays to which he lays
claim, are Thirteen in Number; viz.

Banditti, or A Ladies Distress, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, printed
in quarto Land. 1686. This Play was affronted in the Acting by some who thought
themselves Critics, and others with Cat-calls, endeavored at once to stisle
the Author's Profit, and Fame: which was the occasion, that through Revenge he
dedicated it to a certain Knight under this Ironical Title. To the extreme
Witty and Judicious Gentleman, Sir Critick-Cat-call. The chief Plot of this
Play is founded on a Romance, written by Don Francisco de las Coveras, called
Don Fenise translated into English, in 8o. See the History of Don Antonio, Book
4. p. 250. The design of Don Diego's turning Banditti, and joining with them to
rob his supposed Father; resembles that of Pipperollo in Shirley's Play called
The Sisters.

Commonwealth of Women, a Tragi-Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by Their
Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto Land. 1686. and dedicated to the truly
Noble and illustrious Prince Christopher Duke of Albermarle. This Play is
Fletcher's Sea-Voyage revived, with the Alteration of some few Scenes; though
what is either altered or added may be as easily descern'd from the Original,
as Patches on a Coat from the main Piece.

Fond Husband, or The Plotting Sisters; a Comedy acted at his Royal Highness
the Duke's Theater, printed in quarto Land. 1678. and dedicated to his Grace
the Duke of Ormond. This is One of his best Comedies, and has been frequently
acted with good Applause: though methinks the business of Sneak, Cordelia, and
Sir Roger Petulant, end but abruptly.

Fool turned Critic, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal by His Majesty's
Servants, and printed in quarto Land. 1678. The Prologue to this Play is the
same with that of Mr. Anthony, and was I suppose borrowed from thence. The
Characters of Old Wine-love, Tim, and Small-wit, resemble those of Simo,
Asotus, and Balio in the Jealous Lovers.

Fools Preferment, or The Three Dukes of Dunstable, a Comedy acted at the
Queens Theater in Dorset-Garden by their Majesty's Servants, with the Songs and
Notes to them, Composed by Mr. Henry Purcel, printed in quarto Land. 1688. and
dedicated to the Honorable Charles Lord Morpeth, with this familiar Title, My
Dear Lord, and subscribed like a Person of Quality, only with his Surname
D'Urfey. Nor is his Epistle less presumptuous, where he arrogates to himself a
Play, which was writ by another, and owns only a hint from an old Comedy of
Fletcher's, when the whole Play is in a manner trascrib'd from the Noble
Gentleman, abating the Scene that relates to Basset, which is borrowed from a
late traslated Novel, called The Humors of Basset. As to part of the first
Paragraph of his Dedication it is borrowed from the translation of Horace's
Tenth Satyr, by the Earl of Rochester: and any Man that understands French, and
should read a Place he there quotes out of Montaigne, would be so far from
taking him to be (as he styles himself Poem, in octavo, First Edition, page 61.
Nephew to the famous D'Urffee, the Author of the Excellent Astraea; that they
would rather think he understood not the Language, or was extremely negligent,
in suffering such Errata to go uncorrected. For my part, I should rather take
him to be lineally descended from the Roman Celsus, whom Horace makes mention
of in his Epistle to his Friend Julius Florus Epist.Lib. 1. Ep. 3.
: at least I am sure the Character will fit our Author.

Quid mihi Celsus agit? monitus, multumque, monendus,
Privatas ut quaerat opes, and tangere vitet
Scripta, Palatinus quaecunque recepit Apollo:
Ne, si forte suas repetitum venerit olim
Grex avium plumas, moveat cornicula risum,
Furtivis nudata coloribus. --
Injured Princess, or The fatal Wager, a Tragi-Comedy acted at the
Theater Royal by His Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto Land. 1682. The
Design and the Language of this Play is borrowed from a Play called the Tragedy
of Cymbeline. In this Play he is not content with robbing Shakespeare, but tops
upon the Audience an old Epilogue to the Fool turned Critic, for a new
Prologue to this Play. So that what Mr. Clifford said of Mr. Dryden Notes on
Mr. Dryden's Poems, p. 7.
, is more justly applicable to our Author, That he is a strange unconscionable
Thief, that is not content to steal from others, but robbs his poor wretched
Self too.

Madam Fickle, or The Witty false One, a Comedy acted at his Royal Highness the
Duke's Theater, printed in quarto Land. 1677. and dedicated to his Grace the
Duke of Ormond. This Play is patch up from several other Comedies, as the
Character of Sir Arthur Old Love, is borrowed from Veterano in the Antiquary;
Zechiel's creeping into the Tavern Bush, and Tilbury Drunk in the Street under
it, with a Torch, Act 5. Sc. 2. is borrowed from Sir Reverence Lamard, and
Pimp-well in the Walks of Islington and Hogsden. There are other Hints likewise
borrowed from the Fawn: so that the Author did well to prefix that Verse of
Horace before his Play, Non cuivis Homini contingit adire Corinthum,
plainly implying, that he could not write a Play without stealing.

Royalist, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and printed in quarto Land.
1682. This Comedy was well received on the Stage, but patcht up from Novels, as
the former from Plays. Witness the Trials which Camilla put upon her Husband
Sir Oliver Old-cut, for the Love of Sir Charles King-love; which the Author
borrowed from Boccace, Day 7. Nov.9. Les Contes de M. de la Fontaine page 47.
and other Hints. Nay our Author who sets up himself for Madrigals, has stolen
the Song of Hey Boys up go We, etc. in the fourth Act, from The Shepherds
Oracle, an Eclogue printed in quarto Land. 1644.

Siege of Memphis, or The Ambitious Queen, a Tragedy acted at the
Theater Royal, printed in quarto Land. 1676. This Play is writ in Heroic
Verse, and dedicated to the Truly Generous Henry Chivers Esquire who showed himself
truly such, in defending a Play so full of Bombast, and Fustian. There goes
more to the making of a Poet, than capping Verses, or taging Rimes, it is not
enough concludere versum, as Horace Sat. L. 1. Sat. 4.
calls it, but a Poet must be such a One, Ingenium cui sit, cui men's divinior,
atque os
Magna sonaturum, des nominis hujus honorem.
I would therefore advise all these Poetasters in the words of a Modern
Prologue Prol. to Atheist.
; Rimesters, get Wit e're ye pretend to show it,
Nor think a game at Crambo makes a Poet.


Squire Old-sap, or The Night Adventurers, a Comedy acted at his Royal Highness
the Duke's Theater, printed in quarto Land. 1679. This Comedy is very much
beholding to Romances for several Incidents; as the Character of Squire
Old-sap, and Pimpo's tying him to a Tree, Act 1. is borrowed from the beginning
of the Romance called the Comical History of Francion. Trick-love's cheating
Old-sap with the Bell, and Pimpo's standing in Henry's place, Act 4. Sc. 3. is
borrowed from Boccace's Novels, Day 7. Nov. 8. The same is related in Les
Contes de M. de la Fontaine in the Story entitled La Gageure des trois
Commeres Tom. 1. page 47. Trick-love's contrivance with Welford, to have
Old-sap beaten in her Habit, Act 4. Sc. the last, is borrowed from Boccace Day
7. Nov. 7. though the same is an incident in other Plays, as in Fletcher's Women
Pleased, London Cuckolds, etc. There are other passages borrowed likewise,
which I purposely omit to repeat.

Sir Barnaby Whig, or No Wit like a Woman's, a Comedy acted by their Majesty's
Servants at the Theater Royal, printed in quarto Land. 1681. and dedicated to
the Right Honorable George Earl of Berkley. This Play is founded on a Novel of
Monsieur S. Bremond, called The Double Cuckold; and the part of the Humor of
Captain Porpuss is borrowed from a Play called The Fine Companion.

Trick for Trick, or The Debauched Hypocrite, a Comedy acted at the
Theater Royal by his Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto Land. 1678. This
Play is only Fletcher's Monsieur Thomas revived: though scarce at all
acknowledged by our Author.

Virtuous Wife, or Good luck at last; a Comedy acted at the Dukes Theater by
His Royal Highness his Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1680. This Comedy is one of
the most entertaining of his; though there are many little hints borrowed from
other Comedies, as particularly the Fawn; and the Humor of Beaufort, is copied
from Palamede, in Marriage A-la-mode.

Besides these Plays, he has written several Songs, which (if I mistake not)
were collected into one entire Vol. and printed 8o. Land. 1682. But I would not
have him ascribe all his Songs, any more than his Plays, to his own Genius, or
Imagination; since he is equally beholding for some of them to other Men's
pains; Witness the abovementioned Song in the Royalist, And did thou not
promise me when thou ligst by me, etc. He has writ besides other pieces, as
Butler's Ghost, printed 8o. Land. 1682. Poems, 8o. Land. 1690. Collin's Walk,
8o. Land. 1690. etc.

E.
Edward ECCLESTON.
A Gentleman now living, the Author of an Opera, of the same Nature with Mr.
Dryden's State of Innocence; but being published after it, it served rather as a
Foil to the excellent piece, than any ways rivaled its Reputation. This piece
first bore the Title of Noah's Flood, or The Destruction of the World, an Opera
printed 4o. Land. 1679. and dedicated to her Grace the Duchess of Monmouth:
This Play not going off, a new Title and Cuts were affixed to it in
Hillary-Term 1684. it then going under the Title of The Cataclism, or General
Deluge of the World. Whether Mr. Holford was more successful than Mr. Took, in
putting off the remainder of the Impression, or whether the various Sculptures
took more with the Ladies of the Pal-mall, than the Sense did with those who
frequent Paul's Churchyard, I am not able to determine: but I doubt the
Bookseller still wants Customers, since I again find it in the last Term
Catalogue, under the Title of The Deluge, or The Destruction of the World. The
Title shows the Foundation of it to be Scripture.

Sir George ETHERIDGE.
A Gentleman sufficiently eminent in the Town for his Wit and Parts, and One
whose tallent in sound Sense, and the Knowledge of true Wit and Humor, are
sufficiently conspicuous: and therefore I presume I may with justice, and
without envy, apply Horace's Character of Fundanus, to this admirable Author;
Sat. Lib. 1. Sat. 10.
Arguta meretrice potes, Davoque Chremeta
Eludente senem, comis garrire libellos,
Unus vivorum, Fundani. --


This Ingenious Author has obliged the World by publishing three Comedies, viz.

Comical Revenge, or Love in a Tub, a Comedy, acted at his Royal-Highness the
Duke of York's Theater in Lincolns-Inn-fields: printed quarto Land. 1669. and
dedicated to the Honorable Charles Lord Buckhurst. This Comedy though of a mixed
nature, part of it being serious, and writ in Heroic Verse; yet has succeeded
admirably on the Stage, it having always been acted with general approbation.

Man of Mode, or Sir Fopling Flutter, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater
printed 4o. Land. 1676. and dedicated to her Royal Highness the Duchess. This
Play is written with great Art and Judgment, and is acknowledged by all, to be
as true Comedy, and the Characters as well drawn to the Life, as any Play that
has been Acted since the Restoration of the English Stage. Only I must
observe, that the Song in the last Act written by C.S. is translated from part
of an Elegy written in French by Madame la Comtesse de la Suze, in Le Recueil
des Pieces Gallantes, tom. 1. p. 42.

She would if she could, a Comedy Acted at his Highness the Duke of York's
Theater, and printed quarto Land. 1671. This Comedy is likewise accounted one
of the first Rank, by several who are known to be good Judges of Dramatick
Poesy. Nay our present Laureat says, Pref. Humorists.
It Is the best Comedy written since the Restoration of the Stage. I heartily
wish for the public satisfaction, that this great Master would oblidge the
World with more of his Performances, which would put a stop to the crude and
indigested Plays, which for want of better, cumber the Stage.

F.
Sir Francis FANE, Junior, Knight of the Bath.
A Gentleman now living at Fulbeck in Lincolnshire, and Granson (as I suppose)
to the Right Honorable the Earl of Westmorland. This Noble Person's Wit and
Parts, are above my Capacity to describe; and therefore I must refer my Reader
to his Works, which will afford him better satisfaction. He has obliged the
World with two Plays, which are equaled by very few of our modern Poets, and
has showed that he can command his Genius, being able to write Comedy, or
Tragedy, as he pleases.

Love in the dark, or The Man of business, a Comedy; acted at the Theater Royal
by his Majesty's Servants: printed 4o. Land. 1675. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable John Earl of Rochester. The Plot of Count Sforza, and Parthelia
Daughter to the Doge of Venice, is founded on a novel of Scarron's, called the
Invisible Mistress. Bellinganna, Cornanto's Wife, sending Scrutinio to
Trivultio, to check him for making Love to her, is founded on a Novel in
Boccace, Day 3. Nov. 3. Hircanio's Wife catching him with Bellinganna, is built
on the Story of Socrates and his Wife Mirto, in the Loves of Great Men p.59.
Trivultio's seeming to beat Bellinganna, is grounded on a Story in Boccace, See
Day 7. Nov. 7.

Sacrifice, a Tragedy printed 4o. Land. 1686. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. There are two Copies of Verses
that I have seen writ in Commendation of this Play; one writ by Mr. Tate, to
the Author, and printed with the Play; the other writ by the late Mrs. A. Behn;
see the Miscellany Poems printed with Lycidas, or the Lover in Fashion 8o. p.
102. The Plot of this admirable Tragedy is founded on the Story of Tamerlane
and Bajazet. Many are the Historians that have given an Account of the Affairs
of these Great Men. Read Chalcocondylas lib.3. Leunclavius lib.6. The Life of
Tamerlane by Mr. D'Assigny; the same by P. Perondini; Knolls his Turkish
History, in the Life of Bajazet the First. This Play, the Author Epist. Dedic.
(wanting patience to attend the leisure of the Stage) published without
Action. How much all Lovers of Poetry are indebted to him for it, I must leave
to those that are Poets to describe: I that am none, am glad to set my hand to
an Address drawn up by Mr. Tate, in the following Lines.

Accept our Thanks, though you decline the Stage,
That yet you condescend the Press to engage:
For while we, thus possess the precious store,
Our Benefits the same, your Glory more;
Thus for a Theater the World you find,
And your Applauding Audience, All Mankind.
It Is not in Dramatick Poetry alone that our Author is a Master, but his Talent
is equal also in Lyricks: Witness three Copies of Verses printed in Mr. Tate's
Collection of Poems 8o. One to the Earl of Rochester, upon the Report of his
Sickness in Town, Tate's Misc. p. 11.
in allusion to an Ode in Horace. A second to a great Lord inviting him to
Court, or else to write a History in the Country: p. 13.
being a Paraphrase upon Horace Lib. 2. Ode 12. A third to a perjured Mistress,
p. 16.
in imitation of another Ode of Horace Lib. 1. Ode 8.

The Honble Sir Richard FANSHAW.
This Excellent Man was Brother to the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fanshaw, of
Ware-Park in Hertfordshire. He had his Breeding in his younger Years in
Cambridge: and was so good a Proficient in Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, and
Portugese; that he understood them as well as his Mother Tongue. He removed
from Cambridge to Court, where he served his Majesty with all imaginable
Fidelity, and Dutiful Affection. He was his Secretary in Holland, France, and
Scotland; and at Worcester Fight was wounded, and taken prisoner in Defense of
the Royal Cause. His Loyalty and Abilities, were so conspicuous to His Majesty
King Charles the II. that at His happy Restoration, He preferred him to be one
of the Masters of the Requests; and afterward sent him into Portugal, with the
worthy Title of Lord Ambassador of Honor, to court the present Queen Dowager,
for this Master; where he remained three Years, and discharged his Employment
with Honor. In the Year 1644. he was sent Ambassador into Spain, to complete a
Treaty of Commerce, and to strengthen the League between the two Crowns: which
Affair he managed with great Prudence, and Integrity. He died at Madrid in July
1666. leaving behind him the Character of an able Statesman; a great Scholar;
and a sincere, sweet natured, and pious Gentleman. At present we are only to
consider his Scholarship, which will sufficiently appear by the several
Translations which he has published, particularly those which are Dramatick: the
first of which in Order, and the most Eminent, is styled

Il Pastor Fido, The Faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, printed 4o. Land. 1646. and
dedicated to the Hope and Luster of three Kingdoms, Charles Prince of Wales.
This Piece is translated from the Italian of the Famous Guarini; of whose Life,
by way of Digression, give me leave to speak succinctly. He was a Native of
Ferrara, and Secretary to Alphonsus the II. Duke of that Principality; who sent
him into Germany, Poland and Rome, in the time of Pope Gregory the XIII. After
the death of Alphonsus, he was Secretary to Vincent de Gonzaga Duke of Mantua,
to Ferdinand de Medicis Great Duke of Tuscany, who created him Knight of the
Order of Saint Stephen, and to Francis Maria de la Rovera Duke of Urbin: in all
these Stations, he was as much admired for his Politics, as Poetry. How much
he was esteemed for this last, the several Academies of Italy are a sufficient
proof; most of which elected him a Member into their several Societies; as Gli
Humoristi of Rome, De la Crusca of Florence, Gli Olympici of Vicenza, and Gli
Innominati of Parma, and Gli Elevati of Ferrara. He withdrew from pulick
Affairs toward the latter end of his Life, and dwelt privately at Padua,
afterward at Venice, where being about seventy five Years of Age, he died in
the Year 1613.

Having given you this Abridgment of Guarini's Life, I shall return to our
English Author's Translation. Though in his Epistle to the Prince, He speaks
modestly of his Performance, as if this Dramatick Poem had lost much of the
Life and Quickness, by being poured out of one Vessel, (that is one Language)
into another; besides the unsteadiness of the Hand that pours it; and that a
Translation at the best, is but a Mock-Rainbow in the Clouds, faintly imitating
the true one; into which Apollo himself had a full and immediate Influence: I
say, notwithstanding this modest Apology; yet Sir John Denham in his Verses on
this Translation, infinitely commends it: and though he seems to assent to our
Author's Notions, touching Translations in general: yet he shows that Sir
Richard has admirably succeeded in this particular Attempt; as the Reader may
see by the following Lines; where after having blamed servile Translators, he
goes on thus; A new and nobler Way thou do pursue
To make Translations, and Translators too.
They but preserve the Ashes, thou the Flame,
True to his Sense, but truer to his Fame.
Foording his Current, where thou find'st it low,
Let'st in thine own, to make it rise and flow.
Wisely restoring whatsoever grace
Is lost by change of Times, or Tongues, or Place,
Nor fettered to his Numbers, and his Times,
Betray'st his Music to unhappy Rimes;
Nor are the Nerves of his compacted strength
Stretched and dissolved into unsinew'd length:
Yet after all (lest we should think it thine,)
Thy Spirit to his Circle do confine.


I have already said, that Guarini imitated Tasso's Aminta, in this Pastoral;
Page 99.
and I may add, that by the unquestionable Verdict of all Italy, he outstript
him: which raised Tasso's Anger so high, that he cried out in a great Passion,
Se non havuto visto il mio Aminta, etc. If he had not seen my Aminta, he had
not excelled it. Give me leave to enlarge further, that this Pastoral was writ
on the occasion of Charles Emmanuel, the Young Duke of Savoy's Marriage with
the Infanta of Spain. The Author's Design is Allegorical and Instructive, under
the Name of Carino, he personates himself, and his chief End was to instill
into his Princely Pupil, under the disguise of a Dramatick Diversion, the
Principles of Divine, Moral, and Political Virtues.

Querer por solo querer, To love only for Love's sake; a Dramatick Romance
represented at Aranjuez before the King and Queen of Spain, to celebrate the
Birthday of that King, [ Phil.IV.] by the Meninas; which are a Set of Ladies,
in the Nature of Ladies of Honor in that Court, Children in Years, but Higher
in Degree (being Daughters and Heirs to Grandees in Spain) than the Ladies of
Honor, Attending likewise that Queen. This Play was written in Spanish, by Don
Antonio de Mendoza 1623. and dedicated to the Queen of Spain: [which was
Elizabeth Daughter to Henry the Great of France.] It was paraphrased by our
Author in English in 1654. during his Confinement to Tankersly Park in
Yorkshire, by Oliver, after the Battle of Worcester; in which (as I have
already observed) he was taken prisoner, serving his Majesty King Charles the
Second, as Secretary of State. At that time he writ on this Dramatick Romance 3
Stanzas, both in Latin and English, which may give the Reader a Taste of his
Vein in both these Languages; and therefore may not be improper for me to
transcribe, or unpleasant to the Reader to perufe. I shall give the preference
to the Latin Verses, Learning and Learned Men being to be preferred before
Vulgar Readers.

Ille ego, qui (dubiis quondam jactatus in Undis,
Qui, dum nunc Aulae, nunc mibi Castra Strepunt)
Leni importunas mulceban Carmine Curas,
In quo PASTORIS Flamma FIDELIS erat.
At nunc and Castris, Aulisque ejectus and Undis,
(Nam mihi Naufragium Portus, and Ira Quies);
Altius insurgens, Regum haud intactus Amores,
Et Reginarum fervidus Arma Cano:
Quae (vinclis Hymenaee tuis, spretisque Coronis)
Nec juga far virum, nec dare Jur a velint.
Dulce prosellosos audire ex Litore fluctus!
Eque truci Terram dulce videre Mari.
In English thus.

Time was when I, a Pilgrim of the Seas,
When I midst noise of Camps, and Courts disease;
Purloin'd some Hours, to charm rude Cares with Verse,
Which Flame of FAITHFUL SHEPHERD did rehearse:
But now restrained from Sea, from Camp, from Court,
And by a Tempest blown into a Port;
I raise my Thoughts to muse on higher things,
And Echo Arms and Loves of Queens and Kings:
Which Queens (despising Crowns and Hymen's Band)
Would neither Men Obey, nor Men Command.
Lucretius L. 2.
Great Pleasure, from rough Seas, to see the Shore!
Or from firm Land to hear the Billows rore.
Though this Play was during the Author's Imprisonment translated, 'twas not
printed till long after his Death, viz. 4o. Land. 1671. to which is added,
Fiestas de Aranjuez, Festivals represented at Aranjuez, written by the same
Author, and on the same Occasion; and translated by the same Hand. The Play it
self consists but of three Acts (which the Spaniards call Jornadas) according
to the Spanish Custom: their Poets seldom or never exceeding that number.

As to his other Works, he writ several Poems in Latin, as a Copy on the
Escurial; another on the Royal Sovereign; and a third on Mr. May's Translation
of, and Supplement to Lucan. He translated other Pieces into that Learned
Tongue, as two Poems written by Mr. Thomas Carew: Several Pieces he translated
out of Latin into English, as the fourth Book of Virgil's AEneids, an Epigram
out of Martial Lib. 10. Epig. 47. Two Odes out of Horace, relating to the Civil
Wars of Rome, (the First, Carm. Lib. 3. Ode 24. The Second, Epod. 16.) with
some Sonnets translated from the Spanish, and other Poems writ in his Native
Language, with several Pieces, which you will find bound up with Pastor Fido,
printed 8o. Land. 1671.

Nor was it out of these Languages only that he translated what pleased him;
but even so uncourted a Language as he terms that of Portugal, employed his Pen
during his Confinement; For he translated Luis de Camoens (whom the Portugals
call their Virgil) his Lusiad, or Portugal's Historical Poem. This Poem was
printed fol. Land. 1665. and dedicated to the Right Honorable William Earl of
Strafford, Son and Heir to that Glorious Protomartyr of Monarchy, the Noble
Thomas Earl of Strafford, Lord Deputy of Ireland; on whose Trial our Author
writ a Copy of Verses, printed amongst his Poems, p. 302.

Besides these Pieces, Mr. Philips Modern Poet., p. 156.
and Mr. Winstanley Acc. of the Poets, p. 196.
attribute to him the Latin Version of Mr. Edmund Spencer's Shepherds Calendar,
which I take to be a mistake of Mr. Philips' whose Errors Mr. Winstanley
generally copies; not having heard of any other Translation than that done by
Mr. Theodore Bathurst, sometime Fellow of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, and
printed at the end of Mr. Spencer's Works in fol. Land. 1679.

Henry Ld Viscount FAULKLAND.
This Worthy Person was (as I suppose) Father of the present Right Honorable
Carry Viscount Faulkland. A Person Eminent for his Extraordinary Parts, and
Heroic Spirit. He was well known and respected at Court, in the Parliament,
and in Oxfordshire, his Country, of which he was Lord Lieutenant. When he was
first elected to serve in Parliament, some of the House opposed his Admission,
urging That he had not sowed his Wild-oats: he replied If I have not, I may sow
them in the House, where there are Geese enough to pick them up. And when Sir
J. N. told him, That He was a little too wild for so grave a Service; he
replied Alas! I am wild, and my Father was so before me, and I am no Bastard,
as, etc. But what need I search for Wit, when it may be sufficiently seen in a
Play which he writ, (the occasion of our making mention of him) called

The Marriage Night, a Tragedy, printed 4o Land. 1664. I know not whether this
Play ever appeared on the Stage, or no.

He was cut off in the prime of his Years, as much missed when dead, as beloved
when living.

Nathaniel FIELD.
An Author that lived in the Reigns of King James, and King Charles the First;
who was not only a Lover of the Muses, but beloved by them, and the Poets his
Contemporaries. He was adopted by Mr. Chapman for his Son, and called in by Old
Massinger, to his Assistance, in the Play called The Fatal Dowry, of which Play
more hereafter. He writ himself two Plays, which will still bear Reading, viz.

Amends for Ladies; with the merry Pranks of Moll Cutpurse, or The Humor of
Roaring; a Comedy full of honest Mirth and Wit. Acted at the Black-Friars, both
by the Prince's Servants, and the Lady Elizabeth's; and printed 4o Land. 1639.
The Plot of Subtles tempting the married Wife, at her Husbands entreaty, seems
to be founded on Don Quixote's Novel of the Curious Impertinent, and has been
the Subject of many Plays, as The City Nightcap, Amourous Prince, of The
Curious Husband, etc. This Play was writ by our Author as Amends to the Fair
Sex, for a Play which he had writ some Years before, and whose very Title
semm'd a Satyr on Womankind; viz.

Woman's Weathercock, a Comedy acted before the King in White Hall, and
several times privately at the White-Friars, by the Children of her Majesty's
Revels, printed 4o. Land. 1612. and dedicated to any Woman that has been no
Weathercock. This Play is commended by a Copy of Verses writ by Mr. Chapman.
There is one thing remarkable in this Play; and which for the Author's Credit,
I must take notice of, that the Time of the Action is circumscribed within the
compass of twelve Hours; as the Author himself observes in the Conclusion of
his Play.

Nere was so much (what cannot Heavenly Powers)
Done and undone, and done in twelve short hours.
Richard FLECKNOE, Esquire
This Gentleman lived in the Reigns of King Charles the First and Second; and
was as Famous as any in his Age, for indifferent Meter. His Acquaintance with
the Nobility, was more than with the Muses; and he had a greater propensity to
Riming, then a Genius to Poetry. He never could arrive with all his Industry,
to get but one Play to be acted, and yet he has printed several. He has
published sundry Works, (as he styles them) to continue his Name to Posterity;
though possibly an Enemy has done that for him, which his own Endeavors would
never have perfected: For whatever become of his own Pieces, his Name will
continue whilst Mr. Dryden's Satyr called Mack Flecknoe, shall remain in Vogue.
He has published several Pieces both in Prose and Verse, which I have seen; and
he has others in print, which I could never obtain a view of: as in
particular, that Epistle Dedicatory, to a Nobleman, which Mr. Dryden raillys so
severely in his Dedication of Limberham. As to what Works I have seen of his, I
shall give the Reader a particular Account, beginning first with his Plays.

Damoiselles a la mode, a Comedy printed in octavo Land. 1667. and dedicated to
their Graces the Duke and Duchess of Newcastle, more humbly than by way of
Epistle. This Comedy was designed by the Author to have been acted by the Kings
Servants, as the Reader may see by the Scheme drawn by the Poet, showing how he
cast the several Parts: but I know not for what reason they refused it. The
Poet indeed seems to give one, which whether true or false, is not much
material; but methinks it will serve to show the Reader his Humor. For the
acting this Comedy (says he) Preface to his Play.
those who have the Governing of the Stage, have their Humors, and would be
entreated; and I have mine, and will not entreat them: and were all Dramatick
Writers of my mind, they should wear their Old Plays Threadbare, ere they
should have any New, till they better understood their own Interest, and how to
distinguish betwixt good and bad. I know not whether the late Duke of
Buckingham thought of Mr. Flecknoe when he drew the Character of Mr. Bays; but
methinks there is some resemblance between his Anger at the Players being gone
to Dinner without his leave, and Mr. Flecknoe's Indignation at their Refusing
his Play: Mr. Bays seeming to me to talk much at the same rate. How! are the
Players gone to Dinner? If they are, I Will make them know what it is to injure a
Person that does them the Honor to write for them; and all that, A Company of
Proud, Conceited, Humorous, Cross-grained Persons; and all that I Will make them
the most Contemptible, Despicable, Inconsiderable Persons, and all that, in the
whole World for this Trick.

This Play (as the Author in his Preface acknowledges) is taken out of several
Excellent Pieces of Molliere. The main Plot of the Damoiselles, out of his Les
Precieuses Ridicules; the Counterplot of Sganarelle, out of his L'Escole des
Femmes, and the Two Naturals, out of his L'Escole des Maris.

Erminia, or The Chaste Lady, printed 8o Land. 1665. and dedicated to the Fair
and Virtuous Lady, the Lady Southcot. This Play (though the Actors Names designed
by the Authors, be printed over against the Dramatis Personae) was never acted.

Love's Dominion, a Dramatick Piece, full of Excellent Morality; written as a
Pattern for the Reformed Stage, printed 8o Land. 1654. and dedicated to the
Lady Elizabeth Claypole. In this Epistle, the Author insinuates the use of
Plays, and begs her Mediation to gain License to act them. Whether the Play
answer the Title Page, or whether Mr. Flecknoe have so regularly observed the
three Unities, I shall leave to the Critics.

Love's Kingdom, a Pastoral-Tragi-comedy; not as it was acted at the Theater
near Lincoln's Inn, but as it was written, and since corrected; printed 8o Land.
1664. and dedicated to his Excellency William, Lord Marquess of Newcastle. This
Play is but the former Play a little altered, with a new Title; and after the
King's Return it seems, the Poet got leave to have it acted; but it had the
misfortune to be damned by the Audience, (which Mr. Flecknoe styles The people,
and calls them Judges without Judgment) for want of its being rightly
represented to them. He owns that it wants much of the Ornament of the Stage;
but that (he says) by a lively Imagination may easily be supplied. To the same
purpose he says of his Damoiselles a la mode, Preface.
That together with the Persons represented, he had set down the Comedians that
he designed should represent them; that the Reader might have half the pleasure
of seeing it acted, and a lively Imagination might have the pleasure of it all
entire.

I fancy Mr. Flecknoe would have been much pleased with Readers of the Argive
Gentleman's Humor described by Horace, Epod. L.2. Ep.2.
Qui se credebat miros audire Tragoedos,
In vacuo laetus sessor, plausorque Theatro.
Who fancied he saw Plays acted in the empty Theater; but to others in their
right Senses, all his Rhetoric could not have been able to persuade them, that
a Play Read, (notwithstanding the utmost force of Imagination) can afford half
the pleasure with that of a Play Acted; since the former wants the Greatest
Ornament to a Play, Gracefulness of Action. But Mr. Flecknoe was to make the
best of a Bad-market; and since he could not get his Plays acted, he was to
endeavor to get them to be read; by laboring Mr John Fletcher
to persuade people, that Imagination would supply the defect of Action.

Marriage of Oceanus and Britannia, a Masque, which I never saw, and therefore
am not able to give any Account of it.

Whether our Author have any more Plays in print, I know not; but I remember a
Prologue amongst his Epigrams, intended for a Play, called The Physician
against his will, which I believe might be a Translation of Molliere's Le
Medecin malgre luy; but it was never published that I know of. As to his other
Works, they consist of Epigrams and Enigmatical Characters, which are usually
bound up with his Love's Dominion; at the end of which is a short Discourse of
the English Stage, which I take to be the best thing he has extant. There is
another Book of his Writing, called Diarium, or The Journal, divided into
twelve Jornadas, in Burlesque Verse; with some other Pieces, printed 120 Land.
1656

John FLETCHER, and Francis BEAUMONT, Esquire
I am now arrived at a brace of Authors, who like the Dioscuri, Castor and
Pollux, succeeded in Conjunction more happily than any Poets of their own, or
this Age, to the reserve of the Venerable Shakespeare, and the Learned and
Judicious Johnson. It Is impossible for me to reach their Characters; and
therefore, as the Witty Dr. Fuller Cheshire, p. 181.
cites Bale's saying of Randal Higden, Descript. Brit. Gent. 6.Nu.11.
That it is no shame to crave aid in a Work too weighty for any ones back to
bear; I must have recourse to others Assistance, for the Characters of this
worthy pair of Authors. To speak first of Mr. Beaumont, he was Master of a good
Wit, and a better Judgment; he so admirably well understood the Art of the
Stage, that even Johnson himself thought it no disparagement to submit his
Writings to his Correction. What a great Veneration Ben. had for him, is
evident by those Verses he writ to him when living See before the last Edit.
. Mr. Fletcher's Wit was equal to Mr. Beaumont's Judgment, and was so
luxuriant, that like superfluous Branches, it was frequently pruned by his
Judicious Partner. These Poets perfectly understood Breeding, and therefore
successfully copied the Conversation of Gentlemen. They knew how to describe
the Manners of the Age; and Fletcher had a peculiar tallent in expressing all
his thoughts, with Life and Briskness. No Man ever understood, or drew the
Passions more lively than he; and his witty Raillery was so dressed, that it
rather pleased than disgusted the modest part of his Audience. In a word,
Fletcher's Fancy, and Beaumont's Judgment combined, produced such Plays, as
will remain Monuments of their Wit to all Posterity. Nay, Mr. Fletcher himself
after Mr. Beaumont's Decease, composed several Dramatick Pieces, which were
well worthy the Pen of so great a Master. Of this, the following Lines, writ by
that Excellent Poet Mr. Carthwright, are a proof.

Though when All- Fletcher writ, and the entire
Man was indulged unto that sacred fire,
His thoughts and his thoughts dress, appeared both such,
That 'twas his happy fault to do too much;
Who therefore wisely did submit each Birth
To knowing Beaumont, e're it did come forth;
Working again, until he said 'twas fit,
And made him the sobriety of his Wit;
Though thus he called his Judge into his Fame,
And for that aid allowed him half the Name,
It Is known, that sometimes he did stand alone,
That both the sponge and pencil were his own;
That himself judged himself, could singly do,
And was at last Beaumont and Fletcher too.
Else we had lost his Shepherdess, a piece,
Even, and smooth, sprung from a finer fleece,
Where Softness reigns, where passions passions greet,
Gentle and high, as floods of Balsam meet:
Where, dressed in white Expressions, sit bright Loves,
Drawn, like their fairest Queen, by milky Doves;
A Piece, which Johnson, in a Rapture bid,
Come up a glorified Work, and so it did.
They who would read more of these admirable Poets worth, may peruse at their
leisure those excellent Copys of Verses printed with their Works, written by
the prime Wits of the Age, as Waller, Denham, Sir John Berkenhead, Dr. Main,
etc. I am extremely sorry, that I am not able to give any Account of the
Affairs of these Great Men; Mr. Beaumont's Parentage, Birth, County, Education,
and Death, being wholly unknown to me: And as to Mr. Fletcher, all I know of
him is, That he was Son to the Eminent Richard Fletcher, created Bishop of
Bristol, by Queen Elizabeth An. 1559. and by her preferred to London, 1593. He
died in London of the Plague in the First Year of King Charles the Martyr,
1625. being Nine and forty Years of Age, and was buried in St. Mary Overies
Church in Southwarke.

I beg my Reader's Leave to insert the Inscription, which I find writ under his
Picture, by that well known Wit, Sir John Berkenhead; which will give the
Reader a fuller Knowledge of his Abilities and Merit, than I am able to
express. Felicis aevi, ac Praesulis Natus; comes
Beaumontio; sic, quippe Parnassus, Biceps;
FLETCHERVS unam in Pyramida furcas agens.
Struxit chorum plus simplicem Vates Duplex;
Plus Duplicem solus: nec ullum transtulit;
Nec transferrendus: Dramatum aeterni sales,
Anglo Theatro, Orbi, Sibi, superstitites.
FLETCHERE, facies absque vultu pingitur;
Quantus! vel umbram circuit nemo tuam.
Where, or when Mr. Beaumont died, I know not; but I have met with an Epitaph,
writ by Dr. Corbet, immediately after his Death, that well deserves the
Reader's perusal.

On Mr. Francis Beaumont. (Then newly dead.)
He that has such Acuteness, and such Wit,
As would ask Ten good Heads to husband it;
He that can write so well, that no man dare
Refuse it for the best, let him beware:
BEAUMONT is dead, by whose sole Death appears,
Wit's a Disease consumes men in few years.
There are two and fifty Plays written by these worthy Authors; all which are
now extant in one Volume, printed fol. Land. 1679. each of which I shall
mention Alphabetically.

Beggars Bush, a Comedy: This Play I have seen several times acted with
applause.

Bonduca, a Tragedy. The plot of this Play, is borrowed from Tacitus's Annals
Lib. 14. See Milton's History of England, Book 2. Ubaldino de Vita delle Done
Illustri del Regno d' Inghelterra, and Scotia, page 7, etc.

Bloody Brother, or Rollo Duke of Normandy, a Tragedy much in request; and
notwithstanding Mr. Rymer's Criticisms on it, Tragedies of the last Age
considered, p. 16, etc.
has still the good fortune to Please: it being frequently acted by the present
Company of Actors, at the Queen's Playhouse in Dorset-Garden. The Design of
this Play is History: See Herodian. lib. 4. Xiphilini Epit. Dion. in Vit. Ant.
Caracallae. Part of the Language is copied from Seneca's Thebais.

Captain, a Comedy.

Chances, a Comedy, revived by the late Duke of Buckingham, and very much
improved; being acted with extraordinary applause at the Theater in
Dorset-Garden, and printed with the Alterations Land. 4o 1682. This Play is
built on a Novel written by the Famous Spaniard Miguel de Cervantes, called The
Lady Cornelia; which the Reader may read at large in a Fol. Vol. called Six
Exemplary Novels.

Coronation, a Tragi-comedy.

Coxcomb, a Comedy, which was revived at the Theater Royal, the Prologue being
spoken by Jo. Hains.

Cupid's Revenge, a Tragedy.

Custom of the Country, a Tragi-comedy. This is accounted an excellent Play;
the Plot of Rutilio, Duarte, and Guyomar, is founded on one of Malespini's
Novels, Deca. 6. Nov. 6.

Double Marriage, a Tragedy, which has been revived some years ago; as I learn
from a new Prologue printed in Covent Garden Drollexy, p. 14.

Elder Brother, a Comedy, which has been acted with good applause.

Faithful Shepherdess, a Pastoral, writ by Mr. Fletcher, and commended by two
Copies written by the Judicious Beaumont, and the Learned Johnson, which the
Reader may read at the end of the Play: See the last Edit. Fol. p. 233. When
this Pastoral was first acted before their Majesty's at Sommerset House on
Twelfth-Night, 1633. instead of a Prologue, there was a Song in Dialogue, sung
between a Priest and a Nymph, which was writ by Sir William D'Avenant; and an
Epilogue was spoken by the Lady Mary Mordant, which the Reader may read in
Covent Garden Drollery, page 86.

Fair Maid of the Inn, a Tragi-comedy. Mariana's disowning Caesario for her
Son, and the Duke's Injunction to marry him, is related by Causin in his Holy
Court, and is transcribed by Wanley in his History of Man, Fol. Book 3. Chap.
26.

False One, a Tragedy This Play is founded on the Adventures of Julius Caesar
in Egypt, and his Amors with Cleopatra. See Suetonius, Plutarch, Dion,
Appian, Florus, Eutropius, Orosius, etc.

Four Plays, or Moral Representations in One; viz. The Triumph of Honor; The
Triumph of Love; The Triumph of Death; The Triumph of Time. I know not whether
ever these Representations appeared on the Stage, or no. The Triumph of Honor
is founded on Boccace his Novels, Day 10. Nov. 5. The Triumph of Love, on the
same Author, Day 5. Nov. 8. The Triumph of Death on a Novel in The Fortunate,
Deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers, part 3. Nov. 3. See besides Palace of
Pleasure, Nov. 4o. Belle-forest, etc. The Triumph of Time, as far as falls
within my discovery, is wholly the Authors Invention.

Honest Man's Fortune, a Tragi-Comedy. As to the plot of Montaign's being
preferred by Lamira to be her Husband, when he was in Adversity, and least
expected: the like Story is related by Heywood in his History of Women, Book 9.
page 641.

Humourous Lieutenant, a Tragi-Comedy which I have often seen acted with
Applause. The Character of the Humourous Lieutenant refusing to fight after he
was cured of his Wounds, resembles the Story of the Soldier belonging to
Lucullus described in the Epistles of Horace, lib. 2. Ep. 2. but the very Story
is related in Ford's Apothegms, p. 30. How near the Poet keeps to the Historian
I must leave to those that will compare the Play with the Writers of the Lives
of Antigonus and Demetrius, the Father and the Son. See Plutarch's Life of
Demetrius, Diodorus, Justin, Appian, etc.

Island Princess, a Tragi-Comedy. This Play about three Years ago was revived
with Alterations by Mr. Tate, being acted at the Theater Royal, printed in
quarto Land. 1687. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Henry Lord Walgrave.

King and No King, a Tragi-Comedy, which notwithstanding its Errors discovered
by Mr. Rymer in his; Criticisms, has always been acted with Applause, and has
lately been revived on our present Theater with so great success, that we may
justly say with Horace, Haec placuit semel, haec decies repetita placebit.


Knight of the burning Pestle, a Comedy. This Play was in vogue some years
since, it being revived by the King's House, and a new Prologue (instead of the
old One in prose) being spoken by Mrs. Ellen Guin. The bringing the Citizen and
his Wife upon the Stage, was possibly in imitation of Ben Johnson's Staple of
News, who has introduced on the Stage Four Gossips, Lady-like attired, who
remain during the whole Action, and criticize upon each Scene.

Knight of Malta, a Tragi-Comedy.

Laws of Candy, a Tragi-Comedy.

Little French Lawyer, a Comedy. The Plot is borrowed from Gusman or The
Spanish Roque, part 2. chapter 4. The Story of Dinant, Clerimont, and Lamira, being
borrowed from Don Lewis de Castro, and Don Roderigo de Montalva. The like Story
is in other Novels; as in Scarron's Novel called The Fruitless Precaution; and
in The Complaisant Companion, 8o p. 263. which is copied from the
abovementioned Original.

Love's Cure, or The Martial Maid, a Comedy.

Love's Pilgrimage, a Comedy. This I take to be an admirable Comedy. The
Foundation of it is built on a Novel of Miguel de Cervantes called The Two
Damsels. The Scene in the first Act, between Diego the Host of Ossuna, and
Lazaro his Ostler, is stolen from Ben Johnson's New Inn: which I may rather term
borrowed, for that Play miscarrying in the Action, I suppose they made use of
it with Ben's Consent.

Lovers Progress, a Tragi-Comedy. This Play is built on a French Romance
written by M. Daudiguier, called Lisander and Calista.

Loyal Subject, a Tragi-Comedy.

Mad Lover, a Tragi-Comedy. The Design of Cleanthe's Suborning the Priestess to
give a false Oracle in favor of her Brother Syphax, is borrowed from the Story
of Mundus and Paulina, describe'd at large by Josephus Lib. 18. Cap. 4. This
Play Sr. Aston Cockain has chiefly commended in his Copy of Verses on Mr.
Fletcher's Plays. See the Verses before the old Edition, printed 1647. and
Cockain's Poems, page 101.

Maid in the Mill, a Comedy. This Play amongst othershas likewise been revived
by the Duke's House. The Plot of Antonio, Ismenia, and Aminta, is borrowed from
Gerardo, a Romance translated from the Spanish of Don Gonzalo de Cespides, and
Moneces; see the Story of Don Jayme page 350. As to the Plot of Otrante's
seizing Florimel the Millers supposed Daughter, and attempting her Chastity;
it is borrowed from an Italian Novel writ by Bandello; a Translation of which
into French, the Reader may find in Les Histoires Tragiques par M. Belleforest,
Tom. 1. Hist. 12. The same Story is related by M. Goulart; see Les Histoires
admirables de notre temps, 8o. Tom. 1. p. 212.

Maids Tragedy, a Play which has always been acted with great Applause at the
King's Theater; and which had still continued on the English Stage, had not
King Charles the Second, for some particular Reasons forbid its further
Appearance during his Reign. It has since been revived by Mr. Waller, the last
Act having been wholly altered to please the Court: as the Author of the
Preface to the second part of his Poems informs us, and give us further the
following Account: It Is not to be doubted, who sat for the Two Brothers
Characters. 'Twas agreeable to the Sweetness of Mr. Waller's Temper, to soften
the Rigor of the Tragedy, as he expresses it; but whether it be agreeable to
the Nature of Tragedy it self, to make every thing come off easily, I leave to
the Critics. This last Act is published in the Second Part of Mr. Waller's
Poems, printed in quarto Land. 1690.

Masque of Gray's Inn Gentlemen, and the Inner Temple. This Masque was written
by Mr. Beaumont alone, and presented before the King and Queen in the
Banqueting House of Whitehall, at the Marriage of the Illustrious Frederick and
Elizabeth, Prince and Princess Palatine of the Rhine.

Monsieur Thomas, a Comedy, which not long since appeared on the present Stage
under the Name of Trick for Trick.

Nice Valor, or The Passionate Madman, a Comedy.

Night Walker, or The Little Thief, a Comedy, which I have seen acted by the
King's Servants, with great Applause, both in the City and Country.

Noble Gentleman, a Comedy which was lately revived by Mr. Durfey, under the
Title of The Fools Preferment, or The Three Dukes of Dunstable.

Philaster, or Love lies a Bleeding: a Tragi-Comedy which has always been acted
with Success; and has been the diversion of the Stage, even in these days. This
was the first Play that brought these Excellent Authors in Esteem; and this
Play was One of those that were represented at the old Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, when the Women acted alone. The Prologue and Epilogue were
spoken by Mrs. Marshal, and printed in Covent Garden Drollery, page 18. About
this Time there was a Prologue written on purpose for the Women by Mr. Dryden,
and is printed in his Miscellany Poems in octavo, p. 285.

Pilgrim, a Comedy which was revived some years since, and a Prologue spoke,
which the Reader may find in Covent Garden Dollery, p. 12.

Prophetess, a Tragical History, which has lately been revived by Mr. Dryden,
under the Title of The Prophetess, or The History of Dioclesian, with
Alterations and Additions after the manner of an Opera, represented at the
Queens Theater, and printed 4o Land. 1690. For the Plot consult Eusebius Lib 8.
Nicephorus Lib. 6. and 7. Vopisc. Car. and Carin. Aur. Victoris Epitome.
Eutropius L. 9. Baronius An. 204. etc. Orosius L. 7. C. 16. Coeffeteau L. 20.
etc.

Queen of Corinth, a Tragi-Comedy.

Rule a Wife, and have a Wife, a Tragi-Comedy which within these few years has
been acted, with applause at the Queens Theater in Dorset-Garden.

Scornful Lady, a Comedy acted with good Applause even in these times, at the
Theater in Dorset-Garden. Mr. Dryden has condemned the Conclusion of this Play
in reference to the Conversion of Moor-craft the Usurer Dram. Essay, p. 35.
; but whether this Catastrophe be excusable, I must leave to the Critics.

Sea Voyage, a Comedy lately revived by Mr. Durfey, under the Title of The
Commonwealth of Women. This Play is supposed by Mr. Dryden, (as I have
observed) to be copied from Shakespears's Tempest. Prol. to the Tempest.


The Storm which vanished on the neighbring shore,
Was taught by Shakespears Tempest first to roar,
That Innocence and Beauty which did smile
In Fletcher, grew on this Enchanted Isle.
Spanish Curate, a Comedy frequently revived with general Applause. The Plot of
Don Henrique, Ascanio, Violante, and Jacintha, is borrowed from Gerardo's
History of Don John, page 202. and that of Leandro, Bartolus, Amarantha and
Lopez, from the Spanish Curate of the same Author, page 214. etc.

Thirry and Theodoret, a Tragedy. This Play is accounted by some an excellent
old Play; and therefore it is pity the Compositor was so careless in this new
Edition as to omit a great part of the last Act, which contains the King's
behavior during the Operation of the Poison given him by his Mother; and which
is as moving as any part of the Play. This Imperfection may be supplied from
the Copy printed in quarto, and I hope the Proprietors of the Copy, will take
care in the next Impression to do justice to these admirable Authors.

Cockain's Epigr. L. 2. Ep. 35.
`For Beaumont's Works and Fletcher's should come forth,
'With all the Right belonging to their Worth.
The Plot of this Play is founded on History. See the French Chronicles in the
Reign of Clotaire the Second. See Fredegarius Scholasticus, Aimoinus Monachus
Floriacensis, De Serres, Mezeray, Crispin, etc.

Two Noble Kinsmen, a Tragi-Comedy. This Play was written by Mr. Fletcher, and
Mr. Shakespeare.

Valentinian, a Tragedy revived not long ago by that Great Wit, the Earl of
Rochester; acted at the Theater Royal, and printed in quarto 1685. with a
Preface concerning the Author and his Writings. For the Plot see the Writers of
those Times; as Cassidori Chron.; Amm. Marcell. Hist. Evagrius Lib. 2.
Procopius, etc.

Wife for a Month, a Tragi-Comedy. This Play is in my poor Judgment well worth
reviving, and with the alternation of a judicious Pen, would be an excellent
Dramma. The Character and Story of Alphonso, and his Brother Frederick's
Carriage to him, much resembles the History of Sancho the Eighth, King of Leon.
I leave the Reader to the perusal of his Story in Mariana, and Louis de Mayerne
Turquet.

Wild-Goose Chase, a Comedy valued by the best Judges of Poetry.

Wit at several Weapons, a Comedy which by some is thought very diverting; and
possibly was the Model on which the Characters of the Elder Pallatine and Sr.
Morglay Thwack were built by Sr. William D'Avenant, in his Comedy called The
Wits.

Wit without Money, a Comedy which I have seen acted at the Old House in little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields with very great Applause; the part of Valentine being
played by that complete Actor Major Mohun deceased. This was the first Play
that was acted after the Burning the King's House in Drury Lane: a New Prologue
being writ for them by Mr. Dryden, printed in his Miscellany Poems in octavo,
p. 285.

Woman Hater, a Comedy. This Play was revived by Sr. William D'Avenant, and a
new Prologue (instead of the old One writ in prose) was spoken, which the
Reader may peruse in Sir William's Works in Fol. p. 249. This Play was one of
those writ by Fletcher alone.

Women pleased, a Trigo-comedy. The Comical parts of this Play throughout
between Bartello, Lopez, Isabella, and Claudio, are founded on several of
Boccace's Novels: See Day 7. Nov. 6. and 8. Day 8. Nov. 8.

Woman's Prize, or the Tamer tamed, a Comedy, written on the same foundation
with Shakespeare's Taming of the Shrew; or which we may better call a Second
part or counter-part to that admirable Comedy. This was writ by Mr. Fletcher's
Pen likewise.

I wish I were able to give the Reader a perfect Account what Plays He writ
alone; in what Plays he was assisted by the Judicious Beaumont, and which were
the Plays in which Old Phil. Massinger had a hand: but Mr. Charles Cotton being
dead, I know none but Sir Aston Cockain (if he be yet alive) that can satisfy
the World in this particular: all that I can say, is that most of these Plays
were acted at the Globe and Black-Friars, in the Time of those Actors Tailor,
Lowin, Burbage, etc. This Account I received from Sir Aston Cockain's Poems,
who writ an Epistle to his Cosen Charles Cotton, Poems Octavo, p. 91.
concerning these excellent Authors, part of which I shall transcribe for the
Reader's better Satisfaction, and because his Poems are not very common.

It Is true, Beaumont and Fletcher both were such
Sublime Wits, none could them admire too much;
They were our English Pole-Stars, and did bear
Between them all the World of Fancy clear:
But as two Suns when they do shine to us,
The Air is lighter, they prodigious;
So while they lived and writ together, we
Had Plays exceeded what we hoped to see.
But they writ few; for youthful Beaumont soon
By Death eclipsed was at his high Noon.
Surviving Fletcher then did Penn alone
Equal to both, (pardon Comparison)
And suffered not the Globe and Black-Friar's Stage
TO envy the Glories of a former Age.
As we in Humane Bodies see that lose
An Eye, or Limb, the Virtue and the Use
Retreat into the other Eye or Limb,
And makes it double. So I say of him:
Fletcher was Beaumont's Heir, and did inherit
His searching Judgment, and unbounded Spirit.
His Plays were printed therefore, as they were
Of Beaumont too, because his Spirit's there.
I know no Poems writ by Mr. Fletcher; but Mr. Beaumont has a Poem extant
called Salmacis and Hermaphroditus, printed Land. 4o 1602. and which was again
reprinted with his Elegy of Love; Elegies, Sonnets, and other Poems, 8o Land.
1653. Our Author joined with the Famous Johnson, and Middleton, in a Comedy
called The Widow. Of this Play, see more under the Name of Ben. Johnson.

John FORD.
A Gentleman of the Middle Temple, who lived in the Reign of King Charles the
First: Who was a Well-wisher to the Muses, and a Friend and Acquaintance of
most of the Poets of his Time. He was not only a Partner with Rowly, and Decker
in the Witch of Edmonton, (of which see an Account in Rowly) and with Decker,
in The Sun's Darling, but writ likewise himself seven Plays; most of which were
acted at the Phoenix, and the Black-Friars: and may be known by an Anagram
instead of his Name, generally printed in the Title Page, viz.

FIDE HONOR.

He was more addicted to Tragedy, than Comedy; which occasioned an Old Poet to
write thus of him.

Deep in a Dump John Ford was alone got
With folded Arms, and melancholy Hat.
I shall give an Account of his Plays Alphabetically, and place The Sun's
Darling in its order, because the greatest part of it was writ by our Author.

Broken Heart, a Tragedy acted by the Kings Majesty's Servants, at the private
House in Black-Fryars, printed 4o Land. 1633. and dedicated to the most Worthy
Deserver of the Noblest Titles in Honor, William Lord Craven, Baron of
Hamstead Marshal. The Speakers Names are fitted to their Qualities; and most of
them are derived from Greek Etimologies.

Fancies Chaste and Noble, a Tragi-comedy, presented by the Queen Majesty's
Servants, at the Phoenix in Drury Lane; printed 4o Land. 1638. and dedicated to
the Right Noble Lord, the Lord Randell Macdonell, Earl of Antrim in the Kingdom
of Ireland. This Play is ushered into the World by a Copy of Verses, written by
Mr. Edward Greenfield.

Ladies Trial, a Tragi-comedy acted by both their Majesty's Servants, at the
private House in Drury Lane; printed 4o Land. 1639. and dedicated to his
Deservingly Honored John Wyrley Esquire and to the Virtuous and Right worthy
Gentlewoman Mrs. Mary Wyrley his Wife.

Lovers Melancholy, a Tragi-comedy acted at the private House in the
Black-Fryars, and publicly at the Globe by the Kings Majesty's Servants;
printed 4o Land. 1629. and dedicated to his most worthily Respected Friends,
Nathaniel Finch, John Ford, Esquires; Mr. Henry Blunt, Mr. Robert Ellice, and
all the rest of the Noble Society of Gray's Inn. This Play is commended by four
of the Author's Friends; one of which who styles himself (...), writ the
following Tetrastick.

It Is not the Language nor the fore-plac'd Rimes
Of Friends, that shall commend to aftertimes
The Lovers Malancholy: Its own Worth,
Without a borrowed Praise, shall set it forth.
The Author has Embellisht this Play with several Fancies from other Writers,
which he has appositely brought in; as the Story of the Contention between the
Musician and the Nightingale; described in Strada's Academical Prolusions, Lib.
2. Prol.6. which begins, Jam Sol e medio pronus defluxerat Orb, etc.
A Definition and Description of Melancholy, copied from the Ingenious Mr. Rob.
Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy, etc.

Love's Sacrifice, a Tragedy, received generally well; acted by the Queens
Majesty's Servants, at the Phoenix in Drury Lane; printed 4o Land. 1633. and
dedicated to his truest Friend, his worthiest Kinsman, John Ford of Gray's- Inn
Esquire. There is a Copy of Verses printed before this Play, written by that
Dramatick Writer Mr. James Shirley.

Perkin Warbeck, a Chronicle History, and a Strange Truth, acted (sometimes) by
the Queens Majesty's Servants in Drury Lane; printed 4o Land. 1634. and
dedicated to the Rightly Honorable William Cavendish Earl of Newcastle. This
Play as several of the former, is attended with Verses written by Four of the
Author's Friends; one of which is his Kinsman abovementioned. The Plot is
founded on Truth, and may be read in most of the Chronicles that have writ of
the Reign of King Henry the VII. See Caxton, Polidore Virgil, Hollingshead,
Speed, Stow, Salmonet, Du Chesne, Martyn, Baker, Gaynsford's History of Perkin
Warbeck, etc.

Sun's Darling, a Moral Mask, often presented by their Majesty's Servants, at
the Cockpit in Drury Lane, with great applause; printed 4o Land. 1657. and
dedicated to the Right Honorable Thomas Wriathesley, Earl of Southampton. This
Play was written (as I have said) by our Author and Decker, but not published
till after their Decease. A Copy of Verses written by Mr. John Tateham, is the
Introduction to the Masque; at the Entry whereof, the Reader will find an
Explanation of the Design, alluding to the Four Seasons of the Year.

It Is pity she is a whore, a Tragedy printed 4o I can give no further Account of
the Title Page, or Dedication, mine being lost. All that I can say is, that it
equals any of our Author's Plays; and were to be commended, did not the Author
paint the incestuous Love between Giovanni, and his Sister Annabella, in too
beautiful Colors.

Mr. Winstanly says, Lives of the Poets, p. 114.
that this Author was very beneficial to the Red-Bull, and Fortune Play Houses;
as may appear by the Plays which he wrote; though the Reader may see by the
foregoing Account that he takes his Information upon trust, or else the Plays
he has seen are of different Editions from those I have by me: but I rather
believe the former, since I have found him subject to several Mistakes of this
Nature.

Thomas FORD.
An Author who lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, who published a
Dramatick Poem, called

Love's Labyrinth, or The Royal Shepherdess, a Tragi-comedy, printed 8o Land.
1660. This Play is commended by two Copies of Verses: but whether ever it
appeared on any Stage, I cannot determine; only this I know, that part of this
Play is stolen from Gomersal's Tragedy of Sforza Duke of Millain. Mr. Philips
through mistake ascribes this Play to the abovementioned Mr. John Ford.

This Author has writ several other Pieces, Virtus Rediviva, a Panegyric on
King Charles the Martyr: A Theater of Wits, being a Collection of Apothegms:
Fenestra in Pectore; or a Century of Familiar Letters: Fragmenta Poetica; or
Poetical Diversions: A Panegyric on the Return of King Charles the Second. All
these Pieces, with the foregoing Play, are printed together in 8o Land. 1661.

John FOUNTAIN.
A Gentleman who flourished in Devonshire, at the time of his Majesty King
Charles the Second his Return; and was the Author of a single Play named,

Reward of Virtue, a Comedy, printed in 4o. Land. 1661. This Play was not
designed for the Stage by the Author; but about eight Years after the first
printing, Mr. Fountain being dead, it was revived with Alterations, by Mr.
Shadwell, and acted with good Applause, under the Title of The Royal
Shepherdess.

Abraham FRANCE.
An Ancient Writer who lived in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and was the Author
of a Book called, The Countess of Pembroke's Ivy Church; which Title in former
Catalogues was set down as the Name of a Play in 2 Parts, though in reality,
there is but one Dramatick Piece, called,

Amintas's Pastoral, being the first part of the Book, printed 4o Land. 1591.
and dedicated to the Right Excellent and most Honorable Lady, the Lady Mary,
Countess of Pembroke. This Play is writ in English Hexameters, and is a
Translation from Tasso's Aminta; which was done into Latin by one Mr. Watson,
before this Version was undertaken by our Author. He owns that he has somewhat
altered Epist. Ded.
Sigr. Tasso's Italian, and Mr. Watson's Latin Amyntas, to make them both one
English.

Notwithstanding Mr. Chapman in his Translation of Homer, and Sir Philip Sidney
in his Eclogues, have practiced this way of Writing; yet this way of Imitating
the Latin Measures of Verse, particularly the Hexameter, is now laid aside, and
the Verse of Ten Syllables, which we style Heroic Verse, is most in use. If
this Translation be allowed grains for the time when 'twas writ, 'twill be
excused by the more moderate Critics; though if compared with the Translation
which was afterward printed in 1628. or that more Modern Version done by
Dancer, at the King's Return, 'twill appear inferior to either in Value.

The Second Part goes under the Title of Phillis Funeral; and it is writ in the
form of Eclogues, being divided by the Author into twelve Parts, which he
styles Days. This Poem is likewise writ in Hexameters; to which is annexed in
the same Measure, The Lamentation of Corydon for the Love of Alexis. This is a
Translation of the second Eclogue of Virgil Verse for Verse. The Author added
likewise the beginning of The AEthiopick History of Heliodorus, in the same
Species of Meter.

With these Pieces are commonly joined another of our Authors Writing, called
The Countess of Pembrokes Emanuel; Containing the Nativity, Passion, Burial,
and Resurrection of Christ; together with certain Psalms of David, all in
English Hexameters; printed in quarto Land. 1591. and dedicated to the Right
Excellent and most Honorable Lady, the Lady Mary, Countess of Pembroke; by the
following Distick.

Mary the best Mother sends her best Babe to a
Mary,
Lord to a Ladies Sight, and Christ to a Christian
Hearing.
Mr. Phillips says Modern Poets, p. 3.
, That he writ some other things in Hexameter, and Pentameter, and the same
writes Mr. Winstanley Lives of the Poets, p. 65.
: though I doubt the former takes his Opinion upon Trust, and the later does not
I believe know a Pentameter from an Asclepiade Verse. The truth is, there are
no Pentameters throughout the Volume: but in the last Act, there is a Scene
between Phillis and Amyntas (which whether it be in the Original, I question)
where this pair of Lovers sing some Asclepiades, which I suppose is the
Occasion of the mistake: though I cannot but wonder at Mr. Winstanley's
negligence, that when he copied out the beginning of Heliodorus, he should not
inform himself better; but I hope my small pains may be serviceable to his next
Impression. Neither is his Conjecture less probable concerning the time of our
Author's Death, which he supposes was about the former part of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth; this can not be, since our Author was alive at the publication
of his Book, which was in the Year 1591. and in the Thirty-third Year of her
Reign: though how long after he survived I know not.

Sir Ralph FREEMAN.
A Gentleman who during the late Troubles busied himself in Poetry, and writ an
excellent Tragedy called Imperiale, printed in quarto Land. 1655. and dedicated
to his Ancient and Learned Friend, John Morris Esquire. I know not whether ever
this Play was acted; but certainly it far better deserved to have appeared on
the Theater than many of our modern Farces that have usurped the Stage, and
deposed its lawful Monarch, Tragedy. The Compositor maimed the last Act by
setting the Sheet [I] false, so that it is pretty difficult to make out the five
first Scenes: The Catastrophe of this Play is as moving as most Tragedies of
this Age, and therefore our Author chose a proper Lemma for the Frontispiece of
his Play, in that Verse of Ovid.

Omne Genus Scripti gravitate Tragoedia vincit.

The Story on which this Play is built is related by many Authors, as Pontanus,
Budaeus's Treasury of Ancient and Modern Times; Beard's Theater of Gods
Judgments, part 1. p. 427. and part 2. p. 45. Wanley's History of Man, Book 4.
Chap. 11. Goulart Histoires admirables de notre temps, tom. 1. p. 362. The
Story is related at large in Bandello's Italian Novels, see the French
Translation by Belleforest, Tom. 2. p. 242.

Ulpian FULWEL.
An Ancient Writer, of whom I can give no other Account, than that he lived in
the Reign of Q. Elizab. and published a Dramatical Piece called

Like will to Like, qouth the Devil to the Collier, an Interlude, wherein is
declared what punishments follow those that will rather live Licentiously, than
esteem and follow good Counsel: And what Benefits they receive that apply
themselves to virtuous Living, and good Exercises; printed in quarto Land.
1587. This Interlude is so contrived that Five may easily play it. It Is printed
in an old Black Letter; the Prologue is writ in Alternate Verse, and the whole
Play is writ in Rhyme such as it is: however it might have suited with Mr.
Dyrden's Design Pref. Rival Ladies.
to prove the Antiquity of Crambo, far better than the Tragedy of Gorbuduc,
which was writ in Blank Verse; whereas this Play is tag'd with Rimes
throughout, and is Three Years Older than the other, that not being printed
till the Year 1590.

G.
George GASCOIGNE, Esquire
THis Gentleman I can give no further Account of, than that he flourisht in the
beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; that he was a Member of the
Honorable Society of Gray's- Inn, and was the Parent of feveral Poetical
Works, amongst which, are Four Dramatick Pieces, of which I shall first
discourse.

Glass of Government, a Tragical Comedy, so entitled, because therein are
handled as well the Rewards for Virtues, as also the Punishments for Vices.
Seen and allowed, according to the Order appointed in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions; printed in quarto Land. 1575. At the beginning of this Play I find
the following Hexastick.

In Comoediam Gascoigni, Carmen B.C.
Haec nova, non vetus est, Angli Comoedia Vatis,
Christus adest, Sanctos nil nisi sancta decent.
Graecia vaniloquos genuit, turpesque Poetas,
Vix qui sincere scriber at unus erat.
Idvereor nostro ne possit dicier aevo,
Vana precor valiant, ver a precor placeant.
This Play is printed in a Black Letter as are all his Works: it is writ in
prose with a Chorus between each Act, which with the Prologue, are all in Verse.

Jocasta, a Tragedy written in Greek by Euripides, translated and digested into
Acts by our Author, and Mr. Francis Kinwelmershe of Gray's Inn, and there
presented, and printed in quarto Land. 1556. Each Act of this Play is
introduced by a Dumb show, (which in those times was the mode in Tragedies) and
concluded by a Chorus. The First, Fourth, and last Acts were translated by Mr.
Kinwelmershe, the Second and Third by our Author: and the Epilogue was writ by
Mr. Christopher Yelverton, in Alternate Rhyme.

This is the only Play of that ancient Tragedian, that to my Knowledge is
translated into English: though our Language, and the Knowledge of this Age, be
far more proper for Translations, now, than in that time our Author flourisht.
That I may not be wanting in my Respect to those Worthy Ancients, which by any
of my Countrymen are Naturalized, I shall give some Account of them and their
Writings as opportunity shall offer it self; and therefore I crave leave to lay
hold of this, to speak a word or Two of Euripides.

This Poet was styled the Tragic Philosopher, and was born at Phyla a Town in
Attica, in the 75 Olympiade, and in the 274 Year after the Building of Rome.
Prodius taught him Rhetoric, after which he made a Voyage to Egypt, with
Plato, to visit the Learned Men there, and to improve himself by their
Conversation. He was also a Friend of Socrates, and some have believed that
this Philosopher assisted him in the Composition of his Tragedies. He went from
Athens dissatisfied with the People, for preferring the Comic Writers before
him; and retired to the Court of Archelaus King of Macedonia about the year of
Rome 338. This Prince conferred many Favors on him, and had a great value for
him. It happened at that time, that a certain person named Decamnion, having
raillied him about his Breath (which was not over agreeable) Archelaus sent him
to Euripides, to be punished at his pleasure. This so exasperated Decamnion both
against the King and the Poet, that for the sake of Revenge he joined with
other Conspirators in the Assassination of the Former, and set Dogs upon the
later, which soon devoured the Object of his Hatred. Some say, that this
Misfortune proceeded from the Brutality of those irrational Creatures, by
accident, and not design. Others again relate, that he received his Death, from
some inhumane Women, against whom he had somewhat too bitterly inveighed. I
remember a pleasant Story in Ford's Apothegms; that Sophocles being once asked
the Reason why in his Tragedies he always represented Women Good, and Euripides
Wicked; answered, That Euripides described them as they were, he, as they ought
to be. But Digression apart; the time of his Death no more than the manner of
it is agreed upon. Some say, he Died about the 65 year of his Age, in the 93
Olympiade, and in the Year of Rome 348. being 406 years before the Incarnation
of our Savior. Others say, that he Died not, till the Year of Rome 351. The
Ancients mention Ninety odd Tragedies writ by him, of which at present we enjoy
but Nineteen.

Supposes, a Comedy Englisht from the Italian of Ariosto a famous Poet; a
Ferarese, and Favuorite of Alphonsus the First Duke of Ferrara, and of the
Cardinal Hippolito d' Este, his Brother. He Died the 13 of July, in the Year
1533. I purposely decline to give a larger Account of his Life, because it
would swell my Book too much, and the English Reader may satisfy his Curiosity
by perusing his Life at the End of Sr. John Harrington's Translation of Orlando
Furioso. Those Versed in Italian, may read his Life writ by Gierolamo Poro of
Padoua, Gierolamo Guarafola of Ferrara, Simon Fornari of Rheggio, etc.

This Play was presented at Gray's- Inn, and printed in quarto Land. 1566. The
Prologue as well as the Play is writ in prose. This Prologue I suppose gave the
Grounds for that writ by Mr. Duffet to the Play called Trappolin supposed a
Prince, as that did to the Epilogue of The Duke and No Duke.

Pleasure at Kenelworth Castle, a Masque, (as Mr. Kirkman informs us in his
Catalogue) which I never saw.

Our Author has written several Poems of a Different Species which he calls
Herbs, and which with his Plays make a considerable Vollume, and are printed
together in quarto Land. 1587.

Henry GLAPTHORN.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, who published
several Plays which I presume in those days past with good Approbation at the
Globe and Cockpit Playhouses; though I cannot agree with Mr. Winstanley English
Poets, page 115.
, That he was One of the chiefest Dramatick Poets of this Age. He writ Five
Plays, viz.

Albertus Wallenstein, Duke of Fridland, and General to the Emperor Ferdinand
the Second, his Tragedy, acted with good Allowance at the Globe on the
Bank-side, by His Majesty's Servants, printed in quarto Land. 1640. and
dedicated to the Great Example of Virtue, and true Mecaenas's of Liberal Arts,
Mr. William Murrey of His Majesty's Bedchamber. For the Plot see the
Historians who have writ on the last German Wars, in the Reign of Ferdinand the
Second. See besides M. Sarasins Walstein's Conspiracy translated into English,
8o Land. 1678. Spondanus's Continuation of Baronius. Fierzen L'Hist. de Liege,
etc.

Argalus and Parthenia, a Tragi-comedy acted at the Court before their
Majesty's: and at the Private-house in Drury Lane by their Majesty's Servants;
printed in quarto Land. 1639. The Plot of this Play is founded on Sr. Philip
Sidney's Arcadia, a Romance, in the Story of Argalus and Parthenia, see page
16. etc. Mr. Quarles has writ a pretty Poem on the same Foundation.

Hollander, a Comedy written in the Year 1635. and then acted at the Cockpit
in Drury Lane by their Majesty's Servants, with good Allowance: and at the
Court before Both their Majesty's, printed in quarto Land. 1640. and dedicated
to the great Hope of growing Nobleness, his Honorable Friend Sir Thomas Fisher.

Lady's Privilege, a Comedy, acted with good Allowance, at the Cockpit in
Drury Lane, and before Their Majesty's at White Hall twice; printed 4o. Land.
1640. and dedicated to the true Example of Heroic Virtue, and Favourer of
Arts, Sir Frederick Cornwallis.

Wit in a Constable, a Comedy, writ in the Year 1639. and then acted at the
Cockpit in Drury Lane, by Their Majesty's Servants with good Allowance,
printed 4o. Land. 1640. and dedicated to the Right Honorable his singular good
Lord, Thomas Lord Wentworth.

Besides these Plays, he has a Book of Poems extant, in which are several
Copies, directed to his Mistress, under the Name of Lucinda; printed 4o Land.
1639.

Thomas GOFF.
A Gentleman that flourisht in the Reign of King James the First: He was born
in Essex toward the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, about the Year
1592. In his Youth he was sent to Westminster-School, and at the Age of
Eighteen he was brought in Student of Christ-Church College in Oxford. Being
an Industrious Scholar, he arrived to be a good Poet, a skilful Orator, and an
Excellent Preacher. In the Year 1623. he proceeded Batchelour of Divinity, and
was preferred to a Living in Surrey, called East-Clandon: there he got him a
Wife, which proved as great a plague to him, as a Shrew could be; and became a
true Xantippe to our Ecclesiastical Socrates: insomuch that she gave him daily
opportunities of exercising his Patience; and it is believed by some, that this
Domestick-scourge shortened his days. He was buried at his own Parish Church at
Clandon, the 27. of July 1627.

He writ several Pieces on several Subjects, amongst which are reckoned five
Plays, viz.

Careless Shepherdess, a Tragi-comedy, acted before the King and Queen, at
Salisbury-Court with great applause; printed 4o Land. 1656. with an
Alphabetical Catalogue of all such Plays that ever were till that time
published. This Catalogue is very full of Errors throughout.

Courageous Turk, or Amurath the First, a Tragedy, acted by the Students of
Christ-Church in Oxford; printed 8o Land. 1656. and dedicated to the No less
Honored than Deserving Sir Walter Tichborn, by Mr. Rich. Meighen, who
published it after the Authors Decease. There is a Copy of Verses prefixed to
the Play, writ I suppose by the same Person, and directed to the Author; In
that, Transcribing his Book without his Knowledge, he was bound by promise to
stand to his pleasure to keep it, or burn it. For the Plot, consult the Writers
of the Turkish History in the Reign of Amurath, as Leunclacius, Chalcocondylas,
Knolles, etc.

Orestes his Tragedy, acted by the Students of Christ's Church in Oxford;
printed 8o Land. 1656. How far our Author has followed Sophocles in his
Electra, or Euripides in Orestes, I shall leave to the search of the Learned
Reader; only I cannot but observe, that when I first read it, I thought by the
length it might vye with that Epick Poem of Orestes, which Juvenal complains
of, Satyr. 1.
as being, -- Summi plenajam margin libri
Scriptus, and in tergo nec dum finitus, Orestes.


Raging Turk, or Bajazet the Second, a Tragedy, acted by the Students of
Christ-Church in Oxford; printed 8o Land. 1656. This Play was writ (with the
two foregoing Tragedies) when the Author was Master of Arts, and Student of
Christ-Church; but not printed till after his decease; and then dedicated by
Mr. Richard Meighen the Publisher, To the No less Ingenious than Zealous
Favourer of Ingenuity, Sir Richard Tichborn, Brother to the above-named Sir
Walter. For the Plot, consult Chalcocondylas, Artus, Knolles, etc. These three
last Plays are all printed together in 8o Land. 1656.

Selimus Emperor of the Turks his Tragedy, printed 4o Land. 1638. I question
whether ever this Play were acted, because it is not divided into Acts. The
Author calls this the First Part; and in his Conclusion, as he styles it, or
Epilogue, he promises a Second Part, saying, If this First Part, Gentles, do
like you well;
The Second Part shall greater Murders tell.


But whether it was ever published, I am ignorant: though I am apt to believe not,
since it is not mentioned in any Catalogue. The Plot is founded on the Turkish
History; see the Writers of the Reign of Selimus the First, as Paulus Jovius,
Mezeray, Knolles, etc.

Mr. Philips, and Mr. Winstanley, have fathered a Comedy on this Author, called
Cupids Whirligig; though Democritus and Heraclius were not more different in
their Temper, than his Genius was opposite to Comedy. Besides, the true Father
was one Mr. E.S. who (as he says) Epist. Ded.
being long Pregnant with Desire to bring forth something, and being afterward
brought a Bed, had chose his Friend Mr. Robert Hayman to be Godfather, not
doubting but his Child would be well maintained, seeing he could not live above
an hour with him, and therefore, he entreated him when he was dead, that he
might be buried deep enough in his good Opinion, and that he might deserve this
Epitaph; Here lies the Child that was born in Mirth,
Against the strict Rules of Childbirth:
And to be quit I gave him to my Friend,
Who laughed him to death, and that was his End.


Yours, while he is his own.

I hope the Reader will forgive me this Digression, which I was forced to in
Vindication of my Author, who was so far from this Ridiculous Style, and
affected Mirth, that nothing but Manly and Serious escaped his Pen: and in his
latter Time, he forsook the Stage, for the Pulpit, and instead of Plays,
employed himself in writing Sermons; some of which have appeared in Print in
the Year 1627. To these I may add his Latin Funeral Oration, in the
Divinity-School, at the Obsequies of Sr. Henry Savil, printed 4o Oxon. 1622.
Another in Christ-Church Cathedral, at the Funeral of Dr. Goodwin, Cannon of
that Church, printed Land. 1627.

Robert GOMERSAL.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, and was the
Eldest Son of an Esquire. He was born at London, and was sent by his Father to
the University of Oxon. 1616. being then 14 Years of Age. He was entered at
Christ-Church, and in a little time was chose Student of that Royal-Foundation.
Here he took his Batchelors and Masters Degrees, and in the Year 1627. he went
out Bachelor of Divinity. I know not what Preferment he got, though I believe he
was Minister of a place called Flower, in Northamptonshire; but this is only
Conjecture, from some of his Poems, dated from thence. However I am assured he
died in the Year 1646.

He is accounted by some no mean Preacher, or Poet: but this I leave to the
Judgment of those who will peruse the Works which he has published, and though
Divinity ought to claim the preference, yet Poetry being my immediate Subject,
I crave the Readers pardon that I give Account of his Poetry in the first
place, and begin with his Play called

Lodovick Sforza, Duke of Millain, his Tragedy, printed 8o Land. 1632. and
dedicated to his most Worthy Friend, Mr. Francis Hide, Student of
Christ-Church, and Junior Proctor of the University in the Year 1627. I cannot
satisfy the Readers whether ever this Play appeared on any Stage: but I can
inform him, that the Foundation of it may be read in Guicciardine lib. 1, 2,
etc. Philip de Commines, Mezeray in the Reign of Charles the VIII. of France.

Besides this Play he has writ several other Poems, which are printed with it,
as particularly The Levites Revenge containing Poetical Meditations upon the
19, and 20. Chapters of Judges; and is dedicated to his Worthily Respected
Friend, Barten Holiday, Archdeacon of Oxford. This Poem is highly Commended,
by a Copy of Verses, written by a Gentleman of the Middle Temple: but I shall
leave this and his other Poems, to the Readers perusal and Judgment.

He has several Sermons in print, on the I. Pet. Chap. 2. Verse 13, 14, 15, 16.
printed 4o. Land. 1663.

Francis GOULDSMITH, Esquire
I am able to recover no other Memoires of this Gentleman, than that he lived
in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr; and obliged the World with the
Translation of a Play out of Latin, called

Sophompaneas, or The History of Joseph, with Annotations, a Tragedy, printed
4o Land. 1640. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Henry Lord Marquess of
Dochester. This Dramma was writ by the Admirable Hugo Grotius, published by him
at Amsterdam 1635. and dedicated to Gerardus Vossius, Professor of History and
Civil Arts, in the most flourishing City of Amsterdam. He styles it a Tragedy,
notwithstanding it ends successfully; and quotes for his Authority, AEschylus's
Danaides, Euripides his Alcestes, Jon, Helena, Iphigenia among the Tauri, and
even Vossius his own Art of Poetry: whether this Opinion be to be controverted
or no, I leave to the Critics. Some people make it a Question, whether it be
lawful to make a Dramatick Poem of a Sacred Argument: and I have!heard some
People of tender Consciences, speak against this Play, and Christ's Passion,
writ by the same Author. But I think the following Opinion of the Great
Vossius, In Addend. 1. 2. Instit. Poetic.
printed before this Play, may satisfy them in this point. I am of Opinion
(says he) it is better to choose another Argument, than Sacred. For it agrees not
with the Majesty of Sacred things to be made a Play and a Fable. It is also a
Work of very dangerous Consequence, to mingle Humane Inventions with things
sacred; because the Poet adds uncertainties of his own, sometimes falsities;
which is not only to play with holy things, but also to ingraft in Men's Minds
uncertain Opinions, and now and then false. These things have place especially,
when we bring in God, or Christ speaking, or treating of the Mysteries of
Religion. I will allow more where the History is taken out of the Sacred
Scriptures, but yet in the Nature of the Argument is Civil. As if the Action be
of David flying from his Son Absalon; or of Joseph sold by his Brethren,
advanced by Pharaoh to the Government of Egypt, and in that Dignity adored by,
and made known unto his Brethren. Of which Argument is Sophompaneas, made by
the most Illustrious and Incomparable Man Hugo Grotius, Ambassador when he
lived, of the most Gracious Queen and Kingdom of Sweden, to the most Christian
King of France. Which Tragedy, I suppose, may be set for a Pattern to him that
would handle an Argument from the Holy Scriptures.

I shall say nothing of the Life of Hugo Grotius; only that he was an Honor to
Delph, where he was born in the Year 1583. and will be famous to Posterity, in
regard of those many Excellent Pieces that he has published. In some of his
Writings he had defended Arminianism, for which he suffered Imprisonment in the
Castle of Louverstein, in the Year 1618. (at which time his Associate Barnevelt
lost his Head on the same Account): afterward he escaped out of Prison, by
means of Maria Reigersberg his Wife, and fled into Flanders; and thence into
France, where he was kindly received by Lewis the XIII. He died at Rostoch in
Meclebourg, Sept. the first 1645. His Life is writ at large by Melchior Adamus,
in Latin; and in English by C. B. and printed 8o Land. 1652.

^^^ to our Author, and his Translation, (which is in Heroic Verse) I find it
extremely commended by the Verses of four of his Friends: and I doubt not but
the candid Reader will assent to their Judgments. For the Plot, the Author has
acquainted the Reader (before the Play) That the History is recorded by Moses
in Genesis, 44 and 45 Chapters, with the Contexts there adjoining; Psalm. 105.
Acts 7. By Philo, in the Life of Josephus: By Josephus, in the 2d. Book of the
Jewish Antiquities; and partly by Justin, out of Trogus Pompeius, the 36. Book.
It is extant also in Astapanus, out of Alexander Polyhistor, and in Demetrius:
the places you may see in Eusebius his Preparation to the Gospel.

Alexander GREEN.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of King Charles the Second; who presently
after the Restoration published a Play, called The Politician cheated, a
Comedy, printed 4o Land. 1663. I know not whether ever this Play appeared on
the Stage, or no; nor can I recover any thing else of this Author's Writing.

Robert GREEN.
This Author lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and was a Master of Arts of
Cambridge: As to any further Account of him, I I can meet with none, except
what I am forced to borrow from Mr. Winstanley. But the truth is I dare not
trust too much to him, knowing how subject he is to take things upon Re^^^^^ as
I find, particularly in the Innumeration he makes of this Author's Plays:
However, for once I will venture to transcribe the following passage upon his
Authority; who tells us, That the Person we here treat of was married to a
Deserving Gentlewoman, whom he ungratefully forsook, living above himself; and
therefore was forced to make his Pen a slave to his Purse, to supply his
Extravagancies: notwithstanding which he was reduced to extreme poverty toward
the latter end of his Life; which through God's Mercy, led him to a sight of
his former Follies, and to a Repentance of his evil Course of Life: especially
his Unkindness and Disloyalty to his Virtuous Partner: which occasioned a
Letter, (published by Mr. Winstanley) which was directed to her by our
Penitent, and found after his Death: which Epistle in my Opinion very much
resembles the Style of Dr. Reynolds in his God's Revenge against Murder. As to
that Distich said by Mr. Winstanley to be writ on our Author, I have showed his
mistake in the Account.

This Author has writ several Pieces, but especially one Play, (the occasion of
his mention in this place) whose Title is,

The Honorable History of Friar Bacon, and Friar Bungy; played by the Prince
Palatine's Servants, and printed Land. -- I know not whence the Author borrowed
his Plot; but this Famous Friar Minor, lived in the Reign of King Henry the
Third, and died in the Reign of Edward the First, in the Year 1284. Con^^^^^
Bale, Script. Illustr. Majoris Britannae Ca^^^^ Pitseus Relationes Historicae.
Wood. Antiq. Oxon. Dr. ^lot Hist. Oxford, etc.

Mr. Philips, Page 6^.
and Mr. Winstanley Page 74.
say, That he was an Associate with Dr. Lodge in writing several Comedies;
namely, The Laws of Nature; Lady Alimony; Liberality and Prodigality; and a
Masque called Lumenalia. Besides which he wrote alone, the Comedies of Friar
Bacon, and Fair Emme. But in this Assertion they are extremely out; for he
joined with Dr. Lodge but in one Play, called A Looking-glass for London; of
which hereafter: and as to the others (most of which I have by me) they are all
Anonymous Plays.

As to his other Pieces, I have never seen but two; viz. Quip for an Upstart
Courtier, and Dorastus and Fawnia; though Mr. Winstanley reckons up several
others, as Euphues his Censure to Philautus; Tullies Love; Philomela, The Lady
Fitzwaters Nightingale, Green's never too late, first and second part; Green's
Arcadia; Green's Farewell to Folly; Green's Groats-worth of Wit, etc.

H.
William HABINGTON, Esquire
A Gentleman that lived in the Time of the late Civil Wars; and slighting
Bellona, gave himself up entirely to the Muses. He was equally famous for
History, and Poetry, of which his Edward the Fourth, and Castara, are
sufficient Testimonies. Mr. Kirkman (who was very knowing in Plays,) has
ascribed a Dramatick Piece to him, which gives us occasion to speak of him;
it is called,

Queen of Arragon, a Tragi-comedy, acted at Court, and the Black-Fryars; and
printed fol. Land. 1640. Though the Author's Name be not prefixed to the
Title Page, yet I have that confidence in Mr. Kirkman's Judgment as to believe
this Play to be writ by him.

His other Poems are all printed together 8o. and go under the Title of
Castara: they are divided into three parts, under a different Title suitable to
their Subject. The first, which was writ when he was a Suitor to his Wife, is
ushered in, by a Character writ in Prose, of a Mistress: The second, being
Copies writ to her after Marriage, by a Character of a Wife: After which is a
Character of a Friend, before several Funeral Elegies. The third part consists
of Divine Poems, some of which are Paraphrases on several Texts out of Job and
the Book of Psalms: before which is the Portraict of a Holy Man. I know not
when those Poems were first printed, but the last Edition which I have by me
augmented and corrected, was printed 8o. Land. 1640. and his Poetry is
commended by his Friend and Kinsman, Mr. John Talbot.

I know nothing that he has writ in Prose, except his Chronicle of K. Edward
the Fourth, printed fol. Land. 1640. Of what esteem it is in the World, is well
known to Historians.

Peter HAUSTEAD.
A Gentleman that was born at Oundle, a Market Town in Northamptonshire, and
flourisht in the Reign of King Charles the First of Blessed Memory. He was
after some Years sent to the University of Cambridge: where in Queens College
he took the Degree of Master of Arts. He challenges a Place in our Catalogue,
on Account of his Play, called

Rival Friends, a Comedy, acted before the King and Queens Majesty's, when out
of their Princely Favor they were pleased to visit the University of
Cambridge, upon the nineteenth day of March 1631. Cried down by Boys, Faction,
Envy, and confident Ignorance, approved by the Judicious, and Exposed to the
public Censure by the Author; printed 4o Land. 1632. and dedicated by a Copy
of Verses to the Right Honble, Right Reverend, Right Worshipful, or whatsoever
he be, shall be, or whom he hereafter may call Patron. The Play is commended by
a Copy of Latin Verses, and Two writ in English. The Prologue is a Dialogue
betwixt Venus, Thetis, and Phoebus, sung by two Trebles, and a Base. Venus
(being Phosphorus as well as Vesper) appearing at a window above, as risen,
calling to Sol, who lay in Thetis Lap, at the East Side of the Stage, canopy'd
with an Azure Curtain. Our Author seems to me to be much of the Humor of Ben
Johnson, (whose greatest weakness was that he could not bear Censure;) and has
so great a Value for Ben's Writings, that his Scene between Love-all, Mungrel,
Hammershin, Act 3. Sc. 7. is copied from that (in Johnson's Play called The
Silent Woman,) between True-wit, Daw, and La-fool, Act. 4. Sc. 5.

I know not whether our Author were in Orders when he writ this Play; but I
know there are Eleven Sermons in print, under his Name, published 4o Land. 1646.

Richard HEAD.
This Author lived in the Reigns of King Charles the First and Second. He was
born in Ireland, of English Parents, being the Son of a Clergyman, who was
murdered in the deplorable Massacre of Ireland; in the beginning of the
Rebellion, which broke out there on the 2d day of October 1641. He was educated
for some small time in the University of Oxford; and afterward exchanged his
Study for a Booksellers Shop. I remember him a Bookseller, and Partner with
Kirkman, (if I mistake not) in the Alley that fronts the North-gate of Paul's,
called Cannon-Alley. He was a Man extremely given to pleasure, and yet of
excellent Natural Parts, had they been improved by Virtue, or fixed by
Solidity. He writ a Play called

Hic and ubique, or The Humour's of Dublin, a Comedy acted privately with good
Applause; printed in quarto Land. 1663. and dedicated to the Illustrious
Charles, Duke of Monmouth and Orkney.

He has writ several other Pieces, of different Subjects though all of them
trivial, and which betrayed his Conversation; as The first part of the English
Rogue; Venus Cabinet unlocked; The Art of Wheedling; The Floating Island, or A
Voyage from Lambethania to Ram-allia; A Discovery of O Brasil; Jackson's
Recantation; The Red Sea; and some Pieces against Dr. Wild; all which I have
borrowed from Mr. Winstanley, and shall be ready to return him Interest for it,
in the Next Edition of his Book, if he pleases to command me.

Our Author (according to Mr. Winstanley) was cast away at Sea, in his passage
to the Isle of Wight.

William HEMMINGS.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, and was Master
of Arts of the University of Oxford: though I cannot inform my self of what
College. He writ two Tragedies, which in his time were in some esteem; and one
of them has appeared on the Stage, since the Restitution of his late Majesty
and the Muses, with Approbation. It is called

Fatal Contract, a Tragedy acted with good Applause, by Her Majesty's Servants;
and printed quarto Land. 1653. This Play was published after the Author's
Death, having passed through many Hands, as a Curiosity of Wit and Language;
Epistle Dedic.
and was dedicated to the Right Honorable James Compton Earl of Northampton,,
and to Isabella his Virtuous Countess. It was revived not many Years since
under the Title of Love and Revenge, with some Alterations: the Old Play being
out of print, it was about three Years ago reprinted as a New Play, under the
Title of The Eunuch. For the Plot it is founded on the French Chronicle, in the
Reigns of Chilperic the First, and Clotaire the Second: Consult Gregoire de
Tours, Lib. 4, 5. etc. Aimoin, Fredegaire, Sigebert, Fortunat, Valois, De
Serres, Mezeray, etc.

Jews Tragedy, or their fatal and final Overthrow by Vespasian, and Titus his
Son, agreeable to the Authentic and Famous History of Josephus; printed 4o
Land. 1662. This Play was not published till some Years after the Author's
Death. For the History consult Josephus Lib. 6, 7.

Jasper HEYWOOD.
This Author was Son to John Heywood, the Famous Epigramatist, (of which by and
by) and was bred in his younger Years at Merton College, and afterward was a
Member of All Souls College in Oxford. In some few Years, he changed the
University for S. Omers; where he became a fierce Bigoted Jesuit, and was the
first Jesuit that set foot in England. Dr. Fuller says, Worthies London, p.
222.
He was executed in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: but Sir Richard Baker tells
us, Q. Eliz. p. 364.
That he was one of the Chief of those seventy Priests that were taken in the
Year 1585. and when some of them were condemned, and the rest in danger of the
Law, that Gracious Queen caused them all to be Shipped away, and sent out of
England.

During his Residence in the University, he employed part of his time, in
translating three of Seneca's Tragedies, of which we shall give an Account: But
first with the Readers permission, since an hansome Opportunity offers it self,
we will present you with an Abridgment of the Life of this our Poetical-Stoick.

Lucius Annaeus Seneca was born at Cordoua, in Spain, a little before the Death
of Augustus Caesar. He bore his Father's Name, which Conformity has misled
some Authors, causing them to ascribe to the Son, the Declamations collected by
the Father. He gave himself to the Study of Philosophy and Rhetoric; and in
the beginning of Caligula's Reign, he signalized himself by a Cause which he
pleaded in the Senate, under the protection of Cneus Domitius. But finding that
Emperor, aiming at the Universal Monarchy of Eloquence, he pleaded no more in
public, for fear of giving Ombrage to this Ambitious Prince. He was banished
for two Years into the Isle of Corsa, upon suspicion of too much Familiarity
with the Relict of his Patron Domitius. Agripina being married to Claudius, she
repealed his Banishment, and gave him the Honorable Station of Tutor to her
Son Nero, who she designed for the Empire. He acquitted himself of this Employ
with universal Applause; and the first five Years of Nero's Reign, sufficiently
testified the Diligence and Prudence of the Tutor, and the pregnant Temper of
the Royal Pupil: who so well put in practice the Instructions that were given
him, that the beginning of his Reign might serve as a Model to the best of
Princes: But when once Poppaea and Tigillinus became Masters of his Temper,
they soon destroyed that Noble Foundation of Virtue, that Seneca had taken so
much pains to erect; and he gave himself up to those abominable Crimes, that
rendered him the shame of Mankind. Seneca's Virtue was a continual Check to his
Vices; this rendered his Company at first disagreeable to him, afterward
intolerable. This occasioned him to hire Cleonice, Seneca's Freed-man, to
poison him; which either through the Repentance of the Domestic or the
Distrust of Seneca, was prevented. Nero some time after, hearing that Seneca
was privy to Piso's Conspiracy, and being impatient of his Death, laid hold of
that Opportunity to destroy him. All the Return this ungrateful Pupil made him
for the Care of his Education, was to allow him the choice of his Death; which
he accepted from the Tyrant, and causing his Veins to be opened, he died in the
twelfth Year of Nero's Reign, A.D. 65.

I could willingly enlarge upon his Life, but since my Subject confines me to
speak obiter only of foreign Poets, I hope the Reader will excuse me, and seek
in Tacitus, Suetonius, and other Roman Historians for the further Satisfaction:
or in Justus Lipsius, who has Penned his Life more at large; whilst I return to
my Translator, and those three Plays made English by him, which are Hercules
Furens, Troas, and Thyestes.

Hercules Furens, though not allowed by some who are Critics in Style, to be
writ by Seneca, is yet thought by most Learned Men to be an Imitation of that
Play of Euripides, which bears the same Name: and though in some things relating
to Economy and Contrivance, they differ, in others they agree; as has been
observed by Scaliger, Apud Euripidem Tragoedia est huic assinis, and Argumento
and Nomine: oeconomia, partim similis, partim dissimilis. An Instance of this,
is in the Scene between Lycus and Amphitruo, where Seneca has observed the
Decorum of the Stage in the person of Amphitruo, better than Euripides; so that
Scaliger sticks not to prefer the Latin to the Greek Poet, In Decore personae
Amphitrionis long inferior Seneca ut in multis aliis.

As to the Version of our Author, though I cannot much commend it, yet I believe
it may vye with the Translations of Mr. Brisset, and Le Sieur Nouvelon. If Mr.
Lineage has outdone him, it is because the One is writ in Prose, and so is left
at liberty to express his Thoughts; the Other is fettered in Rhyme, and has
taken an ill Measure of Verse; Lines of fourteen Syllables sounding harsh to
the Ears of those that are used to Heroic Poetry. I must do my Author this
Justice to acquaint the whole World, That he endeavors to keep to Seneca's
Sense; and likewise to imitate his Verse, changing his Measure as often as the
Author; the Chorus of each Act being different from the Act it self, as the
Reader may observe by comparing the English Copy with the Latin Original.

Troas, is a Tragedy which is extremely commended by the Learned Farnaby, and
the Judicious Daniel Heinsius; the former stiling it A Divine Tragedy, in his
Preface before these Tragedies, Divinam Tragoediam Troadas L. Annaeo Senecae
Philosopho adscribo; the other preferring it before the Troadas of Euripides,
both for the Language and Contrivance: But especially he says, It far exceeds
it in the Chorus: so that those of Seneca are Divine in respect of these of
Euripides. Etiam in Choris noster vincit quos ex paucis Graecis verbis, and
quae sparsum leguntur fecit alios and plane divinos. I shall not dispute
whether this Tragedy be named Troas, or Troadas, according to Scaliger's
Opinion: or whether it ought to be named Hecuba, as Valerius Probus, and some
others believe; but leave these Niceties to the Decision of the more Learned
Critics, whilst I proceed to give an Account of our Authors Version.

In this Tragedy the Author has taken the liberty of adding several things, and
altering others, as thinking the Play imperfect; whether left so by Seneca, or
whether part of it be lost, he pretends not to decide. First, as to his
Additions; he has at the end of the Chorus after the first Act, added
threescore Verses of his own Invention. In the beginning of the second Act, he
has added a whole Scene, where he Introduces the Spectre of Achilles rising
from Hell, to require the Sacrifice of Polyxena. To the Chorus of this Act, he
has added three Stanzas. Secondly, as to his Alterations; Instead of
translating the Chorus of the third Act, (which is wholly taken up with the
Names of Foreign Countries, the Translation of which without Notes, he thought
would be tiresome to the English Reader;) he has substituted in its stead,
another Chorus of his own Invention. This Tragedy runs in Verses of fourteen
Syllables, and for the most part his Chorus is writ in Verse of ten Syllables,
which we call Heroic Verse. Whether his Translation excel, or be excelled by
those done by Robert Garnier, and the Sieur de Sallibray, I must leave to those
who have read them to decide.

Thyestes, is a Tragedy in the Judgment of Heinsius not inferior to any of the
other Dramatick Pieces writ by Seneca. Whether he made use of Lucius Varius or
no, I must leave to the Inquiry of the Learned; whilst I Inform my Reader, That
our Author translated this Play when he was Fellow of All Souls College in
Oxford. This Tragedy, is writ in the same measure of Verse with the other; only
the Chorus is writ in Alternate Rhyme. The Translator has added a Scene at the
end of the fifth Act, spoken by Thyestes alone; in which he bewails his Misery,
and implores Heaven's Vengeance on Atreus. These Plays are printed with the
other seven in a Black Letter, in 4o Land. 1581.

John HEYWOOD.
This Ancient Writer flourished in the Reigns of K. Edward the Sixth, and Queen
Mary; and lived at North-mims in Hertfordshire, near St. Albans, He was most
familiar with Sr. Thomas More, whose Neighbor he was, and by whom I suppose he
was introduced to the knowledge of Queen Mary; in whose Favor he grew
exceedingly. After her Death, he fled beyond Sea, on Account of his Religion,
and Died an Exile at Mechlem, An. Dom. 1556.

He was I believe One of the first Dramatick Writers in our English Tongue, and
published Seven Pieces, which he calls Interludes: and which according to Mr.
Kirkman, were printed with the first of our English Printing. Notwithstanding
his suffering for Religion, he has as much exploded the Vices of the Romish
Clergy, as Nic. de Clemangiis. He says of his own Writings, `That he applied
Mirth more than Thrift, `made mad Plays, and did few good Works 500. Epigrams,
Numb. 100.


Of all his Plays, I never saw but one, which I have by me, in quarto; though I
have been told that the rest of his Plays are printed in fol. of which in Order.

Four P's, a Merry Interlude, of a Palmer, a Pardoner, a Potycary, and a
Peddler; Imprinted at London in Fleet Street, at the Sign of the George, by
Will. Middleton in 4o. Take a Sample of his Style, that you may judge of the
rest.

Palmer;
Now God be here, who keeps this Place
Now by my Faith, I cry you mercy
Of Reason I must sew for grace
My Rewdness shows me no so homely
Where of your pardon art, and won
I sew you as Curtesy does me bind
To tell this which shall be begone
In order as may come best in mindy
I am a Palmer as ye se, etc.
Play between John the Husband, and Tib his Wife.

Play between the Pardoner, the Friar, the Curate, and Neighbor Prat.

Play of Gentleness and Nobility, 2 Parts.

Play of Love.

Play of the Weather.

Besides these Plays, he has written Three hundred Epigrams upon 300. Proverbs,
printed in quarto London.

A Fourth hundred of Epigrams, printed in quarto Land. 1598.

A Fifth hundred of Epigrams, printed in quarto Land. 1598.

Dr. Fuller mentions a Book writ by our Author, Worthies London, p. 221.
entitled Monumenta Literaria, which are said to be Non tam labor condita,
quam lepore condita. The Author of The Art of English Poetry, speaking of
several of our Old English Bards, says thus of this our Poet; Lib. 1. p. 49.
John Heywood, who in King Edward the Sixth's time, for the Mirth and Quickness
of his Conceits, more than for any good Learning that was in him, came to be
well benefy'd by the King. That the Reader may judge of his Epigrams, to which
certainly the forementioned Writer alludes, I will transcribe one, writ by him
on himself.

Of Heywood's Fifth Hund. Numb. 100.
Art thou Heywood, with thy mad Merry Wit?
Yea, forsooth Master, that Name is even hit.
Art thou Heywood, that apply'st Mirth more
than Thrift?
Yes, Sir, I take merry Mirth, a Golden Gift.
Art thou Heywood, that have made many mad
Plays?
Yea, many Plays, few good Works in my Days.
Art thou Heywood, that has made Men merry long?
Yea, and will, if I be made merry among.
Art thou Heywood, that would be made merry now.
Yes, Sir, help me to it now, I beseech you.
It Is not unlikely that our Author may have more Plays in Print, than we have
mentioned; but I am very confident that The Pinder of Wakefield, and Philotas
Scotch, notwithstanding the Allegations of Mr. Philips and Mr. Winstanley, are
not of that number: the One being written, as I suppose, at least printed,
above Twenty, the Other more than Forty Years after his Death.

Thomas HEYWOOD.
An Author that lived in the Time of Queen Elizabeth, and the Reign of King
James the First. Though he were but an Actor, as is manifest by Mr. Kirkman's
Testimony, and apparent from a Piece writ by him, called The Actors
Vindication; yet his Plays were in those Days accounted of the Second-Rate. He
was the most Voluminous Writer that ever handled Dramatick Poetry in our
Language; and I know none but the Famous Spaniard, Lopez de Vega, that can vye
with him; if at least we give Credit to his own Attestation, in the Preface to
One of his Plays; English Traveller.
This Tragi-comedy (as he says) being One reserved amongst two Hundred and
Twenty, in which I have had either an entire Hand, or at the least a main
Finger. Of this Number we have, that I know of, but Five and Twenty entire
Plays remaining: the Reason of which the Author gives us in the same Epistle.
True it is, that my Plays are not exposed unto the world in Volumes, to bear
the Title of Works, (as others) one Reason is, That many of them by shifting
and change of Companies, have been negligently lost, Others of them are still
retained in the Hands of some Actors, who think it against their peculiar
profit to have them come in Print; and a third, That it was never any great
Ambition in me to be Voluminously read.

These seem to me, to be more plausible Reasons than what Mr. Winstanley gives
for their Miscarriage; It Is said Lives of the Poets, p. 96.
, that he not only acted himself almost every day, but also wrote each day a
Sheet; and that he might loose no time, many of his Plays were composed in the
Tavern, on the backside of Tavern Bills; which may be the occasion that so
many of them be lost. Certainly the Tavern Bills were very large, or Mr.
Winstanley must think his Readers Credulity of the same extent with his own;
who would subscribe to the belief of so ridiculous a Story. This Report Mr.
Winstanley partly borrows from Mr. Kirkman's Advertisement at the End of his
Catalogue, and as Stories lose nothing in the carriage, Mr. Winstanley had
added the Contrivance of making use of Tavern Bills to save Paper. But though
many of these Plays being written loosely in Taverns as Mr. Kirkman observes,
might occasion their being so mean; yet it did not in probability much
contribute to their loss, as Mr. Winstanley would have it.

To do our Author justice, I cannot allow that his Plays are so mean as Mr.
Kirkman has represented them: for he was a general Scholar, and an indifferent
Linguist, as his several Translations from Lucian, Erasmus, Textor, Beza,
Buchanan, and other Latin and Italian Authors, sufficiently manifest. Nay,
further in several of his Plays he has borrowed many Ornaments from the
Ancients; as more particularly in his Plays called The Ages, he has intersperst
several Things, borrowed from Homer, Virgil, Ovid, Seneca, Plautus, etc. which
extremely set them off. What Opinion the Wits of the last Age had of him may
appear from the following Verses, extracted from a Copy of the Poets of those
Times: viz. The squibbing Middleton, and Heywood Sage,
The Apologetick Atlas of the Stage;
Well of the Golden Age, he could entreat,
But little of the Metal, he could get;
Three score sweet Babes he fashioned at a Lump,
For he was Christened in Parnassus Pump;
The Muses Gossip to Aurora's Bed,
And ever since that time his Face was Red.
I shall now give the Reader an Account of the Plays our Author has written;
but crave his leave to begin first with those, which are usually styled The
Ages, because they are generally sold together, and depend upon each other: and
on another score they deserve the Preference, as being accounted by most the
Flower of all his Plays. I shall rank them in the same manner, as Ovid has
described them in his Divine Work, the Metamorphosis.

Golden Age, or The Lives of Jupiter and Saturn, with the Deifying of the
Heathen Gods; a History sundry times acted at the Red-Bull, by the Queens
Majesty's Servants, and printed 4o Land. 1611. This Play the Author styles,
Epistle to the Reader.
The Eldest Brother of three Ages, that have adventured the Stage, but the only
yet, that has been judged to the Press. The Author in this Play, and the Two
following introduces Homer as the Expositor of each Dumb show, in imitation, as
I suppose, of Shakespeare's practice in Pericles Prince of Tire, where Gower is
supposed to do the same piece of Service to the Audience. I shall leave it to
the Learned Readers Judgment how far our Poet has followed the Writers of
Poetical History: whilst I refer my English Readers to Ross's Mistagogus
Poeticus; and to Galtruchius's Poetical History for satisfaction: or, if they
please, to the Historical Dictionaries of Gouldman, Littleton, etc.

Silver Age, a History including the Love of Jupiter to Alcmena; the Birth of
Hercules; and the Rape of Proserpine: concluding with the Arraignment of the
Moon; printed 4o Land. 1613. The Author in this Epistles acquaints the Reader,
That though He began with Gold, follow with Silver, proceed with Brass, and
purpose by God's Grace to end with Iron. He hopes the declining Titles shall no
whit blemish the Reputation of the Works: but he rather trusts, that as those
Metals decrease in value, so e contrario, their Books shall increase in
substance, weight, and estimation. Our Author in this Play has borrowed several
Passages from the Ancients: as the Intrigue of Jupiter and Alcmena, is
translated from the Amphitruo of Plautus. The Rape of Proserpine is borrowed
from Ovid's Metamorphosis, lib. 3, with other places too many to repeat.

Brazen Age, a History; the First Act containing the Death of the Centaure
Nessus; the Second, the Tragedy of Meleager; the Third, the Tragedy of Jason
and Medea; the Fourth, Vulcan's Net; the Fifth, the Labors and Death of
Hercules: printed 4o Land. 1613. All these Stories are to be found in Ovid's
Metamorphosis. For the Story of Nessus see Lib.9. Fab.2. Of Meleager, Lib.8.
Fab.4.. Of Jason, Lib.7. Fab.1. Of Vulcan's Net, Lib.4. Fab.5. Of Hercules,
Lib.9 Fab.3.

Iron Age, the first part, an History containing the Rape of Hellen; the Siege
of Troy; the Combat between Hector and Ajax; Hector and Troilus slain by
Achilles; Achilles slain by Paris; Ajax and Ulysses contend for the Armor of
Achilles; the Death of Ajax etc. printed 4o Land. 1632. and dedicated to his
Worthy and Much Respected Friend, Mr. Thomas Hammond of Gray's Inn Esquire. The
Author in his Epistle acquaints the Reader, That this Iron Age, begins where
the other left, holding on in a plain and direct course from the second Rape of
Hellen, not only to the utter ruin and devastation of Troy; but it, with the
second part, stretches to the Deaths of Hellen, and all those Kings of Greece,
who were the undertakers of that Ten years bloody and fatal Siege. Lastly, he
desires the Reader to take notice, That these were the Plays often (and not
with the least applause,) publicly acted by two Companies, upon One Stage at
once, and have at sundry times thronged three several Theaters, with numerous
and mighty Auditories. The Author has borrowed in many places of this Play, as
the Reader may see by comparing the Contention between Ajax and Ulysses with
Ovid's Metamorphosis, Lib.13. and other the like, too numerous to
particularise. For the main Plot consult Homer, Vigil, Dares Phrigius, etc. for
the Episodes, Ovid's Epistles, Metamorphosis, Lucian's Dialogues, etc.

Iron Age, the second part, a History containing the Death of Penthesilea,
Paris, Priam, and Hecuba: The burning of Troy: The Deaths of Agamemnon,
Menelaus, Clitemnestra, Hellena, Orestes, Egistus, Pylades, King Diomed,
Pyrbus, Cethus, Synon, Thersites, printed 4o Land. 1632. and dedicated to his
Worthy and much Respected Friend, Mr. Thomas Manwaring Esquire. For the Plot
consult the forementioned Authors.

Mr. Heywood designed a new Edition of all these Ages together, And to
illustrate (as he says Epistle to the Reader.
the whole Work, with an Explanation of the difficulties, and an Historical
Comment upon every hard Name, which might appear obscure and intricate to such
as were not frequent in Poetry: but design of his, I know not for what reason
was laid aside.

Having given the Reader a full, if not too tedious Account of these Plays, I
hasten to speak of the rest in our accustomed order as follows.

Challenge for Beauty, a Tragi-comedy, sundry times acted by the Kings
Majesty's Servants at the Black friars, and at the Globe on the Bank-side;
printed 4o Land. 1636.

Duchess of Suffolk her Life; a History diverse and sundry times acted with
good Applause; printed 4o Land. 1631. The PLot is built on History, see the
Story at large in Fox's Martyrology in the Reign of Queen Mary, An. Dom. 1558.
in the Story of Lady Katherine, Duchess of Suffolk. See besides Clark's
Martyrology, Chap. 11. page 521.

Edward the Fourth, a History in Two Parts, printed 4o Land. 16 --. The
Foundation of this Play is built upon Chronicle. See the Story of this King
writ by Polydore Virgil, Du Chesue, Speed, etc.

English Traveller, a Tragi-comedy publicly acted at the Cockpit in
Drury Lane, by her Majesty's Servants; prited 4o Land. 1633. and dedicated to
the Right Worshipful Sir Henry Appleton, Knight Baronet. The Plot and Language
of young Lyonel and Reginald, is stolen from Plautus's Mostellaria. The Story of
old Wincote and his Wife, Geraldine, and Dalavil, the Author affirms to be true
in his History of Women; where it is related at large lib. 4. page 269. 8o
Edition.

Fair Maid of the Exchange, a Comedy, together with the merry Humors, and
pleasant Passages of the Cripple of Fanchurch, furnished with variety of
delectable Mirth: printed 4o. Land. 1637. The Parts are so cast by the Author,
that though there are Twenty Actors, Eleven may easily act this Comedy: though in
my opinion it is not worth reviving. Nay further, I question notwithstanding
Mr. Kirkman has ascribed it to our Author, whether it be his, since his Name is
not prefixed, neither does the Style, or Economy resemble the rest of his
Labors.

Fair Maid of the West, or A Girlworth Gold, a Tragi-comedy the First Part:
lately acted before the King and Queen, with approved liking, by the Queens
Majesty's Comedians; printed 4o Land. 1631. and dedicated to his much Worthy,
and his most Respected John Othow Esquire, Counselor at Law, in the Noble
Society of Gray's- Inn.

Our Author in the Epistle both to this Play, and The English Traveller, pleads
Modesty, in not exposing his Plays to the public view of the World, in
numerous Sheets and a large Volume, under the Title of Works, as others: By
which he would seem tacitly to arraign some of his Contemporaries for
Ostentation, and want of Modesty. I am apt to believe, that our Author levelled
his Accusation at Ben Johnson: since no other Poet that I know of, in those
day, gave his Plays, the pompous Title of Works; of which Sir John Suckling has
taken notice in his Sessions of the Poets.

The first that broke silence was good Old Ben,
Prepared before with Canary Wine;
And he told them plainly that he deserved the Bays,
For his were called Works, where others were but Plays.
This puts me in mind of a Distick directed by some Poet of that Age, to Ben
Johnson; Pray, tell me Ben, where does the mystery lurk?
What others call a Play, you call a Work.


Which was thus answered by a Friend of his; The Author's Friend thus for the
Author says,
Ben's Plays are Works, when others Works are Plays.


Fair Maid of the West, or A Girl worth Gold, the second Part; acted before the
King and Queen, with approved Liking, by the Queens Majesty's Comedians:
printed 4o Land. 1631. and dedicated to the true Favourer of the Muses, and all
good Arts, Thomas Hammond, Esquire of Gray's Inn. These Plays (as our Author
acquaints his Patron) Epistle Dedicatory.
`Not only past the `Censure of the Plebe, and Gentry, but of the Patricians
and Pretextatae; as also of our Royal-Augustus, and Livia. I know not where our
Poet met with this Story, but as Poets usually take the Foundation of a Play,
from a History, or a Romance; so these two Plays have served for the Subject of
a Romance, which on this Model was writ by John Dancer, abovementioned, to
whom I refer you Page 100.


Fortune by Land and Sea, a Tragi-comedy, acted with great applause, by the
Queen's Servants; written by our Author, and the Well-Esteem'd William Rowly;
but not printed till after their Decease, 4o Land. 1655.

Four Prentices of London, with the Conquest of Jerusalem; a History diverse
times acted at the Red-Bull, by the Queens Majesty's Servants with good
applause; printed 4o Land. 1635. and dedicated to the Honest High-Spirited
Prentices, the Readers. This Play was written (as the Author says) in his
Infancy of Judgment, in this kind of Poetry, and his first Practice; and that
as Plays were then, some sixteen Years before its Publication, it was in the
Fashion. This Play is founded on the Exploits of the Famous Godfrey of
Bulloign, who took Jerusalem from the Infidels the 15. of July A.D. 1099. For
the Story, see Tasso's Il Gosredo, Dr. Fuller's Holy War. The late History of
the Croisades, etc.

If you know not me, you know no Body; or The Troubles of Queen Elizabeth: a
History in two Parts, printed 4o Land. 1623. This Play was printed without the
Author's Knowledge or Consent, and that so corruptly, (it not being divided
into Acts) that at the Reviving of it at the Cockpit, after having been acted
for the space of one and twenty Years, he writ a Prologue Printed in his
Dialogue and Dramas, p. 241.
, which particularly inveighed against this Imperfect Copy, as will appear by
the following Lines.

-- 'Twas ill nursed,
And yet received as well performed at first,
Graced, and frequented for the Cradle-Age
Did throng the Seats, the Boxes, and the Stage,
So much; that some by Stenography drew
The Plot, put it in print; (scarce one word true:)
And in that lameness it has limpt so long;
The Author now to vindicate that wrong,
Has took the pains, upright upon it is feet
To teach it walk; so please you sit, and see it.
For the Plot, see the Writers of the Life of Q. Elizabeth; as Cambden, Speed,
Du Chesne, etc. And our Author had so great a Veneration for that Heroic
Pricess, that he writ a little Historical Piece, called England's Elizabeth,
printed 8o Land. 1631.

Lancashire Witches, a well received Comedy, acted at the Globe on the
Bank-side by the Kings Majesty's Actors; written by our Author, and the
Ingenious Rich.Brom, and printed 4o. Land. 16 --. I have read in my younger
Days (if I mistake not) the Foundation of this Play, in an old English Quarto;
but as to that part of the Plot, where Whetstone revenges himself by his Aunt's
means, on Arthur, Shakstone, and Bantam, for calling him Bastard, Act 4. Sc.
the last; it is founded on the Story of John Teutonicus of Holberstad, a place
in High-Germany, who was a known Bastard, and a Magician. Our Author has
related this Story in Verse, in his Hierarchy of Angels, Lib. 8. page 512, etc.

Loves Mistress, or The andQueen's Masque; three times acted before their
Majesty's, within the space of eight Days; in the presence of sundry Foreign
Ambassadors. Publicly acted by the Queen's Comedians, at the Phoenix in
Drury Lane. The Second Impression corrected by the Author, printed 4o Land.
1640. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Dorset. The Play is
founded on Apuleius's Golden Ass: a kind of Romance in Latin; and Englished by
W. Addington, 4o Land. 1634.

Maidenhead well lost, a pleasant Comedy, publicly acted in Drury Lane, with
much applause by her Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1634.

Rape of Lucrece, a true Roman Tragedy, with the several Songs in their
appointed places, by Valerius the merry Lord among the Roman Peers. The Copy
revised, and sundry Songs before omitted, now inserted in their right places;
acted by the Majesty's Servants at the Red-Bull, printed 4o Land. 1638. For the
Plot, see Livy Dec. 1. C. 58. Florus Lib. 1. C. 7. Val. Max. Lib. 6. C. 11. Ex.
1.

Robert Earl of Huntington's Downfall, afterward called Robin Hood, of Merry
Sherwoode; with his Love to Chaste Matilda, the Lord Fitz-water's Daughter,
afterward his Fair Maid Marian: acted by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Nottingham, the Lord High Admiral of England his Servants, and printed 4o.
Land. 1601.

Robert Earl of Huntington's Death, otherwise called Robin Hood of Merry
Sherwoode; with the Lamentable Tragedy of Chaste Matilda, his Fair Maid Marian,
poisoned at Dunmow by the King; and printed 4o. Land. 1601. Both these Plays
are printed in Black-Letter, but neither of them are divided into Acts. The
first part is introduced by John Shelton, Poet Laureat to King Henry the
Eighth; and the the second, by Friar Tuck. For the Plot, see our English
Chronicles in the Reign of King Richard the First, as Du Chesne, Speed, Baker,
etc. See besides Fullers Worthies in the Account of Nottinghamshire, p.315.
Drayton's Polyolbion, Song 26.

Royal King, and Loyal Subject; a Tragi-comedy, acted with great applause by
the Queens Majesty's Servants, and printed 4o. Land. 1637. The Plot of this
Play, extremely resembles that of Fletcher's Loyal Subject.

Wise-Woman of Hogsden, a Comedy sundry times acted with good applause, printed
quarto Land. 1638. This Play is commended by a Copy of Verses, printed at the
End, writ by his Friend Mr. Samuel King.

Woman killed with Kindness, a Comedy oftentimes acted by the Queens Majesty's
Servants; and printed quarto Land. 1617.

These are all the Plays that our Author has extant, except we will reckon his
Dialogues, under the Species of Dramatick Poetry; such as Jupiter and Io;
Apollo and Daphne; Amphrise, or The Forsaken Shepherdess; etc. all which with
several Translations abovementioned the Reader may peruse in a Book entitled,
Pleasant Dialogues and Drammas, collected out of Lucian, Erasmus, Textor, Ovid,
etc. printed octavo Land. 1637.

There may be another Reason added to those already mentioned, why no more of
our Author's Plays have been published, which he himself gives us in his
Epistle to The Rape of Lucrece; That he used to sell his Copy to the Players,
and therefore supposed he had no further right to print them, without their
Consent; which is the Reason that so few are in print; and that some of these
Plays that are so, have been copied by the Ear, and printed uncorrect without
his Knowledge.

As to his other Pieces, he has published several in Verse and Prose. In the
former he has written a Poem, called The Hierarchy of the Blessed Angels, with
Notes, printed fol. Land. 1635. In reading over this Book, I find our Author
informing the World, Notes on Lib. 5. p. 245.
That he intended to commit to the public View, the Lives of the Poets,
Foreign and Modern, from the first before Homer, to the Novissimi and last, of
what Nation or Language soever; so far as any History, or Chronology would give
him warrant. But this Work, notwithstanding our Author's Intention, I presume
was never completed, or at least published.

His chief Pieces in Prose are, An Apology for Actors, printed 4o. Land. 1612.
which was highly commended by several Copies of Verses, written in Greek,
Latin, and English. This piece was answered, or rather railed against by One J.
G. in a Pamphlet called, A Refutation of the Apology for Actors; printed 4o.
Land. 1615. Whether Mr. Prynn's Piece called Histriomastix, printed 4o. Land.
1633. were particularly levelled against this Book, I cannot positively
determine: but I think Sir Richard Baker, who answered it, (in a little Piece
called The Theater vindicated, printed 8o. Land.) has sufficiently made out the
Character he gives of it, Page 17.
That all his Book is but a Bundle of Scolding Invectives, and Railing, instead
of Reasoning. He has writ besides, The Life and Troubles of Queen Elizabeth,
from her Cradle to her Crown, printed 8o. Land. 1631. The Examplary Lives and
Acts of Nine Women Worthies; three Jews, three Gentiles, and three Christians;
printed 4o. 1640. The General History of Women of the most Holy, and Profane,
the most Famous, and Infamous in all Ages; printed 8o. Land. 1657.

The usual Motto which he prefixed to most of his Works, and which showed the
chief design of his Writing, was this of Horace, Aut prodesse solent, aut
delectare. --


Barten HOLLYDAY.
A Gentleman that flourisht in the Reigns of King Charles the First and Second.
He was born about the latter End of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, in Oxford, in the
Parish of All Saints. He was entered young at Christ-Church, in the time of Dr.
Ravis, his Relation and Patron, by whom he was chose Student; and having taken
his Degrees of Bachelor and Master of Arts, he at length became Archdeacon of
Oxfordshire. He died soon after the King's Return, at Eifly, the Corpse of his
Arch-Deaconry, (near Oxford) in the Year 1661. and was buried in Christ-Church;
having left behind him the Character of a general Scholar, a good Preacher, a
skilful Philosopher, and an excellent Poet. As a proof of this, I must refer my
Reader to his Works in general, it being my province at present only to
enumerate his Writings, and make remarks on nothing, but what he has published
in Dramatick Poetry; which is a Play called

TEXNOTAMIA, or The Marriages of the Arts, a Comedy, acted by the Students of
Christ-Church in Oxford, before the University, at Shrove-tide; printed 4o.
Land. 1630. The Author has sufficiently showed his Learning in the Contexture
of this Comedy, and has introduced several things from the Ancients;
particularly two Odes from Anacreon, viz. Act 2. Sc. 2. Act 3. Sc. the last. He
has showed how well he was able to imitate another Author, by this Play; as the
Reader may see, by comparing the Challenge of Logicus, to Poeta, Act 2. Sc. 2.
with that of Dametas to Clinias, drawn by the Pen of the Admirable Sir Philip
Sidney.

He has several other Pieces of Poetry, which though Translations, have gained
him a considerable Reputation, as the Translation of the Satyrs of Juvenal, and
Persius; Illustrated with Notes and Sculptures, printed Fol. Oxon. 1673. His
Version of the Odes of Horace, mentioned by Mr. Wood, Antiq. Lib. 2. p. 279.
to have been printed Land. 1652. He has likewise published several Sermons, as
Three Sermons preached at Oxford, and two Sermons at St. Pauls-Cross, printed
1626. A Sermon of the Nature of Faith, printed 4o. Land. 1654. Motives to a
godly Life, printed 4o. Oxon. 1657. In Latin, he has printed two Pieces, viz.
Philosophiae Politico-barbarae Specimen, de Anima. 4o. Oxon. 1635. Orbis
terrarum Inspectio, lib. 10. Oxon. 1661.

Charles HOOL.
A Gentleman living in the Reigns of King Charles the First and Second, and
possibly still in Being. He was born at Wakefield in Yorkshire; and at eighteen
Years of Age, came up to the University of Oxford, and was entered of Lincoln
College. After having taken his Degree of Master of Arts, he withdrew into his
own Country, where he took upon him the Profession of a School Master: he
taught in several places, particularly at Rotheram, (a Market Town in the West
Riding in Yorkshire;) and afterward, being sent for up to London by several
Eminent Citizens, he taught School in Red-Cross-street, near Alders-gate
Parish; and afterward removed to Arundel-Buildings, not far from the
Royal Exchange. At the King's Return, he left the City, and removed into Wales,
where possibly he still follows that useful Profession. He has been very
laborious, not only in Instructing Youth, but also in publishing many Books to
their Advancement. One of which, is the Subject of his being mentioned in our
Catalogue; viz.

Six Comedies of that Excellent Poet Publius Terentius, an African of Carthage,
in English and Latin; for the use of Young Scholars, that they may the more
readily obtain the purity of the Latin Tongue, for common Discourse; printed
8o. 1676. This Translation was undertaken by our Author, at the Request of the
Company of Stationers, for whom it was printed; and was castrated in some
places; as in particular, see Eunuchus Act 3. Sc. 4, 5. to spare the Modesty of
the Youth under his Tuition. Those who would know more of Terence, and his
Works, let them turn back to Richard Bernard.

The rest of his Works consist chiefly in Translations of Books for the use of
young Scholars, as Corderius, Cato AEsop's Fables, Commenii Orbis pictus, etc.
To which I may add his Edition of the Greek Testament, in which the Young
Grecian will find all the Themes of Greek Words (according to Passor's Lexicon)
placed in the Margin. He has published besides, An Entrance to the Latin Tongue,
octavo Land. 1659. An Explanation of the Accidence, octavo Land. 1683. with
other Books of the like Nature.

Edward HOWARD, Esquire
A Gentleman, (as I suppose) now living, who has addicted himself to the Study
of Dramatick Poetry: how well he has succeeded therein, I shall leave to the
Readers Judgment, who may find four Plays of his, under the Titles of

Man of New Market, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, and printed 4o Land.
1678.

Six Days Adventure, or The New Utopia, a Comedy acted at his Royal Highness
the Duke of York's Theater; printed 4o Land. 1671. This Play miscarried in the
Action, as the Author himself acknowledges in his Preface; and indeed that
sharp Wit, the late Earl of Rochester, writ an Invective against it Poems, p.
90.
; but the Ingenious Mrs. Behn, Mr. Ravenscroft, and other Poets of the Age,
sent the Author Recommendatory Verses, which are printed with the Play: and in
return he writ a Pindarick Poems, p. 259.
to Mrs. Behn; which she gratefully published in a Collection of Poems, printed
8o Land. 1685.

Usurper, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's Servants, and
printed 4o. Land. 1668. Whether the Author designed in the Caracter of
Damocles, to personate Oliver Cromwell, and intended his Play, a parallel of
those times, I leave to more discerning Judgments.

Women's Conquest, a Tragi-comedy, acted by his Royal Highness the Duke of
York's Servants, and printed 4o. Land. 1677. This I take to be the best Play
our Author has published.

Besides these Plays Mr. Howard has published an Epick Poem, in octavo, called
The British Princess; which the late Earl of Rochester has likewise handled
severely. Poems, p. 88.
There is ascribed to him, another Book of Poems and Essays, with a Paraphrase
on Cicero's Laelius, or Tract of Friendship, printed in octavo London 16 --.

James HOWARD, Esquire
I am not able to acquaint the Reader, whether or no this Gentleman be of the
same Family with the former; but I am obliged to mention him, on Account of two
Plays writ by him, viz.

All mistaken, or The Mad Couple, a Comedy, acted by his Majesty's Servants, at
the Theater Royal, and printed 4o Land. 1672. This Play is commended by some
for an excellent Comedy.

English Monsieur, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's
Servants, printed 4o Land. 1674. Whether the late Duke of Buckingham in his
Character of Prince Volscius's falling in Love with Parthenope, as he is
pulling on his Boots to go out of Town, designed to reflect on the Characters
of Comely, and Elsbeth, I pretend not to determine: but I know there is a near
Resemblance in the Characters.

Sir Robert HOWARD.
This Ingenious Person is equally conspicuous for the Luster of his Birth, and
the Excellency of his Parts; being (as I suppose) Brother to the present Earl
of Berkshire, and One whose Plays will remain Eternal Testimonies to Posterity,
of his Skill in Dramatick Performances. His Committee, and Indian Queen, are
deservedly admired by the best Judges of Dramatick Poetry: and even our late
Laureat, in spite of Envy, must acknowledge his Worth, both as a Poet and
Patron His Plays are six in number, viz.

Blind Lady, a Comedy, printed octavo Land. 16 --

Committee, a Comedy, printed fol. Land. 1665. This is an admirable Comedy, and
highly commended.

Great Favorite, or The Duke of Lerma, a Tragi-comedy, acted at the
Theater Royal by his Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1668. For the Plot,
see the Historians of those Times, as Mariana, de Mayerne Turquet, etc. This
Play (as I have before observed p. 165.) was reflected on by Mr. Dryden, though
had he consulted Reason, Gratitude, or his own Reputation, he had otherwise
employed his time; it being a true Observation, which Sr. Robert has made, in
his Prologue to the Vestal Virgin: This does a wretched Dearth of Wit betray,
When things of Kind on One another prey.


Indian Queen, a Tragedy, writ in Heroic Verse, and formerly acted with great
applause at the Theater Royal, printed fol. Land. 1665.

Surprisal, a Tragi-comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, and printed fol. Land.
1665.

Vestal Virgin, or The Roman Ladies, a Tragedy acted by the King's Servants,
and printed fol. Land. 1665.

Some Readers, who are strangers to the Excellent Tallents of Sir Robert, might
expect from me some Discoveries of what he has borrowed; but I am to Inform
them, That this Admirable Poet has too great a Stock of Wit of his own, to be
necessitated to borrow from others. All that I can observe is, That The Vestal
Virgin has a double Fifth Act; the One of which ends Tragically, the Other
successfully; which possibly might be done, in Imitation of Sir John Suckling,
the only Gentleman that I know, fit for his Imitation, who has done the same
thing in his Aglaura.

He has writ besides some Poems, which are printed with his Blind Lady, in
octavo; and four of his Plays, viz. Surprisal, Committee, Indian Queen and
Vestal Virgin, are printed together in fol. Land. 1665.

James HOWEL.
A Gentleman of Wales, born at Abernalies in the County of Caermarden, in the
Year 1594. He was Bred up at the Free School in Hereford; and at 16. Years of
Age, sent to the University of Oxford, where he became a Member of Jesus
College. About March, in the Year 1618. he traveled beyond Sea, being sent on
Buisiness, by Sir Robert Mansel, where he visited the Low Countries, and
afterward made a Tour through France, and Italy; as appears by the Letters he
has published. In which the Reader may not only be informed of the Chief
Occurences of those Times, but of our Author's several Employments; as, His
being sent by King James into Spain, for the Recovery of a Vessel of great
value, seized on by the Viceroy of Sardinia, under pretense of being laden
with prohibited Goods: His being chosen Fellow of Jesus College, during his
absence; His being Secretary to the Lord Scroop, when he was President of the
Council in the North; His being Employed about the Clerks of the Council, etc.

Notwithstanding his various Employs, and multiplicity of Business, he found
leisure to publish abundance of Books, to the number of Fourty-nine: Many of
them were Translations out of French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese: Of which
Nature is the Play, which occasions his mention in our Catalogue; viz.

Nuptials of Peleus and Thetis, consisting of a Masque, and a Comedy, or The
Great Royal Ball acted in Paris, six times, by the King in person, the Duke of
Anjou, the Duke of York, with diverse other Noblemen. Also by the Princess Royal
Henriette Marie, the Princess of Conty, etc. printed 4o. Land. 1654. and
dedicated to the most Excellent and High Born Lady, the Lady Katherine
Marchioness of Dorchester. The Masque was extracted from an Italian Comedy,
which the Author has made English, by a nearer adherence to the Original, than
to the French Translation. For the Plot, it is founded on Ovid's Metamorphosis,
lib. 11. See besides, Catulli Aurgonautica, sive Epithalamium.

It Is not to be expected that I should spare room to give an Account of our
Authors Works in particular, they being so numerous: I shall therefore only
mention some of the most Emiment, and refer the Reader for further Satisfaction
to the perusal of a Catalogue of them, published with a former Edition of his
Letters, printed 8o. Land. 1655. His chief Pieces are, Dodona's Grove, a Book
much prized, and translated into French 1652. His Letters, which were formerly
in four distinct Volumes, and are reduced into one; amongst which are several
to Ben. Johnson, which speak their Intimacy. Besides these, he has writ a Book
of the Precedence of Kings, printed Fol. Land. 1664. Survey of the Seniorie of
Venice. Fol. Land. 1652. Life of Lewis the Thirteenth, and Cardinal Richelieu,
Fol. Land. 1646. Morphandra, or The Queen of the Enchanted Island, a Poem in
Fol. The Vote, a Poem Royal, in 4o, etc.

He died about the beginning of November, 1666. and was buried on the
North-side of the Temple-Church, with this Inscription fixed upon the Wall;
Jacobus Howell Cambro-Britannus, Regius Historiographus, in Anglia primus; qui
post varias peregrinationes, tandem naturae cursum peregit, Satur Annorum, and
Famae, domae, forisque huc usque erraticus, heic fixus 1666.

I.
Thomas JEVORN.
A Person lately dead, and one sufficiently known to all that frequent the
Theater, both for his Excellency in Dancing and Action. He has writ a Play, or
rather a Farce, called

The Devil of a Wife, or A Comical Transformation; acted by their Majesty's
Servants at the Queen's Theater in Dorset-Garden; printed 4o. Land. 1686. and
dedicated to his Friends, that frequent Locket's Ordinary. This Farce is
founded on a Tale as well known as that of Mopsa, in Sir Philip Sidney's
Arcadia; though I think if compared with our French Farces so frequent on our
English Stage, it may deserve the Pre-eminence.

Thoms INGELAND.
A Student in Cambridge in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: The Author of a Play,
which he styles, A Pretty and Merry Interlude, called The Disobedient Child.
It Is writ in old Verse of Ten Syllables, and printed 4o. in an old Black
Letter, (without any Date) by Thomas Colwell in Fleet Street.

John JONES.
An Author who lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, and writ a Play
named

Adrasta, or The Woman's Spleen, and Loves Conquest, a Tragi-comedy, printed 4o.
Land. 1635. and dedicated to Eugenius, by which Name he desires to comprehend
all his Friends, subscribing himself Musophilus. This Play the Actors refused,
and I think with Justice; it being very indifferently written. The Intrigue
between Damasippus, Frail-ware, and their Wives, in the third Act, is borrowed
from Boccace's Novels Day 8. Nov.8. However the Author was of Opinion it
deserved to appear in public; and therefore prefixed the following Saying of
Horace, in his Title Page: -- volet haec sub luce videri,
Judicis argutum quae non formidat acumen.


Benjamin JOHNSON.
I have already drawn some strokes of this Great Man's Character, in my Defense
of him against the Attempts of Mr. Dryden; and therefore shall less need to
make a curious and exact Description of all his Excellencies; which otherwise
are very Great, Noble, and Various; and have been remarked in parcells by
several Hands, but exceed my small Capacity to collect them into one full View.
I shall therefore rather let them lie dispersed, as Scaliger did Virgil's
Praises, through his whole Book of Poetry; contenting my self at present with
giving the Reader an Account of the private Occurrencies of his Life.

To begin then with his Nativity: He was born in the City of Westminster; and
though he sprang from mean Parents, yet his Admirable Parts have made him more
Famous than those of a more Conspicuous Extraction. Nor do I think it any
Diminution to him, that he was Son-in-law to a Bricklayer, and worked at that
Trade; since if we take a Survey of the Records of Antiquity, we shall find the
Greatest Poets of the meanest Birth; and most liable to the Inconveniences of
Life. Witness Homer, who begged from door to door; Euripides, traded in Herbs
with his Mother; Plautus was forced to serve a Baker; Naevius was a Captain's
Man; Terence was a Slave to the Generous Lucan; Virgil, was the Son of a
Basket-maker: and yet these thought the Obscurity of their Extraction no
Diminution to their Worth; nor will any Man of Sense reflect on Ben. Johnson on
this Account, if he seriously call to Mind that saying of Juvenal Satyr. 8.
.

-- Nobilitas sola est, atque unica Virtus.
He was Bred first at a Private-School, in St. Martin's Church, then placed at
Westminster, under the Famous Mr. Cambden, (to whom in Gratitude he dedicated
his Fourteenth Epigram) afterward he was sent to Saint John's College in
Cambridge; from thence he removed to Oxford, and was entered of Christ-Church
College; where in the Year 1619. (as Mr. Wood Antiq. L. 2. p. 243.
says) he took his Master of Arts Degree: though Dr. Fuller says, Worthies,
Westminster, p. 243.
He continued there but few Weeks, for want of Maintenance, being fain to
return to the Trade of his Father-in-law; where he assisted in the New Building
of Lincolns Inn, with a Trowel in his Hand, and a Book in his Pocket. But this
English Maro, was not long before he found a Maecenas and a Varus, to manumit
him from an Employment so painful, and furnished him with means to enjoy his
Muse at liberty, in private. 'Twas then that he writ his Excellent Plays, and
grew into Reputation with the most Eminent of our Nobility and Gentry. 'Twas
then, that Carthwright, Randolph, and others of both Universities, sought his
Adoption; and gloried more in his Friendship, and the Title of his Sons, than
in their own Well-deserv'd Characters. Neither did he less love, or was less
beloved by the Famous Poets of his Time, Shakspear, Beaumont, and Fletcher:
witness his Copy which he writ on Shakspear, after his Death, See his Works at
the beginning.
and his Verses to Fletcher when living See Fletcher's works.
.

He was a Man of a very free Temper, and withal blunt, and somewhat haughty to
those, that were either Rivals in Fame, or Enemies to his Writings: (witness
his Poetaster, wherein he falls upon Decker, and his answer to Dr. Gill, who
writ against his Magnetic Lady,) otherwise of a good Sociable Humor, when
amongst his Sons and Friends in the Apollo: from whose Laws the Reader may
possibly better judge of his Temper; a Copy of which I have transcribed for the
Learned Readers perusal.

Leges Convivales, quod foelix faustumque Convivis in Apolline sit.
Nemo asymbolus, nisi umbra huc venito,
Idiota, insultus, tristis, turpis abesto.
Eruditi, Urbani, Hilares, Modesti adsciscuntur,
Nec lectae Foeminae repudiantur.
In apparatu, quod convivis corruget nares nil esto,
Epulae delectu potius, quam sumptu parantur;
Obsonator, and Coquus convivarum gulae periti sunto;
De Discubitu non contenditur.
Ministri a Dapibus, oculati, and muti,
A poculis auriti, and celeres sunto.
Vina puris fontibus ministrantur, aut vapulet hospes,
Moderatis poculis provocare sodales fas esto,
At sabulis, magis quam vino velitatio fiat,
Convivae nec muti, nec loquaces sunto.
De seriis aut sacris, poti, and saturine disserunto,
Fidicen nisi accersitus non venito.
Admisso risu, tripudiis, choreis, saltibus,
Omni gratiarum festivitate sacra celebrantur:
Joci sine fell sunto
Insipida Poemata nulla recitantur;
Versus scribere nullus cogitur;
Argumentationis totius strepitus abesto;
Amatoriis querelis, ac suspiriis liber angulus esto,
Lapitharum more, scyphis pugnare, vitrea collidere,
Fenestras excutere; supellectilem dilacerare ne
fas esto.
Qui for as dicta vel facta eliminet, eliminatur;
Neminem reum pocula jaciunto.
Focus perennis esto.
As to his Poetry, I dare not pretend to give a Judgment on it, it deserving
somewhat above what my faint Praise can reach, or describe: therefore those who
would be better satisfied must have recourse to his Character drawn by Dr.
Fuller, and Mr. Anthony Wood in Prose, and by Mr. Carthwright, and the late Mr.
Oldham in Verse; to the foregoing, I might add Mr. Dryden's Dramatick Essay,
which had it been writ after his Postscript to Granada, might have atoned for
that unbecoming Character, and had served for a Palinode; but since he has not
that I know of thought fit to retract it, give me leave to insert an old Copy
of Verses, which seems to wipe off the Accusations of Mr. Johnson's Enemies
Fizts-geofridi Altaniarum, Lib. 2.
.

Ad Benjaminum Johnsonum.
In jus te voco, Jonsoni venito:
Adsum, qui plagii and malae rapinae
Te ad Phoebi peragam reum tribunal,
Assidente choro NovemDearum.
Quaedam Dramata scilicet diserta,
Nuper quae Elysii roseti in umbra,
Faestivissimus omnium Poeta,
Plautus composuit, Diisque tandem
Stellato exhibuit poli in Theatro,
Movendo superis leves cachinnos,
Et risos tetrico Jovi ciendo,
Axe plausibus intonante utroque;
Haec tu Dramata scilicet diserta,
Clepsisti superis negotiosis,
Quae tu nunc tua venuitare pergis: In jus te voco, Jonsoni venito.
En pro te Pater ipse, Rexque Phoebus

Assurgit modo, Jonsoni, palamque
Testatur, tua serio fuisse
Illa Dramata, teque condidisse
Sese non modo conscio, at juvante:
Unde ergo sibi Plautus illa tandem
Nactus exhibuit, Jovi Deisque?
Maiae Filius, and Nepos Atlantis,
Pennatus celeres Pedes, at ungues
Viscatus, volucer puer, vaferque,
Furto condere quidlibet jocoso,
Ut quondam facibus suis Amorem
Per ludos videavit, and Pharetra,
Sic nuper (siquidem solet frequenter
Tecum ludere, plaudere, and jocari)
Neglectas tibi ilepsit has papyrus
Secumque ad Superos abire jussit: Jam victus taceo pudore, vincis
Phoebo Judice, Jonsoni, and Patrono.

I might here appositely enough bring in a pleasant Story or two of Ben.
Jonson's, as Instances of his Debonaire Humor and Readiness at Repartee, did I
not fear to be condemned by Mr. Dryden, and reckoned by him and his Admirers,
in the number of those grave Gentlemen, whose Memory (he says Postscript to
Granada.
) is the only Plea for their being Wits: for this reason I shall forbear, and
hasten to give an Account of his Works.

He has writ above fifty several Pieces, which we may rank under the Species of
Dramatick Poetry; of which we shall give an Account in Order, beginning with
one of his best Comedies, viz.

Alchymist, a Comedy, acted in the Year 1610. by the Kings Majesty's Servants,
with the Allowance of the Master of the Revels; printed fol. Land. 1640. and
dedicated to the Lady most deserving her Name and Blood, the Lady Mary Wroth,
[the Author of the Urania]. Mr. Dryden supposes this Play was copied from the
Comedy of Albumazer, as far as concerns the Alchymist's Character, as the
Reader may observe from the following Lines, (being part of his Prologue, to
Albumazer revived;)

Subtle was got by our Albumazer,
That Alchymist by this Astrologer;
Here he was fashioned, and we may suppose
He liked the Fashion well, who wore the Clothes.
Whether this Accusation be true, I pretend not to determine; but sure I am,
that this last Couplet is borrowed from Mr. Dryden's Dramatick Essay; Page 46.
where he says of Mr. Johnson thus; You will pardon me therefore if I presume
he loved the Fashion, when he wore their Clothes.

Bartholomew Fair, a Comedy, acted at the Hope on the Bank-side, Oct. 31. in
the Year 1614. by the Lady Elizabeth's Servants, and then dedicated to King
James the First, and printed fol. Land. 1640. This Play has frequently appeared
on the Stage, since the Restoration, with great applause.

Cataline his Conspiracy, a Tragedy first acted in the Year 1611. by the Kings
Majesty's Servants, with Allowance from the Master of the Revels; printed fol.
Land. 1640. and dedicated to the great Example of Honor and Virtue, the most
Noble William Earl of Pembroke. This Play is still in Vogue on the Stage, and
always presented with success. It was so well approved of by the Judicious
Beaumont, that he writ a Copy of Verses in praise of it, which the Reader may
find before our Authors Works. Nevertheless I must take notice that Mr. Johnson
has borrowed very much from the Ancients in this Tragedy; as for Instance, part
of Sylla's Ghost, in the very Entrance of the Play, is copied from the Ghost of
Tantalus, in the beginning of Seneca's Thyestes. Thus our Author has translated
a great part of Salust's History, (though with great Judgment and Elegance) and
inserted it into his Play. For the Plot, see Salust. Plutarch in the Life of
Cicero. Florus Lib. 4. C. 1.

Challenge at Tilt, at a Marriage, a Masque printed Fol. Land. 1640.

Christmas his Masque, presented at Court 1516. printed Fol Land. 1640.

Cloridia, or Rites to Cloris, and her Nymphs personated in a Masque at Court,
by the Queens Majesty and her Ladies at Shrove-tide, 1630. printed Fol. Land.
1640. The Inventors of this Masque were Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Inigo Jones.

Cynthia's Revels, or The Fountain of Self-love, a Comical Satyr, first acted
in the Year 1600. by the then Children of Queen Elizabeth's Chapel, with the
Allowance of the Master of the Revels, printed Folio, Land. 1640. and dedicated
to the Special Fountain of Manners, The Court.

Devil is an Ass, a Comedy acted in the Year 1616. by his Majesty's Servants,
and printed Fol. Land. 1641. Though our Author seldom borrows any part of his
Plot; yet in this Play, if I mistake not, Wittipol's giving his Cloak to
Fitz-dotterel to court his Wife one quarter of an Hour, is founded on a Novel
in Boccace, Day 3. Nov. 5.

Entertainment of King James, in passing to his Coronation, printed in Fol.
Land. 1640. This Entertainment was mentioned, I suppose by the Compilers of
former Catalogues, because it consists of Speeches of Gratulation (as the
Author styles them) which were spoke to his Majesty at Fen-Church, Temple Bar,
and the Strand: and therefore besides the presidents of former Catalogues,
which might in part justify me, I might be blamed should I omit it. The Author
has placed a Comment throughout to illustrate and authorize his Contrivance.

Entertainment in private of the King and Queen on May Day in the Morning, at
Sir William Cornwallis's House at High-gate, 1604. printed Fol. Land. 1640.

Entertainment of King James and Queen Anne at Theobalds, when the House was
delivered up, with the possession, to the Queen, by the Earl of Salisbury, May
22. 1607. The Prince of Janvile, Brother to the Duke of Guise, being then
present, printed Fol. Land. 1640.

Entertainment in particular of the Queen and Prince, their Highnesses, at
Althrope, at the Lord Spencer's, on Saturday being the Twenty-fifth of June
1603. as they came first into the Kingdom, printed Fol. Land. 1640.

Entertainment of the Two Kings of Great Britain, and Denmark, at Theobalds,
July 24th 1606. printed Fol. Land. 1640. This Entertainment is very short, and
consists chiefly of Epigrams.

Every Man in his Humor, a Comedy acted in the Year 1598. by the then Lord
Chamberlain's Servants, printed Fol. Land. 1640. and dedicated to the Most
Learned, and his Honored Friend Mr. Cambden, Clarencieux. This Play has been
revived since the Civil Wars, and was received with general Applause. There is
a new Epilogue writ for this Play, the latter part of which is spoken by Ben
Johnson's Ghost. The Reader may find it in a Collection of Poems on several
Occasions, printed 8o. Land. 1673. See page 29.

Every Man out of his Humor, a Comical Satyr; first acted in the Year 1599. by
the then Lord Chamberlain's Servants; with allowance of the Master of the
Revels: printed Fol. Land. 1640. and dedicated to the Noblest Nurseries of
Humanity, and Liberty in the Kingdom, The Inns of Court. This Play was revived
at the Theater Royal, in the Year 1675. at which time a new Prologue, and
Epilogue were spoken by Jo. Heyns, which were writ by Mr. Duffet. See his Poems
8o. page 72. etc. This is accounted an excellent Old Comedy.

Fortunate Isles, and their Union celebrated in a Masque designed for the
Court, on the Twelfth-Night, 1626. printed Fol. Land. 1641.

Golden Age restored, in a Masque at Court, 1615. by the Lords and Gentlemen
the King's Servants, and printed Fol. Land. 1641.

Hymenaei, or The Solemnities of a Masque and Barriers at a Marriage; printed
Fol. Land. 1640. To this Masque are annexed, by the Author, Learned Notes in the
Margin, for illustration of the Ancient Greek, and Roman Customs.

Irish Masque at Court, by Gentlemen the King's Servants; printed Fol. Land.
1640.

King's Entertainment at Welbeck in Nottingham-shire, a House of the Right
Honorable William Earl of Newcastle, at his going into Scotland, 1633. printed
Fol. Land. 1640.

Love freed from Ignorance and Folly, a Masque of her Majesty's, printed Fol.
Land. 1640.

Love Restored, in a Masque at Court, by Gentlemen the King's Servants, printed
Fol. Land. 1640.

Love's Triumph through Callipolis; performed in a Masque at Court, 1630. by his
Majesty King Charles the First, with the Lords and Gentlemen Assisting: the
Inventors being Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Inigo Jones: printed Fol. Land. 1641.

Love's Welcome; the King and Queen's Entertainment at Bolsover, at the Earl of
Newcastle's; the 30th of July, 1634. and printed Fol. Land. 1641.

Magnetic Lady, or Humors Reconciled, a Comedy acted at the Black-fryars, and
printed Fol. Land. 1640. This Play is generally esteemed an Excellent Play:
though in those days it found some Enemies; amongst which Dr. Gill Master of
Paul's School, or at least his Son, writ a Satyr against it: part of which (the
whole being too long) I shall take the pains to transcribe.

But to advise thee Ben, in this strist Age,
A Brick-kill's better for thee than a Stage.
Thou better know a Groundsil for to lay,
Then lay the Plot or Groundwork of a Play,
And better can direct to Cap a Chimney,
Then to converse with Clio, or Polyhimny.
Fall then to work in thy old Age again,
Take up thy Trug and Trowel, gentle Ben,
Let Plays alone: or if thou needs will write,
And thrust thy feeble Muse into the light;
Let Lowen cease, and Tailor scorn to touch
The loathed Stage, for thou have made it such.
But to show how fiercely Ben could repartee on any one that had abused him, I
will present the Reader with his answer.

Shall the prosperity of a Pardon still
Secure thy railing Rhymes, infamous Gill,
At libelling? Shall no Star Chamber Peers,
Pillory, nor Whip, nor want of Ears,
All which thou have incurred deservedly:
Nor Degradation from the Ministry,
To be the Denis of thy Father's School,
Keep in thy bawling Wit, thou bawling Fool.
Thinking to stir me, thou have lost thy End,
I Will laugh at thee poor wretched Tike, go send
Thy blotant Muse abroad, and teach it rather
A Tune to drown the Ballads of thy Father:
For thou have naught to cure his Fame,
But Tune and Noise the Echo of his Shame.
A Rogue by Statute, censured to be whipped,
Cropped, branded, slit, neck-stockt; go, you are stripped.
Masque at the Lord Viscount Hadington's Marriage at Court, on Shrove-Tuesday
at Night 1608. and printed fol. Land. 1640.

Masque of Augurs, with several Antimasques, presented on Twelfth-night 1622.
printed fol. Land. 1640.

Masque of Owls at Kenelworth, presented by the Ghost of Captain Coxe, mounted
on his Hobbyhorse, 1626. printed fol. Land. 1640.

Masque of Queens, celebrated from the House of Fame, by the Queen of Great
Britain with her Ladies, at Whitehall, Febr. 2. 1609. This Masque is adorned
with learned Notes, for the Explanation of the Author's Design. He was assisted
in the Invention and Architecture of the Scenes throughout, by Mr. Inigo Jones.

Masque presented in the House of the Right Honorable the Lord Hay, by diverse
of Noble Quality his Friends; for the Entertainment of Monsieur Le Baron de
Tour, Extraordinary Ambassador for the French King; on Saturday the 22. of
Febr. 1617. printed fol. Land. 1617.

Metamorphos'd Gypsies, a Masque thrice presented to King James: first at
Burleigh on the Hill; next at Belvoyr; and lastly at Windsor, in August 1621.
printed fol. Land. 1641.

Mercury Vindicated from the Alchymists at Court, by Gentlemen the King's
Servants, printed fol. Land. 1640.

Mortimer's Fall, a Tragedy, or rather a Fragment, it being just begun, and
left imperfect by his Death: though the Reader may see the Model of each Act, by
the Argument published before it, printed fol. Land. 1640.

Neptune's Triumph for the Return of Albion, celebrated in a Masque at Court,
on the Twelfth-Night 1644. printed fol. Land. 1641.

News from the New World discovered in the Moon, a Masque presented at Court
before King James 1620. and printed fol. Land. 1641.

Oberon, the Fairy Prince, a Masque of Prince Henry's, printed fol. Land. 1640.
On this Play the Author has writ Annotations.

Pan's Anniversary, or The Shepherd's Holyday; a Masque presented at Court
before King James 1625. and printed fol. Land. 1641. In the Decorations our
Author was assisted by the above mentioned Mr. Jones.

Pleasure reconciled to Virtue, a Masque presented at Court before King James,
1619. to which were made some Additions for the Honor of Wales. This in former
Catalogues was mentioned as a Masque distinct from the other.

Poetaster, or His Arraignment, a Comical Satyr, first acted in the Year 1601.
by the then Children of his Majesty's Chapel, with the Allowance of the Master
of the Revels; printed fol. Land. 1640. and dedicated to the Virtuous and his
Worthy Friend, Mr. Richard Martin. I have already spoken of this Play in the
Account of Decker's Satyromastix; and I must further add, I heartily wish for
our Author's Reputation, that he had not been the Agressor in this Quarrel; but
being altogether ignorant of the Provocations given him, I must suspend my
Judgment, and leave it to better Judges to determine the Controversy. Our
Author has adorned this Play with several Translations from the Ancients, as
Ovid. Amor. lib. 1. Eleg. 15. Horatii Sat. lib. 1. Sat. 9. lib. 2. Sat. 1.
Virgilii AEneid. lib. 4. with others.

Queen's Masks; the first of Blackness, personated at the Court at Whitehall,
on the Twelfth-Night 1605. the second of Beauty, was presented in the same
Court at Whitehall, on the Sunday Night after the Twelfth-Night 1608. printed
fol. Land. 1640.

Sad Shepherd, or A Tale of Robin Hood; a Pastoral, printed fol. Land. 1641.
This Play is left imperfect, there being but two Acts, and part of the third
finished.

Sejanus's Fall, a Tragedy, first acted in the Year 1603. by the Kings
Majesty's Servants, with the Allowance of the Master of the Revells, printed
fol. Land. 1640. and dedicated to the No less Noble by Virtue than Blood, Esme
Lord Aubigny. This Play is generally commended by all Lovers of Poetry; and
ushered into the World by nine Copys of Verses, one of which was writ by Mr.
George Chapman. It Is founded on History; and the Author in a former Edition,
published 4o. Land. 1605. has printed Quotations throughout; the Reasons
whereof take in his own Words, (being part of the Preface to that Edition)
Preface.
The next is, least in some nice Nostrils, the Quotations might favor
affected, I do let you know, That I abhor nothing more; and have only done it
to show my Integrity in the Story, and save my self in those common Torturers,
that bring all Wit to the Rack: whose Noses are ever like Swine, spoiling and
rooting up the Muses Gardens; and their whole Bodies like Moles, as blindly
working under Earth, to cast any, the least hills, upon Virtue. For the Story,
the Reader may consult Tacitus's Annals, lib.3, 4, 5. Suetonius in the Life of
Tiberius. Dion. etc.

Silent Woman, a Comedy first acted in the Year 1609. by the Children of her
Majesty's Revels, with the Allowance of the Master of the Revels; printed fol.
Land. 1640. and dedicated to the truly Noble, by all Titles, Sir Francis
Stuart. Part of this Play is borrowed from the Ancients, as Act 1. Sc. 1. part
from Ovid de Art Amandi. Act 2 Sc. 2. part from Juvenal. Sat. 6. Act 2. Sc. 5.
part from Plautus's Aulularia Act 3. Sc. 5. with other passages.
Notwithstanding which, this Play is Accounted by all, One of the best Comedies
we have extant; and those who would know more, may be amply satisfied by the
perusal of the judicious Examen of this Play made by Mr. Dryden Dramatick
Essay, p. 50.
.

Speeches at Prince Henry's Barriers, printed fol. Land. 1640. These Speeches
being printed amongst his other Masks, and always reckoned under that Species
of Poetry, by others, in former Catalogues, I could not omit their Mention in
this place.

Staple of News, a Comedy acted in the Year 1625. by his Majesty's Servants,
and printed fol. Land. 1631. The Author introduces four Gossips on the Stage,
who continue during the Action, and criticize on the Play. This was practiced
more than once; witness, Every man out of his Humor, and Magnetic Lady: and
herein he was followed by Fletcher, (as I have already observed See page 210.
) in His Knight of the Burning-pestle.

Tale of a Tub, a Comedy, printed, fol. Land. 1640.

Time vindicated to himself, and to his Honors; a Masque, presented at Court
on Twelfth-Night 1623. and printed fol. Land. 1641.

Vission of Delight, a Masque presented at Court, in Christmas 1617. and
printed fol. Land. 1641.

Vulpone, or The Fox, a Comedy; first acted in the Year 1605. by the Kings
Majesty's Servants, with the Allowance of the Master of the Revells; printed
fol. Land. 1640. and dedicated to both Universities in the following form: To
the most Noble and most Equal Sisters, the two Famous Universities; for their
Love and Acceptance shown to his Poem in the Presentation, Ben. Johnson the
grateful Acknowledger, dedicates both it and himself. This Play is writ in
Imitation of the Comedy of the Ancients, and the Argument is formed into an
Acrostick, like those of Plautus, which are said to be writ by Priscian, or
some other Eminent Grammarian. It is still in vogue at the Theater in
Dorset-Garden, and its value is sufficiently manifested by the Verses of Mr.
Beaumont, and Dr. Done.

All these Plays with several other Poems and Translations, and an English
Grammar, are printed together in two Volumes in Folio.

He has three other Plays, which are omitted in these Volumes, though for what
reason, I know not; two of which are printed in 4o. and the third in 8o. of
which we are now to speak.

Case is altered, a pleasant Comedy, sundry times acted by the Children of the
Black-fryars, and printed 4o. Land. 1609. In this Comedy our Author has very
much made use of Plautus, as the Learned Reader may observe by comparing His
Aulularia, and Capteivei, with this Comedy.

Widow, a Comedy acted at the Private House in Black-fryars with great
applause, by his late Majesty's Servants, and printed 4o. Land. 1652. This Play
was writ by Mr. Johnson, Mr. Fletcher, and Mr. Middleton, and first published by
Mr. Alexander Gough, a great lover of Plays, who helped Mr. Mosely the
Bookseller to this, and several other Dramatick Manuscripts, as the Passionate
Lovers 2. parts; The Queen, or The Excellency of her Sex, etc. It was revived
not many Years ago, at the King's House, with a new Prologue and Epilogue,
which the Reader may find in London Drollery, p. 11, 12.

New-Inn, or The Light Heart, a Comedy never acted, but most negligently played
by some the Kings Servants; and more squeamishly beheld, and censured by
others, the Kings Subjects 1629. Now at last set at liberty to the Readers, his
Majesty's Servants and Subjects, to be judged; printed 8o. Land. 1631.

The Reader may see by this Title Page, that the Play succeeded not answerable
to our Author's Expectation, and the just Merit (as he thought) of his Play:
which may be conjectured, from the Ode which he published at the End of this
Play; which as being pertinent to our purpose, I shall transcribe at large.

The just Indignation the Author took at the Vulgar Censure of his Play, begat
this following Ode to himself.

Come, leave the loathed Stage,
And the more loathsome Age:
Where Pride and Impudence (in fashion knit)
Usurp the Chair of Wit!
Inditing and arraigning every day
Something they call a Play.
Let their fastidious, vain
Commission of the Brain
Run on, and rage, sweat, censure, and condemn:
They were not made for thee, less thou for them.
Say that thou pour'st them Wheat,
And they will Acorns eat:
'Twere simple fury, still, thy self to waste
On such as have no taste!
To offer them a surfeit of pure bread,
Whose appetites are dead!
No, give them Grains their fill,
Husks, Draff, to drink, and swill.
If they love Lees, and leave the lusty Wine,
Envy them not their palate, with the Swine.
No doubt some moldy Tale,
Like Pericles A Play writ by Shakespeare.
; and stale
As the Shrieve's Crusts, and nasty as his Fish --
scraps, out of every Dish,
Thrown forth, and raked into the Common-tub,
May keep up the Play-Club:
There, Sweepings do as well
As the best ordered Meal.
For, who the Relish of these Guests will fit,
Needs set them, but The Almes-basket of Wit.
And much good do it you then:
Brave Plush, and Velvet Men;
Can feed on Orts: And safe in your Stage-clothes,
Dare Quit upon your Oaths,
The Stagers, and the Stage-wrights too (your Peers)
Of larding your large Ears
With their foul Comic Socks;
Wrought upon twenty Blocks:
Which, if they are torn, and turned and patcht enough,
The Gamesters share your guilt, and you their stuff.
Leave things so prostitute.
And take the Alcaeick Lute;
Or thine own Horace, or Anacreon's Lyre;
Warm thee by Pindar's fire:
And though thy Nerves be shrunk, and Blood be cold,
E're Years have made thee old;
Strike that disdainful Heat
Throughout, to their defeat:
As curious Fools, and envious of thy Strain,
May, blushing, swear no Palsy's in thy Brain.
But when they hear thee sing
The Glories of thy King,
His zeal to God, and his just awe over Men;
They may blood shaken then,
Feel such a Flesh-quake to possess their powers;
As they shall cry like ours
In sound of Peace, or Wars,
No Harp ere hit the Stars,
In tuning forth the Acts of his sweet reign:
And raising Charles his Chariot 'bove his Wain.
This Ode sufficiently shows what a high Opinion our Author has of his own
Performances; and like Aristotle in Philosophy, and Peter Lombard, (The Master
of the Sentences) in School Divinity; our Ben. looked upon himself as the only
Master of Poetry; and thought it the Duty of the Age, rather to submit to, than
dispute, much less oppose his Judgment. 'Twas great pity, that he that was so
great a Master in Poetry, should not retain that old Axiom in Morality, Nosce
Teipsum: a Sentence so highly admired by Juvenal Satyr. 11.
, that he seems to think it above the Conception of Chilon, saying, -- e coelo
descendit, (...),
Figendum, and memori tractandum pectore.
He had then prevented that sharp Reply made by the Ingenious Mr. Feltham, to
this Magisterial Ode; and which could not choose but vex a Person of our
Author's Haughty Temper: but he was a Man, and subject to Infirmities, as well
as others; though abating for his too much abounding in his own Sense, (an
Epidemical Distemper belonging to the Fraternity of Parnassus) he had not his
Equal in his Time for Poetry.

Having presented the Reader with Mr. Johnson's Ode, it may not be improper for
me perhaps to transcribe, nor unpleasant to him, to peruse Mr. Feltham's Answer.

An Answer to the Ode, Come leave the loathed Stage, etc.
Come leave this saucy way
Of haiting those that pay
Dear for the sight of your declining Wit:
It Is known it is not fit,
That a Sale Poet, just contempt once thrown,
Should cry up thus his own.
I wonder by what Dower,
Or Patent, you had power
From all to rape a judgment. Let't suffice,
Had you been modest, y'ad been granted wise.
It Is known you can do well,
And that you do excel,
As a Translator: But when things require
A Genius, and Fire,
Not kindled heretofore by others pains;
As often y' ave wanted Brains
And Art to strike the White,
As you have levelled right:
Yet if Men vouch not things Apochryphal,
You bellow, rave, and spatter round your Gall.
Jug, Pierce, Peek, Fly The Names of several Dramat. Person.
, and all
Your Jests so nominal,
Are things so far beneath an able Brain,
As they do throw a Stain
Through all th unlikely Plot, and do displease
As deep as Pericles.
Where yet there is not laid
Before a Chambermaid
Discourse so weighed New-Inn, Act 3. Sc. 2. Act 4. Sc.4.
as might have served of old
For Schools, when they of Love and Valor told.
Why Rage then? when the Show
Should Judgment be and Know -- This Break was purposely designed by the Poet,
to ape that in Ben's third Stanza.

ledge, there are in Plush who scorn to drudge
For Stages, yet can judge
Not only Poets looser Lines, but Wits,
And all their Perquisits.
A Gift as rich, as high
Is Noble Poesy:
Yet though in sport it be for Kings a Play,
It Is next Mechanics, when it works for pay.
Alcaeus Lute had none,
Nor loose Anacreon,
Ere taught so bold assuming of the Bays,
When they deserved no praise.
To rail Men into Approbation,
Is new to yours alone;
And prospers not: For know,
Fame is as coy, as you
Can be disdainful; and who dares to prove
A rape on her, shall gather scorn, not Love.
Leave then this humor vain,
And this more humorous Strain,
Where Self-conceit, and Choler of the Blood
Eclipse what else is good:
Then if you please those Raptures high to touch,
Whereof you boast so much;
And but forbear your Crown,
Till the World puts it on:
No doubt from all you may amazement draw,
Since braver Theme no Phoebus ever saw.
This Haughty Humor of Mr. Johnson was blamed, and carpt at by others, as well
as Mr. Feltham: amongst the rest, Sir John Suckling, that Neat Facetious Wit,
arraigned him at the Sessions of Poets Suckling's Poems, p. 7.
; and had a fling at this Play in particular: though we may say, compared to the
former, He did only circum praecordia ludere; laughed at, and railly his
unreasonable Self-opinion; as you may see in the following Lines: the first
Stanza of which though already mentioned in the Account of Heywood, I crave my
Readers leave to repeat, that he may read our Author's Character entire: The
first that broke silence was good Old Ben,
Prepared before with Canary Wine;
And he told them plainly that he deserved the Bays,
For his were called Works, where others were but Plays.
And
Bid them remember how he had purged the Stage
Of Errors that had last many an Age:
I understand not this Couplet, without the Expression be taken after the Greek
manner, where two Negatives make an Affirmative; and then they do vehementius
negare.
And he hoped they did not think, the Silent Woman,
The Fox, and the Alchymist, out done by no Man.
Apollo stopped him there, and bid him not go on,
'Twas Merit, he said, and not Presumption
Must carry't; at which Ben. turned about,
And in great Choler offered to go out:
But,
Those that were there, thought it not fit
To discontent so ancient a Wit;
And therefore Apollo called him back again,
And made him mine Host of his own New-Inn.


I know nothing else published by our Author; only I have read a Letter
Familiar Letters, Vol. 1. Sec. 6. Let. 31.
from Mr. James Howell to Dr. Duppa, (then Bishop of Chichester, and Tutor to
King Charles the Second, when Prince of Wales) that he was publishing a Piece
called, Johnsonus Verbius; to which Mr. Howell contributed a Decastick. I know
not what Reception Mr. Howell's Verses met with in the World; but I am
confident, he had willingly allowed Mr. Oldham's Ode (had he then lived) a
place in the first Rank of Poets. The Title sufficiently explains the Design;
and the Reader may find it commended by an Ingenious Copy of Verses addressed to
the Bishop by Sir W. D'Avenant. See his Poems Fol. Edit. p. 253.

He died An. D. 1637. being aged 63. and was buried in St. Peter's Church in
Westminster, on the West Side near the Belfry; having only a plain Stone over
his Grave, with this Inscription;

O RARE BEN. JOHNSON.

It Is manifest, that a better Monument was designed him, by some Friends; but
the Civil Wars breaking out, hindered their good Intentions: though it shall not
prevent me from transcribing an Elegy written by a Studious Friend and Admirer
of Ben. Johnson; which I wish were set upon his Grave.

Hic Johnsonus noster Lyricorum, Dramaticorumque Coryphaeus, qui Pallade
auspice laurum a Graecia ipsaque Roma rapuit, and fausto Omine in Brittaniam
transtulit nostram, nunc invidia major, fato, nec tamen aemulis cessit. An Dom.
1637. Id. Nov. Wood, Antiq. Oxon.


Thomas JORDAN.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, who could both
write and act Plays; as appears from three Drammas he has published, and from a
Tragedy, called Messalina, in which he acted the part of Lepida, Mother to that
shameless Empress. His Plays are two Comedies, and a Masque; viz.

Fancies Festivals, a Masque, printed 4o. Land. 16 -- This, I have not at
present, but have formerly read it with satisfaction, and still retain the
following Lines spoken by a Soldier; God, and the Soldier, Men alike adore,
Just at the brink of danger, and no more:
The danger past both are alike requited,
God is forgotten, and the Soldier slighted.


Money is an Ass, a Comedy acted with good applause printed 4o. Land. 1668. I
suppose by the Style, this was writ (and possibly published) some Years before;
it being a common thing with Mr. Kirkman, to publish old Plays; as, Any thing
for a Quiet Life; Cure for a Cuckold; Gammer Gurton's Needle, and many others.

Walks of Islington, and Hogsdon, with the Humors of Woodstreet-Compter; a
Comedy, publicly acted Nineteen Days together, with extraordinary applause;
printed 4o. Land. 1657. and dedicated to the true Lover of Ingenuity, the much
Honored Richard Cheyny, of Hackney, Esquire This Play in those days was commended
by a Copy of Verses, written by R. C. Master of Arts; part of which are thus:
These Walks 'twixt Islington and Hogsdon, will
(Like those 'twixt Tempe and Parnassus Hill)
Show, how the Muses in their sportfull Rage,
Set all the Town a walking to your Stage,
With so much Wit, and Art, and Judgment laid,
That Nineteen days together they were played.
Now by the bounty of the Press we be
Possessed of that which we before did see,
Not pleasing only Nineteen times read over,
But Nineteen Ages, or till Times no more.


William JOYNER.
A Gentleman born in Oxfordshire, and Educated in Magdalen College, where he
was sometime Fellow; but upon the Change of his Religion, or in order to it, he
voluntarily quitted his Place, in the beginning of the Wars. After he left the
College, he betook himself to a retired Life, never intermedling with the
Controversies of Religion, or the Affairs of State: which prudent Demeanor,
joined with the Sweetness of his Disposition, continued him in the Favor and
Good Will of the Society; till the New-modelling of the College, under the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners; by whom he was re-placed in his former Station:
but did not long enjoy it, the College being shortly after again restored to
its former Settlement. That he did not wholly bid Adieu to the Muses, when he
first withdrew from the University, may appear by a Dramma that he published
under the Name of

The Roman Empress, a Tragedy acted at the Royal Theater by his Majesty's
Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1671. and dedicated to the Honorable Sir Charles
Sidley. This Play in spite of a dead Vacation, and some other Impediments,
found the applause and approbation of the Theater, as often as it appeared. The
Author has proposed the Oedipus and Hippolitus for his pattern; and I think it
may justly deserve to be observed, That his Tragedy is writ in a more
Masculine, and lofty Style than most Plays of this Age; and Terror and
Compassion being the chief hinges on which he designed his Tragedy should turn;
he has judiciously rejected what he calls the Gingling Antitheses of Love and
Honor. By the Advice of Friends, he tells us, that he has disguised the
Names: yet that this Emperor was One of the Greatest that ever Rome boasted. I
am apt to believe, that under the Character of Valentius, the Author means
Constantine the Great; and that Crispus, and his Mother-in-law Faustina, are
shadowed under the Characters of Florus and Fulvia: but this being only
Conjecture, I must leave it to the Critics Decision.

Our Author has nothing else in print that I know of, except a little Book
entitled Some Observations on the Life of Cardinal Reginal dus Polus; where he
disguises his Name under these two Letters, G. L. which I take to be Guilielmus
Lyde, the Ancient Name of that Family: It Is printed 8o. Land. 1686. In this
Book, the Reader is made acquainted not only with the Authors Reading, Style,
and Judgment; but his skill in the French, and Italian, Languages.

K.
Henry KILLEGREW.
AN Author who lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, and writ a Play,
called Conspiracy, a Tragedy printed 4o. Land. 1638. This Play was designed for
an Entertainment of the King and Queen at York-House, at the Nuptials of the
Lady Mary Villiers, and the Lord Charles Herbert. 'Twas afterward acted on the
Black-fryars Stage, Preface.
and found the approbation of the most Excellent Persons of this kind of
Writing which were in that time, if there were ever better in any time; Ben
Johnson, being then alive, who gave a Testimony of this Perce even to be
envied. Some Cavillers at its first Representation at Blackfryars, exclaimed
against the Indecorum that appeared in the part of Cleander, who being
represented as a Person of seventeen years old, is made to speak words, that
would better suit with the Age of Thirty; saying, It was monstrous and
impossible: but the Author was sufficiently vindicated by the Lord Viscount
Faulkland, who made the following Repartee, to One of these Hypercriticks; Sir,
it is not altogether so monstrous, and impossible, for One of Seventeen Years to
speak at such a rate; when He that made him speak in that manner, and writ the
whole Play, was Himself no Older. This Impression was printed without the
Authors consent, from a false and an imperfect Transcript, the Original Copy
being (with the Author) in Italy; so that it might rather be called the First
Design, or Foul Draught, than a True Copy. This occasioned a new Edition, and
the Publisher imposed on it a New Title, that it might show as little Affinity
as possible, to (what he calls) its Antitype; stiling it,

Pallantus and Eudora, a Tragedy, printed fol. Land. 1653. To this Edition, I
recommend the Reader, remembering that of Martial. Multum creed mihi, refert, a
font bibatur
Quae stuit, an pigro quae stupet unda lacu.


Thomas KILLEGREW.
A Gentleman well known at Court, having been Page of Honor to King Charles
the First, and Groom of the Bedchamber to King Charles the Second, with whom
he endured twenty Years Exile. During his abode beyond Sea, he took a view of
France, Italy, and Spain; and was Honored by his Majesty with the Creditable
Employ of Resident at the State of Venice, whither he was sent in August 1651.
During his Absence from his Country, he diverted himself with the Muses,
writing several Plays, of which Sir John Denham (in a jocular way) takes
notice in his Copy of Verses on our Author's Return from his Embassy from
Venice Denbam's Poems, p. 70.
.

I.
Our Resident Tom,
From Venice is come,
And has left the Statesman behind him:
Talks at the same pitch,
Is as wise, is as rich,
And just where you left him you find him.
II.
But who says he was not
A man of much Plot
May repent that false Accusation;
Having plotted and penned
Six Plays to attend
The Farce of his Negotiation.
Though Sir John Denham mentions but six, our Author writ nine Plays in his
Travells, and two at London; amongst which his Don Thomaso, in two parts, and
his Parson's Wedding, will always be valued by the best Judges and Admirers of
Dramatick Poetry. Of these Eleven Plays, I shall speak in their Order.

Bellamira her Dream, or Love of Shadows, a Tragi-comedy, the first Part,
printed fol. Land. 1663. written in Venice, and dedicated to the Lady Mary
Villiers, Duchess of Richmond and Lenox.

Bellamira her Dream, the second Part, a Tragi-comedy, written in Venice;
printed fol. Land. 1663. and dedicated to the Lady Anne Villiers, Countess of
Essex.

Cicilia and Clorinda, or Love in Arms, a Tragi-comedy, the first Part, printed
fol. Land. 1663. written in Turin, and dedicated to the Lady Anne Villiers,
Countess of Morton.

Cicilia and Clorinda, the second Part, a Tragi-comedy printed fol. Land. 1663.
written in Florence in August 1651. and dedicated to the Lady Dorothy Sidney,
Countess of Sunderland. The first Scene between Amadeo, Lucius, and Manlius,
seems copied from the Characters of Aglatidas, Artabes, and Megabises, in the
Grand Cyrus; see the History of Aglatidas and Amestris, Part 1. Book 3.

Claracilla, a Tragi-comedy, printed Folio Land. 1663. written in Rome, and
dedicated to his Dear Sister the Lady Shannon. On this Play, and The Prisoners,
Mr. Carthwright has writ an ingenious Copy of Verses, which the Reader may find
amongst his Poems, p. 258.

Parson's Wedding, a Comedy printed Folio Land. 1663. written at Basil in
Switzerland, and dedicated to the Lady Ursula Bartu, Widow. This Play was
revived at the Old Theater, in little Lincolns-Inn-fields, and acted all by
Women, a new Prologue and Epilogue being spoken by Mrs. Marshal in Man's
Clothes, which the Reader may find printed in Covent Garden Drollery, 8o. page
3. etc. The Intrigue of Careless and Wild circumventing the Lady Wild, and Mrs.
Pleasance into Marriage, is an Incident in several Plays, as Ram-Alley,
Antiquary, etc. but in none so well managed as in this Play.

Pilgrim, a Tragedy printed Fol. Land. 1663. written in Paris in the Year 1651.
and dedicated to the Countess of Carnarvan.

Princess, or Love at first sight, a Tragi-comedy printed Fol. Land. 1663.
written in Naples, and dedicated to his Dear Niece, the Lady Anne Wentworth,
Wife to the Lord Lovelace.

Prisoners, a Tragi-comedy printed Fol. Land. 1663. written in London, and
dedicated to his Dear Niece, the Lady Crompton.

Thomaso, or The Wanderer, a Comedy in two Parts, printed Fol. Land. 1663. and
dedicated to the Fair and Kind Friends of Prince Palatine Polexander. In the
first part of this Play the Author has borrowed several Ornaments, as the Song
sung by Angelica Act 2. Sc. 3. is taken from Fletcher's Play called The Captain
Act 4. He has made use of Ben Johnson considerably, for not only the Character
of Lopus, but even the very Words are copied from Johnson's Fox, where Vulpone
personates Scoto of Mantua: as the Reader will see by comparing Act 4. Sc. 2.
of this Play, with that of the Fox, Act 2. Sc. 2. I do not believe that our
Author designed to conceal his Theft, since he is so just to acknowledge a Song
against Jealousy, which he borrowed, and was written by Mr. Thomas Carew,
Cup Bearer to King Charles the First; and sung in a Masque at Whitehall, An.
1633. This Chorus (says he) I presume to make use of here, because in the first
design, 'twas writ at my request, upon a Dispute held betwixt Mrs. Cicilia
Crofts and my self, where he was present; she being then Maid of Honor: this I
have set down, lest any man should believe me so foolish as to steal such a
Poem from so famous an Author; or so vain as to pretend to the making of it my
self. Certainly therefore, if he scrupled to rob Mr. Carew, he would much more
Mr. Johnson, whose Fame as much exceeded the others, as his Writings and
Compositions are better known: However it be, I am sure he is not the only Poet
that has imp'd his Wings with Mr. Johnson's Feathers, and if every Poet that
borrows, knew as well as Mr. Killegrew how to dispose of it, 'twould certainly
be very excusable. All these Plays are printed together in One Volume in Folio
Land. 1664.

Sir William KILLEGREW.
A Gentleman who by his Writings, and honorable Station in the Court (being
Vice-Chamberlain to the Queen Dowager,) is well known. He is the Author of Four
Plays, which have been applauded (whether with Justice or no I leave to the
Critics) by Men, who have themselves been reputed Eminent for Poetry, as Mr.
Waller, Sr. Robert Stapleton, Mr. Lodowick Carlell, and others: I shall
therefore only acquaint the Reader with their several Titles, and submit them
to his further judgment.

Ormasdes, or Love and Friendship, a Tragi-Comedy.

Pandora, or The Converts, a Comedy.

Selindra, a Tragi-comedy.

Siege of Urbin, a Tragi-comedy.

All these Plays were printed together in Folio, Oxon 1666.

There is another Play ascribed to our Author called The Imperial Tragedy,
printed Fol. Land. 1669. the chief part was taken out of a Latin Play, and
very much altered by him for his own diversion. But upon the Importunity of
Friends, he was prevailed with to have it published; but without Name: because
many do censure Plays according to their Opinions of the Author: The Plot is
founded on the History of Zeno the Twelfth Emperor of Constantinople after
Constantine. Several Authors have writ his Story, as Marcellinus, Cassiodorus,
Cedrenus, Evagrius, Zonoras, Baronius, etc.

John KIRK.
A Writer, in the Reign of King Charles the First, of a Play called The Seven
Champions of Christendom: acted at the Cockpit, and at the Red Bull in St.
John's Street, with a general liking; printed 4o. Land. 1638. and dedicated to
his much respected and worthy Friend Mr. John Wait. This Play is written in a
mixed style, and founded on that well known Book in prose, which bears the same
Title. See besides Dr. Heylin's History of St. George.

Ralph KNEVET.
An Author that lived about the same time with the former. He writ a Play
called Rhodon and Iris, a Pastoral, presented at the Florists Feast in Norwich,
May the Third 1631. printed 4o. Land. 1631. and dedicated to the Right
Worshipful Mr. Nicholas Bacon of Gillingham Esquire. This Pastoral is commended
by Four Copies of Verses.

Thomas KYD.
An Ancient Writer, or rather Translator in the time of Queen Elizabeth, who
published a Play called Pompey the Great his Fair Cornelia's Tragedy; effected
by her Father and Husband's Down-cast, Death, and Fortune; printed 4o. Land.
1595. and dedicated to the Virtuously Noble, and rightly Honored Lady, the
Countess of Sussex. This Play is translated from the French of Robert Garnier,
who in the Reigns of Charles the Ninth, Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth,
was accounted an Excellent Poet, though M. Rapin says, His Tragedies with those
of Rotrou, Serre, and others of that time, are of a mean Character. It Is
evident to any that have read his Tragedies, which are Nine in Number, that he
proposed Seneca for his Model, and he was thought in those days to have happily
succeeded in his Design. This Translation is writ in blank Verse, only here and
there, at the close of a Paragraph (if I may so speak) the Reader is presented
with a Couplet. The Chorus's are writ in several Measures of Verse, and are
very sententious.

L.
John LACY.
A Comedian whose Abilities in Action were sufficiently known to all that
frequented the King's Theater, where he was for many years an Actor, and
performed all Parts that he undertook to a miracle: in so much that I am apt to
believe, that as this Age never had, so the next never will have his Equal, at
least not his Superior. He was so well approved of by King Charles the Second,
an undeniable Judge in Dramatick Arts, that he caused his Picture to be drawn,
in three several Figures in the same Table. viz. That of Teague in the
Committee, Mr. Scruple in The Cheats, and M. Galliard, in The Variety: which
piece is still in being in Windsor-Castle. Nor did his Talent wholly ly in
Acting, he knew both how to judge and write Plays: and if his Comedies are
somewhat allied to French Farce, it is out of choice, rather than want of
Ability to write true Comedy. We have Three Plays extant under his Name, viz.

Dumb Lady, or The Farriar made Physician, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal;
printed 4o. Land. 1672. and dedicated to the Highborn and most Hopeful Prince,
Charles, Lord Limrick, and Earl of Southampton. This Play is founded on a
Comedy of Molliere's called Le Medecin malgre luy. If the Reader will take the
pains to compare them together, he will easily see that our Author has much
improved the French Play.

Old Troop, or Monsieur Ragou, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal; printed 4o.
Land. 1672. and dedicated to the young Prince George Third Son to the Duchess
of Cleveland. I fancy by the style, this Play likewise is founded on some
French Original, though my small Acquaintance with French Poets makes me speak
only on Conjecture. Both these Plays were acted with universal Applause.

Sir Hercules Buffoon, or The Poetical Squire, a Comedy acted at the Duke's
Theater, and printed 4o. Land. 1684. This Play was brought upon the Stage, and
published after the Author's Decease, the Prologue was writ by Mr. Durfey, the
Epilogue by Jo. Heyns the Comedian, and both spoken by the later. I know not
how this Play succeeded on the Theater, but I am confident had the Author been
alive to have graced it with his Action, it could not have failed of Applause.
This Mr. Durfey has observed in the beginning of his Prologue; Ye Scribbling
Fops, (cry mercy if I wrong ye)
But without doubt there must be some among ye.
Know, that famed Lacy, Ornament of the Stage
That Standard of true Comedy in our Age,
Wrote this New Play:
And if it takes not, all that we can say on it,
Is, we have his Fiddle, not his Hands to play on it.


John LEANARD.
A confident Plagiary, whom I disdain to style an Author: One, who though he
would be esteemed the Father, is at best but the Midwife to the Labor of
others; I mean those Two Dramatick Pieces, which go under his Name. I know not
how they were received on the Stage, but I am sure the Author deserved (though
the Plays might not) to be damned for his vainglorious Humor of re-printing
another Man's Play, under his own Name, as he has done Mr. Brewer's Country
Girl, under the Title of

Country Innocence, or The Chambermaid turned Quaker, a Comedy acted at the
Theater Royal, printed 4o. Land. 1677. and dedicated to his Honored Friend Sr.
Francis Hinchman. Whether his Patrons Instructions Epistle Dedicatory.
raised him to that height of presumption as to publish another man's Play as
his own, I pretend not to judge: but I am sure he has sufficiently made appear
to the World that he is One of those Authors he speaks of, whose Arrogance and
Impudence are their chief dependency. Had our Author been as well acquainted
with Martial, as he pretends to be with Homer, he would have weighed his
Opinion before he had made any progression as he calls it in his Thefts. Lib.
1. Epigr. 67.


Mutare dominum non potest liber notus. --
Aliena quisquis recitat, and petit famam;
Non emere Librum, sed silentium debet.
Rambling Justice, or The Jealous Husbands, with the Humors of Sir John
Twiford, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal; printed 4o. Land. 1680. A great
part of it is stolen from a Comedy of Middleton's called More Dissemblers
besides Women. As the Scene between Sir General Amorous and Bramble Act 2. Sc.
1. is stolen from the Scene between Lactantio and Dondolo. Act 3. Sc. 1.
Petulant Easy disguised like a Gipsy in the same Act, is borrowed from
Aurelia's Disguise in Middleton's Play, Act 4. Sc. 1. The Scene between Bramble
and the Gypsies is stolen from the same Play; but since our Author is forced to
strole like One of that Tribe for a Livelihood, with the Issue of other Men's
Brains, I leave him to his hard Stars: though possibly Gipsy-like, he begs with
stolen Children, that he may raise the more Compassion.

Nathaniel LEE.
An Author whose Plays have made him sufficiently remarkable to those who call
themselves The Wits; and One whose Muse deserved a better Fate than Bedlam. How
truly he has verified the Saying of the Philosopher, Nullum fit Magnum-Ingenium
sine mixtur a dementiae even to the Regret and Pity of all that knew him, is
manifest: I heartily wish his Madness had not exceeded that Divine Fury which
Ovid mentions, and which usually accompanies the best Poet; Est Deus in nobis
agitante calescimus illo.
But alas! his Condition is far worse, as it has been described in a Satyr on
the Modern Poets.

There In Bedlam.
, in a Den removed from human Eyes
Possessed with Muse, the Brain-sick-Poet lies,
Too miserably wretched to be named;
For Plays, for Heroes, and for Passion famed
Thoughtless he raves his sleepless Hours away,
In Chains all Nights, in darkness all the Day.
And if he gets some intervals from pain,
The Fit returns; he foams, and bites his Chain,
His Eye Balls roll, and he grows mad again.
However, before this misfortune befell him, he writ several Dramatical Pieces,
which gave him a Title to the First Rank of Poets; there being several of his
Tragedies, as Mithridates, Theodosius, and:c. which have forced Tears from the
fairest Eyes in the World: his Muse indeed seemed destined for the Diversion of
the Fair Sex; so soft and passionately moving, are his Scenes of Love written.
He has published Eleven Plays, besides those two, in which he joined with Mr.
Dryden (and of which we have already spoken) viz.

Caesar Borgia, Son to Pope Alexander the VI. a Tragedy acted at the Duke's
Theater, by their Royal-Highnesses Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1680. and
dedicated to the Right Honorable Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery. For
the Plot, see Writers of those times, as Guicciardine, L. 5, 6. Mariana L. 27,
28. Sr. Paul Ricaut's Continuation of Platina, in the Reign of Pope Alexander
the VI.

Constantine the Great, a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal by their Majesty's
Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1684. Many are the Authors that have writ the
Actions of this Illustrious Emperor, as Socrates, Sozomen, Eusebius, Zonaras,
Eutropius, Ruffinus, Baronius, etc. The Story of Crispus and Fausta, is
particularly related (as I think) in Ammianus Marcellinus: See besides Beard's
Theater of God's Judgments, Chapter 13. p. 225.

Gloriana, the Court of Augustus Caesar, a Tragedy in Heroic Verse, acted at
the Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1676. and
dedicated to her Grace the Duchess of Portsmouth. The Plot I take to be rather
founded on Romance than History, as the Reader will find by comparing the Play
with the Romance of Cleopatra, in the several Stories of Caesario, Marcellus
Julia; Part 1. Book 3. Part 5. Book 3. Ovid, Cypassis and Julia, Part 7. Book
3. A Modern Poet, in a Satyr writ in Imitation of Sir John Suckling's Session
of the Poets, writes thus of our Author and this Play Rochester's Poems, p. ^11.
: Not Lee stepped in next, in hopes of a Prize,
Apollo remembered he had hit Once in Thrice;
By the Rubies in 's Face, he could not deny,
But he had as much Wit, as Wine could supply;
Confessed that indeed he had a Musical Note,
But sometimes strained so hard, that it rattled
in the Throat;
Yet owned he had Sense, to encourage him for 't,
He made him his Ovid in Augustus's Court.


Lucius Junius Brutus, Father of his Country, a Tragedy, acted at the Duke's
Theater, by their Royal Highnesses Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1681. and
dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. This
Play well deserved so great a Patron as his Lordship, few Plays that I know,
being writ with more Manly Spirit, Force and Vigor. For the Plot our Author
has partly followed History, partly Romance: For History, consult Floras Lib.
1. Chapter 9, 10. Livy Lib. 1. Dionysius Hallicarnassaeus, Eutropius, Sextus Rufus,
Orosius, etc. For Fiction, read in the Romance called Clelia, The History of
Junius Brutus, Part 2. Book 1. p. 170. Part 3. Book 1. p. 229.

Massacre of Paris, a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1690. This Play is founded on that Bloody Massacre
which was acted on St. Bartholomew Day, in the Year 1572. For the Story,
consult Thuanus, Davila, Lib. 5. Pierre Matthieu, or, (as some say) Monliard
his Continuation of De Serres, Mezeray and other Historians in the Reign of
Charles the IX. Several passages in the Duke of Guise, are borrowed from this
Play, as the Reader may find by comparing p. 6. of the former, with p. 4. of
the latter; p. 11. with p. 5. p. 13. with p. 5. and 6, etc.

Mithridates Kings of Pontus, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants: printed 4o. Land. 1678. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. This Play may be reckoned
amongst those of The First-Rank, and will always be a Favorite of the
Tenderhearted Ladies. It is founded on History: See Appian de Bell. Mithrid.
Florus l.3.c.5. Vell. Paterculus, l. 2. Plutarch in the Lives of Scylla,
Lucullus and Pompey, etc.

Nero Emperor of Rome his Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's
Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1675. and dedicated to the Right Honble the Earl of
Rochester. This Play is writ in a mixed Style, part in Prose, part in Rhyme, and
part in Blank Verse. For the Plot, consult Suetonius in his Life; Aurelius
Victor; Tacitus Ann. lib. 13, 14, etc. Sulpicius Severus, etc.

Princess of Cleve, a Tragi-comedy, acted at the Queen's Theater in Dorset
Garden; printed 4o. Land. 1689. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain of his present Majesty's
Household, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. This Play is
founded on a Romance called The Princess of Cleves, translated from the French.
The Invective against Women, spoken by Poltrot Act 5. Sc. 1. is printed in
several Books of Poetry, and may be read in a Romance called The French Rogue,
8o. chapter 21. p. 132. The Author tells his Patron, Epist. Ded.
That the Duke of Guise has wrested two Scenes from the Original; but which
they are I have not time to enquire.

Rival Queens, or The Death of Alexander the Great, a Tragedy acted at the
Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants, printed Land. 1677. and dedicated
to the Right Honorable John, Earl of Mulgrave. This Play has always been
applauded by the Spectators, and is acknowledged a Masterpiece by Mr. Dryden
himself, in that Copy of Verses prefixed to it, which are a sufficient
Testimony of its worth. The Prologue was written by Sir Car Scroop. For the
Plot, as far as the Author has followed History, consult Arrian; Q. Curtius;
Plutarch's Life of Alexander; Justin lib. 11, 12. Diodorus Siculus, lib. 17.
and 18. Josephus lib. 11. cap. 8.

Sophonisba, or Hannibals Overthrow, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1676. and dedicated to her Grace
the Duchess of Portsmouth. This Play is writ in Heroic Verse, and has always
appeared on the Stage with applause; especially from the Female Sex: and Envy
it self must acknowledge, That the Passion between Massanissa, and Sophonisba,
is well expressed; though Hannibal and Scipio's Parts fall somewhat short of the
Characters given them by Historians; as the Ingenious and Sharp Lord Rochester
has observed, in his Allusion to Horace's Tenth Satyr of the First Book; When
Lee makes temperate Scipio, sret and rave;
And Hannibal, a whining Amorous Slave,
I laugh, and wish the Hot-brained Fustian-Fool,
In Busby's Hands to be well lasht at School.


As our Author has taken the Liberty in several Plays to follow Romances, so
possibly he purposely erred with the late Earl of Orrery, who in his first Part
of Parthenissa, has represented the Warlike Hannibal as much in Love with
Izadora, as Mr. Lee has described him passionate of Rosalinda's Charms. Many
Historians have writ the Actions of these Great Men: see Cornelius Nepos his
Life of Hannibal; Plutarch's Life of Scipio; and that of Hannibal, fathered on
him, though supposed to be writ by Donatus Acciajolus: Livy Dec. 3. Lib. 1. etc.
Florus Lib. 2. C. 6. Justin, Orosius, Diodorus, Polybius, Appian, etc. Those
who understand Italian, may read the Story of Massanissa, and Sophonisba, very
neatly described by the Excellent Pen of Petrarch, in his Il Trionfo d'Amore,
C. 2.

Theodosius, or The Force of Love, a Tragedy acted by their Royal-Highness's
Servants, at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1680. and dedicated to her
Grace, the Duchess of Richmond. The Passions are extremely well drawn in this
Play, and it met with its deserved Applause: and our Author has said with as
much Truth as Modesty Epist. Dedicat.
, That such Characters Every Dawber cannot draw. This Play is founded on a
Romance called Pharamond, translated from the French of Mr. Calpranede. See the
History of Varannes, Part 3. Book 3. p. 282. Of Martian. Part 7. Book 1. p.
207. Of Theodosius Part 7. Book 3. p. 256.

I know nothing else that our Author has in Print; and therefore I shall
conclude with that just Commendation given him and Mr. Otway, by Mr. Evelyn, in
his Imitation of Ovid's Elegy ad Invidos Tate's Collection of Poems, 8o. p. 90.
.

When the aspiring Grecian He alludes to The Rival Queens.
in the East,
And haughty Philip To Don Carlos.
is forgot in the West,
Then Lee and Otway's Works shall be suppressed.
John LILLY.
An Ancient Writer, living in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: he was a Kentish
Man, and in his younger Years brought up in St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxon.
where in the Year 1575. he took his Master of Arts Degree. He was a very close
Student, and much addicted to Poetry; a Proof of which he has given the World
in Nine Plays, he has bequeathed to Posterity, and which in that Age, were well
esteemed both by the Court and the University. He was One of the first Writers,
that in those Days attempted to reform our Language, and purge it from obsolete
Expressions. Mr. Blount, a Gentleman, who has made himself known to the World,
by the several Pieces of his own Writing, (as Horae Subsecivae, his
Microcosmography, etc.) and who published fix of these Plays; in his Title Page
styles him, The only Rare Poet of that Time, The Witty, Comical,
Facetiously-Quick, and Unparalleled John Lilly.

It Is not to be expected that I should any where trace this Author, if the
Character Mr. Blount gives of him in his Epistle Dedicatory, be true; That he
sat at Apollo's Table; that Apollo gave him a Wreath of his own Bays, without
Snatching; and that the Lyre he played on, had no borrowed Strings. The Reader
therefore is only to expect a short Account of his Titles Alphabetically.

Alexander and Campaspe, a Tragical-Comedy played before the Queens Majesty, on
Twelfth-day at Night, by her Majesty's Children, and the Children of Paul's,
and afterward at the Black-fryars; printed 120. Land. 1632. The Story of
Alexander's bestowing Campaspe on the Enamored Apelles, is related by Pliny in
his his Natural History, Lib. 35 L.10.

Endymion, a Comedy presented before Queen Elizabeth, by the Children of her
Majesty's Chapel, and the Children of Paul's; printed 120 Land. 1632. For the
Story of Endimion's being beloved by the Moon, with Comments upon it, may be
met with in most of the Mythologists: See Lucian's Dialogues between Venus and
the Moon; Natalis Comes, Lib. 4. C 8. Hygini Poeticon Astronomicon; Fulgentii
Mythologia; Galtruchius's History of the Heathen Gods, Lib. I. C. 9. M.
Gombauld has writ a Romance, called Endymion, translated in English, printed
octavo 1639.

Galathea, a Comedy played before the Queens Majesty at Greenwich, on New Years
Day at Night, by the Children of Paul's; printed 120. Land. 1632. In the
Characters of Galathea and Phillidia, the Poet has copied the Story of Iphis
and Janthe, which the Reader may find at large In Ovid's Metamorphosis,
Lib.9.Cap.12.

Love's Metamorphosis, a Witty and Courtly Pastoral, first played by the
Children of Paul's, and now by the Children of the Chapel; printed 4o. Land.
1601.

Maid's Metamorphosis, a Comedy, sundry times acted by the Children of Paul's;
printed 4o. Land. 1600. The first Act is wholly writ in Verse, and so is the
greatest part of the Play.

Mother Bombie, a Pleasant Conceited Comedy, sundry times played by the
Children of Paul's; printed 120. Land. 1632.

Mydas, a Comedy, played before the Queens Majesty upon Twelfth-day at Night;
printed 120. Land. 1632. For the Story, see Ovid's Metamorphosis, Lib. II.
Fab.4. Natalis Comes, Lib. 9. Cap. 15. Galtruchius, Book 2. Ch.5. Apuleius has
writ the Story at large in his Aureus Asinus, etc.

Sapho and Phao, a Comedy, played before the Queens Majesty on Shrove-Tuesday,
by her Majesty's Children, and the Children of Paul's, and afterward at the
Black-fryars; printed 120. Land. 1632. This Story the Reader may learn from
Ovid's Epistle of Sapho, to Phaon, Ep. 21.

Woman in the Moon, a Comedy, presented before Her Highness, printed 4o. Land.
1667.

Six of these Plays, viz. Alexander and Campaspe, Endymion, Galathea, Mother
Bombie, Mydas, Sapho and Phao, are printed together, under the Title of Six
Court Comedies, 120. Land. 1632. and dedicated by the above mentioned Mr.
Blount, to the Right Honorable Richard Lumley, Viscount Lumley of Waterford.
The other three are printed single in 4o. By which it appears how and Mr.
Philips Page 113.
and his Transcriber Mr. Winstanley Page 97.
are mistaken, in affirming, That all Mr. Lilly's Plays are printed together in
a Volume: Not are they less mistaken in ascribing to him a Play called Warning
for fair Women, it being writ by an Anonymous Author.

I presume our Author may have other Pieces in print, though I have not been so
happy to see them: Mr. Blount seems to mention a Book styled Euphues, Epistle
to the Reader.
Our Nation (says he) are in his Debt for a new English which he taught them;
Euphues and his England began first, that Language: All our Ladies were then
his Scholars; and that Beauty in Court, which could not Parley Eupheisme, was
as little regarded, as She which now there, speaks not French.

Thomas LODGE.
A Doctor of Physic in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; who was not so entirely
devoted to AEsculapius, but that during his Residence in the University of
Cambridge, he sometimes sacrificed to Apollo, and the Nine Sisters. Mr. Philips
says Page 178.
, That he was One of the Writers of those pretty old Pastoral Songs and
Madrigals, which were very much the Strain of those Times. But it is not in
Lyrick Poetry alone that he exercised his Pen, but sometimes he exercised it in
Dramatick likewise, in which way he has publish two Pieces, viz.

Looking-Glass for London and England, a Tragi-comedy, printed 4o. Land. 1598.
in an old Black-Letter. In this Play our Author was assisted by Mr. Robert
Green, of whom we have given an Account p. 241. This Drama is founded on Holy
Writ, being the History of Jonas and the Ninevites, formed into a Play. I
suppose they chose this Subject in Imitation of others who had writ Dramas on
Sacred Subjects long before them; as Ezekiel, a Jewish Dramatick Poet, writ the
Deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt; Gregory Nazianzen, or as some say,
Apollinaris of Laodicea, writ the Tragedy of Christ's Passion: as I learn from
the Learned Vossius Addend Lib. 2 Inst. Poet.
. To these I might add Hugo Grotius, Theodore Beza, Petavius, etc. all which
have built upon the Foundation of Sacred History.

Wounds of Civil War, lively set forth in the true Tragedies of Marius and
Silla, publicly Played in London, by the Right Honorable the Lord High
Admiral his Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1594. For the Plot, consult Plutarch in
the Lives of Marius and Silla; Velleius Paterculus, Lib.2. Salust. de Bello
Jugurth. T. Livius, Lib.66. Brev. Florus, Lib. 3. C. 3. Aurelius Vistor;
Eutropius, etc.

This Author (as Mr. Winstanley says) Page 72.
was an Eminent Writer of Pastoral Songs, Odes, and Madrigals; of which he
cites a pretty Sonnet, which is said to be of his Composure: and he has
transcribed another in praise of Rosalinde, out of his Euphue's Golden-Legacy.
This Book I never saw; and know nothing else of our Author's Writing, except a
Treatise of the Plague, printed 4o. Land. 1600. As to the Plays ascribed to him
by Mr. Philips and Mr. Winstanley, in which he is made an Associate with Mr.
Robert Green, I have already showed their mistakes in the Account of that
Author, to which I refer the Reader.

Sir William LOWER.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, who during the
beat of our Civil Wars, took Sanctuary in Holland, where in peace and privacy
he enjoyed the Society of the Muses. He was a great Admirer of the French
Poets, and bestowed some times and pains in dressing some Plays in an English
Garb: besides what, he has writ himself in his Mother Tongue. So that we are
obliged to him for six Plays, viz.

Amorous Phantasin, a Tragi-comedy printed at the Hague 120. 1658. and
dedicated to her Highness The Princess Royal. This Play is translated from the
French of M. Quinault's Le Fanto^me Amoureux, which appeared with success on
the French Stage.

Enchanted Lovers, a Pastoral; printed at the Hague 120. 1658.

Horatius, a Roman Tragedy; printed 4o. Land. 1656. This Play is Translated
from the French of Mr. Corneille; and as it is the first Version we had of that
Admirable Play, I think it ought to be excused, if it come short of the
Excellent Translation of Mr. Cotton, and the Incomparable Orinda. For the
Story, consult Livy, Lib. 1. Florus, Lib. 1. C.3. Dionysius Hallicarnassaeus,
Cassiodorus, etc.

Noble Ingratitude, a Pastoral Tragi-comedy, printed at the Hague 120. 1658.
and dedicated. to Her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia. Our Author is fully
persuaded, that this Epist. Dedic.
Play is in the Original One of the best Dramatick Pieces, that has been
presented on the French Stage: and undoubtedly M. Quinault is an Excellent
Poet, notwithstanding the Raillery of the Sharp-witted Boileau Sat. 2.
.

Si je pense exprimer un Auteur sans default,
La Raison dit Virgile, and la Rhyme Quinault.
Phoenix in her Flames, a Tragedy, printed 4o. Land. 1639. and dedicated to the
Right Worshipful, his most Honored Cousin, Thomas Lower Esquire. This Play was
written before our Author was Knighted, and I take it to be the first he writ.

Polyeuctes, a Tragedy; Printed 4o. Land. 1655. For the true Story, consult
Coeffeteau Hist. Romans Surius de Vitis Sanctorum. As to the Incidents of the
Dream of Paulina, the Love of Severus, the Effectual Baptism of Polyeuctes, the
Sacrifice for the Emperors Victory, the Dignity of Felix, the Death of
Nearchus, the Conversion of Felix and Paulina, they are all of them the
Author's Invention.

Three of these Plays; viz. Amorous Phantasm, Enchanted Lovers, Noble
Ingratitude, were printed together at the Hague, during the Author's Exile; and
at His Majesty's Return, the Remainder of the Copies were purchased by Mr.
Kirkman, who printed new Titles in the Year 1661.

Thomas LUPON.
I am able to recover nothing of this Author, either as to the time of his
Birth, the Place where he lived, or any thing he writ, besides a Tragedy
mentioned in former Catalogues, called

All for Money, which I never saw.

M.
Lewis MACHIN.
A Gentlemen that lived in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr; the Author of
a single Play, called

Dumb Knight, an Historical Comedy, acted sundry times by the Children of his
Majesty's Revels; printed 4o. Land. 1633. Our Author has borrowed several
Incidents from Novels; as the Story of Mariana her Swearing Prince Philocles to
be Dumb, Act 2. is borrowed from Bandello's Novells, as I have read the Story,
translated by Belleforest Tom. 1. Nov. 13. The same Incident is in a Play,
called The Queen, or The Excellency of her Sex. Alfonsos' Cuckolding Prate the
Orator, Act 3. and the latter appearing before the Council, and pleading in
Alfonso's Clothes, whilst he is brought before the King in the Orator's Habit,
Act 5. is borrowed (as I remember) from another of Bandello's Novels; and the
English Reader may meet with the same Story in The Complaisant Companion,
octavo p. 246.

John MAIDWEL.
An Ingenious Person, still living (as I suppose) in London; where some time
ago he undertook the Care and Tuition of young Gentlemen, and kept a Private
School; during which Employment, besides some other Performances, (with which
he has obliged the World) he has borrowed so much time as to write a Play,
styled

Loving Enemies, a Comedy acted at his Highness the Duke of York's Theater;
printed 4o. Land. 1680. and dedicated to the Honorable Charles Fox Esquire.
The part of Circumstantio, seems to me to resemble the Humor of Sir Formal
Trifle; especially the Description of the Magpies sucking a Hen's Egg, Act 4.
Sc. 1. is writ much after the same way with that of the Mouse taken in a Trap,
See Virtuoso, Act 3. toward the End. The Epilogue to this Play, is writ by Mr.
Shadwell.

Jasper MAIN.
A Person of Fame and Note, as well for Natural Parts, as acquired Learning. He
was Born in the Reign of King James the First, at Hatherleigh, etc. His
Education was at Westminster School; from whence be was transplanted to
Christ-Church, and admitted Student A.D. 1624. In this College he gradually
advanced in the Study of Arts and Sciences, till he took both his Degrees, and
entered into holy Orders, and was preferred to two Livings, both in the Gift of
the College, and one hardby Oxford. About this time the Civil Wars breaking
out, and the Pious King being forced by wicked Subjects, to fly for shelter to
this Seat of the Muses: our Author was made choice of amongst others deputed to
Preach before His Majesty. Soon after which, Mr. Wood tells us, he was created
Dr. of Divinity, and resided in Oxford till the time of the Mock Visitation
sent to the University, when he, amongst other Worthies eminent for their
Loyalty, was ejected not only from the College, but both his Livings. During
this Storm, he found an Asylum in the House of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Devonshire, where for the most part he resided, till the Happy Return of King
Charles the Second to his Kingdoms; at which time, he was not only restored to
his Places, but made Canon of Christ-church, and Archdeacon of Chichester;
which Preferments he enjoyed to his Death. He was a Person of a ready and
facetious Wit, and yet withal, a sound, Orthodox Preacher. In his younger
years, he was very much addicted to Poetry, in which time he writ two Plays,
which are very much esteemed by the generality of those who delight in
Dramatick Poetry.

Amorous War a Tragi-comedy, printed 4o Oxon. 1658.

City Match, a Comedy acted before the King and Queen at Whitehall, and
afterward on the Stage at Black-friars, with general Applause, and printed 4o.
Oxon. 1658. These two Plays, have been printed in Folio, 4o. and 8o. and are
bound together.

Besides these Dramatick Pieces our Author writ a Poem, upon the Naval Victory
over the Dutch by the Duke of York, printed 1665. and added some Dialogues to
those of Lucian translated by Mr. Francis Hicks, printed Fol. Land. 1638. He
published likewise many serious Pieces, as several Sermons in 4o. 1646 -- 47 --
52 -- 62. Amongst which, none was so much talked of, as that concerning false
Prophets. It was, if I mistake not, writ against by Mr. Francis Cheynel, which
occasioned our Authors Vindication published 1647. He writ besides (...) or The
Peoples War examined, according to the Principles of Scripture and Reason, in
answer to a Letter, for the satisfation of a Person of Quality, printed 4o. --
1647. with several other Pieces which I have not seen.

He Died on the Sixth day of December, An. 1672. and was Buried in
Christ-Church on the North-side of the Quire: having in his Will left several
Bequests to Pious uses. As Fifty Pounds to the Re-building of St. Paul's; A
Hundred Pounds to be distributed by the Two Vicars of Cassington and Purton,
for the use of the Poor of those Parishes, with many other Legacies: amongst
which I cannot forget One, which has frequently occasioned Mirth at the
relation. He had a Servant who had long lived with him, to whom he bequeathed a
Trunk, and in it Somewhat (as he said) that would make him Drink after his
Death. The Doctor being dead the Trunk, was speedily visited by his Servant
with mighty Expectation, where he found this promising Legacy to be nothing but
a Red-Herring: So that it may be said of him, that his propensity to innocent
Raillery was so great, that it kept him Company even after Death.

Cosmo MANUCH.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, and One that as
I suppose took up Arms for his Majesty, under the Quality of a Major, though
whether of Horse or Foot I am ignorant. Mr. Phillips Modern Poets, p. 29.
supposes him an Italian, stiling him Manuci; but whatever his Country be, he
has writ Two Plays which show him well versed in the English Language; viz.

Just General, a Tragi-comedy printed quarto Land. 1650. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable James Earl of Northampton, and Isabella, his most Virtuous
Lady. This is the first Play our Author writ, and which was intended for the
Stage, but never acted: not that it is any ways contemptible; and therefore the
Major did not forfeit his Modesty when he said of it, Prologue to the Reader.


In spite of Malice, venture I dare thus far,
Pack not a Jury, and I Will stand the Bar.
Loyal Lovers, a Tragi-comedy printed 4o. Land. 1652. In this Play our Author
lashes the old Committee Men, and their Informers, in the Persons of Gripeman
and Sodom, and I believe he meant to expose Hugh Peters's Adventure with the
Butcher's Wife of St. Sepulcher's, with his Revenge thereupon, under the
Characters of Phanaticus and Fly-blow. If my Conjecture prove true I hope no
sober man will be angry, that Peter's should be personated on the Stage, who
himself had ridiculed others, when he acted the Clown's part in Shakespeare's
Company of Comedians, as I have read in Dr. Young's Relation of his Life.

If it be considered that our Author's Muse was traveste en Cavileer; that he
made Writing his Diversion, and not his Business; that what he writ was not
borrowed but propria Minerva, I hope the Critics will allow his Plays to pass
Muster amongst those of the third Rate.

Gervase MARKHAM.
A Gentleman who flourisht under the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and
King Charles the First: for the later of whom he took up Arms, in the time of
the Rebellion: being honored by His Majesty with a Captain's Commission. He
was the Son of Robert Markham of Cotham, in the County of Nottingham Esquire and
was eminently Famous for his numerous Volumes of Husbandry, and Horsemanship:
besides what he has writ on Rural Recreations, and Military Discipline. He
understood the Practick as well as the Theory of the Art of War: and was
esteemed a good Scholar, and an excellent Linguist, understanding perfectly the
French, Italian, and Spanish Languages, from all which he collected Notes of
Husbandry. In the enumeration of his Works the Reader will be satisfied of his
excellent Parts and Abilities: and that he was tam Marti quam Mercurio, versed
in the Employments of War and Peace: and One piece of Dramatick Poetry which he
has published, will show that he Sacrificed to Apollo, and the Muses, as well as
to Mars and Pallas. This Play is extant under the Title of

Herod and Antipater, a Tragedy printed 4o. Land. 1622. where, or when this
Play was acted the imperfection of my Copy hinders my information. For the
Foundation it is built on History. See Josephus Ant. Jud. Lib. 14, 15, 16, and
17. Torniel, Salian, Spondanus, Baronii Ann. etc

I shall now mention his Works, and first those which treat of Horsemanship,
which have made him Famous all over England. Of these he has writ A Discourse
of Horsemanship, printed 4o. without Date, and dedicated to Prince Henry Eldest
Son to King James the First. Cure of all Diseases incident to Horses, 4o. 1610.
English Farriar, 4o. 1649. Masterpiece, 4o. 1662. Faithful Farriar, 8o. 1667.
Perfect Horseman, 120. 1671. For Husbandry he published Liebault's Le Maison
Rustique, or The Country Farm, Fol. Land. 1616. This Treatise (which was at
first translated by Mr. Richard Surflet, a Physician) our Author enlarged with
several Additions from the French Books of Serres and Vinet, the Spanish of
Albiterio, and the Italian of Grilli, and others. The Art of Husbandry, first
translated from the Latin of Conr. Heresbachius, by Barnaby Googe, he revised
and augmented, 4o. 1631. He writ besides, Farewell to Husbandry, 4o. 1620. Way
to get Wealth, wherein is comprised his Country Contentments, printed 4o. 1668.
To this I may add Hungers Prevention, or his Art of Fowling, 8o. His Epitome,
120. etc. In Military Discipline, he has published The Soldiers Accidence, and
Grammar, 4o. 1635. Besides these the second part of the First Book of The
English Arcadia is said to be writ by him: insomuch that he may be accounted if
not Unus in Omnibus, at least a Benefactor to the Public, by those Works he
left behind him, which will (without doubt) eternise his Memory.

Christopher MARLOE.
An Author that was Cotemporary with the Incomparable Shakespeare, and One who
trod the Stage with Applause both from Queen Elizabeth, and King James. Nor was
he accounted a less Excellent Poet by the Judicious Johnson: and Heywood his
Fellow Actor, styles him, the Best of Poets. In what esteem he was in his time
may be gathered from part of a Copy of Verses writ in that Age, called a
Censure of the Poets, where he is thus Uncharacterized.

Next Marlow bathed in the Thespian Springs,
Had in him those brave Sublunary things,
That your First-Poets had; his Raptures were
All Air and Fire, which made his Verses clear;
For that fine Madness still he did retain,
Which rightly should possess a Poet's Brain.
His Genius inclined him wholly to Tragedy, and he has obliged the world with
Seven Plays of this kind, of his own Composure, besides One, in which he joined
with Nash, called Dido Queen of Carthage, which I never saw. Of the others take
the following Account.

Dr. Faustus his Tragical History, printed 4o. Land. 1661. There is an old
Edition which I never saw, but this is printed with new Additions of several
Scenes. The Plot, or the Foundation of this Play, may be read in several
Authors, as Camerarei Hor. Subcisiv. Cent. 1. Wierus de Praestigiis Daemonum,
Lib. 2. Cap. 4. Lonicerus, etc.

Edward the Second, a Tragedy printed 4o. Land. -- I know not the Date, or the
Stage where this Play was acted, through the defect of my Title Page. For the
Plot consult the Historians, that have writ on those Times, as Ranulphus
Higden, Walsingham, Math. Westminster. Especially those that have more
particularly writ his Life, as Thomas de la More. Sr. Fr. Hubert, etc.

Jew of Malta, a Tragedy played before the King and Queen, in her Majesty's
Theater, at Whitehall, and by her Majesty's Servants at the Cockpit, printed
4o. Land. 1633. (after the Author's Decease) and dedicated (by Mr. Thomas
Heywood the Publisher) To his Worthy Friend Mr. Thomas Hammon of Gray's- Inn.
This Play was in much esteem, in those days the Jew's Part being played by Mr.
Edward Allen, that Ornament both to Black-friars Stage, and to his Profession;
to the One on Account of of his excellent Action, to the Other of his exemplary
Piety in founding Dulwich Hospital in Surrey. What Opinion Mr. Heywood had of
the Author and Actor, may be seen by the beginning of his Prologue spoke at the
Cockpit.

We know not how our Play may pass this Stage,
But by the best of Poets Marloe.
in that Age
The Malta Jew had being, and was made:
And He, then by the best of Allen.
Actors played:
In Hero and Leander, A Poem.
one did gain
A lasting Memory: in Tamberlain,
This Jew, with others many: the other wan
The Attribute of peerless; being a Man
Whom we may rank with (doing no one wrong)
Proteus for Shapes, and Roscius for a Tongue.
Lust's Dominion, or The Lascivious Queen a Tragedy published by Mr. Kirkman 8o.
Land. 1661. and dedicated to his worthily honored Friend William Carpenter
Esquire. This Play was altered by Mrs. Behn, and acted under the Title of
Abdelazer, or The Moor's Revenge.

Massacre of Paris, with the Death of the Duke of Guise; a Tragedy, played by
the Right Honorable the Lord Admiral's Servants, printed octavo Land. -- This
Play is not divided into Acts; it begins with that fatal Marriage between the
King of Navarre and Marguerite de Valois, Sister to King Charles the Ninth, the
Occasion of the Massacre; and ends with the Death of Henry the Third of France.
For the Plot, see the Writers of those times, in the Reigns of these two Kings,
Chapter IX. and Henry III. Thuanus, Davila, Pierre Matthieu, Dupleix, Mezeray, etc.

Tamburlain the Great, or The Scythian Shepherd, a Tragedy in two parts; sundry
times acted by the Lord Admiral's Servants, printed in an old Black-Letter
octavo Land. 1593. Had I not Mr. Heywood's Word for it, In the forementioned
Prologue, I should not believe this Play to be his; it being true, what an
ingenious Author said Sander's Preface to Tamerlane.
, That whoever was the Author, he might even keep it to himself, secure from
Plagiary.

For the Story, see those that have writ his Life in particular, as Pietro
Perondini, M. St. Sanctyon, Du Bec, etc. and those that have treated of the
Affairs of Turks and Tartars in general, in the Reigns of Bajazet and
Tamerlane, as Laonicus, Chalcocondylas, Pet. Bizarus, Knolles, etc.

He writ besides a Poem, called Hero and Leander; Whose mighty Lines (says One
Bosworth's Poems, Pref.
) Mr. Benjamin Johnson, a Man sensible enough of his own Abilities, was often
heard to say, that they were Examples sitler for Admiration, than Parallel. This
Poem being left imperfect by our our Author, who (according to Mr. Philips
Modern Poet:, p. 24.
) In some riotous Fray, came to an untimely and violent End; it was finished by
Mr. Chapman, and printed octavo Land. 1606.

Shakerley MARMION.
A Gentleman born in the Reign of King Charles the First, at Ainoe, (in Sutton
Hundred) in the County of Northampton, about the beginning of January A. D.
1602. He was bred up at Thame-School, in Oxfordshire, and at fifteen Years of
Age was sent to the University of Oxford, where he became a Member of Wadham
College, and in 1624. he took his Master of Arts Degree. What further became
of him, I know not, all that I am able to inform the Reader, is, that he was
the Author of three Comedies, which have formerly been well approved, viz.

Antiquary, a Comedy, acted by her Majesty's Servants at the Cockpit, and
printed quarto Land. 1641. Aurelio's declaring his Marriage to the Duke and
Leonardo, from Lucretia's Lodging, where he got in by her Maid's Assistance, is
an Incident (as I have already showed) in several Plays.

Fine Companion, a Comedy acted before the King and Queen at Whitehall, and
sundry times with great applause at the Private House in Salisbury-court, by
the Prince's Servants; printed quarto Land. 1633. and dedicated to the truly
Noble, and his worthy Kinsman in all respects, Sir Ralph Dutton. The Reader
will find that Captain Porpuss, in Sir Barnaby Whig, is beholding to Captain
Whibble in his Play, for some of his Expressions.

Holland's Leaguer, an Excellent Comedy, often acted with great Applause, by
the High and Mighty Prince Charles his Servants, at the Private House in
Salisbury-court, printed quarto Land. 1632. The Author in this Play has showed
his Reading, having borrowed several things from Juvenal, Petronius Arbyter,
etc.

Mr. Winstanley has made no mention of our Author, and Mr. Philips Modern
Poets, p. 170.
to prove his Character of him, that he is not an Obscure or Uncopious Writer
of English Comedy, has ascribed two Comedies to him, which belong to other Men;
the Fleire being writ by Edward Sharpham, and the Fair Maid of the Exchange (if
we may believe Kirkman's Account) by Thomas Heywood.

John MARSTON.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King James the First, who was a
Contributor to the Stage in his Time, by Eight Plays which were approved by the
Audience at the Black-fryars, and one of them, viz. Dutch Curtezan, was some
few Years since, revived with success on the present Stage, under the Title of
The Revenge, or The Match in Newgate.

The place of our Author's Birth, and Family, are to me unknown, neither can I
recover other Information of him, than what I learnt from the Testimony of his
Bookseller Ep. Ded. to his Plays, 8o.
; That he was free from all Obscene Speeches, which is the chief cause that
makes Plays to be so odious unto most Men. That he abhorred such Writers and
their Works, and professed himself an Enemy to all such as stufft their Scenes
with Ribaldry, and larded their Lines with Scurrilous Taunts and Jests: So that
whatsoever even in the Spring of his Years, he presented upon the private and
public Theater, in his Autumn and Declining Age he needed not to be ashamed
of. An Excellent Character! and fit for the Imitation of our Dramatists; most
of whom would be thought to have thoroughly studied Horace: I could wish
therefore, that they which know him so well, would call to Mind and practice
his Advice; which is thus expressed De Art Poetica.
, Silvis deducti caveant, me judice, Fauni, --
Ne nimiu^ teneres juvenentur versibus unquam,
Aut immunda crepent, ignominiosaque dicta.
Offenduntur enim quibus est equus, and pater and res.


But leaving this, I shall give the Reader an Account of his Plays in their
Accustomed Order: having first informed him, that six of our Author's Plays are
collected into one Volume, being published under the Title of The Works of Mr.
John Marston, printed octavo Land. 1633. and dedicated to the Right Honorable,
the Lady Elizabeth Carry, Viscountess Faulkland. According to the Alphabet, I
am to begin with, viz.

Antonio and Melida, a History acted by the Children of Paul's, printed octavo
Land. 1633.

Antonio's Revenge, or The Second part of Antonio and Melida; frequently acted
by the Children of Paul's, printed in octavo. These two Plays were likewise
printed in quarto above 30 Years before this new Edition, viz. 1602.

Dutch Curtezan, a Comedy diverse times presented at the Black-fryars, by the
Children of the Queens Majesty's Revels; printed in octavo Land. 1633. This
Play was published long before in quarto viz. 1605. Cockledemoy's cheating Mrs.
Mulligrub the Vintner's Wife, of the Goblet and the Salmon, is borrowed from an
old French Book called Les Contes du Monde: see the same Story in English, in a
Book of Novels, called The Palace of Pleasure, in the last Novel.

Insatiate Countess, a Tragedy acted at the White-fryars, printed quarto Land.
1603. It being a common custom with our Author to disguise his Story, and to
personate real Persons, under feigned Characters: I am persuaded that in this
Play, under the Title of Isabella, the Insatiable Countess of Suevia; he meant
Joane the First Queen of Jerusalem, Naples, and Sicily: and I doubt not but the
Reader who will compare the Play with the History, will assent to my
conjecture. Many are the Writers that have related her Life, as Collenuccio,
Simmoneta, Villani, Montius, etc. but I refer my English Reader to Dr. Fuller's
Profane State. Chapter 2. That her Life has been the Subject not only of History,
but of Poetry and Novels also, is manifest from this Play, and the Novels of
Bandello, who has related her Story under the Title of The Inordinate Life of
The Countess of Celant. This Novel is translated into French by Belleforest,
Tom. 2. Nov. 20. and possibly our Author might build his Play on this
Foundation. The like Story is related in God's Revenge against Adultery, under
the Name of Anne of Werdenberg, Duchess of Ulme: See Hist. 5.

Male Content, a Tragicomedy, the first Design being laid by Mr. Webster, was
corrected and augmented by our Author, printed 4o. Land. 1604. and dedicated in
the following Style to Ben Johnson: Benjamini Johnsonio, Poetae Elegantissimo,
Gravissimo, Amico suo candido and cordato, Johannes Marston, Musarum Alumnus,
asperam hanc suam Thaliam D. D. Notwithstanding our Authors profession of
Friendship, he afterward could not refrain from reflecting on Mr. Johnson, on
Account of his Sejanus, and Catiline, as the Reader will find in the perusal of
his Epistle to Sophonisba: Know (says he) that I have not labored in this Poem
to relate any thing as an Historian, but to enlarge every thing as a Poet. To
transcribe Authors, quote Authorities, and translate Latin Prose Orations into
English Blank-Verse, has in this Subject been the least aim of my Studies.
That Mr. Johnson is here meant, will I presume be evident to any that are
acquainted with his Works, and will compare the Orations in Salust, with those
in Catiline. On what provocations our Author thus censured his Friend I know
not, but this Custom has been practiced in all Ages; the Old Proverb being
verified in Poets as well as Whores, Two of a Trade can never agree. It Is
within the Memory of Man, that a Play has been dedicated to the late witty Earl
of Rochester, and an Essay upon Satyr from the same Hand has bespattered his
Reputation: So true it is that some Poets Are still prepared to praise or to
abhor us,
Satyr they have and Panegyric for us.
But begging pardon for this Digression, I return to the Play, which I take to
be an honest general Satyr, and not (as some malicious Enemies endeavored to
persuade the World) designed to strike at any particular Persons.

Parasitaster, or The Fawn, a Comedy diverse times presented at the Black-fryars
by the Children of the Queens Majesty's Revels; printed 80. Land. 1633. This
Play was formerly printed in quarto 1606. The Plot of Dulcimel her cozening the
Duke by a pretended Discovery of Tiberio's Love to her, is borrowed from
Boccace's Novels, Day 3. Nov. 3. This Novel is made use of as an Incident in
several other Plays, as Flora's Vagaries, Soldiers Fortune; and Nymphadoro's
Humor of Loving the whole Sex, Act. 3. Sc. 1. is copied from Ovid's Amor. Lib.
2. Eleg. 4.

What you will, a Comedy printed 8o. Land. 1633. Francisco's zanying the Person
and Humor of Albano, is an incident in several Plays, as Mr. Cowley's
Guardian, Albumazer, etc. though I presume the Design was first copied from
Plautus his Amphitruo. This I take to be one of our Authors best Plays.

Wonder of Women, or Sophonisba her Tragedy, sundry times acted at the
Black-fryars, and printed in 8o. Land. 1633. This Play is founded on History;
see Livy, Dec. 3. Lib. 10. Corn. Nepos in Vit. Annibal. Polibius, Appian,
Orosius. The English Reader may read this Story lively described by the
Judicious Sir W. Rawleigh, in his History of the World, Book the 5.

Mr. Phillips Modern Poets, p. 113.
, and Mr. Winstanley English Parnassus, p. 137.
have created him the Author of a Play called The Faithful Shepherd, which I am
confident is none of his; and have ommitted his Satyrs, which rendered him more
eminent than his Dramatick Poetry. The Title is The Scourge of Villainy, in
three Books of Satyrs, printed in 8o. Land. 1598. Mr. Fitz-Geoffry
abovementioned, in the Account of Daniel and Johnson, writ in their
Commendation the following Hexastick Affamarum, Lib. 2.
.

Ad Johannem Marstonem.
Gloria Marstoni Satyrarum proxima primae,
Primaque, fas primas si numerare duas;
Sin primam duplicare nefas, tua gloria saltem
Marstoni primae proxima semper eris.
Nec te paeniteat stationis, Jane: secundus,
Cu^ duo sint tantum, est neuter; at ambo pares.
John MASON.
I can give the Reader no Account of this Author, further, than he was a Master
of Arts in the time of King James the First, about the middle of whose Reign he
published a Play styled,

Muleasses the Turk, a Worthy Tragedy, diverse times acted by the Children of
his Majesty's Revels, printed 4o. Land. 1610. Whether this Play deserved the
Title of Worthy, I shall not determine: but that the Author had a good Opinion
of it, seems apparent from his Lemma in the Title Page, borrowed from Horace;
Sum superbiam quaesitam meritis.


Philip MASSINGER.
This Author was Born at Salisbury, in the Reign of King Charles the First;
being Son to Philip Massinger, a Gentleman belonging to the Earl of Montgomery,
in whose service after having spent many years happily, he Died. He PHILIP
MASSINGER.
bestowed a liberal Education on our Author, sending him to the University of
Oxford, at Eighteen years of Age viz. 1602. where he closely pursued his
Studies in Alban-Hall, for Three or Four years space. How he spent his Life
afterward I know not: but it is evident that he dedicated a great part of his
Studies to Poetry, from several Plays which he has published, and which were
highly esteemed of by the Wits of those times, for the purity of Style, and the
Economy of their Plots; for which Excellency he is thus commended by an old
Poet: Ingenious Shakespeare, Massinger, that knows
The Strength of Plot, to write in Verse, and Prose;
Whose Easy Pegasus will ramble over
Some Threescore Miles of Fancy in an Hour.
He was extremely beloved by the Poets of that Age, and there were few but what
took it as an Honor to club with him in a Play: witness Middleton, Rowley,
Field, and Deckers: all which joined with him in several Labors. Nay, further
to show his Excellency, the ingenious Fletcher, took him in as a Partner in
several Plays, as I have already hinted, p. 217. He was a Man of much Modesty
and extraordinary Parts, and were it not that I fear to draw Envy on our Poets
Memory, I could produce several Testimonials in confirmation of this truth:
however I will give the Reader one Instance for many, being the Testimony of a
Worthy Gentleman, Sir Thomas Jay: You may remember, how you chid me, when
I rankt you equal those glorious Men
Beaumont and Fletcher: if you love not praise,
You must forbear the publishing of Plays.
The crafty Mazes of the cunning Plot;
The polisht Phrase; the sweet Expressions, got
Neither by theft, nor violence; The Conceit
Fresh, and unsullied; All is of weight,
Able to make the Captive Reader know,
I did but Justice, when I placed you so.


Our Author has published Fourteen Plays of his own Writing, besides those in
which he joined with other Poets. We shall begin with a Play called

Bashful Lover, a Tragi-comedy often acted at the private House in
Black-friars, by His Majesty's Servants, with great Applause, printed 8o. 1655.

Bondsman, an ancient Story, often acted with good allowance at the Cockpit in
Drury Lane, by the most Excellent Princess the Lady Elizabeth her Servants,
printed 4o. Land. 1638. and dedicated to the Right Honorable and his Singular
good Lord Philip Earl of Montgomery. The Plot of the Slaves being seduced to
Rebellion by Pisander, and reduced by Timoleon, and their flight at the sight
of the Whips; is borrowed from the Story of the Scythian Slaves Rebellion
against their Master. See Justin L.1.C.5.

City Madam, a Comedy acted at the private House in Black-friars with great
Applause, printed 4o. Land. 1659. for Andrew Pennycuicke, One of the Actors,
and dedicated by him to the truly Noble and Virtuous Lady, Anne, Countess of
Oxford. This is an Excellent old Play.

Duke of Millain, a Tragedy printed in 4o. tho when, or where acted I know not,
my Copy being imperfect. As to the Plot, I suppose Sforza's giving orders to
his Favorite Francisco, to murder his beloved Wife the Duchess Marcelia, was
borrowed from the History of Herod, who on the like occasion left orders with
his Uncle Joseph to put his beloved Mariamne to Death; as the Reader may see in
Josephus, Lib. 15. Cap. 4.

Emperor of the East, a Tragi-comedy diverse times acted at the Black-friars,
and Globe Playhouses, by the King's Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1632.
and dedicated to the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, John Lord
Mohune, Baron of Oke-hampton. This Play is commended by three Copies of Verses,
One of which was writ by Sir Aston Cockain. For the Play, it is founded on the
History of Theodosius the Younger. See Socrates L. 7. Theodoret L.5. Nicephorus
L. 14. Baronius, Godeau, etc.

Fatal Dowry, a Tragedy often acted at the private House in Black-friars, by
His Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1632. This Play was writ by our
Author and Mr. Nathaniel Field (of whom I have already spoken). The behavior
of Charalois in voluntarily choosing imprisonment to ransom his Fathers Corpse,
that it might receive Funeral Rights; is copied from the Athenian Cymon, that
admirable Example of Piety so much celebrated by Valerius Maximus, Lib. 5. C.4.
Ex.9. Plutarch and Cornelius Nepos notwithstanding make it a forced Action, and
not voluntary.

Guardian, a Comical History often acted at the private House in Black-fryars
by his late Majesty's Servants, with great Applause, printed 8o. Land. 1655.
Severino's cutting off Calipso's Nose in the dark, taking her for his Wife
Jolantre, is borrowed from the Cimerian Matron a Romance 8o. the like Story is
related in Boccace Day 8. Nov. 7.

Great Duke of Florence, a Comical History often presented with good allowance
by her Majesty's Servants at the Phoenix in Drury Lane, printed 4o. Land. 1636.
and dedicated to the truly Honored and his noble Favourer, Sir Robert Wiseman
of Thorrel's- Hall in Essex. This Play is commended by two Copies of Verses,
One of which was writ by Mr. John Ford, of whom we have already spoken p. 219.
The false Character given the Duke of the Beauty of Lidia, by Sanasarro,
resembles the Story of King Edgar and Duke Ethelwolph in his Account of the
Perfections of Alphreda. As the Reader may find the Story related in our
English Chronicles that have writ the Reign of Edgar, as Speed, Stow, Baker,
etc.

Maid of Honor, a Tragi-comedy often presented with good allowance, at the
Phoenix in Drury Lane, by the Queen's Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land.
1632. and dedicated to his most Honored Friends, Sir Francis Foliambe, and Sir
Thomas Bland. A Copy of Verses is prefixed to the Play, writ by Sir Aston Cokain.

New way to pay Old Debts, a Comedy often acted at the Phoenix in Drury Lane,
by the Queens Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1633. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable Robert Earl of Carnarvan. This Play is deservedly commended by
the Pens of Sir Henry Moody, and Sir Thomas Jay, abovementioned.

Old Law, or A new Way to please you, an excellent Comedy acted before the King
and Queen at Salisbury-house, and at several other places with great applause,
printed 4o. Land. 1656. In this Play our Author was assisted by Mr. Middleton,
and Mr. Rowley. At the End of it is printed a Catalogue of Plays, which though
styled perfect in the Title Page, is far from it: for besides abundance of
Typographical Faults, there are many other gross Errors: several pieces being
mentioned under the Title of Plays which are of a different Species; for
Instance Virgil's Eclogues are inserted under the Name of a Tragedy etc.

Picture, a Tragi-comedy, often presented with good allowance at the Globe and
Black-Fryars Play Houses, by the King's Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land.
1636. and dedicated to his Honored, and Selected Friends of the Noble Society
of the Inner Temple. This Play was acted by those excellent Players of the last
Age, Lowin, Tailor, Benfield, etc. and is commended by his true Friend, Sir
Thomas Jay. The Plot of Sophia's decoying the two debaucht Courtiers Richardo
and Ubaldo, who attempted her Chastity, is related in a Book of Novels in
octavo, called The Fortunate, Deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers, see Nov. 4. of
the Deceived Lovers: but this Story is I suppose originally Italian, this Book
being a Collection from Italian Novels.

Renegado, a Tragi-comedy often acted by the Queens Majesty's Servants, at the
private Playhouse in Drury Lane, printed 4o. Land. 1630. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable George Harding, Baron of Barkley of Barkley-Castle, and Knight
of the Honorable Order of the Bath. This Play is likewise commended by two
Copies of Verses; One of which was writ by Mr. James Shirley.

Roman Actor, a Tragedy acted diverse times with good allowance at the private
House in the Black-fryars, by the King's Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. 1629.
and dedicated to his much Honored, and most True Friends, Sir Philip Knivet,
Sir Thomas Jay, and Thomas Bellingham of Newtimber in Sussex Esquire. This Play
is commended by Six Copies of Verses writ by several Dramatick Poets of that
Age, as May, Goss, Ford, etc. For the Plot read Suetonius in the Life of
Domitian, Aurelius Victor, Eutropius, Lib. 7. Tacitus, Lib. 13. etc.

Very Woman, or The Prince of Tarent, a Tragi-comedy often acted at the private
House in the Black-fryars, by His late Majesty's Servants with great applause,
printed 8o. Land. 1655. Our Author owns See Prologue.
this Play to be founded on a Subject which long before appeared on the Stage:
though what Play it was I know not. I have already acquainted the Reader Page 69.
with the Resemblance between the Plot of this Tragi-comedy, and The Obstinate
Lady. This Play, with The Bashful Lover, and The Guardian, are printed together.

Virgin Martyr, a Tragedy acted by His Majesty's Servants with great applause,
printed 4o. Land. 1661. In this Play our Author took in Mr. Thomas Decker for
Partner. I presume the Story may be met with in the Martyrologies which have
treated of the Tenth Persecution in the time of Dioclesian, and Maximian. See
Rossweidus, Valesius, etc.

Unnatural Combat, a Tragedy presented by the King's Majesty's Servants at the
Globe, printed 4o. Land. 1639. and dedicated to his much Honored Friend,
Anthony Sentliger of Oukham in Kent, Esquire. This Old Tragedy (as the Author
tells his Patron) has neither Prologue nor Epilogue, it being composed in a
time, when such By-ornaments, were not advanced above the Fabric of the whole
work.

I know nothing else of our Authors Writings, and therefore must hasten to the
last Act of his Life, his Death; which happened at London in March 1669. On the
Seventeenth of the same Month he was Buried in St. Mary Overies Church in
Southwark, in the same Grave with Mr. Fletcher. What Monument, or Inscription
he has I know not; but shall close up our Account of this Ingenious Poet, with
the following Epitaph writ by Sir Aston Cokain, Epigrams, L. 1. Ep. 100.


An Epitaph on Mr. John Fletcher, and Mr. Philip Massinger, who lay both buried
in one Grave, in St. Mary Overy's Church, in Southwark.

In the same Grave Fletcher was buried, here
Lies the Stage Poet, Philip Massinger:
Plays they did write together, were great
Friends,
And now one Grave includes them in their Ends.
So whom on Earth nothing did part, beneath
Here (in then Fame) they lie, in spite of Death.
Thomas MAY.
This Gentleman, was born in Sussex of an ancient but somewhat declining
Family, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. He was for some Years bred a Scholar
in the University of Cambridge, being Fellow-Commoner of Sidney College.
During his Abode there, he was a very close Student, and what Stock of Learning
he then treasured up, is apparent from his Works, which are in print. He
removed afterward to London, following the Court, where he contracted
Friendship with several Eminent Courtiers, amongst others with the accomplished
Endymion Porter, Esquire One, of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber; a
Gentleman so dear to Sir William D'Avenant, that he styled him Poems, p. 233.
Lord of his Muse and Heart. Whilst he resided at Court, he writ the five Plays
which are extant, and possibly his other Pieces. Dr. Fuller says of him
Worthies Sussex, p. 110.
, That some Disgust at Court was given to, or taken by him, (as some would have
it) because his Bays were not gilded richly enough, and his Verses rewarded by
King Charles, according to expectation. Mr. Philips Page 179.
and Mr. Winstanley Page 164.
insinuate, That being Candidate with Sir William D'Avenant, for the Honorable
Title of the Queen's Poet, and being frustrate in his Expectations, out of mere
Spleen, as it is thought, for his Repulse, he vented his Spite in his History
of the late Civil Wars of England; wherein, Mr. Winstanley says, he showed all
the Spleen of a Male-contented Poet, making thereby his Friends his Foes, and
rendering his Name odious to Posterity. Whether this Accusation be true, or no,
I know not; but I am sure his Enemies must allow him to be a good Poet, though
possibly he fell short of Sir William D'Avenant: and though I no ways abet his
self Opinion, yet I learn from Horace, that even Ill Poets, set a value on
their Writings, though they are despised by others; Ridentur mala qui componunt
Carmina, verum
Gaudent Scribentes, and se venerantur, and ultro,
Si taceas, laudant, quicquid scripsere beati.
And therefore I hope the moderate Critic will bear with the Frailty of our
Author: and I doubt not but if they will read his Works with Candor, and
especially his Plays, they will find he had some Reason for his Opinion of what
he writ. I shall first give the Reader a succinct Account of his Plays as
follows:

Agrippina Empress of Rome, her Tragedy, printed 120. Land. 1639. Our Author
has followed Xiphilinus, Tacitus, and Suetonius, in the Designing his Tragedy:
and besides has translated and inserted above 30. Lines from Petronius Arbyters
Satyricon Act. 4.
, being a Translation of those Verses recited by Eumolpus, beginning

Orbemjam totum victor Romanus habebat, etc. and concluding with -- Siculo
scarus aequore mersus
Ad mensam vivus perducitur, --
Now although this is patly enough applied by our Author, he having introduced
Nero at a Banquet, commanding Petronius to write a Satyr against those
Pleasures he used to commend; yet methinks Mr. May, having such a particular
Value for Lucan, as to translate his Pharsalia, he should not have inserted
what was purposely writ against this particular Work; as may be gathered from
the foregoing Speech, Ecce Belli Civilis ingens Opus, etc. but rather have left
it to such a Man as Douza, who (as a French Author has observed) could no
longer endure the Fire and Tempest of Lucan, when he read the I take the first
to be spoke of Virgil's AEn.
Taking of Troy; or that The second of Petronius his Poem abovementioned.
little Essay of the War of Pharsalia, which he declared to love much better
quam trecenta Cordubensis illius Pharsalicorum versuum Volumiua. The first Act
of this Play has been ill corrected, four pages of it being printed twice over.

Antigone, the Thebane Princess her Tragedy, printed 8o. Land. 1631. and
dedicated to the most Worthily Honored Endymion Porter Esquire. Our Author in
the Contexture of this Tragedy has made use of the Antigone of Sophocles, and
the Thebais of Seneca. The Reader may see besides Statius's Thebais, etc.

Cleopatra Queen of Egypt her Tragedy, acted 1626. and printed 120. Land.
1639. and dedicated to the Accomplished Sir Kenelme Digby. The Author has
followed the Historians of those times, as Appian. de Bellis Civilibus lib. 5.
Plutarch's Life of M. Anthony, Suetonius's Life of Augustus. Florus lib. 4.
Dion, etc. He has borrowed besides several other Embelishments, as Calimaccus's
Epigram upon Timon the Misanthropist; an Account of the Ancient Lybian Psylls,
so famous for curing the Venomous Bites of Serpents, by sucking the wound,
related by Pliny, lib. 7. c. 2. and by Solinus, etc.

Heir, a Comedy acted by the Company of Revels 1620. printed 4o. Land. 1633.
This Comedy is extremely commended by the already mentioned Mr. Thomas Carew,
in a Copy of Verses affixed to the Play; where amongst other Commendations
bestowed on the Style, and the Natural working up of the Passions, he says thus
of the Economy of the Play: The whole Plot does alike it self disclose,
Through the Five Acts, as does a Lock, that goes
With Letters, for till every one be known,
The Lock's as fast, as if you had found none.
I believe there are few Persons of Judgment that are true lovers of Innocent
and inoffensive Comedy, but will allow this to be an Excellent Play.

Old Couple, a Comedy printed 4o. Land. 1651. This Play is not much short of
the former, and is chiefly designed an Antidote against Covetousness.

Mr. Philips Page 179.
and Mr. Winstanley Page 164.
ascribe two other Plays to our Author, viz. The Old Wives Tale, and Orlando
Furioso; the first of these I never saw, but for the latter, I assure my
Reader, it was printed long before our Author was born, at least before he was
able to guide a Pen, much less to write a Play, it being printed 4o. Land. 1594.

But though he has no more Plays, he has other pieces extant in print; as the
Translation of Lucan's Pharsalia 8o. Land. 1635. which Poem our Author has
continued down to the Death of Julius Caesar, in VII Books both in Latin and
English Verse. I have already given you Douza's Character of this Poem, to
which I might add that of Scaliger, Rapin, and other Critics; but this being
somewhat foreign to my present Subject, I shall wave it, and content my self
with acquainting my Reader, That however pompous and splendid the French
Version of Brebeuf has appeared in France, our English Translation is little
inferior to it; and is extremely commended by our Famous Johnson, in a Copy of
Verses prefixed before the Book well worth the Reader's perusal. He translated
besides Virgil's Georgicks, printed with Annotations 8o. Land. 1622. Mr.
Philips mentions a History of Henry the Second, writ by him in Verse, and a
History of the late Civil Wars of England in Prose; neither of which have I
seen, and therefore pretend not to determine whether he were a partial Writer
or no. Only give me leave to conclude in the Words of Dr. Fuller; That if he
were a biased and partial Writer, yet that he lies buried near a good and
true Historian indeed, viz. Mr. Cambden, in the West Side of the North-Isle of
Westminster Abbey, dying suddenly in the Night, A.D. 1652. in the 55th Year of
his Age. I know not how Mr. Winstanley happened to omit the Transcript of so
memorable a passage, since he has elsewhere borrowed so largely from this
Worthy Author, as well as Mr. Philips, without either of them acknowledging the
least obligation to him.

Robert MEAD.
An Author that lived in the Reigns of King James, and King Charles the First,
and was sometime a Member of Christ-Church College in Oxford, as I learn from
the Title Page of a Play, called

Combat of Love and Friendship, a Comedy, formerly presented by the Gentlemen
of Christ-Church in Oxford, and printed 4o. Land. 1654. This Play was published
after the Authors decease, at that time when the Muses were banished the
Theater. I wish I were able to give the Reader a better Account of our Author:
But being destitute of other Information, this Gentleman having wholly escaped
the Industry of Mr. Wood, I must be beholding for what I have borrowed, to the
Stationer's Epistle to the Reader; where he tells us, That he had been a
Person, whose Eminent and General Abilities, have left him a Character precious
and honorable to our Nation; and therefore the Reader is not to look upon this
Composition, but as at a stoop, when his youth was willing to descend from his
then higher Contemplation. He tells us, that he could say more in his Honor,
but that he was so great a lover of Humility in his Life, that he was almost
afraid, being dead, he might be displeased to hear his own worth remembered.

Mr. Philips through his old Mistake ascribes to him The Costly Whore; though I am
almost confident the Play is not of his Writing: and that those that believe it
so, have taken up their Opinion upon Conjecture.

Matthew MEDBOURN.
An Actor belonging to the Duke's Theater, in the Reign of King Charles the
Second. One, whose good parts deserved a better fate than to die in Prison, as
he did in the time of the late Popish-Plot; through a too forward and indiscreet
Zeal for a mistaken Religion. Ten Years before the Discovery of that
Conspiracy, our Author published a Play, called

Tartuffe, or The French Puritan, acted at the Theater Royal, written in French
by Molliere, and rendered into English, with much Addition and Advantage;
printed 4o. Land. 1670. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Henry, Lord
Howard of Norfolk. This Play was recceiv'd with universal Applause on our
English Stage, if we believe our Author, and is accounted by him the
Masterpiece of Molliere's Productions, or rather that of all French Comedy. I
presume the Translator, (who was a great Bigot) esteemed this Play the more, it
being designed as a Satyr against the French Hugonots, though at the same time it
must be acknowledged, that the French Author has made an Admirable Defense for
the Character of his Protagonist Tartuffe, in his Preface, to which I refer the
Reader who is versed in the French Tongue.

Thomas MERITON.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of King Charles the Second, and is
certainly the meanest Dramatick Writer that ever England produced. I may with
Justice apply to his Stupidity what Menedemus the Eretriack Philosopher, said
of Perseus's wickedness: He is indeed a Poet; but of all Men that are, were, or
ever shall be, the dullest. Never any Man's Style was more Bombast, so that
undoubtedly he deserved to have been under Ben. Johnson's Hands; and had he
lived in that Age, had without question underwent the trouble of a Vomit, as
well as Crispinus in Poetaster, till he had (to borrow One of his losty
Expressions) disgorg'd the obdure Faculty of his Sense. I pretend not to that
Quickness of Apprehension, as to understand either of his Plays, and therefore
the Reader will not expect that I should give any further Account of them, than
that they are two in number, viz.

Love and War, a Tragedy, printed 4o. Land. 1658. and dedicated to the Truly
Noble, Judicious Gentleman, and his most Esteemed Brother, Mr. George Meriton.
I am apt to believe these two Brothers acted the Counterpart of those German
Brethren that dwelt at Rome, the Orator and the Rhetorician mentioned by Horace
Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 2.
, whose business it was, -- ut alter
Alterius sermon meros audiret honores:
Gracchus ut hic illi foret, hic ut Mutius illi.


Wandering Lover, a Tragi-comedy acted several times privately at sundry places
by the Author and his Friends with great Applause; printed 4o. Land. 1658. and
dedicated to the Ingenious, Judicious, and much Honored Gentleman, Francis
Wright Esquire. This Author's Works being very scarce, and most of the
Impression bought up by Chandlers and Grocers, I may possibly oblige my Reader,
by giving him a Taste of his Style, and justify my self from the Imputation of
Scandal. I shall therefore transcribe part of his Epistle, which runs thus:

To the Ingenious, Judicious, and much Honored Gentleman, Francis Wright Esquire

Sir: My Intentions wandering upon the limits of vain Cogitations, was at the
last arrived at the propicious brinks of an Anglicis of Performance; where
seeing Diana and Venus in a Martial combat, and such rare Achievements
performed by two such Ininimate Goddesses, did lend to the Aspect of their
Angelical Eyes, my self to be the sole Spectator of their foregoing Valor:
where then their purpose was to choose me their Arbitrator; the which I
perceiving, did with a mild Complexion (knowing my self impotent) relent
backwards, thinking thereby to lose less Credit, and gain more Honor, to set
Pen to Paper, and to relate some certain and harmless Dialogues, that while I
was present, betwixt them past, which is This Poem; etc.

By this time I suppose my Reader is sufficiently tired, and will take my Word
that the Play is of the same piece, without giving himself the trouble to
disprove me: and I assure him that His Love and War is yet more swelling and
unintelligible, than this Play.

He tells his Patron abovementioned, That certain it is he writ two Books of
the same Nature, viz. The several Affairs, a Comedy, and The Chaste Virgin, a
Romance; but they were his Pocket-Companions, and but shown to some private
Friends. Happy certainly were those Men, who were not reckoned in the number of
his Friends; since they were obliged to hear such an Author's ampullous
Fustian, which like an empty Cask, makes a great Sound, but yields at best
nothing but a few Lees. Though to all Men generally such Authors are troublesome,
if not odious, and to be shunned by them, as Horace says De Art Poetica.
: Indoctum, doctumque sugat recitator acerbus.
Quem vero arripuit, tenet, occiditque legendo,
Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo.


Thomas MIDDLETON.
An Author of good Esteem in the Reign of King Charles the First. He was
Contemporary with those Famous Poets Johnson, Fletcher, Massinger and Rowley,
in whose Friendship he had a large Share; and though he came short of the two
former in parts, yet like the Ivy by the Assistance of the Oak, (being joined
with them in several Plays) he clim'd up to some considerable height of
Reputation. He joined with Fletcher and Johnson, in a Play called The Widow, of
which we have already spoken, p. 298. in the Account of Johnson; and certainly
most Men will allow, That he that was thought fit to be received into a
Triumvirate, by two such Great Men, was no common Poet. He club'd with
Massinger and Rowley in Writing the Old Law, as before I have remarked already:
See page 352. He was likewise assisted by Rowley in three Plays, of which we
shall presently give an Account; and in those Plays which he writ alone, there
are several Comedies; as Michaelmass-Term, Mayor of Quinborough, etc. which
speak him a Dramatick Poet of the Second Rank. The first Play we are to begin
with, is called

Any thing for a Quiet Life, a Comedy formerly acted at the Black-fryars, by
his late Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1662. This Play being One of
those Manuscripts published by Kirkman, I suppose was in Esteem on the Stage,
before the Breaking out of the Civil Wars.

Blurt Mr. Constable, or The Spaniard's Night-walk; a Comedy sundry times
privately acted by the Children of Paul's, printed Land. 1602. There is no Name
affix`d to this Play, and several others, which are ascribed to our Author by
Mr. Kirkman; as The Phoenix, Game at Chess, and The Family of Love; but knowing
his Acquaintance with Plays to have been very considerable, I have placed them
to their Reputed Author.

Changling, a Tragedy, acted with great applause, at the Private-House in
Drury Lane, and Salisbury-Court; printed 4o. Land. 1653. in this Play our
Author was assisted by Mr. Rowley. The Foundation of the Play may be found in
Reynold's God's Revenge against Murder. See the Story of Alsemero, and
Beatrice Joanna, Book 1. Hist. 4.

Chaste Maid in Cheap Side, a pleasant conceited Comedy, often acted at the Swan
on the Bank-side, by the Lady Elizabeth her Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1620.

Fair Quarrel, a Comedy, printed 4o. Land. 1622. and dedicated to the Nobly
disposed, and Faithful-breasted Robert Gray Esquire one of the Grooms of his
Highnesses Chamber. The Plot of Fitz-allen, Russel and Jane, is founded, as I
suppose, on some Italian Novel, and may be read in English in the Complaisant
Companion, octavo p. 280. That part of the Physician tempting Jane, and then
accusing her, is founded on a Novel of Cynthio Giraldi: See Dec. 4. Nov. 5. In
this Play Mr. Rowley joined with our Author.

Family of Love, a Comedy acted by the Children of his Majesty's Revels;
printed 4o. Land. 1608. This Play is mentioned by Sir Thomas Bornwel, in The
Lady of Pleasure, Act 1. Sc. 1.

Game at Chess; sundry times acted at the Globe on the Bank-side, printed 4o.
Land. 16 -- This Play is consonant to the Title, where the Game is played
between the Church of England, and that of Rome; Ignatius Loyola being
Spectator, the former in the End, gaining the Victory.

Inner Temple Masque, or Masque of Heroes; presented (as an Entertainment for
many worthy Ladies) by Gentlemen of the same Ancient and Noble House, printed
4o. Land. 1640. This Play was writ twenty Years before it was printed; and yet
so well esteemed by Mrs. Behn, that she has taken part of it into the City
Heiress.

Mayor of Quinborough, a Comedy often acted with much applause, by his
Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1661. In this Play are several Dumb
Shows, explained by Rainulph Monk of Chester, and the Author has chiefly
followed his Polychronicon: See besides Stow, Speed, Du Chesne, etc. in the
Reign of Vortiger.

Michaelinass-Term, a Comedy, printed in quarto, but where or when, I know not,
through the imperfection of my Copy.

More Dissemblers besides Women, a Comedy printed 8o. Land. 1657.

No Wit, no Help, like a Woman's, a Comedy printed 8o. Land. 1657.

Phoenix, a Tragi-comedy, sundry times acted by the Children of Paul's, and
presented before his Majesty; printed 4o. Land. 1607.

Roaring Girl, a Comedy which I never saw.

Spanish Gypsy, a Tragi-comedy acted (with great applause) at the
Private-House in Drury Lane, and Salisbury-Court, written by our Author and Mr.
Rowley; printed 4o. Land. 1661. The Story of Roderigo and Clara, has a near
resemblance with (if it be not borrowed from) a Spanish Novel, writ by Mignel
de Cervantes, called The Force of Blood.

Trick to catch the Old One, a Comedy often in Action, both at Paul's, the
Black-fryars, and before their Majesty's; printed 4o. Land. 1616. This is an
Excellent Old Play.

Triumphs of Love and Antiquity, an Honorable Solemnity performed through the
City, at the Confirmation and Establishment of the Right Honorable, Sir
William Cockaine Knight. in the Office of His Majesty's Lieutenant, the Lord Mayor
of the Famous City of London: Taking beginning in the Morning at his Lordship's
Going, and perfecting it self after his Return from Receiving the Oath of
Mayoralty at Westminster, on the Morrow after Simon and Jude's Day, October. 29
1619. printed 4o. Land. and dedicated to the Honor of him to whom the Noble
Fraternity of Skinners, his Worthy Brothers have dedicated their Loves in
Costly Triumphs, The Right Honorable Sir William Cockaine Knight, Lord Mayor
of this Renowned City, and Lord General of his Military Forces. This Piece
consists only of Speeches, addressed to his Lordship, at his Cavalcade through the
City, and I think no ways deserved either the Title of a Masque, under which
Species it has been hitherto ranked; nor so pompous a Title, as the Author has
prefixed.

Women beware Women, a Tragedy, printed 8o. Land. 1657. This Play with two
others, viz. More Dissemblers besides Women, and, No Wit like a Woman's, are
all in one Volume. The Foundation of this Play, is borrowed from a Romance
called Hyppolito and Isabella, octavo. This Drama, if we give Credit to Mr.
Richards, a Poet of that Age, was acted with extraordinary applause, as he says
in his Verses on that Play: I that have see it, can say, having just cause,
Never Tragedy came off with more Applause.


World lost at Tennis, a Masque diverse times presented to the Contentment of
many Noble and Worthy Spectators, by the Princes Servants; printed 4o. Land.
1620. and dedicated to the truly Noble Charles, Lord Howard, Baron of
Effingham, and to his Virtuous and Worthy the Right Honorable Mary, Lady
Effingham, Eldest Daughter of the truly Generous and Judicious Sir W. Cockain
Knight, Ld. Mayor of the City of London, and Lord General of the Military
Forces.

Your Five Gallants, a Comedy often in Action at the Black-fryars, and
imprinted at London 4o. This Play has no Date, and I believe was One of the
first that our Author publishd.

John MILTON.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr. Had his
Principles been as good as his Parts, he had been an Excellent Person; but his
demerits toward his Sovereign, has very much sullied his Reputation. He has
writ several Pieces both in Verse and Prose: and amongst others two Dramas, of
which we shall first give an Account, viz.

Samson Agonistes, a Dramatick Poem; printed 8o. Land. 1680. Our Author has
endeavored to imitate the Tragedy of the Ancient Greek Poets; it is writ in
Blank Verse of ten Syllables, which the Author prefers to Rhyme. His Reasons are
too long to be transcribed; but those who have the Curiosity, may read them at
the Entrance of his Paradise lost. The Chorus is introduced after the Greek
Manner, and (says my Author) The Measure of its Verses is of all sorts, called
by the Greeks Monostrophic, or rather Apolelymenon, without regard had to
Strophe, Antistrophe, or Epod, which were a kind of Stanza's framed only for
the Music, than used with the Chorus that sung; not essential to the Poem, and
therefore not material: or being divided into Stanza's, or Pauses, they may be
called Allaeostropha. Division into Act and Scene, referring chiefly to the
Stage, (to which this Work never was intended) is here omitted. In this the
Author seems to follow Sophocles, whose Plays are not divided into Acts. I take
this to be an Excellent Piece; and as an Argument of its Excellency, I have
before taken Notice, that Mr. Dryden has transferred several Thoughts to his
Aurengzebe. The Foundation of the History is in Holy Writ: See Judges Chapter 13,
etc. Josephus Antiq. l. 5. Torniel, Salian, etc.

Masque, presented at Ludlow Castle 1634. on Michaelmass Night, before the
Right Honorable John, Earl of Bridgwater, Viscount Brackley, Ld. President of
Wales, and One of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council; printed 4o.
Land. 1637. and dedicated by Mr. Henry Laws the Publisher, to the Right
Honorable John, Lord Viscount Brackley, Son and Heir Apparent to the Earl of
Bridgwater, etc. The Publisher acquaints his Patron, that Although not openly
acknowledged by the Author, yet it is a Legitimate Offspring; so lovely, and
so much desired, that the often copying of it has tired his Pen, to give his
several Friends Satisfaction, and brought him to a Necessity of producing it to
the public view. The principal Persons of this Masque, were the Lord Brackley,
Mr. Thomas Egerton, the Lady Alice Egerton.

Our Author's other Pieces in Verse, are his Paradise lost, an Heroic Poem, in
twelve Books. I know not when it was first printed, but there came out not long
since a very fair Edition in Fol. with Sculptures, printed Land. 1689. His
Paradise regained, a Poem in four Books, is fitted likewise to be bound with
it. He published some other Poems in Latin and English, printed 8o. Land. 1645.
Nor was he less Famous for History than Poetry; witness his History of
Britain, from the first Traditional Beginning of the Norman Conquest; printed
4o. Land. 1670. He writ several other Pieces, as a Latin Piece called, Pro
populo Anglicano, Defensio contra Salmasium, 120. Land. 1652. The Doctrine and
Discipline of Divorce, in two Books, printed 4o. Land. 1644 this being answered
by an Anonymous Writer, was replied to by our Author, in a Book which he called
Collasterion, printed 4o. Land. 1645. He writ besides a Piece called
Tetrachordon, or An Exposition on the Four Chief places of Scripture,
concerning Marriage and Divorce; printed Land. 1645. Sr. Robert Filmer (if I
mistake not) writ against him, in his Observations concerning the Original of
Government, printed 4o. Land. 1652.

Walter MOUNTAGUE, Esquire
A Gentleman, who lived at Court in the Reign of King Charles the First, and
during the times of Peace, before the Muses were disturbed by the Civil Wars,
writ a Play, called

Shepheard's Oracle, a Pastoral, privately acted before King Charles, by the
Queen's Majesty and Ladies of Honor, printed octavo Land. 1649. I shall not be
so presumptuous to criticize on a Play, which has been made Sacred by the
Protection of Majesty it self: besides I am deterred from Criticism, by the
Stationers Friend's Advice, in his Verses in Commendation of the Play: -- at
least: good Manners says,
They first should understand it e're dispraise.


William MOUNTFORT.
One who from an Actor, sets up for an Author; and has attempted both Tragedy
and Comedy, with what success, I leave to those who have seen his Plays to
determine. Had I been of the number of his Friends, I should have endeavored
to have persuaded him still to act Sir Courtly Nice, in bestowing only
Garniture on a Play (as he calls it) as a Song or a Prologue, and let alone
sine Language, as belonging only to Pedants and poor Fellows, that live by
their Wits. He has published two Plays, viz.

Injured Lovers, or The Ambitious Father, a Tragedy, acted by their Majesty's
Servants at the Theater Royal; printed 4o. London 1688. and dedicated to the
Right Honorable James Earl of Arran, Son to his Grace the Duke of Hamilton.
There are some Surlyes, who think that in this Play, Sir Courtly writ for his
Diversion, but never regarded Wit.

Successful Strangers, a Tragi-comedy, acted by their Majesty's servants, at
the Theater Royal; printed 4o. Land. 1690. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Thomas Wharton, Comptroller of his Majesty's Household. This Play far
exceeds the Other: though the Author as well as his predecessors, is beholding to
others for part of his Plot; he having made use of Scarron's Novel, called The
Rival Brothers, in working up the Catastrophe of his Comedy.

I have seen some Copies of Verses in Manuscript writ by our Author, but not
being in print, that I know of, I forbear to mention them.

N.
Thomas NABBES.
A Writer in the Reign of Charles the First, who we may reckon amongst Poets of
the Third-rate; and One who was pretty much respected by the Poets of those
Times; Mr. Richard Brom, and Mr. Robert Chamberlain, (before mentioned) having
publicly professed themselves his Friends; and Sir John Suckling being his
Patron.

He has Seven Plays and Masks extant, besides other Poems: of which we may
say, That if they are not to be compared with some Dramatick Pieces of this
Age, at least wise what our Author has published is His own, and not borrowed
from others; and in that Respect deserves Pardon, if not Applause from the
Candid Reader. This he averrs in his Prologue to Covent Garden, and which I
believe may be urged for the rest of his Labors; viz. He justifies that it is
no borrowed Strain,
From the Invention of another's Brain.
Nor did he steal the Fancy. It Is the same forth
He first intended by the Proper Name.
'Twas not a Toil of Years; few Weeks brought
This Rugged Issue, might have been more worth
If he had licked it more. Nor does he raise
From the Imitation of Authentic Plays
Matter or Words to height: nor bundle up
Conceits at Taverns, where the Wits do sup.
His Muse is solitary, and alone
Does practice her low Speculation, etc.
The Reader therefore is to expect little more from me, than a bare Account of
the Titles of his Works, as followss.

Bride, a Comedy acted in the Year 1638. at the Private-House in Drury Lane, by
their Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1640. and dedicated to the
Generality of his Friends, Gentlemen of the several Honorable Houses of the
Inns of Court.

Covent Garden, a pleasant Comedy, acted in the Year 1632. by the Queen's
Majesty's Servants; and printed 4o. Land. 1638. and dedicated to the Right
Worthy of his Honor, Sir John Suckling.

Hannibal and Scipio, an Historical Tragedy, acted in the Year 1635. by the
Queen's Majesty's Servants at their Private-House in Drury Lane; printed Land.
1637. The Play is addressed in Verse by the Author, to the Ghosts of Hannibal and
Scipio, with an Answer printed in their Names, directed to our Author. It was
acted before Women came on the Stage; the part of Sophonisba being played by
one Ezekiel Fenne. For the Plot, the Title Page speaks the Foundation to be
History: see the Life of of Hannibal, writ by Cornelius Nepos; that of Scipio
by Plutarch: see besides Livy, Florus, and other Authors mentioned p. 326.

Microcosmus, a Moral Masque, presented with general liking at the
Private-House in Salisbury-Court, and here set down according to the Intention
of the Author; printed 4o. Land. 1637. and dedicated to the Service and Delight
of all Truly Noble, Generous, and Honest Spirits. This Masque is introduced by
two Copies, One of which was writ by Mr. Richard Brom.

Spring's Glory, vindicating Love by Temperance, against the Tenet, Sine Cerere
and Baccho friget Venus; Moralized in a Masque with other Poems, Epigrams,
Elegies, and Epithalamiums of the Author's; printed 4o. Land. 1638. and
dedicated to Peter Balle Esquire At the end of these Poems is a piece called, A
Presentation, intended for the Prince his Highness's Birthday, the 29. of May
1638. annually celebrated: this in former Catalogues was styled an Interlude.
These Masks and Poems are commended by two Copies, one of which was penned by
Mr. Robert Chamberlain.

Tottenham-Court, a pleasant Comedy, acted in the Year 1637. at the
Private-House in Salisbury-Court; printed 4o. Land. 1638. and dedicated to the
Worshipful William Mills Esquire

Unfortunate Lover, a Tragedy never acted but set down according to the
Intention of the Author; printed 4o. Land. 1640. and dedicated to the Right
Worshipful Richard Brathwaite Esquire This Play is attended by three Copies written
in its Commendation, by several of our Author's Friends, and a Proeme in Verse
by the Author, wherein he justifies it to be writ according to the Rules of Art.

A Constant Scene; the buisiness it intends,
The two Hours of Time of Action comprehends.
Mr. Philips Page 181.
and Mr. Winstanley Page 148.
, according to their old Custom, have ascribed two other Anonymous Plays to our
Author, The Woman-Hater arraigned, a Comedy; and Charles the First, a Tragedy:
the Reason of their Mistake, has been already given p. 13. and more at large,
in the Preface to my former Catalogue.

Thomas NASH.
A Gentleman that lived about the time with the forementioned Author, and was
sometime educated in the University of Cambridge. His Genius was much addicted
to Dramatick Poetry and Satyr; and he writ some things in Prose; all which
gained him the Reputation of a Sharp Wit. In an Old Copy of Verses, I find His
Character thus drawn.

And surely Nash, though be a Proser were,
A Branch of Laurel yet deserves to bear.
Sharply Satyrick was he; and that way
He went, since that his being, to this day,
Few have attempted; and I surely think,
Those Words shall hardly be set down by Ink
Shall scorch, and blast, so as his could, when he
Would inflict Vengeance. --
As to his Plays, he has published only two that I have heard of, viz. Dido
Queen of Carthage, in which he joined with Marloe; and, Summer's last Will and
Testament, a Comedy: I could never procure a Sight of either of these; but as
to that Play called See me and see me not, ascribed to him by Mr. Philips and
Mr. Winstanley, I have it by me, and have placed it to the right Author, Mr.
Dawbridgecourt Belchier; see page 24.

He writ several other Pieces; some Satirical, as Pierce Penniless his
Supplication to the Devil; Have with ye to Safron-Walden; Four Letters
Confuted: A Poem called The White-Herring and the Red; and another Piece in
Prose, which I take to be the same Thomas Nash, called A Fourfold Way to a
Happy Life, in a Dialogue between a Countryman, Citizen, Divine, and Lawyer,
printed 4o. Land. 1633.

Alexander NEVILE.
An Author in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, that early addicted himself to
Poetry, and was one of those that the Eminent Jasper Heywood made choice of to
join with him and others, in the Translation of Seneca. Our Author undertook
the Task, and at sixteen Years of Age he translated

Oedipus, a Tragedy, which he Englished in the Year 1560. and was printed with
the rest 4o. Land. 1581. and more immediately dedicated by the Author, To the
Right Honorable Mr. Dr. Wotton, One of the Queens Majesty's Privy Council.
Many were the Authors of Antiquity that writ on this Subject; though but two
Plays writ by Sophocles, viz. (...), and (...), have descended to our Times;
from the which Seneca is said to have borrowed part of this Play. Our
Translator acknowledges in his Epistle to his Patron and Godfather, That he
has not been precise in following the Author word for word; but sometimes by
Addition, sometimes by Substraction, to use the aptest Phrases, in giving the
Sense, that he could invent.

There are other Pieces which I suppose were writ by our Author, published in
Latin; as Oration in Obitium Sydnaei, printed 4o. Land. 1587. De Furoribus
Norfolciensium Ketto Duce, printed 4o. 1575. Norvicus, ibid. all which being
printed about the time that he lived, make me imagine them to be his.

Robert NEVILE.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, and in his
younger Years was educated in the University of Cambridge, where he became a
fellow of King's College. I know nothing that he has published, but a single
Play, called

Poor Scholar, a Comedy, printed 4o. Land. 1662. This Play was (as I suppose)
writ some Years before, it being printed for Mr. Kirkman. I know not whether
ever it was acted, but I may presume to say it is no contemptible Play for Plot
and Language. It is commended for an excellent one, by three Copies of Verses
prefixed to it, writ by his Friends; One of which says thus in its praise: Bees
from a bruised Ox, says Maro, breed,
But thou drawest Honey from a tattered weed.
Seeing thy Wit's so pure, thy Phrase so clean,
Thy Sense so weighty, that each Line's a Scene;
We'll change the Song An Old Song, whose Burden was, Alas! Poor Scholar
whither will thou go?
, and cry as truly too,
Whither may not This thy Poor Scholar go?
This fault the Best-nos'd Critics only smell,
That thy Poor Scholar is attired too well.
Ben's Auditors were once in such a mood,
That he was forced to swear his Play was good:
Thy Play than his, does far more current go,
For without Swearing, we'll believe thine so.


William, Duke of NEWCASTLE.
I am now arrived at a Nobleman, whose Heroic Actions, are too Copious and
Illustrious for me to attempt the Description of; and are a fitter Subject for
the Pen of a Modern Plutarch, if any such were to be found, than for mine: I
shall leave therefore the Character of this Valiant Hero, Careful Tutor, Wise
Statesman, Exact Courtier, and Loyal Subject, to be described by some
Illustrious Historian; or else refer my Reader to his Life, already writ in
Latin and English, by the Hand of his Incomparable Duchess: who during his
Lifetime, described all his Glorious Actions, in a Style so Noble and
Masculine, that she seems to have even antedated his Apotheosis. But though I
dare not pretend to describe his Heroic Achievements, or view him in the
Field, as a General; yet I shall presume to look upon him in his Retirements,
and consider him as a Poet, and an Author, it being my immediate Province.

To speak first of his Acquaintance with the Muses, and his affable Deportment
to all their Votaries. No Person since the Time of Augustus better understood
Dramatick Poetry, nor more generously encouraged Poets; so that we may truly
call him our English Mecaenas. He had a more particular kindness for that Great
Matter of Dramatick Poesy, the Excellent Johnson; and 'twas from him that he
attained to a perfect Knowledge of what was to be accounted True Humor in
Comedy. How well he has copied his Master, I leave to the Critics: but I am
sure our late, as well as our present Laureat, have powerful Reasons to defend
his Memory. He has writ four Comedies, which have always been acted with
applause; viz.

Country Captain, a Comedy lately presented by his Majesty's Servants at the
Black-fryars; 8o. In's Grave van Hag. Ant. 1649. I believe this Play was writ
during his Exile.

Humorous Lovers, a Comedy acted by his Royal Highness's Servants; printed 4o.
Land. 1677. This Play equals most Comedies of this Age.

Triumphant Widow, or The Medley of Humors, a Comedy acted by his Royal
Highness's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1677. This was thought so excellent a
Play by our present Laureat, that he has transcribed a great part of it in his
Bury-Fair.

Variety, a Comedy presented by his Majesty's Servants at the Black-fryars;
printed 8o. Land. 1649. This Play, and Country Captain, are always bound
together: the Duke's Name is not prefixed to them, but I am confident they are
his, from several Testimonies; since Mr. Alexander Brom writ a Copy in praise
of this Play, directed to his Grace, and printed before the Comedy, called
Covent Garden weeded: and Mr. Leigh in a Copy directed to Mr. Mosely (the
publisher of Mr. Carthwright's Works) in reckoning what Poetical Treatises he
has presented the Public with, names these two Plays, in the following
Couplet: Then famed Newcastle's choice Variety,
With his Brave Captain held up Poetry.


We have many other Pieces writ by this Ingenious Nobleman, scattered up and
down in the Poems of his Duchess: all which seem to confirm the Character
given by Mr. Shadwell; That he was the greatest Master of Wit, the most exact
Observer of Mankind, and the most acurate Judge of Humor, that ever he knew.

Besides what his Grace has writ in Dramatick Poetry, he published during his
Honorable Exile at Antwerp, the most Magnificent, and withal the Best Book of
Horsmanship, that was ever yet extant. How eminent his skill was in that Noble
Art of Dressing Horses in the Manage, is well known not only to our Countrymen
but to all Nations of Europe: Persons of all Countries, and those of the best
Quality crouding to his Manage at Antwerp, to see him ride. Insomuch that
Signior del Campo, One of the most knowing Riders of his Time, said to the Duke
(upon his Dismounting) as it were in an Ecstasy, Il faut tirer la Planche; The
Bridge must be drawn up: meaning that no Rider must presume to come in
Horsemanship after him M. De Soleil, (one of the best Writers that I have met
with amongst the French) when he enlarged his Le Parfaict Marshall, borrowed
the Art of Breeding from the Duke's Book, as he owns in his Avis au Lecteur;
and styles him Un des plus accomplis Cavaliers de notre temps. But having named
this Forreigner's borrowing from his Grace, I should justly deserve to be
branded with Ingratitude, should I not own, That it is to the Work of this Great
Man, that I am indebted for several Notions borrowed from his Grace, in a
little Essay of Horsemanship, printed 8o. Oxon. 1685. Nay, further, I think it
no small Glory that I am the only Author that I know of, who has quoted him in
English. He has written two Books of Horsemanship; the first in French, called
La Method nouvelle de Dresser les Chevaux, avec Figures, Fol. Ant. 1658. The
other in English, styled A New Method and Extraordinary Invention to dress
Horses, and work them according to Nature, as also to perfect Nature by the
Subtlety of Art, Fol. Land. 1667. The first Book was writ by the Duke in
English, and made French at his command, by a Wallon; and is extraordinary
scarce and dear. The latter (as the Duke informs his Reader) Is neither a
Translation of the first, nor an absolutely necessary Addition to it, and may
be of use without the other, as the other has been hitherto, and still is
without this; but both together will questionless do best.

I beg my Reader's Pardon, if I have dwelt upon this Subject, to the trial of
his Patience: but I have so great a Value for the Art it self, and such a
Respect for the Memory of the best of Horsemen, that I cannot refrain from
trespassing yet further, by transcribing an Epigram writ to the Duke, on this
Subject; but it being the production of the Immortal Johnson Underwood, p. 223.
I hope that alone will atone for the Digression.

An Epigram to William Duke of Newcastle.
When first, my Lord, I saw you back your Horse,
Provoke his Mettle, and command his force
To all the uses of the Field, and Race,
Methought I read the ancient Art of Thrace,
And saw a Centaure past those tales of Greece,
So seemed your Horse, and you both of a piece!
You showed like Perseus, upon Pegasus;
Or Castor mounted on his Cyllarus:
Or what we hear our home-born Legend tell
Of bold Sir Bevis, and his Arundel:
Nay, so your Seat his Beauties did endorse,
As I began to wish my self a Horse:
And surely had I but your Stables seen
Before: I think my wish absolved had been.
For never saw I yet the Muses dwell,
Nor any of their Household, half so well.
So well! as when I saw the Floor, and Room,
I looked for Hercules to be the Groom:
And cried, Away with the Caesarian Breed,
At these immortal Mangers Virgil fed.
Margaret Duchess of NEWCASTLE
A Lady worthy the Mention and Esteem of all Lovers of Poetry and Learning.
One, who was a fit Consort for so Great a Wit, as the Duke of Newcastle. Her
soul sympathising with his in all things, especially in Dramatick Poetry; to
which she had a more than ordinary propensity. She has published six and twenty
Plays, besides several loose Scenes; nineteen of which are bound, and printed
in one Volume in Fol. 1662. the others in Folio, Land. 1668. under the Title of
Plays never before printed.

I shall not presume to pass my Judgment on the Writings of this Admirable
Duchess; but rather imitate the Carriage of Julius Scalinger, to the Roman
Sulpitia; by concluding with him Poet. L.6. C.6.
, Igitur ut tam laudibilis Heroinae Ratio habeatur, non ausim objicere ei
judicii severitatem. I know there are some that have but a mean Opinion of her
Plays; but if it be considered that both the Language and Plots of them are all
her own: I think she ought with Justice to be preferred to others of her Sex,
which have built their Fame on other People's Foundations: sure I am, that
whoever will consider well the several Epistles before her Books, and the
General Prologue to all her Plays, if he have any spark of Generosity, or Good
Breeding, will be favorable in his Censure. As a proof of my Assertion, it may
be proper in this place, before I give an Account of her Plays, to transcribe
part of that general Prologue, the whole being too long to be here inserted.

But Noble Readers, do not think my Plays
Are such as have been writ in former Days;
As Johnson, Shakespeare, Beaumont, Fletcher
writ;
Mine want their Learning, Reading, Language, Wit;
The Latin Phrases I could never tell,
But Johnson could, which made him write so well.
Greek, Latin Poets, I could never read,
Nor their Historians, but our English Speed:
I could not steal their Wit, nor Plots out take;
All my Plays Plots, my own poor Brain did
make;
From Plutarch's Story, I nere took a Plot,
Nor from Romances, nor from Don Quixot,
As others have, for to assist their Wit,
But I upon my own Foundation writ; etc.
I hasten now to give an Account of the Titles of her Plays, according to our
accustomed order; viz.

Apocryphal Ladies, a Comedy. This Play consists of three and twenty Scenes,
but is not divided into Acts.

Bell in Campo, a Tragedy in two parts: In the second Play, are several Copies
of Verses writ by the Duke of Newcastle.

Blasing World, a Comedy: Though this be styled a Play in former Catalogues, yet
it is but a Fragment; the Authress before she had finished the second Act
desisted, not finding her Genius tend to the prosecution of it.

Bridals, a Comedy.

Comical Hash, a Comedy: This Play has not been in any Catalogue before.

Convent of Pleasure, a Comedy.

Female Academy, a Comedy.

Lady Contemplation, a Comedy in two parts. Three Scenes in the first, and two
in the second part, were writ by the Duke.

Loves Adventures, in two parts, a Comedy. The Song, and the Epithalamium, in
the last Scene in the second part, was likewise writ by the Duke.

Matrimonial Trouble, in two parts; the second being a Tragedy, or as the
Authress styles it, a Tragi-comedy.

Natures three Daughters, Beauty, Love, and Wit; a Comedy, in two parts.

Presence, a Comedy. To this are added twenty nine single Scenes, which the
Duchess designed to have inserted into this Play, but finding it would too
much lengthen it, she printed them separately.

Public Wooing, a Comedy, in which the Duke writ several of the Suitors
Speeches; as that of the Soldier, the Countryman, the Spokesman for the
Bashful Suitor; besides two other Scenes, and the two Songs at the End of the
Comedy.

Religious, a Tragi-comedy.

Several Wits, a Comedy.

Sociable Companions, or The Female Wits, a Comedy.

Unnatural Tragedy. The Prologue and Epigue, were of the Duke's making. Act 2.
Sc. 3. the Duchess inveighs against Mr. Cambden's Brittannia: though whether
with Justice, I leave it to the Determination of others.

Wits Cabal, a Comedy in two parts: His Grace writ the Epilogue to the first
part.

Youth's Glory, and Death's Banquet; a Tragedy in two parts. Two Scenes with
the Speeches at the first part, in commendation of Mile Sans pareille, were
writ by his Grace; so were all the Songs and Verses in the second part.

The Blazing World, Bridal, Convent of Pleasure, Presence, and Sociable
Companions, are printed together in one Volume; and the rest in another.

As to her other Works, I shall only mention the Titles, and the Dates when
printed; and I shall begin with the Crown of her Labors, The Life of the Duke
of Newcastle, in English, printed Folio Land. 1667. and in Latin Folio Land.
1668 Nature's Picture drawn by Fancy's Pencil to the Life, printed Fol. Land.
1656. at the End of it she has writ her own Life. Philosophical Fancies,
printed Fol. Land. 1653. Philosophical and Physical Opinions, Fol. Land. 1655.
Philosophical Letters, Fol. Land. 1664. Two Hundred and Eleven Sociable
Letters, Fol. Land. 1664. Orations, Fol. 1662. Poems, Fol. 1653.

Thomas NEWTON.
An Author that lived in the Reign of Que^^ Elizabeth; and joined with Jasper
Heywood, and Alexander Nevil abovenamed and others, in the Translation of
Seneca's Tragedies. Though our Author translated but one Play, yet he published
all the Ten; and dedicated them to Sir Thomas Henage, Treasurer of her
Majesty's Chamber. The Play which our Author has rendered into English, is
entitled

Thebais, a Tragedy. This by some is believed not to be Seneca's; because in
this Tragedy Jocasta appears alive, and in Oedipus she is killed: and it is not
likely that he would w^ite two Drammas, that should so very much differ in the
Catastrophe. But if it be Seneca's, it is the shortest of his Tragedies, and has
no Chorus; and is said by One, Toysii Collect. Comm. in Trag. Senec.
to be Perpetuum Canticum, nullis diverbiis incorruptum.

I know not how Mr. Philips Page 182.
came to THOMAS OTWAY.
ascribe Tamburlaine the Great to this Author; for though Marloe's Name be not
printed in the Title Page, yet both in Mr. Kirkman's and my former Catalogue
printed 1680. his Name is prefixed.

Thomas NUCE.
An Author of the same Time, and joined in the same Design with the former. We
are owing to his pains for the Version of One Play of Seneca's, called

Octavia, a Tragedy. This is the only Tragedy of the Ancients that I know of,
that is founded on History so near the time of the Author. I shall not pretend
to determine, whether it was writ by Seneca, or no: though Delrio and others deny
it. For the History, see Suetonius in Vit. Claud. Nero. Tacitus, L.12. C.14.
Dion, etc.

O.
Thomas OTWAY.
AN Author who was well known to most Persons of this Age, who are famous for
Wit and Breeding. He was formerly (as I have heard) bred for some time in
Christ-Church College in Oxford. From thence he removed to London, where he
spent some time in Dramatick Poetry; and by degrees writ himself into
Reputation with the Court. His Genius in Comedy lay a little too much to
Libertinism, but in Tragedy he made it his business for the most part to
observe the Decorum of the Stage. He was a man of Excellent parts and daily
improved in his Writing: but yet sometimes fell into plagiary as well as his
Contemporaries, and made use of Shakespeare, to the advantage of his Purse, at
least, if not his Reputation.

He has published ten Dramatick Pieces, (if we may be allowed to reckon his
Farces as Distinct Plays) of which we shall give the Reader a particular
Account, beginning with

Alcibiades, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1675. and
dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles, Earl of Middlesex. This Play is writ
in Heroic Verse, and was the first Fruits of our Author's Muse: He has made
Alcibiades, a Person of true Honor, choosing rather to loose his Life, than
wrong his Defender King Agis, or his betrothed wife Timandra: whereas Plutarch
gives him a different Character; telling us that in the King's Absence he
abused his Bed, and got his Queen Timaea with Child, and that Timandra was not
his Wife, but his Mistress: and Justin says Lib. 5. Cap. 2.
That he was informed of the design of the Lacedmoonian Princes against his
Life, by the Queen of King Agis, with whom he had committed Adultery.

Atheist, or the Second part of The Soldiers Fortune, a Comedy acted at the
Duke's Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1684. and dedicated to the Lord Elande,
Eldest Son to the Marquess of Hallifax. The Plot between Beaugard and Portia,
is founded on Scarron's Novel of The Invisible Mistress.

Cheats of Scapin, a Farce acted at the Duke's Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1677.
It Is printed with Titus and Berenice, and dedicated to the Right Honorable
John, Earl of Rochester. This Play is translated from a French Comedy of
Molliere; though it is not printed amongst his Plays of the Amsterdam Edition in
5 Tomes, which I have by me; yet that it is his, I collect from M. Boileau's
Art of Poetry: where speaking of Molliere in the third Canto, he says thus:
Estudiez la Cour, and connoissez la Ville;
L'une and l'autre est toujours en Modeles fertile.
C'est par la que Moliere illustrant ses Ecrits,
Peut-estre de son Art eust remporte le prix;
Si moins ami du Peuple en ses doctes peintures,
Il n'eust point fait souvent grimacer ses Figures,
Quitte pour le Bouffon, l'agreable and le fin,
Et sans honte a Terence allie Tabarin.
Dans ce sac ridicule, ou Scapin s'enveloppe,
Je ne reconnois point l' Auteur du Misanthrope.
But notwithstanding the Farce in this Comedy, Molliere has borrowed the Design
from Terence his Phormio, as may be visible to those that will compare them.

Caius Marius his History and Fall, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater,
printed 4o. Land. 1680. and dedicated to the Ld Viscount Faulkland. A great
part of this Play is borrowed from Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet; as the
Character of Marius Junior, and Lavinia the Nurse, and Sulpitius: which last is
carried on by our Author to the End of the Play: though Mr. Dryden says in his
Postscript to Granada, That Shakespeare said himself, that he was forced to kill
Mercurio in the 3d. Act, to prevent being killed by him. For the true History
of Marius Senior, see Plutarch's Life of C. Marius; Lucan's Pharsalia, lib. 2.
Florus lib. 3. c. 21.

Don Carlos Prince of Spain, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o.
Land. 1679. and dedicated to his Royal Highness the Duke. This Play is writ in
Heroic Verse, as well as Alcibiades; that being the first, this the second
that ever he writ or thought of writing. For the History, consult the Spanish
Chronicles, as Louis de Mayerne; Turquet's Chronicle of Spain; Cabrera's Life
of Philip the Second; Thuanus; Brantome, etc. Though I believe our Author chiefly
followed the Novel of Don Carlos, translated from the French, and printed 8o.
Land. 1674. which is the most perfect Account of that Tragical Story that I
have met with.

Friendship in Fashion, a Comedy acted at his Royal Highness the Duke's
Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1678. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles,
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. This is a very diverting Play, and was acted with
general applause.

Orphan, or The Unhappy Marriage; a Tragedy acted at his Royal Highness the
Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1680. and dedicated to her Royal Highness the
Duchess. This is a very moving Tragedy, and is founded on a Novel, called
English Adventures: See the History of Brandon, p. 17.

Soldiers Fortune, a Comedy acted by their Royal Highness's Servants, at the
Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1681. This Play is dedicated to Mr. Bentley
his Stationer: and is (as he says) a sort of Acquittance for the Money received
for the Copy. There are several passages in this Play, that have been touched
before by others: As for Instance, the Plot of My Lady Dunce, making her
Husband the Agent in the Intrigue between Beaugard and her, to convey the Ring
and Letter, is the Subject of other Plays writ before this; as The Fawn, and
Flora's Vagaries: and the Original Story is in Boccace's Novels, Day 3. Nov. 3.
Sir Jolly boulting out of his Closet, and surprising his Lady and Beaugard
kissing, and her Deportment thereupon; is borrowed from Scarron's Comical
Romance, in the Story of Millamant, or The Rampant Lady, p. 227. though by the
way, that Story is not in the French Copy, and I suppose was not writ by
Scarron; but was rather translated from Les Amors des Dames Illustres de notre
Siecle. The Behavior of Bloody-bones, is like the Bravo, in the Antiquary; and
that of Courtine at Silvia's Balcony, like Monsieur Thomas his Carriage to his
Mistress, in that Play of Fletcher's so called.

Titus and Berenice, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land.
1677. and dedicated with the Cheats of Scapin, as aforesaid. This Play is
translated from the French of Monsieur Racine: it consists of three Acts, and
is written in Heroic Verse. For the Story of Titus and Berenice, see Suetonius
in his Life, Chapter 7. See besides Josephus, Dion, etc.

Venice preserved, or A Plot discovered; a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater;
printed 4o. Land. 1682. and dedicated to the Duchess of Portsmouth. I have not
at present any particular History of Venice by me, but suppose this Story may
be found in some of the Writers on the Venetian Affairs; as Bembus, Sabellicus,
Maurocenus, Paruta, etc.

Besides his Dramatick Poems, our Author writ a Stitcht Poem, called The Poet's
Complaint to his Muse, printed 4o. Land. 1680. and a Pastoral on King Charles
the Second, printed with Mrs. Behn's Lycidas, 8o. p. 81. Add to these his
Translation out of French, being a Book called The History of the Triumvirates,
printed since his Decease 8o. Land. 1686.

P.
John PALSGRAVE.
AN Author that lived in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. He was Bachelor of
Divinity, but of what University I know not, and was Chaplain to the King. He
printed a Play in an Old English Character, called

Accolastus, a Comedy printed 4o. 1540. and dedicated to King Henry the Eighth.
This Play was translated from the Latin Accolastus written by Gulielmus
Fullonius, the English being printed after the Latin. The Plot is the Parable
of the Prodigal Son in the Gospel, and the Author has endeavored to imitate
Terence and Plautus in the Economy: 'Twas set forth by the Author Fullonius,
before the Burgesses of the Hague in Holland, An. Dom. 1529.

This Author published besides L'Eclaircissement de la Langue Francoise. -- 1530.

George PEEL.
An Author that lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and was formerly
Student, and Mr. of Arts of Christ-Church College in Oxford. He is the Author
of Two Plays, which are in print; viz.

David and Bethsabe their Love, with the Tragedy of Absalom, diverse times
played on the Stage; and printed 4o. Land. 1599. This Play is founded on Holy
Scripture: See Samuel, Kings, etc.

Edward the First, Surnamed Edward Longshanks, with his Return from the Holy
Land. Also the Life of Llewellin Rebel in Wales. Lastly the sinking of Queen
Elinor, who sunk at Charing Cross, rose again at Potters Hithe, now named
Queen-hithe; printed 4o. Land. 1593. For the Story see the Authors that have
writ of those times; as Walsingham, Fabian, Matthew. Westminster. Pol. Virgil, Grafton,
Hollingshead, Stow, Speed, Martyn, Baker, etc.

I am not ignorant, that another Tragedy, to wit, Alphonsus Emperor of Germany,
is ascribed to him in former Catalogues, which has occasioned Mr. Winstanley's
mistake: but I assure my Reader, that that Play was writ by Chapman, for I have
it by me with his Name affixt to it.

Mr. Philips mentions some Remnants of his Poetry extant in a Book called
England's Hellicon, which I never saw.

Mary Countess of PEMBROKE.
The beloved Sister of the Admirable Sr. Philip Sidney (to whom he dedicated
his Arcadia) and Patron to the Ingenious Daniel. A Lady whose Inclinations led
her not only to the Patronage but love of the Muses: as appears by a Tragedy of
Hers in print, called Antonius, which to my regret I never yet saw, though I
have earnestly desired it; it is thus commended by Mr. Daniel, in his
Dedication of Cleopatra.

I, who contented with an humble Song,
Made Music to my self that pleased me best,
And only told of Delia, and her wrong,
And praised her Eyes, and plained mine own unrest,
A Text, from whence my Muse had not digrest,
Had I not seen thy well graced Anthony,
Adorned by thy sweet style, in our fair Tongue,
Required his Cleopatra's Company.
Mr. Philips through mistake (as formerly) has ascribed another Play to her,
viz. Albion's Triumph, a Masque. I know nothing else of this Admirable Lady's
Writing.

KATHARINE PHILLIPS.


Mrs. Katherine PHILIPS.
A Lady of that admirable Merit, and Reputation, that her Memory will be
honored of all Men, that are Favorers of Poetry. One, who not only has
equaled all that is reported of the Poetesses of Antiquity, the Lesbian Sapho,
and the Roman Sulpitia, but whose Merit has justly found her Admirers, amongst
the greatest Poets of our Age: and though I will not presume to compare our
Poets with Martial, who writ in praise of Sulpitia, or Horace, Ausonius, and
Sydonius, who commended Sapho, least I offend their Modesty who are still
living: yet I will be so far bold as to assert, that the Earls of Orrery and
Roscommon, the Incomparable Cowley, and the Ingenious Flatman, with others
(amongst whom I must not forget my much respected Countryman James Tyrrel Esquire)
would not have employed their Pens in praise of the Excellent Orinda, had she
not justly deserved their Elogies, and possibly more than those Ladies of
Antiquity: for as Mr. Cowley observes, in his third Stanza on her Death, Of
Female Poets, who had Names of old,
Nothing is shown but only told,
And all we hear of them, perhaps may be
Male Flattery only, and Male Poetry;
Few Minutes did their Beauties Lightning waste,
The Thunder of their Voice did longer last,
But that too soon was past.
The certain proofs of our Orinda's Wit,
In her own lasting Characters are writ,
And they will long my Praise of them survive,
Though long perhaps that too may live.
The Trade of Glory managed by the Pen
Though great it be, and every where is found,
Does bring in but small profit to us Men,
It Is by the numbers of the Sharers drowned;
Orinda, in the Female Courts of Fame
Engrosses all the Goods of a Poetic Name,
She does no Partner with her see;
Does all the buisiness there alone, Which we
Are forced to carry on by a whole Company.


The Occasion of our mention of this Excellent Person in this place, is on the
Account of two Dramatick Pieces, which she has translated from the French of
Monsieur Corneille; and that with such exquisite Art and Judgment, that the
Copies of each seem to transcend the Original.

Horace, a Tragedy; which I suppose was left imperfect by the untimely Death of
the Authress; and the fifth Act was afterward supplied by Sir John Denham.
This Play acted at Court, by Persons of Quality; the Duke of Monmouth speaking
the Prologue: Part of which being in Commendation of the Play, I shall
transcribe. This Martial Story, which through France did come,
And there was wrought in Great Corneille's
Loom;
Orinda's Matchless Muse to Britain brought,
And Foreign Verse, our English Accents taught;
So soft that to our shame, we understand
They could not fall but from a Lady's Hand.
Thus while a Woman Horace did translate,
Horace did rise above a Roman Fate.
For the Plot of this Play, consult Livy's History, Lib. 1. Florus Lib. 1. C.
3. Dionysius Hallicarnassaeus, etc.

Pompey, a Tragedy, which I have seen acted with great applause, at the Duke's
Theater; and at the End was acted that Farce printed in the fifth Act of The
Playhouse to be Let. This Play was translated at the Request of the Earl of
Orrery, and published in Obedience to the Commands of the Right Honorable the
Countess of Corse; to whom it is dedicated. How great an Opinion My Ld Orrery
had of this Play, may appear from the following Verses, being part of a Copy
addressed to the Authress.

You English Corneille's Pompey with such
Flame,
That you both raise our wonder and his Fame;
If he could read it, he like us would call
The Copy greater than the Original:
You cannot mend what is already done,
Unless you will finish what you have begun:
Who your Translation sees, cannot but say,
That it is Orinda's Work, and but his Play.
The French to learn our Language now will seek,
To hear their Greatest Wit more nobly speak;
Rome too would grant, were our Tongue to her
known,
Caesar speaks better in it, than in his own.
And all those Wreaths once circled Pompey's
Brow,
Exalt his Fame, less than your Verses now.
Both these Plays with the rest of her Poems, are printed in one Volume in Fol.
Land. 1678. This Lady to the Regret of all the Beau Monde in general, died of
the Smallpox, on the 22d. of June 1664. being but One and Thirty Years of Age,
having not left any of her Sex, her Equal in Poetry.

Sam. PORDAGE, Esquire
A Gentleman who was lately (if he be not so at present) a Member of the Worthy
Society of Lincoln's Inn. He has published two Plays in Heroic Verse, viz.

Herod and Mariamne, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and printed 4o.
Land. 1673. This Play was writ a dozen Years, before it was made public, and
given to Mr. Settle by a Gentleman, to use and form as he pleased: he preferred
it to the Stage, and dedicated it to the Duchess of Albermarle. For the Plot,
I think the Author has followed Mr. Calpranede's Cleopatra, a Romance, in the
Story of Tyridates: but for the true History, consult Josephus, Philo-Judaeus,
Eberus, Egysippus, etc.

Siege of Babylon, a Tragi-comedy, acted at the Theater; dedicated to her Royal
Highness the Duchess, and printed 4o. Land. 1678. This Play is founded on the
Romance of Cassandra.

Henry PORTER.
An Author in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who writ a pleasant History, called
The two Angry Women of Abington, with the humorous Mirth of Dick Coomes, and
Nicholas Proverbs, two Servingmen; played by the Right Honorable, the Earl of
Nottingham, Ld High Admiral's Servants, and printed 4o. Land. 1599.

Thomas PORTER, Esquire
An Author that has writ in our Times two Plays, which are received with
Candor, by all Judges of Wit; viz.

Carnival, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by his Majesty's Servants;
printed 4o. Land. 1664.

Villain, a Tragedy, which I have seen acted at the Duke's Theater with great
applause: the part of Malignii being incomparably played by Mr. Sandford.

What this Author may have writ besides, I know not; and am sorry I can give no
better Account of One, whose Writings I love and admire.

George POWEL.
A Person now living, the Author of a Tragedy, called

The treacherous Brother, acted by their Majesty's Servants, at the
Theater Royal; and printed 4o. Land. 1690. It Is dedicated to the Patentees, and
Sharers of their Majesty's Theater; and commended by a Copy of Latin Verses,
writ by his Fellow-Actor Mr. John Hudgson. For the Foundation of the Play, I
take it to be borrowed from a Romance in Fol. called The Wall Flower: and though
they are not alike in all particulars, yet any One that will take the pains to
read them both, will find the Soporifick Potion, given to Istocles and
Semanthe, to be the same in quantity, with that given to Honoria, Amarissa and
Hortensia, in the asoresaid Romance.

Thomas PRESTON.
A very ancient Author, who writ a Play in old fashioned Meter; which he calls
A Lamentable Tragedy, mixed full of pleasant Mirth; containing the Life of
Cambises King of Persia, from the beginning of his Kingdom unto his Death, his
one good deed of Execution, after the many wicked Deeds, and tyrannous Murders
committed by and through him; and last of all his odious Death, by Gods Justice
appointed. Done in such order as follows; printed 4o. Land. -- by John Allde.
In stead of naming more than Justin and Herodotus, for the true Story, I shall
set down the beginning of this Play, spoke by King Cambises; not only to give
our Reader a Taste of our Author's Poetry; but because I believe it was this
Play Shakespeare Hen. IV. Act 2.
meant, when he brought in Sir John Falstaff, speaking in K. Cambyses Vein.

My Counsel grave and sapient,
with Lords of Legal Train:
Attentive ears toward us bend,
and mark what shall be sain.
So you likewise my valiant Knight
whose manly acts does fly,
By brute of Fame the sounding trump
does perse the azure Sky.
My sapient words I say perpend
and so your skill delate:
You know that Mors vanquished has
Cyrus that King of state,
And I by due Inheritance
possess that Princely Crown:
Ruling by sword of mighty force
in place of great Renown.
Edmund PRESTWITH.
The Author of a Tragedy, called Hyppolitus, (which as I suppose is translated
from Seneca) though I never saw it; but have heard 'twas printed in octavo. Mr.
Philips and Mr. Winstanley, have placed another Play to his Account, viz. The
Hectors: but it was a fault, which I suppose they were led into by my
Catalogue, printed 1680. as I my self was; though I must now assure my Reader,
That that Play has no Name to it, and in Mr. Kirkman's Catalogue is set down as
an Anonymal Play.

Q.
Francis QUARLES, Esquire
THis Gentleman was Son to James Quarles, Esquire who was Clerk of the Green-Cloth,
and Purveyor to Queen Elizabeth. He was Born at Stewards, in the Parish of
Rumford in Essex. He was sent to Cambridge, and was bred for some time in
Christ-Church College: afterward he became a Member of Lincoln's Inn, in
London. He was sometime Cup Bearer to the Queen of Bohemia; Secretary to the
Reverend James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh; and Chronologer to the Famous City
of London. He was a Poet that mixed Religion and Fancy together; and was very
careful in all his Writings not to entrench upon Good Manners, by any
Scurrility, in his Works; or any ways offending against his Duty to God, his
Neighbor, and himself. The Occasion of our Mentioning him in this place, is
from his being the Author of an Innocent, Innosfensive Play, called

The Virgin Widow, a Comedy, printed 4o. Land. 1649.

As to his other Works, they are very numerous: those which I have seen, are
his History of Sampson in Verse; Jonah, Esther, Job Militant. His Emblems, are
reputed by some, a Copy of Hermannus Hugo's Pia Desideria; Anniversaries upon
his Paranete. Pentalogia, or The Quintessence of Meditation; Argalus and
Parthenia; being founded on a Story, in Sir Philip Sydney's Arcadia.
Enchiridion of Meditations Divine and Moral. Nor must I forget his Loyal
Convert, though I never saw it; being a Cause of his Persecution, by the Usurped
Authority then in being.

The troubles of Ireland, forced him from thence; so that he died in his Native
Country, Sept. 8. 1644. being aged 52 Years, and the Father of eighteen
Children, by one Wife; and was buried at St. Foster's Church, London.

R.
Thomas RANDOLPH.
HE Flourisht in the Reign of King Charles the First; and was Born at Houghton,
in Northamptonshire; from whence he was sent for Education to Westminster
School; and thence was removed to Cambridge, where he became Fellow of Trinity
College in that University. He was accounted one of the most pregnant Wits of
his Time; and was not only admired by the Wits of Cambridge, but likewise
beloved and valued by the Poets, and Men of the Town in that Age. His Gay
Humor, and Readiness at Repartee, begat Ben. Johnson's Love to that Degree,
that he Adopted him his Son: on which Account Mr. Randolph writ a Gratulatory
Poem to him, which is printed, these Lines being part of the Copy: -- When my
Muse upon obedient knees
Asks not a Father's Blessing, let her leese
The Fame of this Adoption; it is a Curse
I wish her 'cause I cannot think a worse.
How true a Filial Love he paid to his Reputation, may appear from his Answer
to that Ode, which Ben. writ in Defense of his New-Inn, and which Mr. Feltham
replied upon so sharply. Having given you the two former, in my Account of Mr.
Johnson; give me leave likewise to transcribe this in Honor of Mr. Randoph,
whose Memory I reverence, for his Respect to that Great Man.

An Answer to Mr. Ben Johnson's Ode, to persuade him not to leave the Stage.

I.
Ben, do not leave the Stage,
'Cause it is a loathsome Age:
For Pride and Impudence will grow too bold,
When they shall hear it told
They frighted thee; stand high as is thy Cause,
Their Hiss is thy Applause:
More just were thy Disdain,
Had they approved thy Vein:
So thou for them, and they for thee were born;
They to incense, and thou as much to scorn.
II.
Will It thou engross thy Store
Of Wheat, and pour no more,
Because their Bacon-brains have such a taste,
As more delight in Mast:
No! set them forth a board of Dainties, full
As thy best Muse can cull;
Whilst they the while do pine
And thirst, midst all their Wine.
What greater plague can Hell it self devise,
Than to be willing thus to Tantalize?
III.
Thou can not find them stuff,
That will be bad enough
To please their Pallates: let 'em them refuse,
For some Pye-Corner Muse;
She is too fair an Hostess, 'twere a sin
For them to like thine Inn:
'Twas made to entertain
Guests of a Nobler Strain;
Yet if they will have any of thy Store,
Give them some scraps, and send them from thy door.
IV.
And let those things in plush
Till they be taught to blush,
Like what they will, and more contented be
With what Brom His Man Rich Brom; See an Account of his Plays before.
swept from thee.
I know thy worth, and that thy lofty Strains
Write not to Clothes, but Brains:
But thy great Spleen does rise,
'Cause Moles will have no Eyes:
This only in my Ben I faulty find,
He Is angry, they will not see him that are blind.
V.
Why should the Scene be mute,
Cause thou can touch thy Lute,
And string thy Horace; let each Muse of Nine
Claim thee, and say, The art mine.
'T were fond to let all other Flames expire,
To sit by Pindar's Fire:
For by so strange Neglect,
I should my self suspect,
The Palsy He had the Palsy at that time.
were as well thy Brains disease,
If they could shake thy Muse which way they please.
VI.
And though thou well can sing
The Glories of thy King;
And on the wings of Verse his Chariot bear
To Heaven, and fix it there;
Yet let thy Muse as well some Raptures raise,
To please him, as to praise.
I would not have thee choose
Only a treble Muse;
But have this Envious, Ignorant Age to know,
Thou that can sing so high, can reach as low.
There was another Copy of Verses writ by Mr. Carew to Mr. Johnson, on occasion
of his Ode of Defiance, annexed to his Play of the New-Inn: See his Poems, 8o.
p. 90.

Having given you a taste of his Lyrick Poetry, I now proceed to his Dramatick
Performance; of which (according to our Custom) I shall speak Alphabetically.

Amyntas, or The Impossible Dowry; a Pastoral, acted before the King and Queen
at Whitehall.

Aristippus, or The Jovial Philosopher; presented in a private Show; to which
is added The Conceited Pedlar.

Jealous Lovers, a Comedy presented to their Gracious Majesty's, at Cambridge,
by the Students of Trinity College; and dedicated to Dr. Comber, D. of
Carlisle. This Play I think to be the best of his, and was revived on the Stage,
at London, in 1682. as may appear by an Epilogue written by Mrs. Behn, and
printed in her Collection of Poems, published 8o. Land. 1685. This Play was
revised and printed by the Author, in his Lifetime; being ushered by the Chief
Wits of both Universities to the Press. One of which says Mr. Edw. France.
thus of it: Though thou have made it public to the view
Of Self-love, Malice, and that other Crew:
It were more fit it should impaled lie
Within the walls of some great Library;
That if by chance through Injury of Time,
Plautus, and Terence, and that Aristophanes.
Fragrant Thyme
Of Attick-Wit should perish, we might see
All those revived in this own Comedy.
The Jealous Lover, Pander, Gull, and Whore,
The Doting Father, Shark, and many more
Thy Scene does represent unto the Life,
Besides the Character of a cursed Wife;
So truly given in so proper Style,
As if thy Active Soul had dwelt a while
In each Man's Body; and at length had seen
How in their Humors they themselves demean.


Muses Looking-Glass, a Comedy, which by the Author was first called The
Entertainment; as I learn from Sir Aston Cockain's Works, who writ an
Encomiastick Copy on it. See his Works, p. 98. As to this Play, it answers both
the Designs of Poetry, Profit, and Delight: and what a Student of
Christ-church, Mr. Rich. West, said of it, will be found true by every Reader.

Who looks within his clearer Glass, will say,
At once he writ an Ethick Track, and Play.
All these Dramatick Pieces, and his Poems, were published by his Brother, Mr.
Thomas Randolph, of Christ-church College in Oxon. and are now printed the 5th
Edit. Oxon. 1668.

I know not when our Author died; though I presume he lived to no great Age,
being too much addicted to the Principles of his Predecessor Aristippus,
Pleasure, and Contempt of Wealth.

My Readers are not to expect any Discoveries of Thefts, for this Author had no
occasion to practice Plagiary, having so large a Fond of Wit of his own, that
he needed not to borrow from others; and therefore I may justly say, with a
Friend of his, With what an Ecstasy shall we behold
This Book? which is no Ghost of any old
Worm-eaten Author; here is no Jest, or Hint,
But had his Head both for its Oar, and Mint.
Were not for some Translations none could know
Whether he had e're looked in Book or no.
Of this Nature, are not only his several Versions, as the Second Epod of
Horace, several Pieces out of Claudian, etc. but likewise a Dramatick Piece
from Aristophanes, called in the Original (...), but by our Translator,

Hey for Honesty, Down with Knavery; a pleasant Comedy, printed 4o. Land. 1651.
This Play was first translated by our Author; and afterward augmented and
published by F. J. I shall not pretend to determine, whether this Translation,
for that published in octavo be better; but leave it to those more versed in
the Original than I pretend to. Permit me therefore to conclude all with the
following Lines, writ by One of St. John's, in Memory of our Author.

Immortal Ben is dead, and as that Ball
On Ida tossed, so is his Crown, by all
The Infantry of Wit. Vain Priests! That Chair
Is only fit for his true Son and Hen.
Reach here thy Laurel: Randolph, it is thy praise:
Thy naked Skull shall well become the Bays.
See, Daphne courts thy Ghost: and spite of Fate,
Thy Poems shall be Poet Laureate.
Edward RAVENSCROFT.
A Gentleman now living, and One that was sometime a Member of the
Middle Temple. One who with the Vulgar passes for a Writer: though I hope he will
pardon me, if I rather style him in the Number of Wit-Collectors; for I cannot
allow all the Wit in his Plays to be his own: I hope he will not be angry, for
transcribing the Character which he has given of Mr. Dryden, and which mutato
nomine belongs to himself. It Is not that I any ways abet Mr. Dryden for his
falling upon his Mamamouchi; but that I may maintain the Character of
Impartial, to which I pretend, I must pull off his Disguise, and discover the
Politic Plagiary, that lurks under it. I know he has endeavored to show
himself Master of the Art of Swift-writing; and would persuade the World, that
what he writes is ex tempore Wit, and written currente calamo. But I doubt not
to show, That though he would be thought to imitate the Silkworm, that spins its
Web from its own Bowels; yet I shall make him appear like the Leech, that lives
upon the Blood of Men, drawn from the Gums; and when he is rubbed with Salt,
spues it up again. To prove this, I shall only give an Account of his Plays;
and by that little of my own Knowledge which I shall discover, 'twill be
manifest, that this Ricketty-Poet (though of so many Years) cannot go without
others Assistance: For take this Prophecy, from your humble Servant, or Mr.
Ravenscroft's Mamamouchi, which you please, When once our Poets translating
Vein is past,
From him you cannot expect new Plays in have.
To prove this, I need only give you an Account of what he has already
published; and from thence you may judge, according to the old Adage, Expede
Herculem, what is like to follow.

Careless Lovers, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and printed 4o. Land.
1673. The Epistle to this Play was written against Mr. Dryden, and his Prologue
levelled against Almanzor; and his Play, called Love in Nunnery. The truth is,
Mr. Dryden had fallen first upon his Mamamouchi, as we have said; and therefore
on that Account, our Poet was excusable; but to accuse him for borrowing, and
translating, as he faith: Till then he borrowed from Romance, and did translate,
was unreasonable, when our Poet knew his own Guilt; for notwithstanding he
writes in the same Prologue, `That all that is in it is ex tempore Wit.
Yet I must take the Liberty to contradict him, and acquaint my Reader, That
the Sham-Scene in the 4. Act, which is the most diverting in the Play; where
Mrs. Breedwell, and Clapham bring in their Children, and challenge Marriage of
the Ld De Boastado, is stolen from Molliere's M. De Pourceaugnac. Act 2. Sc.
7. and 8. As to the rest of the French Play, he has inserted it into his
Mamamouchi. The Author in his Epistle acknowledges, That the Reason why there
are such continual Picques amongst the Poets, is the same with that of Whores,
Two of a Trade can never agree: and therefore Mr. Dryden and Mr. Ravenscroft,
being professed Plagiaries, and having both laid claim to Molliere, no wonder if
they fell out, like the two Travelers in AEsop about the Ass; though at the same
time a third Poet ran away with the prize; at least the greatest part.

Dame Dobson, or The Cunning Woman; a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and
printed 4o. Land. 1684. This Play is translated from a French Comedy, called La
Devineresse, ore Les faux Enchantements. Notwithstanding this Play was so
followed and applauded in France, as the Epistle to the Original informs me;
yet it was damned in its Action at the Theater at London. I pretend not to give
the Reason of it; only I have Mr. Dryaen's Dram. Essay p. 37.
Testimony, That Corneille's Le Menteur, (since published under the Title of
The Mistaken Beauty, or The Liar) was notwithstanding Mr. Hart's acting Dorant
to Admiration, judged far Inferior to many Plays writ by Fletcher, and Ben
Johnson: and I question not but this last will obtain the preference from the
other, if they are read by unbiased Judges.

English Lawyer, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, and printed 4o. Land.
1678. This Play was written originally in Latin, by Mr. R. Ruggles, sometime
Master of Arts in Clare Hall in Cambridge; and was acted several times with
extraordinary applause, before King James the First by the Gentlemen of that
University. There was a Version done by a Master of Arts of Magdalen College
in Oxford, printed near thirty Years ago, though translated some Years before:
and I believe Mr. Ravenscroft made more use of that, than the Original; at
leastwise they who understand not the Latin, and yet would see a true Copy,
(this of our Author being drawn in Miniature) may read it, under the Title of
Ignoramus.

King Edgar, and Alphreda; a Tragi-comedy acted at the Theater Royal, and
printed 4o. Land. 1677. This Play I suppose (if any) to be of the Author's own
Minerva; though the Story of it be sufficiently Famous, not only in Novels both
French and Italian: but in almost all the Historians of those Times. For
Novels, see the Annals of Love octavo: For Historians, see W. Malmesbury, H.
Huntingdon, Rog. Hoveden, Ingulfus, Ranulph Higden, M. Westminster, Pol.
Virgil. Grafton, Stow, Speed, Baker, etc. Ubaldino Le Vite delle Done
Illustri, p. 28.

London Cuckolds, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and printed 4o. Land.
1683 This Play, though the most diverting of any that he has writ, is patcht up
from several Novels. I may truly aver, that Wise-acre and Peggy, are borrowed
from Scarron's Fruitless Precaution, Nov. first; at least that part of it where
Peggy in Armor watches her Husband's Nightcap. Though possibly these two
Characters were drawn from Arnolphe and Agnes, in Molliere's L'Escole des
Femmes: Loveday's Discovering Eugenia's Intrigue, and pretending to conjure for
a Supper, is borrowed from Les Contes d'Ouville, part. 2. page 235. Eugenia's
Contrivance to have Jane lie in her place by her Husband, whilst she went to
Ramble; is borrowed possibly from the Mescolanza dolce Cap. 16. at the End of
Torriano's Grammar: or else from Scarron's Fruitless Precaution, where is such
a like passage. The Contrivance of Eugenia to bring off Ramble, and Loveday, by
obliging the former to draw his Sword, and counterfeit a Passion, is borrowed
from Les Contes d'Ouville, 2. part. page 257. or from Boccace Day 7. Nov. 6.
Doodle's Obliging his Wife Arabella to answer nothing but No in his Absence,
and the Consequence of that Intrigue with Townly, is borrowed from Les Contes
d'Ouville, 2. part. page 121 Eugenia's making a false Confidence to her Husband
Dashwell, and sending him into the Garden to Loveday, in her Habit, where he is
beaten by him, is borrowed from Les Contes d'Ouville, 2. part. page 250. The
same Story is in Baccace, Day 7. Nov. 7. and in Les Contes de M. de la
Fontaine, Nov. 2. p. 21. and is the Subject of several Plays; as City
Nightcap, etc. This is sufficient to show how much our Author borrows in his
Plots, and that his own Genius is either lazy, or very barren of Invention.

Mamamouchi, or The Citizen turned Gentleman; a Comedy acted at the Duke's
Theater, and printed 4o. Land. 1675. This Play is dedicated to his Highness
Prince Rupert. Our Author had that good Opinion of Molliere's Monsieur de
Pourceaugnac, that what he left untoucht in that Play when he writ The Careless
Lovers, he has taken into this: So that his Sir Simon Soft-head, is M. de
Pourceaugnac in an English Dress; and the rest of his Play is stolen from Le
Bourgeois Gentilhomme, a Comedy writ by the same Author. So that here is a
whole Play borrowed, and yet nothing owned by the Author; a procedure which
savours of the highest Ingratitude, and which (as I have elsewhere observed)
has been long ago thus inveighed against by the Excellent Pliny Epist. ad. T.V.
, Obnoxii profecto Animi, and infelicis Ingenii est, deprehendi in furto malle,
quam mutuum reddere, cum praesertim sors fiat ex usura.

Scaramouch a Philsopher, Harlequin a Schoolboy, Bravo, Merchant, and
Magician; a Comedy after the Italian Manner, acted at the Theater Royal, and
printed 4o. Land. 1677. This Play was fore-stall'd in the Action, by the Duke's
House, they having brought upon the Stage the Cheats of Scapin; as the Author
complains in the Prologue. Our Author would be thought to have taken a great
deal of pains in this Play, and to have brought a new sort of Comedy on our
Stage: as he says, The Poet does a dangerous trial make,
And all the common ways of Plays forsake.
Upon the Actors it depends too much;
And who can hope ever to see two such,
As the famed Harlequin, and Scaramouch.
This he well knew --
Yet rather chose in New Attempts to fail,
Than in the Old indifferently prevail.
But notwithstanding our Author's Boasting, he is but a Dwarf dressed up in a
Giant's Coat stufft out with Straw: for I believe he cannot justly challenge
any Part of a Scene as the Genuine Offspring of his own Brain; and may rather
be reckoned the Midwife than the Parent of this Play. This Author has followed
his old Custom of sweeping clean, and leaving nothing behind him; for what he
left of Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme, he has taken into this Play; as will appear
to them that will compare the first Act with that Dramma. Almost all Le
Marriage force, is taken into this Play likewise; and for the Cheats of Scapin,
I suppose our Author has not only seen that Play, but borrowed from thence; I
have already taken notice, that part of it resembles Terence's Phormio.

Wrangling Lovers, or The Invisible Mistress; a Comedy acted at the Duke's
Theater, and printed 4o. Land. 1677. This Play is founded upon a Spanish
Romance in 8o. translated and called Deceptio visus, or Seeing and Believing
are two things. Th. Corneille has a Play writ on the same Subject, called Les
Engagements du Hazard.

I know nothing else of our Author's Writing, without I should reckon his
Alteration of Titus Andronicus, of which I shall speak by and by, in the
Account of Shakespeare.

Thomas RAWLINS.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, who was well
acquainted with most of the Poets of his time. He was the Chief Graver of the
Mint to both King Charles the First and Second, and died in that Employment in
1670. He writ a Play for his Diversion only, not for profit; as he tells the
Reader in his Preface: Take no notice of my Name, for a second Work of this
Nature shall hardly bear it. I have no desire to be known by a Threadbare
Cloak, having a Calling that will maintain it Woolly. His Play is called,

Rebellion, a Tragedy acted Nine Days together; and diverse times since with
good applause, by his Majesty's Company of Revels; and printed 4o. Land. 1640.
It Is dedicated to his Kinsman, Robert Ducie of Aston, in the County of Stafford
Esquire and is accompanied with Verses, to the number of eleven Copies; amongst
which are several writ by the Dramatick Poets his Contemporaries. He was very
young when he writ this Tragedy, as appears from the following Lines of Mr.
Chamberlain, published with the Play.

To see a Springot of thy tender Age,
With such a lofty Strain to word a Stage;
To see a Tragedy from thee in Print,
With such a World of fine Meanders in it,
Pusles my wondering soul: for there appears
Such disproportion 'twixt thy Lines, and Years:
That when I read thy Lines, methinks I see
The sweet tongued Ovid fall upon his Knee,
With Parce precor; --
The Scene of this Play lies in Sevile; but I cannot direct you to any
particular History, because I know not in what King of Spain's Reign this
Action happened: All I can tell you is, That I believe this Tailor was fitted
upon Crispin's Last; and that Webster's Shoemaker gave Birth to our Poet's Don
Sebastiano.

Mr. Winstanley speaks of other small Pieces that he wrote, though I know of
none, except some commendatory Verses, published with his Friends Plays; as with
Mr. Chamberlain's Swaggering Damsel; Mr. Richards's Messalina, etc.

Edward REVET.
An Author of our Time, who published a Play, called

Town Shifts, or Suburb Justice; a Comedy Acted at his Royal Highness the Duke
of York's Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1671. and dedicated to Stephen Mosedelf
Esquire Give me leave so far to commend this Comedy, to say that it is Instructive;
and that the Author's Protagonist Lovewel, though reduced to poverty, yet
entertains not only an Innate Principle of Honesty, but advises his two
Comrades, Friendly and Faithful, to the practice of it; and it succeeds happily
to them. I mention this, because few of our Modern Characters are so nicely
drawn.

Nathaniel RICHARDS.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First; of whom I can
give no further Account, than that he writ one Tragedy, published in the
beginning of our late Troubles; viz.

Messalina the Roman Empress, her Tragedy, acted with general applause diverse
times, by the Company of his Majesty's Revels, and printed 8o. Land. 1640. This
Play is dedicated to the Right Honorable John Carry, Viscount Rochsord: and is
ushered into the Light by six Copies of Verses; two of which were writ by our
Dramatick Authors, Davenport and Rawlins; two by two Actors in his Play,
Robinson and Jordan; and a fifth Latin Copy, by One Thomas Combs, which may
deserve a place in our Account: after having acquainted the Reader, that for
the Story he may consult Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny, Plutarch, and Juvenal; all
which have given a Character of the Insatiate Messalina; as the following
Verses do of her Vices, and the Virtues of her Mother Lepida.

Carissimo Amico Auctori in eximiam Missalinae Tragoediam.
Ridentem Venerem veteres pinxere; sed ecce
Apparet Venus hic sanguinolenta; nigra.
Lascivos amplexa viros amplectitur ensem:
Effera quae vita, est baec furibunda nece.
Sic eadem Victrix, eademque Libidinis Ultrix,
Messalina, altrix quae fuit, ipsa fuit,
Du^ moritur mala pars, oritur pars conjungis illa,
Quae superat quamvis mors in utramque furit.
Casta parens toties, quoties fit adultera proles,
Pugnat, and adversa cum pie tate scelus:
Dumque scelus fugiens dat terga, stat altera luge^s,
Et nituit niveo pectore purus Honor,
Haec ubi sunt verbis aptata, Tragoedia digna
Illa est in primis Laudis, and illa tua est.
Thomas Combs.
William RIDER.
This Writer (as I suppose by the Date of his Play) flourished in the Reign of
King Charles the Second; and was a Master of Arts, though of which University or
College, is to me unknown. All I can inform my Reader is, that he is the
Author of a Play, called

Twins, a Tragi-comedy acted at the private House at Salisbury Court with
general applause, printed 4o. Land. 1655. This Play is not contemptible, either
as to the Language, or Economy of it, though I judge it older far than the the
Date of it imports.

William ROWLY.
An Author that flourished in the Reign of King Charles the First; and was
sometime a Member of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge. I can say nothing further of
his Life or Country; but as to his Poetry, and his intimate Acquaintance with
the prime Poets of that Age, I can speak at large. He was not only beloved by
those Great Men, Shakespeare, Fletcher, and Johnson; but likewise writ with the
former, The Birth of Merlin. Besides what he joined in writing with Poets of
the second Magnitude, as Heywood, Middleton, Day and Webster; as you may see
under each of their Names; our Author has four Plays in print of his own
Writing, of which take the following Account; viz.

All Is lost by Lust, a Tragedy diverse times acted by the Lady Elizabeth's
Servants; and with great applause at the Phoenix in Drury Lane, and printed 4o.
Land. 1633. This is a good old Play, and the Story it self may be read in the
Spanish Histories: See Mariana Lib. 21, 22, 23. Suritta's Annals, etc. Lib. 1.
C. 1. Turquet, L. 5. C. 30. As to Margaretta's Designed Revenge on her Husband
Antonio, read the Unfortunate Lovers, Novel the 3.

Match at Midnight, a pleasant Comedy, acted by the Children of the Revels; and
printed 4o. Land. 1633. The Plot of Alexander Bloodhound's being hid by Jarvis
under the Widow's Bed, is founded on an old Story inserted in the English
Rogue, part 4. Chapter 19.

Shoomaker's a Gentleman, a Comedy printed 4o. Land. -- Not having this Play by
me at present, I cannot inform my Reader where It was acted, or when printed.
But this I know, that it has not many Years since been revived at the Theater
in Dorset-Garden, and been formerly acted abroad in the Country: and the
Comical part of it, is an usual Entertainment at Bartholomew and Southwarke
Fairs; it being a Copy to which all Stroling Companies lay claim to. The Play
is founded on a stitcht Pamphlet in quarto, called The History of the
Gentle-Craft. The Reader may find an Epilogue printed in Duffet's Poems, p. 60.
writ for this Play, when 'twas revived.

New Wonder, a Woman never vexed; a pleasant Comedy, sundry times acted, and
printed 4o. Land. 1632. That passage of the Widows finding her Wedding-Ring,
which she dropped in crossing the Thames, in the Belly of a Fish which her Maid
bought accidentally in the Market, is founded either upon the Story of
Polycrates of Samos, as the Author may read at large in Herodotus, Lib. 3. sive
Thalia; or upon the like Story related of one Anderson of Newcastle, by Doctor
Fuller, in his Worthies of England.

I know of nothing else written by our Author, neither can I tell the time of
his Death, and therefore I must leave it to Persons of better Information to
acquaint the World, with more particulars of his Life, whilst I hasten to an
Account of his Names sake.

Samuel ROWLEY.
Whether this Author was related to as well as Contemporary with the former, I
know not: only this I know, that he writ himself a Servant to the Prince of
Wales. He is the Author of two Historical Plays, of which we are to give an
Account in their Alphabetical Order; viz.

Noble Spanish Soldier, or A Contract broken justly revenged; a Tragedy,
printed 4o. Land. 1634. This is a Posthumous Piece; and if we believe the
Printer's Preface, has received applause in Action. Where it was acted, I know
not, nor the Foundation of the Story, it not being mentioned what King of Spain
it was, that committed that act of Perjury with Onaelia.

When you see me, you know me; or The Famous Chronical History of Henry the
Eighth; with the Birth, and Virtuous Life of Edward Prince of Wales: being
played by the High and Mighty Prince of Wale's Servants, and printed 4o. Land.
1632. For the Plot, see the Ld Herbert's Life of Hen. the VIII. and other
Writers of his Life, as Polydore Virgil, Hollingshead, Hall, Grafton, Stow,
Speed, Martin, Baker, etc.

Joseph RUTTER.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First. He belonged to
the Earl of Dorset's Family; and attended on his Son, the Father of the present
Earl. At the Command of the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Dorset, and Lord
Chamberlain to the Queen, he undertook the Translation of the Cid, out of
French: and Mr. Kirkman ascribes another Play to him besides; of both which I
shall speak in their Order.

Cid, a Tragi-comedy acted before their Majesty's at Court, and on the Cockpit
Stage in Drury Lane, by the Servants to both their Majesty's, and printed 8o.
Land. 1637. This first Part is dedicated to Edward Earl of Dorset aforesaid,
part of it being translated by the young Lord his Son, on whom our Author
attended.

Cid, Part the second, printed 4o. Land. 1640. and dedicated to the Lady
Theophila Cook. This Part was undertaken by our Author, at his Majesty's
Command, who was pleased to think it worth the translating; and commanded it to
be put into our Author's Hands. Both these Plays are usually bound together in
actavo.

As to these Plays in the Original, they are much commended, though I never saw
but the first Part in French. I shall not here transcribe the Author's own
Sentiments of it; but leave it to those who understand the French to peruse the
Examen of the Second Part; it being too long for this place. But what M.
Boileau says of it, in his 9th Satyr, may be sufficient to show the Sentiments
of the public in its Favor: His Words are these: En vain contre le Cid un
Cardinal Richelieu.
Ministre se ligue,
Tout Paris pour The Names of the Heroine, and
Climene a les yeux de Hero, in the Play.
Rodrigue.
The Academy writ a Book against it, by the Cardinal's private order, entitled
Sentimens de l'Academie Francoise sur la Tragi-comedie du Cid: though 'twas
publicly so well approved of, that many places of France 'twas Proverbially
said, Gela est beau comme le Gid.
L' Academie en Corpse a beau le censurer,
Le Public revolte s'obstine a l'admirer.


To speak of the Translation in general, I think, if the Time be considered
when it was undertaken, it may pass muster with candid Readers: The Author
having at least so far improved it, as to bring several things in Action, which
in the Original are delivered in Narration; an Excellency commended by Horace,
in those Lines so well known to all Scholars.

Aut agitur res in Scenis aut Acta refertur:
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem;
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, and quae
Ipse sibi tradit spectator --
It is true our Author has altered in the Original, some places; but not many.
Two Scenes he has left out, as being Soliloquies, and things little pertinent
to the Business: and give me leave to observe by the by, That the French are
much addicted to bring in these Monologues, in their serious Plays. Some things
likewise our Author has added, but scarce discernable: and where M. Corneille
would give him leave, he says he has followed close both his Sense and Words;
though, as he has observed, many things are received Wit in one Tongue, which are
not in another. As to the Play, it is founded on true History; and the Author
has followed Roderic de Tolede, and Mariana. The Reader may consult other
Historians, that have writ of the Affairs of Don Fernando, the First King of
Castille.

Shepherds Holyday, a Pastoral Tragi-comedy, acted before their Majesty's, at
Whitehall, by the Queen's Servants; and printed 8o. Land. 1635. This Play is
ascribed by Mr. Kirkman, to our Author; though only J.R. is affixed to the
Titlepage. This Play is of the Nobler sort of Pastorals; and is writ in Blank
Verse: At the End is a Pastoral Elegy, on the Death of the Lady Venetia Digby,
in the Person of Sir Kenelm Digby, her Husband; and a Latin Epigram on her Tomb.

I know nothing else of our Authors Writing.

Thomas RYMER, Esquire
This Gentleman is now living, and was once (if he be not at present) a Member
of the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn. He has excellent Talent toward
Criticism; as appears by his Preface to the Translation of Rapin's Reflections
on Aristotle's Treatise of Poetry 8o. and his Tragedies of the last Age
considered: but I think for Dramatick Poetry, there are other Poets now alive,
that at least equal that Tragedy which he has published, viz.

Edgar, or The English Monarch; an Heroic Tragedy, printed 4o. Land. 1678.
This Tragedy is dedicated to King Charles the Second, and written in Heroic
Verse. If it be compared with Mr. Ravenscroft's King Edgar and Alfreda, it far
exceeds it. For the Plot, see the Historians before mentioned; viz. Malmesbury,
Huntingdon, Hoveden, Ingulfus, Higden, etc. Grafton, Stow, etc.

S.
Thomas St. SERF.
A Gentleman, who in the Reign of King Charles the Second writ a Play, called
Tarugo's Wiles, or The Coffee-house; a Comedy acted at his Highnesses the Duke
of York's Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1668. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable George, Marquess of Huntley. This Comedy if not equal with those of
the first Rank, yet exceeds several which pretend to the second; especially the
third Act, which discovers the several Humors of a Coffee-house. As to the
other part of the Play, it is founded (as I suppose) on the Spanish Play No
puedeser, or It cannot be; but not having the Original, I cannot be positive:
but this I know, That the Lord Bell-guard, and Crack in Sir Courtly Nice,
extremely resembles Don Patricio and Tarugo, in this Play: Nay more, the Plots
of both are alike. I leave it to the Decision of Mr. Crown, or any other who
have seen the Spanish Play. In the mean time, I desire no Man to rely upon my
Judgment; but if what I have said cannot save him, excuse him upon his own
Plea, in his own Words.

If this prevail not, he hopes he is safe from danger,
For Wit and Malice ought not to reach a Stranger.
William SAMPSON.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First: He was sometimes
a Retainer to the Family of Sir Henry Willoughby, of Richley in Derbyshire; and
was the Author of a Play, called

Vow-breaker, or The Fair Maid of Clifton, in Nottinghamshire; diverse times
acted by several Companies with great applause, printed 4o. Land. 1633. and
dedicated to Mrs. Anne Willoughby, Daugther to Sir Henry: in which Epistle, the
Author concludes thus; Heaven keep you from Fawning Parasites, and busy
Gossips, and send you a Husband, and a Good One; or else may you never make a
Holyday for Hymen. As much Happiness as Tongue can speak, Pen can write, Heart
think, or Thoughts imagine, ever attend on you, your Noble Father, and all his
Noble Family; to whom I ever rest, as my bounden Duty, a Faithful Servant,
Will. Sampson. This Play seems founded upon Truth; I have likewise, in my
younger Years, read a Ballad composed upon the same Subject.

Our Author besides this Play, joined with Mr. Markham in Herod and Antipater,
which I forgot before. But as for the Valiant Scot, and How to choose a Good
Wife from a Bad, they are in my Judgment none of our Author's writing; though Mr.
Philips and his Follower Mr. Winstanley, have ascribed them to him.

George SANDYS, Esquire
A Gentleman who flourished in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr; if one may
so say, of a Person, who sympathiz'd so deeply with his Prince and Country in
their misfortunes. He was Son to his Grace Edwin, Arch-bish. of York: and was
born in the Year 1577 at Bishops-Thorp, in the same County, being his Father's
youngest Child. He was sent to the University that memorable Year 1588. being
then eleven Years of Age; and was entered of St. Mary Hall in Oxford. how long
he stayed, I know not: but in the Year 1610. memorable for the Murder of that
Great Hero Henry the Fourth of France, by that Villain Ravaillac, he began his
Travels through France, Italy, Turkey, Egypt, Palestine, etc. an Account of which
you may read in his Travels, printed Fol. Land. 1658. But it is not on this
Account, but his Poetry, that he is here mentioned; and therefore I shall
hasten to speak of his Writings in that kind, and first of that excellent Piece
of Dramatick Poetry, which he has left us; and chiefly in this Account
challenges a particular place; viz.

Christ's Passion, a Tragedy, with Annotations, printed 8o. Land. 1640. and
dedicated to King Charles the First. This Play is translated from the Latin
Original writ by Hugo Grotius. This Subject was handled before in Greek, by
that Venerable Person, Apollinarius of Laodicea, Bishop of Hierapolis; and
after him by Gregory Nazianzen: though this of Hugo Grotius, (in our Author's
Opinion) transcends all on this Argument. As to the Translator, I doubt not but
he will be allowed an Excellent Artist, by Learned Judges; and as he has
followed Horace's Advice of Avoiding a servile Translation, Nec verbum verbo
curabis reddere fidus
Interpres:
So he comes so near the Sense of the Author, that nothing is lost, no Spirits
evaporate in the decanting of it into English; and if there be any Sediment, it
is left behind. This Book was reprinted with Figures, 8o. Land. 1688.

Nor are his other Translations less valued, especially Ovid's Metamorphosis,
printed with Cuts, Fol. Oxon. 1632. This Translation was so much esteemed in
former times, that I find two old Copies of Verses, speaking in praise of our
Author. In the first, called A Censure of the Poets, are these Lines: Then
dainty Sands, that has to English done
Smooth sliding Ovid, and has made him One,
With so much sweetness, and unusual Grace,
As though the neatness of the English Pace
Should tell your setting Latin, that it came
But slowly after, as though stiff or lame.
The other on the Time Poets, says thus, Sands Metamorphos'd so into another,
We know not Sands, and Ovid from each other.


To this I may add the Translation of the first Book of Virgil's AEneis; by
which Specimen, we may see how much he has excelled Mr. Ogilby. For his other
Divine Pieces, as his Paraphrase on the Psalms, Job, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations
of Jeremiah, etc. I have heard them much admired by Devout and Ingenious
Persons, and I believe very deservingly.

Having done with his Translations, give me leave to conclude with His to
another World, which happened at his Nephew, Mr. Wiat's House, at Boxley-Abbey
in Kent: in the Chancel of which Parish Church he lies buried, though without a
Monument; and therefore I shall follow my Author, from whence I collected this
Account, by transcribing what deserves to be inscribed on a Monument; viz.

Georgius Sandys, Poetarum Anglorum sui saecult Princeps, sepultus fuit Martii
70 Stilo Anglico. A.D. 1643. Charles SAUNDERS.
A Young Gentleman, whose Wit began to bud as early, as that of the
Incomparable Cowley; and was like him a King's Scholar, when he writ a Play
called

Tamberlane the Great, a Tragedy acted by their Majesty's Servants, at the
Theater Royal; as likewise at Oxford, before his late Majesty King Charles the
Second, at his meeting the Parliament there. 'Twas printed in quarto Land.
1681. and the Design was drawn (as the Author owns) from the Novel of Tamerlane
and Asteria, in octavo: I have so great a value for this Author's Play, that I
cannot but wish well to his Muse; but being no Poet, I must set my Hand to
another Man's Wishes: I mean Mr. Banks, who has writ a Copy of Verses on this
Play, part of which are as follow: Launch out young Merchant, new set up of Wit,
The World's before thee, and thy stock is great,
Sail by thy Muse, but never let her guide,
Then without danger, you may safely glide
By happier Studies steered, and quickly gain
The promised Indies of a hopeful Brain,
Bring home a Man betimes, that may create
His Country's Glory in the Church, or State.


Elkanah SETTLE.
An Author now living, whose Muse is chiefly addicted to Tragedy; and has been
tragically dealt withal by a Tyranical Laureat; which has somewhat eclipsed the
glory he at first appeared in: But Time has her vicissitudes; and he has lived
to see his Enemy humbled, if not justly punished; for this Reason, I shall not
afresh animadvert upon his fault, but rather bury them in Oblivion; and without
any Reflections on his Poetry, give a succinct Account of those Plays, which he
has published, being Nine in Number; viz.

Cambyses King of Persia, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. 3d
Edit. Land. 1675. and dedicated to the Illustrious Princess Anne, Duchess of
Monmouth. This Tragedy is written in Heroic Verse, and founded on History. For
the Plot, see Justin, Herodotus, Ammianus Marcellinus, etc.

Conquest of China by the Tartars, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater;
printed 4o. Land. 1676. and dedicated to the Lord Castle-Rizing. This is also
writ in Heroic Verse, and founded on History. See Signior Palafax his History
of China, translated in octavo; John Gonzales de Mendoza, Lewis de Guzman, etc.

Empress of Morocco, a Tragedy in Heroic Verse; acted at the Duke's Theater,
printed with Sculptures 4o. Land. 1673. and dedicated to the Right Honorable
Henry, Earl of Norwich, and Earl-Marshal of England. This Play Mr. Dryden writ
particularly against, in a Pamphlet called, Notes and Observations on the
Empress of Morocco; or some few Erratas to be printed instead of the Sculptures
with the second Edition of that Play; printed 4o. Land. 1674. This (as I have
already observed) was answered by another Pamphlet, which showed Mr. Dryden was
not Infallible; but that notwithstanding his Bravadoes, he himself was as
faulty as others: and that he had verified the Spanish Proverb, No es tan bravo
el Leon come le pintan; The Lion is not so fierce as they paint him.

Fatal Love, or The forced Inconstancy; a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal;
printed 4o. Land. 1680. and dedicated to Sir Robert Owen. This Play is founded
on Achilles Tatius his Romance, called Clitiphon and Leucippe; see Book the
fifth. The English Reader may peruse it translated in octavo printed Oxon. 1638.

Female Prelate; being the History of the Life and Death of Pope Joan: a
Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal, printed 4o. Land. 1680. and dedicated to
the Right Honorable, the late Earl of Shaftsbury. This Play being founded on
History, see Marianus Scotus, Sigibert, Sabellicus: and for the English, he may
read Platina translated in Fol. by Sir Paul Ricault; and the Life and Death of
Pope Joan, written heretofore in a Dialogue, by Mr. Alexander Cook, a
Gentleman formerly a Fellow of University College in Oxford: a Piece so much
cried up, and admired in those Times, that it was translated into French by J.
De la Montaigne. It Is now published in a set Discourse 8o. Land. 1675. The
Reader will find there a List of those Authors who affirm, and those who deny
the truth of this Story.

Heir of Morocco, with the Death of Gayland; acted at the Theater Royal,
printed 4o. Land. 1682. and dedicated to the Lady Henrietta Wentworth, Baroness
of Nettlested.

Ibraim, the Illustrious Bassa; a Tragedy in Heroic Verse, acted at the Duke's
Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1677. and dedicated to the Duchess of Albermarle.
The Play is founded on M. Scudery's Romance so called.

Love and Revenge, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land.
1675. and dedicated to the Late Duke of Newcastle. It Is a great part borrowed
from a Play called The Fatal Contract; and is founded on the French Chronicles:
see Mezeray, De Serres. etc. It Is pity our Author was so little considerate,
to fall upon Mr. Shadwell in his Postscript, when he lay so open to an Attaque
himself: and if our Laureat replied too severely upon him in his Preface to the
Libertine, 'twas but se defendendo; and he being the Aggressor, ought to
forgive it.

Pastor Fido, or Faithful Shepherd; a Pastoral acted at the Duke's Theater;
printed 4o. Land. 1677. and dedicated to the Right Honorable, the Lady
Elizabeth Delaval. The Play was written in Italian by Guarini, and afterward
translated by Sir Ric. Fanshaw. This Translation our Author has followed, being
a stranger to the Italian: though possibly it may by ill natured Critics be
thought a presumption, to attempt to improve either the Original, or the Copy.

Our Author I think has several Copies of Verses in print, besides Prose; but
because some of them will not advance his Reputation; and of others, I know not
exactly which he writ, I shall omit further mentioning of them in this place.

Tho. SHADWELL, Esquire Poet Laureat to their present Majesty's.
A Gentleman, whose Dramatick Works are sufficiently known to the World; but
especially his Excellent Comedies; which in the Judgment of some Persons, have
very deservedly advanced him to the Honor he now enjoys, under the Title of
Poet Laureat to their present Majesty's. An Advancement which he ingeniously
consesses, is chiefly owing to the Patronage of the Noble Earl of Dorset, that
Great Judge of Wit and Parts; in whose Favor it has been Mr. Shadwell's
particular Happiness sor several Years, to have had an Eminent Share. Mr.
Dryden, I dare presume, little imagined, when he writ that Satyr of
Mack-Flecknoe, that the Subject he there so much exposes and ridicules, should
have ever lived to have succeeded him in wearing the Bays.

But I am willing to say the less of Mr. Shadwell, because I have publicly
professed a Friendship for him: and though it be not of so long date, as some
former Intimacy with others; so neither is it blemished with some unhandsome
Dealings, I have met with from Persons, where I least expected it. I shall
therefore speak of him with the Impartiality that becomes a Critic; and own I
like His Comedies better than Mr. Dryden's; as having more Variety of
Characters, and those drawn from the Life; I mean Men's Converse and Manners,
and not from other Men's Ideas, copyed out of their public Writings: though
indeed I cannot wholly acquit our Present Laureat from borrowing; his
Plagiaries being in some places too bold and open to be disguised, of which I
shall take Notice, as I go along; though with this Remark, That several of them
are observed to my Hand, and in a great measure excused by himself, in the
public Acknowledgment he makes in his several Prefaces, to the Persons to whom
he was obliged for what he borrowed.

That Mr. Shadwell has proposed B. Johnson for his Model, I am very certain of;
and those who will read the Preface to the Humorists, may be sufficiently
satisfied what a value he has for that Great Man; but how far he has succeeded
in his Design, I shall leave to the Reader's Examination. So far only give me
leave to premise in our Laureat's Defense, that the Reader is not to measure
his Merit by Mr. Dryden's Standard; since Socrates, never was more persecuted
by the Inhumane Aristophanes, than Mr. Shadwell by Mr. Dryden's Pen; and with
the same injustice: though I think, whoever shall peruse the Modest Defense of
the former, in his Epistle to the tenth Satyr of Juvenal, will not only acquit
him, but love him for his good Humor and gentle Temper, to One who endeavored
to destroy his Reputation, so dear to All Men, but the very Darling of Poets;
as Ovid says De Art Amandi, Lib. 3.
, Quid petitur sacris, nisi tantum fama Poetis?
Hoc votum nostri summa laboris habet.


Mr. Shadwell has Fourteen Plays in print, which we shall give an Account of in
the Order we have begun, viz. Alphabetically; though by this means his last Play
comes first upon our Stage, viz.

Amorous Bigotte, with the Second Part of Tegue O Divelly; a Comedy acted by
their Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1690. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Charles, Earl of Shrewsbury.

Bury Fair, a Comedy acted by his present Majesty's Servants, printed 4o. Land.
1689. and dedicated to the Rt. Honorable Charles, Earl of Dorset and
Middlesex, the present Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household. How
difficult it is for Poets to find a continual Supply of new Humor, this Poet
has sufficiently showed in his Prologue; and therefore he ought to be excused,
if Old Wit, and Sir Humphry Noddy, have some resemblance with Justice spoil
Wit, and Sr. John Noddy; in the Triumphant Widow. Skillful Poets resemble
excellent Cooks, whose Art enables them to dress one Dish of Meat several ways;
and by the Assistance of proper Sawces, to give each a different Relish, and
yet all grateful to the Palate. Thus the Character of La Roche, though first
drawn by Molliere, in Les' Precieuses ridicules, and afterward copied by Sir
W. D' Avenant, Mr. Betterton, and Mrs. Behn; yet in this Play has a more taking
Air than in any other Play, and there is something in his Jargon, more
diverting than in the Original it self.

Epsom Wells, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1676. and
dedicated to his Grace the Duke of Newcastle. This is so diverting, and withal
so true a Comedy, that even Foreigners, who are not generally the kindest to
the Wit of our Nation, have extremely commended it: and it is no small credit
to our Author, that the Sieur De Saint Euvremont, speaking of our English
Comedies in his Essays, has ranked this Play with Ben Johnson's Bartholmew
Fair, as two of our most diverting Comedies. It Is true that some endeavored to
fix a Calumny upon our Author, alleging that this Play was not in Ingenious
but this Stain was quickly wiped off, by the Plea he makes for himself in the
Prologue, spoken to the King and Queen at Whitehall, where he says, If this for
him had been by others done,
After this Honor, sure they would claim their own.


Humorists, a Comedy acted by his Royal Highnesses Servants; printed 4o. Land.
1671. and dedicated to the most Illustrious Margaret, Duchess of Newcastle.
The Design of this Play was, To reprehend some of the Vices and Follies of the
Age, which is certainly the most proper and most useful way of writing Comedy.
But notwithstanding the Author's good Design, it met with implacable Enemies,
who resolved to damn it right or wrong; and the Author was forced to mutilate
his Play, by expunging the chief Design, to prevent giving Offense. These and
other Disadvantages (the particulars of which you may read in the Preface) the
Poet met with: and yet I think a Candid Judge would let it pass without much
Censure; and pardon the faults of the Play, for that Reparation that is made
for it in the Preface.

Lancashire Witches, and Teague O Divelly, the Irish Priest; a Comedy acted at
the Duke's Theater, and printed 4o. Land. 1682. This Play was written in the
Times of Whig and Tory, therefore was opposed by Papists and their Adherents,
for the sake of their Dear-Joy, Teague O Divelly: but nevertheless there
appeared so numerous a party in the Play's Defense, that the Play lived in
spite of all their Malice. However, I wish our Author for his own sake, had
left out the Character of Smirk, notwithstanding and the Defense he makes for
it in the Preface, and his Protestation of having a true value for the Church
of England: for it is evident that her Sons, the Clergy, are abused in that
Character; particularly in the first Scene of the second Act: and therefore Mr.
Shadwell must allow me a little to distrust his sincerity, when he makes such
large Professions of Respect to Gowns-men; to whom I believe his Obligations
are greater than Kindness: otherwise, he would not have suffered such
reflections to have passed his Pen, as are to be met with in his Squire of
Alsatia, and the Epilogue to the Amorous Bigotte, etc. If Mr. Shadwell would
therefore take a Friend's Counsel, I would advise him to treat serious things
with due Respect; and not to make the Pulpit truckle to the Stage; or Preface a
Play, with a a Treatise of Religion: every Man has his Province, and I think
the Stating of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance, is none of Mr.
Shadwell's: He may remember, that Mr. Dryden never miscarried more, than when
he inter-meddled with Church Matters; and that all the Art and Beauty of his
Absalom and Achitophel, will hardly make Amends for the Spots and Blemishes
that are to be found in his Hind and Panther. But to return to our Subject: Mr.
Heywood and Mr. Brom have writ a Play on the same Story with our Author; but
how much this exceeds it, will be evident to unbyassed Judges. As to the Magic
in the Play, our Author has given a very good Account in his Notes, from the
Writings of Delrio, Bodinus, Wierus, etc. and I know nothing that we have in
this Nature, in Dramatick Poetry, except Ben. Johnson's Masque of Queens, which
is likewise explained by Annotations.

Libertine, a Tragedy acted by his Royal Highnesses Servants; printed 4o. Land.
1676. and dedicated to William Duke of Newcastle. This Play, if not regular, is
at least diverting: which according to the Opinion of some of our First-Rate
Poets, is the End of Poetry. The Play is built upon a Subject which has been
handled by Spanish, Italian, and French Authors: there being four Plays extant
(says my Author) on this Story. I have never seen but one, viz. Molliere's
L'Athee Foundroye, which it appeared our Author has read. There is a Character
in Sir Aston Cockain's Ovid; I mean that of Captain Hannibal, whose Catastrophe
is like that of Don John, which (as I have said) may possibly be borrowed from
Il Atheisto fulminato.

Miser, a Comedy acted by his Majesty's Servants, at the Theater Royal; printed
4o. Land. 1672. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles, Ld Buckhurst,
the present Earl of Dorset. This Play the Author confesses is founded on
Molliere's L'Avare; which by the way is it self founded on Plautus his
Autularia. 'Twas the last Play that was acted at the King's House, before the
fatal Fire there: Whoever will peruse this Play, will find more than half writ
by our Author, and the French part much improved.

Psyche, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1675. and
dedicated to the late James, Duke of Monmouth. This was the first Play that our
Author writ in Rhyme; and on that Account he found most of the Crambo-Poets up
in Arms against it, who looked upon our Author, as an Incroacher on their
Territories; and Were (as he says) very much offended with him, for leaving his
own Province of Comedy, to invade their Dominion of Rhyme: But as our Author
never valued himself upon this Play, so his Design at that time, was to
entertain the Town with variety of Music, curious Dancing splendid Scenes, and
Machines; and not with fine Poetry, the Audience being not at leisure to mind
the Writing. The foundation of this Play, is Apuleius his Aureus Asinus; which
the Reader may read in English, under the Title of The Golden Ass, translated
by W. Adlington, printed 4o. Land. 1639. How far he has borrowed from the
French Psyche, he tells you in the Preface, and I leave it to those which have
seen it (which I have not) to give Judgment to whom the preference belongs. How
much this Opera takes, every Body that is acquainted with the Theater knows;
and with reason, since the greatest Masters in Vocal Music, Dancing, and
Painting, were concerned in it.

Royal Shepherdess, a Tragi-comedy acted by his Highness the Duke of York's
Servants; and printed 4o. Land. 1669. This Play (as our Poet owns) was
originally Mr. Fountain's of Devonshire; and without descanting on the Play, I
shall refer the Reader to the view of Mr. Shadwell's Epistle to the Reader, and
the Comparison of both Plays, which are in print, for his satisfaction.

Squire of Alsatia, a Comedy acted by their Majesty's Servants; printed 4o.
Land. 1688. and dedicated to the Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. The Ground of
this Play, is from Terence his Adelphi; especially the two Characters of Mitio
and Demea, which I think are improved. If he has not taken notice of having
borrowed these Characters, it is because he is not beholding to the French, or
English for his Model; and that those for whom he chiefly writes, are Persons
that are well acquainted with Poets of Antiquity, and need not be informed.
It Is sufficient for the vulgar Audience, that the Play is taking and divertive,
without troubling their Heads whence it is borrowed: and all People must allow
that no Comedy has found better success than this, since the Restoration of
the Theater.

Sullen Lovers, or The Impertinents; a Comedy acted by his Highness the Duke of
York's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1670. and dedicated to the late Duke of
Newcastle. The Author owns that he received a hint from the Report of
Molliere's Les Facheux, upon which he wrote a great part of his Play, before he
saw it. The Play is regular and diverting, and the Author himself has better
defended it than I am able to do, nor does he at any time need a Second; and
therefore I refer you to his Preface for Satisfaction.

Timon of Athens, the Man-hater, his History, acted at the Duke's Theater; made
into a Play, printed 4o. Land. 1678. and dedicated to the late Duke of
Buckingham. The Play is originally Shakespeare's; but so imperfectly printed,
that it is not divided into Acts. How much our Author has added, or expunged, I
must leave to the Examination of the less busy Reader; I not having time at
present to enquire into particulars.

True Widow, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1679. and
dedicated to Sir Charles Sidley. This Play I take to be as true Comedy; and the
Characters and Humors to be as well drawn, as any of this Age.

Virtuoso, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1676. and
dedicated to his Grace the late Duke of Newcastle. I think there is no Body
will deny this Play its due Applause; at least I know, that the University of
Oxford, who may be allowed Competent Judges of Comedy, (especially of such
Characters, as Sir Nicholas Gimcrack, and Sir Formal Trisle) applauded it: and
as no Man ever undertook to discover the Frailties of such Pretenders tenders
to this kind of Knowledge, before Mr. Shadwell; so none since Mr. Johnson's
Time, ever drew so many different Characters of Humors, and with such Success.

Woman-Captain, a Comedy acted at his Royal Highnesses Servants; printed 4o.
Land. 167 -- and dedicated to Henry, Lord Ogle, Son to his Grace Henry, Duke of
Newcastle. If this Play falls short of the former, at least it wants not
variety of Characters, which have gained it a Reputation above what is written
by pitiful Poets of the Fourth-Rate, our Author's perpetual Enemies, who are no
more to be regarded, than the buzzing of Flies, and Insects in hot Weather;
which though troublesome, are inoffensive, and without Stings: and for his
greatest Enemy; he has imitated the Be, that with his Malice, has left his
Sting behind him. I hope now, our Author is advanced to a Station, wherein he
will endeavor to exert his Muse; and having found Encouragement from Majesty
it self, aim at writing Dramatick Pieces, equal to those of Antiquity: which
however applauded, have been paralelled (I was about to say excelled) by the
Comedies of the Admirable Johnson.

I must do Mr. Dryden so much Justice, as to acknowledge, that in Epick Poetry,
he far exceeds not only Mr. Shadwell, but most, if not all the Poets of our
Age: and I could wish our present Laureat, would not give his predecessor such
frequent Advantages over him; but rather confine himself within his own Sphere
of Comedy.

He has several Poems extant, but because his Name is not affixed to them, I
shall mention but Three; viz. The tenth Satyr of Juvenal, translated with
Notes, printed 4o. Land. 1687. A Congratulatory Poem on his Highness the Prince
of Orange, coming into England: and another to the most Illustrious Q. Mary,
upon her Arrival; both printed 4o. Land. 1689.

William SHAKESPEARE.
One of the most Eminent Poets of his Time; he was born at Stratford upon Avon
in Warwickshire; and flourished in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King
James the First. His Natural Genius to Poetry was so excellent, that like those
Diamonds Dr. Fuller in his Account of Shakespeare.
, which are found in Cornwall, Nature had little, or no occasion for the
Assistance of Art to polish it. The Truth is, it is agreed on by most, that his
Learning was not extraordinary; and I am apt to believe, that his Skill in the
French and Italian Tongues, exceeded his Knowledge in the Roman Language: for
we find him not only beholding to Cynthio Giraldi and Bandello, for his Plots,
but likewise a Scene in Henry the Fifth, written in French, between the
Princess Catherine and her Governante: Besides Italian Proverbs scattered up
and down in his Writings. Few Persons that are acquainted with Dramatick
Poetry, but are convinced of the Excellency of his Compositions, in all Kinds
of it: and as it would be superfluous in me to endeavor to particularise what
most deserves praise in him, after so many Great Men that have given him their
several Testimonials of his Merit; so I should think I were guilty of an Injury
beyond pardon to his Memory, should I so far disparage it, as to bring his Wit
in competition with any of our Age. It Is true Mr. Dryden See Mr. Dryden's
Account.
has censured him very severely, in his Postscript to Granada; but in cool
Blood, and when the Enthusiastic Fit was past, he has acknowledged him [in his
Dramatick Essay] Equal at least, if not Superior, to Mr. Johnson in Poesy. I
shall not here repeat what has been before urged in his behalf; in that Common
Defense of the Poets of that Time, against Mr. Dryden's Account of Ben.
Johnson; but shall take the Liberty to speak my Opinion, as my predecessors
have done, of his Works; which is this, That I esteem his Plays beyond any that
have ever been published in our Language: and though I extremely admire Johnson,
and Fletcher; yet I must still aver, that when in competition with Shakespeare,
I must apply to them what Justus Lipsius writ in his Letter to Andraeas
Schottus, concerning Terence and Plautus, when compared; Terentium amo,
admiror, sed Plautum magis.

He has writ about Forty six Plays, all which except three, are bound in one
Volume in Fol. printed Land. 1685. The whole Book is dedicated to the Earls of
Pembroke and Montgomery: being ushered into the World with several Copies of
Verses; but none more valued than those Lines made by Ben Johnson; which being
too long to be here transcribed, I shall leave them to be perused by the
Reader, with his Works, of which I shall give some Account as follows.

All Is well, that ends well; a Comedy. This Play is founded on a Novel written
by Jean Boccacio; see his Nov. Day the 3. Nov. the 9. concerning Juliet of
Narbona, and Bertrand Count of Rossilion.

Anthony and Cleopatra, a Tragedy. The Ground of this Play is founded on
History: see Plutarch's Life of Anthony; Appian, Dion Cassius, Diodorus,
Florus, etc.

As you like it, a Comedy.

Comedy of Errors. This Play is founded on Plautus his Maenechmi: and if it be
not a just Translation, it is at least a Paraphrase: and I think far beyond the
Translation, called Menechmus, which was printed 4o. Land. 1595.

Coriolanus, a Tragedy. This is founded on History: see Livy, Dionysius
Hallicarnassaeus; Plutarch's Life of Coriolanus, etc. Part of this Play
appeared upon the Stage seven Years since, under the Title of Ingratitude of a
Commonwealth.

Cromwell, ( Thomas Ld.) the History of his Life and Death. This Play is
likewise founded on History: See Fox's Martyrology; Fuller's Church History;
Stow, Speed, Hollingshead, Herbert, Baker, Dr. Burnet, etc. The Story of
Cromwell, and Mr. Frescobald the Merchant, is related in Dr. Hakewell's
Apology, and Wanley's History of Man, Book 3. Ch.20.

Cymbeline his Tragedy. This Play, though the Title bear the Name of a King of
Brute's Lineage; yet I think ows little to the Chronicles of those Times, as far
as I can collect, from Graston, Stow, Milton, etc. But the Subject is rather
built upon a Novel in Boccace, viz. Day 2. Nov. 9. This Play was revived by
Durfey about seven Years since, under the Title of The Injured Princess, or The
Fatal Wager.

Henry the Fourth, the First part; with the Life of Henry Percy, surnamed
Hot-spur. This Play is built upon our English History: see the four former
Years of his Reign, in Harding, Buchanan, Caxton, Walsingham, Fabian, Polydore
Virgil, Hall, Grafton, Hollingshead, Heyward, Trussel, Martin, Stow, Speed,
Baker, etc. As to the Comical part, it is certainly our Author's own Invention;
and the Character of Sir John Falstaff, is owned by Mr. Dryden, to be the best
of Comical Characters: and the Author himself had so good an Opinion of it,
that he continued it in no less than four Plays. This part used to be played by
Mr. Lacy, and never failed of universal applause.

Henry the Fourth, the Second part; containing his Death, and the Coronation of
King Henry the Fifth. For the Historical part, consult the forementioned
Authors. The Epilogue to this Play is writ in Prose, and shows that 'twas writ
in the Time of Q. Elizabeth.

Henry the Fifth his Life. This Play is likewise writ and founded on History,
with a Mixture of Comedy. The Play is continued from the beginning of his
Reign, to his Marriage with Katherine of France. For Historians, see as before,
Harding, Caxton, Walsingham, etc. This Play was writ during the time that Essex
was General in Ireland, as you may see in the beginning of the first Act; where
our Poet by a pretty Turn, compliments Essex, and seems to foretell Victory to
Her Majesty's Forces against the Rebels.

Henry the Sixth, the First part.

Henry the Sixth, the Second part, with the Death of the Good Duke Humphrey.

Henry the Sixth, the Third part, with the Death of the Duke of York. These
three Plays contain the whole length of this Kings Reign, viz. Thirty eight
Years, six Weeks, and four Days. Although this be contrary to the strict Rules of
Dramatick Poetry; yet it must be owned, even by Mr. Dryden Drammar. Essay, p.
79.
himself, That this Picture in Miniature, has many Features, which excel even
several of his more exact Strokes of Symmetry, and Proportion. For the Story,
consult the Writers of those Times, viz. Caxton, Fabian, Pol. Virgil. Hall,
Hollingshead, Grafton, Stow, Speed, etc.

Henry the Eighth, the Famous History of his Life. This Play frequently appears
on the present Stage; the part of Henry being extremely well acted by Mr.
Betterton. This Play is founded on History likewise. Hollingsh. Hall, Grafton,
Stow, Speed, Herbert, Martin, Baker, etc.

Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, his Tragedy. I know not whether this Story be true
or false; but I cannot find in the List given by Dr. Heylin, such a King of
Denmark, as Claudius. All that I can inform the Reader, is the Names of those
Authors that have written of the Affairs of Denmark and Norway; and must leave
it to their further search: such are Saxo-Grammaticus, Idacius, Crantzius,
Pontanus, etc. This Play was not many Years ago printed in quarto; all being
marked, according to the Custom of the Stage, which was cut out in the Action.

John King of England, his Life and Death. For the Plot, see Matthew. Paris, R.
Higden, Walsingham, Westminster, Fabian, Pol. Virgil, Hollingshead, Grafton,
Stow, Speed, etc.

Julius Caesar his Tragedy. This Play is founded on History; see Livy,
Plutarch, Suetonius, etc. This Play was revived at the Theater Royal, about
fifteen Years ago; and printed 4o. Land. 1684. There is an Excellent Prologue
to it, printed in Covent Garden Drollery, p. 9.

Lear King of England, his Tragedy. This Play is founded on History; see such
Authors as have written concerning Brutes History, as Leland, Gloucester,
Huntingdon, Monmouth, etc. But the Subject of this Story may be read succinctly
in Milton's History of England, 4o. Book 1. p. 17. etc. This Play about eight
Years since was revived with Alterations, by Mr. Tate.

Locrine Eldest Son to King Brutus, his Tragedy. This Tragedy contains his
Reign, with the loss of Estrildis and Sabra; which according to Isaacson's
Chronology, was twenty Years. For the Authors, consult those aforementioned,
particularly Milton, Book 1. p. 14. Supplement to Theater of Gods Judgments,
Ch.6. Ubaldino Le vite delle Done Illustri, p. 7.

London Prodigal, a Comedy. This is One of the Seven Plays which are added to
this Volume; which though printed all of them in 4o. were never in Folio, till
1685. Two of these, viz. Cromwell and Locrine, we have already handled; the
Remaining four, viz. Old-castle, Pericles, Puritan Widow, and Yorkshire
Tragedy, shall be treated in their order.

Loves Labor lost, a Comedy: the Story of which I can give no Account of.

Measure for Measure, a Comedy, founded on a Novel in Cynthio Giraldi: viz.
Deca Ottava, Novella 51 The like Story is in Goulart's Histoires Admirables de
notre temps, Tome 1. page 216. and in Lipsii Monita L.2. C.9. p. 125. This
Play, as I have observed, was made use of with the Comedy Much ado about
nothing, by Sir William D' Avenant, in his Law against Lovers.

Merchant of Venice, a Tragi-comedy.

Merry Wives of Windsor, a Comedy; which Mr. Dryden Dram. Ess. p. 47.
allows to be exactly formed; and it was regular before any of Ben. Johnson's.
This is not wholly without the Assistance of Novels; witness Mrs. Ford's
conveying out Sir John Falstaff in the Basket of Foul Clothes; and his
declaring all the Intrigue to her Husband, under the Name of Mr. Broom; which
Story is related in the first Novel of The Fortunate Deceived, and Unfortunate
Lovers: which Book, though written since Shakespeare's Time, I am able to prove
several of those Novels are translated out of Cynthio Giraldi, others from
Mallespini; and I believe the whole to be a Collection from old Novelists.

Mackbeth, a Tragedy; which was revived by the Dukes Company, and reprinted
with Alterations, and New Songs, 4o. Land. 1674. The Play is founded on the
History of Scotland. The Reader may consult these Writers for the Story: viz.
Hector Boethius, Buchanan, Du chesne, Hollingshead, etc. The same Story is
succinctly related in Verse, in Heywood's Hierarchy of Angels, B. 1. p. 508.
and in Prose in Heylin's Cosmography, Book 1. in the Hist of Britain, where he
may read the Story at large. At the Acting of this Tragedy, on the Stage, I saw
a real one acted in the Pit; I mean the Death of Mr. Scroop, who received his
death's wound from the late Sir Thomas Armstrong, and died presently after he
was removed to a House opposite to the Theater, in Dorset-Garden.

Midsummer Nights Dream, a Comedy. The Comical part of this Play, is printed
separately in 4o. and used to be acted at Bartholomew Fair, and other Markets
in the Country by Strolers, under the Title of Bottom the Weaver.

Much ado about nothing, a Comedy. I have already spoke of Sir William D'
Avenant's making use of this Comedy. All that I have to remark is, That the
contrivance of Borachio, in behalf of John the Bastard to make Claudio jealous
of Hero, by the Assistance of her Waiting Woman Margaret, is borrowed from
Ariosto's Orlando Furioso: see Book the fifth in the Story of Lurcanio, and
Geneuza: the like Story is in Spencer's Fairy Queen, Book 2. Canto 4.

Oldcastle, the good Lord Cobham his History. The Protagonist in this Play, is
Sir John Oldcastle, who was executed in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth: See
his Life at large in Fox his Martyrology; Dr. Fuller, and other Writers of
Church History, as well as Chronologers.

Othello, the Moor of Venice his Tragedy. This is reckoned an Admirable
Tragedy; and was reprinted 4o. Land. 1680. and is still an Entertainment at the
Theater Royal. Our Author borrowed the Story from Cynthio's Novels, Dec. 3.
Nov. 7. The truth is, Salustio Picolomini in his Letter to the Author,
extremely applauds these Novels, as being most of them fit Subjects for
Tragedy; as you may see by the following Lines. Gli Heccatomithi vostri, Signor
Cynthio, mi sono maravigliosa mente piaciuti. Et fra le altre cose io ci ho
veduti i piu belli argomente di Tragedy, che si possano imaginare, and quanto
a i nodi, and quanto all solutioni, tanto felicemente ho viste legate le
difficulta, che pure ano impossibili ad essere slegate. Mr. Dryden says Preface
Mock-Astrol.
, That most of Shakespeare's Plots, he means the Story of them; are to be found
in this Author. I must confess, that having with great difficulty obtained the
Book from London, I have found but two of those mentioned by him, though I have
read the Book carefully over.

Pericles Prince of Tire; with the true-Relation of the whole History,
Adventures, and Fortunes of the said Prince. This Play was published in the
Author's Lifetime, under the Title of The much Admired Play of Pericles; by
which you may guess the value the Auditors and Spectators of that Age had for
it. I know not whence our Author fetched his Story, not meeting in History with
any such Prince of Tire; nor remembering any of that Name, except the Famous
Athenian, whose Life is celebrated by Plutarch.

Puritan, or The Widow of Wattling-street; a Comedy sufficiently diverting.

Richard the Second his Life and Death; a Tragedy, which is extremely commended
even by Mr. Dryden, in his Grounds of Criticisme in Tragedy, printed before
Troilus and Cressida: and Mr. Tate, who altered this Play in 1681. says, That
there are some Master-touches in this Play, that will vye with the best Roman
Poets. For the Plot, consult the Chronicles of Harding, Caxton, Walsingham,
Fabian, Pol. Virgil, Grafton, Hollingshead, Stow, Speed, etc.

Richard the Third his Tragedy, with the landing of the Earl of Richmond, and
the Battle of Bosworth Field. This Play is also founded on History. See Fabian,
Caxton, Pol. Virgil, Hollingshead, Grafton, Trussel, stow, Speed, Baker, etc.

Romeo and Juliet, a Tragedy. This Play is accounted amongst the best of our
Author's Works. Mr. Dryden says, That he has read the Story of it in the Novels
of Cynthio; which as yet I cannot find, but set it down in my former Catalogue,
relying upon his Knowledge. But I have since read it in French, translated by
M. Pierre Boisteau, whose Surname was Launay; who says it was writ by
Bandello; but not having as yet met with Bandello in the Original, I must
acquiesce in his Word. The French Reader may peruse it in the first Tome of Les
Histoires Tragicques, extraictes des oeuvres Italiennes de Bandello, imprime
8o. a Turin 157c.

Taming of the Shrew, a very diverting Comedy. The Story of the Tinker, is
related by Pontus Heuteras, Rerum Burdicarum, lib. 4. and by Goulart, in his
Hist. Admirables, Tom. 1. p. 360

Tempest, a Comedy, How much this Play is now in Esteem, though the Foundation
were Shakespeare's, all People know. How it took at the Black-fryars, let Mr.
Dryden's Preface speak. For his Opinion of Caliban, the Monster's Character,
let his Preface to Troilus and Cressida explain. No Man except Shakespeare, ever
drew so many Charactars, or generally distinguished them better from one
another, except only Johnson: I will instance but in one, to show the
copiousness of his Invention; it is that of Caliban, or the Monster in the
Tempest: He seems here to have created a Person, which was not in Nature; a
boldness which at first sight would appear intolerable: For he makes him a
species of himself begotten by an Incubus on a Witch; but this is not wholly
beyond the bounds of Credibility; at least, the Vulgar (I suppose) still
believe it. But this is not the only Character of this Nature that Mr.
Shakespeare has written; for Merlin, as he introduces him, is cozen-German to
Caliban by Birth; as those may observe, who will read that Play. As to the
Foundation of this Comedy, I am ignorant whether it be the Author's own
Contrivance, or a Novel built up into a Play.

Titus Andronicus his Lamentable Tragedy: This Play was first printed 4o. Land.
1594. and acted by the Earls of Derby, Pembroke, and Essex, their Servants.
'Twas about the time of the Popish-plot revived and altered by Mr. Ravenscroft.
In his Preface to the Reader, he says Synesius his Opinion.
, That he thinks it a greater theft to rob the Dead of their Praise, than the
Living of their Money: Whether his Practice agree with his Protestation, I
leave to the Comparison of his Works, with those of Molliere: and whether Mr.
Shadwell's Opinion of Plagiaries, reach not Mr. Ravenscroft, I leave to the
Reader. I (says he Pref. Sullen Lovers.
ingeniously) freely confess my Theft, and am ashamed on it; though I have the
Example of some that never yet wrote a Play, without stealing most of it; and
(like Men that Lie so long, till they believe themselves) at length by
continual Thieving, reckon their stolen Goods their own too: which is so
Ignoble a thing, that I cannot but believe that he that makes a common practice
of stealing other Men's Wit, would, if he could with the same Safety, steal any
thing else. Mr. Ravenscroft, in the Epistle to Titus, says, That the Play was
not originally Shakespeare's, but brought by a private Author to be acted, and
he only gave some Master-touches to one or two of the principal Parts or
Characters: afterward he boasts his own pains; and says, That if the Reader
compare the Old Play with his Copy, he will find that none in all that Author's
Works ever received greater Alterations, or Additions; the Language not only
refined, but many Scenes entirely new: Besides most of the principal Characters
heightened, and the Plot much increased. I shall not engage in this
Controversy; but leave it to his Rivals in the Wrack of that Great Man, Mr.
Dryden, Shadwell, Crown, Tate, and Durfey. But to make Mr. Ravenscroft some
Reparation, I will here furnish him with part of his Prologue, which he has
lost; and if he desire it, send him the whole.

To day the Poet does not fear your Rage,
Shakespeare by him revived now treads the Stage:
Under his sacred Laurels he sits down
Safe, form the blast of any Critics Frown.
Like other Poets, he will not proudly scorn
To own, that he but winnow'd Shakespeare's Corn;
So far he was from robbing him of's Treasure,
That he did add his own, to make full Measure.
Timon of Athens his Life. This Play was thought fit to be presented on the
Stage, with some Alterations by Mr. Shadwell, in the Year 1678. I shall say
more of it in the Accounts of his Works. The Foundation of the Story may be
read in Plutarch's Life of M. Anthony; see besides Lucian's Dialogues, etc.

Troilus and Cressida, a Tragedy. Of this Play I have already given an Account:
see the Name, in the Remarks on Mr. Dryden, who altered this Play, in the Year
1679.

Twelfth-Night, or What you will; a comedy. I know not whence this Play was
taken; but the Resemblance of Sebastian to his Sister Viola, and her change of
Habit, occasioning so many mistakes, was doubtless first borrowed (not only by
Shakespeare, but all our succeeding Poets) from Plautus, who has made use of it
in several Plays, as Amphitruo, Maenechmi, etc.

Two Gentlemen of Verona, a Comedy.

Winter's Tale, a Tragi-comedy. The Plot of this Play may be read in a little
Stitcht-pamphlet, which is called, as I remember, The Delectable History of
Dorastus and Fawnia; printed 4o. Land. --

Yorkshire Tragedy, not so new, as lamentable and true. This may rather deserve
the Old Title of an Interlude, than a Tragedy; it being not divided into Acts;
and being far too short for a Play.

These are all that are in Folio; there rest yet three Plays to be taken notice
of, which are printed in quarto, viz.

Birth of Merlin, or The Child has lost his Father; a Tragi-comedy several
times acted with great applause, and printed quarto Land. 1662. This Play was
writ by our Author and Mr. W. Rowly; of which we have already spoken. For the
Plot, consult the Authors of those times: such as Ethelwerd, Bid, G. Monmouth,
Fabian, Pol. Virgil, and Stow, Speed, etc. Ubaldino, Le Vite delle Done
Illustri, p. 18.

John King of England his troublesome Reign; the First and Second Part, with
Discovery of King Richard Coeur de lyon's Base Son, (vulgarly named the Bastard
Fawconbridge.) Also the Death of King John at Swinstead Abbey. As they were
sundry times acted by the Queens Majesty's Players, printed quarto Land. 1611.
These Plays are not divided into Acts, neither are the same with that in Folio,
I am apt to conjecture that these were first writ by our Author, and afterward
revised and reduced into one Play by him: that in the Folio, being far the
better. For the Plot, I refer you to the Authors aforementioned, in that Play
which bears the same Title.

Besides these Plays, I know Mr. Kirkman ascribes, another Pastoral to him;
viz. The Arraignment of Paris: but having never seen it, I dare not determine
whether it belongs to him or no. Certain I am, that our Author has writ two
small Poems, viz. Venus and Adonis, printed 8o. Land. 1602. and The Rape of
Lucrece, printed 8o. Land. 1655. published by Mr. Quarles, with a little Poem
annexed of his own production, which bear the Title of Tarquin banished, or The
Reward of Lust. Sr. John Sucklin had so great a Value for our Author, that (as
Mr. Dryden observes in his Dramatick Essay) he preferred him to Johnson: and
what value he had for this small Piece of Lucrece, may appear from his
Supplement which he writ, and which he has published in his Poems: which because
it will give you a taste of both their Muses, I shall transcribe.

I.
One of her Hands, one of her Cheeks lay under,
Cozening the Pillow of a lawful Kiss,
Which therefore swelled, and seemed to part asunder,
As angry to be robbed of such a Bliss:
The One looked pale, and for Revenge did long,
Whilst to other blushed, 'cause it had done the wrong.
II.
Out of the Bed, the other fair Hand was
On a green Satin Quilt, whose perfect white,
Looked like a Dazie in a field of Grass,
Thus far Mr. Shakespeare.
And showed like unmelt snow unto the sight:
There lay this pretty perdue: safe to keep
The rest of the Body that lay fast asleep.
III.
Her Eyes (and therefore it was Night) close laid,
Strove to imprison Beauty till the Morn:
But yet the Doors, were of such fine stuff made,
That it broke through and showed it self in scorn;
Throwing a kind of light about the place,
Which turned to smiles, still as't came near her Face.
I have now no more to do, but to close up all, with an Account of his Death;
which was on the 23d of April, Anno Dom. 1616. He lies Buried in the Great
Church in Strasford upon Avon, with his Wife and Daughter Susanna; the Wife of
Mr. John Hall. In the North Wall of the Chancel, is a Monument fixed which
represents his true Effigies, leaning upon a Cushion, with the following
Inscription.

Ingenio Pylum, genio Socratem, art Maronem,
Terra tegit, Populus moeret, Olympus habet.
Stay, Passenger, why do thou go so fast?
Read, if thou can, whom envious Death has placed
Within this Monument, Shakespeare, with whom
Quick Nature died, whose Name does deck the Tomb
Far more than cost, since all that he has writ
Leaves living Art, but Page, to serve his Wit.
Obiit An. Dom. 1616. AEt. 53. die 23. Apr.

Near the Wall where this Monument is Erected, lies a plain Freestone,
underneath which, his Body is Buried, with this Epitaph.

Good Friend, for Jesus sake, forbear
To dig the Dust enclosed here.
Blessed be the Man that spares these Stones,
And cursed be he that moves my Bones.
Lewis SHARP.
An Author of a Play, in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, styled

Noble Stranger, acted at the private House in Salisbury Court, by her
Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1640. and dedicated to Sir Edmund
Williams. It Is commended by a Copy of Verses, writ by Rich. Woolfall; of which
these are part: -- Yet do not fear the danger
Of Critic Readers, since thy Noble Stranger,
With pleasing strains has smoothed rugged Fate
Of oft-cramn'd Theaters, and proved Fortunate:
Smile at their frowns, for I dare boldly say,
Who ere dislikes it, cannot mend thy Play.
If this Play be looked upon with mild Eyes, it will weigh against some Plays
writ in our Time. There is somewhat in the Characters of Pupillus and Mercutio,
which might take in this Age: and I believe old Lacy had read this Play, before
he writ the Character of several Poets of his Poetical Squire Buffon. In the
fourth Act, he has given the Characters of several Poets; particularly of Ben.
Johnson, under the Title of a Confident Poetical Wit; as may be guessed from
the Epilogue, to Cynthia's Revels; This from our Author, I was bid to say,
By Jove it is good; and if you will liked you may.
But I leave this to the Judgment of the Curious Reader; and hasten to the next
Poet.

Edward SHARPHAM.
A Gentleman of the Middle Temple, who lived in the Reign of King James the
First He writ a Play, called

Fleire, a Comedy often paly'd in the Black-fryars, by the Children of the
Revels; and printed 4o. Land. 1615. I take the Character of Antifront the Duke
of Florence, to be a pattern taken from Hercules Duke of Ferrara: and Marston's
Fawn, to be the Father of Sharpham's Fleire; but this I leave to the Judgment
of others, to decide they please.

S. SHEPHERD.
One who lived in the time of the late Unhappy Civil Wars; and whose Loyalty
seems to have been far better than his Poetry. He writ in the time of the
Prohibition of the Stage, two Pamphlets, which he styles Comedies; but indeed
are no longer than one single Act of a Play, that I have seen. His Comedies are
styled.

Committee-man curried; a Comedy, in two parts, represented to the View of all
men. A piece discovering the Corruption of Committee Men, and Excise-men; the
unjust Sufferings of the Royal-party; the devilish Hypocrisy of some
Roundheads; the Revolt for Gain of some Ministers. Not without pleasant Mirth
and Variety; and printed 4o. Land. 1647. This Title Page led me to great
Expectations; but I soon found Horace's Observation true, Parturient Montes,
nascetur ridiculus Mus.
The Author indeed has showed his Reading, if not his Fancy: for there is
scrace a piece of Sir John Suckling that he has not plundered. His Aglaura,
Goblins, Brenoralt, all have paid tribute to our Excise-Poet: neither his
Verses, nor Prose have escaped him. This with what he has borrowed from Sir
Robert Stapleton's Translation of Juvenal Sat. 1. and 3. make up the greatest
part of the two Comedies. But however I am so far obliged by my Charity, and
Respect, and good Intention, of asserting Loyalty, to set down his own Apology,
in the Prologue to the Second part. The Author prays you, for to think the Store
Of Wit is wasted by those went before:
And that the Fatness of the Soil being spent,
Men's Brains grown barren, you would not raise the Rent.


Edward SHERBURN, Esquire
A Gentleman (as I suppose) still living, and Famous for his Versions,
particularly of Manilius his Sphere, or Five Books of Astronomy, in Fol. Land.
1675. Besides that famous Work, he has translated two of Seneca's Tragedies;
viz.

Medea, a Tragedy, with Annotations; Printed octavo Land. 1648. to which is
added Seneca's Answer to Lucilius his Query, Why Good Men suffer misfortunes.
On this Play, see Mr. Stanley's Vindication of the Author, in his Poems octavo,
p. 75.

Troades. or The Royal Captives; a Tragedy, with Annotations; printed 4o. Land.
1679.

These Tragedies I look upon as the best Versions we have extant, of any of
Seneca's; and show the Translator a Gentleman of Learning, and Judgment. What
he writ besides, I know not; though there was the 16th Idillium of Theocritus,
printed in Tate's Miscellanies, and ascribed to Sir Edw. Sherburn: whether the
same Person, I know not.

Thomas SHIPMAN, Esquire
A Gentleman not many Years since deceased, who (as a Friend of his says Mr.
Flatman's Epistle to his Poems.
,) was a Man every way accomplished: To the advantage of his Birth, his
Education had added whatsoever was necessary to fit him for Conversation, and
render him (as he was) desirable by the best Wits of the Age. He was the Author
of a Play, called

Henry the Third of France, stabbed by a Friar; with the Fall of the Guises; a
Tragedy in Heroic Verse, acted at the Theater Royal, printed 4o. Land. 1678.
and dedicated to the Right Honorable Henry, Lord Marquess of Dorchester. For
the Plot, see Davila, M. Girard D. of Espernon's Life, etc.

Besides this Play, he has a Book called Carolina, or Loyal Poems, printed
octavo Land. 1683. which sufficiently evince the Ingenuity and Parts of the
Author.

Henry SHIRLEY.
A Gentleman who flourisht in the time of King Charles the Martyr: of whom I
can give no further Account, than that he was the Author of One Play, called

Martyred Soldier, a Tragedy sundry times acted with great Applause, at the
private House in Drury Lane, and at other public Theaters, by Her Majesty's
Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1638. and dedicated to the Famous Sir Kenelm Digby:
by the Publisher J. K. who gave it to the Press, after the Author's Decease;
and in his Epistle to the Reader, speaks thus of both. For the Man, his Muse
was much courted, but no common Mistress; and though but seldom abroad, yet ever
much admired at. This Work not the meanest of his Labors, has much adorned not
only One, but many Stages, with such general Applause; as it has drawn even the
Rigid Stoics of the Time; who though not for pleasure, yet for profit, have
gathered something out of his plentiful Vineyard. This Play is founded on
History, during the time of the Eighth Persecution; see Victor Episc. Uticensis
de Vandalica, Persecutione, Isodorus Hispalensis, Baronius, etc.

James SHIRLEY.
A Gentleman, of the same Name and Age with the former; and was (if not Poet
Laureat, yet) Servant to her Majesty. One of such Incomparable parts, that he
was the Chief of the Second-rate Poets: and by some has been thought even equal
to Fletcher himself. He had a great Veneration for his Predecessors, as may be
seen by his Prologue to the Sisters; and particularly for Mr. Johnson, whom in
an Epistle to the Earl of Rutland, he styles, Our acknowledged Master, the
Learned Johnson: and in all his Writings shows a Modesty unusual, seldom found
in our Age; and in this, I cannot refrain from comparing his Carriage, to the
Civil and Obliging Gentleman of Rome; I mean Ovid, who speaking of Virgil, in
the first of his two Epigrams (if at least they are his which Heinsius
questions) says thus: Quantum Virgilius magno concessit Homero:
Tantum ego Virgilio Naso Poeta meo.
Nec me praelatum cupio tibi far poetam:
Ingenio si te subsequor, hoc satis est.
I need not take pains to show his Intimacy, not only with the Poets of his
Time; but even the Value and Admiration that Persons of the first Rank had for
him; since the Verses before several of his Works, and his Epistles Dedicatory
sufficiently show it. He has writ several Dramatick Pieces, to the Number of
37. which are in print: besides others which are in Manuscript. Of these I have
seen four since my Remembrance, two of which were acted at the King's House;
and the other two presented at the Duke's Theater, in Little Lincoln's Inn
Fields: viz. Court Secret, Chances, Grateful Servant, School of Compliments:
with what success, I leave it to the Players now in being. Permit me to bring
you the Testimonium of an Old Writer on the Time-Poets, in behalf of our
Author, who delivers this Distich in his praise Choice Drollery, p. 6.
. Shirley (the Morning Child) the Muses bred,
And sent him born with Bays upon his Head.
But I shall cease any further Enlargement on his Commendation, and leave you
to the perusal of his Works, which will show him in his Native Excellence, far
better than I am able to describe him, or them: however, take the following
Account, for want of a better; and first of those in Quarto, which are Twenty
Nine.

Arcadia, a Pastoral acted by Her Majesty's Servants, at the Phoenix in
Drury Lane, printed 4o. Land. 1640. This Play is founded on the incomparable
Romance written by Sir Philip Sidney, and called The Arcadia.

Ball, a Comedy presented by Her Majesty's Servants, in the private House in
Drury Lane, printed 4o. Land. 1539. In this Play our Author was assisted by
Geo. Chapman, as likewise another (which in its Order) I forgot in his Account
to take notice of.

Bird in a Cage, a Comedy presented at the Phoenix, in Drury Lane, and printed
4o. Land. 16 --. This Play is an Excellent Old Comedy, and is dedicated by an
Ironical Epistle, to the Famous Mr. William Prinne, that Great Antagonist to
Plays. Amongst other Sentences, give me leave to transcribe One, which may give
the Reader a taste of the whole. Proceed ( Inimitable Mecaenas,) and having
such convenient Leisure, and an indefatigable Pegasus, I mean your Prose (which
scorneth the Road of Common Sense, and despises any Style in his Way) travel
still in the pursuit of New Discoveries; which you may publish, if you please,
in your next Book of Digressions. If you do not happen presently to convert the
Organs, you may in time confute the Steeple; and bring every Parish to one
Bell. --

Changes, or Love in a Maze; a Comedy presented at the private House in
Salisbury Court, by the Company of His Majesty's Revels; printed 4o. Land.
1632. This Play is dedicated to the Honorable the Lady Dorothy Shirley, by a
Copy of Verses. The passage in the first Act, where Goldsworth examining his
Daughters Chrysolina and Aurelia, find them both in Love with Gerard, is better
managed in the Maiden-Queen: though this Play has been received with Success (as
I said) in our Time; and as I remember, the deceased Mr. Lacy acted Jonny
Thump, Sir Gervase Simple's Man, with general Applause.

Chabot (Philip) Admiral of France his Tragedy; presented by Her Majesty's
Servants, at the private House in Drury Lane; printed 4o. Land. 1639. This is
the Second Play in which Mr. Chapman joined with our Author. For the Plot, see
the French Chronologers, and Historians in the Reign of Francis the First; such
as Paulus Jovius, Arnoldus his Continuation of Paulus AEmilius, Mart. Longeus,
De serres, Mezeray, etc.

Constant Maid, or Love will find out the way; a Comedy acted at the New
Playhouse, called The Nursery, in Hatton-Garden; printed 4o. Land. 1667.
Hardwell Courting Mrs. Bellamy the Widow, by the Advice of his Friend
Play-fair, is the Subject of several Plays Old and New; as I might instance,
were it material: though I mention it here, because it occasions most of the
business in the Play.

Contention for Honor and Riches; printed 4o. Land. 1633. I know not what to
call this, whether Interlude, or Entertainment; but I think I may call it A
Useful Moral; and which being enlarged under the Title of Honoria and Mammon, I
shall speak more of anon. It Is dedicated to Edward Golding, of Colston in
Nottinghamshire, Esquire

Coronation, a Comedy, which though printed in the Folio Edition of Fletcher's
Works, was writ by Shirley; as the Reader may see by the Catalogue of his Six
Plays, octavo Land. 1653.

Cupid and Death, a private Entertainment, represented with Scenes and Music,
Vocal and Instrumental; printed 4o. Land. 1659. I cannot call to Mind at
present, whence the Poet took originally his History, which is the Changing of
Arrows between them, which produce dismal Effects: but the English Reader may
read the same Story in Ogilby's AEsop's Fables, Vol. 1. Fab. 39.

Dukes Mistress, a Tragi-comedy presented by Her Majesty's Servants, at the
Private-house in Drury Lane; and printed 4o. Land. 1638.

Example, a Tragi-comedy, presented by Her Majesty's Servants, at the
Private-house in Drury Lane; and printed 4o. Land. 1637.

Gamester, a Comedy presented by Her Majesty's Servants, at the Private-house
in Drury Lane; and printed 4o. Land. 1637. The Intrigue between Wilding and his
Kinswoman, his Wife and Hazard, is borrowed from Ducento Novelle del Signor
Celio Malespini secunda part, Nov. 96. The same Story in Q. Margaret's Novels
Day first, Nov. 8. though managed to greater Advantage by our Poet; and I must do
Mr. Shirley this Justice, to say in his behalf, That whatever he borrowes from
Novels, Loses nothing in his Hands, any more than in in Mr. Dryden Pref. Mock
Astrologer.
; though our modest Author would never have said so much, were he living.

Gentleman of Venice, a Tragi-comedy, presented at the Private-house, in
Salisbury Court, by Her Majesty's Servants; and printed quarto Land. 1655. This
Play is dedicated to the Honorable Sir Thomas Nightinghale, Baronet; and the
Intrigue between Florelli, Cornari, and Claudiana, is borrowed (as I suppose)
from a Novel out of Gayton's Festivous Notes on Don Quixote: see Book 4. Chap.
6, 7, 8.

Grateful Servant, a Comedy presented with good Applause, in the Private, house
in Drury Lane, by Her Majesty's Servants. This Play is dedicated to the Right
Honorable Francis, Earl of Rutland; and printed 4o. Land. -- Lodowik's
Contrivance to have Piero, tempt his Wife Artella, that he might be Divorced,
is the same with Contarini's Humor and Contrivance Giotto, in the Humorous
Courtier.

Hide Park, a Comedy presented by Her Majesty's Servants, at the Private-house
in Drury Lane; and printed 4o. Land. 1637. This Play is dedicated to the Right
Honorable Henry, Earl of Holland. This was the first Earl of that Name,
created in 23. Jac. Apr. 3. and was Beheaded with Duke Hamilton, and the Lord
Capel, March the ninth, dying a Martyr to retrive his former forfeited Loyalty
to his Prince. To this Earl, I presume, Hide Park once might belong, since the
Title was occasioned by his Command to the Author.

Humorous Courtier, a Comedy presented with good Applause, at the Private-house
in Drury Lane; and printed 4o. Land. 1640.

Lady of Pleasure, a Comedy acted by Her Majesty's Servants, at the
Private-house in Drury Lane; and printed 4o. Land. 1637. This Play is dedicated
to the Right Honorable Richard, Lord Lovelace of Hurley. The Plot of Alex.
Kickshaw his Enjoying of Aretina, and thinking her the Devil, resembles
Lodowick, in Grateful Servant.

Love Tricks, or The School of Compliments; acted by His Royal Highness the
Duke of York's Servants, at the Theater in Little Lincoln's Inn Fields; and
printed 4o. Land. 1667.

Love's Cruelty, a Tragedy presented by Her Majesty's Servants, at the
Private-house in Drury Lane; printed 4o. Land. 1640. and dedicated to Cornet
George Porter, and Mr. Charles Porter. The Concealment of Hyppolito, and
Chariana's Adultery from her Servant by her Husband Bellamente's Contrivance,
is borrowed from Queen Margaret's Novels, Day 4. Nov. 6. The like Story is
related in Cynthio's Heccatomithi, Dec. terza, Novella sesta.

Maid's Revenge, a Tragedy acted with good Applause, at the Private-house in
Drury Lane, by Her Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1639. and dedicated to
Henry Osborn, Esquire. The Play is founded on a History, in Mr. Reynolds his
God's Revenge against Murder; see Book 2. Hist. 7.

Opportunity, a Comedy presented by her Majesty's Servants, at the
Private-house in Drury Lane; printed Land. -- and dedicated to Captain Richard
Owen. The Resemblance of Aurelio to Borgia, is founded on the same, with
Measure for measure, and other English Plays; all which, as I have observed,
took their Original from Plautus.

Politician, a Tragedy presented at Salisbury Court, by Her Majesty's Servants;
and printed 4o. Land. 1655. This Play is dedicated to Walter Moyle, Esquire. A
Story resembling this, I have read in the first Book of the Countess of
Montgomery's Urania, concerning the King of Romania, the Prince Antissius, and
his Mother-in-Law.

Royal Master; a Tragi-comedy acted in the New Theater in Dublin; and before
the Right Honorable the Lord Deputy of Ireland, in the Castle; and printed 4o.
Land. 1638. This Play is dedicated to the Right Honorable George, Earl of
Kildare; and is accompanied with Ten Copies of Verses, in its Commendation.

Traitor, a Tragedy acted by Her Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1635.
and dedicated to the Right Honorable William, Earl of Newcastle; afterward
Marquess, and Duke. This Play is recommended by a Copy of Verses, writ by Mr.
William Atkins, a Gentleman of the Worthy Society of Gray's Inn.

Triumph of Peace, a Masque presented by the Four Honorable Houses, or Inns of
Court, before the King and Queen's Majesty's, in the Banqueting House at
Whitehal, Feb. the third 1633. The Scene and Ornament was the Contrivance of
Mr. Inigo Jones: the Music was Composed by Mr. William Laws, and Mr. Simon
Ives. The Masque is dedicated to the Four Equal Honorable Societies of the
Inns of Court; Mr. Shirley being at that time of Gray's Inn. The Masquers went
in a Solemn Cavalcade, from Ely House to Whitehall, and the Author himself
says, That this Masque, for the Variety of the Shows, and the Richness of the
Habits, was the most Magnificent that has been brought to Court in his Time.
It Is printed 4o. Land. 1633. I have a little Piece by me, called The Inns of
Court Anagrammatist, or The Masquers masqued in Anagrammes; written by Mr.
Francis Lenton, One of Her Majesty's Poets; and printed 4o. Land. 1634. This
Piece not only names the Masquers, and of what House they were; but commends
each in an Epigram.

Saint Patrick for Ireland, the First part; printed 4o. Land. 1640. Though our
Title Page calls it the First part, I know not whether there was ever a Second
part printed; though the Prologue seems to promise one, in the following Lines:
Saint Patrick, whose large Story cannot be
Bound in the limits of One Play, if Ye
First welcome this, you will grace our Poets Art,
And give him courage for a Second Part.
For the Story, see Bede's Life of St. Patrick; Sigebert, Baronius, Balaeus,
Seven Champions of Christendom: His Life in English in Twelves, Land. 16 --

Wedding, a Tragi-comedy acted by Her Majesty's Servants, at the Phoenix in
Drury Lane; printed 4o. Land. 1690. and dedicated to William Gowre, Esquire.
This is an Excellent Comedy, considering the Time in which 'twas writ.

Witty Fair One, a Comedy presented at the Private-house in Drury Lane; and
printed 4o. Land. 1633. This Play is dedicated to Sir Edmund Bushel.

Young Admiral, a Tragi-comedy presented by Her Majesty's Servants, at the
Private-house in Drury Lane; printed 4o. Land. 1637. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable George, Lord Barkley, of Barkley-Castle.

These are all the Plays that our Author has in print in Quarto; we are now to
give an Account of Nine Dramatick pieces printed in Octavo. We shall begin with
Six Plays, which are printed together; viz.

Brothers, a Comedy acted at the Private-house in Black-fryars; printed 8o.
Land. 1652. and dedicated to his Noble Friend Thomas Stanley, Esquire

Cardinal, a Tragedy acted at the Private-house in Black-fryars; printed 8o.
Land. 1652. and dedicated to his Friend G. B. Esquire

Court Secret, a Tragi-comedy, prepared for the Scene at Black-fryars, but not
acted till after it appeared in print; it being printed 8o. Land. 1653. and
dedicated to William, Earl of Strafford, Son and Heir to that Great Soul of
Honor, Thomas Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and the Proto-martyr for Religion
and Loyalty, in the Year 1641.

Doubtful Heir, a Tragi-comedy, acted at the Private-house in Black-fryars;
printed 8o. Land. 1652. and dedicated to the Worthily Honored Friend, Sir
Edmund Bowyer. The Queen's Courting Rosania, under the Disguise of a Page, and
the King's Surprising them, has Resemblance to a Story in the English
Adventures, 8o. part 3. between King Henry, Izabella, and Horatio.

Imposture, a Tragi-comedy acted at the Private-house in Black-fryars, and
printed 8o. Land. 1652. It Is dedicated to Sir Robert Bolles, Baronet.

Sisters, a Comedy acted at the Private-house in Black-fryars, and printed 8o.
Land. 1652. It Is dedicated to William Paulet, Esquire

Having given an Account of these Six Plays, I am now to speak of Two others,
which are printed together in 8o. Land. 16 -- viz.

Honoria and Mammon, a Comedy, which is built upon that Entertainment before
mentioned, called Contention for Honor and Riches. I shall refer my Reader to
the Author's Epistle, for further Satisfaction of the Reason of his
Undertakings.

Contention of Ajax and Ulysses, for the Armor of Achilles. This Interlude was
nobly represented (says the Author) by Young Gentlemen of Quality, at a private
Entertainment of some Persons of Honor. The Design is taken from Ovid's
Metamorphosis, Book the 13. See the beginning.

There rests only his Poems to be spoken of, printed octavo Land. 1646. to
which is added a Masque, called

Triumph of Beauty, personated by some Young Gentlemen, for whom it was
intended, at a private Recreation. The Subject of this Masque, is that known
Story of the Judgment of Paris, upon the Golden-Ball; which you may read in
Lucians Dialogues: But our Author has imitated Shakespeare, in the Comical part
of his Midsummer Nights Dream; and Shirley's Shepherd Bottle, is but a Copy of
Shakespeare's Bottom, the Weaver.

I shall conclude this Account, with Four Lines writ in our Author's
Commendation, by One Mr. Hall; who in the Title of his Panegyric styles him,
The Surviving Honor and Ornament of the English Scene: and in the End,
concludes thus: Yet this I dare assert, when Men have named
Johnson (the Nations Laureat,) the famed
Beaumont, and Fletcher, he, that cannot see
Shirley, the fourth, must forfeit his best Eye.


Sir Charles SIDLEY.
A Gentleman whose Name speaks a greater Panegyric, than I am able to express;
and whose Wit is so well known to this Age, that I should but tarnish its
Luster, by my Endeavoring to deliver it over to the next: His Wit is too Noble
a Subject to need any Herald to proclaim its Titles and Pedigree; or if it did,
my Voice and Skill are too weak, to sound out his Praises in their due
measures. I shall therefore only content my self, as the Vallys, that have no
Voice of their own, to echo out his Merits at the Second-hand; and give you
part of his Character, from a Person whose Honor and Pride it is, to have a
considerable share in his Friendship: I mean Mr. Shadwell, who in his Epistle
Dedicatory to The True Widow, says, That he has heard him speak more Wit at a
Supper, than all his Adversaries, with their Heads joined together, could write
in a Year. That his Writings are not unequal to any Man's of this Age, (not to
speak of Abundance of Excellent Copies of Verses). That he has in the Mulberry
Garden, shown the true Wit, Humor, and Satyr of a Comedy; and in Anthony and
Cleopatra, the true Spirit of a Tragedy. But least this might be thought
Partiality or Flattery in our Laureat, give me leave to transcribe another part
of his Character, from an Unquestionable Judge of Poetry, the great Ornament of
the Muses, the Lord Rochester, in his Imitation of Horace's Tenth Satyr of the
First Book.

Sidley, has that prevailing gentle Art,
That can with a resistless Charm impart,
The loosest Wishes, to the chastest Heart,
Raise such a Conflict, kindle such a Fire,
Betwixt declineing Virtue, and Desire;
Till the poor vanquished Maid dissolves away,
In Dreams all Night, in sighs, and tears all Day.
The Plays this Great Wit has obliged the World with, are but three; all which
appear to be writ with Design (at least they may serve to be) Patterns for
succeeding Poets Imitation; which I shall only mention in their Alphabetical
Order, viz.

Anthony and Cleopatra, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; and printed 4o.
Land. 1677. For the History, see Plutarch's Life of Anthony, Appian, Dion
Cassius, Diodorus, Florus, etc.

Bellamira, or The Mistress; a Comedy acted by their Majesty's Servants, and
printed Land. 1687. This Play is an Imitation (as the Author informs us) of
Terence's Eunucbus.

Mulberry Garden, a Comedy acted by his Majesty's Servants, at the
Theater Royal; printed 4o. Land. 1668. and dedicated to Her Grace, the Duchess
of Richmond and Lenox: which Epistle is not the least Ornament to the Play, and
shows the Neatness of his Style in Prose. I dare not say, that the Character of
Sir John Everyoung, and Sir Samuel Forecast, are Copies of Sganarelle and
Ariste, in Molliere's L'Escole des Maris; but I may say, that there is some
Resemblance: though whoever understands both Languages, will readily, and with
Justice give our English Wit the preference: and Sir Charles is not to learn to
Copy Nature from the French.

Give me Leave to conclude, with what the Learned Mr. Evelyn has said, with no
less Truth than Ingenuity, (in his Imitation of Ovid's Fifteenth Elegy) of this
Excellent Poet, and his Friend Sir George Etheridge: While Fathers are severe,
and Servants cheat,
Till Bawds and Whores can live without deceit,
Sidley and easy Etheridge shall be Great.


John SMITH.
A Gentleman (as I suppose) now living at Snenton in Yorkshire, the Author of a
Comedy, called Cytherea, or The Enamouring Girdle; printed 4o Land. 1677. This
Play was refused to be acted by the Players of the Duke's Theater, as you may
see by the Epistle Dedicatory to the Northern Gentry. I leave the Play to the
Judgment of those that have read it.

William SMITH.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King James the First, who published a
Play, called

Hector of Germany, or The Palsgrave Prime Elector; an Honorable History,
publicly acted at the Red-bull, and at the Curtain, by a Company of Young Men
of this City; printed 4o. Land. 1615. and dedicated to the Right Worshipful Sir
John Swinnerton, Lord Mayor of London, in the Year 1611. This Play is not
divided into Acts: I am not certain where this Story is to be found; though
possibly Albertus Argentinensis, or Henry Monk of Rebdorf, may make some
Mention of this Palatin.

Our Author writ another Play, called The Freeman's Honor, to dignify the
Worthy Company of Tailors; but whether ever it was printed or no, I know not.

This Author joined with One W. Web, in writing a Book, called The
Description of the Counry Palatine of Chester, Land. 1656. Hieronymo is
ascribed by Mr. Philips and Winstanley, through their old Mistake, to our Author;
it being an Anonymous Play.

Thomas SOUTHERN.
An Author of whom I can give no further Account, than that he has two Plays in
print; viz.

Disappointment, or The Mother in Fashion; acted at the Theater Royal, printed
4o. Land. 1684. and dedicated to the Right Honorable James, Earl of Ossory,
the present Duke of Ormond. This has somewhat of the Story of The Curious
Impertinent, in Don Quixot.

Loyal Brother, or The Persian Prince; a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1682. and dedicated to his Grace,
the Duke of Richmond. The Play is founded on a Novel, called Tachmas Prince of
Persia, octavo.

Thomas STANLEY, Esquire
A Gentleman who flourished in the Reign of King Charles the First, at
Camberloe-Green, in Hertfordshire. One, who is sufficiently known to all
Learned Men, not only for his Skill in Languages, as appears by his several
Versions; but by his Great Learning, Exquisite Fancy, and Admirable Judgment.
For the One, to wit, his Fancy, he is here mentioned in Quality of a Poet; and
the rather because we owe to him the Version of an Excellent Piece of
Antiquity, which he calls

Clouds, a Comedy, which he translated from Aristophanes his (...). This Play,
as AElian observes, in his Various History, was writ at the Instigation of
Anytas, purposely to abuse Socrates; and is subjoined by our Author to the Life
of that Excellent Philosopher, (not as a Comical Divertisement for the Reader,
who can expect little in that Kind, from a Subject so ancient and particular;
but) as a Necessary Supplement to the Life of Socrates. This Play is printed
with Mr. Stanley's History of Philosophy, printed Fol. Land. 1687. Second Edit.
a Work which will always be valued by all Learned Men: In which the Reader will
find also translated a Dramma of Ausonins, inscribed Ludus Septem Sapientum.

His Translation of AEschylus his Tragedies into Latin, with his Excellent
Comment, printed Fol. Land. 1664. deserves the highest Commendation: and for
his Poems in English; not only those which are properly his own, sufficiently
show his Genius for Poetry: But even his various Translations from the Greek of
Anacreon, Moschus; from the Latin of Ausonius, Catullus, Bion, Secundus,
Barclaius, to which I may add Picus Mirandula his Discourse of Platonic Love;
from the Spanish of Lope de Vega, Gongora, and Montalvan; the Italian of
Guarini, Marino, Tasso, Petrarch, Cassone, Preti, Boscan, etc. the French of
St. Amant, Tristan, Ronsard, Theophile, and De Voiture; show how much he was
versed in those Languages. His Poems received several Editions; that which I
take to be the best was printed 8o. Land. 1651.

Besides these Poems, he has in print two little Romances, or Novels,
translated from the Spanish of Don Juan Perez de Montalvan, called Aurora,
Ismenia, and The Prince; which with the Poem of Oronta, translated from the
Italian of Signor Girolamo Preti, are printed octavo Land. 1655.

Sir Robert STAPLETON.
A Gentleman, who I presume is still living. He was well known at Court, by the
Honorable Station he was in, being One of the Gentlemen-Ushers of his Majesty
King Charles the Second's most Honorable Privy-Chamber: But his Writings have
made him not only Known, but Admired throughout all England; and whilst Musaeus
and Juvenal are in Esteem with the Learned, Sir Robert's Fame will still
survive: the Translation of those two Famous Authors, having placed his Name in
the Temple of Immortality. As to Musaeus, he had so great a Value for him, that
after he had translated him, he built the Story into a Dramatick Poem, called

Hero and Leander their Tragedy; printed 4o. Land. 1669. and dedicated to the
Duchess of Monmouth. Whether this Play were ever acted or no, I know not, or
where; though the Prologue and Epilogue, seem to imply that it had appeared on
the Stage.

Slighted Maid, a Comedy, written likewise by our Author, and acted with great
Applause, at the Theater in Little Lincoln's Inn Fields, by his Highness the
Duke of York's Servants; printed 8o. Land. 1663. and dedicated to the late Duke
of Monmouth. The Epitaph made by Decio upon Iberio and Pyramena, is borrowde
from Arria and Petus; see Martial Epigr. L. 1. Ep. L. 4.

Stapleton's Juvenal, the best Edition with Cuts, is printed Fol. Land. 1663.
and his Musaeus, or Hero and Leander in Verse, is printed 8o. Land. 1647. to
which is added Leander's Letter to Hero, and her Answer translated from Ovid's
Epistles. Besides these, he Englished Strada de Bello Belgich, printed Land.
1650. Of these Pieces, Jo. Leigh Esquire in his Verses on Carthwright, says thus;
Brave Stapleton translates Old Wit and New;
Musaeus, Juvenal, and Strada too.


I know nothing else that our Author has extant, but a Translation from the
French of Mr. De Marmet, Ld of Valcroisant; called Entertainments of the
Course, or Academical Conversations, printed 8o. Land. 1658. and Mr. De
Bergerac's History of the World in the Moon, in twelves Land. --

John STEPHENS.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King James the First, who has published a
Play, called

Cynthia's Revenge, a Tragedy, printed 4o. Land. 1613. This is One of the
longest Plays that I ever read, and withal the most tedious. The Author seems
to have a great Value for Lucan: for he not only makes King Menander repeat
part in the Original, but in the Fourth Act he makes him speak a Speech
containing the beginning of the First Book of Lucan, to the 24th Verse; but how
far short he falls of Mr. May, I leave to the Readers Judgment. In the Fifth
Act, the Poet introduces an Interlude of the Contention of Ajax and Ulysses,
for the Armor of Achilles, which I take to be but Indifferent.

He has writ besides a Piece, called Satirical Essays, in octavo Land. 1615.

This Play was in former Catalogues ascribed to John Swallow; but I believe
this to be the Genuine Author.

William STRODE.
A Gentleman that flourished in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, of a Good
Family in Devonshire; being Countryman and Collegiate with the Witty Dr. Main.
He was entered in Christ-Church College in Oxford, at Nineteen Years of Age;
and soon after was elected Student. He took his several Degrees, and was chosen
for his Excellent Parts, Orator of the University. Though he was in Orders, he
was sent for by the Dean and Chapter, to write a Play, for the Diversion and
Entertainment of their Majesty's, which was called

Floating Island, a Tragi-comedy acted before his Majesty at Oxf. Aug. 1639. by
the Students of Christ-Church. The Airs and Songs, were set by Mr. Henry Laws,
Servant to his Majesty, in public and private Music. This Play was not
printed till Eleven Years after the Author's Death, and above Eighteen Years
after 'twas acted; being printed Land. 1655. and dedicated even in Manuscript,
and in the Author's Lifetime, to his most Honored Patron Sir John Hell, by a
Copy of Verses. This Play was too full of Morality, to please the Court; though
at the same time 'twas commended by the King; as was apparent by his bestowing
a Cannon's Dignity upon him, not long after; at which time he took the Degree
of Doctor of Divinity.

'Twas then that he employed his Pen in more Serious Studies; and those Three
Sermons of his which are extant, show him a Solid Divine, as well as an
Excellent Orator.

He died the Eleventh of March 1644. and was Buried at Christ-Church.

John STUDLEY.
An Author that lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and who contributed with
the other Four Translators already mentioned, ( viz. Heywood, Nuce, Newton, and
Nevile) to perfect the Version of Seneca's Tragedies. Our Author had the
largest Share in the Work, he having rendered Four into English; viz.

Agamemnon, a Tragedy, of which says Heinsius, Est frugis bonae haec Tragoedia.
I shall not pretend to determine of the economy of this Tragedy, but leave it
to the Critics; nor take upon me to discover how much, or how little Seneca
has borrowed from Ion and AEschylus; but refer the Reader to Delrio, and
others. It Is sufficient for me to observe, That the Translator has taken upon
him to add a whole Scene at the End of the Fifth Act: though upon what Reason I
know not, except it be to give an Account of the Death of Cassandra, the
Imprisonment of Electra, and the Flight of Orestes; all which was made known
before. However, for this purpose the Translator makes choice of Euribates, who
in the beginning of the Third Act, brings notice to Clitemnestra, of
Agamemnon's Return; possibly to comply with the Poet, who throughout makes no
use of a Nuntius in this Play; though the Death of Agamemnon be to be discovered
by a Narration, but leaves it to Cassandra and Electra, in the Fifth Act.

Hippolytus, a Tragedy, that is extremely regular in the Three Unities, of
Place, Time and Action: and Heinsius, that great Critic, has not stuck to give
it the Title of Divine: How near our Translator has approacht the Sense of the
Author, I shall leave to others Determination.

Hercules Oetaeus, a Tragedy, which by some is thought to be an Imitation of
Sophocles his TRAXINIAI.

Medea, a Tragedy, in which Seneca has imitated Euripides; and in the Opinion
of some, even excelled his Copy. This Play is styled by One, Alta Medea
Senecae, and is likewise regular; as indeed are all Seneca's Tragedies, except
his Thebais. Our English Translator, (I know not for what Reason) has altered
the Chorus of the First Act: whether it was that he thought the Description of
an Epithalamium, which the Corinthian Women sing, before the designed Wedding
of Jason and Creusa, were too light a Subject for a Tragedy, or what other
Motive he had to substitute his own Thoughts instead of Seneca's, I know not;
but must leave him and his Works to the Judgment and Censure of the Critics.

Sir John SUCKLING.
A Gentleman, whose Admirable Parts made him sufficiently Famous, in the Reign
of King Charles the First, to whom he was Comptroller. He was born at Witham,
in the County of Middlesex in the Year 1631. and which was Extraordinary,
(according to his Mother's Reckoning) in the beginning of the Eleventh Month.
Nor was his Life less Remarkable, than his Birth: for he had so pregnant a
Genius that he spoke Latin at Five Years Old, and writ it at Nine Years of Age.
His Skill in Languages, and Music, was Remarkable; but above all his Poetry,
took with all the People, whose Souls were polished by the Charms of the Muses:
And though War did not so well agree with his Constitution; yet in his Travels he
made a Campaign under the Famous Gustavus, where he was present at three
Battles, five Sieges, and as many Skirmishes: and if his Valor was not so
Remarkable, in the North in the beginning of the Wars; yet his Loyalty was
conspicuous, by his Expense in the Troop of Horse, which he raised, whose
Equipage, viz. Horses, Arms and Clothes, were provided all at his own Charge,
and stood him in 12000 l. But these passages being at present foreign to my
Subject, I shall return to his Poetry; and begin with his Dramatick Pieces,
which are Four in Number, viz.

Aglaura, presented at the Private-house in Black-fryars. This Play was first
printed in Fol. upon which an Anonymous Satyrist ( i. e. Mr. Rich. Brom, see
at the Entrance of Covent Garden weeded) made a Copy of Verses; which being too
large to be transcribed, I shall refer my Reader to a Small Book of Poems,
called Musarum Deliciae, or The Muses Recreation, where he may find them in the
51st. page. Only by this we may observe the truth of that saying of Ovid
Amorum, L.^. 19
: Pascitur in vivis livor: post fata quieseit,
Cum suus ex merito quemque tuetur Honos.


This Play is much prized at this Day, and has this Remarkable, That the last
Act is so altered, that it is at the pleasure of the Actors, to make it a
Tragedy, or Tragi-comedy: which was so well approved of by that Excellent Poet
Sir Robert Howard, that he has followed this president, in his Vestal Virgin.

Brenoralt, or The Discontented Colonel; a Tragedy presented at the
Private-house in Blackfryars, by His Majesty's Servants.

Goblings, a Tragi-comedy presented at the Private-house in Blackfryars, by His
Majesty's Servants.

Sad One, a Tragedy. This Piece was never finished. It Is not to be expected
that I should give any Account of the Plots, or Thefts in this Author's Works;
for his Muse was Young, and Vigorous enough, had she not so soon been cut off
by Death, to have brought forth many more Children, without any Assistance, but
that of the proper Parent: All that I have further to say is, That these Plays,
with the rest of his Works, are printed under the Title of Fragmenta Aurea; or
A Collection of all the Incomparable Pieces, written by Sir John Suckling, 8o.
There are several Editions of his Works: and the last (as I think) was printed
8O. Land. 1676. to which are added several Poems, and other Pieces, which were
by his Sisters Permission allowed to be published. I shall not pretend to give
a Character of his Works, but subscribe to One already printed Lloyd's
Memoires, p. 159.
; viz. That his Poems are Clean, Sprightly, and Natural; his Discourses Full
and Convincing; his Plays well humor'd and Taking; his Letters Fragrant, and
Sparking: only his Thoughts were not so loose as his Expression, witness his
Excellent Discourse to My Lord Dorset, about Religion.

This Ingenious Gentleman died of a Fever, A. D. 164 -- being about 29. Years
of Age: What Excellent Advice he left to his Friends about him, may be read in
Mr. Lloyd's Memoirs; nor can I forbear transcribing what that Author writ upon
that Subject.

Ne hae zelantis animae sacriores
Scintillulae ipsum unde deciderant spirantes
Coelum, and Author magnus ipsa quam
Aliis dedit careret memoria; Interesse
Posteris putavimus brevem Honoratissimi
Viri Johannis Sucklingii vitam Historia
esse perennandam.
Utpote qui Nobilissima Sucklingiorum Familia Oriundus, cui tantum reddidit,
quantum accepit honorem; Not. Call. Apr. 1613. Withamiae in Agro Middles.
Renatus ibid. Maii 70. and Denatus 164 -- haud jam Trigessimus, and Scriptu
dignissima fecit and factu dignissima scripsit. Calamo pariter and Gladio
celebris, pacis artium gnarus and belli.

Gilbert SWINHOE, Esquire
A Gentleman, who lived in the Reigns of King Charles the First and Second; a
Northcountry Man by Birth, (being Born in Northumberland) the Author of a Play,
called

Unhappy fair Irene her Tragedy; printed 4o. Land. 1658. This Play is
accompanied with three Copies of Verses in its Commendation; though I think it
scarce deserve them. The Play is founded on History: see Knolles his Turkish
History, in the Life of Mahomet the First; which Story is the Subject of a
Novel in Bandello, which is translated into French by Pierre Boisteau; see
Histoires Tragicques, tome premier Nov. 2. The same is translated into English,
by Will. Painter in his Palace of Pleasure, in quarto, Nov. 4o.

T.
Nathaniel TATE.
AN Author now living; who though he be allowed to be a Man of Wit and Parts, yet
for Dramatick Poetry, he is not above the common Rank: What he has extant, for
the most part is borrowed; at least we may say, That generally he follows other
Men's Models, and builds upon their Foundations: for of Eight Plays that are
printed under his Name, Six of them owe their Original to other Pens; as we
shall show in the following Account.

Brutus of Alba, or The enchanted Lovers; a Tragedy acted at the Duke's
Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1678. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles,
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. This Play is founded on Virgil's AEneids, Book
the 4th; and was finished under the Names of Dido and AEneas, but by the Advice
of some Friends, was transformed to the Dress it now wears.

Cuckold's Haven, or An Alderman no Conjurer; a Farce acted at the Queen's
Theater, in Dorset Garden; printed 4o. Land. 1685. and dedicated to Colonel
Edmund Ashton. This Play is borrowed from Johnson's Eastward-hoe, and Devil is
an Ass.

Duke and no Duke, a Farce acted by their Majesty's Servants; with the several
Songs set to Music, with Thorough-Basses for the Theorbo, or Bass-Viol;
printed 4o. Land. 1685. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Sir George Hewyt.
This Play is founded on Sir Aston Cockain's Trappolin supposed a Prince.

Ingratitude of a Commonwealth, or The Fall of Caius Martius Coriolanus; acted
at the Theater Royal, printed 4o. Land. 1682. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Charles, Lord Herbert, Marquess of Worcester. This Play is borrowed
from Shakespeare's Coriolanus.

Island Princess, a Tragi-comedy acted at the Theater Royal: revived with
Alterations; printed 4o. Land. 1687. and dedicated to the Right Honorable
Henry, Lord Walgrave. This Play is Fletcher's Originally.

Loyal General, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1680.
and dedicated to Edward Tailor Esquire.

Lear King of England his History; acted at the Dukes Theater: revived with
Alterations; printed 4o. Land. 1687. and dedicated to Thomas Boteler Esquire This
Play in the Original, was writ by W. Shakespeare.

Richard the Third, a History acted at the Theater Royal, under the Name of The
Sicilian Usurper: with a Prefatory Epistle, in Vindication of the Author;
occasioned by the Prohibition of this Play on the Stage: printed 4o. Land.
1681. and dedicated to George Raynford, Esquire This Play owns its Birth likewise
to Shakespeare.

Besides these Plays, our Author has two Volumes of Poems in print. One wholly
writ by him, called Poems writ on several Occasions, second Edit enlarged
printed 8o. Land. 1684. The other called Poems by several Hands, and on several
Occasions, collected by our Author, and printed octavo Land. 1685.

John TATEHAM.
An Author that flourished in the Reign of King Charles the First; and was
(says Mr. Winstanley) the City Poet. If he was not an Extraordinary Wit, at
least he was Loyal in the highest Degree, as may appear by his Plays; and
equally hated the Rump and the Scots. He has Four Plays in print; Three in
quarto, and One printed with his Poems in octavo.

Distracted State, a Tragedy, written in the Year 1641. but not printed till
1651. 4o. and dedicated to John Sidley. This Play suited well with the Times;
and his Hatred to the Scots appears in this Play, where he introduces a Scotch
Mountebank (in the fourth Act) to poison Archias the Elected King, at the
Instigation of Cleander. This I take to be the best of our Author's Writings.

Rump, or The Mirror of the late Times; a Comedy acted many times with great
applause, at the Private-house in Dorset Court; printed (the second Edit.) 4o.
Land. 1661. and dedicated to Walter James, of Rambden-House, in Smarden, in the
County of Kent, Esquire This Play has lately been revived on our Stage, under the
Name of The Roundheads.

Scots Figaries, or A Knot of Knaves; a Comedy, printed 4o Land. 1652. and
dedicated to Robert Dormer, Esquire Most of this Play is writ in the Scotch
Dialect, and displays them to the Life.

Love crowns the End, a Tragi-comedy acted by the Scholars of Bingham, in the
County of Nottingham. This Play is not divided into Acts, and is much shorter
than most usually are; being fitted purposely, as I suppose, for those Youths
than acted it. It Is printed with his Poems, called The Mirror of Fancies, in
octavo Land. 1657. and dedicated to Sir John Winter, Secretary of State to his
Majesty in his Exile.

Robert TAYLOUR.
An Author, to whose Person and Writings I am wholly a Stranger; only I find in
former Catalogues a Comedy ascribed to him, called Hog-huth lost his Pearl.

Thomas THOMSON.
Another Author of the meanest Rank, and a great Plagiary; if One of the Plays
be owned by him, which Mr. Kirkman has ascribed to him; viz.

English Rogue, a Comedy acted before several Persons of Honor with great
applause; printed 4o. Land. 1668. and dedicated to Mrs. Alice Barret.

Mother Shipton her Life, acted Nine Days together with great applause; printed
4o. Land. 16 -- I suppose the Occasion of the Success of this Play, was from
what he stole; for all the Characters, except what relate to Shipton, are
borrowed; as the Characters of Shift-hose, Monylack, Sir Oliver, Whore-hound,
David, etc. are stolen verbatim from Massinger's City Madam, and Middleton's
Chaste Maid in Cheapside. This Play has not the Author's Name to it, but the two
first Letters: it may be he was ashamed to set his Name to other Men's Labors.
As to the Story of Shipton, I know not how to direct the Reader, except to an
old Book in quarto, called The Life and Death of Mother Shipton.

Nicholas TROTT.
An Author, who writ a Tragedy, called Arthur, which I never saw: neither can I
give any Account of the Author himself, or the time he lived in.

Richard TUKE.
An Author, of whom I can give no further Account, than that he writ a Play,
called

Divine Comedian, or The Right Use of Plays, improved in a Sacred Tragi-comedy;
printed 4o. Land. 1672. and dedicated to the Right Honorable, and no less
Virtuous Mary, Countess of Warwick. This Play was called first by the Author,
The Soul's Warfare; and is grounded on the Danger of the Soul in this World.

S. TUKE.
A Colonel now living (as I have been informed) in Sussex: the Author of One
of the best Plays now extant, for Economy and Contrivance; viz.

Adventures of five Hours, a Tragi-comedy, the second Edition; printed 4o.
Land. 1662. and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Henry Howard, of Norfolk:
attended with Eight Copies of Verses, writ by very Eminent Persons; as Mr.
Cowley, Evelyn, Carlisle, and others. This Play, I believe, ows its Foundation
to one in Spanish.

Cyril TURNEUR.
This Author lived in the Reign of King James the First, and published Two
Tragedies; viz.

Atheist's Tragedy: Of the Date of this Play, or to whom dedicated, I can give
no Account, the Title Page and Epistle, (if there were any) of my Copy being
lost. The Plot of Levidulcia, her Conveying Sebastian and Fresco out of her
Chamber, when she was surprised by her Husband Belleforrest's Coming, is
borrowed from Boccace, Day the 7. Nov. the 6.

Revenger's Tragedy, sundry times acted by the Kings Majesty's Servants; and
printed 4o.

Of these two Plays, Mr. Winstanley quotes a Distich, I know not from what
Author, as follows.

His Fame unto that pitch so only raised,
As not to be despised, nor too much praised.
John TUTCHIN.
An Author of our Times; who has a Pastoral extant, called

Unfortunate Shepherd, a Pastoral; printed 8o. Land. 1685. This Play with the
rest of his Poems on several Occasions, and a Piece in Prose, called A
Discourse of Life, were all printed octavo Land. 1685.

W.
Lewis WAGER.
A Learned Clerk, living in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; who
was the Author of an Interlude, called

Mary Magdalen, her Life and Repentance; printed in a Black Letter, 4o. Land.
1567. This Interlude may easily be acted by Four Persons. For the Plot, take an
Account from the following Lines; being part of the Prologue, and will give you
a Taste of the Author's Style.

Of the Gospel we shall rehearse a fruitful Story,
Written in the 7th of Luke with words plain,
The Story of a Woman that was right sorry,
For that she had spent her Life in sin vile
and vain.
By Christ's preaching she was converted again,
To be truly penitent by her fruictes she declared,
And to show her self a sinner she never spared.
Edmund WALLER.
A Gentleman not many Years deceased: whose Name will ever be dear to all
Lovers of the Muses. His Compositions are universally applauded; and they are
thought fit to serve as a Standard, for all succeeding Poems. He was a Friend
to the Ingenious Fletcher; as appears by his Verses, printed at the beginning
of those Plays; and was so far a Lover of Dramatick Poetry, that he translated
part of a Play, in which the Right Honorable the Earl of Dorset and Middlesex,
was concerned; viz.

Pompey the Great, a Tragedy acted by the Servants of His Royal Highness the
Duke of York; printed 4o. Land. 1664.

Besides this Play, he has a Volume of Poems extant, which have been several
times reprinted; the Fourth Edition, was printed octavo Land. 1682. There is
newly published a Second part, containing his Alteration of The Maid's Tragedy,
and whatsoever of his was left unprinted, published octavo Land. 1690.

George WAPUL.
An Author, whose Writings are as unknown as any of the former; to whom is
ascribed a Comedy, called Tide tarrieth for no Man.

William WAYER.
An Author, of whose Time and Writings I can give no further Account, than that
he is accounted the Author of a Comedy, which I never saw, called

The more thou liv'st, the more Fool thou art. There are two other Plays (whose
Authors are unknown) ascribed by Mr. Philips and Winstanley, to our Author;
viz. Trial of Chivalry, and Tom Tyler and his Wife: though I believe they were
never writ by him.

R. WAVER.
The Author of a Play, which I have never seen, called Lusty Juventus; who, or
whence this Author was, I know not.

John WEBSTER.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King James the First; and was in those
Days accounted an Excellent Poet. He joined with Decker, Marston, and Rowley,
in several Plays; and was likewise Author of others, which have even in our Age
gained Applause: As for Instance, Appius and Virginia, Duchess of Malfy, and
Vittoria Corrombona; but I shall speak of these in their Order.

Appius and Virginia, a Tragedy, printed (according to my Copy) 4o. Land. 1659.
I suppose there may be an older Edition than mine; but this is that which was
acted at the Duke's Theater, and was altered (as I have heard by Mr.
Carthwright) by Mr. Betterton: For the Plot, consult Livy, Florus, etc.

Devil's Law-case, or When Women go to Law, the Devil is full of business; a
Tragi-comedy, approvedly well acted by Her Majesty's Servants; printed 4o.
Land. 1623. and dedicated to Sir Thomas Finch. An Accident like that of
Romelio's stabbing Contarino out of Malice, which turned to his preservation,
is (if I mistake not) in Skenkius his Observations: At least I am sure, the
like happened to Phaereus Jason, as you may see in Q. Val. Maximus, lib. 1.
cap. 8. The like Story is related in Goulart's Histoires Admirables, tome 1.
page 178.

Duchess of Malfy, a Tragedy presented privately at the Black-fryars, and
publicly at the Globe, by the King's Majesty's Servants; and I have seen it
since acted at the Duke of York's Theater. 'Twas first printed 4o. Land. 1623.
and dedicated to the Right Honorable George, Lord Barkeley, and since
reprinted 4o. Land. 1678. For the Plot, consult Bandello's Novels in French, by
Belleforest, N. 19. Beard's Theater of God's Judgments, Book 2. Chapter 24. The
like Story is related by Goulart, in his Histoires admirables de notre temps,
p. 226.

White Devil, or The Tragedy of Paulo Giordano Ursini, Duke of Brachiano; with
the Life and Death of Vittoria Corombona, the Famous Venetian Curtezan: acted
by the Queen's Majesty's Servants, at the Phoenix in Drury Lane; printed 4o.
Land. 1612. and since acted at the Theater Royal, and reprinted 1665.

Besides these Plays, our Author has been assisted by Mr. Rowley in two others;
which because he had the least part in their Composition, I place to our
Author; viz.

Cure for a Cuckold, a Comedy several times acted with great applause; printed
4o. Land. 1661.

Thracian Wonder, a Comical History several times acted with great applause;
printed quarto Land. 1661.

Mr. Philips has committed a great Mistake, in ascribing several Plays to our
Author, and his Associate Mr. Decker; One of which belong to another Writer,
whose Name is annexed, and the rest are Anonymous: As for Instance, The Noble
Stranger, was writ by Lewis Sharp; and The New Trick to cheat the Devil,
Weakest goes to the wall, and Woman will have her will, to unknown Authors.

John WATSON, Esquire
An Author, who in the Reign of King Charles the Second, writ a Play in Heroic
Verse, called

Amazon Queen, or The Amors of Thalestris to Alexander the Great; a
Tragi-comedy in Heroic Verse; and printed 4o. Land. 1667. The Story of
Thalestris may be read in Q. Curtius, lib. 6. c. 5. Just. lib. 3. Strabo lib.
5. etc. Though our Author makes her somewhat nice in her Amors. This Play was
never acted, by reason of the Author's hearing of two Plays besides on the same
Subject, that were intended for the Stage.

-- WHITAKER.
The Author of a Play, called Conspiracy, or The Change of Government; a
Tragedy acted at His Royal Highness the Duke of York's Theater; and printed 4o.
Land. 1680. This Play is written in Heroic Verse: as to its Character, I shall
leave it to the Judgment of abler Critics.

Dr. Robert WILD.
A Doctor of the Presbyterian Leven; but yet (who it seems) in his Juvenile
Years, was the Author of a Comedy, called The Benefice; which was printed 4o.
Land. 1689. His Opinion of the Orthodox Clergy, may easily be collected from
this Play; though he is beholding to another Play, called The Return from
Pernassus, or The Scourge of Simony, for his Design. His Poems are well known,
octavo 1605.

Leonard WILLAN.
A Gentleman that flourished in the Reign of King Charles the Second. This
Author published a Play, called

Astraea, or True Loves Mirror; a Pastoral in Verse; printed 8o. Land. 1651.
and dedicated to the Illustrious Princess Mary, Duchess of Richmond and Lenox.
This Play is founded on the Romance of Astraea, writ by Mr. D'Urfe.

On this Author, Mr. Herrick has writ a Copy of Verses; which the Reader may
peruse at leisure, p. 354. of his Poems in octavo.

George WILKINS.
An Author that lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, who was the
Writer of a single Comedy; besides that in which he joined with Day and Rowley;
I mean The Travels of three English Brothers. The Play I am speaking of, is
called

Miseries of Enforced Marriage, played by his Majesty's Servants; printed 4o.
Land. 1637. This Comedy has been a great part of it revived by Mrs. Behn, under
the Title of The Town Fop, or Sir Timothy Tawdry.

Robert WILMOT.
An Author in the time of Queen Elizabeth, who at the desire of the Gentlemen
of the Inner Temple, composed a Play, called

Tancred and Gismund their Tragedy, acted before Her Majesty, by the Gentlemen
of the Temple; printed 4o. Land. 1592. and dedicated to the Right Worshipful
and Virtuous Ladies, the Lady Mary Peter, and the Lady Anne Gray. This Play is
founded on a Story in Boccace; see Day the fourth, Novel the first.

John WILSON.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of King Charles the Second, if not still
alive; whose Muse has been applauded on the Stage. His Play called The Cheats,
having the general Approbation of being an Excellent Comedy. He has writ three
Plays; in Number of which take the following Account.

Andronicus Comnenus, a Tragedy; printed Land. 1663. For the Plot, consult
Glycas Leunclaius, Chorriates, Cantacusenus, etc.

Cheats, a Comedy written in the Year 1662. and printed 2d Edit. 4o. Land.
1671. The Author has sufficiently Apologiz'd for this Play, in his Preface, to
which I refer you.

Projectors, a Comedy; printed 40. Land. 1665.

Robert WILSON.
A Gentleman that flourished in the time of Queen Elizabeth; and was the Author
of a Comedy, called

The Cobblers Prophecy, printed 4o. Land. 1655.

Nathaniel WOODS.
An Author that was a Minister in Norwich, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and
who writ an Old Comedy, called

Conflict of Conscience; containing a most Lamentable Example of the doleful
Desperation of a miserable Worldling, by the Name of Philologus; who forsook
the Truth of God's Gospel, for fear of the Loss of Life, and worldly Goods. The
Actors Names divided into six parts, most convenient for such as be disposed
either to show this Comedy in private Houses, or otherwise; printed 4o. Land.
1581.

John WRIGHT.
A Writer still living, who has published two Plays; the one being writ in
Heroic Verse, and the other disguised En Travesty. They both bear the same
Title, and are bound together; viz.

Thyestes, a Tragedy translated out of Seneca; printed in octavo Land. 1674.
and dedicated to Bennet, Lord Sherrard.

Mock Thyestes, a Farce in Burlesque Verse; and printed 4o. Land. 1674. In
commendation of these two Plays, there is a Copy of Verses, written by Mr. O.
Salisbury; which begins thus: Did Seneca now live, himself would say,
That your Translation has not wronged his Play;
But that in every Page, in every Line,
Your Language does with equal splendour shine, etc.


William WYTCHERLEY.
A Gentleman, whom I may boldly reckon amongst the Poets of the First Rank: no
Man that I know, except the Excellent Johnson, having outdone him in Comedy; in
which alone he has employed his Pen, but with that Success, that few have
before, or will hereafter match him. His Plays are four in Number; viz.

Country Wife, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, and printed 4o. Land. 1683.
This is reckoned an Admirable Play.

Gentleman Dancing Master, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater; and printed in
quarto Land. 1673.

Love in a Wood, or Saint James's Park; a Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal,
by His Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1672. and dedicated to the
Duchess of Cleveland.

Plain Dealer, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's Servants;
printed 4o. Land. 1678. and dedicated to Madam B -- Of this Play and its
Author, Mr. Dryden says thus: The Author of the Plain Dealer, whom I am proud
to call My Friend, has obliged all Honest and Virtuous Men, by One of the most
Bold, most General, and most Useful Satyrs, which has been presented on the
English Theater. But notwithstanding this Admirable Character, I must take the
Freedom to allege, That our Author has borrowed his chief Characters of Manly
and Olivia, from Molliere's Le Misanthrope; that of Major Old-fox, from
Scarron's City Romance; and that of Vernish his seizing Fidelia, and
discovering her Sex, may possibly be founded on Silvia Molliere's Memoires. But
notwithstanding all this, the Play is Excellent in its kind; and the Author's
Character is justly drawn by Mr. Evelyn: As long as Men are false, and Women
vain,
While Gold continues to be Virtues bane,
In pointed Satyr Wycherley shall Reign.


Y.
Robert YARRINGTON.
An Ancient Writer in Queen Elizabeth's Time; who has published a Play, called
Two Tragedies in One. The One, of the Murder of Mr. Beech a Chandler, in
Thames Street, and his Boy; done by Thomas Mern: The Other, of a Young Child,
murdered in a Wood by two Ruffins, with the Consent of his Uncle; printed in
quarto Land. 1601.

Supposed Authors.
WE are now arrived at those Authors, whose Names are not certainly known, who
discover themselves only to their Friends in private, and disguise themselves
from the Knowledge of the World by Two Letters only: part of which we shall
unriddle in the following Account.

R. A. Gent.
This Author writ a Play, called The Valiant Welchman; or The True Chronicle
History of the Life and Valiant Deeds of Charadoc, the Great King of Cambria,
now called Wales. This Play has been sundry times acted by the Prince of Wales
his Servants; but printed 4o. Land. 1663. For the Plot of this Play, it is
founded on true History: see Tacitus Annals, Milton's History of England, etc.
See besides Ubaldine, Le Vite delle Done Illustre, p. 6.

H. H. B.
The Author of a Play, called The World's Idol, or Plutus; a Comedy, written in
Greek by Aristophanes, and translated by our Author; together with his Notes,
and a short Discourse upon it; printed octavo Land. 1650.

P. B. i. e. Peter BELON, Gent.
An Author now living, who is supposed to write a Play, called The Mock
Duellist, or The French Vallet; acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's
Servants; printed quarto Land. 1675. and dedicated to the Virtuous Accomplished
Lady, Madam S. C.

J. C.
The Author of a pleasant Comedy, called The two Merry Milk-maids, or The best
Words wear the Garland; acted before the King with General approbation, by the
Company of the Revels; printed quarto Land. 16 -- Part of the Plot of this
Play, viz. Dorigene's promise to Dorillus, of Enjoyment when he presented her
with a Garland that should contain all sorts of Flowers in January, and the
Consequence, is founded on Boccace Day 10. N. 5. and is the Foundation of other
Plays; as Fletcher's Four Plays in one, etc.

R. C.
There are two Plays, which no otherwise discover the Author, than by these two
Letters: The first called Alphonsus King of Arragon, a History which I never
saw; the other named Ignoramus, a Comedy several times acted with extraordinary
applause, before the Majesty of King James; with a Supplement which (out of
Respect to the Students of the Common Law) was hitherto wanting: Written in
Latin by R. Ruggles, sometimes Master of Arts in Clare Hall in Cambridge, and
translated by R. C. sometimes Master of Arts in Magdalen College in Oxford;
printed 4o. Land. 1662.

J. D.
The Author of a Comedy, called The Mall, or The Modish Lovers; acted by his
Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1674. and dedicated to William Whitcom
Junior, Esquire This Play is ascribed by Dr. Hyde (the Proto-Bibliothecarius to the
University) to Mr. Dryden; though methinks the Style of the Epistle Dedicatory,
is not like the rest of his Writings.

R. D.
The Author of a Play, called New Trick to cheat the Devil, a Comedy, printed
4o. Land. 1639. The Plot of Friar John's Discovering the Constable and the
Woman's Intrigue, and pretending to conjure for Victuals at the Husband's
Return, Act 3. Sc. 1. is the same with that made use of in the London Cuckolds;
and which is related since the Writing of this Play, by M. D'Ouville in his
Tales, part. 2. page 257. Slight-all's teaching the Art of Love, to the two
Gentlemen, in the second Scene of the first Act, is borrowed from Ovid De Art
Amandi, Lib. 2.

T. D.
Under these Letters, is a Play in print, called The Bloody Banquet, a Tragedy;
printed 1620. This Play by some old Catalogues, is ascribed to Thomas Basker.

S. H.
Concerning this Author was, I know no more, than that he was a Bachelor of
Arts, of Exeter College in Oxford; and writ a Play, called Sicily and Naples,
or The Fatal Union; a Tragedy, printed 4o. Oxon. 1640. This Play is commended
by Seven Copies of Verses, which are prefixed, most of them being writ by Young
Academics.

B. J.
The Author of a Tragedy, called Guy of Warwick, which I have once seen in
quarto Land. -- and the Gentleman that showed it me, told me it was writ by Ben
Johnson; though by that little I read, I guessed it to be writ by a Pen far
inferior to that Great Master in Poetry.

E. M.
The Author of a Tragedy, called Saint Cecilie, or The Converted Twins; printed
quarto Land. 1667. This Play was published by Mr. Medbourn, the Comedian, and
dedicated to Queen Katherine. For the Plot, consult Ecclesiastical Writers, as
Epiphanius, Eusebius, Baronius, etc.

T. P.
Under these Letters, are printed two Plays; One of which is called The French
Conjurer, a Comedy acted at the Duke of York's Theater; and printed 4o. Land.
1678. This Play is founded on two Stories in the Romance of Guzman, the Spanish
Rogue; one called Dorido and Clorinia: the other, The Merchant of Sevil. The
second Play is styled, A witty Combat, or The Female Victor; a Tragi-comedy
acted by Persons of Quality, in Whitson Week, with great applause; printed 4o.
Land. 1663. This Play is founded on the Story of Mary Carleton, the German
Princess: See her Life in octavo.

Monsieur P. P.
The Author of an Opera, called Ariadne, or The Marriage of Bacchus: being a
Vocal Representation, translated out of French, and put into Music by Mr.
Grabut, Master of his Majesty's Music; and acted by the Royal-Academy of
Music, at the Theater Royal in Covent Garden; printed 4o. Land. 1674. and
dedicated to King Charles the Second

S. P.
An Author, which I take to be Samuel Pordage, who published a Play of
Seneca's, with Notes, called Troades; to which is annexed some Poems on several
Occasions; all which are printed together octavo Land. 1660.

T. R.
An Author that published a Play, called The Extravagant Shepherd; a Pastoral
Comedy, translated from the French of M. Corneille Junior; printed 4o. Land.
1654. and dedicated to Mrs. Thornhill, Wife to Coll. Rich. Thornhill, of
Ollantigh in Kent. This Play is founded on a Romance, called Lysis, or The
Extravagant Shepherd, in Folio.

W. R.
The Author of a Piece, which I never saw, called Three Lords and Ladies of
London.

Mr. S. Mr. of Arts.
The Author of a Right, Pithy, Pleasant, and Merry Comedy, Entitled Gammer
Gorton's Needle; played on the Stage near a hundred Year ago, in Christ's
College in Cambridge; printed in a Black Letter 4o. Land. 1661.

J. S.
Four Plays are printed under these Letters; viz. a Masque, called Masquarade
du Ciel, presented to the Great Queen of the Little World; printed 4o. Land.
1640. and dedicated to the Queen. A Pastoral, called Phillis of Scyros,
translated from the Italian of C. Guidubaldo di Bonarelli; and printed 4o.
Land. 1655. A Tragedy, whose Name is Andromana, or The Merchant's Wife; printed
4o. Land. 1660. This Play is founded on Sr. Phil. Sidney's Romance, called
Arcadia, in Fol. see the Story of Plangus, p. 155. And a Comedy, called The
Prince of Priggs Revels, or The Practices of that Grand Thief Captain James
Hind; printed 4o. Land. 16 --

S. S.
The Author of a Play, called The Honest Lawyer, a Comedy acted by the Queens
Majesty's Servants, and printed 4o. Land. 1616.

J. T.
Under these Letters, are two Plays; the first called Grim the Collier of
Croyden, or The Devil and his Dame, with the Devil and St. Dunstan; printed
octavo Land. 1662. This Play is bound with two others, viz. Thorpy Abbey, or
Marriage Broker, under the Title of Gratiae Theatrales, or A Choice of Ternary
of English Plays. The second Play is, L. Annaeus Seneca's Troas, a Tragedy
translated from the Latin, and printed 4o. Land. 1686.

C. W. i.e. Christopher WASE.
An Ingenious Person, lately deceased; being one of the Squire Bedles in the
University of Oxford. His Skill in Languages, particularly in Latin and Greek,
is sufficiently known to the Learned World. He translated out of Greek the
Electra of Sophocles, and presented it to Her Highness the Lady Elizabeth;
printed 120. at the Hague 1649. Several Translations besides he has published,
as Gratius his Cynegeticon, printed 8o. Land. 1654. and Prioli's Hist. of
France: some of Tully's Orations, and his Latin Dictionary, besides other
School-Books; several of which have been often reprinted, and all of them show
his Great Industry and Parts.

E. W.
A Person who was (though not the Author, yet) the occasion of the Publication of
a Comedy, called Apollo Shroving, composed for the Scholars of the Free School
of Hadleigh, in Suffolk, and acted by them on Shrove-Tuesday, Feb. 6. 1626.
written by the Schoolmaster of Hadleigh, and printed octavo 1627.

J. W.
The Author of a Play, called The Valiant Scot; which was printed 4o. Land.
1637. and dedicated to the Right Honorable James, Marquess Hamilton, by the
Publisher or Promoter of the Copy to the Press, Mr. William Bowyer.

L. W.
The Author of a Play, called Orgula, or The Fatal Error; a Tragedy, whereunto
is annexed a Preface, discovering the true Nature of Poesy, with the proper
use and Intention of such public Divertisements; printed 4o. Land. 1658. and
dedicated to the most accomplished Lady, the Lady Frances Wildegoss.

M. W. Master of Arts.
Another Author, whose Play is bound in the Ternary of Plays: it is called The
Marriage Broker, or The Pander, a Comedy printed 120. 1662.

T. W.
The third Author concerned in that Volume, having writ a Tragedy, called
Thornby-Abby, or The London Maid. All these Plays are dedicated to William
Austin Esquire by R. D. the Publisher.

W. W.
The Translator of a Comedy writ by Plausus, called Manaechmi, printed 4o.
Land. 1515. This Author had translated several others in Manuscript, though they
were never permitted to come abroad in the World.

Unknown Authors.
WE are now come to the last Division of Authors, I mean those whose Modesty,
or other Reasons, have hindered the publication of their Names: and as we have
Decyphered some Authors in the foregoing Division, upon Conjecture, so we shall
not pretermit to take Notice of such Plays, whose Authors we can any ways guess
at in this. I shall Rank these, as I did the former, in an Alphabetical Method.

A.
Abdicated Prince, or The Adventures of Four Years; a Tragi-comedy, lately
acted at Alba-Regalis, by several Persons of Great Quality; and printed Land.
4o 1690. This Play contains the Transactions of the Court and Nation, during
the Reign of the late King James, under seigned Names: there needs no Clavis,
the Persons, being obvious to all Intelligent Persons. The time of the Action
is from the Coronation of King James, to the Landing of his present Majesty.

Abraham's Sacrifice, a Play which I never saw, but do believe that it may
possibly be a Translation from Theodore Beza.

Alarm for London, or The Siege of Antwerpe; with the Venturous Acts, and
Valiant Deeds of the Lame Soldier; played by the Right Honorable, the Lord
Chamberlain his Servants, printed Land. 1602.

Albion, an Interlude mentioned by Kirkman, which I never saw.

Albion's Triumph, personated in a Masque at Court, by the King and Queens
Majesty's, and the Lords, the Sunday after Twelfth-Night, 1631. printed 4o.
Land. 1631. Mr. Inigo Jones had a Share in the Contrivance of this Masque.

Albumazar, a Comedy presented before the King's Majesty at Cambridge, by the
Gentlemen of Trinity College; printed 4o. Land. 1634. This was revived at the
King's House, and a Prologue writ by Mr. Dryden: see Miscellan Poems published
by him 8o. p. 279.

Aminta, a Pastoral, translated from the Italian of Torquato Tasso; to which is
added Arriadne's Complaint, in Imitation of Anguilara, written by our
Translator; both printed in quarto Land. 1628.

Amorous Gallant, or Love in Fashion; a Comedy in Heroic Verse, as it was
acted, and printed 4o. Land. 1675. This Play has appeared abroad, under the
Title of The Amorous Orontus: It is translated from a French Play, written by
Th. Corneille, and called L'Amour a la mode. It is founded on a Spanish Play,
writ by Ant. de Solis, called by the same Name, (towit) El Amor al uso.

Amorous Old Woman, or It Is well if it take; a Comedy acted by their Majesty's
Servants, and printed 4o. Land. 1684. I have been told this Play was writ by
Tho. Duffet: it is printed with a New Title Page, called The Fond Lady.

Arden of Feversham his True and Lamentable Tragedy, who was most wickedly
murdered by the means of his disloyal Wife; who for the love she bare to one
Mosebie, hired two desperate Ruffins, Black-will and Shak-bag, to kill him:
printed 4o. Land. 1599. in a Black Letter. The Story is to be found in the
Reign of Edward the Sixth; see Hollingshead, Goodwin, Hayward, Baker, Beard's
Theater of God's Judgment, Book 2. Chapter 10. Edit. 4. and the second part Chap.
6. added by Dr. Tho. Taylour.

Arraignment of Paris, a Pastoral, which I never saw; but it is ascribed by
Kirkman to Mr. W. Shakespeare.

B.
Battle of Aliazar, fought in Barbary, between Sebastian King of Portugal, and
Abdelmelech King of Morocco; with the Death of Captain Stukeley: played sundry
times by the Lord High Admiral's Servants, printed 4o. Land. 1594. For the
Plot, several Authors mention the Story: the English Reader may find it in
Heylin's Cosmography, and Fuller's Worthies.

Band, Ruff, and Cuff; an Interlude, which other Catalogues mention, but which
I never saw.

Bastard, a Tragedy; printed 4o. Land. 1652. The Plot of this Tragedy, and part
of the Language, concerning Clare, Rodriguez, Balthazar and Mariana, is
borrowed from the Loves of Schiarra and Florelia, in the English Lovers: and
Catilina's Supplying her Mistress Mariana's Room on the Wedding Night, is
founded on the Story of Roberto and Isdaura, in Gerardo the Unfortunate
Spaniard, p. 87.

Bloody Duke, or The Adventures for a Crown; a Tragi-comedy, acted at the Court
of Alba Regalis, by several Persons of Great Quality; by the Author of the
Abdicated Prince, printed 4o Land. 1690. This Play comprises the public
Affairs, from the first Discovery of the Popishplot, to the Death of King
Charles the Second. The Persons are as easily known as in the former.

C.
Caesar's Revenge, a Tragedy which I never saw.

Charles the First King of England his Tragedy; printed 4o. Land. 1649. and
dedicated to King Charles the Second, commended by a Copy of Verses.

Combat of Caps, a Masque of which I can give no Account.

Commons Condition, a Comedy which I never saw.

Constant Nymph, or The Rambling Shepherd; a Pastoral acted at the Duke's
Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1678.

Costly Whore, a Comical History acted by the Company of Revels; printed 4o.
Land. 1633.

Contention between York and Lancaster, with the Death of the Good Duke
Humphrey, and the Banishment and Death of the Duke of Suffolk; and the tragical
End of the proud Cardinal of Winchester; with the notable Rebellion of Jack
Cade, and the Duke of York's first Claim to the Crown: printed 4o. Land. 1600.
This Play is only the Second part of Shakespeare's Henry the Sixth, with little
or no Variation.

Counterfeits, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1679.
This Comedy is ascribed by some to Leanard; but I believe it too good to be his
Writing: it is founded on a translated Spanish Novel, called The Trapanner
trapann'd, octavo Land. 1655. and I presume the Author may have seen a French
Comedy, writ by Tho. Corneille, on the same Subject, called D. Caesar D'Avalos.

Counterfeit Bridegroom, or The Defeated Widow; a Comedy acted at His Royal
Highness the Duke's Theater, printed 4o. Land. 1677. This Play is only an Old
Play of Middleton's, called No Wit like a Woman's, printed octavo.

Cromwell's Conspiracy, a Tragi-comedy, which I never saw.

Cruel Debtor, a Play only named by Mr. Kirkman.

Cupid's Whirligig, a Comedy sundry times acted by the Children of his
Majesty's Revels; printed 4o. Land. 1616. and dedicated by the Publisher, to
Mr. Robert Hayman. This Play is part founded on Boccace; as for Instance, the
Conveyance of the Captain, and Exhibition out of the Lady's Chamber, is founded
on the Sixth Novel, of the Seventh Day; and is the Groundwork of many other
Plays.

Cyrus King of Persia, a Tragedy mentioned by Kirkman, which I never saw.

D.
Damon and Pythias, a History, of which I can give no Account.

Debauchee, or The Credulous Cuckold; a Comedy acted at his Highness the Duke
of York's Theater, and printed 4o. Land. 1677. This Play is by some ascribed to
Mrs. Behn; but is indeed only a Play of Brome's revived, called A mad Couple
well matched.

Destruction of Jerusalem, a Play which I never saw; but in the Catalogue
printed with the Old Law, it is ascribed to one Thomas Leg.

Dick Scorner, a Play mentioned in Mr. Kirkman's Catalogue, but which I never
saw; nor do I know what species of Dramatick Poetry it is.

Divine Masque, printed in quarto Land. -- The Title Page of mine is lost, but
it is dedicated to General Monk, by One Anthony Sadler, who I take to be the
Author.

E.
Edward the Third his Reign, a History sundry times played about the City of
London; printed 4o. Land. 1599. The Plot is founded on English Chronicles: See
Walsingham, M. Westminster, Fabian, Froissart, Pol. Virgil, Hollingshead, Stow,
Speed, etc. See besides AEschasius Major, and a Novel called The Countess of
Salisbury octavo, translated from the French.

Elvira, or The worst not always true; a Comedy written by a Person of Quality,
(supposed to be the Lord Digby) and printed 4o. Land. 1667.

Empress of Morocco, a Farce acted by His Majesty's Servants; said to be writ
by Thomas Duffet, and printed 4o. Land. 1674.

English Princess, or The Death of Richard the Third; a Tragedy in Heroic
Verse, ascribed to Mr. John Carel, and printed 4o. Land. 1673. For the Plot,
see Fabian, Pol. Virgil, Hollingshead, Grafton, Stow, Speed, Baker, etc.

Englishmen for Money, or A Woman will have her Will; a pleasant Comedy diverse
times acted with great applause; printed 4o. Land. 1626.

Enough's as good as a Feast, a Comedy, which I never saw, but mentioned by Mr.
Kirkman.

Every Woamn in her Humor, a Comedy, printed quarto Land. 1609.

F.
Factious Citizen, or The Melancholy Visioner; a Comedy acted at the Duke's
Theater; and printed quarto Land. 1685.

Fair Em, the Miller's Daughter of Manchester; with the Love of William the
Conqueror; a pleasant Comedy sundry times publicly acted in the Honorable
City of London, by the Right Honorable, the Lord Strange his Servants; printed
quarto Land. 1631.

Fair Maid of Bristow, a Comedy played at Hampton, before the King and Queen's
most Excellent Majesty's; printed quarto Land. 1605. in a Black Letter.

False Favorite disgraced, and the Reward of Loyalty; a Tragi-comedy never
acted, printed octavo Land. 1657. This Play is ascribed to George Gerbier
D'Ouvilly.

Fatal Jealousy, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and ascribed by some
to Mr. Pane; printed quarto Land. 1673. Part of the Plot is in Johannes Gigas's
Postills: See besides Theater of God's Judgments, 2d part p. 55. Unfortunate
Lovers, Nov. 1.

Feigned Astrologer, a Comedy translated from the French of Monsieur Corneille;
and printed 4o. Land. 1668. The Plot of this Play [which is borrowed from
Calderon's El Astrologo fingido] is made use of in the Story of the French
Marquess, in the Illustrious Bassa, when he played the part of the Feigned
Astrologer.

Fidele and Fortunatus: I know not what sort of Play it is, whether Comedy or
Tragedy, having never seen it; but in Old Catalogues it is ascribed to Thomas
Barker.

Flora's Vagaries, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's
Servants: ascribed to Mr. Rhodes, and printed quarto Land. 1670. This Plot of
Orante's making use of the Friar, to carry on her Intrigue with Ludovico, is
founded on Boccace, Day 3. Nov. 3.

Free Will, a Tragedy, which I know not where or when printed, the Title Page
of Mine being lost. 'Twas written Originally in Italian by F. N. B. which I
take to be Franciscus Niger Bassentinus, and was translated into English by H.
C. that is Henry Cheek. It Is printed in an Old English Character.

Fulgius and Lucrelle, a Piece of which I can give no Account having never seen
it.

G.
Ghost, or The Woman wears the Breeches; a Comedy writ in the Year 1640. and
printed quarto Land. 1650.

H.
Hell's Higher Court of Justice, or The Trial of the Three Politic Ghosts,
viz. Oliver Cromwell, King of Sweden, and Cardinal Mazarine; printed quarto
Land. 1661.

Histriomastix, or The Player whipped; printed quarto Land. 1610. This Play was
writ in the time of Queen Elizabeth, though not printed till afterward; as
appears by the last Speech, spoken by Peace to Astraea, under which Name the
Queen is shadowed.

Henry the Fifth his Victories, containing the Honorable Battle of Agin-court;
a History, acted by the Kings Majesty's Servants, printed quarto Land. 1617.
For the Plot, see the English Chronicles, as Hollingshead, Stow, Speed, etc.

Hector, or The False Challenge; a Comedy written in the Year 1655. and printed
quarto Land. 1656. I know not the Author of this Play; but I think it may vye
with many Comedies writ since the Restoration of the Stage.

Hyppolitus, a Tragedy, which (as I have been told) is printed in octavo, and
translated from Seneca by Edmund Prestwith. For the Plot, see the Poets, as
Ovid's Epistle of Phaedra to Hyppolitus: his Metamorphosis, Lib. 6. Virgil.
AEn. Lib. 7. etc.

Hoffman his Tragedy, or A Revenge for a Father; acted diverse times with great
applause, at the Phoenix in Drury Lane; and printed 4o. Land. 1631. This Play
was adopted by One Hugh Perry, and by him sent to the Press, and dedicated to
his Honored Friend Mr. Richard Kilvert.

How a Man may choose a Good Wife from a Bad; a pleasant conceited Comedy,
sundry times acted by the Earl of Worcester's Servants; and printed 4o. Land.
1634. The Story of Anselme's saving of Young Arthur's Wife, by taking her out
of the Grave, and carrying her to his Mother's House, is the Subject of other
Plays: and such a Story is related in several Novels; see the 9. Nov. of the
Pleasant Companion (printed octavo Land. 1684.) called Love in the Grave. But
the Novel which I take to be the foundation of this Play, is in Cynthio
Giraldi, Dec. 3. Nov. 5.

I.
Jacob and Esau, an Interlude mentioned in former Catalogues, which I never
saw: though it is easy to guess that it is founded on Scripture Story; see Genesis
Chapter 25, 26, etc. See besides Josephus Lib. 1. Tornelli Annals, etc.

Jack Drum's Entertainment, or The Comedy of Pasquil and Katherine; sundry
times acted by the Children of Paul's, and printed 4o Land. 1616. Mammon's
poisoning Katherine's Face, resembles the Usage of Demagoras to Parthenia, in
Argalus and Parthenia.

Jack Juggler, styled a Comedy by Old Catalogues; of which (having never seen
it) I can give no Account.

Jack Straw's Life and Death, a Notable Rebel in England; who was killed in
Smith-fields by the Lord Mayor of London: printed quarto Land. 1593. This Play,
I know not for what reason, is divided into but four Acts. For the Plot, see
the English Chronicles, as Pol. Virgil, Hollingshead, Stow, Speed, etc. in the
Reign of King Richard the Second.

James the Fourth, a History mentioned in former Catalogues, which I never saw;
but I suppose the Play is founded on the Story of the King of Scotland of that
Name.

Jeronymo, the First part; with the Wars of Portugal, or The Spanish Tragedy;
containing the Life and Death of Don Andraea: a Tragedy, printed 4o. Land. 1605.

Jeronymo is mad again, or The Spanish Tragedy; containing the Lamentable End
of D. Horatio, and Bellimperia; with the pitiful Death of Jeronymo: printed
quarto Land. 1623. This Play has been diverse times acted, and several Lines
have been quoted out of it, by several Authors; as those may see that will read
over Every man in his Humor, Bird in a Cage, Love will find out the way, etc.

Impatient Poverty, styled a Comedy by some Catalogues. This Play I never saw.

Imperial Tragedy; taken out of a Latin Play, and very much altered, by a
Gentleman for his own Diversion; who on the importunity of Friends, consented
to have it published, but without his Name: Because many (says he) do censure
Plays according to their Opinion of the Author. This Play was printed Fol.
Land. 1669. and has been acted (if I mistake not) at the Nursery in Barbican.
For the Story, see Marcellinus, and Cassiodorus, in their Chronicles concerning
Zenon. See besides Zonaras, Baronius, Godeau, etc.

Interlude of Youth, an Old, Serious, Instructive Piece; written in Verse, and
printed at London in quarto, in an Old Character: As to the Date hereof, or the
Title Page, I am ignorant, mine being lost.

John the Evangelist, a Piece which I never saw.

Joseph's Afflictions, another: though the Title Page of both show the Subject
Divine.

Tovial Crew, or The Devil turned Ranter; an Interlude which I never saw; though
being mentioned in Mr. Kirkman's Catalogue, I could not omit it.

K.
King and Queen's Entertainment at Richmond, after their Departure from Oxford;
in a Masque presented by the most Illustrious Prince, Prince Charles, Sept. 12.
1636. printed 4o. Land. 1636. and dedicated to the Majesty of the Queen of
Great Britain, by a Copy of Verses of Ten Lines. The Occasion of the Masque was
the Queen's Desire to see the Prince (not much above six Years of Age) dance.
The Dances were composed by Simon Hopper; the Music by Mr. Charles Hopper: and
the parts of the Captain and Druyd, were acted so well by the then Ld.
Buckhurst, and Mr. Edward Sackvile, that it proved that Genuine Action was not
so much confined to the Stage, but that a Gentleman might reach it, if not
transcend it.

Knack how to know an Honest Man, a Comedy which I could never meet with.

Knack how to know a Knave, a most pleasant and merry Comedy, sundry times
played by Edw. Allen; with Kemp's Applauded Merriments of the Men of Goteham,
in Receiving the King into Goteham: printed quarto Land. 1594. The Serious part
of this Play is the Story of King Edgar, Ethenwald and Alfreda. See Malmesbury,
Pol. Virgil, Walsingham, Grafton, Stow, etc. The Play is printed in Old Black
Letter, and lays open the Vices of the Age, being detected by Honesty.

Knave in grain, new vampt; a Comedy acted at the Fortune, many Days together,
with great applause; and printed 4o. Land. 1640. This Play has given Subject to
the late Novels, as Julio's Cheating his Drunken Guests (Act 3d) is repeated by
Kirkman, in the Third part of the English Rogue Chapter 13. His Cheating the
Countryman of the piece of Gold, Act 5th is revived in the Account of the last
Frost 1684. in octavo p. 46.

Knavery in all Trades, or The Coffee-House; a Comedy acted in the Christmas
Holy Days, by several Apprentices with great Applause; printed quarto Land.
1664. I know not with what Applause it might be acted privately; but I presume
it would not meet with Success on the Stage in Dorset Garden, nay nor in the
Nursery, for I can find no Plot in it.

L.
Lady Alimony, or The Alimony-Lady; an Excellent pleasant Comedy; duly
authorized, daily acted, and frequently followed: printed 4o. Land. 1659.

Late Revolution, or The Happy Ghange; a Tragi-comedy acted throughout the
English Dominions, in the Year 1688. Written by a Person of Quality, and
printed Land. 1690. This Play begins from the Birth of the late Prince of
Wales, to the Arrival of Our present Majesty at Exeter; and concludes the whole
Catastrophe of our late Affairs.

Laws of Nature, a Play which I never saw.

Levellers levelled, or The Independents Conspiracy to root out Monarchy; an
Interlude written by Mercurius Pragmaticus; printed quarto 1647. Who this
Author is, under this Disguise, I know not: but it is easy to discover him a
Royalist, by his Dedication to King Charles the Second; and an Enemy to Lilly,
the Almanack-maker, whom he lashes under the Name of Orlotto.

Liberality and Prodigality, a Comedy which I can give no Account.

Lingua, or The Combat of the Tongue, and the Five Senses for Superiority; a
pleasant Comedy, printed quarto Land. -- Mr. Winstanley says, That the late
Usurper Oliver, acted the part of Tactus, in Cambridge, which first inspired
him with Ambition: See his Account of Ant. Brewer, to whom (through mistake) he
ascribes this Play,

London Chanticleers, a Witty Comedy, full of Various and Delightful Mirth;
often acted with great applause, and printed quarto Land. 1659. This Play, or
rather Interlude, for it is not divided into Acts, is of the Basse Comedy, writ
by the French; the Scene lying entirely amongst Persons of the lowest Rank.

Look about you, a pleasant Comedy, played by the Right Honorable, the Lord
High Admiral's Servants, and printed 4o. Land. 1600. For the Historical part,
see the Chronicles in the Reign of King Henry the Second; viz. Pol. Virg.
Speed, Baker, Daniel, etc.

Love in its Ecstasy, or The large Prerogative; a kind of Royal-Pastoral,
written long since by a Gentleman [supposed by Mr. Kirkman, I know not on what
ground, to be One Peaps] Student at Eaton; and printed quarto Land. 1649. The
Author was not seventeen Years of Age when this was writ; on which Account I
think the Play may pass Muster, with others of those Times.

Lost Lady, a Tragi-comedy, which I never read, or saw but once, and which I
remember was printed in Folio.

Love a-la-mode, a Comedy acted with great applause, at Middlesex House;
written by a Person of Honor, and printed 4o. Land. 1663. This Play is
justified by the Author, in his Preface, and ushered into the World by three
Copies of Verses; nor is the Play altogether undeserving Commendation.

Luminalia, or The Festival of Light; personated in a Masque at Court, by the
Queen's Majesty and Her Ladies, on Shrove-Tuesday Night 1637. and printed 4o.
Land. 1637. The Famous Mr. Inigo Jones, Surveyor of Her Majesty's Works, had a
Hand in the Contrivance of this Masque, by Her Majesty's Command. The Invention
consisting of Darkness and Light: the Night presented the first Antimasque, and
the Subject of the Main-masque, is Light. But for the clearer Information of
the Reader, I refer him to the Masque it self.

M.
Manhood and Wisdom, a Play mentioned by other Authors, of which I can give no
Account, never having seen it.

Marcus Tullius Cicero, that Famous Roman Orator, his Tragedy; printed quarto
Land. 1651. I know not whether even this Play was acted; but it seems to me to
be written in Imitation of Ben. Johnson's Cataline. For the Plot, see Plutarch
in his Life: See likewise his own Works, Hist. Ciceroniana, Lambin; as also
Dion, Appian, etc.

Marriage of Wit and Science, an Interlude which I never saw.

Masque of Flowers; presented by the Gentlemen of Gray's Inn, at the Court at
Whitehall, in the Banqueting House upon Twelfth-Night 1631. Being the last of
the Solemnities and Magnificences which were performed at the Marriage of the
Right Honorable, the Earl of Sommerset, and the Lady Frances, Daughter of the
Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain; printed 4o. Land. 1614. This Masque is
dedicated to Sir Francis Bacon, Attorney General to King James the First.

Massenello, (but rightly Tomaso Amello di Malfa, General of the Neopolitans)
his Tragedy; or The Rebellion of Naples: printed in octavo Land. 1631. This
Play was written by a Gentleman, who was an Eyewitness where this was really
acted, upon that Bloody Stage, the Streets of Naples, An. D. 1647. It Is
dedicated to John Caesar, of Hyde-Hall, in the County of Hertford Esquire, by
his Kinsman T. B. the Publisher. For the Plot, or rather the History, read
Alexander Giraffi's History of Naples, translated by J. Howell: See besides Du
Verdier Histoire Universelle, etc.

Mercurius Britannicus, or The English Intelligencer; a Tragi-comedy acted at
Paris with great applause, printed 1641. The Subject of this Play is about the
Business of Ship Money; the Judges being arraigned under feigned Names: as for
Example, Justice Hutton, is called Hortensius; and Justice Cook, Corvus
Acilius: Prin is also introduced under the Name of Prinner. There are but Four
Acts, and of the Fifth, the Epilogue gives the following Account. It is
determined by the AEdils, the Mistress of public Plays, that the next Day (by
Jove's Permission) the Fifth Act shall be acted upon Tyber; I should say
Tyburne, by a New Society of Abalamites. Vive le Roy.

Merry Devil of Edmonton, a Comedy acted sundry times by his Majesty's
Servants, at the Globe on the Bank-side, and printed 4o. Land. 1655. This Play
is said by Kirkman, to be writ by Shakespeare; though finding no Name to it, I
have placed it amongst those that are Anonymous. This Play is founded on the
History of One Peter Fabel, of whom see Fuller's Worthies in Middlesex, p. 186.
See other Chronicles in the Reign of Henry the Sixth.

Morning Ramble, or The Town Humors; a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater,
printed 4o. Land. 1673. This Play is said to be written by One Mr. Pane, and
may be accounted a good Comedy.

Mucedorus, the King's Son of Valencia, and Amadine the King's Daughter of
Arragon; with the Merry Conceits of Mouse: a Comedy acted by his Highness's
Servants at the Globe, and before the King's Majesty at Whitehall on
Shrove-Tuesday Night; printed 4o. 1668. This Play is said by former Catalogues
to have been writ by Shakespeare; and was, I presume, printed before this
Edition. It has been frequently the Diversion of Country People, in Christmas
Time.

Muse of New Market, containing Three Drolls; viz. Merry Milk-maids of
Islington, or The Rambling Gallants defeated: Love lost in the Dark, or The
Drunken Couple: Politic Whore, or The Conceited Cuckold: acted at New Market,
and printed quarto Land. 1681. All these Three Drolls are stolen (as I
remember) from Plays: but not having them by me, I cannot tell the particulars.

Mistaken Beauty, or The Liar; a Comedy acted by their Majesty's Servants, at
the Theater Royal, printed quarto Land. 1685. This Comedy is translated from a
Play of P. Corneilles, called Le Menteur.

N.
Nero's Tragedy, printed Land. in quarto. This Play was in former Catalogues
called Nero newly written; because 'twas writ after that of Claudius Tiberius
Nero; which through Kirkman's want of Knowledge in History, he called Nero's
Life and Death: which led me into the same Mistake, till I came to read both
Plays. I know not when either of them were printed or when printed, the
Title-pages of both my Plays being wanting. For the History of Domitius Nero;
consult Suetonius in Vit. Neronis Aurelius Victor. Tacitus, Sulpitius Severus,
Augustinus de Civit. Dei, Eusebius, etc.

New Custom, an Interlude no less witty (if we believe the Title Page) than
pleasant; printed in a Black Letter, quarto Land. 1573. This Play is so
contrived, that Four Persons may act it; and the Design of it is against
Propery, and to justify Reformation, which then flourished in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign. This Play consists of 3. Acts, but is written in Verse throughout: so
that had Mr. Dryden Rival Ladies Pref.
ever seen this Play, he might better have quoted it than Gondibert, (which
besides being writ seventeen Years before this, is not in Rhyme) to prove the
Antiquity of Verse.

New Market Fair, a Tragi-comedy in Two parts; the First of which I never saw:
but the Second part I have by me, and the Title of it is, New Market Fair, or
Mistress Parliaments New Figaries; written by the Man in the Moon, and printed
at You may go look, in quarto 1649. The Design of it is to expose the Rebels
then in power.

Nice Wanton, a Comedy, which I never saw.

No Body, and Some Body; with the true Chronicle History of Elydure, who was
fortunately three several times crowned King of England: acted by the Queen's
Majesty's Servants, and printed quarto Land. -- For the Historical part of this
Play, consult Grafton, Hollingshead, Pol. Virgil, Lloyd, etc. It Is not divided
into Acts.

O.
Old Wives Tale, a Play of which I can say nothing, having never seen it.

Orlando Furioso, One of the Twelve Peers of France, his History: acted before
the Queen's Majesty, and printed quarto Land. 1594. This Play is not divided
into Acts; but is founded upon the Epick Poem of Ariosto, so called, and
translated into English by Sir John Harrington.

P.
Pastor Fido, or The Faithful Shepherd; a Pastoral, translated out of Italian
into English, printed quarto Land. 1602. This was the first Version of the
Famous Guarini into English; and was Excellent for those Times. The Author,
though his Name be unknown, was nearly related to Sir Edward Demock, Queen
Elizabeth's Champion; to whom after the Author's Decease, the Bookseller
dedicated it.

Pathomachia, or The Battle of Affections, shadowed by a Feigned Siege of the
City Pathopolis: printed quarto Land. 1630. This Play was written some Years
before; and published by Fr. Constable, a Friend of the Deceased Author's, and
by him dedicated to the Lord Hundsdon. This is the same Play with that called
Love's Loadstone.

Patient Grissel, a Comedy, (say ancient Authors) which though I never saw, I
presume is founded on that Famous Story in Boccacio, I mean the last Novel in
his Book.

Pedlers Prophecy, a Comedy, mentioned in former Catalogues, of which I can
give no Account.

Philotus, a very Excellent and Delectable Comedy (as we are told in the
Preface) wherein we may perceive the great Inconveniences that fall out in the
Marriage between Old Age, and Youth. This Play is printed at Edinburgh, in an
Old Black Letter, An. Dom. 1612. Some People have mistaken this Play for
Daniel's Philotas; but this is of a different Subject, and kind of Verse, and
is printed in Stanzas.

Pinder of Wakefield, a Comedy, which I have once seen; printed in 4o. (as I
remember) Land. 1632. or thereabouts.

Piso's Conspiracy, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed 4o. Land.
1676. This Play is only the Tragedy of Nero (before mentioned) Revived, and
printed verbatim. For the Plot, see Suetonius, Tacitus, etc.

Presbyterian Lash, or Noctroffe's Maid whipped; a Tragi-comedy, acted in the
Great Room at the Pie Tavern at Algate, by Noctroff the Priest, and several of
his Parishioners, at the Eating of a Chine of Beef. The First part printed for
the use of Mr. Noctroffe's Friends. This Play is dedicated to Mr. Zach.
Noctroffe, by F.K. which I take to be Fr. Kirkman. I know not whether ever
there were a Second part extant, or no.

Promises of God manifested; this I never saw.

Promus and Cassandra, in Two parts. These are mentioned in other Catalogues,
though I can give no Account of either.

Q.
Queen, or The Excellency of her sex; an Excellent Old Play, found out by a
Person of Honor, and given to the Publisher, Alexander Goughe; printed 4o.
Land. 1653. This Play is dedicated by him to the Lady Katherine Mohun, Wife to
Lord Warwick Mohun, Baron of Oakehamton. This Publisher is applauded by two
Copies of Verses before the Play. The Plot of Salassa's Swearing Velasco not to
fight, is founded on a Novel, said to be Bandello's, which the Reader may
peruse in Les Dixhuit Histoires Tragicques, par Fr. De Belleforest, 8o. Nov.
13, p. 285.

R.
Rampant Alderman, or News from the Exchange; a Farce, printed quarto Land.
1685. This Farce is patcht up out of several Plays, as Fine Companion, etc.

Reformation, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and printed 4o. Land. 1673.
This Play is ascribed to Mr. Arrowsmith; and is a very good Comedy.

Rehearsal, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal; printed [4th Edit.] quarto
Land. 1683. This Play is ascribed to the Late Duke of Buckingham, and will ever
be valued by Ingenious Men. There are some who pretend to furnish a Clavis to
it; my Talent not lying to Politics, I know no more of it, than that the
Author lashes several Plays of Mr. Dryden; as Conquest of Granada, Tyranick
Love, Love in a Nunnery; and some passages of other Plays; as The Siege of
Rhodes, Virgin Widow, Slighted Maid, Villain, English Monsieur, etc.

Religious Rebel, a Tragi-comedy in quarto, which I have only once seen; but
can give no Account of.

Return from Parnassus, or The Scourge of Simony; a Comedy publicly acted by
the Students of St. John's College in Cambridge, printed quarto Land -- In
this Play, the Poets of those times are censured: and this is the Original of
Dr. Wild's Benefice, which is now in print.

Revenge, or A Match in Newgate; a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater, and
printed quarto Land. 1680. This Play is ascribed to Mrs. Behn; but is indeed a
Play of Marston's revived, and called The Dutch Curtezan.

Rivals, a Tragi-comedy in quarto, which at present I have not; but have heard
Mr. Cademan, for whom (as I think) it was printed, say it was writ by Sir Will.
D' Avenant.

Robin Hood's Pastoral May Games; which I know not.

Robin Hood, and his Crew of Soldiers; of the same Stamp, and which I never
saw.

Romulus and Hersilia, or The Sabine War; a Tragedy acted at the Duke's
Theater, and printed quarto Land. 1683. For the Plot, see Livy, lib. 1. Ovidii
Met. lib. 14. Plut. in Vit. Romuli; Florus, Dionysius Hallicarnassaeus,
Velleius Paterculus, Eutrop. etc.

Royal Masque at Hampton Court, presented on Sunday Night, being the Eighth of
January 1604. and personated by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, attended by
Eleven Ladies of Honor; printed quarto Land. 1604.

Royal Voyage, or The Irish Expedition; a Tragi-comedy, printed quarto Land.
1690. The Subject of this Play is known by the Title.

S.
Salmacida Spolia, a Masque presented by the King and Queen's Majesty's, at
Whitehall on Tuesday, the 21st of January 1639. and printed quarto Land. 1639.
The Invention, Ornament, Scenes, and Machines, with their Descriptions, were
made by Mr. Inigo Jones, Surveyor General of His Majesty's Works. What was
spoken, or sung, by Sir Will. D'Avenant; and the Music was composed by Mr.
Lewis Richard, Master of Her Majesty's Music.

Sicelides, a Piscatory, acted in Kings College in Cambridge; and printed
quarto Land. 1631. The Serious parts of this Play, are most writ in Verse; with
Chorus's between the Acts. Perindus, telling to Armillus the Story of Glaucus,
Scylla, and Circe, Act 1. Sc. 4. is taken from Ovid's Met. lib. 13. Atychus
fighting with, and killing the Ork, that was to have devoured Olynda, is an
Imitation of Perseus and Andromeda, Ovid, Met. lib. 4. or else Orlando Furioso,
Book eleventh.

Shoomaker's Holyday, or The Gentle-Craft; with the Humorous Life of Simon
Air, Shoemaker, and Lord Mayor of London: a Comedy acted before the Queen's
most Excellent Majesty, on New Year's Day at Night, by the Right Honorable the
Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Admiral his Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1657.
This Play is dedicated, To all Good Fellows, Professors of the Gentle-Craft, of
what Degree soever. For the Plot, I can direct you to no other but the Book of
the Gentle-Craft, in Quarto.

Siege of Constantinople, a Tragedy acted at the Duke's Theater; and printed
quarto Land. 1675. For the Plot see Chalcocondylas, Constantinopolis a
Mahammada, Secund. Expugnata. Paulus Jovius, Hen. Pantaleon, Knolles, etc.

Sir Clyomon, Knight of the Goledn-shield, Son to the King of Denmark; and
Clamydes, the White Knight, Son to the King of Swavia, ( both Valiant Knights)
their History: printed quarto Land. 1599. This Play is written in Old Fashioned
Verse, and is very heavy in Reading.

Sir Gyles Goose-cappe, Knight; a Comedy acted with great applause, at the
Private-house in Salisbury Court; printed quarto Land. 636. and dedicated by
the Publisher Hugh Perry, to Rich. Young Esquire of Wooley-Farm, in the County of
Berks.

Sir Solomon, or The Cautious Coxcomb; a Comedy acted at his Royal Highness the
Duke of York's Theater; printed 4o. Land. 1671. This Play is Originally French,
being a Translation from Moliere's L'Ecole des Femmes. It was translated (as I
have heard) by John Carell; and owned in the Epilogue as a Translation.

What we have brought before you was not meant
For a New Play, but a new Precedent;
For we with modesty our Theft avow,
(There is some Conscience shown in stealing too)
And openly declare, that if our Cheer
Does hit your Palates, you must thank Molliere.
This Play was frowned and pelted at, (to use the Author's own Expression) by
many Persons, who thought themselves Critics: but notwithstanding it met with
Success in the Action: And the Author has sufficiently justified his Play, in
his La Critique de L'Ecole des Femmes, to whom I refer the Reader.

Solomon and Perseda, their Tragedy; wherein is laid open Love's Constancy,
Fortune's Inconstancy, and Death's Triumphs: printed quarto Land. 1599. This
Play, I presume was never acted, neither is it divided into Acts.

Sophister, a Comedy printed 4o. 1638. I know not where this was acted, or
printed, the Title Page of my Play being lost.

Spanish Bawd, represented in Celestina; or Calisto and Melibea; a
Tragi-comedy, wherein is contained, besides the Pleasantness and Sweetness of
the Style, many Philosophical Sentences, and profitable Instructions, fit for
the Younger Sort: Showing the Deceits and Subtilties housed in the Bosom of
false Servants, and Cunny-catching Bawds: printed Fol. Land. 1631. This Play is
originally Spanish, and translated into English by a Spaniard, One Don Diego
Puede-ser; and by him dedicated to Sir Thomas Richardson: the same Author
translated Miguel de Cervantes his Exemplary Novels, Fol. Land. 1664.

Stepmother, a Tragi-comedy acted with great applause, at the Theater in
Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Highness the Duke of York's Servants;
printed quarto Land. 1664.

Strange Discovery, a Tragi-comedy, printed in quarto. I know not when this
Play was acted, or where printed, mine having not the Title Page: but I know
very well that both the Plot and the Language is borrowed from Heliodorus his
AEthiopick History; which I take to be One of the most Ancient (if not the
first) Romances extant.

Susanna's Tears, a Play which I never saw.

Swetnam, the Woman-hater, arraigned by Women; a Comedy acted at the Red-Bull,
by the Queen's Servants; and printed quarto Land. 1620. Though this Play seems
designed chiefly as a Scourge for Joseph Swetnam's Scandalous Pamphlet against
the Female Sex, called The Arraignment of lewd, idle, froward, and unconstant
Woman, printed quarto Land. 1617. Yet the Play is founded on Story much elder,
which I have read in Spanish in Twelves, and is Entitled, Historia de Aurelia,
y Isabella Hija del Rey de Escotia, donde se disputa quien da mas occasion de
peccar, el Hombe a la muger, o la muger al Homber.

T.
Tempe restored, a Masque presented by the Queen and Fourteen Ladies, to the
King's Majesty at Whitehall; on Shrove-Tuesday 1631. and printed quarto Land.
1631. This Masque is founded on the Story of ^irce: see Ovid's Metamorphosis,
Book 14. The Verses were writ by Mr. Aurelian To ^nsend: The Subject and
Allegory of the Masque, with the Descriptions and Apparatus of the Scenes, were
invented by Mr. Inigo Jones, Surveyor of His Majesty's Works.

Thersites. an Interlude, which I never saw.

Tom Essence, or The Modish Wife; a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater; printed
4o. Land. 16 --. This Play is founded on two French Plays, viz. Molliere's
Sganarelle, ou Le Cocu Imaginaire; and Tho. Corneille's D. Caesar D'Avalos, in
the part of Love-all's Intrigue with Luce: without the Reader will suppose that
he followed a Spanish Novel, called The Trapanner trapann'd: and for the
Business of Tom Essence and his Wife, copyed Sir William D'Avenant's Playhouse
to be Let, Act fifth, which is a Translation from the former. This Play is said
to be writ by One Mr. Rawlins.

Tiberius ( Claudius Nero) his Tragical Life and Death; a Tragedy in quarto.
This Play used to be placed under the Title of Nero's Life and Death; which
made People mistake it for the Life of Nero Caesar, who was the Sixth Emperor
of Rome: this being the Third, I know not when this Play was printed, or where
acted, mine wanting the Title Page: but for the Plot, read Suetonius, Tacitus,
Dion, Victor, Eutropius, etc.

Tom Tyler, and his Wife; an Excellent Old Play acted about a Hundred and
thirty Years ago, and printed quarto Land. 1661. This Play is printed in an Old
English Letter, and is writ in a kind of Burlesk Verse, where the Author
affects an odd sort of Chiming, in the middle of each Line. The Design of the
Play, is to represent a Shrew, and teach the way to humble her. The Plot of
this Play has some Resemblance with Mr. Poisson's Le Sot venge.

Traitor to himself, or Man's Heart his greatest Enemy; a Moral Interlude, in
Heroic Verse; Representing the Careless, Hardened, Returning, Despairing, and
Renewed Heart: with Intermasques at the Close of each several Act. Acted by the
Boys of a Public School at a Breaking-up; and published so as it may be
useful, on the like Occasion: printed Oxon. 1678. I find nothing Remarkable in
this Play, but that it is writ without Women's parts; which the Author says he
never thought fit to put on Boys. I remember not any Play, but Plautus his
Captivei, that is thus writ; and yet notwithstanding it is generally accounted
an Admirable Play.

True Trojans, or Fuimus Troes; being a Story of the Britains Valor at the
Romans first Invasion: publicly presented by the Gentlemen Students of
Magdalen College in Oxford; and printed quarto Land. 1633. For the Plot or
Story, the Author has followed Livy, lib. 3. Caesar's Commentaries, lib. 4. and
5, and Galfridus Monumetensis, lib. 4. as you may see by the perusal of the
Drammatis Personae.

Trial of Chivalry; a Play, of which I can give no Account, having never seen
it.

Trial of Treasure; a Play, to which I am as much a stranger.

Tunbridge Wells, or A Days Courtship; a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater,
and printed quarto Land. 1678. This is said (in the Title Page) to be writ by a
Person of Quality: though I have been told it was writ by Mr. Rawlins: But
whoever was the Author, it is certainly inferior to Epsom Wells, in point of
Humor and Repartee.

Tyrannical Government, another Play, which I never saw.

U.
Unfortunate Usurper, a Tragedy, printed 4o. Land. 1663. This Play is dedicated
by the Author (who ever he was) to his Honored and Highly Esteemed Friend, Mr.
Edward Umfreville. Fox the Plot, it is founded on History; being the Story of
Andronicus Comnenus: See Glycas, Leunclaius, Choniates, Cantacusenus, Nicetas,
Baronius, etc. This Play is short of that of Willson's on the same Subject: but
in the Fifth Act Sc.3. there is a parallel between those Times and Ours, in
Reference to the Late Rebellion; which I take to be the best thing in the Play.

Ungrateful Favorite, a Tragedy written by a Person of Honor; and printed
quarto Land. 1664. The Scene of this Play lies in Naples; but in what King's
Reign this happened, I am not able to guess; so that whether it be founded on
Romance or History, I leave to the Enquiry of those who have read Pandulphus
Collenuctius, Jov. Pontanus, Guicciardine, or others Writers of the Affairs of
Naples.

W.
Warning for Fair Women, a Tragedy, containing the most Tragical and Lamentable
Murder of Mr. George Sanders, of London, Merchant, near Shooters Hill;
consented unto by his own Wife; acted by Capt. George Brown, Mrs Drury, and
Trusty Roger, Agents therein, with their several Ends. This Play was in Vogue
in Queen Elizabeth's Time: and diverse times acted by the Right Honorable, the
Ld Chamberlain's Servants. It Is not divided into Acts, and full of Dumb-shews,
according to the Mode of those Times; the Prologue and Epilogue, being spoken
by Tragedy. It Is printed in a Black Letter 4o. Land. 1599.

Wealth and Health, a Play of which I can give no Account.

Weakest goes to the Wall, a Tragi-comedy played sundry times by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Oxenford, Lord Great Chamberlain of England's Servants;
and printed 4o. Land. 1618.

Wily beguiled, a pleasant Comedy; wherein the Chiefest Actors be these; a Poor
Scholar, a Rich Fool, and a Knave at a Shift: printed quarto Land. 16 --

Wine, Beer, Ale, and Tobacco contending for Superiority; a Dialogue, (though in
other Catalogues styled an Interlude) printed 4o. Land. 1658.

Wisdom of Dr. Dodipol, a Comedy acted by the Children of Paul's; and printed
quarto Land. 1600. The Earl Cassimeere's Friendship, in marrying Deformed
Cornelia, and Sharing his Estate with her Father Flores, when he was in
Affliction, and Arrested by the Duke's Order, is copied from Lucian's Story of
Zenothemis and Menecrates.

Wits, or Sport upon Sport; a Collection of Drolls and Farces, presented at
Fairs by Stroling Players; and printed last Edition octavo Land. 1675. These
are most of them taken out of the Plays of Shakespeare, Fletcher, Shirley,
Marston, etc. There is a former Edition, that has a Table prefixed, which shows
from what Play each Droll is borrowed.

Wit of a Woman, a pleasant merry Comedy; printed quarto Land. 1604. Though the
Author styles it so, I think it no ways answers the Title.

Wit led by the Nose, or A Poet's Revenge; a Tragi-comedy acted at the
Theater Royal, and printed quarto Land. 1678. The greatest part of this Play
(except a Scene or two) is stolen from Chamberlain's Love's Victory.

Woman turned Bully, a Comedy acted at the Duke's Theater; and printed quarto
Land. 1675. This I take to be a very Diverting Comedy.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical INDEX of PLAYS, Referring to the AUTHORS, etc.
A.
ABdelazer. 18 Abdicated Prince. 525 Abraham's Sacrifice. Ib. Acolastus. 400
Actaeon and Diana. 89 Adelphi. 25, 273 Adrasta. 281 Adventures of 5 hours. 505
Agamemnon. 495 Aglaura. 497 Agrippa K. of Alba. 98 Alaham. 38 Alarm for Land.
525 All Fools. 58 -- for Love. 152 -- for Money. 334 -- mistaken. 276 All Is
lost by Lust. 428 All Is well that ends well. 455 Albion. 525 Albion and Alban.
151 Albion's Triumph. 525 Albertus Wallenst. 232 Albovine. 107 Albumazar. 525
Alchimist. 287 Alcibiades. 396 Alexander and Campaspe. 328 Alexandrian Tragedy.
2 Alphonsus Emperor of Germany. 59 Alphonsus King of Arragon. 518 Amazon
Queen. 510 Ambitious Statesm. 91 Amboyna. 153 Amends for Ladies. 198 Amorous
Bigotte. 445 -- Fantasm. 332 -- Gallant. 526 -- Old Woman. Ib. -- Prince. 18
Amourous War. 337 Amynta. 98, 224 Andraea. 25, 273 Andromache. 91 Andromana.
522 Andronicus Comn. 513 Anthony and Cleopatra. 455, 487 Antigone. 363
Antipodes. 35 Antiquary. 346 Antonio and Melida. 348 Antonius. 402 Any thing
for a quiet Life. 371 Apocryphal Ladies. 392 Apollo Shroving. 523 Appius and
Virg. 509 Arcadia. 476 Arden of Feversh. 526 Argalus and Parthethenia. 232
Ariadne. 520 Aristippus. 414 Arraignment of Paris. 526 Arthur. 504 Arviragus
and Phil. 46 As you like it. 455 Assignation. 154 Astraea. 511 Atheist. 505,
396 Atheist's Tragedy. 505 Aurengzebe. 156
B.
BAll. 476 Band, Ruff, and Cuff. 527 Banditti. 179 Bartholmew Fair. 287 Bashful
Lover. 354 Bastard. 527 Battle of Alcazer. Ib. Begger's Bush. 207 Bell in
Campo. 392 Bellamira her Dream. 312 Bellamira, or The Mistress. 487 Benefice.
511 Bird in a Cage. 476 Birth of Merlin. 466 Black Prince. 27 Blazing World.
392 Blind Beggar of Alexandria. 60 Blind Beggar of Bednal-Green. 118 Blind
Lady. 276 Bloody Banquet. 519 -- Brother. 207 -- Duke. 527 Blurt Mr. Constab.
371 Bondsman. 354 Bonduca. 207 Brazen Age. 260 Brenoralt. 498 Bridals. 392
Bride. 380 Broken Heart. 219 Brothers. 483 Brutus of Alba. 500 Bury Fair. 445
Bussy D'Amboyse. 60 Byron's Conspiracy and Tragedy. 61
C.
CAEsar Borgia. 321 Caesar and Pomp. 62 Caesar's Revenge. 527 Caius Marius. 397
Calisto. 92 Cambyses K. of Persia. 440 Captain. 207 Cardinal. 483 Careless
Lovers. 418 -- Shepheardess. 234 Carnival. 407 Case is altered. 298 Cataline's
Conspiracy. 288 Chabot Admiral of France. 477 Challenge at Tilt. 288 -- for
Beauty. 262 Chances. 207 Changes. 477 Changling. 371 Charles the First. 528 --
the Eighth of France. 92 Chaste Maid in Cheapside. 371 Cheats. 513 -- of Scapin.
397 Christ's Passion. 437 Christian turned Turk. 117 Christmas Masque. 288
Cicilia and Clorinda. 312 Cid. 431 Circe. 116 Citizen turned Gentleman. 422
City Heiress. 19 -- Madam. 354 -- Match. 337 -- Nightcap. 116 -- Politics. 93
-- Wit. 35 Claricilla. 312 Cleopatra. 101, 363 Cloridia. 288 Clouds. 490
Cobler's Prophecy. 513 Coelum Britannicu^. 43 Colas Fury. 41 Combat of Caps.
528 -- of Love and Friendship. 365 Comedy of Errors. 455 Committee. 276
Committee-man curried. 471 Commons condit. 528 Commonwealth of Women. 180
Conflict of Conscience. 513 Conquest of China. 440 -- of Granada. 157
Conspiracy. 309, 511 Constant Maid. 477 -- Nymph. 528 Constantine the Great.
322 Contention betw. York and Lancaster. 528 -- of Ajax and Ulysses. 485 -- for
Honor and Riches. 478 Coriolanus. 455 Cornelia. 316 Coronation. 208, 478
Costly Whore. 528 Covent Garden. 380 Covent Garden weeded. 35 Covent of Pleas.
392 Cou^terfeit Bridegr. 528 Counterfeits. Ib. Countess of Pembroke's
Ivy-church. 224 Country Captain. 386 -- Girl. 31 -- Innocence. 319 -- Wife. 514
-- Wit. 94 Courageous Turk. 234 Court Beggar. 36 -- Secret. 484 Coxcomb. 208
Croesus. 3 Cromwell's Hist. 529 Cruel Brother. 107 -- Debtor. 529 Cuckolds
Haven. 501 Cunning Lover. 32 Cupid and Death. 478 Cupid's Revenge. 208 --
Whirligig. 529 Cure for a Cuckold. 510 Custom of the Country. 208 Cutter of
Colemanstreet. 81 Cymbeline. 456 Cynthia's Revels. 289 -- Revenge. 493 Cyrus K.
of Persia. 529 Cytherea. 488
D.
DAme Dobson. 419 Damoiselle. 36 Damoiselles a-la-mode. 200 Damon and Pythias.
529 Darius his Tragedy 3 -- K. of Persia. 94 David and Bethsabe. 401 Debauchee.
529 Deorum Dona. 11 Deserving Favorite. 47 Destruction of Jerusalem. 95, 529
Destruction of Troy. 7 Devil's an Ass. 289 Devil's Charter. 9 Devil's Law-case.
509 Devil of a Wife. 280 Dick Scorner. 529 Dido Q. of Carthage. 383
Disappointment. 489 Disobedient Child. 280 Distracted State. 502 Distresses.
107 Divine Comedian. 504 Divine Masque. 530 Doctor Dodipole. 556 Doctor
Faustus. 342 Don Carlos. 398 Don Sebastian. 161 Double Marriage. 208 Doubtful
Heir. 484 Duke and no Duke. 501 Duke of Guise. 163 Duke of Lerma. 276 Duke of
Millain. 355 Duke's Mistress. 478 Dumb Knight. 334 Dumb Lady. 318 Dutch
Courtezan. 348 Dutch Lover. 19 Duchess of Malfy. 609 Duchess of Suff. 262
E.
EAstward-hoe. 66 Edgar. 434 Edward the First. 401 -- Second. 343 -- Third. 530
-- Fourth. 262 Elder Brother. 208 Electra. 522 Elizabeth's Troubles. 265
Elvira. 530 Emperor of the East. 355 -- Moon. 440 Empress of Morocco. 530
Enchanted Lovers. 333 Endymion. 228 English Friar. 95 -- Lawyer. 420 --
Monsieur. 276 -- Moor. 36 -- Princess. 530 -- Rogue. 504 -- Traveller. 262
Enough's as good as a Feast. 530 Entertainment at King James's Coronat. 289 --
at RutlandH. 107 Entertainment of King James and Q. Anne at Theobalds. 289 --
of the K. and Q. at High-gate. Ibid. -- of the K. of Engl. and Denmark at
Theobalds. 290 -- of the Q. and Pr. at Althrop. Ibid. Epsom Wells. 445 Erminia.
201 Evening's Love. 163 Every man in his Humor. 290 -- out of his Humor. Ib.
-- Woman in her Humor. 531 Eunuchus. 25, 273 Example. 478 Excommunicated Prin.
15 Extravagant Shepherd. 521
F.
FActious Citiz. 531 Fair Emm. Ib. -- Favorite. 108 -- Irene. 499 -- Maid of
Brist. 531 -- of the Exchange. 262 -- Inn. 208 -- West. 263 Fair Quarrel. 371
Faithful Shepheardess. 208 False Favorite. disgraced. 531 -- Count. 20 -- One.
209 Family of Love. 372 Fancies. 320 Fancies Festivals. 306 Fatal Contract. 247
-- Dowry. 355 -- Jealousy. 531 -- Love. 441 Fawn. 350 Feigned Astrologer. 531
-- Courtezans. 20 Female Academy. 392 -- Prelate. 441 Fidele and Fortunatus.
532 Fine Companion. 346 Fleire. 471 Floating Island. 494 Flora's Vagaries. 532
Fond Husband. 180 Fool turned Critic. Ib. -- would be a Favorite. 47 Fools
Preferment. Ib. Forced Marriage. 20 Fortunate Isles. 291 Fortunatus. 122
Fortune by Land and Sea. 265 Fortune-Hunters. 49 Four Land. Prentices. 265 --
P's. 254 -- Plays in one. 209 Fox. 297 Free Will. 532 French Conjurer. 520
Friendship in Fashion. 398 Friar Bacon. 242 Fulgius and Lucrelle. 532
G.
GAlathea. 329 Game at Chess. 372 Gamester. 478 Gam. Gurton's Needle. 521
Generous Enemies. 73 Gentle-Craft. 548 Gentleman Dancing Master. 514 -- of
Venice. 479 -- of Verona 466 -- Usher. 63 Ghost. 532 Glass of Government. 228
Gloriana. 322 Goblins. 498 Golden Age. 259 Golden Age restored. 291 Grateful
Servant. 479 Great Duke of Florence. 356 Green's Tu quoque. 72 Grim the Colier
of Croyden. 522 Gripus and Hegio. 11 Guardian. 80, 356 Guy of Warwick. 519
H.
HAmlet Prince of Denmark. 457 Hannibal and Scipio. 380 Heautontimorumenos. 25,
273 Hector of Germany. 488 Hectors. 533 Hecyra. 25, 273 Heir. 363 -- of
Morocco. 441 Hell's High Court of Justice. 533 Henry the Third of France. 473
Henry the Fourth. 456 -- Fifth. Ib. -- Sixth. 457 -- Eighth. Ib. Heraclius. 48
Hercules Furens. 250 -- Oetus. 496 Hero and Leander. 492 Herod and Antipater.
340 -- and Mariamne. 406 Hey for Honesty. 416 Hic and Ubique. 246
Histriomastix. 532 Hoffman. 533 Hog has lost his Pearl. 503 Hollander. 232
Holland's Leaguer. 349 Honest Lawyer. 522 -- Man's Fortune. 209 -- Whore. 122
Honoria and Mammon. 484 Honor of Wales. 294 Horace. 74, 404 Horatius. 333 How
to choose a Good Wife from a Bad. 533 Humorous Courtier. 480 -- Days Mirth. 63
-- Lieutenant. 209 -- Lovers. 387 Humorists. 446 Humor out of Breath. 119 Hyde
Park. 479 Hymenaei. 291 Hymen's Triumph. 102 Hyppolitus. 409, 495
I.
JAck Drum's Entertainment. 534 -- Jugler. Ib. -- Straw's Life and Death. Ib.
Jacob and Esau. 534 James the Fourth. Ib. Ibrahim. 441 Jealous Lovers. 414
Jeronymo. 535 Jew of Malta. 343 Jew's Tragedy. 248 If this ben't a good Play,
the Devil's in it. 122 Ignoramus. 518 Impatient Poverty. 533 Imperial Tragedy.
315 Imperiale. 226 Imposture. 484 Indian Emperor. 165 -- Queen. 276 Ingratitude
of a Commonwealth. 501 Injured Lovers. 378 -- Princess. 182 Inner Temple
Masque. 372 Insatiate Countess. 348 Interlude of Youth. 44 Jocasta. 208 John
the Evangel. 535 -- K. of England. 458 John and Matilda. 117 Joseph. 238
Joseph's Afflictions. 536 Jovial Crew. 36 Irish Masque. 291 Iron Age. 260
Island Princess. 210 Isle of Gulls. 119 Juliana Princess of Poland. 96 Julius
Caesar. 4, 458 Just General. 339 -- Italian. 108
K.
KInd Keeper. 164 King and no King. 210 -- Edgar and Alfreda. 420 -- Lear and
his three Daughters. 501 -- and Queen's Entertainment at Richmond. 536 King's
Entertainment at Welbeck. 261 Knack to know an Honest Man. 536 -- a Knave. Ib.
Knave in Grain. 537 Knavery in all Trades. Ibid. Knight of the Burning Pestle.
210 -- Golden-shield. 594 -- of Malta. 210
L.
LAdy Alimony. 573 -- Contemplation. 392 -- Errant. 53 -- of Pleasure. 480
Ladies Privilege. 233 -- Trial. 220 Lancash. Witches. 266 Landgartha. 42 Late
Revolution. 537 Law against Lovers. 108 -- Tricks. 119 Laws of Candy. 210 --
Nature. 538 Lear's Tragedy. 458 Levellers levelled. 538 Liberality and
Prodigality. Ibid. Libertine. 448 Like will to like, quoth the Devil to the
Collier. 227 Lingua. 538 Little French Lawyer. 210 Locrine. 458 London
Chanticleers. 538 -- Cuckolds. 420 -- Prodigal. 459 Look about you. 538
Looking-glass for London. 331 Lost Lady. 539 Love a-la-mode. Ib. Love and
Honor. 109 -- Revenge. 442 -- War. 368 -- Crowns the End. 503 -- freed from
Ignorance. 291 -- in a Tub. 187 -- in a Wood. 515 -- in its Ecstasy. 539 -- in
the Dark. 188 -- restored. 291 -- sick Court. 36 -- King. 31 -- Tricks. 480
Love's Cruelty. 480 -- Cure. 211 -- Dominion. 201 -- Kingdom. Ib. -- Labor
lost. 459 -- Labyrinth. 222 -- Loadstone. 544 Lover's Melancholy. 220 --
Progress. 221 -- Metamorphosis. 329 -- Mistress. 267 -- Pilgrimage. 211 --
Riddle. 82 -- Sacrifice. 221 -- Triumph 71, 291 -- Victory. 57 -- Welcome. 291
Loving Enemies. 335 Loyal Brother. 489 -- General. 501 -- Lovers. 339 --
Subject. 211 Lucius Junius Brutus. 323 Lucky Chance. 20 Luminalia. 539 Lusts
Dominion. 344 Lusty Juventus. 508 Liar. 542
M.
MAckbeth. 460 Mad Couple well matched. 36 -- Lover. 211 Madam Fickle. 102
Magnetic Lady. 292 Maid of Honor. 356 -- in the Mill. 211 Maiden Queen. 169
-- head well lost. 276 Maid's Metamorphosis. 329 -- of Moorclack. 6 -- Revenge.
481 Maid's Tragedy. 212 Malcontent. 349 Mall. 518 Mamamouchi. 422 Manhood and
Wisdom. 539 Man of Mode. 187 -- Newmarket 274 Man's the Master. 109 Marriage a
la mode 166 -- Broker. 524 -- Night. 197 -- of Oceanus and Britannia. 203 -- of
the Arts. 271 -- of Wit and Science. 540 Mariam. 43 Marcelia. 26 Marcus Tullius
Cicero. 540 Marius and Scilla. 331 Martyr. 334 Martyred Soldier. 474 Mary
Magdalen's Repentance. 506 -- Q. of Scotland. 8 Masque at Bretbie. 68 -- at the
Ld Haddington's House. 293 -- at Ludlow Castle. 376 -- of Augurs. 293 -- of
Flowers. 540 Masque of Gray's Inn. 212 -- of Owls. 293 -- of Queens. Ib. -- of
the Middle Temple and Lincoln's Inn. 63 Masquarade du Ciel. 531 Massacre at
Paris. 323 -- of Paris. 344 Massianello. 540 Master Anthony. 28 Match at
Midnight. 428 -- me in Land. 123 Matrimonial Trouble. 392 May Day. 64 Mayor of
Quinborough 372 Measure for Measure. 459 Medea. 472, 496 Menechmus. 524
Merchant of Venice. 459 Mercurius Britannicus. 541 Mercury vindicated. 294
Merry Devil of Edmonton. 541 -- Milk-maids. 517 Merry Wives of Windsor. 459
Messalina. 426 Metamorphosed Gypsies. 293 Michaelmass Term. 373 Microcosmus.
381 Midas. 329 Midsummer Night's Dream. 460 Mirza. 11 Mizer. 448 Miseries of
Civil War. 96 -- Enforced Marriage. 512 Mistaken Husband. 166 Mithridates. 324
Mock Duellist. 517 -- Tempest. 177 Monsieur D'Olive. 64 -- Thomas. 213 Money is
an Ass. 307 More Dissemblers besides Women. 373 Morning Ramble. 541 Mortimer's
Fall. 294 Mother Bomby. 329 -- Shipton's Life and Death. 504 Mucedorus. 541
Much ado about nothing. 460 Mulberry Garden. 487 Muleasses the Turk. 352 Muse
of New Market. 542 Muses Looking-glass. 415 Mustapha. 28, 39
N.
NAtures 3 Daughters. 362 Neptune's Triumph. 294 Nero's Life and Death. 324 New
Custom. 543 -- Exchange. 36 -- Inn. 299 -- Trick to cheat the Devil. 518 --
Market Fair. 543 -- Way to pay Old Debts. 357 -- Wonder. 429 News from
Plymouth. 110 -- the World in the Moon. 294 Nice Valor. 213 -- Wanton. 543
Nicomede. 99 Night-walker. 213 Noah's Flood. 185 Noble Gentleman. 231 Noble
Ingratitude. 333 -- Spanish Soldier 430 -- Stranger. 470 No body, and Some
body. 543 No Wit No Help like a Woman's. 373 Northern Lass. 36 Northward-hoe.
123 Novella. 37
O.
OBeron the Fairy Prince. 294 Obstinate Lady. 69 Octavia. 395 Oedipus. 167, 384
Old Castle's History. 461 -- Couple. 364 -- Law. 357 -- Troop. 318 -- Wives
Tale. 544 Opportunity. 481 Ordinary. 53 Orestes. 234 Orgula. 523 Orlando
Furioso. 544 Ormasdes. 315 Orphan. 398 Osmond the Gr. Turk. 47 Othello. 461
Ovid. 69
P.
PAllantus and Eudora. 310 Pandora. 315 Pan's Anniversary. 294 Parliament of
Bees. 119 Parson's Wedding. 313 Passionate Lover. 48 Pastor Fido. 191, 442
Patient Grissel. 544 Patrick for Ireland. 482 Pedlers Prophecy. 545 Peleus and
Thetis. 278 Pericles Prince of Tire 462 Perkin Warbeck. 221 Philaster. 213
Phillis of Scyros. 522 Philotas. 102 Philotus Scotch. 545 Phoenix. 373 -- in
her flames. 333 Phormio. 25, 273 Picture. 357 Pilgrim. 213 Pinder of Wakefield.
545 Piso's Conspiracy. Ib. Pity she is a Whore. 222 Platonic Lovers. 109
Playhouse to be Let. Ibid. Play between John the Husband, and Tib his Wife.
255 -- betwixt the Pardoner and the Friar, the Curate and Neighbor Prat. Ibid.
-- of Gentleness and Nobility. Ib -- of Love. Ib. -- of the Weather. Ib. Plain
Dealer. 515 Pleasure at Kenelworth Castle. 231 -- reconciled to Virtue. 294
Plutus. 292 Poetaster. Ib. Politician. 481 -- cheated. 241 Pompey. 405, 507
Poor Man's Comf. 118 -- Scholar. 385 Pragmatical Jesuit. 50 Presbyterian Lash.
545 Presence. 393 Prince of Prigg's Revels. 522 Princess. 313 -- of Cleves. 324
Prisoners. 313 Projectors. 513 Promises of God manifested. 545 Promus and
Cassandra. Ib. Prophetess. 214 Psyche. 449 -- debauched. 178 Public Wooing.
393 Puritan Widow. 462
Q.
QUeen. 546 -- and Concubine. 37 -- of Arragon. 244 -- of Corinth. 214 Queen's
Arcadia. 103 -- Exchange. 37 -- Masque of Beauty. 295 -- of Blackness. Ib.
Querer per solo querer. 193
R.
RAging Turk. 235 Ram Alley. 14 Rambling Justice. 230 Rampant Alderman. 546
Rape of Lucrece. 267 Rebellion. 424 Reformation. 546 Rehearsal. Ib. Religious.
393 -- Rebel. 547 Renegado. 358 Return from Parnassus. 547 Revenge. Ibid.
Revengers Tragedy. 506 Reward of Virtue. 223 Rhodon and Iris. 316 Richard the
Second. 462 Rival Friends. 245 -- Kings. 8 -- Ladies. 167 -- Queens. 325
Rivals. 547 Roaring Girl. 373 Robert Earl of Huntingdon's Downfall and Death.
267 -- Hood's Pastoral May-games. 547 -- and his Crew of Soldiers. Ibid. Roman
Actor. 358 -- Empress. 308 -- Generals. 129 Romeo and Juliet. 462 Romulus and
Hersilia. 547 Roundheads. 21 Rover. 20 Royalist. 183 Royal King and Loyal
Subject. 268 -- Masque at Hampton Court. 547 -- Master. 481 -- Shepherdess. 450
-- Slave. 43 -- Voyage. 548 Rule a Wife, and have a Wife. 214 Rump. 503
S.
SAcrifice. 184 Sad One. 498 -- Shepherd. 295 Saint Cicely. 520 Salmacida
Spolia. 548 Sampson Agonistes. 375 Sapho and Phaon. 329 Scaramouch, etc. 429
School of Complements. 480 Scornful Lady. 214 Scots Figaries 503 Sea Voyage.
214 Seven Champions of Christendom. 315 See me, and see me not. 24 Sejanus. 295
Selimus. 315 Sertorius. 6 Several Wits. 393 Sforza Duke of Millain 237
Shepherds Holyday. 433 -- Paradise. 377 Shoomaker's a Gentleman. 429
Sicelides. 548 Sicily and Naples. 519 Siege. 54, 110 -- of Babylon. 406 -- of
Constantinople. 549 -- of Memphis. 183 -- of Rhodes. 110 -- of Urbin. 315
Silent Woman. 296 Silver Age. 259 Sir Barnaby Whig. 184 -- Courtly Nice. 96 --
Giles Goose-cap. 549 -- Hercules Buffon. 318 -- Martin Mar-all. 170 -- Patient
Fancy. 21 -- Solomon. 549 Sister. 484 Six Days Adventure. 274 Slighted Maid.
492 Sociable Companions. 393 Soliman and Perseda. 550 Sophister. Ibid.
Sophonisba. 325, 351 Sophy. 128 Soldiers Fortune. 399 Spanish Bawd. 550 --
Curate. 214 -- Friar. 170 -- Gypsies. 373 -- Rogue. 178 Sparagus Garden. 37
Speeches at Pr. Henry's Barriers. 296 Spightful Sister. 6 Sport upon Sport. 90
Springs Glory. 381 Squire of Alsatia. 450 -- Old Sap. 183 Staple of News. 296
State of Innocence. 172 Stepmother. 551 Strange Discovery. Ib. Successful
Strangers. 378 Sullen Lovers. 450 Summers's last Will and Testament. 383 Sun's
Darling. 221 Supposes. 231 Surprisal. 277 Susanna's Tears. 551 Swaggering
Damois. 56 Sweetnam the Womanhater arraigned. 551
T.
TAle of a Tub. 297 Tamberlain the Great. 344 Taming of the Shrew. 463 Tancred
and Gismond. 512 Tartuff. 367 Tarugo's Wiles. 434 Tempe restored. 551 Tempest.
172, 463 Temple. 64 -- of Love. 110 The longer thou liv'st, the more fool thou
art. 508 Thebais. 394 Theodosius. 326 Thersytes. 552 Thomaso. 313 Thornby Abbey.
524 Thracian Wonder. 510 Three Lords and Ladies of London. 521 Thyerry and
Theodoret. 215 Time vindicated to himself, and to his Honors. 297 Timon of
Athens. 451 Titus Andronicus. 464 Titus and Berenice. 399 Tom Essence. 552 --
Tyler and his Wife. 508 Tottenham Court. 381 Town Fop. 22 -- Shifts. 425
Trapolin supposed a Prince. 70 Travels of 3 English Brothers. 119 Traitor. 481
-- to himself. 553 Treacherous Brother. 407 Trick for Trick. 184 -- to catch
the Old One. 373 Triumph of Beauty. 485 -- Love and Antiquity. 373 -- Peace.
482 -- the Prince D'Amour. 111 Triumphant Widow 387 Troades. 472, 521 Troas.
251 Troylus and Cressida. 173 True Trojans. 553 -- Widow. 451 Trial of
Chivalry. 508 -- Treasure. 554 Tryphon. 28 Tunbridge Wells. 554 Twelfth Night.
466 Twins. 427 Two Angry Women of Abington. 407 -- Noble Kinsmen. 215 Two
Tragedies in One. 516 -- Wise Men and all the rest Fools. 64 Tide tarrieth for
no Man. 508 Tyranical Government 554 Tyranick Love. 173
V.
VAlentinian. 215 Valiant Scot. 523 -- Welchman. 516 Varieties. 387 Venice
preserved. 400 Very Woman. 359 Vestal Virgin. 277 Vilain. 407 Virgin Martyr.
359 -- Widow. 410 Virtuoso. 451 Virtuous Octavia. 30 -- Wife. 185 Virtue
betrayed. 8 Vision of Delight. 297 -- the Twelve Goddesses. 103 Unfortunate
Lovers. 112 -- Mother. 382 -- Shepherd. 506 -- Usurper. 554 Ungrateful
Favorite. Ib. Unhappy Fair One. 499 -- Favorite. 9 Unnatural Combat. 359 --
Tragedy. 393 Untrussing the Humorous Poet. 123 Vow-breaker. 437 Usurper. 274
W.
WAlks of Islington and Hogsden. 307 Wandering Lover. 368 Warning for fair
Women. 555 Weakest goes to the wall. Ib. Wealth and Health. Ib. Wedding. 483
Westward-hoe. 124 What you will. 351 When you see me, you know me. 430 White
Devil. 509 Whore of Babylon. 124 Wiat's History. 125 Widow. 298 -- Ranter. 22
-- 's Tears. 65 Wife for a Month. 216 Wild Gallant. 174 -- Goose-chase. 216
Wily beguiled. 555 Wine, Beer, Ale, and Tobacco. 555 Winters Tale. 466 Wise
Women of Hogsden. 268 Wit at several Weapons. 216 -- of a Woman. 556 -- in a
Constable. 233 -- without Money 216 Wits. 111 -- Cabal. 393 -- led by the Nose
556 Witty Combat. 520 -- Fair One. 483 Woman Captain. 452 -- Hater. 216 -- in
the Moon 330 -- killed with Kindness. 268 -- turned Bully. 556 Woman's a
Weathercock. 198 -- Conquest. 374 -- Prize. 217 Women beware Women. 374 --
pleased. 217 Wonder a Woman never vexed. 429 World lost at Tennis. 374
Wrangling Lovers. 423
Y.
YOrkshire Tragedy. 466 Young Admiral. 483 -- King. 22 Your five Gallants. 375
Youths Glory and Deaths Banquet. 393
The Plays in the Appendix.
ALphonso King of Naples. Amphytryon. Banished Duke. Belphegor. Bragadocio.
Distressed Innocence. Edward the Third. Ferrex and Porrex. Folly of
Priestcraft. Gorboduc. Mad World my Masters. Mistakes. Robin Conscience. Royal
Flight. Scowrers. Sir Anthony Love. Unfortunate Lovers. Witch of Edmonton.
Woman will have her will. Wonder of a Kingdom.
The APPENDIX.
THe Occasion of adding this following Appendix, is to complete the Account of
all the Plays that have been printed as far as this present Time: since several
new Ones have been published after the Foregoing Sheets were sent to the Press,
and some others through oversight omitted in the Body of the Book; I have chose
rather to place them here, than leave the whole imperfect. I shall follow the
same Method, as before; beginning first with the Known Authors, in an
Alphabetical Order; and afterward mention those, whose Authors are concealed.
I begin with

Sir William DAVENANT.
I have already given an Account of this Author, p. 106, etc. to which I refer
my Reader; only beg his Pardon for the Omission of a Play to be found in the
Body of his Works, named

Unfortunate Lovers, a Tragedy, printed in Folio.

Thomas DECKER.
An Author already mentioned, p. 122. to have a hand in Twelve Plays; though
through mistake, I have given an Account but of Ten of them. It Is true, I
referred the Reader p. 125. to the Account of Will. Rowley, for The Witch of
Edmonton; but quite forgot a Play, which was writ wholly by our Author, styled

Wonder of a Kingdom, a Tragi-comedy; printed 4o. Land. 1636. This I take to be
a very diverting old Play.

John DRYDEN, Esquire
The Reader will find an Account of this Author's Writings, p. 130, etc. but he
having lately published a new Play, I am here to give the Reader some Account of
it.

Amphytryon, or The Two Socias; a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, to which
is added the Music of the Songs, composed by Mr. Henry Purcel; printed 4o.
Land. 1691. and dedicated to the Honorable Sir Levison Gower, Baronet. This
Play is founded on Plautus's Amphytruo, and Molliere's Amphytryon, as the
Author himself acknowledges in his Epistle Dedicatory. The Reader that will
take the pains to compare them, will find that Mr. Dryden has more closely
followed the French, than the Latin Poet: but however it must with Justice be
allowed, that what he has borrowed, he has improved throughout; and Molliere is
as much exceeded by Mr. Dryden, as Rotrou is outdone by Molliere. The truth is,
our Author so polishes and improves other Men's Thoughts, that though they are
mean in themselves, yet by a New Turn which he gives them, they appear
Beautiful and Sparkling: Herein resembling Skillful Lapidaries, that by their
Art, make a Bristol Stone appear with almost the same Luster, as a Natural
Diamond.

Joseph HARRIS
A New Author, who being infected with the Contagion of Poetry, spread amongst
his Fellow Actors, is setting up for an Author; but with what Success, I leave
to those who frequent the Theater to decide. He has lately published a Play,
called

Mistakes, or The False Report; a Tragi-comedy, acted by their Majesty's
Servants; printed quarto Land. 1690. and dedicated to Godfrey Kneller Esquire This
Young Author is beholding to the Poets to rig him out; Mr. Dryden having
bestowed a Prologue on his Play, and Mr. Tate an Epilogue; and the ever
Obliging and Compassionate Mr. Montford, (as the Author with Gratitude
acknowledges) Not only corrected the Tediousness of the Fifth Act, by cutting
out a whole Scene; but to make the Plot more clear, has put in one of his own,
which heightens his own Character, and was very pleasing to the Audience.

This Play seems to me to be of the same Stamp with several others lately
written by his Fellow-Comedians; though in my Opinion, they had better confine
themselves within their own Sphere of Action.

Thomas MIDDLETON.
An Author of several Plays already mentioned p. 370. but particularly One,
which by chance was omitted, viz.

Mad World my Masters, a Comedy often acted at the Private-House in Salisbury
Court, by her Majesty's Servants, and printed quarto Land. 1640. This Play was
writ twenty Years before 'twas published, as the Printer and Stationer inform
the Reader; and appeared with Applause on the Stage. The Language and Plot of
this Comedy are very diverting; and the former is so little obsolete, that Mrs.
Behn has transplanted part of it into her City Heiress.

George POWELL.
An Author and Poet already mentioned, p. 107. who has published a new Play,
called

Alphonso King of Naples, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, printed quarto
Land. 1690. and dedicated to Her Grace the Duchess of Ormond. The Prologue was
written by Mr. John Haynes, and the Epilogue by Mr. Durfey.

William ROWLEY.
An Author of whom I have already given an Account, p. 428. but forgot to speak
of a Play, in which he was chiefly concerned, viz.

Witch of Edmonton, a Known True Story, composed into a Tragi-comedy, by diverse
well esteemed Poets, William Rowley, Thomas Decker, and John Ford; acted by the
Prince's Servants often at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, and once at Court with
singular Applause; printed quarto Land. 1658.

Tho. SACKVILE, and Tho. NORTON.
Two Authors that lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; the former of which
was Ld Buckhurst, and in the first Year of K. James the First, viz. March 13.
1603. created Earl of Dorset: He was Ld Treasurer, and Chancellor of the
University of Oxford. He joined with Mr. Norton in writing a Tragedy, which in
those Days was in much repute. It was thrice printed: the first Edition was
published under the Title of

Ferrex and Porrex, printed 8o Land. 1565. by W. G. This Edition was printed
from a surreptitious Copy, when the Ld Buckhurst was beyond Sea, and Mr. Norton
far distant from London. The second Edition was printed with Consent of the
Authors; the Title Page being as follows:

The Tragedy of Ferrex and Porrex, set forth without Addition or Alteration,
but altogether as the same was showed on the Stage before the Queen's Majesty,
about nine Years past, viz. the Eighteenth Day of January 1565. by the
Gentlemen of the Inner Temple; printed 8o Land. -- 15 --. The last Edition is
styled

The Tragedy of Gorboduc, whereof three Acts were written by Thomas Norton; and
the two last by Thomas Sackvile; set forth as the same was showed before the
Queen's most Excellent Majesty, in Her Highness's Court of the Inner Temple;
printed 4o Land. 1590. I have already given some Account of this Play in Mr.
Dryden's Character, p. 168. I shall here add the Opinion of that Great Judge of
Wit, Sir Philip Sidney, in his Excellent Defense of Poesy: Page 561.
Our Tragedies and Comedies, are not without cause cried out against; observing
Rules neither of Honest Civility, nor Skilful Poetry; excepting Gorboduc,
(again I say of those I have seen) which notwithstanding, as it is full of
slately Speeches, and well-sounding Phrases, climbing to the height of Seneca's
Style; and as full of notable Morality, which it does most delightfully teach,
and so obtain the very End of Poesy: Yet in truth, it is detectuous in the
Circumstances; which grieves me, because it might not remain an exact Model of
all Tragedies. For the Plot, consult Nenius, Leland, R. of Gloucester, H. of
Huntingdon Jeo. of Monmouth, Du Chesne, etc.

I know not whether My Lord Buckhurst writ any thing besides, or no; but I have
seen two little Pieces writ by Mr. Norton in octavo: One entitled, To the
Queen's Majesty's poor deceived Subjects in the North Conntry, drawn into
Rebellion by the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland: printed octavo Land.
1569. A Second, styled A Warning against the dangerous Practices of Papists,
and especially the Partners of the late Rebellion: printed 8o Land. 15 --

Elkanah SETTLE.
An Author who has forsaken the Banners of Mars and Pallas, to return to the
Theater, the Seat of the Muses: One, (to use his own Expression) Who after all
his repented Follies, is resolved to quit all Pretentions to Statecraft, and
honestly skulk into a Corner of the Stage, and there dye contented. This
Resosolution our Author has begun to put in Practice, by publishing a Play,
whose Title is

Distressed Innocence, or The Princess of Persia; a Tragedy acted at the
Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants, printed Land. 1690. and dedicated
to the Right Honorable, John Lord Cutts, Baron of Gowran: This Tragedy was
kindly received by the Audience, as the Poet gratefully acknowledges, and owns
likewise his Obligations to Mr. Betterton, for his several extraordinary Hints,
to the heightning of his best Characters; and to Mr. Montford, for the last
Scene of his Play, which he was so kind to write for him: To which may be added
the Epilogue. The Author likewise owns, That whatever Fiction he has elsewhere
interwoven, the Distresses of Hormidas and Cleomira, are true History. I have
not leisure at present to make Enquiry after this Passage; but possibly the
Reader may find somewhat of it in Socrates, Zozomen, or Nicephorus, all which
(if I mistake not) mention the Affairs of Isdegerdes King of Persia.

Thomas SHADWELL.
Our present Laureat having published a New Play, I am bound to take Notice of
it: viz.

Scowrers, a Comedy acted by Their Majesty's Servants; printed 4o. Land. 1690.
How this Play succeeded on the Stage, I know not; but I think it is far from the
worst of his Comedies: and I believe is wholly free from Plagiary.

Thomas SOUTHERN.
An Author that has contributed three Plays to the Stage, which have gained him
no small Reputation: Two of them I have already mentioned, p. 489. This last
Play is styled

Sir Anthony Love, or The Rambling Lady; a Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal,
by their Majesty's Servants, printed quarto Land. 1690. and dedicated to his
Friend, Thomas Skipwith Esquire This Play was acted with extraordinary Applause;
the Part of Sir Anthony Love being most Masterly played by Mrs. Montfort: and
certainly, who ever reads it, will find it fraught with true Wit and Humor;
and in the Characters of M. L'Abbe, and Palmer the Pilgrim, our Author has
given us some Sketches of the Hypocrisy of those pretended Saints.

Mr. WILSON.
I am apt to believe this Writer is the same with the Author of the Cheats; I
mean John Wilson, already mentioned, p. 512. Whoever he is, he has published a
New Play, called

Belphegor, or The Marriage of the Devil; a Tragi-comedy, lately acted at the
Queen's Theater in Dorset Garden; printed quarto Land. 1690. This Play
notwithstanding it was decryed on the Stage, I think far surpasses many others,
that have lately appeared there. For the Foundation of the Play, the Author has
directed the Reader to Matchiavel and Straparola, both which have played with
the same Story: And I may add, That those who delight in French Poetry, may
read it ingeniously translated in Les Contes de M. de la Fontaine, octavo, 1.
party, page 180. derniere Edit. and the English Reader may find it pleasantly
related, not only in the Folio Translation of Matchiavel, but likewise at the
end of Quevedo's Novels Engl. octavo.

Unknown Authors.
I Am in the last place to give an Account of those Plays whose Authors are
unknown; do in the former Method, beginning with a Play called

Banished Duke, or The Tragedy of Infortunatus; acted at the Theater Royal,
printed 4o. Land. 1690. The Reader will easily find that under the Character of
Infortunatus, the Poet designed to portray the late Unfortunate Duke of
Monmouth: under that of Romanus and Papissa, the late King and Queen.

Braggadocio, or The Bawd turned Puritan, a New Comedy, by a Person of Quality,
printed 4o. Land. 1690. This Comedy I take to be instructive; and undoubtedly
in the Character of Flush, he has hit some Features, which belong to some
private Enemies of Universities.

Edward the Third, with the Fall of Mortimer, Earl of March; an Historical
Play, acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants; printed quarto
Land. 1690. and dedicated to the Right Honorable Henry, Lord Viscount Sidney,
of Sheppey; by Mr. Mountfort to whom the Play was made a Present. This Play I
take to exceed most of the Plays that have been lately published; and I think in
the Characters of Tarleton, Chancellor of England, and Sergeant Etherside, he
has somewhat detected the Misdemeanors of some Great Men in the last Reign.
For the Plot, as far as concerns History, consult Harpsfield, Walsingham, Pol.
Vigil, Froissard, Du Chesne, Math. Westminster, Hollingshead, Grafton, Stow,
Daniel Speed, etc.

Englishmen for Money, or a pleasant Comedy, called A Woman will have her Will;
diverse times acted with great Applause; printed 4o. Land. 1626. This Comedy is
not divided into Acts.

Folly of Priestcraft, a Comedy printed quarto Land. 1690. Though the Modesty,
or Prudence of this Author, will not permit him to to be known; yet I think he
deserves a place amongst the Eldest Sons of Apollo: and if I may presume to
speak my Judgment, I believe no Satyr since The Plain Dealer, has been more
judiciously or ingeniously penned: and I question not but it will deserve a
good Character from all Readers, except the Priests and Bigots of the Romish
Religion.

Robin Conscience, a Play which I never could obtain the sight of: tho finding
it mentioned in former Catalogues, I was unwilling to omit it.

Royal Flight, or The Conquest of Ireland; a New Farce, printed quarto Land.
1690. The Subject of this Play, is evident from its Title Page; and the Author
has no ways disguised his Characters: Though had he treated some Persons in his
Farce, with more Modesty, it had been no less for his Reputation.

Thus I have finished My ACCOUNT of Our English Dramatick Poets, and their
Writings: and having laid a Foundation. I shall leave it to Others (who may
think it worth their while) to perfect the Edifice: hoping those that will
attempt it, will alter or supply what ever they dislike or find defective in
the whole Essay.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 106 Line 6, for suo, read tuo. p. 158 l. 34 after Albibech, r. of
Abdalla, Abdelmelech. p. 169 l. 26, for his, r. this. p. 215 l. 7. for Thirry,
r. Thierry. p. 224 l. 15, for Walton's, r. Watson's. p. 242 l. 19 after
Account, r. of J. Cook. p. 255 l. 24, for benefy'd, r. beneficed. p. 260 l. 3,
for I began, r. he began p. 274 l. 29, for Women's, r. Woman's. p. 304 l. the
last, for last, r. lasted. p. 310 l. 3, for Person, r. Judges. p. 352 l. 2, for
their, r. his. Id.l. 6 for eti, r. eris. p.376 l. 20, for 1687, r. 1637. p. 377
l. 1, for Oracle, r. Paradise. p. 382 l. 3, for Lover, r. Mother. p. 388 l. 18,
for Soleil, r. Soleisel. p. 405 l. 13 for Corse, r. Cork. p. 415 l. 12, for his
own, r. this One. p. 446 l. 8, for Ingenious, r. Genuine. p. 454 l. 16, for Ben
Johnson, r. our Author. p. 492 l. 27, to the end belongs to Tho. St. Serf, p.
435. p. 508 l. 10 for more, r. longer. Id.l. 16, for Waver, r. Weaver. p. 514
l. 13, for Talisbury, r. Salisbury. p. 519 l. 12, for Basker, r. Barker. Id.l.
14, dele was. p. 522 l. 20, for Thorpy, r. Thorny. p. 527 l. 2, for Aliazer, r.
Alcazer. Id. l. 14, for Chare, r. Clare. p. 534 l. 12. for Tornelli Annals, r.
Tornielli Annals. p. 535 l. 7, for Bellimperin, r. Bellimperia. p. 538 l. 19,
for Lactus, r. Tactus. p. 543 l. 15, for before, r. after.

Some other Literal faults not here inserted, the Reader is desired to correct.


