THE LIVES AND CHARACTERS OF THE English Dramatick POETS.

ALSO An Exact ACCOUNT of all the PLAYS that were ever yet Printed in the
English Tongue; their Double Titles, the Places where Acted, the Dates when
Printed, and the Persons to whom Dedicated; with Remarks and Observations on
most of the said Plays.

First begun by Mr. Langbain, improved and continued down to this Time, by a
Careful Hand.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Leigh at the Peacock against St. Dunstan's-Church,
and William Turner at the White Horse, without Temple Bar.

THE Epistle Dedicatory, TO CHARLES CAESAR, Esquire OF Bonnington in Hertfordshire.
Honored Sir,
I Have long had an Ambition to lay something at your Feet that might be worthy
your Protection, but despairing to produce any thing my self deserving of that
Honor, and impatient of making known how Proud I am of being in the Crowd of
your Admirers, I could not but lay hold of this Opportunity, where the Merit of
the Subject, and Assistants I have had, might in some Measure atone for what
is deficient in my Performance. I offer, Sir, to your Protection this History
of the Lives and Works of all the Dramatick Poets of your Native Country, of
which few Nations have produced so great a Number under so very little
Encouragements. But to show them, Sir, the more Worthy your Patronage, I shall
lay down a short Account of what Value their Art has been, in the most Polite
and Politic, as well as most successful Government in the World.

Athens, Rome, and France will furnish me with the Proofs I want. Athens gave
Birth and Perfection to the Art, and seems, like the true Mother, to have been
most fond of it, and therefore gave its professors the greatest Encouragement.
The Value that Government had for both is evident from these two Instances:
Sophocles, as a Reward of his Antigone, had the Government of the City and
Island of Samos conferred upon him: And on the Death of Eupolis in a Sea Fight,
there was a Law published, that no Poet for the Future should go to the Wars;
so great a Loss they thought the Death of one Poet to the Commonwealth.

Thus we see that Athens that was the most Populous and Trading City of Greece,
and which produced braver, better, and more learned Men than all Greece
besides, prove, by the Encouragement she gave Dramatick Poetry, that it was the
Opinion of the Wisdom of that State, that Plays were so far from being
destructive of Industry and good Morals, that they were equally conducive to
the Honor and Advantage of its People.

To say nothing of the Care that was taken of the Poets, and the Esteem they
were in among the Greatest and Bravest of the Old Romans; I shall only mention
the Great Maecenas, who laid the Foundation of the greatest Monarchy that ever
was in the World; who formed as Great and Politic Designs, did as Great
Services to his Prince as any Man whatever; and and who indeed established the
greatest Emperor over the most Free and Polite People in the Universe; Maecenas
I say, thought Poetry so worthy his peculiar Care, that we owe the best of the
Roman Poets to him, and his Name is passed from a Proper to a Common Name for
all Generous Patrons.

It Is yet fresh in our Memories what that Master in Politics, the great
Richelieu has done for these Politer Studies in France. The Theaters, the
Academy remain a glorious Monument of it; and yet no Man could have fled with a
better Pretense to the Multiplicity of Affairs, no Man ever dispatching more
Business, or forming more Successful, and Serviceable-Designs for his Master's
Advantage, and the present and succeeding Glory and Grandeur of Fr^^^e; for to
his Counsels the French Monarchy owes all that Terror and Power, with which we
have seen all Europe so lately struggle with: And yet this great and busy
Politician could find a time in spite of the Weight of the whole
Administration of France, to take Care of the Muses, and thought it an Honor
to himself and Country for the lasting Advantage of learned Men and Poets. He
took Care of the Reformation of the Stage, and by his Order the Abbe Hedeline,
composed a Piece of the whole Art of the Stage.

But our Nation, alas! Furnished with as brave a People, and a greater Genius
for Poetry than our Neighbors, had never yet been so happy, as to find in the
Administration, any Man with Soul enough, to think the Care of the Muses worth
their Thoughts; and yet the World will never be induced to believe, that they
are wiser or greater Politicians than Maecenas or Richelieu.

This Neglect of their Science has forced the Poets, who had nothing to expect
from the Government, to make the most Noble and useful School of Virtue,
degenerate into a mere Diversion; that they might Please an Audience, whence
they could only hope for their Support. And this has laid the Stage open to the
weak Assaults of those whom either Biggottry, Intrest, or Hypocri^y have made
its Enemies.

It Is not therefore the supine and criminal Neglect of the Great Men (I mean
the Ministers) of our Nation, that we are to form the Esteem that is due to
this Science by; but the Care and value the most refined and most successful
Politicians in the World have Discovered for it; If the English Statesmen come
short of this, it is to be looked on by all Men of true Sense, as their Defect
and Infamy, not their Wisdom.

Wherefore, though the Public has not yet thought fit to take this into its
Consideration and Protection, yet I had reason to think a Man of Mr. Caesar's
Qualifications, could not but be pleased to extend his Protection to those,
whose Business it is to celebrate the Virtues that gain you the general Esteem.
You that forsook the lower Pleasures of Fortune and Youth, for the Pursuit of
Honor and Glory in the War; You, Sir, that in your Actions have shown the
Hero, have a nearer Reason than other Men, to take care of the Poets, whose
task it is to celebrate the Heroes Deeds, and to transmit them in their most
engaging Form to Posterity, for their Honor and Imitation. Carmen amat quisque
carmina digna gerit.
You, Sir, that have added to your Birth and Fortune so strong and general a
Love, that your Wit, Sweetness of Temper, and Honor, defeat that Envy which
Merit usually raises, will naturally take care of those, whose Employment it is
to distinguish betwixt the Pretense, and Reality; the Man of true Sense and
Bravery, and the Flashy Opiniator, and the vain Boaster of his own Deeds.

From you therefore I hope, Sir, a favorable Reception, when I shelter all our
Dramatick Writers under the Protection of your Name; for in you we shall find a
Manly, yet Modest Merit Worthy at once, and negligent of Fame.
Wit without Opiniatreture; but balanced with a true and penetrating Judgment;
Bravery which has nobly distinguished you from the Remisness of the Inglorious
Youth of the Age, witness your Voluntary Campaigns in Flanders; a Generosity
that gets you the Esteem of all Men, while the sordid are the Contempt and
Laughter of Men of Sense.

I need be no farther particular in the Enumeration of your Virtues, since
where ever Generosity goes justly to the making up of a Character, there can be
no Virtue wanting. On this Virtue, Sir, it is that I depend for your Pardon for
the Presumption of this Dedication, which I hope I shall gain with the greater
ease, because I have kept clear of the Crime of Dedications, Flattery, having
confined my self much within the Compass of severe Truth, and the Sentiments
of, Sir,

Your most Devoted, Humble, and Obedient Servant, etc.

THE PREFACE.
I Do not trouble the Reader with this Preface because it is the Mode to say
something before every Book; but because there is a Necessity of premising a
Word or two as to the following Treatises, and the other Essays of this Nature,
that have already been seen. I shall take no notice of Mr. Winstanley's or Mr.
Phillips's, for one I never saw, and the other I could not read, and Mr.
Langbain has discovered their Defects sufficient to justify his undertaking a
more perfect Work; and which he indeed in the last Edition he has pretty near
accomplished. I must own that his Undertaking has saved me a great deal of
Trouble, but then he is every where so partial, that he destroys the Character
of a Critic and Historian at once, whose Object ought always to be Truth;
whereas Mr. Langbain seems every where to gratify some private Pique, and
seldom to regard the Merit of the Person he reflects upon. This I have every
where avoided, and distinguished betwixt the Desert and Defect of the Auth^r.
Mr. Langbain is farther generally mistaken in his Censures as a Critic, he
seems to have known nothing of the Matter, to have had little or no Taste of
Dramatick Poetry: and a Stranger to our Stage^ would from his Recommendation
make a very odd and ridiculous Collection of our English Plays. He often
commends, Shirley, Heywood, etc. and will scarce allow Mr. Dryden a Poet;
whereas the former have left us no Piece that bears any Proportion to the
latter; the All for Love of Mr. Dryden, were it not for the false Moral, would
be a Masterpiece that few of the Ancients or Moderns ever equaled; and Mr.
Shirley, and Mr. Heywood have not left enough in all their Writings to compose
one tolerable Play, according to the true Model and Design of a Play.

Mr. Langbain has in many of the Lives, swelled them out with interlarding them
with tedious Copies of Verses little to the purpose in Hand, which I was
obliged to avoid for Two Reasons; First I designed to give the Reader as
compendious an Account of our Dramatick Writers as I could, and so to bring my
Book to an easier Price than Mr. Langbain's. And therefore I was, Secondly,
forced to leave out all that was Superfluous: And this the rather, because I
had several Lives and Remarks to add to this Edition, which he could give no
Account of, foam of the Authors having appeared since his time, and others, by
the Advantage of the ingenious Mr. Ash's admirable Collection of English Plays,
I have met with, which he never saw; all which has rendered this more Perfect
in its Kind than his could be: besides, writing after him, I have endeavored
to avoid his Faults, and preserve his Beauties.

Next I have to inform the Reader, that the following Piece is not writ all by
one Hand, as will, I believe, be perceived in the Reading. And lastly, I find
on the perusal of it, something in the Book, which I must differ from in the
Preface, and that is in the Account of Mr. Oldmixon's Amyntas, where it is
remarked, that Pastoral is a Modern Invention, when in reality, the Ancients
had a sort of Dramatick Performance not unlike it, that is, their Satyrs, which
might be said to be something of a nature with our Pastoral; but if we may
guess at what is lost by what remains of that kind, it was also something
different. In the Cyclops of Euripides, we find the Shepherds were the major
part of the Dramatis Personae; for such was Polyphemus, Silenus, and the
Chorus: But the Character of Ulysses hightned the Play, and gives a greater
Force to the Passions; it is not the Love of Polyphemus, but his Cruelty we see;
and the Dexterity and Wisdom of Ulysses. Of this sort of Poem, Mr. Dacier in
his Preface to the Satyrs of Horace, will give you something a fuller Account.
And as this takes its Rise from Antiquity, so Farce, in some Measure, may
derive it self from the Pantomimi; at least that sort of Farce which the
Italian Players in Paris used to act; though the Mimi and the Pantomimi were
esteemed for their admirable Expression of Nature in Action and Dancing; but
our Farce is something beyond Nature, and Extravagant to a Degree of
Nauseousness, to all good Judges.

I have lately read Mr. Congreve's Love for Love over, and am of Opinion, that
the Contrivance of the Marriage of Tattle and Mrs. Frail is highly probable,
though the Reflections on that Play do seem not to admit it as absolutely so.

Lastly, I have to advertise the Reader, that on the Perusal of the last Sheets
of this Book, I found that in the Remark on Beauty in Distress, one of my
Assistants has seemed to imply, that the Author is more a Comic than Tragic
Poet; I cannot agree with him, for I think it is an extraordinary Effort for the
first Undertaking in Tragedy, in which most have failed in their first Attempt:
I say this, least any thing my Friend said, should seem a lessening of that
Performance of the Author, which he assures me he never meant.

THE NAMES OF THE Known Authors.
A.
ALexander William, Earl of Sterline page 1 Armin Robert 4
B.
BAily Abraham 5 Bancroft John Ibid. Banks John 6 Barnes Barnaby 7 Baron, Esquire
Robert 8 Beaumont Francis Ibid. Bedloe William Ibid. Behn Aphara Ibid. Belchier
Dawbridgecourt 10 Bernard Richard Ibid. Boothby, Mrs. Frances 11 Boil Roger,
Earl of Orrery. Ib. Brandon Samuel 12 Breton Nicholas Ibid. Brewer Anthony
Ibid. Brom Alexander Ibid. Brom Richard 13 Bourn Ruben Ibid. Birkhead Henry
14 Burnel, Esquire Henry. Ibid.
C.
CArew, Lady Elizabeth 14 Carew Thomas Ibid. Carlell, Esquire Lodowick 15 Carlisle
James Ibid. Carpenter Richard 16 Cartwright George Ibid. Cartwright William
Ibid. Chamberlain Robert 17 Chamberlain William Ibid. Chapman George 18 Cibber
Colley 19 Cockain, Sir Aston 21 Congreve William Ibid. Cook, Esquire Edward 25 Cook
John 26 Corey John Ibid. Cotton, Esquire Charles Ibid. Cowley Abraham 27 Cox Robert
28 Crown John Ibid.
D.
DAncer John 31 Daniel Samuel Ibid. D'Avenant, Sir William 32 D'Avenant, Dr.
Charles p. 35 Davenport Robert Ibid. Dauborn Robert Ibid. Day John Ibid. Deckar
Thomas Ibid. Denham, Sir John 37 Dennis John 38 Dilke Thomas Ibid. Dogget
Thomas 39 Dover John Ibid. Drake, Dr. James 40 Dryden, Esquire John Ibid. Dryden,
Junior, John 47 Duffet Thomas 48 D'Urfey Thomas Ibid.
E.
ECcleston Edward 53 Etheridge, Sir George Ibid.
F.
FAne, Sir Francis 54 Fanshaw, Sir Richard Ibid. Falkland Henry, Lord Viscount
55 Field Nathaniel Ibid. Filmer, Dr. Edward Ibid. Fishbourn 56 Flecknoe Richard
Ibid. Fletcher John 57 Ford John 61 Ford Thomas 62 Fountain John Ibid. France
Abraham Ibid. Freeman, Sir Ralph Ibid. Fulwell Ulpian 63
G.
GAscoign George 63 Glapthorn Henry 64 Goff Thomas Ibid. Gomershal Robert 65
Gould Robert Ibid. Gouldsmith, Esquire Francis 65 Granvile, Esquire George p. 66 Green
Alexander Ibid. Green Robert Ibid.
H.
HAbington, Esquire William 67 Harris Joseph Ibid. Hausted Peter Ibid. Haynes
Joseph 68 Head Richard Ibid. Hemings William Ibid. Heywood Jasper 69 Heywood
John Ibid. Heywood Thomas 70 Higden, Esquire Henry 72 Holyday Barton Ibid. Hool
Charles 73 Hopkins Charles Ibid. Howard, Esquire Edward 74 Howard, Esquire James 75
Howard, Sir Robert Ibid. Howell, Esquire James. 76
I.
IEvorn Thomas 76 Ingeland Thomas 77 Johnson Benjamin Ibid. Jones John 81
Jordan Thomas Ibid. Ioyner William 82
K.
KIlligrew Henry 82 Killigrew Thomas Ibid. Killigrew, Sir William 83 Kirk John
84 Knevet Ralph Ibid. Kid Thomas Ibid.
L.
LAcey John 84 Leanard John 85 Lee Nathaniel page 85 Lilly John 87 Lodge Thomas
88 Lower, Sir William ibid. Lupon Thomas ibid.
M.
MAchin Lewis 89 Maidwell L. ibid. Maine, Dr. Jasper ibid. Manley, Mrs.
Delarivier 90 Manuch Cosmo 91 Markham Gervase 92 Marlow Christopher ibid.
Marmion Shakerly 93 Marston John ibid. Mason John 94 Massenger Philip ibid. May
Thomas 96 Mead Robert 97 Medbourn Matthew ibid. Meriton Thomas ihid. Middleton
Thomas 98 Milton John 100 Montague, Esquire Walter 101 Motteux Peter ibid.
Mountsord William 102
N
NAbs Thomas 102 Nash Thomas 103 Nevile Alexander 104 Nevile Robert ibid.
Newcastle, Duke ibid. Newcastle, Duchess 105 Newton Thomas 106 Norton Thomas
ibid. Nuce Thomas 107
O
OTway Thomas 107 Oldmixon John 109
P.
PAlsgrave John Page 110 Peaps ibid. Peel George ibid. Philips, Mrs. Catharine
ibid. Pix, Mrs. Mary 111 Pordage, Esquire Daniel 112 Porter Henry ibid. Porter
Thomas ibid. Powel George 113 Preston Thomas ibid. Prestwich Edmund 114
Q.
QUarles Francis 114
R.
RAndolph Thomas 115 Ravenscroft Edward ibid. Rawlins Thomas 117 Revet Edward
ibid. Richards Nath. 118 Rider William ibid. Rowley William ibid. Rowley Samuel
119 Rutter Joseph ibid. Rymer Thomas ibid.
S.
SAckvile Tho. see Norton 106 Sampson William 120 Sandys, Esquire George 121
Saunders Charles ibid. Scot Thomas ibid. Settle Elkanah 122 Shadwell, Esquire
Thomas 124 Shakespeare William 126 Sharp Lewis 129 Sharpham Edward 130
Shepherd, S. ibid. Sherburn, Esquire Ed. ibid. Shipman, Esquire Tho. Page 130 Shirley
Henry 131 Shirley James ibid. Sidley, Sir Charles 134 Smith John ibid. Smith
William ibid. Southern Thomas 135 Stanley, Esquire Thomas 137 Stapleton, Sir Robert
ibid. Stephens John ibid. Strode William ibid. Studley I. 138 Suckling, Sir
John ibid. Swinhoe Gilbert. 139
T.
TAte, Esquire Nahum 139 Tateham John 140 Tailor Robert 141 Thompson Thomas ibid.
Trot Nicholas ibid. Tuke Richard ibid. Tuke S. ibid. Turner Cyril 142 Tutchin
John ibid.
V.
VAnbrug, Captain 142
W.
WAger Lewis 145 Waller, Esquire Edw. ibid. Wapul George 146 Wager William ibid.
Waver R. ibid. Webster John page 146 Weston, Esquire John 147 Whitaker ibid. Wild,
Dr. Robert 148 Willan Leonard ibid. Wilkins George ibid. Wilmot Robert ibid.
Wilson John ibid. Wilson Robert 149 Wood Nathaniel ibid. Wright John ibid.
Wright Thomas ibid. Wycherly ibid.
Y.
YArrington Robert 150 Supposed Authors 151 Unknown Authors 156
In the Appendix.
GIldon Charles 174 Grevile Fulk, L. Brook 180 Pembrook Countess 177 Phillips,
Esquire William ibid. Pix, Mrs. Mary 178 Plautus 181 Rivers 178 Shadwell, Esquire Tho.
178 Shirley James 179 Terence ibid. Trother, Mrs. Catharine 179 Walker William
180
ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 12. put the Comma after she. p. 9. l. 7. for is read are. p. 16.
l. 18. read Antiquary. p. 22. l. 40. for Nor read And. p. 39. l. 22. for
Account read Action. l. 27. dele e. p. 41. l. 16. read Albianus. p. 45. l. ult.
for first read last. p. 47. l. 20. read Lollius. p. 51. l. 3. read Victrix. l.
11. read Vandosme. l. 17. dele fairer. l. 33. dele Cinic. p. 90. l. 36. for
adding read Address. p. 102. for Three read Four. p. 175. l. 3. read proboque

THE Lives and Characters OF THE English Dramatick Poets: WITH AN ACCOUNT OF
ALL THE PLAYS, Printed to the Year, School.
A
William Alexander, Earl of Sterline.
THE Title of this Nobleman makes it evident that he derives his Birth from
Scotland, as the Dedication of his Works affords us a Proof that he lived in
the Time of King James the First, for there he has this Stanza: Of this dived
Isle the Nurselings brave
Erst from intestine Wars could not desist,
Yet did in Foreign Fields their Names engrave,
Whilst whom one spoild, the other would assist.
These now have One; whilst such a Head they have,
What World of Words were able to resist?
Thus has Thy Worth (Great JAMES) conjoined them now,
Whom Battles often did break, but never bow.


That he was in Favor with King James, is evident from Sir Robert Ayton's
Verses before his Tragedies. As ^or any Particulars of his Family and Private
Affairs I can give you no Account, but that it may be reasonably drawn from his
Quality, Nation, and Favor at that time, that he was not unhappy in any of
them, at least that depended on Fortune.

This Nobleman has by his Writings showed Posterity, that he had a just Right
to his King's Favor, as any one that reads his Recreations of the Muses will
allow. Mr. Langbain tells us of former Editions, but the best is in Folio,
London, Printed for Tho. Harper, 1637. and dedicated to King James, not King
Charles the First, as Mr. Langbain mistakes. In this Volume are Four Plays,
which he calls, Monarchick Tragedies; The Alexandrean Tragedy, Croesus, Darius,
and Julius Caesar. Nor can I agree with Mr. Langbain, that he has proposed the
Ancients for his Model, whom he has followed in nothing but the Chorus: For as
for the Unities of Action, Time and Place, always observed by them, he seems to
know nothing of them. He seems to mistake the very Essence of the Drama, which
consists in Action, most of his being Narration; and may rather be termed
Historical Dialogues, than Dramatick Pieces. There is scarce one Action
performed in View of the Audience; but several Persons come in, and tell of
Adventures perform^d by others or themselves, and which often have no more to
do with the Business of the Play, than the Persons that speak, as in the First
Scene of the Fifth Act of the Alexandrean Tragedy, Aristotle and Phoceon, who
have no hand in the various Revolutions of that Play, spend a long Scene on the
Uncertainty of Humane Grandeur, only to tell a few Lines of Business done by
some of Alexander's Captains. This Play is so far from being after the Model of
the Ancients, the Action so far from being one, that it is multiplied enough for
at least Ten Plays, it containing the various Revolutions, and Murders of the
Commanders of the Macedonean Army, after the Death of Alexander; and here, as
in the rest, he runs too far back to bring things ab ovo, that have no Relation
to the Action, as the Scene between Harpagus and Cyrus, and Craesus and
Sandanis, and many more will evince. If he has not followed the Model of the
Ancients, he has yet borrowed very freely their Thoughts, translating whole
Speeches from Seneca, Virgil, and others, as the First Act of Julius Caesar
from Juno's Speech in the First of the AEneids; and many of his Sentences, as
well as the Defect of his Sententiousness, he owes to Seneca. The Two First
Acts generally are wholly foreign to the Business of the Play, as indeed the
greatest part of the other Acts are too. This at least may be said of my Lord,
that he is a very good Historian, and from his Plays the Reader may gather a
great deal of the Affairs of Greece, and Rome. Juno in the first Act of Julius
Caesar, gives us the History of all the Invasions of the Roman Empire, by the
barbarous Nations, whether Gauls or the Cimbri, etc. to the time of Julius
Caesar, and finding none of them effectual enough to ruin the Power of the
Roman State, which deriving it self originally from the Trojan Race, she could
not but hate, therefore she now resolves to destroy it by Civil Wars, and to
raise her Brothers Servants, the Furies, always obsequious to mischievous
Commands, Whilst Furies furious by my Fury made.
Says, she shall at last do the Work; with which, after a Speech of Two or
Three Hundred Lines she ends the Act. Indeed my Lord seems often to have a
peculiar Fancy to punning, and that in all his chief Characters; as Caesar says
in the Second Act, Great Pompey's Pomp is past --
and To seem uncivil in these Civil Wars.


But not to wrong my Lord in the Judgment of the Readers, by these ridiculous
Quotations; they are to consider, First, that this was the Vice of the Age, not
the Poet; he having in that, as well as some other things, imitated the Vices
of our admirable Shakespeare, and next that these punning Fits come not very
often upon him. To show that he writes in another ^Strain sometimes, I must
give you Three or Four Lines, (my Brevity denying more large Quotations) which
will give you a Taste of his better Parts. Love is a Joy, which upon Pain
depends;
A Drop of sweet drowned in a Sea of Sowers:
What Folly does begin, that Fury ends;
They Hate ^or Ever, who have Loved for Hours.
It Is the Reflection of Adrastus in Craesus, the most moving Play of the Four;
but to return to Caesar. in the Second Act, Caesar thinks it a part of his
Grandeur to boast his Deeds to Anthony (who knew 'em well enough before) and
betwixt 'em both, we have an Account of his Commentaries, and almost a Diary of
his Actions. I cannot omit one thing in this Play, in the Fifth Act he brings
Brutus, Cassius, Cicero, Anthony, etc. together after the Death of Caesar,
almost in the same Circumstances as Shakespeare had done in his Play of this
Name. But Shakespeare's Anthony and Brutus ravish you, while my Lord's Brutus,
Cicero, and Anthony would make you sleep, so much our English Poet excels. This
must be said for my Lord's Julius Caesar, that it is much the most regular of
all his Plays, at least in the Unity of Action, which is only Caesar's Death,
though the whole last Act is almost redundant, for when Caesar is once dead, we
have no occasion to hear of the Consequence of it, either in the Grief of
Calpurnia, or the Disagreements of the Noblemen and Commons; but this may be
objected likewise to Shakespeare, who gives us a History, not a Play.

But it is time now to give over our Reflections on this Poet, and give the
Reader a more particular account of their Plots, in their Alphabetical Order.

The Alexandrean Tragedy, For the Plot you may consult Quintus Curtius, and the
13th Book of Justin, Diodorus Sciculus, l. 18. Orosius, l. 3. c. 21. Josephus
l. 12. c. 1. Appian de Bellis Syriacis. Saliani Annals Ecclesiastici A. M^
3730. N. 30. etc. Torniel. A. M. 3730. N. 5. Raleigh's Hist. l. 4. c. 3.
Heylin's Hist. of Greece, Howel, etc.

Croesus, Taken from Herodot. Clio. Justin, l. 1. c. 7. Plutarch's Life of
Solon. Salian. Torniel. A. M. 3510. Xenophon's Cyropaideia.

Darius, This, as Mr. Langbain assures us, was the First Fruit of his
Lordship's Dramatick Muse, Published at Edinburgh, 1603. when he was yet Lord
Menstrie: The Language and design very much improved in this last Folio
Edition. As to the Plot, consult Quintus Curtius, lib. 3, 4, and 5. Justin, l.
II. c. 5. etc. Diodorus, l. 17. Arrian, de Expeditione Alexandri, l. 2.
Plutarch's Life of Alexander, Salian, A. M. 2719, etc.

Julius Caesar, The Story of this Play will be exactly found in the Roman
Histories, Plutarch and Suetonius in the Life of Caesar, Appian de Bellis
Civilibus, lib. 2. Florus, l. 4. c. 2. Salian, Torniel, etc.

He has writ besides these Plays, Doomsday. A Paraenaesis to Prince Henry, on
whose Death he dedicated it to Prince Charles, afterward King Charles I. A
Fragment of an intended Heroic Poem of Jonathan, of which he has left but one
Book.

Robert Armin.
THE Author of a Play which Mr. Langbain never saw, and is called,

The History of the Two Maids of Moor Clack, with the Life and Simple Manner of
John in the Hospital; Played by the Children of the King's Majesty's Revels,
and Printed in 4 to. London, 1609. I believe the Plot may be taken from some
Old Story in those Times. This Author lived in the Reign of King James I. and
in the Title Page discovers himself to be one of his Majesty's Servants, and
was, I believe, of the then Company of Actors, for I find his Name Printed in
the Drama of Ben. Iohnson's Alchymist, among the rest of the eminent Players of
that Age; and indeed the Preface of his Play seems to intimate as much.

B
Abraham Baily.
A Gentleman of the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn, and the Author of a
Comedy called,

The Spightful Sister; London, Printed in 4 to. 1667. which I presume never was
Acted, being Printed without Prologue, Epilogue, or Dedication, and with Mr.
Langbain, I must acquit him entirely of being a Plagiary, either as to
Characters of Language, and if it fall to any ones Chance to read it, and to
observe my Lord Occa's and Winifred's Characters, will easily allow that what
he has writ is surely all his own.

John Bancroft.
THIS Author was born in London, and though by Profession a Chyrurgeon, was
infected by the Vicinity of the Wits with Poetry, and has left behind him Two
Tragedies, dying about a Year and half ago, he lies interred in St. Paul's
Covent Garden.

Henry the Second, with the Death of Rosamond, a Tragedy Acted at the Theater
Royal, by their Majesty's Servants, London Printed 4 to. 1693. This Play has
not our Author's Name prefixed to it, but is dedicated by Mr. Mountfort to Sir
Tho. Cook, Knight, Alderman and Sheriff of the City of London. For the Plot
consult Daniel, Stow, Speed, Sir Richard Baker, and the rest of the English
Chronicles.

Sertorius, a Tragedy, Acted at the Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants,
and London, Printed 1679. it is Dedicated to Captain Richard Savage, and the
Epilogue was writ by Mr. Ravenscroft. The Elder Corneil has writ on the same
Subject. The Story is to be found in Plutarch's Life of Sertorius, Velleius
Paterculus, l. 2. Florus, l. 2. c. 22. etc. Whatever the Fate of this Play was,
his other had no ill Success, and may claim a Place of equal Rank with several
celebrated Tragedies of this Age.

John Banks.
THIS Author is now living, and was once a Member of the worthy Society of
New-Inn; who quitted the more profitatable Practice of the Law, for some Years,
in pursuit of the Bays, till Experience convinced him of his Error, and that
the ungrateful Stage, like other Friends we often esteem, forgets the
Obligations it has to one. And though of late he has given us a Cyrus, yet it was
^rit some Years ago, he wholly applying himself to a more gainful employ. If
the Golden Age of Poetry carried him from that in the Luxurious Reign of
Charles II. when more People run Mad after the Muses than even now; the Iron
Age that soon ensued, recalled him from so fruitless a Pursuit. Though by his
Episodes, being generally inartificial, we may conclude he has not much studied
Aristotle, and the Art of the Stage, yet in Two of his Plays he has gained the
true End of Tragedy, the moving Terror and Pity, which many more celebrated
Authors are so far from, that they seem never to have aimed at it: And this
indeed makes some Amends for the Defects of Language, in which he seems to me
very faulty. He has Seven Plays in Print, of which the Alphabetical Order
brings the last first.

Cyrus the Great, a Tragedy, Acted at the New Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields,
Dedicated to her Royal Highness the Princ^ss Ann of Denmark, 4 to. 1696. The
Plot of this Play is taken out of Scudery's Romance of the Grand Cyrus, and for
the true Story of Cyrus, you may consult Herodotus, Justin, Xenophon's
Cyropaideia, etc. Though this Play had been formerly refused the Action, yet it
held up its Head about Six Days together, and has been since Acted several
Times. Destruction of Troy, a Tragedy, Acted at his Royal Highness the Duke's
Theater. Lhndon, Printed 4 to. 1679. and dedicated to the Right Honorable the
Lady Katharine Roos: This Play wanted the Success the Poet desired on the
Stage. For the Story you may read Homer, Virgil, Ovid, Dares Phrygius, Dictys
Cretensis, etc. The Innocent Usurper, or the Death of the Lady Jane Gray, a
Tragedy, 4. to. London, Printed 1694. and dedicated to Mr. Bently the
Bookseller that Published it, in which he complains of the mistaken Cause of
its Prohibition of the Stage, appealing from the false Insinuations of his
Enemies, to Mr. Bently's Knowledge of its being writ Ten Years before, so that
he could design no Reflection on the present Government. His Defense seems
reasonable, and I think him as much in the Right, when he tells us, that this
Tragedy is inferior to none of his former, and that he is confident it would
move the Ladies Tears. He assures us, he has nicely followed the Truth of the
Story, which you may find in our Chronicles. This Play I look on to be much
better than any of the late Tragedies; though in his Metaphors, he seems not to
've consulted that Iustness which the Rules of good Rhetoric requires; but
like all other human Performances, as it has its Beauties, it has also its
Faults, but not enough of the later to overbalance the former. The Island
Queen, or the Death of Mary Queen of Scotland, 4 to. 1684. This Play too had
the ill fortune to be denied the Justice of appearing on the Stage, but
Published by the Author in defense of himself and the piece, The Story you may
read in Buchanan, Speed, Camden, Du Chesne, Brantons's Memoirs, Causon's Holy
Court, etc. Rival Kings, or the Loves of Oroondates and Statira a Tragedy, 4
to. Acted at the Theater Royal, 1677. Dedicated to the Lady Catharine Herbert.
For the Plot consult the Romance of Cassandra, Quintus Curtius, and Justin.
Virtue Betrayed, or Anna Bullen, a Tragedy, Acted at his Royal Highness the
Duke's Theater, 4 to. Lon. Printed 1682. Dedicated to the illustrious Princess,
Elizabeth Duchess of Somerset; for the Plot consult a Book called, The Novels
of Elizabeth Queen of England, etc. Speed, Herbert, Du Chesne, Dr. Burnet's
History of the Reformation, etc. Unhappy Favorite, or the Earl of Essex, a
Tragedy, Acted at the Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants, 4 to. Lon.
1682. Dedicated to the most High and most Illustrious Princess, the Lady, Ann,
Daughter to his Royal Highness. This has always been Acted with Success, and
never failed to draw Tears from the Eyes of the fair Sex. For the Story, see
the Novel called, The Secret History of the most Renowned Queen Elizabeth, and
the Earl of Essex. Camden's Elizabeth, Speed, Du Chesne, Stow, Baker, etc.
Barnaby Barns.
AN Author who lived in the time of King James I. he writ but one Play
Published, which bears the Name of the

Devil's Charter, a Tragedy. 4 to. 1607. It seems to be written in imitation of
Shakespeare's Pericles, Prince of Tire; an ancient Play, and is an Account of
the Life and Death of Pope Alexander VI. See Guiccardin's Hist. Italy: and
Massonius de Gestis Pontificum Romanum.

There is also Published under this Author's Name, a Book of Offices, about
Princes, fol. 1606.

Robert Baron, Esquire
A Young Gentleman who Lived in the Reign of King Charlaes I. and the
Interregnum of Oliver, first bred at Cambridge, and afterward was a Member of
the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn: He writ these three Plays, Deorum Dona, a
Mask, 8 vo. This is part of a Romance, writ by Baron, called the Cyprian
Academy, Printed at L^nd. 1647. Gripus and Hegio, Past. 8 vo. A Play consisting
of three Acts only, and borrowed a great part from a Play of Webster's, called,
The Duchess of Malfey, and the aforesaid Romance. Mirza, Trag. 8 vo. Plot from
Herbert's Travels, fol. accounted by his Friends a good Play, is Dedicated to
the King, and recommended to the World by diverse Copies of Verses; for most of
the Scenes and Language he seems to have Consulted Ben. Iohnson's Catiline. Sir
John Denham's Sophy is on the same Subject, and writ about the same time.


Lodow Barrey.
THIS Author Lived in the time of King Charles I. he writ one Play called,
Ram-Alley, or Merry Tricks, C. 4 to. 1611.

Francis Beaumont.
See Fletcher.

Capt. William Bedloe.
THIS Author was a Famous Evidence in the Popish Plot, before the Expiration of
which he Died, leaving behind him one Play, called,

The Excommunicated Prince: or, The False Relick, T.C. Fol. 1679. The Plot
taken out of Heylin's Geography, in his Account of Georgia. His Life is Pr^nted
in 8 vo. 1681.

Aphara Behn.
THIS Authoress, whose Name was Aphara, not Astrea, as many have thought, was
Born in the City of Canterbury in Kent, her Maiden Surname Johnson; she was
much admired in her Youth for her Beauty, as afterward for her Poetic Works,
in which she excelled not only all that went before her of her own Sex, but
great part of her Contemporary Poets of the other: She had a great Facility in
Writing, a^^ much of Nature in all she writ, was employed by Charles II. in the
Discovery of the Dutch Intreagues, in the Dutch War; Lived beloved, and Died
lamented by all that knew her, and lies Buried in the Cloisters of Westminster
Abbey, under a great Marble Stone, on which is inserted these two Verses: Here
lies a Proof that Wit can never be,
Defense enough against Mortality.


Her Plays, Seventeen in Number, are as follow in their Alphabetical Order;
Abdelazer, or the Moor's Revenge, T. 4 to. Compare this Play with one of
Christopher Marlo's, called Lust's Dominion, 8 vo. and you will find it almost
the same. Amorous Prince, or Curious Husband, T. C. 4 to. Part of it taken from
the Story of the Curious Impertinent in Don Quixot, Part 4. Chapter 6,7,8. City
Heiress, or Sir Timothy Treat-All, C. 4 to. Part of it from a Play of
Middleton's, called, A mad World, my Masters, 4 to. and part from another of
Massengers, called, the Guardian, 8 vo. Dutch Lover, C. 4 to. Plot from Don
Fenise, 8 vo. See the Stories of Eufheme, Theodore, Don Iame, and Frederic in
that Romance. Emperor of the Moon, F. 4 to. Taken from Harlequin, Empereur dans
le Monde de la lune. Forced Marriage, or The Jealous Bridegroom, T.C. 4 to. The
first Play the Writ. False Count, or a New way to play an Old Game, C. 4 to.
Isabella's being deceived by the Chimney Sweeper, taken from Molieres des
precieuses Ridicules. Feigned Courtezans or a Nights Intreague, C. 4 to. This
Play was well accepted, and accounted one of the best she writ. Lucky Chance,
or the Alderman's Bargain, C. 4 to. Gayman's enjoying Lady Fulbank, and taking
her for the Devil, taken from Mr. Alexander Kickshaw, and Lady Aritina, in the
Lady of Pleasure, written by Shirley, 4 to. Rover, or The Banished Cavaliers,
two Parts, C. 4 to. Taken from Tho. Killegrew's Don Thomaso, or The Wanderer,
fol. Round Heads, or The good Old Cause, C. 4 to. A Play of John Tateham's,
called, The Rump, altered, 4to. Sir Patient Fancy, C. 4 to. Part of this Play
taken from Richard Broom's Damoyselle, 8 vo. and Le Malade Imaginaire. Town
Fop, or Sir Timothy Tawdry, C. 4 to. A great part of this Play borrowed from a
Play, called, The Miseries of Forced Marriage, written by George Wilkins, 4 to.
Widow Ranter, or The History of Bacon in Virginia, F. 4 to. This Play was
Published after her Death by G. I. Plot from the known Story of Cassius. Young
King, or, The Mistake: A Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1683. This Play is Dedicated to a
particular Friend of hers, under the name of Philaster. The Design is borrowed
from Calpranedes Cleopatra. See the History of Alcamenes and Menalippa Part
8th. Younger Brother, or The Amorous Iilt, C. 4 to. This Play was Published
after her Death (with her Life added) the Story was of her own Knowledge, and
written above ten years before she dyed, it was much esteemed by her, and it
must be owned, in spite of the ill success it met with, that there is a great
deal of Wit at least in the beginning of it, the first two Acts being very well
received but the tedious Scenes in Blank Verse, betwixt Mirtilla and Prince
Frederick, lost the Diversion they would have given in another more easy
Dress. Taken from a true Story of the Brother of Coll. Henry Martin, and a Lady
that must be nameless. See the Novel called Hatige.


These Plays were all written between the Years 1670. and 1690.

Dawbridgcourt Belchier.
THIS Gentleman writ one Interlude in the time of King James I. whilst he lived
at Vtreicht, in the United Provinces, which he entitled,

Hans Beer-pot, his Invisible Comedy of See me, and See me not, Int. 4 to.
1618. Acted by an honest Company of Health-Drinkers, says the Title. He was an
English Man, and in his Epistle calls it neither Comedy nor Tragedy, wanting
both number of Speakers, and Parts or Acts it should have, it consisting of
three Acts only.

Richard Bernard.
A Gentleman that Lived in Lincolnshire, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and
gave us then a Translation of Terrences Comedies, in a Language and Style
suitable to the time he Lived in. Pub. Terentius was a Carthaginian born, and
brought a Slave to Rome in his Youth, there well Educated by his Patron Terent.
Seneca, and by him made Free for his Wit, and left behind him six Comedies (
viz.) Andrea, Adelphi, Eunuchus, Heutontimorumenos. Hecyra and Phormio, the
Fourth Edition in 4 to. 1614. The four first of these Comedies are borrowed
from Menander. The two last taken from Apollodorus. He generally brought two of
Menander's into one of his. He was thought to have the help of Laelius and Pub.
Scipio, in his Writings which he thought an Honor, not Disgrace.

Mrs. Frances Boothby.
WHether this Authoress be yet Living, I know not, she Lived, and Writ in the
time of King Charles II. a Play called, Marcelia, or The Treacherous Friend, T.
C. 4 to. 1670.

Roger Boil, Earl of Orrery.
A Noble Man of the Kingdom of Ireland, eminent both in Arts and Arms, as a
Poet and as a Patron; he dyed October. 1679. and has Published these following
Plays, Black Prince: For the Story consult Walsinghami Hist. Angl. Wigornensis
Chronicon. Polid. Virgilii. Florentii Monarch. Froissard Chron. de France, and
d' Angleterre, English Chronicles in Reign of Edw. III. Tryphon: Consult the
first Book of Maccabes, Josephus, lib. 13. Appian de Bellis Syriacis, etc.
Henry V. See the English Chronicles in the Reign of that King, and the Reign of
King Charles VI. in the French Chronicles, as Iean Iuvenal des Vrsins, Le Hist.
de Charles VI. Mezeray, etc. Mustapha: Consult for the Plot Thuanus, lib. 12.
Tho. Artus la continuacon de le Hist. des Toure's, and Knowles's Turkish Hist.
These four in Folio; the two first Published 1672. the other two in 1677.


Guzman, A Comedy Acted at the Theater Royal. 1693. The Plot of this Play is
taken from a Romance of that Name.

Herod the Great, a Tragedy, Printed 1694. I do not find that this Play was
ever Acted. The Story of this Prince you will find in Josephus, and his Life in
Caussin's Holy Court.

These two Plays are bound up with the rest of his Plays, in fol. and though the
Title Page tells us that the first was Acted, yet there is no Drammatis
Personae before it.

He also writ one other Play, called, Master Anthony, 4 to. 1690. The Prologue
to this, is the same of that to one of Durfey's Plays, called, The Fool turned
Critic.

Samuel Brandon.
HE Lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and writ this Play toward the
latter part of her time, called,

The Virtuous Octavia, T. C. 8 vo. 1598. and though this Play was never Acted,
yet the Author had a very good Opinion of it; and his Epistles Printed with it,
Composed in imitation of Ovid's. Plot from Plutarch's Life of M. Antony. See
also the Life of Augustus in Suetonius. Dion. Cassius, etc.

Nicholas Breton.
HE has Writ and Published nothing more then this one Interlude, called,

The old Man's Lesson, and Young Man's Love. Interl. 4 to. a very old Piece.

Anthony Brewer.
AN Author in the Reign of King Charles I. Published these two Plays following
( viz.) The Country Girl, C. 4 to. 1647. This Play was Revived just thirty
years after its first Publishing, by one Leanard, who gave it a new Title,
calling it, Country Innocence, or the Chambermaid turned Quaker. 4 to. 1677.
Lovesick King, T. C. 4 to. 1655. This Play was also Revived, and Acted at the
King's House, under the Title of The Perjured Nun, 4 to. 1680. See Speed,
Polyd. Virgill, Gu. Malmsb. Ingulfus, Higden, Du Chesne, etc.


Alexander Brom.
HE Lived in Charles I. time, and was a Stirring Attorney and Poet in the Royal
Cause, during the Government of those Times. He Published but one Play of his
own, entitled, The Cunning Lovers, C. 4 to. 1654. The Story of the Cunning
Lovers, taken from the 7 Wise Masters. See also the Nov. of the Fortunate
Deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers.


Yet he took care to give the World a Volume of Mr. Richard Bromes after his
Decease, Printed in 8 vo. This Author has Published also a Volume of Poems,
which he writ in the late Troublesome Times, together with Epistles and
Epigrams, Translated from diverse Authors, Printed about the time of the
Restoration of King Charles II. and again 1664. Besides these, we have under
his Name Horace, 8 vo. though not wholly Translated by him.

Richard Brom.
HE Lived in the time of King Charles I. was servant to Ben. Johnson, and writ
himself into Reputation by his Comedies; was Complimented with Copies of
Verses, from most of the Poets of his time, and even from his Master Ben. His
Plots are his own, and studying more Men then Books, he has not fallen into
Plagiarism. Besides those Plays writ by himself, he joined with Heywood, in a
Play called, The Lancashire Witches. His Plays, in all fifteen, as they were
Published follow ( viz.) City Wit, or The Woman wears the Breeches, Court
Beggar, Damoyselle, or The New Ordinary; Mad Couple well Matched; Revived under
the Title of Debauchee, or The Credulous Cuckold, 1677. Novella: These five are
Printed together in one Vol. 8 vo. 1653.

Covent Garden Weeded; English Moor, or The Mock Marriage; Lovesick Court, or
The Ambitious Politic; New Academy, or The New Exchange; Queen and Concubine:
These five are Printed in another Vol. 8 vo. 1659.

Antipodes, C. 4 to. 1640. Jovial Crew, or The Merry Beggars, C. 4 to. 1659.
Revived and Reprinted 1686. Northern Lass, C. 4 to. 1663. Revived and Reprinted
1684. with new Prologue and Epilogue. Queens Exchange, C. 4 to. 1657. Sparagus
Garden, C. 4 to. 1640. Most of these Plays were Acted with general Applause.

Fulk Grevile, Lord Brook,
see Grevile.

Ruben Bourne.
I Can say no more of this Author, but that I Am informed he is or lately was of
one of the Temples, and has a Play in Print under this Title:

The Contented Cuckold, or The Woman's Advocate, 4 to. C. 1692. This Play was
never Acted, but Dedicated to his Worthy Friends John Huxly of Wyerhall in
Edmonton, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire and Richard Andrews of the same
Gentleman.

Henry Burkehead.
THIS Author was a Merchant in Bristol, in the Reign of King Charles I. his
Play called,

Colas Fury, or Lyrindas Misery, T. 4 to. was never Acted, it represents the
Troubles of Ireland under feigned Names.

Henry Burnel, Esquire
A Gentleman that Lived in Ireland in King Charles I. time, Writ a Play called,

Landgartha, T.C. 4 to. 1641. Acted at Dublin with good Applause, and some time
after Printed there. The Plot which is founded on the Conquest of Fro (and
called by our Author Frollo) King of Suethland, by Regner King of Denmark,
which the Repudiation of Landgartha Q. to Regner. See Krantzius, Lib. 4. c. 6.
Io. Magnus, Lib. 17. cap. 4, 5. and Saxo Gramat. Lib. 9.

C
Lady Elizabeth Carew.
THIS Lady lived in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and has left behind her a Tragedy
called,

Mariam the Fair Queen of Jury, 4 to. There is another Tragedy written by
Pordage, more Modern, on the same Subject, called, Herod and Mariamne. Plot
taken from Joseph. Hist. Jews, lib. 14 and 15. Salian. Tom. 6. A. M. 4012.
Torniel. Tom. 2. A. M. 4026^ etc.

Thomas Carew.
ONE of the Gentlemen of the Bed Chamber, and Sewer in Ordinary to King Charles
I. by whose command, and the Assistance of Inigo Jones, he composed a Masque,
called,

Coelum Britannicum, 8 vo. performed in the Banqueting House at White Hall, by
his said Majesty, King Charles I. and his Nobles, An. Dom. 1633. (Mr. Hen.
Laws, one of the King's Private Music, and Gentleman of the Chapel Royal,
set all the Music to the same. This Author Published a Volume of Poems and
Songs, which have been diverse times (with this Masque) Reprinted, the last
Edition, 1670.

Lodowick Carlell, Esquire
THIS Gentleman was an Old Courtier, and lived in the Time of both the King
Charles's, and possessed the Places of Gentleman of the Bows to King Charles I.
and of Groom of the King and Queen's Privy-Chamber. He has Published Eight
Plays ( viz.) Arviragus and Philicia, in Two Parts, T.C. 12^, 1639^ (revived
since with a new Prologue writ by Mr. Dryden, and spoke by the famous Actor,
Mr. Heart. For the Story on which this Play is grounded, see Ge^f. Monmouth,
lib. 4. c. 16. Pol. Virgil, lib. 2. Matthew. West. page 93. Grafton, Part 7. page
7^. Deserving Favorite, T. C. 8 vo. 1659. This Play was represented before
King Charles I. and his Queen at White Hall, and often in Black-Fryars, with
great Applause. Fool would be a Favorite; or, The Discreet Lover, 8 vo. 1657.
Osmond the Great Turk; or, The Noble Servant, Tragedy, 8 vo. 1657. (The Action
of this Play is, the taking of Constantinople, in the Year 1453. See Knolles's
Turkish Hist. in the Life of Mahomet II. Bandello's Novels, Tom. 1. Hist. 2.
Lipsii Monita, lib. 2. Cap. 9. Artus le Contin. de l' Hist. des Tur^s. Lib. 11.
This Play, with the two preceding, are Printed together in 8 vo. 1657.
Passionate Lover, in Two Parts, T. C. 8 vo. 1655. This Play was published by
Mr. Alex. Gough, it having been before twice presented before the King and
Queen's Majesty's at Somerset House. Her^(...) of the East, Trag. 4 to. 1664.
This transla^^^n (...) the Fr^^h of Monsieur Corre^lle, was designed by
the(...) for the Stage, but never Acted. See Zonar, Baronius, etc.


James Carlisle.
HE was born, as I Am informed, in Lancashire, he first appeared in the World as
a Player, and gave no small Promises of making considerable Progress in that
way; he left the Stage while he was yet young, and took to the Wars; got no
little Reputation in the Irish Expeditions under his Present Majesty, and with
his Brother, lost his Life in the Bed of Honor. He gave us a Play called,

The Fortune Hunters; or, Two Fools well met. Com. 4 to. This was Acted with
Applause, as it has been lately revived by the Patentees Company.

Richard Carpenter.
THIS Author lived in the latter end of King James I. and the beginning of King
Charles I. Published one Play called,

The Pragmatical Jesuit new Leavened, 4 to. A Play tends to Morality and
Virtue; so it is doubted whether the Author was not a Divine, there being Three
Sermons Published under the same Name, in the latter end of the Reign of King
James I.

George Cartwright.
OF this Gentleman I can only say, that he lived at Fulham, and that he has
writ a Play called,

Heroic Love; or, The Infanta of Spain, a Tragedy, dedicated to King Charles
II. and Printed, London, 1661. 8 vo.

William Car^wright
THE Name of our Author's Father and Place of Nativity, are differently Related
by Mr. Wood, Antiquit. Oxon. p. 274.
the late Antiquarian in his Antiquit. Oxon. and Lloyd's Memoirs, p. 422.
Mr. Loyd in his Memoirs, the first making him Gloucestershire, and the latter
Oxofordshire; but all agree he was brought up a King's Scholar at Eaton, under
Dr. Olbaston, and chose Student of Christ-Church-Colledge in Oxon, where he
passed through his Degrees of Bachelor and Master of Arts: The House made choice
of him for Proctor, and was admitted by the University with Mr. Wake of
Magdalen College in the Year 1643. in the Winter that Year he Died of a
Malignant Fever, and lies Buried in the South Isle of that Church. He was
beloved by the King and Queen, and lamented by all his Acquaintance and
Friends. He was expert in the Latin, Greek, French, and Italian Tongue^; was
extreme modest, as well as handsome; and admired, not only by his Acquaintance
but Strangers. Ben. Johnson among the rest writ in his Praise; and Bishop Fell
gives him the highest, if not Hyperbolical Praise, in saying, He was the utmost
that Man could come to. He writ four Plays, viz. Lady Errant, a Tragi-Comedy, 8
vo. 1657. This was esteemed by many about that time a good Play. Ordinary, a
Comedy 8 vo. 1657. Part of the first Act is insert^ed in a Book called, Wits
Interpreter, as a Love Dialogue, unde the Title of the Old Widow, p. 81. Royal
Slave, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1651. This Play was first presented to the King
and Queen, by the Students of Christ-Church-Colledge, Oxon, Dr. Busby, late
Schoolmaster of Westminster, acting a part therein; and afterward at Hampton
Court, to both Their Majesty's, by the Players, at the Queens Command; and though
the Poet gave equal Instructions, the Students carried the Prize. Seige, or
Loves Convert, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1651. Occasion in Plutarch's Life of
Cymon, and part from Boccaces Novels, Day 9th. Nov. 1 st.


These Plays are Printed together with his Poems in 8 vo. where you may find
most of the Wits in the University appear with Copies of Verses, to show the
great Esteem they had for him.

Our Author has also extant other Pieces, viz. a Sermon Printed 1652. a Latin
Book entitled, Dies in Mense November. maxim notabiles Coronam, etc. 1671.

Robert Chamberlain.
THIS Anthor Lived in the time of King Charles I. and Writ a Play called,

The Swaggering Damsel^ a Comedy 4 to. 1640. Whether ever this Play was Acted I
cannot learn, nether can I say it deserved Acting.

William Chamberlain.
A Doctor of Physic who Lived and Dyed in Shaftsbury in Dorsetshire, was an
old Cavalier, and had received several Marks of his venturing in those Wars. He
gave us a Testimony of his Poetic Capacity in an Heroic Poem, entitled
Pharonida, 8 vo. 1659. and since has appeared in Prose, with the Title of
Eromena, or The Noble Stranger, a Novel, 1683. He writ but one Play Printed,
called,

Loves Victory, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1658. This has appeared since under a new
Title and Acted, called, The Wits led by the Nose, or A Poet's Revenge, 4 to.
1678.

George Chapman.
THIS Poet Flourished in the latter part of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and
King James I. He was received among the foremost of the Poetic Writers of that
Age, for his Translations, as well as Original Writings. He joined with Ben.
Johnson and Marston, in the Composing one Play called, Eastward Hoe. He also
Translated all Homer, Hesiod, and Musaeus, which Works were esteemed well done
in that Infancy of Translation: His Plays which follow, are 18 in Number.

All Fools, a Comedy, 4 to. 1605. Then accounted a good Play; it is Built on
Terence's Heautontimorumenos or Self-Denyer, and was Acted before King James I.
Alphonsus Emperor of Germany, a Tragedy 4 to. 1654. Plot from Chron. de Rebus
Germanicis, see also Reynolds on the Passions, Wanley's Hist of Man, Mariana de
Reb. Hist. lib. 13. c. 10. Hist. Generale d'Espagne, lib. 12. Blind Beggar of
Alexandria, a Comedy, 4 to. 1598. Acted by the Earl of Nottingham, then Lord
High Admiral his Servants; this Play is neither divided into Acts nor Scenes.
Bussy d'Amboise, a Tragedy 4 to. This has been presented formerly at St.
Paul's, and since the Restoration by the Kings Servants, with good Applause.
Plot from the French Chron. Hen. III. Thuan^s, Deserres, and Rossets Hist.
Trag. de notre temps, (under the names of Lysis and Silvie) Hist. 17. p. 363.
Bussy d'Amboise his Revenge, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1613. This Play met not with that
Esteem as the former, nor is it founded on so great Truth as the other.
Conspiracy and Tragedy of Charles Duke of Byron, Marshal of France, two Plays 4
to. 1608. For the Plot which is founded on History, see Davilas Hist. France,
Mezeray and other French Chron. in the time of H. IVth of France. Caesar and
Pompey, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1631. Diverse are the Authors that have treated on this
Story, as Lucan in his Pharsalia, Svetonius in the Life of Julius Caesar,
Plutarch, Vill. Paterculus, Florus, Dion, etc. Gentleman Usher, a Comedy 4 to.
1606. A Play which deserves no great Commendation, and I question whether ever
'twas Acted. Humorous days Mirth, a Comedy, 4 to. 1599. A Play of indifferent
Repute, but entitled, A Pleasant Comedy, as it has been sundry times Pulickly
Acted by the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Admiral's
Servants. Masque of the Middle Temple and Lincoln's Inn, 4 to. 1614. This was
presented at Court before the King, at the Celebration of the Nuptials between
the Palsgrave and the Princess Elizabeth, Mr. Inigo Jones was the Ingineer to
order the Machines and Decoration of the Scenes. May Day, a Comedy 4 to. 1611.
Diverse times Acted with good Applause. Monsieur d'Olive, a Comedy, 4 to. 1606.
This Play was often Acted by her Majesty's Children with good Success. Revenge
for Honor, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1654. When the Nursery Acted in Barbican, since
the Restoration they sometimes made use of this Play. Temple, a Masque, 4 to.
As I Conjecture, may be the same with that before of the Middle Temple, and
Licolns-Inn; Mr. Langbain, nor any other that I could ever learn, having seen
any of this Title. Two Wise Men, and all the rest Fools, 4 to. 1619. Mr.
Langbain's former Remark on this Play was, that it exceeded in the Number of
Acts any Play of what Language whatever. But if he had seen the Spanish Baud,
either in the Original, or the Folio Edition in English, he might have found
one with three times as many Acts; the Prologue and Epilogue of this Play are
both writ in Prose, as was sometimes used in those times: Mr. Chapman's Name
not being to the Title of this Play, it is a question whether it be really his,
though former Catalogues make it so. Widows Tears, a Comedy, 4 to. 1612. Plot
from Petronius Arbiter. See also the Ephesian Matron, Printed in 8 vo. 1668.
Eastward Hoe, a Comedy, 4 to. 1605. This was his but in part, Ben Johnson and
Marston having joined with him in it; 'twas thought worth the reviving by Mr.
Tate, our present Poet Laureat, who gives it the Title of Cuckolds-Haven.
Colley Cibber.
AN Author now Living, he is of Foreign Extraction, his Father being a Native
of Holstein, and a very skilful Statuary. I cannot understand that his
Education ever reached either of the Universities; he having been early by his
Fancy led to the Stage, though it was not till the division of the Houses that he
made any considerable Figure there, and then he at once exerted both the Poet
and the Player, in his first Play called, Loves last Shift, and in the part of
Sir Novelty fashion, which he played himself, and so increased both his Profit
and his Reputation; he has already Published two Plays of something a different
Character, of which in their Order.

Loves last Shift, or The Fool in Fashion, a Comedy, Acted at the Theater Royal
by his Majesty's Servants. London, Printed 1696. 4 to. And Dedicated to Richard
Norton of Southwick, Esquire.

In the Epistle our Author informs us that the usual Enmity at the Success of
an unknown Author, had produced some Surmises that this Play was not his own;
but he assures his Patron, that he should think he affronted him, if he should
dedicate a Play to him that he could not entirely call his own; no part of
this, either of the Plot or the Expression being borrowed from either the Dead
or the Living. He indeed took a very rational Way to that Success, which his
Epistle lets us know this Performance of his met with, by making use of the
extensive Acquaintance of Mr. Southern. For that Author that will stand on the
bare Merit of his Play, may satisfy himself in its Iustness and Perfection,
but will seldom or never reap that Profit from his Labors, that will answer
either his Hopes or his Merit. Being sensible of this, I suppose Mr. Cibber
took care to engage the Interest of a great many, by obliging their Vanity, in
submitting his Play to their Perusal and Censure; for there is no Complement so
prevailing with Mankind, as that which is made to their Wit.

Mr. Cibber has taken Care to avoid the Guilt of an unconfessed Theft, in
avowing his Innocence, only so far as he could remember. The Plot indeed seems
to be new, as it is surprising and admirable; but some of the Critics will
have it founded on a very great improbability, viz. on Loveless's not knowing
his Wife: Though it may be urged in defense of it, That young Worthy's
Confirmation of her Uncle's former Account of her Death might very much
contribute to his being imposed on. But were this insufficient, yet the Beauty
of the Incident, and the excellent Moral that flows from it, abundantly
outweigh the Fault. The Characters of Sir Novelty, Snap, Narcissa, and the
Elder Worthy, seem to be good Copies of Sir Fopling, Ierry in Love for Love,
Setter in the Old Bachelor, etc. Of Melantha in Marriage Alamode, etc. and
Vain-love in the Old Bachelor.

Woman's Wit, or The Lady in Fashion, a Comedy acted at the Theater Royal by his
Majesty's Servants, 4 to. 1697.

This Play is much short of the former in the Easiness of Wit and Style, as in
the Artful working up of the Plot. The Characters of Rakeish, Father and Son,
with the Plot of their Walk, is much borrowed from the Fortune Hunters; from
Otway's Dare Devil; from Sir Thomas Revel and his Son in Greenwich-Parke; and
indeed among the other Characters there is not much new.

Sir Aston Cockain.
THIS worthy Knight lived (about the Restoration) at his Seat at Ashbourn, a
Market Town in Derbyshire, his Family Ancient, pretending an Alliance with
Cockain's Epigr. Lib. 2. Epig. 7.
William the First: He had Education in Trinity College in Cambridge, made the
Tour of France and Italy in his Five and Twentieth Year, finishing it in the
Year 1632. See his Poems p. 93. and 118.
Poetry being his darling Study. Among other Pieces, he has left us Three Plays
and a Masque, of which in their Order.

Masque, presented at Berthie in Derbyshire, 1639. before the then Earl of
Chesterfield, on a Twelfth-Night, his Two Sons acting Par^s in the same.
Obs^inate Lady, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1658. This Play seems a mere Imitation of
Massenger's Very Woman. Ovid's Tragedy, 8 vo. 1669. Some part taken from his
Elegies, and part from Il Atheisto Fulminato, an Italian Play. Trappolin
supposed a Prince, a Tragy-Comedy, 8 vo. 1658. Plot from Trapolen credulo
Principe, which he owns to have seen acted at Venice. It has been revived by
Mr. Tate, and acted in the Year 1685. by the Dukes Servants in Dorset Garden.
Thersites, and Tyranical Government, which may well be supposed to be none of
his, though placed to him by Winstanly and Philips, you may find it in their
Alphabet among the Anonymous Plays. These are all printed with his Poems,
Epigrams, etc. in 8 vo.
William Congreve.
A Gentleman now living, who derives himself from an Ancient Family in
Staffordshire of that Name. His Politer Knowledge he owes to Dublin College,
from whence being returned to England, his first Applications were to the Law.
But Mr. Congreve was of too delicate a Taste, had a Wit of too fine a turn, to
be long pleased with that crabbed, unpalatable Study; in which the laborious
dull plodding Fellow, generally excells the more sprightly and vivacious Wit;
for the Law is something like Preferment at Court, won by Assurance and
Assiduity; this concurring with his Natural Inclinations to Poetry, diverted
him from the Bar to the declining Stage, which then stood in need of such a
Support; and from whence the Town justly received him as Rome's other Hope.

Rochfoncault truly observes, that Merit alone will never make a Hero, without
the friendly Assistance of Fortune; and therefore Mr. Congreve must be said to
be as much obliged to her for his Success, as to Nature for his Wit, which
truly deserved it, and of which all those that read his Plays, must allow him a
more than ordinary Share. And indeed he took the most certain way to make sure
of Fortune, by the Intimacy he contracted with the most active part of the
established and received Wits and Poets of the Age, before he ventured his
Reputation to the Public. For as a celebrated French Writer has observed, an
Author should never expect to raise his Fame in the World, from an unknown
State, by the Single Force of his own Genius, and without the Help and
Concurrence of the Men of Wit, that have an Influence over the Opinion of the
World in things of that Nature. But then on the other side, it must be
confessed, that his Merit was certainly of more than ordinary Power, to oblige
them to forget their habitual Ill Nature; and criminal Emulation or Iealousy
(to give it no worse Name) of all those, whom they have any Cause to fear, will
once prove any considerable Rivals in their Fickle Mistress, Fame. Mr. Congreve
has already given us Four Plays, of which in their Alphabetical Order.

The Double Dealer, a Comedy, Acted at the Theater Royal by their Majesty's
Servants, 1694. 4 to. and Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Montague,
Esquire. one of the Lords of the Treasury. This Play not meeting with that Success
as was expected, the Author, as Poets are generally apt to do, engages a little
too violently in a Defense of his Comedy. The Character of Mask-well I take to
be an Image of Vernish in The Plain Dealer.

Love for Love, a Comedy, Acted at the Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields,
by his Majesty's Servants, 1695. 4 to. and Dedicated to the Right Honorable
Charles, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. This Play, though a very good Comedy in it
self, had this Advantage, that it was Acted at the Opening of the New House,
when the Town was so prepossessed in Favor of the very Actors, that before a
Word was spoke, each Actor was Clapped for a considerable Time. And yet all this
got it not more Applause than it really deserved: For there is abundance of Wit
in it, and a great deal of diverting Humor. The Characters are justly
distinguished, and the Manners well marked. Yet in the Plot he has not given
himself the Pains of avoiding that so often repeated Improbability of Marrying
in Masks and Disguises, which Mr. Tattle, nor Mrs. Frail had Sense enough to
avoid, if we may judge by the rest of their Characters; yet it must be owned,
that he has much better prepared this Incident to gain it, at least some show
of Probability, than in the Old Bachelor, or than I have generally met with in
other Plays. I leave the nicer Critics to decide whether the unravelling of
the Plot, and the Conduct of Angelica in it, be extremely just or no: I shall
only say it pleased, and that is a considerable Defense, whatever some may
think to the contrary.

The Mo^rning Bride, a Tragedy, Acted at the Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by His Majesty's Servants, and Dedicated to her Royal
Highness the Princess ANN of Denmark, 1697. 4 to^ This Play had the greatest
Success, not only of all Mr. Congreve's, but indeed of all the Plays that ever
I can remember on the English Stage, excepting none of the incomparable
Otway's; and if what Dr. Blackmore says of it be true, it deserved even greater
than it met with; for the learned Doctor in the Seventh Page of his Preface to
King Arthur, says thus: -- Since the writing of this, I have seen a Tragedy,
called, The Mourning Bride, which I think my self obliged to take Notice of in
this Place. This Poem has received, and, in my Opinion, very justly, universal
Applause; being looked on as the most perfect Tragedy that has been wrote in
this Age. The Fable, as far as I can judge at first sight, is a very Artful and
Masterly Contrivance; the Characters are well chosen, and well delineated; that
of Zara is admirable. The Passions are well touched, and skilfully wrought up.
The Diction Proper, Clear, Beautiful, Noble, and Diversified agreeably to the
Variety of the Subject. Vice, as it ought to be, is punished; and oppressed
Innocence at last reward^d. Nature appears very happily imitated excepting one
or two doubtful Instances, through the whole Piece; in which there are no
immodest Images, or Expressions; no wild, unnatural Rants, but some few
Exceptions being allowed, all things are Chaste, Just, and Decent. This Tragedy,
as I said before, has mightily Obtained, and that without the unnatural, and
foolish Mixture of Farce and Buffoon'ry; without so much as a Song or a Dance
to make it more agreeable. By this it appears, that as a sufficient Genius can
recommend it self, and furnish out abundant Matter of Pleasure and Admiration,
without the paultry Helps above named: So likewise, that the Taste of the Nation
is not so far depraved, but that a Regular and Chaste Play, will not only be
forgiven, but highly applauded.

Thus far the Learned Doctor, of whom I will not say, as the Plain Dealer says
of my Lord Plausible, That rather than not Flatter, he will Flatter the Poets
of the Age, etc. Yet I must needs say, so very great a Commendation, will make
some of the Censorious Critics imagine what it was that obliged him to take
such particular Notice of this Play; which, though I should be never so willing
to allow a Place in the first Form, yet I can never prefer it to the All for
Love of Mr. Dryden, The Orphan, and Venice Preserved of Mr. Otway, or the
Lucius Iunius Brutus of Mr. Lee, either in true Art in the Contrivance and
Conduct o^ the Plot; or the Choice and Delineation of the Characters for the
true End of Tragedy, Pity and Terror; or the true and natural Movement of the
Passions, in which Particular, none of the Ancients (I was going to say
equaled, but I will boldly say) surpassed our English dead Bards in those
Plays, and our living Poet in this of his that I have mentioned. Or the
Diction, either in regard to its Propriety, Clearness, Beauty, Nobleness, or
Variety. Let any impartial Judge read but All for Love, and tell me if there is
or can be a Style more Pure, or more Sublime, more adapted to the Subject in
all its Parts: And I believe, notwithstanding all that some Gentlemen have
urged against the Language in Otway's Plays, it seldom wants any of those
Qualities that are necessary to the Perfection of the Piece he has undertaken;
he has seldom given us any Persons of Kings or Princes, and if his Style swell
not so much in the Mouths of those of a Lower Degree, whom he has chosen, it
was because he had too much regard to the Nature of the Person he introduces.
And in Lee (with the Critick's permission let me speak it) you find always
something Wildly Noble, and Irregularly Great; and I am unwilling, with some,
to think his Style puffie or tumid; I Am sure in his Play of Lucius Iunius
Brutus he is generally Just, both in his Thoughts and his Expressions; and it
is rather for want of a true Taste of him, than his want of Merit, that he is
condemned in that Play, I mean, if there be any that do not exempt that from
the Faults of his other Plays.

I urge not this as any Reflection on Mr. Congreve's Performance, for which I
have all the just Value the Merit o^ the Play commands; but to do Justice to
his great Predecessors on the Stage, at the depressing whose Praise, the
Doctor, both in this and his former Preface, seems rather to aim, than at the
raising that of Mr. Congreve. No, had I a mind to exert the Critic, I might,
like many other of that Denomination, urge those Defects that either the
Malice, or too nice Palate of others have descover'd in the Play it self. But I
think it is a very ungenerous Office (and not to be excused by any thing but
some extraordinary Provocation) to dissect the Works of a Man of Mr. Congreve's
undoubted Merit, when he has done his Endeavor to please the Town, and so
notoriously obtained his End; and when the Faults that may perhaps be found in
'em, are of a Nature that makes them very disputable, and in which both his
Predecessors and Contemporaries have offended; and I ^uppose he does not
pretend to infallibility in Poetry. But tho^ I purposely omit all Critical
Reflections, yet the Duty of this Undertaking, and the Foundation I build on,
obliges me to examine what he may have borrowed from others; which indeed is
not much, though the Incident of the Tomb, seems to be taken from the Meeting of
Artaban and Eliza, at the Tomb of Tyridates, in the Romance of Cleopatra. And
Zara has many Features re^embling Nourmahal in Aurenge Zebe, and Almeria in the
Indian Emperor; I know some will have the whole Play a kind of a Copy of that;
but I confess I cannot discover likeness enough to justify their Opinion:
unless it be Zara's coming to the Prison to Osmin, as Almeria does to Cortez. I
believe our Poet had the Bajazet of Racine in view, when he formed his Design,
at least there is as much Ground for this as the former Opinion. Perez
resenting the Blow the King gave him, is like an Incident in Caesar Borgia; but
the Spaniard's Revenge is more generous, and less cruel than that of the
Italian.

Thus much for the Mourning Bride, of which, if I may be allowed to speak my
impartial Sense, I must needs say, that in spite of its Excellence, it
discovers Mr. Congreve's Genius more inclined and turned to Comedy, than
Tra^edy, though he has gained an uncommon Praise for both; however, it being his
first Poem of that Kind, it promises more perfect Products hereafter; and for
which all Lovers of Poetry long with Impatience.

Old Bachelor, a Comedy, Acted ^t the Theater Royal by their Majesty's
Servants, and Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Lord Clifford, of
Lanesborough, 1693. 4 to. This Comedy was Acted with so general an Applause,
that it gave both Fame and Fortune to our Author; at once made him known to the
Town, and to an Honorable Mecaenas; who, to the Satisfaction of all Lovers of
Learning, Wit, and Poetry, has ever since proved a generous Friend to our Poet.
The Old Bachelor was ushered into the World with several Copies of Verses of
his Friends, and which the Merit of the Play abundantly justifies: For there is
a genteel and sprightly Wit in the Dialogue, where it ought to be; and the
humorous Characters are generally within the Compass of Nature, which can
scarce be truly said of those of several Poets, who have met with Succe^s
enough on the Stage. Bluff seems an Imitation of the Miles Gloriosus of
Plautus; of Bounce in Greenwich Park; and Hackum in the Squire of Alsatia, etc.
The Incident of Sir Joseph Wittoll's Marrying Sylvia, and Captain Bluff, Lucy,
in Masks, has been too often an Incident on the Stage, since I Am confident it
was scarce ever done in reality. Some other Characters are not entirely new,
but that is very excusable in a Young Poet, especially in a Play, which I have
been assured was writ, when our Author was but Nineteen Years Old, and in
nothing altered, but in the Length, which being considered, I believe few Men
that have writ, can show one half so good at so unripe an Age.

Edward Cook, Esquire.
THIS Gentleman, only known to me by a single Play, never Acted, but Printed, (
viz.)

Love's Triumph, or The Royal Union, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1678. Plot from
Cassandra, Romance, Part 5. Book 4.

John Cook.
THIS Author has but one Play in Print, called,

Green's Tu Quoque, a Comedy, 4 to. Published with a Preface by Tho. Heywood,
who says in his Heywood's Epistle to the Reader.
Epistle, That it past the Stage with general Applause, and that the Title had
its Nam^ in regard that excellent Commedian, Thomas Green, Acted the chief Part
in it, whose general Repartee to all Complements was, Tu Quoque; and gives him
this Character, That there was not an Actor of his Nature in his time, of
better Ability in Performance of what he undertook, more applauded by the
Audience, of greater Grace at the Court, or of more general Love in the City.
The Printed Copy is not divided into Acts, but has since King Charles the
Second's Restaura^ion, been Revived and Acted with good Applause.

John Corey.
A Gentleman that has set together a Play, called:

The Generous Enemies, or The Ridiculous Lovers, a Comedy, Acted at the Theater
Royal, 4 to. 1672. This Play is patched up out of four several Poets: The chief
Design is borrowed from Quinault's La Genereuse Ingratitude; that of the
Ridiculous Lovers from Corneille's D. Bert^am de Cigarral, which is also
founded on the Spanish Play, Enter bobos anda el juego; Bertran's Testy Humor
is partly borrowed from Randolph's Muses Looking-Glass, Act 2. Scene 1. and
Act. 3. Scene 3, and 4. and the Quarrel betwixt him and Robatzi, Act 5. wholly
stolen from Love's Pilgrimage, Act 2. Scene 1. Act 3. Scene 3.

Charles Cotton, Esquire.
A Gentlemen of a good Family in Staffordshire, who has written many Originals
besides Translations, but nothing with more Success than his Burlesque on
Virgil, in Imitation of the French Scarron; among the rest, he translated one
of Corneille's Plays, called,

Horra^^, T. 4 to. 1671. This Play has been translated by Two other Hands, viz.
Sir William Lower, and Mrs. Katharine Phillips; but this has been accounted
equal to Madam Phillips's Translation, and far to exceed that Version of Sir
William Lower. For the Plot consult Livii Hist. Lib. 1. L. Florus, Lib. 1. C.
3. Cassiodorus, Dionysius Hallicarnassaeus, etc.

This Author has published (besides this Play) diverse other Pieces; as a Volume
of Poems on several Occasions, 8 vo. 1689. The Complete Angler, being a Second
Part of that Book on the same Subject written by Mr. Isaac Walton, 8 vo. 1676.
in which Book are excellent Instructions how to Angle for a Trout or Grayling
in a clear Stream. The Wonder of the Peak, a Poem, 8 vo. 1681. Scaronides, or
Virgil Travestie, a Mock Poem on the 1st and 4th Books of Virgil's AEneis, 8
vo. 1678. And one more attributed to him, though his Name not thereto, called,
The Scoffer Scoft; which are several of Lucian's Dialogues put into Burlesque
Verse, Printed 8 vo. 1675.

Abraham Cowley.
THIS eminent Author was Born in London, 1618. at Ten Years Old (whilst he was
a Westminster Scholar) he writ the Tragical Story of Pyramus and This^e; at
Twelve that of Constantia and Philetus. By Thirteen he had published several
Poetical Pieces. From a Boy he was very Studious, and his Chance lighting on
Spencer's Fairy Queen, roused his Inclinations to Poetry, which never forsook
him till he Died. Whoever would read a just Account of his Life, will find it
admirably writ by the present Bishop of Rochester. He Died of a Stoppage in his
Breast and Throat, having lain Ill a Fortnight; and was Buried the 30th of
August, 1667. in Westminster-Abbey, next Chaucer, and near Spencer and Drayton,
with a neat Marble Monument erected (as the Inscription informs us) to him, by
the late Duke of Buckingham. He has published Three English Plays, of which in
their Order.

Cutter of Coleman-Street, a Comedy, 4 to. 1663. This Play was Represented at
the Duke's Theater in Salisbury-Court, with good Applause; yet met with
Opposition by some few, who at that time envied the Author for his Loyalty to
his Prince, but was afterward Acted with universal Applause, it being a
revised Comedy, and much altered and enlarged from that Mr. Cowly had about Ten
Years before hastily drawn up, under the Name of the Guardian, a Comedy, 4 to.
1650. Acted several times privately during the Prohibition of the Stage; as
also at Cambridge before Prince Charles, and after the Restoration publicly
Acted at Dublin with good Applause. Love's Riddle, a Pastoral Comedy, 4 to.
1633. This Play was written in the Author's Youth, whilst a King's Scholar at
Westminster, first printed with his Poetical Blossoms; and since that, in the
Second Volume of his Works.
In any of his Plays he cannot be taxed with borrowing from any other.

The Works of this admirable Author are eminent enough to the Ingenious, so
needless to be here uncharacterized. He left Two Volumes in Folio, Verse and
Prose, also a Volume in 8 vo. Entitled, Poemata Latina. It is a great Pity he
lived not to finish that incomparable Epick Poem of Davideis, being only Four
Books of the Troubles of David; which he design^d to extend in all, to Twelve.
For his Life and Works I refer you further, to Dr. Sprat, Bishop of Rochester's
Account thereof.

Robert Cox.
THIS Author was a celebrated Comedian in King Charles the First's time: On the
Suppression of the Stage he made several Drolls, and, with his Companions,
Acted them by stealth, both in London and the Country Towns: He Acted the chief
Parts himself, and so very naturally, that at Oxon he gained great Applause. He
published one Interlude, called,

Actaeon and Diana, Interl. 4 to. The Plot from Ovid's Metamorph. This, with
some Drolls of his, may be found a second time printed 1656. in 4 to. the first
Edition being printed for the Author's own Use, and in the Year 1673. they were
again printed, with other Drolls collected by Kirkman, under the Title of Sport
upon Sport, 8 vo.

John Crown.
A Gentleman yet living, whose Father having ventured most of his Estate (which
was considerable) in a Foreign Plantation, that was afterward taken by the
French, and all King Charles's Reign neglected, he took, by the Encouragement
of the late famous Lord Rochester, to Dramatick Writing, and has performed very
well both in Tragedy and Comedy; though, with Mr. Langbain, I look on Comedy to
be his Talent; he has given us a Proof of his Ability in these following Plays:
Ambitious Statesman, or The Loyal Favorite, a Tragedy, 4 to. 16-9. Acted at
the Theater Royal, and Dedicated to her Grace the Duchess of Albermarle. This
Play met not with the Applause the Author and his Friends expected. For the
Plot, See De Serres, Mazeray, and other French Chronicles. Andromache, a
Tragedy 4 to. 1657. Acted at the Duke's Theater in Dorset-Garden. This Play was
translated from the French of Monsieur Racine, by another Hand, into Prose, and
turned into English Verse by Mr. Crown, as he owns, and though the Original is
well esteemed, yet this had not its expected Success on our English Stage. It
seems founded on Virgil, Lib. 3. Ver. 292. and in some things the Author
follows the Andromache of Euripides. Calligula, Emperor of Rome, a Tragedy,
London, Printed 4 to. School. Acted at the Theater Royal, by his Majesty's
Servants. For the Plot consult Suetonius in his Life: for the Poet has very
nicely followed his Character given us by that Author. Calisto, or, The Chaste
Nymph, a Masque, 4 to. 1675. This was writ by the Command of her late Majesty,
and often tim^s represented at Court, by Persons of great Quality, with Songs
between the Acts. The Foundation from Ovid Metam. Lib. 2. Tab. 5, 6. Charles
the Eighth of France, or The Invasion of Naples by the French; an Hist. Tragedy
4 to. 1680. writ in Heroic Verse; Acted at the Duke's Theater in
Salisbury-Court. Plot taken from Guicciardine's Hist. Philip de Comines's
Memoires: Andre de la Vigne, and other French Chronicles in the Reign of
Charles VIII. City Politics, a Comedy, 4 to. 1683. Acted at the Theater Royal
in Drury Lane, with good Applause. This Play the Whiggish Party in those times
took to be a severe Satyr on them. Country Wit, a Comedy, 4 to. 1675. This
Play, though but one Degree above Farce, was Acted at the Duke's Theater in
Dorset Garden, and approved of by his then Majesty, King Charles II. Part of
the Plot and Language is taken from that Comedy of M^lliere's, called Le
Sicilien, ou L'Amour Peintre. Darius, King of Persia, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1688.
Acted by their Majesty's Servants. For the Plot see Quint. Curt. Lib. 3, 4, and
5. Justin. Lib. 11. Cap. 5. and Diodorus, Lib. 17, etc. Destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, in Two Parts, T. 4 to. 1677. Both these Tragedies
are writ in Heroic Verse, and when first appeared on the Stage, were Acted at
the Theater Royal, with great Applause. For the Plot see Josephus Hist. Lib. 6,
and 7. Tacitus Hist. Lib. 5. Suetonius, Eusebius, etc. English Friar, or The
Town Sparks, a Comedy, 4 to. 1690. This Play was Acted by their Majesty's
Servants; but met not with that Success the Author expected. See his Preface
thereto. Henry the Sixth, the First Part, with the Death of the Duke of
Gloucester, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1681. This Play was Dedicated to Sir Charles
Sidley, and Acted at the Duke's Theater with good Applause at first, but at
length, the Romish Faction opposing it, by their Interest at Court, got it
suppressed. See the Second Part of Shakespeare's Henry VI. from whence part of
this is borrowed. Henry the Sixth, the Second Part, or The Miseries of Civil
War, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1681. Acted also at the Duke's Theater, with good
Applause. Part of it is likewise borrowed from Shakespeare. For the Plot see the
English Chronicles writ in those times, by Grafton, Hollingshed, Stow, Speed,
etc. Iuliana, or The Princess of Poland, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1671. This Play
was Acted at the Duke's Theater, and Dedicated to the Earl of Orrery, being the
first of this Author's Production. The Married Beau, or The Curious
Impertinent, a Comedy, 4 to. 1694. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants; and Dedicated to the Lord Marquis of Normanby, Earl of
Mulgrave, etc. To this Play the Author has also prefixed a Preface in
Vindication of himself from the Aspersions cast on him by some of his Enemies,
as to his Morals and Loyalty, which I think he sufficiently clears,
particularly in Mr. Lovely's, yielding to Polidos, and I think Mr. Crown in the
Right, when he tells us, it is hard to find which offends the Ladies, the Sin,
or the Confession; the latter Example perhaps they like worst. This is
accounted a good Play, and has been often Acted with general Approbation. The
Story is taken out of the Comical History of Don Quixot. Regulus, a Tragedy, 4
to. 1694. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants; it has no
Dedication, and met with no very good Success, though the Design be Noble; the
Example of Regulus being the most celebrated for Honor and Constancy of any of
Antiquity: nor is it confined to the Roman Historians; Horace has writ an Ode
upon it. You may read the History in Livy, Lucius Florus, etc. Sir Courtley
Nice, or It cannot be, a Comedy, 4 to. 1685. Acted by his Majesty's Servants,
and Dedicated to his Grace the Duke of Ormond. The Plot and Part of the Play
from a Spanish Play, No Pued-eser; another Play called, Tarugo's-Wiles, first
Acted 1668. has the same Plot, and much resembles this in many Parts thereof.
The Song of stop Thief is taken out of Flecknoe's Demoisell a la Mode, who
likewise had it from the French of Molliere. This Play was often Acted with
good Success. Thyestes, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1681. Acted at the Theater Royal by
their Majesty's Servants. Plot from Poetical History. There are Two other Plays
on the same Subject, one in Spanish, the other in French, which are also
founded on Seneca's Thiestes.


John Dancer.
THIS Anthor lived a great part of his Time in Ireland, if not born there;
about the Year 1670. he came over into England, and understanding well the
Italian and French Tongues, he then Translated Two Plays, as also a Pastoral
before. The first in Order is, Agrippa King of Alba, or The False Tiberinus, T.
C. 4 to. 1675. written in Heroic Verse; printed in London, with Amendments
from what it was before, when Acted diverse times with great Applause in Dublin,
before his Grace the Duke of Ormond, then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; and
Dedicated to the Lady Cavindish, Daughter of the said Duke: Translated from the
French of Monsieur Quinault. Aminta, a Pastoral, 8 vo. 1660. This has been
translated into Five several Tongues, from that celebrated Wit, Torquato Tasso,
accounted the Father of Pastorals, and is, above all others he ever writ, the
most esteemed; this is printed with several Love Verses, etc. of the same
Author. Nicomede, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1671. Acted at the Theater Royal in
Dublin; and Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Earl of Ossery. Translated
from the French of Monsieur Corneille, being a Piece he much valued. Story from
Justin, Book 34. He writ besides, a Romance, called, The English Lovers and (if
we believe Mr. Winstanly) A complete History of the late Times, and A Chronicle
of the Kingdom of Portugal.


Samuel Daniel.
A Gentleman that flourished in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James I.
he was born near Taunton in Somersetshire, and was entered Commoner of St. Mary
Magdalen-Hall, Oxon, 1581. ^n the 19th Year of his Age; from whence, after
Three Years Study, his Merit, and his Brother-in-law, Florio, preferred him to
be one of the Grooms of Queen Ann. Most of his Plays he writ at a little
Retreat from London: weary of the World, he at last retired into Wiltshire or
Somersetshire, and there turned Farmer, living in those Parts till he was near
Eighty Years Old, to whose Memory a Monument was erected in the Parish Church,
at the Charge of the Lady Ann Clifford (to whom he had been Tutor) afterward
Countess of Pembrook, Dorset, and Montgomery. Besides his excellent History of
England, Printed in Folio, and continued by Trussel, he left behind him several
Poetical Pieces, among them Five Dramatick, of which in their Order: Cleopatra,
a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1611. and 4 to. 1622. Dedicated to the Right Honorable the
Countess of Pembrook: The last Edition is much amended, and far excels the
first. For the Story see Plutarch's Lives of Pompey and Anthony; Florus, lib.
4. c. 11. Appian de Bell. Civil. lib. 5. but chiefly, Otway's Translation of a
French Book called, The History of the Three Triumvirates, 8 vo. 1686. This
Play was much esteemed in its time. Hymen's Triumph, a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy, 4
to. 1623. This was presented at the Queen's Court, at the Nuptials of the Lord
Roxborough, and Dedicated in Verse to the most excellent Majesty of the Highest
Born Princess, Ann of Denmark, Queen of England, etc. Philotas, his Tragedy, 4
to. 1623. and Dedicated to King Charles the First, when he was Prince. This was
the first Play our Author writ, and then esteemed, though at first met with some
Opposition, the Reason you may find by his Apology, at the End of the Play;
where he handsomely acquits himself from the Imputation cast on him. Plot from
Plutarch's Life of Alexander; Quint. Curt. Book 6, etc. Queen's Arcadia, a
Pastoral Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1623. This Play was presented to the Queen and her
Ladies, by the University of Oxon in Christ Church College, 1605. Dedicated to
the Queen's Majesty. Act. 1. Scene 2. of Carinus and Amyntas, resemble
Quinault's Philene, and Daphnis, in his Comedy Sans Comedy, and Scene 4. Act
2. and the 7th Scene of the same Act, are very like Randolph's Amyntas. Vision
of the Twelve Goddesses, a Masque, 4 to. 1623. Presented by the Queen and her
Ladies at Hampton Court, and Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lady Lucy,
Countess of Bedford, and because this was first published imperfect, the Author
soon after published it from his own Copy to prevent its suffering for the
Future.


Sir William D'avenant,
THE Son of John D'avenant, Vintner of Oxford, in that very House that has now
the Sign of the Crown near Carfax; a House much frequented by Shakespeare in his
frequent Iourneys to Warwickshire; whither for the Beautiful Mistress of the
House, or the good Wine, I shall not determine. Our Author was Born there in
the Year 1605. in February, and Christened on the 3d of March following, he was
admitted a Member of Lincoln College, 1621. the same Year that his Father was
Mayor of that City: After some Smattering in Logic, he quitted those Studies
for Poetry, which proved more advantageous to him than to any Modern Professor
of that Art. From Lincoln-Colledge he went first into the Service of the
Duchess of Richmond, and afterward to that of Foulk Lord Brook; after whose
Death he applied himself to Writing of Plays. In the Year 1637. he succeeded
Ben. Johnson as Poet Laureat; 1641 he was accused of endeavoring to Seduce the
Army; Flying on a Proclamation, he was taken at Feversham in Kent, committed
Prisoner to a Sergeant at Arms, was Bailed, and fled for France; returning he
was made General of the Ordinance, by the Marquess of New Castle, he was
Knighted by the King, 1643. toward the end of the Civil Wars he retired again
into France, and began his Gondibert, in the Year 1650. he was taken at Sea by
an English Ship, carried Prisoner to the Isle of Weight; thence removed to the
Tower, and had been tried for his Life, 1651. had not the Mediation of the
Divine Milton prevented it, and got him his Liberty, as Prisoner at Large. His
Patrons Endimion Porter, and Mr. Iermin (afterward Lord St. Albans) got him as
a Reward of his Poetry and Services, the Place of Commissioner of the Customs,
and a Patent for a Company of Actors, who first set up in the same Tenniscourt
in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, where they now Act: But finding the good Acting
of the other Company won the Favor of the Town, he set up the Whim of Opera's.
He was Laureat to Charles the I. and II. he died the 7th of April, 1668. Aged
63, and is Buried among the Poets in Westminster-Abbey. His Works are Published
Fol. 1673.

His Plays which follow in Order, were most of them Acted with Applause, and
Printed in the Author's Lifetime separately in 4 to. and since together in
Folio.

Albovin King of the Lombards, his Tragedy 4 to. and fol. The Design is founded
on History, and the whole Story related in Bandello's Histoires Tragiques, Tom.
4. Nov. 19. Paulus Diaconus de Gestis Longobardorum, lib. 2. c. 28. Greg.
Episc. Turonensis Hist. Franconum, lib. 2. c. 28. Heylin's Cosmog. Part 1. Book
1. Page 57. Britannia Triumphans, a Masque, 4 to. written by him, and Inigo
Jones the King's Surveyor. Cruel Brother, a Tragedy 4 to. and fol. Dedicated to
the Right Honorable the Lord Weston, Lord High Treasurer of England. The
Distresses, a Tragi-Comedy, Printed in Fol. 1673. Entertainment at Rutland
House, Printed in fol. 1673. This was presented by way of Declamation, and
Music, after the manner of the Ancients: The Music, Vocal and Instrumental
was Composed by Dr. Coleman, Captain Cook, Mr. Laws, and Mr. Hudson, all
eminent at the time it was first represented^ The Fair Favorite, a
Tragi-Comedy, first Printed in 4 to. and since in fol. 1673. The Just Italian,
a Tragi-Comedy, first Printed in 4 to. and since in fol. 1673. Dedicated at
first Publishing to the Right Honorable Earl of Dorset, with Recommendatory
Verses of Mr. Hopkins and Mr. Carew. The Law against Lovers, a Tragi-Comedy,
fol. 1673. Taken from two Plays of Shakespeare, viz. Measure for Measure, and,
Much ado about nothing; the Language much amended and polished by our Author.
Love and Honor, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. and fol. Acted both at the Theater in
Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and in Dorset-Garden, with Applause. The Man's the
Master, a Comedy, 4 to. and fol. often Acted with Applause. Plot from Scarron's
Ioddelet, ou Le Maistre Valet, etc. The Platonic Lovers, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo.
and fol. first Printed in 8 vo. with the Wits, another Play of this Authors.
The Playhouse to be Let, fol. The second Act consists of a French Farce
Translated from Mollieres Sagnarelle: The third and fourth Acts contain the
History of Sir Francis Drake, and the Cruelty of the Spaniands in Peru: The
fifth Act relates the Actions of Caesar Anthony and Cleopatra; most of these
Acted in Oliver's time, separately by stealth, and some of them Printed first
in 4 to. The Siege, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. 1673. The Siege of Rhodes, in two
Parts, 4 to. and fol. Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Earl of Clarendon,
Lord High Chancellor of England, Acted with good Applause at the Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields. For the true Story see Boissardi Icones and vitae
Sultanorum Turcicorum in Vit. Solym. 2. Tho. Artus Continuation de la Histoire
des Turc's, and our English History of the Turks, by Knolles. News from
Plymouth, a Comedy, fol. 1673. Acted formerly at the Globe. The Temple of Love,
a Masque, fol. 1673. This was in King Charles the Ist's time, presented at
Court by his Queen, and diverse of the Nobility, both Lords and Ladies, the
Scenes and Habits were very magnificent and Glorious. The Triumphs of the
Prince d' Amor, a Masque, presented by his Highness, at his Palace in the
Middle Temple, fol. 1673. Acted by the Members of that Honorable Society, as
an Entertainment to the Prince Elector. The Author Composed it in three Days
time; the Music of the Songs set by Mr. Henry, and Mr. William Laws. The
Wits, a Comedy, 8 vo. 4 to. and fol. first Acted at Black Friars, and since at
the Duke's Theater, with Applause.^
Dr. Charles Davenant.
THIS Gentleman is the eldest Son of Sir William, and Dr. of Laws; he is yet
Living, and has given us one Proof that Horoum filii noxae, is not always true
in his Play called,

Circe, an Oper^, 4 to. 1677. Acted at the Duke's Theater with Applause. Plot
founded on Poetical History; see Ovid's Metamorph. Natal. Comes, Boccace, etc.

Robert Davenport.
HE lived in the time of King Charles I. writ two Plays, which were not Printed
till the succeeding Reign; he is Author of two Dramatick pieces, Acted with
great Applause.

The City Nightcap, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1661. Plot from Don Quixot's Novel
of the Curious Impertinent, and Boccaces Novels, Day 7. Nov. 7.

John and Matilda, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1655. This Play is Dedicated to the Right
Honorable Montague Bertie, Earl of Lindsey. For the Plot see Hollingshead,
Martin, Stow, Speed and Baker's Chronicles in the Reign of King John.

Robert Dauborn.
THIS Author was both Poet and Divine; he lived in the time of K. James I. was
Master of Arts, but of which University is uncertain. He writ these two Plays
following, The Christian turned Turk, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1612. The Story from a
Printed Book, entitled, The Overthrow of Captain Ward and Dansiker, two
Pirates, written by one Barker, and Published 1609. 4 to. The Poor Man's
Comfort, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. Printed 1665. but Acted many Years before.


John Day.
HE lived in the time of King James I. was once Student of Gonvile and Caius
Coll. in Cambridge, and has Writ Six Plays, ( viz.) The Blind Beggar of
Bednal-Green, with the merry Humor of Tom. Stroud the Norfolk Yeoman, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1659. For the true Story see our English Chronicles in the Reign
of King Henry VI. Humor out of Breath, a Comedy, 4 to. 1608. Isle of Gulls, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1633. This Play was often Acted in the Black Friars, by the then
Children of the Reve^s; Plot from Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia. Law Tricks, or
who would have thought it, a Comedy, 4 to. 1608. This Play was also diverse
times Acted by the Children of the Revels. Parliament of Bees, with their
proper Characters, or (says the Title) A Bee-hive, furnished with Twelve
Honey-Combs, as pleasant as profitable: This in former Catalogues is accounted
a Masque. Printed 4 to. 1607. Dedicated to a worthy Gentleman ( viz.) Mr.
George Butler, who has Writ and Published a Treatise of Bees. Travels of the
Three English Brothers, Sir Thomas, Sir Anthony, and Mr. Robert Shirley, an
Historical Play, 4 to. 1607. Ro^ley and Wilkins joined with this Author in
Composing this History for the Stage. See Dr. Fuller's Worthies, in his
Description of Sussex, p. 107. see also our English Chronicles.


Thomas Deckar.
THis Author was a Contemporary of Ben. Iohnson's, in the Reign of K. James I.
and his Antagonist for the Bays; he Writ Eight Plays entire, and four others
assisted with Webster, Rowley, and Ford, in all Twelve, which take as follow.

Fortunatus, a Comedy, 4 to. 1600. styled, Old Fortunatus. This Play is not
divided into Acts; the story is taken from the stitched Book of Fortunatus.
Honest Whore, the First Part, with the Humors of the Patient Man, and the
Longing Wife; a Comedy, 4 to. 1635. Acted by her Majesty's Servants with great
Applause. Honest Whore, the Second Part, with the Humors of the Patient Man,
and the Impatient Wife, also the Comical passage of an Italian Bridewel, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1630. This Play is not divided into Acts, nor ever, (I suppose)
Acted. See Harrington's Epig. at the end of his Orlando Furioso. If this b'ent
a good Play, the Devil's in it; a Comedy, 4 to. 16 a Play then Acted with great
Applause by the Queen's Majesty's Servants. See Machiavel's Novel of Belphegor.
Match me in London, a Comedy, 4 to. 1631. This was then accounted a good Play
and often Acted both at the Bull in St. John's street, and in Drury Lane.
Northward Hoe, a Comedy, 4 to. 1607. sundry times Acted by the Children of
Paul's. John Webster joined with our Author in this Play. See Ducento Novelle
del Signior Celio Malespini, part 1. Nov. 2. Satyromastyx, or, The Vntrussing
the Humorous Poet, a Comedy, 4 to. 1602. presented Publicly by the Right
Honorable the Lord Chamberlain's Servants, and privately by the Children of
St. Paul's. Ben. Iohnson's Poetaster (wherein he is severe on this our Author)
occasioned the Writing of this Play. Westward Hoe, a Comedy, 4 to. 1607. This
Play was diverse times Acted by the Children of Paul's. Mr. Webster also was
concerned in producing this Play. The Whore of Babylon, a History, 4 to. 1607.
Acted by the Prince's Servants. This Play was designed to expose the Roman
Catholics, especially the Jesuits at that time, and sets forth the excellent
Virtues of Queen Elizabeth, and the many Dangers she escaped. Wyat's History, 4
to. 16 In this Mr. Webster joined with him, and is a Play Mr. Langbain never
saw. See the English Chron. in the Reign of Queen Mary. The Witch of Edmonton,
a Tragedy, 4 to. 1658 In this Play Mr. Rowley and Mr. Ford joined with him. The
Wonder of a Kingdom, a Comedy, 4 to. 1636.
He likewise writ with Mr. Philip Massenger, the Virgin Martyr, and with Mr.
Middleton, the Roaring Girl.

Sir John Denham, Knight of the Bath.
HE was born in Ireland, though his Father was Sir John Denham of Horsley in
Essex, but was at the Birth of this his only Son a Judge in that Kingdom, and
Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer; on his being promoted to the Exchequer in
England, he brought over our Author very young. In the year 1631. he was sent
to Trinity-Colledge in Oxon: After some few years he left Oxon for London,
where he applied himself to the Study of the Civil Law. By the Assistance of
Hugh Peter's, he got admission to Charles I. then in the Armies Hands at
Causham, being then employed on a Message to him by the Queen, to whom he had
offered his Service, which Negotiation he performed, so that he was further
employed by the King: but being discovered by Mr. Cowley's Hand being known, he
escaped beyond Sea, where he afterward gave his Attendance on King Charles II.
who oftentimes gave him Subjects to write on. He made him Surveyor General of
his Royal Buildings, and at his Coronation Knight of the Bath. He died at his
House near Whitehall, March 10th, 1668. and was Buried among the Poets in
Westminster-Abbey. He has writ diverse Poems and Translations in 8 vo. among
them Cooper's Hill, a Piece much commended; at the end of these Poems is one
Play of this Author's, wherein he shows his Ability in Dramatick Poesy. It is
Entitled,

The Sophy, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1671. Acted at the Black Friars with good
Applause; it was first Printed in 4 to. 1642. Plot from Herbert's Travels, Life
of Abbas. The same Story is differently handled by Mr. Baron in his Tragedy of
Mirza.

John Dennis.
THis Gentleman now Living, has made himself a Name by several Books, both in
Prose and Verse, which he has Published, but for none more than his Critical
Observations on the so much Celebrated Prince Arthur, writ by Sir Richard
Blackmore, in which he has showed himself a perfect Critic, and Master of a
great deal of Penetration and Judgment; his Remarks being beyond Controversy
just, and the Faults he finds undeniably such. I am not able to give any
Account of his Parents. He was Born in London, his Education was at Gonvile and
Caius College in Cambridge, which he improved afterward by Travel and the best
Conversation; but the occasion of his being mentioned here, is a Dramatick
piece he has lately Published, called,

A Plot and no Plot, a Comedy, 4 to. Acted at the Theater Royal, 1697. and
Dedicated to the Right Honorable Robert, Earl of Sunderland, Lord Chamberlain
of his Majesty's Household. The Plot of this Play is our Author's own, though I
confess, an Incident or two are not so new as the rest of the Play may justly
be said to be; for old Bulls being persuaded, that he is in Newgate, when he is
in his own House, is not unlike an incident in the City-Politicks, and young
Bulls being married by Baldernoe has been in the Old Bachelor, The City Match,
etc. This Play is exactly regular, and discovers it self writ by a Master of
the Art of the Stage, as well as by a Man of Wit; the justness, fineness, and
delicacy of the Reflections, the pleasantness of the Humors, the Novelty and
Distinction of the Characters, the admirable Conduct and Design of the whole,
with the useful Moral of the Play, places it in the Rank of the best Comedies
of this latter Age of Poetry; and though he himself term it low Comedy, gives us
a Desire, as well as Hopes, of some more Noble Performance.

Thomas Dilke.
A Gentleman now living, who (as I am informed) was some time a Student of
Oriel Coll. in Oxon, has since quitted the Camp for the Theater, and Mars for
Apollo; he has given the World two Plays with different Success, the last of
which comes first in order.

The City Lady, or Folly Reclaimed, a Comedy Acted by his Majesty's Servants,
at the Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, 4 to. 1697. Dedicated to Fisher
Wentworth, Esquire This Play, as the Author tells us in the Epistle, miscarried in
the first Night's Representatation, and owns he has not hit the Humors of the
Town in some of his principal parts^ The Lover's Luck, a Comedy, Acted at the
Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, 4 to. 1696.
Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lord Raby.
This Play, as the Author takes care to inform us, met with a general Applause.
As to the Characters, they are most but Copies, Sir Nicholas Purflew, of the
Antiquary of Marmion; Goosandelo, of Sir Courtly, and Sir Fopling, etc. I will not
say, that the Poet had the Sharpers in the Squire of Alsatia in his Eye, when
he drew Eager, etc. but there is some resemblance.

Tho. Dogget.
AN excellent Comedian, now living, who dealing daily in the Products of
Parnassus, found himself inspired with the Vein of Poetry, that has spread so
far among his Brothers of the Stage, and has given us a very diverting Play
called,

The Country Wake, a Comedy, Acted at the New Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, 1696. 4 to. Dedicated to the
Illustrious and truly Noble James, Duke, Marquess and Earl of Ormond, in
England and Ireland, etc. This Play was well received, but whether it was owing
to the admirable Account of the Author, or his Writing, or to both, I leave to
the Reader; that it has Merit, is not to be doubted, nor do I know of any
remarkable Thefts from other Plays, unless the imitation of Shakespeare's
Clowns, in the Character of Hob, which I look on as a praise to Mor. Dgget, and
no Fault.

John Dover.
A Gentleman of Gray's Inn, in the time of Charles II. whether he be yet living,
I know not; he Writ one Play, ( viz.)

The Roman Generals, or, The Distressed Ladies, 4 to. 1697. Dedicated to the
Right Honorable the Lord Brook. For the Plot see Plutarch's Lives of Caesar
and Pompey. See also Lucan, Suet^nius, etc.

Dr. James Drake.
A Member of the College of Physicians, and formerly of Gonvile and Caius
College in Cambridge. He has lately Published a Play, called,

The Sham Lawyer, or, The Lucky Extravagant, a Comedy, 4 to. Acted at the
Theater Royal, 1697. This Play, as it wanted Success, so it is for the most
part borrowed from two of Fletcher's, ( viz.) The Spanish Curate, and Wit
without Money; but whether our Author has improved the Materials, or not, I
leave to the Critics.

John Dryden, Esquire
THis Gentleman, who was Poet Laureat, and Historiographer to the late King
James, is of a good Family, (if I mistake not) in Northamptonshire, was Bred at
the University of Cambridge, and had some thoughts once (as I have been told)
of entering a more profitable state of Life than Poetry, where Learning met with
more Encouragement, I mean the Church: How early his Genius led him to Poetry,
I am not able to inform you; but he was above thirty before he gave us his
first Play, which met with so little Success, that if he had not had a peculiar
force of Inclination to Writing, he had been Discouraged, for that Play indeed
made no Promises of that great Man he was afterward to be. He is a Poet that
has met with Applause often above his Merit; though in many of his Writings, it
must be confe^s'd, he deserved the highest: But I must own, I think, his
Dramatick Pieces, if we must take our Standard of their Excellence from the
Ancients, the most incorrect of his Productions. There is generally indeed the
sublime, but very rarely the Pathetick; for in all his Plays he has not touched
Compassion above thrice, and that but weakly; Terror he has often hit on; but
it is not for me to Censure a Man of no Vulgar Genius; but what is necessary for
the making this of a piece in its Impartiality. I shall give some Instances of
his playing the Plagiary, omitting all those scurrilous and Digressory^
Reflections with which Mr. Langbain has bespattered him, and through which
indeed runs all along a great evidence of private and ungenerous Malice,
brought in, though nothing to the Business before him.

On the other hand, it must be confessed, that he has, (where he detects his
Thefts) urged a great deal of Truth; for Mr. Dryden has borrowed from the
French, at the same time that he seems to contemn them; unless it may be
pretended, that he has used them as Virgil did Ennius of old, to extract Gold
out of their Dung. For I never found him in any Theft indeed, but what he gave
a new Luster too, when taken, even from the best of the Ancients; and I may
therefore believe the same of what he has taken from the French. I shall not
therefore pursue Mr. Langbain's steps in his Excursions; only at the Foot of
each Play, lay down the places from whence he has borrowed. But the Reader must
not expect I shall give him all that he owes for in each Play, for that would
exceed the Limits of this Compendium; it must suffice that I give some
Instances of each, to put him in mind of his own Deeds, and so mollify his
Reflections on those young Men that are now coming up, and who may think it not
below them to follow that Path which they have seen Conduct him to so much
Glory; of which in their Order.

Albion and Albanus, an Opera, fol. 1685. presented at the Queen's Theater in
Dorset-Garden.

All for Love, or The World well Lost, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1678. For the Plot and
some of the Descriptions, especially Cleopatra's sailing down the Cydnus, see
Plutarch's Life of Antony, Suetonius in Aug. Dion Cassius, lib. 48. 51.
Orosius, lib. 6. c. 7. Cluny, lib. 4. c. 11. Appian de bellis Civilibus, l. 5.

Amboyna, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1673. acted at the Theater Royal, see Purchas's
Pilgrimage, Vol. II. l. 16. c. 16. Sanderson's History of King James, p. 577.
Stubb's Relation of the Dutch Cruelties to the English at Amboyna; Wanley's
History of Man, lib. 4. c. 10. ex. 1. The Rape of Isabinda by Horman, is built
on a Novel of Cynthais Gyraldi, Idea 5. Nov. 10.

Amphitryon, or, The Two Socia's, a Comedy, 4 to. from Moliere and Plautus of
the same N^me.

Assignation; or, Love in a Nunnery, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678. Acted at the Theater
Royal. Most of the Incidents borrowed, as well as Characters. The Characters of
the Duke of Mantua, Frederick and Lucretia, from Constance the fair Nun in The
Annals of Love, p. 81. those of Aurelian, Camillo, Laura, and Violetta, from
Scarron's Comical Romance; San's Destiny, and Madam Star. cap. 13. p. 43.
Benito's Affectation of Music, from Quinault's Iadolet, in his Comedy sous
Comedy, Frontonas throwing Water on L^ura, from Les contes de M. de la
Fontaine, Par. 1. Nov. 11. p. 74. See likewise Les Cent. Novelles, La
Damoiselle a ceur ouvert, etc.

Aureng-zebe, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1676. Acted at the Theater Royal; for the Plot
consult Tavernier's Travels, vol. 1. part 2. C. 2. I will not determine with
Mr. Langbain, that the Characters of Anreng-zebe and Nourmahal, are borrowed
from Seneca's Phaedra and Hippolytus; since I see nothing alike through their
whole Story, but the Love of a Son-in-Law, and his Aversion; but that does by
no means constitute the Character, (which is a thing Mr. Langbain seems never
to understand) Hippolytus has an Aversion to Love, Aureng-zebe is in Love, and
much more Polite; Hippolytus was a Hunter indeed, and Aureng-zebe a Warrior:
Nourmahal is a degree beyond the Lewdness of even Seneca's Phaedra, who
Degenerated extremely from her Original in Euripides, and indeed shows none of
her Qualities, but Revenge for disappointed Love: It must be owned, that these
Lines which Mr. Langbain instances are borrowed from Seneca in that place; Aur.
Heavens! Can you this without just Vengeance bear?
When will you Thunder, if you now are clear?
Yet her alone let not your Thunder seize,
I too deserve to dye, because I please.
Hip. Magne Regnator deum
Tam lentus audis scelera tam lentus vides
Ecquando saeva fulmen emittes Manu
Si nunc serenum est
-- Me velox cremet.
Transactus ignis sum Nocens; merui mori
Placui Novercae.


Here, what is uncommon with Mr. Dryden, he seems to have lost the Beauty of
Seneca's Expression of Me velox cremet Transac^us ignis, which gives you some
Image of the stroke of a Thunderbolt, whereas Mr. Dryden Yet her alone let not
your Thunder seize,
looks more like the taking a Thief or Debtor by a Constable or Bailiff; for
seizing is too calm, and impotent a word to express the force of a Bolt sent
from the Arm Trisulci Iovis. But this is the effect of Writing in Rhyme; for
I Am confident he had never used that word in Blank Verse.

Hipp. -- Thesei vultus amo
Illos priores, quos tulit quondam puer
Cum prima turas signare barba Genas.
I am not changed, I love my Husband still,
But love him as he was when youthful Grace,
And the first Bloom began to shade his Face.
Again from Milton's Sampson Agonistes.

Dal. I see thou art implacable, more Deaf
To Prayers, than Winds and Seas; yet Winds to Seas
Are reconciled at length, and Sea to Shore
Thy anger unappeaseable still rages;
Eternal Tempest never to be calmed.
Eng. Vnmov'd he stood, and deaf to all my Prayers,
As Seas and Winds to sinking Mariners:
But Seas grow calm, and Winds are reconciled;
Her Tyrant Beauty never grows more mild.
Cleomenes, The Spartan Hero, Trag. 4 to. Acted at the Theater Royal, 1692.
and Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Earl of Rochester, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter: To which is prefixed the Life of Cleomenes,
Translated from the Greek of Plutarch, by Mr. Creech. This Play was by some
Enemies of the Poets, so misrepresented at Court, that it was stopped; but by
the generous Friendship of the late Lord Falkland, cleared from the Aspersions
cast on it, and Acted with great Applause. As for the Plot or Story, the Author
in his Preface owns it taken from Plutarch, and that he has closely followed
the Truth as he found it there; only that he has changed, for the sake of their
sound, some Names, as that of Agathoclea, the King's Mistress, into Cassandra,
and that of Nicagoras into Caenus. To the Story he has added the Love of
Cassandra for Cleomenes, and has given him a second Wife, which the Story only
gave him a small hint for. And indeed our Author has trod upon Plutarch so
close, that the very words of that Author, are Transplanted with little
variation, into the Play. You may read more of Cleomenes in Polybius, and
Cornelius Nepos in his Life.

Conquest of Granada by the Spaniards, Two Parts, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1678.
Acted at the Theater Royal. Almanzor is very like Ponce de Leon, in Almahide,
as Mr. Langbain observes; but in my Opinion, though there may be many Features
like Ponce in the Draught, yet Almanzor seems rather to be a Copy of the
Achilles of Homer, ill understood, for he does more alone, and without an Army
to back him, than Achilles with his Myrmidons; Achilles was injured, and
desisted from fighting, but Almanzor goes over to their Enemies; nor is he
fixed there, but receiving another Injury from Abdalla, returns to B^abdelin,
takes it ill that he is mistrusted, and tells them he will again change his
side, if provoked: But of him enough, since no Man of good sense can think that
Play's Success owing to the Excellency o^ the Poet's Performance, but the
Extravagance; for I have always observed it to have the Effect of Comedy on the
Audience: But Mr. Langbain will indeed have him a Knight of the Shire almost,
and Represent the Extravagant Heroes of two or three Romances more; as the
Osmin of Gusman, and Artaban of Cleopatra, Boabdeline, Almahide, Ferdinand,
Isabella, Arcos, Hamet, Gomel, from the Romance of Almahide, Ozmin and
Benzaida, from Ozmin and Alibech in Ibraim, etc. see also Grand Cyrus, S. ix.
Book 1. for Abdelmelech, Lydaraxa, etc. so much for the Characters, now for the
thoughts; the Description of the Bull-Feast, if allowing for the Rhyme, almost
entirely taken from Gusman's Iuego de Toores, and Cannas; Con^ult the Story of
Ozmin and Daraxa, Pt. ^. page 82, 85^ the Description of the Factions from
Almahide, page 1. The four ensuing lines spoke by Boabdeline, from Prince
Massa's Advice to Almahide, p. 6. the King's Speech going betwixt the Factions,
p. 5. taken from Almahide, pt. 3. p. 63. Tariffa and Ozmin's Quarrel, and the
Rise of the Famlies, from Abindacray's Speech, Al. p. 2. Almanzor's killing
Gomel, his quelling the Tumult, from Alm. p. 64, 65. His Victory, Act 2d. and
taking Acaos Prisoner, ibid. The Scene betwixt Lindaraxa and Abdalla, from Al.
p. 62. and from the Story of Elibesis in Cyrus, pt. 9. B. 1. p. 20. Zulemus
Plea for Abdalla^s Right to the Crown, which one would scarce think is so
childish a fancy, from Al. p. 62. and Cyrus as above; Almanzor's Description of
Boabd. p. 18. from Al. p. 55. etc. nay, the Alarm after the Zambra-Dance, in
which there is an absurdity of bringing in the Images of a Heathen Deity. The
first meeting of Alman. and Almahide, p. 69. of Abdalem and Almanzor, p. 71.
and the Controversy betwixt Almanzor and Zulema, ibidem, and his returning to
Boabdelin, from the same Romance, p. 72. Abdelmeleck's Visit to Lynidaraxa, in
Disguise, from Elibesis in Grand Cyrus, p. 25. and Abdalla's Visit, from the
same, p. 67. Almanzor's deliv'ring Almahide, copied from Almahide, p. 73.
Abdalla's Converse with Lyndaraxa, under the Walls of Albayzin, from the fore
cited Story of Cyrus, p. 61. his flying to the Christians from p. 72. of the
same; Osmin and Benzaida's Flight, from p. 8. of Ibrahim.

This is e^ough for the two Parts, to give a taste of how many Feathers are
borrowed from other Pieces; now I shall proceed to another.

Don Sebastion King of Portugal, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1690. Acted at the Theater
Royal; Founded on a French Novel of the same Name. See also Vasconcellos's
Anacephaleosis, sine summa capitum Actorum Regum Lusitaniae. Anace. 20. and
other Writers of that time, it being 1578. when Sebastian was killed.

The Duke of Guise, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1683. Acted by their Majesty's Servants.
Mr. Lee joined in this. For the Plot consult Davila, Mezeray, and other Writers
of the Reign of Charles IX. or rather the Reigns of Henry III. etc. the
ridiculous Story of Malicorn you may find in Rosset's Histoires Tragiques en la
vie de Canope 8vo. p. 449.

Ev'ning's Love, or The Mock Astrologer, a Comedy, 4 to. 1671. Acted at the
Theater Royal. Almost wholly made up out of Corneilles le feint Astrologue;
Molliers depetit Amoreux; and Les Precieuses Ridicules; Quinault's L'Amant
Indiscret; some hints too from Shakespeare, Petronius Arbiter, and the main Plot
on Calderon's El Astrologo fingido: But to be a little particular, Aurelia's
Affectation in her Speech from Les Precieuses Ridicules; Scene between Alonzo
and Lopez, p. 39. is from Mollieres de petit Amoreux, Act 2. Scene 6. Camilla^s
begging a Boon of Don Melchor, from the same; the Love-Quarrel betwixt Iacinta
and Wild Blood, and Mascal and Beatrix, from the same Play, Act 4. Scene 3, 4.
Aurelia's falling into Alonzo's Arms, from L'Amant indiscret Act 5. Scene 4.

Kind Keeper, or, Mr. Limberham, a Comedy 4 to. 1680. Acted at the Duke's
Theater. Mrs. Faintlies discovery of Love All in the Chest; See pt. 1. Cynthio
Giraldi, dec. 3. N. 3. Mrs. Brainsick's pricking and pickling him. See a Novel,
called, The Triumph of Love over Fortune.

King Arthur, or The British Worthy, a Tragedy, Acted at the Theater in
Dorset-Garden, 1691. and Dedicated to the Marquess of Halifax. This Play is
writ more for the sake of the Singing part and Machines, than for any
Excellence of a Dramatick Piece; for in it shines none of Mr. Dryden's great
Genius, the Incidents being all extravagant, many of them Childish; the
Enchanted Wood, as well as the rest of the Wonders of Osmond's Art, he entirely
owes to Tasso; where Rinaldo performs what Arthur does here. I shall not
presume to expose any of the Faults of this great Man in this particular piece,
he having suffered so much under the Hands of my Predecessor in this
Undertaking. The fabulous Story of this King Arthur, you may read in Geffery of
Monmouth, and in the Preface of a late famous Poem, that bears his Name, as
well as in the first Volume of Mr. Tyrrell's History of England.

Indian Emperor; or, The Conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards, being the sequel
of the Indian Queen, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1670. Acted at the Theater Royal.
For the true Story consult Lopez de Gamara. Hist. general de las Incas and de
Conquista de Mexico, de Bry. Americae pars 9. l. 7. Ogilby's America, Chap. 3.
Sect. 10. Mariana de Reb. Hisp. lib. 26. cap. 3. Sir Paul Ricaut's Hist of
Inca's.

Love Triumphant, or Nature will Prevail, a Tragi-Comedy, Acted at the Theater
Royal by their Majesty's Servants, 4 to. 1694. Dedicated to the Right
Honorable James Earl of Salisbury, etc. In the Epistle Mr. Dryden informs us,
That it is the last he intends for the Theater. I take this Play to be Founded
on the Story of the King and no King of Fletcher, at least on the Corrections
of the Fable of that Play made by Mr. Rymer, in his Reflections on the
Tragedies of the first Age. Though this Play had not that Success which most of
Mr. Dryden's met with, yet it must be confessed, That in several parts the
Genius of that Great Man breaks out, especially in the Scene of the Discovery
of Alphonso's Victorious Love, and the very last Scene, where the Catastrophe
is extremely moving, though contrary to Aristotle it be made from the change of
Will in Veramond.

Marriage A-la-mode, a Comedy, 4 to. 1673. Acted at the Theater Royal. The
serious part built on the Story of Sesostris and Timareta, in B. 3. pt. 9. of
Cyrus. The Characters of Palamede and Rodophil from the Story of Tyrianthes and
Parthenia, in the same Romance, pt. 6. B. 1. some Features at least of Doralice
drawn from Nogaret, in the Annals of Love. Melanth^^ making Love to her self,
from Les Contes D'Ouville, pt. 1. p. 13.

The Mistaken Husband, a Comedy, 4 to. 1675. Acted at the Theater Royal. This
is is not Mr. Dryden's, who only added a Scene; for the Plot consult Plautus's
Maenechmi.

Oedipus King of Thebes a Tragedy, 4 to. 1679. Acted at the Duke's Theater.
This Play was writ by Mr. Lee and Mr. Dryden; therefore to whom to attribute
the Faults is difficult; and we have so little to accuse them of being
Plagiaries here, that the most understanding Judges wish they had followed
Sophocles yet closer, it had then been the best of our Modern Plays, as it is of
the Ancients; but as it is, they have destroyed the Character of Oedipus, and
made it absolutely Contradictory. For Oedipus that fled from a Crown, for fear
of threatened Incest, and had pulled out his Eyes on the Discovery of it, can
relish an Embrace of Iocasta too well, in the 5th Act, till the Ghost of Laius
frights him; but this place admits not all those just Criticisms that might be
made on this Play.

The Rival Ladies, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1679. Acted at the Theater Royal. The
Dispute betwixt Amideo and Hypolito, and Gonsalva's fighting with the Pirates,
borrowed from Encolpius, Giton, Eumolpus and Tryphena's, on Boarding the Vessel
of Lyca's, in Petronius Arbiter, and the Catastrophe resembles Scarron's Rival
Brothers.

Secret Love, or, The Maiden Queen, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1679. Acted at the
Theater Royal. The serious part founded on Cle^buline Queen of Corinth, pt. 7.
B. 7. Celadon, Florimel, Olinda, and Sabina, from the History of Pisistratus
and Cerintha, in the said Cyrus, pt. 9. B. 3. and the French Marquess Ibra.
Part 2. Book 1.

Fign'd Innocence, or Sir Martin Mar-all, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678. Acted at the
Duke's Theater. The greatest part, both Plot and Language of Sir Martin and
Warner, stolen from Quinault's L'Ama^^ indis^ret, and Mollieres L'Etourdy ou le
Contre temps. Sir Martin's foolish Discovery of his not Playing on the Lute,
from Firmur^n, L. 7. and Sir John Moody's being set up in their Altitudes, from
Shakerly's Marmion's Fine Companions, Act 4. Sc. 1. etc.

The Spanish Friar, or, The double Discovery, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1681. Acted
at the King's Theater. The Comical part built on the Novel, called, The Pilgrim.

The State of Innocence, or, The Fall of Man, an Opera, 4 to. 1678. Taken from
Milton's Paradise Lost, though guilty of many absurdities, which are not in
Milton, whose being a Narration of things done long since, made room for
several things, which had he placed it in Action, could never have been brought
in; to give one Instance; Mr. Dryden makes Lucifer (before the World was made,
or at least before the Devil knew any thing of its Form, Matter or
Vicissitudes,) compare the prostrate Devils to Leaves in Autumn, before there
was an Autumn, etc.

The Tempest, or, Enchanted Island, a Comedy, 4 to. 1676. Acted at the Duke's
Theater. This is an Alteration only of one of Shakespeare's, by Sir William
D'Avenant and Mr. Dryden.

Troilus and Cressida, or, Truth found out too late, a Tragedy 4 to. 1679.
Acted at the Duke's Theater. One of Mr. Shakespeare's, altered by Mr. Dryden.
The Story is to be found in Lellius a Lombard, in Latin, and in our old Chaucer
in ancient English.

Tyrannick Love, or, The Royal Martyr, a Tragedy, 4 to., 1679. Acted at the
Theater Royal. For the Plot see Zosimus, lib. 4. Socrates, lib. 5. c. 14.
Herodian, l. 6, 7; and 8. Iul. Capit. in cit. Mac. Iun.

The Wild Gallant, a Comedy, 4 to. 1669. Acted at the Theater Royal. This was
his first Play, published 1669. being about Twenty eight Years since, and by
which he was near Thirty eight years old when this was Played.

John Dryden, Junior.
THis Gentleman is second Son to the abovesaid great Poet of that Name, and is
now living in Rome, in the Pope's Service, as a Gentleman of the Bedchamber,
where he wrote a Play, called,

The Husband his own Cuckold, a Comedy 4 to. 1696. Acted at the Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, and Dedicated to the Right
Honorable Sir Robert Howard, etc. and is ushered into the World by a Preface
of his Father, who in it indeed shows the tenderness of a Parent^ but I think
not the Impartiality and Justice of a true Critic, when he excludes all from
Poetry and Nature but his Friends, at least since the Revolution. The young
Gentleman in his Epistle, has gone a little too far for a Beginner, as yet too
uncertain of his own Success, to fall upon the other Writers of the Age.

Thomas Duffet.
HE was before he became a Poet, a Milliner in the New Exchange, he has writ
four Plays, two of them in a Burlesque Style, their Names follow.

The Mock Tempest, or, The Enchanted Castle, a Farce, 4 to. 1675. Acted at the
Theater Royal by his Majesty's Servants. Writ on purpose to draw Campany from
the other Theater, where was great resort about that time, to see that revived
Comedy, called, The Tempest, then much in vogue. Psyche Debauched, a Comedy, 4
to. 1678. Acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's Servants. This Mock Opera
is a Burlesque on Shadwell's Psyche, and writ for the same purpose as that
above. Spanish Rogue, a Comedy, 4 to. 1674. Acted at the Theater Royal by his
Majesty's Servants, and Dedicated to Madam Ellinor Guin. this Play had no great
Success. There is likewise a Masque under his Name omitted by Mr. Langbain,
it is called. Beauties Triumph, presented by the Scholars of Mr. Ieoffery
Banister, and Mr. James Heart, at the new Boarding School at Chelsey, Printed,
London 4 to. 1676.
This Author has also writ a small Volume of Poems, Songs, Prologues and
Epilogues which were first disposed of to one Bookseller, and laying long in
the Licenser's Hands, were again disposed of to another, without Consent of the
first Purchaser, and Printed 8 vo. 1676.

Thomas Durfey.
THis Gentleman (if I am not misinformed) was Born in Devonshire, and designed
for some part of the Law; whatever provoked him to Poetry I cannot tell; but
whatever it was, he has with various Success given us above Twenty Plays, and
if the prosperous Success of the Major part will give him the Credit of a Poet,
he has a just pretense to it, and may justly Challenge it from all the
Vindicators of Dr. Blackmores's Poem from that Topic. For my part, I can only
say, that I have laughed heartily at his Plays, which is one end of Comedy, or
Farce at least; and if the Critics will deny him to be a good Writer of
Comedy, they must allow him a Master of Farce. His Plays follow in Alphabetical
Order.

The Banditti; or, A Ladies Distress, a Comedy, 4 to. 1686. Acted at the
Theater Royal. Plot from Don Fenise, 8 vo. See also the History of Don Antonio,
B. 4. p. 250, Diego's turning Banditti, etc. from Pipperollo in Shirley's
Sisters. Bussy D'Ambois; or, The Husbands Revenge, a Tragedy, (...) Acted at
the Theater Royal, 1691. newly Revised by Mr. Durfey, and Dedicated to the
Right Honorable, Edward, Earl of Carlisle, Viscount Howard of Morpeth, etc. In
his Epistle he owns it to be Chapman's, only challenges to himself the Merit of
having Purged it of a great deal of Obsol^te Phrases, and intolerable Fustain;
though some are of Opinion, that with those Defects, he has injudiciously pared
away many of its Beauties. The Character of Tamyra, he will have us believe, he
has altered for the better; though he will hardly persuade, that Pity is due to a
Woman, that quits her Honor and Virtue on any Account. You may find the Story
in Thuanus Iean de Serres, and Mezeray, in the Reign of Henry III. of France,
and the particular Intrigue of Bussy with Tamyra in Rosset, in his Histoires
Tragiques de Notre temps, under the Names of Lysis and Siluie, Hist. 17. p.
363. Commonwealth of Women, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1686. Acted by their
Majesty's Servants at the Theater Royal, and Dedicated to the truly Noble and
Illustrious Prince Christopher, Duke of Albemarle. This Play is borrowed from
Fletcher's Sea Voyage. Cinthia and Endimion; or, Loves of the Deities; a new
Opera, as it was designed to be Acted at Court before the late Queen, and now
Acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's Servants, 1697. 4 to. Dedicated to
the Right Honorable Henry, Earl of Rumney, Viscount Sidney, etc. Our Author is
not contented in the Title Page, to let his Patron know the Honor her late
Majesty designed this Offering of his Muse, but repeats it in the Epistle,
which had indeed been the more pardonable piece of Vanity; but that is a small
fault in a Poet, especially when there are so many greater in the Work it self.
For by a sort of Poetic License, unknown to our great Master Horace, he
perverts all those known Characters given us by Ovid; he has made the Chaste
Favorite of Diana, ( Daphne) both a Whore and a Iilt; and so sordid, as to
contemn the God of Wit and Light, for a pitiful dull Country Lad: and fair
Syrinx must loose her Reputation, in the unknown ignomy o^ an envious, jilting,
mercenary, infamous Woman. Though this Play ^ook, yet it merits not a nice
Enquiry into its Virtues and Vices; but as I have given a specimen of one, my
impartiality obliges me to own, that there are many Lines in it above the
Genius which generally appears in his other Works. The Ver^ification is often
good, and the Expression often significant and Poetical. The Story of Cynthia
and Endimion, as well as the others contained in this Opera, you may find
beautifully done in their Original, in the several parts of Ovid's
Metamorphoses, and that of Psyche in the 4th, 5th, and 6th Books of Lucius
Appuleius de Asino Aureo. The Comical History of Don Quixot, Acted at the
Queens Theater in Dorset-Garden, by their Majesty's Servants, Part I. 1694. 4
to. Dedicated to the Duchess of Ormond. This Play met with an extraordinary
Applause; and is taken entirely from that famous, and much Celebrated Antic
Romance of the same Name, written by Michael Cervantes, a Spaniard. Part II.
Acted at the same Theater, in the same Year, and Dedicated by an Epistle in
Heroic Verse, to the Right Honorable Charles, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex,
etc. This as well as the former, is taken from the foresaid Romance, and met
with great Applause, which encouraged our Author to proceed to Part III. adding
to the Title of that only, With the Marriage of Mary the Buxome. This was Acted
and Printed 1696. and Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Montague, Esquire
one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, etc. in which he will not allow
that its innate Defects are so obnoxious as are supposed; but owns its want of
Success, which never Poet yet attributed to himself: This is as the other two
Parts borrowed from the incomparable Cervantes. The Fond Husband; or, The
Plotting Sisters, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678. Acted at the Dukes Theater, and
Dedicated to his Grace the Duke of Ormond: This when Presented first was
accounted a good Play. The Fool turned Critic, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678. Acted at
the Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants. The Characters of Old Wine Love,
Tim, and Small Wit, are something like Simo, Asotus, and Balio in Randolph's
Jealous Lovers. A Fool's Preferment; or, The Three Dukes of Dunstable, a Com. 4
to. 1688. Acted at the Queens Theater in Dorset-Garden, by their Majesty's
Servants, with Songs set by Mr. Henry Purcell, and Dedicated to the Honorable
Charles, Lord Morpeth, transcribed from Fletcher's Noble Gentleman, except one
Scene from the Novel of the Hum^urs of Bassett. The Injured Princes; or, The
Fatal Wager, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1682. Acted at the Theater Royal by their
Majesty's Servants; the Prologue to this Play is the same with the Epilogue of
another of his own, called, The Fool turned Critic; and the Foundation of the
whole Play from Shakespeare. The Intrigues of Versailles; or, A Iilt in all
Humors, a Comedy; Acted at the Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. 1697. 4 to.
This Play had not the Success the Author desired; who in his Epistle to the two
Sir Charles Sidley's, is pleased to Condemn the Taste of the Town for not
liking it, when they had approved others of his Plays of less value, and Merit,
it having been approved by two such Judges as Mr. Congreve and Mr. Betterton,
as he tells us it would be a sort of presumption to dissent from them, though
with the Town on ones side; for of them, as of Cato, it may be said, Viatrix
causa diis placuit sed victa Catoni; yet it is to me unaccountable, that Ramlure
should be introduced speaking broken English, or a sort of Iargon between
French and English, when all the Persons in the Play except Guillamour are
French, and the Scene laid at Versailes. Nor can I imagine how Mr. Durfey and
his two Judges could oversee the young Count Tornese absconding in the very
Court of the King, in so thin a Disguise as that of a Woman, when he had
committed so unpardonable a Fault as a Duel is there, and have such a Confident
of his Disguise as Voudosm, who had a better way of Attacking him than with a
pruning Knife: But Nequid Nimis. As for the Thefts they are numerous enough.
Tornezres Disguise, and Count Brisack's falling in Love with his Wifes Gallant
in Woman's Clothes, are Borrowed from a Novel called, The Double Cuckold.
Vandosms Character seems to be a fairer Copy of Olivia in The Plain Dealer, and
Mirtilla in Mrs. Behn's Play, called, The Amorous Iilt; but Vandosms Language
is more Billinsgate than either, wanting the Wit of the first, and the
Genteelness of the last. Love for Money; or, The Boarding-School, a Comedy,
Acted at the Theater Royal, 1691. 4 to. and Dedicated to the Right Honorable
Charles, Lord Viscount Lansdown, Count of the Sacred Roman Empire, etc. This
Play it seems in the first Days Representation met with Enemies, which
endeavored to Damn it, especially the Dancing-Masters, and other Friends to
the Boarding-Schools, who supposed themselves, and their Livelihood expos^d;
from which the Poet clears himself, and lets us understand, that all this
Opposition could not oppress the Merit of the Play; which is, without doubt, a
sufficient Proof that there was something in it that pleased more than
ordinary. I do not find many new Characters; Deputy Nicompoop, Ned Bragg, etc.
being the Refuge of every Cinic Writer, at least of late. The Plot in general I
take to be his own. Madam Fickle; or, The Witty False One, a Comedy, 4 to.
1677. Acted at his Royal Highness the Dukes Theater, and Dedicated to his Grace
the Duke of Ormond. Old Love resembles Veterano in Marmion's Antiquary,
Zechiel's creeping into the Tavern-Bush, and Tilb^^y's being drunk under it,
etc. from Sir Reverence Lamard and Pimpwell in Isling^^n and Hogsden-Walks. See
also a Play called The Fawn, writ by Marston. The Marriage Hater Matched; a
Comedy, Acted at the Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants, 1693. 4 to. and
Dedicated to the Illustrious, and truly Noble Prince James, Duke, Marquess, and
Earl of Ormond in England and Ireland, etc. This Play was very well received,
and in it Mr. Dogget gave the first Proofs that were taken great notice of,
what an admirable Actor he was. Before this Play is prefixed a Letter to the
Author in Defense of it; and with that I do agree, that this is by much the
best of his Comedies, though I can never allow the rest of that Epistle free from
Flattery; and we may conclude that Friendship, or some other Motive blinded his
Eyes very much, when he made so large an Encomium of it. The Richmond Heiress;
or, a Woman once in the Right, a Comedy, Acted at the Theater Royal by their
Majesty's Servants, 1693. 4 to. Dedicated to the Honorable, and my very good
Friend Sir Nicholas Garrard, Bar. whom he is pleased to inform, that in the
piece offered him, there appears no defect of Genius, whatever there might be
of Judgment; whether the Poet be in the Right or no the Reader must Determine;
but it is evident, it was not Received with an Applause Answerable to his
Expectations; though upon a Revival and Alterations he has pleased the Town. The
Royallist; a Comedy, 4 to. 1682. Acted at the Dukes Theater. Camillas Trick of
Sir O^iver Old-Cut, for Sir Charles King-Love, borrowed from Boccace's Novels,
Day 7. Nov. 9. and the Song of Hey boys up go we, stolen from an E^clogue, 4
to. in The Shepherd's Oracle. The Siege of Memphis; or, The Ambitious Queen, a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1676. Acted at the Theater Royal, and Dedicated to Henry
Chivers, Esquire This Play met not with that Success the Author desired. Sir
Barnaby Whig; or, No Wit like a Woman's; a Comedy, 4 to. 1681. Acted at the
Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants, and Dedicated to the Right
Honorable George, Earl of Berkley. Plot from The Fine Companion, a Play of
Marmion's, and part from a Novel called The Double Cuckold, 8 vo. Trick for
Trick; or, The Debauched Hypocrite, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678. This is only Monsieur
Thomas (a Play of Fletcher's) Revived. The Virtuous Wife; or, Good Luck at
last; a Comedy, 4 to. 1680. Several Hints stolen from other Plays ( viz.) The
Fawn, Marriage A-la-mode, etc.
He has written besides the abovementioned Plays, some Volumes of Songs and
Poems, as Butler's Ghost, Collins's Walk, etc.

E
Edward Eccleston.
THis Author is (I suppose) still living, and has writ a Play set off with
Sculptures, and several Titles to make it sell; it was first called,

Noah's Flood; or, The Destruction of the World, an Opera, 4 to. 1679.
Dedicated to the Duchess of Monmouth; the second Title was The Cataplasm, or
General Deluge of the World, 4 to. 1684. and again the third time, under the
Name of The Deluge, or, The Destruction of the World, 4 to. 1691. The
Foundation of it is from Sacred Writ.

Sir George Etheridge.
A Gentleman very famous in the Reign of King Charles the Second; his Country I
am ignorant of; but his first Applications were to the Law; his Love in a Tub,
and his Wit brought him into good Acquaintance, and general Esteem, till for
Marrying a Fortune he was Knighted, and by King James the Second, he being in
particular esteem with the late Queen his Consort, sent him Envoy to Hamburgh.
After the Revolution he went for France to his Master, and dyed there, or very
soon after his arrival in England from thence; He is the Author of three Plays;
two of them are admirable; and were the first divided from the serious part, it
would not want a considerable Praise, at least it still meets with a general
Applause.

The Comical Revenge; or, Love in a Tub, a Comedy, 4 to. 1679. Acted at the
Duke of York's Theater then in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields. This Play, though part
serious, and part Comical, yet (as before) met with a general Applause. The Man
of Mode; or, Sir Fopling Flutter, a Comedy, 4 to. 1676. Acted at the Duke of
York's Theater, and Dedicated to his Duchess. This Play met with extraordinary
Success; all agreeing it to be true Comedy, and the Characters drawn to the
Life. She would if she could, a Comedy, 4 to. 1671. Acted also at the Duke of
York's Theater. This Comedy is accounted by Mr. Langbain, with whom I agree,
one of the first Rank, and by Mr. Shadwell (in his Preface to his Humorists)
the best Comedy written since the Restoration of the Stage.
F
Sir Francis Fane, Iun. Knight of the Bath.
THIS Honorable Author is lately deceased, his late Residence was at Fulbeck
in Lincolnshire; he was Grandson to the Earl of Westmorland, and has given us
the two following Plays: L^ve in the Dark; or, The Man of Business; a Comedy, 4
to. 1675. Acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's Servants, and Dedicated
to the Right Honorable John, Earl of Rochester. The Plot taken from the
Invisible Mistress in Scarron's Novels, 8 vo. Boccace's Novels, Day 3. Nov. 3.
and Day 7. Nov. 7. Loves of Great Men, p. 59. The Sacrifice, a Tragedy 4 to.
1686. and Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles, Earl of Dorset and
Middlesex. This Play though Published without Acting, was highly commended by two
Copies of Verses to the Author by Mr. Tate and Mrs. Behn; For the Plot see
Chalcoco^dyla^, lib. 3. Leundavius, lib. 6. See also the Lives of Bajazet and
Tamerlain, the last by Mr. D'Assigny, and the former by Knoll's in his Turkish
History.


Sir Richard Fanshaw.
BRother to the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fanshaw of Ware-Park in
Hert^ordshire; he was Educated at Cambridge, from thence removed to Court; he
perfectly understood Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese; was
Secretary to the King in Holland, France, and Scotland, was after the
Restoration sent Ambassador to Portugal, to Consummate the Match between the
present Queen Dowager and Charles the Second. In the Year 1664. he was s^nt
into Spain, Ambassador, to confirm the Treaty of Commerce and League between
the two Crowns, and dyed at Madrid, 1666. to say nothing of his Capacity as a
Statesman, we confine our selves only to his Poetry, and particularly his
Dramatick Pieces.

Pastor Fido, The Faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, 8 vo, and 4 to. Dedicated to
King Charles the Second, when Prince of Wales. Translated from Guarini's
Italian, and Printed with his Poems, 8 vo. Querer por Solo querer, To Love only
for Love's sake, 4 to. 1671. This is a Dramatick Romance, Translated from the
Spanish of Mendoza, when Sir Richard was a Pri^oner in Tankersly-Castle in
Yorkshire, after the Battle of Worcester, where he was on the King's side, this
Play consists but of three Acts, the Spanish Poets seldom exceeding that
Number.
Henry Lord Viscount Faulkland.
FAther to the late Lord Faulkland, celebrated by Cowley. He was of
Oxfordshire, and Lord Lieutenant of that County, and a Member of Parliamen^t;
his Diversion led him to write one Play, called,

The Marriage Night, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1664. This Play never appeared public on
the Stage.

Nathaniel Field.
THis Poet Lived in the time of King James I. and King Charles I. he was
assistant to old Massenger in the writing a Play called, The Fatal Dowry, and
commonly called Son by Mr. Chapman, who, as well as most of the then Poets, had
our Author in good Esteem, he was an Actor, and writ himself two Plays, ( viz.)
Amends for Ladies, with the merry Pranks of Moll Cutpurse, or the Humor of
Roaring, a Comedy, 4 to 1639. Acted at the Black Friars, by the Prince's and
Lady Elizabeth's Servants. This Play the Author writ to please the Ladies whom
he had offended by his other Play. The Plot in part taken from the Novel of the
Curious Impertinent in Don Quixot. Woman's a Weathercock, a Comedy, 4 to.
1612. Acted before the King at Whitehall, and several times privately at the
White Friars by the Children of her Majesty's Revels. This Play pleased much in
those Days, and highly commended by Mr. Chapman.


Edward Filmer.
AN Author that has been pleased to visit the Town with a Play in the Autumn of
his Age, if I am rightly informed; it is therefore no great wonder if it wanted
fire and force enough to preserve its Life above three Days. He is a Doctor of
the Civil-Law, and otherwise esteemed a Man of good Sense and Judgment; and
some Lines in this Play confirm that Opinion, it is called,

The Unnatural Brother, a Tragedy, 4 to. Acted at the Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, 1697. by his Majesty's Servants; he owns the Plot to be
taken from Cassandra, particularly the Story of Alcinoe in that Romance.

Mr. Fishbourn.
A Gentleman who writ an unlicensed Play without his Name, called,

Sodom; before this Play are put the two Letters E. R. the Printer having a
mind to have it pass for one of the Works of the late Earl of Roche^^er, as it
had been formerly imputed to him, and which he denies and detests in a Copy of
Verses made on purpose against the Author of it, who was, as I Am very well
assured, one Mr. Fishbourn, an Inns of Court Gentleman; nor indeed has it an^
of my Lord Rochester's Wit to make amends for the abominable ^ilth of the
Obscenity which must nauseate every Reader of any tolerable Judgment.

Richard Flecknoe.
THis memorable Author lived in the Reign of both the Charle's, was (as I have
had it from good hands) a Jesuit, but forsook the knavish part of his O^fice
for Poetry, though his Works, if I may credit those that have read him with more
regard than my self, is not enough to quit him of all the tricks of that Order,
he is for nothing so ^amous, as for naming a Poem of Mr. Dryden's called, Mac
Flecknoe, he has Published several Plays, but whether any of 'em were Acted or
not, I Am not able to determine.

Damoyselles A-la-mode, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1667. Dedicated to their Graces the
Duke and Duchess of New Castle, borrowed from Moliere's Precieuses Ridicules,
L'Escole des Femes, and L'Escole des Maris. Erminia; or, The Chaste Lady, a
Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1667. Dedicated to the fair and virtuous Lady the Lady
Southcott. Loves Dominion, a Postoral, 8 vo. 1654. Dedicated to the Lady
Elizabeth Claypole: A Play full of Morality, and written as a Pa^^ern for the
Reformed Stage. Love's Kingdom, a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1664. Dedicated
to his Excellency the Marquess of Newcas^le. This Published with a fresh Title
ten years after; the other going before, is almost the same, only Corrected,
and a very little altered. Marriage of Oceanus and Britania, a Masque.
This Author has written diverse Epigrams and Enigmatical Characters; also a
short Discourse of the English Stage, Published at the end of his Love's
Dominion, 8 vo. Diarium, or The Iournal, another piece of his in Burlesque
Verse, 12 ves. 1656. etc.

John Fletcher, and Francis Beaumont.
MR. Fletcher was the Son of Dr. Fletcher, created Bishop of Bristol by Queen
Elizabeth, and afterward translated to the Sea of London, 1593. He died the
first year of Charles I. of the Plague in London, 1625. in his Forty ninth
Year, and was Buried in St. Mary Overy's Church, Southwark. His Colleague in
writing most of his Plays, Mr. Beaumont, I can say little of, but what the
Reader may gather from the Verses of the Poets in that Age, before their Works;
that he was a Man of Learning none can question; but to imagine, as Mr.
Langbain does, that he was perfectly versed in the Dramatick Laws, is more than
can be drawn from their Plays, of which there is scarce one regular. Their
Comedies are much the best; yet of them take away five or six, and they will
not bear Acting, scarce reading by a nice Judge. I say not this to derogate
from Men of undoubted Merit, but only prompted by my impartiality, a Character
which Mr. Langbain professes but has no where preserved. Their Plays are Fifty
two in Number, all which are Printed and Published in one large Volume Folio,
1679. They follow in Alphabetical Order.

The Beggars Bush; a Comedy, fol. often Acted formerly with good Applause.
Bonduca, a Tragedy, fol. This Play has been twice revived, Plot from Tacitus's
Annals, Book 14. See also Milton's History of England, Book 2. The Bloody
Brother; or, Rollo Duke of Normandy, a Tragedy, fol. This Play has been
sometimes Acted of late Days in Dorset Garden, with good Success. Plot from
Herodian. Hist. Lib. 4. and part of the Language from Seneca's Thebais. The
Captain, a Comedy, fol. This Play has not been Acted of late years. The
Chances; a Comedy, fol. Revived by the late Duke of Buckingham, and Printed
with Alterations 4 to. 1682. oftentimes Acted with great Applause of late days
at the Theater in Dorset Garden, etc. Plot from the Lady Cornelia in Exemplary
Novels, fol. or the Novels of Cornelia in Miguel des Cervantes Novels,
translated by Dr. Pope. The Coronation; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. not Acted these
many years. This Play, though Printed in this folio Edition, is claimed by
Shirley to be his. The Coxcomb, a Comedy, fol. This Play has been Revived and
Act^d at the Theater Royal, but met with little Success. Cupid's Revenge, a
Tragedy, fol. The Custom of the Country; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. The Plot of
Rutilio, Duarte, and Guyomar, built on Malispinis Novels, Decad. 6. Nov. 6. The
Double Marriage; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. This Play was Revived some Years since,
but met not with that Success expected. The Elder Brother; a Comedy fol.
oftentimes Acted formerly, and met with indifferent Success. The Faithful
Shepherdess; a Pastoral, fol. This was entirely Fletcher's, and commended by (
See Beaumont and Fletcher's Plays, last Edition, fol. p. 233.
) Copies of Verses by Mr. Beaumont and Ben. Johnson. 'Twas first Acted on a
Twelfth Night, at Somerset House; instead of a Prologue was a Song in Dialogue,
writ by Sir William D'avenant, and Sung between a Priest and a Nymph; and the (
Covent Garden Drollery, p. 86.
) Epilogue was then spoken by the Lady Mordant. The Fair Maid of the Inn; a
Comedy, fol. Marianus disowning Caesario, and the Duke's Injunction to Marry
him, you may find in Causin's Holy Court, and Wanly's Hist. of Man, Book 3 Cap.
26. The False One, a Tragedy, fol.^ See Plutarch, Suetonius, Dion, Appian,
Florus, Orosius, etc. Four Plays; or, Moral Representations in One,
Tragi-Comedy, fol. (viz.) The Triumphs of Honor; built on Boccace's Novels,
Day 10. Nov. 5. Triumph of Love, on Nov. 8. Day 5. Triumph of Death, on Nov. 3.
Part 3. of the Fortunate Deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers, also The Palace of
Pleasure, Nov. 4. And The Triumph of Time, the Author's own Invention. An
Honest Man's Fortune; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. See Heywood's Hist. of Women, Book
9. p. 641. The Humorous Lieutenant; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. Some hint may be taken
from Horace, Lib. 2. Ep. 2. but rather from Ford's Apothegms, p. 30. See also
Plutarch's Life of Demetrius, Appian, Justin, etc. Island Princess, a
Tragi-Comedy, fol. and 4 to. This Play was about ten Years since Revived by Mr.
Tate, the present Poet Laureat, with Alterations. Acted at the Theater Royal,
and Dedicated to the Right Honorable Henry, Lord Walgrave, the Quarto Edition,
Printed 1687. A King and no King; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. Revived since the
Restoration, and Acted with Applause at the Theater Royal. The Knight of the
Burning Pestle; a Comedy, fol. Revived also in King Charles the Second's time,
and Acted at the Theater Royal, with a new Prologue, spoken by the famous Madam
Ellen Guin. A Knight of Malta, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. not Acted of late years.
The Laws of Candy; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. not Acted these many years. The Little
French Lawyer, a Comedy, fol. Plot from Gusman's Don Lewis^ de Castro, and Don
Roderigo de Montalvo. See also Scarroon's Novel of the Fruitless Precaution.
Loves Cure; or, The Martial Maid, a Comedy, fol. Love's Prilgrimage, a Comedy,
fol. The Plot from a Novel, called, The Two Damsels, in a Book Entitled
Exemplary Novels, and part of the Play taken from Iohnson's New Inn. The Lovers
Progress, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. Plot from a French Romance, called Lysander and
Calista. The Loyal Subject; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. The Mad Lover, a Comedy, fol.
See the Story of Mundus and Paulina, in Josephus Hist. of the Jews, Book 18.
Chap. 4. The Maid in the Mill, a Comedy; This Play was Revived, and sometimes
Acted at the Dukes Theater after the Fire of London. Plot of the serious part
from Gerardo, a Romance, and the Comical part from Bandello's Novels. The
Maid's Tragedy, a Tragedy, fol. This Play was often Acted at the King's Theater
since the Restoration; but somewhat in it displeasing King Charles the Second,
it was for some time forbid coming on the Stage, till Mr. Waller Reviving it,
and wholly altering the last Act (which is Printed in his Poems) appeared again
publicly. A Masque of Gray's Inn and the Inner Temple-Gentlemen, fol. This was
presented at the Marriage of the Princess Elizabeth, and the Prince Palatine of
the Rhyne, in the Banqueting House of White^all; written by Mr. Beaumont
alone. Monsieur Thomas, a Comedy, fol. This has appeared since on the Stage,
with a new Title, called, Trick for Trick. Nice Valor; or, The Passionate mad
Man; a Comedy, fol. The Night Walker; or, The little Thief, a Comedy, fol. This
has been Acted since the Restoration, by the King's Servants. The Noble
Gentleman; a Comedy, fol. This Play has appeared of late years with a new
Title, called, The Fool's Pre^erment; or, The Three Dukes of Dunstable, Riviv'd
by Mr. Durfey. Philaster; or, Love lies a Bleeding; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. A Play
often Acted formerly, and sometimes of late Years, is accounted one of the best
our Authors have Published. The Pilgrim; a Comedy, fol. Revived and Acted some
Years since. The Prophetess; a Tragi-Comedy, fol. This is Revived under the
name of the Prophetess; or, The History of Dioclesian, an Opera, 4 to. 1690. I
know not what reason Mr. Langbain has to attribute the revival to Mr. Dryden,
when 'twas Mr. Betterton's. The true History you may find in Nicephorus, lib.
6. and 7. Eusebius lib. 8. Baronii An. 204. etc. The Queen of Corinth; a
Tragi-Comedy, fol. Rule a Wife, and have a Wife, a Comedy, fol. This Play has
been sometimes Acted of late days with good Applause. The Scornful Lady, a
Comedy, fol. Acted often in these days with good Applause. This Play is
likewise Printed in Quarto, 1691. The Sea Voyage, a Comedy, fol. This Play has
been Revived by Mr. Durfey, with a new Title, called, The Commonwealth of
Women, and in part resembles Shakespeare's Tempest. The Spanish Curate, a
Comedy. Plot from Gerardo's Hist. of Don John p. 202. and from the Spanish
Curate of the same Author, p. 214. Thiery and Theodoret, a Tragedy, fol. and 4
to. imperfect in the last Act in the folio Edition, but supplied in the 4 to.
Plot from the French Chronicles, in the Reign of Clotair II. See Fredegarius,
De Serres, Mezeray, etc. Two Noble Kinsmen, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. Mr. Shakespeare
assisted in the writing of this Play. Valentinian, a Tragedy, fol. and 4 to.
This Play, has been Revived and Altered by the late Earl of Rochester, and so
Acted at the Theater Royal with great Applause. The Quarto Edition, Published
1685. with a Preface relating to the Author and his Works. Plot from Amm.
Marcellinus. Procopius. Hist. Evagrius, and other Writers of those times. A
Wife for a Month, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. See the Story hereof in Mariana, and
Louis de Mayerne Turquet, and the History of Sancho VIII. King of Leon. The
Wild Goose Chase, a Comedy, fol. This Play has been in good repute. Wit at
several Weapons, a Comedy, fol. built on the Wits; writ by Sir William
D'avenant. Wit without Money, a Comedy, fol. This Play was Revived and Acted in
Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, immediately after the Theater in Drury Lane was
burnt, with a new Prologue by Mr. Dryd^n. The Woman Hater, a Tragi-Comedy, fol.
Revived by Sir William D'avenant, with a Si^ William D'avenant's Works, fol. p.
249.
new Prologue writ in Prose. Mr. Fletcher writ this Play without the Assistance
of Mr. Beaumont. The Woman's Prize; or, The Tamer Tamed; a Comedy, fol. built on
the Taming of the Shrew, writ by Mr. Shakespeare, and may be taken as a Counter
part thereof. Women Pleased; a Comedy, fol. See the most Comical parts hereof
taken from Nov. 6. Day 7. and Day 8. Nov. 8. etc. of Boccace's Novels.
Mr. Fletcher joined with Ben. Johnson and Middleton, in one other Comedy,
called, The Widow, placed under Johnson; and Mr. Beaumont has writ a Book of
Poems, Elegies, Sonnets, etc. last Edition, 8 vo. 1653.

John Ford.
A Gentleman of the Middle Temple, in the Reign of King Charles I. and besides
those Plays he has joined with Rowley and Decker, he has writ seven entirely
alone.

The Broken Heart, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1633. Acted by his Majesty's Servants, at
the private House in Black Friars, and Dedicated to the Lord Craven. Fancies
Chaste and Noble; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1638. Acted at the Phoenix in
Drury Lane, by the Queens Majesty's Servants, and Dedicated to the Lord
Macdonel, Earl of Antrim^ in Ireland. The Ladies Trial; a Tragi-Comed^^ 4 to.
1639. Acted by their Majesty's Servants in Drury Lane, and Dedicated to John
Wyrley, Esquire and Mrs. Mary Wyrley his Wife. Lovers Melancholy; a Tragi-Comedy, 4
to. 1629. Acted at the private House in Black Friars, and publicly at the
Globe by the King's Servants, and Dedicated to several of his Friends of
Gray's Inn in particular, and to the whole Society in general. Loves Sacrifice;
a Tragedy, 4 to. 1633. Acted by the Queens Servants at the Phoenix in Drury
Lane, and Dedicated to John Ford of Gray's Inn, Esquire. Perkin Warbeck; an
Historical Play, 4 to. 1634. Acted by the Queens Servants in Drury Lane, and
Dedicated to the Right Honorable William, Earl of New Castle. For the truth of
the Story see Gainsford's Hist. of Perkin Warbeck, 4 to. and our English
Chronicles in the Reign of Henry VII. It Is Pity she is a Whore; a Tragedy, 4 to.
1633. Acted by the Queens Majesty's Servants at the Phaenix in Drury Lane, and
Dedicated to the truly Noble John, Earl of Peterborough, Lord Mordant, Baron of
Turney. The Suns Darling; a Mask, 4 to. 1657. Presented by their Majesty's
Servants at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, and Dedicated to the Right Honorable
the Earl of Southampton. This Play was not wholly written by this Author, but
Decker joined with him therein.
Thomas Ford.
THIS Author lived in the Reign of King Charles I. and has writ one Play,
called,

Loves Labyrinth; or, The Royal Shepherdess, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1660. Part
of it taken from Gomersal's Tragedy of S^^rza, Duke of Millain, and is bound up
with his other Works in 8 vo. 1661.

John Fountain.
A Devonshire Gentleman who lived in the Reign of K. Charles II. and writ one
Play, called,

The Reward of Virtue; a Comedy, 4 to. 1661. never Acted whilst the Author
lived, but after his Death Mr. Shadwell Revived and Altered it; and then under
another Title, ( viz.) The Royal Shepherdess, it was Acted with Applause.

Abraham France.
THIS Poet lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; in a Book writ by him,
called, The Countess of Pembroke's Ivy-Church, is one Dramatick Pastoral,
entitled.

Amyntas Pastoral; 4 to. 1591. writ in Hexameters, and is a Translation of
Tasso's.

Sir Ralph Freeman.
THis Gentleman after the Martyrdom of K. Charles I. writ one Play, called,

Imperiale; a Tragedy, 4 to. 1655. and Dedicated to John Morris, Esquire For the
Plot consult Pontanus, Budaeus's Treasury of Ancient and Modern Times, Beard's
Theater of God's Judgments, part 2. page 45. Wanley's History of Man, Book 4.
Chapt. 2. Goulart Hist. Admirables de Notre temps, Tom. 1. p. 362. and
Bandello's Novels.

Vlpian Fulwell.
AN Author in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, who writ in Rhyme one Play, called,

Like will to like quoth the Devil to the Collier; an Interlude 4 to. 1587.
This ancient piece was so contrived, that it might be Acted by five Persons;
shows what Punishments overtake the Licentious, and what Rewards the Virtuous
receive; its printed in an old black English Letter.

G
George Gascoign, Esquire.
AN ancient Poet who writ in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, he was
of Gray's Inn, and has left us four Dramatick pieces, of which in their order.

The Glass of Government; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1575. This Play was also
printed in an old black Letter, like that of Fulwell's, and shows the
Punishments for Vice, and the Rewards for Virtue. Iocasta; a Tragedy, 4 to.
1556. Translated from the Greek of Euripides by this Author, and one Mr.
Kinwelmersh of Gray's Inn, where it was presented. Supposes; a Comedy, 4 to.
1566. presented also at Gray's Inn, Enlished from the famous Italian Oriosto.
This and the former, are two of the Ancients Plays in our English Tongue.
Pleasure at Kenelworth-Castle; a Masque, but what year when Printed I cannot
tell. This Play was played before the Queen for her Entertainment there.
The Author has Published diverse Poems with his Plays, printed 4 to. 1587.

Henry Glapthorn.
I Know no more of this Author, than that he writ five Plays in the time of K.
Charles I. which follow; Albertus Wallenstein; a Tragedy, 1640. Acted at the
Globe on the Bank side by his Majesty's Servants. See the German Writers of
Ferdinand the 2 d's Reign. Spondanus^s Continuation of Baronius, etc. Argalus
and Parthenia, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1639. This Play was presented before the
King and Queen at Court; and afterward Acted at the private House in Drury
Lane by their Majesty's Servants. Plot from Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia, sol.
The Hollander; a Comedy, 4 to. 1640. Acted at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, as
also at Court before their Majesty's. The Ladies Privilege; a Comedy, 4 to.
1640. Acted both at Court before their Majesty's, and at the Cockpit in Drury
Lane, by their Majesty's Servants. Wit in a Constable; a Comedy, 4 to. 1640.
Acted at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, by their Majesty's Servants.


He also Published a Poem called Whitehall, which are Printed in Quarto 1639.

Tho. Goff.
HE was born about the year 1592. began his Studies at Westminster-School,
finished them at Christ-Church, Oxon, whether he removed at Eighteen. He went
out Bachelor of Divinity, and had the Living of East-Clandon in Surrey, and a
Xantippe to his Wife, whose Tongue, etc. he could not bear so indifferently as
sometimes, but as my Author observes, let it shorten his Days. He was Buried in
the said Parish Church, 1627. and has written diverse Poetical Pieces: His Plays
five in Number, follow: The Careless Shepherdess, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1656. Acted
at Salisbury-Court, before their Majesty's the King and Queen with good
Applause. To which Play is added an Alphabetical Catalogue of all Plays till
that time published i^ English, but very Erroneous. The Courageous Turk; or,
Amurath the First; a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1656. Acted by the Students of
Christ-Church in Oxon. For the Plot, see Leunclavius, Chalcocondylas, Knolles,
etc. in the Reign of Amurath. Orestes his Tragedy, 8 vo. 1656. Acted also by
the Students of Christ-Church in Ox^n. Plot from Euripides's Orestes; or,
Sophocles's Electra. Raging Turk; or, Bajazet the Second; a Tragedy, 8 vo.
1656. which was likewise Acted by the Students of Christ-Church, Ox^n. For the
Plot consult the same Turkish Histories before mentioned. Solimus Emperor of
the Turks, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1638. For the Plot consult also the Turkish
Historians, as Paul. Iovius, Mezeray, etc. in the Reign of Solimus the First.


Three of these five Plays mentioned to be Acted at Oxon, are Printed together
in one Volume 8 vo.

Robert Gomersal.
THis Author, like the last, a Divine, born 1602. at London, at Fourteen was
entered at Christ-Church in Oxon, and chosen Student of that Royal Foundation,
past through his several Degrees to Bachelor of Divinity, and died 1646. He
writ one Play by the Name of,

Lodovick Sforza, Duke of Millain, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1632. For the Story see
Guiccardine, lib. 1,2. etc. Mezeray and Philip de Comines in the Reign of Chapter
VIII. This Author has writ several Poems, some of them Divine, which are
Printed with this Play in 8 vo. Also some Sermons Printed 4 to. 1663.

Robert Gould.
A Gentleman now living, formerly a Domestic of the Right Honorable Charles,
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex; and since teaches School in the Country. He has
given us One Play, called,

The Rival Sisters, or the Violence of Love, a Tragedy, Acted at the Theater
Royal, by his Majesty's Servants 4 to. 1696. and Dedicated to the Right
Honorable, James, Earl of Abingdon, etc. This Play was well received, though
delayed for some time the Acting, as the Author complains in his Epistle. The
Plot is almost entirely taken out of Shirly's Maids Revenge, though he has left
out the Characters of Signior Sharkino, a sharking Doctor, and his Man
Scarabeo; the Story is taken originally out of Reynolds's God's Revenge against
Murder, Book 2. Hist. 7.

Francis Gouldsmith, Esquire
I Can only say, this Author lived in Charles the First's time, and writ a
Play, called,

Sophompaneos, or the History of Joseph, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1640. with
Annotations, this Divine Dramma was writ in Latin by Hugo Grotius, translated
by our Author in Heroic Verse. For the Plot, ^ee the 44th, and 45th Chapter of
Genesis, Philo, in the Life of Josephus, Justin, Book 36. Eusebius's
Preparation to the Gospel, etc.

George Granville, Esquire
THIS Gentleman is of the Noble Family of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Bath, and his Nephew: A Person of uncommon Qualifications, and one that gives
as much Honor to the Name he bears, as he has received from it; whose Wit,
Personal Bravery, and Sweetness of Temper, have made him the Delight of all
that know him. The great Mr. Waller has expressed his Esteem of him, in a Copy
of Verses in return of some made to him by Mr. Granville. He has already given
the World Two Plays.

Heroic Love, a Tragedy, Acted at the Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields.
This Play is one of the best of our Modern Tragedies, and writ after the manner
of the Ancients, which is much more natural and easy than that of our Modern
Dramatists. The Plot is built on the First Book of Homer, etc. The
She-Gallants, a Comedy, Acted at the Theater Royal in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, 1696. 4 to.
This Play has, next the Plain Dealer, more just and substantial Reflections
and Satirical Observations, than any of our English Comedies; the Dialogue is
not only easy, but nervous; and indeed he makes his Persons speak more Wit than
the Stage is generally used to, which armed a Faction against it, though even
that was not sufficient totally to suppress its Success, for it was very often
Acted to the Satis^action of most that saw it with impartiality, and would be
contented to be pleased. The Episode of the Four Sisters is taken out of the
French Marquess, in the Romance of Ibraim.

Alexander Green.
HE lived in the Reign of King Charles the Second, and writ a Play, called,

The Politician Cheated, a Comedy, 4 to. 1663. This Play I do not find to be
ever Acted.

Robert Green.
T^IS Poet lived and writ One Play and part of another in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, was Master of Arts in Cambridge, and has Published some other Pieces.

The Honorable History of Friar Bacon, and Friar Bungy, a Comedy, 4 to. For
the Plot consult Plot's Hist. of Oxonshire, and Wood Antiquit. Oxon. etc.

Looking-Glass for London and England. For this see the Account of Dr. Lodge,
with whom he joined in this Divine Drama. This Author has writ diverse other
Pieces, most of them Printed in an old Black Letter.

H.
William Ha^ington, Esquire
OUR Poet in the midst of the late Civil Wars, devoted himself to the Muses,
and among their Productions is a Play, called,

The Queen of Arragon, a Tragi-Comedy, Fol. 1640. Acted both at Court and the
Black-Fryars. He has a Book of Poems, called, Castara, 8 vo. 1640. also the
History or Chronicle of Edward the Fourth, Fol. 1640.

Joseph Harris.
A Player yet living, and Brother to the Famous Organist of the City of London;
he has been more than once aiming at Authority, by the Help of his Friends; he
has Published Two Plays under his Name, called, The Mistakes, or the False
Report, a Comedy, 4 to. 169. which Play, as I am informed, was originally
composed by another, and put into his Hands, and so he made shift, by altering
it, to spoil it. The City-Bride, or the Merry Cuckold, a Comedy, Acted at the
new Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants; 4 to.
1696. and dedicated to the Honorable Sir John Walter, Bar. This Play
miscarried, though borrowed from John Webster's Cure for a Cuckold, whole Scenes
being the same, but spoiled by the Transposer; for which he would seem to make
amends, by the Performances of the Musicians, and ^o far he is in the Right.


Peter Hausted.
HE was born at Oundle, in Northamptonshi^e, proceeded to Master of Arts, in
Queens-College, Cambridge, in the Reign of Charles the First; he was impatient
of Censure, as well as his admired Ben. and writ a Play, called.

The Rival Friends, a Comedy, 4 to. 1632. Acted before the King and Queen at
Cambridge. The Scene betwixt Love-all and Hamershin, Act 3. Scene 7. from that
betwixt True-wit, Daw, and La-Fool, in Ben's Silent Woman.

Joseph Haynes.
THIS Person is mentioned here, for the sake of an abominable Play that is
mentioned under his Name, but he is not the Author of it, called,

A Fatal Mistake, or the Plot spoiled, Printed 4 to. 1696. but never Acted.

Richard Head.
THIS Author, born in Ireland of English Parents, his Father was a Minister,
and murdered in the Massacree 1641. He had a little smattering of the
University of Oxon, but was soon removed to a Bookseller in St. Paul's
Churchyard, London. He writ one Play, called,

Hic and Vbique, or the Humors of Dublin, a Comedy, 4 to. 1663. Dedicated to
Charles, Duke of Monmouth. He writ the First, and most of the Third Parts of
the English Rogue, The Art of Wheedling, 8 vo. The Complaisant Companion, 12
mo. Venus's Cabinet unlocked, 12 mo. with several other small Treatises.

William Hemmings.
AN Author, of whom I can only say, That he lived in the Reign of Charles the
First, was Master of Arts of Oxford, and he writ Two Plays, viz.

Fatal Contract, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1653. Acted by her Majesty's Servants, and
Dedicated to the Right Honorable, James, Earl of Northampton, and to Isabella,
his Virtuous Countess. Since the Restoration of King Charles the Second, it
has been twice revived, first under the Title of Love and Revenge, with little
Alterations; and about Ten Years ago, under the Title of the Eunuch. For the
Plot, consult Gregory de Tours, lib. 4, 5, etc. Aimion, Valois, De Serres,
Mezeray, etc. in the Reigns of Chilperic the First, and Clot^air the Second.
Jews Tragedy, a Tragedy, Printed 4 to. 1662. For the Plot, consult Iosephus's
History of the Jews, Book 6, and 7. where you may find the fatal Overthrow by
Vespasian and Titus his Son, agreeable to that famous History by Josephus,
Printed 4 to. 1662.
Jasper Heywood.
SON of John Heywood, first of Merton, and then of All-Souls-College, Oxon,
which he left for St. Omers, where he proved a zealous Biggotted Jesuit, and
the first that seminary sent for England: some say he was Fuller's Worthies, p.
222.
Hanged; others, That he was, with Seventy more, of that and other Orders,
taken the Year 1585. and Baker's Chron. Reign of Queen Eliz. p. 364.
sent away beyond Sea. While he was of Oxford, he tran^lated Three of Seneca's
Plays, ( viz.) Hercules Furens, a Tragedy, 4 to. Compare this with a Tragedy of
Euripides, bearing the same Title. Thyestes, a Tragedy 4 to. which our Author
translated, whilst he was of All Souls, in Oxon; he has added a Scene at the
End of the Fifth Act. Tr^as, a Tragedy, 4 to. Farnaby styles this, a Divine
Tragedy, and highly commends it; Dan. Heinsius also commends and prefers it
before the Troades of Euripides.


These Three Tragedies, translated by our Author from Seneca, are printed
together in a Black Letter, 4 to. 1581.

John Heywood.
FATHER of the foregoing Poet, and lived in the Reigns of Edward the Sixth, and
Queeen Mary the First, at North-Mims, in Hertfordshire, was Sir Tho. More's
Neighbor, and in Favor with Queen Mary; after whose Death, flying for
Religion, he died at Mechlem, 1556. was one of our first Dramatick Writers;
and^ though a Papist, severe on their Regular Clergy, as they call 'em.

Four P^s, an Interlude, 4 to.

A Play between John the Husband and Tib his Wife.

A Play between the Pardoner, the Friar, the Curate and Neighbor Prat.

A Play of Gentleness and Nobility, Two Parts.

A Play of Love.

A Play of the Weather, styled, A new and very merry Interlude of all manner of
Weathers, Fol. 1533.

These being some of the first Plays appeared in our English Language, nothing
in Commendation will be expected of them. This Author writ Two or Three Books
of Epigrams, Published in 4 to. also a Book called Monumenta Literaria.

Thomas Heywood.
THIS Author was both Actor and Poet, lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
and King James I. He writ, or had assisted in composing Two Hundred and Twenty
Plays, of which there are but Twenty Five remain entire. Langbain's Account of
the Dram. Poets, p. 258.
Mr. Langbain sets up for a Vindication of this Author, in the same Book that
he condemns Mr. Dryden, which indeed is enough to render his Judgment very much
suspected, and that the Variety of Plays he had read, either corrupted his
Taste, or else that he never had any.

The Golden Age, or The Lives of Jupiter and Saturn, etc. 4 to. 1611. Acted at
the Red Bull, by the Queen's Majesty's Servants. See Galtruchius's Poetical
Hist. Ross's M^stagogus Poeticus^ Hollyoak, Littleton, and other Dictionaries.
The Silver Age, a History, 4 to. 1613. See Plautus, Ovid's Metamorph. lib. 3.
and other Poetical Hist. Brazen Age, a History, 4 to. 1613. See Ovid's
Metamorph. lib. 4, 7, 8, and 9. Iron Age, Part I. a History, 4 to. 1632. For
the Plot, etc. see Virgil, Homer, Lucian, Ovid, etc. Iron Age, Part II. 4 to.
1632. For the Plot, consult the same Authors before mentioned. A Challenge for
Beauty, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1636. Acted at the Black-Fryars, and at the Globe
on the Bank Side, by his Majesty's Servants. The Duchess of Suffolk, her Life,
a History, 4 to 1631. Acted then with good Applause. For the Plot, see Fox's
Martyrology, An. Dom. 1558. and Clark's Martyrology, page 521. Edward the
Fourth, Two Parts, a History, 4 to. 16^^. See the Story hereof, in the
Chronicles of Hollingshead, Speed, Du Chesne, etc. The English Traveller, a
Tragi-Comidy, 4 to. 1633. Acted at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, by her Majesty's
Servants. Both Plot and Language of Lyonel and Reignald, stolen from Plautus's
Mostellaria. See the Story of Wincote, Geraldine, and Dalavil, in the History
of Women, by this Author, where he affirms the said Stories at large to be
true. Fair Maid of the Exchange, a Comedy, 4 to. 1637. wherein are related the
pleasant Passages, and merry Humors of the Cripple of Fanchurch. Mr. Kirkman,
and others, reckon this Play to our Author; but Mr. Langbain makes a Question
thereof, Langbain's Account of Dramatick Poets. p. 263.
since his Name is not prefixed; nor, says he, the Style and Economy does not
resemble the rest of his Labors. Fair Maid of the West, or, A Girl worth Gold,
a Tragi-Comedy, Part I. 4 to. 1631. Acted before the King and Queen, by her
Majesty's Servants. Fair Maid of the West, or, A Girl worth Gold, Part II. 4
to. 1631. Acted likewise before the King and Queen, by her Majesty's Servants.
Both these Plays had, in those Times, good Repute; and afterward served for
the Subject of a Romance, called, The English Lover, writ by John Dancer, one
of our foregoing Authors. Fortune by Land and Sea, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1655.
Acted by the Queen's Majesty's Servants, with good Applause. Our Author was
joined, in composing this Play, by William Rowley, hereafter mentioned. Four
London Prentices, with the Conquests of Jerusalem, History, 4 to. 1635. Acted
at the Red Bull, by the Queen's Servants. Founded on Godfrey of Bulloign. See
Tasso, Fuller's Hist. of the Holy War, and Dr. Nalson's History of the
Crasaide. If you know not me, you know no body, or, The Troubles of Queen
Elizabeth, in Two Parts, 4 to. 1623. Plot from Cambden's History of Queen
Elizabeth, also Speed, and other our English Chronicles in her Reign. The
Lancashire Witches, 4 to. London, 16^^. See this Story in Verse, in a large
Volume of the same Author, called, The Hierarchy of Angels, Fol. lib. 8. Love's
Mistress, or, The Queen's Mask, 4 to. 1640. Acted before their Majesty's, and
diverse Ambassadors, at the Phoenix in Drury Lane. Plot from Apuleius's Golden
Ass. 4 to. Maidenhead, well lost, A Comedy, 4 to. 1634. Acted by her Majesty's
Servants in Drury Lane, with good Applause. Rape of Lucrece, a Tragedy, 4 to.
1638. Acted at the Red Bull, Plot from Tit. Livius, dec. 1. cap. 58, etc.
Robert, Earl of Huntingdon's Downfall, a History, 4 to. 1601. Acted by the
Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Admiral of England's Servants. Plot from Stow,
Speed, and Baker's Chronicles, in the Life of King Richard the First; Fuller's
Worthies in the Account of Nottinghamshire. Robert, Earl of Huntingdon's Death,
a Tragedy, 4 to. 1601. This Earl was usually called, Robin Hood, of merry
Sherwood, Plot from the aforesaid English Chronicles. Royal King, and Loyal
Subject, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1627. Acted by the Queen's Servants, with good
Applause. Compare this with the Loyal Subject, writ by Beaumont and Fletcher.
Wise Woman of Hogsden, a Comedy, 4 to. 1638. often times Acted with good
Applause. Woman Killed with Kindness, a Comedy. 4 to. 1617. Acted by the
Queen's Servants, with good Applause.
Our Author has Published several other Pieces, in Verse and Prose, as The
Hierarchy of Angels, Fol. The Life and Troubles of Queen Elizabeth, 8 vo. The
Lives of Nine Women Worthies, 4 to. The General History of Women, 8 vo. An
Apology for Actors, 4 to. and Pleasant Dialogues and Drama's 8 vo.

Henry Higden, Esquire
I Know not whether this Gentleman be yet living or not; but he was a Barrister
of the Honorable Society of the Middle Temple: A Person known to all the
conversable part of the Town, for his Pleasant and Facetious Company; and
allowed to be a Man of Wit, though it were to be wished he had not Published his
Play of

The wary Widow, or, Sir Noisy Parrat, a Comedy, 4 to. Acted at the Theater
Royal, by their Majesty's Servants, 1693. and Dedicated to the Right
Honorable, Charles, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, etc. The ill Success of this
Play, the Author gives us in the Preface, which complains of the ungenerous
Usage the Bear-garden Critics gave it with Catealls, etc. which, how short
soever it may be of what might be expected from so celebrated a Wit, as Mr.
Higden was esteemed, it could never deserve; since Sir Charles Sidley could
think it worthy a Prologue of his making. It Is ushered into the World by Five
Copies of English Verse, and One of Latin.

Barton Holyday.
HE was born in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in All Saints Parish in Oxon; his
Cousin, Dr. Ravis, early entered, and chose him Student of Christ-Church; after
his Degrees of Bachelor and Master of Arts, was made Archdeacon of Oxonshire,
died 1661. at Ei^ly, near Oxon, and was buried at Christ-Church in Oxon. He
writ One Play, under the Title of

TEXNOTAMIA, or, The Marriage of the Arts, a Comedy, 4 to. 1630. Acted by the
Students of Christ-Church, aforesaid, at Shrove-tide. This Play was then in
good Esteem. He has written diverse Pieces, as his Translation of the Satyrs of
Iuvenal and Perseus, with Notes and Sculptures, Fol. A Version of the Odes of
Horrace; diverse Sermons, 4 to. and Two Tracts in Latin.

Charles Hool.
THIS Gentleman lived in the Reigns of the Two Charles's, being born at
Wakefield, in Yorkshire, was entered at Lincoln-College in Oxon, at Eighteen,
and afterward taking his Master's Degree, he taught School at these several
Places ( viz.) Rotheram in Yorkshire, Red-Cross-Street, and Arundel-Buildings,
in London. And, after the King's Restoration, in Wales, he translated

Terrence's Comedies, in all, Six, 8 vo. 1676. Printed in English and Latin,
for the use of Young Scholars, in many Places Castrated.

He has translated diverse other things, as AEsop's Fables, Corderius, Cato,
Comenii Orbis Pictus, etc. He has also Published a Grammar, an Explanation of
the Accidence, and a Greek Testament with Themes in the Margin, etc.

Charles Hopkins.
A Young Gentleman that is now living, his Father was that eminently Learned
and Pious Divine, Ezekiel Hopkins, Bishop of Londonderry, in the Kingdom of
Ireland. Our Poet was born in Devonshire, but carried, when a Child, to his
Father's See; and when he had past his Childhood under so good a Father, he
removed first to Dublin-College, and thence to Cambridge; whence he went to the
Wars of Ireland, and having there exerted his early Valor, in so Glorious a
Cause as that of his Country, Religion, and Liberty, he returned to England,
and made London his Abode; where he fell into the Acquaintance of Gentlemen of
the best Wit, and Parts, whose Age and Genius were most agreeable to his own.
He is one of those who is, beyond Controversy, born a Poet, which he has shown
in all the Pieces he has already Published; the Sweetness of his Numbers, and
Easiness of his Thoughts, in the several Copies of Verses he has Published,
particularly his Translations out of Ovid, Printed for Mr. Tonson, show him
born to translate that Author; for, if that Opinion of Pythagoras were true, we
should conclude, the Soul of the tender Naso, were transmigrated into Mr.
Hopkins: All the other Translators of that Po^t, have lost his Genius, his
Versification and Softness. But the Occasion of his being mentioned here is,
his having Published Two Plays, with different Success.

Boadicea, Queen of Britain, a Tragedy, Acted at the Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, 1697. 4 to. and Dedicated, in Verse, to Mr. Congreve. This
Play met with great Applause, pleasing both the Ladies and Gentlemen; and
indeed, besides the peculiar Sweetness of his Numbers, for it is written in
Heroic Verse, he has in this Play touched the Passions, and the First Scene of
the Fourth Act, betwixt Cassibellan and Camilla, where she discovers her Rape,
is most Masterly performed. The Story is the same with Bonduca, she being
sometimes called, Boadicea, and sometimes Bonduca. You may read of her in the
Fourteenth Book of Tacitus's Annals, the Second Book of Milton's History of
England, the Seventh Page of Vbaldino de cita delle done illus^ri del Regno d'
Ingelterra and Scotia, and Mr. Tyrrell's History of England, lately Published,
Vol. 1.

Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, a Tragedy, Acted at the new Theater, in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, 1695. 4 to. and Dedicated to
his illustrious Highness, the Duke of Gloucester. This was our Author's First
Play, in which there is a great deal that shows him a Poet, but not enough, it
seems, to gain it that Success which he desired: He was very Young when it was
writ, and therefore may be well excused for wanting that Correctness, which a
more Mature Author, perhaps, would have observed. The History of Pyrrhus is to
be found in Livy, Book Plutarch, in the Life of that King, Lucius Florus, etc.

Edward Howard, Esquire
BRother to the Right Honorable, Sir Robert Howard, and of the Noble Family of
Berk-shire, it is to be wished, that his Friends could either have prevailed
with him to have Published none of his Poetry, or have been less severe upon
him, he has Four Plays in Print, viz. Man of New Market, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678.
Acted at the Theater Royal, but with little Applause. Six Days Adventure, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1671. Acted at the Duke of York's Theater, in Dorset-Garden. This
Play met with no good Success. The Usurper, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1668. Acted at the
Theater Royal, by his Majesty's Servants. Woman's Conquest, a Tragi-Comedy, 4
to. 1677. Acted by the Duke of York's Servants, in Dorset-Garden. This Author
has written Two Books of Poetry, in 8 vo. One called, The British Princess; the
other, Poems and Essays, with a Paraphrase on Cicero's Laelius; Printed 1675.


James Howard, Esquire
A Gentleman of the Noble Family of the Howards, that has Two Plays in Print,
under the Titles of All Mistaken, or, The Mad Couple, a Comedy, 4 to. 1672.
Acted at the Theater Royal, by his Majesty's Servants. English Monsieur, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1674. Acted at the Theater Royal, by his Majesty's Servants.
These Two Plays met with somewhat better Success than those of the beforegoing
Author.


Sir Robert Howard.
THIS Honorable Person is Brother to the above mentioned Mr. Edward Howard,
and to the Earl of Berks, who has long since quitted the barren Fields of
Poetry, for the more advantageous Post of the State, in which he has, for many
Years, made a considerable Figure, being Auditor of the Exchequer, etc. I have
not the Honor to say much of my own Knowledge of him, but I am told, that it
is no small Part of his Character, to be a Patron and Encourager of Learning;
which is a peculiar Merit, in an Age when the selfish Vices of the trading Part
of the Nation, are got into the first Ranks of Men, who will not be so
expensive, to keep a Creature merely for its Wit, as Mr. Prior says of one. He
has writ these Six following Plays, viz. The Blind Lady, a Comedy, 8 vo. This
is usually bound with diverse other Poems of his, and are Reprinted, or at
least, a new Title Printed, 1696. The Committee, a Comedy, Fol. 1665. This is
esteemed an excellent Play, and often times Acted in these Times. The Great
Favorite, or, The Duke of Lerma, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1688. Acted at the
Theater Royal, by his Majesty's Servants. See Mariana, Turquet, De Mayern, etc.
The Indian Queen, a Tragedy, Fol. 1665. This Play is writ in Heroic Verse, and
formerly Acted with general Applause, at the Theater Royal, but now turned into
an Opera, and many times of late represented at the same Theater, with the like
Success. The Surprisal, a Tragi-Comedy, Fol. 1665. This was formerly Acted at
the same Theater, by his Majesty's Servants. The Vestal Virgin, or, the Roman
Ladies, a Tragedy, Fol. Acted also at the same Place, and by the same Actors,
but not of late Years. This Play has a double Fifth Act, one ending Tragically,
the other Succesfully. Four of his above Plays, are Printed together Fol.


James Howel, Esquire
A Gentleman born at Abermarlis, in Caermarthenshire, in South Wales, 1594. the
Seat now of a worthy Gentleman of the Noble Name and Family of Cornwallis, he
was at Sixteen sent from Hereford-School, to Iesus-College, Oxon. In the Year
1618. he was sent beyond Sea, by Sir Robert Mansel; he traveled the Low
Countries from Italy, etc. was employed by King James, in Negotiations in
Spain; was Secretary to the Lord Scroop, when he was President of the North,
etc. He writ and translated Nine and Forty Books: He died about the Beginning
of November, 1666. and lies buried on the North Side of the Temple-Church, with
this Inscription over him on the Wall; Iacobus Howel, Cambro Britannus, Regius
Historiographus, in Anglia primus; qui post varias peregrinationes, tandem
Naturae Cursum peregit, Satur Annorum, and famae Domi, forisque huc usque
erraticus, hic fixus, 1666. He writ One Play, called,

The Nuptials of Peleus and Thetis, a Masque and Comedy, 4 to. 1654. Acted at
Paris, by the French King, Duke of York, Duke of Anjou, Henrietta Maria,
Princess of Conti, with others of the Nobility there. The Author translated it
from an Italian Comedy. The Plot is taken from Ovid's Metamorph. Lib. 11. and
Catulli Argonoutica ^ive Epithalamium.

I
Thomas Ievorn.
A Dancing Master and Player, was a Man of uncommon Activity, lived in the Time
of Charles and James the Second, writ one Play, entitled,

The Devil of a Wife, or, The Comical Transformation, a Farce, 4 to. 1686.
Acted by their Majesty's Servants, at the Queens Theater Dorset-Garden. Taken
from the Story of Mopsa in Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia.

Thomas Ingeland.
HE was of Cambridge, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, writ a Play, entitled,

The Disobedient Child, 4 to. which he calls, A Pretty Merry Interlude. It Is
Printed in an old Black Letter, so long since, that it had not any Date of the
Year.

Benjamin Johnson.
WEstminster gave him Birth, and the First Rudiments of his Learning, under Mr.
Cambden; which St. Iohn's-College of Cambridge, and Christ-Church of Oxon
finished, where he took his Master of Arts Degree; Necessity drove him thence,
to follow his Father-in-Law's Trade of a Bricklayer; working at Lincoln's Inn,
with a Trowel in his Hand, and Horace in his Pocket, he found a Patron that set
him free from that Slavish Employment. He was of an open, free Temper; blunt
and haughty to his Antagonists and Critics; a Jovial and Pleasant Companion;
was Poet Laureat to James and Charles the First. He died in the Sixty Third
Year of his Age, An. Dom. 1637. and is buried in Westminster-Abby, near the
Belfry, with only this Epitaph:

O RARE BEN. JOHNSON.
His Dramatick Pieces, about Fifty in Number, follow: The Alchymist, a Comedy,
Acted by the King's Majesty's Servants, first, 1610. and afterward printed,
viz. 1640. and 1692. Bartholomew-Fair, a Comedy, Fol. 1640. and 1692. Acted
first at the Hope, on the Bank-side, 1614. by the Lady Elizabeth's Servants,
and Dedicated to King James the First; and Acted with good Applause, since King
Charles the Second's Restoration. Cateline his Conspiracy, a Tragedy, Fol.
1640. and 1692. and in 4 to. 16. Acted first by the King's Majesty's Servants,
1611. and sometimes since the Restoration, with good Applause. Is Dedicated to
William, then Earl of Pembrock. Plot from Salust. Hist. Plutarch in Vit. Cic.
Challenge at Tilt, at a Marriage, a Masque, Fol. 1640. and 1692. Christmas's
Masque, Fol. 1640. and 1692. This was first Presented at Court, 1616. Cloridia,
or, Rites to Cloris, a Masque, Fol. 1692. presented by the Queen's Majesty, and
her Ladies at Court, at Shrovetide, 1630. Mr. Inigo Jones assisted in the
Invention hereof. Cynthia's Revels, or, the Fountain of Self-Love; a Comedy,
Fol. 1640. and 1692. Acted by the Children of Queen Elizabeth's Chapel. 1600.
Devil's an Ass, a Comedy, Fol. 1641. and 1692. Acted by his Majesty's Servants,
1616. See Boccace's Novels, Day 3. Nov. 5. Entertainment at King James the
First his Coronation. Fol. 1692. This contains only Gratulatory Speeches at the
said Coronation, with a Comment by the Author to illustrate the same.
Entertainment of King James and Queen Ann, at Theobalds, Fol. 1640. and 1692.
Entertainment of the King of England, and the King of Denmark, at Theobalds,
July 24. 1606. Fol. 1640. and 1692. Entertainment of the King and Queen on
May Day, at Sir William Cornwallis's House at High-gate, 1604. Fol. 1640. and
1692. Entertainment of the Queen and Prince at Althrop; this was the 25th of
June, 1603. at the Lord Spencer's House there, at their coming First into the
Kingdom. Fol. 1640. and 1692. Every Man in his Humor, a Comedy, Fol. 1640. and
1692. Acted first in the Year 1598. by the then Lord Chamberlain's Servants,
and Dedicated to Mr. Cambden, Clarenceux. It has been revived and Acted since
the Restoration, with good Applause, and a new Collection of Poems on several
Occasions, 8vo. 1673. page 29.
Epilogue writ for the same, part of it spoken by Ben. Iohnson's Ghost. Every
Man out of his Humor, a Comedy, Fol. 1640. and 1692. Acted by the then Lord
Chamberlain's Servants. This was also revived and Acted at the Theater Royal,
1675. with a new Duffet's Poems, 8vo. page 72.
Prologue and Epilogue, writ by Mr. Duffet, and spoken by Joseph Haynes.
Fortunate Isles, a Masque, Fol. 1641. and 1692. designed for the Court on
Twelfth Night, 1626. Golden Age Restored, a Masque, Fol. 1641. and 1692. This
was presented at Court by the Lords and Gentlemen, the King's Servants 1626.
Hymnaei, or, The Solemnities of a Masque and Barriers at a Marriage, F^l. 1692.
See the Learned Marginal Notes, for the Illustration of the Greek and Roman
Customs. Irish Masque at Court Fol. 1692. presented at Court by Gentlemen, the
Kings Servants. King's Entertainment, at Welbeck, in Nottinghamshire, Fol.
1692. This Entertainment was at the then Earl, since Duke of Newcastle's House,
1633. Love freed from Ignorance and Folly, a Masque, Fol. 1692. Love Restored,
a Masque, Fol. 1692. presented at Court by Gentleman the King's Servants.
Love's Triumph through Callipolis, a Masque Fol. 1692. performed at Court by his
late Majesty King Charles the First, with the Lords and Gentlemen assisting,
1630. Mr. Johnson and Mr. Inigo Jones joined in the Invention. Love's Welcome,
an Entertainment for the King and Queen, at the then Earl of Newcastle's at
Bolsover, 1634. and Printed Fol. 1692. Magnetic Lady, or, Humors Reconciled,
a Comedy, Fol. 1640. and 1692. Acted at the Black Friars. This Play occasioned
some Difference or Iarring, between Dr. Gill, Master of Paul's School, and our
Author, Ben. as appears by a Satirical Copy of Verses writ by the former, and
as sharp a Repartee by the latter. Masque at the Lord Hadington's Marriage,
presented at Court on Shrove-Tuesday-Night, 1608. Printed Fol. 1692. Masque of
Augurs, Fol. 1692. This was presented on Twel^th-Night, 1622. with several
Anti-masques. Masque of Owls, at Kenelworth, Fol. 1692. In this Presentation
there was the Ghost of Captain Cox, mounted on his Hobbyhorse. Masque of
Queens, celebrated from the House of Fame, by the Queen of Great Britain, with
her Ladies, at White Hall, Feb. 2^ 1609. Fol. 1692. See the Marginal Notes. The
Author was assisted by Mr. Inigo Jones, in the Invention and Architecture of
the Scenes belonging thereto. Masque at the Lord Hayes House, Fol. 1692. This
was presented by diverse Noblemen, for the Entertainment of Monsieur Le Baron de
Tour, Ambassador Extraordinary from the French King. 1617. Metamorphosed
Gypsies, A Masque, Fol. 1692. presented to King James the First, at Burleigh on
the Hill, at Belvoyr, and at Windsor-Castle. 1621. Mercury Vindicated from the
Alchymists at Court, a Masque, Fol. 1692. presented by Gentlemen, the King's
Servants. Mortimer's Fall, a Tragedy, Fol. 1640. and 1692. This was not quite
finished by the Author, but left imperfect, by reason of his Death. Neptune's
Triumph for the Return of Albion, a Masque, Fol. 1692. presented at Court on
Twelfth-Night, 1624. News from the New World discovered in the Moon, a Masque,
Fol. 1692. presented ^lso before King James the First, 1620. Oberon, the Fa^^y
Prince, a Masque of Prince Henry's, Fol. 1692. The Author has diverse
Annotations on this Play. Pan's Anniversary, or, The Shepherds Holyday, a
Masque, Fol. 1692. This was presented at Court before King James the First. Mr.
Inigo Jones assisted our Author in the Decorations. Pleasure reconciled to
Virtue, a Masque, Fol. 1692. This was also presented at Court, before King
James the First, 1619. Hereto were some Additions for the Honor of Wales.
Poetaster, or, His Arraignment, a Comedy, Fol. 1692. Acted by the Children of
his Majesty's Chapel, 1601. This Play is adorned with several Translations
from the Ancients. See Ovid's Elegies, Lib. 1. Eleg. 15. Horat. Sat. Lib. 2.
Sat. 9. and Lib. 2. Sat. 1, etc. Queen's Masque of Blackness, Fol. 1692. This
was Personated at the Court at White Hall, on the Twelfth-Night, 1605. -- Her
Masque of Beauty, Fol. 1692. This also was presented at the same Court, at
White Hall, on the Sunday-Night after the Twelfth-Night, 1608. Sad Shepherd,
or, A Tale of Robin Hood, a Pastoral, Fol. 1692. This Play has but Two entire
Acts, finished, and a Third left imperfect. Sejanus's Fall, a Tragedy, Fol.
1692. first Acted by the King's Majesty's Servants, 1603. Plot from Tacitus,
Suetonius, Seneca, etc. There is an Edition of this Play 4 to. 1605. by the
Author's own Orders, with all the Quotations from whence he borrowed any thing
of his Play. Silent Woman, a Comedy, fol. 1692. Acted First by the Children of
her Majesty's Revels, 1609. Act I. Scene. I. borrowed from Ovid de Art Amandi:
Act. II. Scene II. Part from Iuvenal^ Sat. 6. Act II. Scene V. from Plaut
Auricular, Act 3. Scene 5, etc. This Play has been in good Esteem, and for a
farther Commendation you are referred to Mr. Dryden's Examen. Dryden's Dramatick
Essay, page. 50.
Speeches at Prince Henry's Barriers, Fol. 1692. These are indeed Printed among
his M^sques, but cannot be accounted one; only reckoned so in former
Catalogues. Staple of News, a Comedy, Fol. 1692. Acted by his Maje^ty's
Servants. In this Play Four Gossips appear on the Stage, criticizing on the
same, during the whole Action. Tale of a Tub, a Comedy, Fol. 1692. Time
vindicated to himself and his Honors, a Masque, Fol. 1692. This was presented
at Court on Twelfth-Night, 1623. Vision of Delight, a Masque, Fol. 1692. This
was also presented at Court in Christmas, 1617. Vulpone, or, The Fox, a Comedy,
Fol. 1692. Acted by the King's Majesty's Servants. This is writ in Imitation of
the Comedies of the Ancients.


The before mentioned Plays, and other Poems, etc. were formerly printed
together in Two Volumes, Fol. 1640, and 1641. but Three other Pla^^ which are
there omitted, are hereunder mentioned, and may be found in the late Edition,
printed 1692.

The Case is Altered, a Comedy, 4 to. 1609. and fol. 1692. This was sundry
times Acted by the Children of the Black Friars. See Plautus's Comed. etc. The
Widow, a Comedy, 4 to. 1652. and fol. 1692. Acted at the Private House in Black
Friars, by his late Majesty's Servants, with good Applause. Fletcher and
Middleton joined with the above Author in this Play, which has been revived
since the Restoration, at the King's House, with a new London Drollery, page
11. 12.
Prologue and Epilogue. The New-Inn, or, The Light Heart, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1631.
This Play (says our Author's Title) was never Acted, but most negligently
played, by some of the King's Servants, and more squeamishly beheld, and
censured by others, the King's Subjects, 1629. Now at last set at Liberty to
the Readers, his Majesty's Servants and Subjects, to be judged.
These last, with all the beforegoing Plays, Masks and Entertainments, with
an English Grammar, are now published together in one large Volume, fol. 1692.

John Jones.
HE writ, in the Time of King Charles the First, One Play, called,

Adrasta, or The Woman's Spleen and Loves Conquest, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1635.
Part of it from Boccace's Novels, Day 8. Nov. 8.

Thomas Jordan.
A Player and Poet of King Charles the First his Reign, who writ and published
One Masque and Two Comedies; viz. Fancies Festivals, a Masque, 4 to. 16.
Money's an Ass, a Comedy, 4 to. 1668.


The Walks of Islington and Hogsdon, with the Humors of Wood-street-Compter; a
Comedy, 4 to. 1657. This Play had good Success, it being Acted Nineteen Days
successively.

William Ioyner.
THIS Gentleman was born in Oxonshire, sometime Fellow of Magdalen-College;
which, with his Religion, he quitted, till in King James's Time he was again
re-placed in the same College, with the other Popish Fellows; who were all soon
after displaced, by an Apprehension of the Revolution. He has one Play in
Print, called,

The Roman Empress, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1671. Acted at the Theater Royal, by his
Majesty's Servants, and dedicated to Sir Charles Sidley. For the Plot, consult
Zosomi Histor. Langbain's Dram. Poets, page 308.
Mr. Langbain supposes this to be the Story of Constantine, and his Wife and
Son, Crispus and Faustina. The Author has imitated Oedipus and Hippolitus.

K
Henry Killegrew.
A Person of eminent Wit in K. Charles the First's Time, he writ a Play at
Seventeen Years of Age, called first,

The Conspiracy, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1638. Afterward altered, under the Name of
Pallantus and Eudora, a Tragedy, Fol. 1653. This Play was first Acted at the
Black Friars, with Applause, and the first Impression Printed without the
Author's Consent, whilst beyond Sea, which occasioned afterward a new
Impression with a new Title. At the first Acting of the aforegoing Play, it met
with some few Cavillers against some part thereof; but that was soon over, when
Ben. Johnson, and the Lord Viscount Falkland gave it another Encomium.

Tho. Killegrew,
A Gentleman of a good Family, and a celebrated Wit in the Reigns of the Two K.
Charles's; he was Page of Honor to the First, and Groom of the Bedchamber to
the Second: during the King's Exile, he saw France, Italy, and Spain; was
resident at Venice 1651. In his Banishment he writ most of these Plays, and
died several Years after the Restoration.

Bellamira, her Dream; or, Love of Shadows, in Two Parts, a Tragedy, fol.
written at Venice, and the first dedicated to the then Duchess of Richmond and
Lenox, and the second to her Sister, Ann Villiers, then Countess of Essex.
Cicilia and Clorinda; or, Love in Arms, in Two Parts, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. the
first writ at Turin, the second at Florence. The Scene betwixt Amadeo, Ducius,
and Manlius, seem copied from Aglatidas, Artabes, and Megabises, in the Grand
Cyrus, Part 1. Lib. 3. Story of Aglatidas and Amestris. Claracilla, a
Tragi-Comedy, fol. written at Rome, and dedicated to the Lady Shannon. The
Parson's Wedding, a Comedy, fol. writ at Bazil in Switzerland. The chiefest
Incidents in this Play, are to be found in former Plays; as the Antiquary,
Ram-Alley, etc. The Pilgrim, a Tragedy, fol. writ whilst at Paris, and
dedicated to the Countess of Carnarvan. The Princess; or, Love at first Sight,
a Tragi-Comedy, fol. writ at Naples, and dedicated to the Lady Lovelace, his
Niece. The Prisoners, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. writ at London, and dedicated to the
Lady Compton, another of his Nieces. Thomaso; or, The Wanderer, in Two Parts, a
Comedy, fol. The Author has here borrowed, not only a Story from Fletcher's
Captain, but several things from Iohnson's Fox.
The above named Plays, belonging to this Author, are all printed in one
Volume, Fol. 1664.

Sir William Killegrew.
A Gentleman lately deceased, being in his Life time Vice-Chamberlain to the
Queen Dowager, and has writ several Plays; as Ormasdes, a Tragi-Comedy, fol.
Pandora; or, The Converts, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. Selindra, a Tragi-Comedy, fol.
The Siege of Vrbin, a Tragi-Comedy, fol.


There Is another Play ascribed to him, called,

The Imperial Tragedy, fol. The chief Part of this Play out of Latin, for the
Plot see Marcelinus, Cassiodorus, Cedrenus, Evagrius, Zonatus, Baronius, etc.
of Zeno, the Twelfth Emperor from Constantine.

These Plays are Printed in one Volume, fol. Oxon, 1666.

John Kirk.
THIS Author we find in the time of the First K. Charles, when writ a Play,
called,

The Seven Champions of Christendom, a History, 4 to. 1638. Plot from the old
History of the Seven Champions of Christendom, and Heylin's Hist. of St. George.

Ralph Knevet.
A Norfolk Gentleman, of the same time with the former, writ a Pastoral
represented at Norwich, called,

Rhodon and Iris, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1631. Dedicated to Nicholas Bacon, Esquire.

Thomas Kyd.
THIS Translator Lived in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and Published One Play
called,

Pompey the Great, his Fair Cornelias Tragedy, 4 to. 1595. dedicated to the
Countess of Sussex. This he translated from the French of Robert Garnier.

L
John Lacey.
AN Excellent Comedian of the King's Company, was born near Doncaster in
Yorkshire, originally a Dancing Master, of a rare Shape of Body, and good
Complexion; was a Lieutenant and Quarter Master under Col. Gerrard, afterward
Earl of Macclesfield; he died, Sept. 17. 1681. King Charles the Second fancied
him so much, as to have his Picture drawn in Three several Figures, in the same
Table, as Teague in the Committee, Scruple in the Cheats, and Gallyard in the
Varieties. He was not satisfied to excel only in Acting, but attempted these
Three following Plays, or rather, Farces; besides which, he added the -- of
Sauny the Scot, to the Taming of the Shrew.

The Dumb Lady; or, The Farrier made Physician, a Comedy, 4 to. 1672. Plot and
Language from Mollieres le Medicin Malgre luy. The Old Troop; or, Monsieur
Ragou, a Comedy, 4 to. 1672. Sir Hercules Buffoon; or, The Poetical Squire, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1684. published after his Death.
I. Leanard.
A Plagiary of extraordinary Assurance^ that set up with other Men's Writings
for the Name of an Author. He published Two Plays under these Titles, ( viz.)
The Country Innocence; or, The Chambermaid turned Quaker, a Comedy, 4 to.
1677. Taken from a Play, called, The Country Girl, by Brewer. The Rambling
Justice; or, The Jealous Husbands, a Comedy 4 to. 1680. Most part from a Play,
called More Dissemblers besides Women, a Comedy, 4 to. by Middleton.


Nath. Lee.
ALL the Account I can give you of our Author, is, That he was Son of a
Minister of the Church of England, had part of his Education at Cambridge, was
received with general Applause in most of his Plays. He run Mad, and was some
Years in Bethlem, and after he was let out he was never perfectly well; so died
in the Street in the Night Time. That he has shown a Masterpiece in Lucius
Iunius Brutus, which scarce one of his Contemporaries have equaled, and none
excelled, can never be doubted.

Caesar Borgia, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1680. Acted at the Duke's Theater. See
Guiciardine, lib. 5, 6. Mariana, lib. 27, 28. Sir Paul Ricaut's Contin. of
Platina, in the Reign of Pope Alexander the Sixth. Constantine the Great, a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1684. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.
Plot from Eusebius de vita Constantini, Zonarus, Eutropius, Baronius, Ammianus
Marcellinus, and Beard's Theater of God's Judgments. Gloriana, the Court of
Augustus Caesar, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1676. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their
M^jesties Servants, and dedicated to the Duchess of Portsmouth. See the
Stories of Caesario, Marcellus and Iulia, in Cleopatra, Part 1. Book 3. Part 5.
Book 3. etc. Lucius, Iunius Brutus, Father of his Country, a Tragedy, 4 to.
1681. Acted at the Duke's Theater, and dedicated to the Right Honorable, the
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. See the Story of Iunius Brutus in Clelia, a
Romance, Par. 2. Book 1. and Part 3. Book 1. And for the true History, consult
Florus, Livy, Dion, Hallicar, Orosius, etc. Massacre of Paris, a Tragedy, 4 to.
1690. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants. See Thuanus
Pierre Mathieu, Davila, Mezeray, etc. If you compare a Play, called, The Duke
of Guise, with this, you may find diverse Passages there borrowed from hence.
Mithridates, King of Pontus, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1678. Acted at the Theater Royal,
by their Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to the Right Honorable, the Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex. Plot from Appian, Alexand. Roman Hist. Florus, Vell.
Paterculus, and Plutarch in the Lives of Scylla, Lucullus, Pompey, etc. Nero,
Emperor of Rome, his Tragedy, 4 to. 1675. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants, and dedicated to the Right Honorable, the Earl of
Rochester. Plot from Suetonius in vita Neronis, Aurelius Victor, Tacitus Annal.
etc. The Princess of Cleve, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1689. Acted at the Queen's
Theater in Dorset Garden; and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Charles, Earl
of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household. Founded on
a Romance of the same Title; see also a Book called, the French Rogue, 8 vo.
The Rival Queens; or, The Death of Alexander the Great, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1677.
Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to the
Right Honorable, John, Earl of Mulgrave. Plot from Quint. Curt. Plutarch's
Life of Alexander the Great, Justin, Josephus, etc. Sophonisba; or Hannibal's
Overthrow, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1676. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to the Duchess of Portsmouth. Plot from Sir
Walter Raleighs Hist. of the World, Book 5. Chap. 3. Sect. 18. Livy, Florus,
Appian, Diodorus, Polibius, Justin, etc. Theodosius; or, The Force of Love, a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1680. Acted at the Duke's Theater, by their Royal Highnesses
Servants; and dedicated to her Grace, the Duchess of Richmond. Plot from
Pharamond, a Romance; Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiastica; Varannes; Martian, and
Theodosius.
Most of these Plays have been applauded by the Spectators, and their Worth
acknowledged by Dryden, and other Poets, in diverse Copies of Verses before some
of them. He joined with Mr. Dryden, in Two other Plays, viz. The Duke of Guise,
and Oedipus, both Tragedies, for which see under Dryden Senior.

John Lilly.
ONE of the first Reformers of our Language, in Queen Elizabeth's Days; he was
born in Kent, bred in Magdalen-College, Oxon, and there took his Degree of
Master of Arts, 1575. The Time of his Death I know not; he has published these
Nine Plays following.

Alexander and Campaspe, a Tragi-Comedy, 12 mo. 1632. Acted on a Twelfth Night,
before the Queen, by her Majesty's Children, and those of Paul's, and sometimes
after at Black Friars. Plot from Pliny's Natural Hist. Lib. 35. Cap. 10.
Endimion, a Comedy, 12 mo. 1632. Presented also before Queen Elizabeth, by the
same Children. Plot from Lucian's Dialogue between Venus and the Moon, Natales
Comes, and Galtruchius's Hist. of the Heathen Gods. Galathea, a Comedy, 12 mo.
1632. Presented likewise before the Queen at Greenwich, by the Children of
Paul's on New-Year's-Day. See the Story of Iphis and Ianthe, in Ovid Metamorph.
Lib. 9. Tab. 12, etc. Love's Metamorphosis, a Pastoral 4 to. 1601. First played
by the Children of Paul's, and afterward by her Majesty's Children of the
Chapel. The Maid's Metamorphosis, a Comedy 4 to. 1600. Acted sundry times by
the Children of Paul's. Mother Bombie, a pleasant conceited Comedy (says the
Title) printed 12 mo. 1632. and sundry times played by the Children of Paul's.
Mydas, a Comedy, 12 mo. 1632. This was also played before the Queen on Twelfth
Day at Night, Apuleius has writ this Story at large in his Aureus Asinus. See
also Natales Comes, Galtruchius's Hist. of the Heathen Gods, and Ovid's
Metamorph. Lib. 11. Sapho and Phaon, a Comedy, 12 mo. 1632. Presented before
the Queen on Shrove Tuesday, and afterward at the Black Friars. Plot Ovid
Epist. Woman in the Moon, a Comedy, 4 to. 1667.
Six of the above Plays are printed together 12 mo. and published by one Mr.
Blount, called Court Comedies; the other three are printed single in 4 to. Mr.
Lilly also writ a Book called, Eupheus and his England, 4 to. at that time much
esteemed.

Thomas Lodge.
THis Author we find was a Doctor of Physic, in the Time of Queen Elizabeth,
who, during his Study at Cambridge, writ several pieces of Poetry; among the
rest, Two Plays.

A Looking-Glass for London and England, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1598. One Green
joined with our Author toward completing this Play, which is founded on the
Story of Jonas and the Ninevites, in the Holy Scripture. The Wounds of Civil
War; or, The Tragedies of Marius and Scylla. Plot from Plutarch in vit. Mar.
and Silla: see also Aurelius Victor, Eutropius, Vell. Paterculus, Salustius,
and T. Livius.
Sir William Lower.
A Cavalier that left these Nations during the Civil Wars, and, in Holland,
gave himself the Diversion of Poetry; among the rest, six Plays.

The Amorous Phantasm, a Tragi-Comedy, 12 mo. printed at the Hague, 1658.
translated from Quinault's Le Fantome Amoreux. The Enchanted Lovers, a
Pastoral, 12 mo. printed also at the Hague, 1658. Horatius, a Roman Tragedy, 4
to. 1656. translated from Corneille; consult Dion. Hallicarnasceus,
Cassiodorus, T. Livius, and L. Florus. The Martyr; or, Polyeucte, a Tragedy, 4
to. 1655. For the Story, see Coeffeteau Hist. Romans Surius de Vitis Sanctorum,
etc. Noble Ingratitude, a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy, 12 mo. London, 1658.
translated from the French of Monsieur Quinault. Phaenix in her Flames, a
Tragedy, 4 to, 1639. This was the first the Author writ, and published before
he was a Knight.
Thomas Lupon.
ALL I know of him is, That it is said he writ this one Play, called,

All for Money, a Tragedy, 4 to.

M
Lewis Macchin.
THIS Author lived in the Time of King Charles the First, and writ one Play,
called,

The Dumb Knight, a Comedy, 4 to. 1633. Acted by the Children of his Majesty's
Revels. Compare this Play with one called, The Queen; or, The Excellency of her
Sex: see also, The Complaisant Companion, 8 vo. and 12 mo. and Bandello's
Novels, Tom. 1. Nov. 13, etc.

Maidwell.
A Gentleman yet living, who having made it his Business for some Years, to
educate young Gentlemen, and initiate them in the Learned Tongues, has at
length quitted this Ludum Literarium, for a quiet retreat, during his
Application to this Business, he found time to write a Play, called,

The Loving Enemies, a Comedy, 4 to. 1680. Acted at the Duke of York's Theater
in Dorset Garden, and dedicated to the Honorable, Charles Fox, Esquire The Author
seems to have imitated the Virtuoso, in this Play.

Dr. Jasper Maine.
THis learned Author was Wood Athenae Oxonienses Vol. 2. p. 372, 373.
born at a place called, Hatherleigh, a Market Town in Devonshire, An. Dom
1604. and in the Time of King James the First, passed from Westminster-School,
to Christ-Church, Oxon, An. Dom. 1623. in the Condition of a Servitor, where he
was encouraged in his Studies by Dr. Duppa, and the next Year chosen into the
Number of Students on that noble Foundation. He passed his Degrees till he
entered into Orders, and Plurality of Two Livings near that University, both in
the Gift of the College. After his being made Doctor of Divinity, and turned
out by the Visitation of the late Government of Oliver Cromwell, he was received
into the Family of the Earl of Devon, having lost both his Livings. In the
Restoration of the King, he found his Two Livings, and Advancement to a Canon
of Christ-Church, as also Archdeacon of Chichester. He died December. 6. 1672.
and was buried on the North side of the Cathedral of Christ-Church, where is to
be seen a short Hist. and Antiquit. Oxon. Lib. 2. p. 282.
Epitaph on a Marble Stone, placed over his Grave by his Executors, Dr. South
and Dr. Lamphire. He gave by his Will 500. l. toward re-building of St.
Paul's, and to Cassington, and Pyrton, near Watlington, (of which Places he was
Vicar) 100 l. each. He writ and published the two following Plays: The Amorous
War, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. Oxon, 1658. also printed fol. and 8 vo. The City
Match, a Comedy, 4 to. Oxon, 1658. printed also Fol. and 8 vo. This Comedy was
acted before their Majesty's at White Hall, and diverse times afterward at
Black Friars, with great Applause.


These two Plays are usually bound together.

This Author published diverse other Books; as part of Lucian's Dialogues, Eng.
Fol. diverse Sermons, 4 to. and a Poem on the Victory over the Dutch, 1665, etc.

Mrs. Delarivier Manley.
THis Lady has very happily distinguished her self from the rest of her Sex,
and gives us a living Proof of what we might reasonably expect from Womankind,
if they had the Benefit of those artificial Improvements of Learning the Men
have, when by the mere Force of Nature they so much excel. Rules indeed are but
the Leading-strings to support and carry the Weaker, and more unobserving
Heads, and which those of a strong Genius and Penetration will have no need of,
since a just Consideration of Nature will conduct them with more Ease and
Success. Of this our present Authress is an evident Proof, for in the Two Plays
she has already published, we find no part of Art wanting, but what is the
Mechanic Part, and by much the least valuable. There is a Force and a Fire in
her Tragedy, that is the Soul that gives it Life, and for want of which, most
of our Modern Tragedies are heavy, languid, unmoving, and dull. In her Comedy
there is an easy Freedom of adding, which confesses a Conversation in the
Authress no less genteel and entertaining. This Lady was born in the Isle of
Iersey, her Father, Sir Roger Manley, being then Governor of it; a Gentleman of
a double Merit, both the Gown, and the Sword claiming no small share in his
Glory, and the Republic of Learning owed as much to his Wit and Judgment, in
those Books which he was pleased to publish, as his King and Country to his
Loyalty, Valor and Conduct. And well might our Delarivier prove a Muse, being
begot by such a Father. She has as yet given us but two Plays, of which in
their Order: The Royal Mischief, a Tragedy, 4 to. Acted by his Majesty's
Servants, at the Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, 1696. and dedicated to his
Grace, William, Duke of Devonshire, etc. The Story, as she owns, is originally
taken from Sir John Chardin's Travels, but has received this Advantage, that
the Criminals are here punished for their Guilt, who in the Story escape; a
Poetic Justice, which ought ever to be observed in all Plays; for a Just
Audience could never have been pleased with the Prosperity of Homais, and
Leavan, after so very criminal an Amor. I could here give the Reader a Proof
how well the Rules of Aristotle are observed in this Tragedy, by a Lady who
never read him; and how just all her Metaphors and Allegories are: but that
would exceed the Bounds I am prescribed by the Model I Am obliged to build on. I
shall therefore proceed to The Lost Lover; or, The Jealous Husband, a Comedy, 4
to. acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's Servants, 1696. To this Play is
no Epistle Dedicatory, and the Preface informs us of its ill Success, which we
could never gather from the reading of it; and if we would, as we ought, give
any Allowance for the Sex that wrote it, the Time it was wrote in, and its
being the first Essay of that Nature, we should agree with her, that it met
with a much severer Fate than it deserved.


This Lady has Published several other Books, which have not her Name to 'em,
and which, for that Reason, I shall forbear to mention their Titles.

Cosmo Manuch.
A Major in the King's Army, in the late Civil War, and Author of two Plays,
called, The just General, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1650. This the Author designed for
the Stage, but was not ever acted. The Loyal Lovers, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to.
1652. The Author, in this Play, represents diverse of the Committee Men and
their Informers.


Gervase Markham.
THis Author was Son to Robert Markham, of Cotham in Nottinghamshire, Esquire was
born in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and lived to have a Captain's Command in
the Civil War, under King Charles the First. He writ curious Pieces of
Husbandry, Horsemanship, and War, and one Play, in which one Sampson assisted,
entitled,

Herod and Antipater, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1622. Plot from Josephus Hist. Jews,
Book 14, 15, etc. Spondanus, Baronii Ann. Salian Torniel, etc.

Christopher Marlow.
A Famous Poet of Queen Elizabeth and King James's Time, contemporary with the
Immortal Shakespeare, was Fellow-Actor with Heywood, and others, he writ a Poem
called, Hero and Leander, much commended, as also these seven Plays following:
Dr. Faustus his tragical History, 4 to. 1661, being the last Edition, printed
with the Addition of many Scenes. Plot, Camerarii Opera Subsc. Cent. 1. Cap.
70. Wierus de Praestig. Daemonum, Lib. 2. Cap. 4. Lonicerus, etc. Dido, Queen
of Carthage, a Tragedy, 4 to. 16. In this he was joined by Nash. Plot from
Virgil's AEneids, Book 4. Edward the Second, a Tragedy, 4 to. 16. Plot from
Thomas de la More, Sir Francis Hubert, and other English Historians of that
Time. Jew of Malta, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1633. Acted by her Majesty's Servants
at the Cockpit, and at Whitehall, before the King and Queen. A Play of great
Esteem in those Days. Lust's Dominion; or, The Lascivious Queen, a Tragedy 8
vo. 1661. This Play has been acted of late Years, under the Title of Abdelazar;
or, The Moor's Revenge: with few Alterations, by Mrs. Behn. Massacre at Paris,
with the Death of the Duke of Guise, a Tragedy, 8 vo. Acted by the Lord
Admiral's Servants. Is not divided into Acts. Plot from Davila, Thuanus,
Dupleix, and Mezeray, in the Reigns of Char. IX. and Hen. III. of France,
Tamberlain the Great; or, The Scythian Shepherd, in Two Parts, a Tragedy, 8 vo.
1593. Acted also by the Lord Admiral's Servants. Plot, Iean du Bec, Laonicus,
Chalcocondilas, Pet. Bizarus, Knolles Hist. Turks, L'Histoire de Tamerlain, 8
vo. and his Life in English, 8 vo.


Shakerly Marmion.
AN Author born at Ainoe, in Northamptonshire, January, 1602. initiated in
Letters at Thame-School, Oxonshire; from thence about sixteen Years of Age, was
sent to Wadham-College, Oxon, and continued a Member thereof, till after he
took his Master of Arts Degree. He writ these three Comedies: The Antiquary, a
Comedy 4 to. 1641. Acted at the Cockpit, by their Majesty's Servants.
Aurelio's Marriage is an Incident in some other Plays. The Fine Companion, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1633. Acted by Prince Charles's Servants, in Salisbury-Court, as
also before the King and Queen at White Hall, with great Applause. It is
dedicated to Sir Ralph Dutton. Holland's Leaguer, a Comedy, 4 to. 1632. Acted
also by Prince Charles's Servants in Salisbury-Court, with good Applause.
Several Things in this Play borrowed from Petronius Arbiter.


John Marston.
THis Poet lived in the Reign of King James the First, and writ eight Plays,
six of which are usually bound together in one Volumn, 8 vo. 1633. and one of
them revived not many Years since, and acted with Success, under the Name of
The Revenge; or, The Match in Newgate.

Antonia and Melida, Two Parts, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1602. and 8 vo. 1633.
frequently acted by the Children of Paul's.

The Dutch Courte^an, a Comedy, 4 to. 1605. and 8 vo. 1633. Acted at the
Black-Fryars, by the Children of the Queen's Majesty's Revels. The Story of
Cockledemoy, in this Play, is borrowed from a French Book, entitled, des
Contes du Monde, also from the English Book of Novels called, the Palace of
Pleasure. The Insatiate Countess, a Tragedy, 4to. 1603. Acted at the Black
Friars. Plot from Montius Hist. of Naples: see also Dr. Fuller's Profane
State, Chap. 2. and God's Revenge against Adultery, etc. Hist. 5. The Male
Content, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1604. Mr. Webster laid the Platform, and our
Author Marston, molded it into a Play. Parasitaster; or, The Fawn, a Comedy, 4
to. 1606. and 8 vo. 1633. Act 3. Scene 1. from Ovid's Amor. Lib. 2. Eleg. 4.
see Boccace's Novels, Day 3. Nov. 3. Sophonisba, her Tragedy; or, The Wonder of
Women, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1633. Plot from Sir Walter Raliegh, Polibius, Appian,
Livy's Hist. etc. What you will, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1633. Copied from Plautus
Amphitrio. Mr. Phillips and Mr. Winstanly have made him Author of another Play,
called, the Faithful Shepherd, but his Name not being thereto, nor he ever
owning it, I conclude, with Mr. Langbain, that it is none of his.
John Mason.
THis Poet was Master of Arts in King James the First's Time, and writ one Play
called,

Muleasses, the Turk; a Tragedy, 4 to 1610. Acted by the Children of his
Majesty's Revels. This Author, in his Title Page, calls it, A Worthy Tragedy,
and had a great Conceit of its meeting with Success, adding in the Front, this
Sentence of Horace, Sum Superbiam quaesitam meritis.


Philip Massenger.
A Poet who was born at Salisbury in the Reign of Charles the First, his Father
lived and died in the Service of the then Earl of Montgomery, and sent his Son,
our Poet, to St. Alban-Hall, in Oxon, where he remained a Student for three or
four Years. He was intimate with Rowley, Middleton, Field, Decker, and even
Fletcher. He left this World in March, 1669. and on the seventeenth Day of that
Month, was buried in St. Mary Overies-Church in Southwark, in the Grave where
Mr. Fletcher had been before buried. In Sir Ast^n Cockain's Epigrams you may
find an Epitaph on him, Book 1. Ep. 100. He writ fourteen Plays entire, and
joined with Middleton and Rowley in some others; of which in their Order: The
Bashful Lover, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1655. Acted at the private House in
Black-Fryars, by his Majesty's Servants, with good Applause. The Bondsman, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1638. Acted at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, by the most excellent
Princess, the Lady Elizabeth, her Servants: Dedicated to the Right Honorable,
Philip, Earl of Montgomery. The reducing the Slaves by the Sight of the Whips,
is taken from the Story of the Scythian Slaves. The City Madam, a Comedy, 4 to.
1659. Acted at the Private House in Black-fryars, with great Applause, and
Dedicated to the t^uly Noble and Virtuous Lady, Ann, Countess of Oxon. This has
been esteemed a good Play. The Duke of Millain, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1638. as it
had been often acted by his Majesty's Servants, at the Black-fryars. Plot from
Iosephus's Hist. Jews, Book 15. Chap. 4. The Emperor of the East, a
Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1632. Acted at the Black-fryars and Globe, by his Majesty's
Servants: Dedicated to the Right Honorable, John, Lord Mohun, Baron of
Oke-hampton. Plot from Socrates, Lib. 7. Nicephorus, Lib. 14. Baronius, etc.
The fatal Dowry, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1632. Acted at the Black-fryars, by his
Majesty's Servants; Mr. Field, an Author beforementioned, joined with him in
this Play. Charlois Ransoming his Father's Corpse by his own Imprisonment, taken
from Cymon, in Val. Max. Lib. 5. Cap. 4. Ex. 9. The Great Duke of Florence, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1636. The Title calls it, a Comical History, often presented with
good Allowance, by her Majesty's Servants, at the Phaenix in Drury Lane. The
Dedication to the truly Honored, and his Noble Favourer, Sir Robert Wiseman,
of Thorrells-Hall, in Essex. Plot from Speed, Stow, and other our English
Chronicles, in the Reign of King Edgar. The Guardian, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1655. The
Title also calls this, a Comical History, often acted at the private House in
Black-fryars, by his late Majesty's Servants, with great Applause. Plot from
Boccace's Novels, Day 8. Nov. 7. and from the Cimmerian Matron, 8 vo. The Maid
of Honor, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1632. This was oftentimes acted with good
Allowance, at the Phaenix in Drury Lane, by her Majesty's Servants; and
dedicated to Sir Francis Foliambe, and Sir Tho. Bland. The Play is recommended
by Sir Aston Cokain, who prefixed a Copy of Verses thereto. A New Way to pay
Old Debts, a Comedy, 4 to. 1633. often acted at the Phaenix in Drury Lane, by
the Queen's Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Robert,
Earl of Carnarvan. Sir Thomas Iay, and Sir Henry Moody have very much commended
this Play. The Old Law. Vide Middleton. The Picture, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to.
1636. Acted at the Globe and Black-fryars Play Houses, by his Majesty's
Servants; and dedicated to the Noble Society of the Inner Temple. Plot from the
Fortunate deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers, Nov. 4. of the Deceived Lovers. The
Renegado, a Comedy, 4 to. 1630. Acted at the private Playhouse, in Drury Lane,
by her Maiesty's Servants; dedicated to the Right Honorable, George Harding,
Baron of Barkley-Castle, and Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath. Mr.
Shirley, etc. have commended this Play by Copies of Verses. The Roman Actor, a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1629. Acted at the private House in the Black-fryars, by the
King's Majesty's Servants; dedicated to Sir Philip Knivet, Sir Tho. Iay, and
Tho. Bellingham, of Newtimber, in Sussex, Esquire This Play is recommended by
diverse Copies of Verses from Ford, Goff, May, and other Dramatick Poets. Plot
from Tacitus, Aurelius, Victor, and Suetonius in the Life of Domitian. A Very
Woman, or the Prince of Tarent, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1655. The Plot of this
resembles that of the Obstinate Lady, writ by Sir Aston Cokain. The Virgin
Martyr, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1661. Acted by his Majesty's Servants with great
Applause. Mr. Decker assisted our Author in this Play. Plot from Valesius,
Roswedius, Eusebii Hist. Lib. 8. Cap. 17. The Unnatural Combat, a Tragedy, 4
to. 1639. presented by the King's Majesty's Servants, at the Globe; and
dedicated to his much honored Friend, Anthony Sentliger, of Oukham in Kent,
Esquire This Play is without Prologue or Epilogue. The Bashful Lover, the Guardian,
and the Very Woman, are printed together in one Volume, 8 vo.


Thomas May.
A Gentleman of a good Family in Sussex, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; he
was some Years a Fellow-Commoner of Sidney-College in Cambridge^ whence
removing to London, and the Court, he grew to an Intimacy with Endymion Porter,
Esquire and others; but disgusted with the little Encouragement he met with, which
is indeed no Place for Reward of Merit, he retired. In the Year 1652. he died
suddenly, being Five and Fifty Years Old, and lies buried in the West Side of
the North Isle of Westminster-Abby, near Mr. Cambden. But now to his Plays.

Agrippina, Empress of Rome, her Tragedy, 12 mo. 1639. In the first Act of this
Play, the Printer committed an Error, by printing some few Pages twice over.
Plot, see Tacitus, Suetonius, and Petronius Arbiter. Antigone, the Thebane
Princess, her Tragedy, 8 vo. 1631. Dedicated to the most Worthily Honored
Endymion Porter, Esquire Plot from Sophocles's Antigone, and Seneca's Thebais; see
also Statius's Thebais. Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, her Tragedy, 12 mo. 1639.
Acted some Years before printed, and dedicated to the accomplished Sir Kenelm
Digby. Plot from Appian de Bellis Civ. L. Florus, Lib. 4. Suetonius in vit.
August. and Plutarchus in Vit. M. Antonii. he has also made bold with
Calimachus's Epig. on Timon, etc. The Heir, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1633. Acted
by the Company of Revels. This was accounted an ingenious and modest Play, and
much commended by Mr. Thomas Carew, who has a Copy of Verses to that purpose,
printed with the Play. The Old Couple, a Comedy, 4 to. 1651. This Play has been
formerly in repute, and the chief Design of it seems to be against
Coveteousness.
Two of the above Plays, ( viz.) Agrippina and Antigone, are usually bound
together in a small Volume, 12 mo. This Author has published a Translation of
Lucan's Pharsalia, 8 vo. 1635. and Virgil's Georgicks, with Annotations, 1622.
also a History of the late Civil Wars in England, which he calls, A Breviary.

Robert Mead.
HE lived in the Time of King James and King Charles the First, was of
Christ-Church-College, Oxon, and writ one Play, which was published after his
Death. The Title of his Play is,

The Combat of Love and Friendship, a Comedy, formerly presented by the
Gentlemen of Christ-Church in Oxon, 4 to. printed at London, 1654.

Matthew Medbourn.
AN Actor in the Duke's Company, being a Papist and committed to Newgate about
the Popish Plot, where he died; but some Years before he published one Play,
called,

Tartuffe; or, the French Puritan, a Comedy, 4 to. 1670. Acted at the Theater
Royal; and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Henry, Lord Howard, of Norfolk.
Translated from the French of Molliere.

Thomas Meriton.
THis Scribler lived since the Restoration, and accounted the dullest and most
impotent of Dramatick Poets in his Time, he published Two Plays: Love and War,
a Tragedy, 4 to. 1658. and dedicated to the truly Noble, Judicious Gentleman,
and his most esteemed Brother, Mr. Geo. Meriton. I do not find this Play was
ever acted, or deserved acting. The Wandering Lover, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1658.
The Title makes you believe it was acted several times privately, at sundry
Places, by the Author and his Friends, with great Applause; and the Dedication
is to the Ingenious, Judicious, and much Honored Gentleman, Francis Wright, Esquire


Tho. Middleton, vide Fletcher.
THis Author lived in the Time of King James and King Charles the First; was
Contemporary and Associate with Deckar, Rowley, Massinger, Fletcher and
Johnson. Under the Title of Johnson, you have an Account that he joined with
him and Fletcher, in one Play, called, the Widow. He was assisted by Massinger
and Rowley, in writing another Play, called, the Old Law: by Deckar, in the
Roaring Girl, and by Mr. Rowley, in three others; besides those he writ and
published, entirely his own.

Any thing for a Quiet Life, a Comedy, 4 to. 1662. This was not printed till
that Year, though long before acted at the Black-Fryars, with good Success.
Blurt, Mr. Constable; or, the Spaniard's Night-Walk; 4 to. 1602. Acted sundry
times privately, by the Children of Paul's. Our Author's Name is not in the
Title Page; but nevertheless, on good Grounds, attributed to him by Kirkman,
etc. The Changeling, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1653. Acted at the Private House in
Drury Lane, and Salisbury-Court, with great Applause. This is one of those
Plays in which he was assisted by Mr. Rowley. For the Plot, consult the Story
of Alsemero, and Beatrice Ioanna, in God's Revenge against Murder, fol. writ
by Dr. Reynolds. The Chaste Maid in Cheapside, a Comedy, 4 to. 1620. This is
entitled, A pleasant conceited Comedy, often acted at the Swan on the
Bank-Side, by the Lady Elizabeth, her Servants. A fair Quarrel, a Comedy, 4 to.
1622. This is another of those Plays, in which Mr. Rowley joined, and is
dedicated to the nobly disposed, and faithful Breasted, Robert Gray, Esquire one of
the Grooms of his Highness's Chamber. Plot from Cynthio Giraldi, a Novel, Dec.
4. Nov. 5. The Family of Love, a Comedy, 4 to. 1608. Acted by the Children of
his Majesty's Revels. A Game at Chess, a Comedy, 4 to. Acted at the Globe on
the Bank-Side. The Game being played before Loyola, between one of the Church
of England, and the other of the Church of Rome, the latter loses. Inner Temple
Masque; or, Masque of Heroes, 4 to. 1640. presented by Gentlemen of the same
ancient and noble House, as an Entertainment for many eminent Ladies. Though this
Play was writ about Twenty Years before printed, yet Mrs. Behn approved of it
so much, that when she writ her Comedy called, the City Heiress, she borrowed
part thereof. A Mad World, my Masters, a Comedy, 4 to. This Play is said to be
often acted, with good Applause. The Mayor of Queenborough, a Comedy, 4 to.
1661. often acted with much Applause, by his Majesty's Servants. You have in
this Play, several Dumb Shows. Plot, see the Reign of Vortiger, in Du Chesne,
Stow, Speed, and other English Chronicles. Michaelmas-Term, a Comedy, 4 to. I
know not whether ever acted. More Desemblers besides Women, a Comedy, 8 vo.
1657. No Wit, no Help like a Woman's, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1657. This and the other
preceding Play, with Women, beware Women, may be had bound together, in a small
8 vo. or 12 mo. The Old Law; or, A New Way to Please you, 4 to. 1656. The Title
calls it, An Excellent Comedy, acted before the King and Queen, with great
Applause. Mr. Rowley and Massenger joined with him in this Play. The Phaenix, a
Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1607. Acted several times by the Children of Paul's, before
his Majesty, with good Applause. See the Story writ by Mignel de Cervantes,
called, the Force of Love, being a Spanish Novel. The Roaring Girl; or, Mall
Cutpurse, a Comedy, 4 to. 1611. as it has lately been acted on the Fortune
Stage, by the Prince's Players. Mr. Langbain says, he never saw this Play, and
Ranks it under Middleton; but I take most part of it to be Deckar's, who joined
in it. This Play has an odd sort of an Epistle Dedicatory, to the Comic
Play-Readers, Venery and Laughter. The Spanish Gypsies, a Comedy, 4 to. 1661.
acted both at the Private House in Drury Lane, and Salisbury-Court, with great
Applause. In this Play he was joined by Mr. Rowley. See part of the Plot in a
Spanish Novel, called, the Force of Blood, writ by M. de Cervantes. A Trick to
catch the Old One, a Comedy, 4 to. 1616. The Title says, it has been often in
Action at Paul's and Black-Fryars, before their Majesty's. This was, in those
Times, accounted a good Play. Triumphs of Love and Antiquity, a Masque, 4 to.
1619. Dedicated to the Right Honorable, Sir William Cockain, Knight, then Lord
Mayor of the City of London, and Lord General of his Majesty's Military Forces.
This, though accounted by other Catalogues a Masque, is little more than Speeches
spoke, as now in these Days, to the Lord Mayors, in Pageants, etc. Women,
beware Women, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1657. See Hippolito and Isabella, a Romance, 8
vo. This is usually bound with two others of his beforementioned, 8 vo. The
World tossed at Tennis, a Masque, 4 to. 1620. said to be diverse times acted to
the Contentment of many Noble and Worthy Spectators, by the Prince's Servants.
The Dedication is to the truly Noble, Charles, then Lord Howard, Baron of
Effingham; and to his Virtuous and Worthy Wife, the Right Honorable, Mary,
then Lady Effingham, the Eldest Daughter of Sir William Cockain, Knight, then
Lord Mayor of London, etc. Your Five Gallants, a Comedy 4 to. Acted at the
Black-Fryars. A Play printed without any Date, and in all probability, the
first he ever writ.
John Milton.
AN Author of that Excellence of Genius and Learning, that none of any Age or
Nation, I think, has excelled him: during the Civil Wars, and after the Death of
King Charles the First, he was advanced to considerable Posts in the
Government, as Under Secretary of State, etc. and he was a strenuous Defender
of the Power and Liberty of the People, upon which that Government immediately
stood. His Controversy with Salmatius was very famous all over Europe, and his
Victory cost his Adversary his Life, though he himself lost his Eyes. I have been
told, that after the Restoration of King Charles the Second, he taught School
at, or near Greenwich. The Time or Place of his Birth, Education or Death, I am
ignorant of. He writ two Dramatick Pieces, viz. Samson Agonistes, a Tragedy, 8
vo. 1680. Mr. Dryden Sen. has, in his Aureng-zebe, borrowed some Thoughts from
this Poem, which is founded on Scripture. Consult the Thirteenth Chapter of
Judges, etc. also Tornier, Salian, and Joseph. Antiq. lib. 5. A Masque
presented at Ludlow-Castle, 1634. Printed 4 to. 1687. It was published by Mr.
Laws, who composed the Music, dedicating it to the Right Honorable, John,
Lord Viscount Brackley, Son and Heir Apparent to John, Earl of Bridgewater,
Viscount Brackley, Lord President of Wales, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council; before whom it was presented. He writ besides, diverse
Pieces in Poetry and History, as Paradise Lost, 8 vo. and Fol. with Sculptures;
Paradise Regained, 8 vo. Hist. of Britain, 4 to. Pro populo Anglicano defensio,
12 mo. The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, 4 to. etc.


Walter Montague, Esquire
THE Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral, 8 vo. 1649. This was privately acted
before King Charles the First, by the Queen's Majesty, and Ladies of Honor;
and was then well esteemed.

Peter Motteux.
AN Author now living, who, though born and bred at Roan in Normandy, has made
himself so far Master of our Language, as to be able to divert the Town in Two
Plays, the first called, Love's a Jest, a Comedy, 4 to. Acted at the new
Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, 1696. and
dedicated to Charles, Lord Clifford, of Lanesborough. The Author owns, in his
Preface, himself indebted to the Italians, for the hint of the two Scenes where
Love is made in Jest; as also some Speeches and Thoughts here and there. The
Loves of Mars and Venus, a Play set to Music, as it is acted at the New
Theater, in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, 4 to. 1696.
and dedicated to the Honorable Collone Codrington. In his Preface he owns the
Story to be Ovid's, an^ that he has taken the Dance of the Cyclops from Mr.
Shadwell's Psyche.


The Novelty, every Act a Play, being a short Pastoral, Comedy, Masque,
Tragedy, and Farce; acted at the new Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by
his Majesty's Servants, 4 to. 1697. and dedicated to Charles Caesar, of
Bonnington, Esquire In the Preface he lets us know, that the Pastoral, called,
Thyrsis, is written by his ingenious Friend, Mr. I. Oldmixon. The Tragedy,
which he calls, The Unfortunate Couple, is the latter and most moving part of
Dr. Filmer's Unnatural Brother. That the Farce, called, Natural Magic, is an
Imitation of Part of a French Comedy, of one Act, after the Italian Manner, as
you may find many in the Theater Italien. Hercules, the Masque, is his own,
though I have seen one on the same Subject by a French Author, and represented at
Brussels. The Comedy is his own too, called, All without Money.

Though this bears the Name of The Novelty, it can be called so only as some of
our modern Opinions in Philosophy are called new, that is, because they have
laid by unthought of a great while; for as these are to be met with among the
Old Philosophers, so is this Model to be found in Sir William Davenant's
Playhouse to be Let. I shall only add, That the greatest Novelty is the odd
sort of Numbers used in his Friends Pastoral: What Authority he may have for
it, I don't know.

William Mountford.
THE Birth and Parentage of this Author I know nothing of; the first Figure he
made was, in the part of Tall-Boy, on the Stage, for which, being taken Notice,
he was advanced on the Theater, till he got into the Family of the late Lord
Chancellor Iefferies; from whence he returned to the Stage, where he continued
till he was killed in Norfolk-Buildings, London. He has published three Plays.

Greenwich-Park, a Comedy, 4 to. 1691. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants, and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Algernon, Earl of
Essex, Viscount Malden, etc. This is a very pretty Comedy, and has been always
received with general Applause. The Injured Lovers; or, The Ambitious Father, a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1688. the Dedication is to the Right Honorable, James, Earl of
Arran, Son to his Grace, the Duke of Hamilton. This Play did not succeed as the
Author wished. The Life and Death of Dr. Faustus, made into a Farce, with the
Humors of Harlequin and Scaramauch, as they were several times acted by Mr.
Lee and Mr. Ievoa, at the Queen's Theater in Dorset-Garden, newly revived at
the Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. The Succesful Strangers, a Tragi-Comedy, 4
to. 1690. Acted by their Majesty's Servants, at the Theater Royal. Its
Dedication is to the Right Honorable, Thomas (now Lord) Wharton, Comptroller
of his Majesty's Household. The Catastrophe from The Rival Brothers, in
Scarron's Novels. This Play somewhat exceeded the preceding one.
N.
Thomas Nabbs.
HE was accounted a Third Rate Poet, who lived in King Charles the First's
Time, there is published of his Writings, Eight Dramatick Pieces, which follow
in Alphabetical Order: The Bride, called, a pleasant Comedy, 4 to. 1640. Acted
first, Two Years before, at the Private House in Drury Lane, by their Majesty's
Servants. Dedicated to several Gentlemen of the Honorable Houses of the Inns of
Court, his Friends. Covent Garden, a Comedy, 4 to. 1638. first acted by the
Queen's Majesty's Servants, 1632. The Dedication is to the Right Worthy, Sir
John Suckling. Hanibal and Scipio, called, An Historical Tragedy, 4 to. 1637.
but acted first in the Year 1635. by the Queen's Majesty's Servants, at the
private House in Drury Lane. Plot founded on History; see the Lives of Hanibal
and Scipio, in Corn. Nepos, and Plutarch; see also Livy, L. Florus, etc. An
Entertainment on the Prince's Birthday, 4 to. This is ranked under Nabbs, in
Mr. Langbain's Catalogue, as also in Kirkman's and others, but omitted in Mr.
Langbain's Account of the Poets, for what Reason I know not. Microcosmos, a
Masque, 4 to. 1637. presented (says the Title) with general liking, at the
private House in Salisbury-Court, and here set down, according to the Intention
of the Author. The Dedication is to the Service and Delight of all truly Noble,
Generous, and Honest Spirits. This is a Masque which has good Morality in it,
and (as I find) was commended by Bro^e, and others. Spring's Glory, Vindicating
Love by Temperance, a Masque, 4 to. 1638. This has much of Morality also, and
is commended by Mr. Chamberlain, a then noted Poet, and others. It Is dedicated
to Peter Ball, Esquire. There is joined with this A Presentation, as intended for
Prince Charles's Birthday, ( viz.) May 29. which, in other Catalogues has been
styled an Interlude. There are besides, many Poems, Epigrams, Elegies and
Epithalamiums. Tottenham-Court, a Comedy, 4 to. printed 1638. but acted five
Years before, in Salisbury-Court: And is dedicated to the Worshipful, Will.
Mills, Esquire. Unfortunate Mother, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1640. It is dedicated to the
Right Worshipful, Richard Brathwait, Esquire. Some of the Author's Friends bestowed
commendatory Verses on this Play, though it did not bear acting. The Woman-Hater
Arraigned, a Comedy, and Charles the First, a Tragedy, have been by Philips and
Winstanly, placed to this Author, but without any Ground or Reason: for which
see among the Anonymous Plays, hereafter mentioned.


Thomas Nash.
A Contemporary with the former, though of a more eminent Character; he was bred
at Cambridge, and writ two Plays, called, Dido, Queen of Carthage, a Tragedy, 4
to. This was not wholly writ by him, for Marlow did somewhat assist therein.
The Story from Virgils AEneids, lib. 1, and 4. Summers Last Will and Testament,
a Comedy, 4 to. This Author has writ diverse other small Pieces, both in Verse
and Prose; but not that Play of See me, and see me not, as alleged by Mr.
Philips and Winstanley.


Alexander Nevile.
A Young Gentleman, that at sixteen undertook to translate the Oedipus of
Seneca, and lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Oedipus, a Tragedy, 4 to. printed 1581. but was Englished by him about twenty
Years before, and is dedicated to Dr. Wotton, then one of the Queen's Majesty's
Privy Council.

Robert Nevile.
A Fellow of King's-College, Cambridge, in King Charles the First's Time, and
writ a Play, entitled,

The Poor Scholar, a Comedy, 4 to. 1662. written diverse Years before printed,
but I do not find it was ever acted, tho recommended by some Copies of Verses
by three other Poets of that Time.

William, Duke of Newcastle.
MR. Langbain has always, a good Word for Quality, he can see no Blemish in
that Person that has a Title, though he be so sharp sighted in all those of a
lower Station; and he is so transported on this worthy Nobleman, that he baulks
the Curiosity of his Reader, for some Account of his Life, to vent a clumsey
Flattery. He was of the Illustrious and Ancient Family of Cavendish, a zealous
Follower of the Royal Cause, and with it exiled; during his Abode at Antwerp,
he writ a Book of Horsemanship. He was an Encourager of Poetry, and a Poet
himself. You may find his Life at large, written by his Duchess. We have four
Comedies of his in Print; as The Country Captain, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1649. It was
acted at the Black-Fryars, by his Majesty's Servants, with good Applause; and
^sually bound up with another of his, called, The Variety. The Humorous Lovers,
a Comedy, 4 to. 1677. Acted by his Royal Highness the Duke of York's Servants,
with great Applause. The Triumphant Widow; or, The Medley of Humors, a Comedy,
4 to. 1677. and acted by his Royal Highness the Duke of York's Servants. This
was esteemed a good Play, and Mr. Shadwell had so good an Opinion of it, that
he borrowed a great part thereof, to complete his Comedy, called, Bury-Fair.
The Variety, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1649. presented by his Majesty's Servants at the
Black^Fryars. Though the Duke's Name be not to this, or The Country Captain,
which is usually bound with it; yet, by Mr. Cartwright's Works, and others, we
find Satisfaction enough to believe them his.


Margaret, Duchess of Newcastle.
THE Honorable Consort of the forementioned Duke, whose Plays and Poetry have
made some Noise in the World, and have at least met with Mr. Langbain for an
Admirer and Defender. I know not her Family, nor Time of Birth or Death. She
has published six and Twenty Plays, reckoning those writ in two Parts, each of
them for two. They are usually bound in two Volumes fol. 1662, and 1668. Their
Names follow: The Apocriphal Ladies, a Comedy, fol. 1662. This Play is not
divided into Acts, but has variety of Scenes, to the Number of three and
twenty. Bell in Campo, a Tragedy, in two Parts, fol. 1662. In the last Part you
may find several Copies of Verses writ by his Grace, the Duke, her Husband. The
Blazing World, a Comedy, fol. 1668. This, tho styled a Comedy, yet was never
perfected by the Authoress. The Bridalls, a Comedy, fol. 1668. The Comical
Hash, a Comedy, fol. 1662. This Play was, by Accident, omitted in Mr.
Langbain's Catalogue of Plays, and ignorantly by other Catalogue Publishers.
The Convent of Pleasure, a Comedy, fol. 1668. The Female Accademy, a Comedy,
fol. 1662. Lady Contemplation, in two Parts, a Comedy, fol. 1662. The Duke
assisted in some Scenes of both Parts. Love's Adventures, in two Parts, a
Comedy, ^ol. 1662. The Duke writ also the Epithalamium and Song in the last
Part. Matrimonial Troubles, in two Parts, the first Comedy, the last Tragedy,
fol. 1662. Nature's Three Daughters (viz.) Beauty, Love, and Wit, in two parts,
a Comedy, fol. 1662. The Presence, a Comedy, fol. 1668. The Scenes designed for
this Play, were so numerous, that the Duchess thought it would lengthen it too
much, therefore printed them seperately. Public Wooing, a Comedy, fol. 1662.
Two Scenes and two Songs at the End of this Play, with diverse Speeches therein,
are writ by his Grace, the Duke of Newcastle. Religions, a Tragi-Comedy, fol.
1662. Several Wits, a Comedy, Fol. 1662. The Sociable Companions; or, The
Female Wits, a Comedy, fol. 1668. The Unnatural Tragedy, fol. 1662. The
Prologue and Epilogue of this Play, were writ by his Grace, the Duke of
Newcastle. Wits Cabal, in two Parts, a Comedy, fol. 1662. The Epilogue of the
first Part was also writ by his Grace, the Duke of Newcastle. Youth's Glory,
and Death's Banquet, in two Parts, a Tragedy, fol. 1662. Two Scenes, and the
Speeches of the first Part, as also the Songs and Verses in the second Part,
were also writ by his Grace, the Duke of Newcastle.


Besides these Dramatick Works, she has writ diverse other Pieces; as, The Life
of the Duke of New Castle, 1667. also the same in Latin, 1668. Philosophical
Fancies, 1653. A Volume of Poems, 1653. Philosophical Opinions, 1655. Nature's
Picture, drawn by Fancies Pencil, to the Life; at the End of which was her own
Life, 1656. A Volume of Orations, 1662. Philosophical Letters, 1664. Two
hundred and eleven So^^^bl^ Letters, 1664. All which Volumes are printed in fol.

Thomas Newton.
ONE of the Translators of Seneca, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, he
translated one entirely, and club'd with Jasper Heywood and Alexander Nevile in
the rest; but published them all together, with a Dedication to Sir Thomas
Henage, then Treasurer of her Majesty's Chamber. Philips, in his Theatrum
Poetarum, ascribes one other Play to this Author, called, Tamberlain the Great,
which is none of his, but Marlo's.

Thebais, a Tragedy, 4 to. Translated from Seneca, as before intimated, it has
no Chorus, and is the shortest of all that Author's Tragedies.

Thomas Norton, and Tho. Sackvile.
THese Twin Authors lived in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the latter was Lord
Buckhurst, and in 1 Iac. created Earl of Dorset, Mar. 13. 1603.

Ferrex and Porrex, a Tragedy, 8 vo. first printed 1665. but since by the Title
of

Gorboduc, a Tragedy, 4 to. reprinted, 1590. This Play was presented by the
Gentlemen of the Inner Temple, before the Queen's most excellent Majesty; and
accounted an excellent Play, full of Morality. Plot from our British Chronicles.

Thomas Nuce.
AN Author likewise in Queen Elizabeth's Time, who translated one of Seneca's
Plays, called,

Octavia, a Tragedy, 4 to. Consult Sueton. in vit. Claud. Tacitus, lib. 12. c.
14. Dion. Nero, etc.

O
Thomas Otway.
THE Place of Mr. Otway's Birth I know not; but he was of a good Family, and
has a Nephew a Captain in the present Service. He was bred at Christ-Church, in
Oxford, and thence removed to London, not going on with the Design of being of
the Clergy. Though at first he met with but little Encouragement here, but what a
small Allowance and Sallery from the Playhouse afforded (for he was first a
Player) but after he had writ Don Carlos, he began to have a Name, having in
that Play discovered some Touches of a Tallent, very few of our English Poets
have been Master of, in moving the Passions, that are, and ought to be the Aim
of all Tragic Poets, Terror and Pity; and in which none equaled him, in his
two following Tragedies of The Orphan, and Venice Preserved. He was a Jovial
Companion, and a great Lover of the Bottle, and Particularly of Punch; the last
thing he made before his Death, being an excellent Song on that Liquor. We have
in Print of his, ten Plays; another more excellent than all of them, is, by
some malicious or designing Person suppressed, either hereafter to set up a
Reputation to themselves, by owning it, or to procure a Profit by selling it
for their own.

Alcibiades, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1675. acted at the Duke's Theater. The Dedication
is to the Right Honorable, Charles, Earl of Middlesex. This was the first
Product of our Author. The Plot from Corn. Nepos, and Plutarch, both in the
Life of Alcibiades; but he has varied from the Story, making Alcibiades a more
scrupulous Man than the Historians do, who accuse him of Adultery with the
Queen of Agis, etc. The Atheist; or the second Part of The Soldier's Fortune, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1684. The Dedication is to the Lord Eland, Eldest Son to the
Marquess of Hallifax. Plot, in Part, taken from The Invisible Mistress, in
Scarron's Novels. The Cheats of Scapin, a Farce, 4 to. 1667. acted at the
Duke's Theater: It is printed with Titus and Berenice, a Tragedy after
mentioned, writ by the same Author. It Is translated from Molliere, which,
originally is Terrences Phormio. Caius Marius, his History and Fall, a Tragedy,
4 to. 1680. acted at the Duke's Theater; and its Dedication to the Lord
Viscount Faulkland. Part of it stolen from Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet. Plot
from Plutarch, in his Life of Caius Marius, and Lucan's Pharsalia, Book 2. Don
Carlos, Prince of Spain, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1679. The Dedication is to his Royal
Highness, the Duke. This is the second Play our Author ever writ, and gained
him great Reputation. Plot from the Novel so called, 12 mo. you may also
consult the Spanish Chronicles in the Life of Philip the Second. Friendship in
Fashion, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678. acted at the Duke's Theater, with good Applause.
Its Dedication is to the Right Honorable, Charles, Earl of Dorset and
Middlesex. The Orphan; or, The Unhappy Marriage, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1680. acted
at the Duke's Theater. Its Dedication to her Royal Highness, the Duchess. This
is acccounted an excellent Play, and often acted of late Days. Plot from the
History of Brandon, p. 17. and The English Adventures, a Novel. The Soldiers
Fortune, a Comedy, 4 to. 1681. acted by their Royal Highnesses Servants, at the
Duke's Theater. The Lady Dunce, making her Husband Agent, is from Moliere
Escole de Maris, etc. See also Boccace's Novels, Day 3. Nov. 3. and Scarron's
Comical Romance, p. 227. Titus and Berenice, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1677. to which is
joined The Cheats of Scapin, acted at the Duke's Theater; and dedicated to the
Right Honorable, John, Earl of Rochester. Translated from Monsieur Racine; it
wants two Acts of the usual Number. The Story of Titus and Berenice you may
find in Suetonius, Dionisius, Josephus, etc. Venice Preserved; or, A Plot
discovered; a Tragedy, 4 to. 1688. acted at the Duke's Theater; dedicated to
the Duchess of Portsmouth. This is an incomparable Play, and often acted of
late Days. The Plot is taken from a little Book, printed 8 vo. being an Account
of the Conspiracy of the Spaniards against Venice.
This Author writ a small Piece, called, The Poet's Complaint to his Muse, 4
to. 1680. also a Pastoral on King Charles the Second, which is published in
Mrs. Behn's Lycidas, 8 vo. p. 81. and since his Death, is printed a Translation
of his from the French, called, The History of the Triumvirates, 8 vo. 1686.

I. Oldmixon.
THis Gentleman is of an ancient Family of Oldmixon, near Bridgewater in
Somersetshire. As for the particulars of his Life, I can say little of them,
only that he has given the World a Pastoral, called,

Amyntas, acted at the Theater Royal. The Title Page lets us know, that it is
taken from the Aminta of Tasso, and the Preface informs us of the ill Success
it met with on the Stage: which indeed cannot be attributed to the English
Author's Performance, which is as well as the Original would allow; but, with
Submission to our Author's better Judgment, I must needs say, that Pastoral it
self, though never so well writ, is not a Subject fit for so long an
Entertainment as that of the Stage. This the Ancients very well knew, and
therefore they wisely confined it to a narrower Compass, as is evident from the
Idyllia of Theocritus, and the Bucolics of Virgil: For the sedater Passions
(which our Author himself attributes to a Shepherd's Life) of these Innocent
People represented in a Pastoral, cannot afford so lively Pleasure to an
Audience, as may balance the Length of their Attention, that must of necessity
grow languid, and tired, with so very calm an Emotion, which is still kept
active by the more violent Passions, proper for Tragedy. This extending of the
ancient Pastoral to so unreasonable a length was, as well as Farce, an Italian
Invention, and not one jot the better, because covered with so great a Name as
Tasso's. I could never find that Authority would silence the Sentiments of
Nature and Reason; and Tasso, that has been guilty of Absurdeties enough in his
Epic Poem, must not be supposed infallible in his Pastoral. After all, I am of
Opinion, that it is but a weak Refuge to fly to the Opinion or Taste of a
Foreign Nation, from the Judgment of our own; for I Am satisfied that there are
not fewer Men of Sense, in England, and a great many more of Learning, than
Italy affords us. Aminta might please there, but if we judge by our Taste of
Poetry, and with ours by the Ancients, it pleased without Reason, and only
perhaps for the Novelty, or, which is yet most likely, because it was sung in
Italy, that Musical Nation minding more the Performance of the Composer, than
Poet. All that can be said for our Author is, that in an ill Choice, he has
equaled his Original, and in some Places improved it.

P
John Palsgrave.
THIS Author was a Bachelor of Divinity, and Chaplain to King Henry the
Eighth. He published one Play under the Title of

Acolastus, a Comedy, 4 to. 1540. dedicated to King Henry the Eighth;
translated from the Latin Play of the same Name, writ by Guil. Fullonius, and
printed in Old English Character. It Is the Parable of the Prodigal Son.

Peaps.
A Scholar of Eaten School, who at seventen, writ a Play, called, Love in its
Ecstasy, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1649. but written many Years before 'twas printed.

George Peel.
THis Author was Master of Arts in Christ-Church-College, Oxon, in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, writ two Plays.

David and Bethshabe, their Love, with the Tragedy of Absalom, 4 to. 1599. This
Play, as the Title says, was diverse times played on the Stage. Plot from Holy
Scripture. Edward the first, a History 4 to. 1593. This King was surnamed
Long-Shanks, and the Play gives an Account of his return from the Holy Land,
with the Life of Kewellin, Rebel in Wales; it also relates the Story of Queen
Eleanor's sinking by Chairing-Cross, and rising again at Queen-Hithe, before
called Potters-Hithe. See Grafton, Martin, Hollingshead, Stow, and other
English Chronicles.
The Tragedy of Alphonsus, Emperor of Germany, by mistake, placed to him, in
^ome Catalogues, is not his, but Chapman's.

Mrs. Catharine Philips.
SHE was, if I mistake not, born in Brecknock-shire, in Wales^ Contemporary of
Cowley, and much praised by him. I must confess, I cannot but prefer Mrs. Behn
infinitely before her; she seems to be a very cold Writer, while you may find
in Aphra both Fire and Easiness, which Mrs. Philips wanted. She died of the
Small Pox, June, 22. 1664. Aged 31.

Horace, a Tragedy, Fol. 1678. Translated from the French of Corneille. This
Authress leaving the Play unfinished at her Death, Sir John Denham completed
it, by adding the fifth Act; after which, it was acted at Court by Persons of
Quality. Plot from Livy, lib. 1. c. 2. L. Florus, etc.

Pompey, a Tragedy, fol. 1678. acted at the Duke's Theater, with great
Applause. There was usually at the End acted a Farce of Sir William Davenant's,
which you may find in his Playhouse to be Let. The Earl of Orrery, and
Countess of Cork, were the Chief Instruments of bringing this Play in English,
to light. Translated also from Corneille, and Plot from Lucan's Pharsalia.

Mrs. Mary Pix.
THis is a Lady yet living, and in this Poetic Age, when all Sexes and Degrees
venture on the Sock or Buskins, she has boldly given us an Essay of her Talent
in both, and not without Success, though with little Profit to her self.

Ibrahim, the Thirteenth Emperor of the Turks, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater
Royal, 1696. 4 to. and dedicated to Richard Minchal, of Burton, Esquire This Play,
if it want the Harmony of Numbers, and the Sublimity of Expression, has yet a
Quality, that at least balances that Defect, I mean the Passions; for the
Distress of Morena never failed to bring Tears into the Eyes of the Audience;
which few Plays, if any since Otway's, have done; and yet, which is the true
End of Tragedy. She informs us, that by mistake it was called Ibrahim the
Thirteenth, when it should have been called, Ibrahim the Twelfth, the Story you
may find in Sir Paul Ricaut's Continuation of the Turkish History.

The Innocent Mistress, a Comedy, acted at the Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, 1697. 4 to. The Prologue and
Epilogue writ by Mr. Motteux. This is a diverting Play, and met with good
Success, though acted in the hot Season of the Year, our Poetress has endeavored
to imitate the Easiness and Way of the Author of Virtue in Danger, and The
Provoked Wife. She has borrowed some Incidents from other Plays; as Mrs.
Beauclair's carrying of Mrs. Flywife from Sir Francis Wildlove, from the
Virtuous Wife doing the same to her Husband's Mistress. Then the Scene in the
Park betwixt Sir Francis and her in her Mask, is a kind of Copy in young
Bellair, and Harriots in Sir Fopling. Miss Peggy seems a Copy of Miss Hoyden,
as Chattal is of several of the parts written of late for Mr. Dogget. But
notwithstanding these Imitations, which ever have been allowed in Poets, the
Play has its peculiar Merit; and as a Lady carried the Prize of Poetry in
France this Year, so in Justice, they are like to do in England; though indeed we
use them more barbarously, and defraud them both of their Fame and Profit.

The Spanish Wives, a Farce, acted at the Theater in Dorset-Gardens, by his
Majesty's Servants, 1696. and dedicated to the Honorable Colonel Tipping, of
Whitfield. This Farce had the good Fortune to please, and it must be owned,
there are two or three pleasant Turns in it. For the Plot consult the Novel of
the Pilgrim.

Samuel Pordage, Esquire
Lately, if not still, a Member of Lincoln's Inn, and Author of two Plays,
called, Herod and Mariamne, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1673. acted at the Duke's Theater,
dedicated to the Duchess of Albermarle. A Play writ many Years before it was
preferred to the Stage, where it was received with great Satisfaction. Plot from
Joseph. Hist. Philo Iudaus, and Cleopatra, a Romance, in the Story of
Tyridates. Siege of Babylon, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1678. dedicated to her Royal
Highness the Duchess of York. Plot from the aforesaid Romance of Cleopatra.


Henry Porter.
AUthor of an Historical Play, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, called,

Two Angry Women of Abingdon, with the humourous Mirth of Dick Coomes, and
Nicholas Proverbs, two Serving-men, a Comedy, 4 to. 1599. acted by the Right
Honorable, the Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Admiral's Servants.

Thomas Porter.
THis Gentleman lived in the Time of the two Charles's, and writ, 1664. a Play,
called.

The Carnival, a Comedy, 4 to. 1664. acted at the Theater Royal, by his
Majesty's Servants. The Villain, a Comedy, 4 to. 16. acted at the Duke's
Theater. This Play is now sometimes acted, Mr. Sandford having gained great
Reputation by playing the part of Malignii.
George Powell.
SON of Mr. Powell, an ancient Player, lately dead; he is more eminent for
playing than writing, though there are some Plays under his Name; as, Alphonso
King of Naples, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1691. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants, and dedicated to her Grace the Duchess of Ormond. The
Prologue is written by Io. Haynes, and Epilogue by Mr. Durfey. Brutus of Alba;
or, Augustus's Triumph, a new Opera, acted at the Theater in Dorset Garden, by
his Majesty's Servants, 1690, 4 to. and dedicated by Sam. Briscoe, Bookseller
to George Powel, and John Verbruggen. This Play has not so much as the whole
Title new, for Brutus of Alba is a Play of Mr. Tate's, and all the Design taken
out of several old Plays. The treacherous Brother, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1690. acted
by their Majesty's Servants, at the Theater Royal, and dedicated to the
Patentees and Sharers of their Majesty's Theater. Plot from The Wall-Flower, a
Romance, fol. writ by Dr. Baily, formerly President of St. John's, Oxon. A very
good Wife, a Comedy, 4 to. 1695. acted by their Majesty's Servants, at the
Theater Royal; and dedicated to the honored Alexander Popham, Esquire The Prologue
is writ by Mr. Congreve. This Play is taken whole Pages together out of Brom.


Thomas Preston.
I Know no more of this Author, than that he has writ one Play, called,

Cambyses, King of Persia, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. a very ancient Play with an
odd, long Title, which runs thus, ( viz.) A lamentable Tragedy, mixed full of
pleasant Mirth; containing the Life of Cambyses, King of Persia, from the
beginning of his Kingdom unto his Death; his one good Deed of Execution, after
the many Wicked Deeds, and Tyrannous Murders committed by and through him: and
last of all, his odious Death, by God's Justice appointed. Done in such Order
as follows. London, Printed by John Alde. It is writ in old fashioned Meter,
and has no Date. Plot from Herodotus and Justin.

Edmund Prestwich.
OF whom I know no more, than that it is said, he has writ a Play, called,
Hippolitus, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1641. A Play, which Mr. Langbain says, he never
saw; the Author's Name is to it, who took the Plot from that of Seneca, or the
Phaedra of Euripides. The Hectors, another Play, has been by some Catalogues
attributed to this Author; but I cannot learn for any Reason it should be his,
so you find it placed among the Anonymous Plays.


Q
Francis Quarles.
HE was born at Stewards, a Seat in Rumford, in the Parish of Horn-Church,
Essex, his Father was James Quarles, Esquire Clerk of the Green Cloth, and Purveyor
to Quen Elizabeth. He studied first at Christ-Church, Cambridge, then at
Lincoln's Inn; was Cup Bearer to the Queen of Bohemia, Secretary to Bishop
Usher, and Cronologer to the City of London. He suffered Persecution by the
Government then it being, for a Book called, The Loyal Convert. The Troubles of
Ireland brought him to die at Home, in the Two and Fiftieth Year of his Age,
Sept. 8. 1644. Home had Eighteen Children by one Wife, and lies buried in St.
Foster's Church, London. He writ one Play, called,

The Virgin Widow, a Comedy, 4 to. 1649.

He writ diverse other Pieces, as a Book of Emblems, which has born many
Editions; a Book of Poems, wherein is the History of Sampson, Jonah, Esther,
and Job Militant; Argalus and Parthenia; Enchiridion of Meditations, Divine and
Moral; Pentalogia, or, The Quintessence of Meditation; The Loyal Convert, with
some others.

R
Thomas Randolph.
HOughton in Northamptonshire gave Birth, Westminster School, and Trinity
College, Cambridge, (where he was Fellow) a learned Education to this Poet. He
was an adopted Son of Ben. Johnson; and dyed Young, though his exact Age I know
not; he writ these following Plays.

Amyntas; or, The Impossible Dowry, a Pastoral, 8 vo. 1688. This was acted
before the King and Queen at White Hall. Aristippus; or, The Jovial
Philosopher, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1688. to which is added, The Conceited
Pedlar. This was presented in a private Show. Hey for Honesty, Down with
Knavery, a Comedy, 4 to. 1651. Translated from Aristophanes's Plautus. This was
since augmented and published in 8 vo. by another Hand, ( viz.) F. I. The
Jealous Lovers, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1668. This was presented to their Majesty's at
Cambridge, by the Students of Trinity-Colledge, and has been accounted the best
of his Plays, it was revised by the Author in his Lifetime, and since revived
on the Stage, 1682. It is dedicated to Dr. Comber, Dean of Carlisle. The Muses
Looking-Glass, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1681. before called, The Entertainment. Sir
Aston Cockain, and one Mr. Rich, formerly of Christ-Church College, Oxon, have
given great Commendation of this Play.
The two first and two last of these Plays are printed at Oxon with his Poems.

Edward Ravenscroft.
A Gentleman of an Ancient Family, and though designed for the Law, and once a
Member of the Middle Temple, was pleased to quit the rugged Paths of Business
for Poetry, in which he has performed with various Success. So omitting Mr.
Langbain's Personal Reflections, which ^avour strongly of the University, I
shall proceed to an Account of the Plays.

The Anatomist; or, The Sham Doctor, a Comedy, 4 to. 1697. acted at the Duke's
Theater in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and dedicated to Thomas Ravenfcroft, Esquire
late High Sheriff of Flintshire. This Play met with extraordinary Success
having the Advantage of the excellent Music of The Loves of Mars and Venus
performed with it. The Canterbury Guests; or, A Bargain Broken, a Comedy, 4 to
1695. acted at the Theater Royal, and dedicated to Rowland Air Esquire this Play
had not that Success the Poet desired, as may be gathered from the Epistle. The
Careless Lovers, a Comedy, 4 to. 1673. Acted at the Duke's Theater. Part of
this Play borrowed from Molliere's Monsieur de Pourceaugnac, 8 vo. The Citizen
turned Gentleman, a Comedy, 4 to. 1675. acted at the Duke's Theater, and
dedicated to his Highness, Prince Rupert. Borrowed from the same Author he made
use of in the foregoing Play, and Molliere's le Burgois Gentlehome. Dame
Dobson; or, The Cunning Woman, a Comedy, 4 to. 1684. acted at the Duke's
Theater. Translated from La Deveniresse, a French Comedy. English Lawyer, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1678. acted at the Theater Royal, translated from the Latin
Ignoramus. The Italian Husband, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1697. acted at the Theater in
Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields. To this Play, besides the Prologue, is prefixed a
Dialogue, which he calls, The Prelude. This Discourse is managed by the Poet, a
Critic, and one Mr. Peregrine, the Poet's Friend; Mr. Peregrine and the Poet
would make it out, that the Italian Way of writing a Tragedy in Three Acts, is
very commendable; That I shall leave to the Decision of our great Master
Horace, who will have the Dramma neither more nor less than Five. Then the Poet
seems under another Mistake, in thinking, that because an Italian Lady would
esteem you a dull, heavy and Phlegmatic Lover, if you should waste time in
idle Ceremony and Complement; it is Excuse enough for her yielding so soon in
his Play: For if they are such, they are no fitter for a Tragedy, than one of
our English Prostitutes, and can here merit no more Pity. And though it is an
extraordinary thing to make us pity the Guilty, (which I know none but Otway
could do) yet the Audience must be very Compassionate, to pity so willing an
Adultery as this; and her Repentance proceeds from Fear, more than a Sense of
the Crime, or at least from the seeming Generosity of the Husband, joined with
a Fear of Death. Our Poet is under the same Mistake with other of our modern
Writers, who are fond of cruel, barbarous, and bloody Stories, and think no
Tragedy can be good, without some Villain in it; but of this elsewhere. As for
the Laconic Way he effects, I shall only say this, That it was in use only with
the Lacedaemonians, who were also Masters of their Passions; and never the more
natural for being short, for very few Passions, and only some part of them, are
to be drawn in that snip^snap way. I only say this in respect to the Ancients,
whose Practice is natural, and directly contrary to our Author's. King Edgar
and Alfreda, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1677. Plot from English Chronicles; see also The
Annals of Love, 8 vo. The London Cuckolds, a Comedy, 4 to. 1683. acted at the
Duke's Theater. Plot part from Scarron's Novels, 8 vo. Nov. 1. ( viz.) The
Fruitless Precaution. Part from Les-Contes Du-Sieur D'ouville, 8 vo. part 2.
page 121. And part from Boccace's Novels, Day 7. Nov. 6, 7. Scaramouch a
Philosopher, Harloquin a School-Booy, Bravo a Merchant and Magician; a Comedy
after the Italian Manner, 4 to^ 1677. acted at the Theater Royal. Part of this
Play taken from Molliere's Le Bourgeois Gentlehomme; and part from Le Marriage
Force, 8 vo. The Wrangling Lovers; or, The Invisible Mistress, a Comedy, 4 to.
1677. acted at the Duke's Theater. Compare this with a Play called, Les
Engagements du Hazard, by Corneille; and a Romance, called, Deceptio Visus; or,
Seeing and Believing are two Things, 8 vo. The Tragedy of Titus Andronicus, by
Shakespeare, was about the time of the Popish Plot, revived and altered by this
our Author; who, in his Epistle, denies it to be Shakespeare's, and then boasts
of his own Labor and Pains therein, by making great Alterations and Additions,
and that he had not only refined the Language, but made many Scenes entirely
new.
Thomas Rawlins.
PRincipal Graver of the Mint to both the K. Charles's, till he died, 1670. and
when he was very young, writ a Play, called,

The Rebellion, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1640. acted by his Majesty's Company of
Revels, Nine Days successively, as also diverse times since with good Applause,
and dedicated to a Kinsman of his, Robert Ducie, of Aston in the County of
Stafford, Esquire There is printed 11 Copies of Verses with this Play, in
Commendation of the Author.

Edward Revet.
THE Author of a Play, published 1671. called,

The Town Shifts; or, The Suburbs Justice, a Comedy, 4 to. 1671. acted at his
Royal Highness, the Duke of York's Theater. This is an instructive Play.

Nathaniel Richards.
AN Author in the time of King Charles the First, and published one Play about
the beginning of the Civil Wars, called,

Messalina, the Roman Empress, her Tragedy, 8 vo. 1640. This was acted diverse
times by the Company of his Majesty's Revels, with great Applause; and
dedicated to the Right Honorable, John Carry, Viscount Rochford. Plot from
Suetonius, Claudian, Pliny, Iuvenal, and Plutarch.

William Rider.
THis Author was Master of Arts, and writ one Play, called,

The Twins, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1655. acted at the private House in
Salisbury-Court, with general Applause.

William Rowley, vide Webster, etc.
HE studied once at Pembrook-Hall, Cambridge, and was in writing Associate with
Shakespeare, Fletcher, Massinger, Heywood, etc.

All Is lost by Lust, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1633. acted at the Phaenix in Drury Lane,
by the Lady Elizabeth's Servants. Plot, Lipsii Monita, Lib. 1. Cap. 5. etc.
Turquet, Lib. 5. Cap. 30. Unfortunate Lovers, Nov. 3.

A Match at Midnight, a pleasant Comedy, 4 to. 1633. Plot of Bloodhound's being
hid under the Widow's Bed, taken from an old Story, you may also find in The
English Rogue, part 4. chap. 19.

A Shoemaker's a Gentleman, a Comedy, 4 to. 1638. styled, A merry and Pleasant
Comedy, as it has been sundry times acted at the Red Bull. Plot from The
History of the Gentle Craft, 4 to.

A new Wonder, a Woman never vexed, a Comedy, 1632. The Widow's finding her
Wedding Ring in a Fishes Belly, founded on the Story of Polycrates, in Thalia
of Herodotus.

The Spanish Gypsies, a Comedy, 4 to. See Middleton, who joined with him in
this.

The Witch of Edmonton, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1658. acted by the Prince's
Servants at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, as also once at Court, with great
Applause.

Samuel Rowley.
THis Author writes himself Servant to the Prince of Wales, which by the Date
of his Play must be Charles II.

The Noble Spanish Soldier; or, A Contract broken justly revenged, a Tragedy, 4
to. 1634. This Play was printed after the Author's Death.

When you see me, you know me, or the famous Chronical History of Henry VIII.
with the Birth and virtuous Life of Edward, Prince of Wales, 4 to. 1632. This
was played by the Prince of Wales's Servants. Plot from English Chronicles; see
also the Life of King Henry VIII. by the Lord Herbert, of Cherbury.

Joseph Rutter.
A Dependant of the Family of the Lord Dorset, and Servant to his Son, and at
his Command, translated the Cid of Corneille.

The Cid, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1637. acted before their Majesty's at Court,
and at the Cockpit in Drury Lane, by their Majesty's Servants; dedicated to
Edward, Earl of Dorset, whose Son put his Hand to some part of the Translation
from Corneille.

The Cid, Part II. a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1640. dedicated to the Lady Theophil a
Cook. This part was also translated from Corneille, by our Author, at the
Command of his Majesty. These Plays are generally bound together, and are
founded on History; see Roderic de Tolede, and Mariana, etc.

The Shepherds Holiday, a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1635. acted before their
Majesty's at White Hall, by the Queen's Servants. This is written in Blank
Verse, and attributed to our Author by Kirkman, in his former Catalogues,
though there is no more than I. R. affixed to the Title Page.

Thomas Rymer.
A Gentleman born in the North of England, the Country of his Family, but I
cannot be positive to the County; of which University he was I know not, but
his first Applications in this Town were to the Law in Gray's Inn. However, his
Learning and Love to Poetry led him to a Consideration of those Authors, which
set him up for a Critic; and it must be confessed, that he has merited some
Praise in his Preface to Rapin, and the first part of this View of the
Tragedies of the last Age; though I cannot so much as agree with those that allow
most of the Errors he has found in Shakespeare, Just; for I Am confident it may
be made Evident, that not the fifth part have any Justice. He, since the Death
of Mr. Shadwell, has the Place of Historiographer to his Majesty, for which
Office it is certain his Learning very well qualifies him.

Edgar; or, The English Monarch, an Heroic Tragedy, 4 to. 1678. dedicated to
King Charles the Second. Mr. Ravencro^t has writ a Play on the same Subject,
published the Year before this. For the Plot, consult W. Malmsbury, H. H.
Huntingdon, Rog. Hoveden, Pol. Virgil, and other English Chronicles: see also
The Annals of Love, 8 vo.

S
Thomas Sackvile, see Norton. Thomas St. Serf.
THE Author of one Play, called,

Tarugo's Wiles; or, The Coffee-House, a Comedy, 4 to. 1668. acted at the Duke
of Y^rk's Theater; dedicated to the Right Honorable, George, Marquess of
Huntley. One part of this Play is built on No Puedeser; or, It cannot be, a
Spanish Play: and another part on Si^ Courtly Nice, written by Mr. Crown.

William Sampson.
A Retainer of Sir Henry Willoughby's Family of Richley in Derby-shire, in the
Reign of King Charles the First. He writ one Play and part of another.

The Vow breaker; or, The Fair Maid of Clifton, in Nottingham-shire; a Tragedy,
4 to. 1633. acted by several Companies with great Applause; and dedicated to^
Mrs. Ann Willoughby, Daughter to Sir Henry, aforesaid.

Herod and Antipater, a Tragedy, 4 to. See Markham, with whom he joined in this.

George Sandys, Esquire
THis Poet was Son of Edwin, Archbishop of York, born at Bishops-Th^rp, in
Yorkshire, 1577. was ^nter'd in St. Mary-Hall, Oxon, at Eleven Years old;
began his Travels about the World 1610. the Year of the Murder of Henry IV. of
France. among his Poetical Works he translated a Latin Play of Hugo Grotius,
entitled, Christ's Passi^n. He died at Boxley-Abby, in Kent, being his Nephew
Mr. W^at's Seat, and buried in the Chancel of that Church, March 7. 1643.

Christ's Passion, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1640. dedicated to King Charles the First.
Translated from the Latin of Hugo Grotius, with Annotations. It was reprinted
with Sculptures, 8 vo. 1688.

This Author also translated Ovid's Metamorphosis, published likewise with
Sculptures, Fol. 1632.

Charles Saunders.
THis young Gentleman writ a Play, whilst a King's Scholar, called,

Tamberlain the Great, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1681. acted by his Majesty's Servants
at the Theater Royal, as also before the King at Oxon. This Play was highly
commended by Mr. Banks, and other Poets. Plot from Asteria and Tamerlane, a
Novel, 8 vo.

Thomas Scot.
AN Author yet living, he was a Westminster Scholar, and lately a Student in
Cambridge, who has given the Town two new Plays in Appearance, at least two new
Titles, the first in Order, and writing, is, The Mock Marriage, a Comedy, 4 to.
acted at the Theater in Dorset-Garden, by his Majesty's Servants, 1696. This
Author has given us no Proof of his Talent in Flattery, for he has dedicated
neither of those Plays he has appeared in; but he has that part of a Poet
however, of flattering himself (as indeed every Man does more or less) in
defending what the Town has once condemned, for though a bad Play may take, yet
we hear very few Instances that a good one miscarried; it is true, this is like
other general Rules, not without its Exception. This particular Play met with
pretty good Success, for the Season of the Year, considering it the first Essay
of a young Writer, unacquainted with the Town. The Unhappy Kindness; or, A
Fruitless Revenge, a Tragedy^ 4 to. acted at the Theater Royal, 1696. This Play
is only the Wife for a Month of Fletcher's altered, though he has thought fit to
retain its greatest Faults, in the Character of the Wife, whose Behavior to
her Husband, to provoke him to ease her of her Maidenhead, is by no means
agreeable to the Modesty of the Sex, which is a Sin against the Manners.


Elkanah Settle.
AN Author now living, who was some time at Trinity-Colledge, Oxon; but coming
to London, and having been there possessed with Poetry, spent a very good
Fortune, and then stuck to the Stage, which yet would not stick to him; his
^ickleness in political Principles (having once been an active Man for the
Whigg-Party) lost him too his Friends on the other Side, without any Reward for
his Desertion. Whatever his Plays are (which if compared with the best of our
present Writers, I mean some of them, far excel 'em) in the Opinion of his
Enemies, he has performed in some, with no less applause than Merit; in his
Dispute with Mr. Dryden, he had evidently the better of him; though, being a
modest Man, he suffered himself to be run down by his Antagonist in his
Interest in the Town.

The Ambitious Slave; or, A Generous Revenge, a Tragedy acted at the Theater
Royal, 4 to. 1694. and dedicated to the Honored John Bright, Esquire which
Dedication the Author begins with the ^ll Fortune of the Play. The Scene he has
placed in Persia, from whence I find he is scarce to be got.

Cambyses, King of Persia, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1675. acted at the Duke's Theater;
dedicated to the Illustrious Princess Ann, Duchess of Monmouth. This Play sold
two Impressions before this time of printing, and is in Heroic Verse. Plot,
Justin, Lib. 1. Cap. 9. Amianus Marcellinus, Lib. 23. Herodotus, etc.

The Conquest of China by the Tartars, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1676. ^cted at the
Duke's Theater; and dedicated to the Lord Castle-Ris^^g. This Play is founded
on History, and writ in Heroic Verse. Plot, Heylin's Cosmography, Book 3.
Conquest of China by Signior Palafax, Englished, 8 vo. Lewis de Gusman, and
Gonzales de Mendoza.

Distressed Innocence; or, The Princess of Persia, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1691. acted
at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to the Right
Honorable John, Lord Cutts, Baron of Gowram.

This Play our Author writ after ten Years Silence, and pays his public
Acknowledgment to Mr. Betterton, for his several extraordinary hints to the
heightning of its best Characters, and how he was indebted to Mr. Montfort for
the last Scene thereof, who also writ the Epilogue. The Story of Hormidas and
Cleomira built on true History.

The Empress of Morocco, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1673. writ in Heroic Verse, with
Sculptures; acted at the Duke's Theater; and dedicated to the Right Honorable,
Henry, Earl of Norwich, and Earl Marshal of England. This Play was writ against
by Mr. Dryden, Mr. Shadwell, and Mr. Crown, and called, Notes and Observations
on the Empress of Morocco; or, Some few Erratas to be printed instead of the
Sculptures, with the second Edition of that Play. 4 to, 1674. Which Pamphlet
was answered by another.

Fatal Love; or, The forced Inconstancy, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1680. acted at the
Theater Royal; and dedicated to Sir Rob. Owen. Plot from Achilles Tatius's
Clitophon and Lucippe, a Romance, Book 5. which Romance is likewise in English,
printed 8 vo.

The Female Prelate; or, The History of the Life and Death of Pope Joan, a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1680. acted at the Theater Royal; and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Anthony, Earl of Shaftsbury. Plot from Platina's Lives of the Popes,
Englished by Sir Paul Ricaut, and the Life and Death of Pope Joan, 8 vo. 1675.
wherein is a List of such Authors who affirm, and others who deny the Truth of
this Story. There is also another small Book of the Life and Death of Pope
Joan, writ Dialogue-wise, by one Mr. Cook, formerly Fellow of
Vniversity-Colledge, Oxon. which Piece was so much valued then, that 'twas
translated into French by I. de la Montaign.

The Heir of Morocco, with the Death of Gayland; a Tragedy, 4 to. 1682. acted
at the Theater Royal; and dedicated to the Lady Henrietta Wentworth, Baroness
of Nettlested.

Ibrahim, the Illustrious Bassa; a Tragedy, 4 to. 1677. acted at Duke's
Theater; and dedicated to the Duchess of Albermarle; it is writ in Heroic
Verse. Plot from The Illustrious Bassa, a Romance, Fol.

Love and Revenge, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1675. acted at the Duke's Theater; and
dedicated to the Duke of Newcastle. A great part of this Play taken from
another, called, Fatal Contract, writ by Mr. Hemmings, formerly of the
University of Oxon.

Pastor Fido; or, The Faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1677. acted at the
Duke's Theater, and dedicated to the Lady Elizabeth Delaval. It was first
translated by Sir Richard Fanshaw, from the Italian of Guarini, which
Translation our Author has endeavored to improve.

The World in the Moon, an Opera; 4 to. School. as it is performed at the Theater
in Dorset-Garden, by his Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to Christopher Roth,
Esquire This is something unusual, being a comical^ Opera. I think great part of
the Run betwixt Palmerin, Worthy, Sir Dotterel, and Iacin^ha, pleasant enough,
though the first and late Essay of our Author in the Soc.

Tho. Shadwell, Esquire
A Gentleman of a good Family in the County of Norfolk, was well received by
the Noblemen of Wit, especially the present Earl of Dorset, the late Duke of
Newcastle, etc. he was on the Revolution made Poet Laureat, which place he held
till his Death, which happened about three or four Years since. His Comedies,
at least some of them, show him to understand Humor; and if he could have
drawn the Character of a Man of Wit, as well as that of a Coxcomb, there wou^d
have been nothing wanting to the Perfection of his Dramatick Fables. But to his
Plays in their Order, being Seventeen in Number, ( viz.) The Amorous Bigotte,
with the Second part of Teague O Divelly, a Comedy 4 to. 1690. acted by their
Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles, then Earl,
now Duke of Shrewsbury. Bury Fair, a Comedy, 4 to. 1689. acted by his Majesty's
Servants; and dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles, Earl of Dorset and
Middlesex, then Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Hoshold. Part of this Play
taken from the Duke of Newcastle's Triumphant Widow, and part from Molliere's
Precieuses Ridicules. Epsom Wells, a Comedy, 4 to. 1676. acted at the Duke's
Theater; and dedicated to his Grace the Duke of Newcastle. It Is a pleasant
Commendation of Mr. Langbain, (whose (...) Mr. Shadwell is) to bring Monsieur
St. Euveremont's Praise of it who cannot speak a Word of English, and by
Consequence none of the best Judges of the Goodness of our English Plays, which
require a Mastery of our Tongue. The Humourists, a Comedy, 4 to. 1671. acted by
his Royal Highness's Servants; and dedicated to the most Illustrious Margaret,
Duchess of Newcastle. This Play (though the Design of it was good) met with many
Enemies at its first appearance on the Stage. The Lancashire Witches, and
Teague O Divelly, the Irish Priest; a Comedy, 4 to. 1682. acted at the Duke's
Theater. Heywood and Brom have writ on the same Subject, but not so diverting.
The Libertine, a Comedy, 4 to. 1676. acted by his Royal Highnesses Servants;
and dedicated to his Grace the Duke of Newcastle. This is accounted one of his
best Plays, and is diverting enough. Plot from Molliere's L'Athee Foudroye, and
H. Atheisto Fulminato. The Miser, a Comedy, 4 to. 1672. acted by his Majesty's
Servants, at the Theater Royal; and dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles,
Lord Buckhurst, now Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. Plot from Mollieres L'avaree.
Psyche, an Opera, 4 to. 1675. acted at the Duke's Theater, and dedicated to his
Grace James, Duke of Monmouth. This being the first Play he writ in Rhyme, met
with diverse Enemies. Our Author made use of the French Psyche, and of
Apuleius's Asinus Aureus, which is also in English, 4 to. 1639. The Royal
Shepherdess, a Tragi-Comedy. 4 to. 1669. acted by his Highness the Duke of
York's Servants. This Play is taken from The Reward of Virtue, writ by Mr.
Fountain. The Scowrers, a Comedy, 4 to. 1691. acted by their Majesty's
Servants; and dedicated by his Widow, to the late Queen, of ever blessed
Memory. I think in this Comedy there is a great deal of noisy Humor, and that
not unpleasant. The Characters of Eugenia, and Clara are Copies of Sir George
Etheridge, at least that of Eugenia is of Harriot, and so is Sir William Rant,
a faint one of Dorimant, and Sir Frederic Frolic. The Squire of Alsatia, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1688. acted by their Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to the
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. This Play, which met with good Success, is
founded on Terence's Adelphi. The sullen Lovers; or, The Impertinents, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1670. and dedicated to his Grace William, Duke of Newcastle. Plot
from Molliere's Les Facheaux. Timon of Athens; or, The Man-hater, a Tragedy, 4
to. 1678. acted at the Duke's Theater, and dedicated to the late Duke of
Buckingham. Most part of this Play is Shakespeare's; nay, and the Critics say,
all of it that is good for any thing. The True Widow, a Comedy, 4 to. 1679.
acted at the Duke's Theater, and dedicated to Sir Charles Sidley. This Play has
not appeared very often on the Stage, though Mr. Langbain commends the Characters
and Humors to be as well drawn as any of this Age. The Volunteers; or, The
Stock-Iobbers, a Comedy, 4 to. 1693. and dedicated by his Widow to the Queen.
Sir Timothy Castrils growing Valiant on his Rencounter with Nickum, is very
like the Little French Lawyer of Fletcher; only Sir Timothy preserves his
Valor to the end of the Play; though we have not the Experiment whether the
sight of his Blood would not have had the same Effect on him. The Woman
Captain, a Comedy, 4 to. 1680. acted at the Duke's Theater, by his Royal
Highness's Servants; and dedicated to Henry, Lord Ogle, Son to the Duke of
Newcastle.


William Shakespeare.
HE was born and buried in Stratford upon Avon, in Warwickshire. I have been
told that he writ the Scene of the Ghost in Hamlet, at his House which bordered
on the Charnel-House and Churchyard. He was both Player and Poet; but the
greatest Poet that ever trod the Stage, I am of Opinion, in spite of Mr.
Johnson, and others from him, that though perhaps he might not be that Critic
in Latin and Greek as Ben; yet that he understood the former, so well as
per^ectly to be Master of their Histories, for in all his Roman Characters he
has nicely followed History, and yo^ find his Brutus, his Cassius, his Anthony,
and his Caesar, his Coriolanus, etc. just as the Historians of those times
describe 'em. He died on the 23d of April, 1616. and is buried with his Wife
and Daughter in Stratford-Church aforesaid, under a Monument on which is a
Statue leaning on a Cushion, and this Inscription: Ingenio Pylum, genio
Socratem, art Maronem,
Terra tegit, Populus moerit, Olympus habet.
Stay, Passenger, why do thou go so fast?
Read, if thou can, whom envious Death has placed
Within this Monument, Shakespeare, with whom
Quick Nature died, whose Name does deck the Tomb
Far more than cost, since all that he has writ
Leaves living Art, but Page, to serve his Wit.
Obiit An. Dom. 1616. AEt. 53. Die 23. Apr.


Near the Wall on a plain Stone, which covers him, is this Epitaph: Good
Friend, for Jesus Sake forbear
To dig the Dust enclosed here.
Blessed be the Man that spares these Stones,
And cursed be he that moves my Bones.


All Is well that ends well, a Comedy. Plot from Boccace's Novels, Day 3. Nov.
9. Juliet of Narbona, etc.

Anthony and Cleopatra, a Tragedy, fol. Plot from Plutarch in vita Antonii.

As you like it, a Comedy, Fol.

The Birth of Merlin; or, The Child has lost his Father, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to.
1662. Mr. Rowley joined with our Author in this Play. Plot, Ethelword, G.
Monmouth, Bid, Polidor, Virgil, Stow, Speed, etc.

A Comedy of Errors, a Comedy, fol. The Ground from Plautus, Amphitruo, and
Maenechmi.

Coriolanus, a Tragedy, fol. Plot from Plutarch's Life of Coriolanus, from
Livy's History, Dionisius Hallicarnassaeus, etc.

Cromwell, ( Thomas, Lord) his Life and Death, a History, fol. and 4 to. Plot
from Fox's Martyrology, Fuller's Church Hist. Dr. Burnet's Hist. Reformation,
Wanly's Hist. of Man. Hacwell's Apology, and Lloyd's English Worthies.

Cymbeline, his Tragedy; fol. Mr. Durfey's Injured Princess; or, The Fatal
Wager, is only this Play revived. The Plot from Boccace's Novels, Day 2. Nov. 9.

Henry the Fourth, Two Parts, History, fol. the first Part containing the Life
of Henry Percy, surnamed Hotspur; and the comical part the Character of Sir
John Falstaff, which has been played by the late famous Mr. Lacey, to
Admiration. In the second part you have an Act of the Death of this King, and
the Coronation of his Successor. See Geoffry of Monmouth, Caxton, Harding,
Hall, Grafton, Martin, Hollingshead, Stow, and other our English Chronicles.

Henry the Fifth, his Life; History, fol. A Comical part is mixed with the
Historical, and contains the Reign of this King, to his Marriage with Katharine
of France. See the aforesaid English Chronicles.

Henry the Sixth, Three Parts, History, fol. In the Second is the Death of the
good Duke Humphrey, in the Third the Death of the Duke of York; all the Pa^ts
contain the whole Reign of this King. See the same English Chronicles.

Henry the Eighth, his Life; History, fol. The part of King Henry was often in
King Charles the Second's Time extraordinary well acted by Mr. Betterton. See
our English Chronicles beforementioned.

Hamlet, Prince of Denmark; a Tragedy, fol. and 4 to. For the Plot see
Saxo-Grammaticus, Crantzius, Pontanus, Idacius etc.

John, King of England; History, fol. for the Plot see our English Chronicles.

John, King of England, his troublesome Reign, in two parts, History, 4 to.
1611. with the Discovery of King Richard Caeur de Lions, Base Son (as vulgarly
called) Fawconbridge; also the Death of the said King John at Swinstead Abbey.
These Plays were several times acted by the Queen's Majesty's Players, tho not
divided into Acts, and differ much from the other Play in Folio.

Julius Caesar, a Tagedy, fol. and 4 to Founded on History. It was revived and
acted diverse times in the Reign of the late King Charles II. For the Prologue,
which was highly commended, see a small Book, called Covent Garden Drollery,
page 9. and for the History, see Plutarch, Livy, Suetonius.

Lear, King of England; a Tragedy, fol. and 4 to. This Play has been revived
with Alterations by our present Poet Laureat. For the true Story, see Milton's
Hist. of England, beginning page 17. see also Leland, Monmouth, Gloucester, etc.

Locrine, Eldest Son to King Brutus, a Tragedy, fol. and 4 to. For the Plot,
see Milton's Hist. of England, and the aforesaid Authors.

London Prodigal, a Comedy, fol. and 4 to.

Love^s Labor lost, a Comedy, fol.

Mackbeth, a Tragedy, fol. and 4 to. revived and reprinted with Alterations
and Songs, and now often acted. For the Plot consult Buchanan, and others who
have written Scottish Affairs; see also Heywood of Angels, p. 508. Heylin's
Cosmography, Book 1.

Measure for Measure, a Comedy, fol. For the Plot see Cynthio Giraldi, Dec. 8.
Nov. 5. Lipsii Monita, p. 125. Histoirs Admirabiles de notre temps. p. 216.

The Merchant of Venice, a Tragi-Comedy, fol.

Midsummer-Nights Dream, a Comedy, fol. The comical part hereof is printed 4
to. under the Title of Bottom the Weaver, and acted by small Parties at
Bartholomew Fair, and other Places: and since published under the Name of The
Fairy Queen.

Much ado about nothing, a Comedy, fol. Sir William D'avenant made use of this
Play, and Measure for Measure, in composing his Law against Lovers. For the
Plot see Ariosto's Orlando Furioso, Book 5. and Spencer's Fairy Queen, Book 2.

Oldcastle, Lord Cobham's Life and Death, a Tragedy, fol. See Fuller's Church
Hist. and Fox's Book of Martyrs, where you may find Sir John Oldcastle's Life
at large.

Othello, Mo^r of Venice, a Tragedy, fol. and 4 to. This is still often acted,
and esteemed one of the best of our Author's Plays. Plot from Cynthio's Novels,
Dec. 3. Nov. 7.

Pericles, Prince of Tire, History, fol. This Play was much admired in the
Author's Life time and published before his Death.

The Puritan; or, The Widow of Watling-Street, a Comedy, fol. This was
accounted a very diverting Play.

Richard the Second, History, fol. 4 to. Our Poet Laureat, Mr. Tate, altered
it, An. 1681. he and Mr. Dryden have much applauded this Play. Plot from
English Chronicles.

Richard the Third, with the Landing of the Earl of Richmond, and the Battle of
Bosworth-Field, History, fol. for the Plot consult our English Chronicles.

Romeo and Juliet, a Tragedy, fol. Plot from Bandello's Novels.

The Taming of the Shrew, a Comedy, fol. The Story of the Tinkar, so diverting,
may be found in Goulart's Hist. Admirabiles and Pontus Heuterus, Rerum
Burdicarum.

The Tempest, a Comedy, fol. and 4 to. This has been revived and altered by Mr.
Dryden, who brought it much in esteem, and is of late Days often acted.

Titus Andronichus, a Tragedy, fol. and 4 to. This Play has been revived and
altered by Mr. Ravenscroft.

Timon of Athens, a Tragedy, fol. and 4 to. This Play, as published first by
our Author, was not divided into Acts, but has been revived with Alterations,
by Mr. Shadwell, and for a few Years past, as often acted at the Theater Royal,
as any Tragedy I know.

Troilus and Cressida, a Tragedy, fol. This was revived with Alterations, by
Mr. Dryden; who added diverse new Scenes. Plot from Chaucer's Troilus and
Cressida.

Twelfth-Night; or, What you will; a Comedy, fol. Plot from Plautus, Amphitruo,
Maenechmi, etc.

Two Gentlemen of Verona, a Comedy. fol.

A Winters Tale, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. Plot from Dorastus and Fawnia, 4 to.

The Yorkshire Tragedy, fol. When this Play was first printed, the Title then
told you, the Story was new, lamentable, and true. The Play, being but very
short, is not divided into Acts, and may rather be accounted an Interlude than
a Tragedy.

The Arraignment of Paris, which you may find among the Anonymous Plays, has
been by Kirkman ascribed to this Author, but not being in any Edition of
Shakespeare, I much question whether it be any of his.

Our Author writ little else, we find in print only two small pieces of Poetry
published by Mr. Quarles, viz. Venus and Adonis, 8 vo. 1602. and The Rape of
Lucrece, 8 vo. 1655.

Lewis Sharp.
THis Author, who lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, writ but one
Play, viz.

The Noble Stranger, a Comedy, 4 to. 1640. acted at the private House in
Salisbury-Court, by her Majesty's Servants; dedicated to Sir Edmund Williams.

Edward Sharpham.
A Member of the Middle Temple, in the time of King James the First, writ and
published one Play, called,

The Fleir, a Comedy, 4 to. 1615. acted in the Black-Fryars, by the Children of
the Revels. Compare this with a Play of Marston's, called, The Fawn.

S. Shepherd.
A Zealous Cavalier in the Civil Wars, writ a Play against the Parliament
Party, styled,

The Committee-Man curried, a Comedy, in Two Parts, 4 to. 1647. Much of it
stolen from Sir John Suckling, and Sir Robert Stapleton's Translation of
Iuvenal.

Edward Sherburn, Esquire
THis Gentleman Translated Two of Seneca's Tragedies, and is, for ought I know,
yet living.

Medea, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1648. with Annotations. Mr. Stanly in his Poems has
writ a Vindication of this Play.

Troades; or, The Royal Captives; a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1679. These are printed
together, with some Poems of the same Author.

Tho. Shipman, Esquire.
THis Gentleman died in King Charles the Second's Time, having writ one Play,
called,

Henry the Third of France, Stabbed by a Friar; with the Fall of the Guises; a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1678. acted at the Theater Royal; and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Henry, Lord Marquess of Dorchester. Plot from Davila, and the Duke
of Espernon's Life, fol.

Henry Shirley.
AN Author who lived in the(...) King Charles the First, and writ one Play,
which was published after his Death, called,

The Martyred Soldier, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1638. acted at the private House in
Drury Lane, and other public Theaters by her Majesty's Servants, with great
Applause. Plot, Baronius, etc.

James Shirley.
A Contemporary, as well as Namesake of the Former^ he was once of Gray's Inn,
and Servant to the King, and a Poet esteemed in the Days of Charles the First.
Mr. Langbain gives him no small Praise, and indeed he does to most of the
indifferent Poets, so that should a Stranger to our Poets read him^ they would
make an odd Collection of our English Writers, for they would be sure to take
Heywood, Shirley, etc. and leave Dryden, etc. He has printed 37 Plays, of which
in their Order. He died since the Restoration.

Arcadia, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1640. acted at the Phaenix in Drury Lane, by her
Majesty's Servants. Plot from Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia, fol. The Ball, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1639. acted at the private House in Drury Lane, by her Majesty's
Servants. Our Author was assisted by Chapman in this Play. A Bird in a Cage, a
Comedy, 4 to. 16^^. acted at the Phaenix in Drury Lane; and dedicated to Mr.
William Prinne. The Brothers, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1652. acted at the private House
in Black-Fryars; and dedicated to his noble Friend, Thomas Stanley, Esquire The
Cardinal, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1652. acted at the private House in Black-Fryars;
and dedicated to his Friend, G. B. Esquire The Changes; or, Love in a Maze; a
Comedy, 4 to. 1632. presented at the private House in Salisbury-Court, by the
Company of his Majesty's Revels; and dedicated to the Honorable, the Lady
Dorothy Shirley, in Verse. Compare this and the Maiden Queen. Chabot, Admiral
of France, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1639. acted by her Majesty's Servants at the
private House in Drury Lane. Mr. Chapman joined with our Author in this Play.
Plot, Paul Iovius, Paul AEmilius, Mezeray, and other French Chronicles and
Histories in the Reign of Francis the First. The Constant Maid; or, Love will
find out the Way; a Comedy, 4 to. 1667. This was acted at a new House, called,
The Nursery in Hatton-Garden. You may find Hadwell's courting of the Widow
Bellamy, by the Advice (...)fair, to be the Subject of diverse other Plays.
Contention for Honor and ^^^^es, a Masque, 4 to. 1633. dedicated to Edward
Golding(...) Colston, in Narthamptonshire, Esquire This Author, with this and ^ome
other Matter, composed a Comedy, called, Honoria and Mammon, hereafter
mentioned. The Contention of Ajax and Ulysses for Achilles's Armor, a Masque,
8 vo. 1658. Plot from Ovid's Metamorposis, Book 13. The Coronation, a Comedy, 4
to. Which Play by some means or other, was printed with Beaumont's and
Fletcher's Plays, though none of theirs. A Cou^^ Secret, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo.
first printed 1653. then acted at the Black-Fryars; and dedicated to William,
Earl of Strafford. Cupid and Death, a Masque, 4 to. 1659. For the Plot, see
Ogilby's AEsop's Fables, Vol. 1. Fab. 39. The Doubtful Heir, a Tragi-Comedy, 8
vo. 1652. acted at the Black-Fryars; and dedicated to Sir Edmund Bowyer. For
part of the Story, see The English Adventurers. 8 vo. part 3. The Duke's
Mistress, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1638. acted at the private House in Drury Lane,
by her Majesty's Servants. The Example, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1637. acted at
the private House in Drury Lane, by her Majesty's Servants. The Gamester, a
Comedy, 4 to. 1637. acted at the private House in Drury Lane. Plot, Queen
Margaret's Novels, Day 1. Nov. 8. and Unlucky Citizen, 8 vo. The Gentleman of
Venice, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1655. acted at the private House in
Salisbury-Court, by her Majesty's Servants, and dedicated to Sir Tho.
Nightingale, Baronet. For the Plot, consult Gayton's Notes on Don Quixot, Book
4. Chap. 6. etc. The Grateful Servant, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1655. acted at the
private House in Drury Lane, by her Majesty's Servants, with good Applause; and
dedicated to the Right Honorable, Francis, Earl of Rutland. Compare this Play
with The Humerous Courtier, writ by the same Author. Hide-Park, a Comedy, 4 to.
1637. presented by her Majesty's Servants at the private House in Drury Lane;
and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Henry, Earl of Holland. Honoria and
Mammon, a Comedy, 8 vo. Plot grounded on a Masque of the same Author's, called,
Contention for Honor and Riches. The Humorous Courtier, a Comedy, 4 to. 1640.
presented at the private House in Drury Lane, with good Applause. The
Imposture, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. 1652. acted at the private House in
Black-Fryars; and dedicated to Sir Rob. Bolles, Baronet. The Lady of Pleasure,
a Comedy, 4 to. 1637. acted at the private House in Drury Lane, by her
Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Richard, Lord
Lovelace, of Hurley. Part of this Play resembles part in The Grateful Servant.
Love Tricks; or, the School of Compliments; a Comedy, 4 to. 1667. acted at the
Theater in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Royal Higness, the Duke of York's
Servants. Love's Cruelty, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1640. acted at the private House in
Drury Lane, by her Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to Cornet George Porter,
and Mr. Charles Porter. See Cynthio's Novels, Dec. 3. Nov. 6. and Q. Margaret's
Novels, Day 4. Nov' 6. The Maid's Revenge, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1639. acted at the
private House in Drury Lane, with good Applause, by her Majesty's Servants.
This Play is dedicated to Henry Osborn, Esquire Plot from Reynold's God's Revenge
against Murder, fol. Book 2. Hist. 7. The Opportunity, a Comedy, 4 to. acted
at the private House in Drury Lane, by her Majesty's Servants; it is d^dicated
to Capt. Richard Owen. Compare this Play with Shakespeare's Measure for Measure.
The Politician, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1655. presented at Salisbury-Court, by her
Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to Walter Moyle, Esquire For the Plot see the
Countess of Montgomery's Urania. The Royal Master, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1638.
acted at the Theater in Dublin, and in the Castle there before the Right
Honorable, the Lord Deputy of Ireland; and dedicated to the Right Honorable,
George, Earl of Kildare. By the many Copies of Verses in Commendation of this
Play, we may guess it was well esteemed. St. Patrick for Ireland, a History, 4
to. 1640. There is but one part of this Play printed; a second was designed by
the Author for the Press, but never published. See Bedes Life of St. Patrick,
Sigibert, Baleus, Baronius, etc. The Sisters, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1652. acted at
the private House in Black-Fryars; and dedicated to William Paulet, Esquire The
Traitor, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1635. acted by her Majesty's Servants; and dedicated
to the Duke of Newcastle. This Play was one Mr. Rivers's, a Jesuit, though
altered a little and introduced into the House by Shirley. The Triumph of
Beauty, a Masque, 8 vo. 1646. Compare this to the comical Part of the
Midsummer-Nights Dream, and another part to Bottom the Weaver, both by
Shakesp^ar: see also Lucian's Dialogues. This is printed with the Author's
Poems, 8 vo. The Wedding, a Comedy, 4 to. 16. acted by her Majesty's Serva^^s
at the Phoenix in Drury Lane; and dedicated to William Gower, Esquire The Witty Fair
one, a Comedy, 4 to. 1633. acted at the private House in Drury Lane; and
dedicated to Sir Edward Bushel. The Young Admiral, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1637.
acted at the private House in Drury Lane; and dedicated to the Right
Honorable, George, Lord Barkley.
Sir Charles Sidley.
THis Noble Gentleman is yet living, and has been esteemed a Man of the First
Rank of Wit. He writ these three following Plays: Anthony and Cleopatra, a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1677. acted at the Duke's Theater. Plot from Appian, Dion
Cassius, Plutarch's Life of M. Anthony. Bellamira; or, The Mistress; a Comedy,
4 to. 1687. acted by his Majesty's Servant. The Ground from Terrence's
Eunuchus. The Mulberry Garden, a Comedy, 4 to. 1668. acted at the Theater
Royal, by his Majesty's Servants. This Play is dedicated to her Grace the
Duchess of Richmond and Lenox. Sir John Everyoung, and Sir Samuel Forecastle
copied from Molliere's L'Escole de Maris.


John Smith.
A Gentleman of Snenton, in Yorkshire, and now (or lately) living; he writ a
Play that was never acted, called,

Cytherea; or, The Enamouring Girdle, a Comedy, 4 to. 1677. This Play the
Author dedicated to the Northern Gentry.

William Smith.
THis Autho^ writ one Play in King James the First his Reign, called,

The Hector of Germany; or, The Palsgrave Prime Elector; a History, 4 to. 1615.
acted at the Red Bull, etc. by a Company of young Citizens, and dedicated to
the right Honorable, Sir John Swinnerton, Lord Mayor of London. This Play is
not divided into Acts. He writ, with the Assistance of one Mr. Web, a Book
called, The Description of the County Palatine of Chester.

Thomas Southern.
A Gentleman now living, who, as I have been informed, made his first
Application to the Law; but quitted those rougher Studies for the more pleasing
Entertainment of the Muses; and after the writing of two Plays, with no ill
Success, at least with very good Judges, moved by his active Temper, he left,
for some Years, the calmer retreat of Poetry for the War; till, in the Year
1690. he presented the Town with that diverting Comedy of Sir Anthony Love, and
Six more, but of all in their order: The Disappointment; or, The Mother in
Fashion; acted at the Theater Royal, 1684. 4 to. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable, James, Earl of Ossery (the present Duke of O^mond). The Curious
Impertinent of the incomparable History of Don Quixot, seems to have given our
Author an Hint of the Plot. The Loyal Brother; or, The Persian Prince; a
Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants, 1682. 4 to.
and dedicated to his Grace, the Duke of Richmond. This was his first Play, and
is built on the Novel of Tachmas, Prince of Persia, 8 vo. The Fatal Marriage;
or, The Innocent Adultery; a Play, acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants, 1694. 4 to. and dedicated to Anthony Hammond, of Somersham
Place, Esquire In the Dedication our Author owns his taking a hint of the Tragical
part of this Play, from a Novel of Mrs. Behn's, called, The Nun; or, The Fair
Vow-breaker. This Play was received with vast Applause, and is yet acted with
Success; the Distress of the Story being extremely moving, and the Passions
very well touched by the Author; though had he made Villeroy and Biron Friends,
it would have something heightened the Distress. In the Comical part, the Hint
of Fernando being persuaded to believe that he had been dead, buried, and in
Purgatory, seems to be owing to The Little Thief of Fletcher. The Maids Last
Prayer; or, Any thing rather than Fail; a Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal,
by their Majesty's Servants, 1693. 4 to. and dedicated to the Honorable, Mr.
Charles Boil. Oroonoko, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by his Majesty's
Servants, 1696. 4 to. and dedicated to his Grace, William, Duke of Devonshire,
etc. in which the Author makes this ingenuous Acknowledgement, which few Poets
have formerly done; viz. I stand engaged to Mrs. Behn for the occasion of a
most passionate Distress in my last Play, (which was The Innocent Adultry) and
in a Conscience that I had not made her a sufficient Acknowledgment, I have run
farther into her Debt, with a Design to oblige me to be Honest, and that every
one may find me out for Ingratitude, when I don't say all that is fit for me
upon that Subject: she had a great Command of the Stage, and I have often
wondered that she should bury her Favorite Hero in a Novel, when she might
have revived him in the Scene. I have quoted this, because it is very uncommon
with Authors to speak well of those they borrow from in their Writings, for I
have known a great Man perpetually rail at the French Authors, and yet
contradict his Reflections on them, by filling his Writings with their^ Wit and
Designs; and I have so often experienced this Particular, among the Writers of
our Age, that when I hear any of them condemn, either our Ancient or Modern
Authors, I conclude, he has been robbing there, and would deter us from finding
out his Theft. But as to this Play of Oroonoko, you find our Poet has allowed
the Plot of it Mrs. Behn's; for on that Prince she has composed the best of her
Novels: and as it must be confessed that the Play had not its mighty Success
without an innate Excellence; so in my Opinion, the necessary regularities a
Dramatick Poet is obliged to observe, has left many Beauties in the Novel,
which our Author could not transfer to his Poem. As Mrs. Barrey did the Poet
all the Justice so admirable an Actress, when she most exerts her self, could
do, in the Innocent Adultery; so Mr. Verbruggen, in the Part of Oroonoko, by
doing the Author Right, got himself the Reputation of one of the best Actors of
his time. Sir Anthony Love; or, The Rambling Lady; a Comedy, 4 to. 1690. acted
at the Theater Royal by their Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to Tho.
Skipwith, Esquire (now Sir Thomas). This Play met with extraordinary Success. The
Wives excuse; or, Cuckolds make themselves; a Comedy, acted at the Theater
Royal, by their Majestses Servants, 1692. 4 to. This Play it seems did not take
as well as was expected, but is ushered into print by a Copy of Verses of his
Friend, Mr. Dryden; in which he ^ustly reflects on the depraved Taste of the
Age, especially in these Two Lines, on the Fault of those Poets, who debauch
the Palate of the Audience. Far^e in it self is of a nasty Scent;
But the Gain smells not of the Excrement.
For if there be not so intricate a Plot, there is certainly a gaity of
Conversation, and Purity of Language, which few of our Poets observe.


Thomas Stanley, Esquire
A Learned Gentleman of Cumberloe-Green, in Hertfordshire, who in the time of
King Charles the First, writ the History of the Philosophers, and in that a
Play of Aristophanes, called,

The Clouds, a Comedy, fol. 1687. Translated from Aristophanes, printed with
his History of Philosophy, Reprinted about Ten Years since. He translated
AEschylus's Tragedies into Latin; also Anacreon and Moschus, from the Greek. He
has published likewise diverse Translations from Latin, Spanish, and Italian;
besides his Poems in English, 8 vo. and two small Romances or Novels, 8 vo.

Sir Robert Stapleton.
A Learned Author who was Gentleman Usher of the Privy Chamber to King Charles
the Second; and is, I suppose, still living. He writ Two Plays: Hero and
Leander, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1669. dedicated to her Grace, the Duchess of
Monmouth. Plot from Ovid's Epistles, and Musaeus's Erotopagnion, Greek, and
Latin. The Slighted Maid, a Comedy, 4 to. 1663. dedicated to his Grace, the
Duke of Monmouth. Plot from Mart. Epigr. 4. etc.


John Stephens.
THis Author, who lived in the Reign of King James the first, writ one very
long Play, called,

Cynthia's Revenge, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1613. Plot from Lucan's Pharsalia, and
Ovid's Metamorphosis, lib. 13.

William Strode.
POet and Divine in the Reign of King Charles the Frst; he was born in
Devonshire, entered at Nineteen, and admitted Student of Christ-Church, Oxon;
having taken most of his Degrees, was chose University-Orator, and after that
commenced Doctor, and was made a Cannon by the King. He died March 11. 1644.
and was buried at Christ-Church aforesaid.

The Floating Island, a Comedy, 4 to. 1655. acted by the Students of
Christ-Church, before his Majesty, at Oxon. 1639. The Airs and Songs were set
by Mr. Henry Laws. The Author had transcribed and dedicated the Play to his
honored Patron, Sir John Hell, but it was not printed till some Years after
his Death. This Play is full o^ Morality. The Author published three Sermons
besides the Play.

I. Studley.
ANother Translator of Seneca's Tragedies, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of
which he Englished Four: viz. Agamemnon, a Tragedy, 4 to. Our Author has added
a whole Scene in the Fifth Act. Hippolitus, a Tragedy, 4 to. This is a very
regular Play, as to Time, Place, and Action. Hercules Oetaeus, a Tragedy, 4 to.
A Resemblance of Sophocles Trachiniai. Medea, a Tragedy, 4 to. In this Seneca
imitates Euripides, but at too great a distance, and is also regular, as most
of his Tragedies are. This Translator has altered the Chorus of the First Act.


Sir John Suckling.
WAS born at Witham, in Middlesex, 1631. in the beginning of the Eleventh
Month; he spoke Latin at Five Years old, and writ it at Nine. He was
Comptroller to King Charles the First. An excellent Musician and Poet: made a
Campaign with Gustavus, and was in Five Sieges, Three Battles, etc. he was at
the Expense of 12000 l. to raise a Troop for the King. He writ Four Plays, viz.
Aglaura, a Tragi-Comedy, fol. and 8 vo. presented at the private House in
Black-Fryars. The Author has so altered the last Act, that it is at the Pleasure
of the Actors to make it a Tragedy or Tragi-Comedy. Brenoralt; or, The
Discontented Colonel; a Tragedy, 8 vo. presented by his Majesty's Servants, at
the private House in Black-Fryars. The Goblins, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo. presented
by his Majesty's Servants at the private House in Black-Fryars. The Sad One, a
Tragedy, 8 vo. This Play Sir John never finished.


These Plays, with his other Works, are printed together 8 vo. the last Edition
printed 1676. If you would see a farther Character of this Author, see Lloyd's
Memoirs, fol. page 159.

Gilbert Swinhoe.
A Northumberland Gentleman, who in the Reign of King Charles the First, writ a
Play, called,

The Unhappy Fair Irene, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1658. Plot from Bandello's Novels,
and Turkish Chronicles, Life of Mahomet the First.

T
Nahum Tate, Esquire
OUR present Poet Laureat, a Person of great Probity of Manners, Learning, and
good Nature: His Birth and Education (as I have been told) he owes to the
Kingdom of Ireland: He has, for several Years, had the Patronage of the present
Earl of Dorset, and has Merit to deserve more than he has met with from others:
He is guilty of Modesty, of which few of his Profession know much; and it is
the noisy pushing Man in Poetry, as well as other things, that prevails with
Fame as well as Fortune. But now to his Drammatick Composures.

Brutus of Alba, an Opera, 4 to. 1678. acted at the Duke's Theater; it is
dedicated to the Right Honorable, Charles, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. Plot
from Virgil's AEneids, Book 4.

The Cuckold's Haven; or, An Alderman no Conjurer, a Farce, 4 to. 1685. acted
at the Queen's Theater in Dorset-Garden; and dedicated to Col. Edmund Ashton.
Plot from Eastward Hoe, and The Devil's an Ass.

A Duke and no Duke, a Farce, 4 to. 1685. acted by their Majesty's Servants;
and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Sir John Hewyt. In this Play are diverse
Songs set to Music with thorough Basses for the Theorbo or Bass-Viol. Plot
from Trappolin supposed a Prince.

The Ingratitude of a Commonwealth; or, The Fall of Caius Martius Coriolanus;
a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1682. acted at the Theater Royal; and dedicated to the
Right Honorable, Charles, Lord Herbert, Marquis of Worcester. Part of this
Play borrowed from Shakespeare's Coriolanus^

The Island Princess, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1687. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable, Henry, Lord Walgrave. Revived with Alterations from Fletcher.

The Loyal General, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1680. acted at the Duke's Theater; and is
dedicated to Edward Tailor, Esquire

Lear, King of England, and his Three Daughters; an Historical Play, 4 to.
1687. acted at the Duke's Theater; it is Dedicated to Thomas Boteler, Esquire and
revived with Alterations from Shakespeare; and now called, The Ancient History
of King Lear, etc.

Richard the Third; or, The Sicilian Usurper; a History, 4 to. 1681. acted at
the Theater Royal, and dedicated to George Raynsford, Esquire with a Prefatory
Epistle in Vindication of the Author by Reason of the Prohibition of this Play
on the Stage. Revived from Shakespeare.

This our Author has published diverse Poems on several Occasions, some of them
printed 8 vo. one Volume whereof are all his own, another Volume by several
Hands.

John Tateham.
CIty Poet in King Charles the First's Time. Mr. Langbain has found out a
pleasant Compensation for his want of Wit, viz. his Loyalty, which might be
something to atone for the Defects of a Servants Brains, but I think very
little for those of a Poet.

The Distracted State; a Tragedy, 4 to. 1651. This Play was written Ten Years
before printed, and is dedicated to Sir John Sidley.

The Rump; or, The Mirror of the late Times; a Comedy, 4 to. 1661. acted at
the private House in Dorset-Court, and dedicated to Walter James, Esquire This Play
has been revived under the Title of The Roundheads. For the Plot consult our
English Chronicles of the Civil Wars.

Scots Vagaries; or, A Knot of Knaves; a Comedy, 4 to. 1652. and dedicated to
Robert Dormer, Esquire This Play is writ in a Sc^tch Dialect.

Love Crowns the End, a Tragi-comedy, 8 vo. 1657. acted by the Scholars of
Bringham in the County of Nottingham. This Play is very short and not divided
into Acts; you may find it printed with his Poems, 1657. 8 vo.

Robert Tailor.
THE Author of one Play, called,

The Hog has lost his Pearl, a Comedy, 4 to. 1611. diverse times publicly acted
by certain London Prentices.

Thomas Thompson.
A Poor Plagiary, that could not disguise or improve his Thefts.

These two following Plays go under his Name; viz. The English Rogue, a Comedy,
4 to. 1668. acted (says the Title) before several Persons of Honor, with great
Applause, and dedicated to Mrs. Alice Barret. Mother Shipton, her Life; 4 to.
The Author hereof says, 'twas acted Nine Days together, with great Applause.
Plot from a Book so called in Prose, 4 to. but most of the Characters and
Language from The City Madam, and The Chaste Maid of Cheapside.


Nicholas Trot.
HE writ one Play, called,

Arthur, a Tragedy.

Richard Tuke.
AUthor of a Play that represents the Danger of the Soul in this World, and was
once called The Souls Warfare; now,

The Divine Comedian; or, The right Use of Plays, improved in a Sacred,
Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1672. and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Mary, Countess
of Warwick.

S. Tuke.
AN Essex Gentleman, a Colonel, who in 1661. translated a Play from the
Spanish, called,

The Adventurers of Five Hours, a Tragi-Comedy 4 to. 1662. being the Second
Edition; it is dedicated to the Right Honorable, Henry Howard, of Norfolk.
This Play is of good Repute.

Cyril Turner.
AN Author who writ in the Time of King James the First, two Plays, entitled,
The Atheists Tragedy, 4 to. The Conveyance away of Sebastian and Fresco, on her
Husband's approach, is taken from Boccace's Novels, Day 7. Nov. 6. The Loyal
Brother; or, The Revenger's Tragedy, 4 to.


John Tutchin.
A Gentleman of those Times, who has writ one Play, called,

The Unfortunate Shepherd, a Pastoral, 8 vo. 1683. This is printed with a Piece
called, A Discourse of Life, in Prose; and some Poems on several Occasions, 8
vo.

V
Captain Van Brug.
THOUGH this Gentleman's Modesty has hitherto hindered him from setting his Name
to any of the Plays that he has Writ, yet they are so Universally known to be
his, and owned by him to the Stage by all other ways, that it cannot reasonably
be taken amiss by him, to find his Name here, since it is not in the Power of
Envy to mention it, without the highest Value and Esteem. This Gentleman, as I
am informed, was born in Cheshire, and by more than a Common Education, and
Converse with the best Company qualified for these Performances, which have got
him the Preference to all our Modern Writers of Comedy, since Mr. Wycherly, and
Sir. George Etheridge have left the Stage; and with all the due Respect that I
owe those two great Men, I must place Mr. Van Brug in their Form, for the
sprightliness of his Wit, the ea^iness, and at the same time, force of the
Conversation of his Plays are such, that none else can stand in Competition
with him. Methinks in the Comparison of his Plays, with most of our other
Drammatic Pieces, there is the same difference, which there is betwixt the
Draughts of Van Dike, Titian, and other great Masters of former Days, and some
of our best Painters now; these are indeed good Representations, but his are
the things they Represent; (if you will pardon that seeming Contradiction of the
Expression) many of our Writers have given us good Images of the Fools of our
Age, but they are still but Images; but, when you read or see Mr. Van Brug's,
you see the very Originals, all is so free, so easy and so bold, as persuade
them to be no Copies, you evidently see the Lineaments of Nature, without the
stifness of Art, which would but debase his Work. Others of our Comic Writers,
who have succeeded most in that way, pick out Characters that are indeed
diverting enough on the Stage, but which scarce one sensible Man in a Thousand
can read in his Chamber, so much is left to the Action: But Mr. Van Brug's
Characters are Composed of that part of Nature, which is not so Monstrous to
shock the Reader, or Nauseate his Palate, but which yield a pleasing
Entertainment; he puts Folly into such a Light, that it is as diverting to the
Reader as Spectator; and his Fools are so pleasing, that you are not weary of
their Company before they leave you.

Another Quality distinct from many of our Received Poets, is, That his Men of
Wit are really so, and not like Mr. Shadwell's the dullest in the Play: I have
ventured to say all this, without either the Prospect of Encolpius in Petronius
Arbiter, Vt foris Cenaris Poetam Laudasti, or the fear of that Wity Censure of
The Plain Dealer, for choosing to flatter the Poets of the Age, rather than not
flatter at all. Because one that is unknown, can have but little expectations
of the former, or justly deserve the latter, when he speaks but what is justly
his due; unless the Praise of Wit be as unallowable as superfluous. He has
Honored his Country with three Plays that he owns: Of these in their Order.

AEsop, A Comedy 4 to. Acted at the Theater Royal, 1697. In the Preface we
learn both the Fate of the Play, and that the Author owes his Foundation to the
French; for it was writ Originally in French by Mr. Boursaut, and had almost
the same Fate there as here, as to its Success; the first day it was not liked,
the next it scarce gained Ground, the third it held up its Head, and the fourth
Triumphed, and was in Paris Acted for near a Month together. It is so far from
wanting any Beauties of the French, that it every where excels it; and that
extremely diverting Scene of Sir Polydorus Hogstye, may be said to be entirely
his own, as are all the three Scenes that were since added of the Players, the
Senator and the Beau, and which were received with Universal Applause, as
indeed they justly merited. It will perhaps be wondered that it should Act so
very often in Paris, and not hold out a Fortnight nor ten days here; for which
there may be two Reasons Assigned: First, in Paris there is not that foolish
and extravagant Prejudice against the Stage, as is entertained in a numerous
Party of this City, who rail against that and Common Prayer with an equal Zeal:
So that in Paris almost every one goes to the Theater, here not the tenth part,
for Hypocrisy and Business here, divide the greater part to their several and
different Offices: Another Reason is, That the Governors of the House were
unwilling to wear it out, and so balk'd the Run of it.

I am not ignorant of the several Objections made against this Play by the
Critics, viz. that the Scenes are loose, and not at all akin to the Plot^ and
may be cut out and altered in perpetuum, without the least Injury or Advantage
to the thin and frail Design of the Play; that in Lydia, before the time of
Alexander the Great, they talk of Justices of the Peace, Fox Hunting, Flanders
Horses and other things which are entirely Modern; but at the same time that
these Accusations must be confessed not to be ill grounded; it must be owned,
that without these Faults we must have lost Beauties of greater Consequence.
This I Am sure, there has never been on the Stage, a Play of more general Satyr
since the Plain Dealer; and there are such Public and useful Morals
recommended to the Audience, that will be as beneficial to the Commonweal, as
diverting to the immediate Spectators.

The Provoked Wife, a Comedy 4 to. Acted at the Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, 1697. To speak of this Play as
I ought, I should have the Pen of the Author who Writ it, and the recommending
the Reader to a Perusal of it, is the greatest Praise I can give it. But I
cannot omit the Objections I have heard made to it, by some of our Critics,
viz. That it is a loose Play, without Design, or if there be a Design, it is
such a one as the just Rules of Comedy exclude, since it teaches the Wives how
they ought to return the Brutality of their Husbands. I cannot by any means
allow this Objection; for the Design seems to me as just as the Reflections and
Wit of it are poinant, the Conversation lively and genteel; for it rather
teaches Husbands how they ought to expect their Wives should make them a
Return, if they use them as Sir John Brute did his; such Husbands may learn,
that slighted and abused Virtue and Beauty, may be provoked to hearken to the
prevailing Motives of Revenge. I can never think any reasonable Man should
suppose a Woman entirely divested of a sense of Humanity, or insensible either
of the Power of an agreeable Temptation, or of the Pleasure it yields: and as
most of our Vices are the surest Guard, if not source of our Virtues, I Am
confident, when the Husbands ill Usage of his Wife deprives himself of her
Love, he dismisses the surest Guard of their common Honor; and the other, that
is her Pride and Care of her Reputation will not be of force enough against
Revenge; and the strong solicitations of an agreeable Person, that
demonstrates a value for what the Possessor slights: So that it cannot be
denied, that this Moral is of admirable Use; and offers a Truth to our
consideration, which would often prevent the Ruin of Families, which generally
begins with the Husbands Faults. I know of no Thefts in this Play, or indeed
any of this Gentleman's, but what he has owned in his Preface. The Relapse, or
Virtue in Danger, being the sequel to Loves last Shift or The Fool in Fashion,
4 to. Acted at the Theater Royal, 1697. This Play was received with mighty
applause, and spite of the broken Scenes, which must be allowed an
irregularity that might have been avoided, has its just and uncommon Merits;
and I think the Character of my Lord Foppington, if it at all fall short of
that Masterpiece of Sir Fopling Flutter, at least challenges the next place, in
preference to all of that kind, for the Stage has been almost as Fruitful in
Beaux, as the Boxes.
The time when these three Plays were written is uncertain; but all appeared in
a little time of one another, and this which comes last in the Alphabet, was
the first in the Representation; and as he informs us in the Prologue, was
Wrote in six Weeks, a sign of a double Blessing, of bringing forth without
Pain, and even Children Perfect and Beautiful, without the usual nine Months
Travel.

W
Lewis Wager.
THIS Author (who was a Clerk in Queen Elizabeth's time) was then accounted a
Man of great Learning. He writ in the beginning of her Reign an Interlude,
styled,

Mary Magdalen, her Life and Repentance, 4 to. 1567. This was printed in an old
Black Letter, it may be acted by four or five Persons.

Edmund Waller, Esquire
THis Gentleman was of a good Family, and Estate, the last ^ncommon with so
good a Poet^ he was beloved by all that knew him, for his personal Merit and
Affability, as well as admired for his Poetry. He died about Eight Years ^ince.

The Maid's Tragedy, 8 vo. 1690. This was a Play of Fletcher's and is revived
with great Alterations by this our Author, and printed with his Works.

Pompey the Great, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1664. acted by his Highness the Duke of
York's Servants. Translated from Corneille, in which the Right Honorable, the
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex assisted.

George Wapul.
AN Author who has writ one Play, called,

Tide tarrieth for no Man, a Comedy, 4 to. 1611. printed so long since, that
Mr. Langbain could not find what Volume or Date it was of. It is styled, A most
pleasant and merry Comedy, right pithy and full of Delight.

William Wayer.
HE has a Play so long since printed, that Mr. Langbain could never gain a
Sight of it. The Title is,

The longer thou Liv'st the more Fool thou art, a Comedy, 4 to. but so old that
it has no Date. It has also this Title. A very merry and pithy Comedy, etc.

R. Waver.
AN Author as unknown as the two former: he published but one Play, which Mr.
Langbain says he never saw, entitled,

Lusty Iuventus, an Interlude, 4 to. printed without any Date. Though Mr.
Langbain attributes this Play to R. Waver, yet his Name is not to the Title
Page, nor any where about the Play, to give him that Assurance; but I suppose
he depended on former Catalogues.

John Webster.
THis Author was Clerk of St. Andrews Parish in Hol^ourn, as he was
Contemporary with Decker, Marston, and Rowley; so he joined with 'em in several
Plays, besides several he writ himself; as, Appius and Virginia, a Tragedy, 4
to. 1659. acted at the Duke's Theater. There are more Editions than one of this
Play, and has been revived and altered by Mr. Betterton. For the Plot see Livii
Hist. Florus, etc. The Devil's Law-Case; or, When Women go to Law, the Devil is
full of Business, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1623. acted by her Majesty's Servants,
and dedicated to Sir Tho. Finch. Plot in part from Skenkii Observat. Medic. p.
2^. Goulart's Histoires Admirabiles de notre Temps, Tom. 1. and V. Maximus,
lib. 1. cap. 8. The Duchess of Malfey, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1623. and 1678. first
acted privately at Black-Fryars, then publicly at the Globe, by his Majesty's
Servants; and dedicated to the Right Honorable, George, Lord Barkley. Revived
and acted at the Duke of York's Theater. Plot from Bandello's Novels, Nov. 19.
Goulart Hist. Admirab. p. 226. Beard's Theater of God's Judgments, Book 2. Chapter
24. The White Devil; or, The Tragedy of P. Giordano Vrsini, Duke of Brachiano,
with the Life and Death of Vittoria Corombona, the Famous Venetian Curtezan; 4
to. 1612. and 1665. first acted at the Phaenix in Drury Lane, by the Queen's
Majesty's Servants, and since revived and acted at the Theater Royal, by his
Majesty's Servants.


In these two following Plays our Author was assisted by Mr. Rowley.

A Cure for a Cuckold, a Comedy, 4 to. 1661. This was several Times formerly
acted with great Applause. The Thracian Wonder, 4 to. 1661. our Authors call
this a Comical History, several times acted with great Applause.
John Weston, Esquire
THis Author, whose Name is not Watson, as Mr. Langbain mistakes, writ a Play
in King Charles the Second's Time, styled,

The Amazon Queen; or, The Amors of Thalestris to Alexander the Great;
Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1667. This Play writ in Heroic Verse, appeared not on the
Stage. Plot from Strabo, lib. 11. Q. Curt. lib. 6. and Justin, lib. 3.

Mr. Whitaker.
THis Author, in King Charles the Second's Reign, published a Play, called,

The Conspiracy,; or, the Change of Government; a Tragedy 4 to. 1680. in
Heroic Verse, and acted at the Duke of York's Theater.

Dr. Robert Wild.
THis Author, though a Presbyterian Doctor, writ one Play and diverse Poems, but
is most famous for his Iter Boreale. The Play is entitled,

The Benefice, a Comedy, 4 to. 1689. The Design taken from another Play,
called, The Return from Parnassus; or, A Scourge for Simony.

Leonard Willan.
THE Author of a Play, published one Pastoral in Verse, called,

As^raea; or, True Love's Mirror; a Pastoral, 8 vo. ^ 1651. It is dedicated to
the Illustrious Princess, Mary, Duchess of Richmond and Lenox. Plot from a
Romance so called.

George Wilkins.
HE lived in the Reign of King Charles the First, and writ (besides one he
joined with Day and Rowley in) a Play, called,

The M^series of Enforced Marriage, a Tragi-comedy, 4 to. 1637. Mrs. Behn took
her Plot and great part of the Language of this Play, to her Town Fop; or, Sir
Timothy Tawdry. The other Play he joined in, is called, The Travels of Three
English Brothers.

Robert Wilmot.
A Poet of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and at the Request of the Gentlemen of the
Inner Temple, writ,

Tanc^ed and Grismond, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1592. acted before her Majesty by the
Gentlemen of the Inner Temple; and dedicated it to the Right Worshipful and
Virtuous Ladies, the Lady Mary Peter, and the Lady Ann Gray. Plot, Nov. 1. Day
4. of Boccace's Novels.

John Wilson.
AN Author of the Place of whose Birth I am ignorant; he was once Recorder of
Londonderry, and sometime resided in Dublin, where he writ Belphegor, which was
afterward acted in London He died about three Years since, near
Leicester-Fields, but where buried I know not. He is Author of four Plays; viz.
Andronicus Commenius, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1663. Plot from Heylin's Cosmography in
the Description of Greece, Cantacusenus, Leunclavius, etc. Belphegor; or, The
Marriage of the Devil; a Comedy, 4 to. 1690. acted at the Queen's Theater in
Dorset-Garden. Plot taken from a Novel of Machiavel, and Quevedo's Novels, 8
vo. The Cheats, a Comedy, 4 to. Printed two Editions, the last 1671. This Play
met with Applause when first acted, and is a diverting Comedy. The Projectors,
a Comedy, 4 to. 1665. This Play met with no great Success.


Robert Wilson.
A Gentleman that lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and writ one Play,
called,

The Cobler's Prophecy, a Comedy, 4 to. 1655.

Nathaniel Wood.
HE was a Clergyman, and lived in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in the City of
Norwich; writ one Play, calling it,

The Conflict of Conscience, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1581. This is a Play of
Morality, and may be presented by six Persons.

John Wright.
A Gentleman, if I mistake not, of the Middle Temple, and is yet living; has
writ Two Plays, of which in their Order: Thyestes, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1674.
dedicated to Bennet, Lord Sherrard. Translated from Seneca. Mock Thyestes, a
Farce, 8 vo. 1674. This is writ in Burlesque Verse, and printed to be bound up
with the former.


Thomas Wright.
I Can give no Account of this Author, only that he has a Play in print, called,

The Female Vertuoso's, a Comedy, 4 to. 1693. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Charles, Earl of Winchelsea. The Design our Author owns none of his
own, but of some Fri^nd from the French. The Prologue written and spoke by Mr.
Dogget; yet all not enough to make it take.

William Wycherley.
A Shropshire Gentleman, who has excelled all Writers in all Languages, in
Comedy, and most of the Poets of the present Age in generous Dealing with those
he owns his Friends, he has writ Four Plays, The Country Wise, a Comedy, 4 to.
1683. acted at the Theater Royal. This Play from the beginning has been
frequently acted with great Applause. The Gentleman Dancing Master, a Comedy, 4
to. 1673. acted at the Duke's Theater. Love in a Wood; or, St. James's Park; a
Comedy, 4 to. 1672. acted at the Theater Royal, by his Majesty's Servants; and
dedicated to the Duchess of Cleveland. The Plain Dealer, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678.
acted at the Theater Royal, by his Majesty's Servants. This is accounted the
most excellent of all his Comedies, of which and the Author, Mr. Dryden and Mr.
Evelyn gives a large Encomium. Some of the Characters are in Molliere's Le
Misanthrope, and Scarron's City Romance, 8 vo.


Y
Robert Yarrington.
AN Author in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, who writ one Play, entitled,

Two Tragedies in one, 4 to. 1601. Two Murders, one of a Chandler and his Boy,
the other of a Child in a Wood, by Order or Contrivance of his Uncle, are the
Subject of this Play.

SUPPOSED AUTHORS.
R. A. Gent.
THIS Author writ one Play, called,

The Valiant Welsh Man; or, The True Chronicle History of the Life and Valiant
Deeds of Charadoc the Great, King of Cambria, now called Wales; a Tragi-Comedy,
4 to. 1663. acted by the Prince of Wales's Servants, the Plot from Vbaldine le
vite del done illustre, p. 6. Tacitus Annals, Milton's History of England, and
from our British Chronicles.

H. B.
THis Author has published one Play, entitled,

The World's Idol; or, Plutus, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1650. Translated from
Aristophanes, with Notes and a Discourse upon it.

P. B.
THE Mock Duellist; or, The French Vallet; a Comedy, supposed to be writ by
Peter Bellon, Gent. 4 to. 1675. acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's
Servants, and dedicated to the virtuous, accomplished Lady, Madam S. C.

I. C.
THis Author writ a very diverting Play, called,

The Two Merry Milk Maids; or, The best Words near the Garland, a Comedy, 4 to.
1661. played before the King with great Applause, by the Company of the Revels.
Part of the Plot from the Tenth Day, Nov. 5. of Boccace's Novels, and is the
Foundation of several Plays, as Fletcher's Four Plays in One, etc.

I. D.
UNder these Two Letters are these Two Plays following: Hell's High Court of
Justice; or, The Trial of Three Politic Ghosts, viz. Oliver Cromwell, King of
Sweeden, and Cardinal Mazarine; a Tragedy, 4 to. 1661. The Mall; or, The Modish
Lovers; a Comedy, 4 to. 1674. acted by the King's Servants, and dedicated to
William Whitcom, Junior, Esquire (supposed by Dr. Hide, the Proto-Bibliothicarius
to the University) to be Mr. Dryden's, though it differs much from the Style of
his Works.


R. G.
THis Translator and Author was some time Master of Arts of Magdalen-Colledge,
Oxon; published Two Plays: Alphonsus, King of Arragon, a comical History, 4 to.
1599. as it has been sundry times acted. Ignoramus, a Comedy, 4 to. 1662. very
often acted with Applause before King James the First, written originally in
Latin and translated by our Author.


S. H.
THis Author was of Exeter-Colledge, Oxon; and whilst Bachelor of Arts, writ

Sicily and Naples; or, The Fatal Union; a Tragedy, 4 to. 1640. There were
several Copies of Verses in Praise of this Play, writ by the Students of Oxon.

SUPPOSED AUTHORS.
B. I.
UNDER these Letters are printed these Two Plays: Guy, Earl of Warwick; a
Tragedy, 4 to. said by some to be writ by Ben. Johnson, tho much inferior to
the Works of that excellent Poet. The Bashful Lovers, a Tragi-Comedy, 8 vo.
1655. acted at the Black-Fryars, by his Majesty's Servants.


E. M.
THis Author writ one Play, called,

Saint Cecily; or, The Converted Twins, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1667. supposed to be
writ by Mr. Matthew Medbourn, the Comedian, and dedicated to Queen Catharine.
Plot From Eusebius, Epiphanius, Baronius, etc.

N. N.
ROme's Follies; or, The Amorous Friars; a Comedy, as it was lately acted at a
Person of Quality's House, 4 to. 1681. This Play (which has been omitted by Mr.
Langbain) is dedicated to the Right Honorable, Anthony, Earl of Shaftsbury.
There Is not enough in this Play to recommend it to the nicer Judges of Poetry:
Instead of the Author's Name, we only find the Two Letters abovementioned.

W. N.
HVntin^ton's Divertisement; or, An Interlude for the general Entertainment of
the County Feast, held at Merchant Taylors-Hall, printed, 4 to. 1678. by W. N.
and dedicated to the Nobility and Gentry of that Country.

T. P.
THis Author has published two Plays: The French Conjurer, a Comedy, 4 to.
1678. acted at the Duke's Theater. Plot part of it from Gusman, in the Stories
of Dorido and Cloridia, and the Merchant of Sevil. A Witty Combat; or, The
Female Victor, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1663. acted by several Persons of Quality.
Plot from The German Princess, a Novel, in 8 vo.


Monsieur P. P.
THis Translator Published,

Ariadne; or, The Marriage of Bacchus; an Opera, 4 to. 1674. acted by the Royal
Academy of Music at the Theater Royal, and dedicated to the King; being a
Vocal Representation from the French, and set to Music by Mr. Grabutt, Master
of the King's Music.

S. P.
TRoades, a Tragedy, 8 vo. 1660. Supposed to be writ by Samuel Pordage, and
taken from Seneca.

T. R.
A Translator, who published this one Play, called,

The Extravagant Shepherd, a Pastoral Comedy, 4 to. 1654. and dedicated to Mrs.
Thornehill, of Ollantigh, in Kent. Translated from Corneille; Plot founded on
Lysis; or, The Extravagant Shepherd; a Romance, fol.

W. R.
CHristmas Ordinary, a Private Show; wherein is expressed the jovial Freedom of
that Festival; as it was acted at a Gentleman's House among other Revels;
printed 1682. This is a Piece that falls into the Number of Dramatick Writings,
tho there is not much to recommend it to this Place. The Author is not known,
but there are two Letters of his Name put to the Title Page; ( viz.) W. R.
Master of Arts.

The Coronation of Queen Elizabeth, or, The Restoration of the Protestant
Religion, etc.

Mr. S. Master of Arts.
THE Author of this ancient Play, printed in a Black Letter, is styled by him,
A right Pithy, Pleasant, and Merry Comedy, called,

Gammer Gurton's Needle; a Comedy, 4 to. 1561. acted at Christ's-College,
Cambridge, near a Hundred Years ago.

I. S.
UNder these Two Letters are published these following Plays, viz. Andromana;
or, The Merchants Wife, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1660. Plot from Sir Philip Sidney's
Arcadia, in the Story of Plangus, p. 155. Masquerade du Ciel, a Masque 4 to.
1640. and dedicated to the Queen. Phillis of Scyros, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1655.
Translated from the Italian of C. Guidubaldo di Bonarelli. The Prince of Priggs
Revels; or, The Practices of that grand Thief, Captain James Hind, a Comedy, 4
to. This Piece I could never yet get a Sight of.


S. S.
THis Author published only this single Play, entitled,

The Honest Lawyer, a Comedy, 4 to. 1616. acted by the Queen's Servants.

I. T.
UNder these two Letters we may find two Plays printed, viz. Grim, the Collier
of Croyden; or, The Devil and his Dam, with the Devil of St. Dunstan's, a
Comedy, 8 vo. 1662. Plot from Machiavel's Marriage of Belphegor, a Novel, fol.
it is also printed with Quevedo's Novels, 8 vo. and in the Ternary of Plays.
Troas, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1686. translated from Seneca.


C. W.
THis Author is supposed to be Christopher Wase, late one of the Squire-Beadles
of Oxford, who published a Play called,

Electra, a Tragedy, 12. Hague, 1649. presented to her Highness the Lady
Elizabeth. Translated from Sophocles.

E. W.
ONE who does not pretend to be the Author, but the Occasion of publishing this
single Play;

Apollo Shr^ving, a Comedy, 8 vo. 1627. writ by the Master of Hadleigh-School
in Suffolk, and acted there by his Scholar's.

I. W.
UNder these two Letters is printed one Play, called,

The Valiant Scot. 4 to. 1637. published by William Bowyer, and dedicated to
the Right Honorable, James, Marquis of Hamilton.

L. W.
UNder these two Letters the Author published this Play, entitled,

Orgula; or, The Fatal Error, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1658. and dedicated to the most
accomplished Lady, the Lady Frances Wildegooss; with a Preface showing the true
Nature of Poesy.

M. W. Master of Arts.
THE Second Author who has this Play in the Ternary of Plays, viz.

The Marriage-Broker; or, The Pander; a Comedy, 8 vo. 1662. Plot from English
Chronicles, in the Reign of Sebert, King of the West Saxons.

R. W.
THis ancient Author published a Play many Years ago, which Mr. Langbain gave a
wrong Title to, by reason he never saw it, and is entitled,

The Three Ladies of London.

T. W.
THE Third Author who has this following Tragedy, in the Ternary of Plays,
called,

Thornby-Abby; or, The London Maid, a Tragedy 8 vo. and dedicated to William
Austin, Esquire by R. D. the Publisher; and translated from Plautus.

W. W.
THE Translator of this following Comedy, called,

Manaeehmi, a Comedy, 4 to. 1515. This Author had several others translated,
though never published them.

UNKNOWN AUTHORS.
A
THE Abdicated Prince; or, The Adventures of Four Years; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to.
1690. acted at White Hall, by several Persons of Quality.

Abraham's Sacrifice, mentioned in former Catalogues, but I question whether it
may be properly called a Play, Mr. Langbain, or my self, having never seen it.

An Alarm for London; or, The Siege of Antwerp; with the Adventurous Acts, and
Valiant Deeds of the Lame Soldier; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1602. played by the
Servants of the Right Honorable, the Lord Chamberlain. Plot from the Tragical
History of the City of Antwerp, 4 to.

Albion, an Interlude, mentioned in former Catalogues, but never met with by
Mr. Langbain, or my self

Albion's Triumph, a Masque, 4 to. 1631. personated at Court by the King,
Queen, and the Lords, the Sunday after Twelfth-Night, 1631.

Albumazer, a Comedy, 4 to. 1634. played at Cambridge before the King, by the
Gentlemen of Trinity-Colledge; afterward revived at the King's House with a
new Prologue writ by Mr. Dryden.

Aminta, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1628. Translated from Tasso's Aminta, with Ariadne's
Complaint, in Imitation of Anguilara.

The Amorous Gallant; or, Love in Fashion; sometimes under the Title of The
Amorous Orontus; a Comedy, 4 to. 1675. Translated from a French Play, writ by
Th. Corneille, styled, L'Amour Alamode; the Plot from a Spanish Play writ by
Ant. de Solis, named, El Amor al Vso.

The Amorous Old Woman; or, It Is well if it take; a Comedy, 4 to. 1684. it is
also printed with another Title, called, The Fond Lady.

Andronicus, a Tragedy, Impiety's Long Success; or, Heaven's late Revenge. 8
vo. 1661. This Play is not mentioned by Mr. Langbain, nor can I learn who is
the Author thereof.

Arden of Feversham, his true and lamentable Tragedy, who was barbarously
Murdered by the means of his Wife, who being in Love with one Mosebie, hired
two Ruffins, Black Will and Shakbag to kill him, 4 to. 1599. Plot from Goodwin,
Hayward, Hollingshead, Baker, and Beard's Theater of God's Judgments.

The Arraignment of Paris, a Pastoral, supposed by Kirkman to be Mr. William
Shakespeare's.

B
THE Banished Duke; or, The Tragedy of Infortunatuo; 4 to. 1690. acted at the
Theater Royal.

The Battle of Alcazar, Fought in Barbary, between Sebastian, King of Portugal;
and Abdelmelech, King of Morocco; with the Death of Captain Stukely, a Tragedy,
4 to. 1594. acted by the Lord High Admiral's Servants. Plot from Heylin's
Cosmography in the History of Spain; De rebus Lusitan. by Andr. Schottum, fol.
and Fuller's Worthies.

Band, Ruff, and Cuff; accounted an Interlude in former Catalogues, but neither
Mr. Langbain nor my self, could ever procure the Sight of one.

The Bastard, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1552. Plot and part of the Language is taken
from The Loves of Schiarra and Florelia, in the English Lovers. See also The
Unfortunate Spaniard.

The Bloody Duke; or, The Adventures for a Crown, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1690.
by the Author of The Abdicated Prince; acted at the Court of Alba Regalis, by
several Persons of Quality.

Bonduca, with an Entertainment of Music, Vocal and Instrumental, a Tragedy
acted at the Theater in Dorset-Garden, 1696. 4 to. and dedicated by Mr. Powel
to the Right Honorable, the Lord Iefferys. This Play on the Revival (for it is
scarce to be said more) though the two Universities club'd to the Alterations,
did not succeed so well as it deserved, considering it almost all Fletcher's.

Braggadocio; or, The Bawd turned Puritan, a Comedy, 4 to. 1690. by a Person of
Quality.

C
CAEsar's Revenge, a Tragedy, of which I can give no Account.

Charles the First, King of England, his Tragedy, 4 to. 1649. and dedicated to
King Charles the Second, with a Copy of Verses in Praise of it. Plot from
English Chronicles.

The Combat of Caps, a Masque which is mentioned in diverse Catalogues, but I
could never see one.

The Commmons Condition, a Comedy, of which I can give no Account.

The Constant Nymph; or, The Rambling Shepherd, a Pastoral, 4 to. 1678. acted
at the Duke's Theater.

The Cornish Comedy, a Comedy, 4 to. 1696. acted at the Theater Royal in
Dorset-Garden, by his Majesty's Servants, this Play was writ by a Cornish
Attorney, as I am informed, who had better have kept to the other Offices of
the Quil, so very different from those of Parnassus. It Is dedicated by Mr.
Powel to Christopher Rich, Esquire one of the Patentees of his Majesty's Theater;
and ushered in, like other Plays that miss of Success, with a Preface in its
Vindication, let its Fate be never so just.

The Coronation of Queen Elizabeth; or, The Restoration of the Protestant
Religion, and the Downfall of the Pope, 4 to. 1680. being a most excellent Play,
as it was acted both at Bartholomew and Southwark Fairs, with great Applause.
This is only a Droll, but the Success the Current of the Times gave it, met
with a Bookseller to make it pass the Press; but there is no great Poetry to be
expected from it, or any Mastery of Design or Conduct; yet if the Readers have
a mind to see a particular Account of the Transactions of that glorious Queen,
I would advise them, besides our Chronicles of Stow, Speed, Baker, etc. to read
the great Cambden's Elizabeth, and Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation.

The Costly Whore, a comical History, 4 to. 1633. acted by the Company of
Revels.

The Contention between York and Lancaster, two Parts, with the Death of the
good Duke Humphrey, and the Banishment and Death of the Duke of Suffolk, and
the Tragical End of the Proud Cardinal of Winchester, with the notable
Rebellion of Jack Cade, and the Duke of York's first Claim to the Crown, a
Tragedy, 4 to. 1600. This Play differs very little from the second Part of
Shakespeare's Henry the Sixth, fol.

The Counterfeits, a Comedy, 4 to. 1679. acted at the Duke's Theater. Plot from
a translated Spanish Novel, called, The Trapanner Trapann'd, 8 vo. 1655. Some
account this Play to be John Leanard's, a great Plagiary.

The Counterfeit Bridegroom; or, The Defeated Widow; a Comedy, 4 to. 1677.
acted at his Royal Highness the Duke's Theater. It Is only an old Play of
Middleton's, called, No Wit like a Woman's, 8 vo.

Cromwell's Conspiracy, a Tragi-Comedy. This I never saw.

Cruel Debtor, a Play only named by Mr. Kirkman, but I never saw any such.

Cupid's Whirligig, a Comedy, 4 to. 1616. several times acted by ^he Children
of his Majesty's Revels, and dedicated by the Publisher, to Mr. Rob. Hayman.
Plot, Boccace's Novels, fol.

Cyrus, King of Persia; a Tragedy.

D
DAmon and Pythias, a History.

Darius, (styled) a pretty new Interlude, both pithy and Pleasant, of the Story
of King Darius, being taken out of the third and fourth Chapter of Esdras.
Land. 1565. 4 to. This is a good old Play, and the Author has so contrived it,
that Six Persons may ^asily act it. The Title Page refers the Reader to the
Place where (if his Curiosity requires it) he may read the Story.

The Debauchee; or, The Cred^lous Cuckold; a Comedy, 4 to. 1677. acted at his
Highness the Duke of York's Theater. It Is a Play of Broome's revived, called, A
Mad Couple well matched.

The Destruction of Jerusalem.

Dick Scorner, mentioned to be a Play in Mr. Kirkman's Catalogue.

The Divine Masque, 4 to. dedicated to General Monk, by one Anthony Sadler.

E
EDward the Third, his Reign, a History, 4 to. 1599. sundry times played about
the City of London. Plot from our old English Chronicles.

Edward the Third, with the Fall of Mortimer, Earl of March, a History, 4 to.
1690. acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to
the Right Honorable, Henry, Lord Viscount Sidney. Plot from the English
Chronicles, vide Walsingham, du Chesne, Grafton, Stow, Speed, M. Westminster,
Fabian, Fro^ssart, Pol. Virgil, Hollingshead, etc. as also AEschasius Major,
and a Novel translated from the French, styled, The Countess of Salisbury, 8 vo.

Elvira, or, The Worst not always True; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1667. This is by
some ascribed to the Lord Digby.

The Empress of Morocco, a Farce, 4 to. 1674. acted by his Majesty's Servants.
Said to be writ by Tho. Duffet.

English Men for Money; or, A Woman will have her Will; a very pleasant Comedy,
4 to. 1656. often acted with great Applause.

The English Princes; or, The Death of Richard the Third; a Tragedy, 4 to.
1673. This Play is ascribed to John Carel, and writ in Heroic Verse. Plot from
Hollingshead, Speed, Baker, Stow, Fabian, Grafton, Pol. Virgil, etc.

Enough's as good as a Feast, a Comedy.

Every Woman in her Humor, a Comedy, 4 to. 1609.

F
THE Factious Citizen; or, The Melancholy Visioner; a Comedy, 4 to. 1685. acted
at the Duke's Theater.

The Faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, 4 to. Plot from Guarini's Il Pastor Fido.

Fair Em, the Miller's Daughter of Manchester; with the Love of William the
Conqueror, a pleasant Comedy, 4 to. 1631. often acted in the City of London, by
the Servants of the Right Honorable, the Lord Strange.

The Fairy Queen, an Opera, 4 to. 1692. represented at the Queen's Theater, by
their Majesty's Servants. There Is a Preface prefixed to it, in Defense of
Opera's, etc. It Is wholly borrowed from the Midsummer-Night's Dream, of
Shakespeare, though there is no such Acknowledgment by this Author.

The Fair Maid of Bristow, a Comedy, 4 to. 1605. played before the King and
Queen at Hampton Court.

The False Favorite Disgraced, and the Reward of Loyalty; a Tragi-Comedy, 8
vo. 1657. This Play is ascribed to George Gerbier D'Ouvilly, but never acted.

The Fatal Jealousy, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1673. acted at the Duke's Theater, and
ascribed by some to Mr. Pane. Plot from Johannes Gigas's Postills; see also
Theater of God's Judgments, part 2. p. 55. Unfortunate Lovers, Nov. 1.

The Feigned Astrologer, a Comedy, 4 to. 1668. translated from the French of
Monsieur Corneille, Junior. Plot from Calderon's El Astrologo fingido.

Fidele and Fortunatus, in former Catalogues has been ascribed to one Barker.

Flora's Vagaries, a Comedy, 4 to. 1670. acted at the Theater Royal, by his
Majesty's Servants; ascribed to Mr. Rhodes. Plot is founded on Boccace's Third
Day, Nov. 3.

The Folly of Priestcraft, a Comedy, 4 to. 1690.

The Fond Lady, a Comedy, 4 to. The same with The Amorous Old Woman, only
different Titles.

Free Will, a Tragedy, translated from the Italian, by H. C. supposed to be
Henry Cheek.

Fulgius and Lucrelle, I can say nothing of this Play, having never seen it.

G
THE Gentile Craft, see Shoomakers Holiday, which is the same Play.

The Ghost; or, The Woman wears the Breeches, a Comedy, writ in the Year, 1640.
and printed 4 to. 1650.

H
THE Hector; or, The False Challenge; a Comedy, 4 to. 1656.

Henry the Fifth, with the Battle of Agen-Court; a History, 4 to. 1617. acted
by the King's Majesty's Servants. Plot from the English Chronicles, viz. Stow,
Speed, Baker, etc.

Histriomastrix; or, The Player whipped, a Comedy, 4 to. 1610. This Play was writ
in the time of Queen Elizabeth.

Hoffman his Tragedy; or, A Revenge for a Father; acted with great Applause, at
the Phaenix in Drury Lane, dedicated by Hugh Perry, to his Honored Friend Mr.
Richard Kilvert.

How to choose a good Wife from a Bad one, a pleasant conceited Comedy, 4 to.
1634. several times acted by the servants of the Earl of Worcester. The
Foundation of this Play is taken from a Novel in Cynthio Giraldi, Dec. 3. Nov.
5. the Story of Anselmes saving of young Arthur's Wife, is related in several
Novels; vide the Ninth Novel of The Pleasant Companion (printed in 8 vo.
London, 1684.) styled, Love in the Grave.

I
Jack Drums Entertainment; or, The Comedy of Pasquil and Catherine, 4 to. 1616.
several times acted by the Children of Pauls^ Mammon's poisoning of Catherine^s
Face, resembles the Usage of Demagoras to Parthenia, in Argulus and Parthenia.

Jack Iugler, a Comedy, according to old Catalogues, but I could never procure
one.

Jack Straw's Life and Death, a notorious Rebel in England, who was killed in
Smithfield by the Lord Mayor of London, 4 to. 159^. This Play is divided into
but Four Acts. Plot in the English Chronicles, viz. Baker, Speed, Stow, etc. in
the Reign of King Richard the Second.

Jacob and Esau, an Interlude, this Play, as it is easy to be perceived, is
founded on Scripture. See Genesis, Chap. 25, 26, etc. See also Josephus, Lib.
1. Tornelli Annals, etc.

James the Fourth, a History. The Play is founded on the King of Scotland of
that Name.

Ieronymo, the First Part, with the Wars of Portugal; or, The Spanish Tragedy,
a Tragedy, 4 to. 1605. containing the Life and Death of John Andraea.

Ieronymo is mad again; or, The Spanish Tragedy; a Tragedy, containing the
lamentable End of D. Horatio and Bellimperin, with the pitiful Death of
Ieronymo, 4 to. 1623. There are some Authors that have quoted several Lines out
of this Play, viz. Ben. Johnson in Every Man in his Humor, Shirley in his Bird
in a Cage, etc.

Impatient Poverty, styled a Comedy by some Catalogues.

The Imperial Tragedy; fol. 1669. acted at the Nursery in Barbican, Plot from
Marcellinus and Cassiodorus, in their Chronicles about Zenon; see also,
Baronius, Godeau, Zonarus, etc. it is by some ascribed to Sir William Killigrew,
and translated from the Latin.

The Int^rlude of Youth, a serious, old, instructive Piece, written in Verse in
4 to.

John the Evangelist, The Title page of this also shows the Subject Divine.

The Jovial Crew; or, The Devil turned Ranter; an Interlude, 4 to. 1651. This
is a Character of The Roaring Ranters of those Times represented in a Comedy.

K
KIng Edgar and Alfreda, a History, 4 to. Plot from English Chr^nicles.

The King and Queen's Entertainment at Richmond, after their leaving Oxford, in
a Masque, presented by the most Illustrious Prince Charles, September 12. 1636.
and dedicated to her Majesty, the Queen of Great Britain, by a Copy of Verses.

A Knack how to know an Honest Man, a Comedy, 4 to. 1596. It Is entitled a
pleasant conceited Comedy, as it has been sundry times played about the City of
London.

A Knack how to know a Knave, a very pleasant and merry Comedy, 4 to. 1594.
several times acted by Edw. Allen, with Kemp's applauded Merriments of the Men
of Goteham, in receiving the King into Goteham. Plot from the Story of King
Edgar, Ethenwald and Alfreda; see also Walsingham, Grafton, Malmesbury, Stow,
etc.

The Knave in Grain new vampt, a Comedy, 4 to. 1640. acted at the Fortune with
very great Applause.

Knavery in all Trades; or, The Coffee-House; a Comedy, 4 to. 1664. acted in
the Christmas Holy Days, by several Apprentices with great Applause.

The Knight of the Golden Shield. See Sir Clyomon.

L
THE Lady Alimony; or, The Alimony-Lady; an excellent pleasant Comedy, 4 to.
1659. duly authorized, daily acted, and frequently followed.

The Late Revolution; or, The Happy Change; a Tragi-Comedy, acted throughout
the English Dominions, in the Year 1688. written by a Person of Quality, and
printed in 4 to. 1690. the Epistle Dedicatory is to all true English Men, etc.
This Play or Story is what the Title Bears, viz. The Transactions of the Late
King's leaving the Nation.

The Laws of Nature, a Comedy, by former Catalogues; but I question whether any
such.

The Levellers Levelled; or, The Independents Conspiracy to root ou^ Monarchy;
an Interlude written by Mercurius Pragmaticus, 4 to. 1647. This is dedicated to
the late King Charles the Second.

Liberality and Prodigality, a Comedy.

Lingua; or, The Combat of tho. Tongue and the five Senses for Superiority; a
pleasant Comedy, 4 to. Mr. Winstanly says, that Oliver Cromwell, the late
Usurper, acted the part of Lactus, in Cambridge, which first inspired him with
Ambition.

London Chanticlers, a witty Comedy, full of various and delightful Mirth,
often acted with great Applause, and printed 4 to. 1659.

Look about you, a pleasant Comedy, 4 to. 1600. played by the Servants of the
Right Honorable, Lord High Admiral. For the Historical Part, see the English
Chronicles; viz. Baker, Speed, Pol. Virgil, Daniel, etc. in the Reign of King
Henry the Second.

The Lost Lady, a Tragi-Comedy, fol.

Love A-la-mode, a Comedy, 4 to. 1663. acted at Middlesex House, with great
Applause. This Play is justified by the Author, who, if we believe the Title
Page, is a Person of Honor.

Love's Loadstone, a Comedy, 4 to. of which I refer you to the Letter P. where
you may find some Account of it under the Title of Pathomachia; or, The Battle
of Affections; which is the same Play, 1630.

Luminalia; or, The Festival of Light; a Masque, 4 to. 1637. this was
personated (the same Year) on Shrove-Tuesday-Night, by the Queen's Majesty and
her Ladies. Mr. Inigo Jones assisted in it.

M
MAnhood and Wisdom, a Play mentioned in other Catalogues.

Marcus Tullius Cicero, that famous Orator, his Tragedy, 4 to. 1651. writ in
Imitation of Catiline's Conspiracy, by Johnson. Plot Plutarch in vita
Ciceronis, Appian, Dion, Lambin, etc.

Marriage of Wit and Science, an Interlude.

Master Turbulent; or, The Melancholicks; a Comedy, 4 to. 1682. as it was acted
at the Duke's Theater.

Masque of Flowers, 4 to. 1614. presented at the Banqueting House at
White Hall, by the Gentlemen of Gray's Inn, on Twelfth-Night, 1631. It is
dedicated to Sir Francis Bacon, then Attorney General.

Massianello, his Tragedy; or, The Rebellion of Naples; 8 vo. 1631. This is
dedicated to John Caesar, of Hyde-Hall, in the County of Hertford, Esquire Plot
from Giraffi's History of Naples, Englished by James Howel.

Mercurius Britanicus; or, The English Intelligencer; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to.
This Play reflects much upon the Judges, Cook, Hutton, and other Persons
concerned in the Business of Ship Money. It has but four Acts.

The Merry Devil of Edmonton, a Comedy, 4 to. 1655. Plot, Fuller's Church Hist.
p. 186.

The Morning Ramble; or, The Town-Humours; a Comedy, 4 to. 1673. acted at the
Duke's Theater. This Play some think to be written by one Mr. Pane.

Mucedorus, the King's Son of Valencia; and Amadon, the King's Daughter of
Arragon; with the Merry Conceits of Mouse; a Comedy, 4 to. 1668. acted at the
Globe, and afterward before the King at White Hall. Supposed to be writ by
Shakespeare, and printed formerly.

The Muse of New Market, containing three Drolls; viz. The Merry Milk Maids of
Islington; or, The Rambling Gallants defeated: Love lost in the Dark; or, The
Drunken Couple: The Politic Whore; or, The Conceited Cuckold. 4 t.. 1681.
acted (as the Title says) at New Market. All three Drolls stolen from other
Plays.

The Mistaken Beauty, or, The Liar; a Comedy, 4 to. 1685. acted by their
Majesty's Servants, at the Theater Royal. Translated from Corneille's Le
Menteur.

N
NEglected Virtue; or, The Unhappy Conqueror; a Play acted at the Theater
Royal, by his Majesty's Servants, 1696. 4 to. and dedicated by Mr. Horden the
Player, to the Honorable, Sir John Smith, Baronet, etc. in which he lets his
Patron know its ill Success, and that it is none of his own, and in that he is
much in the Right, for all the Comical Part is taken out of Fletcher.

Nero's Tragedy, 4 to. writ many Years since; another bearing the like Title,
was writ and published by Mr. Lee. Plot or Hist. from Suetonius in vita
Neronis, Aurelius Victor, Sulpitius Severus, and Tacitus Annal.

A New Custom, an Interlude, 4 to. 1573. It contains but three Acts, and may be
acted by four Persons. This being writ in Queen Elizabeth's Time, was purposely
to vindicate the Reformation.

New-market-Fair, the First Part, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to.

New-market-Fair; or, Mrs. Parliament's New Figaries; the Second Part, a
Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1649. and the Title tells you, writ by the Man in the Moon,
and printed at You may go look. The Intent of these Two Plays are to expose the
Rebels against King Charles the First.

The Nice Wanton, a Comedy.

No Body, and Some Body; with the true Chronicle History of Elydure, who was
fortunately three times Crowned King of England, 4 to. acted by the Queen's
Majesty's Servants. It is not divided into Acts. For the true Story consult our
English Chronicles.

O
AN Old Wives Tale.

Orlando Furioso, One of the Twelve Peers of Fr^nce; a Hist. 4 to. 1594. acted
before the Queen's Majesty. It is not divided into Acts: Translated by Sir John
Harrington from Ariosto's Poem so called.

P
PAstor Fido; or, The Faithful Shepherd; a Pastoral, 4 to. 1602. written in
Italian by Guarini, and afterward translated into English by this Author, who
conceals his Name; but (if we believe the Bookseller who printed it after his
Decease, was a Relation to Sir Edward Dimock, then Queen Elizabeth's Champion.
Sir Richard Fanshaw and Mr. Settle have both put their Pens to the same Subject.

Pathomachia; or, The Battle of Affections, Shadowed by a Feigned Seige of the
City Pathopolis; a Comedy, 4 to. 1630. published by one Constable, and
dedicated to the Lord Hunsdon: But is the same Play as Love's Loadstone, only
different in Title.

Patient Grissel, a Comedy. Plot from Boccace's Novels, Day 10. Nov. 10 fol.

Pausanias, the Betrayer of his Country, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal,
by his Majesty's Servants; written by a Person of Quality, 1696. 4 to. and
dedicated to Anthony Henly, of the Grange in Hampshire, Esquire by Mr. Southern;
the Epilogue being writ by Mr. Henly, and the Prologue by an unknown Hand. Mr.
Southern in^orms us in the Epistle, that it was put into his Hands by a Person
of Quality; and that the Play is built on the Model of the Ancients, and
according to the Reformation of the French Stage; and I am of Opinion that
there is something of the Manly Force of the Ancients in it: though the perverted
Judgments of the Town could not relish it. The Story you will find in his Life
in Plutarch.

The Pedlar's Prophecy, a Comedy.

Philotus, a Comedy, 4 to. printed in Scotland, 1612. This Play shows the
Mischiefs oft-times happening by Old Age Marrying with Youth.

Piso's Conspiracy, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1676. acted at the Duke's Theater. This is
no more than the Tragedy of Nero, with a Title changed, and if you compare
them, will find no Difference throughout.

The Presbyterian Lash; or, Noctroff's Maid Whipped; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1661.
and, says the Title Page, acted in the Great Room at the Pye-Tavern at Algate,
by Noctroff the Priest, and several of his Parishoners at the eating of a Chine
of Beef.

The Promises of God manifested, this has been in former Catalogues as a
Dramatick Piece, but whether it be so I much question.

Promus and Cassandra, in Two Parts.

Q
THE Queen; or, The Excellency of her Sex; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1653.
published by Alexander Gough, being given him by a Person of Honor; dedicated
to the Lady Catharine Mohun. Plot, part of it from Bandello's Novels, and part
from Histoires Tragicques par de Bellesorest, 8 vo.

R
THE Rampant Alderman; or, News from the Exchange; a Farce, 4 to. 1685. This is
taken out of several other Plays, as Fine Companion, etc.

The Rape; or, The Innocent Impostors, a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal,
by their Majesty's Servants, 1692. 4 to. and dedicated to the Right Honorable,
Charles, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, etc. This Play was writ by a Divine,
though introduced by our late Laureat, Mr. Shadwel. It met with no great Success,
tho^ it is not the worst of our English Tragedies.

The Reformation, a Comedy, 4 to. 1673. acted at the Duke's Theater. This Play
is accounted to be written by Mr. Arrowsmith.

The Rehearsal, a Comedy, 4 to. 1683. This being an excellent Farce, and
ascribed to the late Duke of Buckingham, as Author, has bore several
Impressions, and is frequently acted of late Days. This Play lashes the
ridiculous Model of our modern Tragedies.

The Religious Rebel, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1671.

The Return from Parnassus; or, The Scourge of Simony, a Comedy, 4 to. 1606. It
was acted by the Students of St. John's C^lledge in Cambridge. This Play
censures the Poets, and is the Original Dr. Wild's Play, called, The Benefice.

The Revenge; or, A Match in Newgate; a Comedy, 4 to. 1680. acted at the Duke's
Theater. This is only a Play of Marston's, called, The Dutch Courtezan, revived
and ascribed to Mrs. Behn.

The Rivals, a Tragi-Comedy, in 4 to. printed 1668.

Robin Conscience. This has been styled a Play, but is rather an old Dialougue,
entitled, Robin Conscience against his Father Covetous, his Mother Newguise,
and his Sister Proud Beauty.

Robin Hood's Pastoral May Games.

Robin Hood and his Crew of Soldiers.

Romulus and Hersilia; or, The Sabine War; a Tragedy, 4 to. 1683. Plot from
Livii Hist. lib. 1. Ovidii Metamorph. lib. 14, etc.

The Royal Cuckold; or, Great Bastard; giving an Account of the Birth and
Pedigree, of Lewis le Grand, the First French King of that Name and Race, a
Tragi-Comedy, as it is acted by his Imperial Majesty's Servants, at the
Amphitheatre in Vienna; translated out of the German Language, by Paul
Veegerius, 1695. 4 to. and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Edward Russel,
Lord High Admiral of England, etc. This Play was never acted, and is taken from
a little Book in 8 vo. called, The Secret History of Lewis the Fourteenth.

The Royal Masque at Hampton Court, 4 to. 1604. presented January the 8th, that
Year; personated by the Queen's most excellent Majesty, and the Ladies of
Honor attending.

The Royal Voyage; or, The Irish Expedition; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1690. You
may easily conjecture what the Subject of this Play is, by its Title and Date.

S
SAlmacida Spolia, a Masque, 4 to. 1639. This was presented by the King and
Queen's Majesty's, on the 21th of January the same Year at White Hall. The
Scenes, Machines and Ornaments are the Invention of Mr. Inigo Jones, Surveyor
General of his Ma^esty's Works. What was sung or spoken, was writ by Sir
William Davenant; and the Music was composed by her Majesty's Master of
Music, Mr. Lewis Richards.

The Scottish Politic Presbyter Slain by an English Independent; or, The
Independents Victory over the Presbyterian Party, etc. a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to.
1647. This is a Play of the same Class with the ^ormer, and of most others that
are writ by Anonimous Authors, ^or the particular Gust of the Times they are
printed in. The Year of its being printed, the Title of it shows; where the
Reader may find more of the Grounds of it, viz. in the Accounts of the
Transactions of those Times.

She Ventures, and He wins, a Comedy, acted at the New Theater in
Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants, written by a young Lady,
1696. 4 to. The Plot is taken from a very pleasant witty Novel of Mr. Alexander
Oldis, called, The Fair Extravagant; or, The Humorous Bride.

Sicelides, a Piscatory Dramma, or a Pastoral, 4 to. 1631. acted at
King's-Colledge, Cambridge. For the Plot consult Ovid Metamorph. lib. 4, and
13. also Orlando Furioso.

Shoomakers Holyday; or, The Gentle Craft; with the Humorous Life of Simon
Air, Shoemaker and Lord Mayor of London, a Comedy, 4 to. 1657. acted before
the Queen's most excellent Majesty, by the Right Honorable the Lord High
Admiral's Servants. The Story from the old Book, called, The Gentle Craft, 4 to.

The Siege of Constantinople, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1675. acted at the Duke's
Theater. Plot from Heylin's Cosmography, Book 2. in the Description of Greece,
Paulus Iovius, Knolles Hist. and Constantinopolis a Mabammada 2 da. expugnata,
fol.

The Siege and Surrender of Mons, a Tragi-Comedy, exposing the Villainy of the
Priests, and the Intreagues of the French, 1681. 4 to. This was never acted,
and is built on the public News, and private Reports of that Siege.

Sir Clyomon, Knight of the Golden-Shield, Son to the King of Denmark; and
Clamydes, the White Knight, Son to the King of Suavia, (both Valiant Knights)
their History, 4 to. 1599.

Sir Giles Goose-Cap, Knight; a Comedy, 4 to. 1636. acted at the private House
in Salisbury-Court, with great Applause. This was published by one Perry, and
dedicated to Richard Young, Esquire

Sir Solomon; or, The Cautious Coxcomb; a Comedy, 4 to. 1671. acted at his
Royal Highness, the Duke of York's Theater. This is mostly a Translation from
Moliere's L'Ecole des Femmes, and most agree done by Mr. Carel. This Play, though
met with some Enemies, yet found Success in the Action; and afterward the
Author printed a Justification of it.

Solimon and Perseda, their Tragedy; wherein is laid open Love's Constancy,
Fortune's Inconstancy, and Death's Triumphs; 4 to. 1599. This old Play, with
the before-going long Title, is not divided into Acts.

The Sophister, a Comedy, 4 to. 1638. This Play, though printed, was not, I
believe, ever acted.

The Spanish Bawd; or, Calisto and Melibea, represented in Celestina, a
Tragi-Comedy, fol. 1631. The Play is very long, and was originally writ in
Spanish, and done into English by Don Diego Puedeser, a Spaniard; who also
translated another Book into English, called, Exemplary Novels, fol. There are
Twenty Four Acts in The Spanish Bawds.

Sport upon Sport; Drolls, 8 vo. This is a Collection of Drolls taken from
Plays, by Kirkman, and printed 1673.

The Stepmother, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1664. acted at the Theater in Little
Lincoln^-Inn-Fields, by his Highness, the Duke of York's Servants.

The Strange Discovery, a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1640. Plot and Language from
Heliodorus's AEthiopick Hist. 8 vo. Book 10.

Susanna's Tears.

The Subjects Joy; or, The King's Restoration, cheerfully made known in a
sacred Masque, etc. 4 to. 1660. dedicated to the Lord General Monk. This Masque
has been omitted by Mr. Langbain.

Swetnam, the Woman-Hater, arraigned by Women, a Comedy, 4 to. 1620. acted at
the Red-Bull, by the Queen's Servants. Plot from an old Spanish Book, called,
Historia de Aurelia, Isabella Hija del Rey de Escotia, etc. 12 mo. and from an
English Pamphlet, entitled, The Arraignment of Lewd, Idle, Froward, and
Inconstant Woman.

T
TEmpe Restored a Masque, 4 to. 1631. This was presented on Shrove-Tuesday, at
White Hall, to his Majesty, by the Queen and fourteen Ladies of Honor. The
Descriptions, etc. of the Scenes were invented by Mr. Inigo Jones.

Thersytes, an Interlude.

Tiberius ( Claudius Nero) his Tragical Life and Death, a Tragedy, 4 to. 16.
Plot from Suetonius, Dion, Tacitus, etc.

Timoleon; or, The Revolution; a Tragi-Comedy, London, printed 1697. 4 to. and
dedicated to his Friend, I. F. The Comical part is a very good and useful Satyr
on the Mercenary Temper of many Courtiers of preferring Money to Merit. The
Story of Timoleon, is in his Life in Plutarch, and Cornelius Nepos, etc.

Tom Essence; or, The Modish Wife; a Comedy, 4 to. 1677. This Play succeeded
well, and is said to be writ by one Mr. Rawlins; Part from Molliere's Le Cocu
Imaginary, and part from Corneilles D. Caesar D' Avalos.

Tom Tyler and his Wife, an Interlude, 4 to. printed first many Years ago, in
an old English Black Letter, and in a sort of Burlesque Verse. The Drift of the
whole Play is to represent and humble a Shrew. If it be compared with Monsieur
Poison's Le Sot Venge, a near resemblance will appear.

A Traitor to Himself; or, Man's Heart his greatest Enemy; a moral Interlude,
in Heroic Verse, 4 to. 1678. This was acted by the Boys of a Public School at
a Breaking up, and published that it may be useful on the like occasion. In it
are no Women's Parts. Plautus his Captives is writ like it.

The True Trojans; or, Fuimus Troes; being a Story of the Britains Valor at
the Romans first Invasion; a History, 4 to. 1633. This Play was publicly
presented by the Gentlemen Students of Magdalen-College, in Oxon. Plot from
Live. Lib. 5. Caesar Comment. Lib. 4, and 5. Galfridus ap. Arthur Monumetensis.
De Gestis Regum Britanniae, Lib. 4.

A Trial of Chivalry, 4 to. Wanting the Title Page, I Am ignorant of the Date
and Place of its acting.

Trial of Treasure.

The Triumphs of Virtue, a Tragi-Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, 1697. by
his Majesty's Servants. Though this Play succeeded not, it seems, among a great
many Faults of Language, not to want some Merit; and had the Style and Language
been as good as the Design, it could not have failed of Applause. The Beginning
seems to be borrowed from Fletcher's Wit without Money; and great part of the
Character of Antonio (if I Am not mistaken) is copied from thence.

Tunbridge-Wells; or, A Day's Courtship, a Comedy, 4 to. 1678. acted at the
Duke's Theater. This is thought to be writ by Mr. Rawlins, though the Title says,
by a Person of Quality. This does not equal Epsom-Wells.

Tyrannical Government.

V
THE Unfortunate Usurper, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1663. dedicated to Mr. Edward
Vmferville. The same Story of Andronicus Commenus, is writ by one Wilson,
beforementioned; which Play I take to excel this, but in this, Act 5. Scene 3.
we have a Parallel between those Times, and our late Civil Wars.

The Ungrateful Favorite, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1664. writ by a Person of Honor;
but I do not find it was ever acted. See Guicciardine Pontanus, and other
Writers on the Affairs of Naples.

W^
A Warning for Fair Women, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1599. The Title tells you it
contains the most Tragical and Lamentable Murder of Mr. George Sanders, of
London, Merchant, near Shooters-Hill.

The Weakest goes to the Wall; a Comedy, 4 to. 1618. acted by the Right
Honorable, the Earl of Oxon, Lord Great Chamberlain of England's Servants.

Wealth and Health.

Wily Beguiled, a pleasant Comedy, 4 to. The Chief Actors in the Comedy are a
Poor Scholar, a Rich Fool, and a Knave at a Shift.

Wine, Beer, Ale and Tobacco, contending for Superiority; incerted in former
Catalogues as an Interlude, but is no other than a Dialogue, 4 to. 1658.

Win her and Take her; or, Old Fools will be Meddling; a Comedy, 4 to. 1691.
acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants; and is dedicated to
the Right Honorable, Peregrine, Earl of Danby, Viscount Latimer, etc. by Mr.
Underhill.

The Wit of a Woman, a pleasant merry Comedy, 4 to. 1604.

The Wits led by the Nose; or, A Poets Revenge; a Tragi-Comedy, 4 to. 1678.
acted at the Theater Royal, great part of it is taken from Chamberlain's Love's
Victory.

Woman turned Bully, a Comedy, 4 to. 1675. acted at the Duke's Theater. This
Play met not with that Success as was expected.

A Woman will have her Will. See English Men for Money.

THE APPENDIX.
GREAT Part of these Sheets having been printed a good while, has occasioned a
Necessity of this Supplement to complete the Design of the Book, in giving the
Reader an Account of all the Plays that have been hitherto printed; some
whereof were accidentally omitted in their proper Places.

KNOWN AUTHORS.
Thomas Dilke.
THIS Author has lately published another Comedy, called,

The Pretenders; or, The Town Unmasked, a Comedy, acted at the Theater in
Little Lincolns-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants; and dedicated to Thomas
Barnadiston, of Ketton, in Suffolk, Esquire I have little to say to this Play, for
it is not fair to attack a Man that is down, though I do not think (considering
what Plays have pleased) that this ought to have met with so severe a Fate.
Vainthroat seems a Copy of Medley, and Scandal; Sir Bellamour, a faint Shadow
of the Plain Dealer, or at least of Blunt in The Committee; Captain Bounceby we
have had in various Plays, as The Squire of Alsatia, Old Bachelor, Epsom
Wells, etc. Since the Miscarriage of this Play, the Author died.

Thomas D'Vrfey.
THis Author has lately published another Play, called,

The Campaigners; or, The Pleasant Adventures at Brussels; with a Familiar
Preface upon a late Reformer of the Stage; ending a Satirical Fable of the Dog
and the Ottor, School. 4 to. It Is dedicated to the Right Honorable, Thomas, Lord
Wharton, etc. The Intreague and Discovery betwixt Madam La Marquise, and the
Colonel is borrowed from a Novel or Memoir, called, Female Falsehood.

Charles Gildon.
THis Author, being known too late to be brought in the Order of the Alphabet,
I have placed him here in the Appendix, with an Account of those two Plays he
has already Published, and are owned by him, though his Name, without his
Consent, was omitted in the Impressions of the Plays.

He is, as I Am informed, a Gentleman born at Gillingham, near S^aftsbury, in
the County of Dorset. His Parents and Family were all of the Romish Persuasion,
and in the time of the Civil War, doubly incurred the Penalties of the
Prevailing Side; both as engaged in the Royal Party, and as Recusants in
Religion; for which, after the Plunderings of the War, his Grandfather paid two
thirds of his Estate, all the Time of that Government. His Father was of the
Honorable Society of Gray's Inn, and though a great Ze^lot for the Faith he was
born in, he could not convey that Zeal to his Son, our Author, whom he dying,
left but Nine Years of Age, having sold the best part of the Estate that our
Author was born to, before he died. Gillingham, the Place of his Nativity, gave
our Author the first Rudiments of Learning, under a very Honest and Learned
Master, one Mr. Young. Thence his Relations sent him to the English College of
Secular Priests at Doway^ in Hainault, with a design of making him a Priest, if
his Inclination could away with that Function; which was supposed the best
Support of a Gentleman whose Fortunes and Religion could promise him no greater
Advantage. But after Five Years Study there, he found his Inclinations point
him another way; and at the Age of about Nineteen he returns for England; and
as soon as One and Twenty, put it into his Power of enjoying those Pleasures
that Age generally pursues, he came to London, where having spent the Remainder
of his Paternal Estate, betwixt Two or Three and Twenty he married, and most of
the Reign of King James, he spent in reading the Controversies of that Time;
being dissatisfied with several of the Tenants of the Church of Rome, that he
had imbibed with his Mother's Milk, as they say. In him there was an Example
how difficult a thing it is, to overcome the Prejudice of Education; for I am
assured that it cost him above Seven Years Study and Contest, before he could
entirely shake off all those Opinions^ that h^d grown up with him from a Child;
though he could not answer to himself the Conviction of his Reason in the Points
of Religion, yet he did what is said of Medea, by Ovid: Video meliora probque
Delesiosa sequor --


I have heard him say, that the first Book that gave him the greatest
Conviction was, the Discourse of the late pious and ingenious Dr. Tillotson,
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, against Transubstantiation, lent him by a
Lawyer, that at the same time cheated him of about Four Hundred Pounds, though he
made way for that Peace of Mind that this Book first opened the Door to.

If I should do with our Author, what some other Writers of Lives have done, I
might here tell you of his Inclinations to Poetry from his Childhood, and talk
of his Performances; but he being my Friend, I shall forbear all things that
may argue me guilty of Partiality; and shall only say, as he tells us in a
Letter of his Essays, that Necessity was the first Motive of his venturing to
be an Author. His first attempt in the Drammatick way, was not till he was was
past Thirty Two Years of Age; and then in about a Month's time, he gave us a
Tragedy, called, The Roman Bride's Revenge; but of that in its Order: for we
must first speak of a Play of the late famous Mrs. Behn's, which he introduced
by the Importunity of a Friend of hers and his, on the Stage: It was called,
The Younger Brother; or, the Amorous Iilt; out of the Respect to her Memory,
and a Deference, which was too nice, to her Judgment, he durst not make any
Alterations in it, but what were absolutely necessary, and those only in the
first and second Act, which reflected on the Whigs; when if he had altered the
jejune Style of the three last Acts, betwixt Prince Frederick and Mirtilla,
which was too heavy, in all Probability it would have been more to the
Advantage of his Purse. But now I shall proceed to his own Plays, which are two
in Number; the first in our Alphabetical Order, is, Phaeton; or, The Fatal
Divorce; a Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, written in Imitation of the
Ancients, etc. School. 4 to^ and dedicated to the Right Honorable, Charles
Montague, Esquire etc. the most Noble and Generous Patron of the Muses that our
Nation has Produced. Though it was a very bold Undertaking of a Young Author, to
attempt to bring so very different a way of Writing on so corrupt a Stage as
ours; yet the Success justified his Opinion, that the Irregular, Profane, and
Obscene Plays took only because our Audience saw no other, through the Poets
Fault. The Plot, and a great many of the Beauties of the Play, the Author
fairly owns that he has taken from the Medea of Euripides; and in his Preface
you may find his Reasons for altering the Names and Characters from what they
were in the Original that he has here copied. The Roman Bride's Revenge, a
Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, 1697. 4 to. dedicated by the Bookseller to
William Gregory, Esquire This Play was our Author's first; and as it was writ in a
Month, so it had the Fate of those untimely Births, as hasty a Death. Though
notwithstanding the Faults of this Play, which must be confessed numerous
enough, there is so much Merit in the First, and part of the Second Act, and
the Beauty of the Catastrophe, that if the Voice of the Town had not been
influenced by the Ill Representation, it must have met with a less rigorous
Censure. But the Author's Faults lie generally in the Style, and the Incidents
of the Third and Fourth Acts. The Style is too near an Imitation of Mr. Lees
(the worst Qualification of that Poet, who had Beauties enough to make amends
for it) I mean in many Places, for in others it is Just enough. The Incidents
were too numerous, and not so distinct as to be well discerned by the Audience,
especially in the Fourth Act. Though I think there is no Incident in this Play so
unnatural, as some of our celebrated Plays are esteemed for; and then the
Confusion of the Action contributed to the making them seem less prepared. The
Plot I take to be of the Author's own Invention, allowing for a Hint taken from
Camma of Galata, which is thus far improved, that the Husband here is alive
after the Wife has drank the Poison, which heightens the Distress of the Chief
Characters. But the Moral is one of the most noble of any of our Modern Plays,
it being to give us an Example in the Punishment of Martian, that no
Consideration in the World, ought to make us delay the Service of our Country.


Peter Motteux.
SInce the Printing of the foregoing Sheets, this Author has published another
Play, called,

Beauty in Distress, a Tragedy, as it is acted at the Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Maje^ty's Servants, 4 to. School. dedicated to Henry
Heveningham, Esquire I cannot perceive that the Author has stole any part of his
Design, nor am apt to believe he has, since he has generally been very free in
owning to whom he has owed any Part of what he has published. There are a great
many very fine Lines in this Play, yet Comedy seems much more the Bent of our
Author's Genius than Tragedy; though it must be confessed, that in the
Multiplicity of his Incidents he has followed only the Example of our native
Poets, which may well excuse him. Before this Play we have a Discourse of the
Lawfulness and Unlawfulness of Plays; lately written (as the Title says) in
French, by the Learned Father Caffara, Divinity Professor at Paris. Sent in a
Letter to the Author, by a Divine of the Church of England.

Europe's Revels for the Peace, and his Majesty's happy Return, a Musical
Interlude, 4 to. 1697. performed at the Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields,
by his Majesty's Servants, at the King's Return after the Conclusion of the
Peace; with a Panegyrical Poem, spoken there, on the same Occasion. The Music
set by Mr. Eccles. Dedicated to Sir Theodore Ianssen.

Mary, Countess of Pembroke.
THis Lady (accidentally omitted by the Printer) was that Sister to Sir Philip
Sidney, to whom he dedicates his famed Arcadia, she was the only Woman, almost,
that had the Generosity to be a true Patroness to Poetry; for such she was to
Mr. Samuel Daniel, who had been her Tutor, we have had many Pretenders to the
Muses of that Sex, but I do not remember that I have read of any one, that
having Power, did ever exert it in the Encouragement and Patronage of any
particular Poet, or Poetry in general. It Is true indeed, the Catalogue of Men
that have done it, is far from being numerous, though this may be said of them,
which cannot of our little Politicians, That they have been the greatest Men of
their Age, and perhaps of any Age. She published one Play, which Mr. Langbain
could never procure a Sight of; it is entitled.

Antonius, or, The Tragedy of Anthony; 8 vo. 1695. This is a Translation out of
French; though it was very well for a Lady of those times, but in nothing so
desirable, as Mr. Langbain seems to make it, only because the Work of a Person
of Qu^lity; for he has always a furious Tender for Quality.

William Philips, Esquire
A Gentleman, as we find by the Epistle Dedicatory, that had his Education in
Ireland; he has given us a Play, called,

The Revengeful Queen, a Tragedy, as it was acted at the Theater Royal, by his
Majesty's Servants, School. The Story, he tells you, is taken from the fourth or
fifth Page of Machiavel's History of Florence; and he seems sensible, that the
Characters of Alboino, and Rosamund are not agreeable to the present Taste of
the Town; and that Sir William D'Avenant has writ a Play on the same Subject.

THis Prolifick Lady has again gratified the Town with a Play, called

The Deceiver Deceived, a Comedy, as it is now acted by his Majesty's Servants,
at the Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields, 4 to. School. and dedicated to Sir
Robert Marsham, Knight and Baronet. This Play and The Impostor Cheated, are on
the same Bottom, built on a little printed Story of the same Subject. I think
the Scene where the Blind Man's Wife make's Love before his Face, is better
managed in Mr. Powel's Play, than here, though in general, this is the better
Play.

Queen Catharine; or, The Ruins of Love, a Tragedy, 4 to. School. acted at the
Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields; and dedicated to the Honorable Mrs.
Cook of Norfolk. For the Plot consult Baker, Speed, Stow, in the Lives of
Edward the Fourth, and Henry the Sixth.

Mr. Rivers.
ALL that I know of this Author, is but on Report; which is^ that he was a
Jesuit, and writ a Play, called,

The Traitor, which he put into Mr. Shirley's Hands, and by his means it was
acted. It was revived in 1692. and dedicated by the Anonymous Reviver to the
Earl of Clincarty. Though I cannot, with the Reviver, say it is the best Tragedy
this Age has produced, because it is far from being so; yet this I can justly
say, That the Character of Sciarrah is very well drawn, and distinguished
throughout the Play; and so is that of Lorenzo. As for the Plot, it is very
irregular, and consists of various Actions; though the Poet's Design seems to aim
at a very good Moral. The strange Humor that has too long reigned in our
English Poets, misled the Author, I suppose, to the Choice of such barbarous
and bloody Murders, to fill up his Play; which however frequent and tolerable
in Italy, have nothing to do here. Murder is too great a Crime to see
voluntarily committed on our Stage; the Law punishes it with Ignominy, though the
Poet has nothing to do with it, I meanby Right. This Play has gone for
Shirley's.

Tho. Shadwell, Esquire
ONE Play of this Author's has been accidentally omitted in its proper Place,
viz.

The Vertuoso, a Comedy, 4 to. 1679. acted at the Duke's Theater; and dedicated
to the late Duke of Newcastle. This Play, for the great Variety of Characters,
etc. has always found Success, and is accounted one of the best Plays this
Author writ.

Ia. Shirley.
THis one Play was by Accident overseen in its proper Place, an^ therefore
inserted here:

The Triumphs of Peace, a Masque, 4 to.^ 1633. presented before the King and
Queen at White Hall, by the Four Honorable Houses, or Inns of Court Gentlemen;
dedicated by the Author to the Four Equal Honorable Societies of the Inns of
Court. The Masquers went in a solemn Cavalcade (their Habits being
extraordinary Rich) from Ely-House in Holbourn, to White Hall. Mr. Inigo Jones
contrived the Scenes and Ornaments: and Mr. Laws and Mr. Ioes composed the
Music.

Mrs. Catharine Trother.
THis Lady, by her Parents, is of Scotch Extraction, though born and bred in
England; admirable for two things rarely found together, Wit and Beauty; and
with these a Penetration very uncommon in the Sex. She discovers in her
Conversation, a Fineness and Nicety of Reasoning on the highest Metaphysical
Subjects; nor is she less entertaining on the more Gay and Conversible. She has
already given us two Plays, which challenge our Admiration, we like the first,
but are transported with the last; there is the Chastity of her Person, and the
Tenderness of her Mind in both; the Passions are natural and moving, the style
just and familiar, and adapted to the Subject; if there be not the Sublime,
it is because there was no room for it, not because she had not Fire and Genius
enough to write it. What I say will be secured from the Imputation of Flattery,
by what she has writ; and it is the Brevity I have proposed my self in this
Undertaking, that confines me to this little, and obliges me to proceed to her
Plays.

Agnes de Castro, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1696. acted at the Theater Royal, and
dedicated to the Ri^ht Honorable, Charles, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, etc.
This Play met with good Suc^ess. It Is built on a Novel of the same Title,
written Originally in French, by a French Lady, and translated into English by
Mrs. Behn.

Fatal Friendship, a Tragedy, as it is acted at the new Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, School. and dedicated to her Royal Highness the Princess of
Denmark. I need say nothing of this Play, the Town has prevented my
Approbation; and I can only add, that I think it deserved the Applause it met
with, which every Play that has the Advantage of being Clapped, cannot get from
the severer and abler Judges.

William Walker.
A Young Gentleman of about Nineteen Years of Age, he was born (if I Am not
mis-inform'd) in the Isle of Barbados, and of a good Family, his Education was
most in England; he ha^ published one Play, called,

Victorious Love, a Tragedy, as it is acted at the Theater Royal Drury Lane,
School. 4 to. and dedicated to the Honorable James Kendal, Esquire one of the Lords
of the Admiralty. He tells us in the Preface, that he acted a part himself in
his Play, which I suppose was not Disadvantage to it: for it was, as we learn
from the same Preface, well received by the Town. The Play seems to be a kind
of Imitation of Oroonoko, only here instead of one, they are all Negro^s. But,
if they think the Devil white, methinks she should scarce be so very Amiable in
their Eyes; but under this Censure Imoinda would equally fall; and it is very
excusable in so young a Beginner as Mr. Walker. I only say it, for fear the
Public should go on, and we see nothing but Black Heroes for the Future, since
the Color spreads so fast on the Stage. The Greek Poets seldom went out of
Greece for their Heroes; but ours on the contrary, find Heroes every where but
in their own Country; this is no Arg^ment of their Judgment or Virtue; for if
Example be that they would instruct by, the nearer the Example is related to
us, the more force it will naturally have upon us.

Fulk Grevile, Lord Brook.
THis Right Honorable Author was Son to Sir Fulk Grevile the Elder of
Beauchamp-Court in Warwickshire; he left Cambridge in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; was made a Baron in the Seventeenth Year of King James the First;
and was famous for Valor and Learning: among other Poems he gave us two Plays:
He lies buried in Warwick-Church under a Black and White Marble, on which he is
styled Servant to Queen Elizabeth, Counselor to King James, and Friend to Sir
Philip Sidney. See more of him in Fuller's History.

Alaham, a Tragedy, fol. 1633. This Play is built on the Model of the Ancients;
the Prologue is spoken by a Ghost, and the Spectre gives an Account of each
Character. The Scene of the Drama lies at the Entrance of the Persian Gulf, of
which Place you may read in Mr. Herbert's Travels, fol. the Third Edition, p.
114.

Mustapha, a Tragedy, 4 to. 1609. fol. 1633. This Play seems also an Imitation
of the Ancients, and for the Plot consult Paulus Iovius, and other Turkish
Chronicles.

These Two Plays are printed together with other Poems of his Lordships, in
fol. 1633. The Life of Sir Philip Sidney before his Arcadia, is said to be
written by this our Author; as also another Volume of Poems and Remains, 8 vo.
not printed till the Year 1670.

UNKNOWN AUTHORS.
AMPHITRYON, Epidicus, and Rudens, made English from Plautus, with Critical
Remarks upon each Play. This Translation is supposed to be done by a Divine of
the Church of England; but since he has not thought fit to put his Name to it,
I shall not presume to do it. It Is dedicated to Sir Charles Sidley, Baronet.

The Fatal Discovery; or, Love in Ruins, a Tragedy, as it is acted by his
Majesty's Servants, at the Theater Royal, School. The Author of this Play is
unknown, it is ushered into the World by a Preface under Mr. Powel's Name, in
Answer to a Copy of Verses writ by Mr. Dryden, in which there was some
Reflections on that Theater. The Story is originally a Case of Conscience put
by St. Austin; and after that mentioned in some of our English Divines. It
seems to be taken from the hint of the old Story of Oedipus; but it is more
improbable, and scarce possible to happen, and therefore of no Use, as
incapable of affording any Moral.

The Pindar of Wakefield, a Comedy, 4 to. 1633. This Play was through mistake,
omitted in transcribing the Copy for the Press.

Terence, this Latin Poet is translated by the Translator of the former, in
Conjunction with two other Divines of Cambridge. I Am sensible the Translators
understood the Original very well, but their altering the Terminations of the
Proper Names, would make some think that they had taken it only from the French
of Madam Dacier.

The Unnatural Mother; the Scene in the Kingdom of Siam, as it is now acted at
the new Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, by his Majesty's Servants; written by a
young Lady, 4 to. School. This Play is an Argument of the Strange Chance of
Plays, when so indigested a heap could be tollerably received; and I think it is
a great Argument against those judges who receive and permit the Plays to be
acted: For I am unwilling that the Nakedness of our Country should be
discovered; that is, that an Audience could bear such as this, and some other
of a Modern Date. The Writers now (I mean all that attempt Writing) think if
they can make a horrid Character or two in a Play, and some bloody and
barbarous Incidents, they can presently write a Tragedy, never reflecting that
a Poet is not to be a Hangman, he is not to rival Jack Ketch in his Office, and
rob the public Executioners of their Business, by ending a Criminal privately,
who ought to have a Public and most infamous Execution. Where the Laws condemn
a Villain to the Gibbet, the Poet has nothing to do, such Characters are below
the Stage, and ought to appear no where but on the Cart, and in the Ordinary's
Paper. The Poets Court of Justice is more sublime, he examines and punishes
Crimes that the Political Courts overlook. He is not to make Characters more
depraved than Experience ever showed us; for I Am confident Callapeia never had
her Fellow, on this side the Line at least, and for the Vices of those of the
other, I know nothing that we have to do with them, (having Stock enough of our
own) and it is with abundance of Reason, called, The Unnatural Mother; for sure
there never was such an one in Nature. Bebbemeah's being put on the Couch with
a Black Slave, and there found asleep, is borrowed from Mr. Settle's Incident
of Cleomira, and Oirantes, in the Princess of Persia.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF PLAYS, Referring to the AUTHORS.
A
ABdelazar Page 8 Abdicated Prince 156 Abraham's Sacrifice ibid. Acolastus 110
Acteon and Diana 28 Ad^lphi 11 Adrasta 81 Adventures of Five Hours 141
Agamemnon 138 Aglaura ibid. Agrippa K. of Alba 31 Agrippina Empress of Rome 96
Alarm for London ibid. Albion 156 Albion's Triumph ibid. Albion and Albianius
41 Albion K. of the Lombards 33 Albertus Wallenstine 64 Albovine 33 Albumazar
156 Alchimist 77 Alcibiades 107 Alexander and Campaspe 87 Alexandrian Tragedy 4
All Fools 18 All for Love 41 All Mistaken 75 All for Money 88 Alphonsus,
Emperor Germany 18 Alphonsus K. of Arragon * 152 Alphonso K. of Naples 113
All Is lost by Lust 118 All Is well that ends well 126 Amazon Queen 147 Ambitious
Statesman 18 Ambitious Slave 122 Amboyna 41 Amends for Ladies 55 Amorous Bigote
124 Amorous Fantasm 88 Amorous Gallant 156 Amorous Old Woman ibid. Amorous
Prince 8 Amorous War 90 Amphitryon 41 Amyntas 31,62,119,115,116. Anatomist 115
Andrea 11,73 Andromache 28 Andromana 153 Andronicus 156 Andronicus Commenius
149 Anthony and Cleopatra 126,134 Antigone 96 Antonia and Melida 93 Antipodes
13 Antiquary 93 Any thing for a quiet Life 98 Apocraphal Ladies 105 Apollo
Shroving 154 Appius and Virginia 146 Arcadia 132 Arden of Feversham 157 Argalus
and Parthenia 64 Ariadne 152 Aristippus 115 Arraignment of Paris 129,157 Arthur
141 Arviragus and Philicia 15 As you like it 127 Assignation 41 Astraea 148
Atheist 108 Atheists Tragedy 142 Aureng-zebe 41
B
BAll 131 Band, Ruff, and Cuff 157 Banditti 49 Banished Duke 157 Bartholomew
Fair 77 Bashful Lover 94,151 Bastard 157 Battle of Alcazar ibid. Beauties
Triumph 48 Beggars Bush 57 Bell in Campo 105 Bellamira 134 Bellamira, her Dream
33 Belphegor 149 Benefice 148 Bird in a Cage 131 Birth of Merlin 127 Black
Prince 11 Blazing World 105 Blind Beggar of Alexandria 18 Blind Beggar of
Bednal Green 35 Blind Lady 75 Bloody Banquet * 152 Bloody Brother 57 Bloody
Duke 157 Blurt, Mr. Constable 98,157 Boadicea 74 Boarding-School, see Love for
Money Bondsman 94 Bonduca 28,157 Bragadocio 157 Brazen-Age 70 Brenoralt 138
Bridals 105 Bride 102 Britannia Triumphans 33 Broken Heart 61 Brothers 131
Brutus of Alba 113,139 Bury Fair 124 Bussy D'Amboys's Revenge 18,49 Bussy
D'Amboys's Tragedy 18 Byron's Conspiracy ibid. Byron's Tragedy ibid.
C
CAElum Britannicum 15 Caesar Borgia 85 Caesar and Pompey 18 Caesar's Revenge
157 Caius Marius 108 Calisto 29 Calligula ibid. Cambyses, K. of Persia 113,122
Canterbury Guests 116 Captain 57 Cardinal 131 Careless Lovers 116 Careless
Shepherdess 64 Carnival 112 Case is altered 81 Cataline's Conspiracy 77 Chabbot
Admiral of France 131 Challenge at Tilt 77 Challenge for Beauty 70 Chances 57
Changes 131 Changling 98 Charles VIII. of France 29 Chaste Maid in Cheapside 98
Cheats 149 Cheats of Scapin 108 Christ's Passion 121 Christmas Masque 77
Christian turned Turk 35 Christmas Ordinary 152 Cicilia and Clorinda 83 Cid 119
Cinthia and Endymion 49 Circe 35 Citherea 134 City Bride 67 City Heiress 9 City
Lady 38 City Madam 94 City Match 90 City Night Cap 35 City Politics 29 City
Wit 13 Citizen turned Gent. 116 Claricella 83 Cleomenes 43 Cleopatra 96
Cloridia 78 Clouds 137 Cobblers Prophecy 149 Colas Fury 14 Combat of Caps 158
Combat of Love and Friendship 97 Comedy of Errors 127 Comical Hash 105
Committee 75 Committee Man Curried 130 Commons Conditions 158 Common Wealth of
Women 49 Conflict of Conscience 149 Conquest of China 122 Conquest of Granada
43 Conspiracy 82,147 Constantine the Great 85 Constant Maid 132 Constant Nymph
158 Contented Cuckold 13 Contention between York and Lancaster 158 Contention
for Honor and Riches 132 Contention for Achil. Armr. ibid. Convent of Pleasure
105 Coriolanus 127 Cornish Comedy 158 Coronation 58,132 Coronation of Q. Eliz.
153,158 Costly Whore 158 Covent Garden 103 Covent Garden Weeded 13 Counterfeit
Bridegroom 158 Counterfeits ibid. Country Captain 104 Country Girl 12 Country
Innocence 85 Country Wake 39 Country Wife 150 Country Wit 29 Courageous Turk 64
Court Beggar 13 Court Secret 132 Coxcomb 58 Craesus 4 Gromwel's Life and Death
127 Cromwell's Couspiracy page 158 Cruel Brother 33 Cruel Debtor 159 Cuckold's
Haven 139 Cunning Lovers 12 Cupid and Death 132 Cupid's Revenge 58 Cupid's
Whirligig 159 Cure for a Cuckold 147 Custom of the Country 58 Cutter of
Coleman-street 27 Cymbeline's Tragedy 127 Cynthia's Revels 78 Cynthia's Revenge
137 Cyrus King of Persia 159 Cyrus the Great 6
D
DAme Dobson 116 Damoyselle 13 Damoysell's A-la-mode 56 Damon and Pythias 159
Darius 4,159 Darius, King of Persia 29 David and Bethshabe 110 Debauchee 159
Deorum Dona 8 Deserving Favorite 15 Destruction of Jerusalem 29,159
Destruction of Troy 6 Devil's an Ass 78 Devil's Charter 7 Devil's Law-case 147
Devil of a Wife 76 Dick Scorner 159 Dido Q. of Carthage 92,104 Disappointment
135 Disobedient Child 77 Distracted State 140 Distresses 33 Distressed
Innocence 122 Divine Comedian 141 Divine Masque 159 Doctor Dodipole 92 Doctor
Faustus Doctor Faustus's Life and Death, with the Humors, of Harlequin and
Scaramouch 102 Don Carlos 108 Don Quixot 50 Don Sebastian 44 Double Dealer 22
Double Marriage 58 Doubtful Heir 132 Duke and no Duke 139 Duke Guise 144 Duke
of Lerma, see Great Favorite. Duke of Millain 82,95 Duke's Mistress 132 Dumb
Knight 95 Dumb Lady 85 Dutch Courtezan 93 Dutch Lover 9 Duchess Malfey 147
Duchess of Suffolk 70
E
EAstward Hoe 19 Edgar 120 Edward I. 110 Edward II. 92 Edward III. 159 -- with
the Fall of Mortimer ib. Edward IV. 70 Elder Brother 58 Electra 154 Elvira 159
Emperor of the East 95 Emperor of the Moon 9 Empress of Morocco 123,159
Enchanted Lovers 88 Endymion 87 ^^glish Friar 29 ^^^lish Lawyer 116 English Men
for Money 159 English Monsieur 75 English Moor 13 English Princess 160 English
Rogue 141 English Traveller 70 Enough's as good as a Feast 160 Entertainment of
the K. and Q. at High-Gate page 78 Entertainment of the K. of Engl. and Denm.
at Theobalds 78 Entertainment at K. James I. Coronation ibid. Entertainment of
K. James I. and Q. Ann at Theobalds ibid. Entertainment of the Q. and Prince at
Althrop 33 Entertainment on the Prince's Birthday 103 Epsom Wells 124 AEsop
143 Erminia 56 Evening's Love 45 Every Man in his Humor 78 Every Man out of
his Humor ibid. Every Wom. in her Humor 159 Eunuchus 11 Example 132
Excommunicated Prince 8 Extravagant Shepherd 152
F
FActious Citizen 160 Fair Em ibid. Fair Favorite 34 Fair Irene 139 Fair Maid
of Bristow 160 Fair Maid of the Exchange 70 Fair Maid of the Inn 58 Fair Maid
of the West 70 Fair Quarrel 98 Fair Queen 160 Faithful Shepherd ibid. Faithful
Shepherdess 58 False Favorite disgraced 160 False Count 9 False one 58 Family
in Love 98 Fancies 61 Fancies Chaste and Noble 61 Fancies Festivals 81 Fatal
Contract 68 Fatal Dowry page 95 Fatal Iealousy 160 Fatal Love 123 Fatal
Marriage 135 Fatal Mistake 68 Fawn 93 Feigned Astrologer 160 Feigned Courtezans
9 Female Academy 105 Female Prelate 123 Femal Vertuoso 149 Ferrex and Porrex
107 Fidele and Fortunatus 160 Fine Companion 93 Fleir 130 Floating Island 137
Flora's Vagaries 160 Folly of Priestcraft 160 Fond Husband 50 Fond Lady 160
Fool turned Critic 50 Fool would be a Favorite 15 Fools Preferment 50 Forced
Marriage Fortunate Isles 78 Fortunatus 36 Fortunate by Land and Sea 70 Fortune
Hunters 16 Four London Prentices 70 Four Plays, or Moral Representations 58
Four P's 69 Four Plays in one 58 Fox 81 Free Will 161 French Conjurer 152
Friendship in Fashion 108 Friar Bacon 67 Fulgius and Lucrelle 161
G
GAlathea 87 Game at Chess 198 Gamester 132 Gam. Gurton's Needle 152 Generous
Enemies 26 Gentle-Craft page 161 Gentleman Dancing Master 150 Gentleman of
Venice 132 Gentleman of Verona 129 Gentleman Usher 18 Ghost 161 Glass of
Government 63 Gloriana 85 Goblins 138 Golden Age 70 Golden Age Restored 78
Gorboduc 107 Grateful Servant 132 Great Duke of Florence 95 Great Favorite 75
Green's Tu Quoque 26 Greenwich Park 102 Grim, the Collier of Croyden 153 Gripus
and Hegio 8 Guardian 27,95 Guy of Warwick 151 Guzman 11
H
HAmlet Prince of Denmark 127 Hannibal and Scipio 103 Heautontimorumenos 11
Hector of Germany 134 Hectors 114 Hecyra 11 Heir 97 Heir of Morocco 123 Hell's
Higher Court of Justice 152 Henry II. 5 Henry III. of France 130 Henry IV. 127
Henry V. 11.121 Henry VI. ibid. Henry VI. Part 1. with the Death of the D. of
Gloucester 29 Henry VI. Part 2. or, The Miseries of Civil War 30 Henry VIII.
127 Heraclius 15 Hercules Furens 69 Hercules Oetus page 138 Hero and Leander
137 Herod and Antipater 92,120 Herod and Mariamne 112 Herod the Great 11
Heroic Love 16,66 Hey for Honesty 115 Hic and Ubique 68 Histriomastix 161
Hoffman's Tragedy ibid. Hog has lost his Pearl 141 Hollander 64 Holland's
Leaguer 93 Honest Lawyer 153 Honest Man's Fortune 58 Honest Whore 36 Honoria
and Mammon 132 Honor of Wales Horace 26,111 Horatius 88 How to choose a good
Wife from a Bad 161 Humorous Courtier 133 Humorous Days Mirth 18 Humorous
Lieutenant 58 Humorous Lovers 104 Humorists 124 Humor out of Breath 35
Huntingdon's Divertisement 151 Husband his own Cuckold 47 Hyde Park 132
Hymenaei 78 Hymen's Triumph 32 Hyppolitus 114,138
I
Jack Drum's Entertainment 161 Jack Iugler ibid. Jack Straw's Life and Death
ibid. Jacob and Esau 162 James the Fourth ibid. Ibrahim 111,123 Ibrahim XIII.
Emperor of the Turks. 111 Jealous Lovers 115 Ieronymo 162 Jew of Malta page 92
Iew's Tragedy 69 If this been't a good Play, the Devil's in it 36 If you know
not me, you know no Body 71 Ignoramus * 152 Impatient Poverty 162 Imperial
Tragedy Imperiale 83,165 Imposture 133 Enchanted Lovers 88 Indian Emperor 45
Indian Queen 75 Ingratitude of a Commonwealth 139 Injured Lovers 102 Injured
Princess 50 Inner Temple Masque 99 Innocent Mistress 111 Innocent Usurper 6
Insatiate Countess 93 Interlude of Youth 162 Intreagues of Versailles 50
Iocasta 63 John the Evangel. 162 John K. of England 125 John and Matilda 35
Joseph 65 Ioseph's Afflictions Jovial Crew 13,162 Irish Masque 79 Iron Age 70
Island Princess 58 Isle of Gulls 35 Italian Husband 116 Iuliana Princess of
Poland 30 Julius Caesar 4,128 Just General 91 Just Italian 34
K
KIng Arthur 45 Kind Keeper ibid. King and no King 59 King Edgar and Alfreda
117,162 King Lear and his 3 Daughters, see Lear K. of England. King and Queen's
Entertainment at Richmond 162 King's Entertainmen at Welbeck 79 Knack to know
an Honest Man 162 Knack to know a Knave ibid. Knave in Grain 163 Knavery in all
Trades ibid. Knight of the Burning Pestle 59 Knight of the Golden-Shield, see
St. Clyomon Knight of Malta 59
L
LAdy Alimony 163 Lady Contemplation 105 Lady Errant 16 Lady of Pleasure 133
Ladies Privilege 64 Ladies Trial 61 Lancash. Witches 71,124 Landgartha 14 Late
Revolution 163 Law against Lovers 34 Law Tricks 36 Laws of Candy 59 Laws of
Nature 163 Lear's Tragedy 128,140 Levellers levelled 163 Liberality and
Prodigality ibid. Libertine 124 Like will to like, quoth the Devil to the
Collier 63 Lingua 163 Little French Lawyer 59 Locrine 128 London Chanticleers
163 London Cuckolds 117 London Prodigal 128 Longer thou liv'st, the more Fool
thou art 146 Look about you 163 Looking-glass for London and England page 67,88
Lost Lady 163 Lost Lover 91 Love A-la-mode 163 Love and Honor 24 Love for Love
22 Love for Money 51 Love and Revenge 123 Love and War 97 Love Crowns the End
140 Love freed from Ignorance 79 Love only for Love's Sake 55 Love in a Tub 53
Love in a Wood 150 Love in its Ecstasy 110 Love in the Dark 54 Love Restored 79
Lovesick Court 13 Lovesick King 12 Love Tricks 133 Love Triumphant 45 Love's
Adventures 105 Love's Cruelty ibid. Love's Cure 59 Love's Dominion 56 Love's a
Jest 101 Love's Kingdom Ibid. Love's Labor lost 128 Love's Labyrinth 62 Love's
Last Shift 20 Love's Loadstone 163 Loves of Mars and Venus ibid. Love's Triumph
through Calipolis 79 Lovers Melancholy 61 Lovers Progress 59 Lovers Metamorphosis
87 Lovers Mistress 71 Lovers Pilgrimage 59 Lovers Riddle 28 Lovers Sacrifice 61
^overs Triumph 26 Lovers Victory 17 Lovers Welcome 79 Loving Enemies page 89
Loyal Brother 135,142 Loyal General 140 Loyal Lovers 91 Loyal Subject 59 Lucius
Iunius Brutus 85 Lucky Chance 9 Luminalia 163 Lusts Dominion 92 Lusty Iuventus
146 Liar, see Mistaken Beauty
M
MAckbeth 128 Mad Couple well matched 13 Mad World my Masters 99 Mad Lover 59
Madam Fickle 51 Magnetic Lady 79 Maid of Honor 95 Maid in the Mill 59 Maiden
Queen, see Secret Love. Maidenhead well lost 71 Maid's Metamorphosis 87 Maids
of Moorclack 4 Maid's Revenge 133 Maid's Tragedy 59,146 Malcontent 93 Mall *
152 Mamamouchi, see Cit. tur^'d Gent. Manhood and Wisdom 164 Man of Mode 53 Man
of New Market 74 Man's the Master 34 Marriage A-la-mode 46 Marriage Broker 154
Marriage Hater matched 51 Marriage Night 55 Marriage of Oceanus and Britannia
57 Marriage of the Arts 72 Marriage of Wit and Science 164 Married Beau 30
Mariam 14 Marcelia 11 Marcus Tullius Cicero 164 Marius and Scilla, see Wounds
of Civil War. Martyr 88 Martyred Soldier 131 Mary Magdalen's Repentance 145
Mary, Q. of Scotland; see Island Queens. Masque at Berthie 21 Masque at the
Lord Haddington's House 79 Masque at Lord Hayes House 79 Masque at Ludlow
Castle 100 Masque of Augurs 79 Masque of Flowers 164 Masque of Gray's Inn 59
Masque of Owls 79 Masque of Queens ibid. Masque of the Middle Temple and
Lincoln's Inn Gent. 19 Masquerade du Ciel 153 Massacree at Paris 86,92 Massacree
of Paris Massianello 164 Master Anthony 11 Master Turbulent 164 Match at
Midnight 118 Match me in London 36 Match in Newgate, see Revenge. Matrimonial
Trouble 105 May Day 19 Mayor of Quinborough 99 Measure for Measure 128 Medea
130,138 Menechmus 155 Merchant of Venice 128 Mercurius Britannicus 164 Mercury
vindicated Merry Devil of Edmonton 164 Merry Milk-maids Merry Wives of Windsor
Messalina 118 Metamorphosed Gypsies 79 Michaelmas Term 99 Microcosmus 103 Midas
page 87 Midsummer Night's Dream 128 Mirza 8 Miser 125 Miseries of Civil War,
see Henry VI. Part 2. Miseries of enforced Marriage 147 Mistaken Beauty 164
Mistakes; or, False Reports 67 Mistaken Husband 45 Mithridates 66 Mock Duellist
* 151 Mock Marriage 121 Mock Tempest 48 Mock Thyestes 149 Monsieur D'Olive 19
Monsieur Thomas 59 Money is an Ass 81 More Dissemblers besides Women 99 Morning
Ramble 164 Mortimer's Fall 79 Mother Bomby 87 Mother Shipton's Life and Death
141 Mourning Bride 22 Mucedorus 164 Much ado about nothing 128 Mulberry Garden
134 Muleasses the Turk 94 Muse of New Market 164 Muses Looking-glass 115
Mustapha 11
N
NAture's 3 Daughters 105 Neglected Virtue 165 Neptune's Triumph Nero's Life
and Death 86,165 New Custom 165 New Exchange 13 New Inn 81 New Trick to cheat
the Devil New Market Fair 165 New Way to pay old Debts 95 News from Plymouth
page 34 News from the World in the Moon 80 Nice Valor 59 Nice Wanton 165
Nicomede 31 Night Walker 59 Noah's Flood 53 Noble Gentleman ibid^ Noble
Ingratitude 88 Noble Spanish Soldier 119 Noble Stranger 129 No Body and Some
Body 165 Novelty 101 No Wit, no Help like a Woman's 99 Northern Lass 13
Northward-hoe 36 Novella 13
O
OBeron the Fairy Prince 80 Obstinate Lady 21 Octavia 107 Oedipus 46,104 Old
Batchelour 25 Old Castle's History 128 Old Couple 97 Old Law 95,99 Old Man's
Lesson 12 Old Troop 85 Old Wives Tale 165 Opportunity 133 Ordinary 17 Orestes
64 Orgula 154 Orlando Eurioso 165 Ormasdes 83 Oroonoko 135 Orphan 108 Osmund
the great Turk 15 Othello 128 Ovid 21
P
PAllantus and Eudora 82 Pandora 83 Pan's Anniversary page 80 Parliament of
Bees 26 Parson's Wedding 83 Passionate Lover 15 Pastor Fido 55 Pathomachia 166
Patient Grisle ibid. Patrick for Ireland 133 Pausanias ibid. Pedlar's Prophecy
166 Peleus and Thetis 76 Pericles Prince of Tire 128 Perjured Nun 12 Perkin
Warbeck 61 Philaster 60 Phillis of Scyros 153 Philotas 32 Philotus Scotch 166
Phoenix 99 Phoenix in her Flames 88 Phormio 11 Picture 95 Pilgrim 60,83 Pinder
of Wakefield. Piso's Conspiracy 166 Pity she is a Whore 61 Platonic Lovers 34
Playhouse to be Let ibid. Play between John the Husband, and Tib his Wife 69
Play betwixt the Pardoner and the Friar, the Curate and Neighbor Prat ibid.
Play of Gentleness and Nobility ibid. Play of Love ibid. Play of the Weather
ibid. Plain Dealer 150 Pleasure at Kenelworth Castle 63 Pleasure reconciled to
Virtue 80 Plot and no Plot 38 Plutus * 151 Poetaster 80 Politician 133
Politician Cheated 66 Pompey 111 Pompey his Fair Cornelias. 84 Poor Man's
Comfort 35 Poor Scholar 104 Pragmatical Jesuit 16 Presbyterian Lash 166
Presence 105 Prince of Prigg's Revels 153 Princess 83 Princess of Cleve 86
Prisoners 83 Projectors 149 Promises of God manifested 166 Promus and Cassandra
ibid. Prophetess 60 Provoked Wife 144 Psyche 125 Psyche Debauched 14 Public
Wooing 106 Puritan Widow 128
Q.
QUeen 166 Queen and Concubine 13 Queen of Arragon 67 Queen of Corinth 60
Queen's Arcadia 32 Queen's Exchange 13 Queen's Masque of Beauty 80 Queen's
Masque of Blackness ib. Querer per Solo querer, see To Love only for Love's
Sake
R.
RAging Turk 65 Ram Alley 8 Rambling Justice 85 Rampant Alderman 167 Rape ibid.
Rape of Lucrece 71 Rebellion 117 Reformation 167 Rehearsal ibid. Religious 106
Religious Rebel 167 Renegado 95 Return from Parnassus 167 Revenge page 167
Regulus 20 Revenge for Honor 19 Revengers Tragedy, see Loyal Brother Reward of
Virtue 62 Rhodon and Iris 84 Richard the Second 128,140 Richard the Third 128
Richmond Heiress 52 Rival Friends 68 Rival Kings 7 Rival Ladies 46 Rival Queens
86 Rival Sisters 65 Rivals 167 Roaring Girl 99 Robert, ^Earl of Huntingdon's
Downfall and Death 71 Robin Conscience ibid. Robin Hood's Pastoral May-games 167
Robin Hood and his Crew of Soldiers ibid. Roman Actor 96 Roman Empress 82 Roman
Generals 39 Romeo and Juliet 129 Rome's Follies 151 Romulus and Hersilia 167
Roundheads 9 Rover ibid. Royal Cuckold ibid. Royalist 52 Royal King and Loyal
Subject 71 Royal Masque at Hampton Court 168 Royal Master 133 Royal Mischief 91
Royal Shepherdess 125 Royal Slave 17 Royal Voyage 168 Rule a Wife, and have a
Wife 60 Rump 140
S.
SAcrifice page 54 Sad One 138 Sad Shepherd 80 Saint Cicely 151 Salmacida
Spolia 168 Sampson Agonistes 100 Sapho and Phaon 87 Satyromastix 136
Scaramouch, etc. 117 School of Complements, see Love Tricks Scornful Lady 60
Scots Figaries 140 Scottish Politic Presbyter 168 Scowrers 124 Sea Voyage 60
Seven Champions of Christendom 84 See me, and see me not 10 Sejanus's Fall 80
Selimus Emperor of the Turks 65 Selindra 83 Sertorius 5 Several Wits 106
Sforza, Duke of Millain 65 Sham Lawyer 40 She Gallants 66 She Ventures and he
Wins ibid. Shepherds Holyday 119 Shepherds Paradise 101 Shoomaker's a
Gentleman 118 Shoomakers Holiday ibid. Sicelides 168 Sicily and Naples * 152
Siege 17,33 Siege of Babylon 112 Siege of Constantinople 168 Siege of Memphis
52 Siege of Rhodes 34 Siege of Urbin 83 Silent Woman 80 Silver Age 70 Sir
Anthony Love 136 Sir Barnaby Whig 52 Sir Clyomon, Knight of the Golden Shield
169 Sir Courtly Nice 30 Sir Giles Goose-Cap 169 Sir Hercules Buffoon 85 Sir
Martin Mar-all 46 Sir Patient Fancy 9 Sir Solomon 169 Sisters 133 Six Days
Adventure 74 Slighted Maid 137 Sociable Companions 106 Sodom 56 Soliman and
Perseda 169 Sophister 37 Sophompaneos 65 Sophonisba 86,94 Sophy 37 Soldiers
Fortune 108 Spanish Bawd 169 Spanish Curate 60 Spanish Friar 46 Spanish Gypsies
99,118 Spanish Rogue 48 Spanish Wives 112 Sparagus Garden 13 Speeches at Prince
Henry's Barriers 80 Spightful Sister 5 Sport upon Sport 169 Springs Glory 103
Squire of Alsatia 124 Squire old Sap. 183 Staple of News 80 State of Innocence
46 Stepmother ibid. Strange Discovery 169 Subjects Joy ibid. Successful
Strangers 102 Sullen Lovers 124 Summers's Last Will and Testament 104 Sun's
Darling 62 Supposes 63 Surprisal 75 Susanna's Tears 169 Swaggering Damoiselle
p. 17 Swetnam the Woman-hater arraigned 169
T.
TAle of a Tub 80 Tamberlain the Great 92, 121 Taming of the Shrew 129 Tancred
and Gismond 148 Tartuff 97 Tarugo's Wiles 120 Tempe restored 170 Tempest 47,129
Temple 19 Temple of Love 34 Terrence's Comedies 73 The longer thou liv'st, the
more Fool thou art 146 Thebais 106 Theodosius 86 Thersytes 21,170 Thomaso 83
Thornby Abbey 155 Thracian Wonder 147 Three Ladies of London 155 Thyerry and
Theodoret 60 Thyestes 29,69,149 Tiberius (Claudius, Nero) 170 Time vindicated
to himself and to his Honors 80 Timolion 170 Timon of Athens 125,129 It Is pity
she is a Whore 61 Titus Andronicus 117,129 Titus and Berenice 108 Tom Essence
170 Tom Tyler and his Wife ibid Tottenham Court 103 Town Fop 10 Town Shifts 117
Trapolin supposed a Prince 21 Travels of Three English Brothers 36 Traitor page
133 Traitor to himself 170 Treacherous Brother 113 Trick for Trick 52 Trick to
catch the Old One 99 Triumph of Beauty 133 Triumph of Love and Antiquity 99
Triumph of Peace 179 Triumph of the Prince D'Amour 34 Triumphs of Virtue 170
Triumphant Widow 105 Troades 130,152 Troas 69,153 Troylus and Cressida 47,129
True Trojans 170 True Widow 125 Trial of Chivalry 170 Trial of Treasure ibid.
Tryphon 11 Tunbridge Wells 171 Twelfth Night 129 Twins 118 Two angry Women of
Abington 112 Two Noble Kinsmen 60 Two Tragedies in One 150 Two Wise Men, and
all the rest Fools 19 Tide Tarrieth for no Man 146 Tyrannical Government 171
Tyranick Love 47
V.
VAlentinian 60 Valiant Scot 154 Valiant Welchman 151 Varieties 105 Venice
preserved 108 Very Good Wife 113 Very Woman 96 Vestal Virgin 75 Vilain 112
Virgin Martyr page 96 Virgin Widow 114 Virtuoso 178 Virtuous Octavia 12
Virtuous Wife 52 Virtue betrayed 7 Vision of Delight 81 Vision of the Twelve
Goddesses 32 Unfortunate Lovers 103 Unfortunate Mother 382 U^fortunate
Shepherd 142 Unfortunate Usurper 171 Ungrateful Favorite ibid. Unhappy Fair
Irene 139 Unhappy Favorite 7 Unhappy Kindness 122 Unnatural Brother 56
Unnatural Combat 96 Unnatural Tragedy 106 Untrussing the Humorous Poet, see
Satyromastix. Volunteers 125 Vow-breaker 120 Usurper 74 Vulpone, see Fox
W
WAlks of Illington and Hogsden 81 Wandering Lover 98 Warning for fair Women 171
War^ Widow 72 Weakest goes to the Wall 171 Wealth and Health ibid. Wedding 134
Westward-hoe 37 What you will 94 When you see me you know me 119 White Devil
147 Whore of Babylon 37 Wi^t's History ibid. Widow 81 Widow Ranter 10 Widow's
Tears 19 Wife for a Month 60 Wild Gallant 47 Wild Goose-chase 60 Wily beguiled
171 Win her and take her 171 Wine, Beer, Ale, and Tobacco 171 Winters Tale 129
Wise Women of Hogsden 72 Witch of Edmonton 37,118 Wit at several Weapons 60 Wit
of a Woman 171 Wit in a Constable 64 Wit without Money 60 Wits 34 Wits Cabal
106 Wits led by the Nose 172 Witty Combat 152 Witty Fair one 134 Wives Excuse
136 Woman Captain 126 Woman Hater 61 Woman Hater Arraigned, see Swetnam Woman
in the Moon 87 Woman killed with Kindness 72 Woman turned Bully 172 Woman's a
Weathercock 55 Woman's Conquest 74 Woman's Prize 61 Woman will have her Will
172 Woman's Wit 20 Women beware Women 100 Woman pleased 61 Wonder of a K^^gdom
ibid. Wonder, a Woman never vexed 118 World tossed at Tennis 100 World in the
Moon 124 World's Idol * 151 Wrangling Lovers 117
Y.
YORKSHIRE Tragedy, 129 Young Admiral 134 Young King 10 Younger Brother ibid.
Your Five Gallants 100 Youth's Glory and Death's Banquet 106
The End of the Index.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Leigh, at the Peacock in Fleet Street.
FOLIO.
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: An Heroic Poem,
Dedicated to her most Sacred Majesty; in Ten Books: Attempted by Samuel Wesley,
M. A. Chaplain to the most Honorable, John, Lord Marquis of Normanby, and
Rector of Epworth, in the County of Lincoln. Each Book illustrated by necessary
Notes, explaining the more difficult Matters in the whole History: Also a
Prefatory Discourse concerning Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition, revised by
the Author, and improved with the Addition of a large Map of the Holy Land, and
a Table of the principal Matters: With Sixty Copper Plates, by the Celebrated
Hands of William Faithorne.

Resolves, Divine, Moral, and Political; with several New Additions, both in
Prose and Verse, not extant in the former Impressions. In this Eleventh Edition
References are made to the Poetical Citations, heretofore much wauted. By Owen
Feltham, Esquire

QUARTO.
Mechanic Powers; or, The Mystery of Nature and Art unvailed: Showing what
great things may be performed by Mechanic Engines, in removing and raising
Bodies of vast Weights, with little Strength or Force; and also the making of
Machines or Engines for raising of Water, dreining of Grounds, and several
other uses: Together with a Treatise of Circular Motion, artificially fitted to
Mechanic Use, and the making of Clock Work, and other Engines. A Work Pleasant
and Profitable for all sorts of Men, from the highest to the lowest Degree; and
never treated of in English before, and that but briefly. The whole comprised
in Ten Books, and illustrated with Copper Cuts, by Ven. Mandey, and I. Moxon,
Philomat.

OCTAVO.
The Christian Pattern Paraphrased: Or the Book of the Imitation of Christ,
commonly ascribed to Thomas a Keimpis; made English by Luke Milbourn, a
Presbyter of the Church of England.

Four Tracts. I. A Discourse against Revenge. II. Questions and Answers
concerning the two Religions, viz. Church of England and Church of Rome. III.
An Account of an Evening-Conference with a Jesuit in the Savoy. IV. A
Dissuasive from Popery, being a Letter to a Lady. By A. Horneck, D. D. late
Prebendary of Westminster, and Preacher at the Savoy. With a Preface by Mr.
Edwards.

The Family Dictionary: Or, Household Companion: Containing in an Alphabetical
Method, I. Directions for Cookery, etc. II. Making all sorts of Pastry-Ware,
etc. III. Making of Conserves, Candies, etc. IV. Making all kind of Potable
Liquors, etc. V. Making all sorts of Perfumes, etc. VI. The Virtues and Uses of
the most usual Herbs and Plants, etc. VII. The Preparation of several choice
Medicines, Physical and Chirurgical, etc. The Second Edition, corrected and
much enlarged; by William Salmon, Professor of Physic.

Solid Philosophy asserted against the Fancies of the Ideists; or, The Method
to Science farther Illustrated; with Reflections on Mr. Lock's Essay,
concerning Humane Understanding.

Cursus Osteologicus: Being a Complete Doctrine of the Bone; according to the
newest and most refined Notions of Anatomy: Showing their Nature, Substance,
Composition, manner of Ossification, Nourishment, etc. To which is annexed, by
way of Appendix, an excellent Method of Whitening, Cleansing, Preparing, and
Uniting the Bones, to form a Movable Sceleton, wherein the Bones may have the
same Motions as in a living Subject. The whole being a Work very useful and
necessary for all Students in Physic and Surgery. By Robert Baker, Surgeon.

Abra-mule: Or, A True History of the Dethronement of Mahomet IV. Written in
French by M. le Noble. Made English by I. P.

Divine Emblems by Francis Quarles, together with his Hieroglyphics of the
Life of Man.

Contemplations, Moral and Divine, in Two Parts. By Sir Matthew Hale, late Lord
Chief-Iustice of the Kings Bench.

DUODECIMO.
The Psalms of David in English Meter; translated from the Original, and suited
to all the Tunes now sung in Churches; with the Additions of several new. By
Luke Milbourne, a Presbyter of the Church of England.

Officium Eucharisticum; a preparatory Service to a Devout and worthy Reception
of the Lord's Supper. The Sixteenth Edition. To which is added a Meditation for
every Day in the Week.

Lately Published.
The Church of England Man's Private Devotions. Being a Collection of Prayers
out of the Common Prayer Book, for Morning, Noon, and Night; and other special
Occasions. By the Author of the Weeks Preparation to the Sacrament. 12 mo.
Price stitched 3 d. Bound 6 d.

The Holy Days; or, The Holy Feasts and Fasts, as they are observed in the
Church of England (throughout the Year) explained; and the Reasons why they are
yearly celebrated. With Cuts before each Day. 12 mo. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

An Essay upon Sublime Style. Translated from the Greek of Dionysius Longinus
Cassius, the Rhetorician. Compared with the French of the Sieur Despreaux
Boileau, 8 vo. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Spiritual Combat; or, The Christian Pilgrim in his Spiritual Conflict and
Conquest. By John de Castaniza. Translated from the French, with some
Additions. Revised and Recommended by the Reverend Richard Lucas, D. D. Rector
of St. Katharine Coleman-street. 8 vo. Price Bound, 1 s. 6 d.

The Art of knowing ones self: Or, an Enquiry into the Sources of Morality.
Written Originally in French, by the Reverend Dr. Abadie, in Two Parts. The
Second Edition, 8 vo. Price Bound 1 s.

Gulielmi Oughtredi AEtonensis, Clavis Mathematica denuo Limata, sive potius
Fabricata. Cum aliis quibusdam ejusdem Commentationibus, quae in Sequenti
Pagina recensentur. Editio Quinta auctior and emendatior. Ex recognitione D.
Iohannis Wallis, S. T. D. Geometriae Professoris Saviliani. 8 vo. Price Bound 3
s.

Advice to young Gentlemen, in their several Conditions of Life: by way of
Address from a Father to his Children. By the Abbot Goussault, Counselor in
Parliament; with his Sentiments and Maxims upon what passes in Civil Society.
Printed at Paris, 1697. and translated into English. 8 vo. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

A Voyage to the East Indies: Giving an Account of the Isles of Madagascar, and
Mascareigne, of Suratte, the Coast of Malabar, of Goa, Gameron, Ormus, and the
Coast of Brasil, with the Religion, Customs, Trade, etc. of the Inhabitants, as
also a Treatise of the Distempers peculiar to the Eastern Countries. To which
is annexed an Abstract of Monsieur de Rennefort's History of the East Indies,
with his Propositions for the Improvement of the East India Company. Written
Originally in French, by Mr. Dellon, M. D. 8 vo.

The History of Poland, in several Letters to Persons of Quality; giving an
Account of the present State of that Kingdom, Geographical, Historical,
Political, Physical and Ecclesiastical; in Two Volumes. By Bernard Connor, M.
D. Fellow of the Royal Society and Member of the College of Physicians; who in
his Travels in that Country, collected these Memoirs from the best Authors and
his own Observations. Composed and published by Mr. Savage. Price 10 s.

The Mystery of Fanaticism; or, The Artifices of Dissenters to support their
Schism, together with the Evil and Danger of them, wherein it is made appear,
that nothing but the Cunning and Subtilty of their Teachers does now hinder the
People from Conformity, 8 vo.

Modus Transferendi Status per Recorda; a Complete Collection of choice
Precedents for Fines upon Writs of Covenant, and Common Recoveries upon Writs
of Entry in the Post upon all Cases; whereby Lands may be settled; 1. in the
Crown, to preserve the same in the utmost Posterity; or, 2. the same be
transferred from one to another; in Fee Simple, Fee Tale, for Life or Years: or,
3. Annuities may be granted thereby in Fee Tale, etc. or, 4. any other Estates
may be raised thereby, which can be done by Deed of Conveyance, to which
Presidents are prefixed Two Discourses of the Nature and Operations of, and the
Use and Practice relating to Fines and Recoveries. By W. Brown, Clerk of the
Common Pleas. 8 vo.

The History and Reason of the Dependency of Ireland, upon the Imperial Crown
of the Kingdom of England, rectifying Mr. Molyneux's State of the Case of
Ireland's being bound by Acts of Parliament in England.

A Relation of a very sudden and extraordinary Cure of a Person bitten by a
Viper, by the Means of Acids; together with some Remarks upon Dr. Tuthil's
Vindication of his Objections against the Doctrine of Acids, wherein are
contained several things in order to the further clearing of the said Doctrine;
by John Colebatch, Member of the College of Physicians.

An Historical Account of the Manners and Behavior of the Christians, and the
Practices of Christianity throughout the several Ages of the Church; written
originally in French, by Mr. Cl. Fleury, Preceptor to Monseigneur de
Vermandois, and to the Dukes of Burgundy and Anjou, 8 vo.

BOORS Printed for, and Sold by William Turner, at the White Horse without
Temple Bar.
THE English Historical Library; or, A short View and Character of most of the
Writers now extant, either in Print or Manuscript; which may be serviceable to
the Undertakers of a general History of this Kingdom. By William Nicolson, A.
M. Archdeacon of Carlisle.

The English Historical Library, Part II. Giving a Catalogue of most of our
Ecclesiastical Historians, and some Critical Reflections upon the Chief of
them; with a Preface correcting the Errors, and supplying the Defects of the
former Part. By the Author of the First Part.

A Voyage of the Sieur Le Maire, to the Canary-Islands, Kape Verd, Senegal and
Gamby; under Monsieur Dancourt, Director General of the Royal African Company.
Translated from the French by Mr. Dilke.

Some farther Considerations concerning Alcaly and Acid; by way of Appendix to
a late Essay; wherein the Terms are made clear, and the Natures of them both
more fully explained. Together with an Answer to the Objections that have been
raised against some things contained in the said Essay. By John Colbatch,
Physician.

Queen Catharine; or, The Ruins of Love; a Tragedy, as it is Acted at the New
Theater, in ^Little Lincolns - Inn - Fields. Written by Mrs. Pix.


