LICENSED,

Nov. 8. 1669. Roger L'Estrange.

EPICTETUS JUNIOR, OR MAXIMS OF MODERN MORALITY.

IN Two Centuries.

Collected By J. D. of Kidwelly.

LONDON, Printed for T. Bassett, at the George in Fleet Street, near
Cliffords-Inn, 1670.

TO THE MUCH HONORED FRANCIS WATSON Esquire.
SIR,
THough all the parts of Philosophy have their several excellencies, and
perfections, yet may we justly, in point of extent, assign the pre-eminence to
Morality. For, if the Dictates of this last, by a natural currency, diffuse
themselves into all humane Transactions, so as that whatever is done by Man
derives its approbation or disallowance from a consonancy or opposition
thereto, what can be less said of It, then that it has a general influence
over Mankind, that all Rational Nature is its adaequate subject, and that all
Action, as well that of those of the highest, as those of the lowest rank,
falls under the verge of it is Direction?

Hence came it, that among the ancient Philosophers, they who most earnestly
applied themselves to the cultivation and advancement of Morality, were looked
upon as the greatest Exemplars of Life, and had, from their numerous Auditors,
all the veneration and respects, which generous Contributors to the happy
Government and civilization of their Countries could with justice expect:
whilst those others, whose studies transcended the capacities of the Many, were
forced to content themselves with the applause and acclamations of the Few.

Nay, this Consideration may be pressed yet further, if we come to weigh the
obligations, which the other parts of Philosophy have to This. For, whether we
reflect on the Naturalists, searching into the miraculous abysses of Nature; or
on the Politician, contriving the Government of Nations, by a strict inspection
into their different Humors and Manners; or lastly on the Oeconomist,
regulating his private and domestic Concerns, we must affirm, that their
several attempts will not attain their proposed accomplishment, without the
concurrence and illumination of Morality.

These, Sir, were the Prerogatives of Morality while its Precepts were gently
conducive to the happy conduct of men's lives. But into what impure hands it
has fallen of late years, and how it has been disordered and debauched into
pestilent and pernicious deductions, I am unwilling to press at this time;
wishing only, that the present Age may be so happy, as to weather out the
mischievous Principles wherewith extravagant Casuisme has so strangely
pestered it.

As to the present Collection of Maxims, I am to acknowledge, that the
greatest part of it was made by a person of eminent Quality in France. The
several Editions of it there, and in the Low Countries, sufficiently argue its
kind reception among the Ingenious, in those parts. That it will be in some
measure kindly entertained here, I have some encouragement to hope; and this,
partly from the Excellency and Novelty of the things themselves, and partly
from their Dedication to a Person, who, by his engagement in Embassies to the
remotest parts of Christendom, and his public Concerns abroad upon other
accounts, has had the opportunities of Seeing the Manners, and surveying the
Cities of many Nations. That your great and generous Designs may meet with the
success you propose to your self, is the earnest wish of,

SIR, Your most humble, and much obliged Servant, J. DAVIES.

EPICTETUS JUNIOR, OR MAXIMS OF MODERN MORALITY.
VIces enter into the composition of Virtues, as Poisons do into that of
Physical Remedies; the intermixture thereof is made by Prudence, which by that
allay makes an advantageous use of them, against the Evils and inconveniences
of humane life.

II.
The Virtue observable in the ordinary sort of men is only a Phantasm, framed
by our Passions, on which we bestow a plausible name, that we may pursue our
own inclinations, without any fear of punishment.

III.
All the Virtues men so much pretend to, are swallowed up in Interest, as
Rivers lose their names when they fall into the Sea.

IV.
Crimes put on a certain show of innocence, nay sometimes become glorious,
either upon the account of their number, or their quality: Thence it proceeds,
that public Robberies are looked on, as the effects of conduct, design, and
subtilty, and the taking of Provinces without any just pretense, is called
Conquest. Thus is there an Heroic management of Criminal actions, as well as
of Virtuous.

V.
We are many times kept within the limits of our duty by Shame, Sloth, and
Timorousness, while in the mean time our Virtue has all the credit of it.

VI.
If we excise from that which is called Courage the desire of preserving and
the fear of losing, it would not have any great matter left it.

VII.
Clemency is an intermixture of Repute, Sloth, and Fear, of which we make up a
Virtue; and among Princes, it is only a political Intrigue, whereof they make
their advantage to cajol the affection of the people.

VIII.
The Constancy of the wiser sort, is but a certain Artifice, wherewith they
know how to repress the agitation of their Souls.

IX.
Gravity of deportment is a mysterious carriage of the Body, found out to
eclipse the imperfections of the Mind.

X.
Severity and Reserv'dness in Women is a daubing embellishment, whereby they
endeavor to heighten their Beauty; in a word, it is a certain delicate and
subtle Attraction, and a disguised Insinuation.

XI.
Those Reconciliations between enemies, which seem to be carried on with
Sincerity, Compliance and Tenderness, are truly the effects of a Desire of
bettering ones condition, weariness of War, and a fear of some unfortunate
adventure.

XII.
We are to make the same estimate of Gratitude, as of just dealing among
Merchants; This maintains Commerce, and we satisfy our Obligations, not so much
upon the score of Justice, as out of a conceit, that we shall thereby more
easily prevail with others to give us credit.

XIII.
Men are not only apt to be guilty of an equal oblivion of benefits and
injuries, but they also hate those who have obliged them. Pride and Interest
are upon all accounts the Parents of Ingratitude. The acknowledgments of
Kindnesses, and the requitals of Illturns seem to them a kind of slavery,
whereto they think it a hard matter to submit.

XIV.
There is no Virtue so highly celebrated as Prudence, and men have that
fondness for it, as that it deserves the greatest Elogies. It is the square of
our Actions, and the level of our Conduct. Though Fortune-seems to be an
Universal Mistress, yet Prudence is hers. She causes the dilatations and decays
of Empires; her absence occasions all inconveniences and disasters; her
concurrence, all felicity. And as an ancient Poet expresses himself, when we
are guided by Prudence, we are surrounded by all the other Divinities, as if he
said, that, in Prudence, we meet with all the assistances we desire of the
Gods. And yet the most accomplished Prudence we can imagine, cannot give us any
assurance of the most inconsiderable effect of the World, inasmuch as being
exercised on a subject so inconstant and so common, as man is, she cannot with
any certainty execute any of her designs. God only, who has the guidance of
all men's hearts, and the absolute disposal of their inclinations, brings the
things dependent thereon to their due effect. Whence we are to make this
conclusion, that all the commendations we give our Prudence, whether out of
ignorance or vanity, are so many injuries done by us to his Providence.

XV.
The Qualities a man really has, make him not so ridiculous as those which out
of pure affectation he pretends to have.

XVI.
Our Promises are always made with a reflection on our Hopes, and performed
according to our fears.

XVII.
A man is extremely exasperated to be circumvented by his Enemies, and betrayed
by his Friends; and yet he is satisfied to be deceived by himself.

XVIII.
It is as easy for a man to be self-deceiv'd, without being sensible of it, as
it is hard to deceive others, without their perceiving it.

XIX.
It is one of the most pleasant humors in the world to see two men met
together, one to receive advice, the other to give it. The one demeans himself
with a respectful and compliant indifference, and says, that he comes to
receive directions, and to submit his sentiments to the other's; and yet for
the most part he comes to have his own confirmed, and to get the other's
warranty of his advice upon the affair he proposes to him. On the contrary, he
who is consulted seems to requite the sincerity of his Friend with an earnest
and dis-interessed zeal to serve him, and in the mean time examines his own
Concerns, for rules whereby to advise him; so that his Counsel becomes more
advantageous to himself, than to him who receives it.

XX.
It Is an ill expression, to say, Such or such a thing proceeds from Weakness of
Mind; for it is, in effect, a Weakness of the Temperament, which is only an
inability of acting, and a default in the principle of life.

XXI.
Nothing is impossible; there are certain ways conducing to the accomplishment
of all things, and if we had Will enough, we should never be destitute of the
means.

XXII.
Compassion is a resentment of our own Evils, and a reflection on them in a
subject at some distance from us. It is a crafty foresight of those misfortunes
into which we may fall our selves, which inclines us to the relief of others;
out of an imagination, that they are engaged to retaliation upon the like
occasions. So that the services we render those who are fallen into any
misfortune, are, properly speaking, but kindnesses done to our selves by way of
anticipation.

XXIII.
He is not to be accounted a rational person, who thinks he has reason for
what he does, but he who has a delightful and discerning assurance, of his
acting according to the dictates thereof.

XXIV.
As for the acknowledgment of our failings and imperfections, it proceeds from
a desire of repairing the prejudice which they do us in the apprehensions of
others, by the impression we give them of the justice of our own.

XXV.
Humility is a counterfeit submission, whereby we endeavor to bring all others
into a compliance with our humors. It is a slight sally of Pride, whereby it
humbles it self before men, out of a design to advance it self above them. This
is its greatest disguise and its first Stratagem: and as it is out of all
question, that there never was any such thing, as the Proteus mentioned in the
ancient Fables, so is it certain, that Pride is such a real one in Nature. For
it assumes what forms it pleases; but though it be a strange and pleasant
spectacle, to see it in all its figures, and in all its insinuations, yet is it
to be acknowledged, that it is never so rare, nor so extraordinary, as when we
see it with its eyes fixed on the ground, a countenance full of modesty and
composure; words overflowing with mildness and respect, and a certain contempt
of it self: as if it would say, I am unworthy the Honors that are done me,
incapable of the Employments forced upon me; and that it received the Charges
whereto it is advanced only as an effect of men's excessive goodness toward it,
and a blind supererogation of Fortune's liberality.

XXVI.
Moderation in Prosperity is either a dreadful apprehension of losing what a
man is possessed of, or a fear of that shame which attends extravagance and
excess. It may also be said, that a moderate person is one whose humors are in
a certain indisturbance, as being becalmed by the satisfaction of his mind.

XXVII.
We may further give this Character of Moderation, that it is a fear of
disparagement and contempt, which attends those who are besotted with their own
felicity. It is a vain Ostentation of a resolute mind. In fine, to give it yet
a more pertinent definition, we may affirm, that the moderation of men in their
highest advancements is an Ambition of seeming greater, than those things
whereby they are advanced.

XXVIII.
How can a man forbear laughing at this Virtue, and the opinion generally
conceived of it? How fondly is it imagined, that Ambition is opposed, and in a
manner reduced to a certain mediocrity by Moderation, when they never meet
together, the latter being truly but a certain Sloth, demission of Spirit, and
a defect of Courage? So that it may justly be said, that Moderation is a
certain depression of the Soul, as Ambition is the elevation of it.

XXIX.
Chastity in Women is a certain fondness of their Reputation, and a love of
their quiet.

XXX.
Since the Neapolitane Evil came to reign in the World, the fear of infection
has contributed more to the honesty of both Sexes, then any consideration of
Virtue: and yet there will ever be such, as shall prosecute their enjoyments,
with a defiance of diseases.

XXXI.
There is no such thing as Liberality, and it may be said to be a Vanity of
giving, whereof we are more fond, then of that which we give.

XXXII.
Temperance and Sobriety are the effects of our Love of Health, or argue
disability of eating or drinking much.

XXXIII.
Fidelity is a rare invention of Self-Love, whereby a man advancing himself to
be a Depository of precious things, enhances himself to a more extraordinary
value. Of all the several commerces of Self-Love, this is that wherein it makes
least advancement, and greatest advantages. It is the subtlest part of its
Politics; for it engages men by their Liberties and their Lives (which they
are forced to expose upon certain occasions) to raise the faithful person to a
pitch of esteem above all the World.

XXXIV.
The ordinary Education of Princes, is a second Self-Love inspired into them.

XXXV.
Our Repentance proceeds not from the remorse conceived at our Actions, but
from the prejudice we are apt to receive thereby.

XXXVI.
It is a hard matter to distinguish between Goodness considered in its full
extent generally exercised toward all persons, and an accomplished subtlety.

XXXVII.
Whoever shall superficially consider all the effects of Goodness, which causes
us to neglect our own concerns, and obliges us to make a perpetual sacrifice of
our selves for the benefit of others, will be tempted to imagine, that, while
it acts, Self-Love admits a certain oblivion and abnegation of it self. Nay he
will be apt to think, that it suffers it self to be divested and impoverished,
without so much as perceiving any such thing; insomuch that Self-Love seems to
be a certain decoy to Goodness. And yet, it is to be presumed that Goodness is
the most proper of all the means, which Self-Love makes use of, to compass its
ends. It is a close and secret path, whereby it returns to it self with a
richer booty. It is a certain discare of its own concerns, which it puts out at
an excessive usury. In fine it is a well-lodg'd Spring, wherewith it reunites,
disposes, and winds up all men to promote its own advantages.

XXXVIII.
No man deserves the commendation due upon the account of Goodness, if he have
not the resolution and courage to be wicked. All other degrees of Goodness
argue only a privation and Lethargy of Vices.

XXXIX.
The Love of Justice in upright Judges, who are moderate persons, is only a
love of their own exaltation. In the greatest part of men, it is only a fear of
suffering injustice, and a lively apprehension of our being deprived of that
which belongs to us. Hence proceed that consideration and respect which we have
for the concerns of our Neighbor, and that scrupulous suspense of doing him
any prejudice. Were it not for this fear, which confines a man to a
contentedness with those goods bestowed on him by his Birth or Fortune, he
would, incited by a violent desire of self-preservation, endeavor to be
continually preying upon others.

XL.
In Justice we may reflect on four considerables, Justice it self which sees no
more then what it ought to P. 19.
see; Integrity, which weighs the true right and merit of things; Perspicacity,
which perceives things imperceptible of themselves; and Judgment, which gives
sentence what the things are. And yet if we perfectly examine it, we shall
find, that all its Qualities may be summed up in one accomplishment, called
Grandeur of Mind, which in all emergencies, by reason of its extraordinary
illumination, sees all the advantages before mentioned.

XLI.
Judgment is only a Grandeur of the Mind; heightened with all acquirable
illumination: The same thing may be said of its extent, of its depth, of its
discerning faculty, of its justice, of its integrity, and of its perspicacity.
The extent of the mind is the measure of that illumination; the depth is that
which discovers the grounds of things; by the discretive faculty the same
things are compared together and distinguished.

XLII.
Perseverance is neither blameworthy nor praiseworthy; inasmuch as it is a
continuation of those gusts and sentiments, which it is not in a man's power to
assume or divest himself of.

XLIII.
Truth, from which men are denominated ingenuous and sincere, is an
imperceptible ambition they have, to render their testimony considerable, and
engage others to give a religious respect and credit to their words.

XLIV.
Truth is the groundwork and justification of Reason, Perfection, and Beauty:
for it is certain, that a thing, what ever nature it be of, is beautiful and
perfect, if it be all it ought to be, and if it have all it ought to have.

XLV.
True Eloquence consists in saying whatever is requisite, and in not saying any
more then what is requisite.

XLVI.
There is as great a discovery of Eloquence in the accent of the voice, (...)
he choice of words.

XLVII.
The Passions are the only Orators which always persuade: They are as it were
an Art in Nature, whose Rules are infallible. By this latter the simplest
person in the World may have greater success in persuasion, then another with
all the artifices and flowers of Eloquence.

XLVIII.
There is not any thing so contagious as Example, and whatever actions are done
remarkable either for their Goodness or Mischief, they are Patterns to others
to do the like. The imitation of virtuous actions proceeds from Emulation; and
the imitation of lewd actions proceeds from an excess of natural malignancy,
which, being as it were kept in restraint by Goodness, is set at liberty by
Example.

XLIX.
Imitation always proves unfortunate, and whatever is counterfeited breeds a
disgust, and that in those very things which would delight, if they were
naturally represented.

L.
It is observable in persons brought to public execution, that they express a
certain constancy, in their punishment, and betray an indifference and contempt
of death: yet all is but a personated affectation, and done out of design to
persuade that they think not of it. So that it may be said, that those seeming
indifferences and contempts do that to their mind, which the Cap pulled down
over their faces does to their Eyes.

LI.
Few know what Death is. It is endured, not out of resolution, but stupidity
and custom, and the greatest part of men die, without any other reflection on
their departure hence, then that others go the same way.

LII.
We fear all things with a certain acknowledgment of our Mortality, and we
desire all, as if we were Immortal.

LIII.
Subtlety is a counterfeit perspicacity, and Perspicacity is a solid Subtlety.

LIVE.
The World not having the apprehension or knowledge of true merit, must
accordingly be incapable of requiting it. Thence it comes, that it advances to
its grandeurs and dignities, only such persons as have some excellency of
endowments in appearance, and it generally crowns whatever glisters, though all
be not gold that does so.

LV.
As there are some meats, which, though good, bring a certain qualm and
coldness over the heart, so is there a kind of faint Merit, and some persons,
who, with their excellent and esteemable qualities give a disgust to those they
converse withal.

LVI.
Whatever dazles breeds admiration, and the art of setting off mean qualities
with advantage surprises men's esteem, and many times gains greater reputation
then true Merit.

LVII.
Sovereign Princes use their subjects as they do their Coins; they give them
what value they please, and others are forced to receive them according to
their currency; and not according to their true worth.

LVIII.
It is not only sufficient that a man be Master of great Qualities, but it is
also requisite he have the Economy thereof.

LIX.
There are certain persons whose recommendation and merit consists in the
saying or doing of ridiculous things with some advantage, and who would spoil
all they undertook, if they took any other course.

LX.
Nay there are some persons whom their imperfections become well, and others,
who are disparaged by their good Qualities.

LXI.
There are a sort of simple persons, who are sufficiently sensible of their
simplicity, and yet betray a certain subtilty in the management of it.

LXII.
God has disposed different Talents in man, as he has planted kinds of Trees
in Nature; insomuch that, as every tree, so every Talent has its properties
and effects which are peculiar thereto. Whence it comes, that the best Peartree
in the world cannot bear Apples, though of the most ordinary sort, and so
consequently the most excellent Talent cannot produce the same effects with
those which are most common. Thence we may also make this further deduction,
that it is as ridiculous for a man to pretend to those fruits whereof he has
not the seeds in himself, as to expect that a Garden should bring forth Tulips,
when nothing but Onions had been sown in it.

LXIII.
Whoever is desirous to be settled in the World uses his utmost endeavors to
have it believed, that he is so settled already. In all Professions and Arts,
every one assumes a certain mean, and exterior deportment, which he
substitutes into the place of the Thing, whereof he would pretend to the
reality and merit. So that all the world is but an artificious representation
of several garbs, and it is in vain we take pains to find therein the Things
themselves.

LXIV.
There are a sort of people may be compared to those trivial Songs, which all
are in an humor to sing for a certain time, how flat and distasteful soever
they may be.

LXV.
That degree of honor which a man has already acquired is the security, to
him, of what he may afterward acquire.

LXVI.
As in Nature there is an eternal generation, and that the corruption of one
thing is always the production of another: in like manner is there in the heart
of man a perpetual generation, or repullulation of Passions, so that the
expiration of one is always the reestablishment of another.

LXVII.
I am in some suspense, whether that Maxim, That every thing produces its
like, be true in natural things: but certain I am, that it is false in
Morality, and that among the Passions, some many times beget such as are
contrary to them. Thus Avarice does sometimes produce Liberality; a man may be
constant or resolute, out of weakness, and boldness may proceed from Timidity.

LXVIII.
That Man was not created as he now is, may be convictively argued hence, that
the more rational he becomes, the more he is ashamed in himself at the
extravagance, the meanness, and the corruption of his sentiments and
inclinations.

LXIX.
Men are always mistaken in the judgment they make of our Actions, when these
latter transcend our designs.

LXX.
It is requisite there should be a certain proportion between the Actions and
the Designs whereby they are produced: the Actions are never so fully effectual
as they ought to be.

LXXI.
Passion does many times make the subtlest man a fool, and, on the contrary for
the most part makes the simplest persons seem to be subtle.

LXXII.
Every man is not more different from other men, than he is many times from
himself.

LXXIII.
All people are apt to censure and find fault with that in others, which is no
less censureable in themselves.

LXXIV.
A person of excellent parts would many times be at a loss, were it not for the
company of fools.

LXXV.
Men's reflections and sentiments have each of them a certain accent of voice,
and an action and air peculiar thereto.

LXXVI.
These qualifications make either good or bad Comedians; and hence it comes
also that certain persons are pleasant or unpleasant in conversation.

LXXVII.
The confidence a man has of being pleasant in his demeanor is a means
whereby he infallibly comes to be such.

LXXVIII.
There is not any thing should abate so much of the satisfaction we conceive of
our selves, as our observance, that we now disapprove of the conditions and
sentiments we formerly had been of.

LXXIX.
We never in a manner have courage enough to follow the full bent of our Reason.

LXXX.
The love and inclinations we find in our selves for new Acquaintances,
proceeds not so much from a weariness or satiety of the old ones, nor yet from
the satisfaction of variety, as from the disgust we conceive at our not being
sufficiently admired by those who know us too well, and the hope we are in of
gaining a greater admiration among those who are not much acquainted. with us.

LXXXI.
Great souls are not those who are less subject to Passions, and have greater
attendance of Virtues, than the ordinary ones, but those only who have greater
Illuminations.

LXXXII.
There are some who make it their boast that they are not wearied, or out of
humor; but how impertinently they do it, appears hence, that no man without
being ridiculous, can be so fondly conceited of himself, as that some time or
other he should not be ill company.

LXXXIII.
The welfare of the soul is not more certain than that of the Body, how far
soever we may seem to be out of the jurisdiction of those Passions, which we
have not yet had occasion to struggle withal. Yet is it to be imagined, that a
man is no less exposed thereto, than he is to fall sick, when he is in perfect
health.

LXXXIV.
There is a certain injustice and self-concern in the Passions, whence it comes
that they are always offensive and injurious, even when they seem to speak most
reason and equity. Only Charity has the privilege of saying in a manner what
it pleases, and never injuring any one.

LXXXV.
Greatness of wit is a perpetual decoy of the Heart.

LXXXVI.
Though a man be ever so industrious in the smothering of his Passion, under
the veil of piety and honor, yet some claw thereof will still be visible.

LXXXVII.
Philosophy may easily triumph over Evils past, as also over those not yet
ready to assault a man; but the present triumph over it.

LXXXVIII.
The duration of our Passions has no more dependence on us, than that of our
lives.

LXXXIX.
Though all the Passions should conceal themselves, yet are they not afraid of
the light; only Envy is a timorous and bashful Passion, which a man is ashamed
to countenance or acknowledge.

XC.
The most sacred and most sincere friendship is but a kind of Commerce, whereby
we imagine there is still some advantage to be made.

XCI.
The sickleness and inconstancy of our Friendships proceed hence, that it is an
easy matter to discover the qualities of the mind, and difficult to be
acquainted with those of the soul.

XCII.
We are impertinently induced to affect some persons more powerful than our
selves. But we are to impute the production of our friendship to interest,
inasmuch as our promises to them are not regulated according to what we would
bestow on them, but according to what we expect to receive from them.

XCIII.
Love is, in the soul of him who loves, what the soul it self is in the body,
which it animates and informs.

XCIV.
It is impossible there should be a love that is pure and free from all
intermixture with our other Passions.

XCV.
It is a hard matter to define Love: all we can say of it, is, that, in the
Soul, it is a Passion admits no corrivalship in point of Empire; in the
Spirits, it is a Sympathy, and in Bodies, it is a close and delicate desire of
enjoying what we love after a mysterious way.

XCVI.
It Is a great mistake, to think that Love and Ambition triumph over all the
other Passions: on the contrary, Sloth, notwithstanding all its languishment,
has many times a sovereignty over them; this insensibly usurps an Empire over
all the designs, and over all the actions of life; this destroys and compleats
all the Passions, and all the Virtues employed in the conduct of it.

XCVII.
There is not any disguise can long smother Love where it is, nor long
personate it, where it is not.

XCVIII.
Whereas there is no admission of Free Will in loving or not-loving, it follows
that a Lover cannot with any justice complain of the cruelty of his Mistress,
nor the Mistress of the fickleness of her Lover.

XCIX.
If we make an estimate of Love, according to the generality of its effects, it
has a greater resemblance to hatred than to friendship.

C.
It is possible there may be found some Women who were never guilty of any
gallantries; but it were a rare thing to meet with any one, that had never been
guilty thereof but once.

CI.
There are two kinds of constancy in love, one proceeding hence, that a man
perpetually finds new motives of loving, in the person whom he loves, as in an
inexhaustible source; and the other proceeds hence, that a man thinks himself
concerned in point of honor to keep his word.

CII.
All Constancy in Love is a perpetual Inconstancy, inasmuch as we find our
hearts continually wavering in a vicissitude of inclinations, toward the
perfections of the person whom we are in love with, giving one while the
pre-eminence to one, another, to another: so that this Constancy is but an
Inconstancy limited and confined within the same subject.

CIII.
There are two sorts of Inconstancies; the former proceeds from that fickleness
of mind, which ever and anon admits of a change of opinion; or rather from that
meanness of spirit, which complies with all the several opinions of others. The
latter, which is the more excusable of the two, proceeds from the different
apprehensions we have of the things which we love.

CIV.
Great and heroic actions which dazzle their eyes who consider them, are
represented by Politicians, as if they were the effects of great Interests;
whereas they are ordinarily the effects of humor and passions. Thus the war
between Augustus and Marc Antony, which some imputed to the Ambition they had
of aspiring to the Empire of the World, was an effect of their mutual jealousy.

CV.
The affairs and actions of great men are in this particular comparable to
Statues, that they are to be surveyed according to a certain observance of
Perspective. Some are to be viewed near at hand, that we may the better discern
all the circumstances thereof; and there are others, whose beauties and
symmetry are best discoverable at a distance.

CVI.
Jealousy is in some respects rational and just, since its design is only to
secure to our selves a good which we conceive ought to belong to us; whereas
Envy is a distraction and extravagance, which makes us wish the ruin of a good
properly belonging to others.

CVII.
Self-love is a fond conceit in any one, that his affection to all other things
ought to promote the pursuit of his own concerns. Its subtlety and insinuation
transcend those of any thing else. It makes men Idolaters of themselves, and
would make them Tyrants over others, if Fortune gave them the means to be so.
It is never at rest out of it self, and makes no stay in other subjects, but as
Bees do upon flowers, to get out of them what promotes its own interest. There
is not any thing so impetuous and violent as its desires; not any thing so
insearchable as its designs; not any thing so craftily carried on as its
contrivances. Its compliances are not to be represented; its transformations
exceed those of Poetical Metamorphoses; and its sublimations of things
transcend those of Chemistry it self. A man cannot sound the depth of its
projects, nor find any passage into the darkness of its recesses: there it
defies the sharpness of the most piercing Optics. It there makes a thousand
turnings and windings; nay it is there many times invisible even to it self.
There it conceives, there it nurses, there it raises up (not knowing it) a
multiplicity of Affections and Aversions: Of these it many times frames some so
monstrous, that when it has brought them to light, it disclaims all knowledge
of them, or cannot be prevailed with to own them. From this darkness, wherein
they are involved, spring those ridiculous persuasions which it has of it
self. Thence proceed its errors, its ignorances, its stupidities, and its
simplicities, as to what relates to it self. Thence it comes, that it imagines
its sentiments to be dead, when they are but laid asleep, that it thinks it
has no further desire to run, when it does repose it self, and conceits it
has lost all the gusts, which it has satiated. But this great obscurity,
which deprives it of its own view, hinders not its perfect survey of whatever
is without it, upon which consideration it may be compared to our eyes, which
discover all about them, and are blind only as to themselves. To be short, in
its greatest concerns, and most important affairs, wherein the violence of its
wishes summons all its attention, it sees, it resents, it understands, it
imagines, it suspects, it penetrates, it guesses at all things; so that it
raises in others a temptation of believing that each of its passions has a
certain enchantment peculiar thereto. There is not any thing so close and so
strong as its engagement, which it vainly endeavors to dissolve, upon the first
sight of the extraordinary misfortunes which threaten it. And yet it often does
in a short time, and without any violence, what it could not have done with all
those efforts, whereof it is capable, in the course of several years. Whence it
might with much probability, be concluded, that its desires are inflamed by it
self, rather than by the attractions and excellency of its objects; that its
own gust is the motive whereby they are heightened, and the paint whereby they
are embellished; that it pursues it self, and follows only what it has proposed
to it self. It is a confused intermixture of contraries, as participating of
imperiousness and submission, sincerity and dissimulation, clemency and
cruelty, timorousness and audacity, and it betrays a diversity of inclinations,
according to that of the Temperaments, whereby it is turned and directed to the
pursuance of repute, wealth, or pleasures. And in these it admits of a change
and vicissitude, according to the difference of our Ages, our Fortunes, and our
Experiences: but it is indifferent to it, whether it have many of those
inclinations, or that it has but one, because it has the knack of dilating it
self into several of them, or contracting it self to one, when it thinks
requisite, and as it thinks fit. It is inconstant, and besides the changes
which happen to it from other causes, there are an infinite number of such
flowing from it self, and arising upon its own account: This Inconstancy also
proceeds from different motives, as pure fickleness, love, novelty, weariness,
and disgust. It is humorous to extremity, insomuch that it is sometimes
employed with the greatest earnestness imaginable, and incredible pains-taking,
about the attainment of things, which are so far from being advantageous, that
they are prejudicial to it, and it is engaged upon the pursuit of them, out of
no other reflection than that it would needs have them. It is fantastic, and
thence it comes also, that it is extremely intentive in the most frivolous
employments. It finds a height of pleasure in the meanest occupations, and
abates nothing of its ardency in the most contemptible. It posts it self in the
several stages of life, and spreads it self into all conditions and
qualifications. It finds a being every where, it lives on any thing, and can
make a shift to subsist without any thing, making its advantage of things, and
of their privation. Nay, sometimes, out of pure compassion, it sides with those
who profess an hostility against it. It finds a way to creep into their
designs, and, what cannot be considered without admiration, it raises in them
an aversion for it self, conspiring its own destruction and promoting its own
ruin. In fine, it matters not where it has a being, so it have one, and in
order to that, it is content to be its own enemy. Nor is it to be wondered at,
that it should so confidently enter into an association with the severest pity,
when it contributes to its own destruction, in regard that at the very same
time that it is ruined in one part, it is re-established in another: when it is
imagined, that it quits its enjoyment, it does only change it into
satisfaction: and when a man gives it over for conquered, and thinks himself
rid of it, he meets with it again rallying in the triumphs of its defeat. This
may serve for a Description of self-love, whereof all humane life is but a
great and long agitation. The Sea is the most sensible representation we can
propose to our selves of it; inasmuch as self-love finds, in the violence of
its continual waves, a faithful expression of the successive and reciprocal
disturbance of its own reflections and perpetual motions.

CVIII.
But we have this further remark to give of self-love; that, as if it were not
enough for it, to have the virtue of transforming it self, it has also that of
transforming the objects on which it works; which it does after a strange and
surprising manner. For it not only disguises them so well, that it is it self
deceived therein, but also as if its actions were miracles, it makes, in
effect, an unexpected change in the state and nature of the things. When any
person opposes us, and employs all the hatred and persecution he can against
us, it is our own self-love that judges of his actions. This is that which
takes a full prospect of his imperfections, which renders them enormous, and
places his good endowments in so disadvantageous a light, as causes in us a
greater disgust of them than of his miscarriages. Yet is it observable withal,
that as soon as the same person is admitted into any favor in our
apprehensions, or any concern of our own has wrought a reconciliation between
him and us, our particular satisfaction immediately restores his merit to that
luster, which our aversion had before deprived him of. All his advantages are
then susceptible of all the Biass we can give them, and we look on them
accordingly. All his ill qualities vanish, and we are so partial on the other
side, as to summon all our abilities and understanding, to justify the
prejudice which those had against us.

CIX.
Though all the Passions make a certain discovery of this Truth, yet does Love
make a greater demonstration of it than any of the rest. For we find an amorous
person exasperated with rage, at the apparent forgetfulness of a Mistress, and
breaking forth into extravagant exclamations against Heaven and Hell, upon a
discovery of her infidelity: And yet as soon as the same Beauty comes into his
sight, and that her presence has calmed the fury of his transportations, his
ravishment pleads for her innocence. He has no longer any thing to object
against her, but turns all his accusations upon himself, and reverses his
former sentence of condemnation, and, by that miraculous virtue of self-love,
he so translates all criminousness from the actions of his Mistress, as to
change his jealousy into adoration.

CX.
Familiarity is a deviation from the observance of most of those rules
established for the conduct of Civil Life. Or we may say, it is a certain
lightness of demeanor, which Libertinism has introduced into Society, to lead
us into that kind of correspondency, which is accounted most convenient.

CXI.
It may be further affirmed, that this familiarity is an effect of self-love,
which, desirous to make all things compliant with our weakness, obliges us to
cast off that decent subjection imposed upon us by sound Morality; and out of
an overearnestness of finding out the ways to make good manners convenient for
us, occasions their degeneration into vices.

CXII.
The weaker Sex being naturally more inclined to effeminacy and mildness than
the other, is accordingly more apt to be guilty of this relaxation, and makes a
greater loss thereby. As for instance, the authority and prerogatives of the
Sex are not kept up; the respect due thereto suffers a diminution; and it may
be said, that decency loses thereby the greatest part of its rights. There are
but few inclined to cruelty, out of a pure motive of cruelty; but it may be
affirmed, that the cruelty and inhumanity of most men proceeds from a certain
suggestion of Self-Love.

CXIII.
There are many things, besides the love of Fame, which contribute to the
acquisition of that Valor that is so highly celebrated among men. For it is
sometimes the effect of a dread of ignominy; sometimes of the design a man has
laid for the raising of his Fortunes; sometimes, it proceeds from a desire of
promoting the divertisements and conveniences of our life, and sometimes from
an affectation of depressing others, and getting them under our jurisdiction.

CXIV.
It may be further affirmed, that Valor in Men, and Chastity in Women, two
qualifications which make so much noise in the World, are the products of
Vanity and Shame, and principally of their particular Temperaments.

CXV.
Men's insatiate inclinations to Women proceed from a certain envy of their
Chastity, since they endeavor all the ways imaginable to corrupt them, as if
they were not yet fully revenged for the first temptation of the Sex.

CXVI.
Perfect Valor and complete Cowardice, are extremities whereto men seldom
arrive; The distance between them is of a vast extent, and comprehends all the
other species of Courage; and there is no less difference between these, than
there is between men's faces and humors. Yet is there a certain agreement and
conformity among them in many things: there are some men who cheerfully expose
themselves at the beginning of an action, but easily flag, and are disheartened
in the prosecution of it. There are some again, who think they have
sufficiently acquitted themselves, when they have behaved themselves to that
pitch of honor which satisfies the World, and seldom offer at any thing
transcending it. We also observe some, who are not at all times equally masters
of their fear: others are discouraged by general frights; others think it more
safe to run into a charge than to continue in their posts. In fine, there are
some, whom an habitual acquaintance with lesser dangers heightens into a higher
degree of courage, and prepares for an exposal of themselves to greater
hazards. Moreover, there is yet a general correspondence observable among the
courages of the different species before mentioned, which is, that the darkness
of night augmenting fear, and casting an obscurity over good and bad actions,
gives them the liberty to make a greater husbandry of their valor. There is
yet a more general thrift of courage, which, speaking absolutely, has an
influence over all sorts of men, and is this, that there are not any but would
demean themselves to the utmost of their power in an action, if they had but an
assurance of their coming off. So that it is certainly deducible hence, that
the fear of death makes a certain abatement of their Valor, and subtracts
somewhat from its effects.

CXVII.
Pure Valor, if there were any such thing, would consist in the doing of that
without witnesses, which it were able to do, if all the world were to be
spectators thereof.

CXVIII.
Intrepidity, or a defiance of Fear, is an extraordinary force of the Soul,
whereby it represses the troubles, disturbances and disorders, which the
apprehension of great dangers is wont to raise in it. By this force, or
courage, persons of a truly Heroic Spirit keep themselves in a continual
serenity, and have a free exercise of all their functions, in the most dreadful
and most surprising accidents of humane life. This intrepidity is that which
must keep up the heart in great Conspiracies, whereas bare Valor supplies it
only with that constancy and resolution, which are requisite in the hazards of
War.

CXIX.
Men are loath to lose their lives, yet desirous to acquire fame; thence it
comes, that persons of much gallantry and courage discover greater subtlety and
evasions in their endeavors to shun death, than they who are best versed in
the Law do, to preserve their Estates.

CXX.
Valor in the common soldiery is a hazardous Trade they have taken up, to get
a miserable subsistence.

CXXI.
Most men make a sufficient exposal of themselves to the hazards of War, out of
a motive of securing their reputation; but few will at all times expose
themselves, as far as is necessary, to compass the design, for which they do
expose themselves.

CXXII.
Persons of great and ambitious spirits are more miserable than those of a
meaner condition; for there is less requisite for the satisfaction of the
latter, than of the former.

CXXIII.
Generosity is a desire of being eminently remarkable for some extraordinary
actions: it is a subtle and industrious packing together of unconcernedness,
constancy, friendship, and magnanimity, to make a speedy advance to a high
reputation.

CXXIV.
How great soever the advantages and accomplishments of Nature may be, yet is
it not She, but Fortune, that makes Heroes.

CXXV.
Felicity consists not in the things themselves, but in men's imaginations of
them; whence it comes, that he is happy who has what he loves, and not what
others think amiable.

CXXVI.
It may be affirmed that either there are not any happy or unhappy accidents,
or that all accidents are both happy and unhappy, inasmuch as the prudent know
how to make their advantages of the bad, and the imprudent many times turn the
most advantageous emergencies to their own prejudice.

CXXVII.
Merit comes from the treasury of Nature, but is set on work by Fortune.

CXXVIII.
Goods and Evils are much greater in our imaginations of them, than they are in
effect; and men are never so happy or unhappy, as they think themselves.

CXXIX.
What difference soever there may be between the Fortunes, yet is there a
certain proportion of Goods and Evils which makes them equal.

CXXX.
Those who have any conceitedness of their own merit are always repining at
their being unfortunate, whereby they would persuade others, as well as
themselves, that there is something heroic in them, since it is to be
presumed, that the malice of Fortune is never so much bent upon the persecution
of any persons as those of extraordinary endowments. Thence it comes that men
comfort themselves in their being unfortunate, out of a certain pleasure they
take in seeming such.

CXXXI.
Men are never so unhappy as they imagine themselves, nor so happy as they hope.

CXXXII.
Most people observe, in men, only the esteem they are in, and the merit of
their Fortune.

CXXXIII.
It is incident only to great Persons to be guilty of great miscarriages.

CXXXIV.
Though Ministers of State flatter themselves with a conceit of the greatness
of their actions, and attribute them to their conduct and prudence, yet are
they many times but the effects of hazard, or some inconsiderable design.

CXXXV.
The aversion which many express toward Favorites, is only a love of Fortune
and favor. The same aversion proceeds also from a certain exasperation
conceived at ones being out of favor, which is a little comforted and
alleviated, by the contempt of Favorites. In fine, it is a secret desire of
their ruin, which makes us deprive them of their own homages, it being not in
our power to divest them of those qualities and accomplishments, which draw
those of all others toward them.

CXXXVI.
Great men are at last brought down and crushed by the continuance of their
misfortunes. It is not to be inferred hence, that they were undaunted when they
supported them, but it may be said they suffered a kind of torture, to gain the
opinion of seeming such; and that they bore their misfortunes, by the force of
their Ambition, and not by the greatness of their Courage. Hence it is further
manifest, that, abating the greatness of their Vanity, Heroes are of the same
making with other men.

CXXXVII.
It is a fond imagination to think that men are loved and honored for their
Virtues; on the contrary, it is for them, that they are hated and envied.

CXXXVIII.
Yet may it be said, that whenever we honor any upon the account of their
Virtues, it proceeds either from our being truly inclined to Virtue, or a
desire of being accounted such.

CXXXIX.
They who would define Victory by its birth, would be tempted, in imitation of
the Poets, to call her the Daughter of Heaven, since we find not her origin
upon Earth. In effect, she is the product of an infinite number of Actions,
which instead of taking her for their aim, relate only on the particular
concerns of those who do them; since all those persons, whereof an Army
consists, endeavoring the acquest of their own reputation and advancement,
jointly procure a good so great and so general as Victory.

CXL.
There is little distinction made in the species of Anger, though there be a
slight, and in a manner an innocent kind of it, proceeding from the earnestness
of the Complexion; and another very mischievous, which is, properly speaking,
Pride, and Self-love combining into a fury.

CXLI.
We are sensible of, or reflect on the transports and extraordinary agitations
of our Humors and Temperament, and impute them to the violent sallies of
Anger; but there are very few perceive, that these humors have an ordinary and
regular course, which gently moves and turns our wills to the performance of
different actions. They roll together (if I may so express it) and exercise
their jurisdiction with a certain vicissitude, so as that they have a
considerable part in all our actions, whereof we imagine our selves to be the
only Authors; and the capriciousness of the Humors is yet more fantastic than
that of Fortune.

CXLII.
We are liberal of our remonstrances and reprehensions toward those, whom we
think guilty of miscarriages; but we therein betray more pride, than charity.
Our reproving them does not so much proceed from any desire in us of their
reformation, as from an insinuation that we our selves are not chargeable with
the like faults. Were we our selves without pride, we should be the farther
from charging others with it.

CXLIII.
We are so strangely besotted with a favorable conceit of our selves, that
many times what passes for Virtues in our apprehensions, is, in effect, but an
accumulation of Vices, which have some resemblance thereto, so disguised by our
Pride and Self-love.

CXLIV.
Pride is always on the winning hand; nay it loses nothing, even when it seems
to discard Vanity it self.

CXLV.
The blind precipitancy of men in their actions, is, of all the effects of
their Pride, the most dangerous. This is that which affords it nourishment and
augmentation; and it is a manifest argument of our want of light, that we are
ignorant of all our miseries, and all our imperfections.

CXLVI.
We do not hug our selves in any thing so much, as the confidence which great
Persons and such as are considerable for their employments, parts, or merit,
seem to repose in us. From this we derive an exquisite pleasure, as being that
which raises our Pride to the highest pitch, because we look on it as an
acknowledgment and effect of our fidelity. And yet, if we considered well the
imperfection and bastardise of its birth, it should rather raise a confusion in
us: for it proceeds from Vanity, a letchery of making discoveries, and a
disability of keeping secrets. So that it may be said, that confidence is a
relaxation of the Soul caused by the number and weight of the things, which
before gave it some pressure.

CXLVII.
The ancient Philosophers, and especially Seneca, have not taken away Crimes by
their Precepts, but have only laid them down to carry on the superstructures of
Pride.

CXLVIII.
The Comedy of humane life consists of many several parts, yet Pride alone
makes a shift to act most of them; but, at last, weary of its artifices and
different transformations, it appears in its natural looks, and makes an open
discovery of it self in scorn; so that, to speak properly, Scorn is the
lightning, or declaration of Pride.

CXLIX.
Vanity is the great Author of all complemental and superfluous talk; when that
gives over suggesting, people have no great matter of discourse.

CL.
It were too hard a task to enumerate all the species of Vanity, inasmuch as it
extends to the infinity of things. Thence it comes that so few persons are
knowing, and that our knowledges are superfluous and imperfect. Instead of
Definitions of things, we content our selves with the Descriptions of them. In
effect, we neither have, nor can come to the knowledge of them, but at random,
and by certain common marks. Which is as much as if one said, that the body of
man is straight, and consists of different parts, without assigning the matter,
situation, functions, correspondencies, and differences of its parts.

CLI.
As concerning the good qualities remarkable in others, we heighten them rather
according to the esteem of our sentiments, than proportionably to their merit;
and we in effect commend our selves, when we seem to give them their due
praises. And that Modesty which stands so much upon the refusal of them, is
indeed but a desire of having such as are more delicate.

CLII.
In all commendations, wherever they are bestowed, there is some dormant
design and interest of the giver. Praise is a subtle secret and delicate
flattery, from which both the person who gives it, and he who receives it,
derive a different satisfaction: the one takes it as an acknowledgment and
reward of his merit; the other gives it, to make a discovery of his equity in
discerning worth.

CLIII.
We many times make choice of poisonous Praises, which by an unexpected cast
discover those imperfections in our friends which we durst not divulge
otherwise.

CLIV.
We hold men's Praises and Dispraises in several Scales, and make them weigh
heavier or lighter, as we please our selves.

CLV.
There are few arrived to that degree of wisdom, as to prefer the
discommendation, which is advantageous to them, before the praise which betrays
them.

CLVI.
There are some who commend when they make account to reproach; and others
whose praises are detractions.

CLVII.
Raillery is a frolic humor of the mind, which gives a life and smartness to
conversation, and is the cement of Society, if it be obliging, or disturbs it,
if it be not such.

CLVIII.
He who is inclined to raillery is more likely to be the subject of it, than he
who endures it.

CLIX.
To give it a fuller character, we may say it is always a certain skirmish of
Wit and Drollery, whereto the several parties are egged on by Vanity. Whence it
comes, that as well they who are awanting in those, to carry it on, as they
whom a reproached imperfection causes to blush, are equally offended at it, as
at an injurious defeat, which they know not how to pardon.

CLX.
In fine, this Raillery is a Poison, which taken without mixture extinguishes
Friendship, and excites Aversion, but, being corrected by the ingredience of
jocundity, and the flattery of praise, does either acquire or continue it. It
is a Medicine to be used with much caution and prudence, amongst Friends and
the weaker sort.

CLXI.
Interest is the Master-spring, which sets all sorts of persons in motion; it
makes them act all parts, even to that of a dis-interess'd person.

CLXII.
Men may pretend as much as they please to Candor, sincerity, and Honesty, in
their actions, but God only knows how far they are carried on with those
qualifications.

CLXIII.
Sincerity is a natural and voluntary overture of the heart: It is a rarity,
and found in very few persons: and that which is commonly practiced is only a
subtle dissimulation, or stratagem, whereby some endeavor to inveigle others
into confidence.

CLXIV.
Had not men's hearts been so skreen'd, as that there should be no mutual
observance of one another's thoughts, there had been more Tragedy than Comedy
in Humane Life.

CLXV.
In this the prudent man is distinguishable from the imprudent, that he
regulates his interests, and directs them to the prosecution of his designs
each in their order. Our earnestness does many times raise a disturbance in
them, by hurrying us after a hundred things at once. Thence it proceeds, that
out of an excessive desire of the less important, we do not what is requisite
for the attainment of the most considerable.

CLXVI.
Interest may be compared to an eclipsed Luminary. For as the latter is such
only in respect of those to whom the Eclipse is visible and not to others, who
have their abode in climates far remote from it; So of interest, it may be
said, that if some are blinded by it, to others it is all the light, whereby
they carry on their designs.

CLXVII.
It is the common assertion, that Vice deserves reproach, and Virtue praise;
but it is certain, that both derive their several degrees and measures thereof
from interest.

CLXVIII.
Nature which makes ostentation of being always sensible, is upon the least
occasion smothered by interest.

CLXIX.
The Philosophers do not discommend Riches, but only with a reflection upon our
ill husbandry of them, as being in their own nature innocent and indifferent,
since it depends on us to acquire them, and to make an irreproachable use
thereof, whereas they contribute support and augmentation of Vices, as fuel
does to the keeping in and increasing of fire. It is in our power to consecrate
them to the cultivation of all the Virtues, and to make these, by their means,
the more delightful and remarkable.

CLXX.
The contempt of wealth, in the Philosophers, was a secret desire of
vindicating their merit, against the injustice of Fortune, by an affected
slighting of those goods, whereof she deprived them. It was an humorous secret,
which they had found out, to indemnifie themselves from the disparagement
accessory to Poverty. In fine, it was a winding path, or by-way to get into
that esteem, which they could not obtain by Riches.

CLXXI.
Of all the kinds of subtlety, that proceeding from insinuation is the poorest,
since it ever argues a lowness of spirit, and an indigency of intrinsical merit.

CLXXII.
There is not any thing so dangerous as the use of those insinuations and
artifices which so many ingenious persons are commonly guilty of. The most
versed in humane transactions endeavor all they can in ordinary occurrences to
shun them, to the end they may make their advantage thereof upon some great
occasion, and in the pursuit of some considerable interest.

CLXXIII.
Whereas these crafty insinuations are commonly the refuges of a mean spirit,
it accordingly, for the most part, comes to pass, that he who makes use thereof
to disguise himself in one part, discovers himself in another.

CLXXIV.
It is the quintessence of all craft, for a man to make a show of falling into
those snares which are laid for him, and yet to keep out of them. Men are never
so easily deceived as when their thoughts are most bent upon the overreaching
of others.

CLXXV.
It is a fond conceitedness, which makes every one think himself a greater
Master: in point of craft than another: If men endeavored to understand what
are the offices of true prudence, all the designs of subtlety and treachery
would be defeated by circumspection.

CLXXVI.
Follies and imprudencies are our perpetual attendants through the several
scenes of our life; and if any one seem to be discreet, it is only in this,
that his extravagances are proportioned to his Age and Fortune.

CLXXVII.
The wisest men are only such in things indifferent, but seldom have that
denomination justly attributed to them in their most serious affairs; and
whoever thinks he lives without some ingredient of extravagance, is not so wise
as he imagines himself.

CLXXVIII.
Weakness occasions the committing of more treacherous actions, than the real
design of being treacherous.

CLXXIX.
Sycophancy, evasions, and dissimulations are instilled into us from our very
Cradles, and afterward grow so habitual to us, that we can hardly be ever
weaned from them.

CLXXX.
What pretenses soever we disguise our afflictions withal, yet are they but the
effects of Interest and Vanity.

CLXXXI.
There is a great mixture of Hypocrisy in Afflictions. For under pretense of
bewailing a person, for whom we have a more than ordinary kindness, we lament
the diminution of our own good, satisfaction, or concern in the person whom we
have lost. And thus is it, that the deceased have the honor of those tears,
which are shed only for them, from whose eyes they fall. I affirmed it to be a
kind of Hypocrisy, because a man does thereby deceive only himself.

CLXXXII.
There is yet another kind of this Hypocrisy, which is not so innocent, but
imposes upon all the world, and that is, the affliction of certain persons, who
aspire to the glory of a noble and immortal grief. For Time, who is the
insatiate devourer of all things, having consumed that which they so much
bemoan, yet do they still persist in an obstinacy of weeping, sighing, and
complaining. They assume a mournful part, and act it so well, as if they made
it their business to persuade the world, that they will spin out the
continuance of their lamentations to an equal length with that of their lives.
This dumpish and importunate vanity is commonly observable in Women of
ambitious inclinations; proceeding hence, that their Sex obstructing their
pursuit of fame all other ways, they cast themselves into this, and make it
their endeavor to become eminent by the ostentation of a disconsolate grief.
Of this kind would have been that of the famous Ephesian Matron, if the
seasonable relief and kindness of the Soldier had not given it an unexpected
check.

CLXXXIII.
Besides the account we have already given of grief, and the inherent
Hypocrisy that attends it, we have this further to add, That there are other
kinds of Tears, springing from certain small sources, and consequently soon
perceivable. Thus some weep, only to gain the reputation of being good-natured,
and tenderhearted. Others are liberal of their lamentations, to the end others
might express the same compassion toward them. And in fine, there are those
who shed tears, merely out of a consideration that it were a shame not to bear
others company in doing so.

CLXXXIV.
There are a sort of people who have the repute of honesty and fair dealing,
yet are not really possessed of those qualities, in regard they disguise the
corruption of their hearts, not only from others, but even from themselves. But
they are the truly honest who have the perfect knowledge of that corruption,
and make no difficulty to acknowledge it to others.

CLXXXV.
The truly honest person is he who is not offended at any thing.

CLXXXVI.
There may be several causes assigned why we meet with so few persons, whom we
allow to be rational and divertive in conversation. Of which this is one, that
there is hardly any body, whose thoughts are not rather taken up with what he
has a mind to say himself, than in precisely answering what had been said to
him; and that persons of greatest abilities and complaisance think it enough to
make a show of attention in their countenances, even when there may be
observed, in their looks and apprehensions, a certain distraction, and a
precipitancy of returning to what they would say, instead of considering, that
it is an unlikely method of pleasing or persuading others, to be so intentive
to please themselves; and that to hearken attentively, and to answer
pertinently, is one of the greatest perfections a man can be Master of.

CLXXXVII.
We will not say with Monsieur de la Chamber, in his Art how to know men, that
all the formations of the parts in a Woman are Prognostics of Vice, since it
holds not true in other Countries, though happily it may in his; but this we
shall not stick to affirm of the Sex in general, that the pretty humor they
have in talking, their desire of gaudiness in apparel, that of being waited on
into Parks, Walks, Spring-Gardens, or any other place where they may make
ostentation of their artifices, in heightning the advantages of Art or Nature,
(all which accomplishments, with diverse others, the French comprehend in the
word Coquetterie) are so necessary to the composition of a Woman, that without
some of them she must disclaim her name. Yet have not all of that Sex the
exercise of it, because this Coquetterie, in some of them, is checked and
restrained by their Temperament, their Reason, and want of conveniences and
opportunities.

CLXXXVIII.
Gallantry is a volubility of the mind, whereby it penetrates into things the
most insinuating and colloguing, that is, such as are most likely to please.

CLXXXIX.
Politeness is an artificial improvement and cultivation of the mind, whereby
superfluous excrescencies are kept under in order to the production of what
will be decent, delightful and beautiful.

CXC.
There are certain ingenious things which the mind seeks not after, but finds
brought to their full perfection in it self; so that it should seem they lay
hid there, as Gold and Diamonds do in the bosom of the earth.

CXC.
When Kingdoms are come to their height in point of politeness and
civilization, it argues the approach of their declination, inasmuch as then,
all their particular Inhabitants are bent upon the pursuit of their private
concerns, and diverted from promoting the public good.

CXCI.
If it be enquired why some men are so liberal of their civilities toward
others; it may be answered, that it is done, partly out of an expectation of
having the like returned to them, and partly out of a desire of gaining the
repute of understanding the mysteries of Civility.

CXCII.
The Magisterial part of a person who has the repute of being well versed in
humane affairs, is, that he perfectly know the value of every thing.

CXCIII.
It happens sometimes that Vices are hated, but the indigency of Virtue never
escapes contempt.

CXCIV.
When a man cannot find tranquillity within himself, it is to no purpose for him
to seek it elsewhere.

CXCV.
That which many times obstructs our right judging of those sentences, which
prove, that there may be only a show and pretense of Virtues, is this, that we
are over-easily inclined to believe them real in our selves.

CXCVI.
If men are advanced to great Charges, they accordingly meet with the greater
difficulties in the administration of them. Among those, that of a Supreme
Governor is the greatest; and of this qualification again, that Prince has
the hardest task of Government incumbent upon him, whose subjects are
distracted into a greater multiplicity of persuasions.

CXCVII.
If that great Prince, who first had the denomination of Wise given him, and
infinitely transcended in that Attribute all those who assumed it some Ages
after him, concluded his Ethical Recantations with a Vanity of Vanities, all is
Vanity, what is there left for us to say, who are fallen into the dregs of
Time, but the same thing in other words, That in all humane prescriptions there
is an apparent dose of Vanity; that there is an eye of it runs through the
whole Web of mortal Transactions, not to be worn out of them, till the final
dissolution of all things?

CXCVIII.
Of all the kinds of Vanity, that may be ranked among the highest, or rather
may claim a certain supremacy, which some persons are commonly subject to, who,
to gain the repute of ingenuity with others, speak such things as cannot fall
from them, without a secret compunction upon the delivery thereof. Of this
predicament are they, who employ their drollery upon the subject of Obscenity,
and Atheism. As to the former, the greatest end they can propose to themselves,
is, to have it imagined, that their forces, as to the Venereal Militia, have
been, or are, in some measure, answerable to the Muster they make of them in
their discourse, or at least, that their well-wishes and inclinations to the
service are as great as ever. Of the latter, this may be said, that their
satyrizing in divine concerns discovers their unsettled apprehensions of a
future Being, and begets, in those whom they seem to divert, a secret horror
for their positions, and a disrespect for their persons.

CXCIX.
How strangely has Providence ordered the conduct of humane affairs, that
they, who are insatiably desirous of wealth, honors, or pleasures, should, for
the most part, obtain their desires, though prosecuted by indirect courses!
What greater encouragement can they have, whose generous ambition aspires to
things of a more permanent concern, that their industry shall be rewarded? If
they whose apprehensions of happiness are confined to the narrow limits of this
world, are many times gratified with the success they propose to themselves,
what accumulation of recompense may not they expect, who, adjourning their
felicity to the other, are no less fervent in the pursuance of it?

CC.
It was an excellent Dichotomy of things found out by my Predecessor of famous
memory, the ancient Philosopher Epictetus, that they are either dependent on us
or not. What a man is possessed of within the sphere of that dependency on
himself, he may truly call his own, and look on as contributory to his
happiness and satisfaction; what are out of it, must, if he survey them not
with an indifferent eye, prove the continual exercise of his hopes and fears,
and so many disturbances of his tranquillity.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and are to be sold by, Tho. Basset at
the George in Fleet Street. 1669.
Folios.
COsmography in 4 Books, containing the Chorography and History of the World,
by Pet. Heylyn. price 20s.

The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holstein's Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the Year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
complete History of those Countries; whereto are added the Travels of Mandelslo
from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638, and finished in 1640. the whole
illustrated with diverse accurate Maps, and Figures: written originally by Adam
Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy. Englished by J. Davies, price 18 s.

An Historical Account of the Romish State, Court, Interest, Policies, etc. and
the mighty influences of the Jesuits in that Church and many other Christian
States, not hitherto extant. Written originally by Mons. de Saint Amor Doctor
of Sorbonne, Englished by G. Havers, price 14 s.

The History of Barbados, S. Christophers, Mevis, S. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Montserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty
eight, in two Books: containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands.
Illustrated with diverse Pieces of Sculpture representing the most considerable
rarities therein described. Englished by J. Davies, price 10 s.

The History of the late Wars in Denmark comprising all the transactions both
Civil and Military, during the differences betwixt the two Northern Crowns, by
R. Manley, price 6 s.

Ecclesia Restaurata, or the History of the Reformation of the Church of
England, containing the Beginning, Progress, and Successes of it; the Counsels
by which it was conducted, the rules of Piety and Prudence upon which it was
founded, the several steps by which it was promoted or retarded, in the change
of times; from the first preparation to it by K. Henry the 8. until the legal
settling and establishment of it under Queen Elizabeth, together with the
intermixture of such Civil Actions and Affairs of State as either were
co-incident with it, or related to it: the second Edition, to which is added a
Table of the principal matters contained in the whole Book, by P. Heylyn, price
10 s.

Herius Redivivus, or the History of the Presbyterians, containing the
beginnings, progress, and successes of that active Sect. Their oppositions to
Monarchical and Episcopal Government. Their Innovations in the Church, and
their Imbroilments of the Kingdoms and Estates of Christendom in the pursuit of
their designs, by P. Heylyn, price 10 s.

The complete Body of the Art Military, in three Books; being perfect
directions for the right ordering and framing of an Army, both of Horse and
Foot, together with all the manner of fortifications, and the Art of Gunnery,
by R. Elton Lieutenant Colonel, price. 8 s.

Twelves.
A Help to English History: containing a succession of all the Kings of
England, the English Saxons, and the Britains: the Kings and Princes of Wales,
the Kings and Lords of Man, the Isle of Wight: as also of all the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, and Bishops thereof: with the Description of the Places from
whence they had their Titles: together with the names and ranks of the
Viscounts, Barons and Baronets of England, by P. Heylyn. D. D. and since his
death continued to this present Year 1669. price 2 s. 6 d.

Now in the Press.
A persuasive to Conformity, written by way of a Letter to the Dissenting
Brethren, by a Country Minister.


