THREE SERMONS PREACHED AT SHERBORNE IN DORSETSHIRE.

By WILLIAM LYFORD B. D. Being his last SERMONS.

Upon these words;

2 Cor. 2.15, 16. For, we are unto God a sweet savor, etc.

ACADEMIA OXONIESIS
seal

OXFORD. Printed by H. HALL Printer to the University, for EDWARD FOREST.
1654.

2. COR. 2.15, 16. For we are unto God a sweet savor, etc.


TWo parts of Chap. 1. Showing the causes of his Indulgence toward that
excommunicate person, giving order for his reception into Fellowship upon his
repentance testified. 2. The success of his Ministry, v. 14. Now thanks be to
God, etc. The praise and glory of the success of our Ministry is to be
ascribed to God alone; he causes us to triumph: q. d. notwithstanding all the
oppositio^s, we meet with all, yet God gives us the conquest; wherever we
preach the Gospel all Countries are brought into subjection to the obedience of
the faith; he manifests the savor q. d. the doctrine of the Gospel is a
sweet perfume blown about with the Breath of the Apostles preaching into all
parts of the world, and does sweeten and season them with saving knowledge. q.
d. God never places the faithful ministry of the Gospel in any place, but he
uses to make it savorie and fruitful unto some, in every place some were
seasoned with it. Ob. If so, why then do so many in every place reject the
Gospel as an odious thing? You stink in the nostrills of some, and are
counted as the filth of the world: Sol: True, unto some men we are so, but yet,
unto God, in his esteem and account of us, we are a sweet savor of Christ;
the knowledge of Jesus Christ spread abroad by us is pleasing to God, though
not salvificall to all, q. d. we are a sweet savor of Christ, we are pleasing,
grateful, and delightful to God, because, by us is sent abroad the sweet
savor of Christ, the knowledge of his sweet mercy and grace to the corrupt
world, to save filthy sinners, that lay rotting and stinking in their sins.
v. 16. This sweet doctrine is indifferently preached to all, but it works in a
very different manner; for as much as being received by believers, it produces
in them life and salvation, but being rejected by unbeleevers, it seals up
their condemnation, it is a killing word to them. We preach Christ a Savior;
for to know him, it is eternal life, but to them that disobey him, a Judge. To
some Christ preached is the power of God, and the wisdom of God. To others he
is foolish nesse, his Gospel is unsavorie, a dead thing. To the one sort he is
a savor of life (i.) a vital savor, of spiritual life to life eternal, of
spiritual death unto death eternal to the other. In the words. 3. 1. the
nature of the Gospel, a sweet savor. 2. The esteem that God has of his
Ministry, they are unto him a sweet savor for their works sake. 3. The power
of the Gospel, it is unto life or unto death; the one is effectus per se, that
which comes from it in its own nature; the other per accidens that which
follows upon the neglect and contempt of 4. The difficulty of this calling,
who is (...) sufficient? he remoues from himself the suspicion of arrogancy;
for, neither he nor they are sufficient Four doctrines. First, a sound
Ministry is a savorie Ministry, it sends forth a sweet savor of Christ to
perfume the world: or The Gospel Purely preached brings with it a sweet smell
and savor to the souls of God's elect. Second doctrine. The faithful
Ministers of Christ are well pleasing, as a sweet smelling savor unto God both
in them that be saved and in them that perish. God esteems so of them, however
the success be. Third doctrine. The same Ministry and the same doctrine
preached indifferently to all, has not the same effects in all. It is to some a
doctrine of life and salvation, it has a spiritual savor and relish, but to
others it is a deadly savor, it does the^ no good. Fourth doctrine. Men are to
be reckned in a state of life or death, of perishing or being saved, according
as they do, or do not receive the savor, and relish the doctrine of our
ministry of the Gospel; (for, so the persons are here distributed) I made
choice of this Text because from hence arises the fountain of your
everlasting weal or woe, from peoples respect or disrespect to this ordinance.
I think you are glad to see me now. But your aims upon me should be
spiritual, for spiritual good. What the issue will be God knows; if he has
more work for me, he will restore me to his house, and make you more diligent
hearers, that so both may rejoice together: First doctrine, A sound Ministry
sends forth a sweet savor. The Breath of the Gospel is a sweet odor or
smell; and God's faithful Ministers are they that carry it, and blow it abroad
to perfume and season the souls of sinners, that ly stinking in their sins and
in a state of condemnation Ministers are (in regard of their necessity and
utilitie, or benefit to the world) compared to light, to shine to them that fit
in darkness; to salt, to season and preserve from putrefying; and in this
place to a sweet perfume, to make the men of earth to savor of Christ, of
Religion, of Heaven. And that for two Reasons. First Reason. Because they open
the mystery and riches of God's grace in Christ to lost and undone mankind:
Mary Magdalen brought a Box of ointment of Spiknard, very precious; And she
brake the Box, and poured it on Christ's head, and the house was filled, Mark
14.3. Joh 12.3. Christ himself is like that Box; the Ministers open it, the
Treasures of wisdom and mercy, that be in Christ, and pour it on your heads;
and the whole house where they preach is filled with the odor thereof; you
carry the sent of it upon you all the week after, yea as long as you live.
Thus Cant. 1.3. Christ is compared to rich ointments: (because of the savor of
thy good ointments.) Christ was filled with all Graces, anointed with the holy
Ghost and Power, and the savor of these ointments is smelt, when the Gospel
preached is perceived by sense, or judgment, (for, by smell or savours is
meant knowledge by sense and feeling). It follows. Thy name is as ointment
powered forth; Christ's name is by interpretation, Anointed. By his name is
meant the doctrine of his grace, the law of faith, and the preaching of that
grace is called the Bearing of Christ's name before the Gentiles. Acts 9.15.
That Is the pouring forth of that ointment, Therefore do the Virgins love thee,
(that is) They that be chosen of God and faithful, who serve God with chaste
and pure minds, and are not tainted with the common pollutions of the world.
These love Christ, they follow him, they are taken with the odor of his
precious ointments, which they perceive sensible to revive and refresh their
souls. The second reason is: Because the breath of their doctrine does blow
upon dead souls, and does breath into them the spirit of life. In Ezekiel. 37.9.
the Propher was willed to prophecy unto the wind, and say, come O wind, and
blow upon these slain, that they may live: so, I prophesied, and the breath
came into them, and they lived. The savor of Christ's doctrine is like this
breath, Cant. 4.16. Awake o North wind, and blow upon my garden, that the
spice thereof may flow out: By this blowing is signified the ministration of
his word and spirit bestowed on his people for their spiritual reviving and
refreshing. As on the contrary; The restraint of God's graces by wholesome
doctrine, is signified by four Angels holding the four winds of the earth,
that the wind should not blow on the earth nor on the sea, Rev. 7.1. The
savor of the knowledge of Christ is a breath of life; it is that by which
corruption is purged away, which when it enters into the soul, it does become
a savor of life unto life; God makes our words savorie and fruitful to the
Elect: Again, in this Metaphor of sweet savor, is an allusion to the
ointment, and the sweet incense, which the Priests offered with their
sacrifices. So by the Gospel we season the souls of men, and bring them as a
sweet sacrifice unto God. See Romans 15.15.16. He speaks of his ministration.
That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, etc. and the
effect of it was, By it he had prepared a sacrifice for God, the offering up of
the Gentiles. They were unto God an offering of a sweet savor, acceptable to
God, being sanctified by the holy Ghost. A Sacrifice of the Gospel must not be
a dead thing, it must not be an unclean or corrupt thing. But being breathed
upon with this sweet savor of Christ, We offer our selves to God a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable by Jesus Christ, Rom: 12.1. By preaching of
faith we receive the spirit, Gal. 3.2. The third Reason. It sends forth a sweet
savor of Christ to them that are already planted in Christ's garden, to
comfort and refresh their spirits. When our spirits be spent and weak, sweet
things burnt do refresh them. So Cant. 4.16. Blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow out. The ministration of the Gospel causes the
sweet smelling fruits of repentance, faith, love, prayer, thanksgiving to flow
out, that these fruits do ripen, all graces are strengthened and increased.
Thus under God we are a sweet savor of Christ, (that is) we cause the sweet
savor to be sent abroad, because we open Christ's riches to the world, because
by it, the dead souls are seasoned, and they that live are comforted and
refreshed.

First Use. Are we a sweet savor of Christ? Then see what a filthy thing sin
is, and what noisome offensive creatures men are, that have not been perfumed
with this heavenly knowledge. Second Use. Therefore never think thou have been
a good hearer, or have profited by the Gospel, till thy whole soul be filled
and seasoned with the savor of Jesus Christ; where the Gospel is purely
preached and received, ibi reperitur vis odoris Christi, there the efficacy of
Christ's savor is found: your rich perfumes of Leather or Cloth, they are
lasting; the things perfumed will carry the sent for a long time, yea it will
never quite out: so if you be perfumed with the knowledge of Christ, It will
make your affections, your delights, your comforts, your praises, your
dispraises, they will all savor of Christ; so will your tongue, so will your
dealings, so will your outward man. They must all savor of Christ, else do
not think it is all well, else it is but like the perfuming of a dead carcass,
I observe you cast your Rosemarie branches into the graves of your friends, the
smell refreshes you, but not the dead, because he is dead. And it is a sign,
your souls are dead under a savorie ministry, when they still relish and
savor of the earth, of rottenness, of folly and vanity: How few among us can
say, the ministry has been the savor of Christ to me? Consider your own
thoughts and ways, your wit, and discourses, what do they savor of? Of
Christ? Of heavenly things? Nay rather of a Playbooke, of an Alehouse, of
Atheism, of Epicurisme, of Worldly delights. Come to the Statesmen and
Politicians of this world, and what do their counsels savor of. Of Christ?
is the smell of Christ upon them? Nay rather of Machiavell, of Turcisme, Come
to the Gallants of our time, if Christ should take them by their powdered hair,
by their naked backs, by their painted and pictured faces. What do they smell
off? Of Christ? Of Grace? of Modesty? Nay rather of Pride, wantonness,
discontent at God's workmanship, that has made them thus, not fair enough, not
white enough? Consider the ways of Christians, their delights, their labors,
their oppressions, their covenant breaking. How little relish of Christ is to
be found? Men may justly think, that such have not lived under a Ministry,
that savours of Christ. Surely all is not well with such; Thou art not as yet
one planted in the Garden of spices; the ointment of Christ, which is the
graces of the holy Ghost, have not yet descended upon thee; Christ speaks thus
to his Church; Cant 4.10. How much better is thy love then wine, and the smell
of thy garments, then all spices. In Cant. 1.23. The Church admireth Christ's
graces, and prefers Christ's love before wine; here Christ does the like of
her love toward him: here Christ shows how much he is taken with the graces
of his Church. Chap. 1. The Church extolleth the savor of Christ's ointments;
here Christ does hers. Which did send forth a sweet savor, like sweet smelling
spices. A Christian is one anointed with Christ's ointment, and we must carry
the sent thereof upon all our actions: See Za. 14.20.21. It tells you how
holiness should abound in times of the Gospel, In that day there shall be
upon the Bells of the horses, Holiness to the Lord, and the pots in the Lord's
house shall be like the bowls before the Altar: upon the plate, of gold,
which the High Priest did wear on his forehead was engraven Holiness to the
Lord, Now that title must be upon all things belonging to a Christian, (for we
are made Priests unto our God) as upon the Bridles of of our Horses (that is)
upon the instruments of war, of our labor, and of our Recreations. Holiness
must be upon our garments, upon our pots, (that is) upon the Instruments of
our eating and drinking. Upon the Attire of many, may be written not Holiness
to the Lord, but Pride, Lightness, Vanity, prodigality; upon their horses
and furniture, Rapine, Plunder, and violence; upon the Brims of their dishes,
Extortion, and oppression; upon their Cups excesses, etc. Whereas every thing
belonging to a Christian should savor of Christianity. All the things and
utensills and appurtenances of the Temple were counted and called holy in their
kind, and in several degrees Jerusalem was an holy city, and every pot in
Jerusalem shall be holy to the Lord. The house of the Lord was more then the
city, and the pots thereof more holy. The Altar was more holy then the other
parts of the, temple. Now the Holiness under the Gospel should thus rise, the
pots in Jerusalem holy to the Lord: like the pots in the Lord's house: and the
pots in the Lord's house like the Bowls before the Altar. The meaning seems to
be this; that the meanest things of common and ordinary use, whether in war or
peace, should now become holy and be holily used, in the whole carriage and
conversation of a Christian: whatsoever Christians go about to do should be
as an acceptable sacrifice to the Lord. 1 Pe. 2 5.

The third use, how to Judge of a sound Ministry of Christ; does it savor of
Christ? of his doctrine? spirit? Counsels? of his righteousness? Graces? of
salvation? does it tend to season bad hearts? sweeten corrupt tongues and
lives? To make you relish of Christ? It Is one thing to savor of poets, of
learning, of morality, another to savor of Christ, of regeneration. Christ's
perfume must be opened, that our faith may stand in his wisdom, and in the
power of God. It is a sad thing to sit under a dead, saplesse, unsavorie
Ministry: But a savorie Ministry is a choice mercy, a precious blessing, and
so to be reckoned of. One that savours of Christ himself, and can spread that
savor unto others: when ye can smell and taste Christ in his doctrine, in his
words, in his life, this is a choice mercy, because it tends to the salvation
of souls, and they ought to be unto us as a precious perfume. Second doctrine.
The faithful Ministers of Christ are precious, as a sweet smelling savor unto
God; however the success of our Labors be, (unto God) we are a sweet savor
in them that are saved, and in them that perish. Paul does dignifie in this
speech this ordinance of God, the better to work in people an high esteem of
it. However the world esteems of our office and persons, yet unto God we are a
sweet savor. To testify this Esteem of them, God is not ashamed to call us
his Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5. Laborers together with God. 1 Cor. 3.9. Chosen
vessels to bear his name before the Gentiles: yea even where God is not
pleased to work with our Ministry, so far as to make it effectual to the
Conversion of men, yet even there our Ministry is acceptable unto God. He
joyeth and takes pleasure in it, God testifies his esteem of them, because
the injuries done to them, God takes as done to himself. As by the law of
nations injuries doneto an Ambassador are taken as done to the Prince that
sends him, he that receaveth a Prophet in my name, receaveth me; And he that
despises you, despises me, and him that sent me. And he gives a special
charge concerning them, touch not mine anointed (next unto Kings) and do my
Prophets no harm. God will revenge the injuries done to them. 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
Rev 11.5. He that hurts my witnesses shall in like manner be killed. It is
the last sin that goes before a general judgment. But they mocked the
messengers of God, till there was no remedy. It Is a forerunner of judgments
upon an unthankful people. First use is to support us against all
discouragements, the greatest of which is want of success: what? though the
world hate us, it hated Christ first: Paul first was made the offscouring of
the world, even by his own children, whom he had converted to the faith, 1
Cor. 4.14.15. he might expect better esteem from such, yet he was hated by
them. What? though many perish, and be the worse for our preaching, yet our
labor is acceptable, our doctrine sound. God likes us when we preach damnation
to the impenitent; It Is a savorie doctrine, the breathing out of threatenings is
the Advancing of Christ; The breathing out of threatenings is a savorie doctrine
to them that believe it, it mortifies lusts, it kills nothing but sin, it saves
the soul; it is unsavorie to a man settled on his lees, but savory to believers.
Second use if it be a sweet savor to God, it ought also to be to us, if ye be
sons of God; O what a mercy the Gospel is? It Is a sign God has a people
there. The whole course of saving mercy is comprehended in that one mercy. When
Paul would sum up the advantages of the Jew above the Gentile, he does it in
this one word, (Chiefly) Because unto them were committed the Oracles of God,
Romans 3.2. whereas the Gentiles were strangers to the covenants of promises, and
therefore without hope, and without: God in the world. How comes it then
about that they which are sweet to God, are a stink in the no. strills of the
world It is a sign our senses are much distempered: when those words, how
beautiful are the feet of them which preach glad tidings, shall be turned,
into, how ugly are the faces of them that bring this sweet savor? That sense
also is much distempered. A deceitful heart has caused them to err. Let me
speak unto England: as Paul spoke of the Jews, your (Chiefly) your interest,
your Crown, your glory, lies in this, that thou enjoyest the breath of life.
What advantage has England above other Nations? Much every way: You that are
Merchants and Travelers know it full well; we have enjoyed long peace, above
fourscore years (that was the longest rest that Israel's land ever enjoyed, (
Judges 3.30.) Under Kings and Queens, which clothed us with skarlet, made
silver as stones, and gold as the Sycomores, that filled our houses with good
things. The Riches of other nations were brought into us, yea their delights
(as Solomon's Apes and Peacocks), that which other nations enjoyed single, we
enjoyed them altogether. Our honor and renown was spread, no fear to him
that went out, or to him that came in, every one sat under his own vine, etc.
These advantages had thou o England above other people. Yet thy (Chiefly) lay
in this; Thou did enjoy the oracles of God, dispensed by a sound, boly,
faithful ministry. By means whereof thy land was as the garden of spices,
many thousands of thy people are gone to heaven, and many thousands yet alive
have by their ministry received and tasted so much of Christ's sweet savor,
for which they shall bless God to all eternity. What ayleth thee o Land, that
thy Ministers are become hatred in the house of thy God, their names a scorn
and derision? What evil have they brought unto thee, that thou art weary of
them? Nay, may not the Lord expostulate the case with thee, and say wherein
have I wearied thee, o Land, testify against me, I have not wearied thee with
costly sacrifice and incense? Why is that slender maintenance become a burden
unto thee now at last? Is not my Gospel worth thy Tenths? Thou owe to thy
Minister even thy self also, Philem. v. 19. and do thou begrudge them of thy
Temporalls. O England, art thou become a land of Gadarens, that to save thy
Tithes wilt send away thy Preachers? Is thy soul worth no more then the price
of these perishing things, Consider what the change will be: have thou forgot
thy blessed Sabaths, and the fruitful solemnities of them, thy comfortable
Communion with God in the Sacraments, in prayer and praise? Would it not be a
sad time to see a famine, not of Bread, but of hearing the word of the Lord? To
see the songs and solemnities of the Temple turned into howlings? To see those
holy and beautiful houses, where our Fathers praised God, to be burnt with
fire, and all our pleasant things to be laid waste? Esa 64.11. (It was the
Church's complaint there) what is it an honor to thee, that thy Ministers be
of the basest of thy people? To starve them that feed thee; yea that spend
themselves to feed thee? Will it not be grief of heart to see the Candlestick
without a light? The Table without Bread? That there be neither Light nor Food
in the house of God? God be merciful to an unthankful people.

O our God, however it shall please thee to afflict us, do not take thy
Gospel from us. Though thou do feed us with Bread and Water of Affliction:
yet let not our Pastors be hid in a corner, but let our eyes see our Teachers,
and our hearts hear the secret voice of the Spirit, accompanying it, This is
the good way walk in it. And according to thy good promise be with thy holy
ones, to the end of the world. Let the blessing of Levi rest upon their heads,
Deuteronomy. 33.8, 10, 11.

FINIS.
2. Cor. 2.16. To the one a Savor of etc.


A Savor of death unto death, (that is) a deadly savor, an occasion of their
farther hardening and impenitencie. The Gospel is to them a dead unsavourie
thing, they gather poison out of the word of life. To the other sort, a Savor
of life, (that is) It is a quickening word, they feel some life in it: and this
vital Savor is unto life eternal. It follows,



Cor. 1.23, 24. We preach Christ crucified to the Jews a stumbling-blocke, to
the Greeks foolishnes. But unto them which are called both Jew and Greek,
Christ the power of God and wisdom of God. The Jews seek after signs, they
see Christ crucified through weakness, therefore they stumble at him. The
Greeks seek after wisdom, and arguments of reason, they discourse of sin and
salvation, and the life to come, according to their wit, and Philosophical
Principles. It Is foolishness to tell them of Justification by a condemned
person, Again, 1. Pet. 2.7. I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone. But there be
different opinions of him, and accordingly different manners of receiving him;
to some he is precious; nothing so precious as Christ, nothing so honored as
Christ, nothing so dear: To the other, he is set aside as a vessel of no use,
yea he is unto them a Rock of offense, they dash against him, and perish: the
one believe on him, and are not confounded; to the other he is a rock of
offense to their fall and ruin through their own disobedient hearts. And thus
Simeon said of Christ Luke 2.34. That Christ is set for the rising and falling
of many in Israel: Some that stand in high esteem in the Church shall fall,
others that be low, shall be raised and comforted: one proof more, Act. 13.48.
Paul's hearers; some speak against the things which were spoken by Paul. But
as many, as we^re ordained to life believed; God who has ordained the end,
eternal life; has prepared the means, and makes the same effectual to some,
which are not to others. From this his place it is clear: that when several
persons here the same Sermon, see the same miracles, enjoy the same word of
life, yet to so it proves a savor of life etc. 1. The one is effectus per se,
the proper effect of the Gospel; the other per accidens through the
frowardness of them that hear it. 2. These places show what Christ, and the
word preached are (occasionally) to some men through their voluntary resisting
against God and his ordinances. And not what they are (intentionally) in God's
purpose and thoughts, when he first gave the Gospel. He intended them for
good, though men pervert them to their hurt. 2. Again, it is a deadly savor,
not as if the Gospel of its own nature breathed out death to any; for, it is
the ministry of life. 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. and the Power of God to salvation; but by
reason that impenitent sinners will not be healed, they set themselves against
it, and so it turns to their condemnation.



perse, which is unto life, there is one cause) of the event per accidens,
which is unto death, there is another cause: The Reason of the event perse, is
God's grace, which opens the heart, and bows the will to embrace the word of
life, so amongst Paul's Hearers, Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to
eternal life, Believed: ordaining to eternal life went before their
believing. So when the seaventie returned, and told our Savior, what good
success their preaching had abroad, whereas the Jews which heard Christ
himself, repented not, Christ breaks out into an admiration of God's love, I
thank thee O Father of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things
from the wise; and what do we learn from hence. 'It does not go by wit or
learning; for, it was hid from the prudent and wise. Nor yet by the excellency
of the Preacher; for, Christ was greater then the Disciples, yet their Ministry
was of greater efficacy.

Where then lies the difference? God was pleased to reveal those mysteries to
Babes. Even so, because it seemed good in thy sight. Mat. 11.25, 26. with Luke
10.20, 21: To know these mysteries is the Gift of God, and being a gift, it is
free for him to give it to one, and not to another. Remarkable to this purpose
is that Romans 11.7. But the Election has obtained it. The question is
propounded, verse. 1. Has God cast away his people? No, He proves it, first, in
himself, I am a Jew, therefore all are not cast away. Secondly, God has not
cast away his people, whom he foreknew. What then, how stands the matter? Why,
this is the conclusion, the election has obtained it, the rest were blinded;
the elect have a preeminence above the rest, the God of grace does shine into
their hearts the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. But the God of the world has blinded the minds of them that
believe not, least the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the
image of God, should shine unto them. 2 Cor. 4.4.6.

per accidens, occasionally, it provesa savor of death to some.



Jer. 6.14. They dealt falsely, they healed the hurt of the daughter of my
people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there was no peace. Thus it comes
to pass, that the poor soul is hardened, when men preach the free grace of
God and mercy, without laying before people the conditions, whereupon mercy is
promised; when we promise them life, and do not press upon them the
necessity of holy walking in the path of life, mercy without repentance.
People must be sound in repentance, in faith, in purity of conscience, else we
can promise them no peace of conscience; we must put a difference between
precious and vile Jer. 15.19. We must not preach as if all alike should be
saved, as if the outward ordinances and communion therein were sufficient;
unless ye be circumcised in the heart, as well as in the flesh, baptized with
the spirit, inwardly called, really converted, etc. Ye cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven, we must deal clearly in this point, else we delude the
people. We must tell you, that it is not all your moralities, nor all your
civilities, nor all your formalities in prayer and coming to Church, that
makes a sound Christian; ye must be humbled, and brought into covenant with
Christ; whatsoever is short of regeneration, is short of salvation: Thus Mat.
7.22. profession of Christ's name will not serve the turn. A distinguishing
Ministry is the savory saving Ministry, which lets you see in what state you
are, whether in nature, or in Grace; Sheep, or Goats etc. A promiscuous
preaching of Christ's mercy to all without any other distinguishing marks,
does cause a mis-application of the Gospel; and men, that are sons of death,
think themselves Children of life. Poor souls are blinded to their
destruction through Ministers fault: we must not warrant repentance to be true
without faith, nor faith to be true in any, that see not their cursed state in
nature, that feel not their need of faith by reason of sin and misery. Nor can
we warrant faith in any Body, that is not become a new Creature; and the
newborn desire to grow by the sincere milk of the word etc. The Gospel
preaching mercy to the Lump is a truth, But that word must be rightly divided,
and mercy applied to whom it is promised.

On the peoples part, four ways. 1. By reason of their carelessness,
customarinesse in religion, not Examining, Trying, and Applying to themselves
in particular the marks and truths delivered: when the faithful Ministers
show the world how their sins are pardoned, and how they must get into the
Covenant of Grace to have their deadly woe removed, people do not mark it,
nor take pains about it, but esteem of it as a light matter, as if God were
beholding to them for hearing the Gospel of Salvation. This Customarinesse you
discover by carelessness in hearing, and after hearing; some lay them to
sleep, others play with their Children, others place themselves out of hearing
etc. people plainly show, that they come not, as people, that are to deal in
matters of salvation and damnation, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them,
that are lost; the light thereof shines clear, but the fault is in your
selves, you are content to be blindfolded and holden back from so great a
treasure as is communicated in the Gospel. O Is it not a sad thing (and yet
too true) that in many houses, not one of the family knows himself to be
saved? All such saving knowledge is a mystery to them? you think you have
repented, because you have sorrowed for some particular sin; and that you have
faith, because you hold some doctrines of faith, (the Devils do the same.) But
how to know your selves to be the elect of God, though it be clearly laid forth
by your Ministers, yet that heavenly truth is not understood, because you are
not careful to try your selves, and to prove your estate to be good. All is
but a dead and unsavorie thing upon your spirits. Whereas the conscionable
hearer does find spiritual life in such distinguishing truths; he is
comforted and quickened, finding his name to be written in the book of God.

2 Secondly, it proves a deadly savor to you by reason of the discontent,
pride, self-love, and contentiousnesse of your spirits, that will not endure
to be reproved, or searched; you stumble at the word through disobedience, be
angry with that which should do you most good, quarrel at the Light. Now when
people be thus settled on their Lees; when they have such stumbling blocks of
iniquity in their hearts, now I say, that word which brings life to others,
brings death to you, you see no good in it. As if you stir a dunghill, it
stinks the worse, so if you rake in a foul heart, the mud and filth that is in
it does arise, and corruption works the more; O what reasonings and sidings
with sin and Satan? o what anger and opposition against the Light? Sin taking
occasion by the Commandment, says Paul, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence, Romans 7.8. The Law did put no evil motion into his heart; but
wrought, (that is) did stir it up; it was there before, it set corruption
aworke. If the word do not prevail to subdue and purge out corruption; then
it stirs it up and sets it a working, and so proves a savor of death to you.
Whereas the same doctrines, reproves, and searching trialls to the saved ones
do yield a savor of life. Good is the word of the Lord, I am vile, I am
unclean, thy word is truth: Hic ure, hic seca, ut in aeternum parcas. Let thy
word cut and not spare my heart, my dearest corruptions: Let it discover my
ignorance, my hypocrisy, my unsoundnesse in repentance, my formalitie in
duties, etc. It shall not be unto me as an enemies sword, but as a Surgion's
knife, that cuts to heal my wound, my festered soul. Although the word puts
you to strong fightings, to sad fears, to doubtings and disputings within your
self, yea to loud cries through depth of sorrow, and bring you into combats
with Satan; yet you will see, there is a savor of life in it; you will not let
go your hold of it, till it bring forth judgment unto victory. As one in
danger of drowning, will take hold of a naked sword, though it cut him, rather
then sink in the water; it is better to be cut then drowned: so the saved ones
will keep and hold fast the word, though with some great difficulties, rather
then give over their soul into the Divel's hands, and themselves into
perdition. Thus the word is a savor of life to them, though it cut, and smart,
there is life in it, it is good, it is sweet, they relish spiritual counsel
in it, it proves to them a true and faithful word. Thus by occasion of peoples
frowardness, and discontent at the word it proves odor mortis.

3 Thirdly, By reason of prejudices and hard conceits of the Preacher, many a
sound truth is lost and disrellished for the sake of him, that brings it, as
Ahab said of Micaiah, Here is one Prophet of the Lord: but I hate him, etc. If
the same truths were delivered by other men, O how precious would they be? But
such a man I cannot endure to hear, though they cannot be charged with
negligence or unsufficiency, in their Ministry, nor with scandal and disorder
in their lives. But some byrespects turns away our hearts from them, and from
their Doctrine for their sakes; As some are young, and have no judgment, some
are old, and they wax childish again: some are rich, and they are covetous,
some are poor, and therefore Contemptible, and we will not be taught by such:
some tell the peoples faults in the Pulpit, and meddle with that they have
nothing to do withal, and we do not like that; for, they are malicious, and
at enmity with us: some are not of our side, etc. And though none of these
things be faults, yet people stumble at them. It therefore much availes, with
what affections we come to hear. The ignorant and scandalous, the
superstitious and factious, are just offenses, unfit to be Teachers. But do
not lay a stumbling block in thine own way, because the person is not in every
respect such a one as thou desire. If thou were on the Scaffold to be
beheaded, thou would welcome a pardon, though brought by the hand of a
person, not so well thought of: so etc.

4 Fourthly, a savor of death, because people do not hear the words, as the
word of God, but of man. People do not come to it, nor look upon it as an
ordinance of divine authority, but an exercise of humane wit and charity, and
accordingly they do not receive it with reverence and faith; but with the
head, with applause or dispraise, according as the matter is carried. See 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth the
word of God; that is the right way of receiving heavenly truths, not because we
say it, but because it is God's word; and that is the true way to profit by what
we hear; for, then it works effectually in them that believe. An ordinary
retainer to a Kings Court may tell what the Ambassadors message is, but that is
of no respect, unless the Ambassador do deliver it, as from his Master that
sent him: So, etc.

I have seen it printed, and heard it spoken by way of complaint, that the
ordinances now adays have lost their converting power. And well it may be so,
when as gifted men are heard with equal respect to God's Ministers. Gifted men
are like but a retainer to the Court, they cannot preach in the name of the
Lord; they cannot lay obedience upon men's conscience; and why? Because the Lord
has not sent them: the Lord speaks not by them, they speak of themselves. And
since they are cried up, and God's messengers decried, the conscience of the
hearer is at liberty, to obey, or not obey the word. And doubtless much is to
be laid to their charge for the general contempt of the Gospel preached: it is
made a matter of indifferency whom we hear etc. Beware of that error. See
Mat. 7.29. For, he taught them, as one having authority. So must we preach, and
so must you hear.



Ephesians. 1.4. He chose us in him, that we should be holy and without blame before
him in love, with 2 Th. 2.13. We are bound to give thanks to God for you,
brethren; Because God has from the Beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth. 2 Timothy 2.21. If a man
therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel of honor etc. These
things are conjoined; God's elect are not a profane berren, unclean kind of
people, good for nothing, but holy, pure, fruitful, and by such good works is
our calling made sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. And the proper result of this Doctrine is
this, I will strive to be holy, to purify my conscience from all iniquity.
They which make Religion their business etc. have the seal of Election upon
their hearts. Hence they thus reason; Is not the knowledge of my election unto
life, worth all the pains, that I shall take to attain it? and worth all the
sweet sins which I am to relinquish for it: will all the world be able to
recompense the loss of my soul? of my God? what stronger motive to
Godliness, can be proposed to an unconverted soul? Secondly, especially
considering that this Doctrine does not tell any man in particular, that he is
a Reprobate; noe man can know it by himself, because thy present sins are not
above God's Grace; God is above thy naughty heart; and therefore we preach the
Gospel of salvation to men, as sinners, (not as elect or reprobate) to all
sinners without exception; we bid them come to Christ, and he will heal them.
We challen^ge all the world to name one man or woman, that ever repented in
vain, and prayed or sought God in vain. It is a dangerous temptation of the
Devil, in stead of obeying the Gospel, to be inquisitive in the first place,
whether we be elected or not; obey, and thou art Elected. 1 Th: 1.4, 5, 6.
Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God: for, our Gospel came not unto
you in word only, but in power and in the holy Ghost and in much assurance, as
ye know what etc. Therefore art thou a sinner? then Reason thus, Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners, the chief of sinners; Preach this Gospel
to every Creature that every creature may have a ground to believe and live;
for, whosoever comes unto him, he will in noe wise cast off. Reason thus,
The Lord freely offers mercy, if I will but forsake my sins. He assures me,
that if I seek and strive I shall not seek in vain; that he awaites, that he
may be merciful unto me; that where the means are used, the end will be
obtained. Blessed arge they, that hungre and thirst after righteousness.
Praying, Preaching, and seeking, are not in vain; for, every one that seeks,
finds Luke 11.9.10, Ask, and it shall be given unto you seek, and ye shall
find etc. It was a good saying of Sarah Wight to a Gentlewoman in spiritual
distress, go, say to God, heal me, I have sinned, heal my backslidings. Oh
but I am no better for saying it, when I have no heart nor spirit to pray, yet
(quoth Sarah Wight) Say it, though you be not better, because God bids you say
it, Say it, and say it again, till he heal you: it may be he will come in,
when you say it; if you can but say it with your lips, the everlasting Arms of
God can reach you, when you cannot reach him; we must look at God's revealed
will, that we should pray and wait on him in his ways. Peter bid Simon Magus
Pray. In preaching the Gospel, light, motion, and power goes out to all, which
they that resist, perish, not because they could not believe, but because they
resist and refuse to obey. What greater encouragement to holiness and to duty,
to study of piety, and Christian endeavors after Grace? This they do savor,
that are saved.

to accept of it, to humble himself, and pray and obey him, and live to him,
that gave himself for me. Christ's part is to give and bestow the graces of
faith, repentance, and humiliation. But it is the sinner's part to exercise
them. Free Grace does not set the heart at liberty to lusts.

In the doctrine of free grace and redemption by Christ God has this purpose,
and aim (namely) to show a visible ground, upon which all humbled sinners
might accept of peace. And likewise that there might be a visible rule of
rejecting all, that wilfully contemn their own peace.

The doctrine of free will: The Gospel teaches that we are dead in sins and
trespasses, unable to raise our selves to spiritual life. And that it is the
spiritual grace of God, by which we are converted and raised. This yields to
some a deadly inference, therefore in vain is the use of means urged, and
people leave all to God in a brutish way, saying as it pleases God, it is God
that must do it for us, we have no power of our selves etc. This is a deadly
inference, it slaies many a soul. Whereas in other affairs, we reason quite
contrary; I am sick and cannot help my self, therefore I will go to the
Physician; cannot read nor write, therefore I will go to school to be taught.
I cannot tell how to make a garment tto till the ground, etc. Therefore what
shall I say? I must refer all to God; nay, but therefore I will get the skill
etc. The saved ones will make other conclusions from such doctrines; because we
have no strength, no help on earth, therefore I will to my prayers, to the
ordinances to get help from heaven. Thus it is with Gods ordinances and the
precious truths thereofas with physic, it is given for the Patients good, but
many times through the distemper of his body, it does him hurt. Thus wholesome
doctrine through men's perverse reasonings does turn to their destruction,
through those false hardening inferences, is a savor of death. Beware least the
Lord be once provoked to give up obstinate ones to their own hearts lusts;
permitting them to dash against Christ and other means of eternal life, and
so through his just judgment they be blinded to their endless misery and
mischief: as Ps. 81.11, 12. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and
Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they
walked in their own counselles. So Joh. 9.39. For judgment I am come into the
world, that they which see, might be made blind: wretched sinners who
acknowledge their own ignorance, they shall see: But they which think they are
wise, too wise to be taught, they shall be delivered up to the blindness of
their own hearts. Which made an Ancient say, They that have despised God's
inviting will, shall feel his revenging will.





For your Humiliation, and to break the heart to repentance, I will give four
Convictions, whereby it may appear to your own conscience, that it is a dead,
unsavorie, unfruitful thing unto you, that you never yet did relish any thing
of life in it.

1 The first is, Because you take so little delight in it, and so little pains
about it: for, it is the property of every blessed man to delight in the law of
God, to meditate in it, to walk in it both day and night, Ps. 1.1, 2. My
delight and my counsellonrs, Ps. 119.24. How does his soul break out in holy
longings and love to the law of God? And also to take pains for this bread of
life; the Queen of the South came from the uttermost parts of the earth to
hear the wisdom of Solomon, Mat: 12.42. Wheresoever the carcass is, thither
will the Eagles be gathered together. As Eagles by a natural instinct fly to
their food: so where Christ is preached, believers by the motion of the spirit,
will resort to him. Can ye taste honey, and no sweetness in it? Can ye want
bread, and take no pains for it? Take us and all we have for Bread, said they
to Joseph: you labor for meat, that perishes, because there is life in it: so
would you after the meat, that endures to eternal life, if ye did relish
it. Joh. 6.27. Labor not for meat which perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting life, (that is) labor more for eternal life: O what
a deal of contriving, and sweating of unwearied diligence to raise an estate?
to raise posterity, to enlarge possessions? to live? And yet how it shall go
with you, and how you shall live eternally, did did never put you to the
trouble of one houre's serious consideration or pains: God is our chief good,
and all our happiness consists in his love, and therefore it should be valued
and sought above all things; The very business we have in this world is to
glorify God, and to provide for a better life. And yet how little do you set
by the means of life? You will not be at the pains to acquaint your selves or
family with the doctrine of salvation^. I cannot persuade you to read the
Bible, and other good books, or to learn the grounds of Religion in some
Catechism. or to sanctisie the Lord's day in holy exercises of prayer,
selfe-examination, Hearing the word.

(Nay, with much coldness do you come to the congregation). These things are
burdensome, irksome, unsavorie to you, you find no life in this holy course;
and why? Because you are dead souls. Let me speak unto you Husbandmen,
Tradesmen, and Laborers, consider your ways, and your days spent in toil
and labor, up to work early, there is much to be done, in the mornings no
time, in the evenings the head is heavy, unfit for spiritual matters. The
Sabbath is your day, God in mercy provided it for your rest, for your souls
refreshing also; yet that day is too much from your worldly business: In the
morning, go see such a piece of ground, or such a parcel of sheep, or such a
customer, and then to Church if time be left: poor souls, what do you
think? Is this to delight in the word? O how little do you set by heaven? If
you did but take half so much pains and delight for heaven, as for the world,
I should think, you did find some spiritual life in the word.

I speak to you, Careless daughters, perhaps once in the day you give us the
hearing: and stay at home the other part; you trifle away the Sabbath-mornings
about Children: you spend idly as much time, as your necessary affairs of
house require, therefore ye cannot come to Church; perhaps in the afternoon,
ye have some Clothes to mend, or starch: This providing for, and trimming of
the body is your Sabbath-daie's work, as if you were borne to be drudges and
poor, and so to the grave. O what a fearful spirit of slumber is upon our
people? (Not more ignorant, earthly-minded in any parish) there is no sign
that you relish the Ministry of the word, as a word of life, you taste no
such thing in it, all your carriage savours of death; if you had tasted life in
it, you would have love to it, and think nothing too much, that you could
possibly do. You would have zeal to rouse you, and faith, like the spring in
a watch to set all the wheels of your souls agoing. The zeal of thy house
has even eaten me up.

Heb. 12.16. Look diligently, least there be any Fornicator, or profane
person, as Esau: who for one morsel of meat sold his Brith-right: He rellished
good in the morsel of meat, none in his Birthright. Esau must have food;
what? with the loss of his Birthright? The Constant call of the Scripture is,
Strive to enter in at the straight gate. Work out your salvation with fear and
trembling. Walk precisely not as fools, but as wise. Conform your selves not
to this present world. The judgment of the carnal world is otherwise; These
rules are too strict, and precise, if we live by them, we were as good go out
of the world. O are ye wiser then all the world? Shall I make myself a
laughing stock to the world? Nay, but will you be wiser then God?

2 Cor. 2, 16.
THe third Conviction follows, whereby it may appear to your consciences,
that hitherto the Gospel has been but a dead and unsavorie thing upon your
spirits, and that is by the little account of any spiritual good received by
all that you hear; it has left dead hearts, dead, unrenued affections, under
an outside profession; you have not felt the experience of the things taught
and heard, you do not understand it feelingly; it affects not, it alters not
the judgment, nor affections.

There is a twofold knowledge of matters in Religion the one is by rule, the
other is by proof, trial, or experience; the one is gotten out of the letter
of the Scripture only, and so men have it but by rule; the other is learout
of^^ the scripture too: but it is felt to be the sword of the spirit for the
bettering of us. As in all trades and sciences, there is a knowledge, which one
gets by rule and instruction only, yet for want of experience, when, where,
and how to buy, sell, plant, etc. he may decay and grow behind hand: So the
Christian has not only the rule, but the proof of his knowledge, how it has
been effectual to assure him of his own salvation, to change his heart, to
comfort, to overcome temptations, how good God is in his ways, etc. He is the
true Christian indeed, (to the one it is a dead, to the other a lively savor).
As for example, He that only reads in a book, that he is miserable by nature,
and what his soul stands in need of, but never felt himself miserable, nor
felt his several wants, is dead, while he lives. He that reads in a book, or
hears in a Sermon, what repentance is, what the cleansing of the heart is,
what striving of the spirit against the flesh is, etc. But never felt his own
heart purged, his own conscience stricken with fears, etc. This man has a
rule, but not the savor of life in the Gospel. To read or hear of comforts
is one thing, to feel them in the conscience is another. It Is one thing to be
of such a judgment in matters of religion, to hold such and such principles,
to be right in his tenets, and to hold that men must be religious. It Is another
thing to be so, to feel our unkindnesse to Christ, our deadness of heart to
him, our pantings and longings after Christ. A man by the light of Scripture
may confess, that God is the best portion, that he, that enjoyes God, has
all, that all earthly, things are perishing contentments; yet will not for Gods
sake, for conscience sake, forsakeany thing. This man's judgment says, that
God is our chief God, but his heart and affections never said so. But he that
can take up a Cross to follow Christ, deny himself, cut off a right hand for
righteousness sake, he says indeed, and in heart, God is my portion, God is
my chief good. The savor of Christ's knowledge does import a sensitive
expeperimentall feeling knowledge: such as we have of fire, that it is hot, of
honey, that it is sweet, etc. Taste sweetness in obedience.

His manner of deliverie, it was delivered in good language, and a good style,
and I like it well to have good matter clothed in a good dress. Yea but what
was there of Christ in it? that might cleanse the heart, bring one into pardon
of sin, crucify your lusts, build you up in holiness, make you sound in
repentance? Yes, it was a moral good sermon.) O but said the spiritual man,
may not you hear such preaching all days of your life, and yet be never the
wiser for your salvation? If you savor that which is but the natural frothy
part, that which is least worthy of notice in that work, are ye not carnal?
if you commend and love that which you least understand, and be pleased best
with that which does tickle the ear, and not rectify the conscience, are ye
not carnal? your carnal judgment in this point bewraies, that the Ministry
is not a Ministry of life and power to thee, but of form and morality, of
good order; that it has not carried you beyond placing your religion in
Baptism, in Church Constitutions, in outward garbs, and the smaller matters or
bark of religion; your souls all the while being unacquainted with the
essentialls of Religion in power, and purity, in joy, in righteousness, in
peace, in assurance of salvation. Whereas for the matter, that sermon is best,
wherein we manifest the truth, and commend our selves to the consciences of men
in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. And for the manner, that is best which is set
forth not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
spirit and power, 1 Cor. 2.3. It is a curse to have the Gospel in a strange
tongue, and so in a style and frame of words not easily understood by the
people. 1 Cor. 14 9. Except ye utter words easy to be understood, how shall
it be known, what is spoken? For, ye shall speak into the air. The Apostle
does reprove their carnal judgment in this point, because they so much
admired the gift of tongues ver. 20, 21. Its a childish thing to be delighted
with words, ver. 21. It is a judgment, to have the Gospel in a way not
understood; it is a sign God is not pleased to make the same a means of
conversion. And therefore, forasmuch as God does make use of languages and
tongues for a punishment; it is not fit matter of boasting or glorying.

2 Carnal judgment; Come we to their dispraises; How do you like the sermon?
I do not like it, 'twas nothing but ordinary matter, yea scarce fit for a
Sermon; he reproves such petty faults, as sleeping and playing with children,
and dressing our selves, etc. There Is nothing of study of learning in it. He
may preach after that rate all day long, etc. It Is dead and unsavorie matter.
Well, view it again, such matter was delivered, upon what occasion? Why his
doctrine from the Text was, that many hear the word to their hardening; and
what think you, is it not true? Yes, go on, what kind of hearers were they
that did so? Why they were the sloathfull, careless, customary hearers, that
do not examine and apply the Truths taught, or else hear it as an exercise of
wit, or else be offended at the reproves, etc. And what think you of it? Is
not all this true? Did he not prove it? Yes; there is spiritual matter in it,
much moral evil and danger discovered, not so much in the action, as in the
heart; Res parva, magnum indicium; others see spirit and life in that matter,
an evil heart of unbelief to lie at the bottom, if you do compare the
doctrine with the reproves, and your souls with both, you will be found to be
in a wrong course, you will be guided into a saving way, to walk in all well
pleasing before God. In their counsel, you will find mercy and peace, their
paths are paths of peace to deliver you from death

You cannot slight, Note.
nor deride religion, and yet at the same time live under the saving operation
of the word.

The fourth doctrine follows, to the one-to the other.

But to which of these is it a savor of life, and to which of death. In them
that are saved we are a sweet savor of God unto life; in them, that perish, a
savor of death.



Unto the saved ones, we are a savor of life, to the other a savor of death,
and an occasion of their hardening, Joh, 8.46.47. If I say the truth, why do
you not believeme? He that is of God, hears Gods words; ye therefore hear
them not, because ye are not of God. Here our Savior distinguishes them that
be of God, from them that be not, by their different respect and relish of
God's word; they that are of God, and led by his spirit will hearken and
endeavor to do his will, the rest who are not of God, but of Satan, hate and
resist the truth. So does Christ mark out his own sheep, Joh. 10.27. My sheep
hear my voice and follow me, and I know them, and give unto them eternal
life. So Mat. 7.24, 26. He compares his hearers to wise and foolish builders of
their own salvation; the one who hears and does them is blessed, is safe
from danger. Blessed are they, that hear the word and keep it. When people
relish life in it, they are in the rank of blessed and saved ones; when they
remain dead under it, hardened in their sins, it is a sad forerunner of their
everlasting destruction. How can this be so sure an evidence of life and death
seeing Hypocrites go far, yea do all in this kind that a sound Christian may
do?

They may do much, as Herod did to John Baptist, and Ezekiel's hearers, cap.
33. 31. But herein they fall short, they do not yield the word a sincere
universal respect and obedience; they hear, but do it not; they hear, and
are offended at the word. It is the honest heart, that hears and brings forth
fruit with patience; an hypocrite, may do much, but he cannot do this; he may
make many prayers, hear many sermons, use fasting, cleave to the best side,
approve of a sound ministry, forsake scandalous sins, and be reformed in some
measure by the word, etc. Yet this he cannot do, he cannot with an honest
heart bring forth fruit with patience; he does not in all things give the word
a divine power over his heart; he cannot yield universal obedience thereto out
of love to God; Therefore slight not this doctrine, the power of it expressed
in your consciences will witness your soundness, and true fellowship with
Jesus Christ against all temptations.

( Ps. 119.161.) My heart stands in awe of God's word: you dare not resist any
truth, that ye hear, but you will yield unto it, make conscience of it,
desire and endeavor to obey it, and put it in practice. This I say will
witness with you and for you, 1. Th. 1.5. For, the Gospel came not unto you
in word only, but also in power.

Of Exhortation; Therefore come to the Ministry; as to an ordinance wherein
life and death are sealed. Take these Motives. You must live for ever in
heaven, or in hell: and the question must be resolved upon our obeying, or not
obeying the Gospel. Therefore bethink thy self, what thou were best to do?
Is not heaven worth all the sins, which the word would crucify in thee? And
will thy unsubdu'd lusts, and the pleasure thereof make amends for all the
torments, which the disobedient are sure to endure in hell? Is thy conscience
convinced of this truth? If it be, how dare thou now go on in thy common
careless course against the light of the word in thy own conscience? How
dare thou live as loosely? hear as carelessly? Spend the Sabbath as
profanely? slubber over the worship and service of God as slightly, as formerly
thou have done? To have this question resolved on thy side, me thinks thy
heart should break through all oppositions, scorns and temptations, and
forthwith set thy self wholly about the work, and to cast off every weight,
and with full resolution of heart to lay thy soul at the feet of Christ, and
his Ministry, and say, Lord, here I am, what will thou have me to do? Do
with my heart, and mould it to thine own mind will.

Sodom then for thee, they sinned against the light of nature, thou against the
light of the Gospel; they against the Law, thou against the Remedy, against
the mercy of a Redeemer, Heb. 10.29. Of how much serer punishment, suppose ye,
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the blood of the
covenant etc. Woe to poor sinners for their madness against their own souls.
Consider your case; art thou able to bear the wrath of God for ever? When he
shall come in flames of fire, taking vengeance on them that know him not, and
obey not the Gospel of his Son. 2. These. 2.10. Thou can not endure the voice
of the Cock, of a poor Minister, that awakens thy conscience; How then will thou endure the voice of the Trumpet, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment?
Death is terrible, and sickness is painful; thou can not endure thy finger
in the fire one hour, how then will thou endure everlasting fire. The
tooth-ake, the stone, the Gout make thee roar, and cry out, O Lord help me: the
torments of hell made Dives cry out, Send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger
in water to cool my tongue: you that will cry out then pity, pity a poor
tormented soul, should do well to pity your selves now, when we cry out unto
you to pity your own souls; if thou will be entreated to pity thy self,
thouwilt need no man's pity then; but here is your misery, and our infelicitie,
you will not believe your own misery, you will not believe our report, if you
did believe it, you would soon cast away every sin that hangs on so fast,
you would no longer stand off, but deliver up your souls into Christ's
doctrine to be transformed, renewed, and molded by it; you would presently
enter into a strict covenant with God to be his people, you would never content
your selves with a cold, formal, livelesse profession, but labor for the life
of grace, and that too, while the day of grace does last, Heb. 3.14.



FINIS.

