Death the sweetest Sleep, OR A SERMON Preached on the FUNERAL OF Mr. WILLIAM
HIETT, Late CITIZEN of LONDON.

By Tho. Lie, Mr. of Arts, and formerly Minister of the Gospel in Alhallows
Lombard Street, London.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Thomas Parkhurst, at the lower end of Cheapside.
1681.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the worthily Respected. Mrs. ANNE HIETT, Relict of Mr. WILLIAM HIETT lately
Deceased.
CHRISTIAN FRIEND,
THis plain Sermon was lately Preached, and is now Printed at your request. What
you heard with your Ear then, you will now see presented To your Ey, with some
few additions, which my Time then did not permit me To touch upon. It has been
Always my judgment, That, when Ministers of the Gospel ar called forth To
improve funeral obsequies, their proper Work is not so much To launch out into
prais, and panegyric of the Dead, as to excite, and profit the Living. By this
compass I have endeavored to steer in this discourse. And herein, the judge of
Hearts knows, my Heart, and Ey, and Aim were steadily fixed on the Spiritual,
and Eternal Weal of that good Society, whereof, through Grace, I am an unworthy
Pastor, and you, A becoming Member.

I told them then, and I tell you now, that the Time of our departure to our
Beds of Earth was at hand, that we must all, certainly, if not suddenly sleep
in the dust, and if so, may not the Blessed Moses his pathetick breathing be
looked on as a rational inference from that deep consideration. O that they were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end,
Deuteronomy. 32.29. That you are not now to begin that great Work, I do not question,
and do promise my self, that, in Gods strength, you will vigorously endeavor
so to improve this fatal stroke, as, by it, the more To meditate on, and
prepare for your last, lasting, endless end. You well understand the great
Work, and Business, that you have yet To do, before you fall Asleep. -- It is
certainly, so to live, as that you may cheerfully welcome Death as a reconciled
Friend, or believingly defy it as a conquered Enemy. To that end, you will go
on more, and more To clear up your interest in that Christ, who has Turned the
worst of poisons into the Best of Antidotes, transformed Death into sleep. To
live in the constant Acts, and Exercises of your Graces, specially Faith,
Repentance, Self-denial, Heavenly-mindedness. To live, whilst in, Abov this
vain, falls, vexing World. To walk before God in Truth, and with a perfect
Heart. And do but Ask your own experience, whether That be not the way to be in
Heaven here, when even on A supposed Deathbed. To have your Lamp so filled
with Oil, so fairly trimmed, and clearly burning, as that when you com to die,
you may have nothing else left to do, but to die, to die in Christ, to sleep in
him, and, at his return, arise, and live for ever with him. That thus you may
resolv, and do, thus live, and die, both is, and shall be the fervent prayer of

Clapham, Aug. 15th. 81. Your sympathizing Friend and Pastor, Tho. Lie.

JOH. 11.11. Our Friend Lazarus sleeps.


THese Words are an Affirmativ Proposition, delivered by our blessed Savior,
wherein we note 1. The SUBJECT of it, or the Person spoken of, who is here
described, by his Name, in Heb. Eleazar.
LAZARUS, with his Relation, a FRIEND, OUR Friend. 2. The PREDICATE. Sleeps.
Our Friend Lazarus sleeps.


First, As for the Subject. Lazarus, OUR Friend. Not My Friend, but Ours. q. d.
Behold, my dear Disciples, I, who am your Liege Lord, and King, do yet stoop so
far, as To own you not only for my Servants, and Subjects, but for my FRIENDS,
and faithful Lazarus, though now dead, to be my Friend; I am indeed your Friend,
and ye are my Friends, and so was Lazarus, whilst Living, my Friend, and your
Friend. Our Friend Lazarus. From hence I infer

I. That there is A Mutual Friendship, a dear and intimate Lov betwixt the Lord
Jesus and true Believers. 'Twas so betwixt Christ and Lazarus. CHRIST was
certainly a Friend to Lazarus. Both his Sisters attest it. Lord, he whom thou
love, is sick, ver. 3. The Evangelist averrs it, Jesus loved Lazarus, v. 5.
and the Jews, from his melting Tears, and yerning Bowels, conclude it, ver. 36.
Behold, how he loved him. And that LAZARUS loved Jesus, abundantly appears from
his friendly Converse, and Communion with him, his friendly treats and
entertainments of him. Christ did often eat of his bread, and drank of his Cup.
That BETHANY, which, by Lazarus's Death, may justly now be styled an house of
Sorrow, was, in Lazarus Lifetime, to Christ a real BETHLEHEM, an house of
bread. And so it was, and is betwixt the Lord, and all True Believers. ABRAHAM
is styled the Friend of God by Jehoshaphat; 2 Chronicles. 20.7. and Jam. 2.23.
because of his firm Covenanting, and frequent Communion with him: and GOD owns
him as his Friend. Isa. 41.8. The like does Christ our Lord. Henceforth I call
you not servants, but friends. Joh. 15.14, 15. This friendship is Jer. 31.33.
and 32.38, 39. Zec. 13.9. Hos. 2.23.
Mutual I lov them, that lov me. Prove. 8.17. My Beloved is mine, and I am His.
Can. 2.16.

From hence Learn.

1. The height, Ela, Zenith of a True Believer, a clod of dust, and sin, his
Exaltation, that, as the Son of God is not ashamed to call him Brother, so both
Father and Son are pleased to own and embrace him, as a Friend.

2. The infinite stoop, and condescension of the Lord Jesus, who, though he
thought it no robbery, but rather claims it as his just Prerogative, to be
equal with God, judges it no disparagement, to match himself with weak, and
wretched men. Our Friend Lazarus. Friendship bespeaks a kind of (a) Parity.
Amicitia est inter pares.
There may be lov, where there is the greatest inequality. Lov descends. But
Friendship either finds, or makes an Equal.

II. That All those, that are True Friends to Christ, are mutually loving
Friends each to other. Not my Friend, but OUR Friend, says the Text. Not a
Friend to me only, who am the head, but To you also, and all, that are like
you, living Members of the Mystical body. The holy Ephesians, that had true
Faith in Christ, had a sincere lov to All the Saints. Ephesians. 1.15. So had the
Colossians, Col. 1.4. The Beloved Discipl assures us, that it is impossible to
lov the Father, 1 John 4.20, 21.
or his Eternal Son, if we lov not his adopted Children. The Mutual lov of
Saints is the very badg, Joh. 13.35.
livery, (...). Distinctiv Character of a True Discipl. By this shall all men
Know, that ye ar my Discipls indeed, if ye lov one another. Ecce, ut Christiani
se mutuo diligant, was the blessed Elogy, the convinced Heathens gav the Warm
Christians of Old, who, were they now aliv, would see too much reason to decry,
yea condemn the frozen hearts, and yet distemperd heats of the shallow
Professors of this divided Age.

We have dispatched the Subject; proceed we to

Secondly, The PREDICATE of our Saviors Assertion-, (...): dormit. i. e.
mortuus est.
SLEEPS; i. e. is dead. The Apostl makes use of that, which we call an
Euphemismus. By a soft expression hinting that, which is of a more harsh
signification. So, to depart hence, is To Die. The Syriack Version renders it
(...), jacet, cubat, decumbit, is Laid down to sleep; to rest himself on a bed
of Earth, on a pillow of Dust. So the word is used, 2 Samuel 7.12. and Isa. 14.8.
and interpreted by the Septuagint.

But our Lords own Mouth is his Best Commentary, What he Here calls Sleep, ver.
13.14. he most expressly, (...) i. e. most plainly, without a Metaphor, calls
Death, (...), is dead.

From hence we gather This Note, That

Obs. A True Believers Death is a Sleep. A sweet, a Blessed Sleep. Not a Natural
sleep, such as that Mat. 28.13. is. Luke 22.45. Act. 12.6. of this the Discipls
misunderstood the words of Christ, ver. 12, 13. of this Chapter. But a
Metaphorical sleep. Our sleep here is but a shorter Death, and our Temporal
Death but as a longer sleep. None can Know the Estate of Life or Death, so well
as our Blessed Savior, who is Lord of Both. It is enough, that he tells us,
that Death is no other than Sleep.

Quest. But, What is That, that is said to sleep in Death?

Sol. 1. Negatively. 'Not the Soul, after its departure from the Body, No: The
Bodies of men indeed, Genesis 3.19. Almondo a Via. My body dies, my spirit livs.
The day of death to the body, is the birth of Eternity to the Soul.
after Death, return to the dust and see corruption, Act. 13.36. But their
Souls having an immortal subsistence, and vivacity, neither die, nor sleep, but
immediately return to God that gave them, Eccl. 12.7. The Souls of Believers ar,
at their Death, made perfect in holiness, the spirits of just men ar then made
perfect, Heb. 12.23. and do immediately pass into glory. So our Blessed Savior
assures the penitent Thief, that that very day, he, i. e. his Soul should be
with him in Paradise, Luke 23.43. and Paul Knows, that as soon as ever his Soul
departs out of his body, it will be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. and that, when
this our earthly house of this Tabernacle is dissolved, the Soul has a
building of God, an house not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. 2 Cor.
5.1.6.8. That, as soon as we are absent from the Body, we are present with the
Lord. Not the Soul then, but

2. Positivly. The Mat. 27.52
Body, that, and that only is said to sleep. This Metaphor of sleep applied to
Death is taken from the Body only. Now the great Resemblance between a
Believers (...). Plat.
Death, and Sleep appears in four Things.

1. From those many Synonymical Texts, that do all with one Mouth Echo to this
Truth. David slept with his Fathers, 1 Kin. 2.10. Solomon; 1 Kin. 11.43. Asa,
Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah. It Is Paul's usual Idiom, to call death, sleep; 1 Cor.
7.39. and 11.30. -- and 15.6.18.20.51. -- a sleep in Jesus, 1 These. 4.13, 14,
15. -- Since the Fathers fell asleep, 2 Pet. 3.4, the sleep of death, Psalm.
13.3. Thus the Protomartyr Stephen his Death is expressed; (...), Act. 7.60.
He fell asleep.

2. From those Terms, that are given to the Saints Graves. They are called
their Beds. They shall rest in their Beds. Isa. 57.1, 2.
When a Believers Work is done, all he has to do, is to go to Bed, and take
his rest on his Bed, not of down, but dust. Hence the places of the Saints
Burial, both in Greek, Latin, French, (...), Dormitoria, Cemitieres, i. e.
sleeping places. As in Dutch, Gods-acre, because bodies ar only sown there, to
be raised again, which the Heb. express with a greater Faith, by calling the
Grave Beth-chaim, the house of the Living.

3. From that which is Contrary to Death, viz. Resurrection. It is called An
Awaking. When I awake with thy Likeness. Psalm. 17.15.
Many, that sleep in the Dust, shall Awake; Dan. 12.2. To allude only to that
Isa. 26, 19, 20. Awake, and sing ye, that dwell in the Dust.

4. From that notable Parallel, that most clearly runs betwixt Sleep, and
Death, which, say judicious Divines, appears principally in two things, Rest,
and Resurrection.

1. Rest. Sleep argues Rest, at least it tends to it, and disposes for it. They
shall rest in their Ut somnus mortis, sic lectus imago sepulchri.
Beds, Isa. 57.2. Sleep on now, and take your Rest, Mat. 26.45. When A Believer
dies, he goes to his Rest, to a sweet repose in his Bed of Earth, Warmed and
Perfumed for him by the precious Body of his Lord, and Savior. A fivefold
Rest, from Labor, Troubl, Passions, Sins, Temptations.

1. From Labor. This Life is the day of the Saints Labor, and Working, his
Death is the Night of his Resting. The Sun arises, and Man goes forth To his
Labor till the Evening. Ps. 104.23. When the Sun of A Believers Life arises,
he goes forth to his Labor till the Evening of Death. Till Evening, but no
longer, for then he shall rest from his Labors. Rev. 14.13. A Christian here
is like quicksilver, Vidus Bressius. If Gods Spirit say True, I shall strait
rest from my Labors: my Soul is even taking VVing to fly to her resting place.
which has in its self a principl of motion, but not of rest, is never quiet.
His Life is a continued motion, his Death a continued Rest? Here as a Ball upon
the Racket, as a Ship on the Waves, a Strong man in his Race, Death brings him
To his Goal, to his Port of Rest. This life is but nois, and tumult, Death is
silence.

2. Troubls, sufferings, oppressions, and these either public or private.

I. Public. The Lord foresees a storm of Blood, and Wrath to com, in mercy,
he houseth A Believer, before the Storm falls. As the Egyptians housed their
Cattle and Servants, before that dreadful thunder, Exodus 9.20. Isa. 57.1.
and hail came. Merciful men are taken away from the Evil to com. This the Lord
is pleased To promise, as A gracious Answer, and Return, To Josiahs, prayers,
tears, Humiliation, reformation; viz. that he should be gathered to his Grave
in peace, and that his eyes should not see all the evil which God would bring
upon Jerusalem. 2 Chronicles. 34.27, 28.

II. Private and Personal. Man is born to Troubl, as the sparks fly upward.
They, that will live Godly, must suffer persecution. Affliction is the Lot of
Gods Israel. This World ever was, and ever will be An Egypt to the Saints, and
here they must expect to find most cruel Taskmasters. This Life is so full of
Trouble, that 'twas the Observation of Jerome, an Ancient Father, and the
Resolution of the 3d. Christus non ploravit Lazarum mortuum, sed ad hujus vitae
arumnas ploravit resuscitandum.
Toletan Council concerning Christ's weeping over Lazarus. Joh. 11.35. That it
was not so much because he was dead, as because he was to be raised up again, to
feel the burdens, and afflictions of this Life. Gods Jonahs find this Life to
be a stormy passage, A tempestuous Sea-Voiage, wherein they meet with many
Whales, many Leviathans, Death sets them safe on shore, puts them into safe
harbor: whilst here, the Archers sorely griev Gods Saints, shoot at them, hate
them, draw out their Swords after them, strong Bulls of Bashan beset them
round; the Plowers plow upon their backs, they make long their furrows, But
there the weary is at rest, Job 3.17. There the wicked cease from troubling. No
need now to fear A Gardners Prison, Bonners Stocks, or Cole-house, nor a
flaming Smithfield. Lucius to Urbicius, I thank you with all my heart, that by
death will free me from wicked Governors.
Here Gods Peter's no more dread the Cross, nor Paul's the Ax, nor James's the
Sword, nor Gods Elijah's a cursed-painted Jezabels bloody threats. In A Word,
the whole Army of Gods Noble Martyrs, are here past all fear of halters,
Cyprian, God be blessed for this Goal delivery.
racks, wheels, stakes, gibbets, the most exquisite Torments, that either
PAPISTS, or DEVILS can invent, or are ready to inflict.

3. From Passions, and inward perturbations, griefs, Anxietys. Here in this
Life, Babylas. Now will God wipe away all Tears.
the Believers pulse beats slow, and faint, his heart pants, his eyes
moistened, and his cheeks blubbered with tears; you may read the Anguish of his
Soul in his Countenance. But in Death every tear dried up in the eye, wiped off
the cheek, All sorrow, and sighing flown away, Rev. 21.4. The Saints Baca is
turned into A Berachah, sighing into singing, misery into mercy.

4. Pic. Mirand. Death is welcome, not so much as an end of Troubl, as of sin.
From sins, iniquities, corruptions. Whilst here, the poor sin-pester'd Saint
cries out of the Law in his Members, warring against the Law of his mind,
against the body of sin and death. You may hear his outcry as of a person on a
Rack. Romans 7.23, 24 -- But now he, that is dead, is freed from sin, To. 6.7. 1
Pet. 4.1. Not the least spot or wrinkle left in his Soul. Ephesians. 5.27. Not one
Agag spared alive. Every Egyptian not sprawling, but stark-dead upon the shore.
The end of a Saints Living is the Non ultra of a Saints sinning. With this,
that good Martyr held up his head, when he encouraged his fellow with telling
him, that my Lord of London, (he meant that BLOODY Butcher Bonner) was sending
of them there, where they should sin no more.

5. From Temptations, assaults, trialls, combats, Satan's winnowing, etc. Not
an Adam, no not in the Paradise of the Church, but has an Eve in his bosom.
Chaste Joseph attaqu'd by a Potiphars-Wife. A Messenger now and then from the
lowest pit to buffet us. 2 Cor. 12.7.
A damp arising from Satan's deepest Mine, to choke us. Anakims To Wound,
Daughters of Heth to Troubl, Daughters of Midian to Allure us. Snares, Ginns,
Traps, Limetwiggs. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Satan going about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. This world
is the poor Saints Gymnasium, Arena, Wrestling, place. And Though It be the
Saints Honor at length to Conquer, yet It is, and cannot but be the Saints
Troubl, thorn, pain, so long to Conflict. But now Death puts the Saints into so
peaceabl an Estate, as that he is not only without foil, but fighting. Not only
the Accuser, but the Tempter of the Brethren is cast out, Rev. 12.10. Thus we
see The Parallel betwixt sleep, and death with Respect to Rest. Let us see next,
how they suite in

2. Resurrection, or Awaking. Natural Sleep is not perpetual. We sleep, and
awake again. Believers, though they sleep, they shall arise again, as men,
awakened out of sleep. This is expressed in the Words immediately following our
Text. Our Friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go to awaken him out of sleep. i. e.
to raise him from the dead. The Apostle Paul is much upon this Metaphor; see 1
Cor. 15.18, 20, 51, 52. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body
shall they arise. Job 19.26, 27. Although after my skin, worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, etc.

Death may, yea, shall prevail over the whole outward Man. Death spends both
skin and reins; swallows up both flesh and bones, And yet for all this, this
Total Consumption of the Body of Man, is no impediment, no bar in the way of
Faith, to stop us from a firm Belief of our Resurrection. As Death shall
triumph over Jobs Body, so Jobs Faith triumphs over Death. He, that believes in
Christ, yea, tho he were dead, though totally corcupted, and consumed, yet shall
he live again. John 11.25.

I have done with the proof of our Point, the Improvement follows.

Use 1. Of INFORMATION. Is Natural Death a sleep, and no more, hence it is easy
To infer not only the Truth of that great Articl of our Faith, the
Resurrection of the Body, but the facility and easiness of Accomplishing it. --
After Natural sleep men use to awake again. So, after Death, the Bodies of men
shall be awaked: i. e. raised up out of their Graves to life, at the last day.
And It Is most just, that those Bodies, which have been the Souls Copartners in
doing good, or evil, should therefore participate in the reward, and
punishment: which cannot be done without a Resurrection. But the white I aim at
here, is the facility of the Accomplishing it. How easily is a living man
awaked out of a shallow slumber, or deep sleep. Much more easy with God by his
Almighty power, and voice To revive, and raise the dead at the last day. 1 These.
4.15, 16, 17.

Use 2. Of TERROR to, and mourning over unregenerate, unbelieving, impenitent
ones, living, and dying in their sins, and lusts. Poor wretched Creatures. It Is
True, you must die certainly, and you may die speedily: but Know, that your Death
is but A sleep. You must wake again, and when you wake, you will awake deadsick.
Those Bodies of yours must hereafter be awaked and raised out of your Graves at
the last day; and united again To the Soul, that both Souls and Bodies may be
cast together into Hell Torments for ever. Joh. 5.27, 28. Mat. 25.33. Oh how
well were it for such, if their Souls, and Bodies might utterly perish, and be
abolished, by Death, as the Bodies and Souls of Brute Beasts. How happy is A
dead Lion abov An ever-living-or-rather-an ever-dying damned-unbelieving Caitif.

Use 3. OF SUPPORT, AND CONSOLATION TO SOUND Believers: Precious Souls!

1. You complain of sad and unpleasant lives, of dark and gloomy days, of
black and restless nights. Cheer up ye beloved of the Lord, and know, that the
time is shortly coming, when ye shall lie down quietly in your Beds, and not
have one waking moment, or distracting dream. When once you are gone down to
this bed, the grave, when the Curtains of darkness ar drawn about you, you
shall never open your eyes any more till the Morning of Eternity dawns, and
breaks forth in luster on you. Behold to your Everlasting comfort, That, which
is To others (...). A King of Terrors, to you is the King, or chief of
Comforts. what is DEATH to others, is but A SLEEP, a sweet sleep to you. You
may safely play on the Hole of this Asp, on the Den of this Cockatrice, nay
handl this Asp it self. This Death that was once A Serpent is now none, or if
it be, It Is a Serpent without A Sting. TO has left its sting in the side of
Christ. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. What that foolish Agag cracks out falsely, you
may, in holy Triumph, cry out, Truly, surely The bitterness of Death is past, 1 Samuel 15.32. See how Death it self is even embalmed, and clothd in such soft,
and silken Language, that It carries even A sweetness, and beauty in it. It Is A
sleep, no more than A sleep.

2. Sleep, though it chains up the senses for a Time, yet it dissolvs not the
union between the Soul, and the Body. So, neither does Death, the Spiritual,
mystical union betwixt Christ and True Believers; nor indeed betwixt Believers
themselves.

I. Not between God in Christ, and True Believers, Though Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob be dead To others, They are not so to God, Mat. 22.32. God is not the God
of the dead, but of the living. The Relation of God to Abraham, and of Abraham
to God, was as strong, when dead, as living. The Sleep of the Wife breaks not
the Marriage Knot between her, and her Bridegroom. The union betwixt Christ and
Believers outlives Death. Though Death triumphs over the Natural union between
the Body and the Soul, yet not over the mystical union between the Soul and
Christ. Let them live, they live in, and to Christ: Let them dye, they die to,
and sleep in Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. Living, and Dying, they are the Lords. To.
14.8.

II. Nor yet between Believers themselves. As Faith is the Evidence of things
not seen, Heb. 11.1.
that are future, So It is a clear Reflection on things, that are past. By
Faiths ey we may easily look on the pale face of the first Martyr, Heb. 11.4.
and with Faiths ear, Though he be dead, yet hear him speaking. Is a Godly Sarah
dead, It Is possible for her surviving spiritual Daughters to convers with her,
as though aliv, mark her outward dress, her inward ornaments, how she Trusted in
God, and obeyed her Husband. 1 Pet. 3.1. to 7. There is not A Saint of God that
dies, but leaves A glass behind him, in which, when ere you pleas to be Truly
serious, you may behold their face, and conversation. The succeding Jews did so
nearly convers with Jacob, that was dead 2000 years before, that they thought
themselves to be present with him, and his God at Bethel. Hos. 12.3, 4. By his
strength he had power with God, yea he had power over the Angel, and prevailed.
He found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. The Holy Exampls of the
dead, what ar they, but the Spiritual, Heb. 12.23.
lively monuments of the Spirits of just men made perfect, now living.

3. Sleep is A refreshing, reviving Enjoyment. A man lies down in weakness,
sleeps, and rises up in Strength. Like A Giant, refresht with Wine; mounts up
like an Eagl, runs and is not weary, walks, and faints not: It Is Reported of
Antaeus, A Giant of Italy, that as often as he was weary, he would but touch the
Earth, and immediately he rebounds, and rises with renewed strength. The Death
of a Believer, is like the Death of a grain of Corn. It dies, only to spring up
in more lustr, beauty, fruitfulness. Joh. 12.24. if It die, it brings forth
much fruit. As by sleep A Believers Body is refresht, so by Death his Body is
refined. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. It is sown in corruption, It is raised in
incorruption. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in
weakness, It is raised in power.

Use. 4. OF EXHORTATION TO TRUE BELIEVERS in General, Is your Death no more than
a sleep?

1. Away then with all inordinate, immoderate, slavish, sinful Heb. 2.15.
fear of Death. It Is True, Job 18.14.
Death to Nature is the King of fears, and it has its poisonous sting, with
which it will wound the wicked, whom it ushers into Hell. But now To prop you
up against this sinking fear of Death. Know, It Is no wors to you, than FALLING
ASLEEP. Even Gods own peopl ar too too much like foolish Children, afraid to
put off their clothes, and go to bed in A dark Chamber. All this while, we
utterly mistake the case of our dissolution. We take it for An Enemy, it provs
a Friend: There is no littl pleasure in that, wherein we suppose the greatest
horror. Who is afraid, after the weary toiles of the day, to take his rest by
night? Or what is more refreshing to the spent Traveller, then a sweet sleep.
It is our infidelity, and unpreparedness, that makes Death any other than
advantage! I grant indeed, A bloody Cain, A foolish Nabal, an Apostat Saul, An
intemperate Felix, and that Ranting company mentioned, Rev. 6.15, 16. may
justly fear Death. The Conscience of Unregenerate men brings in A black Bill of
Indictment against them, and convinces them of Rebellion against their Lord and
Soverain: and then no wonder, if, as arraigned and condemned Malefactors, they
live in continued fear of the Ax, or Gibbet. It Is no wonder, If their evil
Conscience be To them like the handwriting on the Wall to A Carousing
Belshazzar, Dan. 5.5, 6. and makes their countenance to change, to cause the
joints of their loins to be loosed, and their Knees to smite one against
another. But Believers, Through infinite Mercy, That Is not your case. Death to
YOU is not A summons To Eternal Death, but A gentl Lullaby, and softer Hush To
A Sweet sseep, and that in order to A Resurrection, An Awaking to An Eternal
Life.

2. Adore, bless, lov the Lord Jesus for his infinite lov, and mercy To you,
and All other sound Believers: in that, by his Painful, shameful, Accursed
Death, he has plucked out the sting of Death: and altered both its Name, and
Nature. That, which once was death, is now but A SLEEP. A Cooling, A refreshing
shadow of Death, and no more. Heb. 2.14, 15. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.

3. Carry it so, while you live, that your Death may be A sleep, A sweet sleep,
when you die. Eccl. 5.11. The sleep of A Laboring man is sweet. The sleep of A
diligent Servant, of A Laborious Husbandman, of A painful Tradesman, O how
sweet is it? Oh then my dearly Beloved, whilst you are yet awake in the World,
ply your oar, follow the plow, work, and work hard for your God, be steadfast,
unmovabl, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, for as much, 1 Cor. 15.
last.
as ye know, that, as your labor shall not be in vain, so your sleep shall be
sweet in the Lord. The Lord will giv you sleep, as his beloved, Psalm. 127.2.
Pro. 3.24. Psalm. 3.5. and 4.8.

To make this sleep sweet indeed, I would offer these 2 things.

I. Carefully avoid Those things, that disturb sleep. I do but allude. Reflect
we back on Eccl. 5.12. The sleep of the Laboring man is sweet, But the
abundance of the Rich will not suffer him to sleep. Take heed, that the
abundance of your Wealth, with the many cares, businesses, and fears, troubles,
which are consequent thereupon Genesis 41.19. Pro. 3.10. Luke 12.16, 17. -- 12.
the fatness of diet, gluttony, and excess of delicious fare, cause not such
Distempers, as may hinder your sleep on your Beds, or disturb it in your
Graves. I question much, whither Dives his every day sumptuous fare, did not
rise in his stomach, after he was dead. Luke 16.19. Abraham seems to throw it
in his Dish: v. 25. Take heed therefore to your selves, as you would hope to
sleep undisturbed then, that your hearts be not overcharged with surfeiting,
and drunkenness, and the cares of this life Now. Luke 21.34.

II. Sincerely follow the Blessed David home, To his Sleeping Room, Tread in
his steps, imitate his Nobl Exampl. Read the lovly Epitaph, which the Holy Paul
has as it were written on his Tomb. Act. 13.36. David served his Generation by
the Will of God, and then fell Asleep. He served his GENERATION, before he fell
A sleep. Remember, Remember, Dear Brethren, and forget not, David thought it
not Enough To serve his Generation, when he actually fell asleep, by letting
fall some few ears, or gleanings then: No, No. David served his Generation,
dispatched the greatest part of his Work, and then sweetly laid him down To
Rest. O that High, that Honorable, that Heavenly, that God-like frame of
Spirit of living in, and dying for the service of our Generation. This, if any
thing in the World makes Saints to be like David, Men after Gods own Heart. How
precious is the memory of that Blessed DORCAS? How does she shine as the Moon
among the Stars, she, that was so full of good works, and alms-deeds which she
did! she, that left so many Coats and Garments for the poor, which she made,
whiles she was yet living. Act. 9.36, 39. Oh It Is Wisdom, as well as Charity,
To make your OWN Hands, your Executors, and your OWN Eyes, your Overseers. Do
good, All good, I had Almost said, Do All your good, whilst you live. I own it,
Brethren, I own it for A great, and serious Truth. If any man provides not for
his own, especially for those of his own House or Kindred, he has denied the
faith, and is wors than an infidel. Charity, Regular charity, must, and ought
to begin at Home. But it must not stop, and center There. That Stomach, that
greedily takes in food, merely to satiate, and glutt its own appetite, and not
to transmit the digested food to the needy Parts, would quickly prove not so
much A MEMBER, as A MONSTER. It Is True, You Ar Husbands. As such, next to God,
your dearest Wives must have your Hearts. You ar Parents. Next to Wives, your
Hopeful, obedient Children must have your Bowels. You ar Brethren, and Sisters,
and have near, and it may be poor Relations. These do All put in for A
Christian share. But then know, My Brethren, you have OTHER Relations, which are
as near, and dear To God, to Christ, To the Spirit, as Wives, Children, Kindred
ar, or can be to you! Read, and read again. Mat. 12.50. And look, what e're you
do to, and for these, is filed up, and registered, and shall be brought forth
and proclaimed at the Great day of Account. Mat. 25. from 35, to 41.

It Is your GENERATION-Work. I am now pressing you to dispatch before you fall
Asleep. You profess your Selves not Nominal, but Real Sons of the Tru-Church,
your Spiritual Mother, if so, let me Bespeak you in the words of our Lord To
his Beloved Discipl, Joh. 19.27. Behold your Mother. Behold I say, and see,
whether there be any sorrow like unto her sorrow, which is don unto her,
wherewith the Lord, your displeased Father, has for your sakes, and sins,
justly afflicted her in the day of his fierce Anger: Lam. 1.12. Fix your ey
upon her, and let your ey affect your Heart, and do, as your Everlasting Father
did, when he was just preparing himself to his last sleep. He beheld Jerusalem,
and wept over it. Luke 9.41. Methinks I do, and surely you cannot but hear the
Doleful Groans of the sinking, dying Church, piercing not our ears only, but
hearts, in holy Jobs Soul-stabbing Dialect, Have pity upon me, have pity upon me,
O ye my Sons, Daughters, Friends, for the hand of God, the paw of Satan, the
fangs of Antichrist have touched, wounded, stabbed me. Job 19.21. As SUBJECTS,
your Generation Work is To Giv To Caesar the things that are Cesars, and as
Godly Subjects, To GOD the things that are Gods. As CITIZENS. Luke 20.25.
O pray for the Peace of this our English Jerusalem, poor LONDON. They shall
prosper, that lov Her. Endeavor to your utmost, that Truth, and peace, and
piety may be within her Walls, and your Houses, and Prosperity within your
Palaces. Psalm. 122.6, etc.

As WEALTHY CITIZENS, 1 Timothy 6.18. Rich in good works, ready to distribute.
O be wise Merchants, and think not much To Exchange your Bristol-stones for
True Diamonds. Make you friends of the Unrighteous Mammon. Luke 6.19. Do you see
any poor desolate Widows, be you Husbands To them; any perishing Orphans, be
you Fathers to them; any lean, meager, honest, industrious, poor Houskeepers,
do not suffer them to starv for want of Bread, or Work. This, this is your
GENERATION-Work, To the speedy and faithful dispatch whereof, what mighty
Encouragement Has the Father of All your Mercies given you in that grand Text.
Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. I could wish it engraven with the point of a Diamond on every
wealthy Citizens door or glass, or heart in London. He, that has promised To
strengthen thee on thy bed of Languishing, yea, To make all thy bed in thy
sickness, will certainly not fail after Death, To Turn thy bed of Dust into A
Bed of Down.

3. Is A Believers death A sleep? This should teach us immediately to prepare
for Death. To be always ready. Sleep creeps, steals upon us in a moment. Be
praierful. Be watchful. It Is our Saviors great advice. Luke 21.34, 35, 36.
Your sleeping by day is very like to prevent your sweet sleeping by night. Keep
up in your Spirits a present PREPARED posture for natures dissolution. See,
that you have not your Oil to buy, when it is To burn. Remember the 5 foolish
Virgins. Let your Lamps be both Lighted, and Trimmed, and burning. Your Lord
coms in an hour, that you look not for. Mat. 24.44. and 25.16. Paul was ready,
i. e. prepared to be offered up. 2 Timothy 4.6. Job is ready, and prepared. All
the days of his appointed time waiting, till his change com. Job. 14.14. Set
your houses, and hearts in order. Isa. 38.1. Never rest, till you have gotten a
Well-grounded assurance of your real interest in Christ, and of your undoubted
title to Heaven through him. Fight the good fight. Keep the Faith. Be indeed
dead, mortified, crucified To the World, and all in it. Then may you with Paul,
in an Holy Triumph, set your Foot on the Head of This stingless Serpent, 1 Cor.
15.55. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. and breath forth your Soul into your Gods Bosom, in the
Swan-like Song of good old Simeon. Domine, nunc dimittas. Lord, now Let
thou thy Servant depart in peace, and sleep and rest in peace. Luke 2.19, 20.

2. Particularly To the DISCONSOLATE RELICT, and near Relations of our Worthy
Friend Deceased. It Is True, It is, and can not but be A day of darkness, of
clouds, and thick darkness To you, and us. It has pleased the Allwise God, To
take from you The guide of your youth, the desire of your eyes, the delight of
your Soul, and from us, and our Society, A very considerabl Pillar. For this we
do, and cannot but truly mourn. But yet, both you, and we must remember, that
we mourn as becomes Believers, not as those, that have no hope, but according To
the Apostles Advice, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14.

Something I suppose you expect concerning our dear Friend departed, I confess,
I have not the art of embalming the dead, And, whilst I utter any thing of
them, would not willingly giv the least occasion To Any To cry out assomtimes
they did of that great Lawyer, Now, Now, He pleads, not for the Cause, but his
Fee. However, had I not been so happily prevented by that fair, full,
proportionat character, which that Reverend, and Faithful Minister of Christ
gave of him to that solemn Assembly, that waited on his Hearse To his Grave,
It Is more than probabl, that I should have ventured at some dashes at least with
my Ruder Pencil, which now to do, after such an Apelles, would be, not so much
To add a gloss and luster, as a Blot, and soil To so well drawn a Picture. And
yet for All this, I should not be able To stem the Tide of my Affections, did I
not greatly fear, that should I giv them the least rein, they would soon
transport me into some Excesses concerning my dear, faithful, and Friendly
Gaius. (For such He was to me and mine, from the first hour we saw his face,
which is now near 23 years) which A Malevolent Capricio would not stick To
censure for Paint, and Flattery. However before I Take my leav of his Ashes,
Giv me leav To Tell the World, that he lived, and died, with a perfect
Antipathy against Popish Principls, and Practices: dreaded the Return of Popery
as much, if not more, than Death: bewailed and abhorred the Debaucheries of the
Times and place wherein he lived. A cordial well-wisher to the best of Men and
Interests. What A sober Citizen he was, and How True An Englishman, let the
Common Council speak, amongst whom he sat for many years, and his Vote was
always for Truth, and peace, and soberness both in City, and Kingdom. As for
his charity, The backs, and Bellies of the poor Orphans of Christ's Hospital may
be instead of Tongues. to declare it. As for his justice, in Commerce and
Trade, (that sparkling Diamond in the Ring of Christian Profession) The whole
Circl of his Acquaintance, To my utmost Observation, giv him this Attest, That
his Word to Him, was as Obligatory, as His Bond: and what he spoke with his
Mouth, he would faithfully fulfill with his Hand. A false Tongue, and Balance
were both an abomination to Him. He had learnt that from the God of Truth, and
Righteousness. He durst not go beyond, or defraud his Brother in any matter, as
well Knowing, That his just All-seeing God would avenge that.

A Word to his Mournful surviving-half, and I shall dismiss both the Text, and
this Assembly. Your nearest, dearest Bosom Friend is now gone to sleep, to sleep
in Jesus. It cannot be long, you know not how soon, you may from Heaven be
called to mingl Ashes with him. Whatever you clearly saw, and dearly loved, as
Truly good in him, take it for your Copy. Never forget that good God, that gav
you so large an Interest in his Heart, and Hand. Your God by Him has filled
your Hand with power, O may the same God fill your Heart with grace, most
faithfully to improve your All for him, who have so graciously received your All
from Him. Fix, and keep your ey steady on Luke 12.48.

FINIS.

