PLAIN and FULL INSTRUCTIONS To raise all sorts of FRUIT TREES That prosper in
ENGLAND; In that Method and Order, that every thing must be done in, to give
all the advantage, may be, to every Tree as it is rising from its Seed, till it
come to its full growth.

TOGETHER With all necessary directions about those several ways of making
Plantations, either of Wall-Fruit, or Dwarf-trees in Gardens, or large
Standard-trees in Orchards or Fields.

TOUCHING Which last, because it is so vast an Improvement of Land, all the
profitable and practical ways are here directed to with all exactness.

AND In the last place the best directions are given for making liquors of the
several sorts of Fruit.

By T. LANGFORD, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J.M. for Rich. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.

TO THE READER.
I Would not hinder any man so long from the Book it self, as he must be in the
reading this Preface, if I had nothing to say for it, but that I would not be
taken notice of to break an old Custom, or that I would pre-engage the Readers
favor, of which I think there will be no need: Yet I would not have him come
with prejudice, and therefore this little stop is given him at setting out.

If the obscurity of the Author shall frighten any Man, that takes this Book up
in his hands, I scarce look he should read over the Title before be reject it;
but then he must be content to be told the truth, that he does not do well in
it, because he does he knows not what, and may do himself a greater
discourtesie than he is aware.

I think there are few Books of this kind extant, and of note, but I have read
them, and been the better for it, and named some of them sometimes in what
follows, and will not detract from them any further, than to say, I see no
reason why for any of them, or all of them together, this may not be
acceptable, but much reason why it should; and that is the chief thing I desire
the Reader may understand.

I am not so fondly conceited of what I have here done, as to think there may
not be some that may know as much as is here said of Planting without my
telling them; but they must then know more than is to be found in. Books
already; and I fancy too, some (even amongst them) may meet with some things
here of use, that they may never have taken notice of any where else, though
the tract be calculated chiefly for young beginners, and such as are unperfect.

I should not mention the convenience of the smalness of the Volume, being
thereby the more cheap and profitable, and so of readier use; but that it may
be noted, that some of the most excellent Books of this kind are in folio, and
therefore both dear and tedious: There are others indeed not much bigger than
this, but the one half of them, and sometimes more, rather an hinderance than a
furtherance to a man that would set himself to work by them; for the Rules and
Directions he is then to go by, are almost lost and smothered among Moral,
Mystical, and Philosophical Discourses, Quotations, and sometimes Whimsies,
Crotchets, and Legendary Tales, so that he that enquires into them finds
himself in a wood before ever he has raised one Tree: And yet it seems most of
these Writers could not for their hearts forbear, (for some opinion of fineness
and gayety in them) but out they must come; and they did not amiss, if they
intended their Books only for the delight of reading; but certainly
unadvisedly, if they designed them only for use.

I have therefore pruned off all such superfluous branches, and here showed the
plain Dunstable way to the propagating of all manner of Fruit Trees, without
leading the learner through bushes, and a wilderness of Words, to tire and lose
himself with a little diversion.

I have been long acquainted with raising Fruit Trees, and I think have left
out nothing conducible to this end, that is any where else to be met with, and
have added much more, and yet nothing but what is necessary to carry on this
Art further, if not fully to perfection; having had it all along in my design,
to guide the Planter in every the most minute particular, and in that order,
that if he should have some old experienced. Master always at his Elbow when
any thing is to be done, he could not do it better, and be less at a loss.

And I verily believe, nothing has hindered Planting more among us than this,
That Books are no more curious to acquaint People in every circumstance that is
needful to a due conduct of this business; and therefore for want of some
flight observations in appearance, but of great consequence in reality, some
very much disposed this way, meeting with unexpected and frequent
disappointments, have knocked off before they have well begun, and then sallen
to thinking that the vast improvement of Land by Planting, is but such a kind
of talk, as that of the Philosophers Stone, goodly Words but no Wool.

The manner of expression I have used is plain, I have abstained carefully from
all hard words, as judging it to much more purpose to be understood by a
Plowman, than commended by a Scholar.

And so I have said what I here designed, and shall say no more, but that if
this be not enough to dispose him that knows of it, to read this Book, it will
be to as little purpose to say ten times more. Farewell.

T. L.

Mr Chiswel,
I Have read the Treatise of Fruit Trees, etc. which you lately put into my
hand, and find the entire Mystery so generously discovered from its very
Rudiments, to its full perfection; that (with the ingenious and experienced
Author) as I know of nothing extant which exceeds it, so nor do I of any thing
which needs be added to it. The Gentleman will by this free communication much
oblige the whole Nation, and therefore needs not the suffrage of

Your humble Servant, J. EVELYN.

THE CONTENTS.
The INTRODUCTION.
Showing the reason why a Planter should have a Nursery of his own.
CHAP. I. Of the Seminary.
Sect. 1. How the ground is to be ordered for the Seminary. Sect. 2. How Stones
are to be set. Sect. 3. Of setting Nuts. Sect. 4. How the sowing of Seeds is to
be ordered. Sect. 5. How to secure what is set or sown from prejudice. Sect. 6.
How to order these Plants when they are come up. Sect. 7. What kind of Stones
and Seeds are to be set and sown to make proper Stocks for all kind of Fruit.
Sect. 8. Other ways of raising Stocks.
CHAP. II. Observations concerning the raising of Stocks in the Seminary or
elsewhere.
Sect. 1. Seeds and Stones produce not Trees that without graffing, etc. will
bear the same Fruit as that out of which they were taken. Sect. 2. Concerning
Stocks for Peaches, Apricocks, Nectarines, and Plums. Sect. 3. Of Stocks for
Cherry-trees. Sect. 4. The Cyen that is graffed, etc. must have some agreement
in nature with the Stock. Sect. 5. Stocks may contribute something to the
bettering of the Fruit. Sect. 6. That Crab-kernels yield best Stocks for
Orchards and Fields, yet Apple-kernels are of special use. Sect. 7. A Discourse
of the sympathy betwixt the pith of a Tree and the kernels of its Fruits.
CHAP. III. Of Transplanting the Seedlings.
Sect. 1. Of what growth the Seedlings must be before they are removed into the
Nursery, and how the soil for these must be ordered. Sect. 2. In what Order and
Manner they are to be set at this removal, and how to be ordered. Sect. 3. Some
difference to be observed about Stocks to be set in Fields, and how all those
young Stocks are to be dressed up.
CHAP. IV. Of Inoculating.
Sect. 1. The way of Inoculating described. Sect. 2. Of the different ways of
Inoculating.
CHAP. V. Observations concerning Inoculating.
Sect. 1. Several necessary things to be observed about Inoculating. Sect. 2.
How high above ground the Stocks are to be Inoculated. Sect. 3. Of buds that
are to be inoculated, and when Inoculation is to be used rather than Graffing.
Sect. 4. Reasons why Inoculating is to be preferred before Graffing, where it
may be used. Sect. 5. What time of the day is best for Inoculating.
CHAP. VI. Of the several ways of Graffing.
Sect. 1. Of Slicing or Packing. Sect. 2. Of Graffing in the bark, and the
reason why these two are the best ways of graffing. Sect. 3. Of Whip-graffing.
Sect. 4. Of Side-graffing. Sect. 5. Of Graffing in the Cleft. Sect. 6. Of
Graffing by Approach.
CHAP. VII. Observations concerning Graffing.
Sect. 1. What bigness Stocks are to be of at Graffing. Sect. 2. About the
choice of Cyens, or Graffs. Sect. 3. Of the time of Graffing. Sect. 4. Of
cutting of Graffs, and ordering them before graffing. Sect. 5. About the joint
in a Graff or Cyen, and how high Stocks are to be graffed above ground. Sect.
6. What course may be taken to know readily of what kind every Tree is.
CHAP. VIII. Of Planting Wall-fruit.
Sect. 1. The best time to remove young Trees after graffing and inoculating.
Sect. 2. Of preparing the ground for Wall-fruit, and what distance is to be
observed in setting such Trees. Sect. 3. How to temper the Soil for them, and
to settle their roots in the holes they are to be set in. Sect. 4. How to order
a Tree in spreading it upon a Wall. Sect. 5. The roots are sometimes to be
bared, and the soil about them recruited. Sect. 6. How the soil for these, or
other Trees is to be amended. Sect. 7. How to renew old Trees. Sect. 8.
Directions what Walls are proper for each kind of Fruit. Sect. 9. Instructions
about making the Wall.
CHAP. IX. Concerning Dwarf-trees.
Sect. 1. The advantage of Dwarf-trees. Sect. 2. Stocks for Dwarf-Pear-Trees.
Sect. 3. What Stocks are best for Dwarf-Apple-trees. Sect. 4. What things are
to be observed in getting and ordering Cuttings that are to be set for Stocks.
Sect. 5. How they may be helped to roots by Circumposition. Sect. 6. Other ways
to raise Stocks for Dwarf-trees. Sect. 7. Of raising them of Suckers. Sect. 8.
How to raise Stocks for Cherries and Plums. Sect. 9. How to order the heads of
Dwarf-trees. Sect. 10. Codling-hedges and Trees may be raised from the Cuttings
only of such Trees whose Cuttings will grow. Sect. 10. Codlings and Moils may
be graffed on Crabstocks.
CHAP. X. Of Planting an Orchard.
Sect. 1. How to choose ground for an Orchard. Sect. 2. Directions how to
qualify that ground when it is not of it self (as diverse ways it may not be)
fit for Planting. Sect. 3. How an uneven ground is to be ordered in Planting.
Sect. 4. The time and manner of ordering Trees in planting an Orchard. Sect. 5.
How long they may remain in the Nursery after Graffing before they are
transplanted. Sect. 6. Of the distance these Trees ought to be set at one from
another. Sect. 7. Whether old Trees or young are fitter to be transplanted, and
how to order old ones at such a time. Sect. 8. What order these Trees are to be
set in. Sect. 9. Concerning the fence for an Orchard. Sect. 10. Concerning
Pruning of Orchard-trees. Sect. 11. The soil about their roots must ever after
be kept in good heart.
CHAP. XI. Of Planting in Fields.
Sect. 1. Exceptions against Planting in Fields answered. Sect. 2. Reasons to
show it is profitable to plant Pear Trees in Fields. Sect. 3. Seven ways, The
first, By planting in whole Fields. Sect. 4. A second way of planting in
Fields, where an account is given how such Trees may best be fenced. Sect. 5.
The Third, By doing it near Hedges. Sect. 5. The Advantages. Sect. 5. The
Distance. Sect. 5. Where not good. Sect. 6. The Fourth, In Hedges. Sect. 7. The
Fifth, By Cuttings. Sect. 7. Of choice, and ordering them for that purpose.
Sect. 8. The Sixth, By long Crab-stocks. Sect. 8. Advantage. Sect. 8.
Disadvantages. Sect. 9. The Seventh, By Graffing old Crab-trees. Sect. 9.
Directions therein. Sect. 9. Of doing it in the Cleft or Bark, with some
difference from graffing small Stocks in the bark. Sect. 9. Directions to
prevent the breaking out of the Cyens; Sect. 9. And for pruning the bodies.
CHAP. XII. Of the Annoyances about Fruit Trees.
Sect. 1. To prevent Moss and Canker, etc. Sect. 2. To preserve Trees from
Hares, or Rabbets. Sect. 3. Against Ants, or Pismires. Sect. 4. Of Moles,
Water-rats, Snakes, and Emets or Askers. Sect. 5. To prevent Blasting,
Cuterpillers, Snails, etc.
CHAP. XIII. Some particulars about raising some kinds of Fruit Trees.
Sect. 1. Directions about planting Vines. Sect. 2. Of the Soil and manner of
propagating them and renewing old Vines. Sect. 3. Of Pruning them. Sect. 4.
Concerning Vineyards. Sect. 5. Of planting Fig Trees. Sect. 6. Of raising
Quince-trees. Sect. 7. Of propagating the Medlar and Service-tree. Sect. 8. Of
Walnut-trees. Sect. 9. Of raising Goosberries, Currants, Barberries, and
Rasberries.
CHAP. XIV. Of the several kinds of Fruits.
Sect. 1. That it is convenient to have variety of Fruit. Sect. 2. Of several
sorts of Peaches. Sect. 3. Of Nectarines. Sect. 4. Of Apricocks. Sect. 5. Of
Plums. Sect. 6. Of Cherries. Sect. 7. Of Grapes. Sect. 8. Of Pears. Sect. 9. Of
Apples. Sect. 10. Of Quinces. Sect. 11. Of Walnuts, Chestnuts, Filbeards, etc.
Sect. 12. Of Figs, Medlars, and Services. Sect. 13. Of Mulberries, Goosberries,
Currants, Rasberries and Barberries.
CHAP. XV. Of gathering Fruit, and making several sorts of liquors.
Sect. 1. Of gathering Fruit and ordering them in keeping. Sect. 2. Of a
Ladder. Sect. 3. Of a Mill. Sect. 4. Of Cider. Sect. 5. Of Perry. Sect. 6. Of
Rasberry Wine. Sect. 7. Of Curran Wine. Sect. 8. Of Goosberry Wine. Sect. 9.
Another way to make any of the three last sorts of Wine, and Cherry. Sect. 10.
Cherry and Goosberry Brandy. Sect. 10. The Conclusion.
THE INTRODUCTION.
HAving undertaken in this Book to publish all necessary Directions concerning
Planting, the first step I am to take, (to proceed in due order) is to give
instructions about Seminaries, and Nurseries, wherein young Plants are to be
raised and cherished in their Infancy.

And because Men are generally (through ignorance) so indifferent whether they
have these of their own or no; because for a little money they can have Plants
from others ready brought up to their hands; therefore I shall here in the
first place present such with reasons, that I suppose cannot but make them of
the same mind, that I am my self, That it is far better to have them of their
own bringing up, and to have Seminaries and Nurseries of their own for this
purpose.

1. Because this way a Man shall be sure to meet with no failure, either in the
kind or goodness of his Trees, and Fruit; in both which he shall be often
disappointed, if he have his Trees upon trust from others, who make a Trade of
selling them, and are therefore many times incurious in raising them, and
instead of the right kind (if they can get any thing by it) will not stick to
put him off with another.

2. The trouble and expense of buying young Plants, and getting them home,
(many times from places very remote) and the prejudice they often receive in
the carriage will be wholly prevented.

3. This way a man shall with almost the same labor and charge, both furnish
himself sufficiently, and have so many more as to defray the charge he may be
at about it, if he will sell them, or to gratify his Friends if he had rather
bestow them.

4. He will this way be provided with Stocks for Apples, Pears, Plums,
Cherries, and all choice Wall-fruit raised from Kernels and Stones of Fruit:
which are incomparably better than Stocks procured any other way.

The means some use to furnish themselves with Stocks for Apple Trees is, by
getting young Crab-trees out of Hedges, rough Grounds and Woods; and with
Stocks for Pears, Plums, and Cherries by Suckers springing from the Roots of
old Trees of those kinds; but there is much to be said against both courses.

Against using those Crab-trees got out of Woods, etc. there lie these
Objections.

1. The workmen in getting them break some, and hurt others of the principal
Roots; and it sometimes falls out that they have been cut down, and sprung up
again out of the remaining stump, or otherwise hurt, which though not easily
discerned because skinned over, yet will be a prejudice to them for ever.

2. Many of the Stocks so got out of Woods, and Hedges, have for want of room,
and by reason of shades, and the dropping of other trees about them, been
checked and baffled in their growth, and so become crooked, scabby, ill grown,
rough, and unkindly, and never like to make good Trees.

3. Some that furnish themselves this way with Stocks, choose such as are
largest, and those having for the most part thick and hard bark, and old roots,
come on but slowly when they are removed to make Apple Trees.

4. If these Stocks be not graffed very low (and if they are, a years growth or
two will be lost) they will put forth branches of their own every year in such
abundance that without constant pruning of them off, the graffs will be in
danger of being starved.

5. A better advantage may be made of Crab-trees in Hedg-rows and rough
grounds, by graffing them where they are, (as you shall be hereafter directed)
where they will thrive better.

There is but one scruple, (that I can foresee) that can here be started; and
that is, that a man cannot be furnished with Trees of a good largeness to bear
so soon by stocks raised by Kernels and Stones, as by either those gotten out
of Woods, etc. or those raised by Suckers, that may be of several years growth
before they are made use of.

To this I answer, That if at the same time that you get Crab-tree-stocks, (of
six or seven years growth) out of the Wood, or Suckers, and set them in order
to be graffed, you sow Kernels and Stones, the Stocks and Suckers you so graff,
for six or eight years may continue larger and bigger than the Trees that come
of Kernels and Stones; but yet these lesser Trees shall so get ground of the
other, that by the tenth or twelfth year they shall have overtaken them.

And as to the way of raising Stocks for Pears, Plums, and Cherries by suckers,
it is to be noted, that Trees so raised will be ever apt to cast up such
Suckers themselves; and such as do, are seldom found to be good bearing Trees,
by reason they expend their Sap so much that way.

Nevertheless they may be useful for Wall-fruit and Dwarf-trees, as you will
see hereafter in a peculiar Chapter.

And lastly against both these ways of furnishing a man's self with the
aforementioned Stocks there is this to be said, That a man shall very
difficultly store himself with as many as he may desire, and many of them will
prove bad and miscarry, whereas from Kernels its almost the same labor to have
thousands as hundreds, and such as will almost all of them be sit for use.

Having thus given reasons from certain experience, why a Planter ought to have
a Nursery and Seminary of his own, I shall proceed to direct how to order them,
and thence take my first rise, from whence the Planter is to take his.

CHAP. I. Of the Seminary.
Of ordering the Ground.
SECT. 1.
Against the beginning of October prepare Ground by digging and cleansing it
from weeds and roots, making the mold very fine, choose not a wet or very stiff
Clay-land, nor over rich with Dung, but such as being of it self good, you may
make better only with a little mixture of very rotten dung, let it be fenced
from the cold, as well as you can, so that it be free from shade, and droppings
of Trees.

Of sitting Stones.
Sect. 2.
When you set Stones, (which if they be Stones of Fruit soon ripe, you must
keep in sand till October) do it by a Line, pricking holes about a hands
breadth distance one from another, and then put in the Stones, about three
inches deep with the sharp end uppermost; when one row is finished remove your
Line a foot further, and set another row in the same manner; but let your third
row be about two foot distant from the second, that you may have liberty to go
betwixt every two rows to weed, etc. and so proceed to set as many as you have
a mind; possibly some of these Stones may not come up till the second spring
after they are set, and may not deceive you if you then expect them.

Of setting Nuts.
Sect. 3.
After the same manner you are to set all kind of Nuts: but because it is
necessary that your young Walnut-trees and Chesnut-trees should grow longer in
your Seed-plot than Stone-fruit, before they will be fit to be removed to the
place they are to spend their lives in, you must set them at much further
distance, that they may have more room to grow big without hurting one another.

Of sowing Seeds.
Sect. 4.
To raise Stocks from Seeds or Kernels of Apples, or Crabs, (each of which
sorts are to be sowed by themselves) you must thus go to work.

When either you, or any Neighbor has made Cider, Verjuice, or Perry, take
the Must (or as some call it the Pouz) which is the substance of the Fruit
after the juice is pressed out, the same day or the next day after, before it
heats, and with a riddle sift out the Seeds on a clean floor or cloth, and
these you must sow (as soon as you can conveniently) upon beds of very fine
Farth, very thick, for some being bruised in the grinding, or pounding the
Fruit, and others, not being ripe, many never come up; then sift mold upon them
about two fingers breadth in thickness: this way is much better than to sow the
Seeds with the Must or Pouz together, (as some do) because the Must will heat
them, and many of the Seeds will putrify, and others will not be able to root,
or shoot up, because they are so imprisoned in that dry and tough stuff
clinging about them.

The beds of Earth you sow them on may be made about two foot in breadth, with
a good distance between the beds, that you may the better come at to weed them,
and draw them up as you have occasion.

Of securing them from prejudice.
Sect. 5.
To keep Fowls or Birds from scraping them up, lay some white-thorn on the beds
till the Ground be well settled. Some cover the beds with Fearn or Straw to keep
them warm in the Winter, which may not do amiss; but then it ought to be taken
off when the Spring approaches.

If Moles or Mice get in, (which you will discover easily, (the Mice leaving
shells of the Seeds on the top of the beds) they must be destroyed. For Mice
therefore lay Poison, or Oatmeal mixed with pounded Glass, and Butter, and cast
bits of it upon the beds: or set traps for the Mice and Moles, better known
than described.

Ordering Plants.
Sect. 6.
The next spring you will see these Stones and Seeds come up plentifully; first
the dissimilar leaves, almost of the shape of the Kernel split in two, and from
betwixt them will the stem put forth; keep them clean from weeds all the year,
which must be plucked up while they are young, lest if they get root, in
drawing them up you root up the seedlings with them.

These weeds and such as are plucked up any where else, thrown up into a heap
will rot, and become very good Manure, but this should be before they are
seeded, for then the Manure made of them will be apt to make the ground it is
cast upon more subject to weeds.

If a dry time happen, you may sometimes in the Summer water the beds.

The proper Seeds for Stocks.
Sect. 7.
To furnish your self with a competent variety of Stocks for the several sorts
of Fruit Trees, your Seminary is to be stored with these following; such as
come of Peach-stones, Plum-stones, Cherry-stones, Apple-kernels, Crab-kernels,
and Pear-kernels; and from Nuts you raise your Nut-trees.

Peach-stones are to yield you Stocks for Peaches and Nectarines; Plum-stones,
Stocks for Peaches, Nectarines, Apricocks, and Plums; Cherry-stones, Stocks for
Cherries; Seeds of Apples and Crabs produce Stocks for Apple Trees; and lastly
the Seeds of Pears yield Stocks for Pear Trees.

Other ways to raise Stocks.
Sect. 8.
There are likewise some other ways to be furnished with Stocks, and which you
shall find hereafter are in some cases to be made use of, that is, for Pears,
Plums, and Cherries by Suckers springing out of the roots of Trees of the same
kind, and for several sorts of Apples and Pears by Cuttings of Apple Trees and
Quince-trees: which I here intimate, because Stocks thus raised are sometimes
brought up in Nurseries; but the full directions about them are given in the
Chapter of Dwarf-trees.

Mr. Evelyn says, the ends of roots that are cut off from young trees, taken
up to be Transplanted, and set in beds of good Earth, will shoot forth tops,
and become good Stocks. Such may serve for Dwarf-trees, or for Walls.

And I have heard an Ingenious person speak of inoculating Buds on the small
roots of great trees that grow at furthest distance from the bodies, and after
a years growth to cut off the root, about a foot in length, with the new shoot
growing upon it, and Transplant it; because a Tree will be sooner raised thus
than from a Seed or Stone.

In case of an exigent for a Stock or two, this way may be practiced, but it
would be found too troublesome for general use.

CHAP. II. Observations concerning the raising of Stocks in the Seminary, or
elsewhere.
Seeds produce not their own Fruit.
SECT. 1.
Seeds or Stones of Fruits gathered from Trees that have been graffed or
inoculated on Stocks of different kinds from the Cyens, produce of themselves,
(not being graffed or inoculated) not the same Fruit as that was from whence
the Seed or Stone came, but a different, and most commonly a worse.

The Stones of Peaches produce Trees that will bear Peaches, sometimes better
than the Peaches out of which the Stones were taken, although those Peaches
grew upon a Tree that was inoculated on a Plum: And therefore some Gardiners by
setting many Stones of the Newington Peach, have found some among the Trees
come up from them, to bear a fruit rather improved than worse; and by giving it
a new Name, and inoculating from it, have made good gain of it. But this is not
a practice for every private person; because Peach-trees so raised, will be
longer before they bear fruit, than those which are inoculated; and because he
must run the hazard of filling great part of his wall with these Peach-trees
thus raised from Stones, and not one it may be in many prove any thing
extraordinary, and the rest of no use unless for Stocks, after he has waited
several years to see what Fruit they will bear.

Stocks for Apricocks, Nectarines, and Plums.
Sect. 2.
It is controverted amongst men of this Profession, whether Stocks from
Peach-stones are best to inoculate Peaches upon: both sides have their peculiar
advantages, which I shall here set down, and leave every man to his choice.

Stocks from Peach-stones will be sooner ready to inoculate, and the buds will
take very sure, that are inoculated into them; but they must be carefully and
tenderly used in the removal, and must not be expected to make long lasting
Trees.

Stocks from Plum-stones and budded with a Peach will make a more firm and
lasting Peach-tree; and such as will bear Fruit well.

Therefore rather raise Stocks for Peaches, Nectarines, Apricocks, and Plums
from Stones of the Wheat-plum, which is a White-plum ripe in August (if you can
have them,) or in want of them from the Stones of the White-pear-plum, which is
generally commended and used, or of other good White-plum, whose Tree puts
forth large shoots or branches. If you are not sufficiently furnished with
Stones of these White-plums, you may for Apricocks and Plums raise Stocks from
the Stones of the Muscle-plum, the Black-pear-plum, Primordian, or any other
Black or Red-plum of free growth.

And it is a way much commended, first to inoculate an Apricock very low on such
Plum-stocks, and then after a years growth, inoculate a Peach or a Nectarine on
it; only this way there will be two years loss of time, and take notice that
the Red-Roman-Nectarine will hardly take on a Plum-stock any other way.

The Suckers likewise from the roots of the Wheat-plum before mentioned make
excellent Stocks for the Fruit spoken of in this Section.

Cherry Stocks.
Sect. 3.
Stocks for Cherry-trees are raised from Cherry-stones, set or sowed, or young
wild Cherry-trees got out of Woods, etc. or Suckers from the common harsh red
Cherry. The wild Stocks make large handsome Standard-trees, but though graffed
with a good kind, do not bear Fruit so plentifully as the Suckers of the red
being graffed do, which last also are fittest to graff Cherries on for Wall or
Dwarf-trees being of much smaller growth than those of the wild kind are.

Cyen and Stock must agree.
Sect. 4.
It Is plain all Stocks and Cyens (that prosper when they are joined together)
are congenerous, and related in some degree of affinity; I have tried a
Nectarine on a Horse-plum and it failed; on the very same Stock an Apricock
grew very fast. I have also inoculated an Apricock on a course Black-plum
(known in some Countries by the name of the Lammas-plum) and it took well, and
bore a good Fruit. I have inoculated Pears upon a Hawthorn or White-thorn, and
it has taken very well, but the growth was so small, it is not worth the
practice. A Pear graffed on a Wick^y-berry-tree grew very well, but on the
Hazel or Nut-tree it failed. I have tried the inoculating buds of Walnut-trees
upon Ash-trees to hasten the raising Trees, but not one of many (that I tried)
came to any thing. Mr. Evelyn reports it from one, that said, he had it to
show, that a white Apple graffed upon an Elm did grow and bear a red Apple.

Cherries graffed on Plum-trees will not prosper long, nor Plums on Cherries;
neither do Apples on Pears, nor Pears upon Apples.

Stocks may meliorate the Fruit.
Sect. 5.
It is an Assertion of my Lord Bacon in his Natural History, cent. 5. Exper.
452. That Graffing does meliorate Fruit; and I have heard that the
Golden-renating was the Fruit of a Cyen of an Apple Tree graffed by his
direction on an Apple Tree, and thence had its name as being in a manner born
again.

But mere Graffing does not better the Fruit at all, as if you graff a Cyen
upon the same Tree you took it from, the Fruit will be the same, without any
the least alteration from what the Tree bore before it was so graffed.

But it is a harder question to resolve, if you graff a Cyen on a Stock
differing from it in kind, whether the Fruit of this new Tree will be any thing
better than the Fruit of the Tree from whence the Cyen was taken?

This is by many held in the negative; because (say they) the Stock only
conveys food and nourishment to the Cyen, and then when the Cyen has received
it, it converts it perfectly into its own Nature; so that the Fruit which this
Cyen shall bear, must be the very same that the Tree bore from which the Cyen
was taken, and neither better nor worse. But that the Cyen does thus perfectly
transmute the juice it receives from the Stock into its own kind is not proved,
neither (as I verily believe) ever will; and it may therefore prove for all
that is said to the contrary, that the Fruit may participate something of the
Nature of the Stock, and may so far be made by it either better or worse; for
such a union as that of the Stock and the Graff in natural bodies is hardly
conceivable without some commixture of their Natures, and there are some
reasons from Experience that make this probable, as

1. The Seeds of a graffed Tree take much after the Stock, and it is hard to
conceive the Kernel should participate so much of the Stock, and the Fruit be
nothing influenced by it.

2. Those that produce the best Fruit by their Stones or Seeds, yet vary from
the Fruit the seed or stone was taken out of, which in all likelihood proceeds
from the mixture of the quality of the Stock and Cyen in that Tree the Stone
came from.

3. It Is manifest that amongst Trees of one kind, in the same Orchard, you
shall have some one of them bear better Fruit than any of the rest sometimes;
and I know not what to impute this excellency to more probably, than that the
Stocks they were graffed on might be Crab-trees that bore Crabs of several
kinds, some better, some worse.

So that to conclude this discourse. ti cannot be amiss to be so far curious
about the Stocks you graff, as rather to choose such seeds and stones to raise
them from as come from Trees that bear the best fruit in their kind (if you can
have them) than to take them at adventure.

Crab Kernels best.
Sect. 6.
In raising Apple Trees for Orchards or Fields, whether for Cider or baking,
etc. the Crab-kernels are preferred before Apple-kernels, as yielding stocks
more hardy, and so better able to endure cold and course Land, and because they
root better and so will make larger Trees: Neither are some sorts of Crabs so
contemptible a fruit as they are generally accounted; for being gathered very
ripe and kept a good while to mellow, some of them will make good Cider; and
generally they yield a strong Liquor: so that such kind of Crab-stocks may
rather help to mend some Apples of weak juice than make them worse.

Yet where you cannot conveniently be stored with Crab-kernels; Apple-kernels
are not so much inferior to them, but they may well enough be made use of, (as
they commonly are) for raising stocks to graff Apples upon.

And concerning the seeds of Apples it is to be observed, that although they
produce not Trees bearing the same kind of Apples as those the seeds were had
out of; yet without graffing they will bring forth a good harsh fruit that may
yield good Cider: and thus (it is said) we came by some of our best Cyder-Apples.

If you sow the seeds of several sorts of Apples mixed together, you would
certainly have fruit multiplied into various kinds; but yet perhaps find none
better for Cider than those already known, nor so good, and such Trees will be
longer before they come to bear fruit than others that are graffed: so that it
would be but an unpleasant Experiment to search this way for a Cyder-Apple to
exceed all that have been before, because the trial would be so tedious, and
the labor in greatest likelihood lost at last.

But if a man had a mind to raise a good new Fence about a field he designs to
enclose, which he can keep for four or five years together to bear Corn or
Clover-grass to mow, that Cattle may be so long kept out of it, he might do it
rarely well by sowing Apple-kernels of as many sorts as he will, on the top of
a new made Ditch-bank, making the dead Hedge (that is usually on the top of the
bank) on the outside of the ditch to defend them.

When they are grown up he may plash this Hedge, leaving at every four or five
yards distance, one of the best Trees to grow up, which of themselves will bear
good Cyder-fruit, or may be graffed to bear what pleases the owner; and by
this means in a little time and with small charge he shall have a fruit-bearing
and impregnable Hedge.

Of the Pith and Kernels.
Sect. 7.
It Is held by some, that the Kernel of the fruit has a great dependence upon
and sympathy with the pith of the Tree, and that hollow-trees though they grow
and bear fruit, yet that fruit has few kernels in it, and those little better
than withered husks.

When I was a young Planter, I was once in want of Pear-stocks; and made my
complaint to an ancient practiser, a man of very good judgment in the opinion
of those that knew him, and he told me he had often sowed kernels of Pears and
never could get any to grow: Yet I procured some Seeds of Pears from the Mill,
that were very ripe, and had stocks enough from them, which makes me believe my
friend took his kernels from a Tree that was hollow-hearted, as Pear Trees are
more subject to be than any other Fruit Trees.

I mention this the rather, because if a Planter try any thing but once, and
fail, he should not be discouraged, and particularly in this; but if he can get
ripe Seeds, (which will be then very black) and of a sound Tree, he need not
doubt the success.

And to have plenty of stocks such as are best for large standards for
Orchards, or Fields, there is no better way of raising them than by Kernels;
with which a man can no way be plentifully and easily provided, but at the time
and place of making Perry, though he do send some miles for them.

I shall end this Chapter with this one Observation more, not unsuitable to
what went before, and which I have met with verified more than once or twice in
my own Experience, That there are some hollow Fruit Trees that bear fruit so
much more excellent than any of the same kind the owners have had, or could
elsewhere meet with, that they have been very desirous to propagate from them,
but never could any manner of way raise young ones of those old Trees, that
would bear so good a Fruit; which seems to infer that the fruit of a Tree may
be the better for the piths being consumed; and if that be true, it must be so,
because the pith conveys to the fruit a worse sort of juice than any other part
of the Tree does, and therefore being freed from that infection by the
Consumption of the Pith, the Fruit becomes more choice and delicate. And that
the Pith is the conveyance of a courser, or other sort of juice, is rendered in
some sort probable, because (as has been before observed) the Kernels of Fruit
depend much upon the Pith, which almost never produce such good fruit as they
come out of, and generally much worse.

CHAP. III. Of Transplanting the Seedlings.
Of removing Seedings.
SECT. 1.
In October after one Summers growth in the Seed-plot, you ought to draw up
with your hand, such of your Crab, Apple, or Pear-seedlings as you sind grown
above a foot in height: as for those from Stones they need not be removed, but
inoculated in the Seminary, the stones being set at the distance aforesaid.

When they are drawn up, cut off the side-spriggs from about the top, and the
strings from about the roots, and snip off the extremities, both of the top,
that it may not run too fast upward, but the body may grow in bigness, and of
the tap or heart-root, that it may not run directly downward (lest it run
further than the good soil) but may be more apt to spread its Roots in breadth.

Have beds ready prepared, of good fertile, dry Earth, not over rich, lest upon
removal afterward into a much worse Soil (as for the most part Orchard and
Field ground is) your Trees coming of a sudden from such delicate food, to such
course fare, pine away if they do not perish; and this is but reasonably
thought to be the cause why many Trees bought out of London Nurseries (which
are vastly deep with fat, and rich manure) decay, or come on very poorly, when
they are brought into the Country. Therefore upon every removal endeavor to
have Earth as good, or better (to place next the roots) than that out of which
they were taken.

If any of these spring upright, top them early, it will make them grow bigger
bodied, and so become sooner ready for graffing.

Of saving them.
Sect. 2.
Let every bed you make, for setting these Plants in, be about two foot broad,
leaving room betwixt each bed to walk and work about them, without prejudicing
the Plants: Set two rows a foot or more distant each from other on every bed,
by drawing a line, and pricking holes a full foot asunder; let the holes be so
deep, that if the roots be not very long, you may set your Plants at least two
singers breadth deeper in the ground than they grew in the Seed-plot, close the
mold about them, and if it be a very dry time, water them the same day, the
better to settle the Earth about them.

If you can get old Fearn (in some places called also Brakes) or for want of it
Straw, or new Dung, cover the Beds with it, which will keep the roots warm in
the Winter, and preserve them from overmuch heat in the Summer; if the land be
any whit stiff, this cover will make it mellow, and when rotten enrich it, and
very much hinder the growth of weeds, which ought duly to be plucked up; and
put new Fearn, etc. as the old rots.

Of dressing them.
Sect. 3.
Those of your Plants, which are not grown above a foot in height, you may let
remain in your Seed-plot till another year.

If you intend to raise any Stocks, to be set out in Fields before they are
graffed, you need not top them upon their first removal, neither need you
remove them, till they are grown high enough to stand in the Fields; if you
find that they spread their roots, and run not downward, as in gravelly and
such kind of soils they will not be apt to do; (and by the first you draw up
you may judge of the rest, whether they do or no:) If you reserve any for this
use, you had best choose such as grow straight, and at convenient distance one
from another; which you may contrive to do, in drawing out the first two years,
such as be of stature to be Transplanted from among them: Dress these once or
twice a year by cutting off the biggest side-branches to hasten their growing
tall, but leaving some small side-branches, for this causes them to thrive in
bigness the more, which they ought to do proportionable to their height, or
else they will be too weak to bear a top.

Observe this also in graffed Trees in your Nurseries or elsewhere.

CHAP. IV. Of Inoculating.
Way of Inoculating.
SECT. 1.
About a fortnight before, or after Midsummer (which is the best time, though
it may be done from the beginning of May till August) when you have pitched
upon such stocks as are sit to be inoculated, choose out a strong and well
liking branch, or shoot of that years growth upon a Tree that bears such kind
of fruit as you would by this operation produce, and about the middle, or lower
end of it, (for the top will be too tender) six upon a leaf, that has a fresh
and fair bud growing out betwixt it and the bark, and about half an inch below,
and above the bud cut off the branch, and so you will have a piece of it about
an inch long remaining, with a bud and a leaf on; this you must cleave just
through the midst, so as the bud may be directly in the middle of the one half;
and then snip off a part of the leaf, and holding it by the remainder, clap it
to a smooth place on the stock; and with a Penknife score out, on each side of
it, so much of the stock as it covers, or rather a little broader (because when
the bark on which the bud is, is taken off from its own wood and applied to the
stock, it will cover a wider space of the stock than it did before;) after you
have thus marked your Stock, withdraw the Cyen again, and cut the bark through
where you had marked it, then cut the bark cross and straight, from the
uppermost end of one score to the upper end of the other, and cut the bark
again cross and straight, from one score to the other, but not so low as the
lower ends of the scores by a quarter of an inch, then take the oblong square
piece of bark, that is cut on every side quite off the Stock, and raise up that
part of the bark that remains betwixt the side scores, at the bottom of the
work, from the wood, till you come to the lower ends of the side scores.

Take then a Goose-quill, cut in the fashion of an Apple-scoop, or Scraper, and
having with your Nail a little loosned the upper part of that Bark that is on
the Cyen, thrust the quill betwixt the bark and the wood, holding it close to
the wood, that it may separate them, and take off with the bark a little wood
or root of the bud over against it: If you see a hole on the inside over
against the bud, when you have taken the bark off, cast it away, that little
labor is lost, and try another till you find it otherwise.

Then put in the lower end of that Bark or Cyen betwixt the bark that was
raised on the Stock and the Wood, and so bind it on the stock gently with
Woolen-yarn, or narrow shreds of Linen Cloth, or gentle Stuff, or with Basses,
or Bast, of which the Russia Mats are made, but so that the Cyen may lie close
to the wood of the stock that was made bare, and have a special care that you
hurt not the bud.

Several other ways.
Sect. 2.
There are some other ways of inoculating used, differing only in the manner of
the cut both in the bark of the Stock, and of the Cyen.

And first, Some proceeding in all other things as is before directed, cut the
Bark out of the whole length of the side scores, and apply the Cyen to the
disbarked place.

Secondly, Others cut one slit only, down the bark of the Stock, and another
cross the top of it, like a great T: when this is done, they prepare the Cyen
or bark as before directed, (only cutting it sharp pointed at the lower end
before they take the bud off its wood) then raise the bark of the Stock up on
each side the slit, and put in the Cyen, beginning at the top and sliding it
downward gently, and so bind the Bark gently upon it. This is the common way
used among Gardeners.

Thirdly, You may make the cross cut in the middle of the downright score on
the Stock, and lifting up the four corners of the bark, and making the Cyen
sharp at both ends, put it under the bark of the Stock at both ends, and then
bind it. But in doing this there is danger of hurting the Cyen.

Fourthly, Mr Rea commends the making the cross cut at the lower end of the
down right cut, and having opened the sides, put in the Cyen upward, being made
sharp at the upper end only.

Thus much to satisfy the curiosity of such as have a mind to make trial of
every way; but the first that I have described at large, I take to be the best.

CHAP. V. Observations touching Inoculating.
Necessary Rules.
SECT. 1.
Lest one bud fail, or any mischance break it, put two in every Stock, but not
directly under one another, on the same side of the stock: The branch or shoot,
you cut one Cyen off, may yield you several.

About a month after the inoculating, or sooner, if you perceive the bark swell
where the binding is, cut off the binding.

If it grow it will fix to the stock, keep its color, and that part of the
leaf and stalk that was left will drop off, and the bud appear fair; then
sometime before the next spring cut off the top of the stock, a hands breadth
above the place it was inoculated at, and all the side-branches, that grow any
where upon the Stock; and at Spring the bud will put forth, and if any other
sprouts or buds appear on the stock, cut them off.

If the first inoculation fail, or the buds dye, the stocks may be inoculated
again next Summer; and of such as are inoculated diagram of tree A Denotes the
cutting of the Bark for inoculating the first way directed. B The upper part of
the bark taken off and the lower part raised. C The Bark prepared to put in the
Stock. D The first inoculation finished. E The second way described by taking
the Bark off the Stock in an oblong square. F The same finished. G The cutting
the Bark of the Stock according to the Gardiners ordinary way. H The sides of
the Bark opened to put in the bark or shield. I The Bark of the Cyen prepared
for that purpose. K This way of inoculation finished. L The cutting of the Bark
of the Stock according to Mr. Rea 's best approbation. M The opening the Bark
on each side the slit. N The Bark prepared to be put in. O The same finished. P
The cut of the Cyen and the Stock for side-graffing. Q The cut of the Bark of
the Stock for another way of side-graffing. R The cut of the Cyen and Stock for
Slicing. S The cut of both for graffing by Approach. T The manner of Stock and
Cyen for Whip-graffing. V The manner of cutting the Bark of the Stock for
graffing in the bark. W The manner of Circumposition.


timely in the year, it may be sometimes seen whether they grow or not, time
enough to inoculate them again the same year.

Apricocks will have buds sooner ready than other Fruit; so that you may begin
with them, and follow with other kinds.

Size, height and ordering.
Sect. 2.
Stocks raised of Peach-stones are commonly big enough to be inoculated the
second Summer, sometimes the first after they are set; when they, or any other
Stocks are an inch and half in compass, or thereabouts, they are big enough to
be inoculated.

Those you intend for Wall, or Dwarf-trees, are to be inoculated within a
handful of the ground, and not Pruned at all till you remove them, and then you
will better see what is necessary to be cut off: And these you may remove after
one years growth, or two with more safety.

If you inoculate any Plums, Cherries, Pears or other Fruit, that you intend
for an Orchard, or other place, for tall standards, you may do it higher on the
stocks, and Prune these up in the Nursery, and let them grow there three or
four years (according as they grow in height) before they be removed.

After Stocks that are inoculated have made one or two years growth, you must
cut off the head of the stock, that remained above the bud at your first
cutting it: Cut it close to the new branch, that it may grow over the cut; let
it be cut a little slope, and clay'd over, if you desire the branch should
quickly cover it, and the sooner it does the better.

Choice of Buds, and what Fruits.
Sect. 3.
Care must be had in choosing branches, or shoots, from which you are to have
your buds, that are of strong growth, the Bark firm, and not spung y; suffer
them to fade as little as may be, before you use them; and if the fruit you
design to raise, be at such a distance that you cannot have buds to inoculate
the same day they are cut, put them in wet Moss, or Grass in a Box, and so they
will keep a day and a night very well.

Nectarines, Peaches, and Apricocks, are seldom raised otherwise than by
Inoculation; I knew an Apricock graffed in the cleft, as likely as might be to
grow, but failed; I have heard of one graffed in the bark that grew.

The bark of Cyens taken from some Plums, is so tender and spungy, they will
often miscarry when inoculated; from such one would choose rather to raise by
Graffing; but most Plums will hit very well being inoculated.

Cyens of Apples fail for the most part, their Bark being tender, and buds
weak; but to preserve kind of a dying Apple Tree, that I could not well cut a
Cyen to Graff off, I have taken a hungry bud of the year foregoing, and it has
taken, and grown very well.

Cherries and Pears take very sure being inoculated on young fresh Stocks,
whose Bark is not very thick.

Inoculating preferred before Graffing.
Sect. 4.
Where Inoculating succeeds well, it is to be preferred before Graffing.

1. Because the Stock will be big enough to inoculate sooner by two or three
years, than to graff, and your Plant grows much faster, after the Nature is
so altered, than it did before, and will be sooner ready to Transplant, than if
it be suffered to grow two or three years longer, as it must be before it will
be fit to be graffed.

2. It makes a sounder Tree than one that is graffed, especially in the cleft;
because it covers the Stock speedily and well.

3. It hurts not the Stock so much as graffing; and if it chance to fail, it
may be inoculated next year again, and sometimes the same year.

4. It Is more speedy, easy, and delightful than Graffing, and may be practiced
by Gentlemen, who in June may lie on the ground and do it; whereas they cannot
bear the cold without danger of taing hurt, in February, or March, which is the
chief Graffing season.

Of the time of the day.
Sect. 5.
It is debated among Planters what time of the day is best for Inoculating: I
have heard an Ingenious person argue stiffly for the morning; because there
passes up much more sap, or juice, in the day time, than in the night; as was
observed by him in piercing the Birch-tree, and other Trees, to get the liquor,
that distills out of them, for Physical uses; and consequently the bud
inoculated in the morning, must be more likely to grow, having the whole days
plenty of sap to invite it to unite with the Stock, than if it be inoculated
late in the day, and so must be discouraged in its new habitation, by the
niggardly provision of the nights Sap. If you follow this advice, you had best
wrap some broad leaves, or Fearn, about the Stock, so as to shade the Cyen from
the scorching heat of the day following, to prevent its drying before the Stock
has undertaken the charge of preserving it.

But this work may be done in the middle of the day, if the heat be not
violent, and then you must (as at all times you ought) be very quick in the
doing of it.

And for all that has been said before, the afternoon may be as good a time as
any; because if the bud have less liquor afforded it in the night, then the
coolness of that time makes it less thirsty; and as its thirst increases by
the heat of the next day, a more plentiful stream will be very seasonable to
satisfy it.

CHAP. VI. Of the several ways of Graffing.
Slicing, or Packing.
SECT. 1.
As there are several ways (as you have seen) of Inoculating, so are there of
Graffing, as now I come to let you see; and the first I shall speak of is that
which is called Slicing, or Packing, which I shall describe here at large, and
so it will serve as a general direction for all.

Cut off the top of your Stock in some smooth straight place; if you do it with
a Hand-saw, cut it smooth afterward with your Knife, leaving the top flat and
even.

Then prepare your Cyen or Graff, by cutting it on one side, from the joint, or
seam, (that is, at every years growth) down slope-wise in the old wood, till
it is cut quite off, that the slope may be about an inch long, or something
more, observing its bent, that when the Cyen is fixed to the Stock it may stand
almost upright; give a cut then cross through the bark at the top of the slope,
and then cut a thin chip of that slope upward to the cross-cut, that there may
be a shoulder to rest on the top of the Stock, but cut not this shoulder too
deep, little more than through the bark will be enough, and this will cause a
little rising in the sloped part, which you must cut down, that the whole slope
may be plain and smooth, without dints or risings, and lie even to the side of
the Stock.

Cut then the top of the Cyen off, close above a bud, about four inches above
the shoulder if it be for a standard Tree, two buds above the clay being full
enough; but for Dwarf, or Wall-trees, you may let the Cyen be six inches long
with several buds* that they may shoot forth many branches, and spread from the
very Stock.

The Cyen or Graff thus prepared; lay the cut part of the Cyen on the West, or
South-west side of the Stock, and so measure and mark the breadth and length of
it, then cut away so much of the bark of the Stock, as the cut part of the Cyen
may fit, drawing your Knife upward; but as the stock is bigger, and the bark
thicker than that on the Cyen, so the chip must be longer, and broader, or else
the passage for the sap in the Stock and Cyen, (which is chiefly betwixt the
bark and the wood) will not meet together (as in the work you will easily see)
which should be aimed at.

Then lay the cut part of the Cyen on the cut part of the Stock, and bind it on
with course Woollen-yarn, Basses, or the inward peeling of the Witch-tree; if
you bind with such a material as will not be loose, or rotten by Midsummer,
about that time give it a cut cross-wise with a Knife to set the prisoners at
liberty.

Have in readiness good Clay, free from Stones, mixed with long Hay, and daub it
about the Stock and Cyen, a full inch above and below the head of the Stock,
work it up round the Cyen till it be sharp at the top, that the rain water may
run down it; and with a Knife or little trowel dipped in water smooth over the
clay; in doing this be sure not to displace the Cyen.

Thus you may Graft Pears, Plums, Cherries, and Apples, if it be before the
bark of the Stock will part from the wood of them, for when it will, the next
way following is better for Apples.

In the Bark the best ways.
Sect. 2.
The second way (called Graffing in the Bark) is much like this, and I prefer
it from experience much before the forementioned, or any other way, but it can
only be used for Apples, because all Cyens of other Fruit will be grown past
use, before the bark of the Stocks will peel; which is about the end of March
or the beginning of April; but this will be time enough for Apples, if your
Stocks be in any thing good liking, which if they be not, they are not fit to
be Graffed any way.

Prepare then your Stock and Cyen exactly as you were directed in packing, only
instead of cutting the bark off the Stock, slit it on the South-west side, from
the top, almost as long as the sloped part of the Cyen, and loosen the bark at
the top of the slit with the point of your Knife.

Have in readiness a little Instrument made of Ivory, or a Deer or Sheep-shank,
or Silver, or hard smooth Wood, at one end let it be made of the shape of the
slope part of the Cyen, but much less every way; thrust it down betwixt the
Bark and the Wood of the Stock, where it was slit, to make room for the Cyen,
take it out and put in the Cyen, but first cut a little of the bark at the thin
end of the slope of the Cyen, that it double not in going down, yet leave it
with a sharp edge; and because when your Cyen is put in, it will bear the bark
hollow from the stock, nick or slit the bark, on each side the Cyen, so that it
may fall close to the Stock, and to the edges of the Cyen. Bind and Clay it as
you have already heard.

These two are the best ways of Graffing for these Reasons.

1. Because Stocks may be Graffed thus, some years before they can be ready to
graff in the cleft; and though Whip-graffing may be used sooner than either of
these, yet there are other great inconveniences attending it, as you will see
hereafter.

2. The Stocks are this way less harmed than where a cleft is used, because the
cleft lets wet into them, and makes them not so fit for Graffing again (if any
fail to grow the first time) as these continue to be, though they should once
miscarry, or come to any mischance.

3. The Cyen will much sooner and better cover the Stock, and so make a more
healthful, sound, and swifter growing Tree.

4. This is much more speedy, easy, and sure to succeed.

Sect. 3.
Whip-Graffing.
There is another way, called Whip-graffing, and here your Stock and Cyen ought
to be exactly of the same bigness, as the manner of performing it plainly
shows, which is as follows.

Slope off the Cyen a full inch or longer, and do the like to the Stock, and
tie the one upon the other.

You may if you will, make a shoulder on the Cyen, and cut the top of the Stock
to suit with it, and then bind them together, and clay about the place.

This way is successful enough, so that special care be taken, that both Stock
and Cyen suit exactly where they are joined together, which is somewhat
troublesome to do, and so it is to find Cyens and Stocks of an equal bigness;
besides the head will be apt to overgrow the Stocks; all that can be done to
prevent it, is to Graff these very low, or if high, to give the Stock more
liberty to thicken, by slitting the Bark of it with a Knife.

In this way of Graffing there is another little knack may be added to very
good purpose; and that is, when the Stock and Cyen are prepared (as you heard
before) to be joined together, to make a slit with a Knife in the bare place of
the Stock downward, beginning toward the top of the slope, and so slitting it
a little way, and doing the like in the sloped face of the Cyen, but beginning
at the same distance from the lower end of it, as you did before from the top
of the Stock, and so carrying it upwards, and then join them by thrusting the
one slice into the other, till the bare place of the Cyen cover the bare place
of the Stock.

This may be done likewise in Graffing by packing, and in both conduces much
to strengthen the work, and is called by some, Lipping, or Tonguing.

Sid^ Graffing.
Sect. 4.
I am now going to describe another way that I never read of, neither ever knew
more than one that used it, and he a skilful Gardner and used it very much:
Knowing no name for it I have given it the name of Side-graffing.

It Is done by preparing the Cyen as in Whip-graffing; then without cutting off
the head of the Stock, (but making it thin of side Branches) from a smooth
place of it on the West Side, take off as much bark as the Cyen will cover (as
in Packing) and slit both Cyen and Stock, according to the directions given in
the end of the last Section, and fix them together accordingly: Bind it close
and clay it.

If it grow, at a years end cut off the top of the Stock at the graffed place
slope-wise, and clay it.

Some done thus grow well, and I have used it successfully, but suffer not the
top of the Stock much to overgrow the Cyen the first year before it is cut quite
off.

There is another way of this kind, I have known used, and is easier done than
the former, that is, to slit the bark of the Stock in the form of a great T,
and loosning it with the point of a Knife, and then clapping in a Cyen,
prepared as has been said before, (but without the slit for Lipping,) bind and
clay it.

This can be used only when the Bark will part from the Stock.

In the Cleft.
Sect. 5.
The next way is that which is called Graffing in the Cleft, and is very
ancient, and still used by common-Planters, and it is thus performed.

Cut off the head of the Stock even and smooth, cleave it with a strong Knife,
or Chissel, (hereafter described when I speak of Pruning big Trees) let the
slit run near two inches deep, let it be as near the middle of the Stock as you
can, but not in the pith or heart; have in readiness a stick of hard Wood, near
a foot long, at one end made like a wedg; when you have taken out the Cleaver,
put the wedg into the slit, and open it so wide as to put in the Cyen, when
it is prepared.

Which is by cutting it down slope on each side, about an inch in length,
beginning at the joint, but leaving it much thinner on that side that goes
into the Stock than the other that is outward, (that side must be outward that
will cause it to lean rather outward than inward;) you may let it have a
shoulder on one side, or both, or either, all these ways are used; but
shouldering takes up more time, and makes the Cyen weaker, and so apter by any
chance to be broke off. Then with your Knife cut away any Jags, or roughness,
or blackness that remains after cleaving on each side of the cleft within, and
so put in either one or two Cyens (according as your Stock is in bigness,)
place them so as the passage of the sap betwixt the bark and wood, both of the
Stock and Cyen, may meet all along the cleft, as near as you can; draw then
forth your wedg, and if the Stock be a big strong Stock, and do pinch the
Graffs, drive a little wedg of dry wood into the slit, but not so as to let the
Cyens loose; or for such strong stocks cut the Graffs as thick on that side
that goes into the Stock, as on the outside, which will prevent the Stocks
hurting the sappy part and bark of the Cyen.

Many cleave big Stocks crosswise again, and put in two more Cyens, but
cleaving hurts the Stock so much that you had better (if you will have more
than two Cyens in one Stock) Graff the other two in the bark, according to the
second way of Graffing, forecasting one of them to be on the West Side the
Stock.

By approach.
Sect. 6.
There is another way, called Graffing by Approach, Ablactation, or Enarching,
which is by having a Stock, or Stocks grow so near another Tree, whose Fruit
you would propagate, that the stock and the branch of that Tree may be joined
together in the manner following.

Cut the side of the Branch and of the Stock (where they will meet) about three
inches in length, till you come near the pith of each, and fit them both
together, that the passages of the sap may join, in which posture bind and clay
them: As Soon as you find the Cyen and Stock to be well cemented together, cut
off the head of the Stock, about four inches above the binding; and in March
following, cut off the stub you left of the Stock, and also the Cyen
underneath, close to the Graffed place, that it may subsist by the Stock only.

It Is also used to be done by cutting off the head of the Stock at first, and
sloping half off about two inches long, and joining the Cyen thereunto, being
cut accordingly. See the Figure.

This manner of Graffing is unnecessary, and scarcely practicable in the
Fruit Trees, chiefly intended in this Book; but for Oranges, Lemmons,
Pomgranats, Vines, Jessamins, and such like shrubs it may be practiced.

Also it is said that Trees of different kinds will sooner take this way than
otherwise.

Among all these sorts of Graffing, the second way for Apples, and the first
for all other Fruit Trees, are to be preferred before all the rest.

The Figures with these directions, I hope will make all easy to any man's
understanding.

CHAP. VII. Observations concerning Graffing.
Size of Stocks.
SECT. 1.
If the Plants that you removed out of your Seed-plot into the Nursery, and
such Stocks for Stone-fruit in the Seed-plot as you intend to Graff, be half an
inch over in thickness, where they are to be Graffed, or little more, it is
enough: It Is best not to have them above an inch in the diameter, both that you
may lose no time, and that the Stock may be easier covered by the Cyen.

Choice of Cyens.
Sect. 2.
In providing Cyens or Graffs of Pears, Plums and Cherries you must observe to
cut them in ^^nuary, or the very beginning of February, having respect to the
forwardness or backwardness of the Spring, and the warmth or coldness of the
Country you live in; but you must be sure to cut them before the buds have any
speck of white appear upon them.

Cyens for Apple Trees will seldom be too forward any time before the beginning
of March.

Choose strong and well grown Cyens, that grow at the top or outside of a Tree
that bears well, and good fruit of its kind, and cut not off the tops of the
Cyens till you Graff them, for so they will keep the better.

I have always found a shoot or branch of the year next foregoing to thrive
best; and though in Graffing old Trees in Hereford-shire, some commend and use
Cyens of two or three years growth, yet those are seldom found to have
convenient buds to put forth at, and oftentimes have blossoming buds on them,
and make not so good a growth, neither have they so good a joint to Graff at,
as those of the last year.

When you get them, you had best cut off at least a hands breadth of that which
grew the year before with them, besides the last years shoot; for so they will
keep the better, and you must use about an inch of that old wood in every Cyen
when you Graff it.

Sect. 3.
Time.
In January or February, as you find the weather grow warm, the wind not being
North, or North-East, you may Graff Plums, Cherries, and Pears, but not Apples
till the bark of the Stocks will rise or peel from the wood, which is seldom
before the middle of March, and often not till April, because this is necessary
for the best way of Graffing them; but if you will Graff any Apples in the
cleft, you may do it a little sooner.

Perhaps you may not have several sorts of Plums, Cherries, or Pears, so near
you as that you may get buds fresh enough for Inoculation. In this case you may
procure Cyens and Graff them, and they will continue fresh though you should
send for them from beyond Sea.

Cutting and ordering.
Sect. 4.
These Cyens may be kept three weeks, or a month after they are cut, before
they are used, and there ought to be a fortnight or three weeks betwixt the
time of their being cut, and of their being Graffed, that the Stocks in that
time may be more replenisht with sap, and the Cyens be more empty of it.

To keep your Cyens or Graffs after they are cut, you need not, as some direct,
bury them in moist mold, for this may be a means to make them swell and bud
forth, by receiving moisture from the Earth; and then when by Graffing they are
exposed to the cold open Air, they will be in danger to wither and dye before
they have nourishment from the Stock.

You may lay them in a dry house, so it be near no heat, or under an old Tree,
or Hedge, and cover them all over with dry mold, that the Air may not have too
much influence upon them: though they seem somewhat dry, yet if they cut with a
fresh color, and be not much withered, they will not grow the worse, but
rather the better; yea some that have seemed withered, being carried in a
Cloak-bag seventy or eighty miles have grown well.

Suffer not the buds to be hurt, or rubbed in the binding or carriage.

Of joints and height of Graffing.
Sect. 5.
There be some indifferent whether they Graff at a joint or no, but forecast to
have a bud directly behind the shoulder of the Cyen: If Cyens with joints were
scarce, you might practice so on small Stocks that will be speedily covered,
but if Cyens can be had with joints, never Graff with others, for these will
cover the Stocks sooner.

It will do well in Graffing Stocks for large Standards, to put but one Cyen
into a Stock, and if it put forth several shoots, to cut off all but one, that
is the straightest and strongest: But for Dwarfs and Wall-fruit put in two
Cyens, if the Stock be big enough. Let the later be Graffed near the ground,
the former at such height as the Stock will allow.

Marking T^ees.
Sect. 6.
In Graffing or Inoculating, it may be necessary to have some mark, to know
what kind of Fruit is put upon each Stock; if you Graff many of one kind, (as
it is necessary for Cyder-Fruit) you may observe to make every row to consist
but of one kind, and it is but entering in a Book, that such a row has such a
kind of Fruit in it, and no other; but where there are several in one row,
there may be a Stake knocked into the ground at the beginning of every new sort,
and so entered in your Book; and where you have very few of a kind (or for your
whole Nursery, if you please) you may make marks of several figures or shapes,
in the bark of the Stocks; which marks enter into your Book, and what kind it
denotes, and at two or three years when you remove it, the mark will be very
visible; and by renewing the marks sometimes, you may continue it as long as
you please, and if any Tree be stolen you may own it by the mark.

CHAP. VIII. Of Planting Wall-Fruit.
SECT. 1.
Time.
Stone-fruit will be first ready to remove, for after two years growth in the
Seed-plot or Nursery, after they are Inoculated, or Graffed, you may well
remove them, be they for Wall or Dwarfs, which you ought to do in October or
November; early removing being advantageous for all Fruit Trees, both for the
security of their growing, and for their well growing.

Young Trees, having been taken up about November, and the ends of the roots
cut off, and laid in the Earth till March to be Planted, being then taken forth
again, it has appeared that they have put out many fibrous roots, at the ends
of those big roots that were cut off; which had they done in the place they
were to grow in the next Summer, this would have been a good preparation
against Spring; and it is always seen that Trees set in February or March, make
generally a much less growth the next year, than those that were set before
Winter. If a dry Summer happen to succeed, it often kills some of the late set
Trees, and puts such a stop to others, that they recover not of many years.

In sharp Frosts, though you could dig, it is not good to remove Trees.

Preparing ground, and distance.
Sect. 2.
Make a Trench by the Wall-side you are to set them up to, about two foot
broad, and as deep, and in every place where a Tree is to be set, about a yard
square, mingle good old rotten Neats-dung, with the Earth, and fill it up, near
as high as you intend the borders to be, and when you have filled it about half
full, tread it down; But if you design no borders, make then only a hole for
each Tree, of the square before mentioned; but if your Soil be wet, or binding
gravel, or such like, very bad in the bottom, go not so deep, it will be better
to set them shallow, and raise the Earth about them.

As to the distance Wall-fruit-trees are to be set at, where they are to grow,
you may learn that best by considering their aptness to spread: Apricocks and
Pears spread most, the May Cherry and some others are of very small growth;
it is impossible to give rules for all, but the general distance is about four
yards asunder.

Mixing Soils, and setting them.
Sect. 3.
If it be not a manured Land you set them in, have in readiness some very fine
rich Mold, or shovellings of a yard where Cattle are frequently lodged or fed,
that has lain on heaps till it is mellow, and become dry, or rotten Neats-dung,
which you may mix with the Earth that came forth of the hole, and so order it,
that it may be as good or better, than that out of which your Trees came: Fill
the hole half way up with this, and tread it down in such form (having respect
to the roots of the Tree that is to be set in it) that the roots may rest close
upon it. Cut off the ends of all the roots, (if it have one long downright
root, you may cut it almost half off,) try (by setting the Tree in the hole)
which side will stand best to the Wall, and then cut off such branches as grow
directly toward, and fromward the Wall, leaving only the side branches, to be
nailed unto it, then clap your Tree in, placing it as far from the Wall as the
top will allow, that must be spread upon it, that the roots may have the more
liberty to spread backwards: Fill up the hole with the mold, and use all
diligence to place the roots of your Tree in the same posture they were in
before you removed it: If the Tree be young, and the Roots slender, this can be
performed no way but by throwing in a little Soil at a time, and then raising
up with your hands such Roots as are pressed down by it below their proper
situation, spreading them on the soil you have cast in, and then throwing in
more, and ordering the Roots as before, so continuing to do till you have
filled up the hole.

Old Trees with sturdy Roots do not require so much curiosity; but you must be
sure that the mold lie close under, betwixt, and among the Roots.

If the Soil be light, you must press it down gently with your foot, then cover
them half a yard about with Fearn or Straw; or if your ground be not very rich,
with Dung.

(...) the (...).
Sect. 4.
Every year it will be necessary to prune and nail them to the Wall, twice, or
thrice, according as they grow more or less; wherein you must observe, to bend
down the strongest shoots (that would grow upward) toward the sides, otherwise
they will be apt to run straight upward, and not cover the space you design for
them, and by their luxurious growth, will extremely rob the side branches of
their nourishment. There will branches enough spring out fresh to run upwards out
of them when they are so bowed.

Cut off such as grow directly outward close to the body; if you cut a part of
any branch off, do it at a bud, that the cut may be covered with a fresh sprig.

Lay none across, or under one another, but let them spread as the fingers of
your hand when it is expanded.

The Winter pruning may be done, as soon as the fruit, and leaves are fallen,
or any time before February, except Nectarines, and Peaches, which are apt to
dye, if pruned before the Sap rise. Mr. Rea says, the best time to Prune them,
is after they flower.

Shreads of Woollen-Cloth are the best things to Nail them up with; some use
gentle Leather, or an old Hat, any of these may serve turn.

(...)
Sect. 5.
Sometime in the Winter, after two or three years, if the Soil the roots are to
spread into, be not rich enough, open the ground at the outside of the holes
you made at setting, as near round about, as the Wall will permit. If you find
no roots bare, let it lie open a month, and then sill it up with the Earth that
came forth, well mixed with such a manure as suits with it.

Amenling Soil.
Sect. 6.
Where the natural soil is not good enough of it self, whether it be in Garden,
Orchard, or Field, there it ought to be by skill assisted, and bettered, at
leastwise for such a compass as the roots of every Tree take up for some time,
if not so far round as they are ever like to extend themselves.

And this must be done by mixing such Manures with the Soil, as suit best with
its temper.

If the Soil be clay, or clay mixed with gravel, or wet heavy land, hot Dung,
as that of Horses, or Poultry, is best to mix with it, to bring it to a due
temperament.

And if the soil be a light, hollow, eskie, or sandy land, Marl, Mud our of a
Pond or River, or shovelling^ of dirty yards or highways, if they be not
sandy, and be well mellowed, by lying on heaps, and especially if those heaps
are mixed with Lime, are proper to mend it.

If this last soil be barren likewise, you may properly add a mixture of
Neats-dung.

If your Land be too rich (which is seldom seen) you may mix coal Ashes with it.

I have seen an Apple Tree on a Hempbut, which was constantly Plowed, and
Manured to a great richness, bear more Apples than four such Trees in an
Orchard would do. And it is constantly seen in barren hungry Land, Trees thrive
poorly, grow Mossey, or Bark-bound, bearing very little, and that a very poor
Fruit.

Only Walnut-trees and Pear Trees do not necessarily require a very rich
ground, and will prosper best on stony and light land.

(...)
Sect. 7.
When your Wall-trees are grown old, and full of big wood, you may in three or
four years time renew them, by cutting out some of the biggest stems, or
boughs, yearly, cutting each branch off at some small twig, (if it may be) that
either it, or a fresh branch may grow over the cut place; which must be kept
covered with Clay; and so go on yearly, till all the big wood is cut out.

Or if you dislike the kind of Fruit, you may Inoculate, or Graff the boughs
with a better sort of Fruit, but not all in one year, but some one, and some
another.

By either of these ways, you may renew a decaying Tree, and keep your Wall
almost still furnished, with less trouble and charge, or loss of time than by
taking up the old one, and planting a young one in its stead.

Appropriating Fruit to Walls.
Sect. 8.
In furnishing your Walls with Fruit Trees, observe always to Plant Peaches and
Nectarines up to the Wall that is most Southward; the East Wall is to be
allotted to Apricocks, carly Cherries, and the choicest Plums; the West may be
set with Pears, Cherries, and Plums.

Some of the coursest Pears and Plums, you may set to the North Wall, both to
cover the wall handsomely, and many years they will bear as well on it, as on
standards; especially if your wall stand not directly North, but so as to have
some considerable benefit of the Sun; Nut-trees likewise are proper for this
wall, and will prosper well up to it.

If your conveniences will allow it, and you are to build a new Wall, it is
much better to have your Garden walls not stand directly toward the four
points, than otherwise, and then the worst wall will be much better, and the
best good enough for your purpose.

As thus, the East-wall, to incline to the South; the South, to the West; the
West, to the North; the North, to the East; or contrary, but not so well.

In the first way the two first walls will be extraordinary good, and the two
later good enough for ordinary Fruit.

Making a Wall.
Sect. 9.
In building a New Wall, it would be very advantageous, to make it with half
rounds, each semicircle being eight yards round in the inside, and about six
yards in the face or diameter, each taking two Trees; and betwixt every half
round, let there be two foot breadth of plain walling, where you may place a
Flower-pot on a pillar two soot high, or Plant a Vine to run up it, which every
Summer, you may let spread it self a little into the half rounds on each side
it.

I know an honorable Gentleman, in somewhat a cold Country, that has his
Garden walls so made, and his Trees bear Fruit plentifully in such years as his
neighbors generally fail.

I also saw a wall made thus for raising Melons under, by a pattern or
directions from Italy.

I have also seen Grapes ripen delicately on every side the cluster, that grew
in a half round.

By means of these rounds, every wall will one time of the day or other, have a
share of the Sun, and the best walls (by reason of such a reflection, and
collection of the Sunbeams as will be in every round) will be exceeding hot,
and the Trees be more secure from winds.

Having said thus much here of the Wall, that Fruit Trees are to be set up to,
thus much more may not improperly be here added.

That a Pale is as good for this purpose, and in respect of ripening Fruit
better than any thing else it can be raised up to, if the Pale be made of sawed
boards, nine or ten foot high, and exactly joined, that no wind may come
through; next to this in goodness is a Brick-wall, and then a Stone wall, and
the worst of all that which is made of Timber and Mortar; but in this every one
cannot be his own chooser, but must comply with what the Country he lives in
will permit him to do for his best convenience.

When you Plant your Garden with Fruit Trees, you may do well to draw the
Platform of it in Paper, and so set down the name of every Tree, according to
the place it stands in, whether in Wall-fruit or Dwarf-trees; the same course
you may use about your Orchard, and you will find it both satisfactory and
useful, that you may readily at any season of the year, know what kind of Fruit
every Tree bears: The Fruit Planted in Fields, not being of so much variety,
may be easily distinguished without this help.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Dwarf-trees.
Advantage of Dwarfs.
SECT. 1.
These Trees have been of late much affected and coveted, because they are of
special advantage for Table-fruit, (whether Pears, Apples, Plums, or Cherries)
and being but of low Stature, may be Planted in the borders of Garden-walks,
without doing any thing else there about them any prejudice, by overshadowing
them; and their fruit will be as well secured, and commodious for gathering as
the Wall-fruit.

Stocks for Pear Trees.
Sect. 2.
Plants for this purpose must be provided, and prepared somewhat differently
from those for Orchards, or Fields.

The Quince-tree is generally used, and best for Stocks for Pears, both for
Dwarfs and Wall; as well because it may possibly somewhat meliorate the Pear as
(and that chiefly) because it grows not to that bigness, as on a Pear-stock
it would be apt to do.

For Apple Trees.
Sect. 3.
For Dwarf-Apple-trees the best Stocks are such as are raised of the cuttings
of other Apple Trees, as of the Gennet-moil, the Kentish-Codling and others.

That these are more proper for Dwarf-trees, than Crab-stocks, appears;

1. Because the Fruit will be rather bettered, and not tainted with any
asperity, or roughness, as possibly it might be, if Crab-tree-stocks were made
use of; and one chief design in these Trees is to have choice, and delicious
Fruit for eating.

2. Apple Trees that are raised on such Stocks, will not grow so big as those
on Crab-stocks, but are with ease and certainty kept Dwarfs. Mr. Rea judging
the Paradise-Apple of somewhat slow growth in bringing forward a Cyen, advises
to Graff a Paradise on a Crab-stock, and the Fruit you would have on that
Paradise, that the Crab might yield plenty of juice or sap to the Paradise, and
the Paradise retard the growth of the Apple planted on it, so as to keep it a
Dwarf; but besides loss of time, I doubt the success of this, because the Crab
will put forth strong Roots, and yield plenty of nourishment: For why
Apple Trees raised by cuttings grow not to be very large Trees, I take to be,
their putting forth such small roots, by which means the Tree has sap conveyed
to it accordingly.

3. By using these cuttings for Stocks, you shall get at least four years time,
reckoning from sowing the Crab-kernel, and the setting the Stem or Cutting,
being duly ordered; As

1. By setting the Stem in the place you intend the Dwarf-tree shall grow. 2.
And setting it in good Earth, for then after one years growth you may Graff it,
and you will easily discern the advantage in point of time.
If it be said Crab-stocks ready grown may be made use of instead of cuttings;
there is this Answer ready, They must grow two if not three years after they are
set before they are sit to Graff, and in respect of their large growth will not
be sit for Dwarfs.

Some Nursery Men have made advantage to themselves by this speedy way off
raising Trees by Cuttings, but to the disadvantage of them they put them off to
for Planting in Orchards, because they are never like to make large, or long
lasting Trees.

Rules for providing them.
Sect. 4.
The way then to provide these Stocks is thus.

In October from such Trees whose cuttings will grow, take such stems, or
branches that grow straightest, and which (in the place where they shall be
Graffed) are an inch, or more thick, if they be near two inches it is so much
the better, cut them off, if you can, a hands breadth below such knots or burrs
as are on them, (for at those burrs they principally put forth their roots) and
cut off the top, that they be not above a yard long, (if you cannot get them so
long) of Quinces you must be content with shorter, (if they be two foot it may
do reasonably well: Cut off also all side branches close to the body, except
one small twigg near the top, for the Sap to vent it self at, set these
presently in beds as your Seed-plants were, or rather if your Garden be laid
out (that you can know the places they shall stand in) set them there.

You need not fear setting these as deep, as the length will bear, so that
there be about a foot above ground, because they will shoot out roots all
along, almost to the top of the ground, and so spread their roots in the good
Soil; and by setting them something deep they are in less danger of dying, and
this prevents the trouble of covering the ground about them with Fearn or
Straw; and by this means likewise they will stand the firmer in the loose
Garden-land, for Graffing at a years end, and better support a spreading top
afterward.

By Circumposition.
Sect. 5.
But because it is hard to meet with great plenty of such branches, thus to be
cut, and set for Stocks, that have burrs or knots upon them; Planters have
therefore found out a way (which is called Circumposition) to bring these Knots
or Burrs upon Branches, that had them not before, and to mend and improve those
that before had them, and the way of it is as follows.

About the beginning of February next before you design to cut these stems,
directly above the place you intend to cut them off at, for about a foot in
length, fasten about them some Earth in an old Hat, or Boot, or Bag made of
some strong Cloth: and in that Earth they will have put forth Roots against the
October following, when you are to cut them off to set them.

Or (which is a quicker and readier way) you may dawb some wet Earth or Clay
about the place, and wrap a Hayband about it, putting some moist Earth likewise
betwixt the rounds of the band, and then running it about again over the spaces
betwixt those first rounds of the Hay-band and making fast the ends of it. If
the stem have no burr before you go either of these ways to work, then first
take off here and there a little slice of Bark about an inch long round about
it near the middle of the place to be covered as has been directed.

Some direct, That before this application of the Earth, about an inch breadth
of the Bark be taken off, round about the part of the branch, that is to be
surrounded with the Earth, that roots may shoot out in greater quantity, by
coming out in the upper skirts of that circle, as well as in the lower; but
this is but a Crotchet, and grounded (as my Lord Bacon has truly observed)
upon the opinion of the Descension of the Sap; whereas indeed there is no such
thing, for the whole mass of Sap is always afcending; in lesser quantity in the
Winter, because the Tree is then only to be nourished, and kept alive, to which
end a small supply is sufficient, and yet necessary; and in greater plenty in
the Summer, to furnish the Tree with leaves, fruit, and new yearly growth. And
the true reason why the leaves and fruit fall off toward Winter is, not
because the sap returns downward from them, but because they have arrived to
their full ripeness, and the Tree fails by degrees, to convey up so much Sap as
it did in the Summer to them, to produce fresh ones; and therefore consequently
that is an idle mistake too, to think that the sap or juice in the Winter, is
laid up in the Roots as a repository, as appears plainly, inasmuch as they are
ever found dryer in the Winter than in the Summer.

So that upon the whole, this taking the Bark off round the branch, is good for
nothing, but to endanger it, by intercepting the juice or sap, which rifes in
greatest quantity betwixt the bark and the wood; but if as before was hinted,
you take some little slices of the bark off round the branch, here and there,
leaving the Bark entire in some places, this may by checking the Sap, cause it
the more abundantly to pass into roots.

But to proceed to the business in hand, you have seen the way of preparing
cutting, by circumposetion, and though some will pretend to raise Trees of any
kind by the use of it, yet it is certain it avails not, but only in such as by a
peculiar property are apt to put forth roots, being cut off and set into the
ground; and those generally known, and made use of this way, are the Kentish
Codling, the Genne^-Moil, some sorts of Sweet-Apples, and Bitter-sweets, the
Quince-tree, the Mulberry-tree, and the Paradise-Apple-tree, which last is much
commended by the skilful Mr. Rea, for to raise Stocks for Dwarf-Apple-trees.

(...)
Sect. 6.
Another way to raise Stocks for Dwarf-trees, is to cut down some one Tree of
little worth, of such a kind as you want Stocks of, about a foot, or more from
the ground: This will make some kind of Trees very apt to cast forth very good
Suckers from the old roots, such as at two years growth may be transplanted;
and the Stump above ground, will also put forth abundance of young Shoots:
After these young shoots have grown out of the stump one year, cast Mold, or
Earth about them, a good height; so that you cover not the tops of any of them;
where let them grow two years more, and they will be well rooted, then cut them
off from the old Stock, (which after that may yield fresh ones again) and set
the shoots you take off as before has been directed about Cuttings.

These will be about three years longer before they be ready to Graff than
Cuttings, but will be very good young fresh Stocks, and is a good way to raise
Stocks of the Quince-tree for Pears; because Quince-trees generally grow so
crooked and irregular, that it is difficult to procure any considerable quantity
of them by Cuttings.

If they shoot up tall after they are molded, you had best top them at a
convenient height, it will make them grow the more in bigness, and so be sooner
sit to Graff. But if you have a desire to have any of the same kind, as the old
Tree was, you need not top them.

And by this means if you want Quince-trees, Codlings, etc. you may be
furnished with plenty, that will make better and handsomer Trees than if you
raise them by Cuttings.

By Suckers.
Sect. 7.
You may also raise Stocks for Dwarf-Pear-trees from Suckers of old Pear Trees,
(if you cannot conveniently get enough of the Quince-tree) for many Pear trees
cast them naturally, which being preserved from Cattle, may be taken up, and
set in beds of Earth as you did the Seedlings.

If your Pear Trees yield not Suckers of themselves, you need only cut off the
top of some old ill Pear Tree (and Graff it with a better Fruit if you please)
and the roots will cast forth Suckers plentifully, and you may help them by
making a small Ditch or Gutter, so as to bare some of the roots, about two
yards distant from the Tree, or pare off the Grass (if any grow about the Tree)
that they may have the more liberty to spring up.

Or in this case you may bare the roots, and then give a cut cross some roots
almost to the heart, and from the cross cut cleave the root, raising up the
loose part, and put in a little stone to keep it open, cover it three inches
over with mold: let this be done, if you can, where you find a bud, or eye, on
the root, for the sucker to shoot out at; and either Inoculate the young shoot
in the place where it stands, or remove it to some other place after a years
growth, and when you do, cut off with it about a foot of the old root; and by
this means you may have suckers from some other Trees, that do not naturally
yield them.

For C^erri^s, and Plums.
Sect. 8.
To have Stocks for Dwarf-Cherries, and Plums, or for such Trees for a Wall,
the speediest way, and such as will succeed for that purpose, is by suckers of
the common Red-Cherry, and any ordinary Plum-tree; both which cast up suckers
plentifully.

If the Suckers grow in a place that is secure from harm, you may Inoculate or
Graff them before removal, under their Mother Plant, and let them grow there
one year after; and hereby you will gain a years time and more; choose such
suckers as grow at greatest distance from the old Tree.

Ordering the heads of Dwarfs.
Sect. 9.
In Graffing or Inoculating Stocks for Dwarf-trees, observe to do it as low as
you well can, with two Cyens, and those longer than in Graffing for large
Standards, that they may spread from the ground.

And after they are grown two, or three years in the places they are to stand
in, to make them spread, and to keep the boughs outward, you may tie an old
hoop of a Barrel, or some such thing, in the midst of the branches, to bear
them a good distance one from another; but if one branch be much stronger, or
more inclined to grow upright than the rest, then you may drive a Stake into
the ground, and tie the sturdy one down to it.

If you cut the bark cross-wise in several places on the inside of the
branches, when they are placed as you would have them, it will be a means to
make them more willing to continue in that order of their own accord, after
some years growth: If any one branch shoot out much further than the other, cut
off its top to keep it even with the rest, and yearly cut much off, especially
new shoots, that grow directly upward, after they are grown to that height you
design them to be of, which may be about a yard and a half.

Trees of Cuttings.
Sect. 10.
Having directed how to raise Kentish-Codlings, Gennet-moils, Quinces, or any
that grow of cuttings for Stocks, I need give no other rules for raising Trees,
or Hedges of the same kind of Fruit, only you need not cut them so short as you
do for stocks.

I have seen Codlings Graffed on Crabstocks, and set in a Garden; but I think
it will increase their growth, because Crab-stocks have great roots, and will
yield them more plenty of nourishment than roots of their own putting forth,
when they are raised by Cuttings.

Others Graff Gennet-moils on Crabstocks, and they thrive well, and bear a
larger and (some think) a better Fruit than those Trees of that kind raised by
Cuttings; I have Graffed several of them in rough and woody grounds which have
grown with very strong shoots, and covered the Stocks very soon.

CHAP. X. Of Planting an Orchard.
SECT. 1.
So far as it lies in a Man's power to choose a plot of ground for his Orchard,
Choice of ground.
he ought to do it with respect to these advantages.

It should lie conveniently near him, declining and lying open toward the
South, South-East, or South-West, and defended from the North, North-East, and
North-West winds by buildings, woods, or higher grounds; the land should rather
incline to dryness than moisture, without Springs; the Soil deep, and a fat
Earth, not a stiff cold Clay, or binding Gravel, nor a light sandy or eskie
hollow Earth: Yet with good Husbandry, if it run not into the extremes of any
of these, Fruit Trees may prosper reasonable well in it.

But the natural Soil for an Orchard is more to be respected than a Garden, for
the Garden-Fruit-trees, and what else grows there, rooteth little deeper than
it may easily be manured; but Pear Trees and Apple Trees in Orchards should
grow to be large Trees, and therefore send forth A. The erder of Trees in the
Orchard B. The Garden wall. C. The Chissell. D. The Ladder E. The Instrument to
graff in ye bark with.


roots broad and deep, so that it transcends almost all cost and pains, to
enrich the ground for them, as far as the Roots every way reach.

To qualify ground.
Sect. 2.
If the Land you intend for it be a Turf, or green-sward, you will do well to
Plow it two years before you set your Trees in it, to make it mellow and loose,
that the Trees may the better take root; and you may then lay on Manure, which
by Plowing will be well mixed with the natural Soil; and use such Manure as will
best suit to amend it, according to what you have heard before in the 8th Chap.
Sect. the 6th.

If your Land lie very flat, that wet is apt to stand upon it, or be a shallow
soil, you may something help it in Plowing also, by gathering the Land always
up, in and near the place where you intend the rows of Trees shall afterward
stand, which in two years time will something raise it, and thicken the Soil,
and the Reanes or Furrows so made, will help to carry off the Water.

But if it be a springey Land, you must Trench it at the head of the Spring,
and that deeper than the Channel of the Spring runs in the Earth, which you may
leave open, and yearly cleanse, or fill it with Oler boughs, and cover them
with the Turf and Earth that came forth, much higher than the other Land, for
the Wood and loose Earth will sink very much by degrees.

If it be not springey, but only lie so low and flat, that in the Winter Rain,
or Land-floods will lie upon it, and that it has been lately Plowed, or that
you will not lose two years time by Plowing it, before you set your Trees, or
if it be a shallow or ebb soil, you had best set the Trees by Tumping,
according to the directions in Field-planting, which you will find hereafter
spoken fully to in its proper place.

Of uneven ground.
Sect. 3.
If there be any unevenness in the Land, some direct to level it, by carrying
the banks into low places; but this will not only be very chargeable, but
hurtful, by making the high places too barren, and the low ground too rich.

But that your Trees may grow somewhat level in their tops, and not one
over-shade another, and also appear comely, you may forecast to set such Trees
as grow pendant, or are not apt to grow tall Trees, on the highest ground, and
such as are aspiring in the lower places.

Time and manner of planting it.
Sect. 4.
The best time to Transplant into Orchards, is from the end of September, to
near the end of November, the sooner the better: If the leaves are not all
fallen when you remove your Trees, pick them off.

If your Trees are not very weak bodied, Prune them up, leaving three or four
of the principal branches on the top, that grow outward, which should be lopped
off almost a years growth; but if they be weak (lest the wind should injure
them by tossing them) you may top them lower, doing it at a bud, or small twig;
and in big Trees, cut the top almost all off; and whenever you transplant
young Trees, cut off the end of all big roots.

Of removal of Trees.
Sect. 5.
At three years end, after Graffing in the Nursery, Trees may be fit to be
removed into an Orchard, especially if you Plow (or which is safer dig) the
Orchard land, and set Beans and other Kitchen-Garden-stuff in it for some
years; but if it be such a piece of Land that you Graze, then you must be sure
their heads be grown out of the reach of Cattle before you set them there, and
you must Fence them one of the ways mentioned hereafter, in the Chapter of
Field-planting.

Of distance.
Sect. 6.
The distance of Trees in Orchards ought not to be less than eight yards,
neither need it be more than thirteen, or fourteen; the richer the Land is, the
greater distance you ought to set the Trees at from one another, to which you
ought to have respect, and also to the kinds of Fruit Trees you Plant, for some
Trees take up more room in their growth than others, as most Pear Trees more
than Apple Trees, and some Apple Trees more than others, according to their
aptness to grow more or less, too tedious and difficult to be here related;
only the Redstrake being generally a desired Fruit, you may take notice that
it is one of the least Apple Trees, where it yields the best Cider, sometimes
it is almost but a shrub.

It Is certainly best in many respects for Trees to be Planted at a very good
distance; for,

1. The Plantation will be little annoyance to the Land, if either you set
Garden stuff in it, sow Corn on it, while the Trees are young, or Graze it when
they are grown up.

2. Whereas some say the more Trees, the more Fruit; that is absolutely false,
for when they are set so close, that the Sun cannot have a good influence upon
them, they bear poorly and ripen worse.

3. They cannot grow to be Trees of that size as they would, (if the land be
good) being set at a good distance, and some kind of Trees being of stronger
and swifter growth than others, will so domineer over their neighbors, that
they will make them almost good for nothing.

4. You may plant betwixt every Tree a Cherry-tree, or Codling-tree, which may
grow up, and bear with the other Trees many years, and never prejudice them,
but will decay before the others are at full growth.

Or you may set a young Apple Tree or Pear Tree, betwixt every two of your
standards, that you set in your Orchard, and nurse it up with necessary
dressing and pruning, seven or eight years, or less time, to Transplant into
Fields, or Pasture-land where Cattle feed, whereby with little help it will not
be in such danger of hurt from Cattle, as small ones would, and bear Fruit soon
after it is set; and you cannot let them grow so long in your Nursery without
galling, or hurting one another; unless when you remove Trees out of your
Nursery you take care to leave every other Tree, whereby they may have liberty
to grow big, and so more sit for your fields.

Of transplanting Trees young or old.
Sect. 7.
I know some are for removing Trees very young, and it is certainly the best way
if they can be secure from danger, which in Orchards or Fields where Cattle
have liberty to feed they cannot well be with ordinary fencing, unless they be
of five or six years growth after graffing. He that has a Nursery of his own,
and removes them into places so near that he can well do it, let him the very
same or the next day after they are taken up, set them in the place appointed
for them, and not cut off too much of the roots, but the greatest part of the
top. And he may do well to plant strong and well grown Trees, especially in his
fields and out-grounds; for the charge of Fencing will be much eased, and being
carefully set they may prosper as well, or better than small ones, especially
in uncultivated, or stiff land by Nature, where young Trees cannot so well put
forth roots. And here I shall propose a surer way to have old Trees removed
grow, and prosper well, than is commonly practiced; that is,

If you chance to have any Trees betwixt ten and thirty years old, that you
have a mind to remove, you must about November, the year before you transplant
them, dig a trench, as narrow as you please, but so deep as to meet with most
of the spreading Roots, at such a distance round about the body of the Tree, as
you would cut the roots off at, when you remove it; (about half a yard distant
from the body may do well, if they be not very large Trees, but if you have not
far to carry them leave them longer;) as you make the Trench cut the roots you
meet with clear off, and smooth, without splitting them, or bruising the bark,
fill up the Trench again; and by October next after, when you take up the Tree
to set it elsewhere, you will find those great roots will have put forth many
fibrous roots, and made preparation for more; which fresh and tender roots,
upon removal, will enable the Tree to draw more nourishment than otherwise it
would, and consequently to prosper the better in its new mansion.

The order.
Sect. 8.
The best way you can set Trees in an Orchard is according to the Figure which
is called a Quincunx.

You are to proceed in setting your Trees in the ground by the same general
rules, given for Wall-fruit, observing exactly all that is there, but only what
in particular concerns the wall.

Also in transplanting any big Trees, men generally observe to coast them, (as
it is termed) tha^ is, to place the same side of the Tree ^o the South, East,
etc. as grew so me^ly that way, where it stood before; to which end before you
remove it, you had best make some mark in the bark of the Tree, which way it
stood; this you may observe in straight Trees, but it is more material if your
Trees lean one way more than another, to set the leaning side toward the
South-West, from whence the strongest winds blow.

T^^ Fence.
Sect. 9.
The best quick Fence for your Orchard is a good white-thorn, that when it is
grown up may be plashed, the better to prevent the creeping of Hogs, or Sheep
into it; set no smooth quick in it, that may grow to great Trees, because they
will be hurtful both to the Hedge and Fruit Trees, both by their tops and roots,
when they are grown up; but set two rows of good Hawthorn, and make the
dead-hedg on the outside the ditch, and the quick-set will grow the faster; for
the hedge upon the ditch is apt to choke the quick: And thus with sometimes
weeding it, you may soon raise a good fence.

If you have an old hedge already about your Orchard, scour the ditch, and plash
the hedge, and cut down all big Trees that grow in it, unless on the North, or
West Side, the one requiring a defense to keep the Orchard warm, the other to
secure it somewhat from the strong winds, that blow down the fruit before it is
ripe, though it is better they grew on the outside the hedge.

Sect. 10.
Your Orchard-fruit-trees as well as others, Pruning
will need some pruning, which you may observe to do after this manner; if you
desire they should be tall Trees, cut off all the side- branches till they are
grown to the height you desire; if to spread low, let some be left on each
side, that the boughs on any one side may not weigh down the Tree, but that it
may grow straight upright.

And suffer them not the first three years (at least) to grow thick and bushey
headed, by cutting off some of the inside shoots, and such as grow cross one
another, or pendant; what you cut off from the bodies, or any branch, do it
close and even, that the bark may grow over it: It you cut part of any shoot,
or a Cyen for graffing, cut it close at a bud or sprig, that in that case the
wound may again grow up and a stub end not be left behind.

When Trees grow big, that a knife will not prune them, procure an Instrument
like a broad Chissel, the handle of Iron, and the edge alike on both sides, not
sloping on one side like that of Joyners, but plain as a knife, and very thin,
about 3 or 4 inches in breadth, the form you will see in the Table of Figures;
with which, and a Mallet, you may take off a bough, or large branch as you
will, without either hurting the bark of the Tree, by cutting too near, or
leaving a stump, by not cutting near enough; one of which is not easily avoided
by the chance blows of an Ax or Hatchet; and being amongst thick boughs, your
Chissel and Mallet will be more governable than other instruments. If the
boughs are very large you may use a Saw first, and then smooth it with the
Chissel.

(...)
Sect. 11.
You will do well, if your soil be not rich enough, once in three or four
years, in the Winter time, to open the Earth for a good space round about the
body of each Tree; and about a month after, with some proper manure mixed with
what came forth fill up the hole again: but if you Dig or Plow your land, you
will have no need to do this so long; and if your Trees were set by tumping,
you need not do this till the roots are grown past the ditch that was made
about the tump.

The Water that soaks from a Dunghill is a good thing to enrich the Earth, about
the roots of Trees; and if your Orchard chance to lie so, as that it may be
sloted with it sometimes, you may do it after this manner.

Make a little trench along the upper part of the Orchard, and from it cut a
small gutter down every row of Trees, take off the upper turf, for half a yards
breadth round about every Tree, at about a foots breadth distant from the body;
when a rainy day comes, let this soke go down one row, so that (as near as you
can) every Tree may enjoy it three or four days at several times in one Winter.

If your Orchard stand so that you cannot convey this water to the Trees after
this manner, you may carry two or three Pale-full to every Tree, twice or
thrice a year, and pour it in where the Roots were opened, and against spring
put in the old Earth again; when you do this first, stir up with something the
bottom of this water, the more to thicken and enrich it.

This will follow the roots, and enrich Trees more than can be done by Manure,
or Dung, so that you suffer the water not to be above a days time at once upon
any one Tree.

(...)
Sect. 12.
Within your Orchard, on the North-side, set the first rows of Pear Trees, or
such other Trees, as you know are apt to grow tallest, and the rest Southward,
as they decrease in height, as near as you can judge; for so shall all your
Trees share in greater measure of the South-Sun, and will be less liable to
receive damage by the Northern cold.

On the outside of your Orchard, if it be not well defended, plant on the
North-side two or three rows of Walnut-trees, Chesnut-trees, or some large
growing Trees, thicker than is usually done on other accounts, to preserve your
Orchard from the Northern air.

Some are also for Planting a defense on the West side, to help to preserve
them from the Autumnal winds, which throw down the Fruit before it is ripe.

CHAP. XI. Of Planting in Fields.
(...)
SECT. 1.
The benefit of this kind of Planting is apparent in several Countries in
England, where it has been of long and general usage, and in many other
Countries, Gentlemen have begun already to imitate them, which should much
encourage others to follow; for the more there are that plant, the less
particular persons will lose by Thieves, and where fruit is in great plenty, it
is found to be more slighted by idle people; and besides if a Man have store,
he will not feel the loss of a little; or it may quit his cost, to have one to
cast an eye to them, for a Months time near ripening; and further yet,
Cyder-Apples, Baking-Pears, and Pears for Perry, are so little grateful to the
taste, (which pilferers chiefly aim at pleasing) that he that tastes them once,
shall scarcely find his teeth water after them a second time.

However the benefit of planting in Fields much out-weighs these, and all other
inconveniences, for by this means you may almost have a double crop on your
lands, viz. grass or grain, and your fruit, and the land rather benefited (as
the matter may be ordered) than damaged; one of these Trees also sometimes
bears as much fruit, as three of the best in a thick planted Orchard; the
benefit whereof for sale, or use in a Family for baking, or Liquors, or other
uses is known to be so considerable, that I need say no more of it.

Particularly of Pears.
Sect. 2.
But because the planting Pear Trees abroad in Fields, is of less reputation
generally than the planting other Fruit Trees, I shall here give you sufficient
suggestions to take off the Aspersion.

1. Some Pears do not make so contemptible a liquor, as Perry is commonly
reckoned, but very strong, and kept two or three years, drinks to admiration,
so that several good Palates, that have drank of it, have not been able to
distinguish it well from liquors of more esteem.

2. Their fruit is not eatable, and so in less danger of Thieves, in your
out-grounds than Apples are.

3. They will grow on barren land, where Apples will not prosper so well.

4. They are Trees of long continuance, and often grow to that bigness, and
bear so plentifully, that one single Tree will bear fruit enough to make a
Hogshead of Perry, sometimes two or three in one year, which would save the
expense of much Malt, though the liquor were but mean.

Seven ways.
Sect. 3.
There be seven ways of Planting in this kind; I shall set them all down, that
every man may use that which best suits with his convenience, and good liking.

I. Of Planting whole fields.
1. If your land be in Tillage, you may set fruit trees at thirty yards distance
from one another, throughout the whole Field, after the manner of an Orchard;
and you may go on with your Plowing, with the loss only of about a yard, or
four foot square of land, about every Tree, for twenty years; and when they are
grown so big, that you think your Corn receives hurt by the shade, or droppings
of the Trees, if you can turn it to Pasture, the Trees will improve most kind
of land, by keeping it warm in the Spring, they will make the Grafs grow more
early, and by shades in the Summer, preserving it from burning; but the Trees
being set at such a distance, the land may continue sit for my purpose for
ever, if you dress or prune these Trees higher up than any other, that no
boughs may hang in the reach of Cattle, and for the convenience of going about
them with your Team, to any work, and thereby the Air and Rain will have free
access to the grass, or grain near about them, and the fruit will be safer from
common pilferers.

These need no other fencing than thorns bound about them, and a stake driven
in the midst, to keep them from shaking; because you may receive the profit of
the Stubble or Fallow, without suffering any large Cattle, that will browse
upon them, to come into the ground.

Sect. 4.
II. Walks.
Another way of planting fruit trees in Fields, is by setting walks of them,
running through the midst, or along the sides of your Pasture ground, where you
have a mind to have walks for ornament: For why we should not plant Fruit Trees
for walks, as well as Sycomores, Ash-trees, etc. I know not, there being some
sorts of Fruit Trees that will (and almost any kind may be ordered by pruning,
so as to) grow very handsome in shape, besides the beauty and sweet smell of
the blossoms, and worth of the fruit.

To prevent damage by Cattle, Of Fencing.
if you go this way to work in Field-planting, they must be well grown before
you set them; that is, they must be of about six years growth, and then well
fenced: and there are two ways used to save them harmless.

By Tumping.
1. One much commended is by tumping them; and it is performed thus: Set your
Tree in the place designed, almost on the top of the ground, no deeper than to
make it stand, though all the roots be not covered, till the tump or mound be
raised about it; and then take a line, about a yard and quarter long, tie the
one end of it about the Tree, but so that in going round the Tree, with the
line strained, it may slip about the Tree as you go, fasten the other end to an
iron setter, or stick with a sharp point, and as you go round the tree mark the
ground; make then a ditch on the outside of the round score, and lay the turf
handsomely, two or three heights, with the grass side outward, so as to make the
work full half a yard high; cast the mold out of the ditch, observing to throw
the best of it next the roots of the Tree, till you have raised it within, as
high as the turf, then prick strong thorns into the mold, that they may lie
upon the turf, and point outward, a yard over the turf; as you place the
thorns, put more turf, or fast heavy Earth out of the ditch upon the ends of
them, treading it down, the better to six them; and lay the Earth shelving down
from the turf toward the Tree, that if rain fall, it may soak toward the
roots; if you have any small Thorns, Briers, Furs, or Gorst, lay it on the top
of the work finished, round the Tree, and repair all yearly, as you see cause,
which may be done with small trouble. The great convenience of this way of
setting fruit trees, will appear in these following Observations.

Advantages therein.
1. If your land be over moist, this ditch will drain all wet from the roots of
the Tree; but if the land be clay, or such that water will stand in, then when
you perceive it (which is very rarely) cut some little notch or trench, to let
it out.

2. This way of setting, is commended in dry land; because the Earth of the
mound will secure the roots from the heat of the Sun, and every shower of rain
will much refresh it, by soking toward the Tree.

3. You need not bind your tree to a stake which does often gall and hurt the
Tree, for so much Earth about it will keep it steady.

4. If your land be stiff, or strong old land, the mound made of it will mellow
and improve about the roots, and also by that time the roots spread as far as
the ditch, it will be filled up with mold, fallen from the tump, and with
sticks, leaves, etc. which will be rotten, loose and good for Trees to root in;
and by that time they will need little or no defense, if any at all; a few
thorns tied about the bodies of the Trees, to keep Cattle from rubbing against
them, will be enough.

5. The chief benefit of setting Trees thus, is, that where the soil is
somewhat too moist or shallow, the Tree being set on the top of the land, will
put forth its roots plentifully into the Earth cast up, and thence shoot into
the upper turf, and best land, that had been Plowed and manured before.

2. The second way of fencing is, By Pa^ing.
by erecting, at a foot and half distance one from another, about every tree,
three small posts, (if they be sawed they need be but three inches square) or
you may use poles, or straight boughs, either whole, or if big enough, cloven
in two, three, or four parts, about five foot above the ground in height; being
driven into the ground, nail a cross-bar of wood, from each to other, within a
hand breadth of the tops of the posts, to which bar, nail a pale, or two,
betwixt each two posts, stuck into the ground, or nailed to the like cross bar,
within a foot of the bottom of the posts; the way of it may be seen now in
diverse places, and learnt in a minute; but I think what is here said makes it
plain enough.

Where it is requisite.
This is more chargeable than tumping, where timber is scarce, but much more
durable than it, and absolutely necessary where Deer, or Rabbets, or any thing
that peels the bark of Trees come into the land planted.

III. By Planting near hedges.
Sect. 5.
Another way of planting in Fields, (which I have practiced successfully) is
thus, When you scower a ditch, and cut down or plash an old quick-hedg, then
set a row of Trees within a yard of the hedge on that side that is not ditcht,
and fence them with half round tumps only on the one side, for the hedge will
secure them on the other; and from the cut or plasht hedge, you will commonly
have Thorns and Briers enough for the mounds, to fence it as has been before
directed; and at the same time, or in Summer, draw some of the quick thorns,
hips, or briers, from the hedge into the fence, about the tump, which will
contribute to the strengthening and preserving the dead fence you had made
about it before, so that you may be free from trouble about it for ever after.

There are these advantages in this way of Planting.

1. The ditch on the outside the hedge, Benefits hereby.
drains the ground and makes it healthful. 2. The ground near the hedge, is
commonly very rich, as not having been impoverished by Tillage, but improved,
sometimes by the often scouring of the ditch, and commonly with the dung of
Cattle that for shelter, shade, or foder, repair much thither. 3. It Is not the
least hindrance to plowing, or grass, for the hedge when it is grown up, usually
bears out as far as the tree is set in the field. 4. And this is much better
than planting in the hedg-row, as many do; for in the hedge, when the tree is
grown to have a large top, it is apter to weaken the hedge under it; but these
being set a little distance from the hedge, and growing (as they will) with the
greatest part of their heads from it, will not damage it. 5. The Fruit will be
gathered with much more ease, than of those that are planted in the hedges. 6.
They will not be choakt, or hurt by the hedge when it is grown up, but be good
handsome, fair Trees.
You may set these at eight yards distance, Distance.
or nearer being but one single row, and so if but half a field (as usually it
falls out) have the ditch on the outside, you may set a considerable number,
and find advantage, without damage, and with inconsiderable charge, especially
if the ditch stand on the North-side; if you can therefore, choose such hedges.

Where not good.
This is not to be practiced near hedges that are full of great wood, or trees;
but if there be but few trees, it is but leaving a vacancy near such trees, and
setting your fruit trees against such places where there grow none in the hedge.

IV. In Hedges.
Sect. 6.
Another way of planting in Fields is this, If you would Plant without any
charge of fencing, you may do it in your Hedges; these Trees must be well
grown, and strong, that the hedge choke them not while they are young: And when
you plash, or cut down a quick hedge, observe no certain distance, but as it
happens where you find it most free from quick, set a tree, and enclose the
body in the hedge, but bind not the Etherings too close about it, lest they gall
it, and as it grows, observe what Thorns annoy it and cut them off.

V. By Cuttings.
Sect. 7.
If you have a mind to set any Cuttings of Gennet-moils, or other Apple Trees,
that grow of Cuttings, they will prosper very well in, or rather near a hedge;
because generally there, the mold is loose and mellow for them to put forth
Roots in, and somewhat enricht by the frequent cleansing of the ditch: If you
plant them near the hedge, you must a little fence them on the one side, as by
the third foregoing direction; but the tumps you raise to set the thorns in,
must not be above a foot high, for the cuttings will shoot out their roots,
almost to the top of the Earth about them, and a high mound falling down by
degrees, some of the best roots may be left bare, or very little Earth upon
them.

Of preparing them.
The way of preparing plants for this purpose, is by circumposition, etc. as is
directed in the Chapter of Dwarf-trees.

Choice and ordering.
Make choice of Cuttings or stems as big as a man's wrist (if you can) toward
the lower end, before you set them, prune them out of the reach of Cattle, and
leave but little top on them when you set them, neither let them be very long:
If the tops be out of the reach of Cattle, it is enough.

VI. By long Crab stocks.
Sect. 8.
There be some that get long Crab-tree-stocks out of woods, or else dress some
up in their Nurseries, to grow tall, and set them in their fields, or hedges,
and at three years standing graff them; which may do well, Advantage
and is the better approved of, because there needs no removal after they are
graffed; but some inconvenience there is in this way: Disadvantage.
The long stocks, out of woods, being commonly very old, their bark thick,
their roots big, they thrive but indifferently; and those raised in Nurseries
will seldom be taper grown, or strong enough to bear a large top well, after
they are graffed so high as they ought, being set in fields: You will also be
longer in raising stocks to that height, and any considerable strength (as is
necessary for this purpose) than in raising trees, if your stocks be graffed
young in your Nursery, because they thrive more after graffing than before.

And in both cases if you graff them high, the stocks will be continually
putting forth sprouts of their own kind below the place they were graffed at,
which will require frequent cutting off. If you graff them not very high, you
will find it difficult to defend them from the nipping of Cattle, and from the
Cyens being broke out of the stock by some casualties or other, to which they
are more exposed in fields that lie common to Cattle, than Nurseries that are
enclosed.

VII. By Gra^^^^ old Crab-trees.
Sect. 9.
The last way I shall speak of, is that which is most used in the planting
Countries, and that is, by graffing such Crab-trees, as grow in the hedges, or
grounds, and this is the speediest way to have fruit; because the big Trees
have bodies already, and in four or five years time (well ordered) will have
good tops to bear; and if you graff small stocks in your ground that have grown
of their own accord there, and fence them, they will speedily bring on graffs,
being so well rooted.

A mischief used herein.
I have seen many cut off the tops of old Crab-trees and Apple Trees, and graff
the body or trunk, but the Cyens could never cover the heads of those stocks,
and by that time the top was a little grown up, the body was ready to perish
with rottenness.

Necessary directions.
The best way for big Crab-trees (or if you would change the kind of any
Fruit Trees) is to graff them in the boughs, where they are not bigger than a
man's arm, making use of none but those that grow handsome, at convenient
distance one from another, cutting off the others smooth and even, close to the
body of the tree.

To do this, that Winter that you cut, or plash a hedge, order the workmen to
trim up, but not to lop or top the Crab-trees, unless it be the tops of the
boughs, half a yard or more, above the place you intend to graff them at, and
then in March following, saw off the heads at proper places, and graff them.

Of graffing (...) in the Cleft.
Many are for graffing these in the cleft, because they think the Cyen has
better hold, and will not be so subject to be broke out by the wind, as those
graffed in the bark; but I have seen those in the cleft broke out by the wind,
neither could I ever find that the wood of the Cyen in the cleft, did ever
cement with the wood of the stock, but only on the outside as the others do:
And those in the cleft are not so apt to grow all of them, nor to make so great
a growth as those in the bark; In the B^^.
which with a little wariness may be preserved from danger of wind, and full as
much care must be had about those graffed in the cleft, if you will preserve
them all from the same prejudice.

(...) to be observed.
I have been used to observe the following difference in graffing these great
boughs from all the forementioned varieties of graffing, and look upon it as a
thing well worthy to be taken notice of and observed.

In s^itting (...)
When you have prepared the Cyen, as you are directed to do, when you graff in
the bark, apply it to the place you design to put it in, and slit the bark of
the bough through, on both sides, the Cyen close to it, beginning at the top of
the bough, and not carrying the slits much above half the length of the slope
of the Cyen, separate that little portion of the bark between the two slits,
from the wood with your instrument, thrusting it a little lower than the slits,
to let in the Cyen as far as it is sloped, and then stick the Cyen in, having
first taken off from the edges of the Cyen any unevenness (not cutting through
the bark) that all may the better sit together; and you may put in two, three,
or four Cyens in every head, having respect to the bigness of it; or you may in
the biggest put in two Cyens in the cleft, and two others in the bark, doing
one of the later on the West Side of it, for then the wind blowing it toward
the head, is not so apt to break it out, as if it drove it from the head; bind
the heads, and clay them as you heard before, and continue so to do yearly till
the heads are almost covered.

Of preserving them from inju^^s.
At the first claying, stick in feathers or long escures, to prevent birds
lighting on the Cyens.

In July following (whether you graff these big stocks in the cleft or bark)
pick off most of the leaves of the Cyens, and cut off such sprigs, as growing
inward will make the head thick, and all stragleing out-boughs, that the wind
may not have so much force upon them, to break the branches out of the stocks.

Of (...).
Cut off also some of the biggest shoots, the Crab-tree puts forth of its own
kind; but for the first three years you must not cut off all, lest the Tree not
having liberty to vent all the sap that comes up, furfeit and dye, the small
graffs not being able to receive near so much sap, as the old top did the year
before.

Thus many Countrymen when they take off the whole head of an old Oak, have
sometimes found it dye; and therefore in some Countries they leave one big
bough to grow for one year, to draw up the sap, (as they term it) whereas it is
indeed that the sap may have liberty to vent it self; for Trees that have a
thick bark, as old Oaks have, when all the small boughs are cut off, are long
in putting forth branches; and difficultly at last put forth so many, as will
spend the sap which comes up the Tree in some proportion, to what it did the
year before, when the whole top was on; which sap being chiefly in the greatest
channel, betwixt or near the bark and outside of the body of the Tree, and not
being vented, is either dried or consumed by the heat of the Sun, or putrisies
for want of that continual motion that is in it, when it has vent, that
several trees dye of this disease; and when trees dye this way, the bark will
drop off from the body of them sooner by some years than otherwise.

Hence it is that you may kill a Tree, by lopping off the whole top in the
Summer time, or so much of it, that the remaining boughs cannot receive all the
sap, but lies choakt up for want of issue.

The second Summer you ought to bind some hay-ropes about the lower part of the
Cyens; I have not seen need of repeating this the third Summer, but if done it
will the more certainly secure them from breaking by the wind.

And thus I have ended what I had to say of Field-planting, and have been the
more large in it, because I have not seen it any where else taught without much
imperfection, and many defects; and indeed not much more than mentioned, rather
than treated of.

CHAP. XII. Of the annoyances about Fruit Trees.
Of Moss and Canker.
SECT. 1.
The nature of the soil is the chief cause of Moss and Canker, and therefore
without altering the one, you can scarce prevent the other; However you may
scrape or with a hair-cloth rub the moss off, after rain, or (as some say) burn
it with a bottle of straw under the Tree.

All Canker, filth, and worms must be picked clean off, and bind some clay well
mixed with hay about the cankered place: If the Tree grow but poorly, which is
for the most part caused by the ill temper of the soil, open the ground about
the roots, and put in some manure proper to cure it.

Bark boand.
Slitting the bark is an excellent additional help to most of the aforesaid
evils, and also for bark-binding, some advise that the bark be cut according to
the grain of it, as in Apple Trees, Pear Trees, etc. straight down; in
Cherries, Some Trees prosper where others will not.
etc. round about the Trees.

But I have found in the same land, some kinds of Fruit Trees very subject to
some of these evils, and others prosper very well; when once you discover this,
(because it is utterly in vain to make ground and trees, of different genius
agree together) you must make it your business by degrees, to change your
Trees, till you have left none against which your soil bears such an
implacable hatred, and furnish it with such as will flourish, and be fruitful.

Bark galled.
If any of your Trees are galled, by being bound to stakes, or by thorns, or
otherwise, lay some clay upon the galled place and wrap hay-hands about them.

Dead tops.
Big Plants also, that upon their removal have had their tops cut off, are apt
to dye from the place they were cut off at, to the next sprig, or branch upon
them; these dead parts ought to be cut off close to the next good twig or
shoot, and covered with clay, as in graffing, that the head may be well grown
over, by such twig or shoot, and the wet prevented off getting into the pith,
to the damage of the Tree.

Hares and Coneys.
Sect. 2.
Hares and Rabbets are very mischievous to Nurseries, and young Orchards, by
peeling off the bark of the Plants: If your fence be a wall, or close pale, or
water, there is little danger of them; but because such fences about Orchards
are rare, and no other can keep them out, some expedient must be made use of.

Some have used Hay-ropes, Hay-ropes.
bound about the Tree, from the ground to a sufficient height; but this were
endless in a Nursery, it may be done in an Orchard; but there are other ways to
be preferred before it.

Others therefore dawb the bodies of the Trees over with Tar, Tar.
which being used alone, endangers the life of very young Plants, and extremely
hardens the bark, and otherwise hurts them, which evil is prevented by mixing
the Tar with any kind of Grease, Tar and Grease.
and boiling them on a fire, so as both may incorporate, then with a brush, or
little broom, daub over the body of the Tree, as high as a Hare or Rabbet can
reach; and if this be done in November, it will preserve the Trees for that
whole year, with that once doing, it being the winter time only that they will
feed upon the bark.

Some use Grease alone, Grease.
and then it may require to be laid on twice in a Winter.

Man's dung.
Some thin stuff out of a House of Office, or the thick tempered with water, and
brush't on, once in a Winter has been often used with good success.

Sect. 3.
Pismires.
If you find Pismires, or Ants breed about, or near the roots of any of your
Trees, cast away the Earth they lodge in, and supply its place with some stiff
clay; if they breed distant in several places, some direct to dawb the Tree
about with Tar, that their feet may be taken in it; but you heard already
that is prejudicial to young Trees; but if they pester you extremely, and your
Tree be young, you may bind a single list, or shread of Cloth about it, and
once aweek (when buds and blossoms are putting forth, for that is the chief
time they prejudice them) daub the Cloth over with Tar.

Sect. 4.
Moles.
Moles are to be killed, especially in Seed-plots and Nurseries; Spring-traps,
or Box-traps are best to destroy them, not easily described, but are now know
almost generally.

I have heard that Water-Rats will spoil a whole Nursery, Water-rats.
getting through Mole-holes, and barking or eating the young roots: I found
several roots once so served; and it being near a Fish Pond, I suspected it was
done by them; but finding also a Snake in a hole among the Roots, Snakes.
I knew not whether that might not be the Enemy.

Ests, or Askers.
Ests, or (as some call them) Askers, are also said to be pernicious to Trees;
but these three last accidents are so rare and inconsiderable, that it is
needless to labor much about remedies against them, only as men find them to
destroy them.

Blastings, Caterpillars.
Sect. 5.
The greatest prejudice to fruit, is by blastings, frosts immediately
succeeding rain, Caterpillars, or black Flies, that cat up buds, leaves, and
blossoms: There Is one way used to help in all these cases, for Orchard fruit;
but I know not how it should be useful for any but the last two, for which I
dare commend it: And that is, that when in the Spring you perceive these
Caterpillars, or Flies appear, make fires of something that will smoke, so near
the Orchard, and in such places that the wind may carry the smoke as much
through the Trees as may be. Smoke.
A thing frequently used is Hempsheaves, (as it is called) being the stalk of
the Hemp, when the tow is separated from it, and its certainly very good; but
bad Chaff, wet Straw, or moldy Hay, or any thing of that nature may serve turn.

Snails are pernicious to Wall-fruit, Snails.
therefore destroy as many of them as you can, when they are best to be
discovered, which is early in the morning.

Cover wall-fruit.
And to preserve your Wall-fruit from blasting winds and Frosts; it will be
necessary to cover them in the nights, and cold days by hanging before them
Matts or Blankets: some stick branches of broom before the blossoms and young
tender fruit.

To preserve ripe fruit from birds, Birds.
spread an old Net before the Wall-fruit, or upon the Dwarf-trees.

CHAP. XIII. Some particular Rules about some kinds of Fruit Trees besides the
general rules already mentioned.
Of Vines.
SECT. 1.
Grapes seldom or never ripen well in this Isle, without help of art and
industry, to which purpose take these directions.

1. To plant such as ripen soonest in the year, that they may have as much of
the summer heat at ripening time as may be.

2. Let the wall you plant them against, be a full South, or but a little
inclining to the East; or if you have a half-round, or corner in a wall, or the
back of a brick Chimney, make use of such places for them.

Of low Walls.
Vines will prosper well against a high wall, yet that is not altogether so
necessary but that low walls may serve turn, and the higher may be reserved for
such fruit trees as will not do well without them: That of a Tarras-walk may do
well for Vines, and the gravel-walk under the wall will mightily increase the
heat about them.

Narrow places in Walls.
If you plant any Trees against your dwelling House-wall, there may be some
narrow places between two Windows, or the like, where other fruit trees have
not room to spread: A Vine may grow up there, and above those narrow places
enlarge it self where ever it meets with room.

Betwixt Fruit trees.
You may also plant a Vine betwixt every fruit-tree that grows against your
hottest walls, and let it spread a little in the Summer time into the
Fruit Trees on either side, especially if the fruit of such Trees use to be
early ripe, or that they bear little Fruit, or have not been so long set as to
have covered the wall. And though such Vines cannot extend themselves to that
bigness, as those planted where they have more room; yet by this means you will
make advantage of such portions of your wall, as otherwise you could have had
little benefit from.

Proper Soil.
Sect. 2.
The best ground for them is that which is rich and dry, inclinable to stony or
gravel, so it bind not; the best dung to fatten the Earth they grow in is Horse
or Sheeps dung: Make bare the roots in the beginning of Winter, and throw in
plenty of the same dung most Winters.

Way of propagating.
The best way of propagating of them is, in November to lay a branch of that
years growth into the Earth, under the old Tree, without cutting it off, lay as
many joints or buds in the Earth as you can, leaving but one or two out; for it
puts forth its roots chiefly at the joints; at a years end or in the February
cometwelve-month cut it off from the old one, and plant it where you design it
should grow, lay it in the Earth in the same posture it lay in before, and also
lay some of the buds of the new wood, that grew out since it was first laid
down, that it may gain the more roots, leaving out of the ground again not
above one or two buds.

You may chance to have suckers of an old Vine which will be sure to grow.
Suckers.


Or you may take Cuttings of Vine branches of that years growth, Cuttings.
and set them in good warm loose land, and many will grow; if it be in the
place you intend they shall always stand in, next year lay down a part of that
which has grown out, to root also, or else upon removal lay in the new growth
all but a bud or two, with that part which is already rooted; If it have made
but small growth the first year, lay part of the second years growth in the
ground, it will more advantage them by helping them to good roots, than the
loss of a year or two's growth in the top will amount to.

Cure an old Vine.
If you have an old Vine, that bears not well, lay down in February, or March
some of the strongest branches of the foregoing year, (that grow low) in the
mold under the old Tree, without cutting them off, leaving out of the ground a
bud or two to grow, and your wall will quickly be furnished with new, and fresh
branches; so that by degrees you may cut off many of the old branches of the
Vine; for though one Vine may cover abundance of walling, yet three or four
roots in that compass will strengthen it the more to bear.

Of pruning.
Sect. 3.
As Vines stand in more need of pruning than other Fruit Trees, so great care
is to be taken in the performing of it; when you have set your Vine, as you
have been before directed, so that not above two buds of it remain above
ground, you are to nail up such branches, as grow forth up to the wall, till it
have overspread as much wall as you design for it, suffering not above two
branches to grow from the ground, and snipping yearly the tops of the branches
a considerable length, as far as they are weak and tender, and also all small
poor ones, close to the body, unless the well liking branches be but few, and
then you may leave the lowest bud of some of them, to grow forth next year, and
this you are to do toward the end of February, or beginning of March yearly.

When your Vine comes to bear, you are to use your knife about it three times
in the year.

1. Time.
In February or the beginning of March you are to prune off part of the
foregoing years shoots, where they are too thick, close to the old wood. As it
enriches your Vine to keep it thin of branches, so you must take care it be
well stored with buds against the spring following, for it bears Grapes only on
the new shoots of every year; and in cutting off these branches, you must take
care your wall continue furnished with such branches as may be spread upon the
wall regularly and decently, not thick in one place and thin in another, nor
crossing one another.

2. The next time to take off superfluities from your Vine, is about Midsummer,
when the Grapes are knit, clip off then the end of the branches that have
Grapes on them, a little above the Grapes, that they may have the more
nourishment, and keep them nailed to the wall, as also barren branches where
the wall needs them.

3. The last time of cutting is in August, for then because leaves and branches
may be so thick, as to keep the heat of the Sun from the Grapes, which is
necessary to ripen them, you may pluck off some of the leaves, and cut off some
of the branches to open way for the Sun to come to them.

There Is one thing to be observed in the pruning these peculiar to it, Place.
That whereas others are cut at a bud, the branches of these must be cut off
near the midst, betwixt two buds, and that not later in the year, than the
beginning of March, for afterward the sap or juice will run out, and the Vine
will be much weakened by bleeding: Bleed.
You will by that time also see what the Frost of the Winter foregoing has
killed, which must be taken all away.

If Frosts come before any Grapes are ripe, Frosts.
defend them in the night time with Til^s or Mats.

Sect. 4.
Vineyard.
It Is scarce worth while to have a Vineyard here in England; there having begn
many, and now so few, affords a strong Argument to prove that attempts of that
kind never turn to account: The usage of the People in such cases being of no
small authority.

It Is possible that persons that have very warm ground, well situated, with
care and industry, may some years have good Grapes without the benefit of a
wall. I have seen, not far from Bristol, in a year that was very favorable to
them, Grapes ripen well without such help.

Sect. 5.
Fig Tree.
Fig Trees ought to be planted in a very warm place, against a wall, defended
from the North and North-East wind; every old Tree will yield plenty of
suckers, fit to raise new ones.

Sect. 6.
Quince-tree.
You have seen the way of raising Quince-trees, in the Chapter of Dwarfs; I
shall here only add, that if you have a part of a Tree, that grows so low,
that you can bring it to the ground, either by plashing or otherwise, you may
do it in the beginning of Winter, and cover it all with Earth but the ends of
the branches, and let it continue so one year, and then uncover it, and every
twig will have put forth roots in the Earth, which being cut off and
transplanted, will make you a tree.

And this is the way of propagating of Fruit Trees by layers; Layers.
and you may here take notice, that all such Trees that may be propagated by
Cuttings, may be raised likewise by Layers, and this way takes more sure than
by Cuttings.

Quince-trees delight in a moist rich Land; Soil.
near some gutter that carries away the soke or wash of a Dunghill, or House, is
a place usually chosen for them, and is such as they like very well in.

Sect. 7.
Medlar-tree.
Medlars are raised by graffing on the Pear Tree, Crab-tree, White-thorn or
Service-tree, the last is the best, and the White-thorn by much the worst.

You may get Plants of Services out of woods, Service-tree.
where they grow wild, from which you may raise Service-trees, or stocks for
Medlars, or if you can get none such, graff the Service on the
Wickey-berry-tree, or the White-thorn.

Sect. 8.
Wallnut-trees.
Wallnut-trees are much Planted of late, and are very proper for walks in
grounds and a good fence to shelter Buildings and Orchards; the fruit is
useful, and very profitable if you can spare any to sell, or for Oil for
Painters if the market should be glutted with them; and the Timber so excellent
for Tables, Chairs, and Stools, stooking of Guns, etc. that it goes off well,
and takes a good price.

way of raising.
They are raised by Nuts, gathered from the same Trees, if you can let them have
their green husks on them, for the bitterness thereof will defend the kernels
from being eaten by worms before they spring up; but you must chiefly respect
their full ripeness, at which time they are apt to shed their husks: You may
either set them as they come immediately from the Tree, or keep them in the
sand till March.

Soil and transplanting.
Set them in rich dry warm Land, and when you transplant them, set them as
speedily as you can after taking up, and cut off little of the roots, but by no
means the tap or heart-root, (as in other Trees) and top them not at all if you
can help it; but if the Tree be so tall, crooked, or dead at the top before
removal, that you must put a peg, or some soft wax into the pith-pole, or cover
the cut with clay, that wet may not get in, and make it dye downward, because
these Trees have a large pith; when you do cut off the top, do it, if you can,
at a side branch or sprig, and that will spread under the clay, and cover the
tops again. You may cut off many side branches when you transplant them.

No Cattle will bronze or peel them, Fencing.
by reason of their bitterness; so that a fence that will preserve them from
Cattles rubbing against them is sufficient.

They will grow well in a loose, Soil.
gravelly, stony, or almost rockey land, and best where they are at first set
without being removed; Plant without (...)
to which end you may in such a hillock as is spoken of in Field-planting (but
not so broad nor so high) set three, or four Nuts, or more, and about two years
after they are grown up, pluck up gently all but one of them, that is likely to
make the best Tree.

I have seen Chesnut-trees grow in England to be very large, Chesnut-trees.
and bear good Fruit on a hot, dry land; They are excellent for a defense from
winds, and better than Walnut-trees, but of much slower growth. It Is not good
to top them, as some do when they transplant them.

way of raising.
They are raised by setting Nuts, that are come fresh from beyond Sea, at the
end of the year; or from good Nuts well ripened in England, which you may set
with the husks on, when they are fallen, or rather kept in Sand till the great
Frosts are over: These Trees grow best likewise without being ever removed;
some say they will grow well being graffed upon Oaks, Beech, or Walnut-trees.

The Horse-Chesnut grows of Layers, and makes delicate Trees for Avenues.

Filbeards, Nuts.
Filbeards and Hazle-nuts, worthy to be planted in Orchards, or Gardens are
raised from Nuts set in the Earth, or Suckers from the roots of an old Tree, or
may be graffed on the common Hazle-Nut.

Sect. 9.
Mulberry-trees are raised by Suckers, Layers, or Cuttings.

Goosberies, Currants, Barberries, and Rasberries.
Goosberries, Currants, Barberries, and Rasberries are raised by Suckers, of
which you may have plenty about the roots of old Trees.

When they have grown some years, suffer not many suckers to grow about them,
nor cut the tops to a round close bush, as many Gardeners do; whereby they grow
so thick, that they neither hear nor ripen their Fruit so well as if they grew
taller and thinner.

CHAP. XIV. Of the several kinds of Fruits.
Of choice of Fruit Trees.
SECT. 1.
As to Wall-fruit and Dwarfs, if the Planter have convenient room, he ought not
only to have one, or two Trees of each good kind, but also some of that which
is but indifferent, that is ripe, or will keep good at such time, when better
eating fruit is not to be had; and more of lasting winter fruit than of summer
or any one sort.

Of Peaches.
Sect. 2.
Of Peaches the first and soonest ripe is the White-Nutmeg, next to that the
Red-Nutmeg, next to that the Troy which is ripe almost as soon and a better
Fruit; next ripe are The Izabella Savoy Early Newington Bordeaux Old Newington
Violet-Muscat Persian Modena Morello Rumbullian Scarlet Bellice Royal
Peach.

These are accounted excellent kinds of Peaches, and there are many other good
sorts besides these; and so there are of Apples, Pears, etc. more than I have
mentioned in this tract; for I think it not necessary to trouble either the
Reader, or my self with them here, but only to mention some choice Fruit of
every kind, and leave every one to please his own fancy, and store himself with
them, or others, as he approves them and has convenience so to do.

Of Nectarines.
Sect. 3.
The best Nectarines, are The Red-Roman Murry Tawny Paper-white
Nectarines.

There are others though worse sorts, as The Yellow Painted Russet Red
Nectarines.

The Algiers is commended by some, because it parts easily from the stone.

Of Apricocks.
Sect. 4.
Amongst Apricocks the Algier and Masculine are first ripe: The Turkey is much
commended, so is the Orange, the white Apricock is also accounted better than
the common.

Of Plums.
Sect. 5.
Plums to be preferred before others are as follow; The red and blew Primordian
as being first ripe, though not so good Fruit as several following;

The next ripe, The Morocco Merabolen Violet Apricock Barbary Black and Green
Damascene Prunella Queen Mother Kings Matchless Black-Pear-Plum Pescod Bonum
Magnumque Cheston Marbled Imperial Nutmeg Turkey
Plum.

These you may set to a wall, though most of them will bear well, being Dwarfs
or Standards if you have not wall enough.

The White-pear-plum, Prune, Damsons, and Verdock, are good Preserving Plums.

The Muscle Wheat Lammas
Plum, Bullice, Damsons,
and several course Plums are raised by Suckers, without graffing or
inoculating, and may be set in Orchards, Hedges, or any common places.

Of Cherries.
Sect. 6.
The May Cherry is first ripe, and should have a good wall to expedite its
ripening, for though they are but ordinary Fruit, yet their earliness makes
them a rarity. Next ripe are The Duke Flanders Red-heart Lukeward
Bleeding-heart Spanish-black Naples Carnation Amber
Cherry.

The great bearing Cherry of Millain, and Morella are blackish when ripe and
blood-red within, excellent to make Cherry Wine, affording a strong and vinous
liquor.

These two last and the Prince-Royal are good to Preserve.

If you have not room upon your walls, these will bear well in any warm place,
planted as standards.

Those that you find put forth small twigs, and have a small, dark, green leaf,
are easiliest kept Dwarf-trees.

Of Grapes.
Sect. 7.
The first ripe Grapes are the small Black, or Cluster Grape, next the
Muskadine red and white, the two sorts of Frontiniacks.

The Muscat Grape de Arbois Raison of the Sun Red Orleance Burlet Parsley
Grape.

Of Pears.
Sect. 8.
Pears are of very many kinds, and are much improved by being Planted against
walls. In France they are accounted among their best Fruit, and the best kinds
do well deserve it.

The Summer and Winter-Bon-Cristien, growing pendent, are sitter for a wall,
than to be Planted of Standards, the Winter will keep till May, and is a very
choice Pear.

The Bury de Roy Violet Dove Great-Musk Amadote Rousellet Messier-Jaen
Great-Soveraign Blood Windsor Green-field Dionier Great-Burgamot Virgalous
Pear.

Double-flower'd keeps till May, not fit to eat till March. These do well
planted against a wall: If you have not wall-room enough, such as grow with
small twigs, or almost any, graffed on Quince-stocks, may be kept Dwarfs.

The Winter and Summer Burgamots may also make Dwarfs.

Meat Pears for Standard-trees in common Orchards are such as follow, both for
Summer and Winter Fruit.

The Hill Primating White and Red Geneting Green-Chissel Pearl Sovereign Orange
Katharine Anthony Sugar Pimp Berry Popering Deadmans Scarlet Prick Royal
Nonsuch Kings Ladies-buttock Muscat Oak Virgin Ice Gascoin-Burgamot Winter
Popering Little Dagobert Great Kair ville Long Burgamot
Pear.

With diverse others, each Country affording variety.

The Slipper and the Lewis Pears are good to dry.

In Fields you may set Baking Pears, and Perry-Pears.

For Baking.

The Norwich Black Worcester Quince-pear Bishops Arundel Bell Painted
Pear.

Also Wardens of several sorts very good.

For Perry. The Red and White Horse Pear. There are also diverse other wild or
Choke Pears, whereof the red-coloured yield the strongest liquors. The
Bosbery, and Bare-land Pears are by much the best I have known or heard of: and
the Tree of the first of these two kinds grows to that bigness, that it will
bear fruit to make one, two, or three Hogsheads of Perry in one year: I could
tell you several stories to set forth its excellence when it is two or three
years old. The tree will prosper on almost any base Land.

Of Apples.
Sect. 9.
Apples are seldom planted against a wall: A man had best furnish himself with
the choicest of these following, for Table-fruit, by making them Dwarfs in his
Garden, or larger Trees in a secure Orchard, being tempting Fruit, and some of
them early ripe.

The Juniting Flax King Margaret or Magdalen Golden Russeting Spice Summer
Queening Go no further Royal Golden Pippen Good-Huswife Giant Pomewater Summer
Pearmain Bellaboon
Apple.

There are also some of special account in their respective Countries;

The Stocken Apple in Herefordshire. Darling in Cheshire. Golden Rennating in
Hartfordshire, etc. Angels-bit in Worcestershire. Kirton Pippen in some part of
Northamptonshire. Harvy-Apple in Cambridgshire.


These next following are good Winter Apples, or such as may be planted in
Orchards.

The Winter-Pearmain Winter-Queening Quince-Apple Nonsuch John-Apple.
Leather-coat Winter-reed Golden Doucet Lones Pearmain Westbury Pome-Roy Lording
has little Core July-Flower Pear-Apple
Apple.

The Flower of Kent Parsley Winter-Chesnut Maligar Red-fennel Short-tart
Russeting
Apple.

There are diverse kinds of Pippens, I have heard of eighteen several sorts,
those of them I know are so good, I can scarcely tell which to prefer.

There are also several sorts of Renatings, very choice good Apples.

(...) of Winter A^pl^s.
In Planting Winter-fruit, the best course is to Plant several Trees of some few
of the best kinds, after you have found what sort prosper in your soil best;
for many sorts will be troublesome in the gathering, and keeping them severally
when you have done.

Long lasting and fair Apples will adorn your Table, and yield most prosit.

Of Cyder-fruit.
For Cyder-fruit the Redstrake, and Brombery-Crab have the general pre-eminence,
the last of which is not ready for grinding till almost Christmas.

The Gennet Moil was once accounted the best, and still many Gentlemen that are
Cyder-Masters prefer it, and preserve it for their own drinking.

The white and red Must-Apples make a Cider very good, to be drunk about
Christmas next following the season of making Cider. The Tree is of quick and
large growth, a good bearer, and twelve or fourteen Bushel or Strikes of them
will make a Hogshead of Cider.

The Winter Queening is not commonly used for Cider, yet it yields a strong and
vinous Liquor; but so dry a fruit, that near twenty four Bushels will go to
make one Hogshead. The fruit must not be ground till very late in the year.

The Golden Pippen is said to make an admirable and restaurative Cider.

Pippens and Pearmains mixed, are much used, and Pippens alone, make a strong
and wholesome Liquor.

Of planting several kinds.
Some are apt to object, That since one or two kinds of Fruit may be had very
good for Cider, what occasion is there to Plant of so many sorts?

For answer, They will find it advantageous to have several sorts of Fruit for
Cider, if they consider,

1. One sort of Fruit Trees may, and do bear one year, when another fails.

2. Cider made of some kinds, will be ready to drink sooner than of others, and
thereby you may have it successively ready for your use. The Must-Cyder may be
clear a month after making: The Gennet Moil, a quarter of a year after: The
Redstrake, near half a year after, though it is much improved by longer keeping.

3. You may make your Cider with more ease, the Fruits you make it of ripening
one after another.

4. Though some Fruit yield not so good Cider as others; yet the Trees may be
quicker of growth, bear more plentifully, and last longer than those that yield
better: And the Palates of men being various, some like one sort, and some
another, and so all may be pleased.

5. Some Fruit Trees agree with the Soil and Climate better than others, which
you will not be able to know till you have made trial of several.

Of Quinces.
Sect. 10.
Of Quinces there are some sorts, though not many, somewhat different from each
other.

The Portugal-Apple and Pear-Quince, are held to be the best, and are the
largest.

The Barbary Quince is good but smaller.

The Lions and Brunswick, are also good Fruit.

The English is the most stony.

Of Walnuts.
Sect. 11.
There are several sorts of Walnuts, some being larger, others thinner shell'd
than the common, but differing so little one from another, that Men have not
much minded giving them names. The largest sort is usually called the French
Walnut.

Of Chestnuts.
The best Chestnuts among us, are those that come from beyond Sea; but of those
that grow with us, some are larger than others, without any difference worth
observation.

Of Filbeards.
There are two sorts of Filbeards, distinguished by the color of the skin of
their kernels; the one being red, and the other white.

There is another sort called the Filbeard of Constantinople; the leaves and
fruit of which, are bigger than either of the former.

And there is besides these an excellent large plump Nut, that has a very good
kernel, the best of which have a very thin shell.

Of Figs.
Sect. 12.
Figs are a Fruit that agree with English Palates and Soils much alike, there
being few that affect them. Among the several sorts of them, there are two of
chiefest note among us. The great Blew Fig which is most common, and the Dwarf
blew Fig, that is sooner ripe* and better tasted.

Of Medlars.
There are three or four sorts of Medlars, the biggest sort is best, without any
thorns upon the branches, as the common has: There is another kind also
without stones in the Fruit.

Of Services.
There are two sorts of Services, one larger than the other, that grows wild
in the wood; but neither the sorts of these, nor of Medlars are distinguished
by Names, and the fruit of both is not eatable till they are rotten.

Of Mulberries.
Sect. 13.
Mulberries are distinguished by their colors, for there are black, red, and
white.

Of Goosberries.
There is some variety in Goosberries likewise; the best sorts are the Amber,
and great Hedghog Goosberry, which is prickly, but the other smooth, both of a
bright, yellow color, and the white Holland Goosberry which is large and
transparent; there are likewise some that are of a blew, others of a red, and
others of a green color.

Of Currants.
The white and red Currants of the largest size, are the best sorts of that kind
of Fruit; the great dark-red Dutch-Curran is largest, and has a sweet relish;
some persons affect the common black Curran.

Of Rasberries.
There Is scarcely any other difference found among Rasberries, but that some are
red, and some white.

Of Barberries.
And the like difference is to be found among Barberries, but some are without
Stones.

CHAP. XV. Of Gathering Fruit, and making several sorts of liquors of them.
Hurt not the Trees.
SECT. 1.
In gathering of Fruit, be careful the branches of your Trees be not battered
and broken.

How to gather Fruit for keeping.
Such as you design to keep any time, ought not to be shaked off the Trees
because of bruising; but picked off with your hands. Be sure the Fruit you
gather be thoroughly ripe; which you may know by its beginning to drop, or the
kernels turning black: Let the weather be fair and dry when you gather, and no
dew upon the Trees. Lay up what you thus gather in a close, but sweet room,
upon a boarded-floor, without any green leaves, or sticks among them.

Of preserving.
If you have some Pears, that are choice and lasting, wrap them up in Paper, and
lay them one by one upon a shelf, or hang them up by the stalks, and keep out
the air from them as much as you can.

As you find any in your heaps rot, pick them out; and in a sharp Frost, cover
them with a Straw Mat.

In gathering Cider Fruit you must be sure to let them be well ripe, then let
them be gently shaken down, and laid upon a sweet and dry floor, in a heap, and
there lie a fortnight. The Redstrake, and harder Apples you may let lie longer,
(that is) three weeks or a month; the longer they lie, the less Cider indeed
they will yield, but much the better, it being necessary to have them as ripe
as may be, so that too many of them begin not to rot; some are for picking out
the rotten ones before you grind them; others say a few rotten Apples do no
hurt, but rather good, in helping the liquor to ferment.

Of a Ladder.
Sect. 2.
And because I am here speaking of gathering Fruit, I shall give you the
description of a Ladder, convenient to be used both in getting the fruit off
young trees, and pruning them, they not being strong enough to bear an ordinary
Ladder without harm.

Take a Board like the head of a joint-stool, but thicker; let there be joined
to it a Ladder (of what length you judge convenient, having respect to the
height of your Trees) with such Irons as it may ply to and fro, and at the
other end, let two feet of equal length with the Ladder, be put in so as they
may stand wider at the bottom than the top. See the Figure.

Of an Engine, or Mill for grinding fruit.
Sect. 3.
Of many sorts of Fruits may be made very noble and delicious liquors for
drinking, by separating the juice from the feculent parts of them, which is
performed by Pounding, or Grinding them, by such instruments as were to be had:
But lately has been found out an Engine, incomparably more commodious for this
work, than any thing ever known before; many of which are already dispersed
throughout the Kingdom, made according to the first model: But they have lately
received so vast an improvement, that they seem now quite another Invention,
and to want nothing to their perfection. The Inventor had a Patent for them,
the property of which is now in one Mr. Henry Allen, at the sign of the Cabinet
in Exeter-street, on the back of Exeter-Change in the Strand in London, who
makes them himself, and licenses any Artists in the Country, to do the same
upon reasonable terms. Any that are near London may have the Engine with the
Frame, those that live more remote, may have the Engine alone, with directions
how to make the frame. The price of this Mill is from 4l. to 10l. according as
it is in bigness, or for curiosity of work. The excellencies of it are, That it
takes up so little room, no more than two yards square: It grindes according to
the bigness of it, from 50 to 20 Bushel an hour, with the labor only of one
man, the feeding of it now being contrived with a little assistance of another.
It performs the work better than any thing else. And lastly, It grindes all
manner of Fruit with a little alteration in setting of it.

Sect. 4.
Other Authors have given directions about making liquors, of several sorts of
Fruit; but that he that has this Book may not be troubled to seek for them any
where else, and because I can truly pretend to exactness in this particular, no
less than (I believe) I have justly done in all that went before; and withal
having guided the Reader in the way to get choice Fruit, before I take leave
with him, I shall in the last place, instruct him how to order it, and how to
make use of it.

Of ^^king O^der.
In grinding, or pounding and pressing their Fruit, every one may be safely left
to the custom or convenience of his Country, but the management of the liquor
after it is pressed out is of great importance; Thus therefore you must
proceed, When your Apples are ground, or pounded sufficiently, and the liquor
pressed forth, strain it immediately through a sieve, and tun it up in a Hogshead
or Barrel, seasoned and sweet; fill it not up by two gallons at least, and stop
it up only with a loose stopper for two or three days, and then stop it up
close with clay on the top, and put a cork, or some stopper in the vent hole;
but for a weeks time or more, you may once a day draw it forth a little, lest
it break the vessel, or force some other vent; then stop it close up also, and
so let it stand till you think it may be something clear; and then pierce it to
try how it fines; the Summer Fruit after a Month, the Moil after the first
Frosts, the Redstrake not till after January; other Winter-fruit Cider about
the same time.

Of sining Cider by racking.
If your Cider be not fine at the times aforementioned, try them again about a
month after; and then if it be not fine, rack it off, as you would do Wine,
setting another vessel in a convenient place, that through a pipe of Leather,
or a Siphon, or Crane of some metal or glass the liquor may run out of the one
into the other without being exposed to the air, which is a most material thing
to take care of at the first pressing, and at all times; the spirits of Cider
being very apt to evaporate.

With Izinglass.
Some choose rather to fine their Cider with Water-glew commonly called
Izinglass, than by racking it, which is thus done. For a Hogshead take about a
quarter of a pound of Izinglass (and so proportionably for a greater or lesser
quantity) beat it thin upon an Anvil, or an Iron-wedg or such like thing, cut
it in small pieces and lay it in steep in a quart of White Wine, or some of the
liquor you would fine, so it be not sharp, but it dissolves best in white Wine,
let it lie therein all night, the next day keep it some time over a gentle
fire, till you find it well dissolved; then take a greater proportion of the
liquor you intend to purify, after the proportion of one gallon to a Hogshead,
in which boil the dissolved Izinglass, and cast it in the whole mass of liquor,
stirring it well about and leave the vent-hole for sometime open: This will
fine any kind of Liquor.

But the common and best way is that among Vintners, etc. that have frequent
use for it: And it is to dissolve a considerable quantity of Izinglass in White
Wine without putting it on the fire, which it will do in about a months time
and turn to a jelly, which they keep by them, and it will keep good a
twelvemonth, and when they have occasion to use it remove the scum that will be
on the top of it, and take what quantity will serve their turn out of it
according to the proportion of a quart to a Hogshead; and this they beat to a
froth, and mix it with a quantity of the Liquor it is to be put in, and then
pour it into the vessel mixing it well together with a broom, and so leaving
the work.

When it is very fine either draw it out of the Vessel as you drink it, or
which is better bottle it; and take notice, after it is fine, the sooner you
draw it off the better.

New Vessel.
If the vessel you put it in be new, scald it with hot water, in which some of
the Must or Pouz, has been boiled.

Tainted Vessel.
If it be tainted take some unslact Lime and put it in the vessel with water,
and stopping it well, roll it about a while.

Wine Casks*
Wine Casks, if sweet, are accounted proper to receive this liquor.

Choice Cider.
If any one shall desire a small quantity of Cider extraordinary for its
goodness, let him take the liquor that comes first from the Must, without much
pressing, and dispose of what comes afterward by it self, or mix it with the
juice of another grinding.

Some have been so curious as to pick off the trees the ripest Apples, and
especially those that have had most of the Sun, and to make use of them by
themselves for choice Cider.

Of Perry.
Sect. 5.
Perry is made the very same way as Cider, only observe to let your Pears be
very ripe before you grind them. And it is a thing advised by some, to mix Crabs
among the Pears of weakest juice to mend the liquor.

Of Rasberry wine.
Sect. 6.
If you have plenty of Rasberries they will make delicious Wine, after this
manner.

To every two quarts of Rasberries, put one pound of fine white Sugar; let them
stand two days in an earthen pot, often stirring and bruising them; then put
them in a woollen bag and hang them up, that the liquor may drop out into a
Milk-pan, or such like thing, for twenty-four hours, or more; put then the
liquor into an Earthen Pot, with a Faucet in it, let it ferment there and scum
it off, at a weeks end or sooner (if it be any whit sine) bottle it up, and at
another weeks end, shift it into fresh bottles, reserving the setlings in the
bottom of the bottles, which you may after put together into one bottle by it
self; shift the bottles thus twice or thrice, as long as you see any settlement
in them.

Curran wine.
Sect. 7.
Of Currants also you may make a delicate Wine thus: Gather the Currants very
ripe, bruise and strain them; to every two quarts of the juice put one pound
and a quarter of Sugar, put it into an Earthen Pot, scum it often, and at a weeks
end draw it off, take out the settling, put it in the Stean-pot again; do this
twice or thrice till it be very fine, and bottle it; if you find it not fine in
the bottles at a weeks end, shift it into other Bottles.

Goosberry Wine.
Sect. 8.
To make Goosberry Wine: Gather the fruit before they are too ripe, and for
every six pound of Goosberries, take two pound of Sugar, and two quarts of
water, stamp the Goosberries, and steep them in the Water and Sugar twenty-four
hours, strain them, and put the liquor into a vessel close stopped for a
fortnight or three weeks: Draw it off if you find it fine, if not, let it stand
a fortnight longer, and then draw it into Bottles; but if it be not then fine,
Rack it, or use Izinglass.

Delicate Wines are made these ways upon Experience; but if you desire to make
a greater quantity of liquor of your Fruit, you may either for Rasberry,
Curran, or Goosberry Wine add more water, and make them after this manner.

(...)
Sect. 9.
For every pound of ripe Fruit stamped, take a quart of spring water, and a
quarter of a pound of fine white Sugar, boil the Water and Sugar, scum it and
put in the juice of your Fruit, let it boil up again, take it off the fire, run
it through a hair sieve, and when it is thoroughly cold put it in a Stean-pot or
Vessel, after six or seven days draw it out into Bottles, put into each Bottle
the quantity of a Nutmeg of loaf Sugar. It will not be sit to drink under a
quarter of a years time and will keep good a year.

According to this last direction you may also make Cherry Wine, or to make it
stronger, use no more water than juice of the Cherries.

(...)
Sect. 10.
Cherry Brandy is usually made with black Cherries, by filling a bottle half
full of Cherries, and putting in Brandy till the bottle is near full; shake it
sometimes; within a month it will be ready to drink.

If you put the like quantity of Goosberries instead of Cherries, it will make
the Brandy very delicious.

Reader, I have no more (and I am pretty well assured there is little more
necessary) to say to thee as a Planter; The Con^^^^on.
but when thou go to work by these directions, then as a good Christian
observe the Characters of the Divine wisdom, power and goodness, that thou
shall every where meet with in this ingenious and beneficial Employment, and
chiefly take notice how all ends in that which serves only for thy own use and
pleasure; therefore praise and adore him, and observe his bounds in the
Enjoyment: And in so doing thou may have the benefit of, and I Will take my
leave of thee in, the words of him that spoke of Trees, From the Cedar tree
that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hyssop that springs out of the wall. Go thy
way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now
accepts thy works, Eccl. 9.7.

THE END.
Books Printed for and sold by Richard Chiswel.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign
Parts. Dr Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. Dr Cary's Chronological
Account of Ancient time. Wanly's Wonders of the little World, or History of
Man. Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holyoak's large Dictionary,
Latin and English. Sir Rich* Baker's Chronicle of England. Causin's Holy Court.
Wilson's Complete Christian Dictionary. Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, or
Philosophical Language. Pharmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis.
Judge Jone's Reports of Cases in Common Law. Judge Vaughan's Reports of Cases
in Common Law. Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobbes's Leviathan.
Lord Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Bishop Taylor's Sermons. Sir Will.
Dugdale's Baronage of England in 2 Vol. Ravanelli Bibliotheca Theologica 3 Vol.
QUARTO.
THE several Informations exhibited to the Committee appointed by Parliament to
enquire into the burning of London. 1667. Godwin's Roman Antiquities. Dr
Littleton's Dictionary. Bishop Nicolson on the Church Catechism. The complete
Clark. Dr Pierce on Gods Decrees. History of the late Wars of New England. Dr
Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Popery. Garissolius de
Chr. Mediatore. Corpus Confessionum Fidei. Spanhemii Dubia Evangelica 2 Vol. Dr
Gibb's Sermons. Parkeri Disputationes de Deo. Caryl on Job complete, 12 parts.
Description and History of the future State of Europe 1 s. Fowler's defense of
the Design of Christianity against John Bunyan, 1 s. Lyford's discovery of
Errors and Heresies of the times, 4 s. Dr Sherlock's Visitation Sermon at
Warrington, 1659. 6 d. Dr West's Assize-Sermon at Dorchester, 1671. 6. d. Mr
Dobson's Sermon at Lady Farmers Funeral, 1670 8. d. Directions for Improvement
of Barren Land, 6 d. Culverwel's Discourse of the Light of Nature, 3 s. 6 d. Dr
Meric Casaubon's Letter to Dr Du Moulin, about Experimental Philosophy, 6 d
Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain French Gentlemen
charged with a Robbery, 1671. 6 d. The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a
Sermon by James Paston.
OCTAVO.
COnold's Notion of Schism according to the Ancients with Reflections on Mr
Hales. The Posing of the Parts. Elborow's Rationale upon the English Service.
Burnet's Vindication of the Ordination of the Church of England. Winchester
Phrases. Wilkin's Natural Religion. Hardcastle's Christian Geography and
Arithmetic. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy. Lord
Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the House of Peers in the case of
Skinner. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Appeals. --
Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Impositions. -- Letter about the
Bishops Vote in Capital Cases. Xenophont. Cyropaedia. Gr. Lat. Duporti Versio
Psalmorum Graeca. Grew's Idea of Philological Hist. continued on Roots.
Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. Batei Elenchus motuum
nuperorum in Anglia. Brown's Religio Medici. Several Tracts of Mr Hales of
Eton. Bishop Sanderson's Life. Dr Tillotson's Rule of Faith. Gregorii
Etymologicon Parvum. Pasoris Grammatica Grae. Novi Testamenti, 4. s. Rossei
Gnomologicon Poeticum. Gouge's word to Saints and Sinners. Dr Simpson's
Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of the Original of
Hot-Springs and other Fountains, and a Vindication of Chemical Physic, 3 s.
His Hydrological Essays; with an Account of the Allum-works at Whitby, and some
Observations about the Jaundice. 1 s. 6 d. Dr Cox's Discourse of the Interest
of the Patient, in reference to Physic and Physicians, and Detection of the
Abuses practiced by the Apothecaries. 1 s. 6 d. Organon Salutis: Or an
Instrument to cleanse the Stomach: with diverse New Experiments of the Virtue of
Tabaco and Coffee: To which is prefixed a Preface of Sr Hen. Blunt. 1 s.
Aristotle's Problems. Dr Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three parts. A
Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference of the two Covenants, 1672. 2 s.
Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness, 1672. 1 s. 6 d. Lipsius's
Discourse of Constancy. 2 s. 6 d. Willis Anglicisms Latiniz'd. 3 s. 6 d.
Buckler of State and Justice against France's Design of Universal Monarchy,
1673. A Free Conference touching the Present State of England at home and
abroad, in order to the designs of France, 1673. 1 s. Bishop Tailor of
Confirmation. 1 s. 6 d. Mystery of Jesuitism, third and fourth parts. 2 s. 6 d.
Sanderson Judicium Academ. Oxoniens. de Solenni Liga. 6 d. Dr Samways
Unreasonableness of the Romanists. 1 s. 6 d. Record of Urines. 1 s. Dr Ashton's
Cases of Scandal and Persecution. 1674. 1 s.
DUODECIMO.
FArnabii Index Rhetoricus. Ciceronis Orationes selectae. Hodder's Arithmetic.
Horatius Minellii. Sands Ovids Metamorphosis. Grotius de Veritate Religionis
Christianae. Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations.
VICESIMO QUARTO.
LVcius Florus. Lat. -- -- Id. Truth. 16o Crumbs of Comfort. Valentine's
Devotions. Guide to Heaven.
Books lately Printed.
GVillim's Display of Herauldry with large Additions. Dr Burnet's History of
the Reformation of the Church of Eng. fol. Dr Burlace's History of the Irish
Rebellion. Herodoti Historia. Grae. Lat. fol. Mr John Jenison's Additional
Narrative about the Plot. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary with large
Additions, 1679. William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. October. 12. 1679. --
History of the Gunpowder Treason. -- Impartial Consideration of the Speeches of
the Five Jesuits Executed for Treason. fol. Relation of the Massacre of the
Protestants in France. Trials of the Regicides. 8o. Dangerfield's Narrative of
the Pretended Presbyterian Plot. Mr James Brome's Two Fast Sermons. The Famine
of the Word threatened to Israel, and Gods call to weeping and mourning. Account
of the Public Assairs in Ireland since the discovery of the late Plot. Dr
Jane's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. Dr Burnet's Two
Letters written upon the Discovery of the late Plot. 4.to Decree made at Rome
2d March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of the Jesuits and other Casuists.
4.to Mr John James Visitation Sermon, April 9. 1671. 4.to Mr John Cave's Fast
Sermon on 30 Jan. 79. 4.to -- His Assize Sermon. at Leicester, July 31.79 4.to
Certain Genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural
Medical, Theological and Bibliographical; with a large Account of all his
Works, by Mr Tho. Tenison. 8o Dr Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the
Church of England. 8o The Original of all the Plots in Christendom; with the
Danger and Remedy of Schism: By Dr William Sawell, Master of Jesus College
Cambridge. 8o A Discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right: By a Person of
Quality. 8o Dr Edw. Bagshaw's Discourse upon Select Texts against the Papist
and Socinian. 8o Mr Rushworth's Historical Collections: The Second Volume. fol.
-- His large and exact Account of the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, with all
the Circumstances preliminary to, concomitant with, and subsequent upon the
same to his Death. fol. Remarques relating to the state of the Church of the
three first Centuries, wherein are interspersed Animadversions on a Book,
called A View of Antiquity: By J. H. Written by A. S. Speculum Baxterianum, or
Baxter against Baxter, 4.to The Country Man's Physician. For the use of such as
live far from Cities, or Market Towns. 8o Dr Burnet's Sermon before the Lord
Mayor upon the Fast for the Fire, 1680. 4o. Conversion and Persecutions of Eve
Cohan, a Person of Quality of the Jewish Religion, lately Baptized a Christian.
4.to New England Psalms. 12o An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason
Written by Ma. Clifford Esquire; 12o The laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits,
Seminary Priests, Recusants, the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by
diverse Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges; with other observations
thereupon, by William Cawley Esquire fol.
In the Press.
DR. Burnet's Account of the late Earl of Rochester. 8o -- History of the
Reformation of the Church of England. The second and last part. fol. Bishop
Sanderson's Sermons. Fowlis his History of Romish Conspiracies, Treasons and
Usurpations. fol. The Tything Table. 4.to Markham's Perfect Horseman. 8o
Robinson's Phrases for Winchester School. 8o
FINIS.

