THE MATCHING OF THE Magistrates Authority, AND THE CHRISTIANS TRUE LIBERTY IN
Matters of RELIGION.

Wherein is clearly stated, How far the Magistrate may impose or restrain in
matters of FAITH and WORSHIP, And how far forth the Christian may challenge
Freedom and Exemption.

In a Sermon preached at the Assizes at DORCHESTER, Jul. 17. 1651.

By WILLIAM LYFORD B.D. and late Minister of Sherborn in Dors.

LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON, and are to be sold by Tho: Miller Booke-seller
in Sherborne. 1654.

TO THE HONORABLE, Sir GERARD NAPPER, Knight and Baronet.
Most Honored SIR,
THe World does much call for this little work of my Fathers, who is now with
God. And the Communion of Saints being so great a part of our most holy Faith,
I dare not keep it back from any Christian man's enjoyment; Yet it being a
piece, which was formed in your service, while you were Sheriff of
Dorset-shire, I refuse to send it forth but with your cognizance, and under
your Patronage. It is just, that having been borne, as it were, in your house,
it should not become the property of others, without a special reserve of its
chief homage unto your self. When it was preached to you from the Pulpit, it
found your great acceptance: I hope it shall find as great, now it salutes you
from the Press. And if it shall be still as welcome to your eye as it was then
unto your ear, it will much encourage me to inherit as well my Fathers
affections to you as his name, and to let you see, that though he be dead, yet
there is still alive

Most honored SIR, Your faithful and humble Servant, WILL: LYFORD.
From my Study in Mag. Coll. Oxon. October. 22. 1653.
DAN. 3.14. to 18. Is it true o SHADRACH, etc.
THese two things, The Truths of Christ, and Peace among Brethren, ought to be
precious to every Son of the Church 'Twas a blessed time when the multitude of
Believers were of one heart, and one Soul, Acts
when they held Communion in Doctrine and Fellowship, in breaking of Bread and
Prayers, they heard together, they received together, they prayed together; and
according to this primitive Pattern, all good Christians should endeavor to
walk, and those Churches are happy which hold that blessed knot of Truth and
Love: Contrary whereunto are those two reigning evils among us at this day,
viz. Wantonness of Spirit, and Pride of Spirit; Through the wantonness of
men's spirits craving an absolute liberty in matters of God, the sacred Truths
of God are corrupted and vilified; And through the Pride of men's spirits on the
other hand, imposing matters of Opinion and Worship under temporal penalties,
the Quiet of men's Consciences, and Unity among Brethren is exceedingly
disturbed and unsettled. There is much evil in both extremes, either that all
things should be tolerated, or Nothing; that Nothing should be restrained, or
that All things should be imposed, and rigidly enforced under temporal
inflictions; the one leads to Heresy and Atheism, the other to Perescution.
Now to shape a course out of Gods Word: 1. How the sacred Truths of God, and
the precious Souls of Men, (those great truths committed to our charge.) And 2.
How the just Liberty of Conscience (for I meddle not without my line) with due
reverence to Authority may be preserved pure and blameless, is the scope of my
ensuing discourse, unto which ends I shall endeavor to drive with all
clearness, Christian Moderation and Sobriety, from the words now read in your
ears.

Whether Nebuchadnezzar did erect this huge Statue of such a vast cost (for it
was of God) and bigness (60. cubits high) out of ambition and vainglory, as
a Monument of his Greatness and Magnificence, -- or out of Blind Zeal to his
God Bell, to whom it was dedicated, -- or out of Policy to bring all his
Dominions and People to an Uniformity in Religion and Worship, the better to
prevent Dissentions and Divisions in bis Kingdom, which might be occasioned by
the exercise of the Jews Religion now scattered amongst them? Whether all, or
any of these things might move him, I determine not; But most likely it is,
that there was something of Design in it, for the Princes of Babylon, seeing
their Greatness and Glory eclipsed by Strangers and Captives, moved with Envy
and Indignation, advised the King to such a specious Action of Devotion,
whereby they might entrap, and work the ruin of those Jewish Commanders, for
ver. 12. they inform against Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, that these men
have not regarded thee o King, they serve not thy Gods, nor worship the Golden
Image which thou have set up: Upon this information Nebuchadnezzar sends for
them, and bespeaks them in the words of my Text, Is it true O Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my Gods, nor worship the Image which I
have set up? q. d. I should least of all men expected this from you, you, who
are at my mercy, you that have been so highly advanced by me: He used them
civilly (as the Phrase is) yet cruelly, he did not presently condemn them till
he had heard their defense, and in his speech he did seek to win them, as
unwilling to believe it to be true, which was informed, Is it true O Shadrach,
that you do not serve my Gods, ver. 14. perhaps it was an oversight, or some
needless scruple in you, or a misinformation to me, I shall be willing to
pass it by, if now at last you will conform; Take time to consider of it; But
if you persist, I cannot help you, you must be cast into the fiery Furnace, for
so is the Law, ver. 15. Then follows their Answer, ver. 16, 17. We are not
careful to answer thee in this matter, as if they should say, your Majesty is
not misinformed, we did not worship your Gods, and the truth is, we cannot, we
are sufficiently advised and resolved in this matter, we crave no farther time
for consultation; And whereas you threaten us with Death for our refusal, this
is no satisfaction to our Conscience, nor discharge of our Duty, we are not
moved with thy threatenings, we are ready to sacrifice our lives to the will and
command of our God, rather than our Conscience, or Religion to thy will: It is
a poor Religion, and a poor God, that is not worth the dying for. And if our
God see cause by this means to call for our lives, we are contented to pay a
debt of Nature in a debt of Duty; and yet we know that he can deliver us from
thy Furnace, if it seem good unto him, but if not, we cannot gratify thee in
this matter, We will not serve thy Gods, we rather yield our bodies, and Gods
will be done.

In which Conference note two remarkable Acts, 1. One of the King, enjoining an
Act of Worship upon men of a different judgment, and those, poor Captives,
under the sharpest penalty. 2. The other of the poor vanquished Captives,
their refusal, choosing rather to suffer, than to sin against God, resolving in
the way of Duty to trust God with their lives, ver. 16, 17, 18.


Sundry particulars are observable, but I shall reduce the whole into 2.
Doctrines.

Nebuchadnezzar sets up an Image, requires a Worship to it under pain of death:
This was ill in him, and the like is ill in any man else.]

D. 2. From their Answ. is this, To cleave to Gods will and ways against all
humane dread and terror, out of a confident persuasion that God is Lord of our
lives, able to deliver, and in an humble resignation to his wisdom whether he
will deliver or not in such a strait, is a strength of spirit to be endeavored
after by all that fear God and would keep a good conscience: Thus did these
three men.

This Truth is evidenced by the Repentance of Nebuchadnezzar, v. 28. Blessed be
God that has changed the Kings word: By this Retractation he condemns his
former cruelty. Note that passage of Paul's Repentance recorded, Acts 26.11. I
punished them often in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme: It was a
great weakness in them to blaspheme, but it was a great wickedness in Paul to
compel them; and thus much S. Paul confesses, that it is an Act of
Persecution to compel poor Christians to deny what they believed concerning
Jesus Christ.

Obj. It may be said, S. Paul sinned because he compelled to that which was
evil (as here Nebuchadn. did) else he needed not to repent of what he had done.

Sol. 1. That which he did, was not evil in the judgment of Authority; for
verse 10. Saint Paul had a Commission so to do.

2. Nor was it evil in the judgment of his own Conscience, for he verily
thought, that he ought to do many things against the name of Jesus, ver. 9.
The evil of his acting therefore did not lie only in the Object whereunto he
compelled, but in the very act of compelling Christians to go against their
own Consciences.

3. To put the sinfulness of compelling upon the Object, is altogether
unsatisfactory, for the question will still recurre, who shall judge of the
right? Is not every Power judge of its own right? They that think it just to
compel others to yield to an unknown truth, or duty, will think it hard to be
compelled to a like unknown duty by a contrary Power; And yet Error in Power,
thinks it has as much right to a forcible imposition, as Truth has when it is
in Power.

Sol. 4. Note from this Confession of S. Paul two things, 1. That an erring
Conscience does not excuse in case of misactings; Persuasion of Conscience is
not the ground, nor prime rule of men's actings, (for the Conscience it self
must be regulated, else it will be a false witness of God. As Conscience is
set between God and us, so it must speak from God to us, not from Satan, or any
Spirit of delusion.) Saint Paul verily thought he ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus, yet was he not thereby excused; he did it not in
malice, but his erring conscience put him upon that action, which was damnable.
2. Note, that the plea of authority is not a sufficient discharge before God,
for Paul had Commission for what he did. But he and his Commission were
wicked, and I believe that many are and may be damned for their misactings,
though they have authority for what they do, yea, though they be also in
conscience persuaded that they do nothing but what is good, as the Jews that
crucified Christ, and they of whom Christ speaks Joh. 13.3. He that kills you,
will think they do God good service: Paul had been damned for his
persecuting,, unless he had repented, though he did it ignorantly.


Thus for the proof in general, There be two Branches of our Doctrine. 1.
That the Civil Magistrate may do much in matters of Religion. 2. Yet not this,
viz. to impose under temporal penalties; There be two extremes, some think
the Magistrate has nothing to do in matters of Religion; others, that he may do
what he list. Some claim an absolute freedom from all Civil Power, as being
for matter of Faith and Worship under Christ your King alone. Others challenge
to the Magistrate a Power of imposing the publicly owned and established
Religion: The one is too loose, the other too rigid.

The right or wrong apprehending and executing of this practical point is of
great good, or great mischief to the Church of Christ: therefore for distinct
proceeding, I shall endeavor to resolve these two Questions [1. What the Civil
Magistrate has to do in matters of Religion, [2. What he may not do.

promise made to the Churches of the Gentiles. Es. 49.23. Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers. Though they be not Fathers to
beget thee, yet they shall be Fathers to nurse thee up, they shall carry thy
Sons and thy daughters in their Arms (i.e.) they shall contribute their aid
and assistance for the upholding and enreasing of the Church; And the Nation
and Kingdom that will not serve thee, (when this Kingdom of Jesus Christ comes
to be revealed to them) He will require it at your hands, Psalm 2.10.
they shall perish. Es. 60.12. "From this Unction it is, that Magistrates are
bound to serve Christ, as Magistrates, that is, use their civil power to serve
Christ's Kingdom: The administration of Civil Justice is not sufficient to
give them the title of nursing Fathers (for so much the Turk at this day does
yield them, and yet he is no Nurse Father to the Church.) But the Civil Power
is to be used for the Churches spiritual good. 1 Timothy 2.2. The Object and end
of the Kings Power, is not only the external peace of humane society, but
also honesty and godliness to be procured by his Civil coactive Power, and
for this cause Paul wills us to pray for Kings, and all that are in
authority. Here Is the quod sit, that the Magistrate may do much: how much that
is, 4. Conc.
will appear in these four Conclusions.

1. For propagation of Religion and truth of Jesus Christ; 1. Propagation.
It is his duty to take care that the Gospel be preached to all the people
committed to his charge and governance, thus Jehosaphat sent Princes and
Priests to teach in all the Cities of Judah. 2 Chronicles. 17.8.9. It is a most fond
device to make a distinction between the Kings of Judah, and Christian Princes,
for what the one did by virtue of their Office, the same, the other ought to
do, by virtue of the same Office, if there be no particular exception or
limitation; God enjoynes our obedience to Christian Magistrates as well as unto
them, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject, etc. And the Scripture enjoining
the duty of the subject, does establish the authority of the Christian
Magistrate (for they are Relatives.)

he is to take care for the maintenance and countenance of Ministers who are to
give attendance to that work, thus Hezekiah spoke comfortably unto all the
Levits that taught the good knowledge of God. 2 Chronicles. 30.22. He did also
appoint the people to Minister sustenance unto them. 2 Chronicles. 31.4. He
appointed his own portion. Moreover he commanded the people to give the portion
of the Priests that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord, and they
brought in abundance, the first fruits of Corn, Wine and Oil, and of all
increase of the Field, and the tithe of all things brought they in abundantly.
Verse. 5. The like we read of good Nehemiah, Neh. 13.10, 11, 12. See the place.



Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah were great Reformers, Josiah put down the
Idolatrous Priests whom the Kings of Judah had set up to burn incense, etc.
(the like did Hezekiah. 2 Chro. 31.1.) yet Note by the way, that though those
Priests which had served in the high places were degraded from doing the office
of Priests at Gods Altar any more, yet they did eat the Bread of their God
among their Brethren, 2 Kin. 23.9. And this was according to the Law. Levit.
21. Ver. 21, 22. No man that has a blemish [and this was typical.] of the
Seed of Aaron shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the Lord, yet he shall
eat the Bread of his God. Verse. 22. It was not said unto them, go dig, go
beg etc. This I particularly observe, because though some of our Ministers
might deserve to be put from their Office, as unsavory Salt, yet they must not
be made vagabonds on the earth, nor their Wises and Children beggars: The
Reformers under the N. Testament should follow the rule and example of those
reformers, in the O. Testament, and this is required of them, Eze. 44.11, 13,
14. At the purging of the new Churches Ministry (there figured under Ezekiels
Temple) those that had defiled themselves with false worship, were to be
degraded from the dignity and office of a Priest, to do the most servile and
meanest offices about the Temple, yet they should have whereon to live and
subsist: This I speak and press the rather, because as there is a desire in
some here present, that the work of Reformation should proceed and be carried
on in a way of righteousness and mercy, so there may be a fulfilling of the
same to roll away our (that I say not, your) reproach.

A second thing to be restrained, is the actual preaching and spreading of
heretical and poisonous Doctrines: I lay this restraint, not upon the holding
of any opinion, though contrary to the publikly owned and established Doctrine,
because opinions as opinions, being acts of the mind; are not discernible, and
therefore not punishable by humane Authority, yet when such dangerous opinions
shall be published to the seducing and infecting of his people, then Christ
will not have Jezebel, the pretended inspired Prophetess, nor any other of
like condition, suffered to seduce his servants, Rev. 2.14. It is clear, such
might be restrained, and in case such false Teachers disregard the censures of
the Church, then the Magistrate is in this, to serve Christ, and I think he
may take those words of Paul for his warrant, Gal. 5.12. Note 1. He speaks
there of false Apostles who had poisoned that Church with some Jewish
Doctrines. 2. He calls them troublers of the Church. 3. That such troublers
ought to be cut off, else Paul would never have wished it: I do not understand
it of a cutting off of their Lives or Estates, but a restraint of their
practice, that they might no longer trouble the Church with their pernicious
Doctrines; And the restraint upon them must be so effectual, that they may be
as if they were dead, for as long as they persist in their troublesome
teaching, they are not cut off. 4. And when the Church has gone as far as it
can, Roll 2.3.
and prevails nothing, then Paul's wish calls for the Magistrates help to
restrain them, as evil workers in an high degree, and troublers of the
Churches peace, which the Magistrate is bound to preserve. But that place,
Zach. 13.2, 3, 5. comes more home to our purpose, I will (says the Lord) cause
the Prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the Land, And it shall
come to pass, that when any shall yet prophecy, then his Father and Mother
that begat him, shall say unto him, thou shall not live, for thou speak lies
in the Name of the Lord, etc. This is a plain prophecy of the times of the
Gospel: wherein note, 2 Pet. 2.1, Rev. 2.14.
1. That by the Spirit of God, there is foreshewed a singular evil that should
happen in the Christian Churches, viz. men shall bear themselves for Prophets
which are none, (for they shall wear the Prophets garment to deceive.) 2.
Those Prophets are Teachers of fals-hood. 3. This evil is to be purged away,
and these men brought to shame by the Christian Magistrate: Verse 3.
at the instance and complaint of their dearest friends, his Father and Mother
shall thrust him through when he prophecieth, not with their own hands, but
according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 13.9. They shall bring him to the Magistrate to be
punished. 4. And this shall be the fruit of the Magistrate dealing with them,
viz. they shall be ashamed of their visions, and their prophecyings Ver. 4.5.
and shall confess, I am no Prophet, etc.

And there is a reason, as Mr. Buroughs thinks, why their best friends should
withstand them in this their way. 1. Because it is abhorring to nature to
suffer that God, whom we honor, to be blasphemed. 2. And to see our Wives,
Children and dearest friends to be seduced into ways, which we think will
undo their souls to eternity, and not be able to help them; no way left to
help our selves or them, unless we can persuade the seducer to desist, or ask
them why they do so, and entreat them to forbear.

A third sort to be restrained are makers of Sects and Divisions among the
people, because this is directly opposite to the Magistrates proper end, viz.
public Peace, and Quiet: The setting up of divisions, Church against Church,
Ordinance against Ordinance, does in its own nature tend to the disturbance of
publik peace and humane society; See the danger of it, Gal. 5.15. If ye bite
and devour one another, Take heed ye be not consumed one of another; if the
Church of Christ, which should be as a City at unity within it self, shall
nourish within its bowels contrary Sects and Divisions, there will be biting
and devouring one of another, and the Churches divisions do prove the Churches
consumptions.

A fourth sort to be restrained by the Magistrate are vicious livers, to the
scandal of the Gospel: Though the loving of vice be worse than living in
vice, yet the Magistrate cannot take notice of the affection, but of the
action, to restrain open sins, yea, though they be not peace-disturbing
enormities; For the Magistrates power is not limited to preservation of Peace
and Justice only, as its adequate Object, but is extended to other evil
works and open enormities: "As for example, he is to restrain the polluting
of the Sabbath by buying and selling, as Nehemiah did, cap. 13.15, 16. He is to
punish and restrain Drunkenesse, Deuteronomy. 21.10. though it be a harmless and
quiet drunkard: fornication also and vain swearing comes within his compass,
though the public peace be not thereby disturbed: It is very much, you see,
that the civil power has to do in the things of God. But against the
Magistrates restraining power, 3. things are objected,

1 Ob. May the Magistrate restrain me of that liberty which Christ has
purchased?

Sol. No: but Christ has not purchased a liberty for you to be an Idolater, or
an Heretic, or a maker of Sects, or a vicious Liver: Christ has not purchased
a liberty for Arrius to deny his Godhead, nor for a Papist to worship the
creature, nor for Husbandmen and keepers of cattle, to be Prophets, nor for
any man to endanger the salvation of others; Christ has not purchased a liberty
for every man to hold what he lift; Nor to serve God in his own way, for then
some should be authorized by Christ to blaspheme God, and to serve God by
sinning against him. Therefore this restraint is just, and not against
christian liberty.

2. Ob. But as good have no Religion, as no liberty to practice it.

Sol. 1. Not so neither, in some kind of things, that of Paul, Romans 14.22.
takes place, have thou faith? have it to thy self, that is, art thou certainly
persuaded concerning thy liberty in these things? content thy self with
knowing it, and with being freed from such scruples, yet forbear the practice,
in case of offense, q d. Let no man be carried out, upon particular persuasion
of his conscience to do any thing to the hurt of others: restraint in practice
may stand with Christian liberty. 1 Cor. 8 8.13.

Sol. 2. It is a sweet privilege for men of a different mind to enjoy their
own private judgment, under the civil Power, without having it drawn forth,
and then punished, when it is made known: It is a sweet Privilege, though my
form and way be denied me, yet that I shall not be forced to a positive acting
in a way that is contrary to my judgment; for so I enjoy both my civil Quiet,
and my inward Peace.

Sol. 3. There is no just complaint for want of Liberty, when men may have free
access unto the use of all established Ordinances, which by their own
confession are the power of God unto salvation; Again, no man is cast out of
our Communion for his dissenting judgment, unless he cast himself out; If I
were in New England, in France, or Germany, I would communicate with any
Congregation, that holds Christ the Head, and Faith the Foundation, that holds
and believes the Articles of the Creed, and profess Repentance toward God,
And any of those Nations should communicate with me upon the same terms. My
reason is, because Communion with Christ the Head, and with the Catholic
Church, the Body, is the root of Communion with particular Congregations. 1.
There is but One Church in the World, One Christ, One Faith, One Baptism, One
Lord over all and in all. 2. Ministers of Christ, are Ministers of the Church
where ever they come; we are not Ministers so to one Congregation, as that we
cannot exercise ministerial Acts in another Congregation. 3. The Members also
of the Church are all baptized into that one Body, not into this or that
Congregation, and so we are all Members one of another. 4. Lastly, All the
Members by virtue of their Communion with the Church-Catholique, have a right
to the Ordinances all the world over, and in the Ministers where ever they
come, if they come where Cephas is Pastor, they have a right in him, if where
Paul and Apollos do officiate, they have a right in them, and why so? 1 Cor 3.
12, 23.
because you are Christ's: so that the root of Communion is because I am
Christ's, and from that Head I have a right in Apollo's, and Cephas, etc. Look
what makes one a Member of the Universal Visible Church, the same serves to
make one a Member of any particular Congregation, and such a man has right to
the Ordinances every where: So then our Brethren are not straightned by us, but
in their own bowels. And for them to make their own Conceptions the rule and
condition of holding Communion with us, is in effect to impose upon the
Magistrate, a necessity of receding from the approved and publicly owned
Establishments.

3. Obj. But we are freed by the late Act, to serve God in our own way, Why
then should we be Restrained by the Magistrate?

Sol. That Act frees your Purses from Penalties indeed, but not your
Consciences from Sin: Moses allowed a Bill of Divorcement, if any had put away
his Wife and married another, without giving such a Bill, it had been death:
But now though that Law did exempt the party from punishment, yet not from
sin, and so our Savior told the Pharisees, from the Beginning it was not so.
Thus our Statute of Usury, allowing 8. per cent. if the Question be, Is that
Uusury legal? We say, Yes: But if the Question be, Is it lawful before God?
We tell you, Nay: So in this case, you will not sanctify the Sabbath in the
public Assemblies, if the Question be, Is this separation punishable? That
Act tells you, Nay: But if the Question be, Is the Sabbath duly sanctified, and
do men sin in forsaking the Assemblyes? We tell you, Yea: The Magistrate remits
only the penalty, but that is no discharge of Duty before God: Humane powers
may mittigate penalties, but they cannot make Sin to be no Sia, nor Schism to
be no Schism. Thus is the Magistrates restraining power vindicated.

4. There is yet one thing more belonging to the Christian Magistrate, and that
is a Power to regulate and order Circumstances for the managing of an
Ordinance, which in their general nature are necessary, yet lest undetermined
in Scripture: as for example. It is necessary in the general, that some place
for public Worship be chosen, that some hours be appointed, that the
Minister use some Garments on other, etc. seeing in such things there must be
some way or other used, and yet none is limited in Scripture, therefore the
Magistrate may order this hour of 9. and 3. from public meeting, rather than
Sunrising or Midnight; and for the Place, the Church rather than a Tavern:
and for Habit, a black Gown rather than a white Cloak: the reason is, because
that Circumstance, which I may choose to my self, being free so to do, there
being no institution of Christ in the thing, the same may the civil power
ordain to be obseved by all.

Thus you have seen, that it is much that the Magistrate has to do in the
things of God. 1. For Propagation: 2. For Protection of the truth. 3. For
restraint of Idolatry, Heresy, Divisions, and vicious living. 4. And for
settling outward order among his people.

Now follows the second branch of our Doctrine, viz. what the Magistrate may
not do in matters of Religion. And here let the question be, whether the civil
power may impose an act of worship, and force men by temporal penalties to act
against the convictions of their own conscience (as here Nebu. did the 3.
Children?) Neg.

For answer 2. are to be premised. 1. This question is not rightly resolved by
distinguishing between an act of worship lawful and unlawful, as if a true
Religion might be imposed, not a false; for every act of worship is supposed to
be good in the judgment of the imposer, and evil in the judgment of the
refuser: and they whose hap it is to live under contrary commands, and contrary
Religions, must either have a bad conscience, or a miserable life; a bad
conscience, if he can take in all points of the compass, or else a miserable
life under such change of penalties.

2. I grant, that the Magistrate may compel such as do hold the faith, and own
the worship (yet neglect the same out of an athelsticall profanenes and
irreligiousness,) to present themselves to every such acknowledged act of Gods
worship, as Asa did, 2 Chronicles. 15.13. that whosoever would not seek the Lord God
of their Fathers should be put to death, etc. Here Asa made compulsive Laws
about Religion, and let the case be alike, the Christian Magistrate may
compel, that is, to a confessed, known duty, because in such compulsion, the
Magistrate does not pinch upon the conscience of the party, but upon his
disorderly outward man, forcing him to the practice of a duty, which in his own
conscience and practice, he confesses to be a duty.

These things premised, to the question as it is proposed, See this exemplisied
and applied in cases in the Appendix.
I answer, that the Magistrate may propose, but not impose; Instruct, but not
destroy men of a different judgment and way; he may restrain any false way
(which is contrary to that which he takes himself bound to maintain.) But not
force to a positive acting against the convictions of their own conscience, he
may not set up an Image and a Furnace, he may not say, bow, or burn.

Reas. 1. Because then a false worship may be imposed, as well as the true, and
the godly men undone, by refusing a false worship, as well as carnal people by
not observing the true: John Huss, nobis catholic is fuit haereticus, Bell. de
Laicis l. 3. c. 22.
said Bellarmine, and was therefore burned alive at Constance: look what
reasons one side gives for punishing of another, the same reasons are brought
by the other side to punish them again for the like refusal; the same
argument was used against Paul at Philippi, Acts 16.21. [viz. He teaches
customs which are not lawful for us to observe being Romans, and at Athens,
Acts 17.18. He sets forth new Gods] which Paul himself at first had used,
when he persecuted the Christians.

Reas. 2. It is against the nature of faith and worship to be forced: sunderi,
non cogi vult fides: Quis imponet mihi necessitatem aut credendi quod nolim,
aut quod velim, non credendi? I can not believe against my will, neither can I
disbelieve at my pleasure, much less at the will and pleasure of another. So
for worship, God is not pleased with a forced worship, God is to be served with
a perfect heart, and a willing mind, and whatsoever we perform against our
will, or with an ill will, grudgingly, or with an unbelieving heart, not being
persuaded of the lawfulness thereof, it is sin; It is like the cutting off a
Dogs neck.

3. Reas. To impose an act of worship under bodily punishments, to come with an
Image and a Furnace, is properly that which we call spiritual tyranny over the
conscience, for seeing man cannot punish the conscience directly, by an
immediate stroke [God alone can wound and heal the conscience:] therefore all
the force and punishment done upon the conscience by men, must be by the body:
This is properly to force and Tyrannize over the conscience, when men are
brought to this struck, that either the bodily estate must perish to save the
conscience whole: or else the conscience must be wounded to save the body, and
the estate whole: This is a Lording over men's conscience: This was the sad
condition of our Fathers that lived under the lash of Hen. 8. his six knotted
whip, I mean, the six Articles; He came with an Image and a Furnace, if the
Papists refused to acknowledge his supremacy, they must be hanged for Traitors.
To the Protestants he came with transubstantiation, and a Faggot, if they
refused to bow to that breaden Idol, they must be burnt for Heretics.

Thus some Bishops requiring subscription too rigidly to all the ceremonies,
and silencing the Non-conformists [though men otherwise of quiet spirits, and
useful gifts] were deemed to exercise a spiritual tyranny over men's
consciences, because they came with an image and a furnace, subscription, or
deprivation.

The like things done by other men in other changes of times, is really the
same sin, though the men and names he changed: Hart-divis. P. 45. P. 63.
Hereupon Mr. Buroughs breaks out into this prayer, God grant we never meddle
with any thing answerable to that tyranny, and exhorts thus, the tables may
turn one day, wherein the sufferers shall have the greatest ease, and the
inflicters the sorest burden, but God forbid that their brethren should lay it
upon them, though it were put into their power to do it.

Reas. 4. Thus to enforce an act of Religion is against the prime dictate of
nature, All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you the
same to them, for this is the Law of nature, and of God by his Prophets. It is
a strange thing to consider how men's spirits and minds do alter with their
condition, so as to think the same things just or unjust, according as it
comes to their turns to be up, or down, to be above, or beneath: men would not
think it equitable to be so dealt with, as they deal now with others: He that
sends out groans for liberty, if he shall make others groan for lack of the
same, though the thing imposed be perhaps just and righteous, yet his act of
imposing is most unrighteous, because he sins against the light of nature,
Alteri ne feceris, etc. and against the light of the Gospel: judge this
rather, that no man lay a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way, Romans 14.13.

I shall now clear two or three Objections of those that stand for this power
of imposing in the Magistrate.

1. Ob. If Magistrates may not impose, nor compel to a Church-profession, then
every one may be of what Religion he list.

Sol. No man can be of any other Religion than what himself does list, for
Religion is seated in the understanding and will: A Religion which I like not,
is not my Religion. though I conform outwardly to it: An implicit faith to
believe what the Church or State believes, merely because they have agreed upon
it, is no faith at all. But if by being of what Religion I lift, be understood
thus, every one will have his own way, and so we shall nourish all confusions.
I Answer, This mischief is prevented by the Magistrates restraining power, who
as he may not enforce you to an act of worship against your mind, so neither
will he permit you the exercise of what you list, against his own mind: He
will not force you to keep his days, or prayers, but you shall keep them, or
none at all openly.

2. Ob. But does not this non-imposing under temporal penalties, amount to
that absolute, wild toleration, which you seem to condemn?

Sol. No, toleration is taken away by his act of restraining; That which I
restrain, I do not tolerate, he that restraines the practice of Idolatry, the
spreading of Heresies, etc. cannot be said to tolerate them. This non-imposing
is not toleration, but that Christian moderation which should be known to all
men.

3. Ob. But must such dissenters as refuse to act according as authority
enjoynes, be let alone?

Sol. No: there is a twofold remedy provided. 1. One spiritual for the healing
and reducing of persons going astray in false ways of Doctrine and worship,
viz. Instruction, Discipline, and Prayer: spiritual remedies conscientiously
applied, through Gods blessing will cure spiritual diseases. 2. But if not,
yet the Magistrates restraining power and wisdom (as above described) is a
sovereign remedy, every way commensurable to the suppressing of false worship,
and of all civil distempers that may arise thereof.

4. Ob. Will not this breed contempt of the Civil Power?

Sol. No: Man is not despised, when God is preferred. It is Gods prerogative
royal to be obeyed in what he requires, even because he commands it, that is,
for his own Authorities sake, Gods Commands are good, because commanded by him:
But men's commands are subject to examination, and we owe unto them, not an
absolute, but a conditional obedience, viz. Ex part rei, when the thing
enjoined, is not unlawful. And in such case of non-obedience, the reverence
due to authority is preserved by yiedling our bodies to their power in passive
Obedience, when we cannot yield our souls to their worship in an active
Obedience, (as here these three children did.)

Use. I end with four short Admonitions and Cautions to the party that does
dissent, and craves not to be imposed upon, nor forced by temporal punishments
to act against the convictions of his own conscience, let him precisely observe
these four Rules.

Caution 1. Take heed, beware how thou dare pretend conscience for thy
non-obedience, when it is something else, as perhaps Pride, Affectation of
applause, Humor, Selfe-interest, etc. Do not dare so to abuse thy conscience,
as to make it a baude to thy lust, for then humor will be conscience, Pride
and Schism will be conscience, filthy lucre and vainglory will be
conscience, Selfe-ends and Selfe-interest will be conscience; And so that
precious sparkle of Divine Majesty set up in thy breast to keep thee in awe of
sin, shall be made a cloak for sin, to sin with the more liberty and
security. As it is a great sin to act against the standing indictment of our
own conscience, so it is a singular abuse of the omnipotent, holy,
sin-revenging God, to plead conscience for the doing, or not-doing of this or
that, when as there is nothing less than conscience in the business; -- Such a
man sins with a protection, He has gotten his conscience, yea, God himself
to be the protector of his wickedness; And such men, if they can be
discovered, deserve to be twice punished, once for their fault, another time
for their holy pretense. It Is a great boldness to make conscience a Sanctuary
for any disorder.

2. Let the dissenting party, though he cannot conform to the Injunctions of
Authority in some point of opinion or worship, yet carry himself so
innocently, peaceably, and unoffensively in other respects, that the Magistrate
may justify thee, and have cause to say, I have no occasion or matter against
him, save in the Law of his God, ( as it was said of Daniel, Dan. 6.5.)

3. For the manner of refusal, be careful to carry it in an humble, quiet,
Selfe-denying way; do not bear it out with railing, or Pride, or Turbulence of
spirit factiously or seditiously: He that does dissent from the publikly owned
and established way, has great reason to be humble and jealous of his own
weakness. When a man by reason of his conscience dissents from the civil
power, if he can enjoy his own inward peace and outward quiet, he should
discover a very ill spirit to pour contempt and scorn upon the truths of God
publikly preached, or to east dirt upon the ways which he opposed, or contemn
and vilify those that differ from him.

4. Be sure, practically to put a difference between non-obedience, and
disobedience or Rebellion; if thou be required any thing which is contrary to
thy judgment, sit down with a modest non-obedience, But let not thy spirit be
carried out to rebel, or to setting up of Image against Image, worship against
worship, Assembly against Assembly, in a visible opposition to the public.

Ob. And if thy case be such as that of Peter and James, Act; 4.18. They were
commanded not to speak at all, nor to teach in the Name of Jesus, yet they did
Ver. 19. because God had commanded them to preach in his Name.

Sol. Then remember thou art under a double bond of conscience at the same
time, one from God, who commands thee to preach; Another from men, who command
thee not to Preach; But here in this case, thy conscience is discharged. 1.
Unto God by doing what he commands thee, and 2. To the Magistrate by submitting
to his power in suffering, And so thy duty to God, and thy reverence due to
authority are both preserved. And thus I am brought to my second Doctrine.

Quest. In case of injurious impositions, what is Christian to do?

Ans. Rather yield our bodies to the fire, than our conscience viz. To cleave
to Gods Will and Ways against all humane dread and terror, out of a confident
persuasion that he is Lord of our lives, able to deliver, and in an humble
Resignation to his Wisdom, whether he will deliver or not, in such a strait,
is a strength of spirit to be endeavored after, by all that fear God, and
would keep a good Conscience.

Every circumstance of this Doctrine is grounded on the Answer of Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego to Nebuchadnezzar, Verse. 16 17. To cleave to Gods Will and
Ways [so did they, we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image
which thou have set up.] Against all humane dread and terror. [So did they,
we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.] Out of faith or a
confident persuasion that he is able to deliver [therefore they said, our God
whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery Fornace] and in an
humble Resignation to his wisdom, whether he will deliver in such a strait,
or not [so they said, he will deliver us cut of thine hand, O King, scil. if
it seem best to his Godly Wisdom, we are not sure, that he will deliver us,
therefore they express their confidence conditionally, [But if not] as if they
had said, He can, if he will, if it be for his glory and ours, and the
Churches good, deliver us, but for that, we resign up our selves to his Will
and Wisdom, and resolve to stick to his ways, and to our duties; However he
please to dispose of us] is a strength of spirit, [it is not every degree of
grace that can make a man to do this,] yet it is to be endeavored after, and
resolved on, by all that fear God, [for otherwise we should fear a man that
shall die, and forget the Lord our Maker, who is able to destroy both Body and
Soul in hell, if we deny him before a sinful Generation of men.]

But here I must make an end.

Thus I have, I hope, according to promise, in a sober, moderate way,
unpartially held forth the clear Mind of God in this great and busy
controversy. How we ought to judge, and how to walk betweeen two Opinions,
one of them, that bring the Civil Arm to enforce to a conformity under the
temporal penalties of Imprisonment, Sequestration, etc. and others, that plead
for an absolute freedom from all coercive power of Magistrates in matters of
Religion.

The true use of this Discourse lies in the Practice, which if heeded, will
produce this happy fruit, 1. God will have his Glory and true Pre-eminence over
our Souls. 2. The Gospel of Christ, its true Honor and Splendour, being
propagated and protected. 3. The Devil and his instruments, their due shame,
whilst error is restrained and vice suppressed. 4. The Ministers and Servants
of Jesus Christ will have their due encouragement and protection. 5. Men's
consciences their just Liberty. 6. The Church will enjoy more truth in Power
and Purity, and Brethren more Freedom, Love, and Peace among themselves. 7. And
many thousand Souls preserved from perishing through dangerous Seduction.

If in these or the like respects any Glory may redound to God, any good to the
Church, I shall attain the end of my Preaching, and you the Fruit of my Sermon.

FINIS.

