THE PETITION AND DECLARATION OF Richard Langhorne (A notorious Papist now in
Newgate Condemned for Treason) PRESENTED To His MAJESTY in Council at
Hampton Court, The 10th of this instant July, 1679.
In which He avowedly owneth several Popish Principles and Tenets, relating to
what he believes, and thinks himself bound to believe by his Popish
Principles, in relation to the Duty which he (and it is believed that our
English Papists hold the same) is bound to pay to his present Majesty, a true
Protestant Prince.

The PVBLISHER to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is an Opinion so commonly received for true amongst us here in England,
That Papists have leave from their Priests to disown at their death those
Principles by which they have steered the Actions of their Lives, that I
thought it would not be ungrateful to the Public, to set forth the avowed
Tenants of this Popish Traitor, that he may not find a Case of Conscience to
disown next Monday at the Gallows, that he so lately gave under his Hand to the
King and Council, without receiving the just infamy due to Perjury. For though
the different impressions of the Speeches of the late Executed Jesuits, and
Remarks upon them, may occasion several doubts and mis-interpretations, yet I
am sure, this can hardly admit of either to an impartial Reader: For should Mr.
Langhorne have the confidence to deny, that any word in the following Petition
or Declaration is not such as he signed and sent to His Majesty in Council, the
very Clark of the Council in waiting, (who I suppose may yet have the Petition
by him) as well as the Party that delivered it, can testify the contrary.

I love not to insult over Condemned persons, nor those who are accused of the
most detestable Crimes; and therefore hope it will not be thought to savor of
Reflection, if I say, that I have reason to believe, That Mr. Langhorn has
bred up his Children in the Principles he owns in his Declaration, since one of
them is now in Newgate, and accused for acting in that horrid Plot, for which
the Father stands Condemned. And that you may not here be troubled with
needless Arguments to show how far contrary such Tenets as he owneth are to
those of even all the Reformed Churches, from the first Waldenses of Lions and
Languedock, to this very day, I refer you to the Reasons and Citations of a
late printed Paper, Entitled, Pereat-Papa, where for a penny you may see how
contrary the Principles and Tenets of this Popish Malefactor, in point of
obedience to Princes, etc. are to what the aforesaid Reformed Churches have
taught from time to time.

11 July,1679.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble PETITION of Richard Langhorne,
A Prisoner Condemned in the Goal of Newgate,
Humbly shows,
THat your Majesty's Petitioner, with all gratitude of heart and Soul
imaginably, humbly thanks your Majesty for your Mercy in giving him Life until
Monday next.

That your Petitioner is wholly ignorant of the substance of that Letter
mentioned in your Majesty's Order of Council, of the third instant, to have
been written by the Earl of Roscomon, as also of the grounds upon which it was
written; and therefore hopes that your Majesty will not permit your
Petitioners life to be taken away, before that be clearly understood.

That your Petitioner having, in obedience to your Majesty's particular
Command, made a full, clear, and sincere discovery of all those Estates which
your Majesty commanded him to discover, humbly offers unto your Majesty's
merciful consideration, the Protestation and Declaration by your Petitioner
hereunto annexed; by which he no way intends to reflect upon your Majesty's
Justice, or the Justice of the Judges or Jurie by whom he was tried: and humbly
begs, that the same may not be interpreted to intend any such reflection. And
that your Majesty will please to consider, that it is not impossible for an
innocent person to be Condemned, since it is not many years past that three
persons were executed and hanged in Chains, being condemned for the murder of
one who appeared afterward to be living: And this without any just cause of
reflection upon the Justice of your Majesty, or of their Judges or Jurie.

That your Petitioner humbly beggs leave to hope, that when your Majesty shall
have considered his said Declaration, you will, out of the abundance of your
natural inclinations to Mercy, either vouchsafe to give him his Pardon, so as
to enable him to spend the remainder of his life in the Service of your
Majesty and his Country; or at least, give him leave to live, though it be
abroad, and in perpetual banishment, he having fully obeyed your Majesty's
Commands in discovering every thing within his knowledge which has been
required to be by him discovered; and the Case of your Petitioner being
singular, as not having above any one Witness to any one particular matter of
Fact given in Evidence against him, as the Judges can inform your Majesty.

Your Majesty's Petitioner therefore humbly casts himself at your Majesty's
feet, humbly imploring your Royal Mercy, and that you will be graciously
pleased to give him his life, that he may spend it wholly in praying for your
Majesty's long and happy Life, Reign, and Government.

And your Petitioner (as in Duty bound) shall daily pray for your most Sacred
Majesty, etc. R. Langhorne.

I do solemnly and sincerely, in the presence of Almighty God, profess,
testify, and declare, as follows: That is to say,
1. THat I do believe and own my most Gracious Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, King CHARLES the Second, to be my true and lawful Sovereign Prince and
King, in the same sense and latitude, to all intents and purposes, as in the
Oath commonly called The Oath of Allegiance, his said Majesty is expressed to
be King of this Realm of England.

2. That I do in my Soul believe, That neither the Pope, nor any Prince,
Potentate, or Foreign Authority, nor the people of England, nor any Authority
out of this Kingdom, or within the same, has or have any right to dispossess
His said Majesty of the Crown and Government of England, or to Depose him
therefrom, for any cause, or pretended cause whatsoever; or to give License to
me, or to any other of His Majesty's Subjects whatsoever, to bear Arms against
His Majesty, or to take away his Life, or to do him any bodily harm, or to
disturb the Government of this Kingdom, as it is now established by Law, or to
alter, or go about to alter the said Government, or the Religion now
established in England, by any way of force.

3. That I neither am, nor ever was at any time guilty so much as in my most
secret thoughts, of any Treason, or Misprision of Treason whatsoever.

4. That I do believe, that if I did know, or should know of any Treason or
Treasonable Design, that was, or is intended, or should be intended against his
said Majesty, or the Government of this His Majesty's Kingdom, or for the
alteration, by Force, Advice, or otherwise, of the said Government, or of the
Religion now established in this Kingdom; and should conceal and not discover
the same unto his said Majesty, or His Majesty's Council or Ministers, or some
of them, that such concealment would be in me a sin unto death and Eternal
Damnation.

And I do solemnly, in the presence of God, profess, testify, and declare,
That as I hope for Salvation, or expect any benefit by the Blood and Passion of
Jesus Christ, I do make this Declaration, and every part thereof, in the plain
and ordinary sense of the words wherein the same stand written, as they are
commonly understood by English Protestants, and the Courts of Justice of
England, without any evasion or equivocation, or delusion or mental reservation
whatsoever; and without any Dispensation or Pardon, or Absolution already
granted to me, for this or any other purpose, by the Pope, or any other
Authority or person whatsoever; or without any hope of any such Dispensation,
and without thinking or believing that I am or can be acquitted before God or
Man, or Absolved of this Declaration, or any part thereof, although the Pope,
or any other person or persons, or power whatsoever, should dispense with or
annul the same, or declare that it was or is null or void from the beginning.

R. Langhorne.

FINIS.

