A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, ON THE Anniversary
Fast FOR THE MARTYRDOM OF King CHARLES I.

By E. LANGFORD, D. D.

LONDON ^rinted for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXCVIII.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons.
Isa. 53. v. 7. latter part. -- He is brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and
as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so opens he not his Mouth.


ONE great Attestation to our Lord Jesus his being the true Messiah, and to the
Truth of the Gospel, which he preached, is drawn from the many Predictions of
Him, most clearly laid down in the Prophets, and most manifestly fulfilled by
Him at his Appearance in the World. John 5.
And therefore disputing with the Jews, after He had alleged the Testimony of
his Father, and the Testimony of John, and the Witness of his own Works. ver.
17, etc. ver. 33.
He adds at last the Evidence of Scriptures. Search the Scriptures, says he,
ver. 36.
they are they which testify of me. And again and again, ver. 39.
we meet with Applications of the Prophecies to his whole Economy. Mat. 1.22.
That it might be fulfilled which was said by such or such a Prophet. Then was
fulfilled what was spoken in such or such a place, Cap. 2.17.
and the like. So our Lord himself, beginning at Moses and all the Prophets,
expounded to the Two Disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 24.27.
in all these things concerning Himself. And that I may not trouble you with
many Instances in a thing so well known, Luke 7.
I shall only mention that place where Christ Himself appeals to what was
foretold of the Miracles which were to be wrought by the Messiah at his coming,
and were all exactly performed by him. John the Baptist sent some of his
Disciples to Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come, ver. 19.
or look we for another? (where, by the way, (...), or He that should come, is
meant nothing else but the Messiah;) Our Savior bids them go tell John what
they had seen and heard, how the blind saw, the lame walked, the Lepers were
cleansed, the deaf heard; viz. that the very Miracles were wrought by him,
which were foretold by Isaias the Prophet, Chap. 35.4, 5, 6.
to be the Works and Signs of the Messiah, and ^o lest him to Judge whether he
was the Messiah or not.

But amongst all the Characters of the Messiah, none were more plain and bright
than those which set forth his sorrowful Sufferings, and his Infinite Meekness,
Patience, Humility and Charity. And they are no where more clearly expressed than
in this Prophet, and particularly in this Chapter. He is foretold here, To bear
our Griefs, ver. 3.4. ver. 5. ver. 7. ver. 8.
and carry our sorrows; to be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for
our Iniquities; to be oppressed, to be afflicted, to be distressed, to be
judged, and at last to be cut off out of the Land of the Living. Here you have
a short Abstract of his Sufferings; yet notwithstanding all these, such was his
Invincible Patience and Meekness, that He opened not his Mouth. But is brought
as the Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so
opens He not his Mouth.

He is here compared to a harmless innocent Sheep before the Shearers, and to a
poor innocent Lamb under the Butcher's hands, both silent and without
complaint. The sense or thing hereby signified is no more but this, that

1. He should bear all his sufferings and afflictions, all his Temptations and
Trials, with a most wonderful Humility, Meekness and Perseverance. And, 2. That
he should lay down even his very Life with all cheerfulness and ready
Submission to his Father's Will.
These two parts of his Character were absolutely necessary to promote the main
Design and Doctrinal part of his Gospel; For He came to call Sinners to
Repentance, to teach his Disciples Self-denial; to mortify all their Lusts and
corrupt Affections; to resist the World and all its Pomps and Vanities; to
engage in a War full of Difficulties and Dangers, and by consequence, to endure
all the Crosses, Troubles, and Persecutions which they should meet withal upon
this account.

And if the hatred and violence of the World, or wicked Men should at last
proceed to that height, as to seek their very Blood, then to resign their Lives
with Joy and Gladness, under the comfort of an Innocent Heart and a Good
Conscience.

Now tho these his Precepts, to considering minds, might in themselves seem
very rational, yet the Force of his most Divine Example, together with the
promise of his most gracious assistance, are sufficient alone to enliven and
quicken the Practice of these Duties. For Men are not so easily led by Precept,
as by Exmaple, but most Effectually by both.

From this Explication therefore of the Words read unto you, I will, through
God's assistance, endeavor,

1. To represent unto you this meek, humble and patient Disposition of Mind,
which our Prophet foretells should be so eminently fulfilled in the Person of
our Savior. 2. To recommend the Practice of the same, both from his Precepts
and Example. And then, 3. With your favorable attention, briefly to set before
you the most Christian Behavior of that Patient and Royal Martyr, whom we this
day commemorate, showing thereby, how strictly he observed his Great Masters
Commands, how Religiously he followed his Divine Example.
1. I am, to represent unto you, this meek, humble and patient disposition of
mind, which under the Parable of an harmless Lamb and Innocent Sheep, our
Prophet foretells, should be so eminently fulfilled in the Person of our
Blessed Savior.

Now this Emblem of the Christian Temper and Spirit we have in the New
Testament, painted more at large in those most Lively Colors of Peace and Love
unfeigned, kindness, gentleness, goodness, meekness and tenderness of Heart:
Bowels of Mercy and Compassion, humbleness of mind, patience, long suffering,
forbearance and forgiveness of one another, even as Christ has forgiven us.
All which St. Paul expresses in that one most Comprehensive Word of Charity. 1
Cor. 13.14, etc.
Charity, says He, Suffers long and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no Evil, rejoiceth not in Iniquity, bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things.

This is that most admirable and most excellent Beauty of Holiness, without
which no Man shall see God; and we are hereby instructed that it arises from a
meek heart, and humble Spirit. For what is it but mere Pride and Desire of
Vainglory, that begets all those inward Diseases and corruptions of Malice and
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Herefies, Envyings,
Revenge, Murder, and the like? This puffs Men up, and makes them not endure,
that others should be as good as themselves, Nay, Love that themselves should
be thought much better than they are: For even the wickedest Men give that
Praise and Attestation to Virtue, that tho amongst their lewd Companions,
Perhaps they may Glory in their Villainies, and make themselves seem far more
wicked than they are, yet amongst sober Men, they all desire to pass under a
more favorable Character. They love to appear under something of the outward
form and show of Godliness, tho they are perfect strangers to the Power thereof.

This gives them a false Sense and Reputation; they are highly ashamed their
Faults should be in the least exposed to the Eye of the world, but are nothing
concerned how much dishonor they cast upon Almighty God in committing them. To
trespass against his Eternal Truth, or out-dare his all-searching Spirit, by
telling, and perhaps swearing to a Lie, is too too common a practice amongst
them; but for one to tell them they Lie, is so unpardonable an Affront, in
their Esteem, so high a Provocation, that nothing but the Life or Blood of the
Party that said it, can make satisfaction for it.

O Blessed Jesus! How far are these Men estranged from thy Divine Love! How far
do they make thy Holy and Glorious Name to stink, and become a Reproach amongst
the Heathen, and unbelieving parts of the world! Never then let us count these
most foul Spots of our Sacred Profession, Points of Honor more; Never let him
that calls Himself a Christian any longer glory in this his Eternal Shame.

I confess indeed, I find it in some Great Masters of Morals allowed in Youth
to be a little fond of External Honor, Simplic, in Epict. c. 48.
and Popular Applause, Because it may raise their Virgin Thoughts and Innocent
Affections to the Enterprise of truly Noble Things, and give a Spur to their
Industry. and put them with delight upon Labors and Tasks, which otherwise
might be rather a punishment and torment to them to undergo. But withal they
tell us, That afterward, to make this a Principle of their Actions, will
inevitably prove their Ruin and Destruction. For besides all those dreadful
Consequences which I just now mentioned, it makes all Virtue merely accidental
and conditional; they will neither value nor practice it, as it is Good, but
only as it is Popular. It begets such an absolute Dotage and Frenzy in their
minds, as tho they despise and slight nothing more than the Persons and
Conversations of the Vulgar, yet they are so ridiculously besotted, as to
Court, and wholly depend upon their senseless Esteem, and rest more satisfied
in the vain Opinion of the World, than in the comfort of a Good Conscience, and
the Joint Testimony of that All knowing God, who will certainly one day Judge
the Secret Thoughts of all Mankind.

This Swelling indeed, and Tumor of the Soul, sticks very close unto us; it is
for the most part the last Rag of our corrupt Nature that we put off, and the
last piece of all this Earthly Lumber we bear about us, that we part withal.
Since then it is the bitter Root of so many, and so great Evils, and takes such
deep hold in those infirm and easy Minds, which cherish it, how cheerfully
ought we to entertain, how highly ought we to prize that Evangelical Humility
and Meekness which we have prescribed as a Sovereign Remedy against this
pernicious Distemper of the Mind, and so gloriously recommended (Which is the

II. Second Observable in my Text) to our practice, by the Example as well as
Precept, of our Blessed Lord and Savior, who when He was reviled, reviled not
again; when He suffered, He threatened not, but was led as a Lamb to the
slaughter, 1 Pet. 2. c. 23.
and as a Sheep before her shearers is dumb, so opened he not his mouth.

Our merciful Father, by sending Christ, the Grand Exemplar, to us, most wisely
considered, and most graciously condescended to our present condition; For
whether it be from our Original Nature, or from our Hereditary Corruption of
it, I shall not now determine. We see the Generality of the world led by
Example, as much, if not more than by Precept. To do as another does, was ever
counted a great Encouragement, as well as no small Justification. For Precept
is but as a fair Picture; whereas Example is the very Life: Without this the
other would pass for an Airy Speculation, or mere Romance. Then Men are
believed to be serious and in good earnest, when what they teach others, they
first practice themselves. By their own well-doing, Ep. 1.2, 15.
as St. Peter says, they utterly put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men.
Or being like St. Paul's Bishop, Tit. 1.7, 9.
themselves perfectly blameless, they may be able to convince their most
Insolent Gainsayers.

Segniusirritant animes demissa per Aures.
What we only hear, we usually little mind, and as easily forget; but what we
see, does commonly make a greater impression upon us. Now this is the very
difference betwixt Precept and Example; Quam quae sunt oculis comissa sidelibus
-- Hor.
and as the Evidence of both these Senses, commit, as it were, a Violence upon
our Imagination, so the Influence of both these together, lays as great a Force
upon our Will and Understanding.

The Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses Seat, and without doubt taught many
Excellent Notions, and wholesome Lessons; for our Savior commanded his own
Disciples, as well as the Multitude, Mat. 33.1, 2, 3.
to observe whatever they commanded. But this was it that quite shak'd off all
their Authority; They said, but did not. They might perhaps press the very
Weighty Matters of the Law, but they themselves would not touch them with one
of their Fingers How infinitely beyond them was our Grand Exemplar? It Is truly
said of Him, John 7.46.
He spoke as never Man spoke; and it is as certain also, He Lived as never Man
Lived.

And this was most absolutely necessary for Him to do. He came into the World
to reform both Jew and Gentile; to destroy all Hypocrisy, and mere Shows of
Religion; to purge out all unclean and corrupt Affections; to teach us the pure
Worship of God, in Spirit and in Truth; to instruct us how to mortify all our
Passions and Lusts; how to deny our selves in all unlawful things, and become
perfectly dead unto all the Suggestions of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil;
to sanctify us throughout, and keep us not only from all appearance, but also
from all secret thoughts of Evil; to beget in our Hearts the true Fears of that
dreadful Judge of Heaven and Earth, before whom we shall one day stand to
answer for whatever we have thought, or spoke, or done amiss: and next to that,
to kindle in our Minds a Spirit of Humility and Meekness, Peace and Love, and
to direct and keep us in all Holy and Heavenly Conversation toward one another.

Certainly a Lawgiver so Divine and Extraordinary as this, was obliged to make
His own Life the absolute Pattern of what he taught. As His Doctrine was the
most Sublime Instruction that was ever given to Mortal Men, so it was most
highly requisite that His own most Blessed Example should fully answer it in
all Exactness and Perfection; Mat. 3.15.
or, in His own words to John the Baptist, It became Him above all to fulfill
all Righteousness. Joh. 3.46.
And thus we find him appealing to His own Innocence, Which of you convinces me
of sin? This alone, one would think, without his other mighty Deeds, had been
enough to assert the Truth of His Doctrine. His whole Life and Death being, as
it were, but one entire and uninterrupted Miracle. This made Him in His
Discourses, appear as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes.

Thus both the Old and New Testament represent Christ as sent to be a most
singular Example to the World. Hence Isaiah, foretelling the Peaceable State of
his Kingdom, How the most Furious and Outrageous Tempers should be quieted and
composed by his gentle Precepts and mild Conversation, thus expresses it, by
way of Parable, The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, c. 11.6.
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Lion with the Calf, and a
little Child shall lead them. Men of all Humors and Conditions shall be
reconciled to one another, and their Captain, or Leader, shall be Himself as
Harmless and Innocent as a sucking Child.

Again, the same Prophet tells us, c. 53.3.
He was to be a Man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, He was to be
oppressed and afflicted, to be brought (as in the words of my Text) like a Lamb
to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so was he not to
open His Mouth. He was not to cry nor life up his Voice in the street. He was
not to break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax That is, c. ^3.2, 3.
not to discourage the broken and contrite heart, nor neglect any one that had
the least spark of goodness left in him.

And all this he perfectly made good from the very Manger to the Cross, Nay, He
did not despise the Virgins Womb. How highly reasonable and weighty then must
St. Paul's command be? Let the same mind be in you, that was also in Christ
Jesus. He spoke his mind, Phil. 2.5.
yes, and exactly performed it too. Tho He thought it no Robbery to be equal
with God, yet he made himself of no Reputation, V. 6, 7, 8.
He humbled himself and became obedient to Death, even the shameful Death of
the Cross.

What art thou then, O sinful Worm, that shall think thy self too great for any
Condescension? Hereunto, says St. Peter, are we called, 1 Ep. 2.21.
because Christ also suffered, leaving us an Example. that we also should
follow his steps. And, to instance in no more, let those words of our Blessed
Savior suffice, If any one will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his Cross daily, Luc. 9.23.
and follow me. Do you think this daily Cross signifies only Persecution,
Affliction or Tribulation? No, it is as St. Hierome explains it, Every
Temptation likewise from the World, the Devil, or our own deceitful Heart;
Whatever is uneasy to a sanctified Mind; and the taking it up, is here declared
to be our Mastering of it by self-denial, after Christ's own Blessed Example.

To some weak and willful sinners indeed, such as are too much given up to
their Lusts, and Enslaved to their Passions, this may seem a hard saying.
Custom, I confess, is another Nature, and therefore must allow those words of
the Prophet to be the very Truth its self. Can the Ethiopian change his skin,
or the Leopard his Spots, Jer. 13.23.
then may ye also learn to do good, that are accustomed to do evil. But this is
spoken of Men perfectly Dead in Trespasses and Sins. Men utterly given over to
a Reprobate mind, whose hearts are by continual practice so hardened, As to
Drink in Iniquity like water, with all manner of greediness and delight. For if
there be any Serious Remorse of Conscience remaining at any time, the Flax is
still smoking, there is some little hopes of Life yet left.

A Sense of Sin, and desire of Amendment, are two previous Dispositions here
always necessary to be supposed. What then remains to do the Work, but a
constant and most earnest Endeavor with the Divine Assistance, which our
Merciful Father never witholds in such a Case? We see in ordinary Cases of
Human Life, what mighty hard Tasks in a little time are overcome by only
diligence and a serious application; but here we have the vast advantage
besides of Gods most Holy Spirit to direct, guide, strengthen and support us.

We know all Habits are acquired by often repeated Acts, and by several
Degrees; and those that are bad, as well as those that are good, meet with an
uneasiness and reluctance at the beginning. For I appeal to the Heart of any
Man, whether at the first breach of his Innocence, at his first committing of
any willful sin. He has not had a Dispute with Himself before it was done; and
whether after, his Heart did not smite him, and make him unquiet; tho
afterward, perhaps, by often falling into the same Vice, by little and little
his Conscience fell asleep, and He then went on without any further Reflection
at all.

On the other side, whether in avoiding some occasion of sin, or resisting some
Temptation, He has not met with the like Controversy; and when he had overcome,
whether the Thoughts of his Escape have not filled his Heart with Joy and
Gladness?

Now besides his sensual Appetite and Reason (the outward and the Inward Man)
which wage this War, there are (with reverence be it spoken) those Two
Auxiliaries, the Instigations of the Devil on the one side, and the gracious
Motions of the Holy Ghost on the other, to carry it on. And sure no Man will so
far dishonor God, as to say, the Power of the Devil is in it self, so great as
that of His.

If it seem so to any one, it is, because he makes it so by his own willful
Apostasy. For the Holy Spirit is always willing. Behold, says He, I stand at
the Door and Knock, Rev. 3.20.
if any Man hear (i. e. obey) my Voice and Open the Door, I will come in to
him, and sup with him, and he with me.

Who can doubt of Gods help being always ready, or once question his Sincerity
and Truth, when he reads those most convincing words. As I live, says the Lord
God, I have no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, Ezekiel. 23.11.
but that he should turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye, from your
Evil ways, for why will you Die? Surely, we ought to think the bare Word of God
might have been enough, but for our Encouragement, he has bound it with an
Oath, and because He could swear by no Greater, He Swore by his Eternal and
Everlasting Life.

What does this then come short of a plain demonstration, That in wrestling
with all deliberate sins, it is not only possible, but wonderful easy for us
through Jesus Christ to be more than Conquerors? And if we consider Matters right,
the very same Methods and Powers will prove every whit as effectual even in
mastering of those sins, that seem to overtake and seize us at unawares, and
appear most directly opposite to that peaceable, quiet and meek Disposition we
have been discoursing on; I mean, Trouble, Vexation, Anger, or the like.

For no Man can deny, but that there may be perfect habits of Holiness, as well
as of Impiety. That a Man may be as absolutely dead unto Sin, as dead unto
Righteousness, and that from low beginnings, Men leisurely rise up to both
these heights. Now there are very few Men Subject to these hasty and violent
passions, but upon calm thoughts will be grieved and much displeased at
themselves, and perhaps tell you, that they would give all the World that it
was otherwise with them. This I look upon as a very fair and laudable
Foundation of this great work. I would then ask them, if ever they exercised
themselves by often putting all those Calamitous Cases, which are most likely
to move their particular passions in them; for by such frequent Meditations
they by degrees arm and prepare themselves against all events. In time, they
will have a Defense and Guard for every blow that Fortune can offer.

If the Crosses of the world disturb thee, or thou art shaken at every Loss*
remember then, O Man, remember it often, all that thou have in this world, Wife
or Children, or Lands, or Goods, Health, Strength, Honors or Preferments, or
the like: They are all but lent thee, and are to be surrendered again upon
demand.

That devout and daily Petition, Thy Will be done, O God, on Earth as it is in
Heaven, together with these good thoughts, constantly and seriously laid to
heart and repeated, by the Blessing of God, will at length teach thee such
patience and humble resignation, as e-even in Jobs condition, thou would
cheerfully say, c. 1.21.
The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord.
Or something like this. Lord, I am not worthy the least of those mercies, which
thou have left me. Be not then vexed, O my Soul, Psalm. 43.5.
and be not thou disquieted within me. Still trust in God, for I will yet thank
him, who is the help of my Countenance and my God;

And there is the same Methodical cure for anger and wrath, which from their
heats and extravagant effects, have got themselves the Name of Passion, by way
of Superiority or Singularity. Certainly, such a serious Course of Spiritual
Exercise, as I just now mentioned, would strangely soften and much unbend the
spring of any Man's fury, if not quite unwind and let it down.

I would therefore humbly advise an angry Man to make experiment first in small
occasions: For if he could not bear a slight offense, a great one must needs
quite overset him. There is no hopes he should put up Injurious words, much
less blows, if he cannot pass by a frivolous jest. If (as a Philosopher
somewhere observes) he rages when his idle Servant lets fall a Trencher or a
Glass, what would he do, if by sad mischance he should set fire to his House,
or kill his only Child?

But I shall leave Philosophy, for behold a greater Master than even Socrates
himself is here. The Meditation of whose Example and Divine behavior under all
those things, which seem most grievous to Flesh and Blood, and are counted the
chiefest, if not the only grounds of Provocation, will prove the most effectual
means to beget in us the same most quiet and heavenly mind.

How easily are Men exasperated with reproach and slander? And ill words, we
commonly say, Cut deeper than Blows. Yet he, that was Innocence it self,
thought it no shame to pass them by. They called him a Man Gluttonous, and a
Wine-bibber; A Friend of Publicans and Sinners. All he returned was only that
meek saying, Wisdom is justified of all her Children. Wisdom may be scofft at,
Mat. 11.19.
contemned and abused by the vain or ignorant world, but this is her comfort,
she is justified and esteemed, and honored by those that understand her.

They called him a Samaritane, a Schismatic or Heretic. They said, He had a
Devil and was Mad. Nay, that all his mighty works were done by Beelzebub
himself. Yet when he was thus shamefully and blasphemously reviled, He reviled
not again, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. 1 Pet. 2.23.
He that shall frequently ponder all these things in his Heart and endeavor to
imitate them, will never value opprobrious Language, or any envious Report; for
if it be false, he will bless God for the satisfaction and comfort, he finds in
his own Innocence. If it has any thing of Truth in it, he will bless God for
that too, because the Reporter thereby proves his Monitor instead of his Enemy.
The Venom which is spit at him, he converts to balm and precious Ointment, that
will serve to correct and heal his infirmity; and I dare say, he will be so far
from counting it impossible, as he will soon find himself fully able to return
the like soft and gentle Answers, to the most piercing and most grievous words
whatever, nay, he will find it easier at any time, and I should think, many
times much wiser, If like a Sheep before the Shearers, he be dumb, and say
nothing at all.

2. The next thing that is commonly esteemed matter of Provocation and
Resentment, is in general, churlish and evil usage. And here our Lord and
Master has trodden this rugged Path, and has made it also plain, and very
easy for those that will tread in his steps. When the Satuaritans refused to
entertain Him, it seems to have been about the Eating time of the day, when Men
usually say, the Peevish Humor is most stirring. Two of his Disciples were
presently for commanding Fire from Heaven to consume them. But he rebuked them,
and said, Ye know not wnat manner of Spirit you are of. Luke 9.54, 55, 56.
The Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. When his
Countrymen despised and rejected Him, He only returned that Great Truth, A
Prophet is not without Honor, save in his own Country, and in his own House.
Mat. 13.51.
When the Jews took up stones to stone him, He said unto them, Many good works
have I showed you from my Father, for which of those works do you stone me?
John 10.31.
To the ungrateful and treacherous Judas, Friend, wherefore art thou come?
Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a Kiss? Mat. 26.50. Luke 22.48.
To the Officer that smote him, If I have spoken Evil, bear Witness of the
Evil, but if well, why smitest thou me? John 18.23.
When the Multitude came to take Him, tho he could have had at that instant
more than Twelve Legions of Angels for His Rescue, Mat. 26.53.
yet He resisted not. And when over-zealous Peter, in his defense, smote off
Malchus's Ear, He gave him that mild, but astonishing Rebuke, Put up thy Sword
into the sheath. The Cup which my Father has given me, John 18.11.
shall I not drink it? And what is yet more admirable, that Himself might
Exemplify his own Divine Doctrine, of doing good to them that hate us, He
restored, Luke 22.51.
and healed the Ear by a miraculous touch.

The Time would fail me to tell you at large how He was mocked and scorned by
the Scarlet Robe, the Reed, and the Crown of Thorns. How he was spit upon,
buffeted, scourged, reviled by the Rulers and gazing Multitude, and railed on
by the very impertinent Theif, yet under all this Barbarous usage, he behaved
himself, as he really was, like the Son of God; and to Crown all the rest of
his sufferings, in his very last Agonies of Death, and as it were gasping upon
the Cross, he prayed for his Enemies, Luke 23.24.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

GO this way then, O haughty Man of Fury and Revenge, whoever thou art, with
earnest prayer and diligence daily Hear, Read, Mark, and fear not but by
degrees thou will Learn and Inwardly digest, this excellent Lesson of imitating
what thy Savior both said and did. If thou never make the least serious
application, never complain that the business is too hard, but blame thy
shameful sloth and neglect. Believe him that has said, Whosoever has (tho but
a little) to him shall be given, Mat. 13.22.
and he shall have more abundance, And if that be not'enough to set you about
this necessary work, if thou despairest of arriving to so high a pitch of
Perfection, which He, as God, was only able to attain, yet if thou set
before thine eyes those bright and shining Lights which He has from time to
time raised up, thou will be sufficiently convinced, that these his Laws are
easy and pract cable to those that Love them. Many and many instances the
undoubted History of the Universal Church affords us of this Nature; but to
instance only in the Life and Behavior of this most Illustrious and Royal
Martyr, whom we this day commemorate, which brings me to the last observable,
wherein I promised.

III. To show you how strictly he observed his Great Masters commands, how
Religiously he followed his Divine Example, and by consequence how every good
Christian, that is true to his own endeavors, and faithfully makes use of Gods
assisting Grace, is no less capable of performing and following the same.

It is commonly made an Excuse and Cloak for the Impatience, and immoderate
Complaint of some men, that they are cast down from some great height of
Prosperity, and quite stripped of ample Fortunes and Possessions; as also on the
other side, He that calmly and cheerfully bears up in such a Case, is justly
counted worthy of all Praise and Admiration.

Of such a one I am now to speak of, a King whose loss we this day commemorate,
one who was born to, and possessed of, an Imperial Crown of Three whole Nations,
so powerful and great, as they would turn the balance, and give Laws at
pleasure to all Christendom. None but Emperors could Rival his Birth and
Fortunes; therefore all future complaints in an Inferior Prince, much more in
the greatest Subject, are quite cut off.

He was as Just and as Good as he was Great. Who can doubt it, that has fully
heard, or impartially read his amazing Story, or but cast his Eyes upon that
Excellent and undoubted piece of his, His Pourtraicture in his Solitudes and
Sufferings? He was but a Mortal Man indeed, Vid. Dugdal. late troub. p. 381.
and in that point infinitely short of his Lord and Master, the Spotless Jesus.
We cannot say he was without sin, but certainly He had as few to answer for as
any Prince ever had. It was the apparent Design of that Party (that I may use
their very Words) to blacken him as much as they could; and it is usual for,
Malice to aggravate every thing, and to make even Nothing seem Something in
such a Case; Harrisons Trial.
yet no man ever read, or heard, that He was any ways guilty of the least
Immorality, or so much as one of those Vices which are commonly incident to
Mankind.

One Act indeed He did, wearied out by restless Importunities, rather than wone
by Reason or Right, which was his perpetual Lament, as it was his heaviest
Burden to the day of his Death, and made him on the Scaffold declare all his
Sufferings to be just^; It was his yiedling to that Unjust Sentence against the
Lord of Strafford, Na'sias Journal, p. 11^.
tho the Earl Himself, by Letter, had desired him to do it. Yet he declared,
That He bore no Touch of Conscience with more Regret, Dugd. p. 68
and constantly bewailed his preferring what he thought Safe before what was
Just, his valuing Peace with Men before Peace with God, ^urtrait. (...) 2.
and that to prevent Popular Discontents, he should disturb the Quiet of his
own Mind.

Yet even in this he was to us a most remarkable Example; like David, he gave
us another Royal Pattern of true Penitence; for he recovered himself by one
continual Act of hearty Sorrow and Repentance to his Lives End.

Notwithstanding all this his admirable Piety, and perfect Innocence, Nalson,
ib.
as to all things else, he could not escape the grossest Imputations
imaginable. At his Trial he was Impeached for the Highest Treason that was ever
acted on the Theater of England. He was not called a Man Gluttonous, and a Wine
bibber, but a Tyrant, a Traitor, and a Murderer, a Public and Implacable Enemy
to the Common wealth of England, Nal. p. 32.
and guilty of all the Desolations, Rapines, Burnings, Damages, Mischiefs and
Spoils committed in that Unhappy War. He only smiled at all this Foul and
Villainous Language, for an undanted Courage and immovable Patience are not
only the Effects, but also the Indications of a guiltless and perfect Heart.
Certainly He that (as I have shown you) Was so highly concerned for the Guilt
of consenting unto one Man's Death, could never wilfully occasion, much less
contrive the Effusion of so much Blood.

However to satisfy the whole World, how well he remembered, and how exactly he
observed his Master's words, Blessed are the Peacemakers: Peace I leave with
you, my Peace I give unto you. Joh. ^4.27.
No man ever did labor to obtain it more than He. He sent above 40 Messages to
the then Usurping Powers (which are all in Print, as an Invincible
Demonstration of his Innocence herein to all future Ages) All these returned
without Effect, continually clogged with new demands. And there is no Man Living
but must be forced to vindicate him herein, who shall but compare the Dates of
his, with those of their Commissions and Declarations. Nal. p. 14.


But above all, Dug. 1^^.
when his Standard was set up at Nottingham, he there offered a Treaty before
one Stroke was struck, but was Proudly and Scornfully rejected. So fully was
that saying of David verified in him, I labor for Peace, but whilst I speak to
them thereof, Ps. 120.7.
they make them ready for battle.

What a Divine mixture was there of Modesty and Humility with his profound
Learning and Understanding? Not the very Fathers of our Church could better
have Defended it than He did against Dr. Baily and others of the Popish Party;
as also against Henderson, Caryl, and other sticklers for the Covenant. Yet ^e
all along laid by the Authority and Majesty of a King, and contented himself
only with the Ornaments of a quiet and meek Spirit.

Learn then of Him, ye Scribes, and Disputers of this World, that Religious
Controversies are not to be managed with Heats and Jerks of Wit, but by solid
Dint of Argument, expressed with all Fairness, Calmness and Christian Compassion.

When He was brought before his pretended Judges, it is impossible for mere Man
to comport Himself with more Majesty and Gravity, with more Christian Wisdom
and Magnanimity of Spirit, or with a more steady and even temper, than he did
For Sixty or Seventy Commoners, to sit, arraign, try, Judge and Condema their
undoubted King, rudely to check him all along, and interrupt him again and
again, to overrule, (as they call it) or rather to overpower and suppress,
what they could not answer; Not to suffer his Reasons to be heard, and the
like, are such Transcendent Indignities, as I profess my self utterly
unacquainted with Language, to express them by. Yet through this whole Scene of
Scorn, not one Ill, Rash, or Unbecoming Word fell from his Lips.

Wherefore let all furious Sons of Wrath blush, and for ever after be ashamed
to say or think, that any vile Behavior in Discourse, can under the Light and
Power of the Gospel be too injurious, or too provoking for Flesh and Blood to
bear. Behold here an Highborn and most Mighty Prince; an Humble, but most
Illustrious Precedent of this Perfection to the contrary. C. 3.2.
For St. James allows me to style him so, If any Man offend not in word, the
same is a perfect Man.

He could very well, P. 113.
as he said himself, have held his Peace, but silence at that time, might
perhaps, with Vulgar and Inconsiderate Minds, have seemed to argue Guilt. Yet
it was to vindicate his People's Rights more than his own, that made him offer
at what he did: Nay, from the pious Concern for the Souls, even of those
over-forward and outrageous Wretches, there before Him, He (tho with much ado)
at last wedged in that Wife and Charitable Caution to them; (...).
A hasty Judgment is not so soon recalled.

How incomparably did He bare the Insolences and Affronts of the Barbarous
Guards? When they pufft their noisome Tobacco in his Face, (a thing most odious
and offensive to him) without any further Notice, He only turned His Head away,
or gently fenced it off with his Hand; nay, one had the Incorrigible Impudence
to spit in His Face, (...).
yet He past on without out one Word, and meekly wipt it off with His
Hankercheif. They cried out, Justice, Justice, (which in the Jews Language of
old was, Crucify, Crucify.) Out of the Abundance of Pity and Compassion of
His Royal Heart, for once he opened his Mouth, and said, Poor Souls! for a
piece of Money they would do as much for their Commanders.

He heard the History of his Savior's Bitter Passion, the Morning before he
left this Life, read unto him by Bishop Juxton, out of the 27th of St.
Matthew's Gospel. He thanked the Bishop for his Choice, thinking that he did by
Design, pitch upon that Portion of Scripture, as being most suitable to his
present Condition. But when he understood it to be the ordinary Lesson,
appointed by the Calendar for that day, he exceedingly rejoiced at the Blessed
Conjuncture, and magnified the Gracious Providence of God, who had called him
in that very Day, to follow the Example of his Master, there most happily set
before Him by our Church.

'Twas this, which, as if it were a Message sent from him, that encouraged and
strengthened him. He with Cheerfulness called upon his Attendants as he past
through the Park, to make more haste, saying, He now went before them, to strive
for a Heavenly Crown, with less Solicitude, P. 113.
than he had ever encouraged his Soldiers to fight for an Earthly Diadem.

Hear Him next upon the Scaffold. I have forgiven all the World, even the chief
Causers of my Death; pray God forgive them: But this (said He) is not all, P.
114.
my Charity must go yet further; I wish they may repent. They have committted a
great Sin; I pray God, with St. Stephen, that this be not laid to their Charge.

You see how heartily he could have used our Savior's Words: Father, forgive
them. Happy had they been, if he could have added, they know not what the do.
F^^ the Jews indeed, Act, 3.17. 1 Timothy 1.
as both St. Peter and St. Paul testify, were ignorant that they crucisied the
Lord of Life; but these knew too well whom they Destroyed. He out of his tender
Bowels and Compassion for their Salvation, had long before bid them be ware of
so Horrid a Fact. Remember (said he) I am your King, your Lawful King; Think
upon it, Think well upon it, before you heap Sin upon Sin, and bring down God's
Judgments upon this Land.

But how then, should (I will not say) the Scriptures have been fulfilled; but
what God had designed, and they themselves, tho Hypocritically, had said, that
he should be made a Glorious King.

Being just now entering into the Rest of his Righteous Soul, He had these most
Excellent Reflections on if. I have a Good Cause, and a Gracious God on my side.
I go now from a Corruptible, to an Incorruptible Crown, where no Disturbance
can be. P. 117.


Where there was such a solid Rock of Faith, such a firm Anchor of Hope as
this, Dug. P. 373.
there needed not those Cords and Staples of Iron, which those poor Spirited
Miscreants had prepared to tie him down to the Block. For as He was the Meekest
Prince upon Earth, so like a most Heroic Champion of Jesus Christ, with a
Resolution unchangeable, and a most Undaunted Courage; He quietly yielded his
Sacred Head to the Fatal Stroke.

Thus he valiantly fought a good Fight, like an absolute Conqueror over the
whole World, and all the Powers therein. He finished this Course, like a most
Experienced Master of the Christian Race, he kept the true English Apostolic
Faith, Firm and Spotless to his last Gasp, and is now gone to receive the Crown
of Righteousness, prepared for him in Everlasting Rest.

And there I shall leave Him, for it would be a very vain Essay, to attempt any
full Account of his most amazing, and most compassionate Story, which neithes
Pen nor Tongue can worthily express; nor all the Writings in the whole World,
except the Gospel, parallel. Wherefore I have contented my self in gleaning
here and there a Flower or two, to adorn that Christian Doctrine, which I have
endeavored to dress up in my foregoing Discourse.

And now thou art left wholly inexcusable, O man, whoever thou art, if thou
shall be disordered or disquieted at any Evil that shall be all Thee. What Case
can thou put, which in this short Extract, is not fully Satisfied and
Answered? Do thou stand upon thy Power and Greatness, the Splendor of thy
Name and Family, the Vastness of thy Treasures and Possessions? Remember, I
will not say, the Patience of Job, but of this Mighty Monarch, when he was
treated with such barbarous Inhumanity. He was deprived of whole Kingdoms,
robbed of his dearest Wife and Children, stripped of all the Comforts of this
Life, nay, of Life it self, and yet kept, what he says himself he counted most
Dear, His Conscience and Honor.

As for thy Conscience, God by His Grace, if thou do not reject it, has put
it absolutely in thine own Power. And thy true Honor is then best defended,
when thou least regardest that, which is so only in presence and show.

Is Wisdom and Knowledge the Pride of thy Heart? See here the Greatest Master
of Reason in most Points of solid Learning, Dumb as a Sheep before her
Shearers, and not permitted to open his Mouth in his own Defense.

Is it too much for thee to brook any silly reflection, tho it be in a private
Company, from your Equal or Superior, or one perhaps heated with Wine, or
which is worse, drunk with impertinent Folly, or Self-conceit? Alas! Here is
the Innocent Father of his Country falsely Charged in a pretended Court by a
handful of his meanest Subjects, with the foulest Imputations that Malice could
Invent, publicly Condemned, and led like a Lamb to be Sacrificed before his
own Door, in the sight of the Noonday Sun, and before the Face of his own
Ungrateful People, and yet He from the very Bottom of his tender Soul, forgave
them all, and as heartily prayed to the God of all Mercies, that they might
truly Repent, and Live for Ever.

But I shall forbear launching out any further into the Immense Ocean of his
Praise; for the more I Extol this Incomparable Prince, the more I discover our
own perpetual Shame; the more I aggravate the horrid Guilt of this Innocent
Blood upon this most unhappy, and most sinful Nation.

O Gracious Lord! how highly Unchristian must this Fact appear, when thou shall
Judge the Secrets of all Men according to thy Gospel! The Actors of it, will, I
fear, then be found Sons of Belial, rather than Disciples of the Meek and
Humble Jesus.

But I shall spare them now, and if there be any one here yet alive, whose
Conscience does directly accuse him of that sin, in conformity to the Subject
of this present Discourse, I shall at this time heartily desire to restore such
an one in the Spirit of Meekness, rather than by severe Invectives; and to lead
him, if possible, to a hearty and serious Repentance by a gentle Hand.

As for the rest of us, who have either been born since that heavy Captivity,
or else in those days by God's great Mercy, were not involved in wilfully
contributing any thing to that Infamous and most Abominable Deed. let us not
vainly and wickedly with the proud Pharisee boast, God, we thank thee, we are
not as these Men are: for, except we Repent, we shall all likewise Perish.

We all stand Guilty this Day before the Dreadful Majesty of Heaven, and to
that National Sin we have every one of us added many and many other most
grievous of our own. Tho we have not Eaten the very same sour Grapes with our
Fathers, yet our Teeth are much set an edge by our own Impieties. So that God
may justly visit their sins upon us in this our Evil and Perverse Generation.

Consider the Distractions, Strifes and Animosities which, through a want of
Charity, and of this Meekness, so terribly rend and divide both Church and
State; consider the Deluge of Wickedness, and all manner of Vice, that covers
the whole Face of this miserable Land; Mat. 23.30.
if we still go on to fill up a measure of our Fathers Iniquities, shall not I
visit for these things. says the Lord? Jer. 3.9. c. 3.1.
and shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Oh! that our Heads
were water, and our Eyes so many Fountains of Tears, that we might weep day and
night, not only for the Guilt of this glorious Martyrs Blood, and his Adherents
that were stain, but also for a multitude of our own manifold Transgressions.

And grant, O Lord, that neither the Splendour of any thing that is Great, nor
the conceit of any thing that is Good, in us, may any ways withdraw our Eyes
from looking upon our selves as sinful Dust and Ashes. but that, according to
the Example of this thy Blessed Martyr, we may press forward toward the Prize
of the High Calling that is before us, in Faith and Patience, Humility and
Meekness, Mortification and Self-denial, Charity and constant Perseverance unto
the End, and this for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee
and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory World without End. Amen.

FINIS.
Now in the Press,

DR. Bently's Dissertation upon the Epistle of Phalaris, etc. And the Fables of
Aesop examined.

By the Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire


