EPISCOPAL INHERITANCE.

OR A REPLY To the Humble EXAMINATION of a Printed ABSTRACT OF THE ANSWERS TO
NINE REASONS OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS Against the Votes of BISHOPS IN PARLIAMENT.

ALSO A Determination of the late Learned and Reverend BISHOP of SARUM
Englished.

DEUTERONOMY. 32. 7. Remember the days of Old, consider the years of many
Generations: ( of Generation and Generation) ask thy Father, and he will show
thee, thy Elders, and they will tell thee.

OXFORD Printed by Leonard Lichfield. Anno 1641.

To the READER.
IN the Examiners answer, there is littlemateriall, if once the principal
doubt be cleared, whether Bishops had aunciently votes in Parliaments, and
were Barons, or that which is equal, or superior unto Barons, being accounted
Thanes, in the times of the Saxons, before the Conquest, which I hope is so
fully cleared in thisfollowing discourse, as there will be little question
remaining. Though Parliaments began as our Histories show, long after the
Conquest, in this manner, as now they are held, yet they had Assemblies, (
Gemotts) of the Estates and principal Nobility, whereof the Bishops and Clergy
were always an eminent party according to the laws and custom of those
times, and eqnivalent in authorityto our Parliament: They hadseverall Gemotts:
as the first was.

Wittena-gemot, idem apud Anglo-Saxones fuit, quod apud nos hodie Parliamentnm:
parumque a Folemoto differebat, nisi quod hoc annuum esset, and e certis
plerunque Causis, illud ex arduis contingentibus, and legum condendarum gratia,
ad arbitrium Principis indictum.

In Folemoto semel quotannis sub initio Calendarum Maij (tanquam in annuo
Parliamento) convenere Regni principes, tam Episcopi, quam Magistratus,
liberique homines. Jurantur laici omnes coram Episcopis in mutuum foedus, in
fidelitatem Regis, and in jura Regni conservanda. Consulitur de communi salute,
de pace, de bello, and de utilitate publica promovenda. -- etc. --

Scire-gemot (si pluries opus non esset) bis solummodo in anno indicebatur:
aderat provinciae Comes; aderat Episcopus: aderant Magnates omnes Comitatenses.
Episcopus jura divina enuntiabat, and vindicabat Comes secularia; alter alteri
auxilio. De Causis hic cognitum est tam criminalibus quam civilibus, tam
Ecclesiasticis quam Laicis; sed jurisdictiones postea separavit Gulielmus
primus. -- etc. -- many other Gemots and meetings they had; but in all these
public Gemots, the Clergy were principal members, as appears by the laws
of King Edgar. cap. 5. -- Gemottis adsunto, loci Episcopus: and Aldermannus, (
hoc est Comes) doceatque alter jus divinum; alter seculare. Thus the learned
Glossary shows, out of whom it was necessary to show the several assemblies
then in use, that we would not contend about the French word Parliament, which
came in use, about the time of King Henry 3. but whatsoever their Assemblies
were, the Bishops were always principal Members thereof: and though once in
25. Edward 1. there is mention of a Parliament at St Edmundsbury, where the
Clergy were excluded for denying of money, (which they refused to grant by
reason of a prohibition from Pope Boniface in regard of many Levies lately
raised upon the state Ecclesiastical.) As of later times there was a
Parliament once held without Lawyers in the 6. of Henry 4. at Coventry as both
our histories do testify, and also the Kings writ directed to the Sheriff,
whereof the words are, -- Nolumus autem quod tu seu aliquis alius Vicecomes
Regni nostri praedicti, aut Apprenticius, aut alius homo ad legem aliqualiter
sit electus.

Unde Parliamentum illud Laicorum dicebatur and indoctorum, quo and jugulum
Ecclesiae atrocius petebatur, as a learned Author says: Yet I hope,
(notwithstanding the inconsiderate zeal of this Examiner) our Histories shall
never be blemished with such a reproach, as to report the loss, or defect in
Parliament of either learned Clergy, or Lawyers, to direct and assist in
whatsoever matters are proper to their faculties, and the public welfare of
the Kingdom.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. Margent for Haupan read Eanham. p. 21. l. 27. for not, r. now. p. 23.
l. 6. for slighted, r. settled. p. 27. l. 3. for Emperor, r. Empereur. p. 29.
l. 27. for Rawlie, r. Ralegh. p. 33. l. 29. for Aldermann, r. Aldermannus. p.
38. l. 2 for sequentur, r. sequerentur.

A REPLY to the Humble EXAMINATION.
1. THAT the BISHOPS and principal Clergy were always of great authority in
our Commonwealth, especially for making of laws, and constitutions of all
kinds, is manifest, by all the laws themselves of the Saxon Kings for the
first 500. years before the Conquest: wherein they first testify that the
laws were made by the consent, suffrage, and approbation of their Bishops,
whom they do mention. So in the beginning of the laws of King Ina: -- Ego Ine
Dei Lambard. p. 1. Council. page 186.
gratia West. Saxonum Rex, exbortatione and doctrina Cenredes patris mei, and
Heddes Episcopi mei, and Erchenwoldes Episcopi mei, and omnium Aldermannorum
meorum, and Seniorum, -- Constitui -- so in Lambard. p. 57. Council. p. 402.
the beginning of the laws of King AEthelstan, Ego Adelstanus Rex consilio
Wlfelmi Archiepiscopi mei, et aliorum Episcoporum meorum, mando praepositis
meisomnibus -- Likewise in the laws of King Edmund.

Edmundus Rex congregavit magnam synodum, Dei ordinis and seculi, apud London
civitatem in sancto Council. page 423.
paschae solenni, cui interfuit Odo, and Wulstanus Archiepiscopi, and alij
plures Episcopi.

The same appears, by the subscriptions to the laws, by the Bishops and
principal Clergy of their several times, which is so frequently to be
observed in the first Tome of our English Counsels, that I will forbear
particulars.

II. Likewise for their dignity, order and condition, the Clergy were reckoned,
and accounted equal with the best, as appears by the laws of diverse Kings,
and first, of the first christian King Ethelbert, who, in his laws, does
provide in the first place for their rights and privileges; and what
satisfaction shall be made for any wrong done to the Church, or Bishops, or
Clergy.

Quicunque res Dei vel Ecclesiae abstulerit duodecima Council. page 127. Bed.
lib. 2 cap. 5.
componat solutione.

Episcopires undecima solutione.

Sacerdotis res, nona solutione.

Diaconi res, sexta solutione.

Clerici res, trina solutione.

Pax Ecclesiae violata duplici emendetur solutione.

Volens scilicet tuitionem eis, quos and quorum doctrinam susceperatpraestare.
says Bid.

These being the first laws of our first Christian King, they ought to be
reverenced for their antiquity, piety, and Christian Justice in rendering to
every man his own due, though now some men talk, not only of taking away
superfluities, but of cutting up both root and branches. O tempora! O Mores!

And afterward, about the time of King Withred, there were laws made.

Quomododamna, and injuriae, sacris ordinibus illa.. Council. page 206.
ta, sunt compensanda.

as often elsewhere in the Counsels, many laws do ordain, what satisfaction
shall be given to the Church and Bishops, forseverall offenses committed; LL.
Ed. Confess. cap. 31. Decanus Episcopi reliquas december parts habeat.
for then they had a great part in all fines, and mulcts, together with the
King.

III. Further, for point of honor, and dignity, it appears by the laws of
King AEthelstan, that every Archbishop was equal to a Duke of a Province:
Every Bishop to an Earl, and so esteemed in their valuations. Vid. LL.
AEthelst. Regis apud Lambardum. page 71. and Council. Britan. page 405. cap. 13.
de weris seu wergildis. 1. capitum aestimationibus.

The title of Baron was not then known or used among the Saxons, but they
called the Nobility Thanes. Vid. LL. Inae. page 187.. 9. and the Bishop was
equal (or rather superior) tothe Thanus Major. And the Priest to the Thanus
Minor. The Bishop and Earl are valued at eight thousand thrymses. Messetheines
and Woruldtheines, id est, presbyteri and secularis Thani duo millia thrimsa.
Missae LL. AEthelst. page 406.
presbyteri, and secularis Thani jusjurandum in Anglorum lege reputatur aeque
sacrum. -- and sacerdos Thani rectitudine dignus est. The Priest was then
accounted equal to a Knight, or Lord of the town, and was commonly styled by
the name of, Sr, as a Knight was, though now it be derided, and out of use.

Out of these laws, and some others does the learned Antiquary, who is so well
versed in the antiquities, and monuments of our laws and Kingdom, fully set
down the ancient dignity, and order of the Clergy.

-- Magno sane in honor fuit universus clerus, Epist, ad Regen.
cum apud populum, and Proceres, tum apud ipsos Reges Anglo saxonicos, nec
precaria hoc quidem concessione, sed ipsis confirmatum legibus. Sacerdos ad
altar celebrans minori Thano (1. Villa Domino atque militi) aequiparabatur, in
censu capitis pariter aestimatus Tum in vita tum in funere. Council. Haupam.
page 515.
pariterque alias honorandus: quia Thani rectitudine dignus est, inquit lex.
Abbas five coenobiarcha inter Thanos maiores (quos Barons Regis appellarunt
posteri) primicerius fuit. Episcopus similiter inter comites ipsos maiores, qui
integro fruebantur comitatu, Iuribusque comitivis. Archiepiscopus Duci and
Satrapa amplissime provinciae pluribus gaudenti comitatibus praficiebatur. Vt
and caeteriomnes Ecclesiastici comparibus suis omnibus secularibus.
Amplectebantur siquidem Reges universum clerum laeta front et ex eo semper
sibi legebant primos a conciliis, primos adofficia Reip: obeunda; quippe sub
his seculis apud ipsos solum erat literarum clavis et scientiae. (dum militiae
prorsus indulgerent Laici) factumque est interea, ut os sacerdotis oraculum
esset plebis, os Episcopi oraculum Regis et Reipub: primi igitur sedebant in
omnibus Regni comitijs et tribunalibus Episcopi. In regali quidem Palatio cum
Regni Magnatibus; in comitatu una cum comite et Iustitiario comitatus; in Turno
vicecomitis cum vicecomite: in Hundredo cum Demino Hundredi: sic ut in
promovenda iustitia usquequaque, gladius gladium LL. Ed. Conf. cap. 3.
adjuvaret. Et nihil inconsulto sacerdote (qui velut saburra in navi fuit)
ageretur. Mutavit priscam hanc consuetudinem Gulielmus primus. -- etc. --

IV. After the Conquest William the first divided the Ecclesiastical Courts
from the secular, not with a purpose to diminish the Ecclesiastieall authority.
Imo Iureiurando confirmavit leges sancta matris LL. Guliel. in prooem.
Ecclesiae, quoniam per eam Rex et Regnum solidum subsistendi habent
fundamentum.

Yet the Bishops and Clergy do not now expect or desire to enjoy their ancient
splendor, amplitude, and dignityes, seeing the greatness of their Revenue,
which should uphold the dignity, is long since taken away: so that well might
Bishop Latimer, in his Sermon before King Edward, say, -- We of the 1. Sermon.
Clergy had too much; but that is taken away, and now we have too little.] for
there was no less in the whole taken from them, then many hundred thousands
sterling, too incredible to be here briefly expressed. I will only mention one,
for example: the Arch. Bishopric of York, from which was taken 72 Manners and
Lordships at one instant, by one of the last statutes of Hen. 8. and the like
happened to Canterbury, 37. H. 8. cap. 16.
London, Lincoln, and all the rest: which, methinkes, should be enough to
satisfy, that menshould not go about to strip them of those poor pittances
that are left unto them, being but small fragments in comparison of their
ancient Patrimony, which the liberality and piety of the Primitivetimes had
conferred onthem, when charity and piety was fervent and abounded with good
works of all kinds: in so much that they thought no honor, or respect too much
to be given to the Clergy, especially to the Reverend Fathers and Bishops of
the Prime order.

V. From what has been said, it is manifest, that the Bishops were equal to
the greatest persons and estates of the kingdom, and had their votes and
suffrages for making laws and constitutions for the first 500. years, before
the Conquest. Whereby it appears, that it is a very rash and ignorant
assertion page 42.
oftheexaminer. [ That Bishops at first were but casually mounted to that
height of extent andpower by William the Conqueror, themoreto indeere and
oblige them.] And that it is only of grace that Bishops page 43.
werefirst allowed place in Parliament.] And that they crept in by favor to
serve aConquerours turn -- page 44.
and can derive no higher for sitting (as now they do) inthehouse of Peers,
then an Act of Parliament, if so high.] Whereas it is manifest by all the laws
of the Saxon Kings both in the edition of Lambard, and of the English
Counsels, that the Bishops were the principal men in all ages, for ordayning
of laws and constitutions, in all the great Assemblies of the kingdom, then
in use. And when matters, in question, were only Ecclesiastical concerning the
Church, and Religion, the Clergy sat by themselves, but when there was any
thing to be given and confirmed to the Church, then the Kings and Nobles did
afford their presence and assistance, as appears by diverse Counsels. Vid.
Council. Cloueshoviae. page 230.

VI. As for the title of Baron in that sense as it is now understood, it came
among us, since the Conquest; as the learned Glossary shows. page 81. Ad
Anglos pervenisse videtur vocabulum, Baro, vel cum ipsis Normannis: vel cum
Edovardus confessor auras moresque imbibisset Normanicos. -- Huntingtoniensis
aevi sui vocabulum usurpans, Histor: lib. 5. Adolwaldum (qui occisus est An:
Dn: 903.) Baronem Regis Edwardi senioris vocat: sed Author antiquior Florentius
Wigorniensis, eundem ministrum Regis appellat, quo etiam vocabulo scriptores
ipsi Saxonici passim usi sunt. So, in the Saxon Counsels and charters, diverse
great men, who were no less then Thanes, do style and subscribethemselves,
Ministros Regis: as in the charter of Edgar: page 486.

Ego Oswolde minister confirmavi.

Ego Elfwurde minister corroboravi.

And the like frequently occur. These being the same in degree and substance,
as Barons are now. Whereof the learned Glossary makes three sorts. Hodiernos
itaque nostros Barons e triplici font triplices faciamus.

1. Feodales, seu praescriptitios, qui a priscis feodalibus Baronibus orundi
suam hodie praescriptione tuentur dignitatem. 2. Evocatos, seu Rescriptitios,
qui brevi Regio evocantur ad Parliamentum. 3. Diplomaticos, qui Regio diplomate
hoc fastigium ascendunt.
Feodalium origineminter eos collocavero quibus Willielmus senior Angliam totam
dispertitus est, de se, tenendam, quorumque nomina in Domesdei paginis
recognovit.

Rescriptitios ab aevo Regum Iohannis and Henrici tertij caput extalisse censeo.

Diplomaticos initium sumpsisse perhibent sub Richardo secundo qui anno regni
sui 8. ( 1. Christi. 1387.) Iohannem Beauchampe de Holte, in Baronem de
Kiderminster suo erexit diplomate.

Now the Bishops may be reckoned, both as Feudall Barons, in regard of their
estates, and Baronies annexed to their Bishoprics: And also they are, Evocati
summoned, as Barons, and principal persons by the Kings writ unto Parliaments.
But so were not all the Feudall Barons -- quorum ingens erat multitudo, quae
plus minus 30000. millia, nullo lecto convocari poterat. Says the learned
Antiquary, page 79.

And, as not all the Feudall Barons, so not all the Abbots, and Priors, but a
convenient number, sometimes more, and sometimes less: as in 49. Henr. 3.
there were called to Parliament, one hundred and two, besides five Deanes: Anno
1. Ed. 2. there were 56. Abbats; Anno 4. Ed. 3. about 33. and at other times
more, or less, yet not so few as the Examiner relates out of Sr Ed. Cook,
(page 33.) who though he wereagreatmaster of Law, yet in matters of Antiquity
must yieldtothe Author of the Glossary. Whom you may consult, page 4.

VII. The Examiner might have done well to have observed this distinction, and
difference of Barons; it being extant so long since, before he had taken the
boldness to talk so poorly of the Baronies of Bishops, to whom William the
Conqueror did not add much to endeere them. For he restrained them in many
things, using the power of a Conqueror, and took away much from them. For
before his time they had part in fines and mulcts, and power of coining money,
as appears by the laws of king AEthelstan, de monetariis. page 399. and many
other places. But these were soon after reserved to the Crown, as principal
prerogatives. And till the council of Clarendon, under Hen. 2. the Clergy and
Bishops enjoyed many more freedoms and privileges, which then were abated,
and much diminished; about which contention Thomas Becket opposed the king,
which the learned Glossary shows. page 82

Episcopi autem barons dici videntur propter nominis dignitatem, non quod
vassalagium pendebant, aut seculare servitium: Hoc enim nostratibus jugum
injecit amnium primus Willielmus senior. An. Great. 1070 ut in eodem tradit
Matthew. Paris. Auxit magnopere Willielmus junior ut in historiola Ducum Normania
and in LL. Edwardi confess.c.11. Sed post varias Collectationes aterno rebore
domum confirmavit. Henr.2. Anno Dom. 1164. in magno concilio. Clarendonia
habito, praesidente eidem ex ipsius mandato sacellano suo Iohanne de Oxonia,
praesentibusque Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus and
Baronibus Regni in hunc tonorem.

^

So that the Bishops, besides that they are called by the kings writ to
Parliament, and thereby have the same right, that others have, yet since the
Conquest they may be reckoned also among the Feudall Barons, (...) -- ejus in
respect de leur possessions. S. L' ancient Barons annexes a leur dignites.

Whereas therefore the Examiner says. page 45. [ albeit the Bishops are
usually said to hold of the king per Baroniam. Yet this happily may be meant
rather of the Honor affixed to their plaees, which works it up into a dignity,
then of the lands pertaining to them.] This is but gross ignorance; for like
feudall Barons suas sortiuntur Baronias sola fundorum in vestitur a. In like
manner, I take it, as the Earls of Arondell, both formerly and of late, being
possessed of the Castle of Arondell, Honor, and Seignory, without other
consideration, or creation to be an Earl, became Earls of Arondell, and the
name, state, and Honor of the Earl of Arondell peaceably enjoyed. As Cambden
relates out of the Parliament Rolls, in Page 309
Sussex.

VIII. Further the Examiner says, that the Bishops ought not to have the same
legislative power, as the Temporal Barons, because these are for their sons
and heirs, and the others for their successors only.

This objection is frivolous; because the Bishops are as careful for the
preservation of the public, wherein stands the safety of themselves and
their successors, as any Temporal Lords can be, and perhaps the more, because
temporal Lords do often fall into great wantand poverty, selling sometimes
thevery head of their Baronies, and so may become very obnoxious, and also
ambitious to recover and raise themselves to higher Honors, titles, or
offices: whereas the Bishops move not much higher, though they may get a better
Bishopric, which is not so great a temptation, asto make them forget
themselves, or the trust reposedin them, but rather lays a greater obligation
on them.

IX. Lastly whereas the Examiner says; [ the Bishops Page 45.
are Barons eleemosynarij, and would thence infer, that they are but as
arbitrary almsemen, like the poor Knights of Windsor which may be abated, or
taken away at pleasure.]

This is but a spightfull inference upon the bare word, eleemosyna without the
truesense of it. For as the learned Glossary shows. -- [ Barons
eleemosynarij apud Stanfordum, and in jure nostro dicuntur Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, Abbates, and Priores qui praedia suae Ecclesiae a Rege tenent per
Baroniam: Baronias enim suas ex eleemosyna Regu^ perhibentur accepisse, licet
ipsa praedia aliorum saepe munificentia consequuti fuerint.] And sometimes, not
only by the gift of other noble persons, but also themselves, did buy, and
purchase many Mannours and Lands, conferring them on their successors, and
being so bought, they cannot in justice be taken away, as if all had been given
by the King and others, as mere alms.

X. Further, it is not to be forgotten, that the Kings and Benefactours, who
gave lands, didlay heavy burdens, curses, and imprecations upon any thatshould
everattemptto alilenate the^. And touching the nature of these curses and
imprecations, when lands are thus devoted unto God, much might be said to
affrighten any one from attempting it. Levit. 27. 28. No devoted thing might be
sold, or redeemed; every devoted thing is most holy unto the Lord. For when
things are once promised, consecrated, and confirmed unto God, it is not
afterward lawful to take them away: as peter told Ananias. Acts 5. Who had
given (or at least made a show to give) the price of his land, as other zealous
christians then did to pious uses: -- Why Verse. 3, 4.
has Satan filled thy heart to lie unto the holy Ghost, and to keep back part
of the price of the land? Whiles it remained was it not thine own? And after
it was sold was it not in thine own power? But after he had given it, then it
was not in his own power to resume, or detain a part. This text deserves well
to be considered on, before men proceed to arbitrary resumption of things
consecrated to pious uses.

XI. Butconcerning the legislative power and votesof Bishops in making laws,
to regulate the commonwealth, and to preserve peace, and justice Council. 402.
among all sorts of men: there is not to be forgotten, an ancient law of king
AEthelstan. That worthy king in his laws has one, chapter. 11. De officio
Episcopi, and quid pertinet ad officium ejus.

Episcopo iure pertinet omnem rectitudinem promovere, Dei scilicet ac seculi
imprimis debet paeem ordinatum Dei instruere, quid ei iure sit agendum, and
quid secularibus iudicare debeant. Debet enim sedulo pacem and concordiam
operari cum seculi iudicibus qui rectum velle diligunt, and incompellationum
adlegationem docere, ne quis alij perperamagat in jurejurando, vel in Ordalio.

Nec pati debet aliquam circumventionem injusta mensurae, vel injusti ponderis,
sed convenit ut per consilium and testimonium eius omne legis scitum, et Burgi
mensura and omne pondus, ponderis sit secundum dictionem ejus institutum, valde
rectum.

Ne quis proximum suum seducat pro quo decidat in peccatum. Et semper debet
Christianus providere, contra omnia quae praedicta sunt; and ideo debet se
magis de pluribus intromittere; ut sciat quomodo grex agat, quem ad Dei manum
custodire suscepit, ne diabolus eum laniet, nec malum aliquid superseminet.

Nunquam erit populo been consultum nec digne Deo conservabitur, ubi lucrum
impium and magis falsum diligitur. Ideo debent omnes amici Dei quod iniquum est
evervare, quod justum est elevare; non patiut propter falsum and pecuniae
quaestum se forisfaciant homines erga vere sapientem Deum, cui displicet omnis
iniustitia.

Christianis autem omnibus necessarium est ut rectum diligant, and iniqua
condemnent, and saltem sacris ordinibus evecti, iustum semper erigant, et prava
deponant. Hinc debent Episcopi cum seculi Iudicibus interesse iudicijs, ne
permittant si possint, ut illius culp a aliqua pravitatum germina pullulaverint.

Et sacerdotibus pertinet in sua diocesi, ut ad rectum sedulo quemcunque
juvent, nec patiantur si possint, ut Christianus aliquis alij noceat, non
potens impotenti, non summus infimo, non praelatus subditis, non dominus
hominibus suis, vel servis aut liberis, molestus existat; et secundum Episcopi
dictionem, et per suam mensuram convenit, ut servi testamentales operentur
super omnem Sciram, cui praeest.

Et rectum est, ut non sit aliqua mensurabilis virga longior quam alia, sed per
Episcopi mensuram omnes institutae sint, et exequatae per suam diocesim. Et
omne pondus constet secundum dictionem eius; et si aliquid controver siarum
intersit, discernat. Episcopus.

Et uniuscuiusque, domini necesse proprium est, ut compatiatur, et condescendat
servis suis, sicut indulgentius poterit, qui a domino Deo empti sunt, aeque
chari servus et liber, et omnes codem praetio redemit: et omnes sumus Dei
necessario servi, et sic judicabit nobis siout antejudicavimus eis quibus
judicium super habuimus in terris.

It is manifest hereby, that by the ancient laws of this kingdom, what trust,
charge, and care is reposed in the Bishops, not only to direct matters
Ecclesiastical, but also to assist, rule and guide temporal affairs, to
preserve peace. Justice, upright dealing just and true administration of
several offices and duties, whereby religion is much advanced and adorned,
when men are honest and upright in their actions, contracts, bargains,
andcivill dealings amongthemselves. So that they may not clash, or oppose
Religion, or such Acts, as have special relation to Religion: for all public
Statutes, Acts, and Constitutions for the most part do in some degree more or
less, trench upon Religion, and the furtherance, or hinderance thereof. So
that they can hardly beduly and rightly enacted and framed, without the advice,
counsel, and assistance of Bishops and the Clergy.

XII. And though some Canons may seem to forbid the Bishops and Clergy to
intermeddle with secular affairs, yet that is not absolutely forbidden, but in
a qualified sense, as in the famous council of Cloveshoe, under Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury. An. 747. Canon. 1. negotijs secularibus plus quam
Dei servitijs, quod ab sit, subditus existit. To attend secular affairs more
then spiritual, and to be wholly employed and conversant in temporal matters,
without due regard to the better part: but, it will not hinder sacred studies,
nor the diligent preaching of the Gospel, that some men at convenient times,
have a charge and oversight of temporal affairs, and the carriage of public
business. And concerning this see more, in Bishop Davenants determinations at
Cambridge. Quaest. 11. Civilis Iurisdictio jure conceditur personis
Ecclesiasticis.

XIII. Thus much might serve for reply to the Examiner, especially upon the
fifth reason which I hold to be the only thing material in the whole discourse,
for the rest will appear to be needless, if this be cleared. But if he would
look back to former times, he shall find that our kingdom and government
followed the ancient manner of Gods own people of Israel: whose Ceremonies and
Ritualls, though they now be abolished, yetthe general rules of Justice,
Equity, Government and Order, do still remain. And as God made the Priesthood
then Honorable in the Commonwealth, and committed a great part of the
government unto them; so doubtlessenow underthe Gospel, the Priesthood ought
to be Honorable, and to have a principal part in the ruling and governing of
the state and Commonwealth. To be a Priest in Israel was to be a chief man.
Levit. 21. 4. and therefore in all their Courts of Justice, the Priests and
Levites were chief men in authority for deciding of all causes, both in the
great Court of Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, (which was a continuation of the 70.
Elders, appointed by God himself: Numb. 11. and was answerable in authority to
our Parliament) and also in the lesser Sanhedrims, forth government of cities
in every Tribe, there were always two allotted of the Tribe of Levi for
assistance, as Josephus shows. Lib. 4. cap. 8. Antiquit. Oppidatim praesint
septem viri probatae virtutis etiustitiae cultores: Singulis Magistratibus
attribuantur duo Ministri de Tribu Levitica.

And if these could not determine the business in question, thenthey did
appeal to the Sanhedrim, at Jerusalem. When David was old and near his death,
he appointed Solomon to be king after him, and caused a Parliament of all
Israel to be assembled, wherein he gathered together, all the Princes of Israel
with the Priests and Levites. 1. Chron, 24. 1, 2. In this great Parliament the
Priests and Levites were not omitted, nor in any Court of Justice in that
kingdom. For as it is verse. 4. there were six thousand of them appointed
Officers and Judges throughoutthe land of Israel. Which is the thing that now
many of our common people do much dislike, not well enduring a few Justices of
peace to be of the Clergy: whereas we have the example of David guided and
directed by the spirit of God, as the text says. 1. Chron. 28. 12, 13, 19. so
disposing and ordering the Levites, that he appointed some for the outward
business over Israel, for Officers and Judges. A thousand and seven hundred
were Officers of Israel on this side Jordan, in all business of the Lord, and in
the service of the King. This text is very plain to prove that the same man
may be employed in Ecclesiastical matters of the Church, as also in the Kings
service. So verse. 32. David appointed two thousand and seven hundred chief
Fathers to be Rulers of the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of
Manasses, who were beyond Jordan, for every matter pertaining to God, and
affairs of the king. And cap. 26. 14. Zecharias a Levite is commended for a
wise Counselor. But that now any of the Tribe of Levi should be Counselors,
Judges, or Officers, unto Princes is accounted, by some, an unlawfullthing, or
at least, not very commendable: whereas we see by this very law and direction
of king David, thatthe Levites might attend business belonging to the worship
and service of God, and instruction of the people, as also the public service
and affairs of the King and State. And so the Commentaries do affirm; as
Lavater. in cap. 23. per civitates and provincias judicia Ecclesiastica and
civilia exercuerunt. -- Non omnes qui consolatione and doctrina indigebant
potuerunt Hierosolymam venire, multi quotidie docendi et erigendi erant:
fuerunt igitur passim qui eos docuerunt. Habuerunt autem illi sub se alios
quoque. Vacabant sacris literis, alios instituebant, et causas juxta legem
divinam decernebant. In cap. 24. sic Petr. Martyr. in 2. Reg. cap. 11.

Neither will it hinderthe study of divinity or care of preaching the Gospel,
if some fit men be employed sometimes, in the government of the public: for
the well ordering of the public, and preservation of peace and justice will
more advance the Gospel, and abundantly countervaile some intermission of
preaching, which cannot possibly be so continually attended, but that there
will be some hindrances not only by sickness, and private businesses of ones
family and estate, but also by public Meetings, Convocations, Synods, and
such general Assemblies.

Besides, the Commonwealth and Church is a mixed government, and consists of
all manner of persons of infinitely several conditions and trades, and courses
oflife, and seeing the Clergy are mingled among them, and infinitely entangled
especially of late days, being made subject (which they were not before) to
all temporal laws, suits, arrests, executions, imprisonments, impositions,
taxes, charges, and subsidies; it is but reasonable that the Clergy should have
some of their own tribe in place of judicature and office, to see the
inferior membersdefended, and saire carriage showed to them. Aristotle says
lib. 3. polit. cap. 1. Civis nulla re alia magis definitur quam participatione
judicij ac magistratus. Whosoever are citizens in a Commonwealth, meaning
properly citizens, and of the better sort, (not laborers, porters, strangers,
or aliens) they ought to have voice and suffrage, and to be capable of
Magistracy and office, if they shall be found worthy and fit for it, by any
excellent parts of learning, knowledge and wisdom. Wherein the Clergy have
some opportunity to excel others, and often do go beyond the ordinary sort
of men that are not bred up in learning, Arts, and Sciences.

And as Sr Francis Bacon observes, out of the ancient Roman law, there belongs
to every subject certain common rights and privileges, which cannot be taken
from any of them. 1. Ius civitatis. 2. Ius connubij. 3. Ius suffragii. 4. Ius
petitionis, or Ius Honorum. These four ordinary rights and freedoms, are by
the customs and original principles of humane societies due to all citizens
of quality, such as ever the Clergy have been esteemed, and still ought to be,
if men will profess themselves to be true Christians indeed, and to honor the
messengers and Ambassadors of our Savior Christ, whom he has appointed to
instruct and govern his Church and people. The Pope deprived his Clergy of the
two former rights, by accounting them separate and exempt from the common laws
ofall kingdoms, and forbidding marriage to them. And now our zealous
professors would deprive our Clergy of the two later privileges; the right of
voice, and suffrage in all principal businesses: and the right of honor and
office, whereof they would make them incapable, and render them base, and
equal only to the inferior multitude, and scumme of the people.

XV. If the Clergy might now enjoy those ancient privileges, which are
mentioned in scripture, as Genes. 47. of Pharaoh; who in the time of famine and
great extremity spared the Priests lands, and allowed them their portion, so
that they sold not their lands, then men might talk of applying their studies
and meddling with no common or worldly business. Artaxerxes the Persian king, (
EZra. 7. 24.) commanded, that for all the Priests and Levites and Ministers of
the house of God, it should not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom
upon them. Whereas now the Clergy being made subject to the most sort of
payments, charges, and impositions in a greater proportion commonly then other
men; it is but requisite, that some of the Clergy should have voice and
suffrage in the laws, that are enacted for their government and taxation.

XVI. Besides, the course of laws and government is not much altered from what
was in those days, when holy Fathers spoke of wholly applying themselves to
prayers and sacred studies, and diligent preaching of the Gospel: as if they
were to do nothing else, not so much as to provide bread, or necessaries for
their families, for then they lived most part single, in Colleges and
Monasteries, and societies under the Bishops, where all provisions were made by
Stewards and Officers, appointed, for the purpose, so that their cares in all
those respects were lessened and abated much; that they might apply their
studies only, and forsake all worldly business, which now they cannot forgo
being secular and parochial Ministers, married men, and thereby charged with
children and families; and also made obnoxious to all laws, suits, and
impositions, without any exemptions or privileges. So that it is but a
monastical, and in part a Popish fancy, to talk so much of applying their
studies, and only preaching the Gospel: for by many a writ and warrant from
several Courts of Justice, and Constables, they shall be hindered and commanded
to attend secular and litigious proceedings, and answer to all bills of
complaint, declarations, and vexations, that shall hinder their preaching and
studies, more then a voluntary employment, at fit seasons, in some public
Office.

XVII. Further it is but a Popish opinion that Regimen Ecclesiasticum est
distinctum a politico. De Romans Pontif. l. 1. cap. 5.
Which Bellarmine maintains, (taking it for granted on both sides) only to
advance the Papacy, above Kings and Princes, and to exempt the Clergy from
secular authority. Calvin affirms as much. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 11.. 1. but
under correction, I take it to be a great error, though now it is the common
Idol of every man's fancy: because that in our kingdom (and so perhaps in most
others) the Courts of Justice are divided, the Civil from the Ecclesiastical:
which yet I do not think was the ancient manner, nor to be the best course,
though things be slighted, as now they are at this present, it is not safe to
change; for in a Commonwealth, the Courts of Justice that have been long
settled, cannot easily be altered.

XVIII. There is a discourse about Puritans, Page 29.
lately published by a Lawyer one Mr Parker, wherein he excepts against Calvin
(and I think not amiss) in that he does, according to the Popish grounds,
maintain, that spiritual jurisdiction differs from temporal, because it
proposes not the same ends, but several, which by several means, may be
better compassed: But (says he) the spiritual Magistrate (as I conceive) can
purpose no other end, then which the secular ought to aim at; for either the
Prince ought to have no care at all, of the honor of God, and the good of men,
and that which is the prime mean of both, true Religion; or else his ends must
be the same, which the Prelate aims at, viz: to vindicate Religion by removing
or correcting scandalous offenders. Secondly to preserve the innocent from
contagion by the separation of of open offenders. Thirdly to prevent further
obduration, or to procure the amendment of such as have trangressed, by
wholesome chastisment. Thus he, and I think not much amiss, the scope and end
of both, is the same; and as he says, a little before in his discourse. --
Clergy men being as well citizens of the Commonwealth, as sons of the Church,
and their cases importing as well perturbance of the state, as annoyance to the
Church, there can be but one head, which ought to have command over both, and
in both. It is manifest also, that many cases are partly temporal, and partly
spiritual, and that scarce any is so temporal, but that it relates in some
order to spiritual things, or any so spiritual but that it has some relation
to temporal things, so that the true subject of Ecclesiastical and civil
Justice, cannot rightly be divided.

I demand then, why should the Courts be divided? which was done first among
us by William the Conqueror. And why should not there be Judges partly
spiritual, as well as temporal in all Courts? (saving for the danger of
innovation:) as it was anciently among the Saxons? or at least, why should not
the supreme Court of Justice, which is to give law to all other Courts, be
well tempered, and mingled with all sorts of men, Ecclesiastical and Civil,
the wisest, and choycest that can be found in the whole state, and kingdom?
Why not Priests and Levites admitted into the number, as well as in the
Sanhedrim of the Jewish commonwealth, which was equal to our Parliament, and
was instituted by God himself? And I take it, there can be no just exception,
but that our Christian Commonwealths may most safely follow the general Rules
of policy and government, which God ordained among his own chosen people,
without any imputation of Iudaisme. Now, among them, some of the Priests and
Levites, were not only Judges and Elders in their own cities, which were
allowed them to the number of 48. in the whole but sat with the Elders of
other cities, and were Judges and Officers over Israel. 1. Chron. 26. 29.
Yea, many things, by Gods law, were wholly and chiefly reserved to the
knowledge and sentence of Levit. 13. Number. 5. Deuteronomy. 21. 19. Deuteronomy. 21.
the Priests, as Leprosy, Iealousy, Inquisition for murder, False witness and
such like (which now among us for most part belong to the commonlaw) in which
cases the people and Elders, were to consult the Priests, and take direction
from them. And so Bertram: in his treatise de politia Iudaica. cap. 9. does
make it manifest: -- prorsus est extra controversiam judices municipales
cujusque civitatis, ut vocantur, seniores suisse chiliarchos, centuriones,
quinquagenarios, and decuriones, tot quot esse poterant in quaque civitate, ita
ut ex illis Levitae quidam in praefectos assumerentur, si modo in ea aliquot
erant Levitae; sin minus ex proxima urbe Levitis assignata advocabantur. -- And
again in his cap. 10. -- David in civili politia dicitur ex Levitis destinasse
Iudices and praefectos sexies mill. Ex Levitis Iudices and praefecti assumpti
sunt hac ratione, ut primum essent ex Levitis quidam, qui Assessores essent
Iudicum ordinariorum and municipalium, qui seniores dicebantur: qui and
aliquando de plano (ut vulgo lequuntur) judicarent de rebus levioribus, quales
erant pecuniariae, vel soli, vel assumpto uno aliquo ex loci vel urbis
senioribus: deinde ut essent etiam quidam alij qui judicatas res exequerentur;
vel certe quod verisimilius est, qui assessores erant judicum ordinariorum, qui
et ipsi de rebus pecuniarijs cognoscerent et judicarent, ipsamque rem judicatam
exequerentur. -- etc. -- Ex eadem familia adhibiti sunt, ad regendam Ecclesiam
and ad politiam civilem gubernandam: ita tamen ut nulla esset utriusque
politiae confusio and permixtio. -- and cap. 11. -- ad utrumque judicium (tam
civil, quam Ecclesiasticum) adhibiti sunt Levitae in praefectos, eodem
videlicet modo, quo eos ad id muneris designaverat David. etc.

Thus, and much more to this purpose, Bertram does often throughout his book
deliver his judgment that the Priests and Levites were Judges in the civil
Courts of Justice, and not only in the Ecclesiastical. To this Sigonius
agrees lib. 6 de repub: Heb. cap. 7. speaking of the Sanhedrim. -- Inivere hoc
Concilium Rex cum principibus populi, ac septuaginta senioribus populi and
Pontifex cum Principibus sacerdotum, and scribis, id est legis doctoribus, ut
perspicere liquet ex Evangelijs, ubi agitur de judicio Christi. Voco aute^
principes populi duodecim principes tribuum qui Regi assidebant. Seniores vero
ipsos, quos dixi septuaginta populi seniores. Quare Joseph ab Arimath. Senator
sive decurio Nobilis idem Concilij particeps fuit. Siquidem scriptu^ est, ipsum
cum caeteris assensum damnationi Christi non praebuisse. Principes autem
sacerdotum dico illos, qui vicenis, quaternis sacerdotum classibus seu vicibus
singuli singulis praeerant: Scribas vero ipsos legis doctores quos Prophetas
Josephus vocavit. To both these judicious Abbreviators of the Jewish
government, the learned Reader, for his further satisfaction, may add the late
excellent Annotations of C. L' Emperor upon the 11. chapter of Bertram cited
before.

Now, seeing David appointed no less then six thousand Levites for the
outward businesses, it could not be but that many of them were employed in
their secular and civil affairs. (Whereas now there is not one hundred of the
Clergy employed throughout our whole Kingdom, there being not above three or
four Justices of peace in a whole shire.) The Priests, the sons of Levi
(says God) shall come near, or forth (out of the cities where they were
placed in every tribe) and by their word shall all strife and plague be tried.
Remembering always that doubtful and weighty matters were reserved to the
Council of Priests and Judges, that sat in the place, which the Lord did
choose for the Arc to rest in. If there come a matter too hard for Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
thee in judgment between blood and blood, cause and cause, plague and plague
of matters in question within thy gates thou shall arise and go upto the
place, which the Lord thy God shall choose, and shall repair unto the Priests,
the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and ask and they
shall show thee the sentence ofjudgemene, and thou shall do according to that
which they of the place show thee, and shall observe to do, according to all
that they inform thee: thou shall not decline from the thing which they shall
show thee, neither to the right hand nor to the left. And the man that will do
presum ptuously in not harkening to the Priest, that stands before the Lord
thy God to minister there, or unto the Judge, that man shall dye.

XIX. This Council or Senate of the Elders residing at Jerusalem in
Iehosaphats time, (who no 2. Chron. 19.
doubt did not infringe, but rather observe the tenor of the law) consisted of
Levites and of Priests, and of the heads of the families of Israel: and had
Amarias the High Priest chief over them in all matters of the Lord, as
Zebediah a Ruler of the house of Judah (chief) for all the Kings affairs; and
was a continuance of the 70. Elders, which God adjoined Number. 11. 16.
unto Moses, to bear the burden of the people with him. And this Court cannot
be better resembled among us, then to our Parliament; for there was but one
Council of that nature in the whole land of Jury, and that consisting of some
of the chiefest of every tribe; and they not only debated and concluded the
highest affairs of that Realm, as war, peace, appeals from all places,
punishments of whole Cities and Tribes and such like; but also ruled and
rectified all Cases omitted, or doubted in Moses law; and were obeyed
throughout the land upon pain of loosing goods, or life, or being forever
excluded from the people of God, as they pronounced, or prescribed. Thus the
Reverend and learned Bishop Bilson in his perpetual Govern: cap. 4. Besides,
in every city there were private and peculiar Rulers (7. in number as Josephus
says) and also to every Magistracy in those cities, there was allotted two of
the tribe of Levi for assistance, as Josephus Antiquit. lib. 4. cap 8.
witnesses; and if these could not determine the business, thenthey did
appeal to Jerusalem to the great Sanhedrim. Now, God appointed these offices
and dignities, and power of Judicature to the Priests and Levites, besides
their attendance upon Gods service, which they might persorme duly, intheir
courses, and yet be helpful to the Commonwealth, in government; for they did
not neglect their principal duty to attend the sacrifices and service of God,
and to instruct the people in the law of God, together with the duties of
Judicature and Iusticeto be performed in the Commonwealth. Yea sometimes the
principal Judges, were chosen out of the tribe of Levi, as at the beginning of
their Commonwealth, Moses himself, the greatest Prophet and Prince that ever
almost was among them: So after in succeeding times Eli the High Priest was the
Judge in his time: so Samuel a Levite. And also after the captivity of Babylon,
for some five hundred years till the coming of Christ, the Priesthood had the
greatest stroke in the government; as under the Macchabees, wherein they
performed their duty very worthily: and it pleased God to make that family as
victorious as any other almost, that ever governed that Commonwealth. As Sr
Walter Rawlie says. lib. 2. cap. 15. If thus it were among them, why then
should any in these days be so much displeased that a Bishop, or a Clergyman
should have any part in the government of the Commonwealth, or assistance of
government, for the better ordering and directing of Judgment, as to be
Counselor to a Prrnce, as Zechariah the Levite was, or to be Justice of peace
in the country, who handles matters of Equity and good Conscience, for
preserving of public peace, order, and quietness among neighbors, wherein
happens many businesses that depend much upon the conscience of a Justice, and
the equitable rules of the scripture, whereof Clergy men are the most competent
Interpreters. As also many causes happen touching the estates and persons of
the Clergy, who have little reason to be subject only to secular Judges,
without some of their own tribe on thebench to see fair carriage and
indifferent dealing.

XX. Besides I cannot omit one passage in a late discourse, entitled. An
Assertion of the Scottish government. Wherein the Author cap. 3. makes his
argument for ruling Elders thus. -- Whatsoever kind of Officers the Jewish
Church had, not as it was Jewish, but as it was a Church, the same ought the
christian Church to have also, but the Jewish Church had Elders. -- etc. -- for
Elders is not now my business, but it may be likewise inferred: But the Jewish
Church, and commonwealth, had Priests and Levites, mingled and joined together,
with the Princes of thetribes, in all civil courts of Justice, and Assemblies
of the state; therefore ought it to be so now in the Christian Church That it
was so anciently among them, is sufficiently proved already, but especially
when business concerned God and matters of religion, then the Priests and
Levites were principal and necessary men to be employed: as may clearly
appear by the doings of King David, about removing of the Arc, to the place,
that he had provided for it: Whereupon King James has written a very pious and
excellent meditation, page: 81. upon the 1. Chron. 15. some of whose words I
will here recite. When the Ark of God 2. Sam. 6.
(whereunto they sought not in the days of Saul) had continued long at Kiriath
jearim; David out of his zeal and piety was moved to prepare a Tent for it,
inthe city of David, and when he began to remove it, he called a great
Assembly of principal men, but did not make that use of the Priests and
Levites as he ought to have done, and therefore the Action prospered not, but
there happened a terrible Judgment upon VZZah, which hindered the progress of
the good work, and David was afraid of 1. Chron. 13. 12.
God that day, saying, How shall I bring the Ark of God home to me? So the
Arc rested in the house of Obed Edom. But afterward upon better advise David
perceived his error, and he confesses it. cap. 15. 12, 13. speaking to the
chief of the Priests and Levites. Sanctify your selves, both ye and your
brethren that you may bring up the Ark of the Lord God. For because you did it
not at the first, The Lord God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him
not, after the due Order.

This was a great and a godly work, that was then intended, and therefore King
David called a great Parliament about it: 1. of the Elders of Israel. 2. of the
captains of thousands and hundreds, whose names and praises are recorded. 1.
Chron. 11. 26. 3. the Priests and Levites, who did it not at the first. ver. 13.

But now upon better advise, King David assembled with the first, the children
of Aaron and the Levites: ver. 4. So that men of all Estates were now present
in this godly work: This is to be marked well of Princes, and of all those of
any high calling or degree that has to do in Gods cause: David does nothing
in matters pertaining to God without the presence and especial concurrence of
Gods Ministers, appointed to be spiritual rulers in Gods Church. And at the
first meant to convay the same Arc to Jerusalem, finding their absence and
want of their Counsel hurtful: therefore he says to them. -- Ye are the
chief Fathers of the Levites. Because ye did it not at the first. Thus says
King James of blessed memory; but now there is a generation of men, who do not
think the Clergy necessary men to be consulted: that will interpret
scriptures, remove the Arc, as it were, and do things without the presence,
vote, and suffrage of the chief Fathers of the Levites: which how it agrees
with this pious example of King David, and King James meditation upon it, I
leave to be considered, and submit to better judgments.

XXI. The first frame of our English Commonwealth, was so fetled and ordered,
by the Saxon Kings, when once they became Christians: That the Seldom not. ad
Eadmer. p. 166.
Bishop in his Diocese, together with the Earl of the County (and so their
deputies in inferior Courts under them) should be equal Judges together upon
the same Bench, in the same Courts, and there determineall causes: in the
forenoon, Church Matters; and in the afternoon secular business. As Bishop
Jewel in part observes, in his Defense of the Apology part. 6. page 522. This
course continued, till William the Conqueror, and perhaps it had been very
happy for our Commonwealth, if the frame of our laws and Courts, had so still
continued mingled together; for many reasons that I will not now insist upon.

XXII. The Conqueror first separated the Temporal Courts, from the
Ecclesiastical, yet not diminishing the authority of the Churches
Jurisdiction, which by his oath he confirmed, and promised Proeem. LL. Guil. 1.
to preserve, affirming quod per Ecclesiam Rex and Regnum solidum habent
subsistendi fundamentum.

So that he subverted not the Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction, but as
formerly in the County, or in the Hundred, so now in the Bishops Court, all
Ecclesiastical causes were heard and determined: for the old manner the laws
of King Edgar do show it. cap. 5. Glossar. p. 315 Lambard. p. 80.


Intersit unusquisque Hundredi Gemoto; ut superius est praescriptum; and
habentur burgemoti tres quotannis: duo vero scire gemoti; de istis adsunto loci
Episcopus and Aldermanus, doceatque alter jus divinum, alter seculare. In
Hundredo aderant Thani (quos Baroues vocant posteri (ut patet e LL: Ethelredi.
cap. 1. ipsique judices Ecclesiastici, cum partis illius clero: in Hundredo
enim non minus quam in comitatu una tunc agebantur, quae ad forum pertinent
Ecclesiasticum, and quae ad seculare: donec Gulielmus Conquestor divisis
jurisdictionibus hanc ab illa separavit.

XXIII. For the Division of the Courts, and the erection of the Ecclesiastical
to sit by themselves, under the Bishop and Archdeacon, it appears by the
Charter of King William to the Deane and Chapter of Lincoln. And although it
be sent in the direction by name to them only, yet it seems, it grew afterward
to be a general law, no otherwise then the statute of circumspecte agatis that
has a special reference only to the Bishop of Norwich: as Mr Seldom relates,
in his history of Tithes. cap. 14.. 1. in his Ianus. lib. 2.. 14. and in his
not: ad Eadmer. page 167. The words of it, as they are recorded are.

Willielmus gratia Dei Rex Anglorum Comitibus, vicecomitibus, and omnibus
Francigenis, and Anglis, qui in Episcopatu Remigij Episcopiterras habent,
salutem. Sciatis vos omnes and caeteri mei fideles, qui in Anglia authoritate
praecipio, ut nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus de legibus Episcopalibus
amplius in Hundret placita teneant, nec causam quae ad Regimen animarum
pertinet, ad judicium secularium hominum adducant, sed quicunque secundum
Episcopales leges, de quacunque causa vel culpa interpellatus fuerit, ad locum
quem ad hoc Episcopus elegerit and nominaverit, veniat, ibique de causa sua
respondeat, and non secundum Hundret, sed secundum Canones and Episcopales
leges, rectum Deo and Episcopo suo faciat. Which I the rather transcribe here,
because also it seems togive the original of the Bishops Consistory, as it
sits with us, divided from the hundred, or County Court, wherewith in the
Saxon's time it was joined: And in the same law of his is further added, -- Hoc
etiam defendo, ut nullus laicus homo de legibus, quae ad Episcopum pertinent se
intromittat. -- etc. Thus M. Seldom.] only the words of the charter are more
fully recited out of the Records, by another learned Author. -- Si vero
aliquis per superbiam elatus, ad justitiam Episcopalem venire noluerit, vocetur
semel, et secundo, et tertio: Quod si nec sic ad emendationem venerit,
excommunicetur. Et si opus fuerit, ad hoc vindicandum, fortitudo et justitia
Regis, vel Vicecomitis adhibeatur. Ille autem qui vocatus ad justitiam Episcopi
venirenoluerit, pro unaquaque vocatione legem Episcopalem emendabit. Hoc etiam
defendo, et mea authoritate interdico, ne ullus Vicecomes, aut Praepositus, aut
minister Regis, nec aliquis Laicus homo de legibus, quae ad Episcopum
pertinent, se intromittat, nec aliquis laicus homo alium hominem sine justitia
Episcopi ad judicium adducat. Iudicium vero in nullum locum portetur, nisi in
Episcopali sede, aut in illo loco, quem ad hoc Episcopus constituerit. And the
punishment for disobedience to the Ecclesiastical Judges, was much alike as
formerly was enacted under the Saxon Kings. As by King Alured. Si quis Dei
rectitudines Con. p. 377.
aliquas disforciet, reddat Lashlite cum Dacis, Witam cum Anglis. And the same
law is afterward confirmed and renewed by King Canutus, and by other Kings;
Council p. 568. cap. 17.
whereby it appears how before the Conquest, and likewise after, for a long
time, the authority and jurisdiction of the Church, was maintained and upheld
by the settled laws of the Kingdom. How they had power in their Courts, to
excomunicate, and further by the help of the King, and the Sheriff, to
proceed against stubborn offenders and such asopposed, or contemned their
authority; so that here is the present practice and law confirmed, by many
hundred years continuance.

And this is according to that which Justinian says of all spiritual causes
in the Novell. 123. si pro criminal: si Ecclesiasticum negotium sit, nullam
communionem habento civiles Magistratus, cum ea disceptatione, sed
religiosissimi Episcopi negotio finem imponunto. If it be an Ecclesiastical
suite, let the civil Magistrates have nothing to do there with that plea, but
let the Bishops end it. Whereby it appears that Prohibitions from the
temporal courts were not then allowable, which certainly came not into use,
till after the Council of Clarendon under Hen. 2. Wherein the Clergy were
enforced to appear in the temporal Courts, one Canon thereof being. --
Clerici accusati de quacunque re, summoniti a Iustitiario Regis, veniant in
Curiam responsuri ibidem de hoc, unde videbitur Curiae Regis quid ibi sit
respondendum, et in Curia Ecclesiastica unde videbitur, quod ibi sit
respondendum. Ita quod Regis Iustitiarius mittet in Curiam sanctae Ecclesiae ad
videndum quo modo res ibi tractabitur. Et si Clericus vel confessus, vel
convictus fuerit, non debet eum de caetero Ecclesia tueri. But touching this
and the rest of the Constitutions in Anno 1164.
that Council Matthew: Paris: does sharply inveigh against them: --
Hancrecognitionem sive recordationem de consuetudinibus et libertatibus iniquis
et dignitatibus Deo detestabilibus, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, et Clerus, cum
Comitibus, Baronibus, et proceris juraverunt. And as he adds. His itaque
gestis potestas laica in res et personas Ecclesiasticas, omnia pro libitu,
Ecclesiastico jure contempto, tacentibus aut vix murmurantibus Episcopis,
potius quam resistentibus, usurpabant. And this appears also by that which Mr
Seldom relates in his notes upon Eadmer page 168. that long after in Ed. 1.
time, the Clergy had so many oppositions and hindrances in their proceedings,
from the temporal Courts, that they exhibited a petitionin Parliament, wherein
they recitethe grant and Constitution of Will: 1. allowing them their own
Courts by themselves, and specify their complaints particularly, which
hecalleth, Gravamina Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and says they arethose Vid. Seldom.
mentioned in the Proeme of Articuli cleri. And in this age we have great cause
to complain of Prohibitions, but whereof I will say no more now: as for the
temporal Courts the Conqueror appointed them to follow his Court Royal,
which custom continued for many years, till under King John at the instant
request of the Nobility it was granted. -- Vt communia placita non sequentur
curiam ( 1. Regis) Sed in loco certo tenerentur. That the Courts of Justice for
common pleas should not follow the Kings Court Royal but be held in a place
certain, as now commonly they are in Westminster Hall. Whereas before the
Kings appointed one Grand-Lord chief Justice of all England, who for his
authority and power, was a greater Officer both of State and Justice, then any
in these last Ages, ever since that Office was diminished by King Ed. 1. and
most of those great Justices were Bishops, till at length the Pope forbad it.

XXIIII. But the Courts being now divided in the kingdom many hundred years,
the Ancient manner is forgotten and unknown, save only to the learned, and the
scarres of the Norman Conquest are so overgrowne, that few men are sensible,
what relics of slavery do still remain upon us, by changing the order of
the Courts, the language of the law, in great part, with other things that I
will not now mention. But being so settled by the Conqueror, and continued by
his successors, the Temporal Courts in process of time, grew too powerful
for the Ecclesiastical, and by their Injunctions and prohibitions stopped many
proceedings, especially after the Council of Clarendon. under Hen. 2. Wherein
the power of the Clergy was much abated. And all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
so crushed that it continued lame ever after: although the Clergy by appeals
to Rome, did oftentimes help themselves, and much molest their adversaries. At
length under Hen. 8. upon his breach with the Pope, the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was much abridged and restrained in very many particulars, and
reduced to a narrow compass, becoming much more subject and obnoxious to the
Injunctions, orders, and prohibitions of all the Temporal Courts, that now I
marvel that any should complain, or envy at their power or greatness, there
being no cause of any value, or moment but by one order or other, isdrawne from
them to the Temporal Courts. And now at last there want not some, that would
have all Ecclesiastical Authority and Jurisdiction, either wholly suppressed
from the first Court to the last, or at least so abated, mingled, or changed
that what form, or force of government shall be left remaining, seems very
uncertain. But if Presbyteries and such like consistories of the foreign and
new fangled devising were erected, there will follow great confusion and
disorder to the infinite disturbance of peace and quietness in the kingdom,
by alteration ofso many laws and customs, and of the common law it self,
whereby the kingdom has been governed so many years, and settled in peace,
and all men's estates and lands held in certain possession. For such great and
universal changes as will follow upon the dissolution of the Hierarchy, and
taking away their votes in Parliament, and other eminent parts of government,
will produce such ill events, and troublesome distractions, as will not be
pacified within the compass of any man's life now in being. -- Which I heartily
pray God to prevent, and by his good spirit so to direct and bless the
endeavors and counsels of the supreme Court of Justice, now assembled, that
all our fears and doubts may be quieted, and the voice of peace and truth
restored to our dwellings.

But because what I have formerly said, touching the uniting of the
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts, may seem strange to many, I desire not to
be mistaken, as if I persuaded any innovation or change of settled laws, and
Courts of Justice. Which would be a thing of dangerous consequence, that no
wise man will advise, but leave all to the wisdom of superiors, to whom
properly it belongs. Only I will add a few lines touching the ancient form
and manner of government in the Empire, after that the Emperors became
Christians from whom it is likely, the example was taken both among us, and in
other kingdoms.

XXV. Touching the division of the Courts temporal from the spiritual: though
Will: the Conqueror began the separation with us in England, yet there was the
like done long before, even by Constantine the great the first Christian
Emperor: who first gave leave to the Christian Bishops to meet in Counsels,
and to make Canons to govern the Church. Canones generalium Conciliorum (ut
Isidorus Did. 15. can. 1.
ait lib. 6. Etym. cap. 16.) a temporibus Constantini coeperunt.
Inpraecedentibus namque annis, persecutione fervente, docendarum plebium minime
dabatur facult as. Inde Christianit as in diversas haereses scissaest: quia non
er at licentia Episcopis in unu^ conveniendi, nisi tempore supradicti
Imperatoris. Although ever since Quae fuit plenaria Conciliorum forma.
the Apostles held their first Council in Jerusalem, (Act. 15.) where they
made certain Canons, for the pacification of the Church of Antioch, there were
also some Provincial Councels held by the Bishops, as the violence of
persecutions would permit and suffer them to assemble, and the necessity of the
Churches did require. As may be seen in the first Tome of the Counsels
before the great Nicene Council was assembled by Constantine. Who being the
first Christian Emperor, did greatly labor to setle and advance the dignity
of Episcopal government. And because he knew well, that superiority in the
Church, without power and jurisdiction, was to little purpose. Therefore the
good Emperor in his Christian zeal, enacted:

Et si praecipuum Pontificis seu Episcopi munus est doctrina verbi populum
moderari, tamen, quia non omnes dicto audientes sunt, nec ejusmodi persuasione
ad disciplinam perduci, vel in officio retinere possunt, and superiorit as, in
quasunt Ecclesiastici absque imperio and jurisdictione, non sat is habet
nervorum and authoritatis; denique quoniam Ecclesia matter and cultrix est
Iustitie; Ideo Episcopis peculiaris quaedam Iurisdictio Ecclesiasticae civili
dignior in personas, and causas Ecclesiasticas legibus Imp: est attributa. etc.
-- ut jus dicant clericis -- etc.

And least the Emperor in his Constitution, in these words, ut jus dicant
clericis -- should seem to keep short, and restrain the Bishops in their
Audience, or Consistories, to Clergymen only; there follows a praterea in the
same title in the Code. De Episc. audient: not long after this, praeterea
(says the Emperor there) Ius dicunt laicis.

XXVI. And as before the age of Constantine, for want of power in the Church,
and the Assistance of the Christian Magistrate, the Bishops could not restrain,
nor suppress the many heresies, and schisms that did arise in those first
ages, most of which heresies were such as were fit to be beat down by
authority, rather then by reason and argument, they being so impious, insolent,
and blasphemous; so after his time, when he had settled the Bishops authority,
yet there being two courts, where did arise many differences and debates
between the Bishops, and the secular Judges of that time, touching cognizance
of some causes, Justinian the Emperor made a law, like unto that circumspecte
agatis of our King Edward 1. agreeing with it in substance of matter, and
arising from the same ground, and pointing to the same end.

The Novell is thus -- Si delictum sit Ecclesiasticum Novel. 83. cap. 10.
egens castigatione vel mulct a Ecclesiastica, Deo amabiles Episcopi hoc
discernant; nihil communicantibus clarissimis provincia Iudicibus. Neque enim
volumus talia negotia scire omnino civiles Judices, cum oporteat talia
Ecclesiastice examinari et emendari secundum sacras et divinas regulas, quas
etiam sequi nostrae non dedignantur leges.

XXVII. And further for the greatness of the Bishops authority, it will
appear fully, if we look upon the laws, as they lie concatenatae in the same
title. Where it is said of the Bishops. -- Cum sint ordinarij Iudices -- and
again, similes Praefectis Praetorio, and further. Ordinary quoque procedunt.
The linked Texts in that title of the Code, as they stand cited, do fully show
the greatness of the Bishops Courts and Authority, when they are compared and
said to be similes Praefectis Praetorio. Who were Illustres Iudices, and so
styled in the law, they being indeed the most supreme Judges in the whole
Empire, there being but three in that spacious Empire. One in Asia, Praefectus
Praetorio Orientis. Another in Europe: Praefectus Praetorio Illyrici. The third
in Africa. Praefectus Praetorio legionibus et militiae Africanae. These civil
Magistrates were respectively Judges of the Causes, which the Emperor had
translated from the Empire to the Church, which when the Emperor had done, and
made the Bishops the same Judges in the Church, as the Praefecti Praetorio were
in the Empire before, it appears hereby fully, how great the authority of the
Bishops and their Consistories were, wherein they were assisted by their
Vicar-generalls, whom now we call Chancellours (as a learned Civilian
observes) who are no upstarts in the world, rising out of the Bishops sloth
(as one, though otherwise eloquent and learned, mis-called them) but had their
Original from the Law it self.

Touching whom, I will here say something out of the learned Civilians, because
commonly their place and Original is much mistaken by the ignorantly zealous
people, who do now abound in the world, and think nothing lawful in
government, unless there be express text of scripture for it: as if no
calling, government, or subordination of Officers in the Church, were lawful,
but what is expressly and fully set down in the scriptures, and no power or
authority left in the hands of Christian Kings and Magistrates to appoint
Judges and Officers for Church. discipline, as well as for civil Judicature.

XXVIII. But to return: as the Praefecti Praetorio; quia illustres erant et
antestabant caeteris dignitatibus, ideo habebant Vicarios suos in civilibus
causis audiendis et terminandis: So were the Bishops then, and so are they now
Illustres Iudices et antestabant et antestant caeteris dignitatibus in
Ecclesia. For the Law paralells them in the Church with the chief Judges in
the Empire, as well in this, as in the rest of the parts of their Honor,
wherewith the Emperor had honored them, and the Law honors them at this day.
Iustinien's Code has sundry laws some of his own, some of the Emperors
before him, even from the days of Constantine the great, which show that
Bishops, in their Episcopal Audience, sat not without their Chancellours;
although their Chancellours sat often without the Bishops, whose higher charge
in Christ's Church permitted not the Bishops presence in Court causes
ordinarily. And though not under the name and title of Chancellours, nor
always Vicars Generals, Officials, nor Commissaries, yet they had other
titles, but the same offices. Ecclesiastici or Episcoporum Ecdici, as much as
to say as Church-Lawyers, or Bishops Lawyers, professed Civilians, and
Canonists of that age, the very selfsame Officers and Office that the Bishops
Vicar-generalls then were, and now are. Who together with the Bishops then
made, and do now make but one and the same Tribunal and Consistory: their
Commissions they held from the Bishops; but their Jurisdiction from the Law.
And the cause why the Imperial power furnished the Bishops with these
Officers, was, the multitude and variety of Ecclesiastical causes, more in
that age then now, the decisions whereof in their Consistories, being left to
the Bishops, the Emperor doubted might have drawn them from prayer and divine
exercises. And a second reason was, that the cause of the cognizance of their
Courts, weremore likely to have thereby a more speedy, ready, and Judicious
trial before Judges of the same learning, which require a whole man, then
before Judges of another, though an higher, requiring (as the Bishops pastoral
office does) a whole man too. And a third reason also may be added. Because
that clerks suits, and quarrels should not be divulged and spread abroad
amongst the secular sort, which trenched many times upon the whole profession,
especially in Capital matters, wherein Princes aunciently so much tendered the
Clergy, that if a Clerk had committed an offense worthy of death or open
shame, whereby he became perpetually infamous, he was not first executed or
put to open shame, before he was degraded by the Bishop and his Clergy, and so
was executed and put to shame not as a Clerk, but as a laymalefactour, for the
Honor and dignity of Priesthood. It were to be wished this order were retained
still, that Clerks should not pass immediately, when they fall into such
excesses, from the Altar, to the halter, but hang or suffer other shame without
their Priesthood: which order if it were retained still, or might be restored,
would much honor the Church and no whit derogate from the Jurisdiction of the
Crown. But this, and whatsoever else is said here, I submit to the censure of
superiors.

A DETERMINATION OF A Question, made by the right Reverend, JOHN DAVENANT, late
Bishop of SARUM.
QUAEST. 11th. Civil Jurisdiction is by right granted to Ecclesiastical
PERSONS.
IT is by the warrant of Christ Mat. 18. 18. 1. Cor. 5. 4. 2 Thessalonians, 3. 14.
himself, that the Church does claim and execute a spiritual Jurisdiction in
punishing the offenses of her children. For it can admit an accusation against
the inordinate courses of any Christian; and has power to chastise him being
by sufficient witnesses convicted, either by him the sacraments, or if he
continue obstinate in his wickedness, by an utter exclusion of him from the
fellowship and communion of other Christians. I know none so malignant, or
unskilful in Ecclesiastical affairs, that will deny this Authority, which
indeed goes not beyond Excommunication, to have been conferred on Churchmen
from the beginning, by divine Institution. But in this our Church, Christian
Princes have furthermore allowed the Clergy temporal authority; by virtue
whereof they inflict civil punishments on Heretics, Schismatics, and other
despisers of the Church. As also many sage and grave Divines are in diverse
places endowed with the public power of Justices of Peace. Concerning this
Jurisdiction, let us enquire whether it may lawfully be granted to Churchmen:
which that it may lawfully be done, these following Reasons have induced me to
believe.

It is first to be considered, thatboth these Jurisdictions Argum. 1.
tend to the same end of promoting Justice and bridling vice; but with this
difference, that that power 2. Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.
which is merely spiritual makes use only of spiritual means, whereas the
weapons of civil authority be coactive, and external, as Imprisonment, Fines,
and corporal punishments. Here therefore would I know, why it should be
esteemed a wicked and unlawful act, not suiting to the holy function of a
Priest, to correct Heretics, Schismatics, and other vile and notorious
disturbers of the Christian Commonwealth's Peace, as well with civil and
bodily chastisements as those of the spirit, where Power is given them so to
do. To resist and pull down vices by either way is a good and plausible
action, and of it is self misbeseeming no Person though never so holy. The
blessed Angellsof Heaven Act. 12. 23.
deem it a thing in no wise contrary to their sanctity in the name and command
of God to smite the profane with corporal Punishments. Why then should the
Angels of the Church think it not lawful Apoc. 2. 1.
to adjudge the same delinquents to any deserved punishments, when by the
decree of their Sovereign, Gods Vicegerent here on earth, it is so determined?
For the Execution of civil Authority is not of it is self repugnant to any
Person how holy soever, nor disagreeing to the office of Priesthood.

Again, the high, and absolute Power of the Giver Argum. 2.
persuades me that Churchmen do by good 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14.
right exercise this Jurisdiction. For the King being, by God's appointment,
the Fountain of all civil Authority, may without offense derive some rivelets
thereof to what Persons he shall think fit, whether Lay or Ecclesiastical; I
said but some rivelets; because, (though no Temporal office by Gods laws are
forbidden the Clergy) wisdom and equity permit not Kings so far to burden
them with state affairs, as wholly to divert them from their spiritual 2. Tim.
3. 4.
Function. This Power therefore is so to be entrusted to them, as it may be an
Ornament or Furtherance to the Church government, no hinderance or obstacle
thereunto. But it is not for every vulgar judgment, or envious Piece to
determine how far this Jurisdiction is to be granted to the Clergy, so that
it may help and not trouble them in their Ministry. But what Aristotle, the
life of Philosophers said concerning Exh. 2. c. 6.
the Mean in virtues, that it is so to be ordered (...) as the wise man shall
think fit, May be applied to this Temporal Jurisdiction, that it is so far
to be communicated to Churchmen as a Judicious and wise Prince shall think
convenient. Seeing then it: has pleased Christian Kings to arm the Clergy
with some civil Jurisdiction, and ordain that to the greater improvement of
Christianity, 1. Tim. 2. 2. Romans 13 3. 4.
and casting down of wickedness, they should exercise both Ecclesiastical
and civil Jurisdiction: it is most apparently lawful and pious, and plainly
necessary by the aid of both Jurisdictions as with a two-edged sword to
preserve piety and the Peace of the Church, and cut of it is Opposers.

3ly, Because to many it seems unfitting, the successors Argum. 3.
of the Apostles should exercise an Authority which the Apostles themselves had
nothing to do with, Let us observe the difference of Times, and thence gather
that this civil Jurisdiction is as expedient and necessary to the Divines of
our Time, as it was altogether unnecessary and unprofitable to the Apostles.
Civil Jurisdiction is by the chief Magistrate to be conferred on those that
are subordinate, and according to his laws to be administered. As long
therefore as the Rulers of the earth waged war against the Truth of the
Gospel, neither could they assign, nor the Apostles without scandal to
Christ and the downfall of Religion have received any Temporal Power from
their hands. But since Kings and their laws began to subject themselves to
Christ, civil Authority by them given to the Ministers of Christ, might-have
been a great furtherance to the advancement of the Gospel and more happy
government of the Church. Furthermore, the Apostles and Fathers of the
primitive Church, were from heaven endowed with an extraordinary and miraculous
power, which did more avail to the confirmation of Christians in Faith and
Obedience, then any civil Authority: But now the government of the Church is
in the hands of Ordinary Ministers, who being disarmed of that divine and
miraculous power, are conveniently guarded with this Temporal and Ordinary
Jurisdiction. Lastly, when the Christian Church was in her Infancy, Piety was
more deeply rooted in the breasts of the Disciples, and if they would have
resisted the discipline of the Church, their rebellious minds were soon
quelled by the cruelty of persecution, and hourly imminent danger of violent
death. But now the Christian world wholly possessed and carried away with Pride
and Luxury, has so clean laid aside all respects of Piety and Modesty that
all the spiritual power of the Clergy and Church Discipline, if not seconded
by civil Jurisdiction, breeds rather scorn and contempt then amendment in the
malicious remorse of this present age. Think then what rash and incompetent
Judges they are, who from the Apostles and their days conclude temporal
Authority not requisite to our Ordinary Ministers.

A fourth Argument may be drawn from God's Argum. 4.
own Institution, and the most ancient practice of the Church. God himself
under the law did annect civil lurisdiction to the office of Priesthood: it is
therefore no strangething, nor against the divine Law, that a Churchman should
bear sway in temporal affairs. Heli, Samuel, the Macchabee's, together with
all the high Priests in the old Testament, did exercise this kind of Authority;
but why it continued not so for some hundred years after the Gospel, is made
evident by reasons above alleged. But since Constantine the Great submitted
his Imperial Scepter to Christ, you shall in all Ages find the godly Bishops
and Fathers of the Church administering civil Jurisdiction by Religious
Emperors to them imparted: which if time would serve might be clearly
testified, out of Ecclesiastical Histories, and Counsels, and out of the
Emperor's own laws: but these are so sufficiently known to the learned,
that the citation thereof would prove an unnecessary Trouble.

Lastly, let us out of our adversaries own grants Argum. 5.
and confessions, prove what they themselves deny. They grant the Clergy a
Jurisdiction whereby they can cite before their Courts, Heretics, Drunkards,
Adulterers and such like infamous persons, admitaccusations against them, hear
and examine witnesses, and give sentence of Excommunication on those that are
lawfully convicted. If by virtue of spiritual Jurisdiction, from Christ
received, they can do these things, why shall they not by the accession of
secular Jurisdiction by the King conferred, imprison the same Malefactors, or
by such like civil punishments bridle their loose incontinencies? This Act of
Correction is no less warrantable in it is own nature then that of
Excommunication: both being put in execution by just and legitimate Authority;
neither do corporal punishments less conduce to the Reformation of
delinquents and the Churches good, then those merely spiritual. Therefore, by
the allowance of superior Authority, it is no less expedient that Clergymen
should inflict one kind of chastisement rather then another. In a word,
learned Mr Calvin does grant that what controversies Calvin. Inft. 4. 10. 11.
soever happened between Christians, to avoid strife and division, they were
wont to refer them to their De opere Monach. 29.
Bishops by their judgment to be decided. And St Augustine tells us that he
daily spent some time in secular affairs, either by his sentence determining
and settling them, or cutting them off by his interposition; Furthermore he
records that St Paul employed Churchmen in such troublesome matters. If
private Christians do lawfully commit their civil controversies to the
arbitrament of Bishops, surely Christian Kings may to the same Bishops lawfully
commit the Judgment of the like causes; if at the request of private men, it
be not unlawful for Churchmen to intermeddle with secular businesses, it
cannot be unlawful to do the same by the appointment of the King. For as the
matter stands, he does no left interest himself in State-affayres, who
decides controversies as an Elect Arbitratour, then he who decides the same as
a Judge ordained by the Prince. Let us conclude, that ambitiously so hunt after
or with prejudice to the function of Priesthood to exercise civil
jurisdiction, is a proud and unlawful act; But to accept of civil
Jurisdiction from the hand of a King, and to administer the same to the better
establishing of the Peace and Discipline of the Church is an act lawful and
praiseworthy, most agreeable to the ancient practice of the Church, and no
ways repugnant to the divine Scriptures.

FINIS.

