AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND: COMPRISING The Principal Affairs of
this LAND, From its First Planting, to the coming of the English Saxons.

TOGETHER With a CATALOGUE of the British and Pictish KINGS.

By Daniel Langhorne, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Harper, and John Amery, (...) the Flower-de-L^^e,
and at the Peacock, both against St. Dunstan's Church in First-street. 1676.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with an Introduction to the History of England, comprising
in a Chronological way the most Ancient Affairs of Britain, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil and Military, to the coming in of our English Nation.
Herein I have neither absolutely followed nor rejected Geffrey of Monmouth, but
have made use of him as far as he may be reconciled with better Writers, and
give some light to what we find delivered by them. I have here exhibited a
Catalogue of KINGS truly British, without crowding in Roman Emperors and
Governors; As also another Catalogue of the Pictish Kings, taken out of
Fordon's M.S. Scotichronicon.

If this small TRACT shall be so happy as to meet with Favorable
Entertainment, it will encourage me to proceed in endeavoring a greater
performance.

Daniel Langhorne.

AN INTRODUCTION TO The History of England.
Britannia.
Britain, the most Famous (if not the Largest) Island of the World, is by the
Curious Comparers of the Celestial spaces placed under the Eighth Climate,
included within the 18th and 26th Parallel. In Compass it is reckoned to be
about One thousand eight hundred thirty six miles. Known it was to the Greeks
before the Romans heard of it, as appears by Pytheas Massyliensis, whom Strabo
quoteth about the distance of Thule from this Island, And Moschion out of whom
Athenaeus tells us, That the Main Mast of King Hiero's great Ship was found
by a Swineherd in the Mountains of Britain, and by Phileas Tauromenites
conveyed into Sicily. Aristides calls it (...), The Great Island: And Dionysius
after speaking of this and Ireland, says, (...)
(...).
Now for their greatness verily exceeding great they are,
And seek through Islands all, none may with British Isles compare.
Though Scythinus Cous in Apollonius among other strange Tales which he tells
of it, bounds it within the Precinct of four hundred Stadia; the falsity
whereof is sufficiently notorious, though possibly he might mean Brittia
Batavica. Polybius indeed is the ancientest Author extant, that mentions it,
thus speaking in his Third Book, Of the utmost Ocean, the British Isles, the
plenty of Tynne, Gold and Silver in Spain, old Writers with different Opinions
have reported much. The first Latin Author in whom we find the name of this
Country, is Lucretius, (who lived but a little before Caesar,) in these Verses
concerning the difference of Air, Nam quid Brittannum coelum differ putamus,
Et quod in Aegypto est qua mundi claudicat axis.
For Air, what difference is there in Britain Isle, think we,
And Egypt Land, where Arctick Pole to stoop men plainly see.
This spacious Island was more particularly called Albion, the name of Britain
being taken in a larger sense, as comprehending Ireland too, which by Ptolemey
is termed (...). So Martianus Heracleota in periplo, (...) The British Isles
are two, the one called Alvion, the other Iveruia. And Dionysius Afer calls
them both, (...), agreeing with Strabo in placing them over against the mouth
of the Rhine. And so Enstathius commenting on that place of Dionysius, (...),
The British Isles are two, Vernia and Alvion, or Bernia and Albion. With these
we may join that Book De Mundo, which goes under the name of Aristotle, though
judged by the Learned not so ancient as the time wherein he lived, (...). In it
(speaking of the Ocean) are two very great Islands called British, Albium and
Hierna. But Pliny extends the name of Britain further to all about it, when
speaking of this Island: Britain, says he, renowned in the Greek Records and
ours both, lies betwixt North and West over against Germany, France and Spain,
but with a great distance between them, they being the greatest parts by far
of all Europe. Albion it had to name, when all the Isles adjacent were also
called Britannie's. Some will have it to have received this name from the
fabulous invention of the Greeks, who as they called Italy Hesperia, from
Hesperus the Son of Atlas, France Galatia from Galates the Son of Polyphemus,
so would have this Land denominated from Albion the Son of Neptune, mentioned
with his Brother Bergion by P^mponius Mela. But others derive it from (...),
which, as Festus tells us, in Greek signifies White, from which word the Alps
have their Appellation. So that Albion seems to be corrupted from Alphion; for
it is environed with huge White Rocks: And Fracastorius speaking of the English
Sweat, observes this Country to be a white plasterish Soil. And long ago
Orpheus in his Argonauticks speaking of this Island as lying next to Ireland,
calls it (...), The White Land. For which very Reason Luyd fetches the name of
Britain from Pride Cain, signifying in British A C^mely white form. Mr Hill in
his Notes upon Dionysius Afer, conceives this name of Albion to be framed by
the Greeks from Allybaun, by which name the Irish Scots called the Northern
part of this Island; And this way too it will be originally denominated from
Whiteness, for Ellan-Ban in Highland Scottish signifies a White Island.

Others will have it to be called Albion for Olbion, from the Greek word (...),
Felicity, in respect of the Air and Soil; Though it seems more probable, that
both this Island and Olbia an ancient City of Gallia Narbonensis took their
names from Olbia a City of Cimmeria near the River Boristhenes, from whence the
Ancestors of the Britains came.

Here it will not be impertinent to make some Inquiry how it came first to be
called Britain. Some bring it from the Brutians in Italy, who in Greek are
written (...), and their Country (...), which being sometimes mistaken for
(...), has caused strange confusion in History. But the Antiquity of that Name
and Nation reaching no higher than the Reign of the elder Dionysius, Justine
lib. 23.
and the taking of Rome by the Gauls, renders it very improbable; because
since that time the Roman Records were safely preserved, and some Historian or
other would in all likelihood have transmitted to memory the migration of any
considerable Colony from Italy to these parts. Camden says, That from Brith a
British word signifying Painted, Depainted, Dyed and Colored, and Tania which
as the Greek Glossaries tell us, betokens in Greek A Region, it was named
Brittania; And Seldom fetches its Name from Brith Inis, two British words
signifying a Painted Island, or the Island of Paint. The Native Britains are
zealous assertors of Brutus, and will have him to be the Author of their Stock
and Name, and therefore spell it with a Y, viz. Brytaine, it being frequent
with them in derivation of words to turn V. into Y; their National name in the
plural number being written Brytaniaid, and the name of Brutus being usually
pronounced by them as if it were spelled Brytys.

Many Learned men explode the whole Narration of Brutus, and deny that ev^^
there was any such man, affirming his very ^^^th to be the mere product of
Geffrey of Monmouth's Brain. But hereunto I cannot reasonably assent, for
though I look upon Geoffrey to have been no faithful Translator, but believe
him to have inserted a great many Fictions into that little Chronicle which was
brought over from Armorica, whereby Giraldus Cambrensis was induced to term it
a Fabulous History, and the Church of Rome thought fit (among other Books
prohibited) to forbid his Writings together with Merlin's Prophesies to be
published, yet I see no cause why we should reject all of it as commentitious,
seeing Vennius who lived some Centuries before him, speaks of Brutus though
doubtfully, one while making him the same with Junius the first Consul; another
time calling him Brito, and making him the Son of Sylvius the Son of Ascanius
the Son of Aeneas; and lastly fetches his descent from Jabath the Grandson of
Japheth by his Son Jovan or Javan, thus; Jabath, Jona, Baath, Isran, Esdra, Ra,
Abirt, Oath, Ecthec, Aurthac, Ethac, Maier, Simeon, Boib, Thoi, Ogomun,
Setherir, Alanius, Isacion, Brito; To Brito he adds three Brothers, Francus,
Romanus, and Alemanus. To Armenon the Brother of Isicion he gives five Sons,
Gothus, Valagothus, Gebidus, Burgundus, Longobardus; And to Negno another
Brother, four Sons, Vandalus, Saxo, Bogarus and Turgus. The uncertainty of this
and his other Stories he excuses, because the great Masters and Doctors of
Britain had no skill in the Antiquities of their Nation, and left no memorial
in writing, confessing that himself had gathered whatsoever he wrote, out of
the Annals and Chronicles of the Holy Fathers. Henry of Huntingdon speaks of
Brutus or Bruto in the first and second Books of his History, and in his
Epistle to Warinus a Briton concerning the Kings of the Brittans; And Giraldus
himself in that Seventh Chapter of his Description of Wales, where he so blames
Geffrey, yet acknowledges Brutus for Founder of the Kingdom of the Brittans.
And both these were as ancient as Geffrey. Thaliessin the chief of all the
British Poets living in the days of Malgon Guineth, styles his Countrymen
Wedilhion Troia, the remnant of Troy; And we read in Ammianus, that some who
after the destruction of Troy fled, Lib. 15.
possessed themselves of Gaul at that time void and unpeopled, meaning, but
thinly inhabited, from whence they might easily pass over hither. As
Monumethensis himself confesses, that Brutus arrived in Gaul before he came
into Britain. To this purpose it were not much amiss to allege that Verse
which goes about under the name of Sibylla, wherein they are termed (...), as
it were from Brutus, (...),
(...).
'Twixt Bryts, and Gauls their Neighbors rich, in Gold that much abound,
The roaring Ocean Sea with blood full filled shall redound.


Some there are who would have the Britans to come of the Race of the Grecians,
and Britannia to be deduced from (...), a term given by them to their Finances
and Revenues, of which opinion are Cooper and Eliot. And truly Lib. 6. de Bello
Gall.
Caesar says, that he found the Greek letters to be in use with them; And it
is evident that their Language has a greater affinity with the Greek, than
almost any other has. Diodorus Siculus says of them, Lib. 5. cap. 8
That they used Chariots in fight, as the report goes of the ancient Grecians
at the Trojan War. But all that they say to prove them sprung from Greece,
may serve as well to make good their original from the Trojans; who were
themselves a Colony of the Grecians transported by Teucer out of Creet into
Phrygia. Certain it is out of Homer and others, that the Trojans had Greek
names, and their manner of fighting was the same. Nor is it at all likely, that
in so short a space as the Reign of Seven Kings, they should quite forgo the
Language and Customs of their Ancestors, though the Britans might well undergo
a great alteration in both, for so long it was ere the Romans knew them. As for
the Altar erected in Caledonia with an Inscription of Greek letters mentioned
by Solinus, it may seem to be the work of some Grecian, that came with these
Trojans from Chaonia, or some other Greek Travelers, in honor of Ulysses as a
great Navigator, by which means Vlyssippo too (now Lisbon in Portugal) seems to
have gotten its name. I confess it does not appear to me an irrefragable
Argument against the so long received Tradition of Brutus, that no Roman
Historian speaks of him, since we find in them but a slender account of those
times wherein he must be supposed to have lived, and little more than the bare
names of the Alban Kings which more directly appertained to them. And for those
who wrote after the entry of the Romans into Britain, much of their Writings is
lost, as of Tacitus, Suetonius, Dion Cassius and others, which might have made
something for this purpose. Nor is there any great weight in the objection of
some others, That the name of Brutus is not so ancient as the time of this
British King; since Nennius calls him Brito, of which name Hyginus Polyhistor
mentions a Centaure (or Thessalian), and other Greek Writers speak of a Nymph
named Britona and Britomartis. But when the Romans came to be Lords of the
World, the Britans ambitious to claim Kindred with them, and to ingratiate
themselves with them, might possibly vary the Greek name of this Prince into
the Roman name of Brutus, differing little from it in their pronuntiation. And
seeing it is manifest that even the most unlearned and barbarous Nations have
preserved the memory of some of their old Heroes, especially of the Founders,
without Greek or Roman Authors, why may we not allow our Britans their Brito or
Brutus, though we do not admit the whole Bed-roll of Kings recited in the
Monmouth History? It seems the old English Saxons believed him to be the
Founder of the British Kingdom, as these Verses out of an old Saxon Manuscript
in Trinity College Library in Cambridge show: Of all for one iman In Comm. ad
Bedae Hist. Eccl. lib. 1.

THat Heleine as icleped thorn;is bataille furst bigan
On Heyman as thorn;er bifor thh;at icleped as Dardan
Of him com thorn;e good Bruigt that; as thh;e furst man
THat loverd as in Engeland asc ich eu tell can.
And again, After Bruit his oe name he cleped hit Brutaine;
The Land was Brutain called from Brute's own name.
One Woman caused the Trojan War, whose name
Was Helen, Dardan Prince of noble fame
Was Ancestor to Brute first British King,
From whom the Stemmes of British Princes spring.


No small question is raised about his Father Sylvius, whom Monumethensis will
have to be the Son of Ascanius, supposing probably that after the difference
between Julus and his Uncle the Son of Lavinia was reconciled, whereby Sylvius
Postbumus was adjudged to succeed his deceased Brother, and the Pontificate
(being the next degree of Honor to the Kingly Dignity) was assigned to Julus;
He in respect to the King, and to ingratiate himself with the Albans among whom
the name of Sylvius was in great request, (as Virgil in his Sixth Book of his
Aeneads denotes, Sylvius Albanum nomen; the fair Daughter of Tyrrhus the chief
Herd-master to King Latinus being also named Sylvia,) might assume that name
for his praenomen; and for a straiter linking of their Friendship, married the
Niece (as Geffrey says) of Queen Lavinia. Some conceive Sylvius the Father of
Brutus to be the same with Posthumus, and Son to Aeneas really, but to Ascanius
adoptively; which opinion cannot be admitted, because he after about Nine and
twenty years Reign, dyed a natural death, which our British Historians deny of
the other, making him to be slain by his mistaking Son, so that their relation
would better agree with Sylvius Aeneas the Son of Posthumus, of whose immature
death there is some show of a conjecture out of Aen. 6.
Virgil, who makes a doubt whether he ever attained to be King, Sylvius Aeneas
pariter pietate vel armis,
Egregius sin unquam regnandam acceperit Albam.
Aeneas Sylvius renowned for Arms, and Piety,
If e're of Alba he attain the Royal Monarchy.


And Met. 15.
Ovid favors this, leaving him out of his Catalogue of Alban Kings, and making
Latinus the immediate Successor to Posthumus: -- Successit Sylvius illi,
Quo satus antiquo tenuit repetita Latinus
Nomina cum Sceptro.
Sylvius succeeds, whose Son upholds with fame
The old Latinus 's Scepter and his name.
And if Sylvius Posthumus were also named Ascanius as well as his Elder
Brother, which Livy seems to hint in the beginning of his Pec. 1.
History, then may Brutus be this way too the Grandson of Ascanius, and being
banished for his Parricide leave his Brother Latinus to succeed his Grandfather
in the Kingdom: Though I am not ignorant that others understand Virgil
speaking in that place of Sylvius Aeneas, not to mean that he dyed before his
Father, but that it was very long before regained his right which his usurping
Guardian had withheld from him And in leed, as Livy says, who can positively
determine about things so ancient?

As concerning the Original of this People, Learned Cambden proves them to be
descended from the Gauls, by solid Arguments drawn from their agreement in
Religion, Customs and Language, their vicinity, and their very name. For they
did most generally (as still they do) call themselves Kumero, Cymro and Kumeri,
and a British Woman Kumeraes, and their Tongue it self Kumeraeg; And hence we
have the names of Cambri and Cambria, Cumbri and Cumbria, which proves them a
stock of the famous Cimbrians, who were the same with the Gauls, being one
Nation called by two names. So D^ P^^co^sul.
Cicero speaking of Marius, says that he repressed the Armies of the Gauls
etring in great numbers into Italy, when yet Historiographers witness that they
were Cimbrians, and Lucan calls the Fellow (that was hired to kill Marius) a
Cimbrian, whom Livy and others affirm to have been a Gaul; And out of
Plutarch's Errors, Reinerius Reineccius averreth, That the Gauls and Cimbrians
used the same Language. And hereunto Appian in his Illyricks, gives his
suffrage, The Celts or Gauls, says he, whom they call Cimbrians. And as all
other Nations fetch their first Original from Asia, so do these from the
Asiatick Cimmerians the posterity of Gomer the Son of Japhet, from whom also,
as Josephus and Zonaras report, the ancient Gauls were called Gemari Gomeraei
and Gomeritae, from whence the name of Kumeri, is easily deduced. Mr. Humfrey
Lhuyd in his short Description of Britain, conceives these Kumeri or Kymri to
be those very Cimbrians who so terribly endangered the state-of Rome, and
finding in the Book of Triads that one Irpus of Scandia by subtlety under
pretense of Kindred, and Honor to be achieved, induced a great number of
Britans to assist him in his Enterprise who never returned home again; he
concludes it probable that the British Kymri passed over into the Danish
Chersonesse, whereby it came to be termed Cimbrica, and after some Exploits
there, joining with the neighboring Teutons, and afterward with the Ambrens a
people of Gaul, made sharp War upon the Romans, vanquished Papyrius,
Scaurus, Manlius, Silanus, and Caepio, and were at length with much difficulty
overcome by Marius and Catulus; After which the remainders of the Cimbrians and
Teutons seem to have retired to the Chersonesse. These Ambrons who aided the
Cimbrians in this War, were a people so mischievously addicted to Spoil and
Rapine, that in Tract of time the word Ambro came to be commonly used to
signify a Devourer, as Isidore long ago has told us; whence John Caius his
mistake in thinking that Gildas joins these Ambrons with the Picts and Scots,
(when he speaks of their second vastation of his Country, saying that they
came, aesi Ambrones Lupi, like Ambrones Wolves,) is very obvious; it being
clear, that by Ambrones Lupi, he meant devouring Wolves; in which sense Geffrey
of Monmouth terms the Saxons also Ambrones. Mr. Lhuyd to strengthen his
opinion, produces Plutarch's testimony in his life of Marius, that it was not
known whence the Cimbrians came, only that it was from a far Country, and
that like clouds they issued into France and Italy with the Teutons; tacitly
inferring a likelihood that they might come from this Island. And to this he
adds diverse other Arguments, drawn from the agreement of that people with the
Britans, in Language and names of their Kings, and their Customs, as, their
neglecting of Gold and Silver, their Reverence toward Women and Priests, their
sacrificing men to Mercury, their Shields, Armor and Swords, and the very
shape of their Bodies. Nor was this the first time that the Britans made War
upon the Romans, if we may believe the relation of the British History, and the
constant Tradition of that people concerning Brennus. Sir John Price in his
Defense of the British History, is offended with Polydore Virgill for saying
that the Insular Britans had both their Name and Original from the Britans of
Armorica, and will not allow that any Britans were before the time of
Constantine the Great. Yet Pomponius Laetus says, That they were descended
from the Armorican Cities; And Pliny, among the Maritime people over against
Britain, near the County of Bullen, reckons the Britans, from whom a Haven of
the Neighboring Morini was called by the name of Portus Morin^^um Britannicus;
and of them Learned Cambden understands Dionysius Afer to speak in these
Verses, (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
And verily that utmost point and angle of this Europe.
part
Inhabit the Iberians people of haughty heart,
Near Gibralter at Hercules his Pillars called of old,
Turning upon the Main in length what way the current cold
Of Northern Ocean with strong Tides does overflow and swell,
Where Britans and those fair white folks the Martial Germans dwell.
For, says he, these words [ Where Britans] seem to have respect unto those
other [Turning upon the Main in length.] Eustathius in his Commentary upon that
Author takes it for granted that he meant the Gallick Britans, telling us,
(...), Of these Britans the Isles of Britain over against them took their
denomination. Venerable Bede is of this opinion too, At the first, said he,
this Island had these Britans only to inhabit it, (from whom also it too^ the
name) who, by report, having sailed out from the Tract of Armorica into
Britain, challenged unto themselves the South Coasts thereof, and in process
of time peopled the greatest part of it. And it is not at all unlikely that the
name of Armorica might extend so far, as to take in the Country of those
Britans, as well as the Sea Coasts of Aquitaine on the other side, since the
word only signifies a Country situate upon the Sea, and is not taken by all to
be strictly a peculiar name of a particular Province. And Geffrey of Monmouth
tells us, that Brutus set sail from the River Loire which belongs to Armorica
when he came hither; thereby confessing, what Bid had said, That they came
from Armorica, but bringing them thither from a farther Country. But whether
our Britans had their name from them of the Continent, or they of the Continent
from our Ilanders; most credible it is that the Britans came over hither from
Gaul, as Tacitus tells us; Generally, says he, if a man consider all
Circumstances, it is most likely that the Gauls being Neighbors peopled the
Land of Britain next unto them. For it stands to good reason that every
Country received the first Inhabitants from places near bordering, rather than
from such as were more dis-joyned, as Cyprus out of Syria and Phoenicia, Creet
out of Greece, and Sicily out of Italy, especially if this Island were once
conjoined to the Continent of Gaul, as some have conceived not without
probable grounds. Who will not judge that our Belgae, Attrebatij, Parist, and
Cenimagni, came from the Belgae, Atrebates, Parisij, and Cenomanni of Gaul?
Like as the Menapij of Ireland from the Belgic people of the same name. The
Germans who were Cimbrians (or Gomerians) too, and therefore of Kin to the
Gauls, sent over some Colonies into both these Islands, of which Extract
Tacitus reports our Caledonians to have been, and the very name of the Irish
Causi proves them an Offspring of the German Chauci. Druids and Bards were in
great request among both the Gauls and Britans; And Tacitus says, that there
is an apparent conformity between these two People in their Ceremonies and
Superstitious persuasions; and indeed, in many other things too, as Judicious
Cambden clearly shows. Certain it is, that those parts of the World were first
peopled, which lay nearest to the place where the Ark did first rest after the
Flood, and from whence Mankind was increased, so that all Nations must
necessarily derive their first beginning from Asia. Japheth, Noah's eldest Son,
(Ancestour to the Europaeans, whom the Greeks and Romans call Japetus) had
seven Sons. Their Seats, as Josephus says, Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
beginning from the Mountains Taurus and Amanus, stretched, in Asia to the
River Tanais, in Europe to Gades; And Isidore out of an ancient Author cites
this, The Nations descended of Japheth possess from the Mountain Taurus
Northward the one half of Asia and all Europe so far as to the British Ocean,
leaving names to places and people both, of which very many afterward were
changed, the rest remain as they were.

The Divines generally understand Moses in the Tenth of Genesis, to mean
Europe, by The Isles of the Gentiles (as consisting mostly of Islands) which
were planted by the Children of Japheth. And the Targumists in their Notes upon
the same place, join with them thus, saying, The Sons of Japheth, Gomer, and
the names of their Provinces Africa, and Germania, and Madai, and Macedonia,
and Asia, and Thracia. Here, by Asia, is meant a Province of Sarmatia Astatica,
Lib. 11.
near Sindica, mentioned by Strabo, and inhabited by the Asaei or Asiotae; but
what Region they understand by Africa, whether Phrygia, as Bochartus; or
Cilicia, as Sheringham conceives, or Africa propria, I shall not take upon me
to determine; though I rather incline to believe the last: As for the Land of
Madai, Mr. Mede in his Discourse upon the Fifth Verse of the Tenth Chapter of
Genesis, conceives it to be Aemathia, and will have it to be so called for
(...), the Land of Madai, judging it improbable, that Madai's Offspring should
continue in Media in the midst (as it were) of Shems portion and Inheritance.
But I rather think that the ancient Medi did for the greatest part remove into
Sarmatia, where they were called (...), Sauromatae, for (...), Sauromadae, from
(...) a Prince, and (...) Madai, as Princely Medes, and that some of Shems
Issue taking up their places and mixing with the remnant which stayed behind,
did also assume their name. (...) 2. cap. 12.
Diodorus Siculus makes something for this my opinion, who speaking of the
Colonies sent by the Scythians out of the Countries which they had subdued,
mentions two as the chief; the one from Assyria which settled near Pontus and
Paphlagonia; the other from Media, which settled near the River Tanais, and
were called Sauromatae.

And Pliny says, Lib. 6. Cap. 7.
Dein Tanain amnem gemino ore fluentem incolunt Sarmatae, Medorum (ut ferunt)
soboles. The Sarmatians (as is reported) the Issue of the Medes inhabit upon
the River Tanais which runs in two branches or channels. I take Madai therefore
here, to be Sarmatia Europaea; The other Countries, namely Germany, Macedon and
Thrace, are known to be Provinces of Europe.

That the Eastern parts of Asia were first Inhabited is very evident, from the
two last Verses of the Third Chapter of Genesis, in the former of which Verses
it appears, that Adam was sent out of Eden into the same place where he was
created, and whence he was removed into Paradise; and that this place was on
the East of Eden, is clear from the last Verse, where it is said, that the
Cherub with the flaming Sword was placed on the East of the Garden to prohibit
his return. In the sixteenth Verse of the Fourth Chapter it is said of Cain,
That he dwelt in the Land of Nod on the East of Eden, and Eden it self was in
the East, as we find in the Eighth Verse of the Second Chapter. And as the
Eastern parts were first planted after the Creation, so were they likewise
first replanted after the Flood.

Sir Walter Raleigh and others have sufficiently proved, that the Ark rested
upon the Caucasian Mountains near Margiana, a Country famous for Vines, where
the people have a constant Tradition that Noah planted his Vineyard; where also
the Mountain and River Janus, and the Mountain Nyseus, so called of Bacchus
Nyseus or Noah, were found; for these Mountains are part of that long ledge of
Hills which by Moses are called Ararat; by others Taurus. And as I said before,
it stands to reason that those Countries were first peopled, which were nearest
to the place where the Ark rested; so that China, India, Persia and Scythia may
well be accounted the first Lands that were inhabited after the Deluge. From
thence upon the multiplying of Mankind, was sent forth that Colony by whom
Babel was built, as Moses testifies, telling us, Genesis 11.6. That they
journeyed from the East; thereby plainly showing the Error of the common
Opinion, That the Ark rested in Armenia, and that these people came from
thence; whereas Armenia lies North-west of Shinaar.

Gomer the Son of Japheth seems to have seated himself in Bactriana where
Ptolemey places the City (...), Chomara, and the people named (...),
Chomarians, for Gomarians, who removing into Scythia Sacana, planted themselves
near the River Jaxartes, where the same Ptolemey places the (...), Comarians.
From hence Gomers posterity spread themselves over a good part of Scythia on
this side of the Mountain Imaus, founding the Nations of the Syevi, Sasones,
Asaei or Asiotae, and others who afterward passing through Sarmatia sat down
in Germany and Scandia.

Some may possibly expect that I should fetch our Ancestors from the building
of Babel, as if all the World had been there, whereas the contrary is evident
enough; since it cannot be imagined, that from the Flood till that time, Noah
(who was then living) and all his posterity, should live like Vagrants without
any fixed habitation, and wander so far as Shinaar; Besides, that such an
irreligious undertaking was very disagreeable to the piety of Noah, Shem and
Japheth. I conceive therefore that when Noah had by Divine Inspiration divided
the World among his three Sons, and given directions for their removals as the
propagation and multiplication of Mankind should require, Cham and his Issue,
whose ways were most displeasing to the Religious Patriarch, were sent away
first and farthest off, who being gotten out of the reach of Noah's authority,
fell upon that ungracious attempt, and afterward founded the ancient Kingdoms
of Egypt and Babylon; while the Eastern parts of Asia were peopled by the
posterity of Shem, and the children of Japheth planted themselves
North-westward. The foresaid Comarians removing into Albania, came (with a
small change of their name) to be called Cimmerians, and imparted their new
Appellation to the Mountains Cimmerini. From Albania they sent Colonies into
Asia Minor, of which such as descended from Ashkenaz planted themselves in
Pontus, Bithynia and the Lesser Phrygia, giving name to the Isles called
Ascaniae before Troy, to the Bay called Ascanius, and a River and Lake of the
same name in Bithynia. And likely it is that in honor of Ashkenaz, the Princes
of those parts took the name of Ascanius, of which name we find the Son of
Aeneas, and before him another mentioned by Homer among the Kings that aided
the Trojans. Lib. 2.
The descendents of Rhiphath seated themselves in Paphlagonia where they were
called Riphaei and Heneti, and those of Togorma in Galatia and the Greater
Phrygia. But when the posterity of Shem was so increased that Lud's Issue came
into those parts, then (in obedience to Noah's order which was yet sacred with
the Children of Shem and Japheth) these Ascanians, Rhiphaeans, and Togormians
leaving behind them such as were unfit for Travel, crossed the Euxine, and
passed up the Mouth of Ister, and from thence taking their Expedition for
Germany, sat down by the Western Ocean, as Plutarch says, of which more anon.
Those few which staid in Asia mixing with Lud's Posterity, preserved the Names
and Memories of their Ancestors.

In Germany the Cimmerians suffered another small alteration of their name, and
were called Cimbrians, from thence planting Gaul, and from Gaul, Britain.

But Isacius Pontanus in his Description of Denmark denies the Cimbrians to be
the same Nation with the Cimmerians, contrary to the general Opinion of Ancient
Authors; for Strabo in his Seventh Book tells us out of Posidonius, That the
Cimbrians made Excursions as far as maeotis and named the Bosphorus, Cimmerian,
which is the same with Cimbrian; seeing the Cimbrians are by the Greeks called
Cimmerians; here Strabo consents with Posidonius in the latter clause, but
rejects his opinion of the Cimbrians giving name to the Bosphorus, himself in
the same Book deducing it from an adjoining Mountain named Cimmerius, which was
so denominated from the ancient Cimmerians. And yet out of the Eleventh Book of
the same Strabo, it may seem that the name of the Cimbrians was famous there,
for he mentions Pagus Cimbrieus near the Lake of Maeotis, where they that used
to sail in that Lake were wont to take shipping. But what Posidonius says of
the Cimbrians, being the same with the Cimmerians, is likewise averred by
Diodorus Siculus, Lib. 5. cap. 9.
where speaking of the Celts and Gauls, he thus proceeds, (...). Their Valor
and fierceness being blazed abroad, some affirm that in Old Times they overran
all Asia, and that these People were called Cimmerians, which name was by Tract
of time corrupted into the shorter Appellation of Cimbrians. Then he adds, That
by these, Rome was taken, Apallo's Delphian Temple plundered, a great part of
Europe, and no small part of Asia made Tributary; hereby clearly making them
the same with the Gauls, and consequently the true Progenitors of the Britans.
Diodore's testimony is confirmed by Plutarch in his Life of Marius; his words
are these, (...), They were at first named Cimmerians, afterward not unfitly
Cimbrians. And, a little before, he says, Some conceive that the Cimmerians
which were first known to the Grecians, were but a small part of the whole
Nation, a band of Fugitives or seditious persons, forced by the Scythians to
remove from Maeotis into Asia under the Conduct of Lygdamius; but the main
Body, and most Warlike part of them had their habitations in the remotest
Coasts hard by the Ocean. Which description agrees very well with the dwellings
of our Cimbriaus near the German Ocean: Neither is Plutarch's calling this, a
Conjecture, sufficient to invalidate the authority of more ancient Writers than
himself.

In the last place we shall produce Stephanus Byzantinus in the word (...). The
Cimbrians, whom some call Cimmerians. By these Authors it is manifest, that the
Cimbrians were the same with the Cimmerians, and with the Gauls; and that they
were Germans none deny. Those Cimmerians which (when the rest went for Germany)
stayed about Bosphorus dwelling on both sides of it, being afterward expelled
with their King Lygdamius (as is aforesaid) by the Scythians, invaded Lydia in
the time of Ardys the Son of Gyges, and took Sardes, all but the Castle,
maintaining their gettings in despite of what he or his Son Sadyattes could do
against them, making Excursions as far as Phrygia, and building there the City
Cimmeris. But Halyattes succeeding his Father, gave them a great overthrow;
after which both he and they wearied with so long a War, became more plyant and
inclinable to peace, which was at last concluded between them, Galatia and part
of Pontus being assigned to the Cimmerians, whereby the rest of the Lydian
Kings Dominions was cleared of these troublesome Guests.

Herodotus writes, Lib. 4.
That the Scythian Nomades (who dwelt in Coelo-Syria) being infested by the
Massagetes, crossed over the River Araxes, and invading the Cimmerians forced
them to take this Expedition into Asia minor; and a little after he relates
another Tradition, viz. That the Arimaspians expelled the Issedons their
Country, who salling upon the Scythians forced them to seek new Seats, by whom
the Cimmerians were dispossessed of their Dwellings. But it is not likely that
these Disseizings and Expulsions were so soon after one another; for who will
believe that the Scythians who were not able to keep their own Country, should
so presently expel the Cimmerians, (who were not so inconsiderable a handful of
men as Plutarch's Authors seem to make them, unless they mean it in respect of
the far greater Body of the Nation inhabiting upon the German Sea) and pursuing
them vanquish the Medes, and obtain the Sovereignty of Asia for Eight and
twenty years. Likely it is, that the Issedons being Expelled by the Arimaspians
might by the help of the Massagets drive the Scythians into Cimmeria and
possess their Seats; The same Herodotus telling us in another place, That the
Massagetes dwelt (...), Lib. 1.
over against the Issedons, both Nations inhabiting near the River Araxes; and
that the Scythians, in a long tract of time, growing numerous and powerful,
might expel the Cimmerians (weakened by dissenting Counsels among themselves)
and perform such great exploits in Asia.

The forenamed Arimaspians and the Arimphaeans both of them Aramite Nations, as
their names show, passing by the Massagets and Issedons, and following the
Nomades entered Scythia and seating themselves there (a little before the Voyage
of the Argonauts) were reckoned for Scythians, and grew to be of such fame,
that from them, (as Pliny says) all the Scythians were Anciently by their
Neighbors called Aramaeans. Lib. 6. Cap. 17.
But to return from whence we digressed, the Cimmerians were (as we see) the
Ancestors of the Cimbrians, and these Cimbrians the first Planters of Germany,
Gaul and Britain. They were also called Celts, as Appian witnesses in his
Illyricks, saying, that the Autarians fell into great Calamity through Apollo's
anger because they Warred at Delphos, together with the Celts who are called
Cimbrians. And Plutarch in his Marius terms them Celto-Scythians, referring
to their Cimmerian Original, for the Cimmerians and all the people of the North
of Asia and Europe being not well discovered and known by the Greeks and
Romans, were by them Comprehended under the general name of Scythians, Lib. 11.
and all that vast Tract of ground by them peopled was termed Scythia as Strabo
writes. Cimbrians and Celts were names of equal extent, and of ancienter date
than Germans, Gauls, and Britans; concerning which three Nations, that they
were of the same Celtick or Cimbrian Stock, is well Collected from their
agreement in language. The Gauls which were with Brennus in Greece named in
their own Language, as Pausanias says, Lib. 10.
that Order of Horse-fight which consisted of three horses in a rank,
Trimarchia; for a Horse they called Marcha, which in that very signification is
mere and pure British; for Tri, signifies three; and March, an Horse. Many
other Instances of this sort are produced by Cambden, to whom I remit the
Reader.

Pliny out of Philemon affirms that the Dead Sea was in the Cimbrians Language
called Morimarusa, which is perfect British; for Mor, signifies the Sea, and
Marus, Dead. So then the British Language agrees with the Cimbrian and Gaulish:
Next let us see for the Gaulish and German; And here, Festus Pompeius tells us,
Cimbri lingua; Gallica Latrones dicuntur; Latrones in the Gaulish Language are
called Cimbri; and Plutarch in his Marius, (...) are by the Germans named
Cimbri; Now (...) in Greek, and Latro in Latin, did anciently, as well as now,
denote one and the same thing: formerly Latro signified a Soldier, in which
sense it occurs in Plautus and Terence; and Latrocinari is used by them for
Militare; and (...) is derived of (...), which is ex bello vivere, to live by
War; and (...) and (...), were spoils taken from the Enemy. And Didymus upon
those words of Homer, (...), says he, (...), was not infamous, but of good
import among the Ancients. And Eustathius upon these words, (...), says, (...)
differs from (...), for a man (...), when he gets any thing by War, (...) is
more general when a man gets any thing by bargain, free gift, casual finding,
or any other way. And this thall suffice to show that (...) was one who lived
by War, a Soldier, and Synonymous with Latro; whereby it appears, that
Plutarch's Germans spoke the same Language with Festus his Gauls. Kemff or Kemp
signified a Camp among the old Germans, and still retains the same
signification; from hence come Kemffer, Kemper, and Kimper, denoting a Martial
man: And because Kimper was so near of found to Kimber, Festus and Plutarch,
who had very little insight into the Cimbrian Language, were induced to think
those two words imported one and the same thing: And other later Writers have
stickled mainly to have this People denominated from Kimper. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
But Josephus tells us, That the Grandsons of Noah had the honor to have the
Nations called after their names; and if Gomer did not give name to this
People, I cannot find any to whom he did, and so he, though eldest Brother,
must find harder measure than all the other Sons of Japheth. Kimper and Kimber
therefore though sounding alike, are of different originations, Kimper being
corrupted from Kemper, which is derived from Kemp or Kemff; whereas Kimber or
Cimbrian, comes from Kimmer or Cimmerian, and, that, from Komer or Comarian,
which is so denominated from Gomer. But these resemblances and nearnesses of
words, are shelves upon which too many Writers have been wrack't. Thus the
Henochij in the East have past for Heniochi, as if they had owed their original
to the Charioteers of Castor and Pollux. And here at home, Caermarden in
South Wales has been derived from Caer Merdhin the City of Merlin, instead of
Caer Maridun the City of Maridunum mentioned by Ptolemey. Yet if we should
grant that the name of Cimbrians came from Kimper, it would make nothing
against their being the same with the Cimmerians, seeing diverse Nations when
they became great and powerful, have willingly admitted a small alteration in
their name, when that change carried in it something of August and Illustrious
Import; yet so, that the track and print of the old name should still remain
discernible in the new. Thus they who formerly were called Getae and Getici,
came to be called Gothi and Gothici, because Got in their language signifies
Good and Divine; And our Cimmerians becomeing dreadful to the neighboring
Nations, might possibly come to be called Cimbrians, from their Warlike Courage.

That the Magogaei, Medi, Jaones, Thobeli, Moschi and Thraces were of the
Posterity of Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Mosoch and Thiras, no man denies; why
then should only Gomer be robbed of his Issue? But some there be who are
infected with the old Monkish humor of laboring with all their might to
derive their Nation from Shem, because of him came the holy Seed; and therefore
deny the name of Cimmerians to be so ancient as to have any relation at all to
Gomer, telling us, that they were formerly called Gerberians.

Pliny indeed speaking of the City Cimmerium, Lib. 6. Cap. 6.
adds, Quod antea Cerberion vocabatur, which was formerly called Cerberion,
which may be true of that City; but that the people were called Cerberians
before they had the name of Cimmerians, no ancient Author has averred, though
several have written, that they were also called Cerberians. For having
conquered Cerberium, they gave it the name of Cimmerium; yet it retained also
its old name with the new one, as the old name of Byzantium was not so
abolished by the new one of Constantinople, but that the City retained both
appellations, and the people were sometimes called Byzantini, as well as
Constantinopolitae. And from this Cerberium they came to be sometimes termed
Cerberians, as the Franci having subdued Gallia, and seated themselves there,
were thence named Galli as well as Franci. The Doors winning Lacedaemon, were
thence called Lacedaemonij; and the Getae conquering Thracia and part of
Scythia, were termed Thraces, and Scythae. Some are of opinion, that the Greeks
called this People, Cerberians, and their City, Cerberion, that is, Infernal,
from their dreadful looks, and out of hatred, because they had been shrewdly
afflicted by them, and Jonia more than once grievously ransack't. Lib. 1. cap.
8. Sect. 6.
And Sir Walter Raleigh conceives Pliny to be mistaken in making Cerberium to
be the City of the Maeotian Cimmerians, and tells us, that it was a Town of
Campania, (where the Italian Cimmerians dwelt, Pliny, lib. 3. cap. 5.
where also were the River Acheron, and the Lakes Acherusia and Avernus) and
that it was so called of the unhealthful Waters savouring of Brimstone, which
Augustus caused to be cleansed by letting in the water of the Lake Lucrinus.
But if Pliny were not mistaken, yet this may be further said, That those words
of his, Cimmerium which was formerly called Cerberion, are not necessarily to
be understood, that it was called Cimmerium, but that it was anciently called
Cerberion, as well as Cimmerium, though the name of Cerberion was then worn out
of use; as the same City was called Augusta and Londinum, in the time of the
Roman Government, though the former name has been quite loft long ago. So that
it amounts to no more than if he had said, Londinum quod antea Augusta
vocabatur; Londinum which was formerly called Augusta, whereas yet it is
certainly known that the name of Londinum is of as great (if not greater)
antiquity as that of Augusta.

As for the other Fancies of some inconsiderable Greek Scriblers who affecting
singularity write the name of this People wrong, purposely to coin as wrong a
derivation of it, either from (...), Winter, in respect of the coldness, or
from (...), a Mist, in regard of the darkness of their Bosphoran habitation, I
look upon them as mere effects of the vanity of that Nation, who use all shists
to draw the original of all people and places to themselves. But in the next
place they tell us out of the Thirty eighth Chapter of Ezekiel, That the
Posterity of Gomer and Togormah were in Gog's Army against Israel, which was
raised out of the Countries which were either subject to, or confederate with,
the Seleucidan Kings of Syria: And out of the Fifty second Chapter of Jeremy,
they show that Ashkenaz, is joined with Ararat and Minni the greater and lesser
Armenia in the War of the Medes against Babylon, and therefore not likely to
be far from them. Here we grant, that by Gomer are meant the Cimmerians
inhabiting Galatia and part of Pontus; by Togormah, part of the Phrygians; by
Ashkenaz, the other part of the Phrygians, together with the Bithynians and the
rest of Pontus, because in all these Countries there had been Colonies of the
Issue of Gomer, Ashkenaz and Togormah, who at their departure into Europe had,
as we said before, left behind them some remnants, from which the Prophets
might denominate the whole Provinces, as Ezekiel does all the Syrian Empire
from Magog (which the Greeks call Hieropolis) a City of Coelo-Syria. But this
does no ways contradict what we have said, That the main Body of Gomers
Posterity planted Germany, Gaul and Britain; the Britans being the undoubted
offspring of the Gauls, Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
whom Josephus expressly terms Gomarians, and avoucheth Gomer to be their
Founder; and the Jews and their Rabbines make Ashkenaz the Father of the
Germans, and call Germany by no other name than the Land of Ashkenaz; and the
Learned Melanchthon, with other worthy Writers, say, that the Germans are
called Tuiscones for Die Ascanes. Thus Ashkenaz, as the Eldest Brother, has
the honor to give Name to the ^^^ntry, though the Posterity of his Brothers,
Rhiphath and Togormah, joined with his in the planting of it. As Japheth then
possessed the North of Asia, with Europe and its Isles; so his Son Gomer
possessed the utmost borders of Europe, which his Name significantly imports,
being first imposed upon no light occasion, but rather by Divine Providence and
Inspiration; for Gomer in the Hebrew Tongue betokens Utmost Bordering. The
Cimbrian Gauls therefore were Ancestors to the Britans, (not the Britans to the
Cimbrians, as Humfrey Lhuyd would have it.

But to go on, the Britans were divided into many Principalities and Nations,
diverse of which were subdivided into smaller Septs and Tribes, Cornwall and
Devonshire were possessed by a people, whom Solinus names Dunmonii, Ptolemy
Danmonii, (and in some Copies, Damnonii,) of these the more Western seem to be
called Cossini for Corini, as we read Fusii for Furii, Valesii for Valerii; the
more Eastern, Ostidamnii, Ostaei, and Ostiones, though Artemidorus, whom
Stephanus follows in his Book of Cities, being a Stranger, and not thoroughly
acquainted with the Affairs of Britain, confounds and mistakes them for one
another. But whether our Ostaei, or Ostiones, gave beginning to the Nation of
the same name in Livonia, or they to these, I cannot positively determine, only
thus much I may observe by the way, That that people, as Tacitus says, came
near to the Britains in Language. The Durotriges inhabited Dorsetshire; the
Belgae Somerset, Wilishire, Hantshire, and the Isle of Wight; These Belgae w^^^
as I conceive, those Britans which, as Caesar says, Lib. 2. de bell. Gall.
were subject to Divitiacus King of Soissons, whom some have mistaken to be the
same with Divitiacus the Heduan, Brother to Dumnorix, not considering that
Caesar, with whom this latter was contemporary and familiar, speaks of the
former as dead some while before, and mentions one Galba for his Successor; of
these the Segontiaci were a Tribe, dwelling about Holeshot and Silecester. The
Attrebatii held Barkshire, among whom Comius of Arras was of great Authority,
whither he fled, after he had incurred Caesar's displeasure: Of these the
Bibroci, who dwelt about the Hundred of Bray, were a Tribe. Oxfordshire and
Gloucestershire were possessed by the Dobuni, whom Dion Cassius calls
Bodunni, and of these the Ancalites about the Hundred of Henley were a Tribe.
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hertfordshire, were possessed by a people
whom Dion Cassius calls Cattuellani, Ptolemey Cattieuchlani, according to some
Copies Cattidudani, and Cathicludani; of these the Cassii about Caishow were a
Tribe, and, as I conceive, the Cenimagni too, though I cannot define the place
of their dwelling, unless it were about Dunstable, which was anciently named
Magintum, Magioninium, and Magiorinium. For I cannot assent to Mr. Camdens's
conjecture, that this people were the two puissant Nations of the Iceni and
Regni; since if Caesar had brought them likewise to submit to the Empire of
Rome, Detraction it self could not have set so small a value upon his
performance against the Britans, as Horace, Propertius, Seneca, Lucan, and
Tacitus do, telling us, that he scarce meddled with them, that he only
discovered them, but did not deliver them to the Romans. Neither is Tacitus
necessarily to be understood to speak of Caesar's Transaction with the
Cenimagni, where he, treating of Ostorius, says, that the Iceni had willingly
sought the Amity of the Romans; seeing any one that shall take notice of that
place, will find that it may be as well applied to the first coming of A.
Plautius. And Mr. Camden himself writing of the first Inhabitants of Britain,
takes it for granted, that these Cenimagni had both their Original and Name
from the Cenomanni of Gaul. The forenamed Iceni had Huntingtonshire,
Cambridgeshire, with the Isle of Ely, and Norfolk, and Suffolk. These were also
called Igeni, and Tigeni, and by Ptolemy Simeni. The Trinobantes, or
Trinoantes, enjoyed Essex and Middlesex; and the Kantii, Kent; though some
Copies of Ptolemey have (...) for (...), as that which Camden made use of,
making it the name of the Country, not of the People. And if those Copies be
the truer and more Authentic, then it is only by the name of the Place, and
not of the Inhabitants, which may make way for a critical conjecture, That the
neighboring Regni, who in the time of the Roman Government had Surrey and
Sussex for their part, did formerly possess Kent also; which if it be so, we
need not go far to seek whence this people had their name, since the Greek
Navigators might as reasonably call them (...) (as Ptolemey calls them,) from
the Greek word (...), to break, because between their Coast and Picardy, by the
violent force of waves, Britain was broken off from the Continent, as they did
Rhegium a City of Italy, standing upon the Sicilian Straits; and Vitsan, upon
the Continent opposite to the Kentish shore, may without any forcing or
detortion be derived from Guith a British word, signifying division, or
separation. Mr. John Twine, and others, are of opinion, that there was an
Isthmus, or narrow neck of land, that in times past conjoined these Regions,
and afterward being broken either by the general Deluge, or continual beating
and rushing in of the waves, or some extraordinary Earthquake, did let in the
waters to make a passage through: for the nature of the Soil in both Shores is
the same, where the distance is narrowest, both Shores rising up with losty
cliffs of the same kind of matter and color, so as they may seem to have been
riven asunder. Besides, Plin. lib. 2. cap. 88.
ancient Writers tell us, that the force of the Sea did as much between Cyprus
and Syria, Euboea and Boeatia, Atalante and Euboea, Besbicus and Bithinia,
Sicily and Italy, Calpe and Abila; nor is the breadth of the Sea much greater
between our Island and the Continent, than either the Streights of Gibralter,
or of Sicily, to wit, about twenty four miles over, and not above twenty five
fathom deep, whereas the Sea on both sides of it is much deeper. Servius
Honoratus, commenting on that verse of Virgil, Et penitus toto divisos orb
Britannos, And Britans quite disjoined from all the World, says, that Britain
was in times past joined to the Main. And Claudian seems to be of this mind, --
Nostro diducta Britannia mundo, Britain that is severed from our Roman world;
the word, Diduco, signifying an actual severing, as being diametrically opposed
to Contraho. Neither can it be doubted, but that the face of the Earth has
been much altered, partly by the Deluge, and partly by long continuance of
time, and other causes; whereupon Ovid in his Metamorphosis brings in
Pythagoras thus speaking: Vidi eg^ quod quondam fuerat solidissima tellus
Esse fretum, vidi factas ex aequore terras.
My self have seen main ground sometimes turned into Sea and Sand,
And seen I have again the Sea become main settled Land.


That the Regni were so named from Regnum, a Kingdom, as some would have it,
because the Romans permitted them to remain under the Regal Government of
Cogidunus, seems to me no satisfactory reason; neither does Tacitus say, that
the Cities given to him were in this tract; and I am rather of that Gentleman's
mind, who wrote the life of Nero Caesar, that both they and his Kingdom lay in
the Midland Countries, where his Authority and Fidelity, commended by the same
Tacitus, did certainly much advantage Suetonius Paulinus in his long March from
Anglesey to London, when Boadicia had excited so great an Insurrection; whereby
he answered the expectation of his Politic Lords, whose aim in their
Kindnesses and Donations was, to have even Kings for their instruments of
Thraldom and Servitude. The Coritani, bordering upon the Dobuni or Bodunni,
inhabited the Counties of North-Hampton, Leicester, Rutland, Lincoln,
Nottingham, and Derby. And next to them the Cornavii, or Cornabii, possessed
Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Cheshire, and of
these the Cangi or Ceangi were a Tribe inhabiting the Seacoasts of Cheshire.
The Silures, whom Ptolemy calls Sylires, possessed the Counties of Monmouth,
Hereford, Radnor, Brecknock, and Glamorgan. The Dimetae or Demetae (corruptly
in some Copies of Ptolemey written Metae) had the Counties of Caermarden,
Pembroke, and Cardigan; the Ordevices, Ordovices, or Ordovicae, (corruptly
Ordolucae) inhabited the Counties of Flint, Denbigh, Caernarvon, Merioneth, and
Montgomery, containing the Principalities of North Wales and Powis, (
South Wales being divided between the Silures and Dimetae;) these people were
in all probability of the offspring of the Veneti of Armorica, from whom the
greatest part of their Territory seems to have received the name of Guineth and
Venedotia, which name of Guineth Cambden conceives Pausanias to have aimed at
in his Arcadia, where for Genunia he would have Genuthia to be read.
Lancashire, Yorkshire, Westmorland, Cumberland, and the Bishopric of Durham,
were possessed by the Brigantes, a stout people, and true Sons of the old
Cimbrians, who, as the Germans mentioned by Coesar, accounted no Robberies
infamous that were committed without the borders of their own State, and
allowed the practice thereof to exercise their Youth withal, and to keep them
from idleness; as in that warlike age when men reckoned that their Right, which
they could win or hold by might and dint of sword, for which they were so
famed, that they were from thence called Brigantes, that is, Grassatores,
Robbers, or else others that followed the same courses were so named from them.
Of these the Gabrantovici were a Sept, as also were the Setantii, as likewise
the Parisi, and the Jugantes too, if that name be not a mistake in Tacitus for
Brigantes. In this Territory of the Brigantes Nennius places the country of
Guennesi (wherein stood Caer Guortigerne) which name is in some sort preserved
in Went a Riveret, and Wentworth a Town of the West Riding of Yorkshire, and
Wentsdale a Vale in Richmondshire. Northumberland (strictly so called,)
Teifidale, Twedale, Merch, Lauden, Liddesdale, Eusedale, Eskedale, Annandale,
Nidisdal, Galloway, Carrict, Kyle, Cuningham, Cluydsdale, with part of Lennox
and Sterling. Sherifldome, were peopled by the Ottadini, Gadeni, Selgovae, (by
Tacitus named In vita Agricolae.
Horesti) N^vantes, and Damnii, all comprehended under the general term of
Maeatae, as descended from the Maeatae, a Tribe of the Cimmerians. All the
country beyond these was held by the Epidii, Cerones, Carnonaeae, Carini,
Cornabii; Smertae, Logi, Cantae, Caledonii, Vacomagi, Vennicones or Vernicones,
and Taizali. Of these the five first made up the Nation of the Attiscoti, of
whom St. Hierome speaks in his second Book against Joviman: Quid loquar de
caeteris nationibus, cum ipse adoleseentulus in Gallia viderim Attiscotos
gentem Britannicam humanis vesci carnibus; What should I talk of other Nations
(said he,) when I my self in France, being a youth, saw Attiscots, a British
people, seed upon man's flesh. For so Henricus Gravius tells us it is read in
those Manuscript Cepies which he made use of, not, Scotos, as it is in the
common Edition, and the Agnomination of Gentem Britannicam, is a good evidence
for it. And it is not unlikely, that in the same Book of that Father, where we
read, Ante hoc Autem quoties in Britannia humanis veseebantur carnibus, nunc
jejuniis refiiciunt antmam suam; these words, Autem quoties, through the
carelessness of the Corrector, or ignorance of the Transcriber, crept in for
Attiquoti, so that the sense should be thus: Before this the Attiquots in
Britain did feed on man's flesh, but now relieve their souls with fastings. And
in St. Hierom's eighty third Epistle, written to Oceanus, we find another
barbarous custom of theirs mentioned, where he speaks of some, who Scotorum
and Atticotorum ritu, ac de Republia Platonis, promiscuas uxeres, communes
liberos babeant; After the manner of the Scots and Atticots, and according to
Plato's Commonwealth, have Wives and Children in common. For so Marianus
Victorius affirms it to be in his Copies, which is undoubtedly the genuine
Reading, though in the Old Edition of Basil, Atticorum be foisted in for
Atticotorum. As likewise for the first place that I cited out of St. Hierome
concerning this people, we find in one Copy Attigottos, in another Cattacottos,
in a third Cattitos; and in another place, where this Father speaks of them,
Erasmus puts down for them, Azotos. By Ammianus Marcellinus they are named
Attacotti, and, in the Book called Notitia, Attecotti. I conceive Attis oti to
be the true name of them, and that they were first so termed by the Venedotian
Britans from Vch Y Scot, signifying in British, Above or beyond the Scots, in
respect of their Country, situate upon the Deucaledonian Sea, over or beyond
Dal-Raida in Vlster the Habitation of the Scots, which butts forth into the Sea
between North Wales and Cantyre; as the Ottadini of Northumberland, according
to Camden, from Vch Tin, above or beyond the River Tine. Unless we shall think
they were named Attacotti from the Attaci, Lib. 4. cap. 12.
(a Cimmerian Tribe mentioned by Pliny,) as descended from them. Of the other
seven Nations, or rather Tribes or Septs, whose Country lay along the German
Sea; the Caledonii, whom the Panegyrist calls Caledones, inhabiting from Sinus
Lelanonius, or the River Levin, to Vararis or Murray Frith, were of greatest
fame: Insomuch that In vita Julii Agricolae.
Tacitus calls all beyond Glotta and Bodotria by the name of Caledonia, and the
people, Caledonians; and others extend the Name to the whole Island, calling
the Sea also which environs it, Oreanus Caledonius, the Caledonian Ocean, and
using the term of Caledonian woods, for all the Woods of Britain. Hence
likewise it is, that all the people beyond the Maeatae were sometimes divided
into Deucaledones, (from whom the Deucaledonian Sea on the West of Scotland had
its appellation) that is to say, the Caledonians of the South, or of the right
hand, from the British word, Deheu, betokening the Right hand; and Vecturiones,
them of the North, or of the left hand, from Chwithic, signifying the left
hand; for the Britains, after the manner of the Hebrews, used to denote the
South by the right hand, and the North by the left. But when the Caledonians
strictly so called, with their neighbors between the mountains of Drum Albin
and the German Sea became united into one Nation and Kingdom with the Picts,
these two names of Vecturiones and Deucaledones, (whom Lib. 27.
Ammianus Marcellinus, ignorant of the British Language and Etymology, terms
Dicaledones) were restrained within a narrower compass, the former being taken
only for the Northern men, as the latter was for the Southern of that Kingdom.
At which time they who dwelt on the other side of Drum Albin in a rougher and
more defensible country, not mixing with the Picts, but preserving themselves a
distinct State, began to be named Attiscots, and with the Picts and Scots
grievously annoyed the Britains, that lived under the Roman Government; till at
length the Scots out of Ireland coming up Dunbritton Frith, and being received
and assisted by the Picts, so far gained upon them, that they were fain to
incorporate with them, and pass into their Name, becoming members of the
Scottish Kingdom, as their Neighbors were of the Pictish.

By these Nations was Britain peopled, which falling afterward into the hands
of the Romans, was by them had in no small estimation, as it deserved; for it
enjoyes so kind and temperate an Air, that the Summers are not excessive hot,
and the Winters are very mild; the Soil so exceeding fruitful, that Orpheus
reported it to be the very seat of Ceres, thus speaking of it: -- (...). -- Lo,
here the stately Halls of Ceres Queen. And others have taken these Islands to
be the Fortunate Isles, so much celebrated by the Ancients. From hence the
Romans used to send into Germany yearly a Fleet of eight hundred vessels
(bigger than Barges) laden with Corn for maintenance of their Armies.
Abundantly stored it is with Corn, Fruits, and Cattle, full of Mines and veins
of Metal; accommodated with brave Rivers full of diverse sorts of excellent
Fishes, and with secure and capacious Havens; the ambient Sea contributing a
moderate warmth to it, and serving it with great variety of Fishes too; besides
a kind of Pearl, mentioned by King Juba, Pliny, Marcellinus, and Beda, the
desire of which, as Suetonius says, was one of the inducements that made
Caesar take his Voyage hither, who causing a Breast Plate to be made of them,
dedicated it to Venus Genitrix, as from whom he derived his descent. And St.
Origin affirms the British Pearls to be the best next to those that are bred in
the Red Sea, or found among the Indians. Indeed it was the very Barn, Garner,
and Storehouse for victuals of the Western Empire, which made the Orator, in
his Panegyric to Constantius Chlorus, term the detention of it by Carausius
and Alectus, so great a damage to the Commonwealth. And here I should run
higher in the just praise of my Dear Country, but that I conceive it more
proper for a Choragrapher than an Historian.

Sextus Rufus, who lived in the beginning of the first Valentinian's Reign,
tells us in his Breviary, that Britain (so much of it as was under the Romans)
was divided into four Provinces, viz. Britannia prima, being all the
South-coast, which of one side lies between the British Sea and the River
Thames, with the Severn Sea on the other side, so named, because it lay nighest
to Rome. Wales, in the largest extent from the River Severn and the Irish Sea,
made up Britannia secunda, so called, because it lay remoter off. Maxima
Casariensis, extending from Humber to Glotta and Bodetria, was so named,
because it was the largest; and the middle Country between Thames and Humber
was called Flavia, from the Emperor Constantine's Praenomen, Flavius. But when
in the time of this Valentinian and his Brother Valens, the Northern people had
seized part of Maxima Caesariensis from Glotta and Bodotria, (now called the
Friths of Dunbritton and Edenborough) to the River Tine, Theodosius (Father to
the Emperor Theodosius) recovered it, and named it Valentia in honor of the
Emperors, by whom it was made a distinct Province of it self. To which we may
add the Country inhabited by the Caledonians and Attiscots, making up six
Provinces in all. Septimius Severus had formerly divided Britain into two
parts, the Higher, which was the nearer; and the Lower, which was the remoter:
and before the coming of the Romans it was divided into three parts, Loegria,
now England; Albania, Scotland; Cambria, Wales; at what time they were so
overgrown with Idolatry, that they in a manner equalled the Egyptians for
multitude of Deities, worshipping Andate or Andraste, Camulus, Bellotucadrus,
Viterinus, Magontus, and others; besides that it is likely, that they also
adored the Idols of the Gauls, Teutates, Hesus, and Tharanis, seeing both these
Nations had one and the same Theology of the famous Druids. For these were to
the Gauls and Britans Divines, Philosophers, and Lawyers, as the Bards were
their Prophets, Poets, and Historians. These last embalmed the memories of the
Ancients in Rhiming Verses, which looked both backwards in their Relations, and
forward in their Predictions; so that their Confidence meeting with the
Credulity of others, advanced their wild conjectures to the reputation of
Prophesies. The Druids taught one Chief and Supreme Deity over all the other
Idols, holding also the Immortality of the Soul, yet with the Pythagorean
error of Transmigration, (but restrained only to Humane Bodies;) though whther
they had it from Phythagoras or he from them, be questioned by Lipsius. Their
chief Deity was Dis Pater. He that desires to know more of them, may consult
Caesar, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, Lucan, Pomponius Mela, Pliny, Ammianus
Marcellinus, Lactantius, Eusebius de Praeparatione Evangelica, and the Comedy
Aulularia of Pseudo-Plautus, with Otho Heurnius, Camden, and Seldom.

Under the Romans Britain was at first accounted a Presidial Province, and
appropriate to the Caesar's, as being annexed to the Roman Empire after the
division of Provinces ordained by Augustus, and had Propraetors of their own.
The Emperor Septimius Severus having overcome and slain Clodius Albinus,
divided it into two Prefectures mentioned before, of the Higher and the Lower.
But Constantine the Great made an alteration of Government both here and
throughout the Empire, which I think fit to set down out of Mr. Camden. He
ordained four Prefects of the Praetorium, viz. of the East, of Illyricum, of
Italy, and of Gaul; two Masters of the Soldiers, or Commanders of the Forces,
the one of Footmen, the other of Horsemen in the West, whom they termed
Praesentales. For Civil Government, there ruled Britain the Prefect of the
Praetorium, or Grand Seneschal of Gaul, and under him the Vicar General of
Britain, who was his Vicegerent, and honored with the Title of Spectabilis,
that is, Notable, or Remarkable. Him obeyed respectively to the number of the
Provinces ( viz. in the time when the Book called Notitia Imperii was written)
two Consular Deputies in Maxima Caesariensis and Valentia, and three Presidents
in the other three Provinces, who had the hearing of Civil and Criminal causes.
For Military Affairs there ruled the Commander of the Footmen in the West, at
whose disposition were the Count of Britain, the Count of the Saxon Coast, and
the Duke of Britain, each styled Spectabilis. The Count of Britain seems to
have ruled the inland parts of the Island, (keeping his residence in the
South,) who had with him seven Companies of Foot, and nine Cornets or Troops of
Horsemen. The Count of the Saxon Coast, who is named by Ammianus, Lib. 27.
Comes maritimi Tractus, Count of the Maritime Tract, for defense of the
Seacoast, had seven Companies of Footmen, two Guidons of Horsemen, the second
Legion, and one Cohort. The Duke of Britain, who defended the Marches or
Frontiers against the Barbarians, (keeping his residence in the North) had the
command of eight and thirty Garrison Forts, wherein kept their Stations
fourteen Thousand Foot, and nine Hundred Horse. So that in those days, if
Pancirollus have kept just computation, Britain maintained nineteen Thousand
two Hundred Footmen, and seventeen Hundred Horsemen, or much thereabout, in
ordinary. Besides all these, Comes Sacrarum Largitionum, that is, the Receiver
of the Emperor's Finances or public Revenues had under him in Britain; the
Rational or Auditor of the Sums and Revenues of Britain; the Provost of the
Emperor's Treasures in Britain, (who kept his Office in Augusta or London,
whence those Treasures were called Augustenses;) and the Procuratour of the
Gynegium or Drapery in Britain, in which the Clothes of the Prince and
Soldiers were woven. The Count also of Private Revenues had his Rational or
Auditor of Private State in Britain; to say nothing of the Sword (Fence-School)
Procuratour in Britain, whereof an old Inscription makes mention, and other
Officers of an inferior degree. Having named the Count of the Saxon Coast, I
think it fit here to take notice of an Error in some Learned Writers, who will
have this Saxon Coast to be the hastern shore of Kent, which is well refuted by
Mr. Seldom in his Mare clausum; Lib. 2 c. 6.7.
showing likewise that not only the Cimbrian and Batavian shores were called
Saxon, from that Nation there inhabiting, but also the Belgic and Armorican.
Zozimus mentions their seizing of part of Batavia, near the mouth of the Rhine
in Constantine's time. And in the Notitia Imperii we find under the Duke of
Belgica secunda, Equites Dalmatas Marcis in littore Saxonico, and under the
Duke of Armorica was Tribunus Cohortis primae novae Armoricae Grannona in
littore Saxonico. The Saxons of Baieux occur in Gregory of Tours, Lib. 27.
as old Inhabitants of the Armorican Coast; besides that Ammianus records, how
in the time of Valentinian and Valens, they with the Franks did terribly infest
Gaul both by Sea and Land. But their ancient Seat was in part of the Cimbrick
Chersonesse near the River Elbe, from whence they at times invaded and
denominated so large a Seacoast, which was the Boundary of this Count's
Jurisdiction to the East. And here we must observe, that the Limitaneous Counts
and Dukes under the Roman Empire had their Titles generally from the utmost
limit of their Province; as the charge of the Rhine was committed to a
Prefect, whose Praefecture extended to the further Shore of that River: whence
Posthumus (as we find in Trebellius Pollio) is by the Emperor Valerian styled,
Limitis Transrhenani Dux; and Vopiscus, in the life of Tacitus, speaks of
Lime's trans Rhenum, where the Roman Empire ended, and the German Territory
began. And so this Count's Government extended over all the British Sea to the
Shores of Cimbria, Batavia, Belgica, and Armorica, comprised under the name of
the Saxon Coast, who was therefore called Comes littoris Saxonici per
Britanniam, not because any part of Britain was so termed, (the Saxons having
no footing there till Hengist's time,) but because the Count kept his residence
there in any of the Sea-towns of Kent, Sussex, Suffolk, or Norfolk. Thus the
Command of the Praefects of Danubius and Euphrates reached to the further
Shores of those Rivers, and the Asian Proconsuls to the Europaean Shore of
Hellessont. Nor is it strange, that he should have his Title from that Coast,
which was the very part of his Province that he was to have a more especial
care of, as that from whence the greatest danger was to be expected. The
Britans before the coming of the Romans had no strong nor well built Cities,
Woods serving in stead of them; for when they had by felling of Trees mounded
and fenced therewith a spacious round plot of ground, there they built for
themselves Halls and Cottages, and for their Cattle set up Stalls and Folds,
which served them for places of Refuge and Retreat in time of their Wars, which
were very frequent, the Country being divided into so many petty Nations, and
the Confines very small. But under the Imperial Government they had eight and
twenty considerable Cities as appears by Gildus, besides many Towns of good
note, of which there were three Archbishopricks, York, London, and Carleon upon
Vske, though now there be but two in England, Canterbury and York, and the
Archbishop of St. Andrews Primate of Scotland. And for the more commodious
passage of Soldiers and Travelers, the Romans made several Causeys or
Street-ways here, of which these four were most remarkable: Watling-street, so
called of one Vitellian, who is said to have had the charge of making it;
Ikenild-street, so called, because it began in the country of the Iceni;
Fosse, so named, because, as some think, it was fenced on both sides with a
Ditch; and Ermin-street, denominated, by a German word, of Mercury, under the
name of Erminsul, that is, the Column of Mercury, who was deemed to have the
charge of Ways, whence also by the Greeks he was named (...), and had Statues
with four sides called in old time Hermae, set every where upon Highways.

But it is time now to hasten to the History of the Ancient Britans, before the
Entrance of the English. And here I shall first set down what is reported by
Annius of Viterbo, and Geffrey of Monmouth, to have been transacted here before
the coming of the Romans, which though generally by the Learned reputed
Fabulous, may yet serve for the Readers delectation and recreation.

Britain and Gaul are said to have made up one Kingdom anciently, of which
Samothes, Surnamed Dis pater, was the first King; after whom succeeded his Son
Magus, then Sarron Son to Magus, Druis Son to Sarron, Bardus Son to Druis,
Longo Son to Bardus, Bardus junior Son to Longo, Lucus Brother to Bardus,
Celtes Son to Bardus; this King was Surnamed Bretanus; and had a Daughter named
Galatea, whom Hereules Lybicus married, and of her begat Galates, ( Parthenius
Nicaeus calls the Mother Celtice, and the Son Celtes, after his Grandfather's
name;) this Galates reigned after his Grandfather and Mother: then followed
Narbon Son to Galates, Lugdus Son to Narbon, Beligius Son to Lugdus, who dying
without issue Jasius King of Italy (Son of Camboblascon, who was great Grandson
to Thuscus the Son of Hercules) succeeded him; but he being murdered by his
Brother Dardanus, had for his Successor Allobrox, a nearer Kinsman to Beligius,
put by before possibly for being under age. Then followed Romus Son to
Allobrox, Paris Son to Romus, Lemanes Son to Paris, Olbius Son to Lemanes,
Galates junior Son to Olbius, Namnes Son to Galates, and Rhemus Son to Namnes.
During the Reigns of these Samothean Kings happened nothing remarkable, only that
in the time of King Lucus, Osiris the great King of Egypt was slain by his
Brother Typhon, with the help of Laestrigon, Antaeus, Gerion, Albion and
Bergion the Grandsons of the murdered Hero by his Son Neptune, after which
Albion and Bergion with a multitude of Africans coming into Spain (where Gerion
reigned) from thence invaded and conquered Britain and Ireland, where they
ruled for some years. But in the time of Celtes, Hereules pursuing the revenge
of his Father's death, kills Typhon and Antaeus, settles his Brother Orus and
his mother Isis in the Kingdom of Egypt, destroys Gerion in Spain, and marches
into Gaul with intention to pass into Italy. Celtes joyfully entertains him,
in requital whereof he built the City of Alexia. Albion and Bergion suspecting
he would at length call them to an account, resolved to be before hand with
him, and came against him with a puissant Army, who, having married Galatea,
and increased his Army with Gaulish Supplies, encountered them in a place named
The Stony Strond, or Stony Field, (now called by the French, Le Craux,) where
after a long and terrible fight the two Brothers were deseated and slain. From
thence Hercules departed into Italy, where he slew Laestrygon. The Samotheans
in Britain, emboldned by the success of this Battle, took up Arms against the
residue of the Africans that were lest behind, commencing a long war, which
continued till the coming of Brutus.

In this interval the fifty Daughters of Dioclesian King of Syria, having all
murdered their Husbands in one night, were for their punishment embarked in a
Ship well victualled, but without Pilot, Mast, or Sail, and so committed to the
mercy of the Seas. At last they were cast upon the Western Coast of this
Island, then inhabited by the African Progeny, to whom women were very welcome,
in regard the Samotheans disdained to give their Daughters to them. The Eldest
of these, named Albina, was married to the Prince of these Barbarians, and
renewed to this Isle the name of Albion, which had been before imposed by
Neptune's forementioned Son of that name, but now was worn out. This Fable I
conceive to be founded upon the Grecian Story of Danaus his Daughters. King
Remus having no other children but one Daughter, gave her in marriage to
Franicus, Francus, or Francion, Son to Hector King of the Germans, whose Father
Brennus was lineally descended from the ancient Tuisco. He succeeded his Father
and Father-in-Law, and kept his residence in a City of Pannonia which himself
had built, and called Sicambria, after the name of his Son Sicamber, who
reigned after him, and married a Lady named Galatea, having first slain his
Rival Acis a Sicilian Prince. The Greeks for his valor called him Polyphemus,
which signifies, famous; and the Poets fable him to be a Cyclopian Giant, and
Son of Neptune, whom they generally make the Father of Gigantick Issues. This
Polyphemus Sicamder is by the Germans named Woltheim Sichinger. At his death he
divided his Kingdom between his three Sons; to Celtes he left Germany, who
extended the name of Celts to all the people of that Land; Gaul, and so much
of Britain as was held by the Samotheans, fell to Galates; and Pannonia to
Illyrius, who by Conquest added to it the Country which of him took the name
of Illyris. Francus had parcelled Gaul into twelve Provinces, and appointed
over each of them a Viceroy, with orders to be aiding to his Samothean
Subjects as occasion should require: but Ambition prompted them to other
Designs, whereunto they were animated by their Princes over-large Bounty, who
(it seems) had made their Prefectures Hereditary; so that after the death of
Galates, whose Reign was spent in Wars abroad, they assumed to themselves the
Royal Title and Power. In the Reign of Wolfheim Sichinger the famous City of
Troy was taken by the Greeks, whereupon Aeneas and Antenor were forced to seek
new seats, of whom the latter found means to settle himself about Padua, the
other in Latium, whose Son and Successor Ascanius built Alba Longa. But far
worse fortune had many of their Countrymen, who with their Families were
carried away Captive into Greece by Pyrrhus, and by him kept in slavery. From
him descended one Pandrasus, as Geffrey calls him, though the Greeks had
another name for him, who showed himself very cruel to the issue of these
Trojans. In his time a certain Nobleman dying left two Sons, the one by a Greek
wife, the other (named Assaracus) by a Trojan, who falling out about the
sharing of their Father's Territory, caused the King to interest himself in the
quarrel, who hating the Trojan Nation, and consequently Assaracus for his
relation to them, took his Brothers part against him, and would by force have
disseised him of his Inheritance, if he had not been opportunely succored by
Brutus, of whom we come now to speak.

Ascanius King of Alba dying, there arose a controversy about the succession
between his Son Julus, and his Half-Brother Sylivins Posthumus the Son of
Aeneas by Lavinia, the first being favored by the Trojans, the other by the
Latins, who being more numerous, advanced Posthumus to the Crown, assigning
the Pontificate to Julus, who upon the reconciliation assumed his Uncles name
for his Praenomen, and was called Sylvius Julus. It was made a piea against
him, that he was not of years sufficient to manage the weighty affairs of a
Kingdom; by which it appears that he married very young, having had two Sons
before his Fathers death, from the Elder of whom the Julian Family descended.
The Younger, named Brutus, proved fatal to both his Parents, for his Mother
died in Childbed, and at fifteen years of age he by mischance killed his
Father at a hunting, for which he was banished by Posthumus, and went into
Greece, where upon sundry occasions he gave such proofs of his valor, as
encouraged the poor oppressed Trojans to repair to him, and request him to
undertake the freeing of them from the Grecian Bondage. Brutus becomes their
Prince, and entering league with Assaracus wins two victories of Pandrasus. In
the first, Antigonus the King's Brother, and his friend Anacletus were taken
Prisoners; in the other, the King himself. Hereupon, by the means of a Trojan
named Mempricius, ensued a peace, whereby Assaracus was secured in his Right,
and Brutus obtained in marriage the King's eldest Daughter Innogen, with a
Fleet of three hundred twenty four Ships, well provided with all necessaries to
transport the Trojans and their Families to another Country. The first place he
arrived at, was an Island where Diana had a Temple, whose Oracle he with his
Soothsayer Gerion, consults about the success of his Voyage, and receives a
propitious Answer. From hence departing, he sailed along the coast of Africa,
conquering by the way the Pirates of those Seas, and for a fresh supply of
provision was forced to land in Mauritania, and forage the Country; then
passing the Straits of Gibralter came, as Geffrey of Monmouth says, into the
Tyrrhen Sea. It should seem, the old British Writers meant not by that name the
Sea of Etruria, for the Straits-mouth was out of the way from the Mediterranean
thither; but they understood some nearer Sea by it, as appears by Nennius, who
tells us, that King Belinus the Son of Minocanus subdued the Isles of the
Tyrrhen Sea, whereas the Britans never used to sail so far as ^^ruria with any
considerable Fleets; yet why any Sea between the Straits and Britain should be
so called, I cannot see. Here Brutus met with another Fleet of Trojans,
commanded by Chorinaeus, who was descended from Antenor; him he acquaints with
the Answer he had from the Goddess, and prevails with him to join with him in
his Design. Hence they pass forward through the Gallick Sea, and cast Anchors
in the River Loire, which parted Aquitaine and Armorica. Gaul was at this time
governed by twelve Princes, one of whom, named Groffarius, had Pictavia, and
part of these two Provinces aforenamed for his share, who hearing the arrival
of these Strangers in his Dominions, sent out a party to take an account of
them. These found Chorinaeus with two hundred men chasing their Master's Deer,
and after some angry Expostulations fell to blows, where Imbert Commander of
the Gauls was slain by Cherinaeus, and his men put to flight. Groffarius
hereat incensed, marches against the Trojans, who now were all landed, and
ready for the Encounter, which was very sharp; but at last the Victory fell to
the new Comers, who wasting the Country at their pleasure, loaded their Ships
with spoil and pillage. In this Battle one Suardus, a great Nobleman of Gaul,
lost his life by the hand of Chorinaeus. But now the other Eleven Princes
hasten to the succor of their vanquished friend, and overbearing the Strangers
with multitude, beat them to their Camp, and there beseige them. About midnight
Chorinaeus gets out with three thousand men, and lodges them in an adjoining
Wood till morning, at what time Brutus marched into the field, whom the Gauls
most furiously assail with assured hopes of Conquest, when on a sudden
Chorinaeus from the Wood falls in desperately upon their Rear, who seeing
themselves engaged both before and behind, and thinking these last had been a
new supply brought by Sea, and more in number than they were, began to faint;
which their Enemies perceiving redoubled their courages, and charged them so
fiercely, that they put them to a total rout. In this fight Turnus, the Nephew
of Brutus. who came from Italy with Chorinaeus, was slain, after he had
performed incredible exploits, from whom the people of the country where the
Battle was fought were named Turones.

Brutus began now to consider, the numbers of his men were shrewdly diminished
by these conflicts, whereas the losses of his Adversaries would easily be
repaired by fresh recruits, which he could not have, and therefore enquiring
the name of the Land, and finding that the place intended him by the Oracle lay
beyond it, he re-embarqued his Soldiers, and with a prosperous Gale sailed into
Britain, arriving at Totnes in the Province of Danmonia, and putting to flight
the Albionians who opposed his landing. The forementioned war between the
Samotheans and Albionians becoming hereditary had lasted for diverse Ages, the
former having the better of it, and possessing the best part of the Isle, so
long as their Kings kept their residence in Gaul, and assisted them in their
exigencies; but when Fran^us removed his Court into Pannonia, committing the
government of Gaul to twelve Prefects, whom he likewise ordered to be aiding
to his Samothean Subjects when they should need their help, they minding
nothing more than to establish themselves in their Prefectures, and to secure
them to their Posterity, took no care at all of Britain; whereby the
Albionians, who were glad to keep themselves in the craggy and mountainous
Moors, while the others were helped from beyond Sea, were emboldned to contend
with them in open field. The issue was, that after many bloody Battles both
Nations were reduced to such a paucity, that Diana's Oracle, when consulted by
Brutus about the event of his Voyage, is said to have termed this a Desert
Island, such animosity and hatred was between these two people, though there
was room enough and to spare for both. The Samotheans having heard of Brutus
his same, presently repaired to him, and received him for their King, who to
make good the opinion his new Subjects had conceived of him, sought out the
Albionians, and utterly defeated them, and then gave Danmonia to Chorinaeus,
from whom the Western part of it was called Corinia, now Cornwall. But as they
were solemnizing a Festival for joy of their Successes, not suspecting any
danger, on a sudden they were set upon, and many killed by thirty of the
boldest Albionians, who since their overthrow had lurked in Caves thereabouts.
Brutus and Chorinaeus with their company betake themselves to their weapons,
and surrounding these Desperadoes slew them all but their Chief, whose name was
Gormagot, and is reported to have been a Giant of a prodigious height, whose
strength Chorinaeus desired to try in wrestling, which he afterward did by the
Seaside; in which contest he was so enraged with the pain of his three Ribs
which had broke in the struggling, that heaving him up by main strength he cast
him violently down a steep Rock into the Sea where he perished. After which to
prevent such surprises for the future, they by degrees extirpated his whole
Crew; and this was the end of the Albionians, so named from their Founder
Albion, who are said to have been a Generation of Giants.

Brutus thus settled in his new Kingdom, ordained, that all his Subjects both
Samotheans and Trojans should be called Britans, and then upon the side of the
River Thames he built the City Trinobant (which the Welsh will have to be more
rightly named Troynovant) for a place of Residence for himself and his
Successors: dying, after a happy Reign of four and twenty years, he left his
Kingdom to be divided between his three Sons, but reserved the Superiority and
Sovereignty to the Eldest which was Locrinus, whose part was better than both
his Brothers, and was of him named Loegria, as Camber's part was named Cambria,
and Albanactus his share Albania. This last was invaded and slain by Humber
King of the Hunnes, whose death was soon revenged by Locrinus and Camber, by
whom the Hunnes were overthrown and destroyed, and their Prince drowned in his
flight. Three Ladies were taken Prisoners by Humber in Germany, whom he brought
with him into Britain, one of which called Estrildis was a King's Daughter.
Locrinus intended her for his wife, and therefore carried them all three with
him to Court. But Chorinaeus hearing of it, to whose only Daughter and Heiress
he had been affianced while his Father lived, came to him, and by menaces
compelled him to persorme his former Engagement. Yet he still retaining his
affection to the Captive Lady who was very beautiful, kept her and her two
Companions in a Cave till the death of Chorinaeus, and then repudiating
Guendolena married Estrildis. But this injury was not long unpunished, for the
rejected Queen returning into Danmonia levied an Army, wherewith she gave
Battle to her wanton Husband in Worcestershire by the River Stour, and
victoriously slew him. Estrildis here taken was thrown into the River Severne,
and drowned with her Daughter Habren, which she had by Locrinus. Madan, the Son
of Locrinus and Guendolena, being under age, his Mother governed for him as
Guardian fifteen years, and then retiring to a private life, dyed within a
short space, whereupon the King gave Danmonia to his Uncle Camber.

After Madan reigned his Son Mempricius who murdered his Brother Manlius, then
Eboracus or Ebrauc the Son of Mempricius, Brute Surnamed Green-shield, the Son
of Ebrauc, Leil the Son of Brute, Rudibras the Son of Leil, Bladud the Son of
Rudibras, and Leir the Son of Bladud. This Leir had only three Daughters;
Gonerilla, married to Maglanus Prince of Albania, descended from Albanactus;
Ragana, married to Henninus Prince of Danmonia, descended from Camber; and
Cordella, married to Aganippus a Gaulish Prince, descended from one of those
twelve with whom Brutus fought, which twelve, after the death of Galates the
Son of Wolfheim Sichinger, had made themselves absolute in their several
Provinces, each of them assuming the Name and Title of King, as likewise did
the German Princes after the death of Celtes. Aganippus restored King Leir, who
had been expelled by his other Sons in Law, and he in requital at his death
left his Kingdom to Cordella, which she ruled worthily while her Husband lived,
but after being taken and imprisoned by her Nephews, she killed her self.

The Kingdom must now be divided into two parts, whereof the Southern is
allotted to Cuneda the Son of Henninus, and all North of Humber to Morgan the
Son of Maglanus, which Agreement held not long; for Morgan not satisfied with
his moiety, falls out with his Cousin, who overcomes and kills him, thereby
getting the whole, which he leaves to his Son R^^a^^. To him succeeded his two
Sons, one after the other, first Gorgustus, then Sisillius, and after him Jago,
Son or Grandson to Gorgustus, Chinimarchus the Son of Sisillius, and Gorbodugus
the Son of Chinimarchus, whose two Sons contended for the Kingdom; but Ferrea
finding himself the weaker fled into Gaul, whence returning with such forces
as he had procured of Suardus one of the Kings there, he was slain in battle by
his Brother Porrex, who yet enjoyed not the fruits of his victory, being in
revenge hereof cruelly murdered as he slept in his Tent by Queen Videnia, the
Mother of them both, assisted in that bloody design by her Maids. This plunged
Britain into Civil Wars, and turned the Monarchy into a Pentarchy, under the
Governments of Pinnar King of Loegria, Rudaue King of Cambria, Stater King of
Albania, Jevan King of Northumbria, and Cloten King of Cornwall, whose Father
Chinimarchus was son to Prydain, and Grandson to Aedhmaur the son of King
Gorgustus.

Dunvallo Molmutius, the son of Cloten, reduced the Land to a Monarchical State
again, subduing all his Competitors but Jevan, (or Owen, as some call him) who
terrified by the death of the rest submitted himself; yet the generous
Conqueror suffered their Sons to hold under him part of what their Fathers had
enjoyed. He is said to be the first that wore a Crown of Gold here. His sons
Belinus and Brennus parted the Island between them after their Fathers death,
the Southern moiety with the Sovereignty being assigned to Belinus as the
Elder, and the Northern to Brennus, whom Cenulphus King of the Morini invaded
to his own hurt, being vanquished and chased home with shame. Brennus herewith
puffed up, would no longer stand to the first Agreement, but by the advice of
some flattering Incendiaries, sailed to the King of Norway, and obtaining his
Daughter in Marriage, with a strong Army to make war upon his Brother, who
being informed of his design, had seized his Principality into his own hands.
The King of Denmark, a former lover of the Norwegian Princess, arms all his
power, and meets this bold Britan upon the Sea, where in the heat of the fight
a sudden Tempest severs and scatters the Fleets. The Danish King having luckily
seized the Ship wherein was his beloved Lady, was with two others, making four
Ships in all, cast upon the British Shore, and there taken and delivered to
Belinus, while his Fleet made shift to get home; and Brennus with his Navy was
driven upon the Gallick Coasts, nor was it long ere he crossed over to
Northumbria, and fought with his Brother in the Forest of Galtres, but losing
the day, and all his Ships but one, fled to Seginus, King of the Senones and
Allobroges. Belinus now treats with his Danish Prisoner, who swearing to become
his Liegeman, and pay a yearly Tribute, and leaving Hostages for performance,
is dismissed with his Lady. Brennus in this time had so far gained the love of
Seginus, that he bestowed upon him his only Daughter, and dying shortly after,
left all to him; so that he thought himself able to deal with his Brother, and
getting leave of his Neighbour-Princes to conduct his Soldiers through their
Countries, transported them into Britain, where the two Brothers being ready to
encounter one another, were reconciled by their mother Convenna. They therefore
fall to consulting, how they should dispose of those multitudes of Warriors
that were raised and brought together on both sides, and resolve to purchase
Renown by conquering foreign Nations. Passing into Gaul they easily induced
these people to join with them in their Enterprises, being thereto encouraged
by the former prosperous successes of Sigovesus in Germany and Pannonia, and of
Bel^^vesus and Elitovius in Italy. Having now greatly increased their numbers
and strength, it was judged sit to divide their Forces, and part asunder.

Brennus enters Italy, having Aruns an inhabitant of Clusium for his Guide over
the Alps, and at his instigation besieges that City. Aruns did this, because
he could not otherwise be revenged upon Lucumo a potent Citizen, who had abused
his Wife. The Clusines crave help of the Romans, who send three Sons of Marcus
Fabius Ambustus to Brennus, to try if fair words might avail any thing in the
behalf of their Friends. But these hot-spirited Youths taking offense at the
Answer they received, forgot the duties of Mediators and Ambassadors, and
encouraging the besieged to make a Sally, put themselves in the head of their
Troops, in which Action Quintus, one of the Brothers, slew a great Commander of
the Gauls. This was a violation of the Law of Nations, for which Brennus,
having in vain demanded their persons of the Senate, marches toward Rome, and
takes the City, having first defeated their Army near the place where the River
Allia runs into Tibur. They that escaped from the City and the Battle sled to
the City of Veij, and afterward under the conduct of Camillus (who before was
banished to Ardea, but now made Dictator) relieved those Senators which still
held out the Capitol, who compelled by famine had newly bought their lives, and
were paying the Gold. Brennus had received the greatest part when Camillus came
upon him, and worsting him in a tumultuary skirmish forced him to quit Rome,
and following the Enemy fought a pitched battle with him eight miles off in the
Gabine Way, where after a sharp dispute the Romans prevailed, and the valiant
Brennus, with all his Gauls and Britans, lost their lives upon the spot, not
one escaping, as Livy writes, Dec. 1. lib. 5.
to carry the news. Here was most of the Gold regained, the rest being a long
time after recovered by Livius Drusus, Propraetor of Gallia Cisalpina, Su^t. in
Tib.
which at the first appearance of the Dictator had been sent away for Tuscany,
(where the Gauls had then diverse Colonics) with some Troops to guard it, who
hearing the loss of their Companions entered into the Service of the Tyrant
Dionysius. Belinus had better fortune, and subdued Pannonia, where he settled
the Gauls and most of his Britans, married his Daughter Cambra a warlike Lady
to Antenor King of the Sicambrians, and returning home with Honor died in
peace. Next to him reigned his Son Gorguntius, who slew the Danish King, and
conquered his country, because he refused to pay the promised Tribute. Then
Guiteline, Son to Gorguntius, and Husband to the Learned Queen Martia,
Sisillius Son to Guiteline, Chiomarus Son to Sisillius, Danius Brother to
Chiomarus, and Morindus Son to Danius by his Concubine Tangustella, by whom the
King of the Morini invading this Land was overthrown, and slain. This victory
he used cruelly, putting all to the Sword that were taken. Morindus is said to
have aided the King of Orkney against Basanus King of the Sicambrians, but
lastly adventuring to fight singly with a Sea Monster, he was devoured by it,
the Monster dying presently after of the wounds he had given it. After his
death the Kingdom was divided between his five Sons, Gorbonian, Archigallo,
Elidurus, Eugenius, and Peridurus. Of these, Gorbonian, a just Prince, dyed
peaceably, and was succeeded by his Son Regin: Archigallo for Tyranny was
expelled by his Nobles, who gave his Kingdom to his Brother Elidurus, through
whose intercession he was restored, and reigned afterward very nobly, parting
his Principality at his death between his two Sons, Morgan and Eneon. But
Elidurus found not the same kindness from his other two Brothers, who took him
prisoner, and shared his Province between them, till Eugenius dying first, and
then Peridurus, he again recovered his Kingdom, and left it to his Son
Gerontius. Edwal the Son of Eugenius or Owen, and Runo the Son of Peridurus,
succeeded their Fathers like wise in their Provinces.

Thus was Britain cantoned into sundry parcels, besides, that the Descendents
of those Princes who acknowledged the Sovereignty of Dunvallo and his
Successors hitherto, now renounced all manner of Subordination. Which caused
Tacitus to write of the Britans thus: In vita Agric.
Heretofore they were governed by Kings, now they are drawn by petty Princes
into Partialities and Factions.

After Gerontius, reigned his Son Cadellus, (for the British History takes no
notice of the Posterity of the other Princes.) Then followed Coelus the Son of
Cadellus, Porrex the Son of Coelus, Cherinus the Son of Porrex, whose three
Sons shared their Father's Inheritance between them. Their names were
Fulgentius, Eldadus, and Androgeus. To this last succeeded his Son Vrianus,
after whom reigned these Kings in a direct line from Father to Son: Flind,
Clidacus, Clotenus, Gorguntius, Merianus, Bladud, Capys, Owen, and Sisillius,
who made another partition between his two Sons, Bleg^red and Archivallo; Eldon
the Son of Archivallo ruled after his Father, and then followed in a lineal
Succession Redion, Rodericus, Sawyl (surnamed Penissel,) Pyrrhus, Caporius,
Gilquellus (surnamed Minocanus,) and Belinus; he by his valor much enlarged
his Hereditary Dominions, for which he was entitled The Great. For this is that
B. M. Beli Maur, so famous among the Cambrian Genealogists. He had three Sons,
whom in his old age (for he lived till the first coming of Caesar) he assumed
as Partners in his Kingdom, assigning each of them a Province with Regal
Authority and Title. Immanuentius had the Trinobantes, and was Surnamed Lhud,
that is to fay, Russet or Tawny, it being usual with the Britans, both ancient
and modern, to impose Names and Sirnames from colors. Caswallan had the
Cattieuchlani, and is by Dion Cassius called Suellan corruptly for Cassuellan.
And indeed it is very likely, that the same causes which lost us so many Books
of that excellent Author, might make some corruptions in them that were left;
unless we shall think Suellan or Swallan was his true name, Cas being a
Praeaddition taken from the Cassii, the chief Sept of the Cattieuchlani, as
Cattimarus, Teutobochus, and Decebalus, had the beginnings of their Names from
the Catti, Teut^nes, and Daci; though afterward the name of Swallan grew out
of use, and Caswallan was used in its stead in honor of this Prince. Nennius I
conceive had Kent, and might be the Father of Cyngetorix, Carvilius,
Taximagulus, and Segonax.

These three Princes acknowledged a subordination to their Father Belinus, whom
Geffrey of Monmouth will have to be dead some years before the Romans arrived
here, vainly esteeming it a disparagement to Lhud to reign under his Father,
and aiming to give Caswallan the entire honor of managing all the war from the
first beginning; and therefore makes, that Belinus, which then lived, to be
Caswallan's General and Counselor, not his Father, contrary to Nonnius, who
expressly terms him, King of the Britans. And Henry of Huntington will needs
have him to be his Brother, and Cambden takes him for Caswallan himself,
contrary to the Cambrian Genealogists, who all consent that he was his Father.

Thus far have we waded through the Maeandrian Intrigues of Antiquity from
Samothes, obtruding nothing upon the Reader's belief of this that we have taken
either from Annius of Viterbo, or Geffrey of Monmouth; though both those
Authors have been followed and owned by some Learned men. Neither is there any
thing herein more incongruous or incredible, than what the Greek and Roman
Writers have delivered concerning the Originals of their Nations, which things
are yet allowed a place in many Authentic Historians and Chronologers. What
follows, comes from the hands of more approved Authors.

In the year of the World's Creation, Three Thousand Eight Hundred Ninety five,
according to the common Computation, Pompey and Crassus being Consuls the
second time, Calus Julius Caesar having now by Conquests overrun Gaul, out of
an innate desire of Glory, allured also, as Suetonius says, with hope of
Pearls, which as he was informed were engendered and gathered in the Creeks of
the British Sea, and being incensed against the Britans for sending both Naval
and Land supplies to his Enemies, and entertaining such as run from him, took
up a resolution to make the Puissance of Rome known to these Islanders; which
being discovered by Merchants, some particular States sent Ambassadors to him,
promising to put in Pledges, and yield obedience to the Roman Empire. Caesar
commending their Prudence, and exherting them to continue in the same mind,
sends them back with Comius in their company, whom he had made King of Artois,
giving him instructions to work them to a suller submission, and prepare them
to give him a quiet admission with his forces into their Country. Hereupon the
British Princes join to oppose him, of whom Geffrey names these, Caswallan,
Androgeus, and Tenerantius, with Crederus King of Albania, Guitellus of
Venedotia, and Britael of Demetia. Lhud, as he writes, (though falsely) was
dead some years before, and therefore is not here mentioned; and King Belinus
(as I said before) is only brought in to be his Son's General.

Caesar having gained what knowledge he could of the British coast from C.
Volusenus, whom he had sent out to descry it, embarques two Legions in eighty
Ships of burden, and some Galleys, and endeavors to land in Kent. Here
Dolobellus, General to King Belinus, (as appears by Nennius, who calls him his
Proconful) stood ready to receive him, and performed his part so bravely, that
the noble Roman confessed, the terror of such resolute opposition made his
Veteran Soldiers forget their wonted valor. But in the end they gained the
Shore, and put the Britans to flight with extraordinary slaughter. In Caesar ^^.
Caesar is brought in by Julian attributing to himself the honor (if it be at
all an honor to that person which he su^^ained) of being the first that left
his Ship, and (...) Land; but this were to make him not understand what became
him; and he acknowledges it was the Eagle-bearer of the tenth Legion. Lib. 4.
de bello Galli^^o,
Caesar marching forwards encamps upon a great Plain, supposed to be
Barham-Down, where he beheld the dispersion and loss of a considerable part of
his Flect by the violence of an unexpected storm. Comius found not such
entertainment as he expected, being imprisoned as a Spy by the Britans, who
were wise enough to perceive, that the Romans aimed at more than they should be
willing to grant; yet finding by the late conflict that there was an apparent
inequality in the match between the Roman and Britain Arms and discipline, they
judged it convenient to make their best terms, and submit; to which end they
dispatched Ambassadors to him, and with them sent back Comius, thinking by the
one to moderate his anger, and by the other in consequence to procure a peace;
which they obtained the ^aslier, by reason of the late Wrack, and the approach
of Winter, yet were enjoined to deliver Hostages. But understanding his want of
Horsemen, and the losses he had sustamed by the Tempest, they took courage
again, and slew to Arms.

About a thousand Horsemen were coming after him in eighteen Ships, which being
got within view of the Camp, were driven by a sudden storm, some back to the
Gallick coast, others upon the Western part of the Island, from whence they had
much ado to recover the Continent again; and those Ships that were with him
fared as ill, for the Galleys which were drawn up to the Shore were filled with
the Tide, and the Ships of burden that lay at Anchor were so shaken with the
Tempest, that they were almost rendered unserviceable. The seventh Legion being
sent out to fetch in Corn, was set upon by the Britans, and in danger of being
cut off, if Caesar had not seasonably come to the rescue, who contenting
himself with putting his Enemies to a stand, considering it was not now a fit
time to offer Battle, while his men were scarce recovered of so late a fear,
only keeps his ground for a while, and soon after returns to his Camp. The
Britans giving themselves out for Victors, sent straight to all the neigbouring
States for more forces, and getting together a great multitude drew toward the
Romans; but Caesar encouraging his Soldiers received these Guests with a battle
before his Camp, put them to rout with slaughter, and burnt and laid wast all
round about. Daunted with this ill success they again crave peace, which he
granted them, but withal severely reproved them for their breach of faith, and
imposed a double number of Hostages to be sent after him into Gaul, whither the
season of the year required him to hasten; so that (all his Ships but twelve
being by this time made able to abide the Sea, by incessant labor of the
Soldiers) he hoisted sail about midnight, and arrived safely with all but
eleven Ships of burden upon the Continent; these not keeping their course
landed at a Port of the Morini, who would have put them to the sword in hopes
of prey, if Caesar hearing of their peril had not sent his Horsemen to fetch
them off. The Senate advertised of these passages by his Letters. decreed a
solemn Procession and Supplication of twenty days, and himself ordering
Labienus to chastise the rebellious Morini, went to Rome, as he used to do
every Winter, to look after his concernments there.

About this time died King Belinus, having reigned forty years, yet did not his
death hinder the Britans from celebrating a solemn Festival in Trinovant, for
joy of Caesar's departure. But here fell out an unlucky accident, which proved
of very ill consequence. As the Youth were exercising themselves at Martial
sports, it chanced that two young Noblemen fell out; the one, named Hireldas,
is by Geffrey of Monmouth said to be Nophew to Caswallan; the other, named
Evelinus, to Mandubratius: Henry of Huntington says they were their Sons. In
this quarrel Hireldas was slain by Evelinus, whem Caswallan would therefore
have had to be put to death; but Mandubratius prevailed with his Father
Immanuentius to protect him. Caswallan thought it too difficult a matter to
contest at that time with his Brother in his own Royal City, he departs
therefore, but quickly returns with strong Forces which he had in readiness,
kills Immanuentius, seizes the greatest part of his Kingdom, and compells
Mandubratius to flee for safety of his life into Gaul. Nennius, who adhered so
saithfully to him in his war against the Romans, may seem likely to have sided
with him now, there being a grudg between him and Immanuentius, for going about
to change the name of Trinovant to Caer Lud, as the Lib. 1. cap. 10.
Monmouth Writer tells us.

These proceedings of Caswallan alarmed the Neighbour-States, who thereupon
took up Arms against him. And thus were the Britans embroiled in Civil wars,
not fearing belike Caesar's return, whose hasty departure they looked upon as
little better than flight, and thought he was as desirous to leave them, as
they were to have him, and therefore all the States but two neglected the
sending of their Hostages after him.

Here now some of those that are so earnest to derive our Britans from Troy,
might argue, that the forementioned Martial Sports were for the solemnizing of
King Belinus his Funeral, which was certainly a custom of the Trojans, as may
be evinced out of Virgil's Aeneids, Lib. 5. ^
where Aeneas causes the Obsequies of his Father Anchises to be celebrated
with such Exercises: and the like appears there to have been done upon the
noble Hector's account, where the Poet speaks thus of one Dares.

Idemque ad tumulum quo maximus occubas Hector
Victorem Buten immani corpore qui se
Bebrycia veniens Amyci de gente ferebat,
Perculit, and fulva moribundum extendit arena.
The mighty Butes at great Hector's Tomb
Of Amyeus the Champion's kindred, come
In quest of Honor from Bebrycian Land
By him was quelled and laid along the strand.
Caesar was now come back from Rome, and readily receives Mandubratuts into his
protection, resolving upon a second expedition into Britain, as not being well
satisfied with the success of the former. His Lagats had spent the Winter much
better and (...) than the Britans, in providing a strong (...), which the
others took no care to do. They had in all probability sustained an irreparable
loss in that famous Sea-sight, wherein the Veneti with a Navy of two hundred
and twenty good Ships of Oak engaged D. Brutas, all which were there lost but a
very few, who escaped by the ben^^^t of the night. The greatest part of this
(...) are judged to have been sent from hence to did the Veneti, Lib. 2. c. 2.
by Mr. Seiden in his Mare cla^^um, where he lays down solid reasons for his
opinion. Indeed the Roman Writers make more frequent mention of a sort of Ships
by this people used, of which the K^^ls and Footstocks, or upright Standards
were made of slight Timber, the rest of the body framed of Osiers, and covered
over with Leather. But that they had better Ships, fit for any Sea-service,
appears by Gildas, who could not else have blamed them for not encountering the
Romans with a warlike Navy; though afterward the use of them was interdicted
by the Conquerours, and only the other sort allowed them. Caesar spurred
forward by his own inclinations, and Mandubratius his solicitations, embarques
again with a much greater power than before, in a Navy of eight hundred Ships,
and lands at the same place without opposition* the Britans who had been there
to resist him (as was afterward known) being frighted away with the greatness
of his Heat. Presently he encamped, and then leaving Q. Atrius with ten
Cohorts, and three hundred Horse to guard his Ships and Baggage, marches up
into the Country about twelve Miles, and by the side of a River, supposed to
be the St^wr, set upon the Britans, who received him courageously, but were at
last sorced to take to the Woods, where was one of their old Fortisications,
whereof all the Entrances were barred up with great Trees felled for that
purpose, and laid overthwart one another; but the seventh Legion locking all
their Shields together like a Roof close over head, having raised a Mount,
entered the Wood, and drove them out, whom they pursued not far, the ways being
unknown to them, and the Evening approaching, which was better spent in
pitching and fortifying their Camp. The next day Caesar sent out three parties
to pursue the Britans, of whom the hindmost were yet in sight, when
intelligence was brought by Horse purposely sent from Q. Atrius, that his Navy
was terribly Wrackt by a Tempest the night before, many of his Ships being
utterly spoiled, and almost all of them shrewdly shattered. Hereupon he recalls
those Soldiers, and himself in person hastens to the Seaside. There he sets
all his Shipwrights to work, sends for more to Labienus, who in his absence
commanded in chief in Gaul, with orders to build more Ships, and with
incredible pains of his Legionaries who labored day and night, brought it to
this effect, that all but forty Ships were made serviceable, and being haled up
to land, were enclosed within one and the same Fortification with the Camp; and
so leaving to their defense the same strength as before, he returns to the
place from whence he came. There he found ready for him a greater Army of
Britans than any that had yet come against him; for upon the news of his second
arrival with so great Forces, they found a necessity for a speedy composure of
their intestine dissensions. And though Caswallan had at other times also,
during his Fathers life, been at war with diverse States that bordered upon him;
yet in this exigence, both in regard of his power, and his ability, in Martial
Affairs, they all judged him the fittest person for the management of this War,
and in a public Council elected him their Captain General. He therefore with
his Cavalry and Charioteers entertains Caesar with a sharp conflict, but
finding his naked Britans unable to maintain the fight long against the
well-armed Veterans, retreats to the Woods, still turning upon the Pursuers,
and cutting many off; and observing his opportunity, when Caesar thought there
had been an end of fighting for that day, and was employing his men about
entrenching, suddenly issued out upon those that kept ward before the Camp, and
was in a fair way to have put them to the sword, if two Cohorts had not been
speedily sent to their rescue, who joining with them, were with other fresh
supplies gotten behind the Britans. But such an impression of terror was upon
them, that Caswallan found it no very difficult matter to charge through the
midst of them, and carry off his men with safety. In this fight Nennius
received his mortal wound, having first slain a Tribune, named Laberius, whom
Orosius Beda, and Monumethensis through mistake call Labienus. The next morning
the Britans showed themselves here and there in small companies upon the Hills,
and had some slight skirmishes with their Enemies; but at Noon they fell
furiously upon C. Trebonius, who was sent out a forraging with three Legions,
and all the Horse; these they charged even to the very Legions and their
Standards, but were as stoutly received by the Romans, who repulsed them, and
pressed so hard upon them, that they put them by from their former way of
fighting; and giving them no time either to rally, or stand, or descend from
their Chariots, gained a complete victory, with much slaughter of the
Assailants in the Battle and pursuit. After this the Britans never encountered
the Romans with their main power, for the greater part of them departed to
their several Provinces. Caesar then marched to the River Thames, which he was
informed was no where passable but in one place. To impede his passage, under
the water were stuck many sharp Stakes unseen, and others upon the further
bank, where good Forces stood embattelled to set upon them in that disorder,
which they reasonably hoped this Device might put them in. The place retains
the name of Coway Stakes, near Oatlands still. Nennius ascribes this to
Dolobellus, chief Commander now under Caswallan, as he had been under his
Father before. But all was spoiled by Traitorous Fugitives, and discovered to
Caesar, who sending over a party of Horse first, ordered his Foot to follow,
which they resolutely performed, wading up to the neck with such speed and
violence, and fell on so boldly, that they soon put the amazed Britans to
slight, whom Polyaenus falsely reports to have been frightened at the sight of an
Elephant, with a Turret upon his back. Caswallan now despairing of success by
open force, resolves to try if he can weary out his Enemy; and therefore
retaining with him only four thousand Charioteers, he attends the motions of
the Romans. By the advantage he had in the knowledge of the Country he saved
himself from being forced to fight, and as often as their Horsemen went forth,
and strayed out in the fields for Forage or Booty, he sent out his Chariots
upon them from the Woods, who slaughtering some, and terrifying others, made
them afraid to range abroad, and Caesar himself was induced to give strict
command, that none should part from the Legions, who in all their march had
nothing left them in their way but empty Fields and Houses, which they spoiled
and burnt, the Cattle being before driven away by the Britans. In the mean time
the Trinobantes submit to Caesar, requesting him to send their Prince
Mandubratius to them, and to protect him against Caswallan's violence. Of them
Caesar required and received forty Hostages, and Corn for his Army, and
therewith sent Mandubratius to them. The Cenimagni, Segontiaci, Ancalites,
Bibroci, and Cassij, follow their example, and yield to Caesar, who learns by
the last that Caswallan's chief Town (supposed to be Vernlam) was not far off.
Thither he speeds, and assaults it in two several places, the Britans soon
quitting it, of whom many were taken in their flight, and put to the sword. In
Kent, Cyngetorix, Carrilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax, by Caswallan's orders,
assail the Roman Camp, but were repulsed by those that were left to guard it,
who in a Sally did good execution upon them, and took Cyngetorix Prisoner.

Caswallan after so many losses finding himself basely deserted by the other
States, by means of Comius of Artois, sought and obtained at Caesar's hands a
Peace upon these terms, That he should pay a certain Tribute yearly, and no
ways molest Mandubratius, or the Trinobantes, and that Hostages should be
given for the performance, which was accordingly done. And thus the Victor
having spent almost all the Summer here, with a great number of Captives
returns into Gaul, being forced to transport his Army at two several passages,
by reason of the loss of Ships, which the forementioned Storm had caused. After
this Caswallan (whom Caesar calls Cassivellaunus) reigned seven years, and dyed
in peace, having reigned in all nineteen years, eleven with his Father, (as
likewise did Lhud) and eight after his death. Mandubratius is by Beda called
Androgorius; by Orosius and Monumethensis, Andregeus; and is in the Book of
Triads reckoned the first of the Three most infamous persons that Britain ever
bred, as who was not content to have recovered his own, but also procured by
his insinuating solicitations the submission of those other Cities, which
ruined all the brave endeavors of his Heroic Uncle for his Countries liberty,
who (as Caesar tells us) was Maxim permotus defectione Civitatum, Most of all
troubled with the Revolt of the States. The Monmouth Writer makes this
Androgeus (in stead of Comius) the procurer of his Uncles peace, and the
valiant Scaeva to be his Son, and one of the thirty Hostages (abating ten of
the true number,) whereas the Traitor Bericus (of whom anon) had been a sitter
Son for such a Father, and Scaeva. by better Authors appears to be a Roman, and
to have been in Caesar's Service before the delivery of those Hostages: Then he
tells us, that Androgeus forsook his Principality, and went with Caesar to
Rome, which is evinced to be false by the injunction laid upon Caswallan not to
meddle with him. His Brother Tenevantius was of a more public spirit, and
would not seek to revenge the wrongs done to his Family by the enslaving of his
Country, but joined with his Uncle against the common Enemy, whereby he so won
upon him, that dying issueless he left him his Kingdom, which was enlarged by
the accession of the Province of the Trinobantes. upon the death of
Mandubratius, who also had no Children. This King withheld the Tribute,
whereupon Augustus, about twenty years after Julius Caesar's last Invasion,
resolved upon an Expedition hither, rather than put up such a contempt from a
Country of little note in those days; but being come into Ganl, he there
heard news of the Revolt of the Pannonians, which diverted him for that time.
Seven years after he was coming again, but finding Gaul in an unsettled
condition he accepted the offers of the British Ambassadors, who promised
Obedience and Satisfaction for the Tribute detained. But upon fail of payment
he the next year prepared for a third Expedition; which to prevent, the Britans
again send Ambassadors to him, who coming to Rome, offered Gifts in the
Capitol, and sacrificed to the Roman Gods, swore him Fealty in the Temple of
Mars, agreeing to pay Tolls and Customs for all Wares which they transported
into other parts, and paid him their Tribute. By this obsequious address
Augustus was pacified, not being over-ambitious to catch at all opportunities
of enlarging his Empire, which he thought was already great enough, as likewise
did his Successor Tiberius.

To Tenevantius, after twenty three years Reign, succeeded his Son Cunoheline.
Augustus was now in peace with all the world, a fit time for our Savior the
Prince of Peace to be born in, at whose very Birth the Devil's Oracles began to
cease. For about this time that mighty Emperor, consulting the Oracle about
his Successor, received this Answer, as Suidas says. (...)
(...),
(...).
An Hebrew Child, whom the Blessed Gods adore,
Has bid me leave these Shrines, and pack to Hell,
So that of Oracle I can no more,
In Silence leave our Altar, and sarewell.
Hereupon at his coming home, he in the Capitol erected an Altar, and ther^^n
in Captial (...) caused this Inseription to be engraven, HAEC EST
AKAPKIMO-GENITI DEI, This is the Altar of the First-begetten Son of God.

In Tiberius his time the Britans kept very fair correspondence with the
Romans, as may be gathered out of Tacitus, from their friendly sending back to
Germanious ^ then warring in Germany such of his Soldiers as had been cast upon
their Coasts.

Caligula intended to invade them, but that by his shittle head, sudden
repentance, and foolish attempts against Germany, it came to nothing. Yet he
came on as far as Batavia, where Adminius, the Son of Cunobeline, being for
some offense banished by his Father, was, with those few that accompanied him,
by this vainglorious Emperor taken into Protection. Who thereupon bragged in
his Letters to the Senate, Anno Do. 40.
that the whole Island was yielded to him. The issue of this his Expedition
was, That he made his Army march embattelled to the Seashore over against
Britain, and commanded them to gather Cockles, Muscles, and other Shel-fishes
into their Helmets, terming them the Spoils of the Conquered Ocean; and in
memorial of this Exploit he built a high Watchtower, which was afterward
named Brittenhuis, and then returned to Rome, leaving his Enemies, the Britans
and Germans, to laugh at his strange folly and madness. Cunobeline after a long
and peaceable Reign of sixty six years, dyed, leaving behind him diverse Sons,
Togodumnus, (whom the Britans call Guiderius,) Caradock, Adminius, Arviragus,
and others. The first of these had reigned many years before with his Father,
whom he had but newly interred, when suddenly he found himself necessitated to
prepare for his defense against the Romans.

Hitherto the Britans enjoyed an (...), the free use and exercise of their own
Laws and Customs, only paying a Tribute. But now the Rebellion of some
ambitious persons makes way for their more absolute subjection; for being
unable to make good their parties against their Princes, they flee to Rome, and
there find favorable entertainment. Of these one Bericus was the principal,
who incited Claudius to make war upon the Britans; who were grown so stout,
that they refused to pay the Tribute, because their Fugitives were not
delivered up to those that were sent to demand them. Claudius sends over A.
Plantius with an Army, who soon after his arrival overcomes Caradock first, 43
and then Togodumnus, upon which, part of the Dobuni, who had been subjected by
the Cattieuclani. shook off their old Masters, and submitted to him, receiving
a Garrison. Plautius marches forwards to a River, on the further side of which
the Britans, who deemed it unpassable without a Bridge, lay careless and
secure. The Germans, whose custom was to swim armed through the swiftest and
yiolentest Rivers, were sent over first, with orders to strike especially at
the Horses, whereby the Chariots might be rendered unserviceable. These were
seconded by Vespasian and his Brother Sabinus, by whom the Britans were
surprised, and many of them killed, but night coming on hindered further
execution. The next morning the Britans joined Battle with them, which
continued a long space with doubtful success, till Sidius Geta, at the point of
being taken, so bestirred himself, that through his valor chiefly the Romans
obtained the victory. After this another Battle was fought near the mouth of
the River Thames, where the Britans were again overthrown; though this victory
cost the Romans dear, many of them being lost, not only in the fight, but in
the pursuit too, following the Chase too rashly among the Bogs. Togodumnus
retreating to Portchester, was there slain by Vespasian, (who subdued those
parts,) which was about two years after Cunobelines death. The Britans were
more enraged than daunted at the death of their King, and Caradock, who
succeeded, carried on the War with such fiereness, that Plautius despairing of
Conquest sent word to the Emperor of the doubtful condition of his Affairs.
Claudius, glad of this occasion to get himself an Honorable Name, sets forward
with strong Forces, and armed Elephants, and coming over joins with Plautius,
and marches against the Britans, who were so far from fearing him, that they
adventured to fight a set Battle with him, but were overpowered and
vanquished. After which Claudius took Camalodunum, formerly the Royal City of
Adminius, (or Etiminius, as his name is inscribed in an old Coin,) where he
reigned under his Father before his Banishment. Diverse Cities submitted
hereupon, and were committed to the Government of Plautius, the first
Propraetor or Lieutenant of Britain. Claudius for these Successes was several
times by his Army saluted Imperator, and tempering his Conquests with Clemency,
though he disarmed the Britans, yet he remitted the Confiscation of their
Goods, for which they worshipped him as a God. Having achieved these Exploits
in the space of sixteen days, (for he staid here no longer) he departed
homewards, and came to Rome at the end of six months from his first setting out
from thence, entering the City in Triumph. Plantius goes on with the relics of
the War, and speeds so well, that it was decreed he should have the less sort
of Triumph, called Ovation, at his Return, wherein the Emperor honored him
with his company, and gave him the right hand all the way both going and
coming. And Vespasian, who had fought thirty battles here, (in one of which he
had beed slain, if he had not been rescued by his Son Titus,) and had sudued
two Nations, Wight, was rewarded with Triumphal Ornaments, and other great
Dignities. Valerius Asiaticus, Junius Silanus, Sidius Geta, and others, had
marks of Honor conferred upon them. P. Ostorius succeeding Plautius, Romans,
or submitted to them, were overrun by the other Britans, who encouraged
themselves with a conceit of the new Propraetor's unacquaintedness with the
Army. But he knowing first Successes to be of great consequence, with his
readiest Cohorts advanced against them, whom he soon routed and dispersed, and
then fell to disarming them that he suspected, and by placing Garrisons and
Forts upon the Rivers Antona and Sabrina, attempted to hemme in so much of the
Island as he was concerned to defend. Sabrina is granted by all to be Severn,
but Antona is not so well known, Camden says it is the River Nen that runs by
Northampton, but then he will have it to be transcribed amiss for Aufona, upon
a supposition that the Britans called all Rivers Avon, and so Northampton
should be contracted of Northafandon. But I cannnot see any necessity of
blaming the Transcriber here, nor any reason why Northampton or Northanton may
not take its name from Antona, since himself allows Southampton to be so called
from a River of the very same name. The Icenians, who had sought the friendship
of Plautius, disliked the proceedings of Ostorius, and armed against him, with
their Confederates, but were overcome, whereby they that wavered were confirmed
in their obedience. In this conflict M. Ostorius, the Licutenant's Son, merited
a Civick Crown or Garland. The Cangi were the next who felt the anger of the
Romans, by whom their Territory was wasted and harryed all over. The Lieutenant
was gotten near the Seacoast which looks toward Ireland, when some stirs
among the Brigantes brought him back; but those he quickly quieted by seizing
and punishing some great ones, who would have incited that people against him,
the rest upon his willingness to remit the Commotion departing peaceably to
their homes.

But a War with the Silures could not be avoided; King Caradock in person
headed them, who could not be prevailed with by all the Lieutenant's endeavors
to have any peace with the Romans. Against him therefore Ostorius bends all his
Force, having given some Cities to a British King named Cogidunus, to engage
him against those that should raise any disturbances while he was dealing with
the Silures. Caradock considering how Siluria was hemmed in between the Severn
and the Sea, marched into the country of the Ordovices, who were confederated
with him, where all the odds were to his own party; all the difficulties to his
Enemies. Ostorius follows, and near Clun-castle in Shropshire, forced him to a
Battle, wherein though he and his Britans fought stoutly, yet the fortune of
Rome prevailed. Here his Wife and Daughter were taken Prisoners, and some
Brothers of his yielded themselves; himself escaping to Cartisinandua, Queen of
the Brigantes, was by her command unworthily bound with Irons, and delivered to
his Enemies, Rome, all desired to see this Warrior, who had so long held out
against their power. Thither he was sent, and at his coming the people were
assembled as to a solemn spectacle, and the Emperor's Guard stood in Arms.
First passed his Servants, bearing his Trophies won in former Wars; next, his
Brothers, Wife, and Daughter; last of all, himself, who coming to the
Emperor's Tribunal, without any manner of dejectedness, thus spoke to him. If
my moderation in prosperity had been as great as my Nobility and Fortune was, I
had come rather a Friend into this City than a Captive, neither would you have
disdained to receive me with Covenants of Peace, being a Prince descended of
Noble Ancestors, and commanding many Nations. My present estate as it is to me
dishonorable, so to you it is glorious. I had Horses, Men, Armor, Wealth, no
wonder if I was unwilling to lose them. If you will reign over all, all must
obey. If I had sooner yielded and been delivered into your hands, neither had
my Fortune nor your Glory been so renowned, and in your severest determining of
me both will be quickly buried in oblivion. But if you spare me, I shall be an
Example of your Clemency for ever. Caesar moved with the bravery of his
Carriage, pardoned him with his Wife and Brethren, (and most probably his
Daughter too, though forgotten by Tacitus,) who being unbound did their
reverence to the Emperor, and the Empress Agrippina. Then the Senators being
called together discoursed of the Show, and affirmed it to be no less
Honorable than when Scipio showed Syphax; or Aemylius, Perseus; or whosoever
else exhibited conquered Kings to the people; wherefore the ornaments of a
Triumph were decreed to Ostorius.

This Caradock, Surnamed Frichfras, viz. with the strong Arm, is in the Book of
Triads named First of the Three most valiant Britans; the Roman Writers call
him Caratacus, Caractacus, Cataractacus, and Catacratus: what became of him
afterward, I find not, but I suppose that he did not long survive his entrance
into Rome; for else it is likely he would have returned to his Kingdom, and in
point of Gratitude have restrained his Silures from continuing Hostility
against the Romans.

Caradock had one Brother yet at liberty, which was the brave Arviragus, who
succeeding in the Kingdom soon made the Enemy know, that the Britans wanted not
a General. He took old Caswallan's course, to avoid set Battles, and to watch
for Advantages. The Prefect of the Camp with his Legionary Cohorts (who were
ordered to build Fortresses in the Country of the Silures) he surprised and
killed, with eight Centurions, and many of the stoutest Soldiers, and had cut
them all off, if speedy Succors had not come from the neighboring Villages
and Castles. Shortly after he fell upon the Forragers, and routed them, and the
Troops of Horse that were sent to help them; nor could Ostorius stay their
flight by sending out some Cohorts lightly appointed, till the weighty Legions
coming on, put a stop to the violence of the Pursuers, and made them retreat.
After this passed diverse Skirmishes, the Silures omitting no opportunity,
commanded or without command, to assail the Enemy from their Woods and Bogs,
being strongly incensed at a Report, that Claudius was resolved to extinguish
their very Name. They in th^s heat intercepted two Auxiliary Cohorts, who were
forraging too securely to feed the Avarice of their greedy Prefects, and by
sending abroad liberal shares of the Spoils and Captives which they took, drew
other Nations to join with them These and some other adverse Accidents so
troubled Ostorius, that worn out with cares and travels he dyed, whom Avitus
Didius Gallus succeeded in the Lieutenantship. He was dispatched hither in
great have, that the Province might not be destitute of a Governor; yet could
not make such speed, but that before his coming the Legion of Manlius Valens
had been defeated by the Silures, who made large excursions into the Roman
Pale, till the Lieutenant marching out, kept them somewhat more within their
own Bounds.

The Brigantes would willingly have engaged in their Countries cause against
Ostorius at his first coming, if their King Venutius could have been induced to
own the Quarrrel; but he reigning in right of his Wife Cartismandua, suffered
himself to be wholly guided by her, who judging the friendship of the Romans
very conducible to her designs, restrained the peoples forwardness, and made up
the breach with Osterius to his full satisfaction. But growing weary of her
Husband, and falling in love with Velocatus who was his Servant and
Armourbearer, she abused her marriage bed, and labored to make the Adulterer
King. Venutius nettled with these injuries, and the intercepting of his
Brother, and some of his nearest Kindred, took Arms against the faithless
Queen, and brought her to such Exigencies, that Didius was fain to send some
Cohorts to her Aid, by whose help she won a Battle of her Husband; and in
another conflict Caesius Nasica with his Legion had somewhat the better. But
Venutius quickly recruited his Forces, the people flocking to him apace, out of
indignation against the Adulteress, whose Treachery to him and Caradock had
made her generally odious. And so stoutly he maintained the War against the
Romans, that though they rescued Cartismandua from his just vengeance, yet he
kept possession of the Kingdom in despite of them; so that Didius being aged
had enough to do to keep up a Defensive War, which he was fain to manage by
Deputies, only building here and there a Fortress further into the Country,
that he might seem to enlarge his Province. Nero was now Emperor, who but for
very shame would have withdrawn his Forces out of Britain.

To Didius succeeded Verannius, who dyed in the first year of his Government,
having only made a few Inrodes upon the Silures, and left a great Boast behind
him, That if he had lived but two years more, he would have conquered all;
thereby at his death manifesting his vanity, though while he lived he had
carried a great name of precise Severity.

Suetonius Paulinus followed him, a Commander of as high a reputation as any of
his time; whose beginnings proved so successful, that they emboldned him to
attempt the Conquest of Anglesey, which was a very populous Isle, and the
primary Seat of the Druids, who encouraged the people to make a stout
resistance: notwithstanding which the Romans prevailed, but before they could
settle their new Conquest, they were necessitated to return for suppression of
a dangerous Insurrection. Prasutagus, King of the Iceni, dying about this time,
according to the flattering custom of that Age, left Caesar his Heir with his
own two Daughters, thinking it a very politic course to secure his Family from
future injuries, but his intendment was basely frustrated; for under color to
oversee and take possession of the Emperors new Inheritance, his Kingdom,
House, and Wealth, which was very great, became a prey to Centurions and greedy
Officers, the chief of the people were disseised of their Estates, his Kinsmen
reputed as Slaves, his Daughters defloured, and his Wife Boadicia whipped.
Hereupon the Iceni solicit the other Britans (who had matter enough of
complaint too, especially the Trinobantes, who had suffered the like
indignities from the Colony of Camalodunum) to join with them for redress of
their common wrongs, and to lay hold on the present opportunity of the
Lieutenant's absence in the Isle of Anglesey. Thus all on a sudden they flee to
arms, under the conduct of Queen Boadicia, whom Tacitus calls, a Lady of the
Royal Blood; whereby it should seem, that Prasutagus attained the Kingdom by
marrying her. The Romans were warned of the approaching danger by sundry
Prodigies, yet were not able to prevent it. The angry Virago having amassed a
numerous Army, hastens to her Revenge; which they of Camalodunum fearing, sent
to the Procurator Catus Decianus for aid, who would not or could not spare them
above two hundred men, and those ill armed, who stood the Colony in little
stead; for the Britans took the Town, and sacked it, putting all to the sword,
and destroyed the Temple that had been erected in honor of Divus Claudius,
together with the Priests named Sodales Augustales. Petilius Cerealis hastening
to the rescue with the ninth Legion, was met by the way and defeated, the Foot
all cut off, himself with the Horse escaped to the Camp, and saved themselves
within the Fortifications. Suetonius hearing of these things marched straight
to London, which he intended to make the Seat of War. But considering the
paucity of his numbers, and the disastrous rashness of Cerealis, he changed his
resolution, and notwithstanding the cries and prayers of the Inhabitants,
quitted the place, which was presently taken and sacked by the Britans, as also
was Verolamium, above seventy thousand Roman Citizens and Associates perishing
in this Commotion. Decianus (whose Exactions had been a grand incentive to
these stirs) was fled into Gaul as a place of greater safety. But the
Lientenant having gotten together about ten thousand men, and chosen a very
advantageous place for his purpose, resolved now to try the issue of a Battle,
wherein the Britans were overthrown, with the loss of eighty thousand men.
Cerealis and his Horsemen had their share in the honor of this Victory,
Paenius Posthumus, Camp-Master of the second Legion, having contrary to the
discipline of War disobeyed, when he was sent for, and thereby defrauded his
Soldiers of their parts of Glory in this success, for very grief and shame slew
himself. The Britans intended, as Dion says, to give another Battle, if they
had not been hindered by the death of Boadicia, who made her self away by
poison. Yet Caesar thought fit to augment his Forces by sending Recruits out of
Germany, whereby the ninth Legion was again supplied. Virtue never wants
Detractors, and so Suetonius, having done such eminent Services for the
Emperor, was yet, through the calumnies of Julius Classicianus, who succeeded
Decianus in the Procuratorship, and upon the loss of some few Galleys upon the
Shore, and the Gally-slaves in them, discharged from his Lieutenantship; though
Polycletus, Nero's Freedman, who was sent to take an account of the business,
could find nothing of any consequence against him, but that he was too severe
to the Conquered, which his Accusers said obstructed the Settlement of the
Province.

Petronius Turpilianus succeeded him, Trebellius Maximus followed. Against him
Roscius Caelius, Lieutenant of the twentieth Legion, raised such a Mutiny, that
finding his interest in the Army too weak to master him, he repaired with his
Friends and Followers to Vitellius in Germany, and followed him in his
Enterprises, having obliged him formerly by fending over eight thousand men to
Hordeonius Flaccus for his Service. In the mean time Britain was governed by
the Lieutenants of the Legions, among whom Roscius Caelius, as the boldest,
bore the greatest sway.

Vectius Bolanus was sent by Vitellius to succeed Trebellius, Venutius with his
Brigantes, and the Silures, held out, who had not joined with Boadicia, as
either looking upon himself as slighted by her, or else disliking her womanish
and impotent way of management. Him I conceive to be the same whom others call
Arviragus, and his intercepted Brother to be Caradock, and Cartismandua to be
Genissa, whom Geffrey of Monmouth will have to be the Daughter of Claudius,
possibly by Adoption.

But Vespasian coming to the Empire, Petilius Cerealis in the room of Bolanus,
who sought many Battles with Venutius, and some bloody, conquering or wasting
the greatest part of the Brigantes; Julius Frontinus was so successful against
the Silures, that he forced them to acknowledge the Sovereignty of the Roman
Empire.

About this time Roderick, Picts, came from Scandia to Ireland, and by the
Scots there inhabiting was directed to Albania, where he and his men were
willingly received by the Caledonians, who then expected to be invaded by the
Romans, and therefore looked upon these new-come Guests as a seasonable
Succor, and found their Assistance very useful in the ensuing War.

Julius Agricola followed Frontinus, Ordovices had defeated a Squadron of Horse
which lay in their Borders, with such a slaughter, that very few escaped. But
this was cruelly revenged by the new Lieutenant, who marching thither massacred
the greatest part of the Nation; then invaded and conquered the Isle of Mona,
or Anglesey. After which Agricola turning his Forces Northward, made the rest
of the Brigantes (who remained unvanquished by Cerealis) give Hostages, and
admit Garrisons; as likewise did the Maeatae, to which they were induced by the
generosity of his Demeanor, as well as the power of his Arms. That narrow
partition of ground from Glotta to Bodotria, (now the Friths of Dunbritton and
Edenborough) which divides the Maeatae from the Caledonians and Attiscots, he
fortified with Garrisons and Castles; and furnished that part of Britain which
lies against Ireland with Forces, in hope of atchieving something upon that
Island when he had done with this, to which end he gladly received a certain
Irish Prince expelled by civil dissension, and under color of kindness
retained him, till a fit occasion should serve. These his proceedings caused
the people beyond Glotta and Bodotria to look about them, especially the sight
of his Navy, which he had manned out to search the Creeks and Harbors of their
Country, allarmed them, as though now the Secret of their Sea were disclosed,
and no refuge remained if they were overcome. The Caledonians therefore assault
his Castles, for whose relief the Lieutenant advances, dividing his Army into
three parts; which advantage the Britans quickly spying united their Forces,
and in the dead of night set upon the ninth Legion, which they were likely to
have cut off, if Agricola had not come seasonably to their assistance,
notwithstanding which the Caledonians fought valiantly for a good while, but
were at length overpowered, and driven out of the field. About this time a
Cohort of the Vsipians, levied in Germany, and sent over into Britain, having
slain a Centurion and certain Soldiers among their Maniples, and set over them
for direction in discipline, fled and embarked themselves in three Galleys,
compelling the Masters of the Vessels to execute their charge, and only one
doing his Office, the other two being suspected were slain; so putting off to
Sea, they were driven uncertainly hither and thither, sometimes landing and
skirmishing with the Britans for Booty, and were at last reduced to such
misery, that they were fain to eat one another, first the weakest, then as the
lot lighted. Thus having been carried round about Britain, and lost their
Galleys for want of Pilots, they were seized by the Suevians and Frisians for
Pirates and Rovers, and being sold for Slaves fom Master to Master, some of them
happened into the hands of Romans, among whom they grew into a Name by relating
their so strange Adventure. Agricola increasing his Army with the addition of
many Britans, more faithful to him than to their Country, marches up further
into Caledonia, and on the declining of the Hill Grampius (now Grantzbain)
finds his Enemies lodged to the number of thirty thousand, to whom the
courageous Youth, and even the Old men that were yet vigorous, and had gained
Renown in former Services, daily flocked. Galgacus, the Son of Liennacus,
Prince of the Caledonians, reckoned in the Book of Triads for the second of the
three Illustrious British Heroes, was Commander in chief. Agricola having sent
his Fleet before to distract the Britans by frequent and uncertain Landings,
and to do them what other mischief they could, charged valiantly upon them, and
was received with equal courage, whilst the one side fought for life and
liberty, the other for honor and conquest. The manner of the Fight is
excellently described by Tacitus; the success in short was this, That the
Britans after a stout resistance were vanquished with the loss often thousand
men, and on the Roman part were slain three hundred and forty, and among them
Aulus Atticus Captain of a Cohort. The poor Caledonians after this Overthrow
forsake and burn their Habitations, and the Roman Scouts meet with nothing but
Silence and Desolation. The Summer was almost at an end, and therefore the
Lieutenant brings his victorious Army into the borders of the Horrestians, (so
called for Horeskians, or Areskians, because dwelling upon the River Eske,) and
receives of them Hostages, and commands the Admiral of his Navy to sail about
Britain, by whom it was first found to be an Island, and the Isles of Orkney
discovered and sudued. Himself with slow Marches to awe the new conquered
Nations with the very stay of his Passage, disposes his Army into
Winter Quarters, and the Fleet having finished their Voyage, return to the
Port, which in Tacitus is, through frequent Transcriptions, corruptly written
Trutulensis, as Beatus Rhenanus says, for Rhutupensis. As Agricola was one of
the best Generals of his time in the world, so was he also a Prudent and
Politic Governor; first, he reformed his own Family, not permitting his
Attendants or Followers to sway or meddle in Public Affairs; then the Army, by
electing Officers, not for Bribes or Affection, but for Virtue and Merit; next
he took care for the observing of Equity, and corrected all those petty Abuses
in the collecting of Tributes, and Exactions, which are usually more grievous
than the Burden it self; the people rude and scattered, and therefore prone
upon every occasion to War, he so persuaded, as to build Temples, Houses, and
places of public resort, the principal men's children he caused to be educated
in the way of Learning; and by commending the wits of the Britans above the
Gauls, made them affect the comptness of the Roman Language; then he brought
them to imitate the Roman fashions for Attire, and so by little and little the
incitements and materials of Luxury, stately Edifices, Baths, and sumptuous
Banquets, grew to be in request among them. By these means the Nation was
softened, and in a manner pleased with their Servitude.

In all probability, if Agricola had continued in his Government, Domitian
envying his Glory recalled him, sending in his place Salustius Lucullus, whom
he afterward put to death, because having devised certain Spears or Lances of
a new fashion, he had called them after his own name, Luculleans. Soon after,
as is collected from a Preface of Tacitus to the first of his Histories, the
Britans freed from the fear of Agricola, who was poisoned with the Emperor's
privity, again betook themselves to Arms, at what time the Name of Arviragus
was famous at Rome, as appears from Juvenal, who brings in Fabricius Veiento
thus flattering Domitian.

Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno
Excidet Arviragus. --
Some King thou shall take Captive, or shall make
Arviragus his British Throne forsake.
This valiant King, after a long Reign, from the time of Claudius to the latter
end of Domitian, (whom Juvenal and Ausonius style, Bald Nero) dying, left his
Kingdom to his Son Marius, whom the Britans call Meurig.

By this time the Christian Religion was planted in sundry parts of Britain. In
the Chronicle attributed to Flavius Dexter, and in the Epistle of Hugh, a
Portugal Bishop, to Maurice Archbishop of Bracara, we read, that St. James the
Son of Zebedee came hither; and the Fragments ascribed to Helecas Caesar
Augustanus tell us, that his Mother Salome, and his Father Zebedee (whom they
confound with Aristobulus) were here also. This St. James at his return to
Jerusalem was put to death by Herod Agrippa. Nicephorus Callistus writes, that
Simon Zelotes (called also the Cananite, from his Birthplace, Eccles. Hist.
lib. 7. cap. 48.
Cana of Galilee) came into Britain, where he was crucified and buried, as
Doretheus in his Synopsis, and the Greek Menologies have it, which latter
assign the tenth day of May for his Martyrdom. Thomas Dempster, a Scotch
Historian, Hist. Eccles. Scot. lib. 2. number. 159.
says, that St. Barnabas came into the North part of Britain, now called
Scotland, and there Baptized Beatus, the Apostle of the Helvetians.
Aristobulus, Brother to St. Barnabas, (mentioned by St. Paul in his Epistle to
the Romans) is by the same Dorothaeus recorded to have been Bishop of Britain;
which is confirmed by the Suffrage of the Greek Menologies, who assign the
fifteenth day of March for his Martyrdom, which here he suffered, in the second
year of Nero, according to the Fragment of Helecas Caesar Augustanus. Venantius
Fortunatus, and Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem, Comment. de Petro and Paulo,
ad diem Jun. 39.
say, that St Paul was in Britain; and Simeon Metaphrastes affirms as much of
St. Peter, adding, that he tarried here a long time, and converted many
Nations, settled their Churches, and ordained Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
Isidore and Freeulphus say, that St. Philip the Apostle came into Gaul and
preached there, from whence he sent over hither, in the year Sixty three,
twelve Disciples, of whom Joseph of Arimathea was of greatest note, to whom
Arviragus gave a certain place named Inis witrin, called also Avalon, and
Glastonbury, where they are said to have led an Eremitical life, and to have
built a Church in honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and to have had other
Lands bestowed upon them by Marius and Coelus. This is accounted the ancientest
Church of Britain, and was afterward much reverenced and enriched by many
Kings and Princes, as appears by William of Malmesburie's History of the
Antiquities of Glastonbury, and by King Henry the Second's Charter granted to
the new Church there, in the year one Thousand one Hundred and eighty five,
(which was termed Magnum Privilegium, and is to be seen among the Archiva in
the Tower of London,) and by many other Writers. Pudens and Claudia, mentioned
by St. Paul in the end of his second Epistle to Timothy, are credibly thought
to be the same with Aulus Pudens, and Claudia Rufina, whom the Poet Martial
celebrates, (which Claudia was a British Lady, and by some Writers thought to
be King Caradock's Daughter, mentioned by Tacitus;) and Linus, the first Bishop
of Rome, mentioned also in the same Epistle, is by Clemens, in his seventh book
of the Apostles Constitutions, said to be their Son; Chap. 47.
and Petrus Equilinus gives them two other Sons, Timotheus and Novatus, and to
Pudens by another wife named Sabinella he gives two Daughters, Potentiana (or
Pudentiana) and Praxedis. This Timotheus converted Lucius a British Prince,
and suffered Martyrdom when the first Antoninus was Emperor, and Pius Bishop
of Rome. Lucius being Baptized by Timotheus about the end of Evaristus his
Papacy, leaving his Principality, and taking with him his Sister Emerita
preached to the Rhaetians and Bavarians, became Bishop of Chur, where he was
Martyred under Aurelius Antoninus, as his Sister was at a neighboring place
called Trimontium.

In Hartmannus Schedelius his Chronicle, we find (among those that flourished
under Trajan) Taurinus Episcopus Eboracensis, and Eutropius Episcopus Cantu:
which some of the Hagiocleptae, or Steal-Saints taking hold of, have
endeavored to persuade the world that the one was Bishop of York, and the
other of Canterbury; whereas it is evident from other Authors, that Eboracensis
is through mistake put for Ebroicensis, and Cantu: for Santu: the one being
Bishop of Eureux in Normandy, the other of Saints in Xaintoigne. But Britain
was not so barren of Saints that it should need to steal any from other
Countries, and it is justly famous for receiving and preserving the Christian
Faith from the very times of the Apostles. Eusebius Pamphilus, in his third
Book (...), affirms, that some of the Apostles went beyond the Ocean to the
Isles that are called British. Theodoret likewise, in his Ninth Book (...),
reckons the Britans express^^ among those Nations to whom the Apostles
themselves had preached. Before these, Tertullian tells us, That those places
among the Britans which yielded the Romans no access, were now subdued unto
Christ. Lib. adversus Judaeos, c. 7.
And Origin in his Fourth Homily upon Ezekiel, and in his Sixth Homily upon the
first Chapter of St. Luke, confirms the Antiquity of Christianity in Britain.
Gildas, after reciting Boadicia's insurrection, (whom he calls the Deceitful
Lioness,) and the quelling of it by the Romans, informs us, That between the
latter end of the Reign of the Emperor Tiberius, and the victory of Suetonius
Paulinus, which was obtained about the year of Christ Sixty one, the Christian
Religion began to take footing in Britain; in the mean time (says he) Christ
the true Sun spreading forth, not from the Temporal Firmament, but from the
Castle and Court of Heaven, (which exceeds all Times) throughout the whole
world, his most glorious Light, in the latter end as we know of Tiberius
Caesar's Reign, (whereas in regard that the Emperor against the will of the
Senate threatened death to the Disturbers thereof, Religion was largely
propagated without any hinderance,) did first cast on this Island (starving
with frozen Cold, and in a far remote Climate from the visible Sun) his
gladsome Beams, to wit, his most holy Laws; which although they were received
of the inhabitants but with Lukewarm minds, remained notwithstanding fully and
entirely in the minds of some, and in others less, until the nine years
Persecution of the Tyrant Dioclesian.

What he says of Caesar's threatening death to the Disturbers or Accusers of
the Christians, we also find in the fifth Chapter of Tertullian's Apologeticus,
and in the Chronicle of Eusebius, at the last year, or last but one of the
Reign of Tiberius. Thus early did Christianity enter into this Land, where it
was never since totally extinct, though sometimes shrewdly eclipsed.

Some stirs there were in Britain in Trajan's time, Dacians, and other remote
Nations, the Northern people, with the help of the Picts and their King
Roderick, hoped to recover their ancient Bounds, and revenge the overthrows
they had received from Agricola. Hereupon they invade the Province, but with
ill success, for the Caledonians are beaten by the Romans, and driven to their
old Shelters; and the Picts are at Stanmore in Westmorland vanquished by Marius
(who was now leagued with the Romans,) and Roderick slain; in memory of which
victory the British King erected Rerecross, as some conceive.

Berenchus is said to have succeeded Roderick, who finding himself unable to
cope with Marius, retired into Cathnesse, and there seated himself and his
followers. The Scottish Writers pretend, that both their own Nation and the
Picts were settled in Britain long before, and that these people were Moravians
of Germany; but how falsely, is known to any one that is never so little versed
in History, seeing those Moravians were never heard of before the days of the
Emperor Lewis the Debonaire. Neither did Moravia in Scotland take name from
that remote Nation, but from Mor, which in British signifies the Sea, as being
a Maritime Province; as Moravia in Germany took its Name from the River Mora,
which passes through it. Some reject this Story of Marius his Victory; but that
which William of Malmesbury relates in the Prologue of his third Book De Gestis
Pontificum, seems no contemptible Evidence for it. There is (says he) in the
City of Lugubalia ( now Carlisle) a Dining-Chamber built of Stone, and arched
with Vaults, so that no spiteful force of Tempests, nor furioun flame of Fire
could ever shake or hurt it, ( the Country is called Cumberland, and the people
Cumbrians,) in the forefront thereof this Inscription is to be read, MARII
VICTORIAE, that is, To the Victory of MARIUS.

Here Camden thinks fit to acquaint us, how he had learned, that another,
making mention of this Stone, says, it was not inscribed, Marii Victoriae, but
Marti Victori, that is, To Victorious MARS. But that this is clearly contrary
to Malmesburie's mind, his words immediately following show. What is meant by
it, I am at a stand for, unless part of the Cimbrians happily planted themselves
here, after they had been driven out of Italy by Marius. Here, Lib. 4. cap. 9.
says Ranulphus Cestrensis in his Polychronicon, William of Malmesbury was
deceived, in thinking the Inscription upon this Stone appertained to Marius the
Roman Consul, but it is no wonder, seeing he had not read the British Book
where it is written of King Marius. Neither indeed could he have read it in
Geffrey's History, which was not published when Mulmesbury wrote.

Cneus Trebellius was the next Lieutenant of Britain, that we read of, after
Salustius Lucullus; and after him Julius Severus, who being called hence by
Adrian to suppress the Jewish Rebellion, the Northern Britans, with the Picts,
again entered the Province, and so fiercely assailed the Romans and Southern
Britans, that the Emperor was fain to come in person to their relief, by whom
the Enemies were repulsed, and again forced to betake themselves to their
sculking holes, and Adrian approving the policy of Tiberius for girding the
Empire within moderate bounds, withdrew the Limit from Agricola's Fence an
hundred Italian Miles, (as he had done in the East further, from Tygris to
Euphrates,) and erected a Wall of Turf for fourscore Italian Miles in length
from Gabrosentuns, Spartianus in vita Adriani. 122.
now Gateshead, to Carlisle, (which should divide the Barbarians and the Romans
asunder) strengthened with great Stakes or Piles pitched deep in the ground, and
fastened together in manner of a Mural or Military mound for defense. And then
having reformed many things throughout the Island, triumphantly returned to
Rome, and upon his Coin entitled himself The Restorer of Britain.

The next Lieutenant here was Priscus Licinius, whom Adrian afterward employed
in an Expedition against the Jews, as appears by an old Inscription.

In the year of Christ, Marius the British King, to whom succeeded his Son
Coelus, who kept peace with the Romans, and paid them their Tribute as his
Father had done. In his time the Brigantes confederating with the Northern
people made Inrodes into Genunia, Paus. in Arcad.
a Neighbour-Province, (which Camden thinks should be written Genuthia, taking
it to be the same with Guinethia, or North- Wales,) against whom the Emperor
Antoninus Pius (by whose Ordinance as many as were in the Roman world became
Citizens of Rome) sent Lollius Vrbicus Lieutenant into Britain, who subdued
them, and fined them with the loss of a good part of their Territory, and
driving the Northern Enemies further back, enlarged the Bounds of the Roman
Province again as far as Agricola's Frontier-Fence between Glotta and Bodotria,
In vita Antorini Pij.
building there (as Julius Capitolinus says) another Wall of Turfs, viz.
beyond that of Adrian. Seius Saturninus was now Archigubernus of the Navy in
Britain, Digests; Lib. 36.
but whether by that Title be meant Admiral, or Arch-Pilot, is questionable.

In the beginning of the Reign of the Emperor Aurelius, Picts and Caledonians
raising new Commotions, were quelled by Calpurnius Agricola, who succeeded
Lollius in the Lieutenantship.

Coelus having reigned forty years, dyed in the Year, Lucius, whom the Britans
call Lhes, and Surname him Lever Maur, that is, Great Light, because he was the
first Christian King of their Nation. For having heard of the Miracles wrought
by Christ and Christians, and particularly of the Emperor's Victory over the
Germans, obtained by the Prayers of the Christian Legion, and observing the
Piety and Sanctity of the Lives of those who in Britain professed that
Religion, he begain to entertain a high and honorable opinion of it. Theonus,
Elvanus, and Meduinus, lived at this time; of whom the first was the first
Archbishop of London, the other two were employed by the King to Eleutherus or
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, to request him to send some able Teachers hither to
instruct and Baptize him and his people. Radulphus de Baldock and Gisburnensis
say, that at the receipt of this Message the good Bishop for joy sung the
Angels Hymn, Gloria in Excelsis. The time of this Embassy is much controverted.
Beda, Marianus, and Florentius, though dissenting in the computation of Years,
yet agree in this, that they refer it to the beginning of Eleutherus, which,
according to Eusebius, was in the year, one Hundred seventy six, in the
sixteenth year of the Emperor Aurelius, Aper and Pollio were Consuls. Hereupon
Faganus and Duvianus are dispatched into Britain, who the same year baptized
the King, and many of his Subjects. The Names of these two are strangely varied
by Authors, the former being called Fugatius, Fagatius, Fagaunus, Foganus,
Fuganus, Euganus, and Figinus, and Phaganus; the other, Damianus, Dumianus,
Dunanus, Dunianus, Dimianus, Dimanus, Dinnamus, Diwanus, Divianus, Divinianus,
Derwianus, and Donatianus. The Britans called them Fagan, and Dwywan. With
these was also Marcellus (or Marcellinus) afterward Bishop of Triers and
Tongres. King Lucius having now received the Faith, is reported to have
requested the Bishop of Rome to send him a Copy of the Roman Laws; whereupon
Eleutherus sent him this Letter.

You have desired us to send you the Laws of Rome, and of Caesar, which You
would use in your Kingdom. We may reject the Laws of Rome and of Caesar at all
times, but in no wise the Law of God. Ye have lately by God's mercy received
the Law and Faith of Christ in the Kingdom of Britain. Ye have with you in your
Kingdom both Testaments, out of them by God's Grace, with the Counsel of your
Realm, take a Law, and by it with God's sufferance govern your Kingdom of
Britain. For You are God's Vicegerent in your Realm, according to the Royal
Prophet, Psalm. 24.1.
The Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof, the world and they that
dwell therein; and again, according to that Royal Prophet, Thou love
Righteousness, and hate wickedness, Ps. 45.7.
therefore God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows. And again, according to the same Royal Prophet, Ps. 72.1.
Give the King thy Judgments, O God, etc. for he said not, the Judgments, nor
the Righteousness of Caesar. For the King's Sons are the Christian Nations and
people of the Realm, who live and abide in the Kingdom, under your Protection
and Peace, according to the Gospel, Mat. 23.37.
even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings. The Nations and people
of Britain are your people, whom however divided, you ought to gather into one,
to reclaim to Concord and Peace, and the Faith and Law of Christ, and to the
Holy Church, to cherish, maintain, (or to lead by hand) protect, govern, and
always defend them from injurious and malicious Folks, and from their Enemies.
Eccl. 10.16
Woe to the Kingdom whose King is a Child, and whose Princes eat in the morning:
I do not term a King a Child for Infant-age, but for Folly, Iniquity, and
Madness, according to the Royal Prophet, Ps. 55.23.
Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; By Eating we
understand Gluttony, by Gluttony Luxury, by Luxury all filthy perverse and
wicked things, according to King Solomon, Into a malicious Soul Wisdom shall
not enter, nor dwell in the body that is subject unto sin. Rex dicitur a
Regendo, non a Regno; A King has his name from his Ruling, not from his
Kingdom. As long as you govern well, you shall be a King: which if you do not,
the Name of King will not be evidenced in you, and you will lose that Name,
which God forbid. Almighty God grant you so to govern the Kingdom of Britain,
that you may reign for ever with him whose Vicegerent you are in the said Realm.


This Letter was written in the year, one Hundred seventy nine, when the
Emperor Commodus was Consul with Vespronius; Lambard's Archaeonomia, (Printed
at London in the years 1560, and 1644,) among Edward the Confessor's Laws, and
in a Copy of our old Laws written in Edward the fourths time, now kept in Sr.
John Cotton's famous Library; and likewise in an Ancient Manuscript Chronicle,
called Brutus and Breton. William Harrison has inserted it into his
description of Britain, Lib. 1. c. 9.
having translated it into English out of sundry ancient Copies.

Theon Bishop of London is said to have built St. Peter's Church in Cornhil,
London, with the help of Ciranus the King's Cup Bearer, which Lucius liberally
endowed, and made it to be the Episcopal Sea for the Diocese of London. But
Fagan and Dwywan not confining their endeavors only to Lucius his Kingdom,
converted the greatest part of Britain, with the assistance of Elvan and
Medwin, of whom the former had been made a Bishop at Rome, the other a Doctor,
as Johannes Tinmuthensis, and Capgrave in the life of Dubricius, and an old
Tract concerning the first state of the Church of Landaffe, assirm; meaning
Presbyter, or Priest, as I suppose, by Doctor; for the title of Doctor, does
not appear to have been so ancient in the Church, in the sense wherein it has
been since used. Diverse other Bishoprics are reported to have been erected
about this time as York, Carleon upon Vske, Winchester, Gloucester,
Congresbury, Landaffe, and other places. Philippus Berterius, and Archbishop
Usher of Armagh, take York to have been the Metropolis of Britain at that time,
as being a Roman Colony, and honored with the Emperor's Palace, and the
Praetorium of Britain, in regard whereof Spartianus terms it by way of
Excellency, In vita Severi.
The City. And in the Council of Arles, Eborius of York subscribed before
Restitutus of London. He that in the year, one Thousand four hundred and sixty,
wrote the History of the Archbishops of York, makes Fagan the first Archbishop
of that Sea; but Harrison, in his description of Britain, says, Lib. 1. cap. 7.
that one Theodosius was Bishop there in the time of Lucius, who might be so
indeed in the latter end of Lucius his Reign, after Fagan's death. The Church
of Winchester being finished in the fifth year of Lucius his Conversion, viz.
in the year, one Hundred and eighty, was then Dedicated by Fagan and Dwywan,
Devotus was made Abbot of the Monastery which the King had founded for certain
Monks professing the Egyptian Rule of St. Mark. And about the same time was
also founded the renowned Abbey of Bangor. And now the Northern men are up in
arms again, and passing Lollius his Fence, were come as far as Adrian's Wall,
which they broke down, putting most of the Soldiers that defended it with their
commander to the sword, and entering the Province wasted and spoiled it at their
pleasure; against whom Vlpius Marcelius was sent, who valiantly beat them back
to their own homes, and governed the country with such same and reputation,
that the Emperor Commodus, whose Vices were as notorious as his Lieutenant's
Virtues, fearing the growth of his Credit with the Romans, in an envious mood
sent him Letters of Discharge. After his departure the Army, which he had kept
in excellent Discipline, fell to mutinying and civil Dissensions, the Officers
abusing and defrauding the common Soldiers; whereupon fifteen Hundred of them
went to Rome, and complained against the Emperor's grand Favorite, Perennis,
as the cause of those and many other distempers in the State, for which he was
put to death. Yet did not this compliance so appease the British Army, but that
they would have set up another Emperor; and Helvins Pertinax, who here
succeeded in the Lieutenancy, endeavoring to suppress their insolency by
severe means, provoked them to an Insurrection, in which diverse were slain, and
himself left for dead, whereupon he was glad for his own safety to get himself
revoked.

In his place came Clodius Albinus, who so worthily demeaned himself, that
Commodus either for fear or favor honored him with the Title of Caesar, which
yet he accepted not; but upon a false report of the Emperor's death, having in
a set speech discovered himself to be better affected to the old Government, of
the Senate and Consuls, than to Monarchical Empire, he was commanded to resign
to Junius Severus. But Pertinax suceeding Commodus was not long after murdered
by the Praetorian Guards, who sold the Empire to Didius Julianus, who enjoyed
his Purchase but a very little time, being soon after slain by Septimius
Severus. This Emperor, to keep Albinus. (who during the late Broils had made
bold to keep his place) from attempting any thing against him during his Wars
with Pescennius Niger, created him his Caesar, which he now accepted, as having
a greater esteem for him than for Commodus. But Niger being defeated and slain,
Severus falls to practicing the death of his new Caesar, and therein failing
proclaims him Traitor and public Enemy, and comes in person against him with
the strength of the Empire. Albinus hereupon bestirs himself, and increasing
his Army with the Flower of the British Youth, crosses over into Gaul, where
near Lions a Battle was fought between them, in which at first Albinus had the
better, but was at last overthrown and killed, his Head being sent to Rome by
the Conqueror as a token of the Victory. After which Severus divided the Roman
Province here into two Prefectures, of which the Southern part was termed the
Higher, and the Northern was termed the Lower.

About the beginning of Albinus his Government here, Fagan and Dwywan went to
Glastonbury, where they found nothing but ruin and desolation, for the Hermits
who took care of the Church were all dead long ago. This Church they repaired,
and placed there twelve of their Associates, procuring King Lucius to confirm
to them and their Successors by Charter, the Donation of such Lands as had been
given by his three Predecessors to Joseph and his Companions. Nine years they
are said to have spent in this place, and then having visited their Converts,
and confirmed them in the Faith, to have deceased in Britain, where diverse
Churches were afterward erected and consecrated to their memory. After Theon's
death Elvan was Bishop of London, and is said to have built a Library adjoining
to his Cathedral, and to have converted many of the Druids to Christianity.

King Lucius having built St. Peter's Church at Westminster, St. Mary's at
Dover, and a Church at Canterbury, which was afterward called St. Martins,
dyed, and was buried in the Cathedral of Gloucester, Geffrey says, in the year
two Hundred and eight, as Hollinshed out of ancient Writers tells us, having
reigned three and forty years, according to the Author of the Genealogicon de
Gestis Anglorum. I know there is great difference in Writers about the time of
his Reign and Conversion, which I conceive was partly occasioned through the
variety of Computations of the years both of Christ's Nativity and Passion. As
for his Reign, some allot him but twelve years, as Caxton, Bale, Grafton, Stow,
and Basing stochius, too short a space by far for the many memorable works done
in his time; others allow him seventy seven years, as Matthew Westminster, the
Chronicle of Salisbury, and the Pensile-Table of St. Peter's Church in London;
but these then take from the years of his Predecessors, and make his Great
Grandfather Arviragus, and his Grandfather Marius, to be dead before Domitian's
time. They generally give him the Character of a Religious and Munificent
Prince, and say, that he did very liberally give Possessions and Territories to
Churches and Churchmen, which he confirmed to them by Charters, and that he
privileged Churches and Churchyards to be Sanctuaries, and places of Refuge
for such Offenders as fled to them. He was the first Europaean King that we
read of, who received the Christian Faith, and Britain the first Land in which
it was by Public Authority professed. A high and singular Honor for our
Country, and which (next to Divine Providence) is in a great measure to be
ascribed to the clemency of the Emperor Aurelius to the Christians, upon his
miraculous victory over the Germans. Some with a manifest Antichronisme
confound this King with Lucius the Apostle of the Rhetians and Bavarians; but
Achilles Cassarus, in his description of Augspurg, (as we have him in Munster's
Cosmography,) and Archbishop Usher of Armagh, Cap. 6.
in his Treatise De Britannicarum Ecclesiarum Primordiis, do judiciously
distinguish the one from the other. Again others, in opposition to a whole
cloud of Eminent Witnesses, make him a mere Larva, denying that ever there was
any such King, because Britain was then subject to the Romans. But these do not
consider, that it was customary with the Romans to permit Kings to reign in
several Countries which they had subdued, as in Judaea Herod, in Cilicia
Tarcondemus, in Cappadocia Archelaus, in Pontus Polemon, in Mauritania Juba,
and here in Britain Cogidunus; and that even at this time the Emperor Lucius
Verus having finished the Parthian War, did, as Julius Capitolinus says,
distribute Kingdoms to Kings, and Provincial Governments to his Counts. I do
not fondly suppose that he was King of all Britain, (as Geffrey would persuade
us) nor yet of the greater part of it; but I rather think, that after Arviragus
was driven out of Siluria by Frontinus, and out of Ordovicia by Agricola, the
Province of the Belgae, with part of the Province of the Dobuni, might upon his
submission be granted to him, as places not so difficult to be reconquered, if
he or his Successors should revolt, being an open Champaine Country, of easy
access, and surrounded in a manner with Roman Garrisons. That Arviragus,
Marius, Coelus, and Lucius, bore some sway in this part of the Island I am the
rather inclined to believe, because I read of their Sepulture at Gloucester,
and their Bounty to Glastonbury, besides the last King's Liberality to
Winchester and Congresbury, all which places stand within this Territory.
Neither did Lucius restrain his Beneficence within the limits of his own
Kingdom, but piously extended it to several other parts of Britain, where
Christianity had taken any footing. This we find written of him by Bale; Lucium
pium, Coeli filium unicum, Romanorum fautorem, Caesaris Marci Antonini Very tum
benevolentia tum autoritate Britannis post patrem imperasse; That Lucius the
Godly, the only Son of Coelus, a friend to the Romans by the favor and
authority of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus Verus, reigned over the Britains.
And Archbishop Usher in his Primordia says, Cap. 3.
that there were found here in England two ancient pieces of Coin; one of
Silver, which was in the keeping of M. Josephus Hollandus; the other of Gold,
which himself saw among the Cimelia in Sr. Robert Cotton's Library, stamped
with the effigies of a Christian King, as appeared by the Cross, upon which
these three Letters, LVC, were inscribed.

In the mean time Virius Lupus was so overmatched by the Maeatae and
Caledonians, that he was constrained to buy his Peace and the liberty of some
Prisoners with great Sums of Money; but understanding that Severus had now
ended his other Wars, he sends him an account of the British Affairs, who
thereupon taking with him his two Sons Bassianus and Geta, sets forward with a
mighty Army to revenge his Lieutenant's disgrace: he arrives in Britain in the
same year that Lucius dyed, and finding diverse Competitors striving to succeed
him, puts an end to the Conquest, by laying the Kingdom to the Higher Province.
The Northern people terrified with his coming crave peace, but in vain;
whereupon the Prince of the Caledonians, whom Fordon Boethius and Lesley call
Fulgentius, (though Geffrey names him Fulgenius, and says, that he was Brother
to Martia the first wife of Severus) sails over to Scandia, to procure a fresh
Supply of Picts; with which, and his own Subjects and Confederates, by the
advantage of Loughs, Bogs, Mears, Mountains, and Woods, better known to him
than to the Romans, he made such stout resistance, that the Emperor in this
Caledonian War lost no less than sifty thousand men. Yet did not Severus desist
(though for age and weakness he was fain to be carried in a Litter) till he had
marched to the furthest part of the Island. In which Expedition he worsted his
Enemies in all conflicts, and at last flew Fulgentius, whose Successor
Argetocoxus such for peace, and obtained it upon condition, That all the
Country between the two Fences of Adrian and Lollius should be yielded back to
the Romans, from whom it had been lately gained. During this peace the Empress
Julia discoursing with the wife of Argetocoxus, Sarcastically scoffed at the
looseness of the British Ladies; who thereat incensed made her this brisk Reply:
Much better do we British women fulfill the work of Nature than you Romans, we
with the best men accustom openly, you with the basest commit private
Adulteries.

Severus having thus tamed the Northern men, builds a strong Wall, where Adrian
had formerly made his of Turf, fortified, as Orosius says, with a deep Trench,
and between certain spaces many Towers or Battlements. This Wall was from his
Name called by the Britans, Guall Sever, and Mur Sever, stretching in length
eighty two Italian Miles, which Number being set down in Figures bysome Italian
Writers thus, LXXXII, has been variously corrupted and altered through the
negligence of Transcribers, while some for L. the Quinquagenary numeral, have
put down C. the Centenary, making CXXXII Miles, whereas the Land is nothing
near so broad in that place; and others have wholly left out the L. shrinking
this place of Ground to XXXII Miles, which number agrees neither with this
place, nor that of Lollius his Fence, being far too short for this, and too
large for the other. Severus now assumes the Title of Britannicus Maximus, and
at York (where that Oracle of the Law Papinianus sat to minister Justice) he
and Bassianus being consuked in a case or question of Right, gave forth their
Imperial Constitution, De Rei Vindicatione. But the Northern people, ever
impatient and unquiet, soon took occasion to break the Peace, against whom the
Emperor sent out his Army, with command to spare neither Sex nor Age, but to
put all to the sword, and so having in some sort repressed this Commotion, worn
out with the toils and labors of War, and with trouble and grief for the
unreclaimable misdemeanour of his Sons, especially the Elder, who had attempted
to kill him, he ended his life at York, in the year two Hundred and Eleven,
Ackham, where is to be seen a great Mount of Earth raised up, which of him is
named SEVER's Hill.

His Eldest Son Bassianus (whom he had by his first wife Martia) succeeded in
the Empire, who concluding peace with the Northern people, took Hostages of
them, and departed out of Britain. His Stepmother Julia he incestuously
married, and having cruelly murdered his Brother Geta, and many of the Noblest
Romans, was himself, Mesopotamia, by the conspiracy of his Successor Ma rinus.

In the out-land parts which lay beyond the Wall, the Roman Soldiers built
themselves Stations, which they fortified and furnished with all necessaries,
and when Alexander Severus came to be Emperor, he gave (as Lampridius says)
to the Captains and Soldiers of the Marches, as well in Britain as in the other
parts of the Empire, these Grounds and Lands which were won from the Enemies,
so that they should be their propriety, if their Heirs served as Soldiers, and
that they should never return to any private men; concluding, that they would
go to the Wars more willingly, and take the better care if they should defend
their own peculiar Possessions. And this Mr. Camden looks upon as the beginning
of Feuds. This good Emperor Alexander was afterward slain in his Pavilion at
Sicila, a Suburbial Village to the City of Mentz, by Julius Maximinus, who
succeeded him. Under the Emperor Gordianus, we find by the Inscription of an
Altar-stone, dedicated to the Honor of that Emperor, and his wife Furia
Sabina Tranquilla, that Nonius Philippus governed here as Pro-Praetor.

In the time of Valerianas, we read that Mello a Britan (whom some call
Mallonius, Melanius, and Meloninus) going to Rome to pay the British Tribute,
was there converted by Pope Steven the First, Roan in Normandy, which Church he
governed for many years. Of the thirty Tyrants which usurped the Imperial Title
against Galienus, five took upon them that Style and Power in Gaul, which were
Posthumus, Lollianus, Victorinus, Marius, and Tetricus. These likewise bore
sway in Britain, as their Coins here found do testify. Coelus to his interest
and party, permitted him to assume the name of King. This Caelus, Surnamed
Godebog, was the Son of Teguanus, and was lineally descended from Aflech, one
of the Sons of King Lhud. He was a man of great power and repute among the
Britans, and began his Reign, in the year two Hundred sixty two, as Hollinshed,
Cooper, Powel, and Isacson tell us, and reigned twenty seven years. Some will
have his Kingdom to have been in that part of the Land which is now called
Essex, and Colchester to be denominated from him; others place it in Ordovicia,
where he had great possessions by his wife Stradwen, Daughter and Heiress to
Cadwan, a potent man in those parts. Tetricus, the last of the sorenamed
Usurpers, not enduring the insolency of his mutinous Army, and warned by the
violent deaths of his Predecessors, submitted himself to the Emperor
Aurelianus, by whom he was made Corrector of Italy.

Britain then returned to the obedience of the Roman Empire, Constantius
Chlorus, serving here under Aurelianus, married Helena the Daughter of King
Coelus, and of her begat the Famous Constantine.

In the time of Probus, those two Monsters of Drunkenness and Leachery, Bonosus
and Proculus (of whom the former was a Britan by descent) seized this Island,
Gaul and Spain, but being overcome, paid their lives for their Ambition. Then
Victorinus Maurus, the Emperor's Favorite, procured the Government of Britain
for a Friend of his; who was no sooner come hither, but he rebelled; whereupon
the same Victorinus, to free himself from suspicion of Treachery, came over to
him, pretending that he fled from the Emperor, and being entertained by the
Usurper, slew him in the night, and returned, which put an end to that Revolt.
This Tyrant is by some conceived to be that Claudius Cornelius Laelianus, whose
Coins are found in this Island, and no where else. About this time Probus gave
leave to the Spaniards, Gauls, and Britans to plant Vines, or make Wine; and to
keep the people in better subjection sent over some Companies of Vandals
hither, who seem to have kept their station upon those Hills near Cambridge,
which Henry of Huntington terms, The most pleasant Mountains of Balsham, from a
little Village of that Name standing beneath them, but the Students call them,
Gogmagog Hills. On the top of which there is to be seen a Fort entrenched, and
the same very large, strengthened with a threefold Rampire, which Gervase of
Tilbury calls Vandelbiria. Beneath Cambridge, says he, there was a place
named Vandelbiria, for that the Vandals wasting the parts of Britain with cruel
slaughter of Christians, there encamped themselves; where upon the very top of
the Hill they pitched their Tents, there is a Plain enclosed round with a
Trench and Rampire, which has Entrance into it but in one place as it were at
a gate.

Carus Manlius coming to the Empire, Carinus and Marianus, Caesar's, allotting
by decree to the former, Britain, Spain, Gaul, and Illyricum, who seems to have
exploited something here against the Northern people, from these Verses of
Nemesianus: -- Nec taceam quae nuper bella sub Arcto,
Foelici Carine manu con^^ceris, ipso
Pene prior genitore Deo. --
Neither may I the Wars in silence hide,
Dispatched of late with happy hand in the North
By thee, Carine, thy Father Deify'd
Who do well near surpass in works of worth.
But after the death of his Father and Brother, Diocletian being saluted
Emperor by the Eastern Armies, vanquished and slew Carinus at Murgum or
Murtium, Maesia and Pannonia.

Diocletian associated with him in the Empire his old Companion in Arms,
Maximian, committing the Western parts to his Government, by whom Caius
Caransius, a Menapian, who had given good proof of his Abilities in the late
War against the Gallick Rusticks called Bagaudae, was entrusted with the charge
of Admiral of the Roman Fleet for scouring the Seas, and guarding the Maritim
Coasts, then terribly infested by the Saxons and Franks. But he designing to
enrich himself, and oblige his Accomplices, suffered some of those Pirates to pass
under Compositions, and others he would not seize till they had first robbed
and spoiled the true Subjects, and what he did intercept, he neither restored
to the Provincials, nor accounted to the Public. These courses made him
suspected of intentions to rebel, whereupon Maximian sent some Forces against
him, with orders to put him to death. To prevent this danger, having made sure
of the Navy, he crossed over into Britain, where he drew to his side the Roman
Legion that was lest here in Garrison, and detained other outlandish Cohorts
which he ^ound here, listed the very Merchants and Factors of Gaul, and
procured great Aids from the German Nations, especially the Franks, and putting
on the Purple Robe sent out his Ships to Sea, who did more mischief to the
Roman Subjects of Gaul, Spain, Italy, and other places, than ever the Germans
had done, whence this was called the Piratick War. Maximian, not able to come
any nearer to him than the Seashore, and having his hands full enough at that
time of other Enemies, thought fit to make a feigned Peace with him for the
present, yielding Britain to him, with Gessoriacum (now Boloign,) and some
other Sea-towns neigbouring to it. And now Carausius, to gratify his new
Subjects, turned his Forces against his Northern Enemies, whom he defeated, and
then, as Nennius informs us, he reedified the Wall between Glotta and Bodotria,
and fortified it with seven Castles, and built a round House of polished Stone
upon the bank of the River Carun, which took name of him, (now commonly called
Carron,) erecting therewith a Triumphal Arch in remembrance of his victory.
This House is by some called Arthur's oven, by others Julius hoff, and the
Temple of Terminus. After, ensued a peace, which Carausius the more willingly
granted, because he conceived these people might be useful to him, if the Roman
Emperors should break their Agreement with him, and invade him.

In the year two hundred eighty nine, Coelus the British King dyed, and was
buried at Glastonbury, to whom succeeded his Brother Trahern. Diocletian and
Maximian had now conferred the Title and honor of Caesar's upon Constantius and
Galerius, whom, as Eutropius says, they made to put away their former Wives,
and so Diocletian married his Daughter Valeria to Galerius, and Maximian gave
his Emperesses Daughter Theodora (whom she had by a former Husband) to
Constantius.

The detention of Britain could now no longer be endured, and therefore in the
year two Hundred ninety two, Constantius Caesar, Surnamed Chlorus, is sent
against the Usurper, who besieged Boloigne, obstructing the Port, kept out all
Relief, whereby the Garrison was forced to surrender; after which followed the
yielding of all on that side of the Sea, and the Soldiers were pardoned, and
taken into Caesar's Service. These Losses much impaired the reputation of
Carausius with his own party, who the same year was slain, after seven years
Reign, by Caius Allectus, Captain of his own Guard; who was the more emboldned
to this Treason, because he presumed the Romans would never be able to provide
a Navy sufficient for the recovery of the Island. Having therefore murdered his
Master, and assumed the Title of Emperor, he sent out his Ships to rob and
spoil the Subjects of Rome, and thinking himself secure enough, became a most
luxurious Tyrant. Constantius leaving orders for the preparing of a strong
Fleet, transfers the War into Batavia, which the Franks had seized by the help
of Carausius, and the revolt of that people. Cleve was besieged by them, and
reduced to great extremity, when Constantius with invincible courage
surmounting all the difficulties of a tedious march through Woods and Bogs
where the Enemy had planted themselves to impede his passage, came seasonably
to the relief, and overthrowing the Assailants freed the City, and following
his fortune recovered the Province, forcing Assaricus and Gaiso Princes of the
Franks to sue for peace, which with much ado they obtained, but so, that he
transplanted many of their Nation into Gaul, to till the wast and desert places
there.

In the year two Hundred ninety four, Constantius having gotten his Armada now
in readiness, set sail with a mighty Army though in a very Tempestuous Scason,
and by the benefit of a Mist passing by the British Fleet unseen, which was
placed near the Isle of Wight to discover and intercept him, arrived happily in
Britain to the great joy of the oppressed Inhabitants, who ran out with their
Wives and Children to meet their Deliverer, whom they looked upon as sent them
immediately from Heaven, and adored the very Sails and Oars of the Ship that
brought him. Presently he set all his Ships on fire, to take from his followers
all hopes of escaping otherwise than by conquering. Allectus, who relied
chiefly upon his Naval strength, and thought Constantius had given over all
hopes of regaining this Country, when he saw him engaged in war with the
Franks and Batavians, was hereat so surprised, that flying up and down like a
madman, he lighted upon Marcus Aurelius Asclepiodotus, Grand Seneschal of the
Praetorium, and not staying for the coming up of all his Forces, only with the
Accessaries of his Treason and his mercenary Germans, and those not marshalled
in good order, desperately began the Battle, in which his Army was routed, and
himself slain, having first cast off his Purple Robe, his body being hardly
found among the dead Carcasses. The slaughter fell heavy upon the Barbarians,
of whom such as escaped hasted to London, designing to sack it, and so take
their flight; but part of the Roman Army, which in the Mist had been severed at
Sea from the rest, coming thither at the same time, put them to the Sword, with
their Commander Livius Gallus at a place near a Rivulet, which from him was
called Gallbrook, now Wallbrook.

Thus was Britain restored to the Romans, after it had been withheld for ten
years space by the two Usurpers. And because so many Tyrants had from the time
of the Emperor Galienus born sway in Britain, therefore Porphyrius the
Philosopher, who lived in those days, termed it, A fertile Province of
Tyrants. And here by the way it will not be amiss to observe, that this
Porophyrius is the first and ancientest Writer that makes mention of the Scots,
which he does in his very next words; as his contemporary the Orator Eumenius
is the first that mentions the Pictis. As for Geffrey's narration of Bassianus,
Carausius, Allectus, Asclepiodotus, and Coelus, I do not hold it worth the
reciting, as being contrary to the truth of all History and Chronology. This
Asclepiodotus had been Consul with Afranius Hannibalianus, in the year two
hundred ninety two, of whom Vopiscus speaks with Honor in his Lives of
Aurelianus and Probus. Constantius leaving him to govern Britain, departed
hence to war against the Almans, whom he overcame with the slaughter of sixty
thousand of their men.

In the year three Hundred and three, Asclepiodotus ruled here, the tenth
Persecution began in the month of March, wherein this Land, which had escaped
all the former, bore a great share. Here, on the two and twentieth day of June,
suffered Alban the Protomartyr of this Island, and the Soldier Heraclius, who
being appointed for his Executioner, preferred death before the employment.
This Alban was by Birth a Britan, by Descent a Roman, of a Noble Family, and of
great Authority, whose dwelling at Verulam, and dying near it, did much ennoble
that City. The place where he dyed was called Derswold, and Holmhurst, where
now stands a noted Mercate Town, which bears his Name. His Death is said to
have been accompanied with diverse Miracles, and particularly Gildas tells us,
That by his Prayers he made a way through the River for himself, and a thousand
others to pass over dryfooted. This River, now named Colne, passing by
Colnebroke a Mercate Town, runs into Thames, of which Gildas therefore
accounted it an Arm, and called it by the name of Tamisis. The men which
followed Alban through the River soon after laid down their lives for the same
cause, among those that suffered with Amphibalus.

On the first of July suffered Aaron and Julius, Citizens of Caerleon upon
Vske; and on the sixteenth of September the forementioned Amphibalus, a famous
Doctor of the Monastery of Caermarden, but born at Caerleon, by whom Alban was
converted; after whose death he fled to the borders of Wales, whither he was
followed by a great many Christian Verulamians, to the number of nine hundred
ninety nine. But a party of Soldiers were sent to bring them and their
Instructor back, who quickly seizing their prey, in their return put the
Verulamians to death by the way at Lichfield, and bringing Amphibalus with nine
others of his Companions to a place called Redburn, (about three Miles from St.
Albans,) there cruelly slew them; at which time about a Thousand more of the
same City of Verulam declaring themselves to be Christians, were likewise
Martyred with them. On the next day, being the seventeenth of September, here
suffered Socrates and Steven, of whom the latter is conceived to be that
Steven, whose name we meet with in the Catalogue of the Archbishops of London;
which if we take for granted, we may then suppose that Socrates might be
Archbishop of York, seeing we find his Name placed before Stevens in the Roman
Martyrology, and others. But if Steven was Archbishop of London, there can be
then but little time allotted to his Successor Augulius, whom some call
Augurius, Augulus, and Agulinus. For we find, that he also suffered Martyrdom
here on the seventh day of February following. About the same time Nicolas, a
British Bishop, suffered, and was buried at Peblis in Lauden, near the
Monastery of Meilros, where, in the Reign of King Alexander the Third, was
sound an Urn of Stone, with Ashes and Bones of a man's body, which seemed to
have been torn piecemeal. Some three or four paces off was found a stately
Cross in a certain Coffer of Stone, on which Coffer was engraven this
Inscription, Locus sancii Nicholai Episcopi, The place of St. Nicholas a
Bishop. In this place King Alexander built a Church, and gave it to the Monks
of the Holy Trinity. Dempster would have this Nicholas to be a Scot, but
alleges no Authority for his opinion, and it is as well known for evidence of
the contrary, that Lauden in the time of this Persecution was in the possession
of the Britans, as that Dempster is a notorious Hagiocleptes. Melior, or
Melorus, and many others, were then invested with the Crown of Martyrdom in
this Island. Diocletian and Maximian freely resigned to Galerius and
Constantius, which latter presently put an end to the Persecution in Britain,
Gaul, and Spain, though in the other parts of the Empire, under Galerius and
his Caesar's, it lasted eight years longer.

In the East that renowned Soldier St. George was martyred about the beginning
of this Persecution. He was born in Cappadocia of Christian Parents, and after
the death of his Father was carried by his Mother into Palestine, whereof she
was a Native, and Heiress to a great Estate there, which upon her decease fell
to him. For his valor and good Service in the Persian War, he was first made a
Military Tribune, and afterward a Count Imperial, and was in high esteem with
Dioclesian and Galerius, till they set up their Edict at Nicomedia against the
Christians. For then our George coming thither, could not contain himself, but
moved with Zeal and pious Courage tore it down, and putting off his Military
Habiliments, and making Doal of all his Substance to the Poor, on the third
Session of the Senate, when the Imperial Decree was to be confirmed, he boldly
avouched himself to be a Christian. And when neither by allurements nor
threatenings he could be drawn to renounce his Religion, after sundry cruel
Torments which he endured with undaunted resolution, Sentence was pronounced
against him, That he should be drawn through the City and beheaded; which was
accordingly performed upon the three and twentieth of April, in the year three
Hundred and three; in which year; as I said before out of Eusebius, the
Persecution began, and therefore I cannot assent to them who place his death in
the year, two Hundred and ninety. Of this George I understand Eusebius to
speak, Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. cap. 5.
where he says: Presently one of those who were not obscure, but most
glorious, as they are reputed according to the excellencies of this world, as
soon as the Edict against the Churches was published at Nicomedia, moved with
zeal and fervent faith, took down and rent the Writing as profane and impious,
which was set up in an open and public place, when two Emperors (meaning the
Emperor, and his Caesar) were in the City, and even he who of all the rest was
most honored and chief of the Four. But he who first behaved himself thus
worthily, suffered likewise those punishments, which in all likelihood attended
one that had dared to do such an Action, and manifested an undejected and
undaunted Spirit to the very last. Thus far Eusebius. His Body was afterward
by his Servant conveyed back to Palestine, and interred at a City called Lydda
and Diospolii, now St. Georges, near Ramah. He is reported, by his constancy at
his suffering, and by private Reasonings and Conferences, to have converted
many, and among the rest, Vincentius, who was Martyred in Spain. That George
suffered where the Emperor kept his Court, is agreed by all, which
sufficiently proves, that neither Lydda nor Ramah was the place, as some,
deceived by his Burial at the former, have written; but Nicomediae, where all
the Histories of those times aver that Diocletian usually resided.

The Arians, to procure the reputation of Saintship to their George the
Alexandrian Bishop, confounded him and our Martyr into one, composing a mixed
Legend of their Acts and Sufferings, stuffed with such sottish forgeries of
Saint Athanasius, whom they make a Magician, and Alexandra the wife of
Dacianus, and such like, that Pope Gelasius though fit to reject it with others
of the same nature as Apocryphal; but that he might not be misinterpreted, to
deny the being of those Saints whose Legends he condemned, he thus concludes
his Canon: Yet notwithstanding this, we with the Church devoutly reverence all
those Martyrs, and their glorious sufferings' which are better known to God
than men. Yet did not this Censure, though past with the advice of above
seventy Prelates, hinder succeeding Writers from inserting those Fopperies into
their Relations of this Saint, whereby some, as Calvin, Chemnitius, etc. have
been induced to think that there was never such a man. Others, De Idol. Romans
lib. 1. cap. 5.
of whom Dr. Reynolds is the most considerable, have really believed him to be
the same with George of Alexandria, though he confesses, that in his opinion,
Gelasius did believe him to be a Holy Martyr; which he could not surely think
of the Arian George, whose death was but an hundred and thirty years or
thereabouts before his Papacy, too scant a time to have his impieties and
villainies forgotten. Amm. Marcel. lib. 22.
Neither was the Arian George a Cappadocian, (as this Martyr was,) which Dr.
Reynolds goes about to prove, but a Cilician, born at a Town of that Province,
called Epiphania, in a Fullers House, but dwelling in Cappadocia, when the
Emperor Constantius the Younger appointed him to be Bishop of Alexandria, many
years after the other George's Martyrdom. By Dacianus, the Legendaries mean
Galerius Caesar, a Native of Dacia, who had that Denomination from his
Country, as the Emperor Adrianus had his Name from Adria, a Town of Italy
whence his Family came, and Diocletian from Dioclea in Dalmatia, where he was
born. They call him King of the Persians, in regard of his great victories over
that people, from whom he won five Provinces, and was in a fair way, as we find
in Aurelius Victor, to have subdued the whole Kingdom, if Diocletian had not
recalled him. The Fable of George killing a Dragon to save a Virgin's life,
seems to be taken from the Poetical Fiction of Persens and Andromeda; though it
may not unfitly be judged Emblematical, if by the Virgin we understand his
Soul, and by the Dragon the Devil; the one preserved, the other conquered by
his Christian Magnanimity, and constant perseverance. His name is commemorated
in the Martyrologies of Greece and Rome, and many ancient Authors; his Relics
reverenced, and Churches erected and dedicated to his memory in several Lands.

I have spoken the more of this Martyr, that it may appear to the world, that
the Kings and the Nation of England, who for some Ages have had a peculiar
respect for this Saint, whom they chose for Patron of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, have not bestowed all this Honor either upon a Heretic, or a mere
Chimoera.

Bouchet, in his Annals of Aquitain, writes, That Helena the Daughter of King
Cloel (so he calls Coel) brought Constantius two other Sons besides
Constantine, and that the youngest named Lucius having slain the Elder, was by
his Father banished out of Britain, and condemned to a Monastical life.
Embarking therefore with diverse Priests and Religious men, he crossed over to
Poictou, where at a place from him called Lucionum, now Lusson, he founded an
Abbey and a Church in honor of the Virgin Mary. This he relates out of an old
Hymn of that Church. But seeing no Ancient approved Author mentions any other
Son of Helena's besides Constantine, I rather think this Lucius to be the same
with him who preached to the Rhaetians and Bavarians, since all the Writers of
his Acts agree, that he preached in Gaul before he entered into Germany.

Gaul had been much depopulated by the frequent irruptions of the Barbarous
people; whereupon Constantius, as he had translated many of the Franks to
manure the Grounds about Langres, Rad. Niger. and Lib. Triedum.
Rheimes, Troyes, and Amiens, thought fit to draw a Colony of Britans into
Armorica; which was transported thither under the command of Conan, the Son of
King Coel, whom his Sister, the Divorced Princess Helena, accompanied.

In the year, Picts raised some Commotions here, which brought the Emperor
over, who gave them an Overthrow, but was constrained by sickness to return to
York, where he dyed, in the year three Hundred and six, and was buried at Caer
Seiont near Caernarvon, Caer Custeint: Nenn.
whose Body being found there in the year, one Thousand two hundred and eighty,
Mat. Westminster.
was by King Edward's command Honorably interred in the Church of Caernar^^^^.

To him succeeded the Noble Constantine, worthily Surnamed, The Great; who
happily came Post from Rome to Boloigne, just as his Father was setting Sail
his last time hither, as we find in Eumenius, and an old Historian published
with Ammianus Marcellinus, by Henricus Valesius. His Father when he was made
Caesar, to assure Galerius of his fraternal love, had put this his Son to him
to be trained up in Martial Discipline, out of his Stepmother Theodora's sight.
But he discerning him to be of a great a spiring soul, exposed him to continual
perils, wherein he so behaved himself, that he always came off with Honor.
This made his envious Guardian cause him to be the more narrowly observed,
resolving either by policy or force ever to detain him in his power.
Constantine perceiving himself to be in some sort a prisoner, determined to
take the first opportunity for his Escape, so that when Maximinus and Severus
were made Caesar's by Galerius, which was according to Eusebius his Chronicle in
the year preceding the death of Constantius; he knowing himself as worthy of
that Dignity as they, procured a feigned permission to return to his Father.
And coming to Rome took Post there, and maimed all the Posthorses by the way,
till he got out of Italy, to prevent the pursuit of Severus Caesar, whom he
understood to have private Instructions from Galerius to apprehend him. Coming
safe to Constantius, he was by him before his Embarquing declared Caesar, the
same year, as Aurelius Victor says. He staid behind to govern Gaul in his
Fathers absence, but hearing that he lay sick at York, he hasted thither to see
him, who upon his deathbed appointed him to succeed him, not without the envy
of his Brothers, who csteemed him as the Son of a British Princess not so nobly
born as themselves, whose Mother was a Roman Emperor's Daughter-in-law. Which
stuck so deep in the stomach of his ungracious Nephew Julian, that he was not
ashamed to style the Empress Helena, (...), Anaughty and mean woman; and
Zosimus terms her, (...) A shameful Mother, and (...), An unworthy woman, who
was not the lawful wife of Constantius; the falseness of which appears, in that
he was forced to put her away, in order to his marriage with Theodora. And both
Jews and Gentiles by way of reproach called her Stabularia, or Hostess,
(because she so devoutly sought out that Inn and Stable at Bethlehem where
Christ was born, and there founded a Church,) which gave occasion to that
fabulous report of her keeping an Hostelry at Drepanum in Bithynia. But her
Heroic Son was so far from being ashamed of his Mother, that he declared her
Augusta, and at Triers she had a stately Palace for her residence, while he
kept his Imperial Court there, which retaining her Name long time after, caused
the Abbot Berengosius and others to imagine her a Native of that City.

Constantine pursuing the Relics of the Pictish War, soon brought the Enemy to
terms of Submission, and then crossed the Sea to Gaul, where the next year he
married Fausta, Maximian, by whom he was then declared Augustus, which Title he
had forborne till that time. Octavius, Lord of the Evissaei, people inhabiting
part of the Counties of Monmouth and Hereford, which from them took the name of
Ewias, leaguing himself with the Northern men, rose up in Rebellion here;
against whom the Emperor sent back his Uncle Traherne, (who happened at that
time to be with him upon some business,) between whom, near Winchester, was
sought a Battle, in which the British King was put to the worst, and compelled
to flee into the Country of the Brigantes, where the greatest part of the
Roman Army lay, to oppose the Picts, and their Allies. The Rebel following him
thither (presuming much upon the strength and power of his Confederates) where
another Battle was fought, in which Traherne and the Romans prevailed; who
pursued Octavius so eagerly, that they forced him to quit the Land, and sail to
Scandia, leaving orders with his Friends to contrive some means for dispatching
the King; which was quickly effected: for Traherne thinking himself secure,
rode out of London with a small Retinue, and was intercepted by the Lord of
Verulam, who with an hundred men lay in Ambush for him, and slew him, in the
year three hundred and eleven, Octavius was immediately advertised, who
hastening his return, and getting his Accomplices together, became very strong;
but Constantine coming against him in person, the same year subdued him, and
upon his submission suffered him to hold some part of Cambria, with the Title
of King under him. Eusebius speaks of this Exploit, saying, That Constantine,
after he had furnished his Army with mild and modest Instructions of piety,
Eusebius. de vita Constantin. lib. 1. cap. 4.
invaded Britain, that he might likewise reform those who dwell environed round
about with the waves of the Ocean, bounding the Sun's setting as it were with
his Coasts. And in another place, Cap. 19.
He passed over to the Britans, enclosed on every side within the Banks of the
Ocean; whom when he had overcome, he began to compass in his mind other parts
of the world, that he might come in time to succor those that wanted his help.

After this he overcame and killed Maxentius and Licinius, and established
Christian Religion throughout the Roman Empire. He caused the Council of Arles
to be assembled, in the year three hundred and fourteen, Donatists, to which
Eborius Bishop of York, Restitutus Bishop of London, Adelphius Bishop of
Colchester, Sacerdos a Presbyter, and Arminius a Deacon, repaired out of
Britain, and subscribed. He also called the Famous Nicene Council against the
Arians, British Clergy were present, and held with the Orthodox men. In his
time the Government of Propraetors or Lieutenants ceased in Britain, in stead
whereof succeeded Vicegerents, or Vicars General, of whom Pacatianus was the
first.

In the year three hundred thirty seven, Constantine, the Great and Singular
Ornament of this his Native Country, in respect whereof the Panegyrist cries
out, Panegyric. 3.
O Fortunate Britain, and more happy now than all other Lands, that had the
first sight of Constantinus Caesar.

But Livineius will not allow this Honor to Britain, and tells us, That this
passage only imports, that he was here made Caesar; whereas we have already
showed out of Aurelius Victor, that he was made Caesar the same year with
Maximinus and Severus when he came to his Father in Gaul, just as he was
embarquing for Britain, Lib. 7. c. 19.
which is acknowledged by Nicephorus. Ad that those two were made Caesar's the
year before the death of Constantius, is expressly affirmed by Eusebius in his
Chronicle: Lib. 4. c. 53.
who likewise in his life of this Emperor, deduceth his Reign from that year,
saying, that he reigned two and thirty years wanting some odd months and days.
For if he had computed his Reign from his Fathers death, which was on the
twenty fifth of July, in the year three hundred and six, he could have reckoned
but thirty years nine months and twenty eight days, to the twenty second day
of May, in the year three hundred thirty seven, at which time Constantine died.
Besides, the Panegyrist speaks of his ennobling this Land by his Birth, where
he says to him of his Father, Liberavit ille Britannias servitute, tu etiam
nobiles illic oriendo fecisti; He freed Britain from Servitude, Thou made it
also Noble by being Born there. For I know not how to render Oriendo, better
than by, Being Born; and the Grammarians will tell us, that Orior, and Oriundus
which comes from it, import Birth and Descent. Yet others, from the mistaken
words of Julius Firmicus, Julius Fir mic. mathes. lib. cap. 4.
conceive him to be born at Naisus in Illyricum, not considering, that Firmicus
speaks of Constantius the Son of Constantine, who was also styled Maximus, and
born in Illyricum, as appears by Julian, his Cousin and Successor. And Lipsius,
misled by a corrupted Copy of Firmicus, in stead of Naisus reads Tarsus, and
places it in Bithynia, Orat. 1. i^ laudem Co^^stantii.
near Drepanum, where Nicephorus reports this Emperor to be born in the time
of Diocletian; whereas the Age of Constantine, according to all approved
Writers, proves him to be born in the Reign of Aurelianus. Britain was his
Birthplace, in Gaul he was made Caesar, in Britain he was invested with the
Purple Robe, and the Imperial Dignity, though he modestly abstained from the
Title of Augustus, till at his Marriage in Gaul it was conferred upon him by
his Father-in-Law. He re-edified Byzantium in Thrace for the convenience of its
situation, and Drepanum in Bithynia in honor of the Martyr Latcianus there
buried; calling the former from his own name Constantinopolis, and the latter
from his Mothers, Helenopolis. And, as William of Malmesbury says, he planted
a Colony of Britans (which had served him in his Wars) in Armarica, which I
conceive to be that Army mentioned in the Book of Triads, that went forth under
the conduct of Caswallan the younger, and Gueno and Guavar, and sat down in
Aquitain, whereof the Britans accounted Armorica to be a part: both this, and
Conan's forementioned Army, are said to have consisted of one and twenty
thousand men apiece.

By his Concubine Minervina he had a Son named Crispus, whom he put to death;
and by his wise Fansta he had three Sons, Constantinus, Constantius, and
Constans, among whom he divided his Empire.

In this division, Britain with Gaul and Spain fell to Constantinus, who as
Eldest Brother expected a larger share, and finding himself disappointed,
invaded the Territories of his Brother Constans, by whose Captains he was
trained into an Ambush, Aquileia, when he had reigned three years. His
Provinces were presently seized by Constans, who having overcome the Franks in
a great Battle, Liban. in Basilico.
crossed over into Britain, as Libanius writes, with his Brother Constantius in
the Wintertime, and quieted some stirs here. 343. Julius Firmic. de Error.
profan. Releg. c. 29.
Whereupon Julius Firmicus (not the Pagan Astrologer, but the Christian speaks
thus to them: Ye have in Wintertime subdued under your Oars the swelling and
raging Billows of the British Ocean; the waves now of the Sea, unto this time
hardly known to us, have trembled, and the Britains were afraid to see the
unexpected face of the Emperor. What would ye more? the very Elements, as
vanquished, have given place to your Virtues. This Voyage was in the year four
Hundred forty three; and four years after, Constans caused a Council to convene
at Sardica, at which some British Bishops were present, and gave their
suffrages for Paulus and Athanasius against the Arians. At this time Gratianus,
Father to the Emperors Valentinian and Valens, was General of all the Military
Forces in Britain, who was Surnamed Funarius, because in his youth going about
with a Rope to sell, five Soldiers that set upon him were not able to wrest it
from him.

In the year, three hundred and fifty, Constans was slain by the Traitorous
Conspiracy of Magnentius (Surnamed Taporus,) the Son of a Britain, but born in
Gaul among the Laeti, who usurped the Western Empire, and after three years
inauspicious Reign, being vanquished by Constantius,

After this victory strict Enquiry is made for his Abettors, and among the rest
that suffered, Gratianus Funarius, who had now quitted all public employment,
and betook himself to a private life, was sined in the confiscation and loss of
his Goods, because he was reported to have lodged the Tyrant, and given him
entertainment. For the like purpose Paulus a Notary, Surnamed Catena, from his
craft in linking matters together, Amm. Marcel. lib. 14.
was sent into Britain to discover and apprehend the Favorers of Magnentius,
who violently seized upon the Fortunes and Estates of many, spoiling and
undoing a great number, imprisoning such as were freeborn, and grieving their
bodies with Bonds, and bruising some of them with Manacles, and all by patching
together many false Accriminations against them. Which gave such distaste to
Martinus the Vicegerent here, an honest upright man, that having in vain
entreated him not to ruin such innocent persons, he threatened to depart the
Land, hoping this malicious Inquisitor might for fear thereof be induced to
surcease his cruel proceedings. But Paulus supposing that hereby his Trade was
empaired, converted his spite against the Vicegerent himself, whom he drew
in, to have his part in the common perils, and went very near to bring him also
prisoner bound, with Tribunes, and several others, to the Emperors Privy
Counsel. Whereat Martinus was so incensed, that he assailed him with his
Dagger, but failing to wound him mortally, stabbed himself; and Paulus fearing
to stay any longer in an enraged Province, now destitute of a Governor, hasted
away, carrying over with him a great company in chains, of whom some were
dragged and tortured, some proscribed and outlawed, some banished, and others
suffered punishment by the sword.

And now Constantius being sole Monarch, resolves to promote the interest of
Arianism, and to that end, in the year three hundred fifty nine, Ariminum upon
the Emperor's charges, which was resused by the Gaulish and British Bishops;
only three of the British for mere poverty accepted it, judging it not so
blameable to live upon the Prince's Cost, as to burden any private Purse,
though the other Bishops had offered to contribute to them. Here though the
Arians got some advantage by the Emperor's power, and the violence of his
Prefect Taurus, and the subtle Policies of the two Heretical Bishops, Valens
and Vrsacius, yet did the Western Provinces, and particularly Britain, continue
free from that Herefie long after, as Athanasius, and the other Bishops of
Egypt and Lybia testisie, in their Letter to the Emperor Jovianus concerning
the Nicene Creed.

In the year three Hundred and sixty, 360. Amm. Mare. lib. 20.
the Savage Nations of the Scots and Picts broke the Peace, and by sundry
Inrodes wasted the Frontiers in dreadful manner. Julianus Caesar therefore sent
over Lupicinus to repress their boldness, who with a power of light-armed
Herulians, Batavians, and Maesians, set sail from Boloigne in the midst of
Winter, and landed at Rutupiae (now Richborough,) and marched to London, to
take order there for the management of the War. In the mean time Julianus
Caesar is by his Army saluted Augustus; whereupon he makes preparations against
Constantius, and mistrusting the turbulent humor of Lupicinus, Whom he knew to
be an arrogant and haughty man, he sends a Notary to Boloigne to look that none
should pass from those Coasts to Britain; so that returning before he had any
information of what had happened in his absence, he was able to make no
Disturbance. In his room came Alypius, whom Julian after the death of
Constantius recalled, and employed in that vain attempt of re-edifying the
Temple of Jerusalem.

In the year three hundred sixty four, 364. Amm. Marcel. lib. 26.
Valentinianus and Valeus were made Emperors, in the beginning of whose Reign
the Picts, Saxons, Scots, and Attiscots assailed the Britans, and vexed them
with continual turmoils for some years. Nectaridius, Count of the Maritime
Tract (or the Saxon Shore) was slain, and Bulchobaudes Duke of Britain
circumvented by the enemies Ambuscadoes. Amm. Marcel. lib. 27.
Upon these News Valentinian sent hither Severus, Lord High Steward of his
Household, and presently revoking him sent over Jovinus a famous Commander, who
perceiving his own Forces too weak to perform any great matters, dispatched
Proventusides back for a greater supply. But the Emperor, who could not well
spare him, ordered his return, and sent Theodosins to succeed him in his Charge
here; Experience in Martial Affairs, having with him the Batavians, Herulians,
Jovij, and Victores, fell upon the spoiling Bands and Companies of Robbers,
routed and stripped them of their Prey and Prisoners, and after a full
restitution of all, save only some small parcels bestowed upon his wearied
Soldiers, he triumphantly entered the Ancient Town of London, which Posterity
called Augusta, where he got what intelligence he could from Captives and
Fugitives, of the condition of the Enemies; who being of disserent Nations, and
the war scattered, secret Wiles and sudden Excursions would be most available
against them. Many Deserters and Runnagates he brought back to the Roman
Service, by Proclamation of Impunity. Then he requests, that Civilis, a man of
noted Integrity, might be sent him to govern the Land as Deputy, and with him
Duleitius, a renowned Captain. And now he marches out from London against the
Barbarous people, Amm. Mar. cel. lib. 28. 368.
and gaining all places of advantage to forelay them, discomsited and put to
slight diverse Nations, whom a long unchastised Insolence had emboldned to
invade the Roman Empire, and laid the foundation of a lasting Tranquillity,
restoring every where the decayed Cities and Castles. In the mean time
Valentinus a Pannonian, banished hither for a crime of a high nature,
solicited the Exiles and Soldiers with large promises of Rewards, to allure
and draw them to an Insurrection, but was seasonably prevented by the wary
General, who delivered him, and some sew of his inward Accomplices, to Dulcitius
to be put to death; yet politickly forebore any further inquisition into the
Conspiracy, as knowing that too many were engaged in it. And having now
recovered the Province between the two Walls, he fortified the Frontiers with
standing Watches and strong Fore-fences, and so brought it to the former
ancient Estate, that upon his motion it had a lawful Governor to rule it, and
was, in honor of the Emperors, named Valentia. The Areans, a kind of people
formerly instituted on purpose to run to and fro, by long journeys, to find out
the designs of the neigbour Nations, being convicted of holding traitorous
correspondence with them, were displaced by him from their Stations. So having
quieted and settled all things here, he was sent for by Valentinian, of whom he
was Honorably received, and made General of the Horse. In this war, his Son
named also Theodosius, and Magaus Clemens Maximus, gave good proofs of their
valors, which came afterward to be Emperors.

About this time lived Chebius, or Keby the Son of Solomon, a Cornish Prince,
brought up by Hilarious Bishop of Po^ctiers, by whom made a Bishop; returning
into Brit^^^^ he passed some time at Menevia, from whence he sailed into
Ireland; and building a Church in a certain Island stayed there four years, and
lastly coming back to Mona, now Anglesey, there spent the remainder of his
days with his disciples at a place called from him Caer Guby, for Caer Keby;
as Hilary-point, a Promontory of the same Isle, had its name from his Master,
whom the Britans highly honored.

Valentinian having mastred part of the Almans, Amm. Marcel. 29. 373.
made Fraomarius King of the Bucinobantes, (an Alman Tribe dwelling near Memz,)
whom soon after, in regard his Territory had been shrewdly harassed in the
German Wars, he translated into this Island, with Authority of a Tribune over
his own Countrey-forces, which for number and valor were very considerable.

In the year three hundred seventy five, British King Octavius, (whom the
Cambro-Britans call Eucta, and Euciha) after a long Reign of sixty four years,
leaving behind only one Daughter named Helena, who, as Geoffrey says, was, by
the means of Caradoc Prince of Cornwall, and his Son Maurice, married to
Maximus, probably when he came hither under the Noble General Theodosius.
Geoffrey makes him to be near of kin to Constantine the Great, whose
Grandfather King Coel, as he tells us, had three Brothers, T^^^^rne, Leoline,
and Marius; of whom Leoline married a Roman Lady, and by her was Father to
Maximus, who was brought up in Spain, where (by what means soever it came to
pass) he fell into such despicable Poverty, that Latinus Paratus the Panegyrist
terms him Patris incertum, a man whose Father was unknown, Ft mensularum
servilium Statarium lixam, A standing Drudge to Servants Tables, and Ausmius
calls him, Armigerum lixam, An Army-Drudge: yet afterward by his valor he
rose to great preferment, and wanted not the sprit to challenge Kindred with
the Emperor Theodesius, which in all likelihood he could not have had the
impudence to have done, if his Parentage had been so very base as some would
imply. The Panegyrist calls him, an Exile from the world, not because he was
banished hither, but for the same reason that he calls all the Britans so,
because they were secluded by the Sea from the greater World. It seems he
commanded here in chief, after Civilis, and Dulcitius, and Fraomarius, and
overcame Conan Mertadoc, forcing him and his partakers to sly to the Scots, who
had newly seized upon part of Albania. They by entertaining the vanquished
Britans drew upon themselves a dangerous War, in which part of the Picts with
their King sided with Maximus, and part of them under the conduct of one Melga
aided Conan and the Scots. But Maximus being for his former victory proclaimed
Emperor by his Army in the year three hundred eighty two, Conan and his
Britans submitted. Tiro Prosper in his Chronicle makes mention of this last
victory briesly thus. Maximus in Britannia a militibus Imperator emstitutus,
incursantes Picios and Scotos strenue superavit; Maximus being made Emperor in
Britain by the Soldiers, valiantly overcame the invading Picts and Scots. And
in respect of his former Battle, Gregorius Turenensis says of him: Lib. 1.
cap. 38. al. 43.
C^^m per Tyrannidem oppressis Britannis sumpsisset victoriam, a militibus
Imperatorem creatum fuisse; When having oppressed the Britans by Tyranny had
gotten the victory, he was made Emperor by the Soldiers. In the year three
hundred eighty three he crossed the Sea, British Youth to increase his Army,
and entered the mouth of the River Rhine, and conquered Brittia a Batavian
Island, where he placed a Colony from Britain, over whom he appointed Conan
Meriadoc to rule as Prince. Gratian had some years before set forth a Law, That
every one should be permitted freely to follow what Religion he pleased, and
all Sects indisserently to assemble in Churches, (except Manchces, Photinians,
and Eunomians,) which made way for the Arian Heresy into Britain. And as
hereby he gave distaste to the Orthodox Christians, so by his extraordinary
favor to the Alans, and other Barbarous Mercenaries, he incurred the hatred of
the Roman Soldiery, who deserting him betook themselves to the Service of
Maximus. Gratian at first contemned this Adversary, but finding his Error too
late, after some unsuccesful skirmishes sled to Lions, whither Maximus follows,
and by the Stratagem of his General Andragathius, circumvented and slew him.
Hereupon he creates his Son Victor, Caesar; puts to death Ballio and
Merobaudes, two great Commanders under the late Emperor, settles his Imperial
Seat at Triers, sends an Army into Spain, which soon brought that Country
under his obedience, and makes a feigned Peace with Theodosius, and the younger
Valentinian; of whom, the former acknowledging him for his Associate in the
Empire, ordered Cynegius Prefect of the Praetorium, then going into Egypt, to
exhibit his Image publicly to the Alexandrians; the other, to remove all cause
of suspicions and jealousies, dismissed the Hunns and Alans, whom he had hired
to his Assistance. In the mean time Conan concluded a Marriage with Vrsula,
Daughter to Deonotus Prince of Cornwall, who had there succeeded his Brother
Caradoc; but this unfortunate Lady, with many others who were sent over to be
matched with Conan's Britans, being driven up the Rhine by Tempest, were seized
and inhumanely slaughtered by the Soldiers of Gramus the Scot, and Melga the
Pict, and the Hunnes whom Valentinian dismissed, but were buried at Celein, and
in tract of time came to be reputed Martyrs and Saints. Their deaths are
supposed to have happened about the year three hundred eighty three.

I know Trithemius, and Geoffrey of Monmouth say, that Maximus presently after
his landing, settled Conan in Armorica, but considering that the German Shore
had been strangely out of Vrsula's way from Cornwall, if her Voyage had been
designed for that Country: It seems to me more probable, that Conan governed
first in Brittia Batavi^a; especially seeing all Writers affirm, that Maximus
arrived at the mouth of the Rhine, and that Procopius speaks of a Kingdom of
Britans in that Island. (...).
I shall here set down his own words.

(...). The Isle of Brittia lies in this Ocean, not above two hundred Stadia
from the Shore, over agunst the Mouths of the Rhine, and in the midst between
Britain and Thule. For Britain lies to the West, over against the furthest
part of Spain, distant from the Continent no less than four thousand Stadia;
but Brittia lies behind those Coasts of Gaul which are upon the Ocean, North
from Spain and Britain. And Thule (as far forth as is yet known) is situate in
the remote parts of the Ocean Northwards. But I have already spoken of Britain
and Thule before. This Island Brittia three most populous Nations de inhabit,
which have every one their several King to rule them; and these Nations be
called Angili, Frisones, and (after the name of the very Island) Brittones.
Note they seem to be so vast a multitude of people, that every year a great
number of them, with their wives and children, flit from thence to the Franks;
and they give them entertainment, and plant them in that part of their Country
which seems most desert above the rest. And hereupon men say, they challenge
to themselves the very Island. And truly not long since, when the King of the
Franks sent certain of his people in Embassage to Constantinople to the
Emperor Justinian, he sent withal some of the Angili, pretending ambitiously
that this Island was under his Dominion.

Had Mr. Camden seen this passage of Procopius entire, Camd. in Anglo-Sax.
he had not then mistaken this Brittia for our Britain; but he had only the
latter part of it transmitted to him by Franciseus Pithaeus, and was likewise
in all probability misled by John Tzetzes, and his Brother Isaac; of whom the
former in his Notes upon Hesiod, the other in his upon Lycophron, calls it
(...) Britain, for Brittia, and both of them relate Poetical Fictions of dead
men's Souls carried thither. This Island lay near Caligula's Watchtower, called
Brittenburg, and Huis de Britten, but has been long ago, with many others
thereabouts, swallowed up by the Sea: unless we should rather think it to be
Valachria, which Levinus Lemnius conjectureth to have taken its name from our
Welchmen.

About this time Priscillian a Spaniard, of Noble Birth, revived the Heresy of
the Gnostics, wherein he was countenanced by some Bishops, especially by
Instantius, and Salvianus, (who labored to make himself Bishop of Abila;) upon
which a Council was assembled at Bordeaux, from which the Heresiarch appealed
to Maximus, by whom he was put to death, being also convicted of Sorcery and
Obscenity; though Martin Bishop of Tours had interceded for the sparing of his
life, desiring that he might be left to the Desinitive Sentence of the Bishops,
it being an unexampled heinous Encroachment, for a Secular Judge to determine
Causes of the Church. Diverse others suffered with him, and Instantius (whom the
Council had declared unworthy of his Bishopric) was banished with Tiberianus
to the Isle of Silly.

In the year three hundred eighty seven, Maximus quarrels with Valentinian for
molesting the Orthodox Bishops, and committing Gaul to the care of his Son
Flavius Victor, whom he had lately declared Augustus, enters Italy with such
terror, that the young Emperor, and his Mother Justina, were constrained to
flee to Theodosius for succor. After whose flight his Enemy was received with
all honor by the Cities of Italy; and Africa readily submitted to him, so that
he was now sole Monarch of the Western Empire. But Theodosius first checking
Valentinian for favoring Auxentius and the Arians, and laying down before him
the justice of God's Judgments upon him, at last prepares to restore him, and
levies a mighty Army, which he increases with numerous Aids of Goths, Hunnes,
and Alans. Maximus nothing daunted hereat, resolves to be on the assailing
hand, and advancing into Pannonia superior, takes in Petovio, (now Petow in
Stiria) seated upon the River Dravus, and leaving in it a strong Garrison,
marches to Syscia, (now Sysseg upon the River Savus, in Windischland,) and
takes that too, meaning to make it the Seat of the War. And hearing that
Theodosius intended to send Valentinian and his Mother by Sea into Italy, being
now consident of his strength in field, he commands Andragathius (whom he had
ordered to guard the Alps) to embarque his Forces, and intercept them, which
yet he failed of performing, they being landed, and joyfully received by their
friends before his coming. Yet he continued out at Sea, by reason of a report
that Thodesius designed to follow them with his whole Army. In the mean time
some of the Barbarous people who served under the Eastern Emperor, were by his
Fnemies bribed into a Conspiracy against him, which being discovered, they
withdrew themselves, and fled toward Maccedon to the Boggs and Lakes, but were
found out by the Pursuers, and almost all of them put to the sword. Having thus
prevented that danger, I atinus Pacatus in Paneg.
he marches up to Syseia in Pannonia, where Maximus abode his coming; between
whom was fought a cruel Battle, in which Maximus was overthrown with great
slaughter, and forced to fly to Petovio, where his Brother Marcellinus meets
him with brave Recruits. Theodosius follows, and sights another Battle with him
there, where after a sharp contest he again defeats him, but night drawing on
gave him opportunity to escape. The Conqueror pursues, and by the way receives
into his service some Squadrons of his Enemies Forces which submitted to him.
At his entrance into Italy he is triumphantly received by the Inhabitants and
Soldiers of Haemona, (a City situated at the Foot of the Alps,) and passing
forward sat down before Aquileia, whither Maximus was fled; who appearing too
much dejected at the late change of his fortune, made his followers despair of
all possibility of standing out. Whereupon to make their own peace, they seized
him as he was dealing money to the Soldiers, and stripping him of his Imperial
Robes delivered the City and him to Theodosius, in which extremity he
recollected his Spirits, and behaved himself undauntedly before his
Adversaries. But when the victorious Emperor discovered some inclinations to
pi^y and commiseration of his condition, Andragathius, who was scouring the
Ionian Sea with his Fleet, hearing of his Master's death, and knowing that he
must now expect the utmost severity upon the Emperor Gratian's account, threw
himself headlong into the Sea, and there perished. This Victory was thence
forward, as Pr^cipius says, celebrated by the Romans with an Anniversary
Festival. St. Ambrose taxes this Maximus of favoring the Jews too much, and
says of him, Idcirco Syscia and Petovione, atque ubique terrarum victus est;
Therefore was he overcome at Syscia and Petovio, and every where else. In the
mean time Nannienus and Quintinus, Greg. Turon.
whom he left in Gaul to assist his Son Victor, vanquished the Franks at a
place called Carbonaria; after which Armorica was given to Conan, who had done
good Service in the fight: whereupon he with a considerable number of his
Britans, quitting Brittia, settles himself among the other Britans, who had
been formerly planted there by Constantius and Constantine. The aforesaid
victory so encouraged Quintinus, that he would fain have persuaded his
companion to carry the War into their country, who warily refused, and
returned to Mentz. But Quintinus resolute in his way, passes on by Nuys, and
falls into the Ambushes which Genebald, Marcomer and Sunnon had laid for him,
by whom he is soundly beaten, and Heraclius Tribune of the Jovij, and the
greatest part of the Army cut off, the rest escaping by the benefit of the
night and shelter of the Woods. But Arbogastes is now dispatched into Gaul by
Valentinian, who vanquishes and takes Victor, and puts him to death, and places
Carietto and Syrus in the rooms of Nannienus and Quintinus. This end had the
Empire of Maximus, in the year three hundred eighty eight, when he had reigned
six years, whom Sulpitius Severus, Orosius, and Bid, affirm to have been a
worthy man, and fit to be Emperor, if he had attained it lawfully; and so this
Island returned to the obedience of Rome.

Soon after this we find our Britans going in Pilgrimage to Palestine and Syria
to visit Jerusalem, and Simeon Stylites; but others of them we meet with not so
well employed. For now Pelagius contries his Heresy, which some few years
after he vents, with his two Disciples, Celestius an Irish Scot, and Julianus
an Italian of Campania. This Pelagius was a Britan, and as Polychron. lib. 4.
c. 31.
Ranulphus Cestrensis and Tinm. in vita Sancti Albani.
Joannes Tinmuthensis say, was Abbot of Bangor; and some will have him to be
called Morgan in his own country language, for Morgan in British signifies the
same with Pelagius. His Heresy shrewdly disturbed the Church for many years,
of which I shall say nothing here, because so many have written largely of it.
Chrysanthus, the Son of a Bishop named Martian, governed Britain as Vicar at
this time with great reputation, having formerly been a Consular Deputy of
Italy under Theodosius, and was afterward for his integrity, against his will,
made Bishop of the N^vatian Churches about Constantinople, and was so
charitable, that of all Ecclesiastical Revenues and Profits he reserved nothing
to himself but two loaves of Bread on the Lord's day.

In the year three hundred ninety three, Theodosius being then Consul with
Abundantius, the S^ots from the North-west, Florent. Vi gorn.
and the Picts from the North wasted this Isle of Britain: and three years
after, Joannes Major. lib. 2. ca^ ^. 1.
the Scots again joining with the Picts invaded the Roman Province; to repress
whom, Stilico, Guardian to the Emperor Honorius, sent over a Legion under the
command of Victorinus of Tolosa, who drove them home, and new fortified the
Wall, placing a Legion there against all occasions. The Scottish Writers say
that he went near to have reduced the Picts into absolute subjection. It should
seem the Saxons also did then infest this Land, and were repulsed by him,
Claud. lib. 2. de laud. Stilic.
from these words of Claudian, in which Britain is brought in speaking to
Stilico.

Me queque vi^inis pereuntem gentibus, inquit,
Munivit Stilico, totam quum Scotus Iernen
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Tethys,
Illius effectum curis, ne bella timerem
Scotica, nec Pictum tremerem, ne littore toto
Prospicerem dubtis venientem Saxona ventis.
And me did Stilico protect, when I
Was like to perish by the cruelty
Of Irish Scots, and when the Sea abounded
With Rovers Ships, which all my Coasts surrounded;
His cares have brought to pass that Scotch invasions
I dread not now, nor Pictish Depredations;
Nor ken from far the Saxons come to spoil
On every turn of wind my plenteous Soil.
And in another place: Lib. 2. in Butrop. Exnuch.
-- Domito quod Saxone Tethys
Mitier aut fracio secura Britannia Picto.
Britain secured, and Seas much calmer grown,
Since Picts and Saxons have been overthrown.
And in his Epithalamium to Palladius and Celerina, speaking of the Roman
Forces, among the rest he mentions; -- Quae Saxona froenat
Vel Scotum Legion. --
The Legion which both Scot and Saxon awes. Where we see the Poet attributes to
Stilico the performances of his Licutenant, as formerly Fronto ascribed to the
Emperor Antoninus the Exploits of his Propraetor here. But about the year four
hundred and two, Alarick the Goth made his first irruption into Italy, and
besieged the Emperor Honorius in Asta of Piedmont, to whose relief the Roman
Armies hasted from all parts, and among others Victorinus with his Legion, with
whose help Stilico forced Alarick to raise his Siege, and overcoming him in two
other Battles at Pollentia and Verrona, Sigon. de Occid. Imp. lib. 10.
chased him out of the Country, though in the former he lost a great part of
his Horse, together with their Commander, whose name was Saul. By the departure
of Victorinus the Britans were again exposed to the fury of the Scots and
Picts, who in the year four hundred and five, Connaught report. And the year
following, Vandals, Alans, Quades, Marcomanns, Herules, Turcilirgs, Suevians,
Saxons, Almans, and Burgundians, breaking into Gaul, struck such a terror into
those Roman Forces which remained here in Britain, that fearing lest the flame
of their neighbors fire might flash out and catch hold of them, and despairing
of Protection from Honorius, they in the year four hundred and seven, Britans,
set up their Commander Marcus for Emperor; but soon after upon some dislike
slew him, and in his room set up Gratianus Municeps a British Roman, who, as
Geoffrey of Monmouth says, overthrew the Scots and Picts in the time of
Maximus; and probably some such success might create in him that insolent
humor, which rendered him hateful to his Soldiers, who therefore deprived him
of his Empire and life, when he had reigned four months. They then conferr the
Sovereignty upon one Constantine, whose Name they deemed auspicious and an Osse
of good luck, whom though some Writers speak contemptibly of, yet Procopius
terms him (...), Lib. 1. de bello Vand.
A man not obscure, or ignoble. Geoffrey makes him the Brother of Aldroenus the
British King of Armorica, and says, that he likewise defeated the Scots and
Picts, and married a Roman Lady of Noble Blood. His reign he places much later
than in truth it was, (as he likewise does the Reigns of his Sons, Aurelian,
Ambrose, and the famous Arthus,) assigning contrary to all Chronology, ten
years to his Government, between the refusal of Aetius to help the Britans, and
the entrance of the English Saxons; and makes his Son Constans to reign not
with him, but after his death, telling strange stories of the murders of both
these Princes by Picts. And Hector Boethius makes two Constantines of this one,
and has a long Narration of the Battle between the later and the Scottish King
Dongard, who yet was not born when Cinstantine died, nor had his Father
Fergusius then any thing to do in Britain, as I shall show hereafter. But
leaving these Triflers to their Fables and falsehood, I shall proceed to what I
find in approved Historians.

Constantine being thus made Emperor, makes Justinian and Neviogastes
Commanders of the Celtick Bands, Zosim. lib. 6. Sigon. de Occid. Imper. lib. 10.
and gathering all the Roman Soldiers here that were fit for service, and all
the strength of Britan that Maximus had left, transported them into Gaul,
landing at Boloign, where he stayed some few days, and in that short space was
so fortunate, as to draw all the Roman Forces as far as to the Alps to take
part with him. Limenius Prefect of the Praetorium, and Cariobaudes a great
Commander, finding themselves unable to resist him, fled into Italy, from
whence Sarus is sent with an Army against him, by whom Justinian is vanquished
and slain, with the loss of the greatest part of his Army; and Neviogastes
treating of Articles of Agreement with him, was by him put to death, contrary
to his Oath. After this he lays Siege to Valentia, whither Constantine was
retreated as to a place of strength, expecting there the coming of his two
Generals, Edobichus a Frank, and Gerontius a Britan. Upon whose approach Sarus
raises his Siege, seven days after his first sitting down before the Town; yet
had much ado to escape out of the hands of those valiant and experienced
Captains, being fain to part with all the Spoil he had gotten in this War to
the Bacaudae or armed Rusticks, who met him at the Alps, to procure of them
free passage into Italy. Constantine encouraged with this success builds
Fortresses upon the Alps, as well Cottiae and Peninae, as those toward the
Maritime Coasts, wherever there was any passage. The Rhene, which ever since
Julian's time had been neglected, he fortified with a Garrison, and sent his
Son Constans (whom of a Winchester Monk he had made Caesar) with an Army into
Spain against Didymius and Verenianus, the Kinsmen of Honorius. In this
Expedition Constans made Terentius General, and Apollinaris Prefect of the
Praetorium. Against whom, Didymius and his Brother, with the Lusitanian Armies,
made stout resistance, but finding themselves overpowered, armed the Country
people and Slaves against him, and brought him to hard straits; but
notwithstanding all their brave endeavors, they were at last overcome, and
taken Prisoners with their wives: upon which their Brothers, Theodosius and
Lagodius, giving all for lost, quitted Spain, the former sleeing to Honorius,
the other to the Eastern Emperor. Constans having thus reduced Spain, places
the Honoriaci, and other Celtick Forces in Garrison upon the Pyrenaean Hills,
(though the Spanish Armies had desired that themselves and not Strangers might
be entrusted to guard the Passages and Entrances into their own Country, as
anciently they were,) and leaving the Furniture of his Court and his wife at
Saragosa, and Gerontius to command in his absence, returns to his Father,
carrying with him the two Captive Princes, whom Constantine forthwith commanded
to be put to death. And now he sends an Ambassador to Honorius, requesting to
be held excused for suffering the Purple to be forcibly put upon him by the
Soldiers, who knowing nothing as yet of the death of his Kinsmen, in hopes of
saving their lives sent him of free gift the Imperial Robe. To confirm this
Agreement, and to excuse the deaths of Didymius and Verenianus, Constantine
dispatches another Ambassador, named Jovius, who told the Emperor, that they
were slain by the Soldiers, without the privity of Constantine, and against his
will. But finding Honorius highly incensed at it, he advised him, that
considering the present posture of Assairs, he should remit his anger against
Constantine for what was past remedy, promising that if he would give him leave
to repair to his Master, and inform him of the state of Italy, he would return
to his assistance with the Forces of Gaul, Spain, and Britain; and upon this
assurance he was safely disinist. For Strlico's design to make away the young
Theod sius, and thereby to get the Eastern Empire for his Son Eucherius, being
discovered, he was put to death by the command of Honorius; whereupon Alarick
the Goth, who feared none but him, entered Italy again, which Expedition proved
so much the more prosperous to him than the former, that he took and spoiled
Rome, and many other Cities; so that the Emperor stood in great need of help
against him. In Gaul, Constantine, holding his condition now secure, becomes
supine and negligent, giving himself over to Gluttony and Belly-chear. His Son
Constans he sends back into Spain, who taking with him one Justus to be General
of his Army there, gave thereby such offense to Gerontius, that he set up one
of his friends named Maximus for Emperor at Tarracon, and excited the Vandals,
and other Barbarous people in Gaul, to break their league with Constantine, who
was too weak for them in this conjuncture, the greatest part of his Forces
being in Spain, and siding with his Enemies. This advantage was espied and
taken by the Nations beyond the Rhine, who hereupon cruelly afflicted several
parts of Gaul with their incursions, and the Maritime Cities of Britain with
their Piracies. Which when Constantine could not redress, the Britans addressed
themselves to Honorius, and craved aid of him. But he having his hands full of
the Gothic War, advises them to take courage, and defend themselves, and by
his Letter acquits them of their subjection to the Roman Empire.

They therefore thus discharged, took Arms, and defended themselves as well as
they could; whose example was quickly followed by the Britans of Armorica. At
the same time the Franks crossing the Rhine, took the Imperial City of Triers,
and the Vandals, Sueves, and Alans passed over the Pirenaean Hills, and joining
with the Forces which Constans had left there in Garrison, entered Spain.
Constantine now declares his Son Constans, Augustus and Associate in the
Empire, and displacing Apollinaris from his Praetorian Prefecture bestows it
upon another. Ellobichus or Allobichus, a man of great power and trust with
Honorius, upon some distaste, privily invites Constantine into Italy, who
passing the Alps marched to Verona, and was ready to cross the Po, when news
was brought him of the sudden death of Ellobichus, upon which he returned back
to Arles where he kept his residence, having caused that City to be called
after his own name Constantina, and ordained, that the Assemblies for Assizes
of seven Provinces should be there held. Honorius being hereof advertised as he
returned from a journey, immediately alighted to give God thanks for so great a
deliverance from an unsuspected Domestic Conspiratour. And now he had leisure
to think of revenge against Constantine, since his greatest Enemy Alarick King
of the Goths, was also lately dead at Consentia. In the mean time Gerontius
leaving Maximus in Spain, marches for Gaul; whereupon Constantine orders his
Son Constans to stay at Vienna, while he sends Edobichus to the Franks and
Almans for aid. But Gerontius takes Vienna by Assault, and kills Constans, and
from thence conducts his Forces against Constantine himself, and lays Siege to
Arles. Thither comes Constantius, General for the Emperor Honorius, and sits
down before the City too. At whose coming Gerontius finding that many of his
Soldiers deserted him, and fearing a general Revolt in case of longer stay
there, broke up his Leaguer, and hasted for Spain (with those that would follow
him,) in such sort as little differed from plain flight. The remainder of his
Army went over to Constantius, who hearing that Edobichus was advancing against
him, sent his Lieutenant General Vlphilas, and part of his Army before, with
orders to conceal themselves in some convenient place, while their Enemy passed
by; himself follows, marching directly against Edobichus, between whom was
fought a cruel Battle: but in the end Edobichus being charged by Constantius
before, and by Vlphilas behind, was with great slaughter defeated, and in this
distress flees to an ancient friend of his named Ecdicius, whom he had many
ways obliged formerly. Ecdicius receives him with a feigned kindness, and in
the night cuts off his head, which he presents to Constantius, in hopes of
being well rewarded for it. But when he would have stayed in the Camp, the
worthy General commanded him to depart, as detesting the sight of him who had
been perfidious to a deserving friend. This success so discouraged Constantine,
that to save his life he turned Priest, when he had reigned four years; and so
Arles, after a Siege of four months, was surrendered. Constantine being taken
with his Son Julian, whom he had named Nobilissimus, was sent into Italy, and
near the River Mincius beheaded by the order of Honorius,

In the mean time Jovinus, who commanded in Gaul under Constantine, drawing
together all the Forces of that Country, with strong supplies of Franks,
Burgundians, and Alans, in stead of endeavoring the relief of his Master sets
up for himself, and puts on the Imperial Robes at Auverne, which added to the
dejection of the Besieged in Arles, and hastened their yielding.

In Spain, Gerontius, after his shameful return, grew into such contempt with
the Soldiers, that they beset his house in the night, where, with the help of
his friend Alanus and a few Servants, he defended himself stoutly, and slew
above three hundred of them, and when his Darts and other weapons were spent,
he might at last have escaped at a private door as his Servants did; but not
enduring to leave his wife Nonnichia, whom he entirely loved, to the violence
of enraged Mutineers, he first cut off the head of his dear friend Alanus, then
of his own Wife Nonnichia, at the earnest entreaty of them both, who loved him
so affectionately, that they would not survive him. Last of all, he turns his
sword against himself, but missing the mortal place finishes his work with his
Poniard, more fortunate in his friend than Edobichus, though less deserving it
for his Disloyalty.

Of the death of this Gerontius, Mr. Humfrey Lhoyd says in his brief
Commentaries, there were extant in his time very ancient British Rhymes, if he
mistake him not for another Gerontius that was Prince of Danmonia, many years
after this man's time.

Upon the surrendry of Arles, Constantius goes against Jovinus, whom he
overcomes and drives out of the country. In his room up starts his Brother
Sebastian, whom Constantius soon defeated and slew, together with his
Accomplices, Salustius and Rusticus. Next he conducts his Forces into Spain
against Maximus, whom with like success he vanquishes and takes Prisoner; but
after a short time dismisses him, as one who had not aspired to that usurpation
through his own ambition, but was only made a Stale to the Politic ends of his
Advancers.

Those Britans that came over with Constantine, when the War was ended, never
went home, but joined themselves with their Brethren in Armorica: Procop. de
bello Vand. lib. 1. Bed. lib. 1. cap. 11.
yet did not the Romans at all look after the recovery of Britain, as Procopius
and Bid with others tell us, having still work enough nearer home. And for
some time indeed the Britans defended themselves pretty well: Romans who had
planted themselves here, thought it their wisest and safest course to remove
into Gaul, Annal. Saxon. and Athelward. lib. 1.
hiding for have under ground great part of their Treasure, which was never
after found. Gildas styles this Invasion, which lasted some years, A Trampling
under foot, a most cruel Infestation and Depression, and calls it the First,
accounting all their former Hostilities as nothing in comparison of this, and
those that ensued: the Picts he terms here a Transmarine Nation, because parted
from the rest of Britain in a manner, by two Arms of the Sea, now named the
Friths of Edenborough and Dunbritton.

The Britans thus overpowered and oppressed, send Ambassadors to the Emperor
Honorius, and humbly beseech him, with pittious prayers and promises of
perpetual Subjection and Loyal Obedience for the future, to succor them in
this their distress: whereupon in the year four hundred twenty two, Aetius,
General of the Forces in Gaul, dispatched hither, who encountering with the
Enemies, and killing a huge number of them, drove them out of the Province, and
by so bloody a victory delivered their Friends and Subjects from imminent
peril. Then they ordered them to build across the Island, between the aforesaid
Friths of Edenborough and Dunbritton, from Abercorne to Kirk Patrick, as
Lollius and Cerausius had done before, a Wall, which being made with Garrisons
of Soldiers, might be a terror to their Foes, and a safeguard to themselves.
But the Romans being recalled to be employed against other Enemies, could not
stay to see the work done; so that it being made without fit Directors by the
common people and unreasonable Rout, not so much of Stone as of Turs, proved to
little purpose.

This year the two forementioned Usurpers, Maximus and Jovinus, going about to
raise new Stirs with the assistance of the Barbarous Nations, were taken in
Spain by Castinus and Boniface, who sent them into Italy, where they served to
adorn the Trinmph of the Emperor Honorius.

About this time flourished two famous British Bishops, Fastidius, and
Ninianus, of whom the former wrote to one Fatalis a worthy Book, concerning
Christian Life, (as some Copies of Gennadius have it, or as others, concerning
Christian Faith,) and another, of continuing in the state of Widowhood; the
other converted the Southern Picts, inhabiting between Forth and Grantzbain,
and was the first Bishop of Candida Casa, (now Whitleerne in Galloway,) where
he built a Church of Stone, which, as Joannes Tinmuthensis says, was the first
Church of Stone in Britain; and in Ireland he founded a large Monastery at a
place called Cluayn Coner, both he and his Brother Plebeias were Canonized for
Saints.

In the year four hundred twenty five, Picts and Scots knowing that the Romans
were returned home, again invaded the Britans, breaking down the Rampire, and
all other Fences, committing all sorts of cruelty, and sending out their
Piratick Vessels robbed and ransackt their Coasts in a miserable manner. The
Britans therefore again send suppliant Ambassadors to entreat the Romans, in
mere commiseration of their case, and for their own Honor, once more to
relieve them. Whereupon Aetius, by the Emperor Valentinian's command, Gallio
of Ravenna, woe forthwith marched against those spoiling Enemies, and giving
them a notable Overthrow, chased them home with a terrible slaughter.

After this Exploit the Romans declare to the Britans, That the present
condition of the Empire would not permit them to take any more such troublesome
Journeys, and therefore they must resolve to defend themselves, and not be
afraid of Nations no ways more valiant than they, if by sloth and idleness
they did not weaken themselves. So giving Manful Exhortations to a Fearful
People, and teaching them to make and handle Arms, they together with the
Inhabitants, at the common charge of all, and with the private additional helps
of many, built a Wall of Stone from Sea to Sea, in the same place, where, as Bede and others say, Bed. lib. 5. cap. 12.
Severus built his Wall; and on those Shores which used to be most infested
with Pirates they erected Watch-Towers in diverse places at convenient distances,
and beyond the Wall they fortified up and down Stations for Soldiers as was
done in Severus his time. And so the Romans (never to return again) bid adieu
to the Britans; and the year following, Gallio, Mavortius, and Sinnox, were
sent into Africa against Boniface, in which War the two former lost their lives
the same year by the treachery of their companion Sinnox, who himself received
the just reward of a Traitor from the hands of Boniface, being by him put to
death.

In the year four hundred twenty nine, Presp.
Florentius and Dionysius being then Consuls, Agricola the Pelagian, the Son of
Severianus a Pelagian Bishop, comes into Britain, and here diffuses the
contagion of his pestilent opinion; against whom the British Clergy, more Pious
than Learned in those calamitous times, knowing his Doctrine to be Heretical,
and yet not able to confute him, crave aid of the Gallick Bishops, whom Pope
Celestine, at the Suit of Palladius a Deacon of Rome, excites to help their
British Brethren in this exigence. Whereupon a Council is assembled, wherein
German Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus Bishop of Troyes, men famous for their
Learning and Sanctity, are assigned to the work. These crossing the Sea in the
dead of Winter, had a very stormy passage, which was attributed to Evil
Spirits, and at their arrival found a great deal of hurt had been done here in
a short space. However by continual preaching, not only in Churches, but also
in Streets and fields, and by Miracles accompanying their Doctrine, they
confirmed many that wavered, regained others, and convening a Council at
Verulam in the year four hundred and thirty, Wales, where, as Nennius says,
one Banlius King of Powis, infected (as it seems) with Pelagianism, and
therefore refusing to entertain German, and hear his Preaching, was destroyed
with his Palace by Lightning; and Cadel a Swineherd, who had lodged and treated
the Bishop to his best ability, was therefore advanced to the Heaven-burnt
Tyrant's Throne.

In the year four hundred thirty one, the eighth year of Theodosius, reckoning
from the death of his Uncle Honorius, the Picts and Scots understanding the
resolution of the Romans to come back no more, assail the Britans again, and
with greater considence than ever before drive the dismayed Soldiers from their
Stations, and seize into their hands all the Country which lay on that side of
the Wall. There was placed along this Wall, upon an high Fort, a Garrison,
consisting of such as lacked both Military skill and courage, who warding and
watching there day and night, became lazy with doing nothing. The Enemies
coming on, with their hooked weapons easily pulled down these unwarlike
Wretches, and dashed them to the ground, and making a great Breach in the Wall,
at a place thence called Thirlwall, (which is as much as a Wall pierced
through,) they went forward taking several ways, and committing horrible
spoils and bloody slaughters every where as they went. The Picts in their way
meet with the Saxons, who were come upon the same design of spoil and
slaughter; with them they join, and all together march into Northwales. The
Britans had there an Army to oppose them, and hearing of their Enemies
approach, applied themselves to the two Bishops, bemoaning their past and
present miseries to them, who bid them be of courage, and promised them their
assistance. The decay of the State had wrought a strange decay of Religion, the
greatest part of this Army was yet unbaptized; they therefore first list them
under Christ's Banner by the initiating Sacrament of Baptism, and then German,
who in his younger days had been a Soldier, undertakes to be their General. It
was then the time of Lent, and in the Camp there was a place set a part and
dressed up with Boughs for Easter Day. The Enemies judging the Britans more taken
up with acts of Religion than the exercise of Arms, hasten against them after
the Paschal Feast as to an assured victory. German draws up his Army in a
valley compassed about with Hills, by which the Enemy was to pass, and having
laid an Ambush in a convenient place, gives order that what word they heard him
pronounce aloud, the same they should repeat with an universal Shout. The
Saxons and Picts pass on securely, and German thrice aloud cries Halleluiah,
which answered by the Soldiers with a sudden burst of clamor, is from the
hills and valley redoubled, and presently they that were in Ambush show
themselves. The Enemies were hereat strangely astonished, and searing that some
unexpected Succors were come to the Britans, were seized with such a general
consternation, that breaking their Ranks, and throwing down their Arms, they
ran away in a miserable consusion, leaving their Pillage to the Pursuers, many
of them in their hasty flight being drowned in the River. This victory was
gained in Flintshire, hard by a Town called by the Welsh, Guiderue, by the
English, Mold, and hence the place of Fight was named Maes Garmon, Usser. de
primord.
that is to say, German's field, near which runs the River Alen, wherein so
many of the Britans were baptized, and of the Enemies drowned. The same year
the two Bishops returned home, having overcome both Spiritual and worldly
Adversaries, and acted many memorable things here which we may read in
Constantius, Beda, Nennius, and others. And this very year the forementioned
Palladius was by Pope Celestine sent into Ireland to be Bishop of the Scots
there, who had received the Christian Faith, and to spread Christianity in
those parts; who took with him twelve of his Disciples; to four of whom, namely
Augustine, Benedict, Silvester, and Solonius, he committed the care and charge
of three Churches which he built in the Province of Lemster, whither he was
come, after he had been with the Scots in Vlster. But Nathius the Son of Garcon
King of Lemster opposing and disturbing him, and those wild people not willing
to entertain his Doctrine, he departed thence into Albania, and spent some time
in preaching to the Picts, among whom he died at Fordon in Mernis, where the
common people call him St. Pad. Antonius Possevinus says, he was a Britan, and
we find the same of him in an old Marginal Note to St. Patrick's Charter (in
William of Malmesbury's M. S. History of the Antiquity of Glastonbury, in the
Library of Trinity College in Cambridge,) speaking of Celestine's sending him
to Ireland, Eodem anno vel praecedente misit idem Papa ad praedicandum ibidem
virum nomine Palladium, Britannicum genere, sed idem cito repatriavit sine
effectu. The same year, or the year before, the same Pope sent a man named
Palladius, a Britan by Nation, to preach there, but he soon returned without
effect.

Upon the death of Paliadius, Celestine sent over Patrick, in the year four
hundred thirty two, to convert the Irish; and soon after himself dyed, Prosp.
contra Collat. cap. 41.
of whose Endeavors for Britain and Ireland, Pr^sper gives this Testimony; Nec
segniore cura ab hoc eodem morbo Britannias liberavit, quando quosdam inimicos
gratiae solum suae originis occupantes etiam ab illo secreto exclus^t Oceani,
and ^rdinato Scotis Episcopo dum Romanam Insulam studet strvare Catholicam,
fecit etiam Barbaram Christianam.

The Emperess Placidia, Idacius and Marcellinus comes.
Mother to the Emperor Valentinian, being reconciled to Boniface, resolved to
make him Magister Militum, Chief Commander of the Forces of the Empire in the
place of Aetius, which yet she thought could not casily be done, while Aetius
continued in the head of the Gal^ick Army; she therefore had contrived to have
him elected Consul for this year with Valerius, and thereby drawing him to Rome
to look after his Charge there, sends for Boniface out of Africa, and at his
coming bestows upon him the Command she had designed for him. Aetius not
brooking to see himself so supplanted, and his utter Enemy put over his head,
stood out in opposition, with such of his friends and followers as he could get
together, and came to a conflict with him; wherein these two famous Generals
met, and fought hand to hand, and Aetius with his Javelin gave Boniface his
mortal wound, whereof he dyed about three months after, (charging his wife
Pelagia, whom he left very rich, to accept of no other Husband but Aetius, as
judging none but him a fit Match for his Relict.) Aetius himself received no
hurt in this combat, yet loath to hazard his friends too far against the whole
Army of Italy, retired, and dismissing them betook himself to a private life in
the Country; but understanding that one who owed him an old grudge plotted to
murder him, he privately speeded to Rome, and from thence by Dalmatia to
Pannonia, then possessed by the Hunnes, with whose help he recovered the
Emperor's favor and his former Command, displacing Sebastian Boniface's
Sonin-Law who then held it, and being advanced to the Dignity of a Patrician
returned into Gaul.

The Britans did not make a right improvement of Germans victory, but lost both
Courage and Virtue when they lost the sight of the two Bishops, relapsing to
their old courses of Debauchery and Dissension, being, as Gildas describes
them, as eager and prompt to Civil Broils, as they were backward and heartless
against Foreigners. This encouraged their Enemies to prosecute the War more
furiously, in which after some variable successes, they so prevailed at length,
that they forced the Britans in many places to quit their Towns and Cities, and
flee to the Woods, not daring to till their Grounds, because they durst not
hope to reap; and then arose a cruel Famine (both here and in diverse other
parts of Europe) so that these people had nothing to keep them alive, but what
they got by robbing one another, and by Hunting.

And here, De Gest. Scot. lib. ^, cap. 1.
because John Mayor and others wonder, that the Britans should be unable to
deal with the Picts and Scots, it will not be amiss to consider the sundry
Drainings and numerous Levies made of them, for the service of the Emperors in
their Wars abroad. Learned Camden has observed out of Ancient Inscriptions,
and the Book called Notitia Provinciarum, That these Companies underwritten
served the Romans in their Wars, and were here and there dispersed over their
Provinces, which also were from time to time evermore supplied out of Britain:
Ala Britannica Milliaria, Ala quarta Britonum in Aegypto, Cohors prima Aelia
Britonum, Cohors tertia Britonum, Cohors septima Britonum, Cohors vigesima
sexta Britonum in Armenia, Britanniciani sub magistro peditum, Invicti Juniores
Britanniciani, and Exculcatores Jun: Britan: inter auxilia Palatina, Britones
cum magistro Equitum Galliarum, Invicti Juniores Britones intra Hispanias,
Britones Seniores in Illyrico; besides, the several forementioned Colonies
transported by Constantius Chlorus, Constantine the Great, Maximus, and the
Last Constantine, who settled in Armorica, and are by Procopius called
Arboricans for Armoricans, and are commended by him and Zosamus for valiantly
asserting and maintaining their Liberty, when the rest of Gaul was overrun by
Barbarians. Nor were the Provincials only thus exhausted, but sometimes too the
Northern Britans were drawn into the Roman Service. For among the Palatine Aids
within Caul, were reckoned Attecotti juniores Galiicani, and Attecotti
Honoriani seniores; and within Italy, Attecotti Honoriani juniores. Which
people so weakening themselves to pleasure the Emperors, became an easier prey
to the intruding Scots,

It appears then, that the loss of this Island was a great damage to the
Romans, who bore sway here above four hundred and sixty years, from Julius
Caesar's Conquest to the last Constantine, and so highly esteemed, that they
called it the Roman Isle, and Romania, and the Roman Language was grown so
familiar among them, that Gildas calls the Latin Tongue his own Language. In
all which time the Britans had Kings of their own, reigning in some part of the
Land, which no other European Province of the Empire had. And this may be
further said for the credit of our Britans, That when the Barbarous Nations
like an inundation broke into the Roman Empire, all the other Provinces never
endeavored to assert, in the way of war or opposition, either their ancient
reputation, or their Native Liberties, but suffered themselves to be won, lost,
fought for, and again recovered by their quarrelsome Masters, as if they had no
Title to their own Country, but were born to follow the fortunes of all
Pretenders: only this people stood up for themselves, and when stored with a
new stock of vigorous Youth, contested bravely, not only with the Picts and
Scots, but with the Saxons too, though much more potent Enemies. But at this
time, as I said, the Britans were in a very low condition, which William of
Malmes bury, Lib. 1. de Reg.
having spoken of Maximus and Constantine, thus describes. When the Tyrants had
left none in the Country but half Barbarians, none in the Cities and Towns but
such as wholly gave themseves to Belly-cheer, Britain destitute of all
Protection by her vigorous young men, bereaved of all exercise and practice of
good Arts, became exposed for a long time to the greedy and gaping jaws of the
hordering Nations.

Aetius was at this time Captain General of the Forces of the Empire, and
Consul the third time with Symmachus, Britans send their Ambassadors with a
pitious mournful Letter, superscribed, To Aetius thrice Consul, the Groans of
the Britans: and after a few words, thus: The Barbarians drive us to the Sea,
the Sea puts us back to the Barbarians, between these two sorts of Death we
either have our Throats cut, or are drowned. The Brave Roman affords them pity,
but can spare no Succors, not daring to diminish his Forces, because Attila
the Hunne, that Scourge and Terror of the World, then threatened the Empire
with a terrible Invasion.

The Britans therefore thus disappointed of their last hopes, oppressed with
War and Famine, were many of them fain to yield themselves Slaves to the raging
Foes, merely to get some food, were it never so little, to comfort and refresh
their poor hungry Souls. But there were some Nobler Spirits left, who betaking
themselves to the Mountains, Grots, and desert woody Forests, made from thence
a worthy resistance. Some fortunate Successes brought them more companions, so
that having their numbers pretty well increased, with such as mere Despair made
valiant, they adventured to sight their Enemies in plain field, and giving them
sundry overthrows chased them out of the Country.

Having thus happily disburthened the Land of those Spoilers, they enter into
consultation about preserving it for the future; and knowing that it would not
be long before their Enemies returned again, they resolved to choose among
themselves one supreme King for management of their succeeding Affairs both
military and civil, to whom all the other Roytelets should be subordinate.
Hereupon they elect Vortigern (Prince of Ewias,) not the best but the greatest
man among them, one whose vices were in some sort compensated by the virtues of
his Sons, who in all probability were the chief Instruments of their so late
Deliverance. By this surcease of Hostility the desolate peoples sore of Famine
was perfectly healed, and in the stead of it there ensued in the year four
hundred forty seven such a fertility, Pelagianisme enters upon the Stage again;
to repel which, those of the British Clergy, who retained their integrity and
care of the Church, once more implored Bishop German's help, who (though Lupus
was yet alive, and lived long after,) taking with him Severus Bishop of Triers,
a man eminent for his piety, Lupus his Disciple, came over hither in the year
for hundred forty eight, and assembling a Council in Siluria, there confuted
the Heretical Teachers, who were straight adjudged to Banishment, and delivered
up into the hands of German. In the next place he sharply reproved Vortigern
for his incestuous marriage with his own Daughter, by whom he had a Son named
Faustus, whom the impudent Mother her self was not ashamed to present to the
grave Bishop, in the face of the whole Convention. Vortigerne taking offense at
the Bishop's plain dealing with him, left the Council in a rage, having let
flee slanderous speeches against that holy man; but his Eldest Son Vortimer, a
Prince of another temper, stayed behind, and gave the Land for ever to German,
wherein he had suffered so reproachful an abuse; whereupon that part of the
country was named Guarthenion, which in English signifies, A Slander justly
retorted: and retorted it was, for here was the Tyrant for his Enormities
Excommunicated. The place is now called Gurthrenion, in Radnorshire. In this
Council it is said, that the Son of one Elaphius, who was seized with a strange
lameness in the very flower of his youth, was miraculously cured and restored
to the use of his limbs by German; who taking with him the forementioned
Pelagian Sticklers returned into Gaul, and there disposed of them in such place
where they could not infect others, and were themselves under cure of better
instruction. At his return the Armorican Britans made an address to him upon
this occasion. The Britans, as I said before, were settled in Armorica, whereof
they possessed the greater part, the rest lying to the River Loire, being still
held by the Romans, and a little before this time governed by one Exuperantius:
at first they lived under the government of the Empire, though Conan Meriadoc,
and his Son Grallon, did by permission carry some show of Authority among them.
But in the last Constantine's time, they, as I said before, cast off all
subjection to the Romans, and Solomon, Conan's Grandson, governed them as an
absolute King. Aetius, desirous to reduce them, employes Eucharicus King of the
Almans against them, whereupon they request German to mediate for them, and
procure a peace; which he undertakes, and treats with Eucharicus, who refers
the matter to Aetius, and Aetius to the Emperor Valentinian, then residing at
Ravenna. The good Bishop, though very aged, takes a journey thither, where he
is honorably received by the Emperor and his Mother Placidia, and had
certainly prevailed in his suit, if the Armoricans had not upon some occasion
or advantage raised new stirs, and thereby made the difference wider. Here
German dies, and his body being embalmed, was with a noble Attendance carried
back into Gaul, and with great solemnity enterred at Auxerre.

In the mean time the Britans here proceeding in their courses of Impiety, are
allarmed with a dreadful report of their old Enemies coming on afresh with full
purpose to seize and possess the whole Island from one end to the other. And to
add to the terror, at the same time the Pestilence breaks out so violently,
and destroys such multitudes, that there were scarcely enough living left to
bury the dead. All this while King Vortigern (whom Blandus calls Vertigerius;
Paulus Diaconus, Vertegernus, Pomponius Laetus, and Stephanus Pighius,
Vertigomarus; and Wernerus Laerius, Vortigonus,) lay buried in voluptuousness
and sensuality, till at length excited by the peoples clamours, he summons a
Council, by whose advice this Proud unlucky Tyrant (as Gildas terms him)
resolves upon a desperate Remedy for a desperate Disease; and decrees, That the
English Saxons shall be invited to accept of Seats in some part of the Island,
and to sight for them; which made Gildas cry out: Oh the most palpable darkness
of their Senses! Oh desperate and blockish dullness of their Minds! Those whom
in their absence they dreaded more than Death it self, were now freely and
willingly invited to inhabit with them under the roof (as I may call it) of one
self same House, by the foolish Princes of Taneos, giving indiscreet counsel
unto Pharaoh! Yet there are some, who look upon this Design as not so very
unpolitick, however it proved unsuccessful, since by this means at one time the
Northern Enemies might be kept out, and the British Shores eased of the Saxons
frequent depredations, and preserved from the inroads of others of the same
country of Germany, and the same Piratick Trade. Besides which, Vortigern
might have another reason in reference to his own particular, namely, that he
might be sure of their assistance, in case the Britans at any time disliking
his Government, should go about to bring in and enthrone Aurelianus Ambrosius,
Constantine's Son, then living with great reputation in Armorica, of whom (as
Nennius says) he stood in continual fear.

Upon this invitation, Vortigern's Reign, Theodosius the younger and
Valentinian the third being then Emperors, Asterius and Protogenes Consuls,
the English Saxons entered this Land, who laid the Foundation of the Famous
English Monarchy, which has here flourished by Gods mercy ever since its first
erecting, and may, I trust, by the same mercy continue flourishing to the end
of the World.

FINIS.
The Kings of the Britains, from Beli Maur to Vortigern.
BEli Maur. Immanuence Lhud. Caswallan. Teneufan. Cunobeline. Guiderius
Togodumnus. Caradoc. Arviragus Venutius. Marius, or Meurig. Coel. Lhes Lever
Maur. Fulgen. Argetocox. Coel. Traherne. Eucthaef. Deonot, Father to Vrsula.
Cuneda, Father to Guen the Mother of Igren, Arthur 's Mother. Vortigern.
Archbishops of York.
FAganus. Theodosius. Socrates.
Roman Governors of Britain, and Usurpers.
AVlus Plautius. Ostorius Scapula. Avitus Didius Gallus. Veranius. Paulinus
Suetonius. Petronius Turpilianus. Trebellius Maximus. Vectius Bolanus. Petilius
Cerealis. Julius Frontinus. Julius Agricola. Salustins Lucullus. Cnaeus
Trebellius. Julius Severus. Priscus Licinius. Lollius Vrbicus. Calpurnius
Agricola. Vlpius Marcellus. Helvius Pertinax. Clodius Albinus, Usurper. Virius
Lupus. Nonius Philippus. Posthumus, Usurper. Lollianus, Usurper. Victorinus,
Usurper. Marius, Usurper. Tetricus, Usurper. Eborius. Fastidius. Samson.
Piranus. Thadiocus.
Archbishops of London.
THeon. Elvan. Cadoc, or Cador. Owen. Conan. Paludius, or Palladius. Stephen.
Augulius. Iltutus, or Restitutus. Thedwin. Thedred. Hilary. Guiteline, or
Gosseline. Vodine. Theon. Bonosus and Proculus, Usurpers. Cl. Cornelius
Laelianus, Usurper. Caius Carausius, Usurper. Caius Allecius, Usurper. M.
Aurelius Asclepiodotus. Pacatianus. Gratianus Funarius. Martinus. Lupicinus.
Alypius. Nectaridius and Bulchobaudes. Severus. Jovinus. Theodosius. Civilis
and Dulcitius. Fraomarius. Maximus, Usurper. Chrysanthus. Victorinus. Marcus,
Usurper. Gratianus Municeps, Usurper. Constantine and Constans, Usurpers.
Gallio of Ravenna.
The Angles were a Tribe of the Suevians, and both Suevians and Saxons were the
Offspring of the Syebi and Sasones in Asia, and came into Europe together,
being of the same Gomerian Original with the Cimbrians.
Kings of the Saxons.
STresaeus. Bedwig. Gualas. Hadras. Ittermon. Heremod. Skeph reigned in
Sleswick. Skeld. Bevin. Tetuas. Geta went to Asgard.
In Asgard.
Gedulph, Son to Geta. Finne. Fridulph. Frelaph. Fridwald.
In Germany.
Henry. Sifrid.
Woden, Son to Fridwald returned into Germany. Weldeg and his Brethren, with
Sirick and his Sons, Hunding and Gelder. Anonymus, contemporary with Wermund
King of the Danes. Gelder, contemporary with Tordo King of Sweden, and Dan the
third King of Demnark. Artrick. Ansenrick. Wilkin the I. Swerting and Hanef.
Swerting the II. Wilkin the II. Witikind. Wilkin the III. with his Brother
Sigar. Marbod. Bodo. Vecta. Vita. Witigils. Hengist.
Kings of the Suevians, before the departure of the Angles from them to the
Saxons.
ANonymus, contemporary with Metellus Celer. Arionistus, or Ernest. Nasua and
Cimberius. Maroboduus. Vannius. Vangio and Sido. Italicus and Sido.
Kings of the PICTS.
THE Picts and Scots were Gothic Nations, of the same Gomerian Original with
the Cimbrians, and came from Scandia, which is also called Scythia Germanica.
But in regard our British Histories have hitherto been too deficient concerning
the Pictish Kings, I shall here exhibit a Catalogue of them out of John
Fordon's M. S. Scotichronicon, and Hector Boethius.

Cruithhe Camelon reigned ann. 50. Ghede 100 Ghede II. Hect. 100 Chrine. Hect.
150. Tharan. 150. Ghede III. 150. Duchil. 40. Dinorth Tisy. 20. Duor Deghel.
20. Decok Heth. 60. Congust. 20. Caranath Creth. 40. Garnard Bolg. 9.
Wipopneth, whom Hector calls Unipanus. 30. Blarchassereth. 17. Phiathus albus.
Thalarg Amfrud. 16. Canatalmel. 6. Dongard Nethles. 1. Feredeth Finyel. Gannard
Dives. 60. Nectan II. Hect. 60. Nectan II. Hect. 60. Hungurst, Son of Fergus.
40. In his time Regulus brought St. Andrew's Relics into Albania. Thalarg, Son
of Keother. 24 Durst (alias Nectan) Son of Irby. 48. In his time Palladius
taught in Ireland and Albania. Thalarg, Son of Amyle. 2. Nectan Chaltamoth. 10.
Durst Germerth, Son of Ethrede. 38. Galan. 15. Durst, Son of Gigurun. 5. Durst,
Son of Ethrede. 8. Durst, Son of Gigurun, ag. 4. Garnard, Son of Gigurun. 6.
Kelturan, Son of Garnard. 6. Thalarg, Son of Mordeleth. 11. Durst, Son of
Mometh 1. Thalagath. 4. Brude, Son of Meilothon. 19. In his time Columba came
from Ireland to Albania. Garnard, Son of Dompnach. 20 He built the Church of
Abernethy. Nectan, Son of Irban. 11. Kenel, Son of Luchren. 14. Nectan, Son of
Fode. 6. Brude, Son of Fathna. 5. Thalarg, Son of Farthard. 11. Thalargan, Son
of Amfrud. 4. Garnard, Son of Dompnal. 5. Durst, Brother to Garnard. 6. Brude,
Son of Bridebile. 11. In his time Egfrid, King of the Northumbrians, was slain
by the Picts. Nectan, Son of Brude. 18. To him Abbot Celfrid writ, about the
observing of Easter, and Clerical Tonsure after the Roman way. Garnard, Son of
Feredeth. 14. He slew Amberclet King of the Scots, and gave an Oratory to the
nine Daughters of Dovenald. Oengussa, Son of Fergus. 16. Nectan, Son of Decil:
Nine Months. Feredeth, Son of Alpin: Six Months. Alpin, Father of Feredeth. 26.
Brude, Son of Cenegus. 2. Alpin, Son of Cenegus. 2. Thalargan, Son of Durst. 1.
Thalarg, Son of Drusken. 4. Cenegus, Son of Thalarg. 6. Constantine, Son of
Fergus. 40. He built the Church of Dunkeld, 226 years after the building of
Abernethy Church by Garnard. Hungus, Son of Fergus. 10. Durstolorgus, Son of
Hungus. 3. Feredeth, Son of Badoc. 3. Brude, Son of Feredeth. One Month. Kened,
Son of Feredeth. 1. Brude, Son of Fethel. 2. Drusken, Son of Feredeth. 3.
Five of these Kings are omitted in Fordon's Scotichronicon, viz. Ghede the
second, Chrine, and Ghede the third; and the two Nectan's between Garnard and
Hungurst; but they are here supplied out of Hector Boethius. I confess it is to
be feared, that in this Catalogue there may be some mistake, either in the
computation of years, or the order of succession. And therefore I could
heartily wish, that some Ingenious Lover of Antiquity could produce some more
perfect and exact List of these Kings, than this which I have faithfully
transcribed out of the forementioned Author.

The TABLE.
A.
ALbion, whence so called, Page 4 Ambrons, a mischievous Nation. Page 13, 14
Asia, a Province of Sarmatia Page 18 Asaei and Asiotae. ibid. Ancalites, a
British People Page 34 Attrebatij. ibid. Attiscoti, a Northern People Page 40,
41 Invade the Roman Province Page 150
Albina, Dioclesian's Daughter. Page 53 Androgeus, a British Prince Page 71, 82
Adminius or Etiminius. Page 84, 85, 87 Arviragus, King of the Britans. Page 91
Avitus Didius Gallus, Governor of Britain. Page 92 Agricola subdues the
Ordovices. Page 98 He overcomes the Caledonians. Page 101
Agricola Calpurnius represseth the Picts and Caledonians. Page 111 Adelphius
Bishop of Colchester. Page 144 Arminius a British Deacon, ibid. Albinus
Governor of Britain. Page 117 Argetocoxus Prince of the Calcedonians. Page 122
His Wifes Reply to the Empress ibid.
Allectus an Usurper Page 130, 131 Asclepiodotus a Roman General. Page 131 Was
Governor of Britain, Page 132
Alban and Aaron Martyrs, Page 133 Amphibalus and Augulius, Page 134 Alypius
Governor of Britain Page 150 Armorica planted with Britans. Page 162, 174.
Ambrose Son of Constantine. Page 166, 191
B.
BRitain, its Circuit. p. 1 Whence named. p. 5, 6 Whether it was ever joined to
France. p. 36
Brito King of Britain. p. 9 Also a Centaure. ibid.
Britona or Britomartis. ib. Britans whence descended, p. 12, 13 Belgae, a
British People. p. 34 Bibroci and Bodunni. ibid. Brigantes, whence so named. p.
39 Britain how divided p. 44, 45 British Idols. ibid. Bards, what they were. p.
45 British Government under the Romans p. 46, 47 Britains Cities and Streets,
p. 50 Brutus, the same with Brito p. 9 His Descent and Exploits, p. 55, 56 His
Successors. p. 62
Brennus the Elder's Wars, p. 64, 65, 66 Belinus King of Britain, p. 63 66
Belinus the Great. p. 68 His Sons p. 69 His Death p. 74
Boadicia's Insurrection p. 95 Bonosus an Usurper p. 126 Brittia Batavica
subdued, p. 155, 156
C.
CImmerians, Ancestors to the Cimbrians. p. 13, 26 And to the Britans. ibid.
Cerberion, a City. p. 30 Catticuchlani, Cassij, Cenimagni, Cantij. p. 34, 35
Cossini and Corini p. 33 Coritani, Cornavij, Cangi. p. 38 Cantij. p. 35
Caledonij, Cantae, Carini. p. 40 Carnonacae, Cerones, Cornabyi. ibid. Count of
the Saxon Coast, p. 47, 48 Caswallan, a British King. p. 71, 74 His War with
Caesar p. 78 79
Cunobeline succeeds his Father p. 83 His Sons p. 85
Caligula, intends to Invade Britain. p. 84 Caradock, a British Prince. p. 85
His War with Ostorius, p. 89 His Speech. p. 98
Cartismandua, Queen of the Brigantes p. 93 Cerealis overthrown. p. 95 Made
Governor of Britain p. 98
Conversion of Britain p. 103 104 Coelus King of the Britans. p. 68. 110. 125
Cogidunus a British King. p. 89 Carausius an Usurper. p. 128 129 Constantine
the Great, born in Britain p. 126. 145 His Victories. p. 142. 143 144
Chrysanthus, Governor of Britain p. 163 Constantine an Usurper, p. 166 His
Exploits. p. 166, 167, etc.

D.
DAnmonij and Durotriges, British Nations, p. 33. 34 Dobuni, where they dwelt,
p. 34 Dimetae or Demetae. p. 38 Deucaledones. p. 42 Druids, Famous Philosophers
p. 46 Dolobellus, a British General. p. 71, 80 Duvianus or Dwywan sent thither
with Fagan. p. 112 Dulcitius, a Renewned Captain. p. 151 Deonotus, Ursula 's
Father, Prince of Cornwall. p. 156
E
ETiminius, a British Prince p. 187 Elvan's Embassy, to Eleutherius p. 111 He
was the second Bishop of London p. 118
Eborius Bishop of York p. 115 144 Elutherius his letter to Lucius p. 112 Eucta
or Eucthaf p. 153 Edobichus, Treacherously Murdered p. 172 Ellobichus, a
Traitor dies suddenly p. 171 Epistle of the Britains to Aetius p. 186 English,
enter into Britain p. 191

F
FRontinus, Governor of Britain p. 98 subdues the Silures. ibid.
Fagan, sent hither by Eleutherius p. 112 Was the first Bishop of York p. 115
Fulgentius, opposes the Emperor Severus p. 121 122 Fraomarius, King of the
Bucinobantes p. 153 Fastidius, a famous British Bishop p. 176 Famine afflicts
the Britains p. 183
Faustus, a good Son of bad Parents p. 188
G
GOmer, Ancestor to the Britains p. 12. 13 Gabrantovici p. 39 Gadeni p. 40
Guiderius, King of the Britains p. 85 Galgacus Prince of the Caledonians p. 100
Genissa, the same with Cartismandua p. 97 Gogmagog Hills, a Station of the
Vandals p. 126 George the Cappadocian a famous Martyr p. 135 136 Gueno and
Guavar, conduct a Colony of Britains into Armorica, p. 146 Gratianus Funarius,
was General in Britain p. 147 his goods Confiscated p. 148
Goths overcome by Stilico, p. 165 Gratianus the Emperor slain by Maximus p.
155 Gratianus Municeps, an Usurper p. 166 Gerontius, a Britain p. 167 Turns
rebel p. 170. 171 Kills himself p. 173
Gallio overthrew the Picts and Scots p. 176. 177 German, Bishop of Auxerre
comes with Lupus Bishop of Troyes into Britain p. 178 They confute the
Pelagians ibid. And vanquish the Saxons and Picts p. 177. 180
German comes again with Severus Bishop of Triers p. 188 He dies in Italy p. 189

H
HOresti, the same with the Selgovae p. 40 Heraclius, a Martyr in Britain p.
133 Helena Married to Constantius p. 126. 142 Conduct's a Colony with her
Brother Conan into Armorica p. 140
Honorius, acquits the Britains of their subjection p. 170 Honorius, sends help
to the Britains p. 175
I
JApheth, Ancestour to the Europaeans p. 17 Iceny, a British people p. 35
Jugantes, p. 39 Julius Caesar's Wars in Britain p. 71. 77 Julius Severus,
Governor of Britain p. 109 Julius, a British Martyr p. 133 Jovinus sent over
into Britain p. 150 Jovinus, an Usurper p. 172 175
K
KEnt, by whom inhabited p. 35. 36 Kentish Men, oppose Caesar p. 71. 81 Keby, a
British Saint p. 152
L
LOgi, a Tribe of the Maeatae p. 40 Lucullus, Governor of Britain p. 102
Licinius Priscus, Governor of Britain p. 110 Lollius Urbicus, punishes the
Brigantes ibid. Lucius, first Christian King of the Britains p. 111 Lupus,
Governor of Britain p. 121 Lollianus, an Usurper p. 125 Laelianus, an Usurper
p. 126 Livius Gallus slain p. 132 Lucius converted the Rhaetians and Bavarians,
p. 119 He founded an Abbey at Lusson p. 139
Lupicinus sent over against the Scots and Picts p. 149
M.
MAdai, Ancestour to the Sarmatians. p. 18, 19 Maeatae, a British People. p. 40
Mandubratius, the same with Androgeus, p. 74. 82 Marius, King of the Britains
p. 103 his victory over the Picts p. 107. 108
Medwins Embassy to Eleutherius p. 111 Marcellus the Roman Governor repulseth
the northern enemies p. 116 Mello, a Britan, Bishop of Roan p. 125 Marius, an
Usurper ib. Melior or Melorus, a British Martyr p. 135 Magnentius, an Vsuper p.
147 Martinus Vicegerent, of Britain p. 148 Maximus Marryes Helena the Daughter
of Eucta, p. 153 Overcomes Conan Meriadoc. p. 154 And the Scots ibid. His other
Exploits p. 155, 165, etc.
Marcus an Usurper p. 166 Maximus an Usurper p. 170. 175
N.
NOvantes, a British People. p. 40 Nennius, a British Prince. p. 69. 79 Nonius
Philippus Governor of Britain p. 124 Nicolas a British Martyr. p. 134
Nectaridius, Count of the Saxon shore, slain. p. 150 Nannienus Overcomes the
Franks p. 162 Ninianus Converted the Southern Picts. p. 176
O.
OStaei, Ostiones, Ostidamnij. p. 33 Ordevices, a British People. p. 38
Ostadini. p. 40 Ostorius succeeds Plautius in the Government of Britain p. 88
Octavius rebels against Traherne p. 142 He is overcome by Constantine p. 143

P.
PArisi, a Tribe of the Brigantes p. 39 Plautius invades the Britans p. 85. 86
Was the first Roman Governor here p. 89
Paulinus Governor of Britain p. 94 Prasutagus King of the Iceni p. 94. 95
Pertinax, Governor of Britain p. 116 Posthumus an Usurper. p. 125 Proculus an
Usurper. p. 126 Persecution in Britain. p. 133
Pacatianus, Vicegerent of Britain p. 144 Paulus Catena a mischievous Notary p.
148 Proventusides p. 150 Pelagius the Heretic a Britan p. 163 Plebeias Brother
to Ninianus p. 176 Pelagianisme brought into Britain by Agricola p. 177
Palladius a Deacon of Rome p. 178 Is sent into Ireland p. 181
Placidia displaceth Aetius. p. 182 Restores him. p. 183 Picts overthrown and
expelled by the Britans p. 187 Pestilence afflicts the Britans p. 190
Q.
Quintinus Overcomes the Franks p. 162 Pursuing them too far he is beaten.
ibid. He is displaced. ibid.

R.
REgni, a British People, p. 36 Whence so named. ibid.
Roderick King of the Picts p. 98 Restitutus Bishop of London p. 115. 144
Romans in Britain hide their Treasure under ground p. 174 Romans drain Britain
with numerous Levies. p. 184
S.
SYlvius Father to Brutus or Brito p. 10. 11 Sarmatians descended from Madai p.
18. 19 Comarians and Chomarians p. 20 Segontiaci and Simeni, British People p.
34. 35 Silures or Sylires p. 38 Setantij p. 39 Selgovae and Smertae p. 40
Samothes first King of Gaul and Britain p. 51 His Successors. ibid.
Suellan, the same with Caswallan p. 69 Scaeva a valiant Soldier, p. 82
Saturninus Archigubernus p. 114 Sacerdos a British Priest, p. 144 Severus
divides Britain into Two Provinces p. 117 He builds a Wall cross the Island p.
122
Socrates and Stephen British Martyrs p. 134 Severus sent over into Britain p.
150 Stilico sends Victorinus against the Scots and Picts p. 163 Saxons invade
the Britans p. 150. 164 They are invited hither by Vortigerne. p. 190

T.
TRinobantes and Tigeni, British People p. 35 Tenevantius, Brother to Androgeus
p. 71. 82 Succeeds his Uncle p. 82. 83
Togodumnus, the same with Guiderius p. 85. 86 Turpilianus, Governor of
Britain p. 97 Trebellius Governor of Britain ibid. p. 109 Theonus Bishop of
London p. 111 Theodosius second Bishop of York p. 115 Tetricus an Usurper p.
125 Traherne, a British King, p. 129 Taporus, the same with Magnentius p. 147
Theodosius beats the Northern men p. 151 And recovers Valentia p. 152 And
displaceth the Areans, ibid.

V.
VEnedoti, People of North Wales p. 39 Vacomagi and Vennicenes p. 40
Vecturiones p. 42 Vespasian's Acts in Britain, p. 86. 87 Venutius, a King of
the Brigantes p. 93 Vellocatus an Adulterer, ibid. Veranius Govvernour of
Britain p. 94 Vectius Bolanus, Governor of Britain p. 97 Venutius, the same
with Arviragus ibid. Victorinus an Usurper p. 125 Vandelbiria p. 127 Victorinus
repulsed the Picts and Scots p. 163 Ursula a British Saint p. 156 Vortigerne
made King of the Britans p. 187 Commits Incest with his own Daughter p. 188 He
invites the Saxons into Britain p. 190

W.
WAll built by Adrian, p. 109 And by Severus p. 122
Wall of Turf erected by the Britans p. 175 Wall of Stone built by the Britans.
p. 177
FINIS.

