A Discourse OF PAYING OF TITHES.

By T.L. M.A. Pastor of the Church of Christ at Tavistock in Devon.

Together with an APPENDIX, by way of Apology for the seasonableness thereof.

LONDON. Printed by T.R. and E. M. and are to be sold by Francis Eglesfield at
the sign of the Marygold in Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

TO HIS Highness THE Lord PROTECTOR OF The Commonwealth of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND,
and IRELAND.
May it please your HIGHNESS,
THAT Gods Holy Moral Law may be duly observed, Christian Liberty not
encroached upon, the inward Man commanded by Truth, and Toleration tolerable
be tolerated, is the design of this short ensuing discourse. It had its
conception many Months ago, and was intended for the late Supreme Authority of
this Commonwealth of England, but now it casts it self before your Highness,
whom God has raised up, and into whose hands, power, and opportunities are put
to bring great designs into action. This is your day to honor him eminently,
by whom Kings Reign and Princes decree judgment. The brood of Travellours
returned Exlies must be served too for Christ's sake, who is their Lord and
yours. That it is a piece of your work to take away Snares that have been
spread in the way of Saints, and yet ly unremoved, I humbly suppose you know
much better than I can tell. These Lines rightly understood, refined, and
observed, may be a Cloud like a Man's hand for further fruitful Rain, that your
day may not slip to you, or slide too fast for us, is the prayer of your
Highness humble servant,

THOMAS LARKHAM.

CHAP. I. Contains the Preface or Introduction.
IT is and has been often in my thoughts, to communicate mine Apprehensions
touching that Ball of Contention, and rock of offense, and snare to tender
Consciences, the payment of Tithes, as now they are payable and required by Law
of the Inhabitants of Towns and Villages within this Commonwealth. This is
looked upon by some as a very great burden to the people of these Nations; and
not only so, but as a great Let to the People of God, whereby they are kept
from, or disabled in the doing of their duty to them that teach them in the
Word, and in doing good to all, especially to the Household of Faith, as
Stewards of what the Lord has entrusted them with, especially (as some hold)
of the Tenth of their Estate judged to be the Lords portion by a moral Law
(though not primarily, as neither is the Law of a seventh days Sabbath.)

Now (say many) when men are enforced to pay Tithes to Nobles, Gentlemen,
Colleges, or such Ministers as are thrust upon them by corrupt Patrons or
otherwise, and whom they cannot look upon as their Pastors sent of God and set
over them regularly, hereby they are put out of their way, and the Lords
portion goes not the right way, but is diverted out of its proper chanel in
the judgment of such as hold Tithes due by divine Right, which are not
inconsiderable either for number, judgment, and learning or piety.

And (say others otherwise judgemented) it is a burden which we hoped the
shedding of so much blood and expending such sums of money, would long before
now have freed us from, but we are as we were (alas) an old penny for a new,
and scarce that. Now I shall humbly propose a few considerations in order to
the removal of these inconveniences, and for direction or advice to the giving
of content to all considerable Complainants: (being for my part one of them
that do judge the Tenth part of Estate, and Seventh of time to be holy to the
Lord) And that those confusions which Antichrist his followers have brought
upon the face of the Christian World may be taken away, and Gospel Worship be
ordered in moral duties thereunto belonging, according to the will and mind of
God and our Father, whose rules we ought to walk by in all observance both to
him, and our neighbors. And if this be a truth (which I know no learned Man
to doubt of) that the subject matter of Church-admonitions and Proceedings is
Bonum and malum, rectum and iniquum, pium and impium, that is to say, Good to
be observed, and evil to be avoided; why should not Christ's own way be walked
in for the effecting of these things in his Church, and the particular
Congregations thereof throughout the Commonwealth. And if it be a sin even for
Magistrates and Swordmen Vzzah-like to cart the Ark of God, and pretend to
keep it from falling without call and rule; how much more to protect
sacrilege, and countenance Antichristian disorders, or at least (as others
that are not of my mindhold,) to continue to force the People of God to pay
Tithes unto them, that may as well by a civil Law require Bullocks, Goats, and
Lambs, etc. for sacrifices, or instead thereof, or any such thing of Religious
offspring from Christians, Jews or Heathens. We find in the stories of the
Church, that this wicked practice of diverting Tithes out of their due course,
was first practiced by Roman Popes: when they were come to that incorrigible
pride and liberty to do all things as they pleased. Then began they by all
oppressing power, to grant, first exemptions, and afterward impropriations,
transferring Tithes from one to another. And so in process of time, when
althings were ready merchandise for them that brought most, no marvel that the
portion of the Lord which was to be paid by divine Rule to Church Officers in
their particular Congregations, and disposed of by them in relation to the
particular charges, were taken from them (as now they are kept from them) and
either bestowed upon the Popes kinsmen the lazy Monks, or else some such as
could make best friends with any of the Popes creatures were exempted from
paying any thing at all. And upon the dissolution of those irreligious houses,
you cannot be ignorant how many filled their Mawes, and rode up to the very
Horse bridles into those spoils, when those dens of thieves were routed.

Now because the Lords portion seized upon (as I said before) lay among the
devoted things, all was taken together and made good prize. And because 'twas
so, it must be so, or else (say our wise Men) Children of these Ancestors and
Purchasers of these Tithes will be wronged, if they may not enjoy that which
they or their Fathers purchased. But in other things they have a proverb Caveat
Emptor, and a man may seize on his stolen Horse wheresoever he find it, and
sometimes an honest mao may be in danger of his life for buying it, though
meaning no harm. Why then should not the Lords portion berescued, and restored
to him? And yet other things I shall briefly lay down in order to the making
this good. That Tithes, as now paid are sinfully exacted and received and that
the payment of them this way is injurious, burdensome sacreligious, or at
least an hinderance to the performance of Christian duty according to Gods Law.

CHAP. II. The main argument is taken from referring the duty of paying of
Tithes unto its proper Law, and here is a short discourse of Laws.
COncerning Laws, I will for brevities sake refer them to three Heads:
Divine, Civil, Canon. By Canon Laws I mean the decrees of Councels, which were
of great force when the mystery of iniquity was grown ripe. By Civil Laws, I
mean Princes Constitutions and Acts of Parliament. Now that Tithes did not
receive their original from either of these Laws were very easy to make good.
For we find in Histories, that Tithes were more duly, more orderly, and more
sincerely paid, before the Canon Law was invented, then ever they were since;
and that they were not anciently due by the Civil Law and Princes constitutions
till now of late years, is more then evident. And we know how generally Tithes
have been held due throughout all the Christian World: And we know no one
Prince has power over all Christian Lands. And therefore it remains that if
Tithes be payable at all in Gospel times, it must be by the Law of God, and
from it their due must take it is rise.

Now the Law of God is either Moral, Judicial, or Ceremonial: these things are
known to every abcedarian in Divinity. The work next will be to place the
payment of Tithes in its proper form, that we may by help of its proper
situation see the duty of Princes and Parliaments to help the Lord against
the Mighty, and to cause usurping Cesars to let alone that which belongs to
God, and to take that which is their own. Then will not men be so earnest to
keep up Tithes as they are now paiable, nor make such hideous cries as they do;
set a work by such of Elies House, as know the Lord has not owned them, and
therefore desire not maintenance in his way.

According to those threesorts of Laws beforementioned there are three
several opinions among men that are called Christians. The first that I will
speak of as being the newest and weakest, is that Tithes became payble by the
Ceremonial Law. Now what is Ceremonial is either so Levitically (which all
ceremonies are not, for there was sacrificing and other ceremonies in use
before the Levitical Order) or else those ceremonies that were so in use
before. Now if Tithes be Levitically ceremonial, then before the Levites they
had no being or use at all. But if any shall say they were ceremonial before
the Law, as sacrifices were in use and ceremonial before they were Levitical,
viz. before those particular Ordinances for the manner of sacrificing were
commanded, and therefore (so) ceremonial, I answer this is very plausible and
probable, viz. that Tithes were ceremonies before the Law as well as
sacrifices, and that certain particular Ordinances of paying them to the
Levites, or the assignation of them to that worship of God, which was then in
use may be called a Levitical constitution. But to make this opinion good
ungainsayably, and to make the paying of Tithes, and offering of sacrifices to
agree compleately: we must enquire into two things, first the Propriety,
secondly the end of both Sacrifices and Tithes. For the first, the propriety of
Sacrifices is not the Lords until they are once offered to him, and till that
time he has the right and propriety in those things, that is about to
sacrifice them. But in Tithes man has no right at all, because they are all
the Lords. In Sacrificing man sanctifies of his own to God, which before
offering is his own, and if he should not offer, it remains his own still,
but paying of Tithes is not a giving but a rendering to God that which was his
before: not to sacrifice is ungodliness, not to pay Tithes is injustice also.
Therefore forasmuch as a ceremony stands in giving to God what is a man's own
not what is Gods before, paying of Tithes cannot be a ceremony. Secondly if we
look to the end of a Sacrifice, it did signify and type out the great
Sacrifice, upon the Cross, it was a carnal type of that holy Sacrifice, and
was to have an end when that should be exhibited (and indeed the end of all
ceremonies was to signify something.) But who can show such an end of paying
Tithes or indeed any other end then Maintenance of the Ministry before the
Law, and under the Law with some particular additional constitutions, and
claimed, and challenged in the times immediately succeeding the Apostles, and
by the consent of all, or the most Christians yielded to. Tithes were the Lords
before he assigned them to Levi.

is his more then the other six. We might argue also from the definition of a
Levitical ceremony, and make a long discourse: but the end of my writing is
not to prove Tithes due so much as to show which is the way to help the^ that
fear the Lord to be able to give God his due, which must be by the power of a
Law taking away Tithes, as now they are challenged, and paid rather to the
Devil then to God, at the best to men upon a civil account, which is a snare to
many a gracious soul.

There is a second Opinion that Tithes were paid among the Jews by a judicial
Law. It seems to me somewhat absurd that Holy things and Worship should be
referred to judicials. And besides they that have read Histories know, that
this is an invention of the Popish Schoolmen: and though it be elder then the
former Opinion, that Tithes were ceremonial; yet it is but at most four hundred
years old, and was thought upon, to excuse the Romish sacrilege of
appropriating parochial Tithes to the Popes kinsmen, Abbots and Monks, as D.
John Reynolds upon Obadiah notably shows. For after the Pope had through
corruption made Tithes away from their proper charges, to salve it, this error
was devised, and this is the second Opinion.

The last and most likely to be true (for I determine not absolutely) is, that
Tithes are the Lords, and belong to such as are employed about his worship
morally, and that to maintain Ministers is a part of the worship of God, for
so Jacob did worship God, Genesis 28.22. and that such as withdraw themselves from
this duty, by withdrawing maintenance from Ministers, are robbers of God,
Malachy 3.8. and mockers of God, Gal. 6.6, 7. And here I might make work, had I
time and skill, and an inclination to make a Treatise of Tithes, to show you
the various Opinions that are now in England concerning Ministers, and their
maintenance. Some scarce allowing any use of a Ministry, or Ordinances, others
granting reasonable competent maintenance to be meet to be allowed; Others
pleading hard for the continuance of Tithes as they are now paiable by Law and
custom and to parish Ministers and Lay-proprietaries as they are called, or to
Colleges, and so forth.

From all these I must crave leave to dissent, from the first sort, with
detestation of their delusions and irreligiousness; from the second and third
with a protestation, that I will yield when mine ensuing reasons are soundly
answered, which keep me from closing with either opinion.

And here I shall as I am able, set down my present persuasion concerning
paying of Tithes in these ensuing particulars.

1. That the present payment of Tithes is a grievance to this Commonwealth, a
propagating of Antichristian sacrilege in regard of impropriations, an
oppressing of Saints and ensnaring of the consciences of some that are
unsatisfied touching their Parochial Ministers, and touching the thing it self
viz. of paying Tithes, an hinderance to orderly members of gathered Churches in
many places from doing their duty toward such as are their Officers orderly
set over them, and a strengthening of Christ's enemies profane and scandalous
and proud Ministers by giving or paying that to them which by God is appointed
for such as are sent by him, and gifted and called according to rule.

2. That (with humble submission) it is the Magistrates duty to take away al
these burdens and shares that lie on the states and consciences of the godly of
the Land, and make them unable to discharge their moral duty in their proper
Churches which is to communicate unto them that teach them in all good things,
as the Lord has ordained: compare 1 Cor. 9.14. with Gal. 6.6.

3. That Church members ought to be looked upon as a willing people, Psalm.
110.3. and to be severely dealt withal for neglect of duty herein, as in other
disorderly walkings, and not otherwise.

I mentioned but now three sorts, and rejected the first as not worth the
taking notice of, for why should I look on them that deny the use of a
Gospel-Ministery and Church-Ordinances, seeing they are not so much as outside
Christians? The second sort that would have Ministers to have an honorable and
comfortable maintenance allowed to them, and settled upon them by Parliamentary
power, do seem to many to be far more commendable then the latter sort of
which I am to speak by and by; but for my part I cannot agree to this opinion,
for these reasons. 1. Because it dispenses with the performance of that which
is (most probably at least) a Moral duty, to wit paying of tithes where they
are due. 2. Because it supposes that Christians ought not to choose their own
Church Officers, or there to join, and so to give tithes where they enjoy the
benefit of labors from him or them to whom they pay their tithes. 3. It
forces out from people money whether they will or no, which is not suitable to
a Gospel spirit. 4. It is not so honorable a way as to share and share like in
all sorts of blessings that God shall be pleased to bestow upon his people.

But for the last opinion and cry for the continuance of tithes as now they are
payable; I much wonder that it hears so well from so many that seem so wise
and godly. Let me not seem to be one of those that would persuade people to
rob God, for that is far from my thoughts. Nor am I against Universities,
Schools, Town Divines, or Teachers of the ignorant, but do wish that out of
such lands and estates as have been forfeited to the Commonwealth, some might
be employed for these pious uses, and also do humbly present this to be
considered whether it may not be fit by rates and taxes, to enforce such as
walk not with well-ordered Churches, to maintain such as are set by the
Magistrate about any of the forementioned employments: Methinks there should be
wisdom enough in this present Government to find out fit ways and courses
for these things. But that which I aim at is, 1. That we may not (according to
the Proverb) Rob Peter to pay Paul, as the Pope has done by robbing Parish
Churches to maintain Abbeys and Priories, etc. which has been high
sacrilege, and the cause of much confusion in the Christian world. 2. That
members of well-ordered gathered Churches be not compelled to pay tithes (which
belong to their proper Ministers) unto such as either Patrons thrust upon them,
or the profane multitude get in by an overruling Vote, or even unto such as
being godly Divines appointed by Authority to teach all sorts, ought to be
cared for some other way. Lastly, That only spiritual weapons be made use of to
deal with Saints in matters that do purely belong to Religion, forasmuch as
all do not see this truth of the Jus Divinum of tithes, and will be offended if
they should be enforced by the Civil power to do that as a part of Divine
worship, which they cannot see so to be.

CHAP. III. In this Chapter following Objections against this that has been
said, are answered.
BUt some may say that this taking away of tithes by a Law, will be very
injurious to Ministers, who will be exposed to poverty and want, and what
justice can there be to inflict such punishments upon those who never deserved
it? To which I answer, that pious and true Ministers of Gods sending, have the
Lord for their portion: and although they should have nothing, yet they do
possess all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. and yet further, the Lord has provided a
liberal maintenance for them, as I have showed before; He has ordained, that
they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; Christ has declared,
that the Labourer is worthy of his wages, Luke 10.7. And James the Apostle
threatens them that keep back, etc. chap. 5.4. and many arguments are used by
Paul, 1 Cor. 9.7, etc. to confirm this truth: but what is all this to
continuing of tithes as they are now payable by Law, to Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Colleges, Parish Priests, or any very unworthy men (who yet make the greatest
cry) by this means godly people are disabled from, rather then helped to do
their duty to their godly Pastors and Teachers.

And further I answer, that Gods works are most beautiful when they are done in
Gods way, and not according to the humoroussuperstitious brabling, contentious,
customary ways of men; If paying of tithes be a Moral duty (as it is supposed
to be, at least secundario) and it be confirmed to be in force (at least by
consequence or equivalence) in the writings of the New Testament: Why should
not Christians be left in this duty to Scripture rules and Church weapons
(which are not carnal, but mighty, etc.) as in other parts of worship? But it
may be replied, that then people will break bonds, and cast away Christ's cords,
and make little account of word or censure, etc. Will they so? Why then let our
Ministers that are for promiscuous administrations, see their error in that
opinion, and the sinfulness of their practice, and learn hereafter to
separate between the precious and the vile, and bemore faithful in their
trust, and then God will teach men to be more forward to pay them their due,
and to allow them at least competencies, if they be not convinced of this truth
of the Divine Right of paying of tithes, which I wish were more searched into,
as all truths ought to be without partiality.

Object. But it will be an act of injustice to take away from men that which is
their proper right by the ancient Laws of men, and which men have bought and
paid for, and to give it to such as have no right thereunto, whose it never was
in any ones opinion (for indeed if tithes be not the Lords (as has formerly
been showed they are) they must needs be theirs whom Law and possession has
settled them upon) Now to take tithes from them that claim them, and receive
them as their right by Law (which determines propriety) without allowing a
valuable consideration, may seem to be great iniquity.

Sol. To which I answer, that if to withhold goods from the owner be a sin, and
forbidden (as it is) in the Word of God: then it can be no sin in the
Magistrate to judge the restoring of them to the rightful owner, and to turn
the stream into its proper channel. The case is the same touching tithes,
whether you look upon them as due by the Moral Law to Ministers, or as devoted
in the elder times of the Gospel Church, though for my part I rather believe
the former; but we will not make more questions then need to divide the
worshippers of God: The scope of this Tract being to evince the duty of this
present Power to take tithes away as now they are payable, and to put people
into a capacity of doing their duty.

Object. But if the Laws of men do not compel persons to do their duty, they
will be re^^isse and negligent, etc.

Sol. To which I answer, The Churches are to take cognizance of miscarriages in
their proper and peculiar members, and they have not the power of the Keys
committed to them in vain, it is not sword work, either Military or Civil, to
force peoples consciences, but the work of the Spirits sword, as has formerly
been hinted.

Quest. But what course then shall be taken to provide for such as are to
instruct the world?

Answ. I answer, Churches may send out members, and the State (if they see it
fit) may out of Gleeb-lands (so called) or other devoted Revenues, or by Taxes
and Rates, allow such or any others whom they shall judge meet for that work of
preaching (whether Church Officers or others) a convenient stipend or pay;
provided that Churchmembers be not robbed of that which they are carrying to
the Lord as his portion by his own appointment and ordinance. There may be
many ways thought upon to furnish the Nation with able and godly Teachers and
Preachers, either fixed or itinerary which may be authorized and maintained in
this excellent needful employment, if they be not Church Officers; and if they
be Church Officers, then care is taken for them already by the Ordinance of God
as has been showed; and indeed such only are fit (unless in case of extreme
necessity) for that work of public preaching, and it will tend much to the
making of peace among Professors of Religion, and it is very suitable to the
ancient practice of the Church in the times after the Apostles. Athanasius
against the Messalians, writes, that there were diverse Bishops in some one
Church, though not in that of Alexandria: And D. Sutliffe, de pont. lib. 1.
chap. 5. says, that Paul town by town appointed Presbyters and Bishops. And
Epiphanius, cont. haeres. lib. 2. haeres. 27. And Eusebius also, in his
Ecclesiastical story, reckons both Peter and Paul for Bishops at Rome, both at
one time. But I lay not much weight on these things. Only to show you that if
in one particular Church there be diverse Ministers, Bishops, Presbyters, Elders
(call them by which of these names you will) there may be a sparing of some of
them by course to instruct the world, and yet they may be ready also to
preserve good order in the particular Churches to whom they do belong, and to
propagate the Ordination (for the perpetuity of Churches respectively) others
to succeed them from time to time upon the election of the members of each
Church of fit men so to be presented to them to receive Ordination. And as
Calvin, lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8, 15. and lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 1. affirms
that from among the company of the Presbyters some were chosen to be Pastors
and Teachers, and the rest were Overseers and Censurers of the behaviors of
the people: so why may not these by course, or some of them be chosen to preach
and teach abroad, and receive their livelihood from the Churches to whom they
do belong, out of the tithes paid in to them by the members, and due unto them
as Ministers of those Churches? For I would not have you think that one man
should scrape hundreds together from the Church (as some Parsons so called now
do) but that tithes should be brought into Gods storehouse (as we read they
were commanded to be, Mal. 3.1.) and so employed to the service of God in
maintaining Ministers and Church Officers. But I am sensible of the running of
my Pen. I therefore return to the Answer to the Question, viz. that men of
small reach may easily find out ways for instructing the world that do not
submit to any Church. Bishops or Ministers of old had the care of both Cities
in which they lived, and Countries adjoining, and besides Church Members and
others live promiscuously together in most places, and if they do not, care may
be taken without so much ado for teaching and instructing all. Whole Cities or
towns were not Churches in ancient time, neither ought they to be so now. We
read of the Church of Smyrna, one of the seven Churches of Asia, where
Polycarpus was Pastor, as soon as he was known to be a Christian, was
martyred by the rage of the multitude, and that (as Eusebius, Eccles. hist.
lib. 4. cap. 15. records) in the sight of his own people. The whole Cities
there were not Churches; if they had been, how could the Church of Smyrna
(writing to other Churches of the foresaid martyrdom) entitle her self the
Church of God which is at Smyrna? And yet I will not deny but there might be
some few here and there in the town and hamlets thereabout, which belonged to
the Churches in the greater towns and cities, but not as now where Tavistock
town is one thing, and Tavistock parish another, because it is supposed all
that are within the precincts of the parish, must needs be members of the
Church there, and so has it been accounted formerly: but I must confess
(without fear) it is otherwise now. And why may it not be so in other places? I
teach all in the public meeting house, but do only baptize the children of
such as are received and allowed members of the Church, and admitted to the
Lords Table. And therefore (this question notwithstanding) I conceive, taking
away of tithes, as now payable, will no way hinder the teaching of the world,
but rather (as I have showed) further it, when Church Members shall be enabled
to pay their tithes to their proper Churches.

CHAP. IV. In this last Chapter you have the Conclusion with humble submission
to the Churches of Christ, and to the Ministers of the Gospel.
IT is not my purpose to be either peremptory or prolix. I will therefore sum
up all. Whether they shall read these subitaneous collections that hold that
tithes are mere alms, which was the opinion of those who were called the
Waldenses, which doubtless they were drawn to hold, upon the abuse of tithes
which they saw under the Church of Rome; which opinion afterward came to be
received and taken up by John Wickliffe and his scholars, as you shall find it
to be the 18 Article amongst those against him condemned in the Council of
Constance, and by John Hus a Bohemian, William Thorp an Englishman, as
appears by their examinations recorded by Mr. Fox, which has also since
been taught by Anabaptists and Trinitaries, as may be seen in a book de
antithesibus very and falsi Christi, Anno Domini 1568. Albae Juliae, and is
followed by many now that would have Ministers and Church Officers to have
right to nothing: Or whether they shall peruse what I have written, that hold
for a reasonable and competent maintenance as due by Divine authority, which is
the opinion of them of the Church of Rome, as Bellarmine declares, Tom. 1
contr. 5. lib. 1. and is much received among our Writers of the Reformed
Churches, cap. 25. Or whether they look upon these lines, that hold tithes due
by the express Word of God, which is the judgment of the ancient Fathers from
the beginning without contradiction, until the Supreme Authority of the Pope
took them away by means of impropriations: This is the conclusion, that as now
they are paid by the Laws and usages of this Nation, they cannot be warranted
to be well paid: which to prove, I provoke any Divine, Lawyer, or other to make
good by sound arguments out of the Word of God; and therefore that they ought
to be taken away notwithstanding all that hitherto I have heard to be alleged
for the keeping of them on foot.

If tithes be due at all, it must be either by the Law of God or men, if of
men, either by Princes constitutions, or by the Canon Law, as I have said in
chap. 2. They were paid before the Canon Law was invented, and better then
since. And few plead Princes constitutio^s for their ancient payment in the
Church, for they are held due in all the Christian world over, which no one
Prince rules. And for our late paying of them by Laws and Ordinances; if the
Common Law were well applied, it would be found to be Malus usus, and therefore
abolendus. Wherefore seeing all that can be said for continuance of tithes is
declared to be of no force, seeing it is so injurious to the Churches, so
oppressive to the people of the Land, so unwarrantable by the Word of God, the
taking of them away so much defired by all that are the most considerable, and
that this is the way to have them paid regularly by such as see that truth, and
are so judgemented, or else to help them that are for a liberal maintenance,
for Ministers to be able to do their duty according to their light: Seeing
ways may be easily found out for preventing all inconveniences that will come
by their taking away, I conclude as Cato did his Orations, and semper diruendam
esse Carthaginem. So, that by any means tithes as now payable of all sorts root
and branch are by Authority to be taken away, in the judgment of T. L.

An APPENDIX to the former discourse by way of Apology for the seasonablenesse
of it, which some do or may suppose to be otherwise.
I Am very sensible (Christian Reader) that I shall be looked upon with diverse
sorts of eyes, and the most (I have cause to think) will cast ill aspects upon
these few lines I have written touching the Moral duty of giving the tenth of
our estates to God, the Lord Paramount of all that we enjoy, as tenants at
will, by, and under this (as it were) reserved rent. But forasmuch as I judge
it to be, not only a duty as I am a Minister, to bear witness to every truth
in due time and place, but especially to look after and eye Gods call to a work
of the time when it should be done more eminently and universally; and
conceiving this to be such a one, I trust I shall not be mis-judged by all, nor
the most of them that truly fear the Lord, if in any competent measure they
stand loose and disingaged from private interests. For otherwise truly I shall
be in danger of deep censure, and such of snares and slurs, to the drawing of
them perhaps to oppose, yea, persecute this work of mine, though intended for
the relief of tender consciences, and to make a beginning by breaking of the
ice in this thing, which task God has bin pleased all along my life (as I
could show in many particulars) to lay upon me.

Interests are diverse, of honor some, some of profit, of friends othersome,
and ease and peaceable sleeping in a whole skin (as we say) will be very techy
at such things as cause troubles and stirs, in places and countries, as the
effectual prosecuting of this truth by the hand of power in regard of the
practick part is like enough to do. But interests are never so dangerous as
when colored over with pretenses of piety, justice, Religion: As we read in
Samuel of Readiness sparing of Agag and the best of the flock in order (as he
pretended) to the worship and service of God, or in pity to that King: but this
proved a cause of casheerment to Saul by God, and another must take his place.
The Gadarens upon an interest of profit sent Christ away, for they were loath
to lose their pigs. And Diotrephes upon the interest of honor and preeminence
opposes John and the work of Christ in his Churches. Interest of friendship
was a great blur and scourge to good King Jehosaphat, to wit, his joining with
Ahab and Ahaziah. I might tell you of the interest of relations, which was such
a cause of folly in King Solomon, who by his wives upon this account was drawn
to Idolatry. Also do we not see that many public Preachers like the Pharisees,
oppose Christ in many of his servants, because they are not made (as it were)
little Gods, as once they were; thus many upon the interest of honor miscarry
much, that promised better when time was. But yet truth at last will profligate
all that stands in its way, and as it is written of the Governors of Judah,
Zach. 12.6. Will be like a heath of fire among wood, and like a torch of fire
in a sheaf, and devour all that stands against it on the right hand and on the
left. But to the matter in hand. For the point of taking away tithes as now
they are required, and many molested and grieved in spirit, some even precious
ones, for being unwilling to pay them as now made payable, and yet made by
force so to do, I say for this I suppose I shall have many approvers of what I
write among such as pretend to the exactest Reformation. But the other branch
of my assertion will not so easily go down with them Well, if it will not yet,
I hope yet they will not be uncharitable of me that write what I judge to be
true, and what I think more Saints will see to be a truth shortly. In the mean
time however, I trust that all that have the face of Religion, will be lo^th
under a Gospel dispensation shining as the Sun in its strength, to be worse and
more backward to Minister to the Lord of their substance, then the Jews were,
who lived under such dark Typical and umbratical administrations. And in the
mean time, I hold forth no other compulsories to be made use of, but such as
are to work upon conscience, for these are the weapons Ministers and Churches
must make use of; judging such (for my part) as can find in their heart to
neglect express commands of Scripture concerning Ministers maintenance, and
distributing to the necessities of the Saints, (yea of any that are in want) to
be unmeet for communion in Church-Ordinances. And let such as will not hear the
Church, know that the Lord is coming. Doubtless did Ministers and Saints wield
and look upon spiritual weapons with faithful hands and awful eyes, there would
more be done (in souls I mean borne of the spirit) incomparably, then by all
the force of an arm of flesh can ever be expected.

But I am afraid many Ministers had rather serve the State for visible shpends,
then Jesus Christ upon Scripture pay; which is one maine cause I am persuaded,
though they shall surely answer for it that so use us) that we are so vile and
contemptible among the people. But some objections are to be answered.

Obj. 1. As first, that this Nation is incapable of this way and work, there
being so many in it whose estates are upon the matter made up of tithes, etc.
and therefore it is (at least) unseasonable, though possibly taking away of
tithes, as now payable, may be effected in time to come.

Sol. To which I answer, that the Scripture gives us many examples of such as
have acted by halves about necessary works, upon reasons of State, and grounds
of policy, who have always found at last it had been better for them to have
walked exactly, and to have done to the utmost, what God would have had them to
do. A grave wise counsel was led into a very ill practice, to wit, to Vote the
Son of God to death upon a reason of policy John 11.47. onward in diverse
verses. And besides, we have had experience that some have let slip
opportunities and nicks of time wherein they might have done great things,
which they could never recover again. Now therefore while the spirits of the
most of the godly in the Land are, and have been upon this point of
extirpation of this root of mischief which lies in the way of advancing
Gospel-reformation, paying of tithes I mean, as they are now required to be
paid; it seems to me to be the duty of all, so far as in them lies, to
promote this work before the door be fully shut, and God disowne the present
actors for want of faith, courage, diligence, and sincerity. And although a
sentence of death seem to be passed already upon Christ's cause in this
particular, yet we should not flinch or be discouraged, as long as there is any
the least possibility of doing good. And lastly, the procrastinating of a work
which God has marked our to be now to be done, by the votes of his sealed ones
in all places, is a very great offense: As in Haggai's time the work of
building of the Temple was put off under pretense the time was not come, Hag.
1.2. for which they are sharply reproved.

Obj. 2. But it may further be objected, that the greatest, wisest, and most
learned in the Land cry shame of such motions: and some that have been forward
this way have now learned more wit, and are as much against it as ever they
were for it, etc.

Sol. True it is, Gods works, though in their season, have seldom found the
friendship of great ones. Truths of God (especially touching upon interests)
are a continual offense to the great men of this world. Have any of the Rulers
or Pharisees believed in him? was thought a good plea in Christ's time. Not many
wise, not many mighty, not many noble, in Paul's time. It is not long agone I
taught out of this Scripture, But their Nobles put not their neck to the work
of their God. I confess this is a great discouragement to many. Men of
princely race, noble blood, great parts, are not usually saved first. The Lord
shall save THE TENTS of Judah first, Zach. 12.7. And therefore I am not utterly
cast down to see many great and learned ones withdrawing their hands from Gods
work. But I humbly propound two things. First, whether Moral precepts are out
of date? I hope none think so, that resolve that Christ is Lord and King of his
Church, and that Morals are of eternal verity. It Is true (I confess) that
neither this Law of Decimation or tithes, nor yet that of a Septimarian Sabbath
are primarily Moral, but that they are secundarily and positively Moral I have
formerly proved for the one, and judge so of the other, though it be not my
present work now to meddle with it. And I am persuaded many that dislike my way
of handling this matter, are yet clear enough of the same judgment with me,
viz. that tithes are the Lords portion, and due Jure Divino. Then secondly, I
humbly demand, whether there can be greater evidence that this is a truth of
God (about removing what hinders the practicing of it, I mean) then have
been in our age: when the spirits of men are raised to obey Christ in all
things, and to follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. For although it be
true, that much darkness is among the godly party about the latter part of my
Thesis, that tithes are holy to the Lord Morally; yet for the catching and
snatching of them which is now in use, and the compelling of people to give
(not to Caesar only, but) to Nobles, Lawyers, persecutors of the power of
godliness, and I know to whom else, that which is Gods; I am persuaded it is
generally condemned in the hearts and spirits of all, or the most that truly
fear and love God.

And notwithstanding, what by the perfidious and treacherous dealing of some
particular persons that have been employed about great works in our days, who
like Absolon or Achitophel to David, or like Shemaiah to Nehemiah, or Judas to
Christ, have proved false; and what by discouragements of the honest party, and
disappointments of expectations in the loss of fair opportunities (which we in
England are not strangers unto); And what by over-acting of others before
dispensation to each particular gave the call; And what by conjunction with
such as have not been real hearted to the cause of God; this truth and some
others seem to be slain with the two witnesses for a time; yet I am persuaded
it will not be long before God will return to his work that has been of late
upon the wheel; and either make some to remember themselves and do their first
work, or lay them aside (that peoples eyes may be removed from instruments to
himself) and casheere them that have casheered themselves out of their
employments for God and his people; and of stones raise up children to Abraham,
and bringers to pass of his mind and will, for the setting up of Christian
worship, and throwing down that carnal Ministry which is chiefly kept up by
this irregular paying of tithes in this Nation, to such as Gods people can see
no mark of, or call from God upon.

The result of all is clearly this, that if great men will not, meaner men
shall. Christ was borne of mean parentage, came out of Galilee, which could
not but be a cloud over him, and a great trial to the faith of the godly who
were told that he was to come out of Bethlehem. If professed Ministers out of
fear and distrust of God, will give an uncertain sound, tradesmen, fishermen,
tentmakers, blew-apron-men shall speak plainer; I say, if these (with the
Scribes and Pharisees) should be silent, or enemies rather, the stones shall
cry out: The little stone hewed out of the mountain without hands, will throw
down all that belongs to the fourth beast in either shape or form. We were
wont to say in the times of the Prelacy, that Homilies and the Service Book
were the two legs of a dumb Ministry in England. Consider I pray you,
whether the compelling of payment of Tithes now as they are paid, be not of
great use for the continuance of a formal artificial outside carnal Ministry
in this Nation.

But methinks I hear some say, the Ordinance whereby Commissioners are
appointed for the approbation of publik Preachers, together with that whereby
diverse are appointed for the ejection of scandalous and insufficient
Ministers, being duly and carefully executed, will quickly make a riddance of
many that are now employed, and so the last discourse before-going will be
useless.

I acknowledge there is very much in those two Ordinances, had we such spirited
men as those actings call for which are in them required: And were that way the
way of Christ so clearly to all, as perhaps it may be to some. But the declared
dissents and discontents of a very religious party, do seem to say something
is wanting. Besides rain to lay corn that should be cut down, is out of
season: And Barbers that cut off the hair and let the head alone, that should
rather be so used, are insufficient to be executioners. Consider what I say.

There is further this one thing generally complained of (for I hear many
things more then many that can do much more good then I can, if they would)
that this tends very little in many places to the propagation of the Gospel, or
saving of souls. For (as a great man in the Ministry said in public, that he
knew not which was the best death, poisoning or starving, so) say many, if such
vacant places were filled with godly experienced Saints apt to teach, 'twere
something; but ancient men are found scandalous, and so ejected; and youths
that will be any thing for a quiet life, are found to be made use of, or none
at all: and to my knowledge, Patrons and young men can agree about Livings, and
the Commissioners for Approbation never hear of either the Patron or his Clerk.
Blessed be God that has so far put it into the heart of those that have
power to prepare Christ's way before him, as to do so much as has been done in
this perverse, froward, and untoward Nation: yet it is humbly conceived that
notwithstanding the multiplied sentences of death upon Church work; yet grace
and mercy that are by dark dispensations usually ushered in, are wrapped up and
a coming all this while. I wish none of my Brethren-would give way to envious
grudgings against the persons of such as are now in power, but rather pray for
them, which I am sure, of they more stand in need of, then give cause of,
envy. And for them my prayer is, that they will cast down that foul Idol
Discretion falsely so called: My meaning is, that they would not be too much
given to fears and forecastings, as Jonah was, whereby he was put out of Gods
way.

To make an end of my Appendix. My hope is, that the time is not far off in
which truths will be better seen and agreed upon by and among the Saints. As
for fond Familists, Quakers, Ranters, and such kind of poor seduced be
witched souls, let them be looked upon with pity as we are Saints, and dealt
withal by Magistrates, as Gods Word does warrant. For my part I know no odds
(now) between the power of our Governors, and the Kings of Israel and Judah.
It Is true, their Kings were typical, and their Land Sacramental, but their
power within Church and without, was the same that now it is, concerning both
the Tables of the Moral Law. But I find not that they that ruled well, did
meddle with matters of Church cognizance purely so, otherwise then to protect
the Priests and Levites and people of God, and punish evildoers. Ye cannot be
ignorant of the ground of that catching question moved to our Lord Jesus, Is it
lawful to give tribute to Caesar? If it had not been Gods, it had scarce been
worth the answering. If one should ask of me, Is it lawful to pay Tithes to
my Lord or Master such a one? I have learned of my Lord and Master to answer,
Give -- and unto God the things that are Gods. If Magistrates will not, or
cannot, though they would, redeem or rescue the Lords portion out of the hands
of the spoyler and sacrilegious Tenant, and make way for the Saints observance
of this Moral duty of giving God his due with more ease, and disburden their
consciences that are vexed for not sinning against it (which yet may be their
ignorance); I say if this cannot be, yet (for I acknowledge many clouds of
darkness are about this truth, which I hope the Sun of righteousness will
shortly dispel): yet deride not, slight not my counsel, let the Sabbath day,
Ordinances (whereof this is one, and holding the same Covenant of grace in
extent to you and yours (which was no ceremony among Gods ancient people) is
another) and union together of Saints by profession in Churches, and of
Churches also as streets of one Jerusalem, be carefully regarded; And peace
shall be upon you, and mercy walking by this Rule (or Canon) and upon the
Israel of God. Let God have his due in his way, though with some loss unto
thee, until the time come of the fall of Antichrist in this particular also,
the exacting I mean of Tithes by titles derived from him and his sacrilegious
adherents and successors. The Lord will shortly clear up this and other truths
with the brightness of his coming. Even so Amen, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed, and are to be sold by
Francis Eglesfield, at his Shop at the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard.
THe holy Court in five Tomes, written in French by N. Caussin, and done into
English by Sir T. Hawkins, and others.

Most excellent Instructions for the keeping of Merchants Books and Accounts,
by way of Debtor and Creditor, after the Italian manner, by John Carpenter
Merchant. in Folio.

Aelians Tacticks, or the Art of Imbattelling an Army. in Folio.

Animadversions of War, or the Military magazin, by Robert Ward Gentleman and
Commanander. in Folio.

The Works of John Tailor the Water-Poet, collected into one Volume. in Folio.

Heywood of Angels, in Folio.

Pareus on the Revelation in English, in Folio.

Bp. Usher, his Body of Divinity, in Folio.

Decapala in Psalmos, sive Commentarius ex december Linguis, antiqui Patribus,
Rab. Historicis and Poetis a Joanne Vicars Anglo, in Folio.

A faithful Register of the Transactions in Parliament in the Third and Fourth
years of the Reign of our late Sovereign lord King Charles, containing the
several speeches, Cases, Arguments of Law, and grand Mysteries of the Kingdom
then in Agitation, by T. F.

Gulston in Rhetoricam Aristotelis, gr. lat. in 4to.

The Works of that famous Mathematician, Edmund Gunter, sometime Professor of
Astronomy in Gresham College, newly printed with many corrections and
additions, by Samuel Foster, late Professor of Gresham College, in 4to.

The Works of Sir Rich. Baker, Viz. Meditations and Disquisitions on the Lords
Prayer, in 4to. On the first Psalm, in 4to. On the seven Penitential Psalms,
in 4to. His Cato Variegatus, or Cato's Moral Distcks translated into English
verse, 4to. On the Creed, in 12. Motives for prayer upon the seven days of the
Week, in 12. The Soliloquie of the Soul, in 12. An Apology for Laymens writing
in Divinity, in 12.

Decimal Arithmetic, or the use of Napiers bones by William Barton, in 8vo:

The Sea-man's Secrets with the Tables (...) calculated, very useful for young
Seamen, in (...).

A Commentary on the first Psalm, by Phineas Fletcher, in 4to.

The Purple Island, being Poetical Miscelanies, by Phineas Fletcher, in 4to.

Joy in tribulation, or Consolations for afflicted Consciences, by Phine as
Fletcher. in 12.

Five Sermons upon several occasions preached at Court, by Dr. Preston, in 4to.

The Needles excellency, a most useful Book of Cut-works, in 4to.

Light from heaven by Dr. S^bb^, in 4to.

Lydia's Conversion, or the Riches of Mercy, by Dr. Sibbs, in 12.

The whole works of that Eloquent Divine Thomas Plafere D.D. collected into one
Voume, in 8 vo,

The handmaid to Arithmetic refined, by Nicolas Hunt, in 8vo.

The Art of Dialling by John Foster, corrected and much enlarged by the Author
himself, in 4to.

An Introduction to the right receiving of the Sacrament by W. Pemble, in 12,

The burden and unburthening of a laden conscience, by Richard Kilby, in 12.

Spiritual food and Physic being a large Catechism composed by John Mico, in
8vo.

A Catechism by M. Nicolas, in 8vo.

Corpus Christi, together with the demonstration of Antichrist by John Gurney,
in 12.

The History of Heliodorus in ten Books translated by W. Lisle, in 4to.

AEsop's Fables in Prose and Verse grammatical^^anslated, illustrated with
Pictures, much enlar^^d; exactly translated out of the original Greek,
together with the History of his Life, in 12.

Divine Emblems and Hieroglyphics, by Francis Quarles, in 8vo.

The usefullnesse and excellency of Christ, by C. Jelinger, in 8vo.

The Office and Duty of Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers,
excellently set forth by Nicholas Layer, Counselor, in 8vo.

A Collection of Speeches in Parliament, by Sir Edward Deering, in 4to.

A Discourse of proper Sacrifice, by Sir Edward Deering, in 4to.

Posselii Syntaxis Greek, in 8vo.

Gods Summons to general repentance; by John Harsnet, in 12,

Juelli Apologia, in 8vo. Greek and Latin; and also in Lat. in 12.

Diverse Sermons upon several occasions, by John Bond Master of the Savoy, in
4to.

The Doctrine of the Bible, in 8vo.

Gospel-conversion, by John Cotton of New England, in 8vo.

A Brief of the Bibles History in 12. by Enoch Clapham.

Occasional-Meditations, by Jos: Hall in 12.

A brief Exposition on the Epistle to the Hebrews by David Dixon, in 8vo.

Short handwriting, or the art of tachygraphie, by Thomas Shelton, in 8vo.

Wolleb^i Compendium Theolog. in 12.

Spare minutes, or Warwicks Meditations, in 12.

A Map of England, the most exact that is extant, with the Kings of England
about, done by W. Holar.

Lucian's Dialogues translated into English. 4to.

Holidai Philosophia, in 4to.

Veneti Historia, in 4to.

Death's Deliverance, and Eliah's fiery Chariot in two Sermons, by Alexander
Gross, in 8vo.

A Manual of controversies in Engl. by Osiander, in 8vo.

Munition against man's misery, by R. Smith, in 8vo.

Wit and Mirth, by John Tailor in 8vo.

The Garden of spiritual Flowers, in 12

Bible Battles, by Rich: Bernard, in 12.

Monuments in the Saxon-tongue, written 700 years ago, showing, that both the
Old and New Testament, Lord's Prayer, and the Creed, were then used in the
Mother tongue, collected by W. Lisle, in 4to.

The Excellency of a gracious Spirit, together with Moses Self-denial, by
Jeremiah Buroughs, in 8vo.

The power of the Christian Magistrate in sacred things, by Lewis de Moulin,
History reader in Oxford. in 8.

Brief notes upon the whole book of Psalms, by George Abbot lately published
in 4to.

Amicus Reipublicae, the Commonwealth's friend, or an exact and speedy course
to justice and right, and for preventing and determining tedious Lawsuits, by
Io. March of Grayes-Inne.

The Soul's possession of Christ, by Thomas Hooker of New England, in 12o.

The Saints Dignity and Dutie'^ogether with the danger of Ignorance and
hardness, by Thomas Hooker of New England, in 12.

Rhetorices Elementa, by William Dugard Master of Merchant-Tailors School,
London, in 8vo.

Also, Retoricae Compendium Anglo-Lat., by Thomas Horn Master of Eaton School.

A piece of great Leaning, entitled, The height of Eloquence, written
originally in Greek by Dionysius Longinus, translated into English by J. Hall
Esquire.

The High Court of Justice, a Sermon preached before the Judges of assize
Leicester, by Anthony Scattergood.

Moses his Choice, showing the excellency of a gracious heart, etc, by Mr.
Jeremiah Buroughs.

A glimps of Christ, discovering the sweet incomes of Christ to a spiritual
heart, by Robert Dingly.

The use of the Quadrant, fitted for daily practtice with lines, by Sam: Foster
late Professor of Astronomy at Greshan College.

Reusneri Symbola, exactly corrected, and the defect of the three Tables in
former Editions rectified and made into one.

Letters of Mounsier de Balzack, 1.2.3, and 4th parts, translated out of the
French into English, by Sir Richard Baker and others, now collected into one
volume in 8vo.

None but Christ, the 9th Edition, by Clement Cotton, the author of the English
Concordance, in 12.

A Treatise of Liberty and Necessity, wherein all controversy concerning
Predestination, Election, Free Will, Grace, Merits, Reprobation, etc. is fully
decided and cleared, by Thomas Hobbs, in 12.

The Covenant of Grace, discovering the Great work of a Sinners Reconciliation
to God, by John Cotton, late Minister at Boston in New England, in 8.

The Theater of Complements, or the Art of Eloquence and most refined way of
speaking, by Basilius Musophilus, in 12,

Cases of Conscience, practically resolved, by Joseph Hall, B^. of Norwich, in
12.

The way to Heaven discovered, and the stumbling blocks cast therein by the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, removed; the second Edition much enlarged by
Robert Purnell, in 8.

Satan at Noon, being an impartial relation of the proceedings of the
Commissioners of the County of Berks against John Pordage, Minister of
Bradfield in the said County, published by Christopher Fowler, in 4to.

The Crumbs of Comfort, a prayer book, in 24.

The Psalms of David in Meetre, to be sung in usual and known tunes, by Will.
Barton, M. of Arts.

The mortified Christian, showing the nature, signs, necessity and Difficulty
of true Mortification with a discovery of sincerity, by that faithful
Minister of Christ, Christopher Love. in 8.

The Scotch design discovered, Relating their dangerous Attempts lately
practiced against the English Nation, with the sad consequences of the same, in
4to.

Poems Humane and Divine, by Robert Herrick Esquire, in 8,

The History of Bees, by Charles Butler, in 4to.

Lucius Florus in Latin, in 24.

C. Salustius in Latin, in 24.

Phraseologia puerilis, or selected Latin and English Phrases, very useful
for young Latinists, to prevent Barbarismes and bald Latine-making: and to
initiate them in speaking and writing elegantly in both Languages, the third
Edition, Methodically digested and very much enlarged by the Author John
Clark, Bachelour in Divinity, sometimes Master of the Free School in Lincoln.

Formulae Oratoriae in usum Scholarum concinnatae, cum praxin and usu earundem
in Epistolis, Thematibus, Declamationibm conterendis. Accessit Dux Poeticus,
cum suis aliquot poematiolis, Editio septima, Novissima Autorts Lima expolita,
per Joh. Clarke, B. D. and sometime Master of the Free School in Lincoln.

The Parable of the wedding Supper explained wherein the offer of Salvation
both to Jews and Gentiles is pithily and plainly applied, the second Edition:
whereunto is added a discourse for the payment of Tithes; by Thomas Larckham M.
A. sometime of Trinity College in Cambridge.

The Rock of Ages, or a Treatise of the eighteen Attributes of God; twelve of
them communicable, and six incommunicable, being the substance of Sundry
Lectures, by Thomas Larkham M. A sometime of Trinity College in Cambridge.

FINIS.

