The galant Seamans return from the Indies, or the happy meeting of two
Faithful lovers.
Wherein is showed the loyal constancy of a Seaman to his love, with her kind
salutation unto him for his Welcome home.

Observe this Song which is both neat and pretty
It Is on a Seaman in his praise of Betty.
Tune of Five Sail of Frigates, Or, Shrewsbury By T. L.
With Allowance.


I am a stout Seaman newly come on shore
I have been a long Uoyage where I nere was before
But now I am returned i me resolved to see
My own dearest honey whose name is Betty.
I have been absent from her full many a day
But yet I was constant in every way
Though many a beautiful dame I did see
Yet none pleased me so well as pretty Betty.
Now I am intended what ever betide
For to go and see her and make her my bride
If that she and I can together agree
I never will love none but pretty Betty.
The Gallant Seamans Song at the meeting of Betty.
Well met my pretty Betty my joy and my dear,
I now am returned thy heart for to cheer. NOSTRA ^FRATERNITAS ^ VERITAS ^ ET ^
VNITAS ^


Though long I have been absent yet I thought on thee
O my heart it was always with pretty Betty
Then come my own dearest to the Tavern lets go,
Whereas we will be merry for an hour or two
Lovingly together we both will agree
And i will drink a good health to my pretty Betty.
And when we have done to the church we will hy
Whereas we will be joined in Matrymony,
And always i will be a kind husband to thee
If that thou will be my wife pretty Betty.
I will kiss thee and hug thee all night in my arms,
I Will be careful of thee and keep thee from harms
I will love thee dearly in every degree
For my heart it is fixed on pretty Betty.
For thee I will rove and sail far and near
The dangerous rough sea shall not put me in fear
If I do get treasure i will bring it to thee,
And i will venture my life for my pretty Betty.
And more then all this i will tell thee my Dear.
I will bring thee home rich Jewels for to wear,
And many new fashions I will provide thee
So that none shall compare unto pretty Betty.
Then come mine own Dearest and grant me thy Love
Both Loyal and constant to thee I will prove,
If that thou will put trust and belief in me
I vow nere to Love none but pretty Betty.
Betty's reply wherein she shows her Love,
Promising him always constant to prove.

O welcome my Dearest welcome to the shore
Thy absence so long has troubled me sore
But since thou art returned this i will assure thee
It is thou art the man that my Husband shall be
Although that some Maids now adays proves untrue
Yet i will never change my old Love for a new,
My promise i will keep while life remains in me
For it is thou art the man that my husband shall be.
I have been courted by many a proper youth
If thou will believe me i will tell thee the truth
But all my affections I have set on thee
For thou art the man that my husband shall be
Then Dearest be not discontented in mind,
For to thee I Will always prove loving and kind
No Lord nor Knight i will have if they would have me
For it is thou art the man that my husband shall ^e.
If that I might gain a whole Ship-load of money.
I would not forsake my true Love and Honey,
No wealth nor yet riches shall force or tempt me
^o forsake him who ever my true Love shall be,
This lusty brave seaman and his dearest Dear
Was married full speedily as I did hear,
Now they both together do live happily
And he vows to love his pretty Betty.
He is overjoyed now he has gained his mate
They do Love and live without strife and debate.
He is kind unto her in every degree
So I wish him well to enjoy pretty Betty.
All you young men and maidens pray learn by my song
To be true to your sweet hearts and do them no wrong
Prove constant and just and not false-hearted be
And so I will now conclude my new ditty
Printed for W. Thackery, and T. Passenger.


