The City Prophisier. Or, the country Fortuneteller.
Here in these Lines the which below are pend,
You may know when these hard times will amend,
For they will show, Exactly, right, and plain,
When as we shall enjoy good times again.
Observe them well, and then you all will say,
It Is worth your time and leisure for to stay.
Tune of, Oh is not Old England, grown New.
By Tho. Lanfiere.




ALL you Honest Men in Country and town,
which by the bad times much hardship have known
observe, and I briefly to you will set down,
When the times will be better again, again,
When as the times will mend again.
then mark well my subject which I shall declare
It Is worth your attention, if you will it hear,
I briefly unto you all now will declare,
When, etc.
When great rates and taxes are took away,
From Country and City, which men yearly pay,
If you chance to live for to see that day;
Then the times will be better again, again,
Oh then the times will mend again.
When a Counselor pleads without ere a Fe^,
And a Usurer throws away his Money,
When that comes to pass, you plainly shall see
That the, etc.
When as all rich men so liberal does grow,
that to the poor part of their means they bestow
If we could see such doings, I certainly know,
That the, etc.
When all men to each other faithful does prove
For to live still in unity, true peace, and love;
And envy and malice from their hearts remove;
Then the times will be better again, again,
Oh then the times will mend again.




WHen trading is quick, as it was formerly,
In City and town, and in the Country;
And money with all men flow plentifully;
Then the times will be better again, again,
Oh then the times will mend again.
When Desimulation forsakes the Land,
That plain-dealing may get the upper hand,
And conscience in all men's hearts firmly does stand;
Then the, etc.
When Misers do fetch forth their silver and gold
The which in their chests is grown rusty and old;
Or when Honesty is by Knaves to be sold:
Then the, etc.
When all Neighbors leaves strife and debate,
And live still in peace and not each other hate,
And forgeing and lying is worn out of date;
Then the, etc.
when swearing and drunkenness all men do abhor
And fully conclude for to use them no more,
Or when the City does yield no trade for a whore;
Then the, etc.
when cheating and couzening is proclaimed down
throughout all the Kingdom in country and town
And covetousness is from rich men's hearts flown;
Then the, etc.
when all knaves prove honest, and thieves do turn true,
And leave off their old ways, for to take up new
Or when every Creditor is paid his due:
Then the, etc.
When flaunting Perriwigs are out of request
And Ladies with curled locks hates to be dressed
Or when greedy rich men their poor neighbors feast,
Then the, etc.
and when painting and patching is quite laid aside,
by those which does set their delight all in pride
Or when gallants does at new fashions deride;
Then the, etc.
When Roundheads and Quakers their religion remove,
To turn Cavaliers, and church government love,
Or when Lawyers to Clyents do honest-men prove;
Then the, etc.
And now to conclude my Song, which is new,
I here have declared nothing but what is true,
When these things come to pass, I will assure you,
That the times will be better again, again,
Oh then the times will mend again.
FINIS.
With Allowance, To. L'Estrange.

Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


