LARGE AND SURE FOUNDATIONS.

Matthew. 16.18. Upon this Rock will I Build my Church.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1693.

THE PREFACE.
THESE Papers were drawn up some time ago, and are the result of Settled
Thoughts for many years. They are made short and plain, and cast in amongst
others, if possibly they may help to unite us in Interest and Affection, and to
make the Public Settlement of Religion at any time, more Large and Strong to
our great Advantage every way. Some hopes of this are raised by the
Inclinations of many, and the several Pieces lately Publissh'd to this end; as
(besides many that I may not have seen or heard of,) The Heads of Agreement
assented to by the United Ministers, Free Thoughts occasioned by those Heads;
Mr. Barker's Sermon on John 21.17. at the Consecration of the Archbishop of
Cant. The Grand Question (Writ as it is said by Dr. Woodroff;) Dr. Sherlock's
Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Nov. 4. 1688. To which I may add, the Spirit of
the Church Faction; for it is that only, and not the Church, that violently
opposes all Reformation.

The Design of laying down this great Principle, and the Inferences from it,
is,

That Persons who have Power, may not impose Unnecessary Things, but give all
the Liberty that may be; this being most pleasing to Jesus Christ, and most for
strengthening the Public Settlement.

That People may join with others in the Worship of God as much as may be, and
not give way to Scruples and Opinions that make them separate needlessly.
Imposing, and Opposing needlessly, ruin us much.

That if People cannot join with others constantly, yet that they will do it
sometimes; both those, that cannot approve what is publicly enjoined; and they
that enjoin those things, or in their places practice them.

That if any cannot do that, yet that they will own those they cannot join with
(if they build on the true Foundation) for true, though distempered Churches of
Christ, and unfeignedly seek their good.

That if they cannot do that, through some strict Notions of a Church they are
possessed with, yet they will own, that many amongst them may be sincere
Christians, and love them as such.

And that all kindness may be showed to all Men, even to all sorts that Err and
are deceived, according to the Will and Command of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
Kingdom shall stand for evermore.

But if God, for Holy ends, shall yet suffer Narrow Foundations, and their
Wicked Consequences, (as he does Plagues and Wars) to continue amongst us, and
in the World, why should we complain? We are Wanton, Humorous, Foolish, and
should be undone, without often and sharp Corrections; and our God has used to
carry on his Kingdom by the Testimony and Sufferings of his People (though he
sometimes gives them rest that they may multiply, Rev. 12.11. Acts 9.31.
) thereby to set forth his Power and Glory. To him we cheerfully submit; yet
endeavoring according to our duty in our places, that Princes and People may
be found in his ways, Isa. 61.11.
and that Righteousness and Praise may spring up among us, and before all
Nations.

Some Passages out of BOOKS that came out since these Papers were drawn up.
THE Pious and Famous Mr. Robert Boil, who loved no Practice that seemed to
lessen the Christian Religion, The Bishop of Sarum's Sermon. at his Funeral.
December. 1691. p. 25. p. 27.
thought pure and disinteressed Christianity, a Bright and Glorious thing:
Hated those Opinions that seemed to him to destroy Morality and Charity; had a
most peculiar Zeal against all Severities and Persecutions upon the account of
Religion; and was observed seldom to speak with more heat and indignation than
when That came in his way.

Union Pursued, Printed, 1691.
in a Letter to Mr. Baxter concerning his late Book about National Churches;
that Presbyterians, and Independants may both be United with the Church of
England; to which is added, a small Tract lately put out, called A Draught for
Accommodation.

Dr. Patrick Bishop of Ely Complains, Sermon. before the Lords, Nov. 26. 1691. on
Deuteronomy. 4.9. p. 12.
that many were kinder to the Papists, than to the Protestant Dissenters; that
the Papists, their sworn Enemies, made them their Tools to destroy each other:
We to repent truly of this, and take heed lest our Affections that seemed to be
disposed to Reconciliation, be again alienated one from another: We ought to
have a greater kindness for Infidels, p. 15.
than many of us had lately one for another. Did we not begin to reflect with
grief upon our Zealous folly? p. 17.
Did we not resolve to be Friends upon some terms or other, and to join
together for our mutual Preservation? And do we now break out again into the
said Outrages? Do our Spirits boil up with anger at the very mention of
Reconciliation? etc.

His Prayers for Charity, Peace, and Unity.

The Prayers Appointed for the Public Fast, in the Year 1692.

The Church of God is Built on Large and Sure Foundations.
THE Blessed God, whose tender Mercies are over all his Works, has a Company
of People in the World, called his Church, which he purchased by the Blood of
his only Begotten Son, Acts 20.28.
and calls by his Word and Spirit to know and serve him, so as to set forth his
Glory here, and obtatin Everlasting Salvation.

This Church, or Congregation of God (for so the Word (...) Signifies) is
called by several Names; as the Kingdom of Christ, the Flock of Christ, the
Body of Christ; and is often called a House, and said to be built upon a
Foundation. Isa. 28.6. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6.
And this House of God being very great, must needs have a great and large
Foundation. Solomon said the House he was to build for God was great, and the
Foundation of it was Great and Costly; how much Greater must the Spiritual
House of God be, which reaches over all the World; Not only through Pontus,
Galatia, Asia, Cappadocia, and Bythinia, which sounds great, but through all
Nations, and Ages. Its Foundation must by no means be narrow, vile, or weak.

Now the Foundation of this House is JESUS CHRIST, and the great Truths
Concerning him, revealed to us by God, in his Word, not Humane Reason, 1 Cor.
3.11. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22.
nor the Traditions of any Men whatsoever; but the Foundation of the Apostles,
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Chief Cornerstone; in whom it
grows up into a Holy Temple, for a Habitation of God through the Spirit.

Yet all things revealed in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are
not the Foundation upon which Christ's House or Congregation is built, (for
many of those things are for the Superstructure and Perfecting of it,) but only
the Great and Main Things concerning Jesus Christ our Savior, which are
necessary to be believed, and practiced by all; and therefore the Churches
Foundation is Large, and sure. This is manifest every way.

First, From the Holy Scriptures; of the Old Testament; how few things were
necessary to be explicitly believed then?

Of the New Testament, when all things were clearly revealed, and settled; only
the Great things were required then. St. Peter said, Thou art Christ the Son of
the Living God; and Christ said, upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc.
And again, thou have the words of Eternal Life; and we believe and are sure
that thou art that Christ, Mat. 16.16.18. Joh. 6.68, 69.
the Son of the Living God.

Christ our Lord, when risen from the Dead, and had opened his Disciples Minds
to understand the Scriptures, ordered them to Teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19, 20.
and to Baptize them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and then
to Teach them to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them, but not
whatsoever they should devise.

Philip tells the Eunuch, if he believed with all his heart, he might be
Baptized; Acts 8.37.
and was satisfied with this Confession of his, I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God.

St. Paul, many years after, writing to the Romans, says, if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, To. 10.9, 10.
and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved; for with the heart Man believes, etc. And tells us what he had
Preached to the Corinthians that they might be Saved, How that Christ died for
our Sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was Buried, 1 Cor. 15.1.4.
and that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures, etc.

St. John says, 1 John 3.23.
This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us Commandment. And thus, Obedience to
the great Commands of Christ, (whether only revealed by him, or also written in
our Hearts) is a necessary part of our Religion, as well as the Belief of his
Great Truths. To love the Lord our God with all our heart -- and our Neighbor
as our selves. For Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to those only that
obey him; Mat. 22.37.39. Hebr. 5.9. 2 Timothy 1.13.
and we are to hold fast the form of sound words in Faith and Love which is in
Christ Jesus.

And thus we find the Apostles practiced. They bore with many that held the
true Foundation, but taught and did amiss; they bore with those at Jerusalem
that were Zealous of the Law. Acts 21. Romans 14.
They reproved those at Rome who despised them that durst not eat all things,
and those who judged them that durst eat all things, but bore with both, and
Exhorted them to do so to one another. And so in other places of the Acts, and
the Epistles, they often reproved and taught Believers better, but never denied
them to be of God's Church; and no wonder, since it pleases God, not presently
to Cure all whom he truly Converts, of their Errors, but usually does it by
degrees.

See Vossius and Usher de Symbolis.
Secondly, The Ancient Practice and Creeds of the Church, teach this: for they
are generally very short, and contain only the main things of our Religion, and
agree in sense though not in the very words. We may see this in Justin Martyr's
Apollogie; in Irenaeus, Grotius on Mat. 28.19.
l. 1. c. 2. and l. 3. c. 4. in Tertullian de velandis Virgin. c. 1. de
Praescriptionibus, c. 13. and contra Praxeam, c. 2. And so for a great while
after; though by degrees they grew larger, yet not much, as we see in most of
them we now use. And the Creed at first, was only in those words at Baptism, In
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, Reason also speaks this fully, that all things which are for the
perfection and well-being of a thing, are not necessary to the Being of it.
This holds true in all Persons and Things, both Natural, and Civil, and must do
so as to the Church of God: All Rooms in the same House are not equally
furnished, or perfect, yet are parts of the House; And why not so with God's
House? Else a great many of his true Churches will be denied to be parts of his
Universal Church; and several Parties will (in their Judgment) cut off one
another from it, which is a heinous Sin, how light soever some may make of it.

Fourthly, The Judgment of Great Men, though differing in many other things,
fully agrees in this, with Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity. I by no means
build on this, yet mention it to remove the strong prejudices that possess
many, and shut out the Truth.

Many Years ago reading Archbishop Laud's Book against Fisher,. 9
I observed diverse good Passages against narrow Foundations; that De no^^s
Eccl. c. 8.
Bellarmin makes the Greeks no Church, and so denies them Salvation; that a
chief means whereby Rome grew to her Greatness, was to blast every Opposer by
the Name of Heretic, or Schismatic; that in things necessary, we have an
absolute certainty in the Scriptures, Creeds, and the Four first General
Councils,. 10.
and in other things not absolutely necessary, if Christians differ, it is no
more than has been in all Ages more or less, and yet may and do preserve one
necessary Faith and Charity entire.. 38.
And again, that there is a Latitude in Fundamentals, (for to whom much is
given, of him much shall be required) as well in Belief, as in Obedience; the
Sum of Obedience being in Mat. 22.37, 39. and of Faith in Hebr. 11: 6. or Act.
4.12; L. 3. de Trinit. ad finem. Instit. l. 4. c. 1.
and Cites Hilary, In facili nobis est Aeternitas, Jesum suscitatum a mortuis
per Deum credere, and Ipsum esse Dominum confiteri.

In this he agrees with Calvin; Sunt quaedam ita cognitu necessaria, ut fixa
esse omnibus oporteat,. 12.
qualia sunt, Unum esse Deum, Christum esse Deum and Dei Filium, in Dei
misericordia salutem nobis consistere; Alia controversa, quae Fidei Unitatem
non dirimunt, etc. Multitudes of Foreign Writers might be alleged, but I choose
rather to keep to our own Country.

Printed before His History of Scotland.
Archbishop Spotswood in his Will briefly summed up the things in the Apostles
Creed, That God is one in 3 Persons, the Father, Creator of all things; the Son
made man in the fullness of time, who by his bitter Death and Passion having
redeemed Mankind from death, ascended into Heaven, from whence he will come to
judge all flesh; and the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, the
Sanctifier of all that believe. That this God has chosen to himself a Church,
the Members whereof living in Communion, though never so dispersed, shall by his
infinite mercy receive remission of all their sins, and being raised in their
Bodies, at the last day, shall receive everlasting life.
and then added; This is the Sum of my Faith: other additaments which Ignorance
and Corruption have superinduced into Christianity, I simply refuse, beseeching
God to Purge his Church, etc. -- And in the simplicity of this Faith, says the
Author, he lived, and died.

Rex arbitratur rerum absolute necessariarum ad salutem non Magnum esse
Numerum; and nullam ad Concordiam breviorem viam fore, quam si diligenter
separentur Necessaria a non Necessariis, and ^t de Necessariis conveniat omnis
opera insumatur. In non Necessariis, libertati Christianae locus detur.
Simpliciter Necessaria Rex uppe^^at, quae vel express Verbum Dei praecipit
credenda faciendare, vel ex Verbo Dei necessaria consequentia Verus Ecclesia
elicuit -- Si haec diffinctio adhiberetur, at Jus Divinum a Positivo seu
Ecclesiastico candide separetur, non videtur de Necessariis longa contentio
futura.
King James, Isaac Casaub. in Epistola ad Card Peron. Regis Jac. nomine scripta.
a much Greater Person, before him, by the Pen of Isaac Casaubon, spoke the
same, that the things absolutely necessary to Salvation are but few.

Mr. Chillingworth a Person of Note (whose Book against Knot was Licensed by
the Professors of Divinity at Oxford) sets that Passage in the Front of it; The
Prot. Relig. a safe way to Salvation; at Oxford, 1638.. 30.. 43.
and in his Epistle to the King, calls it a Blessed Doctrine; and in his
Preface says, All things necessary to Salvation, are evidently contained in
the Scripture; and that there is no Conclusion in the whole Fabric of his
Discourse that is not naturally deducible out of it: And that he that believes
the Scripture sincerely, and endeavors to believe it in the true sense, cannot
possibly be a Heretic; and if no more than this was required of any Man to
make him capable of Christian Communion, then all Men so qualified, though
different in Opinion, be of necessity one in Communion; And Men shall find
this, not only a better, but the only means to suppress Heresy, and restore
Unity. And in his Answer to Knot's Preface,. 12.
that to say, that Christians of different Persuasions and Communions (such as
hold all those things that are simply necessary to Salvation;) may obtain
Pardon for the Errors wherein they die ignorantly, by a general Repentance, is
so far from being a ground of Atheism, as Knot said, that to say the contrary,
is to cross in Diameter a main Article of our Creed, and to overthrow the
Gospel of Christ.

Dr. Stillingfleet having Cited with applause, Irenicum, ann. 1662. Part 1. Chapter
6.. 6.
a large Passage of Mr. Hales concerning Schism, says, The Primitive Church
was very large in their Foundation, and proposed only the main Truths in great
simplicity, and charged not People with loads of Articles, as in latter Ages;
and much less would burden Men with imposing doubtful Practices upon them as a
ground of Church Communion: St. Augustine saying, the Rule of Faith is common
(or fit) both for the Weak, and Strong. And he goes upon this Principle in his
Defense of Archbishop Laud's Book.

Multitudes of places to this effect might be Cited out of Dr. Owen, Mr.
Baxter, and many other of the Non-Conformists; as, would it hurt Kings or Souls
to have all Christians hold their Unity and Communion just on the terms they
did under St. Peter, and St. Paul, etc.

The Nature of Religion in 3 Discourses, put out by Mr. R. Baxter, Anno, 1684.
Our Famous and Judicious Judge Hales, (to add no more) says, Religion is plain
and easy to be known; is best in its Simplicity, and Purity, but is hard to be
kept from Corruption by additions which choke and stifle it: This is done by
the Subtleties of the Schools, by turning Religion into Politic Contrivances
for Wealth and Power, and by Contests about Church Government, and Ceremonies,
so as to lay the weight of Religion on them, etc. To this are added the
Testimonies of Sir Francis Bacon, and of Dr. Isaac Barrow.

Many sayings that pass current amongst all, Attest this; as, in necessariis
Unitas, in Adiaphoris libertas, in Utrisque Charitas, etc. But it is needless to
add more Scriptures, Reasons or Authorities for this.

It Is certain therefore, that all that believe the great necessary Truths, hold
Christ the Head, and obey His Great Commands, are true Members of Christ's
Universal Church, and shall be Saved, though they be Ignorant or Erroneous in
many Useful things: For their Works may be burnt, and they suffer loss, but
they shall be Saved, yet so as by Fire.

And those that would Build the Church of God indeed, and thereby do good to
the World, must keep their Eyes strongly fixed on this large Foundation of it
in Faith and Love; because the Blindness of many (which yet goes under the Name
of Zeal and Knowledge) is such, that instead of it they have laid Narrow and
False Ones; some by adding many things as Necessary, that are not found in
Scripture, or are contrary to it, or but their Nice Disputes of things
mentioned in it; and others by Imposing many Useful Truths as Necessary, and
Excluding all that own them not. And this main Truth may be greatly abused, (as
it has been.) As the Naked Gospel seems to do, while it pretends to enlarge
Charity and explode Imposition.
Some its like may press it, to make the Foundations so large, as to set up a
new Heathenism, and make Christ our Savior in effect needless; or to lay aside
many excellent Truths now owned among us, and privily to bring in damnable
Heresies that overthrow the Foundation. But we are firmly to cleave to it,
because it is a most certain Truth, and of the greatest Consequence, if well
minded, to build up the Church of God. For,

From hence it plainly follows,

First, That if all who Believe and Obey the Necessary Truths of the Gospel,
are Members of the Universal Church of God, then no Particular Churches may
require such Persons to profess and own diverse other Useful Truths, to the end
they may be received into Communion with them. Many believe they may and ought
to propose many Profitable Truths to such as Necessary Conditions of their
Communion with them, and will bring many Plausible reasons for it. But it is
clear by the former Principle, they may not. For if they be true Members of
Christ's Church, though they do not know or own those Truths, why should those
Truths be pressed upon them to make them Members of such a Church or Churches
in Particular? Part 1. Chapter 2. 3.4.5. etc.
Shall they Exclude those that Christ receives? This is Evil and causes great
Divisions. Dr. Stillingfleet in his Defense of Arch Bishop Laud builds much on
this, that only the Truths that are necessary to be believed in order to
Salvation, are necessary to believed as to Church Communion.

Ob. This will dishonor Christ, to take in Erroneous Persons, if they hold and
practice the Essentials of Christianity.

R. No: But it is for the Honor of Christ to be so Compassionate, and extend
his Grace so far as to receive such; and his Churches are made for the curing
of such; and therefore the Pastors of Churches should not be such, though the
People may. If we have not the Errors of such, may we not have sins as
provoking as their Errors? If many besides those that are most Orthodox, have
true Faith and Love, and the Spirit of Christ, why should they not be Received?
In the House of God there is Room for all, of several Persuasions, that have
the Wedding Garment.

Ob. The Apostle says, Gal. 5.2.9.
Behold I say unto you, that if you be Circumcised, Christ shall Profit you
nothing, etc.

R. True: 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Tit. 3.2.
For they added to the Foundation something that destroyed it. Such are to be
Cast out, and all that shall bring in Damnable Heresies: A Heretic after the
first and second Admonition is to be Rejected.

Ob. Our Lord severely threatens Churches for suffering those that taught the
Doctrines of Balaam, Rev. 2.14, 15.20.
and of the Nicolaitans.

R. True: For those were great sins, against the Plain Commands of Christ; and
such Persons were not to be Born, 1 Cor. 5.5.
but be proceeded against by Church Censures, as the Incestuous Corinthian was.

Ob. To what end then serve the Confessions of Faith of our and other Reformed
Churches, in which are many useful Truths, besides those that are absolutely
necessary, if all are not to be kept out of their Churches that will not own
them?

R. They are useful to show the Truth those Churches have attained to, Tim.
4.6.7. Heb. 5.12. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 12. Acts 20.27. Mat. 28.20.
and which they are to promote. For it is plain, we must go on to Perfection,
and not be always Babes; yet Babes and imperfect ones are not to be kept out.

We are not to stay only on the Foundation, but must Build Gold and Precious
Stones upon it, and make known all the Council of God, and teach the Baptized
all that Christ has Commanded. But we must not imagine these Confessions were
made, that all who are Ignorant, or differ in any thing from them, should be
kept from Communion with them; for there are several degrees of knowledge, and
of means to get it. They that have more are to own it, and they that have less,
are not to be rejected as cut off from Christ. Where God gives much, he
requires much; and where little, he requires but little.

Our Practice confirms this; for the Articles of the Church of England are not
required to be Subscribed unto by Private Christians, but only by the Minsters
who are to teach others, and ought to have more knowledge than they. And some
say, that they Subscribe them not as Articles of Faith, but of Communion, (that
is, they will hold Communion with those that hold them) which seems scarce
tolerable in Ministers, tho it may be enough in private Persons that Subscribe
them not. Against Fisher. 14.
And Arch Bishop Laud says, our 39 Articles are not declared to be
Fundamental, but only not Erroneous or Superstitious; nor imposed under Pain
of Damnation, but for a peaceable Consent. And whereas the fifth Cannon
Excommunicates all that hold them in any part to be Erroneous or Superstitious,
its to be understood of those only that affirm it boldly and publicly, and not
of those that hold it privately.

Secondly, That no Churches may impose Ceremonies and Unnecessary Things upon
such, that they may be received into Communion with them: For if any useful
Truths Revealed by God, may not be imposed on those that hold the necessary
Fundamental Truths, to the end they may be admitted into Communion with them;
much less, may Ceremonies and Things invented by men, and not appointed by God,
(especially when they are suspected or judged unlawful by many) be imposed on
them for that end. This is plainly unlawful, and is the Cause of abundance of
Divisions and Offenses.

If any say, the Rulers of the Congregation, (or Church, as we use to speak)
may appoint diverse things never appointed by God, Thorndike of Relig. Assem.
chapter 9. p. 212. and many with him.
if indifferent and not sinful in themselves, and require them to be owned and
practiced by all that shall be suffered in their Communion; and that they that
oppose such things resolutely, are not to be born with but opposed, because
such are Enemies to Public Order; that it is not lawful to Dispense with
Public Order for their sake that are Weak, for so there will never be any
Order.

It Is clear by what is laid down, they may not; and that these, and all other
pretenses are Vain. For if Persons holding all necessary Truth, Romans 14. clear
for this. Daven. on Col. 2.20. The Naked Truth, etc.
may and ought to be received without owning many useful Truths revealed by
God, then they that hold all necessary Truths, and many other useful Truths
too, ought to be received without owning or practicing such things as were
never appointed by God, and they judge (though perhaps Erroniously) to be
sinful, or at least very doubtful and Inconvenient: For if many of Gods useful
Truths are not to be pressed as Conditions of their Communion; much less may
Ceremonies and needless Laws of weak (if not worldly) men, be pressed as
necessary to it.

Mr. Chillingworth is clear in this; and it is a wonder Arch Bishop Laud, and
King James before him, were not so, but acted quite against this Principle
which they highly owned K. Cha. at last saw this, Anno 1642. Answ. to the 19
Propos. would have tender Consciences exempt from such Ceremonies at are judged
by some sober men to be indifferent, and by others absolutely unlawful.
It Is related in the Life of Mornay du Plessis, that in the Year 1591. he
Discoursed with an English Bishop, how ill it was for them in England to
Silence and Punish Ministers for not using the Ceremonies; and that in the Year
1608. he wrote to the Lord Carew our Ambassador, to excite King James to
procure an Union of all the Protestant Churches; and said, the King stood too
much upon petty differences among his own Subjects, and pressing the Ceremonies
upon them. And in the Year 1615. du Moulin was sent to the King about means to
Unite all the Reformed Churches.

But our great sin and misery is, that many who are for a great largeness as to
useful things taught by Christ, are for great strictness as to Ceremonies and
things taught only by Men. A Notorious Practice against this plain Truth. Some,
possibly, are too strict in pressing the necessity of many useful things taught
by God, as Conditions of Communion, but large as to things indifferent
prescribed only by Men. This is a far less Fault. But the God of Mercy, though
we press after all Truth, make us large and wise in both! and to Practice this,
which has been owned by many, but observed by few.

Thirdly, Hence it follows, that the true Unity of the Church lies not in
Uniformity, as many through Custom or Interest strongly imagine.

For the true Unity of Christians lies in their Hearts and Souls; (the
multitude of the Believers were of one Heart and Soul) and all that believe and
obey the Great things of Christ, Acts 4.32.
are truly United to him, and to each other, though they differ in useful things
taught by Christ, and much more if in unnecessary things imposed only by Men:
And the Apostles pressed not Uniformity in outward Rites, but this inward
Unity; one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all,
who is above all; Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. John 17.21.
and through all, and in you all. And Christ our Lord, whose Prayers were
always heard, prayed that his Followers might be one; which was never granted,
if their Oneness lie in outward Uniformity.

'Twere well, if only some Fops said, there can be no Unity without Uniformity
in lesser Things: Many Great and Worthy Persons stick too much in that Conceit,
notwithstanding the Clear Demonstration to the contrary. But Unity in them is
none of the Fundamentals, nor has Christ laid our Unity on them, which are so
many that Men would never agree in them.

Besides, many Churches that had true Unity, had diverse Forms of outward
Administrations; and so may have yet; Socr. l. 5. c. 2^. Soz. l. 7. c. 29.
Spond. anno 633. n. 10.
and Uniformity in Worship was but late brought in. In Spain not 'till the year
633, in the Fourth Council of Toledo, and in many Kingdoms to this day, and
among the Romanists themselves, there are varieties of Rites and Customs, though
they agree in the main; and diverse Orders of their Religious, to whom People of
all sorts resort, are exempted from the Bishops.

Further, People may have great Uniformity, and no Unity. They may sit together
in the same Church, say the same words, and use the same gestures, and yet have
their hearts full of Malice, and Enmity; and usually the bitterest Enemies of
true Religion and Godliness, are most earnest for a Unity in needless
Ceremonies, and formalities.

It sticks much with many, that there can be no Decency or Order without
Uniformity in Ceremonies; 1 Cor. 14.33.40.
and that those who obey them not, are Contentious, and go against the Custom
of the Churches of God. But this cannot prevail against a clear Demonstration.
It Is certain, all things must be done Decently, and in Order. Nature teaches
this, though St. Paul had not mentioned it. But cannot things be so done, without
a great many needless Commands of Men? Cannot Baptism be decently and in order
Administered without the sign of the Cross, or the Lord's Supper without
Kneeling, or a Surplice. What if some will stand with their faces toward the
East, some otherwise, and most with their Eyes toward the Minister that
Officiates, Luke 4.20.
as Nature seems to teach? All sorts are for Order and Decency, and Believe God
is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace. But it is said, they that obey not
such Orders are Contentious, and go against the Custom of the Churches of God.
1 Cor. 11.5.13.16.
Not so, but they that needlessly impose them are Contentious, and go against
the Custom of the Apostle, and the best Churches that imposed no such things.
And the Custom there mentioned, for Women to have their Faces (not their Heads
only) covered, was a laudable thing in the Judgment of all; and the contrary to
it, seemed then to be even against Nature, as well as against the Mind of the
Apostle; Tertul. de veland. virginibus. c. 17.
quae si fuerit in pectore, cognoscetur and in capite faeminarum. And if any of
the things pressed now by some, were of that Nature, they would be very
Contentious that would not obey them.

And therefore all true Protestants at home and abroad (for to be sure they
hold the Fundamentals) are one, and have a true Unity, though otherwise they
differ in many things, and (to their shame) quarrel too. Which is a wondrous
Comfort to all good Men, that bewail these Contentions, and labor to have them
more United.

Fourthly, It follows hence plainly, that none may endeavor by Craft or Force,
to Root out and Destroy those that Build on the large and true Foundation, if
they err in useful Truths, or will not join with them in the solemn Worship of
God, or at least not constantly, but only some times. And they sin yet more,
that set themselves chiefly to destroy those, that seem most seriously to Build
on the true Foundation of Faith and Holiness. For if such be true Christians,
and Members of Christ's Universal Church, and ought to be Cherished and Received
into Particular Churches, without having other useful Truths, much less
unnecessary things, imposed on them; then for certain they may not be destroyed
by Vexations, Fines, Imprisonments, Dragoonings, or Death. Those that are true
Christians by Profession, much more if in reality, though they Err, are to be
cherished by Particular Churches, and not to be so used. Especially, when our
Holy Religion is not to be Propagated by Force or Violence; nor even Heretics
and Schismatics, as many hold, are to be proceeded against in that manner, but
only by Spiritual Censures and Weapons.

Fifthly, It follows hence, That this and other Nations cannot be happy, unless
we Build on larger Foundations than we have done; and more than most of the
Lutherans or Calvinists, and others of the Reformation have hitherto done.

The Misery of these parts of the World formerly, and to this day, comes in a
great measure by going against this plain Truth. All generally run upon this,
that there can be no Union or Quiet, unless we agree almost in all useful
Truths taught by Christ, nay and in all things too appointed only by Men; And
the hands of many who have Eminently owned this great Truth, have been chief in
this Trespass; as King James, Arch Bishop Laud, and others.

The Romanists have mightily darkened and opposed this great Truth, and few of
us are yet thoroughly freed from those Principles wherewith they have long
corrupted the World. And Dr. Henry Moore spoke not much amiss, (though he was
sharply Censured for it by Dr. Beaumont) when he said, His Apollogy added to
his Mystery of Iniquity, 1664.
our Church is not quite emerged out of the general Apostasy; and that the
Reformers having separated from the great Babylon have Built less and more
tolerable ones, but not to be tolerated for ever. And it will be the glorious
Work of great Princes, to cause the Public Constitutions about Religion in
their Dominions, to be large and good; and such, as a great Part of the Holiest
and best Christians may not be Excluded and Trampled upon, but taken in and
Encouraged.

But because all lies not on those that have Power to impose, but much also
upon Private Christians;

Sixthly, Hence also it follows plainly, That Persons and Churches that are
better than others, are to own others if Built on the true Foundation, for true
Christians and Churches; and those that are worse than others are to own those
for true Christians and Churches that are better than they, and to love them as
such. Some perhaps will say, yes, if they be in different Kingdoms, but not if
they be in the same. But why not, though in the same Kingdom? Who made the
distinction?

Seventhly, That Persons and Churches Built upon the large and true Foundation
of Faith and Love, are to strive to hold Communion one with another; The
stronger and better, with those that are weaker, and the weaker with those that
are better. It Is a great Error to think we may separate for every cause, as
the Jews did in their Divorces; and that there is no true way of Reforming but
by Separateing: Therefore they do ill, that will not Communicate with Churches
where they lawfully may, at least sometimes; and they do yet worse, that will
hold no Communion with the best Churches, where the best Doctrine, Worship, and
Spiritual helps for Souls are.

Eighthly, That Persons, and Churches that own others for true Churches, may be
obliged not to hold Communion with them in the Public Worship of God, at least
not constantly. Not at all, because such Churches may practice things that are
unlawful, and make them the Conditions of their Communion; or Persons may think
such things unlawful which are not; and while their Error continues, they
cannot join with them, without going against their Conscience.

Not constantly, because such Churches may use many needless, inconvenient, and
suspicious things, though they that dissent will not say they are absolutely
unlawful; or may stick in their weaker beginnings, or go backward, and deny
them the use of those Spiritual means which Christ has given for the promoting
their Salvation.

Ninthly, That there may be true Christian Love between those who do not hold
Public Communion with one another; because they may both be built on the true
Foundation of Faith, and Love. And it is a fond imagination, (to which yet many
are too subject) to think, that those that will not join with them, cannot love
them; or that we must needs want love to those we cannot join with. To think
so, is a great mistake, See Dr. Owen of Evangelical Love.
disowned by all Sober Persons, and a cursed Root of bitterness, and I fear
defiles many. It Is a sad thing to see this in so many, and is a sign that most
build their Religion more upon lesser things, wherein the Life of it lies not,
than on those main things wherein it lies.

If any say, this will cast out Discipline, and many choice Truths of Christ,
and introduce Erroneous Rotten Doctrines. I say it will not; for though People
that are weak and disordered, may be true Christians, and Churches, it hinders
not but that others may and ought to seek after Discipline, and Truth, and grow
in the ways of God. And they do ill, whoever they are, that shall hinder this.
And a great part of the Evil and Misery of the World lies here.

To clear these Things yet more fully.

If the Church of God be built upon such a large Foundation, it plainly follows,

First, That they Err greatly, that make every useful Truth to be a Fundamental
one, and they much more, that make their Great Errors to be of the Foundation
on which the Church is built. The Romanists do so by their Creed of the Council
of Trent, affirming none can be Saved that own it not. And they also, that set
up Opinions of their own to be Fundamental; as those do, that hold Diocesan
Episcopacy, and Ordination by it, so necessary, that there can be no true
Church, nor Sacraments, nor Salvation (in an ordinary way) without it; and
whoever else among us, that make any of their Opinions so absolutely necessary.

Secondly, They Err greatly, that hold all great Errors to be Damnable
Heresies; and all sinful Divisions to be Damnable Schisms.

Thirdly, They Err greatly, that say People are Baptized into a Particular
Church, or Party; and that therefore they forsake their Baptism, if at any time
they cease to Worship God with that Church, or join with any other. For we are
all Baptized into the Faith of Christ, admitted into the Universal Church
that is built, on this large Foundation, and by one Spirit Baptized into one
Body. 1 Cor. 12.13.
But are there any that say so? I wish there were not.

Fourthly, From hence it follows, that it is a Great Sin to confine the Church
of God to any one Party of Christians whatsoever, and cast off others from
belonging to it. Many are much inclined to impropriate Christ to their Party,
Mead on Ezekiel. 37. v. 19.
as it is said the Donatists of old did; but we must not Unsaint the whole World
to Consecrate our own way; and they Err greatly, that set up particular
Churches in opposition to others, and so as to disown other particular Churches
that are true parts of the Universal. Many are apt to destroy God's Invisible
Church by their Disputes about the Visible, which was appointed for the good of
it, and to destroy many particular Visible Churches by their strange Notions of
Particular or National Churches.

Fifthly, that those of the Church of England that will never join in Worship
with the Dissenters on the one hand, and those Dissenters on the other hand,
that will never join with them, act against the plain light of this great
Truth: And thus, many that differ most in other things, agree in this Dividing
Principle, and are great hinderers of the Peace and Edification of the Church
amongst us. The Non-Conformists are accused that they persuade People not to go
to the Public Churches. This is very untrue of most of them. But it is most
certain, that abundance of the Conformists make it their work to dissuade
People from going to hear the Non-Conformists, though unblameable in their Life
and Doctrine, and followers of Peace with them. They do it publicly with much
vehemence in their Sermons, and privately in their Discourses. Some of them
say, if any do, they renounce their Baptismal Covenant; some on their
Deathbed, have solemnly engaged some of their Relations never to hear any of
the Dissenters; and some of them have Preached in great Auditories, that a
Heathen may be Saved, but that a Nonconformist cannot; not to mention other
things. And who then are the People that seek for Peace, and who violently
oppose it?

Sixthly, Hence it follows not, That, If we may join with a Church sometimes,
we are bound to do so always. Many build much upon this, and that People sin
greatly if they do not. But this is a great Mistake. For it follows not, that
what we may do sometimes, we must do always; for in many cases we do things
sometimes, for several Reasons, which we will not, may not do always. Hundreds
of Instances might be given, and strong Reasons too. By this Rule, we should be
bound constantly to Communicate with the worst Churches, that we think we may
Communicate with sometimes, but if we could sometimes Communicate with the
Greek Churches in their way, would we always do it if we could do otherwise? Or
with the Lutherans, would we always do it? Or if the Lutherans could join with
us, (as the Synod at Charenton in France permitted them to do) would they do it
always? Or if the Nonconformists can join sometimes with Churches where there
are corrupt and unprofitable Ministers, scandalous and malicious People, diverse
bad impositions, and an exclusion of some things that Christ has given for the
Churches benefit, must they do so always? Besides, this would tempt the
Nonconformists wholly to leave the Conformists Churches; for the Conformists
argue thus. All Churches that may be sometimes Communicated with, ought always
to be Communicated with: But the Conformists Churches (say the Dissenters) may
sometimes be Communicated with, therefore they ought always be Communicated
with. But the N. C. hereupon will argue thus: Those Churches we may not always
Communicate with, we may never Communicate with; (so say the Conformists.) But
the Conformists Churches may not always be Communicated with, (say the N. C.)
Therefore they ought never be Communicated with.

And this Arguing will be stronger with the N. C. than the other, because they
are more strongly persuaded they ought not always to join with the Conformists,
than that they ought to join with them sometimes. But this Principle is deeply
laid in the hearts of many N. C.; Reformation, but not Separation; and they
say, though they cannot Conform, they must Preach, and strive to save Souls, and
in their places to reform what is amiss, though they say the Conformists Churches
are not unlawful to be Communicated with. They own them as true Churches, and
would help on the work of God that is done in them, and believe the Conformists
also should own them, and be glad of their assistance.

7. Seventhly, That Wickedness in Heart and Life against Christ's Commands,
destroys the Church, as well as Errors against his Truths. For a profession of
Obedience to Christ is as necessary, as a profession of his Truth; and a
sincere Obedience is as necessary to make one a true living Christian, as an
unfeigned belief of the Truth: It Is wickedness that tears the Church of God
amongst us, and abroad, more than any thing; and Love (which includes Holiness)
Unites it most, and builds it up. 1 Cor. 13.
It Is not so much difference in Judgment that causes our Divisions, as the
wickedness and hatred of the Power of Godliness, and those that own it, though of
the same way with them; and it is wickedness that chiefly leads People into bad
Opinions. They therefore go against the Foundation of the Church that neglect
it, and countenance the debauched World, Mr. Baxter's Book of Cain and Abel.
or the formal dead World, and those that hate God. The great Enmity lies here,
between the Godly, and the Wicked, the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the
Serpent; and they do not build up, but pull down the Church, that take part
with these. Luke 12.
Our Lord came to send Fire on the Earth; not Peace, but a Sword: And whence is
this, but from the wickedness of Men that Fights against him?

8. Eighthly, That Persons may be true Christians, though they Err, and go much
against this main Truth. Yet he that hates his Brother is a Murderer, and no
Murderer has everlasting life abiding in him. 1 John 3.15.


Though they be Ignorant, or Err in diverse useful Truths, and be Zealous for
their Errors.

Though they Practice diverse things in their Lives, and in the Worship of God,
which they ought not.

Though they impose their Errors and Practices on others, as necessary to
Communion with them.

Though they Vex, Fine, Imprison, Banish, and use Cruelties against those that
differ from them.

Though they say, those that join not with them are no true Churches, nor can be
Saved.

And much more those, that own others for true Christians, and Churches, and
Persecute them not, though they dare not hold Communion with them, when they
might, and ought.

For many of these, though they sin, and many of them very greatly, may not be in
a state of Damnation; for they may do such things ignorantly, through Custom,
Weakness, or Temptation; and may have in their Hearts true Faith in Jesus
Christ, and Love to him, and his Saints, and be saved by a General Repentance.
The Lutherans generally will not join with the Calvinists; nor our Conformists
with the sober Dissenters; nor the Anabaptists with either; and who dare say
that all of those are in a state of Damnation? Thus we see what need all sorts
of Christians have of this Charitable but true Principle; and they especially,
that are so forward to impose upon others, and exclaim against them, and Fine,
Trouble, and Punish them too. But though some of these may be Saved, it highly
concerns such to look well to themselves, that they be of that number; and not
like those Jews of old, that strove to make the Scriptures serve their Gain and
Ambition, Grotius on Mat. 21.38.
thereby killing the Heir, that they might be Great, and Rule the People.

9. Ninthly, Hence it plainly follows, that this is the only true way to build
up the Church of God. Not for People to Conform to all things in the places
where they shall live; nor to require all to agree to all things taught by
Christ, or invented by Men, and root out all that comply not; nor to make forms
of Agreement in such words, as several Parties keeping their Opinions may agree
in, as Melancthon, Bucer, and others in the beginning of the Reformation did;
but plainly to lay down the great Things of the Gospel wherein we agree,
omitting other things wherein we differ; and bearing with each other, and
mutually loving and assisting each other. These Large and Sure Foundations will
certainly lead us to this, and all that can be said against it, is but the
effect of Prejudice, or Interest.

The Lutherans and Calvinists by this means might have United, and a miserable
Breach have been prevented. It Is not so small a thing we aim at, as an Union
between the Presbyterians, and Congregational, (for wherein almost do they
differ?) Nor only with the Godly Episcopal Men at home, but with all every
where that build on the true Foundation, and hold nothing that overthrows it;
as gross Idolatry, and damnable Heresies do. To approve what is good in all,
and to cleave to what we judge best. To Communicate with others, at least
sometimes; and if we cannot do that, yet to love them as the Servants of
Christ, and seek their good.

What mischiefs have been in the Christian World for want of this? Of old, to
pass by many others.

Victor Bishop of Rome, who Excommunicated the Churches of Asia for not keeping
Easter on the Lord's Day.

Stephen Bishop of Rome, who Condemned Cyprian and his Followers, for
re-baptizing those that had been Baptized by Schismatics.

Saxon Christians in England, who so opposed the Scotch who kept not Easter
after the Roman way, that they would not receive Consecration from them, nor
the Eucharist, nor give it to them; nay, and questioned the Baptism Administered
by them.

Latin and Greek Churches separated about Fasting on Saturdays, eating Blood,
Unleavened Bread in the Eucharist, etc. Their Quarrel increased under Photius,
upon the Nice Dispute of the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and
the Son, and not only by the Son; though the Superiority of the Bishop of Rome
over the Bishop of C. P. was in the bottom.

Leo IX Excommunicated the Greeks, and Humbert wrote against them. And the
Latins when they took CP. Imprisoned, and cruelly used the Greek Priests, for
not using the Roman Ceremonies; and the Greeks abhorred them, scraped the Altars
where they had said Mass, etc. An Union was made at the second Council at
Lions, but the Greeks so opposed it at CP. that Michael Palaeologus the Emperor
who procured it, was so hated, that when he died, he was not suffered to be
publicly Buried.

Florence; but Marcus Ephesius, and Geo: Scholarius opposed it, and it came to
nothing.

Roman Church is yet grown higher, enjoins the Council of Trent, and the Creed
of it, and Damns all that own it not.

'Twere well if by these Miscarriages, Protestants both here, and abroad, had
^nt^^^ more Wisdom, and had avoided those Contests that have been among them.
God grant we may be Wiser for the future.

10. Tenthly, This must needs be most agreeable to Princes and Rulers that
unfeignedly endeavor to Promote the Kingdom of God.

Not to say there is a Moral impossibility of Peace in a State, without a strict
Uniformity in the Church.

Not to force Men to the same Opinion, and Practice in all things, and to vex
and destroy all that differ from them, whether upon right or mistaken grounds.
This Course has been long taken by most, and will not do; and no wonder, for
it is not of God; not according to the clear Truth laid down in Scripture by our
Great Teacher sent by God, nor according to the Rules of true Wisdom. For what
Wise and Great Prince would be at the head of a Party only, and tempt all
others to hate him? What great Things can he propose to do in the World, or
have any hope to effect? Whereas the other way is of God, speaks Universal
Goodness, and can be grievous to none, but to blind Superstitious People; and
to such Mean and Wicked Persons, whose United Carnal Interests lead them to
Sacrifice the welfare of the World to their particular Lusts, which at length
often ends in their own ruin. But when God shall arise to do good to the World,
(which we hope he will, though we deserve it not) he will raise up Heroic
Princes, and enable them to break the Yoaks of Superstitious and Designing Men,
and promote Truth and Love; who shall Cherish the Good, Protect the Peaceable,
People of all sorts from their Mistakes by all fair means, and tread down none
but those that Fight against these things.

And it is evident, that Statesmen oft-times have Larger and Righter Thoughts,
than many that pore on Books, and refine upon Religion; and often prove like the
Princes that delivered good Jeremiah from the hands of those Priests and
Prophets that would have destroyed him for speaking the Truth, which God sent
him to do. Jer. 26.10.16.


This main Principle, and the Plain Consequences from it, may be displeasing to
diverse; but it is a Great Truth of God, and will prevail in his due time.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 28. after Holy Scriptures add a Colon: p. 2. l. 14. after Gods
Church add a Colon: l. 49. for chose, read choose. p. 4. l. 8. to such as
necessary, add a Comma at such, p. 5. l. 10. for any useful, read many useful.
l. 39. for Muolin, r. Moulin. p. 6. l. 6. after themselves, add a Comma. p. 7.
l. 12. for others ore, r. others, are.


