A Vindication of every Free-mans liberty; against all Arbitrary power and
Government. OR, A Letter of WILLIAM LARNER Prisoner, to Sir HENRY VANE junior,
a Parliament man: Wherein is set forth his unjust Imprisonment, and cruel hard
dealings toward the said William Larner.
HONORED SIR,
IT is not unknown unto you, my suffering condition, being in some measure set
forth unto you, in my Letter of the 3d. of April last past, which I sent you
then: I expected according to your undertaking and promise, you would have done
somewhat whereby I might either have been freed from these my bands, or
otherwise brought to trial, according to Law, and not thus to have suffered me
to languish in prison, as many more do. The House of Commons have declared,
that they will not exercise any Arbitrary power, or suffer it to be done by any
other, but according to the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, Justice and
right to be done to every man without respect of persons: Besides, you have
bound your selves by Oath unto, and by a Law confirmed the Great Charter of
Liberties, for the preservation whereof we have adventured all, in assisting
you against the oppugners thereof.

But now contrary to your Oaths, Protestations, Laws and Statutes of this
Kingdom, am I still detained in prison, to the ruining and utter undoing of my
wife and family, all means of subsistence and livelihood being taken from us,
yet you seem regardlesse of it, as if it were a matter that concerned you
nothing. Sir, I pray you to consider, that if the oppressions and several
grievances of men in particular be not redressed what avails your general
Laws? If you that are Members of the House, refuse to present our grievance and
just complaints, to the House, what hopes can we have to receive any comfort or
relief there, whatsoever good that Honorable House intends us? So as indeed
you that neglect or refuse to open your mouths (being bound by Oath and the
duty of your place thereunto for us) in presenting our Petitions, conditions
and sufferings, to that Honorable House, may you not be truly said to be such
as are the betrayers of our Liberties, covertly doing more disservice to the
Parliament and State, then the Enemy that openly fights against them: The
Enemy discovers themselves (by oppugning the Laws and our liberties) what they
be; but you whilst you retard the delivering up of our complaints, thinking
the fault to be in the House, causes us to conceive hard thoughts against them,
brings us into a dislike of their government, and thus you do the work of the
Enemy; and by thus neglecting us, do the Parliament more harm, and in time (if
not provided for) will prove more dangerous then all the machinations and
attempts of the adversary: For, the people begin already to look upon you, as
men carrying on your own designs and peculiar and private interests, under the
Veil of public pretenses, and that your care is how to get great Offices and
places for your selves and your friends, and while you suffer us the Commons to
be spoiled of all, to lie in Prisons, and undergo all miseries, wants and
extremities, you be nothing troubled thereat, so long as your selves fare well;
this is utterly a fault in many of you, of no little blemish and shame for you,
and cannot be imputed to be little less then mere madness, in thus
exasperating our spirits, and alienating our affections from you, and yet to
stand upon so high terms with the contrary party.

Till you by actions manifest, as by your words you have declared to the world,
to be the men you profess and would seem to be, I and others shall doubt that
you intend nothing less then our good, or peace. For hitherto you have sworn
and protested, but all as yet in vain: For these our Bonds and Imprisonments
show them to be (hitherto) emptiness and Wind; and if this be continued,
these courses will make the people hate you, and as you have been regardlesse
of their burdens and complaints, so (I fear) when you shall expect and most
need their help, they will dissert you.

Sir, are we a freeborn people, or are we born slaves? What I pray you, makes
you to differ? who brought you into that House? whether your own greatness and
power, or the peoples love and Election? If by the people, how comes it then to
pass, that their grievances and complaints be so little minded, and themselves
so contemptible in your eyes? (as if mere slaves:) Beware, lest losing and
neglecting them, you lose not your selves: Excuse my plainness and freedom;
for if I hold my peace, I see destruction; by putting my self forth this way, I
may happily save you and my self, in awaking you out of this drowsinesse,
carelessness (of our common liberty) with which you are so deeply overtaken.

You see in what condition you have brought us, even into a condition worse
then slavery, yea, worse then death; for in death sorrow is not remembered;
bread is provided for the slave, but we your prisoners (laden with sorrow,
broken with affliction) mewed up in your prison houses, oftentimes wish for
death and cannot find it, nor any bread you provide for us, hunger-starved
men, and we pine in prisons, not pitied, not lamented.

Sir, if I have offended, if I have transgressed any known law, I then crave
the benefit of the Law, the liberty of a Freeman; that, either according to
the same I may be tried for my justification or condemnation, or otherwise;
that I may be holden no longer from my charge and For if I provide not for my
family, I am worse then an infidel: but woe be to them that are the cause's
thereof.
calling, in this my tormenting Prison.

You have confirmed Magna Charta, and many other good Laws since made in
favor of our Liberties, and yet unrepealed; which if they were duly put in
execution, I then should not doubt but to come forth out of prison, to the
confusion of the faces of such as prosecutes, and maliciously informs against
me: In the beginning of this Parliament you brought us out of Prisons, approved
our standings and sufferings against the Exorbitant and Arbitrary power and
Government of the Starcham-chamber, Council Table, and high Commission Court.
These your encouragements made us bold, did you find us ungrateful? We are the
same men still, we have the same affections to you, and if by you we may
receive one Ordinance, viz. The Ordinance of Justice, then assure your selves,
we to our abilities will not be wanting to you, but will be ever ready to spend
and be spent for you: Thus hoping you will at length answer the expectation of
a Freeman of England wrongfully imprisoned, and no longer add to the sins of
the Prelates, to the increasing of wrath, by imprisoning and unjustly
tormenting, just and free persons. In expectation whereof, Sir I am, and will
remain

Yours in all due respects to his power: WILL: LARNER.
From the Prison in Maiden-lane this 3. of June, 1646.
To the Right honorable, the LORDS assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of Hellen Larner, in the behalf of her husband William
Larner, and their two servants, John Larner, and Jane Hale.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners husband, has now stood committed more then 8. Weeks,
and their servants in the Fleet four Weeks, upon a false suggestion of Hunscors
(the Stationers Beadle) a malicious adversary of your poor petitioners husband.

Your Petitioner most humbly beseeches your Honors, to commiserate our
deplorable condition, whose means of livelihood, depends solely upon their
calling and liberty, and therefore according to your noble clemency, to be
pleased to assign unto them, their liberty out of Goal, free of all prison
fees:

And your Petitioner as bound, shall pray, etc. WILLIAM LARNER.


