The true Effigies of Thomas Larkham Minister of the Gospel at Tavistock in
Devon. L. Cross sculpsit


THE Wedding-Supper: AS It was handled out of the fourteen first verses of the
22. chapter of Matthew, in sundry Exercises in Tavistock in Devon.

WHEREIN The Offer of Salvation, both to Jews and Gentiles, is Noted: and
diverse plain and pithy Doctrines Observed, and Applied.

BEING, The effect of twelve SERMONS Preached by Thomas Larkham, the oppressed
Pastor of the despised Church of Christ there.

Isa 53.1. Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? London Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at his shop at
the black spread Eagle, near the West end of Paul's. 1652.

TO THE Supreme Power, next and immediately under GOD, and his Son Christ Jesus,
within the Dominions of England, Ireland and Scotland, and the adjacent Isles;
The PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England.
Grave Senators,
IT may seem, not only an indiscreet, but a presumptious (yea unsufferable)
Act, in one so mean as I am, to press with so plain a piece into your most
honorable presence. And indeed it would be nothing less, were it not that all
other ways of finding relief for my self and a poor oppressed Congregation of
professed Christians, who have chosen me to be their Minister, were hedged up.
I do not presume to come before you out of any absurd trust or vain confidence
that I shall find favor; neither can fear of displeasing keep me off (for
that in either I should have dishonorable thoughts of that dreadful Tribunal;
which all that are lovers of God, their Country, and true Religion, will make a
conscience of entertaining but in expectance and hope to find Justice, as it
is meet I and every one else should at your hands; so it is (may it please your
honors) that for preaching of these Sermons (which here I humbly present to
your view) I was judged unworthy to be continued in the employment of
Gospel-preaching by such as are mine and the Truths, yea most of them the
States enemies. And thereupon a great part of my livelihood was (and is yet)
detained, though settled in a regular way upon certain Trustees to my use (as
being the Lawful preaching Minister of Tavistock in Devon) out of a Sheaf or
Rectory near adjoining; taken in 15 years value at 90. l. per annum: 1350 l.
being deducted in lieu of the said Parsonage out of the fine which the
Gentleman was set at in his Composition for Delinquency, who formerly was
seized in Fee-simple therein.

Whereupon receiving (as I apprehended it) a Call from God, to be employed in
my Function elsewhere, I obeyed it; and departed from the aforesaid Town of
Tavistock, with a purpose to return thither no more to dwell among them.

But receiving Letters from the godly party, from time to time, in which there
seemed to be a strong continued Call that I must return: I began to consider
what was best to be done, whether to prefer my profit and ease before suffering
affliction with the People of God (as I had cause to fear I did) or to trust
God, of whose owning of me (with humility be it written) I had so many, so
great experiences: And at last I resolved to advise with Godly, learned and
judicious Ministers, which thing I also did, and found them all to agree (upon
view of the Letters sent me) that I must return. One said, Mr. H.P.
that I could not part with the Godly party at Tavistock; and that he believed
others would be of his mind when they did view the Call. Another, Mr. L.S.
that I would go off lame, and not recover while I did return. And so a third
likewise; adding that my Case was his, and he must return to -- whence for want
of maintenance he had departed. Here God enabled me to deny my self, and I
wrote from London news of my resolution to come among them. Mr. I.B.
But as soon as that news came to the ears of the adverse party, it cannot be
imagined with what wrath of pride they run together. I will set down an extract
of a Letter. -- For since we heard that happy news of your coming, the Enemies
do most furiously ^age, and have acted together (as we hear) to send a Letter
to the Earl of Bedford, that at no hand he shall present you, etc.

Now that I may sum up all in a few lines; This is the case; I was chosen by
the Inhabitants of Tavistock (My Lord of Bedford having promised to present and
pay him whom they would choose.) Their choice under many score hands,
accompanied with attestations of the neighboring Ministers, procured a legal
presentation to the incumbency, without my stirring at all in the business,
(indeed (to say truth) I had not freedom of spirit to do) I continued Preaching
Minister quietly some time, and might still, had not my judgment concerning
Discipline made me liable to dislike and Obloquy.

But now, they that were otherwise judgemented, and profane ones, gnash their
teeth to see Christ's Ordinances on foot in public, and themselves laid by as
Reprobate Silver; and begin to quarrel at my preaching, and to join shoulder
to shoulder against the new Church (as they were pleased to call us that
labored to serve God in the spirit, according to his word) and would have
another to be their Minister that would, (according to Custom,) carry on (as
they call it) Gods good service; Hereupon the Rascal Multitude are encouraged
to abuse the Godly Party. Such as were Officers, Troopers, and Foot-Souldiers
in the late Kings Army, are thought fitter to be chosen Officers for the
Parish, then men that have lain in prison or by the hedges in cold nights, and
have been Plundered for their fidelity to the Parliament by their own wicked
Neighbors; while the ringleader of this present adverse Party was in the Kings
Quarters in Cornwall; Who now stands up like a Champion, and with big words
thinks to trample down Gods People whom he (in a Letter written to one of them)
called the Rigid Faction.

I Humbly crave leave in the heat of a Christian, and fidelity of a Commoner of
England, to write, and I will write no more then I can prove (for I know whom
I appeal unto) that the differences at Tavistock are no other but between
Christ and Belial; The Common Wealth of England and Royalty; worshipping of God
according to rule, and Superstitious customary formality, whatever men pretend
to the contrary.

Now because these ensuing Sermons are so cried down for unsufferable railing
with which they are stufft by report of the Enemy; I have faithfully
transcribed them and (with the help of such as wrote in short hand) brought
them to that pass that now they appear in: Being verily persuaded that not one
harsh expression (which might be more excepted against then another) is left
out. Neither would I be thought to print them out of opinion that (in these
glorious times of Gods giving gifts to men) they will give any great blaze; But
to give an account of my manner of speaking in the name of the Lord: That so,
if it seem good unto you, I may be restored to my brethren and employment in
the work of the Lord at Tavistock (though I shall in regard of means of
subsistence have much less then I am to have should I continue Minister there,
where I am come under the bond of Conscience; and whither I am by jealous
Letters, and by strong Arguments woed to return again) Or otherwise may submit
to Gods will and pleasure (in whose hands are the hearts of all, to turn them
which way soever he pleases; and therefore yours) with this comfortable
testimony, in mine own Soul, that I am ready to do my duty, keep my station,
and go in and out before the People over whom the Lord has made me Overseer:
So far and so long as it shall please his heavenly Majesty to give me life,
livelihood and liberty so to do. And if my Adversaries have any thing to charge
me with, that is of legal cognizance; I stand at our English Caesar's judgment
seat, where let me be judged in Gods name. I that have learnd by his Grace to
look with boldness on my Father in Heaven, in Christ; need not fear those (but
rather fly to them,) that are his Ministers for our good on Earth; besides I
am of them that have in most parts of England, I was Captive to the Lord Vicoun
Lisle, etc. and to Sir Har. Waller. the first four years of the ten at
Breerwich, and elsewhere in K^nt.
and also in Ireland adventured my life, spent my strength and poor estate;
often endangered my liberty, and limbs, and health, in my faithful service of,
and adhaering to the Parliament of England, for these Ten years last past,
since my return to my native land from that exile which Episcopal Tyranny and
tenderness of conscience forced me unto. I am loath to be too bold, I might
boast of my many and great sufferings under the Prelacy, and of Gods wonderful
deliverances vouchsafed me in those days: but I will make an end, humbly
submitting my Sermon to your censure, mine outward man to your ordering, and
you shall I commend in my daily prayers (as in duty bound) to Jehovah Elohim,
that you may be a blessing to the Commonwealth, a joy to the good, a terror to
the bad, and successful in all your undertakings.

London, May 12. 1652. This is the hearty prayer of him, Who desires to be
found a faithful Steward in the Lords work, And hopes to approve himself true
and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, Thomas Larkham.

To all them in the Town and Parish of Tavistock in Devon, that love the Lord
Jesus in sincerity, and are now oppressed by an ungodly generation; Thomas
Larkham, their Rightful Pastor, wishes increase of Faith, Patience and
Wisdom, etc.
Beloved,
BEcause the day is Cloudy among you, and the warming beams of that bright Sun
of Liberty (which so many Saints in England, Ireland, and even in Scotland, sit
under) is obstructed and kept off from you, by the furious marching of a
youthful Jehu (among you) in the head of a party that know not God, and that
will not obey the Gospel of Christ; I thought good to present to you these
ensuing Sermons, preached among you and them; to be for a remembrance to you, a
testimony against them, and an apology for my self, against those many
obloquies and opprobrious calumnies, which by evil tongues and unhallowed pens,
dipped in pride, wrath, and malice, are dispersed against both you and me. The
issue of things, I hope, you will readily refer to the righteous Judge; who
has a day set (which is always the best) to relieve his slandred, oppressed,
and persecuted Servants. My Per a Call of God.
temptations on the right hand will appear, by the loud Calls that I have to go
into Macedonia, to help on the great Work of God now on foot there. And on the
left hand the strong opposition that I find against my return to you (which
can scarce be conceived aright, much less expressed fully.) None but a God can
hinder the builders of Babell, and destroy the enemies of Zion among you. Sit
still a while, and you shall see his salvation; So far as the Angel of his
presence shall go before me, I am ready to follow. Only let your conversation
be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, etc. And in nothing be ye terrified,
etc. Our business (me thinks) is like the launching of great Ships; heaving and
shoving will not do it, till the tide come and it be high water. When God puts
forth his arm, your holy and just desires shall be fulfilled. In the mean time
wait, and read over these Sermons which once you heard; put in practice what is
in them contained, rejoice in the consolation that you shall find here and
there in them dispersed; live in love make up breaches, study to be quiet, and
in your daily prayers, remember your Remembrancer

and loving Brother in Christ, Thomas Larkham, Minister of the Gospel.
From my Chamber in London May 12. 1652.
To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, The inhabitants of the place Tavistock in Devon.
where these Sermons were Preached, may very fitly be compared to Jeremiahs
figs mentioned cap. 24.2. One basket had very good figs, even like the figs
that are first ripe: And the other basket had very naughty figs, which could
not be eaten they were so bad. This gave the first motion to the printing of
these ensuing Sermons. The bad figs are among us very bad, and with a high hand
has God (and his ways and worship) been opposed. Some passages thou shall
read, which may seem too invective and sharp, and as proceeding from a spirit
of bitterness: but did thou know the occasions, thou would wonder that the
stones of the street did not cry out.

Now these Sermons (nothing less being dreamed of, then such unworthy carriage,
in the first taking of the Text,) meeting so right by Gods guidance and
providence with some miscarriages, were conceived by some, and reported to
many, to be such unsufferable Sermons, as the like have not been Preached; and
so generally bruted among all the Cavaleirs of the Country. In the mean time
many gracious souls blessed God that ever they heard them, and also manifested
themselves much affected with them. That (Therefore) they may answer for
themselves to the charge (divulged abroad) against them, and that they may be
useful, read over; as they have been first spoken, they now come forth to
their trial. The Authors first in print, after twenty seven years spent in
Preaching, and suffering (in the time of the Prelacy) in almost all the Courts
in England. If thou that read them, find any thing in them with Gods mark
upon it, bless his Majesty for it; the Author was an earthen vessel, but truths
are treasures. Let him that first preached, and now permits the publishing of
these Sermons, have thy prayers, and thine encouragement to make public some
other labors.

Thomas Larkham.

The Wedding Supper, As it was handled out of the fourteen first verses of the
two and twentieth Chapter of Matthew, in sundry Exercises in Tavistook in Devon.
The first Sermon.
Matthew 22. Verse 1.2.3. And Jesus answered and spoke unto them again by
Parables, and said, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain King, which
made a Marriage for his Son, and sent forth his Servants to call them which
were bidden to to the Wedding; and they would not come.


IN the latter end of the former Chap. from the ver. 33. to the end thereof,
Christ under a Parable of a certain householder, planting a Vineyard, and
letting it out to Husbandmen declares, First, Gods mercy toward the Jews, in
taking them for his Church, ver. 33.34. of that Chapter.

Secondly, Their great ingratitude toward him, manifested by their cruel
dealing with, and usage of his Servants; beating some, and killing others: And
by their most wicked murdering of his own Son: ver. 35. unto the 40.

Thirdly, Gods judgments to be inflicted on them for the same, and that by
their own acknowledgement, ver. 40.41.

Now in the former part of this 22. Chap. our Savior mentions under another
Parrable, Gods abundant kindness both toward the Jews, and also the Gentiles,
in the blessed Means of Grace and Salvation. In which Parable, consider, First,
the Preface, Entrance, or Introduction unto the same: Secondly the Parable it
self.

The Introduction is in the 1 verse. And Jesus answered and spoke unto them
again by Parables, saying. In which words we have, First, the Party propounding
the parable. Jesus. Secondly, the occasion intimated in the Word, Answered, to
wit, one speaking touching the blessed condition of such as shall eat bread in
the Kingdom of Heaven. Luke 14.15. Lastly the Parties to whom this Parable was
propounded, viz. unto the Auditors present in the Pharisees house, as may be
seen out of the forementioned Luke 14 ver. 7. of that chap But (to pass over
these things) come we to the Parable it self; In which we have to consider,

First, what is spoken of, or represented; to wit, the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, whereby it is represented, of which afterward.

For the Subject matter, viz. The Kingdom of Heaven, we must enquire after the
meaning of the words in the first place. Know therefore, that sometime these
words, the Kingdom of Heaven, signify the Kingdom of Glory; but not so here.
Sometimes they are taken for the Kingdom of Grace; and that in diverse respects.

First, the manner of the working of Grace is sometime meant; as Mat. 13.31.32.
in the Parable of the grain of mustardseed and of the leaven.

Secondly, In respect of the season of grace, as Math 3.2. The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; hat is, now is the season of Grace, now the door of the
Kingdom stands open.

Thirdly, in respect of the means of Grace, the Preaching of the Gospel; So
this Phrase, the Kingdom of Heaven is used Mat. 13.47. where it is compared to
a Nett that was cast into the Sea, and gathered of every kind; The same phrase
is used also, Fourthly, for the visible Church (^^^^^ng out Christ in preaching
and other ^^^^ances,) in diverse Places and Verses (...) thirteenth Chap. and
also elsewhere. In ^ll these particulars, is this Phrase used by the Holy
Ghost. Grace in the heart is like a grain of Mustard seed, which is the least
of all Seeds; Yet afterward it comes to be a great Tree; So that in those
Eastern places, the birds made Nests in the Branches of them (as the Scripture
speaks.) And we have seen very great Stalks with Branches in this our own
Land in some places. The first seed of Grace, is very little, and sometimes it
is long before a gracious Soul can perceive any thing in himself, of this
precious seed, in his own Soul: But at last it makes sign where it is. And for
that other resemblance, you know Leaven gives a tang to all the Meal; so does
Grace to the whole man. And for the opportunities of Grace, and the powerful
preaching of the Gospel, they may well be called the Kingdom of Grace. They are
the very way to the Kingdom. Joh. 17.3. the knowledge of God and Christ is said
to be life eternal, because it is the way unto it. In the same regard Joh.
12.50. his Commandments are called life everlasting; to wit, because the
observing of them brings to life everlasting, and they are sure fruits of faith
in Christ. So, I say the preaching of the Gospel, is called the Kingdom of
Heaven, because it is that by which God has appointed to bring Souls unto the
Kingdom of Heaven.

This being the acceptance of the Phrase (as I take it) in this Parable, I
will give you some reasons why it may very fitly so be called.

First, in regard of God the Author, the King of Heaven.

Secondly, In regard of the end of the preaching of the Gospel, viz. to prepare
and fit people for Heaven, to show them the way of Salvation. The Devil himself
in the Pythonyss acknowledges rhis truth. Act. 16.17.

Thirdly, In regard of the present condition of such as receive the word. I
believe it, they are heirs of the Kingdom, privileged with a guard of Angels.
Heb. 1.14. Kings and Kingdoms, are terms of relation. All the Saints are made
Kings as well as Priests. Rev. 1.6. The imposition of this high tittle on
Gospel-preaching, gives occasion to note

The truth of this Point will the better appear, if we take notice of the
glorious titles given to the word preached in Scripture; It is called a hidden
treasure, Mat. 13.44. a Pearl verses 45 46. The word of eternal life. Joh.
6.68. The words of this life, Acts 5.20. The word of Salvation. Acts 13.26 The
Salvation of God, Act. 28.28. The power of God unto Salvation. Romans 1.16. The
word of faith. Rom 10.8 The word of reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5.19. The grace of
God that brings Salvation. Titu. 2 11. The immortal seed of regeneration. 1
Pet. 1.23. So that as it is said of the Church, Psalm. 87 ver. 7.3. Glorious
things are spoken of thee thou City of God; it may also be said of the word of
God, glorious things are spoken of it.



the people which sat in darkness (when Christ came among them to preach) saw
a great light: And to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light
was sprung up. Mat. 4.16. And that Christ (preached) is set to be a light of
the Gentiles, and Salvation unto the ends of the earth, Act. 13.47.

But if all Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. And thus are the
secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will
worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. Therefore Paul says
(speaking of this word) 2 Cor. 10.4.5 6. For the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds. Casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. And having in readiness to revenge all disobedience, etc. And so Heb.
4.12. For the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two
edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of
the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. This iron Mace knocks down the contradictory spirits of men.

Power to prevail with God, and to overcome the world, all which faith does.
But this the word preached does work, as may be plainly seen, Romans 10.14, 15,
16, 17. It is the power of God unto Salvation. Romans 1.16. The engraffed word
which is able to save our Souls. Jam. 1.12. That brings Salvation. Tit. 2.11.
Highly esteemed; bonds and loss of life do not move Paul, if he may fulfill his
ministry. Acts. 20. ver. 22. to the twenty fifth. The Saints weep and sorrow
for the loss of Paul, ver. 37.38. And both for Preacher and People, Read Acts
21.13. Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep and to break my heart? For I am
ready, not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the
Lord Jesus; You see then how Paul prizeth it, and how the Saints prize it, and
weep to hear of the binding of that blessed Preacher Paul. Angels scorn not to
learn of the Church the Mysteries of the Gospel, Ephesians 3.10. they enquire after
these things of the word, 1 Peter 1.12. which things the Angels desire to look
into.

Seeing Gospel-preaching is such a rich Vouchsafement: Surely then, great is
their folly which undervalue the same. And of these there are two sorts.

First, Profane people, foolish Gaderens, that lose the seasons and
opportunities in which God way be found; in which they might meet with this
rich jewel Christ. These were wont to be the only men we had to oppose.

But now we have a Second sort, Such as are deluded, and puzzled by the Devil;
It is sad to consider, that many (once) forward and eminent professors of
Religion, do now account it the height of their excellency to slight preaching
and preachers. The ground of this extreme, is the formalitie of the Calves-men
in Dan and Bethel, against whom zeal burning for lack of watchfulness and
wariness, and their unadvisedness of Satan's wiles, has driven many into these
extravagancies in these Ordinance-contemning days. We were wont to shoot our
arrows against that ungodly generation, who by

First, Their careless coming.

Secondly, Their unreverent behavior being present.

Thirdly, Loose carriage afterward: and losing by and by what they have heard
Luke 8.12. gave us greatest offense.

But now (alas) fear of being gulled by black coats has brought a snare upon
many; endangered by men whose coats are of another color. But I say to all,
Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets etc. Prove. 1. from
the twenty fourth to the 33 v. Whiles Christ wooeth, it is good to be wooen. He
cries, take me to be your King, Priest Prophet, and Teacher; O it is a rich
Vouchsafement, the Gospel is a precious commodity; which puts me upon a second
Use.



Can there any good come out of Galilee? was a question in Christ's time; the
answer was, Come and see. I give you that counsel; Come and see. I give hear:
for sake no meeting where ye may meet Christ. The opinion of holiness of
places, is now exploded; take heed of the other extreme; Least ye leap out of
the frying pan into the fire; or at best get out of Gods Paradise into a warm
Sun; What with the mad running after Jeroboams calves on the one side, and
seeking Asses with Saul, on the other side: the passover is neglected, and the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah forsaken.





Paul thanketh God on the behalf of the Corinthians for the Grace of God which
was given them by Jesus Christ; That in every thing they were enriched by him,
in all utterance, and in all knowledge; and that the Testimony of Christ was
confirmed in them, that they came behind in no gift. 1 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7. O, it is
a rare jewel, it is not for every ones obtaining. For you see your calling
brethren, (says the same Apostle) ver. the twentiesixth of the same chap. How
that not many wise men after the flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are
called; Though ye be poor, Mat, 11.5. ver. 25. Jam. 2.5.
yet the Gospel is Preached to you; twill make you rich, if ye receive it.
Though babes, yet these things revealed to you, will make you men, perfect men
in Christ Jesus; Though poor in wealth, yet you shall be rich in faith, yea
heirs of the Kingdom which God has promised to them which love him

blessing; Math. 13.44. If our Gospel be hidden, it is hidden to (yea from)
them that are lost. 2 Cor. 4 3. Be joyful therefore you that have the word.
See the Lord stretching out his hand all the day long; And take heed, let it
not be to a rebellious and gainsaying People. So much of this Doctrine.

The praedicate, or cui comparatum, of that goodly Subject matter or thing
spoken of in this Parable, which is the second thing to be considered; and is
indeed that by which the Kingdom of Heaven is represented, has in it three
Particulars, two whereof are in this second verse: and the third takes up all
the other verses unto the fifteenth.

First, we are to take notice of the provider and maker of a marriage Supper. A
certain King (says our English translation:) But in the Original, A man a
King, or a man being a King. (...).


Secondly, who of his house was to be married, for whose sake this great
wedding was to be held; His son. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that
was a King, that made a marriage for his Son.

The third particular shows us the Guests invited to this supper, to wit. First
Jews, unto the eighth verse. Secondly Gentiles, unto the end of the Parable.

But of that particular or any branch of it; I have no purpose to speak at this
time, there being not much left of this hour. Therefore of the First, the
feast-maker, I am now to speak. And here are two things held out concerning God
to be considered.

First, His humbling of himself, under his being likened to a man.

Secondly, His dignity; though he be compared to a man, yet it is to a man that
was a King.

God is not a man, but a Spirit; and challenges he that dares, or can, to
liken him to to any thing. Isaiah 40.18. To whom then will ye liken God? Or
what likeness will ye compare him unto? And so also. ver. 25. To whom then will
ye liken me, or shall I be equal, says the Holy one? And in the first of
Timothy, the 6. and 16. verse. He only has immortality, dwelling in the light
which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see. Yet
nevertheless it is his pleasure to be set forth for our capacity sake by
Allusions to men, Kings and other things; that we might come to understand
somewhat of this glorious invisible and hidden God. Nihil est in Deo quod non
eft Deus.
Every thing is most excellent that is in God, in whom all good dwells,
Infinitely, Eternally, and Essentially; For there is nothing in God which is
not God. I will not trouble you with School Notions and subtilties: But come
to say first of that excellent frame of his in point of Humility or Humbling
himself, or condiscention.

The glorious God of Heaven and Earth is very Humble. That is, he is that
exactly, which the most Humble men are a little according to the measure of the
Spirit proportionated out unto them: Or as the man Christ Jesus was, who had
the Spirit not by measure, though yet not above measure as he was man. This
would be a glorious discovery of God, were it in the hands of one that had
skill to manage it.

Romans 12.16. So God is said to humble himself, to behold the things that are in
Heaven and in the Earth, Psalm. 113.6. He looks on his meanest Creatures, He
raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill,
ver 7. O what a Glory it is to great men, to take notice of poor distressed mean
ones? But consider, God must needs stoop very low to consider the best of his
creatures; for all the Nations in comparison of him, are not so much as the
drop of a bucket, as the Prophet phraseth it.

verse 3.4. of this chap. I am now upon. And 2 Cor. 5.18. we read of Gods
reconciling us to himself by Jesus Christ, and of a Ministry of reconciliation.
And ver. 19.20. of stooping so low, and honoring man so much as to send
Ambassadors, or rather Petitioners to beg, beseech and pray us to be reconciled
to him. Stand amazed O ye proud worms, that have such proud implacable
Stomachs, that swell with venom like Toades, and are better like mischievous
Devils, then like men; So far are ye from being like Christian men. O the wrath
of pride as Solomon calls it, I Will sell my Plow; I Will do so and so, though it
cost me mine Estate; I Will not leave him worth a groat, base Fellow, Clown,
Mechanic, Priest, I Will make him know that I am not his Companion: (Yea but thou
art, and shall be the fellow creature of the meanest, maugre thy pride) Does
God do so? or Do thou think there is less difference between God and thy
self, then between thy self and the meanest man alive? This is the second
reason as I call it.

For thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is
holy; I dwell in the high and Holy place: With him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the Humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones. Unto babes does God reveal himself, Mat. 11.25. To the
poor separated ones of the world will he be a father, and they shall be his
Sons and Daughters, though he be the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 6.18. I tell you, if
God were to walk abroad in the shape of a man, he would sooner visit a poor
humble gracious soul a thousand times then the Alaflantara fellows, mincing
Minions, or scrapeing Muck worms of the Earth, notwithstanding their Wealth,
Beauty or Gallantry. He puts down the mighty from their seats, and exalts
them of low degree, Luke 52.

I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. He waits, even when
his head is filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night. Cant.
5.2. He endures with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction. Romans 6.22. He is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance. These are glorious beams
of that one Glory and excellency, able to dazzle our eyes utterly; whiles men
are doing him all the mischief they can, he is then waiting and striving to be
gracious. A Plaster was made for those Converts Acts the 2. of that very blood
which they wickedly shed.

read of Psalm. 12.4. who have said with our tongue will we prevail, our lips
are our own; who is Lord over us? Malacy complains cap. 3.15. That the proud
were called happy. This is the cause of contention among People. Prove. 13.10.
Only by Pride comes Contention, but with the well-advised is wisdom. O that
men would mark such threatening Scriptures as I shall mention against Proud
men. Lev. 16.19. I will break the pride of your Power. Prove. 15.25. The Lord
will destroy the house of the Proud. Prove. 16.18. Pride goes before
destruction: and a haughty spirit before a fall. Luke 1.51. He has showed
strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud, etc. James 4.6. God
resists the proud, but he gives Grace to the Humble: Pride is either in
regard of God or men; but I must not meddle now with those particulars.

He will teach them, Psa. 25.9 He will honor them, Ps. 113.7, 8 He raises up
the poor out of the dust: and lifts the needy out of the dunghill, that he
may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his People. He will dwell
with them as Isaiah 57.15. mentioned before. Humility is the forerunner of
honor, Prove. 18.12. Let the Sons of men be in love with this Grace; Who would
not be like God?

Prove. 18.12. No entering into the Kingdom of Heaven without, Mark. 10.15.



The 2. branch. Doctr.
But I proceed to the second thing held out concerning God, viz. his dignity.
Though he will be likened to a man: yet it shall be to a man that is a King.
Surely, Gods humility ought not to cause disrespect of his dignity. Kings are
to be honored 1 Pet. 2.13. The King is Supreme, and therefore to be submitted
unto, and to be honored v. 17. And if Earthly Kings; how much more the King of
Heaven, the King of Glory? God is the King of Glory. Psalm 24. ver. 7.8, 9. and
10. In every one of those four ver. he is called the King of Glory. Lift up
your heads O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that the King of
Glory may come in. Who is this King of Glory? the Lord strong and Mighty, the
Lord Mighty in Battle. Lift up your heads O ye Gates; even lift them up, ye
everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. And twice in the last
verse, Who is this King of Glory? The Lord of Hoasts, he is the King of Glory.
Selah. He is a King that remains for ever: whereas other Kings die and leave
their Kingdoms to others. Psalm 29.10. the latter part of the verse. Yea the
Lord sits King for ever. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his
Kingdom is from Generation to Generation. Deuteronom. cap. 4. ver. 34.

carriage of Abraham a man of Might (he had in his house thirty eight P^sse and
nollenobile.
Genesis 14.14.
Trained Soldiers) got him a great deal of respect among the children of Heth.
You may read the story at large your selves, Genesis twenty three, ver. six unto
the thirteenth. He stood up, he bowed himself to the people of the Land, even
to the children of Heth. ver. 7. And again Abraham bowed down himself before
the People of the Land. So, I say Gods humbling of himself, should rather be a
cause why People should give him the greater Honor and Reverence.

But I must draw to an end; I therefore shall speak a word by way of Use and
Application, and so end this first particular, (to wit the feast maker) and
also this Sermon.

(Hoggery) God (as they call him) Abamaccho, because he does them much
mischief. But their good God, Tanto, they care not how they use. Surely they
are much to blame, that abuse the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads them to
repentance. Romans 2.4. O despise not the Humble and plain ways of the Lord;
undervalue not his Gospel because the poor receive it. Matthew 11.5. and the
rich blaspheme that worthy way, Ja. 2.7. If you do provoke him, and grieve him
and slight him, he will make a way for his Anger, Psalm 78.40 41.50. He will be
terrible; the heathen shall perish out his land. Psalm. 10.16. The Lord
reigns, let the People tremble. Psalm 99.1. He is a great King, and his name
is dreadful among the Heathen. Malachy 1.14. They that abuse Gods kindness,
shall not gain by it. They that scoff at his patience, as 2 Pet. 3.3. etc. or
at the meaness of his worshippers, Joh. 7 48 49. and the like, shall find that
blue-apron Mechanics shall be too hard at last for Scarlet-coats, and bring
down the mighty from their throne.

Sam. 2 30. Though God would walk low and seem to be not worth the looking
after: yet he will come at last to be glorified, and admired by them that have
believed his testimony, and have worshipped him even in a stable, and have kept
the (despised) faith. But here shall be an end.

The Second Sermon.
Matthew 22.2. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a King that made a Marriage
for his Son.


WE have finished in this place of meeting (besides diverse other things
dispatched the last time) the first of those three Particulars noted in the
predicate of this parabolical Proposition: viz. the feast maker; we have heard
of that twofold representation of him; as a man to show his condiscension, and
humbling of himself for our good: And yet a man that was a King; to set forth
his dignity, and greatness over all.

Now the next thing we have to do, The second particular.
is to speak of the Honorable person that gives occasion for this feast. And
that is Christ who is to be married; whose Spouse is the Holy Church.

In this particular there are diverse things of great weight to be taken notice
of.

First, The Author and fountain of saving grace, viz. God, called here A King,
making a Marriage for his Son.

Secondly, Here is implied the near union that is betwixt Christ and the Elect.
It is agreed, that there shall be a marriage concluded upon (according to God
the Fathers everlasting purpose) between them and his son Jesus. The Kingdom of
heaven is like unto a King that made a Marriage for his Son.

Thirdly, we shall also out of these words speak of the way and Means, whereby
this Grace from God in the supper of the Lamb is conveyed, and made out to the
Elect: towit, the powerful preaching of the Gospel. This lies wrapped up in
these words, the Kingdom of Heaven, whereby is meant (as I told you in the
beginning) the word of the Kingdom. The plain Truth is, and the Summary Sense,
The preaching of Christ, and the offering of him in the Ministry of the Gosepl
is the way the Lord has ordained, to work faith by, whereby we are united unto
Christ, and justified.

I will begin with the first, and so proceed to the handling of the rest at
this time, as in the presence of the Lord.

From the first.
That grace here, and glory hereafter, are the free gift of God. It it his
pleasure that his Son be Married, and such a Wedding Supper held as may show
forth the riches of his Grace, (according to the capacity of man) somewhat
answerable to the bounty of a God. You see the Subject matter is Grace, which
we must warily speak of; that we may shun the Charybdis of Popish merit, and
yet not fall upon, or into the Scylla of Lawless Antinomianisme. Most certain
it is that Salvation is of Grace, and not of works: as that learned Dr. of the
Church, the Apostle Paul disputes it, and demonstrates it, both in his Epistle
to the Romans, and also in his Epistle to the Galatians. And although there are
many uses of the Holy Moral Law, (which I purpose not now to meddle with) yet
must it stand aside, as weak and insufficient through the flesh; and give place
unto Gods sending his Son into the world, that whosoever believes in him, and
accepts of Gods offer of Grace, should not perish, but have life everlasting.
This Grace of God is by much the Elder brother, if we look no higher then
Abraham. Gal. 3.17. And this I say, (says Paul) that the Law which was 430.
years after, cannot disannull the Covenant that was before of God in respect of
Christ that it should make the Promise of none effect. All is of Grace.

First, Election is of Grace Romans 11.5. There is a remnant according to the
election of Grace. Ephesians. 1.5, 6. Having predestined us, etc according to the
good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he
has made us accepted in the beloved. See Cap. 2. to the tenth. And in many
other places.

Secondly, all the Coordinated Mediums, all that God works by, all are free and
of Grace.

As first, Christ is given, Romans 8 32. Who spared not his own Son, but gave
him for us all to Death.

Secondly, The word bringing savation is free, and is therefore called the
Grace of God. (Titus 2.11.) bringing Salvation.

Thirdly, Repentance is of Gods giving also. Acts 11.18.

Fourthly, Likewise Faith, that mother-Grace, is the gift of God. Phil. 1.29.
And generally the whole Law of the Spirit of life, as it is called Romans 8.2. is
of Gods gracious working, as is testified Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened
which were dead in trespasses and sins.

gratis, Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis.
that is freely. So the Holy Ghost often reasons in these words, (or else Grace
were no Grace.) And Grace and Merit do stand extremly in opposition one to
another.

Quicquid praedicatur de genere, praedicatur de specie.
Of him and through him (as well as for him) are all things. Every good and
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the father of lights, etc.
James 1.17. All common Graces, are of his Grace and free gift: much more saving
grace, which is a more special effect of his love and favor.

in this popular auditory? They have a blind distinction of merit of congruity
and condignity; one place of Luke will serve for all. Cap. 17.10. So likewise
ye, when ye shall have done all that is commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
Servants. There is neither merit of congruity before justification, nor merit
of condignity after. But by Grace are we saved through faith, Dona sua coronat
Deus, non meritatua. Aug.
and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8. not our Merits,
but Gods gifts are with his merciful and bountiful vouchsafements, crowned
here and hereafter.

They that hunger and thirst, etc. are pronounced blessed. Mat. 5.6. What
though ye see nothing in your selves but that which loads you? even such are
invited to come. Mat. 11.28. If God send to invite, surely he will not reject
those that desire him, though they be never so sinful.

But we must take heed, First, of being contented with a few weak and faint
desires. If thy desires come from a right principle, they are as truly Grace as
faith it self. There is Grace desiring, Gratia sitiens, sitiata.
as well as Grace desired.

Secondly, take heed of regarding wickedness in your hearts, Psalm. 66.18. or
else the Lord will not regard your desire. And no marvail, These desires so
accompanied, show themselves not to proceed from that preventing Grace which
all successful desires do proceed from.









But I said but now, Prayers must proceed from the spirit, and that is that I
need make it plain, will some say.

Lazarus, was to bid him to come forth of the Grave. It was the secret work of
his Allmighty Power to make him alive, that he might hear and obey that command.

How should a man seek Grace at Gods hands aright?

answer. He must be willing to take all that God has promised to give to them
that ask, upon Gods own terms and conditions, and limitations too, in regard of
desired temporal blessings. Ye that say ye believe, ye must repent, etc. Acts 2
38. Nay ye shall. Romans 6.1, 2, 3. What shall we say then? shall we continue in
sin that Grace may abound? God forbid; how shall we that are dead to sin, live
any longer therein? Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his death. And so for outward things, we are taught
by Christ's example in his Agony, to say, not my will, but thy will be done. In
a word to take pleasure in the lovely ways of holiness, and to referr our
selves to Gods Love, Care, Wisdom, Power, Truth and Faithfulness for outward
things. But the main thing in hand is to stir you up, to keep begging of this
Grace, that is of the discovery of Gods love to thy poor Soul, and that God
would lift up upon thee the light of his Countenance. So much of the first
particular.

We come to the second; to wit, to show you what is meant by the Marriage of
the Kings Son. Even no other thing, no less privilege, then a most near Union
between Christ and the Elect. For even as a man and a woman by the bond of
Marriage become one, Genesis 2.24. Therefore shall a man leave his Father, and his
Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife: and they twain shall be one flesh; and
so Mat. 19.4, 5, 6. it is confirmed by Christ, and said to be a Union and a
joining together by God: So is it between Christ and his Church. Ephesians. 5. ver.
23. and 31. And therefore it is said in my text, The Kingdom of Heaven is like
unto a man that was a King that made a Marriage for his Son. Where first, God
is signified with his free Grace (as before.) And secondly, This thing that I
have now in hand, viz. That it was his pleasure, that his Son, so fitted to be
a husband to lost mankind, by his incarnation (as it is said, A body have thou
given me) and by his Death and Passion, and glorious Resurrection, and
Ascension should be offered to all the world of the Jews and Gentiles; and that
there should be a General invitation to the end, that as many as come, should
be not only Guests, but the very Spouse, and be married to Christ, and assured
thereof by the spirit of faith and sanctification. So That the Doctrine shall
be,

That there is a Marriage made, and agreed upon, for the Son of God by God the
King of Kings with every gracious Soul. It Is ended (as we use to say) between
them. This is that which is here called the Kingdom of Heaven, the work of
Grace; and it is therefore compared to a Marriage, because there is such a near
union between all the Children of the Kingdom and Christ, as there is between
the Husband and the Wife.

I will, (for your better profiting by this so admirable point) go upon some
Particulars; some Analogies and Resemblances, between Marriages among men, and
this work of Union and Conjunction with Christ.

And first you know, men use to go a woing, (as we call it) they do either by
themselves or their spokesmen make motions of Marriage, and declare their love,
to the young women, they are willing to make their wives. And this (you know) is
first before there is an actual possessing and uniting: Even so we read 2 Cor.
5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us; we pray you in Christ's steed, that ye be reconciled to God Now when Christ
was in the flesh, he went a woing himself in his own person. John 3.19. Light
is come into the world; end men love darkness, etc. But ver. 29. of that chap.
he has a spokesman, he goes a woing by his friend: He that has the Bride is
the Bridegroom, (as you shall find there:) but the friend of the Bridegroom,
which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the Bridegrooms
voice. That spokesman there meant, was John Baptist. And the Bridegroom there
meant, is Christ now incarnate, though the son of God from everlasting; He was
afterward crucified, dead, and buried, and rose again the third day, this is
the Husband of the Church, this is the young man that is to be married (as we
use to say.) Cursed be they that destroy the History, under a pretense of
embracing the Mystery, (as some absurd men have in my hearing, whom I therefore
questioned, but it was not in a time succesfull.) But I say this, Christ went a
woing himself, but now by his messengers he does it in Gospel-Preaching.

Vnio animarum est essentia matrimonii.
But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name. And indeed this is the very union, and
essence of the Marriage. For such are regenerated, as it follows ver. 13.
Which are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God. It Is a match. My beloved is mine, and I am his, says the
Spouse. Canticles 2.16.

Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better then
Wine. Because of the savor of thy good Ointment, thy name is as Ointment
poured forth, therefore the Virgins love thee. Draw me, we will run after
thee, the King has brought me into his chambers: We will be glad and rejoice
in thee, we will remember thy love more then Wine; the upright love thee: O,
who can imagine what this secret enjoying of Christ is, that has not felt it?
There is a kind of spiritual copulation, between Christ and every true
believer; Yea also between Christ and Congregations, which are so many Mothers
to bring forth.

are like fruitful Vines upon the Walls of the house, whose children stand
like Olive plants round about the Table. Psalm. 128.3. Such as are married in
the fear of God, have a promise of this blessing.

This is made good; First in each Saints growth in Grace, Isaiah 61.10. I will
greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall be joyful in my God: For he has
clothed me with the garment of Salvation, he has covered me with the Robe of
Righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride
adorneth herself with Jewels. The Saints are led forward toward perfection Heb
6.1. O many a sweet Babe does a gracious Soul bear and Nurse to the Glory of
God. But wicked men bring forth ugly bratts of Malice, Pride, Uncleannness,
they are in conjunction with the Devil; their Fruit and Wine is of Sodom, not
of Jerusalem.

And then Secondly, In the Churches increase it is also verified. Isaiah 61.4,
5, 6. And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former
desolations, and they shall repair the wast Cities, the desolations of many
Generations, etc. The Sum is, the Church is a fruitful Mothe^: Jerusalem the
Mother of us all, in conjunction with Christ, brings forth many Sons. The Sons
of the Church come from far, and her Daughters are Nursed at her side. Isaiah
60.4. This comes to pass by Christ's Husband ship; the Church seemingly barren,
and a Widow, brings forth many Children to Christ.

Cor. 5. the last. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that
we might be made the Righteousness of God in him.

Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? So Christ calls out of Heaven. And again
Mat. 25.40. In as much as ye did it to the least of these my brethren, ye did
it unto me. And the Church again is very sensible of Gods dishonors. And it
grieveth David to see the transgressors, because men keep not Gods Law, P^alm
119.136.

in the Marriage knot, there is a great working in affection; great joy in the
presence one of another; grief in the absence one from another: even so, if God
do hide his face from David, he is troubled, Psalm. 30.7. And his heart longs to
be in the Temple, where God was wont to show his beauty, and come with embraces
to him and others of his People.



I say, First, We may be informed of the great worth of Gospel Ordinances,
under which there is such a neerness held forth, yea such a conjunction with
Christ enjoyed. Here are kisses and embraces to be had. Meetings for the
enjoyment of them, are Christ's bed of Love. For there (to wit in the use of
Church Ordinances) the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore,
Psalm. 133.3. and again. By night on my bed I sought him whom my Soul loves.
Cant. 3.1. That is in the Communion of Saints and enjoyment of Ordinances. They
are not much acquainted with Christ, (it is to be doubted) that cry down, what
he is wont to make himself out by to his Saints.



First. He looks for nothing to draw his Love; therefore our want of beauty
cannot dissolve the knot.

Secondly, No infirmity in us, can draw away his Love from us, for his Love is
immutably firm, because it is Eternal and Free.

Thirdly, Nothing can hinder our conversing with him; we have a privilege to
carry about Christ with us.

All the powers in Earth and Hell cannot make a separation between Christ and a
Christian, no not for one minute.

Object. What. cannot Sin? does not the Scripture say, Thy sins have separated
between thee and thy God, etc.

I answer. God is the same in his suspensions which are his Physic, that he is
in his Ordinances of feeding, and in all prosperous Vouchsafements. And so (by
the way) ought the Church and every Christian to be in their Reproofs, Checks,
Admonitions; of the same frame of spirit, aiming at the good of the party dealt
withal, as in their most pleasing dealings: Let all your things be done in
Charity I say, (to return to this branch of the comfort) All the world cannot
separate you, nor hinder you from enjoying Christ, no not a minute; sin may be
an occasion of a hiding of his face. But God would not let his people sin if it
were not for their good; For all things must work together for their good Romans
8.28. This is a mighty privilege the Saints have.

Fourthly, He will enable you to do what he commands you. The Saints have not
only habitual Grace, to wit, the new Creature: But also, the Lord is bound by
promise to be with them, to direct them, to help them, and assist them, with
continual supplies of Grace; for they are taught to wait upon him and to seek
unto him, and to be much in trading with God, and all his Factors, and
therefore must needs be better able to do his will. You shall find Psalm. 25.12.
What man is he that fears the Lord? Him will he teach the way that he shall
choose. The greatest hindrance of Gods service, and of doing his will, is fear.
Now God being Lord of the affections, can quickly take away fear or give
trembling; but he is bound by promise, as to withhold no good thing; so to
withdraw every evil thing, (as all that hinders obedience is evil) from his
servants.

Lastly, the Love of God which is by reason of this Union, is above all Love,
it shall transcend all Love. The happiest Wife in the World may possibly expect
or desire too much from her Husband, though the best Husband in the World. We
cannot be too bold with God in expecting or desiring, unless it be in sinful
desires. I say, We cannot expect too much from God; We can never build too much
upon his Love; it is transcendent.

And I will betroth thee unto me for ever, etc. Therefore come away, marry this
Kings son, forsake not your mercy, do not overstand your Market: You will never
have such an offer again, (I mean not, of another opportunity; for what am I to
limit the Holy one of Israel?) But of another happiness; for in this seed of
Abraham alone blessedness is to be had; I say you cannot possibly speed your
selves better. There is none so lovely, none so able to make you every-way
happy, none so willing to do every body good. These expressions of ours are to
your capacity; These glorious beams of Christ shine brightly, the Lord open
your eyes to see them; seek by Prayer, wait upon Ordinances, argue upon
promises; And the Lord strike hands with you in much mercy. Amen, Amen.

It remains that something be spoken of the means Ordained by the Lord to
attain this assurance of Union with Christ; to wit, the Preaching of the
Gospel, signified by these words, (The Kingdom of Heaven) for by it is saving
Grace conveyed. Gospel preaching is Ordained and appointed of the Lord to that
end, that men may hear of Christ, believe in Christ, be saved by Christ, and be
glorified with Christ. So in that the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Gospel
Preached, is compared to a Marriagemaking, I observe this last Doctrine;

The end of the Preaching of the Gospel is to prepare People for a Marriage
with Christ the Son of God.

So then faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. The Lord has
appointed that the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached over all the World
for a witness unto all Nations; That the Elect in every place may be brought in
(according to Gods eternal purpose of Love) to communion with the Church, and
Union unto Christ.



But yet lodge this truth among the Oracles of God, That Gospel Preaching is
necessary. And that it is the ordinary and usual means to obtain Faith.

And how shall they escape which neglect so great salvation? Which to do is a
greater sin then to break the whole Law. The punishment shows the greatness of
the sin; a double curse is pronounced against them that love not the Lord
Jesus, 1 Cor. 16.22. that is against those that neglect Gospel offers, and
Ordinances, in which Christ goes (...) wooing to the children of men. If any
one therefore here present, be an Enemy to the dispensations of the Gospel, or
a neglector of this gracious offer of Christ therein: let him look upon himself
as on an execrable thing which God hates, and let him see God even stretching
out his power to confound him, and the Gospel cursing him.



Motive. It is the best preferment a man can come unto, to be United and
Married to Christ; And therefore no small preferment to be employed in this
high work of bringing People to Salvation. And to move other People, let this
be weighed well, that to lose all things in the world to gain Christ, is the
best bargain that ever man made. Phil. 3 7. 8. But what things were gain to me,
these I counted loss for Christ. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but
loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may
win Christ.

But how shall Ministers improve this benefit?

answer, by Preaching Christ unto the People, Plainly, Powerfully, in the
evidence of Gods spirit, not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor. chap.
2. ver. 1. etc.

But if a man do not Preach eloquently, he shall lose his repute and the Grace
of his pains.

answer. No; for although some that know not God will be prating; yet he is the
best scholar that edifies most. 1 Cor. 14 v. 12.18.19.21.22. To excel to the
edifying of the Church, to speak five words with understanding that others may
be taught to Prophecy, so as men may believe, are special Phrases in those
verses. A man that speaks pithily to the conscience, will show himself a
scholar (besides his purpose) to all judicious hearers. Such men show
themselves to have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, not handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth, commending themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
2 Cor. 4.2. And yet further ver. 5. For we Preach not our selves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. And then note, I
said not only plainly, but powerfully; We should have such a spirit as Paul,
who out of the abundance of his Zeal was stirred in spirit. Acts 17.16. And so
Philip. 3.18. He told them WEEPING of their faults, that were Enemies to the
Cross of Christ. This proceeded out of the abundance of his Love to Christ and
mankind. And this was a sign of Lots sincerity, that his righteous soul was
grieved and vexed, etc. 2 Pet. 2.7. And to hate the work of the Nicolaitans
which God hates, is very commendable. Rev. 2.15. To hate them that hate God.
Psalm. 139.21. and to be grieved with those that rise up against him.

Now for Hearers.

They must improve this benefit and blessing of Gospel Preaching; 2. Hearers.
By striving and laboring hereby, to be prepared for a Marriage with Christ.
By putting off the old man, and putting on the new man. Ephesians. 4. ver. 16. to
the 25. People must forget their own People and their Fathers house, and labor
to be clothed with clothing of wrought Gold. Psalm. 45. ver. 10.13. Labor to
get Oil in your Vessels, as well as in your Lamps. Mat. 25.4. That ye may
enter in with him to the Marriage, when the door shall be shut against such as
have neglected these opportunities. ver. 10. You must labor to make your
selves ready for the Marriage of the Lamb, to put on Christ, who is the clean
and white and fine Linen of the Saints. Rev. 19.7.8. O that you would know
now, even now, in this your day, the things that do belong to your peace. And
especially to be often hammering on this, that this rich vouchsafement will
have its Errands end one way or the other. It is like strong Physic, if it do
not work, twill kill. If the word be not the savor of life unto life, it will
be the savor of death unto death.

Thus have I finished the second verse wholly. Out of which I have spoken of
the Subject matter of this Parable, the Kingdom of Heaven, and of two Branches
of the praedicate, viz. the Marriagemaker, and the Bridegroom; and in the
latter, of all three particulars. viz. the fountain of Grace, the Union between
Christ and his Church, and the way and means whereby this is wrought.

The third, viz. the Guests, is next to be handled: So much for this time.

The Third Sermon.
Matthew 22.3. And send forth his Servants to call them that were bidden to the
Wedding; And they would not come.


THis verse begins the point of the Guests that are graciously invited by the
Lord to come to Christ. The third particular in the praedicate.
Both Jews, and Gentiles. The double Call of the Jews, Gods old acquaintaince,
is verse. 3. to the 8.

And then the Call of the Gentiles, upon their refusal, unto the end of the
Parable.

We are now to make entrance, and to speak of the first invitation of the
Jews, Gods old customers, as it is set down in this verse now read unto you. In
which we have two parts.

First Gods favor in giving them the first offer of this Grace, in these
words. And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the Wedding.

Secondly, Their ingratitude, showed in their wilful refusing of it, in these
latter words of the Text, And they would not come.

We will begin with the first, and therein again, we have many particulars to
take notice of and speak upon.

As first, a description of the Jews, the parties invited, (...).
by a word wherein their privilege is gloriously held forth: They were the
bidden ones, or the called ones, as the word signifies. Such as before the
coming of Christ were entrusted which the Oracles of God, and were Gods People.

Secondly, (...).
The instruments of their present invitation are said to be his Servants, Gods
Servants:

Thirdly, The ground of these Servants proceeding in the work; (...).
God sent them that had a Commission for what they did. Of these in order.

They which were bidden to the marriage (to wit anciently) must first have the
News when Supper is ready. (...), By these words says Piscator, are understood
those which a little before the preparation of the Marriage feast,
Intelliguntur invitati, qui paulo ante apparatum nuptialis convivii, invitati
ad illud fuerunt.
were invited to it. The like Phrase we have 1 Samuel 9 13. And afterward they
eat that be bidden, that is such as are invited. Hence this Doctrine.

That the Lords bidden Guests are readiest to be called unto his sons Marriage.

Here they were the Jews, Gods selected People, Gods peculiar People, and
treasure above all People. Exodus 19.5. And so, Deuteronomy. 7.6. The Lord thy God has
chosen thee to be a special People unto himself, above all People that are
upon the face of the earth. They were bidden in Abraham. Genesis 17.7. And I
(says God) will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after
thee in their Generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee. It was their privilege and dignity to have Gods
Oracles committed to them. Romans 3.1.2. They were Israelites, to whom pertained
the adoption, and the Glory and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and
the service of God, and the promises. Romans 9.4

Calvin) to such men as write a Catalogue of their chief friends, whom they
intend to make their Guests, when they make a Feast. O say they, we must needs
bid such a one, and we cannot leave out such a one, etc. So is it with the
Lord, so he is wont to deal. Mat. 10.5, 6. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and
commanded. them, saying, Go into not the way of the Gentiles, and into any City
of the Samaritans enter ye not: But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. And cap. 15, ver. 24. (says Christ) I am not sent but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. To make this out more fully, that it may be
fitted for use to be made of it. The Lord being about to reform his Church in
all places of the word (for the time is at hand of glorious things to be done
for and in Christ's Church) looks upon England his old acquaintance, for whom he
has done much often, to whom of old he has been many ways gracious. England,
I say, shall have a fair offer, they shall be first bidden, yea bidden again. O
England (says the Lord) Thee have I known of old; I rooted out Popery out of
thee; I delivered thee in 88 from the Spanish Invasion; I discovered the
hellish Gun-powder-Plot; I have for thy sake poured contempt upon Princes, and
shattered Nobles: Armies commanded by Royalty, have been brought to nothing,
etc. Now take me while I am offering my self to thee in this my reforming time.
And so to this very place may we apply it; O Tavistock, I have afforded that to
thee, which I have not to all Towns. Has not the Lord striven with you in
former times, Mr. G. H.
in regard of that powerful Ministry you enjoyed? And has he not (as it were)
made you the first in Church-resurrection in these parts? Does not the Lord
even beg you to accept of him? Does he not suffer many abuses in his Servants
among you? well, what shall I say? You are fairly offered, you are first
offered, you have the Refuse (as we use to say.)

So much for the Explanation.

That it is a privilege for a people to live in the visible Church, and under
Ordinances, to be within sound of this Bow-bell of the Gospel. For when times
of discoveries of God, and reformation come about, these shall have the
privilege to be served first, at least with offers. And it shall be their
fault (as we say) if they partake not of the richest effusions of the spirit
that are going. And doubtless, then it must needs follow, that, To make light
of Gospel privileges is a fearful sin; as may be gathered out of the
following verses of this Parable. I wish from my heart that you would be
convinced of this truth, What a privilege it is to enjoy the sound and saving
Ministry of Christ. And also of that consequent truth, viz. That if he be
cursed that continues not in every thing that is written in the book of the
Law to do them. Gal. 3. then much more to have an invitation, an offer of
Christ, and not to regard it (of which more shall be said in due place.) It is
an unworthy part to see Christ scorned and rejected, and his word slighted, and
his blood trampled on, and not to be moved with it, not to weep (with Paul
Philip. 3 18.) that the cross of Christ has Enemies: But to be actors in this
Tragedy, must needs be most hideous and abominable.

feast to his Church, he will have you in his remembrance. His old Chapmen
shall have the first sight of his new stuff. I do not mean that we must look
for New Doctrines, but fuller discoveries of the old faith, which was once
delivered to the Saints, but has a while been in Captivity in Babylon.

Pagans, then for Christians (I mean) so called; and for those poor holes that
have scarce a good Sermon in a year, then for such as have much of God in this
kind, if their thankfulness and obedience be not answerable.

Quest. But how should a People or a person improve this Privilege?

answer, By coming at the first call, not to delay nor put off, lest God should
swear once against you, should fall a sealing you and searing you.

So much of the first, the parties invited, (...), call the called ones.

The parties employed in the work, are next to be taken notice of.

And sent forth his servants: That is, such as were Gods Servants in special.
This word is excellently joined with another in the 3. chap. of Amos ver. 7.
The words there are, Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his
secret unto his servants the Prophets. Here you see Prophets are called the
Lords Servants; So Ministers also 2 Timothy 2.24. And the servant of the Lord must
not strive, etc. And that it is to be understood of teachers, is evident out of
the following verse. 25. verse. In meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, etc.

Well then, the Lesson hence to be learned, is, That Gods special servants,
Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, are his ordinary Instruments to call men to the
Weddding supper; That is, in plain English, to preach and teach. Luke the other
Evangelist that records this Parable, sets this punctually down. cap. 14.17.
and in many other verses besides in the Parable.

Reason is, because they are fittest for this employment: It is not for the
Masters dignity to go himself; neither yet that such be employed as have no
relation to him, or no Commission from him: but Servants entertained and put
apart or separated unto the Gospel of God Romans 1.1. (...).
Now to make a man fit for this service, it is best that he be called by Gods
Grace, or to the state of Grace himself: Yet is it not so absolutely necessary,
as to conclude every one that is a lawful Minister, is certainly a gracious
man. A man may be sanctified to his calling, that is not sanctified savingly in
his person. But this is absolutely necessary, that these Servants be fitted for
their work, that is, that Teachers of others be first taught themselves.

Now these teachings of God are of two sorts; the one extraordinary and
immediate; So Amos 7.14.15. I was neither Prophet, nor son of a Prophet, etc.
And the Lord said unto me go Prophecy unto my People Israel. The other way is
by the means and Ministry of man. Now where revelation is wanting, this kind of
teaching and learning is necessary.

There are and have been foor sorts of Teachers in the World.

1. Some taught by God and not by men.

2. Some taught of men and not of God.

3. Some taught by God through the means of men.

4. Others, (bold Bayards,) that never were taught either by God or men. And
yet many there are that take upon them to teach and interpret Scripture, that
are poorly fitted, that cannot be said to abide in the things that they have
learned. 2 Timothy 3.14.

But because the matter is of great weight, in these speaking times (as they
Phrase it) I will a little stay upon it, for satisfaction to such as are
desirous of it.

First therefore you must know that every one that takes upon him to be a
servant of the Lord in this work of preaching, must be taught one way or
another. And therefore they are to be blamed that take upon them to be teachers
of the Gospel, and were never taught by revelation, or by any ordinary way.

Secondly, They must teach what they have learned; they therefore are to be
blamed, that deliver opinions which they never learned from the Scriptures or
any Ministry.

Thirdly, That it is most orderly that Gospel-Preachers be ordained, and put
apart by men, acccording to rule for Preaching.

Fourthly, That yet in times and places, where there is a common corruption of
Doctrine or a common abuse of the office of teaching, and neglecting of
ordaining Godly as well as learned men, there sometimes men Godly, competently
learned, by an instinct as it were for a time may teach and preach, and find
the Lord with them. But all must take heed of nulling offices, and officers,
and also of refusing, when they may orderly have an outward call, to accept of
it. For although God upon great changes does dispense with some things about
his Church for a time, as he did with circumcision in the Wilderness; Yet the
first opportunities must be taken of returning to the exact rules of the Word
for preaching and other Church-Ordinances.

But I return whence I digressed, to show you, that not all but Some special
servants of the Lord, are made use of for this work of winning People to
Christ, in the way of public teaching. For otherwise, all are to improve their
interests, and to be (as we may say) coadjutors to the Gospel-Teachers.

servants of Christ; and that such are not like to be Christ's Guests, that want
them. Miserable are those towns and villages, that are without
faithfully-Preaching-Ministers; And woe to such as live under blind guides. Mat.
15.14. They are in danger, both Priests and People, of falling into the ditch.

hand of the Lord with them; that is an expression, Acts 11.21.

Question. But how is that to be known?

I answer, It is to be known by the effects there mentioned, And a great number
believed, and turned unto the Lord. O, It Is a mercy to live under the sound of
the voice of a servant of the Lord. Gods immediate voice no man is able to
hear. Exodus 20.19. And they said unto Moses, speak thou with us and we will
hear, but let not God speak with us lest we die. So Deuteronomy. 5.25. the presence of
God is terrible, who may abide it? Therefore God has appointed our brethren to
teach us familiarly, and to be in his stead among us; and it is our happiness
to enjoy them, if we could see it.

imployes as his special servants, ought to be esteemed; although it be their
portion to be (as David was) the song of the drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. And to be
despised by young children, as Job was cap. 19.18. Yea by young men whose fathers
he would have disdained to have set with the dogs of his flock. cap. 30.1. All
the silly (yet proud) fools, and all the knaves in the country, think that
Gospel-Preachers are fit to be made a Parable of reproach and object of
despite. O how do some among us ruffle it in the second and third Generations,
whose Ancestors infamously scrapt a little dung together, and ended their days
remarkably I But this ought not so to be, neither will it be so among them that
fear God; Neither let it be so among you. For,

Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me, (says Christ to his Disciples,) and this is to despise him that
sent Christ, as it is in the same verse.

respectfully toward them, it will encourage them in the Lords work.



Both these are to be proved, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit your selves: for they watch for your souls, as they that must
give account, that they may do it with joy and not with grief: for that is
unprofitable for you. And indeed experience teaches, that when the persons of
Ministers are out of esteem, their Doctrine lies the more open to prejudice and
misconstruction.

But how shall I know whether I esteem them as I ought to do or no?

answer, If thou look upon them as Ambassadors, sent of God, for this very
end, that People may believe in Christ, and do so come to hear what they say,
etc. this is a good note of such as are sound Christians, and have the spirit
of God. 1 Cor. 14.37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual,
let him acknowledge, that the things that I write unto you, are the
commandments of the Lord. And no doubt, such as are spiritual, will so
acknowledge: and in their eyes, the feet of them that preach the Gospel of
peace, and bring glad tidings of good things, will be beautiful. Romans 10.15.

Thus I have finished the second particular observed in the first offer of
Christ to the Jews, his Ancient acquaintance.

I now come to the third and last, to wit, the ground and Original of this
action, of calling people to come to Christ: And that is a Commission given (he
sent forth) as it is in the Text. The Servants go not until God (whose
messengers they be) sends them. These words ( he sent forth his servants, are
not only in this third verse. (I am now upon) but also in the next, the fourth;
and likewise ver. 9. a Commission is expressly given unto them. So that we may
have good ground for this Doctrine,



I will give them Pastors after mine own heart. Jerem. 3.15. Such as run before
they be sent, have success accordingly; But they have somewhat else to do, and
all trades must (...), (as we say) and so must they. And this ^ort of men
(though called Ministers) are the very tail of men. It is the part of a servant
to have the word from his Muster first, and then to do faithfully, what they
are Commissionated and commanded to do. It was the Lords complaint, by the
Prophet Jer. c. 23.21. I have not sent these Prophets yet they rann: I have not
spoken to them, yet they Prophesied. And when the spirit of a man has received
a Call from the spirit of Christ, and knows it self to be sent of God, it will
put him upon strict duty,

First, To deliver nothing but what is warranted. 1 Cor. 11.23. For I have
received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you. And. 1 John 1. ver.
3.

And Secondly, To extend his gifts to the utmost advantage of the giver, and
benefit of those that a man is sent unto. 1 Pet. 4. ver. 10. As every one has
received the gift, so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God.

Lastly, He must and shall know on whose arrand he goes, whose Messenger he is.
So 1 Pet. 4. v. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God: if
any man Minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives.

Call and coming of Ministers of the Gospel, is of God; it is not without
Authority. They are in Gods stead; they must give account to him that has sent
them.

sufficient cause of injustice, iniquity, and oppression, because Ministers
shall not be masters of the Town, because they shall not have their will; which
yet indeed is Gods will. Alas neighbors, are we not men as well as you? Why
then should we not enjoy our common privileges as well as you? are we unworthy
to be heard because we are Ministers? how low would ye bring us? But I desire
not to provoke, but rather to convince, that you might not be found despisers
of God, in despising, contradicting and opposing of us in the way of our well
doing.



Call, in regard of the authority of the Sender. It will not be well taken
under any pretense whatsoever, to slight the Lords gracious offers, to trample
under foot his blessed Ordinances. If the messenger sent, please you not, yea
suppose you had just cause of your displeasure: yet that will not excuse your
slighting of the Sender, and his gracious messages. Do not think that what we
do by virtue of the Authority which the Lord has given us, shall be let fall
by him: He will require an account of our sowing from all sorts of ground where
we sow. He tells our fleetings; He puts our tears into his bottle; and our
groans under your wrath of pride and folly, are written in his book. The Lord
bless unto you these words; You and I shall appear at the bar of his tribunal
upon this very controversy between us. And so much of the first part of this
Text.

The great ingratitude of the Jews, comes next to be spoken of, out of these
words, And they would not come.

There is an emphasis in these words, they could not come.

Would they not come? why would they not come? Surely, there can be no other
reason given, but this, they would not because they would not. So that here is
intended to be set forth by the Holy Ghost.

First, The wilful contempt of the People of the Jews.

And Secondly, From the word (they) is to be noted, the generality of their
wicked wilfullness. They, it is not said some of them, but they, that is (as it
were) all of them; Surely the greatest part of them by far. They were upon the
matter (as we use to say) all hanged in a string: never a barrel the better
herring. They would not come.

Beloved, it is a very sad story, That God should have a peculiar people, whom
he calls his own; John 1.11. He came unto his own, and his own received him
not; But that there should be such a general defection and blindness on the
whole Nation, (aver few only excepted not worth the speaking of) is a sad
aggravation of the condition of the Jews, so pitiful in bondage to Wicked
Will. And is it so in Israel? And shall we wonder if it be so among us? But I
will keep to my method which I have accustomed you unto.

This shall be the Doctrine,

neglected, but here wilfully refused.

Question. But you will say (perhaps) Why do you put into the Doctrine this
word (neglected) seeing you have so urged the emphaticalness of the words
before?

Answer, That the greater contains the lesser; where there is wilful contempt,
there must needs be careless neglect. Therefore no wrong is done to the Text.
And I would lay the Doctrine as large as might be, that it might be extended in
the Application to the greater advantage of all the hearers.

We read of such a general distemper 2 Kings 17.13.14.15. But I will but read
the 14. v. (because the time runs apace) mark it. Notwithstanding they would
not hear, but hardened their necks like to the neck of their fathers, that did
not believe in the Lord their God. And so of Judah we read 2 Chro. 24.19. Yet
he sent Prophets to them to bring them again to the Lord their God, and they
testified against them: but they would not hear. And there is the like
complaint Psalm. 81.11. but my people would not hearken to my voice: and Israel
would none of me. Such another instance is John 5.40. And ye will not come to
me (says Christ to the Jews) that ye might have life.

Isaiah 65.1.2. The Lord there complains of his spreading out his hands all the
day unto a rebellious People, which walked in away that was not good, after
their own thoughts. Now when men either lean to their own wisdom, or are
Wedded to their own will, or have any carnal, worldly or sinful distemper in
their hearts, and do inebriate themselves with the present comforts of the
world, though the things in themselves be lawful; or have inordinate cares, or
lastly do harbor and cling to any base lust whatsoever: here there is no room
for Christ, he can have no entertainment. Strong lusts hang upon men as an
haereditary disease, and they must not be crossed; If you would oppose them,
they swell the more, as a water that is pallisadoed up, swells and overrunns
all. This is the reason that the gracious offer of Christ is so contemned and
despised.

excellent vonchsafements, and yet be of the number of negligent and
unprofitable hearers, yea despisers of them. Many do deceive themselves in this
kind. Because they eat and drink in Gods presence, etc. they think there are
Jews and Pagans enough to fill up hell. But they shall have the worser place in
Hell, that have glorious means of Grace, and despise them, or though they do
but slight them. What is a man the better to have abundance of good food, if he
will not eat of it? If Christ be offered, and people will not receive; As it is
recorded of the Jews, John 1.11. That when Christ came urto them, they would
not receive him, and therefore had not the power or privilege of being the
Sons of God. Their case is the worse, not the better, that Christ is among
them. but they do not receive him, nor submit to him.

receive him. They expose themselves to great danger; their sin is great; for
they set light by Gods Grace, as it is said ver. 5. of this chap. They made
light of it, they cared not for Christ his Supper. Herein people do even
despite the spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. They tread under foot the son of God,
and count the blood of the covenant an unholy thing. Yea they grieve Gods
spirit; which is condemned, at least dehorted from, Ephesians. 4.30. And indeed do
but consider, Would it not grieve a man, when he has made a feast for his
friends, and sent his messengers to call them thereunto, if they should
peremptority reject his kindness and good will? Now here the danger must be
very great, this contempt being offered to the King of Heaven and Earth; Surely
they shall smart for it. We read 2 Chronicles. 24.19. of this sin, to wit, that when
the Prophets (sent to the people, to bring them back to the Lord,) had
testified against them, they would not hear. Therefore it is denounced against
them, verse. 20. by Zachariah the son of Jehojadah the Priest, that they should
not prosper, and that the Lord had forsaken them. It is true they stoned him
for his labor, ver. 21. But yet they found it true enough what he said
afterward. You may see more to this purpose Jer. 18. ver. 12. to the 18. their
sin is, they departed from the ancient path, to walk in a way not cast up. They
made their will their Law; And their punishment is, to be made desolate, and a
perpetual hissing, to be scattered as with a East wind before the Enemy. And
(oh sad business, tremble if there be any life in thee) I will (says the Lord
in the 17. ver. of that chap.) show them the back, and not the face in the day
of their Cal^mity. Mat. 23.37.38. ye may read there what the punishment of this
sin is. The sin is (and ye would not) the punishment (your house is left unto
you desolate.) Luke 14.24 For I say unto you, that none of those men that were
bidden shall taste of my Supper. So again had I time, I might read unto you
Luke 19.42.43.44. A sad Prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem, which
afterward came to pass. Heb. 10.28.29. He that despised Moses Law. died
without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment
(suppose ye) shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God? etc. This great sin is in England, yea in this very place. Read therefore
(for it is yours) Isaiah 30. ver. 8. to the 15. Now go write it before them in
a Table, and note in a Book, that it may be for the time to come, for ever and
ever: that this is a rebellious People, lying children, children that will not
hear the Law of the Lord, etc. Then at the 12. ver. begins the sentence;
Wherefore, thus says the holy one of Israel, because ye despise this word, and
trust in oppression and perverseness and stay thereon: therefore this iniquity
shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose
breaking comes suddenly at an instant. And he shall break it as the breaking
of the potters Vessel etc.

heed ye be not of the number of those that say they will not come.

To move you to be the more wary of this sin, know it is a sin we are naturally
prone unto, to pout and mogg.



lives, they shall know sorrow that slight Christ offered in Gospel Ordinances.

So much of the 3. ver. containing the first offer of Christ to the Jews, and
their refusal; and so much at this time.

The Fourth Sermon.
Matthew. 22.4, 5. Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which
are bidden; behold, I have prepared my dinner; mine oxen and my fatlings are
killed, and all things are ready: come unto the Marriage. But they made light
of it, and went their ways; one to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise.


WE are out of this verse and the following unto the eight, to speak of the
second invitation of the Jews to come to Christ: We will take notice, first of
the invitation it self, as it is set down in this fourth verse. Secondly, of
the success of the Invitation, or the manner of their entertainment that were
sent, ver. 5, 6. And Lastly, we shall come unto the behavior of the King, upon
the course and unworthy entertainment of his gracious Message and of his
Messengers, which is set down in the seventh verse.

We will begin with the first branch, which is in the fourth verse. And we
find it illustrated, 1. By the circumstance of time, when the Servants were
sent, in the word (again.) 2. By the Instruments made use of for that purpose
(other Servants.) 3. By the manner of the Message, which these other servants
were to deliver; it is full of grace and sweetness, Tell them, that were
bidden, I have prepared my dinner, etc. Bid them come to the Marriage.

Again; This word sets out much of God, in point of long-suffering and
patience. Notwithstanding the Jews, had formerly rejected Gods grace, and would
not come in: yet God will not give them over so, but sends again. Again he sent
etc.

his makings forth: but now we are to speak of the patience of God as it is
showed and exercised to mankind. But I will endeavor to make out to you what
kind of beam of God that is which we call patience. I will not meddle with the
patience of Christ: that (I mean) which he showed in our nature which he took;
but of that which is attributed to God, and is handled among his divine
perfections.

There is not such a patience in God (as the word properly signifies) which is
versed in griefs or calamities, but in injuries and wrongs. As a King is said
to be patient which moderatly bears abuses, and contains himself from revenge
which he might easily take if he would. Posse and nolle nobile.
O this is a glorious virtue in man; But in God it is a most glorious beam, to
wit, when he acts this way, to suffer sinners, and not to take vengeance upon
them. This infinitely excels the patience of the most patient men in the
world: because the abuses which are offered to God, are infinitely greater then
those which are offered to men; and because he does most distinctly see them
all, and does most sharply resent them, and has in readiness ways to take
vengeance, and yet he withholds. He knows all that he has done for us, Simul
in conspectu Dei sunt omnia beneficia quae ipse in nos, and omnes injuriae,
etc. Lessius.
and on the other side our ingratitude. He sees all the abominations committed
in the world; which did the most patient man in the world see but one hour, he
would certainly burn the world the next (says a late Writer.) And although
God be not capable of grief and sorrow, yet he very bitterly takes his
dishonor, and is provoked to revenge. He perceives the unworthiness of sin;
and that his own Majesty, and his unspeakable goodness showed to the creature
is vilepended. He is armed with thousands of Plagues, and yet forbears: yea,
continues his former benefits; expecting, and stirring up to Repentance, and to
come to his sons Marriage. Admirable patience! So with the old World did God
deal Genesis 6.3. 1 Pet. 3.20. with others Genesis 18.24. Jerem. 31. cap 5. ver. 1.
Luke 13.34.

Pet. 2.9. Because he is not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance. Ezekiel. 18.32. For I have no pleasure in the death of
him that dies, says the Lord God; wherefore turn your selves and live ye; and
so cap. 33.11. Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what
shall I do unto thee? etc. and cap. 11.8. How should I give thee up Ephraim?
How shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I
set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned, within me, my repentings are kindled
together.

That God in the offer of grace, (notwithstanding shameful repulses) is
wonderful patient.

He sends again, and again. Again he sent forth other servants, etc.



Psalm. 78. verses 17. to the 22. and 37, 38, 39. and 56. 59, 60. verses. In
those places the mavelous untowardness of the Israelites is showed: but yet
God tempts no man, but woes, and argues, and allures. And they that do abuse
his patience, will know one day that they had a fair offer. O think upon it.

smoking flax, Matthew. 12.20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking
flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment into victory. If there
be any hope of thy recovery, the he avenly Physician will not give thee over.

Use shall be to persuade all to take heed that they abuse not Gods patience,
but thankfully improve it to their own benefit.

Laesa patientia fit furor.
the abuse of Gods patience will at last provoke the Lord to cast down heavy
judgments. Psalm. 78.49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath,
and indignation, etc. Romans 2.4, 5. Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and for bearance and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance? But after thy hardness, and impenitent heart,
treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God. I might give you instances and examples, of the
Old World, of the Sodomites, of the Jews. But I had rather show you how you
might improve Gods patience, and not abuse it. For I cannot but think that you
see the necessity of the work.

must prevent wrath, and is a way to improve Gods patience to our advantage.
Joel 2.12, 13, 14. Isaiah 55.6, 7. Friends, there is no sin so great, no sins
so many, no abuse of Gods grace so grievous, but repentance will help all.

Matthew, 5.44, 45. Phil. 4 5.

So far of the circumstance of time. We come next to the instruments, other
servants. Again he sent forth other servants.

The Lord is not only patient in the offer of Grace: but very diligent in
providing means and instruments to draw men. That shall be the next Doctrine.
You see God does not presently upon their refusal give over, but sends other
servants.

He would have no man to perish, but that all should come to repentance.
Understand by his will, his word, his approbation and liking of it; Voluntas
approbationis and effectionis.
but what he wills from everlasting, that he works and brings to pass:
and so says David, Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, in
earth, in the Sea, and in all places. But to the matter: The Lord (I say) is
not only patient to wait, but diligent in providing means; here is another
glorious beam of the Deity shining forth; His Spirit strives with men, to do
them good. He gives gifts to men for the sake of mankind: He exposes his
Ordinances to contempt, and his servants to injurious abuses, that men may not
perish, but have life everlasting.

Information, and it teaches us, that then the use of means is necessary for
this purpose; to wit, that men may hear of Christ, believe in Christ, and be
saved by Christ. That therefore is a vain conceit of many, that think Grace
will come without the use of the Means. And therefore, though men will take
pains in the use of the means about worldly matters: yet they regard not to use
means about the gaining of grace. And this will be their condemnation, as it is
written ( Joh. 3.19.) And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.
Many will not so much as give the word a hearing. Such we read of 2 Kin. 17.13,
14, 15. Yet the Lord testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the
Prophets, and by all the Seers, saying, Turn you from your evil ways, and keep
my commandments, and my Statutes, according to all the Law which I commanded
your fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants the Prophets.
Notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks like to the necks
of their Fathers, that did not believe in the Lord their God. And they rejected
his Statutes, and his Covenant that he made with their fathers, and his
testimonies which he testified against them, and they followed vanity, and
became vain, and went after the heathen that were round about them, concerning
whom the Lord had charged them that they should not do like them. So Jer.
18.11. The Lord is to his work, exhorting, menacing, using means, to make them
there spoken of to return from their evil way. But in the 12. ver. you shall
see their behavior. And they said, There is no hope, but we will walk after
our own devices; and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart.
And chap. 25. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. to the same purpose we may read a large
Discourse of the truth of my Doctrine, and the untoward spirit and behavior of
the people, though to their own hurt (as it is there written.) But I will
enlarge no more upon this Use.

means and instruments, to draw People to Christ, we have a ground of comfort
unto such as truly desire Grace and Mercy at the hands of God. They cannot
desire it more then the Lord does (to use Scripture expressions and language)
nor be more willing, or diligent to use means for their good, then he is. And
therefore assuredly there will be a concurrence with them, in their prayers and
endeavors, and a condiscention to their desires and requests.





Ask, and ye shall have; seek and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you, Matthew. 7.7.



We come in the third place to the Message that the Lord wills to be delivered.
Tell them that are bidden, Behold I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and my
fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; come unto the Marriage.

There is not much in these words which has not been spoken of already. Only
mark, here is an invitation to a Marriage. Venite (inquit) non ad labores, aut
ad luctum, sed ad Nuptias. Marlorat. He does not say, come to labors or
lamentation, but to a marriage. Per terrena autem adumbrat Christus Coelestia,
etc. Here, by earthly things are shadowed out heavenly. But that which I shall
a little fasten upon (and yet I shall not be long neither) is the opportunity
offered; it is supper time, all things are ready; therefore come and take it
whilst it is going (as we say) whilst it is to be had.

the opportunity of the season for the gaining of grace, ought to be a special
Argument to persuade people to come, etc.

For man also knows not his time; as the fishes that are taken in an evil
net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. Great
use is made by the Spirit of God, of this Argument in many places of Scripture.
I will quote and read some, Prove. 9.1, 2, 3. Wisdom has builded her house, she
has hewn out her seven pillars, she has killed her beasts, she has mingled
her wine: she has also furnished her Table. She has sent forth her Maidens,
etc. Isaiah 55.6, 7. Seek, ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him
while he is near; Let the wicked forsake his way, etc. Matthew. 3.2. Repent ye,
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. 2 Cor. 6.2. For he says, I have heard
thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee:
behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. Heb. 3.13. But
exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin; from all which Places this truth is plainly
made good, that the opportunity and Seasons of Grace are to be regarded. And
therefore we will now come to the Uses of the Point.

neglect the precious opportunities that are put into their hand, that do not
make hay while the Sun shines, that do not repent while it is called to day.
Remember the foolish Virgins.

take Gods Grace when it is offered, such as take oil in their Vessels with
their Lamps, Mat. 25.4. Such as are faithful ver. 21. They shall enter in with
the Bridegroom into the Marriage, ver. 10. They shall enter into the joy of
their Lord, ver. 21. aforenamed.

season of Grace; Gods dinner is prepared etc. O how have I been deceived in
you! What fair promises were made, if the Lord would but let you see the face
of a Minister of your own again? How did the Lord seem to hide his face from
you for a great while?

Grace and mercy, not desert, that you are once more invited. We are not worthy
to be bidden Guests, not the best of us all; yet we are.

uncertain, how long it will continue. Friends, it is like be a catching
harvest: the base carriage of the great Ones among you (the like whereof I have
hardly met with wherever I have lived) and of the most besides, threatens a
removal of the means of Grace from you. There is such a deal of pride and
heart-burning, and despite showed to the People and ways of God among us, as
that we may justly fear the season of Grace will not be long. Gospel seasons in
glory, are not usually long.

consent to accept of Christ now while he is going, and take him to be your
Priest, Prophet and King, you will do your selves the greatest pleasure that
possibly can be imagined. Ye shall go in with the Bridegroom into the Marriage.
The Lord set home what has been said: Amen, Amen.

I proceed. ver. 5. But they made light of it, etc.

Here begins the second Branch, under the second Invitation of the Jews. The
success or the manner of the entertainment of this gracious offer, again
renewed. Some neglect it, as it is in this ver. Others maliciously oppose it,
in the next verse.

In the verse. now in hand, two things are to be spoken of;

First, To show you how the Jews stood affected unto the precious season of
Grace vouchsafed them: viz. they made light of it.

Secondly, The ground and occasion of their light esteeming of it; to wit,
their overprizing of their worldly profits and Commodities, their Farms and
Commodities of Merchandising, their shops, and their livings.

For the first; They made light of Christ, (...).
they had no care (as the word signifies) they regarded him not nor his
Salvation, as a thing of no worth, they did set it at naught and despised it.

You see this Lesson plainly may hence be learned.

That the precious seasons and means of Grace are little regarded by
worldly-minded People. Or Thus. It is the property of Worldly men to slight
Christ, if they may get Worldly things. Covetousness is a great cause of
irreligiousness.

The Lord sends forth his Servants, to invite them to come to the Marriage of
his Son; but they had no great mind to it. So their Ancestors long before, 2
Kings 17.13.14. So God complains Psalm 81.11. But my People would not harken to
my voice: and Israel would none of me. So Isai. 65.2. Till Christ come with the
power of his spirit into worldly men's hearts, there is nothing but raking and
scraping together the dung of the World. You may peruse Luke 19.41.42.43. and
44. ver. The sin is, they knew not their visitation, they considered it not;
and this puts me upon a Reason of the point, Having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart. Ephesians. 4.18. And they give themselves
to other ways. ver. 19. Men that have not learned Christ, have no
understanding, no judgment; they are bewitched. And such as go about to hinder
them from walking in their evil ways, they account them troublesome persons.
So Ahab accounted Eliah, 1 Kings 18.17. Art thou he that troubles Israel? and
his Enemy, cap. 21.20. Have thou found me O mine Enemy? But they are their best
friends if they could see it, that tell them Gods truth. Paul is become an
Enemy to the Galatians for telling them the truth, cap. 4.16. Alas! What reason
can People give why they will not love Gods People? but only because their
minds are worldly, and because the light of God does not shine in them. The
minds of Earthly People are so drawn after the World, that they cannot see the
excellency of the love of God, nor the worth of his Salvation. They cannot say
with Simeon, Luke 2.
their eyes have seen his Salvation. A worldly man may abhor some sin, because
of the baseness of it; but a Saint does eschew it with a spiritual heart, which
he that is a worldly man has not. And this is the cause that many sins which
indeed have much sinfulness in them, seem no sins, or very little ones, to
People that are Worldly ones. Covetous men are usually proud men; they think
themselves none of the worst, and yet upon the matter they are grievous
murderers (as will be showed hereafter (God willing) when we come to the 7.
verse.) Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, etc. These say in effect, who is Christ?
what is Salvation ye talk so much of? They are murderers of Christ upon the
matter, that do not receive him: they are accursed and accursed 1 Cor. 16.22.
They are self murderers, Soul murderers: They hale their neighbors to hell,
what in them lies, by refusing Christ, and by their selling him with Judas for
the pelf of the World. But I forget where I am.

Let us make use of this point. folly, fault, punishment of worldly minded men.
I shall referr you to some places. Heb. 10.28.29. There the greatness of the
sin is argued by a comparison between despising of Moses his Law and neglecting
Christ. And great language is used to set out the greatness of the latter sin.
Treading under foot the Son of God, counting the blood of the sanctifying
Covenant an unholy thing, a doing despite unto the spirit of Grace. O consider
this ye worldlings, ye Gadarens, that prefer Hoggs (to which ye are fitly
compared in Scripture) before Christ. When a great man has made a feast, and
has sent out for his poor Tenants, and poor Kindred to come to him, promising
them great Legacies when he dies, and great gifts in the mean time: and they
shall scorn to come, or for a penny matter stay away: would he not be angry,
and be ready to vow that they shall never come within his door more? and bid
his Servants go out and fetch in the beggars to eat up that meat so prepared?
This does a little set forth the greatness of their sin, that do refuse to come
to Christ, to partake of Gospel Ordinances, to believe in the Lord Jesus; which
he that does not, shall be damned. Mark. 16.16.

And as the folly and sin is great, so will the punishment be great also of all
such as neglect so great Salvation. Because I have called, and ye refused; I
have streched out my hand, and no man regarded: but ye have set at naught all
my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I will also laugh at your calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes, etc. O what a wosull condition will that man
be in, to whom God will be as a hard-hearted man to his Enemy, whose utter
ruin he takes pleasure to hear of, whose dolorous groans he laughs to hear
without the lest pity in the World! Not that God is properly, harsh or mild,
angry or pleased; Note.
these are attributed to God, that we might a little behold him who is
invisible, and know him who passes knowledge: They are effects, not affects
(as the Schoolmen distinguish.)

But lastly, Last use.
The example of worldly minded men is not to be followed, unless you think it
be a sport to be damned. And let me say this word by the way, of the Torments
of Hell, that in comparison of them, the cruellest Torments that ever were
invented, are but as flea bitings. If God will then act as God in execution of
justice upon ungodly men, judge what they shall undergo, on whom the full
vialls of his wrath shall be poured out. The drowning of the old world, the
burning of Sodom and Gomorra, the swallowing up of Korah and his company, the
Soul-melting miseries of Jerusalem at its last destruction: Eating of children
of a span long, to be flead alive, to be gang'd to death and the like: these
are sad stories. But O when Gods righteous judgment shall be (revealed) Romans
2.5. which till then is as it were covered: tremble ye souls, and shake even
into shivers, at the thoughts thereof, what Torments even as long as God shall
be, shall be endured.

Walk not therefore with Gospel-despisers. Who so despises the word, shall be
destroyed. Prove. 13.13. Take heed therefore of following their Example.

Quest. But how shall I know whither I make light account of the season of
Grace or no?

answer, By thy laboring or not laboring to take the benefit offered thereby.
If a man want a commodity, when the Market or Fair comes, he will come to seek
for it, he will buy it. If it be dear, yet if it be of absolute necessity (as
corn to make bread or the like) he will say, It is no matter, I must have it,
whatever it cost. If Christ were here in person, he would heartily chide many a
Martha, who are as bold to plead as she was, and to blame those bookish Sermon
gadding Mary's, that seem to be more precise then wise, etc. But yet it will
remain for a truth, that they have chosen that good part which shall not be
taken from them. Luke 10.
They which neglect not the seasons of Grace, but improve them to their getting
of more acquaintance with God, and to the further conquest of the world and
their Corruptions, shall receive exceeding great comfort here; and be at last
inhabitors of the New Jerusalem, singing Halelujah's to Heavens King and to the
Lamb; where their unexpressible, unconceivable joy and happiness shall run
Parallel with the line of Eternity. Bolton.
I can go no further at this time.

The fifth Sermon.
Mat. 22. the latter part of the 5. and the 6. v. And went their ways, one to
his Farm, another to his Merchandise. And the remnant took the Servants, and
entreated them spitefully, and slew them.


WE spoke last out of this 5. ver. of the frame of spirit that was in the Jews,
and how they stood affected toward the Doctrine of the Gospel, which was begun
to be preached among them now the second time after the death and passion of
Christ, out of those words, They made light of it, that is, they cared not for
it (as it has been showed the word here used in the Original signifies.) Time
would not give leave to end that verse then; Therefore that is our next work;
To wit, to speak of the ground of this their undervaluing of Christ, and the
preaching of the Gospel: which was, their overprizing of worldly things. From
which we will handle this last Doctrine out of this fifth verse,

It is observed of the Jews, that even to this day, they are a worldly thriving
people; where ever they come, within a little while they grow rich. And hence
was it, that the generality of them thought it not worth their labor to look
after matters of Religion. Even as to this day we find our honest Hogs just of
that temper, which are our best neighbors. For we have so many barking, yea
biting dogs, that these grunting Swine seem to be very honest men among us. But
yet in truth, you must pardon me; O ye my honest courteous neighbors, I must
render evil for your good (as perhaps you will account it, until your eyes be
opened.) You undervalue opportunities of Worship, you attend not the places of
worship. What Is the Reason? Surely because ye think that while ye are attending
the affairs of the world ye are employed in your lawful Calling, and therefore
that your absence from the Means of grace may very well be excused. And because
this is such a plausible evil, such a poison of Asps, I will speak a little of
it by way of digression.

Know therefore, that there is not a man alive that has not a touch, a tang
(as we say) of this evil. Yet nevertheless it is as dangerous an evil, and as
incompatible with Grace, when it becomes predominant, as any sin whatsoever.
And it is to be noted, that of all Sins seldom are the Saints of God tainted
with this in Scripture; And also that such as fall into it, seldom return to
their wonted glory and luster in the Church. Whereas we find Peter denying his
Master, and David falling into Adultery, and Lot into drunkenness etc. yet we
find a returning again, a recovery out of their falls. But when men give
themselves to covetousness, we may fitly compare this sin to that deep ditch
which Solomon compares a whore unto: They that come into it, return not again,
neither take they hold of the paths of life: You have an example in Demas how
he broke his neck quite, in falling into this ditch of the World. 2 Timothy 4.10.
We never read of his recovery. Let me a little declame, or if it must be so,
exclame) against these hoggs and Swine. Do you think the land you have is
yours? or the Silver and Gold you have is yours? No no, You shall know it is
Gods, and that you are but stewards, and shall one day hear that same ( give an
account of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward, (spoken of
Luke 16.2.) O when a wretched man (a beast rather) shall have an estate thrown
into his hands; and shall either hugg it as a God, or wallow in it, as the
Swine do in dirty muddy places, and shall never regard to use any part of it to
Gods Glory nor to the good of the common wealth, nor to the comfort of the
poor; ^ay some will scarce allow what is needful for their own nourishment:
like Tantalus up to the chin in water, and yet dying for thirst, etc. I say,
when such a running out of the Soul is in a man after the World, is it likely
there will be any great mind upon the things of God, of Christ, of Salvation?
Truly no. This sin is like the disease called the hectic fever, at first hard
to be discerned, but easy to be cured; but at last easy to be known (sure
enough) when it is grown incurable.

When worldliness breaks out into gross opposition of the ways of God, (take
heed (honest and kind neighbors) you will come to it at last, if you do not
take heed) I say, when it is come to a hight, then the Soul is (as it were)
becrusted, seared; it will not be discerned easily by such a Soul, that
covetousness has any harm in it at all; It Is good husbandry, thriftiness. Men
grow bold to plead for it, and for their neglect of duty, to do other things.
See how bold Martha is. Mary was harkening to Christ preaching; Martha was
cooking it, and dressing meat for Christ's dinner; Out cries Martha to Christ
(you shall find it Luke 10.40.) Lord, do not thou not care that my sister
has left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me. And if it be
so in the green tree, how much more in the dry? If good People under a
temptation, be so bold to plead for their neglect of attending upon Christ, and
to blame them thar are more careful, and strict then themselves; how much more
will such as are swallowed up (as it were) of the World be bold? But you see in
that place of Luke, what Christ the King of the Church does. He falls a chiding
of Martha, not of Mary. He tells her Mary had chosen the good part. Worldly
people say to the Almighty, depart from us; they hold it good wisdom, to labor
and save while they be young, that they may not live in want when they be old.
It cannot be denied but this is good Wisdom in its place. But they are penny
wise, and pound foolish, as it is said of the Widows that live in pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.6. they are dead while they live. For what is a man profited if he winn
the whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in exchange
for his Soul? Mat. 16.26. I tell you for every hours coming to Sermons, spent
in prayer, thoushalt be rewarded; thou shall have the comfort of it one day.
Time spent in Gods service is the best spent time. When once you come to know
the terrors of the Lord, you will not think any labor too great, to get news
of a crucified Christ, Galeacius.
nor all the wealth in the world to be compared to one Minutes Society with
Jesus Christ. O my mouth is opened, my heart is enlarged. O what would a damned
Soul in Hell give to come out of his condition? I am the more earnest, upon
mine indignation at the abominable boldness of earthly-minded People. It Is well
it was Christ himself spoke, and that it was to Martha. If we should say but half
so much to Christ's pretended Disciples now, we should hear of it again hot and
wholly (as our country folks phrase it.) and they would tell us that if all
should be of our mind, we should all quickly go a begging; and our hair would
grow through our hood. We should have as good as we bring; Such is the boldness
of covetous persons; Such is the conceit that People have of the harmlesness,
yea or rather of the commendableness of worldliness; whereas indeed it is a
vice full of deadly poison, full of ignorance of God, of Atheism, of Idolatry,
Injustjce, Oppression, and indeed of all iniquity: as will be more at large
showed in the uses of the Point, which now I come unto. information, that there
is great danger in affecting worldly things. It is (says the Doctine) a great
occasion to make People set light by the means of Grace, holy and religious
employments; and therefore it must needs be a very dangerous thing, for a man
or woman to let his or her affections to run out after the world. 1 Timothy
6.9.10. But they that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.
For the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the faith, and peirced themselves thorrow with many
sorows. It is the ready way to restrain and keep back our affections from God,
and good excercises; and a sign that men do not savor of religion; to let them
runn out after the things of the World. Now the things of the World are (as
John says 1 John 2.16.) the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life: that is, Voluptuousness, Covetousness, Ambition. Let me single
out this Goliath to encounter it, and draw out the sword of the spirit, out of
that sheath Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath. And Ezekiel
7.19. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be
removed: their Silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the
day of the Lords wrath: they shall not satisfy their Souls, neither fill their
bowels, because it is the stumbling block of their iniquity. And so we might
say of all the pomp of this World. Psalm. 49 6.17. When men die they shall carry
nothing away: their glory shall not descend after them. And the forenamed
Ezekiel 7. ver. 10.11. Behold the day, behold it is come, the morning is gone
forth, the rod has blossomed, Pride has budded, Violence is risen up into a
rod of wickedness: none of them shall remain, nor of their multitude, nor of
any of theirs, neither shall there be wailing for them. You have seen the
danger both of Soul and body too. Exodus 31 15. Six days may work be done, but
in the seventh is the Sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord: whosoever does any
work in the Sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death. And so Jer. 17.27.
But God threatens to kindle a fire, not to be quenched, to devour the places of
such as will not hearken to hallow the Sabbath day. If men will not hallow Gods
Sabbaths, nor reverence his Sanctuaries, but will be cross to God, God will be
cross to them. They that cannot allow him his own day, because they are so
drowned in the world, that they cannot remember it before it comes, much less
observe it when it is come: God will lay great sin to their charge because it
proceeds from undervaluing of him, through ignorance, and this has much
sinfullness in it. Therefore Mat. 6.33. Christ wills to seek first the kingdom
of God; because it is a very sinful thing to prefer the world before God, and
the things of his Kingdom. God and the very quintessence of the world stand in
opposition ex diametro. The very wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God. Romans
8.7. And thence is it that there is so much sinfulness in the love of the
World, because the spirit and the soul do runn out excessively after the World,
and do take great delight in these carnal things. And when the Soul and
affection runs out to take pleasure and delight in any thing more then in God,
there is there much sinfullness.

There is in sin three thing considerable. The baseness of it, the viciousness
of it, and the sinfullness of it. Now it is true, there is not so much baseness
in this sin, as there is in some others; As to instance in Adultery, it is a
sin that has much baseness in it, it carries with it a stain, and a blot that
shall never be blotted out. Yet this sin of worldliness, is a far greater sin;
though it be not majoris infamiae, of greater infamy; yet it is Majoris culpae
of greater fault; there is far more irregularity in it. Why then is it not so
esteemed among men?

answer, Men do not use to judge of sin according to the rules of the Word, but
according to the customs of men. And among men, it is meet, that sometimes
sins, though of lesser fault in themselves, yet of more mischievous
consequence, and more destructive to the peace and comfort of humane society,
should be more severely punished, and so consequently the committers of it,
more hooted at, and had in dishonor. And this is the cause that Covetousness
passes so orderly and quietly, through the judgments of men, until it come
to break out into Robberies and violencies which are prejudicial to the peace
of men living together in humane Society.

vitiousness, then in othersome: Sins that are against Moral Virtues, and
Natural Conscience, do stare more Ghastly someties, then greater sins against
God do: Because a man that has no Grace, has yet a Conscience, which is a
true rule according to its proportion; but is too short to measure sins by that
are more immediately committed against God. So Paul when he was Saul, lived in
all good Conscience, Acts 23.1. He saw not the greatness of the sin of
persecuting the Saints. He thought he had done very well in dealing so cruelly
as he did with the Church; there was not vitiousness in it, according to the
Rules of Morality, nor the outward Rules men use to go by in measuring sin.

strikes deep into Gods honor: And it is the more dangerous, by how much the
less men's help against this evil is. If our Sermons will not deterr you from
the every, or robbery, or murder, or adultery; yet the Gallows may. There are
severe Laws against these sins, and they are sins in the esteem of the world,
and sins against natural conscience; and all is a help against these sins. But
against those Maladies, to make light of Christ, of Gospel. Seasons, of blessed
Ordinances; not to delight in God; to be glad when we have wealth, to put our
trust in Princes; to be very pensive at the frowns and threats of men; not to
put our trust in the living God, and the like; here wants men's laws, the worlds
vote, and natural conscience to accuse. And yet these and such like sins are
far greater, and have far more sinfulness in them, then those other
forementioned sins of infamy: A man may go for an eminent Professor of
Religion, and yet be worldly. To refuse Christ, M. Capel.
or but to neglect the offer of grace, is more sinful then fornication, yea
then adultery. Heb. 10.28, 29. will teach us, that such sinners are worthy of
sorer punishment incomparably then such as break, nay despise all Moses Law. If
you have but your mind upon work, or upon the world in a day of Worship, it is
a very great sin. And the Reason or ground of all this, is, because God is so
every way furnished to do the creature good, and has so unbowelled his heart
in sending his Son, and so humbled himself to our capacity in ordaining
Ordinances, and so cleared his truth and faithfulness in all Ages by making
them effectual, and the like; and knows and considers all this to the utmost;
So as that he cannot but most severely punish worldliness, refusing
Church Communion, love of the creature and the like, as sins that are beyond
measure sinful, by the Rule Saints go by, though not by the worlds rule.

And so I come to the Use of Counsel, and so shall end this Point of Doctrine.

I advise every good man to take care, that his worldly affairs be no
hinderance to him in receiving Christ, or occasions of disesteeming Gods grace
in the means thereof offered to him, after the fashion of worldly men that know
not what it is in the way of mercy to enjoy an Ordinance and Christ in it, or
to neglect it in a way of sin.

I will use some Motives.

be our Fathers or Mothers, or Gentlemen. Regis ad exemplum, etc.
And by the way look to it ye great stones, that draw so much rubbish out of
those old walls after you; Your torments will be the greater for that by your
example God has been the more dishonored.

sinning, Qui parriter peccant pariter punientur.
you shall not be behind in punishment. For God is righteous.

ordinarily even fastened to his Ordinances: So that they that do mean to find
out the riddles of his love in Christ, must plow with the heifers of his
Ordinances, prescribed in his Word.

And that the light of Gods countenance, is the life of a Saint, you may see by
David, Psalm. 4.6, 7. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord,
lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness in my
heart, more then in the time that their corn and wine increased. And therefore
that you may enjoy God, that ye may be on that high Tower from whence all men
look like Crows, take heed that the World do not keep you, from doing those
things that will make you to know him better, whom to know indeed is to be
truly wise and safe.

But how should a man prevent this mischief which others run into?

Psalm. 17.15. As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness. See what an odd man Paul is grown,
Phil. 4 11, 12. Not that I speak in respect of want (says he:) For I have
learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. I know both how to
be abased, and I know how to abound; everywhere and in all things I am
instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer
need. and ver. 17, 18. Not because I desire a gift, etc. But I have all, and
abound, and am full, etc. And (to conclude this Use and point of Doctrine, and
to make an end of this 5. verse) read 1 Timothy 6.5, 6 7, 8. verses, They must be
withdrawn from, that suppose gain is godliness, they are men of corrupt minds
and destitute of the truth. But godliness with contentment is great gain, etc.
The Lions shall want and suffer hunger, but such as have made God their
portion, and do hold fast by him, shall be happy as long as he is God. And that
I hope will be long enough.

But I come to speak of the behavior of the latter sort, out of the 6. ver.

And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew
them.

We are come from speaking of Hogs, to show you the behavior of Dogs: we have
seen a bad behavior in the former verse; but here is a far worse in this. The
former sort of men did but slight the offer of Christ, and the means of grace;
but these do maliciously oppose them.

In this behavior of theirs, there is a threefold act, to be taken notice of.

1. They took them, that is apprehended them as gross Malefactors: And the
remnant took his servants. So the Jews after Christ was ascended, laid hands on
Peter and John, and on Stephen; and Acts 12. there you read that Peter is put
in prison. Thus they took the servants.

2. They entreated them spitefully, says the Text; that is, with scoffs, and
scorns, and imprisonment, and whipping. Paul received of the Jews five times,
40 stripes save one, at a time, 2 Cor. 11.24.

3. They slew them, that is, some of them were murdered by them, as Steven and
James the brother of John: Wherein they declared their malice to the utmost.
And this was implicitly foretold, Matthew 10.28. And fear not them which kill
the body. And we see their spirit. Acts 22.22. Away with them (cried those Jews
of Paul) for it is not fit that he should live.

I shall out of this verse from all these particulars, handle but one Point of
Doctrine.

This appears out of the 21 of Matthew, ver. 35 to the 39. likewise cap. 23. ver.
34. to the 38. cap. 26 4. Acts 7.52 to the 59. It is very evident, that such
was the usage of the Servants of Christ in the time of the Jewish Church and
Common wealth; Peter and the other Apostles whipped. Acts 5. Steven stoned, Acts
7. James slain with the sword, Acts 12. John banished into Patmos, Rev. 1. And
the stories of the Church do show what usage they have had since.

But what may be the reason hereof? Christ who sends is the Prince of peace,
the Gospel is the Gospel of Peace, and the end eternal peace. What therefore
should be the reason, Christ should have no better entertainment in the world?
The son of man came not to destroy but to save; it is true; but yet men do either
think that such as pretend to be Messengers sent of God, are not, but are
wicked men, as the Jews did not stick to say of Christ himself, Joh 8.48. and
they thought they said well. and ver. 52. they are very confident that he had a
Devil: And Joh. 10.53. they pretend they did not find fault with him for any
thing but blasphemy; or else they think that they are their enemies, because in
declaring the grace of God, they declare their duties, or rather their
properties that are partakers of it. Tit. 2.11.12, For the grace of God that
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men, teaching us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present evil world. But this wicked men cannot abide to be told,
because they cannot choose but know that they are not such as they are to whom
Christ appears in power. And because their sins and they are one, like
Hippocrates Twins, born together, live together, and die together; he that
touches their sin, touches the apple of their eye. They and their sins do
mean to run their fortunes together. Now we tell you, as the truth is, that
they that take Christ to be their Priest, must and shall take him to be their
King, to rule them, and their Prophet to instruct them. Now men think we are
too strict, unreasonable; that we abuse them; and they will not be so used by
us; But, Friends, we must tell you the truth, and we have the best Preacher
that ever was, for our example, John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil,
etc. We must be plain; if you will not love the children of God, if you will
not make much of them that fear the Lord; if vile persons in your eyes be not
contemned, if you do not hate the congregation of the wicked; if you love to
sit with vain persons; if you set not up God in your families: if you be
cozeners, oppressors, profane; if you neglect the Kingdom of God, and the ways
of the Lord Jesus, and the Ordinances which are prescribed by the Lord, to wit,
Sacraments, and the ways of worship, etc. you must know that it is not we that
make the breach, but your selves, because ye are in the Gall of bitterness, and
in the bonds of iniquity, as Peter told Simon Magus, Acts 8.23.

Use) they are deceived that think otherwise. John Baptist was a famous
Preacher, he spoke plainly, he calls them a generation of vipers; he plainly
rebukes Herod, Mark 6.16. to the 20 verse. Therefore Herodias had a quarrel
against him, and would have killed him, as after she prevailed to have it done.
Yet man's deceitful heart makes himself stark blind, it is deceitful above all
things. O, if the Jews had lived when their Fathers did, they would have been
loath to have killed the Prophets; but yet they thought it no sin to put Christ
to death. Ye cannot think what hearts ye have, if God do but leave you to your
selves. You have all of you the seeds of all sin, even of the vilest
abominations. Christ only has this privilege, that the Prince of this World
coming found naught in him; both because of his freedom from Original
corruption, and that special supportation that he had from God.

But secondly, It shows the greatness of their sin, that are come to this
height, to abuse them that entreat them to be reconciled unto God. This is our
work, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. And what your work has been, the Sun can witness. But
yet it is (though to you a sign of perdition) to us a token that we are right,
and do our duty, because we find such entertainment from ungodly men among us;
as (I profess) I know not one man that has the least testimony or sign of
grace, that has opposed us. But these dirty ways you make us to trot through,
though they be somewhat irksom to us as we are men: yet are they comfortable
because we know by the dirtiness of them, that we are in our way: for, all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.

cease praying for you, or give over advising you. I will sow the precious seed
of council once more; who can tell whether the Lord will leave a blessing
behind? O take heed ye be not in the number of them that deal cruelly with the
Messengers of Gods grace, that deal despightfully with those that bring the
gospel of salvation. For our parts, we live in the upper region, we are above
ye, we are upon such an high Tower as makes ye all look like crows in our eyes,
though ye were bigger then ye be. For he that can make his calling and election
sure, if he have to do with the greatest Nimrods in the world, he need not
fear: his strength shall be the munition of rocks. etc. But I advise you for
your own sakes, and your poor families, whom you would be loath should be
Vagabonds, and beg their bread (as I have known the children of some opposers
and persecutors to do, that had as big sooks one day as any of you) as, I say,
you would be loath the curse of God should light on you and yours: take heed of
touching these apples of Gods eye: I say (as Pilates wife said to her husband)
Matthew. 27. Have nothing to do with these men. Ye were better anger all the
Witches in the World: O take heed how ye force the Church to fall to their
(desperate) prayers, and to set God upon some notable Work for his great glory,
in your remarkable destruction. But rather come bow, come repent, give over;
There is forgiveness with God. He will forgive all that is past; he can forgive
any sin that is repented of, and will. I know it is harder to raise up a soul
laden with sin, then to load it; therefore I am earnest to persuade you not to
be discouraged, or troubled, that you have been so wicked (as Joseph comforted
his brethren, Genesis 45.5. cap. 50.19, 20, 21.) So would I willingly encourage
you to come and kiss the Son, who is willing to fall on your neck and kiss you.
As the Jailer ( Acts 16.33.) washed those stripes which he had made, and was a
Disciple; So come and rejoice in those ways ye have evil spoken of; love those
Preachers ye have so basely used, and so despightfully handled.

What shall I say?







All which particulars are contained in the verse immediately following this;
and shall be spoken of (God willing) some other time.

The Sixth Sermon.
Matthew. 22. ver. 7. But when the King heard thereof, he was wroth, and he sent
forth his Armies, and destroyed those Murderers, and burnt up their City.


YOu remember (I hope) how far we have gone in this parable; for my purpose is
not to repeat, but to go on with this 7. ver. which contains in it, summarily,
the issue and consequent of their cruel dealing toward the Kings Servants (of
which ye heard out of the foregoing verse.) Wherein (for our more methodical
proceeding) I will consider,

First, Gods taking notice of this their sin, in these words, But when the King
heard thereof.

Secondly, His displeasure against it, in the next words: he was wroth.

Thirdly, The effect of his displeasure in their severe punishment, in all the
other words, And he sent forth his Armies, and destroyed those Murderers, and
burnt up their City.

In which last particular, there are three things, contained, all worthy
observation.

First, The Instrument or means whereby they are punished, viz. Armies.

Secondly, the nature or quality of the Offense, Murderers; they are arraigned
for Murder.

Thirdly, The severity of the punishment, they are destroyed, and their City is
burnt up.

For the first, when the King hear^ ^^ere^^ that is, when Allmighty God decla^^
himself to take notice of this their wickedness; for it is spoken to our
capacity, by a Metaphor taken from a King that has sent Messengers in love,
and hears news that they have been abused.

We have a notable History in the second book of Samuel, chap. 10. David was
willing to show kindness unto Hanun the Son of Nahash, and sent his servants to
comfort him, concerning the death of his Father: Which (as you shall find in
that place) were vilainously dealt withal; and then ver. 5. we have these
words, when they told it unto David. Thus the Lord is made out under these
words, and when the King heard thereof, as taking notice of the cruel usage of
his Servants in the World. And such expressions we have many in Scripture. As
for instance, Genesis 18. ver. 20.21. And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom
and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous: I will go down
now, and see whither they have do^^ altogether according to the cry of it which
is (...) unto me; and if not, I will know. I observe this Doctrine,

cruel or unworthy dealing against the Minis^^^^ of the Gospel is a sin that
God takes specia^ ^^ice of.

And the reason is because it is a capital sin, it is an abuse of Gods Grace in
a high degree. It is (as we may call it) God-Murther, and Christ-Murther, as
well as soul-Murther, etc. (of which more shall be said when we come to it.)
But in the mean time consider, Wherein can Mortal man do greater despite to
the Majesty of God, then to oppose his Grace and favor offered in the means of
Salvation? And therefore, we have a remarkable expression Luke 3.19.20. But
Herod the Tetrach, being reproved by (John) for Herodias his brother Philips
wife, and for all the evils that Herod had done, added this above all, that he
shut up John in Prison. Mark (I pray) many evils are laid to his charge, but
this is added above all the rest, as a more crying sin then all his other sins,
That he shut up John in Prison. It is a sin that cannot be hid, a sin that God
takes special notice of.

Learn therefore for the first use, that ^ens wickedness in this kind (though
(...) looked upon as a sin) is yet a very great one.

To muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn; This is a crying
sin: For if the cry of the laborers hire that reapeth down your corn cries so
loud, as to enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabboths: how much more will
this Preacher-starving sin? And by the way, I must tell you, this is shamelesly
practiced in this very place. There is not a penny that comes out of your
purses, ye are even almesmen in this kind; other places must maintain you a
Preacher, and you entrusted only to gather it up; and yet that wickedly (blush
O Heavens?) is detained; for no other cause, but because ye are plainly, for
your good dealt withal. Because you, and your Pride, Knavery, Folly,
Covetousness, are found fault withal (which all the Country stinks of)
therefore you will add this to all your other wickednesses, to detain that
which ye are only entrusted to receive, and pay. Is it not enough that ye have
embezled the stock of the poor artificers, which was given in by your
charitable Ancestors: and carelessly (like fools) set out the yearly revenews of
the town to such as either cannot or will not pay the rent, wherewith the
Schoolmaster should be paid: but that ye suffer men very well able to pay rent
for houses, to dwell in houses of Charity, and to suffer some of them to run to
ruin; that now in your last enfeoffing the town-Land, ye have conspired
against the Church, and all the Members of it, that not one of them should be
made privy to your proceedings, nor the father of any one that Communicates
with the Church, (though every way more sufficient in estate and far greater
payers to all paiments, then ye your selves) That ye nickname the People of
God a rigid faction; the like unheard of abominations, (which a modest man may
blush to speak of, though you do not to practice them:) I say is not all this
enough, but ye must detain that which others have cared for the procuring of,
and which neither is, nor never was yours? O consider this ye Monsters, lest
some monstrous judgment befall you. And as this is a sin that God ^ears, that
is, takes notice of; So also all your affronts, and scoffs, and provocations,
especially your fitting your tickets and libells of contention and strife to be
read on Lords days, and usually on such of them as the Church use to receive
the Lords supper upon, that you may fill up the measure of your sin; and God
pour on you and yours the Vials of his wrath, which most certainly he will do,
if repentance prevent not.

this should keep up their Spirits in the midst of all their barbarous usages.

verse. and comes next to be handled. The 2. particular.


He was wroth. And without any more ado it affords us this Doctrine.

Read the chap. before this, the one and twentieth, ver. 35. to the 42. You
have their sin in all the verses, except the last which is the one and
fortieth: and in that, the miserable effects of Gods wrath are foretold. He
will miserably destroy those wicked men. Which came to pass sure enough, not
long after.



That God should not spare his own son, but give him to death for us; admirable
love! And here is unparalleld justice too; the Son though the Son, must die
that justice may be satisfied. And wisdom able to make all the wise men of the
World quite mad, so much as once to look upon it. And much might be said of the
glory of the Gospel, the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And
therefore to go about to hinder this design of God for his glory, is a
provoking sin, and brings down great wrath.

Lidford Castle and the Town hall here, where they starved diverse of them. I
say, how much more are they bloody butchers among you that go about to hinder
your Salvation, and to keep you in such a condition as will be for the
everlasting destruction both of body and soul!

Friends, I fear the blood of those that starved in this Town in the late
troubles, will be laid to the charge of some of you, that did not pity them
nor relieve them; but rather rejoiced in their misery (as many of you did) and
helped to make it greater. O do not add to body-killing soul-killing; do not
add to man-killing God-killing, Christ-killing.

tasted the Lord is gracious; yet the righteous God likes it not.



have been stifled and strangled by you so long; and my rich offer so trampled
on in the dirt of your pride and profaneness, passion and worldliness; you shall
be troubled no more; it would be sad news.

And so I come to the severe punishment of this sin, and therein first of the
instrument which God makes use of, and the means whereby he punishes ungodly
men: He sent forth his Armies. The nature and quality of the offense, and the
severity of the punishment it self, shall be spoken of (God willing) afterward.

But first (I say) of the Instrument or means. I am almost out of doubt that
the Holy Ghost here has an eye to the Roman Armies which came and besieged
Jerusalem, by Gods appointment and sending, even to the utter destruction of
that City: but yet I will enlarge somewhat upon this Doctrine.

I add that (the observers of them) because usually wicked men join them
together in their opposing them, as Saul made havoc of the Church, Acts 8.2.
and haled not only Preachers, but other men, yea, and women to Prison. I
confess, through the mighty power of God, Cursed Kine have short horns among us:
but yet what may be done, and what the times will permit to be done, is
extended to the very utmost even against all that are of this way, both old and
young. Now seeing it is ^o, let us muster up the Lords Forces, that they may be
terrible to you, that by repentance, the coming of them may be prevented.

Psalm 84.1, 8, ^2. In all which verses he is so called. The several sorts of
Hosts or Armies we will show you.

An Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, to wit, by the
plague. 2 Kings 19.35. An Angel of the Lord smote in the camp of the Assyrians,
an hundred fourscore and five thousand. These are called a heavenly host. Luke
2.13. And suddenly there was with the (or that) Angel (that brought to the
shepherds the news of Christ's birth) a multitude of the heavenly host praising
God, and saying etc. Acts 12.23. And immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him
(that is, King Herod) because he gave not God the Glory, and he was eaten of
worms, and gave up the Ghost.

2. Deuteronomy. 17.3. Now Host is the same with Army.

We find the Lord making use of this host, Joshuah 10.12, 13. And he (to wit
Joshuah) said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and
thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon. And the Sun stood still, and the Moon staid,
etc.

Exodus 12.51. The Lord did bring the children of Israel out of Egypt by their
Armies. Yea even evil men, wicked men are Armies that God sometimes makes use
of. Isaiah 10.5.6, 7. O Assyrian the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their
hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical Nation; and
against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and
to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. How be
it he means not so, etc. And so Jer. 25.9. Behold, I will send and take all
the families of the North, says the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar my servant, etc.
Thus ye see the Armies of men good and bad are all the Lords,

The Lord prepares waters to drown the whole World for the wickedness of it.
And Exodus 14.27 28. The Lordoverthrew the Egyptians in the middst of the Sea.
And the Waters returned and covered the Charets and horsemen, and all the host
of Pharaoh, etc. So, Judges 5.21. sings Deborah and Barak. The river Kishon
swept them away, that Ancient River, the River Kishon.

Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorra, brimstone and fire from the
Lord out of Heaven. So 2 Kings 1.10. Eliah is sent for, but fire comes down
from Heaven, and consumes that Captain and his fifty men that were sent to
take him; and another in like manner, and his fifty, ver. 11.

Numb. 16.46. Or of hailstones as Joshua. 10. ver. 11.

The earth opens her mouth to swallow up Korah, Dathan and Abiram.

Yea even the meanest creatures Pharaoh, and Herod. Exodus 8.6.8.16.17. and Acts
12.23.

Judas was. Mat. 27.3.4.5. These Armies are all at a minutes Call; when God
does but say the word, they go.

that God wants not power to punish his adversaries. Did folk consider Gods
Armies, they would not dare to go on in sin. Men foolishly think earthly powers
are above the powers of the Allmighty. This is a great sin against the first
Commandment. Yet is it common that men fear earthly powers, and fear not God
who is the Lord of Hoasts; and in comparison of whom, all the Nations are as
the drop of a bucket.

who is himself a consuming fire. Whither shall I go (says David) from thy
presence? Psalm 139.



But how may a man know, whither he fear God or no?

answer. By his diligent departing from evil, and constant cleaving to that
which is good. Psalm. 34.11.12.13.14. Come ye children, hearken unto me: I will
teach you the fear of the Lord. What man is he that desires life, and loves
many days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from
speaking guile, depart from evil, and do good, seek peace and pursue it. Pro.
8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil: pride and arrogance, and the evil
way, and the froward mouth do I hate.

And so I come to show you the nature of the sin, that is here laid to the
charge of Gospel opposers, and neglectors, that you may see the greatness of
it, and the more abhor it.

Murder is laid to the charge of the Jews. They were guilty of murder many ways.

Minister Murder.
In that they murdered Gods Messengers. Now this again is done,

First, By taking away their lives. So Stephen was murdered. Acts. 7.58.59. So
in Queen Mary's days, Cranmer, Ridley Latimer, Philpot, Bradford, Saunders,
Rogers, Julius Palmer, were cruelly burned, because they wit nessed for Christ.

Secondly, Gods Messengers are sometimes Murdered, in their good name, and in
their reputation. He that shall say to his brother, Raca, Mat. 5.22. is in Gods
account a Murderer. We know our times are in Gods hands; and our reputation
rises and falls, even as the Lord will: Yet those evil tongues that speak
such devouring words of us, are murtherous tongues before the Lord.

And so also Thirdly, When people are causelessly angry with any, much more with
Ministers, and swell in their pride and passion, Mat. 5.22, aforenamed, the
former part of the verse.

Lastly, To detain from them, that whereupon they and their families should
live. It is a sin to withold goods from the owners, though there be power in
men's hands so to do. But blessed be God, who has granted us meat to eat some
other way, and wherewith to live. Yet give me leave to tell you, that sit here
before me, and are guilty of this crying sin, that you must answer for it
before that God whom we serve.

The second sort of Murder, is, Soul-murther.
Soul murder, I mean of their neighbors; All that oppose the ways of God, do
by consequence make themselves guilty of their blood that perish in their sins.
They shall perish, but their blood shall be required, (as at the hands of
careless Ministers, so) at your hands, that either neglect to do your best to
procure Preachers; or (which is far worse) oppose them that God has sent among
you.

Thirdly, Ye are guilty of self-murder, Selfmurther.
in regard of your poor souls: And for a man to be found in this sense felo de
se, will procure a sentence not only to be cast out, to a dog-like burial in
the high way, 4. Christmurder.
but to be cast into outer darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

Fourthly, Such will be found Murderers of Christ also. Heb. 10.29. They tread
underfoot the son of God, etc. they are guilty of the blood of the Lord Christ,
they do in effect shed it again, that do refuse this crucified Christ offered
in the Preaching of the Gospel.

Lastly, Godmurther.
Such as oppose Gospel Ordinances, fight against God, the Author of this rich
vouchsafement, and resist the life of God, what in them lies; We have an
expression from the mouth of Gamaliel, recorded Acts 5.39. of fighters against
God: But I lay to the charge of all that do not readily and thankfully accept
of Gods offer, but oppose his Ordinaces, no less crime then murdering of God.
Such as are strangers from the life of God, as stifle the life of God, which is
his truth, O that they would consider. God speaks to us, yea entreats us,
that we would besaved; but we withstand God, we resist the Holy Ghost. Act.
7.51. Learn therefore,

in all the sorementioned particulars, that to the utmost of their power,
endeavor Minister murder, Soul murder, Self-murder, Christ murder, and
God-murther.





The severity of the punishment it self, is the last particular. He destroyed
those Murderers, and burnt up their City. This is the Doctrine,

I shall referr you to what has been said, and proved, and especially to Luke
19.43.44. and also to Mat. 10, 14.15. where the Lord Christ threatens to such
as shall refuse to hear the words of his Messengers, that it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorr^^ in the day of judgment, then for that City
and also you may read Mat. 23.34.35.36. You have the practice of evil men ver.
34. to kill, scourge, persecute those Prophets, wise men and Scribes which God
sends: And after the threatened accusation, or enditement, forerunning the
severity of Gods justice, most certainly to be executed.









Take a Motive, Severe punishment from man is terrible; what then (think ye)
will the severity of God be? when a fire [shall] be kindled in [his] anger, and
shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase,
and set on fire the foundations of the Mountains. I will conclude with Heb.
12.29. For our God is a consuming fire. So much for the offer of Christ to the
Jews. And so much for this time. Let us pray.

The seventh Sermon.
Matthew. 22. ver. 8. unto the 15. Then says he to his servants, The Wedding is
ready, but they which were hidden were not worthy. Go ye therefore into the
high wars, and as many as ye shall find bid to the Marriage. So these servants
went out, etc.


HItherto of the Invitation of the Jews, etc.

Now follows to be considered the Calling of the Gentiles.

In which we may consider 1. The Kings Commission, ver. 8 9. 2. The servants
diligence in the execution thereof, v. 10. 3. The Trial, Proof, and Punishment
of unworthy Guests, ver. 11, etc.


1. As touching the Kings Commission we have 1. The occasion, ver. 8. 2. The
matter of the Commission, ver. 9.


The occasion was the readiness of that admirable Wedding Supper, and the
unworthiness of the invited Jews to taste thereof; from bo^^ which I collect
this Doctrine.

There is here no defect in God; Christ is given to death, the Fathers Justice
is satisfied, he has by his one oblation of himself once offered, made a full,
perfect, and sufficient oblation and satisfaction, for the sins of the whole
world. The Wedding truly is ready; Though your sins be as crimson (says God) I
will make them as white as snow. If there were ten thousand times more sins,
and wicked persons then there be; yet the Wedding is ready; nothing can hinder
from mercy, such as are willing to accept of it. O Judas, thou did commit a
very great sin in betraying thy Master; but a far greater in running from him,
and hanging thy self. The former was to make his Manhood cease to be, the
latter was as it were a nulling of his Godhead, a very murder as it were of
Christ's Deity. Mary Magdalen was a woman out of whom went seven Devils, a
sinner in the worst sense; yet there was not a more holy woman living
afterward. She came to Christ, much was forgiven her; there is enough in God,
enough in Christ. Not any want of will in God. As I live says the Lord, I do
not desire the death of a sinner. Not any want in Christ, for he paid enough
for a thousand worlds. But they which were bidden, were not worthy. Man's
unworthiness deprives him of good. Why did the Apostle turn from the Jews to
the Gentiles, but because they did put the Gospel from them, and did judge
themselves unworthy of everlasting life? Acts 13.46. they were wanting to
themselves; the Supper was ready they were sent for, they would not come. What
was that which turned Adam out of Paradise? His own unworthiness. He had one
easy Commandment given him; but he hearkened to the Serpent, and forgot God
his Creator, Genesis 3. What was that drowned the old world, but sin,
disobedience? they hearkened not to Noah sent for their good; Gods
longsuffering waited in his Ministry and preaching; they were unworthy; they
are now prisoners in Hell for their labor. Read 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. This
unworthiness made the earth to swallow up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; they rose
up against Moses and Aaron, which were Gods Servants, they wanted for nothing
(as we use to say) but they would not be ruled, Numb. 16. there you have their
story. This unworthiness in King Saul lost him his Kingdom; Samuel was sent to
him with a Message from God; he did not punctually observe it. See 1 Samuel
15.23. what is there said. Rebellion is the sin of witchcraft, and stubborness
is as iniquity and idolatry: Because thou have rejected the word of the Lord,
he has also rejected thee from being King. Men's unworthiness is the common
cause of all calamities. Health, wealth, the Gospel, it is unworthiness of them
deprives you, robs you of them all.

Christ, if you would be ruled by God. It Is true, Joseph was in prison, yea, but
God was with him. What care I (may a Saint say) where I am, whither in a Palace
or a Prison, if God be with me.

Isaiah (cap. 59.1, 2, 3. Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot
save; neither is his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: But your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you,
that he will not hear, etc.

Unto us a child is born, and unto us a son is given: Here is a Christ offered
to you all to save you from your sins. O what a sin is this, men will not
thankfully accept of Gods offers!

Consider. 1. This provokes the Lord wonderfully, it moves him to take away his
offers.

2. He that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16.16. If any man love not the
Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha. 1 Cor. 16.22. Let him be cursed, and
cursed over and above. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then light, Joh. 3.19.

3. Men sin against themselves; they rob themselves, undo themselves, cast
themselves away; this is a sin of a high nature, it is a sin against nature.
Men bring misery upon themselves through their foolishness. Beasts that we are!
to deprive our selves of the means of grace, of the fruit and benefit of them,
of health, friends, wealth, every thing! Christ has provided all things; O
what pity it is so much good cheer should be lost! Surely it is a very sinful
sin so to forsake our own mercies, and to be guilty of our own misery.

Next for Counsel. Seeing there is no defect in God or Christ; seeing man's own
unworthiness deprives him of good; are you loath to be deprived of Gods
benefits? be careful to walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God, Col.
1.10. Otherwise we may be justly deprived of good.

Q. But what is it to walk worthy of the Lord?

It is for a man to improve to Gods glory, and to the good of his own soul, all
those vouchsafements and enjoyments, which the Lord has bestowed upon him. Say
thus, God has given me wealth; I will use my wealth to his glory: the Lord
has given me opportunities of grace, I will improve them to the utmost. The
talents which God has given us, we must employ them, trade upon them; we must
not wrap them in a napkin; Have we riches, honors, children, lands, large
possessions, any thing: Let us improve all to Gods glory; let God be first in
our thoughts, let us exalt him in all things. Servants, Children, Householders,
Parents, Constables, Magistrates, use your Talents, your Relations: improve
your Interests to the glory of God, this is to walk worthy of the Lord. And
this is the way, or rather a sign, that God has been, will be, and continue to
be your God unto death.

We come to the matter of the Commission. Go ye therefore into the high ways,
and as many as ye shall find bid to the Marriage. In which words we may
observe 1. The ground and occasion hinted. Therefore 2. The word of command go
ye. 3. The place whither they must go, viz. into the high ways. 4. The work to
be done. As many as ye find, bid to the Marriage.

From the first (besides what has been said already) we may learn this Lesson.

So Acts 13.46 47. The refusal of the Gospel by the Jews, is an occasion of the
offer of it to the Gentiles. So Rom 11.11. Through the fall of the Jews,
Salvation is come to the Gentiles; if one will not, another shall.

Jews reject it, the Lord will incline the hearts of the Gentiles thankfully to
embrace it. Acts 13.48. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and
glorified the word of the Lord; and as many as were ordained to eternal life,
believed. And so also Romans 11.25. Blindness is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Therefore go ye out, etc.

grace, is not limited or disposed according to men's wills, but according to
the mind of the Lord. If men seek never so much to stop the current, they
labor in vain. God alone does all in this as in other things. If Gods elect be
but few or none in one place, they be the more in another: If the word want
good success in this town, it will find better in the next. And yet let such
places take heed as will not receive the Gospel, as will not hear our words. It
shall be more tolerable for such as never enjoyed the word; It shall be easier
for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for those
places. Read Mat. 10.14 15. It is a monstrous absurdity, to think that the
removal of Ministers is in the power of two or three addle-headed fools. Surely
it is a business of a higher concernment then so. David's times were in Gods
hands, and so are the times of all; and therefore no question Gospel preachers
go and come by Gods special will.

Jews do even to this very day. But yet God will bring good out of it. This
consideration is of great use, we will a little look into it. All the creatuets
both in heaven and earth, act, go, and come at Gods command. When we see men
bold in their opposing the ways of God, we many times are troubled; we do not
consider, that as in wisdom he made all things, so in wisdom he orders all
things excellently. Gen 45. ver. 5.7.8. says Joseph there, God did send me
before you to preserve life, etc. And Genesis 50.20. but as for you ye thought
evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring it to pass, as it is this
day, to save much People alive. And so for lusts, and temptations, God suffers
them sometimes in his own children; either to teach us to observe his rules
better; or to humble us, that we may cleave closer to God, and that graces may
grow (Humility) says one) is the Nurse of graces) or that we may know God, and
our selves better, or that we may be the more thankful when victory comes: but
yet all this while God is bringing good out of it: and that Oracle (worthy to
be remembered) that all things shall work together for good to them that fear
God, etc. Romans 8.28. will be found in the end to be gloriously true.

that can and does thus bring good out of evil, good effects out of evil causes.





Deuteronomy. 8.2.5. that we may learn to know him better, and to know our selves.
Therefore it is good (I say) to take notice of Gods dealing in this kind. So
much for this point.

From the word of command. Go ye, we may learn,

They must have a care to do what they have a word of command for; at least,
what is neither directly nor indirectly forbidden in the word of God. For there
are some actions which are called indifferent, as 1 Cor. 7.28.30. If thou
marry, thou have not sinned, etc. and to weep as though we wept not, and to
rejoice as though we rejoiced not. Such things are not a transgression of a Law
(for so sin is 1 Jo. 3.4) they are indifferent in themselves; Though every
particular determined thought word or action be either good or bad, a step
either to heaven or to hell: yet for the actions themselves, there are some
that are neither good nor bad.

But to the point, I say, Christians must do warrantable actions.



Noah Genesis 7.14. and cap. 8.1. (...) In both which chapters, he had a word
(...) mand, both for his making, and also for (...) entering into the ark. and
ver. the 8. for his taking in accordingly clean and unclean beasts as he was
commanded. c. 8.12. and 16. he stayed other seven days, that is, he would have
a warrant for his coming out of the Ark. And Abraham, Genesis 12.1. had a command
to go out of his country, and from his kindred, and from his fathers house,
etc. And Jacob Genesis 31.3. must be bid to return unto the Land of his fathers
and to his kindred. And in his old age though he resolve to go to Egypt, Genesis
25.28. yet he must have and had a warrant, cap. 56. ver. 1.2.3. and 4. And
Numb. 9.18. At the commandment of the Lord the children of Israel journeyed,
and at the commandment of the Lord they pitched, etc. Heb. 5.4. No man takes
this honor unto him (to wit of the priesthood) but he that is called of God as
was Aaron.





thing that might be a ground of comfort to the conscience of the doer.





Go ye therefore into the high ways. From the word of command, we come to
speak of the place where they they must go. Luke 14.23. has it thus, Go out
into the highwayes and hedges. The mind of the spirit is to show us

For all mankind are alike to him. Job. 31.15. Did not he that made me in the
womb, make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb? cap. 34.19. He
accepts not the persons of Princes: nor regards the rich more then the
poor: for they are all the work of his hands.

Therefore are the Commissions so large. Mat. 28.19. and Mark 16.16. All
Nations must be taught; every creature must be preached unto. Acts 10.34.35.
Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons: but in every Nation, he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him Read Acts 13.46.47. And mark the last words
of the latter of those verses; I have thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that
thou should be for Salvation unto the ends of the Earth. Mat. 11.25.26. At
that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee O father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them to babes. Even so, father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. 1
Cor. 1.26. For you see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. Lastly, James 2.5 comes
in for a witness. Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of
this world, rich in says, and heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to
them that love him?

never the nearer Heaven, never the the more in Gods books for their greatness.
They are deceived that think to be esteemed of God as they are in the World.
Friends, you shall all stand alike naked and bare; glory not in any thing.







Fourthly, And as many as ye find, bid to the Marriage. This is the last
particular in the matter of the Commission. In which words we are showed what a
happiness it may prove, to be in the way of the Gospel, as it takes its walk
through the world. The Apostles and Servants commissionated to preach, have
Authority to invite to Christ, all that they have any occasion to meet with:
while they are in the execution of their office. Not all, but as many as ye
shall find, must be bidden to the Marriage. There see

It is true, many more are called then converted; Yet there is a special
providence of God in the outward call to Christ. There are times of grace for
Nations, Towns and Villages. It was a good while before the Gentiles had it at
all. Mat. 0 5.6. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the
Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. Acts 11.19. Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution
that arose about Steven, traveled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch,
Preaching the Word to none but unto the Jews only. But Acts 13.46. it is made
plain both for the Jews and Gentiles; the words are: Then Paul and Barnabas
waxed bold and said, It was necessary that the word of God should first have
been spoken unto you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life: Lo we turn to the Gentiles. And through the fall
of the Jews, Salvation is come to the Gentiles. Romans 11.11. Sometimes in one
place, sometimes in another, is the Gospel Preached; not in all places.

It is a precious commodity. Things of price are not commonly to be had in all
places.

But some will say, out of Mark 16.15. The commission is, that it must be
preached to every creature in all the world.



But yet again, Romans 10 18. It is said there, Their sound went into all the
earth, and their words unto the end of the world.

Psalm. 19.1, 2. and 3. There is neither speech, nor language where their voice
is not heard, that is, of the Heavens and Firmament and Sun, etc.



Why but then those that it is not preached unto, are to be excused; for how
shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? Romans 10.14.

on Gods part, and leaves men inexcusable, Acts 14.17. Nevertheless he left not
himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave rain from heaven, and
fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. And so Romans 1.18,
19, 20. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, etc. So that they are
without excuse.





It is no common vouchsafement.

But how shall one do to show himself thankful therefore?

Gentiles did, Acts 13.48. so much of the 9. verse

Now out of the tenth we are to speak briefly of the Servants diligence; which
ha^h two things.

1. Their Pains. So those Servants went out into the high ways, etc.

2. The Success. And the Wedding was furnished etc.

It is the property of Gods faithful Servants to be obedient to Christ their
Master, (a) Genesis 6.22.12.4.22.2.3.16.
Noah (b) Gal. 1.15, 16.
Abraham, Paul and many more might be instanced in.

For it is, first, their duty.

And Secondly, it is their frame of Spirit.

And lastly, It is their privilege; and upon this they look as upon a
privilege, as indeed it is a very great one.

Romans 6.16. Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey? etc.







To obey is better then Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. and great is the utility and
profit that comes by it.

those formerly named, Christ's example, Phil. 2.8.

Further from the Servants pains we learn,

1. Romans 9.21, 22, 23.

2 In respect of the Godly for their probation and trial of faith, 1 Cor. 11.19.

3. In respect of the wicked to leave them without excuse.



See these places, Genesis 4.3, 4. cap. 9.18.25. cap. 17, 18, 19. cap. 27. ver.
41. Mark 10.4. Acts 5.1. cap. 6.5. cap 18.13. Romans 9.6, 7. cap, 10.16. 1 Cor.
5.1. Jude 12. Rev. 2.9 14, 15.29. A floor of corn and chaff, Matthew. 3.12. Tares
and wheat, cap. 13.24. A draw net, 47, 48 49.

2.

If all comers may be admitted, guests will not be wanting; men may be drawn to
the outside for by-respects, as Balaam, Numb. 23.10. and so Matthew. 7.21.



Gentiles. But I must here end for this time.

The Eighth Sermon.
Matthew 22. ver. 11. etc. And when the King came in to see the Guests, he saw
there a man which had not on a wedding garment. And he says unto him, Friend,
etc.


WE are upon the second branch of the third thing in the praedicate of this
admirable parable, to wit, the latter Guests that are invited (upon the refusal
of the Jews first invited, and again and again called, but refusing, and
abusing the messengers sent) to wit the Gentiles. We have finished our
discourse of the Kings Commission given for their calling, and of the servants
diligence in the execution thereof, out of the three immediate foregoing
verses. Now it follows out of this ^th. verse. and the verses following, unto
the end of the 14. that we speak of the third branch or part formerly noted in
the calling of the Gentiles, viz. the proof and trial of such as become guests,
and take upon them the profession of the Christian faith. Wherein three things
come before us to be taken notice of.

First, The manner of their trial.

Secondly, The issue of the trial; both these ver. 11.

Thirdly, The just, holy, exact, and grave proceeding of the Lord against him
who upon trial was found unworthy, in the verses following; of which hereafter,
by Gods assistance.

This 11. verse tells us first, of the manner of his trial, and that by three
particulars, For.

First, The King himself, viz. God will try him.

And Secondly, He will do it immediately, he is said to come in to see the
guests.

And lastly, It is implied that the visible Church is the place of Gods walk to
and fro, to teach us that God takes special notice of such as make profession
of religion; he will come in to see them.

From these things put together we have to observe this point.

But in what respect shall they be tried?

answer, In point of sincerity, as touching their truth of Grace. Why so?
Surely it is necessary in regard of Gods glory; for first, such as are found to
be sound, do much honor God, God has much glory by them: and this is that God
expects from those that wear his livery, he commands it, Psalm. 50.14. He
delivers them from trouble to that end, ver. 15. He would have our light shine
befone men, that they might see our good works, and glorify our father which
is in heaven. Mat. 5.16. And on the other side, if upon trial professors be
sound saulty, God has much dishonor thereby. Romans 2.14. For the name of God
is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. But we should be to the praise of
his glory. Ephesians. 1.12.

And why will God do it himself why will the King himself come in to see the
Guests?

answer, Because no instrument can do it sufficiently. For the heart is
deceitful. Jer. 17.9.10. No man, no not of himself, can find out the depths of
the heart. And although the Lord lend man a candle to search the heart with,
yet it will only a little serve for his own heart; It will not serve to find
out the heart of another.

But when will God prove men and try men?

For thou Lord, have proved us, thou have tried us as silver is tried. Thou
broughtest us into the net, thou laidst afflictions upon our loins. And
sometime again the Lord tries by prosperity, in and by which many are found
faulty. O the bewitching sunshines of this world! Demas has forsaken me (says
Paul) and has embraced this present world. 2 Timothy 4.10.


God regards not, such Job speaks of chapter 22.13.14. This is atheistical
blindness.

The Lord knows the way of the righteous. Psalm. 1.6. It is a small thing for
Paul to be judged by man; it is his comfort, that he that judges him is the
Lord 1 Cor. 4.4.5.



If he justify, who shall condemn Romans 8 34

Cor. 10.18. But not he (says Paul there) that commends himself is approved,
but he whom the Lord commends.

viz, the clear light of Gods word; this is a lamp for our feet and a light
for our paths, Psalm. 119.105. We live under a larger Canon then the Jews did;
Gods word will teach a young man to cleanse his way, Cereus in vitium flecti,
monitoribus asper. Hor.
Psalm. 119 9. And yet of all Ages they are most untoward. Waxy to be shaped
unto all evil form^, stubborn to teachers, having their minds upon a thousand
vanities; Yet Gods word will teach such. Let this move us, the gracious means
we live under. So much for that.

He saw there a man that had not on a wedding garment. Upon trial there is a
fault found. But what is the fault? And with whom is it found? for both these
particulars are here to be taken notice of. I shall put off the first from this
place, because it will fall in to be handled in the next verse, where his fault
is particularly charged upon him.

Now of the latter first. There is a man found faulty.

What but one?

Answ. The scope is not to that purpose; For doubtless among so many Gentiles,
there were many that wanted the wedding garment; for there be many hypocrites
in every visible Church. Many people came in. Isaiah 2. ver. 2.3. among which
there could not but be many unfound ones. But it is spoken in the singular
Number, to show the strictness of the search. He saw a man; not one can escape
the eyes of the Lord. Hence observe.

Deus est totus oculus.
because he is an al-seeing God, none can go from his presence, Psalm. 139. from
the 1. to the 6. verse read. Jer. 23.23.24. Dan. 2 22 Heb. 4.13. And yet more
evidently, because in him we live and move and have our being, Acts 17.28. I
might heap up places of Scripture, to show how God hunteth out sinners. Genesis
3.8.9.
Adam, Cap 4 9.10.
Cain, Exodus 32.1.6.7. Joshua 7.10.11.20.21. 2 Kings 5.20. Mat. 26.14.15.16.21.
Acts. 5.1.2.3.
the People of Israel, when they had worshipped the calfe which Aaron made, the
Lord knows it. And sacrilegious Achan is found out by this al-seeing God. And
Gehazi, And Judas, And Annanias and Saphira, all these were spied out by the
Lord. The darkness is no darkness with him, the night is as clear as the day,
etc. But I hasten to the Uses. Because I chiefly look upon the next Verse to
speak of the fault charged upon him that is here spied out.

Use. 1. They are fool-deceived, that think their ways and works are hidden
from the Lord. Yet this is not only the fault of hardhearted sinners: but even
of Jacob and Israel. Isai. 40.27.28. We think God sees not or regards nor our
misery; this is our folly. But on the other side, What a poor thing it is to
think to sly from the presence of the Lord! yet so foolish was Jonah. cap.
1.3.4. He paid the fare of a ship, and went into it, to go to Tarshish from the
presence of the Lord; but could he? O no, it follows verse 4. God sends after
him with a witness.

Isai. 29.15.16. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the
Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us? and who
knows us? Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the
potters clay; For, shall the work say of him that made it, he made me not? Or
shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, he had no understanding? It
is a notable place.

ver.) Be advised to take heed of sin; no corners are dark enough to commit
sin in. God will see as well at midnight as at noon day. Pray to God to unite
your hearts, that you may fear his name; it is a good expression; when our
hearts are united to God, we shall stand in awe, and shall not sin. Especially
take heed of Hypocrisy; for the danger is great of that sin, as may be
gathered out of Mat. 25.41. their portion of misery is none of the least, as
you may see by the Lords dealing with this poor wretch, which is next to be
handled.

Verses 12.13.14. And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not
having a Wedding garment? and he was speechless. Then said the King unto his
servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take hiw away, and cast him into outer
darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called,
but few are chosen.

HAving finished out of the foregoing verse, the manner, and issue of the trial
of this unworthy Guest: I now come to the third particular noted in the Lords
proceeding against him; Wherein three other things are observable.

1. His examination about his offense.

Secondly, His conviction thereupon, both which are in the 12. ver.

Thirdly, His condemnation, or the Lords Commission and warrant for his
execution, with the ground or reason thereof. ver. 13.14. of which afterward.

In his Examination we have, 1. The matter laid to his charge. 2. The manner of
Gods dealing.
How came thou hither not having a Wedding garment, is his charge. This man
came with others to the marriage of the Kings son, but he came unprovided, he
was without a Wedding garment; and this is the sum of his accusation, and the
fault that is laid to his charge; aggravated by his impudency, in daring to
come in that trim. How came thou in hither, etc. that is, how did thou dare
be so bold, to come hither unprepared?

The great question is, what is meant here by the Wedding garment. The Papists
understand hereby love and good works, but they miss the mark. By the Wedding
garment we are here to understand, the righteousness of our Lord Jesus put on
by the hand of a true saving and justifying faith, and manifested by a holy,
sincere, and upright walking in the ways of godliness: and therefore the
Apostle Paul, speaking to this purpose, and somewhat altering this phrase;
wills us to put off the works of darkness, and to put on the armor of light,
Romans 13.12. And in the next two verses he expounds his meaning, viz. Not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying; but putting on Christ,
etc. where Christ and a man's own lusts, his sinful lusts are opposed, read
ver. 13. and 14. and he does more fully mention this Ephesians. 4.21, 22, 23. In
these words and phrases, To hear him, to be taught by him, as the truth is in
Jesus. To put off the old man, to be renewed in the spirit of our minds, to put
on the new man; All which is performed by the power of sound and saving faith.
For ye are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ, says Paul, Gal.
3.26. And again, For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ, ver. 27.

By all which you may see plainly what it is to have, or to want the Wedding
garment. The sum of the Charge brought against this Professor in my Text, was,
that he wanted sincerity, he was not that he professed himself to be. He drew
no virtue from Christ, he had not put on Christ by Faith, and therefore could
not walk in sound and sincere obedience.

I observe this Doctrine.

As on the other side, It is most glorious and comfortable to have honest and
good hearts; and such are comely creatures; such have the Wedding garment, and
shall stand with boldness before God in all Trials. You may read for proof of
the Doctrine. Isaiah 1.1, 2, 3. and verses 10 11. where the Lord by Isaiah
keeps woeful doings (as we use to say) with the Jews about this very thing.

Thoir Sacrifices are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. Yea their whole
way, viz. whatsoever they do, is an abomination to the Lord, ver. 9. They bring
scandal to the holy Religion which they profess, whether Ministers (as Elies
sons, 1 Samuel 2.17. made the offering of the Lord to be abhorred) or People,
Romans 2.24. by whose carriage the name of God is blasphemed or evil spoken of.

shall hear, Friend, how came thou in hither? as this unworthy guest here.
But unto the wicked said God, What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy
mouth, Psalm. 50. ver. 16. to the 22. verse. Woe to you Scribes, and Pharisees,
hypocrites, says Christ, Matthew. 23.13.

as a field which he has blessed.



Rev. 7.14
and made white in the blood of the Lamb, will render us glorious creatures.
Cap. 19.7, and 8.
Such may by the Law (as we say) rejoice and be glad, as are so made ready, as
are arrayed in this fine linen, which is clean and white: This is the
righteousness and beauty of Saints.

Secondly the necessity; for else, Friend how came thou in hither? will be
heard one day. All Sacrifices and Services are odious and abominable without
this Wedding Garment, Prove. 15.8.9. The prayer of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord, etc. Read to this purpose Isaiah the first chapter, from the tenth
verse to the 16. No sound comfort to the soul where this is not, sorrow of
heart and a curse belongs to deceitful workers. Cursed be he that does the
Work of the Lord deceitfully, Jer. 48.10. Cursed in his very prayers and
performances of Religious Exercises, though holy for the matter. It is good
counsel therefore, Rev. 3.18. to buy this white raiment, that nakedness be
covered, and may not appear, which will procure a curse.

that all have not faith. 2 These. 3.2. Nay few; For when the Son of man comes,
shall he find faith on the earth? Ephesians. 4.16. to 22.
Luke 18.8. And yet none can put on the Lord Jesus without it. Such as walk
after the course of the Gentiles, which know not God, have not put on Christ;
they have but an outside at most of Christianity, and not the Wedding Garment
here spoken of.

We are next to speak of the manner of his Examination, employed in the word,
The Manner of Gods dealing.
Friend.

But why does the Lord call this unworthy guest Friend? he knew him to be his
Foe and Adversary, and a dissembling Friend.

I answer, he does thus term him by an Irony, for his further conviction; in
that he pretended to be that which he was not, and so sinned against his own
knowledge and conscience. So his seeming holy profession did the more aggravate
his wickedness. And also it may be, that the Lord thus proceeds, to take away
all exception, and to stop up every starting hole. Men now pick quarrels at the
manner of Ministers reproving them, it is a common shift among us in this place
(so wise are men to their own hurt) to put off just reproofs with accusations
of passion, and bitterness in the Speakers of the Word; as Jeremiah was called
the raving Propher, and accused to have his ears more open then was fit, to
that tale-telling fellow Baruch the son of Neriah: So men instead of sorrowing,
and making satisfaction for those evils of injustice, deceit, rejecting of
Christ, and despising the Church (which they are plainly guilty of) complain of
the Reprovers. But God will prevent them, he will call them Friends, yet (and
that justly) cut their throats (as we say) They shall have no hole to pick in
the manner of Gods dealing with them, they shall have no hole to creep out at.
See how he speaks Ezekiel. 18.25. Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal.
Hear now, O house of Israel; etc, He calls them house of Israel, reasons fairly
with them. And so again, Isa. 5. ver. 1, 2, 3. where he gives loving language,
well beloved, and beloved, and his vineyard; yet the scope of this whole
Chapter is to denounce judgments against them for their sins. So that we may
sum up all in this one observation.

we often spoil our work through our indiscretion; yet know, God will not; he
has no passions; he will be too hard for you; he will call the sinner friend,
and yet condemn him.

The question (Neighbors) will not be, Whether we speak in passion; but
Whether it be not against even a principle of nature, to disannul or alter men's
wills, to embezeel things committed to your trust, to convert public stocks to
private uses. Read how Paul argues, Gal. 3.15. to strengthen the Doctrine of
Faith; and take the former part of his Discourse, and apply it to your selves
for false dealing in public stocks, and altering the uses of things contrary
to the wills of the dead. You will have nothing to say to God, though you have
to us, who yet allow not our selves in any expressions unsuitable to the work we
have in hand.

Joshuah did cap. 7.19. My son (says he to Achan) give I pray thee glory to
the Lord God of Israel. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor,
and evil-speaking be put away from you with all malice, and be ye kind one te
another, and tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4 31, 32.



by which we are sealed to the day of Redemption. This is forbidden, Ephesians. 4.30.



Jonah, chap. 4. ver. 9.10, 11. Jonah is desperately pettish, very much out of
frame, yet God speaks kindly to him, reasons fairly with him. He knows our
frame, and considers our infirmities; he is God and not man.

So much of the unworthy guests examination.

Now follows his conviction. And he was speechless, (...).
he was haltered, At ille obmutuit, vel ad verbum, at ille capistratus erat. He
was dumb'd, muzled, he had a bit in his jaws, he was tongue-tied, he could not
speak.

Let this be the Doctrine;

How weak will thy hand and thy heart be, when God shall have to do with thee O
sinner?

Romans 2.15. It will bear witness, and either accuse or excuse. Conscience is
always good so far forth as it is conscience. We use to say such a man has
little conscience; and, thou have no conscience at all; Whereby we mean, they
whom we so accuse have little or none; their conscience is, as it were, laid
asleep, or made drunk. But I say, that which is of it left is always good: and
the judgment which God will give to men, shall be upon the testimony of their
own conscience. a Conde^natio ex propria conscientia. Muscul.


But will some say, No man can make defense for himself in Gods presence, be he
never so good: how then do you say wicked men shall not be able, as if others
could?

Does not Job say, cap. 9. v. 2, 3. But how should man be just with God? if he
will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. And in Eccles.
7.20. For there is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not.
And Isa 64.6. But we are all an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are
as filthy rags, and we do all fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind
have taken us away, Romans 3.9, 10. Jews and Gentiles are all under sin; as it is
written, there is none righteous, no not one. The refore not only wicked men
shall be speechless before God.

I answer, Although no man can justify himself in regard of any perfect
obedience of his own (because indeed all a man's perfection is to bewail his
imperfection, and to cleave close to the imputed righteousness of Christ by
Faith) yet the sincerity of a man's heart, in a careful endeavor to honor
God, is accepted of God, and an evidence of Faith, whereby he may have
comfortable access to God. So Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 20.3. appeals to the Lord. But a
wicked man has an accusing Conscience, but no Christ at all to bear him up.

Again, such as are sincere, do cleave to the Lord with full purpose of heart,
though they are full of failings, and therefore they shall not be so convicted
and made speechless as wicked men shall.

But may no body at the last day have a word to say? Is it not said, Matthew.
7.22. many shall say unto me in that day, etc. and cap. 25.44. They that set on
the left hand, are brought in excusing themselves, etc.

Perkins upon that place, Matthew. 7.22. to this purpose. A man may live and die
with a conceit of his happy condition, etc. and that's the scope of both those
places to show the hardness of of some men's hearts even unto the very last.

And Secondly, If any should be so impudent, they will quickly be answered. It
will be to no purpose for them to plead in their own defense. Christ will
quickly cut their combs, as ver. 23. of the seventh chap. and ver. 45. of the
25. chap. you may see, they are sentenced notwithstanding, and are executed
accordingly.

So much for the explanation of the Doctrine.

The Uses follow.

Information. Wicked men England. But Sirrah, (since thou art good at that, I
mean, to swagger and vapor) let me tell thee for all thy big words, thou shall
not have a word to say before God, when he shall come to deal with thee.
Although men think to outface them that shall seek their Reformation; yea, be
ready to take their remedy as in a matter of false accusation; especially, if
they can get some great man to back them: yet when the Lord takes them in hand,
they will be speechless. I will tell you a dream of one of quality, related to
my self, by the dreamer himself. Said he, I dreamd the day of judgment was
come, and all men appeared before Christ. Some were white, others spotted. Me
thought (said he) I was all white, saving that I had one black spot upon my
breast, which I covered with my hand. Upon the separation of these two sorts, I
got among the white on the right hand; glad was I. But at last a narrower
search was made, and one came and plucked away my hand from my breast; then
appeared my spot, and I was thrust away among the spotted ones. I pray
consider; what this Gentleman dreamed, all of us shall find one day to be
true, when such as are now bold sinners, and have words at will, shall be
speechless.

Would ye then not be speechless in that day under a condemning conscience?
Joh. 4.7. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day
of judgment, etc. Let us labor for the Wedding Garment; for if our conscience
condemn us, condemnation will follow that conviction. Rev. 20.12. And I saw the
dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and another
book was opened which is the book of life; and the dead were judged out of
those things which were written in the books, according to their works. Here
are two Books, Gods Book of Science or Prescience, he knows all things long
before. The other is the book of conscience; this is our own book; this will
stop every man's mouth that is out of Christ. He was speechless, says the Text.
The Commission or warrant for his execution, which also includes the sentence
of condemnation, follows in the next verses, in which we have the sentence ver.
13. The ground or reason, ver. 14. In the Sentence we have Circumstances, and
the Substance. The Circumstances are three. 1. The party commissionating, the
King. 2. The party commissionated, the servants. 3. The time, Then. For the
better handling of these particulars, I crave your prayers. And so much for
this time.

The end of the 12. verse.

The ninth Sermon.
Matthew. 22. ver. 13.14. Then the King said to the Servants, Bind him hand and
foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth; for many are called, but few are chosen.


I Have finished (as you may remember) the examination and conviction of this
unworthy Guest, and false-hearted Professor, out of the foregoing verses. I
ended my last Sermon with the division of these two verses now again read unto
you. I will not repeat what has been delivered, but proceed to that which
remains to be spoken out of these verses.

The party that gives the Commission for the execution of this faulty person,
is said to be the King. that is, Almighty God, who had vouchsafed the means of
Grace to the Gentiles. But (this poor wretch among others abusing it) he gives
a Commission of another nature. There was a time when this King was all white,
but now he is all red. I have showed you out of the foregoing verses, that God
woes the world in the preaching of the Gospel, Go tell them that were bidden, I
have prepared my dinner, etc. You have heard of Tamberlains colors he was wont
to display; and his behavior, and dealing with places upon refusal of his
offer of mercy. Friends, the Lord holds out to you the white flag of mercy: he
has bid me tell you, that his Justice is satisfied, his wrath is appeased in
Christ; if you will not come in, if you will not submit, he has (you see) in
this Text other colors to display. Xerxes wept over his Army, in consideration
of their Mortality. O that I could compassionate these hundreds that sit here
this day. Sirs, a thousand to one but some of you will be damned, or else you
will escape better then ever so many people met together did in this World:
consider seriously what I say.

But I come to observe some poins of Doctrine; The first is,

Any way, I say. My meaning is, whither by a Swinelike carelessness, or (which
is worse) by a doglike barking at the Gospel, and biting the Messengers, or an
Hypocritical closing with the Church. God will punish the abuse of the offers
of Grace (I say) any way, with severity.

Genesis 6.7. And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created, from the
face of the Earth, etc. God did strive with the old World 120. years; it will
not be ruled, the People were diobedient, When the long suffering of God waited
in the days of Noah; 1 Pet. 3.20.
Ye know they were drowned, and are now Spirits in prison. As the Lord had a
time to offer Grace and Mercy by Noah: so he had a time to plague the refusers
of it. The Lord suffered Lot to live a while among the Sodomites, and surely he
was not idle: he was a righteous man, they vexed his righteous soul from day to
day with their unlawful deeds. Then says the Lord, because the cry of Sodom,
and Gomorra is great, 2 Pet. 2.8. Genesis 18.20.21.
and because their sin is very grievous, I will go down now, and see whither
they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me:
and if not, I will know. What Is the conclusion? the Lord did destroy them: He
caused fire and brimstone to come down from Heaven, and he overthrew those four
Cities of the plain, Genesis 19.24.25.
Sodom, Gomorra, Admah and Zeboim. So for Jerusalem, you may read Luke 13. ver.
34.35. Prophets were sent to them, and Apostles, and Christ himself was among
them; he would have gathered her children together, as a Hen does gather her
brood under her wings; they would not. They killed the prophets, and stoned
them that were sent among them. What follows? Behold your house is left unto
you desolate; etc. And so cap. 19.43.44. Thine Enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall
lay thee even with the ground and thy children within thee. and they shall not
leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou know not the time of thy
visitation. He that may and will not, when he will, he shall not. O that you
would read sometime, even this very day, Prove. 1. from the 20. verse unto the
32. I am loath to spend so much time now in reading those verses. The sum is,
Wisdom cries, woeth, uses many arguments, but cannot be heard, is
disregarded: You shall find there what follows. O sad expression, I will
(says God) laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. God is
just as well as merciful.













O where shall I begin, and when shall I make an end! I have much to say; it
may be you will be angry, it is no matter, hear me howsoever: Let me speak,
though ye strike me afterward. I will labor to pluck you out by the ears from
your miserable condition, though ye be angry with me for it. It is better fear
(and so also anger) a knave then kill him. You think God will go in white
still. (...). Luke 12.10.
Thou fool, which art without understanding, thou witless fellow (as the word
in the Original signifies in Luke) do thou think God will cease to be God,
and deny himself? (as he must do if, he should not avenge himself, and
vindicate his Gospel from those horrible neglects, contempts, and abuses which
it is even, as it were, overloaden with, by ungodly men.) No no. Thou shall
find he has red colors as well as white; he will tumble and roll his garments
in blood. O consider this, ye that cozen, deceive, oppress, that flea off the
skin of the necessitous man, and chop his flesh and the flesh of his
hunger-starved children as pye-mear, or herbs for the pot; and are no more
moved then the stones of the Wall. You that live in pleasures and satisfy your
sensual appetites; do thou think God made thee for nothing else but to play
the fool; to ride or run after a Hound, or a Hawk? Buzzard that thou art! The
Lord set home what I say at this time. And you that trample the sweet
Ordinances of breaking bread, etc. under the feet of your Superstitious
Ignorance, Pride, Passion, or Worldliness; know, that the Ordinances which we
hold forth, are the Ordinances of Jesus Christ. And though we are earthen
vessels, yet the Gospel is a treasure. And you that creep in among Gods People,
and yet are strangers to the life of grace, and want the wedding garment; know
for certain, that, that God that bid me not along ago to woo you, and even to
compel you to come in, has now bid me tell you, that you shall be bound hand
and foot, and cast into outer darkness, where there is weeping and wailing and
gnashing of teeth. How dare men slight the hot thunderbolts that are now darted
out of his word against them? I am sent to every blasphemer of God, hinderer,
or slanderer of his word, to every adulterer, to every one that is in malice,
and envy, to every despiser of Gods Church, with heavy tidings, Psalm. 35.4, 5.6.
They shall be confounded and put to shame, they shall be turned back, and
brought to confusion. They shall be as chafe before the wind, and the Angel
of the Lord shall chase them. Their way shall be dark and slippery, and the
Angel of the Lord shall persecute them. Of all the judgments that came upon
the Jews, I find this to be the chiefest, that whereas they were once the
children of the Kingdom, they are now in outer darkness, Matthew 8.12. that is,
whereas in the Church there is light, they are now cast out of the Church; and
others from the East and West are got into their privileges, viz. to sit down
in the Kingdom out of which they are banished. And a curse of contempt upon
them, is fallen on them. Wherever they come, they are a despised People; But
yet this is their greatest unhappiness, that they are the greatest Enemies in
the World to the Christian faith, through the blindness of their mind; for they
are in outer darkness, even as it were in Hell. This makes them to gnash their
teeth at Christ and Christians. This is the fruit of their rejecting Christ.
This plague falls many ways: Sometimes he blinds men's minds, and hardens their
hearts, that they cannot profit by them, though they live under them. Sometimes
they shall be so wicked as not to come to the places where the Ordinances are:
or if they come there, they shall like the spider, suck out poison instead of
honey: And so their table is made a snare unto them, and the word which should
be the savor of life unto them, becoms the savor of death unto death.

Let my counsel be harkned unto. Causes of this evil.
I have mentioned many in my former use. But now upon this use of advice, I
shall enquire after some causes of this epidemical evil.

One would think men should not be so foolish.

David. Quicken me O Lord for thy names sake. Psalm. 143.11. Say to the Lord, I
have a dead heart, I do not consider thy rich offer, or thy severe justice;
keep a groaning and crying to the Lord.

Psalm. 90.11.
We may say of it as David does of Gods anger, Who knows the power of thine
anger, etc. So who knows the highth, and dephth, length and breadth of Gods
mercy? it has sour dimensions in that place, Ephesians. 3.18. We cannot think of
it any way answerable to the truth of it. Thy mercy (O Lord) is in the heavens;
and thy faithfulness reaches unto the clouds. Psalm. 36.5.6, 7.
Thy righteousness is like the great Mountains, thy judgments are a great
deep; O Lord, thou preservest man and beast. How excellent is thy loving
kindness, O God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow
of thy wings. And again. The Lord is graciand full of compassion: (...).
slow to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is good to all: and his tender
mercies are over all his works. But yet for remedy and advice, we must know,
that Gods mercy does not destroy his justice. Where you have a glorious
discovery of Jehovahs back-parts, Exodus 34.6.7. this is among, That will by no
means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, and upon the childrens children, unto the third and to the fourth
Generation. Hear what is written, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. And it come to pass when he
hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add
drunkness to thirst: the Lord will not spare him; but then the anger of the
Lord, and his jealouste shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that
are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot his name
from under heaven. O it is a fearful thing to sin against the riches of Grace.
Romans 2.4.5. says Paul there, Despisest thou the riches of his goodness,
forbearance and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God. It is a sign such souls are not partakers of mercy, which are
upon Gods mercy bold to sin. O hard-hearted soul, thou art telling of Gods
mercy; why do thou not tell of his Justice? the Apostle tells thee, The Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, etc. 2
These. 1.7, 8 9. Be ye persuaded therefore before the sealing time, before the
Lord has sworn against you, to accept of Christ, and to take heed of
hypocrisy, and that ye be not found naked; lest this Sentence be heard, and
Commission given by the King for your execution to his Servants.

his Servants. Then said the King to his Servants. These Servants are certain
instruments which God makes use of, some in this life, some in the life to come.

The Servants which God makes use of here on earth to bind hand and foot, etc.
are First, Ministers; these are Gods high Commissioners to bind and to loose,
Matthew. 18.18 Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven, etc. It is true, it is properly the work of the Church. But
the Ministers are appointed of God for the doing of the work. I will give you
the words of Dr. Fulk in his Annotations upon the Rhemists Testament, upon 1
Cor. 5.4. in answer to that passage pretended to be taken out of Chrysostom
upon those words, Tell the Church, Matthew. 18. Complain to the Church, that is,
to the Prelates and Presidents thereof: says he, The authority of
Excommunication pertains to the whole Church, although the judgment and
execution thereof is to be referred to the Governors of the Church, which
exercise that authority as in the name of Christ, so in the name of the whole
Church to avoid confusion. So he. It is a sad business to be bound by those
Servants of the King of Heaven.

Secondly, Magistrates are executioners too of Gods vengeance; They bear not
the sword in vain. Romans 13.4. For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil, in the same verse. When people will not
take warning by Gods Ministers words, nor by his judgments on others: God
suffers them to fall into the hands of Magistrates, who have places of pain and
shame, Gaoles, Bridewells, stocks, whipping-Posts and Gallowses. These bind
neck and heels also in Gods name, and as his Servants.

Thirdly, Military men, which have the sword of war in their hands, are Gods
Servants. Ashur is the rod of Gods anger, and the staff in his hand is Gods
indignation. God sends such, and gives them a charge to take the spoil, and to
take the prey, and to tread down the people of his wrath as the mire of the
streets, Isa. 10.5, 6.

These are most terrible of all; for first, they do not usually proceed so
regularly as either of the former. Ministers have a word to proceed by, and
Magistrates have Laws; but weapons know not laws; Arma nesciunt leges.
Will is the rule, if not rage, or desperate fury usually. Ashur has not God
in his thoughts, when he goes to destroy and cut off nations not a few, Isa.
10.7.

Secondly, their Bindings have much cruelty, their Language is more terrible,
they are people of a fierce language; Cut their skuls, cleave their heads, even
when I should have thought a reproof had been enough, have I heard from these
Sons of Mars; for so have I heard them style themselves in a bravado. I intend
not to dishonor the Employment; we have found much of God in many of them of
latter times. But yet they are the most dreadful Servants of the Lord.

Fourthly, God has binding Angels both good and bad. Herod is smitten by an
Angel of the Lord, Acts 12.23. And 185 thousand are killed in one night by an
Angel of the Lord, 2 Kings 19.35. And the souls of ungodly men shall be bound
by these binder^, and tormented. Yea, Devils are let loose often by God, to do
mischief, and to plague such as will not put their trust in God; and others
also sometimes for their trial, as Job.

You see then this Doctrine,

This Doctrine is from the second circumstance, Then said he to his servants.

You shall find, when the Lord had a purpose to destroy Ahab, the Devil is
ready, and takes a Commission from the Lord, to be a lying spirit in the mouth
of all his Prophets. 1 Kin. 22.20, 21.









the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And again, Having in readiness to
revenge all disobedience, ver. 6. So little account as ye make of our binding
by word and Ordinances, it is terrible, and will be found to be so at last.

But Secondly, for a second Motive; Vengeance comes suddenly, unexpectedly, if
it be not prevented. I should insist upon this matter as it is a Motive; but it
leads me to the third and last branch of the Circumstantial part of my Text,
The last Circumstance.
from the word, Then. Then the King said to his Servants. That is, presently
upon Conviction follows execution. Or then, that is, when Gods time is come;
Or then, that is suddenly, unexpectedly.

From whence we may learn this most certain Oracle of Truth,

So the Flood came on the world; They were eating and drinking marrying and
giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark: and knew not
till the Flood came and took them all away, Matthew. 24.38, 39. God seems
sometimes to delay, to be slow; but it is not so. The Lord is not slack
concerning his Promise, nor concerning his Threats neither, as some men count
slackness, 2 Pet. 3.9. Neither is he rash or hasty, he uses deliberation, he
gives time, he calls, he stretches out his hand, he will be refused,
dis-regarded; his Counsel must be set at naught before, before fear comes as
desolation, and destruction as a whirlwinde. Read Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. 27. Yea,
all the day long he will wait, and spread out his hands unto a rebellious
People, which walks in a way that is not good, after their own thoughts.
Isaiah 65.2. But when Gods time is come, the time set of old, then comes
sorrow, as upon a woman in travel. For when they shall say, peace and safety,
then sudden destruction comes upon them, 1 These. 5.3. Then out-comes Gods
wrath with a vengeance. The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy
both the young men, and the virgins: the suckling also with the man of gray
hairs.

Then said the King unto his Servants.









He is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to Repentance: as in the forenamed 2 Pet. 3.9. But when he
seems to deferr his mercies, he does it as he does all things else, according
to the Counsel of his will. His will is a wise will, it is guided by Counsel.
It Is true, his ways seem sometimes to be full of contradictions, and his
promises of delays; But there is a mystery in all Gods workings, which we must
learn more and more to understand. The only way is, to delight our selves in
him and we shall (be sure to) have our hearts desire. It is vox vere
Christianorum, a speech fit to proceed out of the heart and mou^h of a
Christian, to say The will of the Lord be done. I am as he is, and my will as
his is, and my times when his are. And be sure he can as well cease to be God
as miss opportunities to do his People good. David's times are in Gods hands,
and Pharaohs times are in Gods hands. The Lord has a Then, a time for every
thing, even for the very falling of a sparrow to the ground. Voluntas dei
necessitas rei, for actions and circumstances. But to the matter; when the time
is come, then most certainly it shall not be well with the wicked.

Prove. 11.4. There will a time come when all the riches in the world shall not
do you one half-pennies worth of good. I will read to you Ezekiel. 7.19. They
shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed; their
silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath
of the Lord. They had a Proverb in Israel, The days are prolonged, and every
vision fails. But, says the Lord (you may find it, Ezekiel. 12.22.2^) I will
make this Proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a Proverb in
Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand, and the effect of every
vision; and ver. 24. For there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering
divination within the house of Israel. It Is true we have men of learning that
are otherwise minded; I would be loath to throw dirt in in any man's face. Men of
parts that are godly, we cannot put a price high enough upon. But yet let me
tell you, there are some men of great learning, which are the most mischievous
men in the world. Take heed of that generation of men, which though they have
the teachings of men, yet not of God. These (as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses) do resist the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the
faith. 2 Timothy 3.8. You are much the near, sure, to be told fair tales, and to
be humoured in your vanity, and at last unawares to be overtaken with the storm
of Gods vengeance, while ye are dreaming of sair weather, when both you and
your priests fall into the Ditch.

a then, when he will assuredly punish, as indeed he he has; and know (by the
way) when God shall cease to be God, then, and not before, shall wickedness
unrepented of, go unpunished. Is it so (I say)? Why then in the fear of God
consider and mark that counsel which is given, Isaiah. 55.6.7.8.9. etc. read
the words your selves when you come home; I have not time; O seek the Lord,
call upon him: O wicked folk, forsake your ways; O unrighteous men forsake
your imaginations. There are in that place great store of Admirable Motives,
taken from the goodness of God, his readiness to be found, and to pardon; the
height of his love, and thoughts thereof above men's thoughts of love and pity.
But to all that is there, let me add what is in my text, Take him, bind him
hand and foot, etc. Go, get the Wedding garment.

But thou will say, Where is it to be had?

I answer; Go to Christ; behold he looks for thee; arise, he calls thee. Say,
I come, Christ; I come; Lo I come; give power to do what thou command, and
command what thou will; comprehend me O Christ, that I may apprehend thee.
Resolve never to give over; thou shall have at last; For, he that asks,
receives. How can it be otherwise? He stands at the door and knocks, and if
thou have a heart to open, it is a sign he is gotten into thy heart; Flesh and
blood has not done it.

So far of the circumstances of the sentence.

It remains that I should speak of the substance of it; But the time is run
out.

The Tenth Sermon.
Matthew. 22.13.14. Then said the King unto his Servants, Bind him hand and foot,
and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping,
and gnashing of teeth. For many are called, but few are chosen.


THese verses now read unto you (as has been formerly showed) do contain in
them, the Commission given by the King, for the execution of that unworthy
professor, that was gotten in among Gods People, and had no Grace in his heart:
which is the third particular, first noted to be in this last head. viz. The
proceeding of the Lord against the unworthy Guest.

We have spoken already of his charge; and that, both of the matter of it, that
he came into the marriage without a wedding garment; and also of the manner of
the Lords dealing with him, calling him friend by an Irony. As i^ the King
should say, Friend, what make you here? I see you pretend to be one of mine;
but how is it that you come in hither not having a wedding garment?

We have also spoken, Secondly, of his Conviction, and he was speechless.

Thirdly, We have begun to speak of his execution, out of these verses now
again read unto you. In which we have noted

First, The Commission it self in the 13. verse.

Secondly, The ground or reason of it, ver. 14.

Again in the Commission, we have observed, and fully handled, the
circumstantial part of it; And are now (the Lord assisting) to proceed, and to
speak of the substance of the Commission, out of these words, Bind him hand and
foot, etc.

Wherein two things are set forth.

First, The manner of his punishment: bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and cast him into outer darkness.

Secondly, The condition of this poor wretch under his punishment, sad enough,
woeful enough, in these words, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

We will begin with the manner of his punishment, laid forth under a continued
Metaphor, taken from the manner of dealing used among men with gross and
heinous offenders, who being found guilty, are manacled, fettered, and
separated from the society of men, and cast into some dark dungeon, there to
lie and dye, and never to come out thence again.

Under which words, Christ sets forth the future condition of all wicked men
and women; to wit, that they shall be cast into Hell, where they shall lie
weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth, not only as long as the Sun and the
Moon endures, but as long as God shall be God.

(...) three degrees of misery, is this punishment of ungodly men here
described unto us.

First, Bind him hand and foot, that is, Tie hi^ fast, chain him up, let him
not escape by (...) means.

Secondly, Take him away, that is, carry him hence from my gracious presence:
Let him never see my face more, nor come among my servants; Let him never sit
with my precious Saints more; Separate him from the communion and society of my
faithful ones; Depart thou cursed cateiffe, (says God) thou caredst not for
my people, or mine Ordinances, on Earth: and therefore now thou shall not be
troubled with them.

Take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; Here is a third degree of
misery. Let him go like a Castaway, as he is, as one good for nothing; cast him
away: For men do not use to cast that away which is good for any thing. But
here is an aggravation of this third degree of misery, cast him into outer
darkness, that is, into Hell. Into (outer) darkness; that is, out from God, and
out from his Church; For, with God is light, and in his Church is light: But
out of Gods presence, and out of the Church, is darkness.

To be cast out of the Church here, is a degree of that outer darkness that
ungodly men shall be cast into hereafter. So some understand (...). 8.12. Many
shall come from the East and from the West, Calvin.
etc. But the children o^ the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness;
that is, Gentiles shall become Members of the Church; and the Jews, called the
children of the Kingdom, because they were so then, shall be exiled, and cast
into a dark and dead frame of Spirit, as usually such are, as are justly
excommunicated, if Gods physic work not with them to their humiliation and
repentance.

Now, We will gather some short lessons, from these particulars thus opened.

And the first shall be,

The Reason is, because they are bound as it were hand and foot. God has
ordained Bands and Chains to bind wicked men withal; They are bound with a
threefold Cord which is not quickly broken; Besides the Chains and cords, which
God binds wicked men withal, to Hell torments, there is a threefold Cord to
bind them with in this life.

First, The Cord of Gods Decree. Jude's Epistle, ver. 4. Who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation. All the men on Earth, or Angels in Heaven, are
not able to break this Cord. There is also a blessed Cord which the Saints are
bound with, Romans 8.30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them also he called:
and whom he called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he
glorified.

The use that we may make of it is to bless God if we sind we are not bound
with that chain that the wicked are bound with: but with that fore-appointed
for the Saints.

The second Cord to bind men, is that, Mat. 18.18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven. This Church binding is the second, with which
men are bound. And for my part, I would not lie under the just censure of a
well-ordered Church, for the whole World.

The reason is, because the Scriptures being true, whom the Church binds on
Earth, God binds in Heaven.

There are three acts in this binding; God acts first and last, and the Church
in the middle. God acts first in giving rules to his Church to walk by. The
Church acts by those rules which God has given; and are like Levi which knew
not father nor mother. And this acting of a Church, carries more in it then
the reproof of one Godly man, though a public Preacher) because of the
Authority which the Lord has given to his Church. And then thirdly, God acts
in confirming in Heaven what the Church regularly does on Earth.

There is in the Church, use of ordinary and common brotherly admonitions and
exhortations; with this Cord the People of God bind one another to the Lord.
So, Heb. 3.12. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily, while
it called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfullness of sin.
And therefore all the People of the Lord should look upon this work as a duty:
and when it is performed, it should be looked upon as a mercy from the Lord to
tie us closer to him. Besides this, sometimes the unruly are to be warned, and
desired to forbear from communicating with the People of God. This is as it
were the trial of Leprosy: We usually call it suspension from the Lords
Supper: and it has its use as a cord to bind men to the good behavior, or to
discover their Spirits.

But in the last place, Fulk on 1 Cor. 5. Sect. 3. Rhem. Test.
there is excommunication, which is to be done by the officers of the Church,
as in the name of Christ, so in the name of the Church and People, to avoid
confusion. I had rather call it a binding then a cutting off; Because it is an
Ordinance of the Lord to be used for the good of an offending brother. 1 Cor.
5.5. That the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And we find
that it was so, by Gods blessing to the incestuous Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7.
Sufficient to this man is this punishment (or censure) which was inflicted of
many. (...).
So that contrary wise, ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest
perhaps, such a one should be swallowed up with over much sorrow. This is a
strong Medicine, by which a fallen brother grossly, and that is hardened in his
sin, may yet be recovered. And if it do not, then he is thereby bound over to
everlasting burnings. It Is true in some sense they are said to be cut off from
the Church; namely in a threefold respect.

First, Perk. Cases of Conscience. 3. Quest. of the 8. c.
They are excluded from Communion with the Church by the censure of the Church.

Secondly, From God; for what the Church rightly does on Earth, God does in
Heaven; If the Church bind on Earth, God binds in Heaven, (and so for Loosing
also.)

Thirdly, In regard of themselves for a time; they are cut off, because they
want the power and efficacy of the spirit, until they be thoroughly touched
with repentance, and begin as it were to live again. Take heed ye that are
bound with this Cord of God and his Church, and labor to be unbound again.

There is a third Cord, wherewith men are bound even in this life; and that is
the Cord of Conscience; As this unworthy Guest here was bound, he had not a
word to say for himself. He was bound hand and foot; he was haltered (as it
were) that he could not stir. So Judas was so haltered with the Cord of his
Conscience, that he could not choose but halter his neck too; For he went away
and hanged himself, Mat. 27.5. This is a sad Cord when God is pleased to make
use of it. O when a man's Conscience shall tell him, that he has no part nor
portion in this business, that his heart is not right in the sight of God, (as
Peter told Simon Magus, Acts 8.21.) that he is in the Gall of bitterness and
bond of iniquity: This will be black News to that poor wretch whosoever he be.

Friends, you are crank and merry; but look o^^ this cooling card; ye are far
on to the ^a^ing of this sad story told by your consciences to you, that ye are
the Enemies of God.

And note hereupon, that men come not to be bound with this Cord by and by:
they usually come to a high degree of sin first. They do the same things, and
commit the same sins for which they judge others. They despise the riches of
[Gods] goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering; They have hard and
impenitent hearts; in a word they sin with a high hand against Conscience; and
begin to be careless and fearless and desperately secure: And then comes this
lord of the Lord, this whip of Conscience; Judas his Cord I may call it. Read 1
These. 5.3. For when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape.
Such fellows come in sometimes among the People of God, to make a faction, and
to do mischief. But though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go
unpunished. Prove. 11.21. But they are bound together to be the Servants of sin,
shall be bound with Cords which shall not be broken. It is storied of Julian
the Apostate, That, after all his wicked behavior against the Christians, he
was strock (in a battle) through the left arm, into the short ribbs, with a
(...) or Javelin: in pulling which out and casting it into the air with his
blood, he uttered these blasphemous words (being bound with this Cord of
Conscience I am now speaking of) Thou have overcome me O Galilean. Zosimus.
lib. 6. cap. 2. and Theod. lib 3. cap. 25.

The second particular is in these words, Take him away. Hence observe,

It will be a principal part of the punishment of ungodly men hereafter, to be
turned out, to be bid to depart, and get packing from God and his People. Mat.
7.23. Depart from me ye that work iniquity. Mat. 13 ver 30 and 41. The tares
must be bound in bundles, that is, as Christ himself expounds it, the Angels
shall gather out of his Kingdom, all things that offend, and them that work
iniquity. They must out of Gods Kingdom, there is no place for them, they must
depart. And so ver. 49. of that same chap. The Angels shall come forth, and
sever the wicked from among the just^ And Mat. 25.32. And he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd divides the sheep from the Goats. and
ver. 41. He shall say to them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed, etc.
they must depart; upon which place (says one, whom I heard many years agone)
Methinks, I hear these Castawayes pleading, and begging, to this effect. O
Lord, If we shall not sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in thy Kingdom;
if we shall not sit on thrones; yet let us stand in thy sight, though but at
the door, or let us but peep into the presence of thy People. No (says God)
depart, ye shall not see my face, get out of my sight: Ye shall not stand in
the congregation of the righteous; Ye scorned them once. ye shall not be
troubled with them now; Depart. Yet may these poor wretches say, if we must
needs depart thy presence (O God) and be thrust out from thy People; yet
remember, we are thy creatures O Lord, and bless us before we go; No (says
God) depart ye cursed: Away with my curse upon your back. Why yet Lord (may
they say) send us to some silent Corner, where we may lie only under the paena
damni, or dissolve us to nothing out of which we were taken. No; that shall not
be granted neither, Depart into fire. Happy should they be if they might cease
to be: but they must depart into hell torments. Part is this all. Hear one
imaginary petition more to set forth the truth of the future condition of
ungodly men, Lord, how long? Lord, how long? Let it be but a thousand years
(may they say) or if that cannot be obtained, yet but as many years as there be
stars in heaven, drops in the Sea, sands on the shore or under the Seas; and
let us come out then. No; It is everlasting fire. (O rocky heart tremble!) But
yet once more. Must we depart, and be accursed, and be in fire, and that
eternally? Yet Lord (may they say) let us have a little good company to help
wear along that which shall be without end. No; Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Ye could not abide good
company when ye lived on earth; ye shall have Devils instead of them now. God
shall be glorified in his Saints, because they received his testimony: but ye
would not; therefore ye must not be their Companions. Ye accounted them a
burden to you, the off-scowring of all things; ye would not join with them, ye
cast them out of your Counsels, not only wickedly, but unjustly, yea against
all reason: Now ye shall never have the comfort, honor, or happiness to see
one of their faces more. Devils, and Reprobates (such as your selves) shall be
your companions, for the increase of your eternal torture and torment.

A word for application of this second particular from the word (depart.) We
may learn how to judge of them that have hearts separated from Gods People and
ways now; they are in Simon Magus his condition, mentioned Acts 8.21. Wicked
men are the men of their delight; and this is their punishment already, and
will bring the other mentioned in the Text; they shall be taken away, and cast
away; which is the next, viz. the third degree of misery in the punishment of
ungodly men.

Learn therefore, That all wicked men, are a company of Cast-aways, a sort of
good fornothings.

All that have not made God their portion, nor have the Spirit of the Son, are
good for just nothing: and therefore, as that which is nought-worth, they shall
be cast away.

They themselves, and all that they possess, though never so much, are under a
Curse, and shall be made to drink the water of jealousy. Riches avail not in
the day of wrath, Prove. 11.4. They are curses to a wicked man, who is an
accursed Castaway. Cursed in the City, and in the Field, in his basket, and in
his store, in the fruit of his body, and of his land, the increase of his kine,
and the flocks of his sheep. Cursed when he comes in, and cursed when he goes
out. Cursing vexation, and rebuke shall follow him in all that he sets his
hand unto. Deuteronomy 20.16. to the 21. ver.

For, A graceless man (to use a Country phrase) is an unlucky fellow. It is a
blessing properly to a godly man, that whatsoever he does, it shall prosper,
Psalm. 1.3. Again, a graceless man makes the naked creature (without an eye to
the Creator) the foundation of his happiness; like a foolish man that has
great store of birds in his field, and because they have pitched in his field,
he accounts them all his, not considering that they will rise and fly away,
when he comes near to them to take them.

So will all that wicked men have, wherein they put their confidence; when God
comes to have to do with them, it will appear that they, with all that they
have are good for nothing but to be cast away.

But yet, Please your self with your notions (may some say) as long as you
will. These nothings as you call them, and these cast aways, are often in great
prosperity, when the godly and happy (so called) are in adversity.

answer, This was indeed David's temptation, Psalm. 73.12. Behold these are the
ungodly who prosper in the world; they increase in riches; and has formerly
been, and at this present is, even mine also; the shameless impudency, and yet
continued prosperity of some among you, are both so continued: yet truly I do
believe that Adversity is never truly evil, nor prosperity truly good. For
wicked men should not have any prosperity, if it were good, nor righteous men
adversity, if it were truly evil. Here now is a place for faith, and blessed is
he that believes, Luke 1.

But yet sometimes wicked men are employed by God for the good of his Church,
as Cyrus was, etc. Therefore they are not altogether good for nothing, or cast
aways.

answer; God makes use of Devils sometimes (as of wicked men) for his own
glory. But my meaning is, that no good shall ever come to themselves by any
thing that they do, Isa. 10.12. Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the
Lord has performed his whole work upon Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem; I will
punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of
his high looks. So this is the sum of all; Let wicked men do what they will, or
seem to be useful to others never so much, or be made use of by God (as
sometimes they are) yet they shall never do themselves good; they are
Cast-aways, they shall be like the chaff which the wind drives away, etc.
Psalm. 1.4. And nothing that they have shall prosper with them. And at last they
shall be cast away quite from God, and all (even) seeming happiness into outer
darkness, which is the punishment it self, and comes now to be spoken of. Cast
him into outer darkness, that is into Hellfire, everlasting fire, as it is
called. Matthew. 19.8, 9.

Hereupon a Question may be moved, Diverse respects.
how Hell, where there is said to be fire, can be a place of darkness, seeing
it is the property of fire to give light; and light and darkness are contrary.

To which I answer, Fire.
that the place of torment, prepared for the reprobate, has in the Scripture
diverse names in diverse respects; as in regard of the grievous pain there to be
endured, it is often compared to fire; so Matthew. 13.4.2. And shall cast them
into a furnace of fire: and Luke 16. ver. 23. The rich man is said to be in
hell in torments: and ver. 24. to be tormented in the flame. And the wrath of
God, to be poured on the damned in Hell, is so vehemently and frequently set
forth by fire, as that many both ancient and latter do hold and write, that
there is a corporal (...)sible fire there; Augustine, Jerome, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Gregory, Tertullian, Lactantius, Cyprian, etc. And that the visible
fire of Hell shall after the day of judgment, punish the damned corporally and
eternally, without quenching it self, or consuming them. Bilson.

But I wave this. In regard of the uncomfortableness of a Hellish condition,
Darkness.
it is compared to darkness, yea to outer darkness, which is most remote from
light. Metaphorice autem per tenehras Scriptura horrendum maerorem designat,
etc. Calv.
Calvin upon Matthew. 8.12. says, that by darkness, Metaphorically, the
Scripture understands horrid sadness, which neither in words can be expressed,
nor in perception comprehended in this life. For in that place there is a
comparing of the sad condition the Jews should be in (upon Gods departure from
their Nation) with Hell; and they are threatened with outer darkness, that is,
unspeakable sadness, in allusion unto Hell. And so in Scripture light is taken
for joy and fullness of consolation: as Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the
righteous; and gladness for the upright in heart. And heaven is said to be the
inheritance of the Saints in light.

But I hasten to the Doctrine, and this it shall be;

John 3.19, 20. Men are said there to love darkness rather then light, because
their deeds are evil. Outer darkness for workers of darkness; so wicked works,
are called works of darkness. Romans 13.12. Let us therefore cast off the works
of darkness. And the unfruitful works of darkness. Ephesians. 5.11. And have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. And outer darkness for the
children of the Prince of darkness.

And so on the contrary side, they that are the children of light here, shall
be the inheritors of light hereafter. They that love light here, shall enjoy
light there: For there shall be a suitableness of condition to the frame of
Spirit and conversation here.

So the Doctrine is evident, That sad and sorrowful enough, will be the estate
of wicked men, that live in darkness here, because it will be their portion
hereafter.

Egyptian palpable darkness (mentioned, Exodus 10.21. even darkness which might
be felt) is no way comparable to the condition of the damned. So that if there
were no other thing, but this disconsolateness, and privation of God and all
good, this poena damni: woeful will be the estate of wicked men, that depart
this life in the dark estate of unbelief, or live here in the darkness of sin
and wickedness, or are in darkness any other way.

in the darkness of ignorance. The soul without knowledge cannot be good. Take
heed of the darkness of unbelief, Mark 16. 1 John 5. v. 12. Romans 13.12. Ephesians.
5.11.
He that believes not, shall be damned. He that has not the Son, has not
life; nor never shall; he is in darkness; he receives not the record that God
gave of his Son. Take heed of the darkness of sin, of the works of darkness, of
the unfruitful works of darkness, as they are called; but they are not only
unfruitful to good, but very pernicious.

Lastly, Take heed of that state of outer darkness in this life, to wit, to be
out of the Communion of the Church. They that live not in fellowship with Gods
Church on Earth, are not like to live with them in Heaven. This is downright;
weigh it well. weigh it the more, because the way is full of errors that
leads to death.

You shall have what remains, in the Afternoon.

The eleventh Sermon.
Matthew. 22. ver. 13. the latter part. There shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.


THe Point that we were in handling, was, The substance of the Commission given
for the execution of this unworthy Guest, as it is in this 13. ver. We have
noted two things therein.

First, the manner of his punishment.

And Secondly, The condition of the man punished.

The former has been dispatched in the forenoon. And many short notes have
been given you of it.

As 1. That ungodly men shall not escape punishment, from the words, Bind him
hand and foot.

2. That it is a punishment to be separated from God, and from the comfortable
society of his People; From these words, and take him away.

3. That all wicked men are a company of Cast-aways; From these words, Cast him
out.

Fourthly, That unspeakably, unconceiveably sad and woeful will the condition
of ungodly men be after death; From these words, outer darkness. Cast him into
outer darkness.

Now it remains, that something be spoken of the condition the Party punished
should be in under this punishment; or a description of the place into which he
was cast, Poena damni, poena sensus.
which is here intimated to be a place of weeping and gnashing of teeth. The
former words of the verse, do but set forth the punishment of loss, but this
the punishment of sense. Weeping does usually attend upon pain, sorrow,
calamity; but gnashing of teeth, imports great tribulation, and anguish. That
sorrow which is set out by gnashing of teeth, is a great sorrow. It shows great
torment, agonies, and pains to be the portion of ungodly men. This little
portion remained intended for the forenoon; but time prevented the delivery of
it then. Therefore take it now in these words,

This point is evident from the effects thereof, weeping and gnashing of teeth.
And we have other places besides the Text to make good the Point; which I will
read unto you.

As first, Matthew. 13.50. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Cap. 25.30. And cast ye the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. Luke 16.23. And in Hell he lift up his eyes being in torment.

They shall be rewarded according to their works of disobedience, and hardness
of heart and impenitency. Romans 2 4. to the 7. ver. God will render to every man
according to his deeds. The weight of this reason lies upon the justice of God:
who can as well cease to be, as forbear to torment unto eternity all ungodly
men.

The torments of the Damned must needs be great in Hell, because there they
shall have the full vials of Gods wrath poured out upon them. Isa. 30.33. For
Tophet is ordained of old, yea for the King it is praepared, he has made it
deep add large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord
like a stream of brimstone does kindle it. The Lord here does but fight with
little parties, but then he will bring up all his Forces. That's the day of
wrath, and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God: you have those
exprestions, Romans 2 5. D Preston, All things come alike to all.
And likewise there in the same verse, you have this phrase of treasuring up of
wrath, by hardness and impenitency of heart. All those expressions are very
significant. Gods Justice here is covered; Psa. 97.2.
clouds and darkness are round about him, though righteousness and judgment be
the habitation of his throne: but then there will be a discovery, a revelation
of Gods justice. A man would think this were somewhat, and sufficient to
discover God: the drowning of the old World, the burning of Sodom, and the
other Cities of the Plain, the killing of so many thousands at several times of
his people in the wilderness (insomuch that of six hundred thousand only Joshua
and Caleb were left alive to go over Jordan) the drowning of that glorious Army
of six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains
over every one of them. Exodus 14.7. What do I talk? time would fail me to
relate the terribleness of God in punishing sinners, the examples are so many
in Scripture, and have been in all Ages; and yet all this is nothing in
comparison of that day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.
Here God makes use of some particular judgments; but there the full vials of
his wrath shall be poured out.

Thirdly, that torment must needs be great where there is no ease, no
intermission, and of which there shall be no end. Not so much as one drop of
water to cool the burning tongue of the rich man in hell, etc. Luke 16.24, 25.
he is tormented, and there is a gulf sixed; out of hell there is no redemption,
Matthew. 25.46. And these shall go their way into everlasting punishment, Mark
9.43, 44. The fire shall never be quenched, the worm dies not. Here men are
partakers of many of Gods gracious Vouchsafements, even such as are his
enemies. God causes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, Matthew. 5.45.
Psalm. 103. v. 9.
and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. Though his Plagues upon
Pharaoh were many and grievous, yet they were numbered and ended, and there were
intervals, and respits. Here God does not always chide, neither keeps he his
anger for ever. But then God will always chide, and will keep his anger unto
all eternity.

thirsting for God, even for the living God, because he is their life, and
their perfection: Psalm. 42. ver. 2. Psalm. 16. v. 11.
and until they come to his right hand, where there is fullness of joy, etc.
they will not be quiet. And so the ambitious man has never honor enough, nor
the covetous man wealth enough: So neither sin punishment enough until these
times of wrath, and revelation of Gods justice, and the perfection of sin (I
know it is a harsh expression) but this is true of all things, that they strive
to, and cry after their completing. And this proves perfection in God, because
in him there is no motion in regard of his glorious essence. Prove. 16. v. 4.
But yet he made all things for himself, even the wicked to perish in the evil
day and therefore it must be so; the fullness of Gods wrath must be poured out
in hellish torments; else sin shall not attain its end; beloved there is an end
of the Work, Finis operis and operantis.
and of the Worker: though sinners intend not their damnation, yet the wages of
sin is death, Romans 6 23.

And now we come unto the application of this point, of the greatness and
intolerableness of Hell fire.

Jude advises, 23. ver. of his Epistle. Others save with fear, pulling them
out of the fire. I say, this is to teach us, that ungodly men have no cause to
be so jocund as they be. O they that tear it out in whole cloth (as we use to
say) in the ale bench corner, and are ready to throw the house out at window,
Psalm. 50.
and let their tongue walk through the earth: little do they think what is a
brewing for them. O consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you. All that befalls wicked men in this
life, are but Gods warning pieces: but in this day of weeping and gnashing of
teeth, ye shall know what belongs to Gods murdering pieces. It would do ye no
harm (O ye wicked great ones,) to read Amos 6. from the 1. ver. to the 8. There
is a woe in that place pronounced to them that are at ease in Sion, and trust
in the mountain of Samaria: and so did put far away the evil day, and cause
the seat of violence to come near, etc. And yet all that is there threatened is
but their going into Captivity, with the first, (that is speedily) and the
removal of their banquet, though they had stretched themselves for it, ver. 7.

But Alas! What comparison is there between the punishment of a temporal
captivity, and the torments of Hell (where most assuredly the Sparks and the
Brutes of our times shall be brought)? Even no more then between painted fire,
and fire indeed. Ye will not come near Gods People now, the time shall come,
Luke 16. ver. 23.
when ye shall see them afar of (as Dives saw Abraham afar of; and Lazarus in
his bosom) and shall wish with all your heart that ye might come among them,
and might be no longer tormented in that hellish flame. And let such as laugh
at Gods word now, know, they shall weep out of his presence then. Woe be to you
that laughed now; for ye shall mourn and weep, Luke 6.25.



But how shall we do to avoid these torments, and this place of weeping and
gnashing of teeth?

answer, Take heed of unbelief, and disobedience. Heb. 3.12. Take heed
brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God. Cleave to God by faith, labor to be obedient: for these
practices show that thou art escaped; and also love of the brethren.

The thing that I shall chiefly press, is, that ye would accept of the gracious
offers of Christ, while they are going. Take heed that ye be not hardened
through the deceitfullness of sin. I do not teach you, that you can avoid and
escape the wrath of God by your doings; but this I say, the work is done to
your hand; accept of Gods love, and Christ's merits, and all shall be well; He
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark. 16.16. What should keep
from believing? ye have a commandment to believe; and ye have a promise, That
he that believes shall be saved.

But may some say, All shall not be saved, all are not elected; therefore some
are commanded to believe a lie: for if they be commanded to believe that Christ
died for them, and he did not (as he did not if they belong not to Gods
election) then they are commanded to believe a lie.

John 5.40. Christ complains of the Jews that they would not come to him that
they might have life. They that do not believe shall be damned, they have made
God a liar, voluntas approbationis and effectionis.
But yet, as there is Gods will of Precept; so there is his will of working;
and he will call in all his elect. The Command of the word we ought to look
after; and so to do, is a sign of salvation. 2 These. 1.10. When he shall come
to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe
(because our testimony was believed among you) in that day.

Here we have to deal with two sorts of People.

First, The profane multitude; these say they have had a strong faith from
their childhood.

But let us talk with them a little. What Demonstration can ye make of your
faith? Have ye a Mean or medium. We will help you to one out of the 2 chap. of
James, and that is Works, this will be a demonstration of the Cause by the
Effects; If thou have faith, show it, make it out, by thy works, by thy
carriage, and conversation. Love to the Saints will be another notable Mean or
medium to make out a man's faith in Christ.

Therefore it is that they (to wit, the Cause and the Effect) are joined
together often, as Col. 1.4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ, and of the
love which ye have to all the Saints. If good People be your delight, and good
men the men of your counsel; if you can say with David, Psalm. 26.
that ye have not sat with vain persons, etc. If ye account religious persons
(as Christ did) as your Brethren, and Sisters, and Mothers; Why then hereby ye
may demonstrate your passage from death to life, and that ye are born of God
and know God. 1 John 3. ver. 14. chap. 4. ver. 7.
And so these two Means or mediums will help ye well if ye will be true to
yourselves. If ye have a respect to all the Commandments; there is one. And if
ye have love to all the Saints, that is the other. And therefore Soul, deceive
not thy self any longer. If thou have neither an obedient frame of Spirit to do
Gods will, nor love to the People of God, thou have no faith. Show me thy
faith. But you will say, God knows my heart; what care I for you? I will not
give an account to you. Yea but I say, thou are bound to give an account to me,
and to every man that asks a reason of the hope that is in thee, and that
with meekness and reverence or fear. 1 Pet. 3.15. But poor neighbors, it is
plain, you have no faith in Christ; for ye are rebellions against the Lord, and
despisers of his People. The Lord pity ye, and soften your hearts, that ye may
escape the wrath to come.

The other sort I have to deal with all, are such poor Souls, as out of holy
and blessed jealousy, are ready to condemn themselves, and to give sentence
against themselves, and indeed against the truth. They know not whither ever
they believed, they are afraid they have not. Never went a soul to hell that
feared the want of faith, and breathed after it. Mat. 5.3. and 6. The poor in
spirit, and the hungerers and thirsters, etc. are pronounced blessed.

But you have said, Faith must have its demonstrations.

I answer, So they must, and so they have in thee, even in this thy emptiness,
and jealousy, and groaning frame of spirit; O these groaning Souls are blessed
Souls. Such a one was Paul. Romans 7. ver. 14. to the end of the Chapter. Have a
care; yield not up your Castle, however it be with you, in your present
apprehension. Learn of Christ, who though he cried, (why have thou forsaken
me?) Yet held fast his relation (my God my God,) Never disown God; that's that
the Devil would have.

There are but three things, all that may seem to be just causes so to do, as,
1. Desertions. 2. Great afflictions. 3. Great sins. Yet bear up against them
all; neither of them is a Medium sufficient to conclude thy damnation. Neither
of them are certain tokens of Gods being thine Enemy. David is a famous example
for all three. God did hide his face from him. And his afflictions were very
many. And what sins in a Saint, comparable to his? And Peter denied, and did
aggravate it with Cursing and Swearing, that he knew not Christ. To despair
after a fall, is a greater fall then the fall. The main push, is, that perhaps
thou have sinned after knowledge. So did those two Worthies, Calvin. Perkins.
Capel. of tentations. p. 124.
and yet they died in peace and honor. We must fortify our selves after
Relapses especially; yet a man may fall into the same gross sin after true
repentance, as Abraham twice laid his wife open to adultery. But still hold
fast by God, thou must be bold.

The end of the 13. verse.

The Twlefth Sermon.
Mat. 22. ver. the 14. For many are called, but few are chosen.


NExt to the Commission for the execution of the unworthy Guest (of whom ye
have heard often, formerly) follows the ground or reason of it. viz, that
howsoever this (condemned) man came into the Church by reason of an outward
call; yet he was none of Gods chosen ones, he was not of the number of Gods
elect (as neither are many others (though called outwardly (as he was) to the
profession of religion) because, many are called, but few are chosen.

and indeed I find such a question in Mr. Calvin, upon this Parable) If all be
bid to come, and yet when men come they shall be rejected, and cast out for
lack of a wedding garment: then who shall be saved? or is it in man's power to
procure it himself?

answer, that the Holy Ghost, intends not here to show whence the garment is to
be had, (for he that invites to the marriage, clothes also. Ezekiel. 16.7 and 10.
v.) But the scope is, to show that such as are found in their sins, shall
perish; not that the garment of righteousness and Salvation is to be found in
any man's own Chest. God finds nothing in us, but miserable nakedness and
filthiness: Neither are we any otherwise reformed unto the image of God, but
as we put on Christ. Therefore (I say) here is not a discovery or Doctrine of
man's power to cloth himself; but of Gods Method in the work of conversion; who
works that in the elect, which he commands men to have. See Calvin in Isai.
1. ver. 16. His words are these as they are translated. Now we know that the
spirit of God is wont to attribute that to men, which himself works in them,
who is therefore said to pour clear water, Ezekiel. ^6.25. Because repetance is a
work proceeding from him. So that (I say) if God that bids you come to Christ's
wedding, do not give you a wedding garment, it is a sign you are not one of his
elect or chosen ones; For all are not that are called; For many are called, but
few are chosen.

Now for the sense of the words; We are by called ones here to understand, not
such as are effectually called, (as in sundry places the word is taken; among
others, 1 Cor. 1.24. where the Gospel is said to be the power of God unto
called ones;) but here by being called, is meant only a partaking of an outward
call; to wit, to hear of such a one as Christ was, and to join outwardly with
Christians; either according to Law (I mean man's Law,) or according to custom,
or the practice of our forefathers; (of which called ones, the greatest part,
are but a rude heap of baptized Pagans and Infidels) or else, such as are
Temporaries and Hypocriets, that have some common works of the Spirit; some
fear of Hell, some ta^t of the powers of the world to come: and yet are found
to be reprobate silver. True it is, that such as are inwardly and effectually
called, are likewise so called, and ought to join themselves with Gods People,
and Will: But yet this is the sum, that many are so called outwardly, that
yet shall perish everlastingly. The Next word to be expounded is the word
(chosen, few are chosen) Whither we understand hereby choice ones, approved
ones (as some expound the word) or else Gods election in Christ before all
time, of some to be vessels of grace (which yet in my poor opinion, may rather
be called a purpose of election, then election it self:) I say understand it
either way; It Is plain the meaning of the Holy Ghost, is, That among the
Multitudes of People that are by general profession Christians, there are but
few choice plants, chosen of God and precious, which indeed none are but such
as God has predestined unto the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. Ephesians. 1.5. And this
election from everlasting, is called Gods purpose and grace (and said to be)
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, 1 Timothy 1.9. And none but such
(though outwardly called ones) shall ever be fitted, and trimmed to go in unto
the marriage of the Lamb, and to be bid welcome there.

From this verse thus opened and expounded, I shall observe three short points
of Doctrine, and briefly handle them at this time, and so end my Sermon, and
this whole Parable.





(says the Text) many are called, but few are chosen. Of these in order.

viz. that many partake of an outward Call. For both Jews and Gentiles partake
thereof, as has been already showed out of this parable. The whole world
consists of two sorts of People; all the world are to be invited one time or
other. The Jews from the time of Abraham unto the dissolution of their state.
Then for the Gentiles you have Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15. Romans 10.18. All Nations
must be taught. Every creature must be preached unto. The sound of the Gospel
must go out into all land^. The general coming of people to the Ordinances is
compared to the calling of Swine and pigs to the mingle mangle, Come pyr, come
pyr to the mingle mangle. So it has been (the more the pity) in our time; and
is yet where unhallowed Ministers have to do. Surely all that are admitted in
the best Societies of Christians are not cercainty sound.

It must be made known to all Nations for the obedience of faith. Romans 16.26.
The preaching of the Gospel must not be too much restrained. The World must
hear of Christ. Some there are that preach very sweetly to Saints in private
places; there may be a time for that. But there must be a time to tell all the
World that Christ died for sinners; that he that believes not, shall be
damned; that Tophet is prepared of old, etc. Some blame Ministers for that they
preach Moses too much. Beloved, let Moses go first; by the Law comes the
knowledge of sin; But let Christ follow after; For the Law is a killing Letter,
the Gospel is the grace of God which brings Salvation. Jude says, difference
must be made; of some (indeed) we must have Compassion: but others must be
saved with fear, and pulled out of the fire, ver 22. and 23. of that Epistle.
Though sometimes our words must distill as the rain, and drop down as the dew;
yet there must be fire, and a hammer, to break the rock in pieces.

But it may be objected, The Gospel is a hidden treasure. Mat. 13.44. And a
mystery, and hidden wisdom. 1 Cor. 2.7.

I answer, Not in regard of the outward means; for it is openly to be revealed,
as before was noted our of Romans 16.25.26. but because of the blindness of man's
understanding, because the natural man cannot discern it. 1 Cor. 2.14. Because
the god of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should
shine unto them 2 Cor. 4.4. But the blame is in men, and it is to them a sign
of perdition; for, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, says
Paul, in the 3. verse of the forementioned chapter, and Epistle to the
Corinthians.

And so much for the first use, or first branch (rather) of the information.



Capernaum Mat. 11.23. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto Heaven, shall
be brought down to Hell. It will be so far from being enough to you, to enjoy
the outward Call, that it will be easier for them that never heard of it, at
last.

And so I come to the second Doctrine, That few are chosen, or choice ones of
those many to whom the sound of the Gospel comes.

If there were found a Judas, among but twelve, and that of Christ's own
choosing; Then a thousand to one but some of you that sit here this day, will
be damned. O consider this, look to your selves; Search your hearts; do as the
Disciples did, when their Master told them one of them should betray him, they
began to enquire, Master, is it I? Master is it I? O if any of you should fall
under that sentence, Go ye cursed; good had it been for you, if ye had never
been born.

viz. why so few of many are chosen, is, because there are few that are
effectually wrought upon, even of those that hear the word. The seed of Gods
word is sown, but most sorts of ground are naught. Mat. 13 ver 3. to the 9. And
so Romans 10.16 17. They have not all obeyed. All said I! Nay of four sorts of
ground there is but one good, as ye may see in the forementioned place of
Matthew. We read in Scripture, Acts. 5. Acts. 8. 2 Timothy 4.10. 1 Timothy 1.20.
of Ananias and Saphira his wife, of Simon Magus, of Demas, of Hymeneus and
Alexander (perhaps the same Alexander mentioned afterward to be the
Coppersmith, who did Paul much wrong. 2 Timothy 4.14.) all professors, but stark
naught. Nay even in the small company of prophets, in the Jewish Church, see
what the most were, to wit, blind watchmen, dumb dogs, greedy dogs, drunken
swine, Isai. 56.10.11. And what a generation of Vipers were there among the
Jews? Mat. 3.7. And Mat. 23.33. Ye serpents (says Christ) ye generation of
Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell? And also Acts 7.51.
Stiffnecked ones (as Steven called them,) uncircumcised in heart and ears, such
as did always resist the Holy Ghost. And so in Moses his time, Korah, Dathan
and Abiram, men of renown, and famous in the congregation. Numb. 16.1.2. A
Zidkijah against Michajah, 1 Kings 32.24. Azariah the Son of Hoshajah, and
Johanan the Son of Kareah, and a knot of other proud men more, that give the
Lords prophet (as it were) the lie. Thou speak falsely (quoth they) thou art
angered by Baruch the son of Neriah. O many are called, but few are chosen. I
need go no surther then our own Town for proof hereof; the Lord grant that it
may be thought upon. on him that wills, nor on him that runs, but on Gods
election. Vocation follows praedestination (I speak now of effectual
vocation.) Rom 8.30. The knowledge of election, (indeed) is discovered upon the
receiving of the Gospel, and following of the Apostles. 1 These. 1. ver.
4.5.6.7. but not the being of it. It was from everlasting, and is a cause of
receiving Christ, not an effect thereof. We have a wilful sort of free will
men risen up, Grace-destroying men, Christ-headers, that separate him from his
body, (the Church) the members whereof (even every one) were written in Gods
book from everlasting. He had a body given him for whom (as well as with which)
he must die.

And how (secondly) are they deceived, that think it enough to be born in
Christian Lands, and to perform outward actions of religion; and to buy for
their babies twelve penniworth of water to sprinkle their faces (or sometimes
it will cost a couple of shillings when these tails of men, and scumme of the
country come a mile further then ordinary) I tremble to think how this sealing
Ordinance is abused, profaned, even every week almost, by these Empyricks, and
vagrant Mountebancks, who are not afraid, nowithstanding God has plucked so
many of them out by the ears in our days. O when God shall come to make a
search in our town; for his choice ones that have the mark of election upon
them; I fear, I fear, what will become of the most of you that hear me this day.

I will name you, but four sorts, look to your selves.

First, The notorious evil liver; the rascals, of which we have (I cannot say
good, but) great store in every street in the Town. Enemies to God and all good
men, enemies to the State and all the blessed proceedings thereof: men indeed,
fitter to be dealt withal with stripes then words; but that God is able to
make words (and sometimes does so) to break (not only bones) contrary to the
common proverb) but also hearts.

Secondly, we have some civil honest people, that have a little exactness that
way; and this makes a greatshow in a Country-Church (as we say;) all the world
shall not put them off from their good conceit of themselves.

Thirdly, but if they come to be conformable to the outward prescriptions for
Religious performances, and to pen a Sermon, or to be (as now we phrase it) a
Member of a Church: why then they are made for ever. And yet such may be as far
from happiness as the worst of men.

There are lastly, A great heap of highflown Apostates, back-sliders from
grace, that show they were never chosen of God and precious, by their turning
with the dog to their vomit, and with the Sow that washed to her wallowing in
the mire. O the fearful doings of our glorious times, in these unglorious
carriages. But the Devil is Gods Ape; when God pours out great measures of his
Spirit, he has his store of delusions to deceive if it were possible the very
elect No marvel then so many fly off; For many are called, but few are
chosen, or elected.

there be any evidence of Election by an effectual Vocation. O we must take
heed how we rest in an outward Calling. Let no man or woman be content, until
they have found themselves in the number of the Lords chosen ones. A notable
place for discovery of it we have 1 Thessalonians. 1. v 3. unto the end of the Chapter.
O when the word is in power and in much assurance, when there is a working
faith, and a laboring love, and a patient hope, and all in sincerity, in the
sight of God our Father: when People become followers of the Lord (though much
affliction follow:) and do receive the word with joy of the holy Ghost; this is
excellent doings; and yet much more might be fetched out of that Chapter, had I
not other things to acquaint you with. Therefore (to stoop to my poor silly
unbred (yet populous) Auditory) I will name some particulars.

First, If you be careful to amend your ways.

Secondly, Marks of men chosen of God.
To seek knowledge.

Thirdly, To renounce the World.

Fourthly, To feel and resist temptations.

Fifthly, To fight against thy flesh.

Sixthly, To forsake ill Company.

Seventhly, To mourn and pray against special sins.

Eighthly, To love Gods children that are the precious ones, and Gods Jewels.

Ninthly, To hate Rascals and Athiests with a deadly hatred; and not only to
shun their society (for that may be done for by-ends) but to hate the very
Garment spotted with the fiesh. As Psalm. 15. In whose eyes a vile person is
contemned. Psalm. 26. I have not sat with vain persons, etc. Psalm. 139, Lord
(says David) do not I hate them that hate thee? And am I not grieved with them
that rise up against thee? Yea, I hate them as though they were mine own
enemies.

And lastly, Learn the folly of the mostdo men of our days. O say men, every
body does it. I say it is an Argument that none but stark buzzards in Religion
will use. Gods People (you see plainly out of this Text) are of the number (not
of those many that are called only, but) of those few that are chosen. O simple
objection against Godly men (yet common) they be like no body. Why it must be
so, it is so in the Text. And it behooveth all to try whether they be of the
little number, sheep of the little flock; and a mighty Motive to labor in this
search, we have next to handle for a Doctrine; it is the third and last, to
wit, That they which are not partakers of an effectual Vocation from Election,
must perish notwithstanding their outward calling to the profession of the
Gospel.

This point arises from this word (For,) which shows the ground of the
condemnation that man lay under, that yet was partaker of an outward calling;
he was not chosen, he was not elected; therefore it was that he was damned. Rom
8.30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called, etc. Rom 9 11.12.
For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that
the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him
that calls, it was said (to Rebekah) the elder shall serve the younger. Romans
11.7. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for: but the
election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded.



That if God has not chosen a man in Christ to be his, it is but in vain to
labor for grace; for it will not be had by any means.

That secret things belong to God; whose revealed will is, Joh. 3.15.
That not one that believes in Christ shall perish. It is my duty therefore
knowing this, to believe; by doing whereof, I may safely conclude mine
election. And therefore labor to believe every one of ye, and show your faith
by your works.

But to return whence I did digress; They err that think it enough to live
under a good Ministry; Judas lived under the best Teacher that ever was. And we
find Mat. 7.21, 22. that many that shall say Lord, Lord, shall not enter into
the Kingdom of heaven. And further, many shall say in the last day, Lord, Lord,
we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out Devils, and in
thy name done many wonderful works; to whom yet it shall be said, Depart from
me ye that work iniquity.



more should we be careful about our life, and to be preserved from erernal
destruction.

But how may a man prove his election of God?

These. 1.3. to the end of the Chapter. And further, effectual Vocation is an
evident sign of Election, Romans 8.30. And the fruits of holiness and
righteousness. 2 Pet. 1. ver. 5. to the 11. Faith, love, patience, sincerity,
and adhering to Christ; a delighting in the excellent ones. Consider whom do
thou love? whom would thou preserve if it were in thy power? O consider this
ye that hate Gods people, that exclude the^ what you can (sometimes shamefully,
though shamelesly) out of your Counsels for no other reason but because they
make conscience of their ways, and the Ordinances of Christ which ye contemn;
the time will come when ye shall be excluded. The ungodly shall not stand in
judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. And let such as
have these forementioned graces, rejoice; they shall grow, and at last come
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

ERRATA:
In the Epist. to the Parl. page 3. in the Margin insert Mr. I. B. blot it out
in the next page in the 24. l. of the 3. page for while read until. In the 6.
page of the same lip for where read whence. In the Margin of the 7. for
Brerewich read Greenwich. p. 8. l. 2. for Sermon 1. Sermons. In the book. Page
1. the title for Tavistook r. Tavistock. page 6. l. 17. for 7. put 2. page 51.
l. 23. sor word r. world, in the 46. p. l. 20. between the two words business
(and indeed) insert the word Which.

FINIS.

