AN APOLOGY For our Public Ministry, AND Infant Baptism.

Written some years ago for Private satisfaction of some Dissenting Brethren; and
upon request enlarged and Published for the same ends.

By William Lyford, B.D. and Minister of the Gospel at Sherborn in Dorcetshire.

DEUTERONOMY. 12.19. Take heed to thy self, that thou forsake not the Levite, as long
as thou live upon the earth.

1 THESE. 5.12, 13. We beseech you brethren to know them, which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them very
highly in love for their works sake, and be at peace among your selves.

Lux. 10.16. He that hears you hears me; and he that despises you
despises me.

LONDON, Printed by William Dugard, 1652.

To my loving Christian friend, Mr John Raymond wishes increas of Grace.
SIR!
ACcording to your earnest desire and my promiss, I have sent up unto you the
heads of those Reasons with large additions, which four years ago I tendered to
some of our Church-forsakers, with hope to have gained them to unity and
communion with us. But by that time Houspreaching was counted a fine knack, and
our English people taught to question the Calling of their Ministers, to call
them by new names, Baals Priests, the black guard, Antichristian Priests, etc.
And then it is high time to set up themselves; if they had lived in the primitive
times, when Christians did meet in dens and secret places for the worship of
Christ, with hazard of their lives, they would have counted it a blessed
privilege to enjoy the free use of the Ordinances in public Assemblies; but
now that liberty is granted, it is despised; our people are wanton and
unthankful. Surely our Lord Christ was no Corner-creeping Preacher, He
disclaimed it, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue,
whither the Jews resort, Joh. 18.20.
and in secret have I said nothing: Neither does he allow it in his servants,
whom he forwarns not to seek him in Corners, Mat. 24.26 if they shall say unto
you, Behold he is in the desert [among those which withdraw themselves from the
public professors,] Go not forth; Behold he is in the secret Chambers, Believ
it not. When men shall say unto you, in such a house or Chamber, there is one
that hold's forth Christ most sweetly in a Gospel-way, let us go to him; Go not
forth, says the Text, Believ it not: How should any believ it? for what one
new sweet Doctrine concerning Christ his person, or offices ^ave ye learned
there, which ye were not taught before. Have ye ^y your new way gotten
farther assurance of your salvation? Have ye thereby grown in grace, and more
escaped the corruptions that are in the world through lust? or are ye more
entangled in the same? What? Christ sweetly held forth, and yet no savor of
that knowledge stick upon your souls? I demand with S. Paul, 2 Cor. 11.4.
He that comes and preaches, does he preach another Jesus, whom we have
not preached, or another spirit, or another Gospel which ye have not accepted?
Christ held forth in private, is it the same Christ, or another? the same way
of Justification, the same spirit of sanctification, which we have taught, or
another? if another, I boldly affirm it, it is a falls Christ, a falls Gospel, a
falls spirit: But if the same, why do people desert the Ordinance, as if it were
not the same? Yes, because other men have a better way of Teaching Christ, and
we go not from one Christ to another, but to the same Christ held forth in a
sweeter manner. Answ. If that be the intent, then it is your wisest and surest
way to partake of both, viz. of the Blessing of God in the Assemblies, and of
the help of another gifts, either before or after the public, by which means
you will avoid the scandal now given (which an honest man will make conscience
to do,) and you will be sure to meet with Christ, if he be any where manifested.

SIR, You may remember that I have often invited the people to com to me, and
open their doubts, which some have don (especially when self-examination of our
spiritual estates was more in use amongst Christians.) Yea, I have offered,
that if any soul could think of any matter or Text which might serve to answer
their doubts, to eas their scruples, to direct their Consciences in particular
Cases, or to inform their minds in any point or Text not usually handled, that
they should choose the way to acquaint me with their desires, and I would
study to answer their expectation: I do not remember, that any made use of
this liberty, besides your self, who once desired me to preach upon that Text,
Joh. 6.44. which I readily did in two Sermons, and shall as readily do the
like, for any soul in the Congregation. I have not used to trouble their heads
with Controversies of the times; but when I had finished my Body of Divinity,
(which was the subject of my morning Sermons, wherein I aimed chiefly at Laying
of foundations, as in the afternoons Sermons, going through some entire piece of
Scripture (as the whole Epistle to the Galatians,) wherein I aimed especially
at larger Applications for instruction in holiness and trials of our spiritual
estate.) In the year 1647. The Testimony of the London Ministers against the
Errors of the times coming forth, I (to avoid suspicion of loading the times
with Errors,) did take the Opinions as they were there drawn up to my hands and
upon each head, I laid down one or two distinctions very briefly (not by Obj.
and Sol.) that so by sorting every thing apart, the Chaff by it self, the Wheat
by it self; Heb. 5.14.
my people might have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, and
see in which side of the distinction lay the Truth and in which the Error,
Phil. 1.10.
and so neither condemn all nor embrace all things in the Lump, but be able to
discern things that differ. In all which, as in the course of my ministry,
with all caution and tenderness avoiding this, Never to encourage any thing of
the flesh, nor discourage any thing of the spirit in my Hearers. The which
exercises, if God be pleased to restore my health, I intend shortly to revise
and publish.

Learned men will wonder, why I should come forth now in the Fag end of the day
with a stale Controversy: But so long as sin reign's, we ought not to be
silent. Variety of Books, though for matter the same, is of good use: You see
that notwithstanding all the Ammunition in the Commonwealth or Nation.
Kingdom, there is new made daily, some are naked, or the old is lost; so it is
in Books, which are more needful then Arms, all com not into all hands, many
would read little, if Books were not new. It Is noted of the Arrians, that they
got the sway of the world, and overtopt the Orthodox, partly by their subtilty
crerping into Emperors Courts, partly by their unwearied diligence; the
Orthodox after sound Confutation of their Heresy, sitting down content with
that discharge of their duty: And surely if ever our glorious lights of the
sanctuary be put out, and new ones set up in their stead, next unto God's
wrath penally inflicting such a judgment for a Peoples unthankfulness, it will
be ascribed to our laziness, and their unwearied diligence, rather then to any
truth of their Cause; or excellence of their Arguing: For they do not or will
not know when they are confuted, but after their Arguments answered ten times
over, they are as brisk to offer new. disputation, insisting upon their old
bald Arguments, as if never uttered before; their diligence should provoke us
to the like, if not their diligence, yet love to their souls should, 2 Timothy
2.25.
remembering that of Paul, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves,
if at any time God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth,
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, we must not
give over a Patient while there is hope, no not though they oppose themselves,
but with long-suffering they must be instructed, because as the gift of grace,
so the time of grace is in God's hand alone. It is a great skill to discern who
are to be forborne and who to be opposed, they that make Divisions and parties
in the Church and scandalize the Doctrine are to be avoided, Romans 16.17.
others that walk humbly and peaceably under that weakness and dissenting
Opinion from their brethren, are to be forborne, loved, and cherished, till we
meet in heaven, where Luther and Calvin and all, whose Faith and hearts do
center in the Lord Christ, shall for evermore be fully agreed. To his Grace I
commend you, who is able to establish you, and rest

Yours, and the Churches servant in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, WILLIAM LYFORD.

AN APOLOGY FOR Our Public MINISTRY.
TOuching the Office and Calling of Ministers, and Lay-men's preaching, the
Question is not, Whether Christians may and ought privately to edify one
another by admonitions, counsels, reproofs, repetition of Sermons, reading of
good Books and other Christian conferences, all this I grant and commend to
practice from these Scriptures, Heb. 3.13. 1 These. 4.8. 1 These. 5.11.14. Romans
15 14. But the whole state of the controversy may fitly be reduced to these
three heads:

Quest. 1. Whether the work of a Minister in the Administration of the Word and
Sacraments, be a Calling, Office and work distinct from the rest of the
people? Whether there be any such Calling or Office for that holy work in the
New Testament? Affir.

2. Whether Ordination of Ministers for Administration of Word and Sacraments
be an Ordinance of Christ in the New Testament? Affir.

3. Whether it be lawful for men uncalled and unordained to Take upon them the
preaching of the Word in the Name and with the authority of the Lord Jesus, or
the Administration of the Sacraments? Neg.

The answer and determination of these three Questions will clearly state the
Cause, which I shall do in three Conclusions.

distinct Calling and Office, which they are bound to attend unto, and None but
they can or ought to perform.

Ordination of Ministers by imposition of hands of other Ministers for the
Administration of the Word and Sacraments, is an Ordinance of Christ in the New
Testament.

uncalled and unordained can with good Conscience intrude or enter upon that
Work and Office, it is a great sin so to do. Of these I will speak in order.

viz. that the Ministry is a distinct Office and Calling, is proved 1. By
express words of the Text, 1 Timothy 3.1. if any man desire the Office of a
Bishop, he desires a good work: The Text tell's you that Bishop, or
Presbyter, is an Office, a good Office, and he that is made a Bishop is a man
in high Office, even to take care of the Church of God, ver. 5. and in him
there are required many qualifications which are not required in other
Believers. Again, Paul writing to the Philippians does plainly distinguish the
Body of Saints from the Officers, To all the Saints which are at Philippi with
the Bishops and Deacons, Phil. 1.1. By Bishops there, all understand Ministers
of the Gospel, in Office of Teaching distinct from the people, who were Saints,
but not Bishops. So in the Church of Ephesus, the like distinction between
Pastor and People in respect of Office and Calling is obferved. Act. 20. Paul
called for the Elders of the Church, verse 17. He minde's them of their Office,
verse 28. Take heed to all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you
overseers or Bishops, to feed the Church of God, for so did Christ ordain, and
set in the Church some Pastors and Teachers for the work of the Ministry,
Ehes. 4.11.12.
e.i. to be Guides to the Flock, to feed them with wholesome Doctrine, Heb.
13.7, 17. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the Word of God, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls. In which
places you see that Ministry of the Word is a name of Office given to certain
men designed and singled out to that work, as a special work not common to
others, take one clear place more, viz. 1 These. 5.11. Comfort and edify one
another, [there's the peoples mutual duty in private.] But verse. 12. know them
which labor among you and are over you in the Lord and admonish you, there is
the Pastor's Office and duty, who, though they may be but even with you in
respect of Gifts and Graces, yet they are over you in the Lord: in respect of
their Office and Work, they are over all, even over them which were able to
admonish one another; and the people's duty is to know, i.e. to acknowledge
them as such, and to esteem them very highly for their work's sake, because God
has set them over you in that Office.

By all which places of Scripture it is evident that in the Churches of Christ
Some are Pastors and Elders to feed Some are Guides and Rulers Some are Sheep and
the flock to be fed Some are Guided and Ruled. Some are single Saints: Some are
Bishops over them in the Lord.


There is a work wholly to be attended, and men appointed to attend that work
wholly. Names of Office, without an Office, are mere mockeries; the Names of a
King, of a Steward, Pastor, Bishop, Guide, etc. without their respective
Offices are not given in Scripture; In the places now cited, you find those
distinctive Titles and Names joined with the work it self. I demand then with
the Apostle, Are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 14.4.
are all Bishops? are all Guids and Pastors? The Minister and his Work are as
precisely distinguished by the holy Ghost from all other Callings, as can be
written with ink and paper. Now that which Christ has set up, who shall dare
to pull down? Those which Christ has distinguished, no may confound. Pastor
and People, Bishops and Flock, Guides and guided are relatives, and stand in
such direct opposition one to the other, that, in respect of the same subject,
the one cannot be the other: the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the
Father; the Master is not the Servant, nor the Servant the Master; the King is
not a subject, nor a subject the King; And therefore regularly, the one cannot
do the duties of the other. A Guifted man, as such, is not a Bishop, nor a
Presbyter, nor a Pastor, for these are distinguished from other men, that have
Gifts, but not Office.

Secondly, This first Conclusion is proved from the special Charge given to
Ministers, over and above what is incumbent on private persons, as for example,
Col. 4.17. Take heed to the Ministry which thou have received of the Lord
that thou fulfill it -- and to all the Flock over which the holy Ghost has made
you overseers, Act. 20.28. with 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed to thy self and to the
Doctrine, meditate upon these things, Give thy self wholly to them, i.e. to
Reading, Exhortation and Doctrine, verse. 13.15. The work to which thou wast
ordained, verse. 14. And as God has given a Charge to Ministers, so he does
require an exact account of their doings in this Tim. 4.1, 3. I charge thee
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, Ezekiel. 3.18. Ezekiel. 34.2, 4, 10. Zech.
11.17.
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, preach the Word, be
instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and Doctrine: This is the Ministers Charge. Now all do not lie
under this weighty Charge and account. Has every Gifted man a Flock to feed?
a Ministry to fulfill? or are they bound to give themselves wholly to that work
forsaking all other Callings? No, but they are persons singled out and designed
to this Office and Work, upon whom this Charge does lie.

3. Our third proof is from the honor and maintenance appointed for them that
preach the Gospel, the Lord has ordained that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. And that the Presbyters which labor
in the Word and Doctrine should be counted worthy double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17.
And can Lay-preachers challenge this honor and maintenance?

The sum of all is this, Ministers, and none but Ministers, are Bishops,
Pastors or Elders; They, and none but they, are bound to give themselves wholly
to that work; They, and none but they, are under that heavy Charge and
account; They, and none but they, can by divine Authority of Christ's
ordinance, 1 Cor. 9.14.
challenge to live of the Gospel; They, and none but they, to whom these
Characters do belong, are the men whom God has made Ministers of Christ and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1.

another capacity, as gifted men.

two sorts of Preachers, some that are appointed and sent, and some that are not,
and yet do it: Some preach in a preaching capacity, and some not in a preaching
capacity: Some are Called, sent and Autorized by Christ to preach, some are not
so Autorized, and yet they preach. It is a contradiction to preach in a
non-preaching capacity, because to preach in the Name and by the Authority of
Jesus Christ, does imply a public mission and Autorizing; If an ordinary
Soldier should usurp the office of a Colonel, or a Colonel the office of the
General, or a private man the office of a Constable, would this be a good
answer to say, I do it not in the capacity of a Constable, or Colonel, or
General, but in another capacity, as a man Gifted for such actions; I believ
such an under-taker would be severely punished in the capacity of an Usurper,
of a busie-disturber of public Order. His being Gifted duly performed by any
other capacity then of their Office and Patent.

work as others do, for their living. Cannot they preach without study and
books? it is a sign they preach not by the Spirit, etc.

justice to say to him at the weeks end, Go work for your living, when he has
been all the while about your work? Such another piece of Justice and Honesty
it is to say, Let Ministers work for their living, when as they have spent
their time, and spirits, and Talents to do you service, to prepare food and
raiment for your souls. Christ count's preaching to be a labor, else he would
not have said, the laborer is worthy of his hire; yea and hard labor too, else
he would not have compared Ministers to soldiers, to shepherds, to
husbandmen, to the labor of the ox that treads out the corn.

Besides, 1 Cor 9.13, 14
Christ has ordained that ministers should live by their preaching, as by a
Calling, as the Priests under the Law did: As they that ministered about holy
things, did live of the things of the Temple, even so has the Lord ordained,
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. These men often Call
for Gospel Ordinances; Lo here is a Gospel-Ordinance, and yet they cannot stoop
to it; (for say they, let ministers work --) But let such men remember that
Complaint of Paul, who though he did not regard money, yet he write's it up
among his wrongs and sufferings, that he was fain to labor for his living,
working with his own hands, 1 Cor. 4.11, 12. to this hour we both hunger and
thirst, and labor working with our own hands. Therefore forbear to use this
objection, unless ye mean to be Persecutors.

Paul bid's Timothy give attendance to Reading and to Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.13.
But you say, Can they not preach without study? Paul saie's verse 15. Give thy
self wholly to these things, that thy profiting may be known; A man so rarely
gifred as Timothy was, of whom there went certain prophecies what a rare man
he would be in the Church, educated from his infancy yet he must give
attendance to study and reading, and that wholly, all is little enough; and
must not we much more follow our studies? 2 Timothy 2.4.
Paul saie's, we must not entangle our selves in worldly imploiments. But you
say, a man may follow a Trade all the week, Verse. 15.
and yet preach the Lord's day. True, after a wild fashion, but not like a
workman that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.

Spirit of God against God's means, in and by which his Spirit does usually
work. The Spirit is it which works effectually in the ministry of us all,
Gal. 2.8.
the sufficiency, and efficiencie is not of us, but of God, but yet the Spirit
works by such Gifts as himself bestows, 1 Cor. 12.4. There be diversities
of Gifts, but the same Spirit, and by the right use of those Gifts, the Spirit
does work to the edifying of the Churches; For the manifestation of the Spirit
is given to every one to profit withal. i.e. Whosoever has any Gift
manifesting the miraculous power of the Spirit, it is given, not for
ostentation, or to be admired, but for this only end, for the profit of all,
verse 7. Now the Gifts then given to profit the Church withal, in the way of
instruction, are reckoned up six. 1. Sapientia, wisdom, to apply Christian
Doctrine to Practice and Use of believers. 2. Scientia, a knowledge of
Principles and deep points of Religion. 3. Prophecy, i.e. a Gift to expound
the prophecies and secret things of Scripture. 4. Discerning of spirits, viz
fanatic and counterfeit inspirations from true. 5. Diverse kinds of tongues,
that all Nations and languages might hear and understand the Gospel. 6.
Interpretation of tongues wherewith others did speak, and wherein the Scripture
is written: These Gifts of the Spirit are useful and profitable for the Church,
they were miraculous for the manner of coming by them, but the Doctrine taught
was the same which was before revealed. These Gifts may either be acquired, or
infused; At first they were infused immediately, both for the honor of the
Gospel, and the speedier spreading of it; Afterward they are continued for the
good of the Church by the Help of study or prayer: Even as the Gift of Healing
is now continued by the study and Art of Physic; without the Gifts of wisdom,
science, and tongues, we can never soundly, nor fruitfully make known the
mysteries of Scripture; and he that by study and prayer does attain the use
of any of these Gifts in preaching, he preaches by the Spirit: if the Things
which we preach, be the things the Gifts by which we preach, be the Gifts
of the Spirit, then, whether the means by which we com by those Gifts, be
extraordinary, as by inspiration, or ordinary, as by study and prayer, the
matter is the same, We preach by the Spirit, i.e. by the illumination and
guidance of the Spirit, leading us into the truth, which himself has revealed.
We pretend not, yea we detest all pretensions of new and immediate
inspirations, whereby the holy Ghost is made the Author of disorder and
confusion, or a cloak for ignorance, nonsense and Heresy.

Ordination of ministers by imposition of hands of the Presbytery for the
Administration of the Word and Sacraments, is an Ordinance of Christ in the New
Testament.

The work of the ministry is an Office and Calling, as you have heard, and
Ordination is Christ's Ordinance whereby fit and approved persons are set apart
and Commissioned for the execution of that Office, in the Name and with the
Authority of Jesus Christ. Droved 1. by example.
The weight of the Controversy lies upon this Conclusion, which is directly
proved. 1. By example, We find in the New Testament four descents of men sent
and ordained. 1. Christ himself was sent of his Father. 2. The Apostles were
sent and ordained by Christ, Mark 3.14. 3. The Apostles sent and ordained
Timothy and others of their own time. 4. And they that lived in the Apostles
times did in like manner ordain others to survive, and do the Office of
Ministers when they were dead, and this succession of Ministers is to last to
the end of the world.

1. Christ was sent and had his Commission from his Father, Joh. 20.21, 22, 23.
My Father has sent me. Christ himself was sent and Autuorized to preach, else
he had not not taken that honor to himself, Heb. 5.4, 5.

2d. Descent. Christ send's the Apostles, As my Father sent me, so sent I you;
there is their Commission, he committed the ministry to their execution,
which himself had received, viz. a power to Preach and Baptize, to bind and
loos, Job. 20.23. with Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, Teach all Nations and
Baptize them. The Man Christ could do nothing, but by Commission from the
Father, nor the Apostles, except Christ had given them Commission: both Christ
and his Apostles were solemnly inaugurated into their Office of Teaching.

Timothy and others of their own time, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the Gift of God
which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands, and the hands of the
presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. By Gift there, is meant that Ghostly power, or
Office, which Timothy received at his ordination, by the laying on of the
Apostles hands, in the presence and with the consent of the presbytery, who
joined with Paul in that action. Again, we find Paul and Barnabas ordaining
Elders in every Church where they went, Acts 14.23.

4th Descent. Timothy and Titus did ordain others, as theniselvs had been
ordained, and that by the Apostle's own appointment, Tit. 1.5. for this cause
was Titus left in Crete, that he should ordain Elders in every City. So
likewise Timothy is directed how to lay on hands, not suddenly, but with good
advisedness, 1 Timothy 5.22. As Timothy was entrusted with the word of Christ, so
He must commit the same trust to faithful men, able to teach others also, that
so there may be a succession of Teachers, 2 Timothy 2.2. Thus ye have recorded
in Scripture four descents, 1. Christ. 2. His Apostles. 3. Timothy and Titus.
4. Elders at Creet and Ephesus, and other Churches where the Gospel was
planted, all sent and ordained, the two later by ordination in the ordinary
way: thus the Apostles in their own Practice admitted men into the ministry,
and thus they appointed for succeeding times; And can any think that Ordination
ended with that Age? Is there not the same cause, necessity, use, and reason
for it in after Ages, as in the first times of the Church, when there were as
yet extraordinary Gifts stirring in the Church, which are now ceased, and
therefore the more need of a standing ministry?

Secondly, 2 From Scripture-Rules.
This Conclusion is proved by Scripture- Rules and Precepts given touching
Ordination and the manner thereof: Unto Titus Paul give's commandment to ordain
Elders, Tit. 1.5. and prescribe's certain Rules and Canons for the trial and
qualification of them that are to be ordained, verse 7. a Bishop must be
blameless, holding fast the faithful word, that he may be able to convince
the gainsaiers, verse 9. So unto Timothy he gave directions and rules touching
Ordination, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be thou
partaker of other men's sins. i.e. Admit not any into the ministry without
sufficient examination, and good proof of their ability for learning, and
godly conversation, else the blame will light upon thee, because by the laying on
of thy hands they were admitted What need Titus be left in Crete to ordain
Elders in every City, if Saints of themselves might do all without Ordination?
And to what purpose are those Cautions and Directions about Ordination, if
there were no such thing to be don? if Ordination it self be needless, then
much more is the manner of doing it needless.

laying on of hands may be omitted: Ans. Sometimes we must be tied to example
in the least gesture, though not prescribed, and yet men presume to dispens in
a circumstance expressly prescribed. Why should we be wiser then Paul? Why
should we be ashamed of Gods express will? Timothy was ordained by laying on
of hands, and enjoined to lay on hands on others in their Ordination: thus were
the Deacons ordained, Act. 6.6. and thus were Saul and Barnabas set apart for
the execution of their Calling, Act. 13.3. And seeing the Scripture is so
punctual about the Manner of Ordination, and the Quality of Persons to be
ordained, the Duty it self is much more established, even as when God give's
us rules for praying, fasting, alms, Magistrates, Matthew. 6.1, 3
etc. it does necessarily implie that there must be Magistrates, and praying,
etc. And herein is fulfilled that prophecy of Es. 66.21. concerning the
Ministry of the N. T. I will take of them for Priests, and for Levites, says
the Lord. ( i.e.) Though the distinction of Tribes be taken away, and that old
Priesthood ceased, yet God promised it as a blessing to the Church of the
Gentiles, that he would raise up of themselves some that should be in stead of
the old Priests and Levites, in things perteining to God.

Upon these undeniable proofs, I frame these 3 Arguments, as to the main cause.

did ordain, and call Ministers of the Word, and as they appointed others after
them to be ordained and sent, so and in like manner, ought men now to be sent
and ordained. But the Apostles did ordain men for the ministration of the word
and sacraments by laying on of hands, and also appointed and enjoined the same
to be don in the Churches of Christ -- therefore it is Christ's Ordinance,
that so it ought still to be don, and they that do otherwise do go against the
example and appointment of the Scripture, and so overthrow an Ordinance of
Christ in the N. Testament.

contrary to the examples, rules and directions of Scripture, cannot be don
without sin. -- But to administer the contrary to the examples and rules of
Scripture; therefore it is unlawful, and cannot be don without sin.

Sending be more then Gifting (by God's word) then there is something more by
God's word required unto preaching, then sole Gifting: -- But Sending is,
according to God's word, more then Gifting, therefore something more then
Gifting is required to make a preacher of the Gospel.

That Sending is more then Gifting, is evident, because Gifted men must be
ordained. Timothy was a man rarely Gifted, yet he was ordained and sent by
the outward calling of the Church, 1 Timothy 4.14. and so were the rest of whom
we read, 1 Timothy 2.7. Act. 13.2, 3.

There be two things required to make a Minister. 1. Gifts, which must be
tried and approved. 2. Ordination and solemn Inauguration into their Office.
Gifts give not Authority to any man for any thing; the Lawyer at the Bar may
have as great gifts as the Judge upon the Bench, yet becaus-hee has not the
like Commission, he may not intrude upon the Judges office. A private man may
be as well Gifted as a Justice of Peace, yet, without a Commission, he may
not do his office; so is it in this present case.

There is but one branch of the second Conclusion unproved, which says that
Ordination must be by the laying of hands of other Ministers, and this is
added to put a difference between true and falls Ordination: In some
congregational Churches, they have their Pastors ordained (i.e.) chosen and
appointed by the people: Truly then they may preach and exercise Ministerial
Acts in the name of the People, but not in the name of Christ, unless they did
derive their Authority by Ordination from Christ.

It is a gross mistake to think or teach that Church Power is Originally in the
People, as the proper seat and subject thereof, from them to be derived and
placed upon whom they choos: Christ gave all power to the Body of the Church
finaliter and objective (i e.) for their use and benefit, according to that of
the Apostle. 1 Cor. 3.22. All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, all are yours, i.e. for your service and salvation, but they are not
yours, i.e. they are not of your making and autorizing: Church Power is first
seated in Christ the Head and Apostle of our possession, and from him committed
to his Apostles, and from them to Bishops and other Ministers commit the same
to others which themselves had first received, but (according to that known
rule) no man can give to another, that which himself has not first received,
therefore the people which never received Orders, nor Power to administer the
word, sacraments, and keys, how they can can bestow it on others, is besides
all Scripture and reason: Church Power is in the Ministers of the Church by
Derivation from the Apostles, and they alone can commit, and Transmit it unto
others. The Text is express which says, that Ordination is by the hands of the
presbytery.

Bishops, and Bishops from the Pope, and the Pope is from the devil. You lost
your true succession in the Papacy, and the calling which ye now have, is
Antichristian.

received it not from Rome. The Brownists say our Ministers are not rightly
called into their Offices, because we r^^eived it from Rome. Thus we are
condemned of all hands, one of these accusers must needs charge us falsely, but
admit both their allegations to have some truth, yet neither of them do conclude
what they intend.

1. To answer the Papist, I shall only crave leav to insert among my plain
pages, a letter of that most godly learned man, Dr Reinolds to a friend of his,
who craved his help to answer the challenge of some Papists touching the
lawfulness of our Ministry.

Your godly requst (good Mr Barker) I should be somewhat better able to
satisfy, Dr Rainolds his Letter.
if I knew on what grounds these proud popish challengers do persuade themselves
that none of you can avow your vocation to the Ministry to be lawful. But I
guess they do it on the same, that Heart in his conference with me, because the
ancient Canons Ecclesiastical ascribed to the Apostles say, Episcopus duobus
aut tribus Episcopis ordinetur, Presbyter autem ab uno Episcopo: and they think
none of us to be ordained by a Bishop, because in the beginning of her
Majesty's reign, one popish Bishop of Q. Mary's being then left, none of our
Bishops could be ordained by two or three. Now if they build hereupon (as to
me it seems they do, because I find no other reason in Decler. c. 3.
Bellarmine, Epitom. Controv. part. 1. Con. 4. q. 2.
Parsons, or Harding, Stapleton, Greg de Valem.
the rest, of this objection against us) it may be, that as Heart, when he saw
the answer that I made thereunto, would needs have that whole point left out in
our conference Canterbury his Register, and taking thence a note how Bishop
Freak (who ordained me) consecratus est a Matthaeo Cant. Roberto Winton. and
Edmundo Sarum; and how each of these was consecrated by other three or four, as
Matthaeus Cant. by four that were Bishops in King Edwards time, these again
consecrated by Archbishop Cranmer (whom three with the Pope's consent had
consecrated) and so brought every one upward to those times wherein the Church
of Rome acknowledged them ordained lawfully, I had no sooner showed this
extract to Mr Heart, but he confessed he thought no such thing could be
showed, and that himself had been born in hand otherwise, on the conceit above
mentioned. You, who are further from London, where the records are kept (though
your friend if need be, can help you thereunto) may ask them, if they think
not Archbishop Cranmer, and the rest in King Henrie's time, to be lawfully
ordained Bishops, which when they acknowledge (because the Pope confirmed them)
you may offer this proof, that our Bishops succeeding them in King Edwards
time, and so in Q. Elizabeth's, were consecrated by three of them, or their
succesfors, out of the authentical Records of the Archbishopric, s^il. that
Matthew Parker the first Archbishop in Q. Elizabeth's days, was thus by William
Barlow, Bishop of Bath and Wells in K. Edward's time, John Scorie Bishop of
Chichester, Miles Coverdale of Exeter, John Hodgeskir Suffragane of Bedford. If
they acknowledge that he and all the rest in like sort were consecrated by a
number of Bishops sufficient, but these not confirmed by the Pope, as the first
in King Henrie's time were, they must bring forth proof that without his
consent no Bishop is lawfully ordained, which soundly they never can. If they
say the Bishops since Cranmer's time, were and are Heretics, and therefore are
not lawfully autorized to ordain; first here they will fail in proof too,
because Heresy is an error repugnant to the word of God, and that we hold any
such, they cannot show: then admitting the contrary, and putting the case we
did, to avoid so huge debate of all points in controversy, their own Principal
Doctors, In 4. sent. did. 25. q. 1. Art. 2. Con. 2.
Dominicus Soto, De sacram. in genere, l. 1. c. 26.
Bellarmine, Com. Theal. Tom. 4 did 9. q. 3. puncts 2.
Greg. de Valentia, do teach out of S. Lib. 2. c. 13. contr. epistolam Parmen.
tract. 9. in Evang. Joannis, Jo. 9.33.
Augustine grounding on the Scripture, that Heretical Dontatists was, to deny
it. What other cavils or sophisms they are likely to use, I cannot imagine, but
very willing to yield you any help that I can, upon farther notice, I commend
you to the Grace of our good God, beseeching him to direct and strengthen by
his holy Spirit, your self, and the rest of your fellow Soldiers to fight his
Battles.

At Oxford the third of June. 1605. JOHN RAINOLDS,


IF any doubt of this Letter, he may receiv satisfaction touching the Truth of
it by some yet living in Corpus Christi College, from whom I had this Copy.

Jesuits mouth, yet it strengthen's the other part of the Objection, with whom
we have chiefly to deal.

continued in the times of the Pop's reign, yet it did not fetch its Original
from the Pope: the Gospel sounded out of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem even as far as Britain long enough before that Antichrist of Rome
was born. Romans 16.26. Col. 1.6.
And though we should not think the wors of the Gospel though received from
Rome in her first pure state (whom Paul celebrate's for a famous Church.) Romans
1.6, 8. Acts and Monoments, l. 2. p. 1. etc. Whites way to the Church 49.
Yet the light came to England first from Jerusalem, and not from Rome, as Mr
Fox and Dr John White have learnedly demonstrated out of Gildas and sundry
other Autors, who affirm that Britain received the Gospel in the time of
Tiberius the Emperor, under whom Christ was crucified; and though there be some
little variance among Autors about the time, yet that confirm's the Truth of
the matter in which they all concur, that England received the Gospel very
early, either by the preaching of some one of the Apostles or some of that time:
mostly received is, that Joseph of Arimathea was sent by Philip from France to
Britain, about the year 63. and laid the first foundation of the Christian
Faith, which was confirmed and increased by others.

The same is confirmed by the Testimony of Tertullian, Adversus Jodaees c. 7.
Et Britannorum inaccessa Romany l^ca, Christ's vero suhdita.
in his Book against the Jews, where reckoning the parts of the world, whither
the Gospel was dispersed by the sound of the Apostles, recites the parts of
Britain unsubdued by the Romane's sword, yet subdued unto the Fox relates that
about the year 180, King Lucius (the first Christened King) sent to Eleutherius
the Bishop of Rome, to receiv of him the Christian Faith [others say to receiv
farther instructions from him.] Eleutherius sent unto him Damianus and Faganus,
by whom the King was converted, with many of the people, and were baptized
about the year 179 the Monumentsand Rites of Heathenish Idolatry were
subverted, Superstition decayed, and true Religion increased; there were then
in Britain, Fox Acts and Mon. ubisupra.
28 Head Priests which they called Flamines, and three Archpriests, which they
called Arch-Flamines, having the oversight of the manners over the rest. These
28 Flamines they turned to 28 Bishops, and the three Arch-Flamines to three
Arch-bishopricks having then their Seats in three principal Cities, viz.
London, York, Gloucester. In these days, Rome was a Virgin Church not
Antichristian. And if we grant that England received the Faith from
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, yet he was neither a Pope nor Papist. And from
this Apostolical root do we extract our Ordination and Succession, as being
well assured that very early in the Primitive Church, Whites Way to the Church,
49.
the Gospel was planted here. And though the Papists object that the Faith was
again extinguished in England, yet Dr White shows the contrary, viz. that the
Faith continued here from King Lucius to the coming of Austen the Monk, whom
Gregory sent hither 600 years after Christ, who when he came found diverse
Britain Bishops and learned men, with a monastery at Bangor, who did oppose
Arrianism and Pelagianism, and the pride of Austen the Pope's Ambassador.

Secondly, I say, that the rightfulness of our Vocation is not cut off, or
nulled by such a Succession; for that learned Letter as it confesses the
Succession of our first Reformers to have been from men of the Romish Religion,
Mat. 3.2.3.
so it teaches truly, That Heretical Bishops may lawfully Ordain, and that it
is an Heresy, such as the Donatish was to deny it. To this agree's the
judgment of our Savior, who Teaches that the Scribes and Pharisees have a
lawful Succession from Moses, (they sit in his Chair, their Calling is of God)
though a race of bad men possessed that Chair, and Christ will have them
acknowledged for the lawful Ministers. So is our Calling and Succession, though
it passed thorough corrupt times: The Scriptures themselves, Baptism, and the
Articles of our Creed, have all passed through the Papacy unto us, and yet
they ceas not to be true Scriptures, nor true Baptism; much less does
Ordination ceas to be rightful, it being an act of jurisdiction, which may be
legally and law fully performed by men of corrupt Faith.

distinguish the Acts of Office [which have their form and being from a root
or fountain without us] from the qualities of the man, that perform's the
Office. The man may be naught, yet his Office good; and Acts don by virtue of
his Office just and allowable, although the man and his Religion be naught. As
for instance, a Popish Landlord make's you a Leas of a Farm, your Leas is not
Antichristian, but good in Law, though he that demised it, be for his
Religion, a Papist. A Popish Judge does pass a sentence in Court, which stand's
good in Judicature: His sentence is not Popish, though he that pronounced it
be a Papist; the reason is, because the legal sentence is not of him, nor from
him, as a Papist, but a Judge, who does but deliver that which he has received
from an higher root the Law; So in this case, Ordination is an Act of Office
derived from Christ, and it is not Popish though executed by a Papist. We do
not rebaptize them that were baptized by a Popish Priest, because the power of
Ged's Ordinance depend's not on the person that does execute the same, but
upon an higher foundation, the Institution of Christ. Ministerial Acts are not
vitiated or made nud, though they pass through the hands of bad men; But stand
good to all intents and purposes to such as receiv them aright, by virtue of
their Office autoritatively derived from the first Institution.

To right Ordination (besides the parties inward Call) are required, To right
Ordination what is requited.
Two things: 1. On behalf of the party to be Ordained, he must have sundry
qualifications, as integrity of life by which he get's a good report even of
those that are without: 2. Soundness in the Faith, he must not be an Heretic
or misbeliever, but able by sound Doctrine to instruct and convince the
gain-faier: 3. He must be apt to teach, ready to communicate his knowledge to
others.

Secondly, on behalf of them that do ordain, it is likewise required; 1. That
they take a trial of their Gifts and Life, as Paul says, Let them first be
proved and then let them minister if they be sound worthy. 2. Then fallows
Ordination it self, which is don, when then they are Consecrated and set apart,
and Autorized with imposition of hands and prayer to preach the Word in the
Name of Christ, 1 Timothy 4.14. 3. Then fallows their Election or designation to
their particular places and charges, which is don, partly by the voice of the
people, and partly by the wisdom of the Guides of the Church.

Thus are we Qualified, Called, Admitted and Autorized to execute the sacred
Function, according to Scirpture-Rules, and God has sealed to us the fruit of
our Calling, by the conversion of many thousand souls, in Christ Jesus we by
the blessing and assistance of the holy Ghost have begotten you, so that if we
be not true Ministers of Christ to others, yet surely we are to the people of
this Nation, and to some, (we hope) of our present, though uuthankful and
Causless enemies.

Object. But private men unordained may convert souls, as the woman of Samaria
informed her neighbors, Rahab was converted by the Spies, Aquila and priscilla
helped Apollos, etc.

1 Cor. 7.16. 1 Pet. 3.1. Tit. 2.3.
at least win them to a liking of Christianity; the Elder women must be
Teacher's of good things, and so the Members of the Church do edify one
another: But what? is this Christ's Ordinary way? must this overthrow Christ's
Order and Ordinance? No, by no means. If any of you be inwardly touched with
the zeal of God's glory, with a sens of the peoples ignorance and misery, let
such being tried, and found Orthodox and competently gifted, be Ordained. Let
them give themselves to this work, and we will give them the right hand of
fellowship, without asking, of what University they were. But beware how ye
bring disorder and confusion into the Church, and so overthrow the Ordinance of
Christ, upon serious consideration of our third Conclusion which now follows:

Office appointed of God, and that Ordination for executing that Office is an
Ordinance of Christ in the New Testament our third Conclusion will naturally
follow, viz. That no man uncalled and unordained can, with good conscience
intrude upon that work and Office.

This position or Conclusion is proved by two places especially remarkable for
this purpose, the first is that of Zach. 83.3, 4, 5. And it shall com to pass
-- that the Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his Vision when he has
prophesied, neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceiv, but he shall
say, I am no Prophet, I am an husbandman, for man taught me to keep Cattle
from my youth. 1. This place is a plain Prophecy of the times of the Gospel,
wherein many blessings are promised when the Messiah is com, verse 1.2. verse
4.5. are words of Recantation and repentance of some that pretended the Spirit,
and took upon them the Office of Prophesying, when as they were not Prophets,
but husbandmen, or bred up to some other Trades. 3. The means by which this kind
of Teachers were brought to shame and repentance, is the zeal of the Christian
Magistrate upon complaint made to him of their doings by their dearest friends,
verse 3. And it shall com to pass, that when any shall yet Prophecy, i.e.
notwithstanding all spiritual means used to cleans the Land of seducing spirits
and Teachers of falls Doctrines, verse. 2.) if for all this, they shall
prophecy, then his Father and his Mother which begat him, shall say unto him,
Thou shall not live, etc. the meaning is this, that as in the Law of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 13.5, 8. He that pretended himself a Prophet and was none, was to be
punished by the Magistrate: such a like zeal should be used against falls
Prophets in the New Testament, their best friends endued with knowledge and
discerning, shall oppose them, preferring their zeal and piety toward God,
before the natural affection they bear toward their own children. And there is
reason (as Mr Borough's thinks) why their best friends should withstand them in
this way: 1. Because it is a thing abhorring to Nature, Heart-divisions, p.
19.23.24.
that men should suffer God whom they honor, to be blasphemed. 2. To see their
wives and children, and dearest friends to be seduced into ways which we
think will undo their souls to eternity, and not be able to help them nor our
selves, unless we can persuade the Seducer to desist, and ask them why they do
so, and entreat them to forbear: Therefore these must com under the Magistrates
restraining power. 4. Then fallows the fruit of the Magistrates dealing with
them, viz. Their shame and repentance, they shall disclaim their usurped
profession, and confess that they were never brought up, nor fitted for it, and
so return to their former course and Trade of living. This Scripture is
fulfilled in one part, by the rising of falls Teachers in our days, and if it
be not fulfilled in the other part, viz. in their repentance, one principal
cause thereof, is, because our Magistrates are so far from putting them to shame,
that they rather uphold them, having enfranchized every Sect to hold Assemblies
to preach who will; yea, to the disadvantage of Christ's Gospel, have suffered
his Ministers to be vilified and reproched even in Almanacks, and to be made
the scorn and derision of the raging waves of the Sea, and mocking spirits, of
which S. Jude complains, v. 13.18. I pray God this be not laid to their charge.

Number. 16.1, 2, 3, 5. Dathan and Abiram were Gentlemen of the Tribe of Reuben
the eldest son of Jacob, Number. 26. 5, 9. This is that Dathan and Abiram which
were famous in the Congregation, they thought they had as much right to the
Government as Moses, who came of a younger Tribe, and therefore [like Levellers]
they say to Moses and Aaron, wherefore lift you up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord, ver. 3. And when they were summoned to appear before
Moses, they refused, saying, we will not com, verse 12.13. Is it a small thing
that thou have brought us out of a Land flowing with milk and honey, except
thou make they self altogether a Prince over us? their quarrel was especially
against Moses, against the Civil Power. Korah for his part was a Levite, and
he would have none above him in the Church, he would needs do the office of a
Priest as well as Aaron; seek ye the Priesthood also, (says Moses to him, v.
10.) His quarrel was Ecclesiastical against Aaron, verse 11. What is Aaron that
ye murmur against him? Thus ye see how Korah did endevor to make common the
Offices of the Priesthood, and why? because (said he) all the Congregation of
the Lord is holy, verse 3. All have the gifts of the Spirit; as if God's
Ordinary gifts of Sanctification, did take away distinction of Callings and
Offices: But what says Moses to all this geer? verse. 5. To morrow the Lord
will show who are his and who is holy, and will cause him to com near unto him,
i.e. God will, by miracle show whom he accepts for his servant in the
Government, you or me: And who is holy, i.e. whom he has consecrated to com
near unto him by special Calling to do the Office of a Priest, Aaron or you.
All the Congregation is holy, by the Gift of common vocation unto Grace, but
not by special Gift of consecration to the Office of a Priest. As Paul, 1 Cor.
11.7. says, that the Husband is the image of God in respect of domestic
Authority; the wife is the image of God in respect of the gifts of grace, as
well as her Husband; but the Husband, and so every good Magistrate has on him
a twofold image of God: 1. One by gifts of Grace common with other Saints. 2.
The other by special Calling and Authority to his Office in Church or State.

Well, you see Korah's sin what it is; but how does the Lord take this at his
hands? see v. 35. Those 250 men which offered incens and invaded the holy
Office, were burnt to death with fire from Heaven. And for a Monument to all
Posterity, that None who is not Called and Consecrated, should presume to take
upon him the Office of ministering holy things, to make himself near to God in
these peculiar memorial unto the children of Israel, that no stranger, which is
not of the seed of Aaron, com near to offer Incens before the Lord, that he
be not as Korah and his Company, verse. 40. Also God commanded Aarons rod that
budded, to be kept for a token against the Rebels, and thou shall quite take
away their murmurings, Number. 17.10. And they shall know that whosoever comes
near to the Tabernacle of the Lord, without a Calling to do the Office of a
Priest, is in danger to die, as Korah did verse 13.

But what is this to us? In the Old Testament God had precisely limited the
Priests Office to one Tribe, how does this reason hold in the New Testament?

Jude, verse 11. To the times of the New Testament. Woe unto them, for they have
ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and are perished in the
gainsaying of Korah: Hence I thus argue, If the sin of Korah is, and may be
committed in the New Testament, then it follows undeniably, that in the New
Testament it is a sin to level Church-Offices, or intrude into the actions of
sacred Ministry, whereto one is not Called, least he perish in Korah's sin.

The Apostle S. Jude foretelling what Sectaries then were, and should be in
Christ's Church, and setting them out by certain characters by which they might
be known among others, has this, verse 11. That they are guilty of Korah's
gainsaying.

In which words I note three things: First, that the sin of Korah is and may
be committed in the New Testament.

Secondly, That none can commit the sin of Korah under the New Testament, if
there were not a Distinction and reservation of ministerial Offices and
Autorities to men set apart for that work, as in Korah's time.)

Thirdly, That those of whom Jude speaks, are therefore guilty of Korah's sin,
because they invaded the Office of the Gospel-Ministerie [for now we have no
proper Priests nor sacrifices] as Korah did the Office of the Priesthood under
the Law: That old Priesthood is changed, Christ has erected another Ministry
in their stead, which must be preserved inviolable from all invaders, as that
of Aarons was, for else the sin of Korah could not be committed in the times of
the New Testament. But seeing the sin of Korah is committed under the New
Testament. our conclusion stand's good, that it is a sin for men uncalled to
exercise Gospel Ministry or of a Prophet being bred up to feed Cattle, etc.

Add hereunto, for close of all, that of the Apostle, Heb. 5.4, 5. No man
takes this honor to himself, but he that is Called of God, as Aaron was. 1
Kin. 12.35. with c. 13.33.
It was a sin in Jeroboam to make Priests of the lowest of the people, which
were not of the Tribe of Levi: When Jeroboam revolted from the House of David,
he changed the worship and the Ministry, 1 Chronicles. 11.13.
(the honest Ministry were not for his turn) least the people should return to
their duty, but God cursed this devilish policy, for this thing became sin
to the House of Jeroboam to cut it off, and destroy it from the face of the
earth: As then, so now it is a sin for any man to take that honor to himself:
The Apostles words are general and Argumentative to this sens, because no man
ought to intrude into this holy Office without a Calling, therefore neither
might Christ; if a man take an Office, not appointed of God thereunto, it is no
honor to him.

make himself a Steward or Ambassador, no man can do any thing in God's House,
as his Steward or Ambassador to preach his Covenant and set thereto God's seal,
but they that have Commission from God. Now a Commission is the imparting of a
power to us, which before we had not. By virtue of God's Commission we are
Stewards of God and Ambassadors for Christ (...). 2 Cor. 5.20. Christ has
committed to us the word of reconciliation, and we in his Name and with his
Authority do tender and seal God's Covenant: Without God's Commission, all
sacred actions are mere nullities and mockeries, like a Judgment without a
Jurisdiction; of no more Authority, then if a private person should give
sentence upon the Bench, or Midwife Baptize your Children: The Pharisees
questioned John for baptizing, Job 1.25. And Christ for Preaching, Mat. 21.23.
The Priests and Elders of the people came to him as he was Teaching, and said,
by what Authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this Authority?
Christ does yield the challenge to be just, if he could not have showed his
Authority, and therefore in his Answer, Christ does avouch both John's and his
own Ministry to be from Heaven, verse 2.25. The Apostle is clear, that God is
the Author, who sel's the ordinary Pastors and Teachers in the Church, 1 Cor.
12.28.
as well as the Apostles and Prophets, and without his setting, we can no more
do the Office of Pastors and Teachers then of Apostles. We must attend God's
Calling to God's imploiment.

Hooker. Hooker Pol. 5. 77.
The Ministry of Divine things is a function which as God did himself
Institute, so neither may man undertake the same but by Authority and Power
given them in lawful manner -- They are therefore Ministers of God, not only
by way of Subordination, as Princes and Civil Magistrates are, whose execution
of Judgment and Justice, the supreme hand of divine providence does uphold, but
Ministers of God, as from whom their Authority is derived and not from men: For
in that they are Christ's Ambassadors and his laborers, who can give them their
Commission, but he whose most inward affairs they manage? Is not God alone the
Father of spirits? Are not souls the purchase of Jesus Christ? What Angel in
Heaven could have said to Peter, Feed my sheep? preach, baptize, do this in
remembrance of me, whose sins ye retain they are retained, and whose ye
remit, they are remitted? What think ye, are these terrestrial souls? the
power of the Ministry of God translateth out of darkness into glory, it does
dispose of that flesh which was given for the life of the World, and it pours
malediction upon the heads of the wicked. -- The things we do, show that we
are and can be Commissioned by none but Jesus Christ. All the Princes of the
world cannot give us this Authority and Commission, we cannot be Deputies in
these Divine things, because themselves have not the chief power to dispense the
things in person, nor to bestow the blessings and curses at their will and
command, whereof we are made the Instruments. What impudence then is it for
Mechanics who have received Commission neither from God nor man, to intrude
into this Office?

evil is it for gifted men to preach though uncalled, me thinks they do well,
better then your dry dunces of the Clergy, they hold forth Jesus Christ, etc.

What evil is it for a private man to execute the office of a Constable? to
pull a Judge from the Bench? me thinks he does better reform manners and
punish vice, then your old rotten Magistrates: must we stay for a Commission
when things be amiss? Absalom will minister justice better then his Father
David; aie, by all means; things are like to go well, judge what is best, and
himself the fittest to do it. But God is a God of Order, Unity, Peace, and not
of Confusion. 2. And this I dare affirm, that the Devil has not a more subtle
prevalent engine to pull down the Kingdom of Christ, and set up his own [which
is established by Heresy, Sedition, Fals-worship, Envy, Hatred, Schism,
Dissension, etc.] then by destroying the Ministry whereby God has erected
and built his Church: But as long as Christ will have a Church among us, he
will hold those stars in his right hand; Rev. 1.16, 20.
And whenever you see them plucked out of the Firmament of the Church, Luke
19.41, 42 2 Chro. 36.16.
then look for nothing but a sad night of darkness and misery upon this
Nation: They are the greatest malignants and avowed enemies of our Nation, that
are haters of it is Ministry. But let them beware what they do, for if he
that loves and receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, M^t. 10 41.
shall receiv a Prophet's reward, then he that despises, derideth, hates,
vilifieth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, or because he is a Minister of
the Gospel, he carrie's in his breast the mark of a Reprobate, and let him be
sure that he shall receiv the reward of a Prophet-hater.

The truth is, God has made these Preachers a check, a shame, and a just
rebuke to a rotten, See Mal. 2.3, 7, 8, 9.
formal, dead Clergy, that understood not, nor ever endeavored the conversion
of souls; God would by a foolish people provoke men of abilities to a more
spiritual and conscionable discharge of their duties, 'twere good this use were
made of it; But what good else this promiscuous preaching has don, how it has
advanced truth or godliness, is their part to show. What mischief it has don,
what Errors it has spread, how many unstable souls it has beguiled, what
fearful Schisms and Factions it has brought into our Land, what discord among
brethren, etc. There be too many Instances in most Counties of England. By
such like men, you see what preaching you are like to have, if ever your
established Ministry be extinguished. People by degrees will grow to a
loathing and contempt of the Gospel preached, through their profaning it with
their fulsom fooleries.

I shall close up this point with a remarkable passage of Mr Owens in his
Treatise of Toleration, joined with that Sermon of his, which he preached
before the House, Jan. 31. 1648. -- His words are these: There are a sort of
persons termed in Scripture (...) unruly, disorderly, Mr Owen of Toleration, p.
82.
1 These. 5.14. (...) of the baser sort, Act. 17.5. (...) absurd, unreasonable
men, 2 These. 3.2. (...) lawless and disobedient, 1 Timothy 1.9. and the like
disorderly, vagabond, wandering, irregular persons, fixed to no calling, abiding
in no place, taking no care of their Families, that under a pretense of
Teaching the truth without mission, without Call, without warrant, uncommanded,
undesired, do go up and down from place to place, creeping into Houses, etc.
Now that such ways as these, and persons in these ways may be judicially
enquired into, I no way doubt: I did yet never observe any other issue upon such
undertakings, but scandal to Religion, and trouble to men in their civil
Relations; Therefore according to the Aposiles order, 1 Cor. 7.24. Let every
man in the same Calling wherein he was Called (to Christianity) therein abide
with God, studying to be quiet, and to do his own business, 1 These. 4.11.
and not other men's, as the Lord has commanded.

Act. 8 ver. 4. with Act. 11.19, 20. they that were scattered abroad upon the
persecution that arose about Stephen, went every where preaching the Word, yet
these that were scattered, were not Ordained men, therefore men unordained may
Preach.

unlike: Suppose that when Ministers are persecuted, Congregations scattered,
when Christians are fain to fly into strange Countries among Infidels, when
such cannot be had, as by God's ordinary Call have power to preach, I say,
admit that in such a Case, any man may preach the Word, declare among the
people the name of Jesus Christ, his Death and Resurrection; yet by what
analogy of reason can this be alleged against the established course provided
in Scripture for sending men to preach? In Case of extreme danger, when I am
assaulted for my life, I may rather kill then be killed, I may be my own
Magistrate; But this warrant's not an ordinary usurping of the Magistrates
sword; so in our present Question:

Rule and an extraordinary Example that crosses that Rule (as in the case of
Phinees and Abraham's killing his son) then we must leav the Example and
follow the Rule; we must not follow dispensations and forsake the standing
precept.

[They] in the Text, that preached abread, were men unsent and unordained?
seeing there be precepts in Scripture for Ordination, Col. 4.10, 11. Philem.
v. 24.
if we find any doing the work of Elders, we are to presume that they are
Ordained, though their Ordination recorded, as Marcus Aristarchus, Demas,
Lucas, Tychichus, etc. And that those preachers above mentioned, were so sent,
I shall offer unto you, for proof, these Textual considerations.

1. All that are named, Act. 9.10. Act. 21.8.
as Philip the Evangelist, and Ananias, and Lucius of Cyrene, were men in
Office.

2. Nothing appears to the contrary, but all make's for it, That the seventie
were at Jerusalem till that scattering, they kept company with Christ while
he lived, and with the Apostles at Jerusalem after he was Ascended, Act.
1.21. (For out of the seventie, Matthias was chosen to be an Apostle,) and
because they nestled themselves in their warm quarters at Jerusalem, God send's a
persecution to dispers them about their business, that so the preaching might
be more fully known according as Christ foretold, Act. 1.8. so it came to
pass the seventie were appointed to preach in the places where those that were
scattered, did preach, Act. 8.1. Therefore it is altogether likely that these
were the men.

3. Besides, it is said, Act. 6.7. that a great Company of the Priests were
Converted to the Faith, and these were Paul's Fellow-helpers unto the Kingdom
of God, Aristarchus and Marcus, and Jesus which is called Justus, who are of
the Circumcision, these were Preachers of the Gospel with Paul, Col. 4.10, 11.
And they being Priests, were Autorized by their former Calling to preach.
Therefore when the Text says, Act. 8.1. They were all scattered abroad except
the Apostles, this cannot be meant of all the Church (for there remained many
households of them, verse 3.) but of them, who did preach Christ at Jerusalem as
Stephen had don, these were especially aimed at in the persecution, and they
seeing how it fared with Stephen, betook themselves to preach abroad, the
Apostles that remained behind were persecuted, James was killed with the
sword, and Peter imprisoned, Act. 12.2.

4. Circumstance evidencing this Truth, is that of Act. 11.20. where it is
said, that some of them were men of Cyrene and Cyprus, who when they were com to
Antioch, spoke unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus. By these, we may
judge what the rest of them that preached were, when it is said, some of them were
men of Cyrene, the rest were of the same rank, though not of the same Cities.
But these men of Cyrene and Cyprus, were they lawfully Called and sent forth to
preach?

any special Calling? I conceiv they had for these reasons:

first that converted the people of Antioch unto the Faith, Act. 11.21, 22, 24.
And God gave testimony to their word by signs and wonders, verse. 21. the hand
of the Lord was with them, viz. to heal the sick, etc. as was usual in the
first planting of Churches. If they had not an ordinary Calling, yet surely
they had an extraordinary one, because their Doctrine was confirmed with signs
following, Heb. 2.4.

wonder-working Preachers continued at Antioch, Act. 11.22.
till Barnabas was sent thither unto them from Jerusalem to confirm the people
in the Faith, these men continuing at Antioch, are expressly called Prophets and
Teachers, Act. 13 1. Now there were in the Church that was at Antioch certain
Prophets and Teachers, as Barnabas, and Simon called Niger, and Lucius of
Cyrene; and these ministered unto the Lord, verse. 2.

Prophets and Teachers, Act. 13.1. are the very same that fled and came first
to Antioch and converted that people, Act. 11.19. For it is said, verse 20. that
they were men of Cyprus and Cyrene that came first to Antioch and preached, and
one of them, Act. 13.1. is Lucius of Cyrene: Lucius therefore of Cyrene,
(called a Prophet, Act. 13.1.) was one of them that fled from Jerusalem upon
that Persecution, Act. 11.20. Hence I gather that seeing they that preached at
Antioch and converted them, were Prophets and Teachers: And they that converted
the Antiochians were the same that fled from Jerusalem upon that persecution,
therefore they that fled and preached were not men merely Gifted, but duly
Called.

These Textual circumstances give sufficient ground to affirm that those which
preached upon that scattering, had some spiritual Calling thereunto; far better
grounds then can be alleged to the contrary. Put altogether thus: They all,
i. e. they which had kept company with the Apostles and were of the seventie,
or of the converted Priests, They are they that preached abroad: 1. Because they
only are named: 2. Because the seventie were appointed to preach in those
places where they that were scattered, did preach: 3. Because they were men
approved by signs and wonders: 4. Because some of them are expressly Called
Prophets and Teachers, being the very same men that came to Antioch, and fled
from Jerusalem. Let the same be said of you, and then preach in God's name,
else such a pattern will not justify you, nor be a fit parallel for for your
actions.

Apollos was no ordained Minister, See Church Members set in joint, by Filo.
dexter Transylvanus against chillenden. p. 17.
yet he preached, Act. 18.24.

He was an Autorized public Preacher in the Church of Corinth, for who is
Paul or Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believ, 1 Cor. 3.5. Paul speak's of
him, as his fellow-laborer. and steward of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4 1, 6.
Yea, it seems that Apollos did Baptize as well as preach, for the Corinthians
were divided into Sects according to the Names and Number of them that taught,
and baptized them, (1 Cor. 1.12.) as Paul's misliking of them does import,
verse 13. were ye baptized into the Name of Paul? And seeing some did call
themselves by the name of Apollo, it fallows that he did also Baptize from
which time they would call themselves by the name of Apollo as others did of
Paul.

'Its true indeed, Apollos preached at Ephesus before he came to Corinth, Act.
18.24, 27. But seeing we read that he was a Minister, and yet read of no new
Ordination received after his coming to Corinth, we must conclude, that he
was an autorized Preacher when he preached at Ephesus.

John, i. e. the Doctrine of John, he had been baptized only with water in
the name of Christ.

true a Minister of the New Testament as John Baptist himself: for John taught
the people that they must repent and believ on Jesus Christ, and so he
baptized them, Act. 19.4. The same Doctrine did Apollos preach, Act. 18.25, 28.
He taught diligently the things of the Lord, and mightily convinced the Jews
that Jesus was Christ.

The Baptism of John and of Christ distinguished, Act. 19.4, 5. are not two
Baptisms of water, but only one with water which is called John's Baptism,
Act. 19.3. and the Lord's Baptism, Act. 8.16. But Christ's Baptism in
distinction from John's, Act. 10.44, 46.
was the pouring forth of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and others in those
days, as S. Peter does expound it, Act. 11.15, 16. saying, That as I began to
speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning, then remembered I
the words of the Lord, how he said, John indeed baptized with water, but ye
shall be baptized with the holy Ghost -- compare, Act. 8.15, 16. when Peter
and John were com to Samaria, they prayed for them, that they might receiv the
holy Ghost, for as yet he was fallen upon none of them, only they were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. usually don by the laying on not of
water, but of hands, Act. 8.17. Act. 19.6.

Paul saie's 1 Cor. 14.31. ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may
learn, for the ministration of the Spirit is given to every one to profit
withal, Chap. 12.7. therefore all that be able, may preach.

Paul's purpose there, is to give directions concerning the use of spiritual
gifts, specially that of Tongues and Prophecy; And because some used their
gifts for ostentation, not for edification; therefore he tells them, that in
what kind soever any gift manifesting the Spirit, is bestowed on any man, it is
to this one end, for the prosit of all, Chap. 12.7.

Secondly, Note that these gifts were diversely distributed, not given all to
one, nor any one gift to all; 1 Cor. 12, 10.
but to one was given to speak with Tongues, to another Miracles, to another
Prophecy. And every one might exercise his own gift, but not another: He
that had the gift of Miracles, might do his Miracle, but not go about to speak
with Tongues, and he that spoke with Tongues might not attempt to heal nor to
Prophecy; God gave not all these gifts to one, but one to one, another to
another, verse 11.
dividing in parts to every man as he will. Prophecy was a chief gift,
extraordinarily inspired, as was the gift of Tongues or healing, and the
Prophets were they, 1 Cor. 14.3.
which by a special and extraordinary gift interpreted Prophetical Scriptures
to edification and consolation; Now Paul being to regulate this gift, says,
ye may all prophecy one by one, i. e. all that be Prophets, all that have a
matter revealed to them, (verse 30. if any thing be revealed to another that
sits by, etc.) All, 1 Cor. 12, 29.
such may take their turns in Prophesying, not any one else; for at Corinth, all
were not Prophets.

This then 'is the plain meaning of that place, as he that had not the gift of
Tongues or of healing might not attempt to heal or to speak with Tongues, so
he that had not the gift of prophecy, might not undertake to exercise it.

Thirdly, Because our men take these Prophets to be ordinary gifted
Christians, and so their practices imitable: 1 Cor. 14.
I shall by three reasons prove the contrary, viz. That prophesying in that
place, was an extraordinary, and not a standing ordinary gift in the Church.

S. Paul saie's of them, that they had some special matters revealed to them of
a sudden, whilst another was prophesying, they only sitting by, and not using
the help or operation of any faculty of their own, as their wit, memory,
reading: they spoke by divine inspiration, like the old Prophets.

rank and order of men set with the Apostles above the most eminent Gifted
Christians, 1 Cor. 12.28. first Apostles secondarily Prophets -- And as the
Apostles, so they had their knowledge of the mystery of christ by revelation,
as Paul witnesses, Ephesians 3.5. as it is now revealed to his holy Apostles and
Prophets by the Spirit. Prophecy therefore was no standing gift, and Prophets
were not ordinary gifted believers, but a rank of men in Office above Pastors.

Cor. 14) were of the same nature for the manner of their Donation, and for
their continuance, i. e. to last for a time only, wherefore seeing the gift of
Tongues and Miracles is ceased, the gift of Prophecy is also ceased, for this
was given in the same manner, and placed among the extraordinary gifts, 1 Cor.
12.10. whereupon I conclude, that the Prophesying in the Corinthians, is no
pattern for the practice of our gifted Speakers, who, I presume, have not the
face to take the place of Prophets next to the Apostles above Evangelists and
Pastors, -- Nor to affirm that they have their knowledge by revelation [for then
what need they plead their parts or gifts, seeing Inspiration or Revelation is
not a faculty of the mind.] and seeing the gift or prophecy is ceased, it is
now a gross taking of the name to counterfeit it, as also it is to imitate the
miraculous works of Christ and his Apostles.

subject to the judging of others, seeing they could not then err: But the Text
says, that the spirit of those Prophets is subject unto the Prophets;
therefore they were but ordinary men, 1 Cor. 14.29.32.

were inspired and could not err, yet they submitted their Doctrine to trial,
Act. 17.11. And because Satan ean transform himself into an Angel of Light, and
his ministers as the Ministers of Christ; 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 John 4.1.
and because as there were falls Prophets of old, so there shall be falls
teachers among you, for this cause we are commanded to try their spirits, ie.
the Doctrines propounded under the name of the spirits instiration: And to
prevent dilusions in this kind, God gave a gift of discerning of spirits,
whereby to know a true Prophet from a falls, which spoke for his own spirit:
yea, the Prophets themselves had a spirit of judging, verse 29. And Examination
of other Prophets, who ought to judge by the Rule of God's Word, whether that
which was spoken, were by the motion of God's Spirit, or by a spirit merely
humane; and this was no disparagement to those Prophets, to have their Doctrine
and Interpretations judged by others endued with the same Spirit. (Nam etsi
bomo spiritualis a nemine judicatur, tamen qui a nemine judicatur, judicatur a
spiritu Dei.) These Prophets were greater then the Ordinary Pastors and
Doctors, yet inferior to the Apostles and Prophets which were the Penmen of
holy Scripture, Lect. Apoer. To. 1. l. 34 p. 300, 301, 305.
as that learned Dr Rainolds has observed) they had indeed gifts and
inspirations more then ordinary for opening of Scriptures, but not the Spirit
so incessantly assisting them, as they had that wrote the Scrptures. Nathan
though a Prophet, yet he had not the spirit incessantly speaking in him, he
spoke out of his own humane judgment and reason, 2 Samuel 7.31.
when he had David to build the Temple, so did Samuel judge concerning Eliab
the eldest son of Jesse, 1 Samuel 16.6, 7.

Meminisse oportet (says Dr Rainolds)) dona spiritus secundum mensuram
hominibus distributa esse, and cum insint in ill is primitiae quidem Spiritus
Sancti, una etiam inesse reliquias spiritus humani. Nemo autem novit, quae sunt
hominis, nisi spiritus hominis; Nec quispiam novit, quae sunt Dei, nisi
Spiritus Dei; Itaque quae tradunt viri Dei, Prophetae hi, de quibus loquimur,
profecta esse possunt ab humano spiritu, qui adhue etiam in illis est, idcirco
doctrinam suam submittere debem fratrum suorum examini and judicio, neque enim
omnia semper Deus servis suis revelat, sed id quisque potest aliquando dicere,
quod Elizeus, cum adipsum Shunamitis accederet, hoc Jehova celavit me, neque
indicavit mihi, ibi. p 305.

If their Doctrine may be judged, 2 King. 4 27.
it may be refused as being possibly subject to error, not when they speak by
Inspiration, but because it is possible, they might speak by a humane spirit, or
by a falls spirit, and that could not be known, but by examination; therefore
the Apostle will have those Prophets Teaching submitted to the judgment of
others, that have the spirit of Prophecy, that so by the harmony and consent
of their Doctrines, the unity of the spirit, by which they all speak, 1 Cor.
14.37.
may be evidenced and approved. Now this could not befall the Penmen of holy
Scripture, who spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, and not of their own
spirits at any time when they preached or writ any part of Scripture.
Whatsoever the Apostles preached or wrote, it is of Divine Authority, because
they wrote it.

Preachers of Fishermen; why therefore may not Tradsmen preach?

from their Trades to an higher imploiment to be Fishers of men, and they left
their Trades to do this Work; But you say, keep on your Trades and preach too.
2. Christ, who is the Author of the Ministry of New Testament, Called them,
trained them up in his School as Disciples, then he Ordained Twelv that they.
should be with him, that he might send them to preach, Mark 3.14. But you
preach without any such Calling, Training up, Ordaining or sending. 3. Christ
sent them out two and two to preach, and gave them power to heal the sick,
cleans the Leapers, raise the dead, cast out Devils. Christ enabled them for the
work which he sent them about; But you have no such mission, nor new
abilities: Here is the difference between Christ and men, he does not find
men fit, but make's them fit, and so send's them; But we must find them fit,
or else not send them: Neither must any run before they be sent. Jer. 23.21. I
have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran, etc. These are the chief Arguments
for preaching without Ordination, for farther satisfaction wherein, and of all
Mr Chillenden's Objections, I refer the Reader to that acute, solid short
Treatise, entitled, Church Members set in joint, written by Filodexter
Transylvanus; and I the rather recommend that Treatise, because my people have
grounded their Opinion and Practice upon Mr Chillenden's Book.

The second Question.
WHether Baptism belong's and be rightly administered to Infants of Christian
Parents in the New Testament? Affir?

Baptism is the first visible Act of God's Grace whereby he does receiv us
into his favor and family: And the first visible means whereby he does apply
to us by Word, Sign and Seal the blood of Jesus Christ for remission of sins.
Now the Question is to whom this Seal of mercy does belong.

Anabaptists have sundry pretenses to scorn and deride Infant baptism: in
their account the Baptism of Infants is no Baptism, because according to
Christ's Institution (as they conceiv) true Baptism does always presuppose
actual belief in the receivers, and is otherwise no Baptism; therefore they
rebaptize.

Others allow of Infant Baptism, they esteem it as an Ordinance which Christ
has instituted in special love and favor to his people, only they restrain
this privilege to the Infants of Parents who join themselves in Church Covenant
to some particular Congregation. My debate is with the former, who deny all
Infant Baptism, the which, if it be proved to belong to any Infants, it is
enough for my purpose; and the same Arguments which prove it to belong to
Infants of this or that Congregation, do prove it to belong to the whole
visible Church and their Infants; it being a vain pride and great presumption
to make new conditions of Church Membership, which God has not made, and to
ascribe to the inventions of men a power to supersede the Ordinances of God, to
cast both us and our Infants out of the Covenant; us, that were baptized into
that one body, if we subscribe not to their Articles, and our children,
because we subscribe not, thus making void the Commandment of god, by the
commandments and Ordinances of men.

I the rather force my self to speak something of this beaten point, because
there be three young heathens in my Parish, and three others dead out of the
Covenant, through their Parents frowardness. Now for the convincing and
satisfying, if it may be, of theirs, and other poor peoples judgments in the
present Controversy, I shall content my self with five Arguments; the first
will depend upon a clear positive Answer to another question, viz.

Covenant of grace only with actual Believers, or with them and their
Infant Seed? Did God take into Covenant the Parents with their children or the
Parents only?

Tenor of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. between God and Abraham, between me and
thee, and thy seed, to be a God unto you: What seed means he? his
Infant Seed, verse 12. He that is eight days old, whether it be a child of
thy loins, or of a stranger, a proselyte, which is not of thy seed: this
Covenant was first made with Abraham, Genesis 12.3. wherein God promised that in
his seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Of God's Covenint.
i. e. in Christ; And it was renewed with the Sign of Circumcision added unto
it, Genesis 17 7, 12.

Wherein observe three things: Abraham was the Gospel Covenant, wherein
blessedness was promised in and through Christ the promised Seed, for God
preached the Gospel to Abraham, when he said, In thy seed shall all Nations
be blessed, as S. Paul reasons, Gal. 3.8. the which Covenant, seeing it was
430 years before the Law, and not disanulled by the coming of the Law, it was
to endure till the Seed should com to whom the promiss was made, verse 17.19.
and consequently to the end of the World, because Christ came to establish the
Covenant made to the Fathers, Romans 15.8.
and after Christ, no more changes to be expected.

Persons with whom that Gospel Covenant was made, were Abraham and his
Infant Seed, and all Nations, even us Englishmen and our Infant Seed, as
appears, Genesis 17.4.12. My Covenant is with thee and with thy seed in their
Generations, and with the stranger that is not thy seed, all of them must be
Circumcised. Compared with Romans 15.8, 15. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a
Minister of the Circumcision, i. e. of the Jews, for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises (of the Covenant) made unto the Fathers, and that the
Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, being made partakers with them of
the same promises, according as it is written, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his
People, etc. Now this Covenant of promises made with the Fathers, Christ should
not confirm, but clip and curtail it, if so great a part as all our Infants be
left out and excluded: But if God take our Infants into Covenant, who shall
dare to exclude them?

3. Note, when God at first gave that Covenant to Abraham and to the Nations,
he gave withal a Commandment, Genesis 17.12
that the initial mark of the Covenant should be set upon all whom he had
taken into Covenant both Jews and Gentiles and their Infants: The Covenant it
self and the mark of the Covenant are alike extended to all the same persons
whether young or old: Note farther, that when Christ, renewed and established
that Covenant in his own blood, though he changed the Sign, yet he repealed
not that Commandment: Nay, Mat. 28.19.
he added a new commandment, enjoining the new Sign, Baptism, to be given to
all Nations, without exception of any persons formerly received into Covenant:
so that we are under a twofold Commandment to Baptize our Infants, one, of God
who first made the Covenant and gave that Commandment, the which is still so of
force, that if Christ the Lord of the house had not changed it, we were all
bound at this day to be Circumcised; and seeing he has changed that Sign
into Baptism, but not the Covenant it self, nor the Commandment thereto
annexed; it follows, that by the old Commandment enjoining Infants to be
marked, and by Christ's new Commandment, enjoining Baptism to be that mark;
all, that are not excepted out of the Covenant stand bound to recei it. In like
manner as the fourth Commandment injoining one day of seven for an holy Rest to
the Lord, does bind us to observe our Lord's Day; the Commandment stand's of
force, though the first day be changed: so the Commandment for signing of the
Nations whom God received into Covenant and their seed, does still oblige us to
set the New Seal upon them; especially, seeing we are again commanded by
Christ so to do without any exception of Infants. Hence I thus argue,



But Infants are taken into Covenant with their Parents, as is proved;
therefore by the Commandment of the Lord, they ought to recev the Sign which
God has enjoined to be used, and that Sign is Baptism:

Or thus,

If Infants have a right to the Covenant and the initial sign thereof then it
is a wrong to deny them. But Infants have a right to the Covenant and the
initial Sign thereof both by God's Original Grant. Genesis 17.11, 14. And by
Christ's confirmation of that Covenant made with the Fathers, Romans 15.8.
therefore it is a wrong to deny it to them. The Covenant under which we are is
the Gospel Covenant, made long since with us Englishmen and our Infant Seed,
with a command of giving them the Sign, which at first was Circumcision, and
now Baptism by the same Divine Authority enjoined, and commanded to be given
without any exception of any within the Covenant.

Act. 2.38, 39. then Peter said, Repent and be baptized, etc. In which passage
of Scripture, I note three things.

persons were, of whom Peter says, The promise is to you and to your children,
they were a mixed multitude of many Nations, as appears, verse 10. strangers of
Rome, Jews, Proselyts, Creets, and Arabians. Note

What promise that is, of which S. Peter says, it belongs to such people and
their children, and is applied to his hearers as the ground of their being
baptized: It is that grand promise made to Abraham to be a God to him and his
seed, (...) that Gospel-promiss of good tidings, gratuitum Dei promissum,
quatenus opponitur legi, says Beza; in a word, it is that promiss of
blessedness, Jer. 31.34.
which consists in remission of sins to be obtained by the promised Messiah.

gifts of the holy Ghost promised Joel 2.27. and given by laying on of the
Apostles hands, especially because it is said in the end of verse 38. Be
baptized and ye shall receiv the gift of the holy Ghost.

promise here spoken of, cannot be understood (I conceiv) of the miraculous
gifts of the holy Ghost. 1. Because Peter's bearers received no such gifts, and
therefore S. Peter made no such promise to them, for doubtless they received
what was promised. 2. Such a promise must here be understood as belongs to
Parents and their children, and to all that shall be called to the worlds end;
But there is no such promise in all the Scripture, that the miraculous gifts of
the holy Ghost shall fall upon Parents with their children, and all that are
to be converted to the worlds end. 3. A promise of such gifts seems not
sutably applied to Peter's hearers comfort; for their Question was, what shall
we do to be saved? And Peter gives them; 1. A direction: 2. And a Promise: A
direction to repent, and to acknowledge Christ to be head and foundation of the
Covenant of Grace, and that life and remission of sins is in his blood, where
of Baptism is the Seal: And then he recites and applies to this comfort the
promises of the Covenant, q. d. ye shall receiv the benefit of the Covenant,
remission of sins, and also the gift of the holy Spirit, the Seal thereof;
those first motions now begun in your hearts, shall be followed with increas
of Sanctification of spiritual light, of joy, comfort and assurance. This
interpretation does exactly agree with the Apostles discourse, Gal. 3.14. where
speaking of the blessing of Abraham to com on the Gentiles, he says, that we
being delivered from the Curse, and restored into God's Grace by Christ, shall
receiv the promise of the Spirit through Faith, i.e. the spirit of Grace (which
is the Seal of the promises of the new Covenant) the gifts of the holy Spirit
which had been so often, and so solemnly promised by the Prophets, Es. 44.3. I
will pour water upon him that is thirsty (as Peter's hearers now were) and
Floods upon the dry ground, I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring, and one say, I am the Lords, and another shall
call himself by the name of Jacob, with Ezekiel. 11.19. and cap. 36.27. A new
spirit will I put within you, I will take the stony heart out of your flesh,
and give you an heart of flesh: Act. 2.38. Gal. 3.2, 14.
So that the gift of the Spirit in Peter's Sermon, and the promise of the
spirit in the Galatians and in the Prophets, is all one thing for substance.

As for that place Joel 2.27. S. Peter expounds it, Act. 2.17. of the
descending of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles in fiery Tongues, and it may
well have relation to all those, upon whom in like manner it did descend: But
if any man conceivs, that that place has a farther accomplishment in the New
Testament in the larger pouring forth of the gifts of the spirit of
illumination and understanding in the mysteries of Christ, and his Kingdom more
generally upon all sorts and conditions of people, and in a greater measure, so
that all sorts and sexes, now, shall have as much, or more light and
illumination then the Prophets had in the old Testament; the common light of
the Elect now under the Gospel shall be clearer and better, then that of
prophecy of old, (according to that of Zach. 12.8. He that is feeble, shall
be as David and the house of David, as the Angel of the Lord.) I shall not
withstand him, and so that place of Joel in this large sens, does contain a
part of the promises of the new Covenant, whereof Baptism is a Seal. But as for
those miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, I no where find them communicated
with or annexed unto Baptism. Sometimes they were poured forth before Baptism
received at the Apostle's preaching, as upon Peter's hearers that were with
Cornelius, Act. 10.45, 47. Sometimes after Baptism, by another Ceremony of
laying on of hands, as Act. 8.16, 17. Act. 19.6. -- Sometimes upon their fervent
prayers, as Act. 4.31. And upon these considerations it is, that I take the
promiss here spoken of and applied to Peter's hearers and their children, to
be the promise of blessedness made to Abraham and all Converts.

Peter's words, Act. 2.39. is this that this promise, (be it what it will) did
belong as well to his hearers children, as to themselves, (it is to you and your
children.)

capacity to receiv the promiss, i.e. to as many of our children as are called
to actual faith, not of our Infants.

[as many as the Lord our God shall call] are quite a new thing, clearly
relating to another sort of people, then his present hearers, viz. All that are
afar off, which as yet never heard of Christ. Those words do not exegetically
expound to which of his hearers children the promiss did belong, as if Peter
meant to tell them, to some of their children it does belong not to others, but
by the very order of the Text, they point out others that were afar off, in
their several generations to be called by the Gospel, to whom saie's Peter
this promise does belong, to them and their children, as well as to you, and
your children. The children then of Peter's Converts were within the promiss.

Peter's reasoning and argumentatisn, in this word [For] verse 39. where S.
Peter give's a reason of his direction, why those hearers should be baptized,
viz. because that grand promiss of blessedness by remission of sins, did belong
to them; and upon this, as upon a principal foundation, he build's his
Exhortation to them to be baptized; the holy Ghost in that manner of reasoning
clearly teaching this Doctrine. To as many as the blessings or promiss of the
Covenant belong's, to them also belong's Baptism; For therefore does the Sign
belong to Peter's hearers, because the Promiss did first belong to them. And by
the like reasoning, the same Apostle does justify his Baptism of Cornelius and
his Family, Act. 10.47, 48. Can any forbid water that these should not be
baptized who have received the holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord; which discourse, if reduced to
form of Argument, saie's this; they that receiv the same Grace are capable of,
yea have right to, the same Sign; but Infants are capable of the same Grace (of
the holy Ghost, and of remission of sins, as shall be proved anon) therefore
of right they are to receiv the same Sign, i.e. the Sacrament of Baptism.

The same Doctrine does our Savior teach, using the same manner of reasoning;
for the admission of Infants to the outward sign of blessing, Mat. 19.13, 14.
There were that brought unto him little children that he should put his hands
on them and pray; and his Disciples rebuked them, but Jesus said, Suffer little
children to com unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of God: In which words
observe 1. Christ's practice: 2. The reason of his Practice: By his practice,
He admitted Infants to the outward sign of Blessing, though they understood
not what was said or don unto them, yet did Christ give them his Blessing, and
the Sign thereof (he laid his hands on them) contrary to the carnal judgment
of his Disciples, who thought it a mockery to give Infants a Sign, which they
understood not. 2. The Reason of Christ's practice is this, Infants are not
excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore they are not to be excluded
from the outward Sign of the right and entry to such a Grace. And if Christ
did esteem it a sufficient reason, why little children should be admitted to
the Sign of his Blessing, because of such is the Kingdom of God; then by the
same reason, Infants must be admitted to Baptism and not debarred from the
first Sign of entry into Christ's Kingdom, viz. Because the Kingdom of Heaven
belong's to Infants before actual Faith.

Now if they will give us leav to make use of Christ and his Apostle's manner
of reasoning, my second Argument for Infant Baptism will be this.

Blessings and Promises of the Covenant do belong, to them also belong's
Baptism, the Sign thereof (by the Doctrine of St Peter and of Jesus Christ
himself.)

But to Infams of believing Parents, the Blessings and Promiss of the Covenant
do belong, before actual Faith; therefore by the Doctrine of the holy Ghost in
Scripture, such Infants ought to be baptized before actual Faith.

The Major, or first part of this Argument, is the very reason of the Text: The
Minor Proposition, viz. that the Blessings and Promises of the Covenant do
belong to Infants before actual Faith, is proved by these reasons. 1. By the
express words of Peter, which say, the Promise is to your children. 2. By the
express words of our Savior, (of such is the Kingdom of Heaven) 3. By example
of Isaac and Jacob, they were children of the Promise before actual faith, and
had applied unto them the Seal of the righteousness of Faith. 4. Some Infants
dying are saved, they are members of Christ's Kingdom; therefore the Blessing
of the Covenant, viz. Regeneration and Remission of sins through the blood of
Christ, do also belong to them, for except an Infant be born again, Joh. 35.
and cleansed by the blood of Christ, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; Heb. 9.22, 23.
But some Infants do enter into Heaven; therefore some Infants are born again
justified and sanctified in the blood of Christ. Now what has the Anabaptist
to except against this plain Doctrine of Scripture?

Elect Infants, not to all: Shall we under that pretense baptize all in
general? (This was objected to me in our Conference.

to one Infant, it is enough to confute them who deny it to all, because they
are Infants. 2. And if it belong to some Infants, why not to all? for who shall
judge which are elected and which are not? It concerns not us to know who are
and who are not Elected, because the Sacraments do belong to the Elect, not as
Elect, but as visible members and Professors; upon which account S. Peter
baptized Simon Magus: And Abraham by God's appointment circumcised Ismael
though a reprobate, Esau and all the children of the flesh were circumcised. 3.
Lastly, by your reason, Men of years should not be baptized, because we cannot
tell whether they be Elected, or not.

Example of children baptized?

need of example when we have the Doctrine of the holy Ghost for it, which is
of greater Authority and force, then bare Example; Howbeit, the practice of the
Apostles may go for an Example; their baptizing of whole households, is an
Example of baptizing all within the house old and young, that are not excepted;
Even as under the name of Abraham's household, are comprehended his Infants:
Abraham and his household were circumcised, so the Jailor and his household were
baptized, the phrase is the same, the case the same, and why not the persons?

Go, Teach and Baptize: and they that gladly received the Word, were baptized:
and again they were baptized confessing their sins; therefore men must be
capable of teaching of Faith and repentance before they be baptized.

first bring the Gospel to a People, they must be first Taught, confess their
Faith and their Repentance, and then be baptized; But it as true, that when
the Parents have received the Faith and are baptized, their children also are
taken into Covenant. Thus Abraham was first taught, and then circumcised; But
his Infants were first circumcised and then taught. This one Error does much
bemist your understandings, you conceiv that the Covenant take's in only
actual Believers: That is indeed a part of the Covenant, but not the whole
extent of it, as has been proved. For as we by deeds do purchase and convey
Lands holden in Leas or Copy to our children, yea, to children which shall be
born, as well as to them that be already born; and though our children at that
age knew not what their Fathers did for them, yet when they come to age, they
claim those Lands by virtue of the Land-Lord's Grant and Seal annexed, paying
their Rents and doing their covenanted Services and Homage: So does the great
Landlord of Heaven put both us and our children into the Copy of Heaven, and
confirms it by Seal of Baptism; And when our children com to have Faith, they
may claim the good things covenanted by virtue of God's Grant and Covenant made
with their Fathers, they performing the conditions of their Father's Covenant.

From Scripture I proceed to some Reasons for Infant Baptism.

capable of the thing signified in Baptism, viz. of the blood of sprinkling;
therefore of Baptism it self: If they have the thing signed which is the
greater, why should they be debarred the Sign which is the less? It cannot be
denied them upon any just ground of Faith or Reason.



nor ever will com to have Faith. 2. You must add that they have not Faith nor
any other means of applying Christ's blood, else your exception is not
sufficient: In men of years, it is applied by the Spirit of God, and by Faith
in Infants by the Spirit alone, which is given unto them. It is the Application
of Christ's righteousness that justifies us, not our Act of apprehending it;
the thing applied, not our Act of applying: God by his Spirit in Infants does
all things on our part, which Faith should do. Joh. 3.8. the wind blows where
it lists, thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes
and whither it goes; so is every one that is born after the spirit, i. e. As
the power of God is seen in the wind moving the aer, so it is in the changing
and renewing of us, though the manner be bid from us. Thou know not what is
the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is
with child, Eccles. 11.5. Thus much we know from Christ's own mouth, that
Infants are blessed, for he blessed them, Mar. 10.16. Shall we deny it
because we know not the manner how they are blessed? Or, shall we deny them to
be reasonable creatures, because we cannot discern in them the use of reason?
Or, shall we deny them to be sinners, because they know not what the Law is,
nor what the transgression of the Law is? We need not trouble our selves about
the manner how Christ's righteousness is applied to them, seeing God is as
gracious to apply unto them the righteousness of the second Adam, as in justice
he did the sin and condemnation of the first Adam.

2. That Exception about Faith and Repentance is no more a bar against the
Baptism of Infants, then against the Circumcision of Infants, forasmuch as in
Circumcision were required all the same qualifications, which you say are
required to Baptism, viz. the inward Circumcision of the heart.

Little children must be brought unto Christ and none forbid them, and by
Baptism they do com unto him, where the Minister in Christ's stead receives
them, and blesses them, and the Lord seals up unto them their receiving into
his favor and grace for his own mercies sake without any merit of ours.

confirmed the Covenant made unto the Fathers, Romans 15.8. He bettered it and
no way worsted it: And when he commanded a new Seal to be set in stead of
Circumcision, he did it without altering the substance of the Covenant in the
least degree; but now the very substance of the Covenant would be altered to
the wors, if some persons formerly received into Grace, should by Christ be
excluded; yea, and Believers children are in wors condition then in the Jewish
Church, which to affirm, were not only derogatorie to Christ's Grace, but
against Scripture it self, which says, Ephesians. 3.6. that the Gentiles are
Fellow-heirs with the Jews, and of the same body, and partakers of his Promise
in the Gospel; of which they are not partakers, nor Fellow-heirs, if so great a
part of the Gentiles as their children should be excluded. The Infants of Jews
and Proselyts at the coming of Christ had interest and right to the Covenant of
Grace: And if that right be taken away, then their condition after Christ is
wors then before: Shall they be loosers by becoming Christians? This, no sober
man will affirm: Neither is this a complaining against God but against them,
who would exclude, whom the Lord has not excluded: God's grace is not
straightened by Christ's coming; therefore our Infants are not excluded.

Cor. 7.14. The Aposile there speaks of such an Holiness, which belongs to the
Corinthians children from this ground, that one of the Parents is a Believer,
and whereof the children of Parents being both unbelievers are not capable,
but remain unclean: Now this cannot be meant of a civil holiness or cleaness,
for so the children of unbelieving Parents were holy, as well as the children
of Believers, seeing holy Matrimony is not an Ordinance peculiar to the
Church: And no where in Scripture are children called holy, because their
Parents are joined in holy Wedlock, and may lawfully live together: Federal
holiness what?
But it is meant of a Federal holiness, whereby the children are joined with
God in Covenant, dedicated to his Service, have right to the means of
salvation, and the sacrament of Baptism, and whereby they are distinguished
from Heathens, Turks, Apollonius, p. 84.
and such other Infidels. This Federal holiness is transferred from the Parents
to the children, not by Generation or Legitimation, but by the merciful will of
God, whereby he promises to be a God to them and their Seed. Thus the whole
Church both young and old by virtue of God's Covenant with them, are severed
from other Nations, dedicated to God's pure Worship and Service, and for that
cause are counted holy, Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. Thou art an holy people unto the Lord,
with Ezra 9.2. the holy Seed had mingled themselves with the people of those
Lands: the Jews were the holy Seed, the Heathens unholy, not because they were
illegitimate, or wanted a civil holiness, but because they were without God's
Covenant, as Paul describes the State of all Heathens, Ephesians. 2.11. Remember
that in time passed, ye were Gentiles in the flesh, without Christ, Aliens
from the Commmon-wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of Promises.

Corinth thought themselves defiled by their marriages with Infidels, though
contracted before their conversion, and thereupon moved a question, Whether it
were lawful to continue their marriage with the unbelieving party, or whether
they must not seek a separation? 1 Cor. 7.1, 12.

Paul is utterly against separation, verse 12.13. Let not him put her away, and
let not the Wife leav her Husband: His reason is, verse. 14. Because the
unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing Husband, though the unbelieving
party be unclean before God, and is not made an holy Person, yet the use of
Matrimony with her is Holy to the believing party; and of this truth, the
holiness of their children is brought for an evidence, to this sens, that
seeing the Lord counted their children holy and in Covenant with him, the
believing party might rest assured, that their abode together, and the use of
their marriage is not polluted, but acceptable in the sight of God.

civil sanctification in that place, i. e. she is sanctified to his use, that
he ought not to put her away. Again, the holiness there spoken of, is a fruit
of that sanctification of the Wife, whereof it will follow, That seeing the
effect cannot be greater then the Cause, the Cause cannot produce a greater
effect then it self, the Cause being only a civil sanctification, Of Christ
exalted, p. 166.
the holiness of the children must be the same, thus argues Tho: Collier.

quia pluris est pietas unius ad sanctificandum conjugium, Calvin. in loc.
quam alterius impietas ad inquinandum, i. e. the faith of the Believer is of
greater force to sanctify their present cohabitation, then the unbelief of the
other to pollute it. This he proves from a greater effect and fruit of the
Husband's faith, viz. The holiness of the children born of such a Husband by
such a woman. The children are holy, not only civilly, as being born of
lawful Wedlock, but federally as being severed from all children of
unbelievers by special prerogative, holy to the Lord, consecrated unto him,
whereas by nature they were Aliens and unclean; according to that of Paul, Romans
11.16. if the root be holy, so are the branches.

The faith of the believing party sanctifies the unbelieving Wife to bear not
only a lawful, but an holy Seed; yea, it sanctifie's the children and severeth
them from the common condition of other children, which are profane and
unclean, without the Church, without God in the World.

the Holiness of the child received from one of the Parents believing, is, more
then the sanctification of the Wife by her believing Husband, because such a
Wife is not taken into Covenant with her husband, but the child is; and
therefore the Apostle saie's not, that such as is the sanctification of the
Wife; such is the holiness of the child: But thus, Such as is the holiness of
the believing party, such is the child's holiness in respect of
Church Membership; and so the faith of the believing Husband is the cause of
both these effects, viz. That his coupling with his Wife is not impure, and
also that his children are holy: And this latter an evidence of the former. And
thus the holiness of the child is a sign of the mother's sanctification to
holy cohabitation, and an effect of the Father's Faith by virtue of God's
Covenant. To have said, That their children were lawful, was no more then to
have said, That their marriage was lawful, which was not the question; But to
say, that the children of their lawful marriage were holy, This did infer not
only the lawfulness of their marriage but the sanctified Use: As Mr Baily has
well observed, of Anabaptism, p. 138.

holy, be only meant a civil holiness, then on the contrary, by unclean,
must be meant a civil uncleanness. But when Paul saie's (else were your
children unclean) his intent is not to make them all as an unclean birth and
impure offspring, which were born at Corinth of unbelieving Parents; but to
show that they are not comprehended within God's Covenant: And so when he
saie's, (but now are they holy,) he notes some pre-eminence of the children of
Christians above the Heathens children: Though in civil respects, in respect of
a lawful birth, both sorts of children were equal, yet that civil holiness
being common to both, there is a pre-eminence of the Christians child above
the Heathens. The child of an Infidel at Corinth is to day unclean and the next
day holy, in case his Parents turn Christians; And what is the reason of this
so sudden alteration? It must needs be in regard of the Covenant into which
the party now believing is taken with his children, his unbelieving Neighbor
with his children still remaining unclean: Hence I conclude with Calv. in loc.
Seeing our children are exempted from the common condition of lost mankind, and
admitted into God's Church and Family, Cur eos a signo arceamus? upon what
reason can we drive them from the sign of their admittance?

It is (says a Learned man) God's great Work to Church the World, A Treatise
entitled a blow at the root^ or a discovery of Satan's devices, p. 154.
and the Divel's counter-work is, to Heathenize the Church. It troubles the
Devil much, that children from their infancy should be under an Engagement to
receiv nurture and admonition in the Lord, to frequent the Ordinances and to
own Jesus Christ by an external profession, if he could but contriv to prevent
their coming into that Engagement, he might hope more easily to keep them out
when they are grown up, then to work them out, (so grown up) to a renouncing of
Christianity, which yet he has brought some unto.

For a close of both the questions hitherto debated, I desire to be resolved
by our Adversaries, What is meant by the doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of
hands, reckoned up among the principles of Christian Religion, Heb. 6.2. By
laying on of Hands, must be understood, either the rite of confirmation, which
stood 1. In instruction and examination of those who had been baptized Infants.
2. And in Praying for them, that God would continue them in the Faith, etc.
This was performed, when they grew up to years of discretion, and were called
to give account of their Faith before their admission to the Lord's Supper. And
of this mind is judicious Mr Calvin: Inst. l. 4 c. 19. de confirmatione,. 4.
And he wishes that this Rite and Custom were again restored and practiced in
the Church of God, Talem ergo manuum impositionem quae simpliciter loco
benedictionis fiat, laudo, and restitutam hodie in purum usum velim; and gives
weighty reasons of what benefit it would be to the Church. Sect. 13.

Or secondly, by imposition of hands must be understood a Rite or Ceremony
used in the Ordination of Ministers. Now choose which sens you pleas; if the
later, then you confess that Ordination is a Scripture-principle, to be
acknowledged of all Christians, and so you yield our first question; if the
former sens, then you acknowledge Infant Baptism to be a Scripture principle,
fit for all men to embrace; and so you yield our later question: But why may
we not understand this laying on of hands in both respects? and so conclude
both points? judicent docti. It is necessary for all men to be instructed and
catechized in these six Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and to believ.

1. That we must Repent of all our sins, which are dead works, and turn from
them to serve God in newness of life. 2. That penitent persons must believ in
God and rest on his mercy in Christ for salvation. 3. And, (for the grounding
of people in Religion) that they be instructed concerning the nature, use and
signification of Baptism, whereby we are baptized and planted into Christ,
Romans 6.3.
to be partakers of the benefits of his death. 4. And farther to be
instructed, that by laying on of hands, our baptized Infants ought to be
trained up in the knowledge and fear of the Lord seasoned with the principles of
Christ's Religion; and that for their good and the instruction of the whole
Church, and for right dispencing of Gospel Ordinances, and the means of
salvation, it is necessary that a succession of Ministers be Ordained, for
gathering and perfecting the Saints till we all meet in Heaven. 5. And that
all Christian people be taught to believ the Resurrection of the dead. 6. And
the last judgment, whereby all men shall be judged, and eternally disposed of,
2 Cor. 5.10.
according to that they have don in the body, whether it be good or bad.
O Lord our God, God of all Grace, Father of all mercies, vouchsafe for thy
Son's sake, to open all our understandings, that we may conceiv and bow all
our hearts to embrace all saving Truths: And let us never be of the number of
those that strive or rebel against the light.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

