A QUESTION Deeply concerning Married Persons, and such as intend to MARRY:
Propounded and Resolved according to the SCRIPTURES.

JER. 20.9. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in
his Name; but his Word was as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was
weary of forbearing, and could not stay.

ANC-HORA-SPEI
printer's device of Thomas Underhill

London, Printed for Tho. Underhill, at the Anchor and Bible Paul's Churchyard.
1653.

The Author to the Christian Reader.
IF the Question proposed be resolved Negatively by the Scriptures, and
practiced contrarily by many Professors, does not the Lord seek for a man to
make up the hedge for preserving the distinct bounds of his honorable
Ordinance? The candle of this Negative resolution was long since lighted to
give light to some of Gods household, that had removed the bounds; but put under
a bushel in expectation of some greater Lamp that might give light to all in
the house of God for a more full illumination. But not finding that to appear
(as he hoped) in all the Orthodox Treatises concerning Marriage, he stayed so
long upon Moses his pretenses, Who am I? and I am not eloquent, etc. and Send I
pray thee by the hand of him whom thou will send, till the anger of the Lord
made this poor candle like fire shut up in his bones, and now constrains him
to set it on a candlestick, lest if he tarry longer, mischief come upon some of
Gods Family, and on himself too for not giving warning.

And therefore I most humbly beseech all the household of God (whom it may
concern) especially those that seem to be Pillars in his House; that as they
read they will so consider and try, that if instead of gold, silver, precious
stones, there be built any wood, hay, stubble on the Foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles by me alleged, that by the spirit of judgment and of burning
they will afford their helping hand to burn it so, that whatsoever loss I may
suffer, may turn to the gain of Gods people. But if the work abide trial, that
then they will vouchsafe to give unto me the right hand of fellowship, that
none of Gods House be edified to perdition (as the Apostle speaks in another
case) by the different Judgment or Practice of any in reputation for Knowledge
or conscience: (...). 1 Cor. 8.10.


So prays the least of Gods Servants in the Work of the Ministry A. L.

A QUESTION deeply concerning Married persons, and such as intend to Marry,
propounded, and resolved according to the Scriptures.
Whether any Woman (Widow or Maid) intending to Marry, may before her Marriage
reserve any of her Goods in her own power, to be disposed by her after she
shall be Married without her Husbands direction or consent?
The resolution is Negative for the Reasons following.

1. THis removes the meerstones of Gods Ordinance, who has Ephesians. 5.23, 24.
set the Husband to be the head of the Wife as Christ is the head of the
Church, and the Wives to be subject in every thing to their own Husbands as the
Church is unto Christ. And if it be a cursed act to remove Deuteronomy. 27.17.
our neighbors Landmark, how much more Mal. 1.8, 14.
cursed (by desert) is that deceiver who will offer this to the Lord of Hosts,
the Genesis 14.22.
most high God, the possessor of Heaven and earth, whose Name is dreadful
among the heathen? Therefore in detestation of all such presumptions every
virtuous woman should say with Genesis 49.6.
Jacob, My soul enter not into such secrets, for they are cursed.

2. As the Wife even in the state of innocence owed subjection to her Husband,
because Romans 2.13.
Adam was first formed, then Eve; and 1 Cor. 11.8.
the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man; neither was the ver. 9.
man created for the woman, but the woman for the man: so after the fall, this
subjection, which before sin entered was Romans 7.22.
delightful and 1 John 5.3.
not grievous, was then imposed as a 1 Timothy 2.11, etc.
penalty of her transgression, Genesis 3.16.
curbing and keeping under her desires. Now if it were a matter of Jer. 27.8.
death not to submit the neck to Nebuchadnezzars yoke when the Lord imposed it,
and he that would rebell-like break that yoke, should Jer. 28.13.
make to himself yokes of iron instead of yokes of wood: shall any woman Isa.
9.9.
in the pride and stoutnesse of her heart slip her neck out of Gods yoke, Jer.
5.3.
and refuse to receive correction; thinking to reverse the Lords decree, like
those rebels of old, who Isa. 9.10.
said The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones? What
though Jer. 28.15, 16
Hananiah and other Prophets taught rebellion against the Lord, and the Jer.
5.31.
people loved to have it so; was not the Lords soul ver. 23, 29.
avenged on such rebels, and the Eze. 14.10.
punishment of the Prophet even as the punishment of those that sought unto
him? And does not the Lord call in the Jer. 5.22.
waves of the sea to testify against all such sottish rebellion?

Wherefore seeing the Lord is Job 37.23.
so excellent in power and judgment, that none Job 9.4.
has been fierce against him and has prospered: and seeing he is so Exodus 20.
jealous of the glory of his holiness and justice, that he has not 2 Samuel
12.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Number. 20.12. Deuteronomy. 3.23, etc. 1 Samuel 3.11, 12, 13.
pardoned the faults of his own faithful servants without heavy judgments, as
fines set on their heads to the Jer. 55.28, 29 1 Pet. 4.17.
terror of the ungodly: should not all Wives beware that Job 36.21.
they choose not iniquity rather then affliction, and Hos. 5.10.
remove the bound like the Princes of Judah, least God pour out his wrath like
water, and make to them yokes of iron instead of yokes of wood?

The religious Wife therefore for her own safety as well as for Gods Honor,
must Ephesians. 5.22, 24.
submit her self to her own Husband, and be subject to him in every thing;
bearing this yoke of the Lord not only patiently without grudging because it is
Mich. 7.9. Lam. 3.39.
her own punishment, that is, of her own Ier. 2.17.
procuring; but willingly without shrinking from it, because it is the Isa.
26.9.
Lords judgment and a cognizance of his holiness and justice, and the
inhabitants of the world shall learn righteousness by it.

3. As God Romans 8.28.
makes all things work together for good to those that love him, so this yoke
of subjection, is by Christ made Mat. 11 30.
an easy yoke to the believing Wife, and no less profitable then comfortable.
For she being the 1 Pet. 3.7.
weaker vessel, and consequently easier to be deceived in judgment and
perverted in affection (as 2 Timothy 3.6.
silly women led with diverse lusts are soon led captives) therefore has God
set her Husband over her as her Prove. 2.17.
guide and Ephesians. 5.23.
head; not only by 1 Cor. 14.35.
teaching and informing her judgment, but by Genesis 3.16.
ruling to master her affections: that he may thus be the instrumental savior
of his wife, as Ephesians. 5.23.
Christ is the efficient Savior of his Church. Now when God does thus in Hab.
3.2.
wrath remember mercy, and Jam. 4.15.
offers such grace to the humble Wife, that in Mat. 11.29.
taking his yoke upon her she shall find rest to her soul, and that in her
subjection shall be her preservation: will ye Deuteronomy. 32.6.
so reward the Lord O ye foolish women and unwise, as with that
frowardgeneration to Isa. 30.16.
say no, we Isa. 28.12.
will not hear it, and Ier. 5.5.
altogether break the yoke and burst the bonds?

Hearken O ye Wives and hear my speech I pray you: Is not this a miserable Ier.
5.4.
foolishness, yea a Ier. 18.12.
desperate stubbornness, not to know the way of the Lord and the judgment of
your God, but to sling off the plaster whereby God would Ier. 3.22.
heal your backsliding? For what says the Scripture? 1 Timothy 2.14.
Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.
What was not Adam deceived at all? yea, as appears first, in that both their
eyes are Genesis 3 7.
said to be opened, after they had eaten; and secondly in Gods ironicall
upbraiding him, saying, Genesis 3.22.
The man is become as one of us to know good and evil: both which sayings have
relation to the devils sophistical promise ver. 4.5.
set down before, wherein he insinuated as if he had been a fecret friend of
theirs, and wished them more good then God himself. So that Adam was not
primarily deceived, but the woman being first deceived, became the devils
Proctor, ver. 6.
and prevailed with Adam to be in the same transgression with her. For the
devil as a cunning Pyrate, intending to 1 Timothy 6.
drown them both in perdition, (for which cause Christ says John 8.
he was a liar and a murderer from the beginning) began first to board the
weaker vessel, and drawing her to a parley, and she presuming without her
Husband to hold tattle with the subtle Serpent, was soon seduced, and she Gen
3.1, 2, 3.
earing ver. 6.
gave also to her husband; presuming to school him and to prescribe what he was
to do, and so he did eat, by harkening to the voice of his wife, as God ver. 17.
charged him in his arraignment.

O that Women were Deuteronomy. 32 29.
wise, that they understood this, that God (who 2 Cor. 9.6.
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, and Isa. 53.
heals us by his Sons stripes, and by delivering him to Romans 8.
death, and Heb. 12.
shame, 2 Cor. 9.15.
brings us to life and Heb. 2.
glory) has been pleased to cure the 2 Timothy 5.13.
prattling infirmity of women, by 1 Cor. 14 34.
commanding that whole sex to perpetual silence in the Churches; her
presumption in taking on her to teach 1 Timothy 2 11, 12.
and usurp authority over the man by requiting the woman to learn in silence
with all subjection. And because Eve being a wife aggravated that her
presumption against her own husband (who Gen 2.17.
hearkened to her voice, and she ver. 6.
gave him and he did eat) therefore for the cure of her and every elect wife^
subject to the like corruption, God charge them that they not only 1 Cor. 14
34.
ask their own husbands at home (that they learn of them, being men of 1 Pet.
knowledge, above all others in private) but that their Genesis 3 16.
desires shall be to their husbands, and they shall rule over them; so that
they must Ephesians. 5.22.
submit themselves to their own husbands as to the Lord, and be ver. 24.
subject to them in every thing as the Church is unto Christ And therefore the
Apostle after he had largely discoursed of both their duties, summarily
concludes all in this saying, ver. 35.
Let every husband love his wife as himself, and for the wife (...)
fear her husband; 1 Pet. 3.2.
fear I say to displease him in any thing wherein God is not displeased, though
it never so much cross her desires; how else can she be subject in every thing
as God requires?

Thus Sarah 1 Pet. 3.6. Genesis 18.12.
obeyed Abraham and called him Lord, acknowledging in word and deed her husband
to be her governor, and therein is commended as the 1 Pet. 3.8.
mother of all believing wives. And whatsoever wife is Joh. 1.13.
born of God to be a daughter of Sarah, and to walk uprightly, she will find
and feel these words and commandments of the Lord to be Micah 6.7.
good, and not 1 John 5.3, 4
grievous: and with sul mission and obedience she will take them upon her, as a
Matthew. 11.3
easy yoke and a light burden, because she thus 1 Timothy 2.15
continuing in faith, and charity and holiness with sobriety shall be saved,
and Phil. 21.12.
make an end of her own salvation with fear and trembling. Contrariwise if any
wives 1 Pet. 2.8.
stumble at the word being disobedient, and Isa. 2.20.
refuse and rebel (whatsoever 2 Timothy 3.3.
show they make of godliness, denying the power thereof) God will refuse to
acknowledge them as 1 Timothy 2.15
daughters of Sarah, and will prove to their woe, that no promise of salvation
belongs to them if they refuse to obey as Sarah did And therefore God in his
promise of 1 Timothy 2.15
saving wives, coupleth faith, and charity, and holiness with sobriety, which
sobriety implies both their verse 11.
learning in silence with all subjection, and their not verse 12.
usurping authority over the man.

Object. 1. But may not a Wife speak to inform her Husband wherein he erreth,
and whet him on in good duties wherein he is dull and negligent? Yea, if her
Husband be such a Nabal, that by his folly he is drawing a mischief on himself
and his household, and is such a son of Belial, that he may not be spoken unto*
may not a wife in such a ease, without his direction or consent, take and
improve his goods and servants for preventing the mischef?

Sol. As at first God made Eve Genesis 2.18.
a meet help for Adam, so a man may possibly Prove. 31.10.
find (though rarely as Solomon intimates) a virtuous woman, with graces more
precious then pearls. And as no small 1 Pet. 3.7.
honor is to be given of husbands to weaker vessels so richly fraughted, so
husbands that have such Prove. 17.16.
prices put into their hands, to get or improve wisdom, are branded for fools,
Eccl. 4.9.
if they have no hearts to use them For as Prove. 31.12.
two are better then one, so sometimes the weaker vessel may hold staunch, when
the stronger may fail. And when we read that the virtuous woman will do her
husband good and not evil all the days of her life; and that one of her virtues
wherein she excels others, is the Prove. 31.26.
Law of kindness in her tongue, whereby she opens her mouth with wisdom;
and that rebuke and conversion of a sinner from the error of his way, are Lev.
19.17. (...) 5.20.
^st^ (...) love, and as Romans 13.8.
due debt to be rendered to every one, much more to a husband from his wife:
what a 1 Samuel 25.
son of Bclial were he that would not be spoken unto by such a ve^^uous wife?
and especially like 1 Pet. 3 6.
Sarah (who obeyed Abraham and called him Lord) reverence from a v^ 4.
meek and quiet spirit shall attend the Law of kindness in hot tongue: not
daring contemptuously to crew over her husband like proud 1 P^ 21.7.
Jezabel, or contume liously to lash him with the Job 5.21.
scourge of the tongue like scornful 2 Samuel 6.20.
Michal, which God 1 Timothy 5 (...).
forbids in all inferiors toward their superiors.

And for the honor and comfort of virtuous wives, we find it written how
Sarah informed her husband what was to be done with Genesis 21.9, 10
the b^^dwoman and her son, and how therein God commanded Abraham to verse
11, 12.
hearken to the voice of his wife in all that she had said, though the thing
were very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son. Likewise Rebekah
espying her husbands error, was a meet help to him Genesis 27.5.
whereby he conferred the blessing on Jacob, according to Genesis 25.23.
Gods prediction, though she ^aned in many circumstances. And so the gracious
Shanamite is registered not only for constraining the Prophet to eat bread as he
passed by, but also for 1 Reg. 4.8, etc.
stirring up her husband to make special provision for the Prophets
accommodation whereby she obtained the blessing of a son, being before
childlesse. And Abigail a woman of great understanding, how is she set forth
and set up as a Crown to her foolish husband, in 1 Samuel 25 ^, 14. etc.
taking and improving his goods and servants without his direction or consent,
whereby she saved him and his family from a mischief whereof he was insensible?
And how came the ver. 32, 33. (...). 31.10. and 12.4.
blessing of David upon her and her advice which kept him that day from
shedding blood? And Nabals may be their names, and folly is with them, that
give not due honor to such virtuous wives, whose price is far above rubies,
and who are Crowns to their husbands.

Object. 2. But may not a Maid, a Widow especially, before Marriage, in
discretion reserve something to be in her power and disposition after she shall
be a Wife, and that for good to her Husband, to help him at a need, or to help
her former Children, or other Saints of God?

Sol. Concerning her former Children or other Saints, she was to Tim. 5.8.
provide for them while things were in Acts 5.5.
her own power: but if being wife she withhold her obedience to God and
subjection to her husband under such pretenses, she must know that 1 Samuel 15.22.
obedience is better then sacrifice, and that ver. 23.
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft: and if she wilfully persist to reject
the word of the Lord, God will reject her from being a daughter of Sarah. For
what is this but to kick at Gods Ordinance, as 1 Samuel 2.29.
Ely and his sons kicked at Gods sacrifices, and to Mat. 10.37.
honor and love her Children and Saints above God, as Ely did his sons? Eze.
14.4.
And what is that, but to set up her Children and Saints as Idols in her heart?
and her stubbornness in this kind will be no less then 1 Samuel 15.23
as iniquity and idolatry.

Secondly, Concerning her pretended discretion and goodness toward her
husband, she must learn that God has coupled the Tit. 2.5.
discretion and goodness of a wife unto subjection to her husband: And
therefore so long as she refuses subjection, she can never approve her self
unto God to be a discreet or good wife. Nay whiles under color of discretion
and goodness, she withdrawes her subjection, and makes a divorce betwixt those
duties which God has coupled together; she Psalm. 73.27.
goes a whoring from God, in withdrawing her heart from him, and not Prove.
3.5, 6.
trusting in him with all her heart, nor acknowledging him in all her ways,
but leaning to her own understanding: And thus missing Gods ver. 6.
direction, she goes the high way to Psalm. 73.27.
destruction. This discretion therefore is not Iac. 3.15.
the wisdom from above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish; witness the
ver. 14, 16.
bitter envying and strife that appears in such wives, when they are therein
gainsaid, instead of that 1 Pet. 3.4.
meek and quiet spirit which should be in them, and which is in the sight of
God of great price.

Object. 3. But what if after she become a Wife, she without her husbands
knowledge or consent put over such things as she before reserved in her own
power to some other godly men in trust, to be kept and disposed by them as they
shall see good?

Sol. This is to Isa. 59.5.
hatch Cockatrice eggs and to weave the Spiders web, and 29.15.
woe to them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their
works are in the dark. And is not this to Isa. 5.18.
draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with cartropes? For though
these and such like Conveyances may be strong as cartropes, to hold such as use
them 2 Timothy 2.26.
captives in the devils snare; yet they will prove but cords of vanity, yea
weaker then vanity it self, to draw away the Isa. 5.21.
woes and Jer. 17.5.
curses that hang over the heads of such, who are prudent in their own sight,
and whose hearts depart from the Lord, and trust in the arm of flesh. And what
is this better then a thievish conspiracy, to Mal. 3.8.
rob God of the honor due to him and his Ordinance, and to steal away and
detain from a husband, yea and that from a believing husband, that power and
right wherewith the Judge of quick and dead has invested him, by the
uncontrollable records of the sacred Scriptures formerly alleged? Will any of
the wise children of this world receive and keep goods feloniously taken,
because in kindness they are brought to him in trust? Where then was the
wisdom of that godly Trustee, in discerning evil from good, nay in Isa. 5.20.
putting evil for good, darkness for light, in entertaining such trust? May
not here the receiver be as bad, yea in some respect Romans 1.3.
worse then the stealer? And are not they Mal. 1.
cursed from the Lord, that offer that to God and his Law, which they dare not
offer to their Prince?

Moreover in this conspiracy there is not only sacrilege against God, and
robbery against a brother, but also a fearful degree of murder. For as the
virtuous woman is a Prove. 12 4.
Crown, and 1 Cor. 11.7
glory of her husband; and will not only Prove. 31.1 and
apply her hands with diligence, but her wits with prudence to uphold her
husbands estate and honor: so she that makes her husband ashamed, is as Prove.
12.4.
rottenness in his bones. Now judge in your selves, Is it not a shame to a man
of wisdom, that his wife should manifest her self to be so foolish, that she
should fear to commit the power and government of her goods to him, whom she
boldly took as the fittest of all others to have the 1 Cor. 7.4.
power of her body, and the Genesis 3.16.
rule of the desires of her soul? Is he worthy to govern the greater matters
and not the lesser? This is a shame, witness the 1 Cor. 6.2, 4,
Apostle Paul. And is not this a shame to a believing husband, that whereas a
Prove. 18.2.
friend sticks closer then a brother; that a brother should stick nearer to
the heart of his wife to be trusted then himself who is such a friend, that he
must Ephesians. 5.25.
love his wife even as Christ loved his Church and gave himself for it?
Wherefore if these courses be as rottenness in a husbands bones as God himself
witnesses, then there must be a ceasing of such cruelty, least the marrow
which is hereby consumed in his bones, Genesis 4.10.
cry unto God as the blood of Abel?

Object 4. But women are the weaker vessels, and should not the kindness and
patience of a good Husband, yield and bear with his Wives weaknesses in
reserving some things, especially trifles in comparison of the great things she
yielded up to him?

Sol. I acknowledge that a good Husband must so love his Wife, that he be not
Col. 3 19.
bitter unto her, and so dwell with her 1 Pet. 3 7.
according to knowledge, that it must be a Pro 19.11.
glory to him to pass over a transgression; yea his love must 1 Pet. 4.8.
cover a multitude of her sins, and for peace sake 1 Cor. 13.
bear all things, believe all things, hope all things, endure all things, as
far as the Ephesians. 6.
girdle of truth can Romans 12.
possibly stretch: So must he (...) 4.
follow the truth in love, and (...) 8.19.
love the truth and peace. But as 2 (...) n. v. 1
love must be in the truth, so must peace; and love and peace must be both
broken in the quarrel of truth and faith, for the Jude 3.
maintenance whereof we must carnestly contend. And Christ the Isa. 9.6.
Prince of peace, who for Ioh. 18.37
this cause came into the world that he should give witness to the truth,
tells us plainly, that in the cause of truth Mat. 10 3^
he came not to send peace but a sword. Pro. 23.23
Buy the truth and sell it not (not at any rate) said the 1 Reg. 4.31
wisest among men, who could best tell the value of it. There must be no
merchandise for truth, no torrent of affection may ^ry us on for the sweet
commodities of love and peace to sail beyond the line of truth, unless we will
1 Reg. 4.31 1 Timothy 1.19
make shipwreck of faith. Charity 1 Cor. 13.
rejoices not in iniquity but rejoices in the truth: and a foul iniquity it
were, if the love of Christ ( Ioh. 14.
who is the way, the truth and the life,) should not have the Col. 1.18.
pre-eminence in all things, above the Luke 14.2^. Mat. 10 37.
love of our selves, wives, or any creatures.

What should I say more? A good husband will not despise the cause of his
maidservant when she contendeth with him, much less of his Wife, but must be
ready to Job 31.13
lay down his life for his wife, much more for peace sake submit with her to be
1 Ioh. 3.1^
judged before the Saints; and honor her not only as the weaker vessel, but
as a 1 Pet. 3 7.
coheir with himself of the grace of life, if she will learn of Sarah, to be
subject and obedient unto her husband as Sarah was. But if her weakness be
turned into wilfulness and rebellion against God, so that command the Lord
what he will, in such and such things as please her she will not be subject to
her husband, but in the stoutnesse of her heart presume to prescribe against
God by her conditiens and reservations: ver. 5, 6.
in such a case as faithful Moses would not yield to Pharaoh in a Exodus 1^.
hoof, though thereby the lives of many thousands seem to be hazarded, nor
faithful Paul to the false brethren Gal. 2.5, 13, 14.
, no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue, though
Peter's dissembling therein were openly reproved to his shame: so a faithful
husband should not yield to his wife, no, not for an hour, nor in a hoof,
though it put her to as open a shame as Number. 12.14,
Miriam was for muttering against Moses, that the bounds of Gods Ordinance may
continue steadfast.

And concerning the pretended patience of a Husband, know that God has coupled
2 Pet. 1.6.
patience and godliness together; and therefore in such rebellion against God,
a godly husband in Christian Rev 2.2.
patience cannot bear with his wife, but Pro. 28.4.
set himself against her, least Christ spue him out of his mouth for
lukewarmnesse. And if under color of kindness he should suffer sin upon her
with slight rebukes, he should Rev. 3.16.
hate her in his heart, and therein be no less then a murderer. Did not Lev.
19.17.
meek Moses so long for his wives sake forbear the 1 Ioh. 3.15.
circumcising of his child, that the Lord met with him and sought to kill him,
had not his wife suddenly put it in execution, though she cast the foreskin at
his feet and said, Surely a bloody husband thou art to me? And was not the
Exodus 4.24, 25, 26.
judgment of God heavy upon old Ely and his house for ever, because his sons
made themselves vile and he restrained them not? And as it 1 Samuel 3.13.
multiplied Eves sorrows, because her familiarity and voice Genesis 3.16. verse 6.
occasioned her husband to yield to second her in eating the forbidden fruit
(being commended and given to him by her who was his Prove. 5.19.
loving, kind and pleasant Roe, with whose love he was ravished) so it
aggravated Adams Genesis 3.17.
sorrows all the days of his life, because he so hearkened to the voice of his
Wife, crossing Gods Commandment. Therefore as Christ knowing the ^ Cor. 5.11.
terror of the Lord in the way of his judgments, says, Luke 17.32.
Remember Lots wife: So say to all married persons, Remember Adam and Eve.

Obj. But what if the husband knew before marriage such purposes and
reservations of his future wife, and consented to them and promised to ratify
them?

Sol. If husband and wife before marriage should so compact and consent
together, I say it were a fearful step toward that downfall sin of Act.
5.1, etc.
Ananias and Sapphira: And says not the Lord, ^ Cor. 5.19, 20.
He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy? We therefore being Ambassadors for Christ, to
whom he has committed the word of reconciliation, beseech such in Christ's
stead, Be reconciled to God, and Dan. 4.14.
Break off your sins by righteousness, and Micah 6.8.
humble your selves to walk with God, keeping your selves within the bounds of
Gods Ordinance, and so ^sa. 55.7.
return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon you, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. For though men's Psalm. 15.4.
oaths and promises tending to their own hurt are not to be changed, yet none
are to be kept that tend to the ^om. 2.23.
dishonor of God and breach of his Law, no more then the Micah. 6.16.
statutes of Omri, or the rash Sam. 25.22, 34, 35.
oath of David, who blessed God for sending Abigail to meet him, and to keep
him from performing such an unadvised, bloody oath.

Who would have thought that ever Jephtah ( Heb. 11.4.
registered in the catalogue of the faithful) who ^udg. 12.13.
put his life in his hands to avenge the ^udg. 11.27.
wrongs of Israel upon the children of Ammon, should so ^udg. 11.39.
unnaturally wrong his own daughter and verse 34.
only child, when the forethought of it made him to rent his clothes and cry
alas? Or that King Herod, who Mark 6.20.
feared John Baptist, knowing that he was a just man and holy, and (...).
saved him (against the verse 19.
bloody purpose of Herodias) and when he heard him he did many things, and
heard him gladly, that ever he would become a bloody butcher to behead so
reverend a Prophet, yea Matthew. 11.9.
more then a Prophet, though he were Mark 6.26.
exceeding sorry to hear and think of it? Had yet the devil, that ^orin 8.44.
murderer from the beginning, brought these things to pass under pretense of a
^udg. 5.35, 39.
vow, and a Mar. 6.22, 26
promise bound by an oath? Now 1 Cor. 1
happened not these things to them for ensamples? and they are written to
admonish us, that under fair pretenses we Prove. 3.
lean not to our own wisdom, least 1 Cor. 1.
Satan who transformeth himself into an Angel of light (though he Heb. 2.1.
has the power of death) stick the 1 Cor. 15
sting of death in men's souls, so that they cannot 2 Pet. 2.1
cease to sin, but 2 Timothy 3
wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, whiles Satan gets advantage
of us by his devises.

Ask ye how? I pray the Lord, even the Zac. 3.2.
Lord who has chosen Jerusalem, to rebuke Satan that Rev. 12.1
accuser of the brethren, that accuses us before our God day and night; 2 Cor.
2.
lest he procure the Eze. 14.1
punishment of the husband to be as the punishment of the wife that seeks his
consent; and least in Exodus 18
that very thing wherein they have dealt proudly, not Prove. 3.6
acknowledging God in their ways, God be above them both in the way of his
judgments: And then to their shame ( Pro. 11.2 16.
which is the play master of pride) they may Jer. 44.28
know whose words shall stand, Gods or theirs; and what Jer. 2.19.
an evil and bitter thing it is for wives to set up their Eze. 14.
Idols in their hearts, and for husbands by yielding to them to Exodus 32. verse
6.
make them naked to their shame, as Aaron made the people of Israel naked unto
their shame among their enemies, the issue whereof was as woeful as shameful.
For whiles they made it their May Game and Play to sacrifice to their molten
Calf, not only was it stamped to powder, and the people made to drink of it,
and three thousand of them slain for it, but both they and Aaron (who Exodus
32.2. Deuteronomy. 9.19, 20.
brought so great a sin upon them) had been Exodus 32.
destroyed by God, had not Moses his chosen prayed for them, and stood before
him in the breach to turn away his wrath, least he should destroy them. And
when God seeks for such a man to stand in the gap before him, should he find
none? Eze. 22.30. Psalm. 106.23. Exodus 32.


As this Author aged now 83 years confesses that his heart burned within him,
till for resolution of the Question he had set up this poor Candle on a
Candlestick, so he prays and hops that the Isa. 4.4.
spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burning will make some Learned and
Judicious hearts (among the many Joh. 5.35.
burning Lamps, shining in and about London) to Luc. 24.
burn within them also, till their light shine forth for clear resolution of
these two Questions ensuing.

1. Whether Merchants 2 Pet. 2.3. Rev. 8.1.
make not merchandise of the souls of men, when they send their Factors and
Servants into Spain, Turkey, and such Idolatrous and Mahumetan places, there to
abide many years free from the Ephesians. 4.11,
Work of the Ministry, as Paul says, Romans 8.20
where men are the servants of sin they are free from righteousness?

2. Whether Indian Merchants (and such Masters as will bind their Apprentices
from Marriage till they come to about 26 years of age) and many others of
several Ranks, give not great advantage to 1 Cor. 7.5.
Satan to tempt souls to Incontinency, and attract to their own souls the guilt
of many Adulteries and Whoredoms, when for filthy lucre, husbands are
sequestered from wives (especially young Mariners from their new married wives)
and others so restrained from Marriage, though they burn, as though the
Scriptures quoted in the 1 Cor. 7.1 and 1 Pet. 3.7. Ephesians 5.31. Pro. 27.8.
margent were either not given by Inspiration of God, or may not bind the
consciences of men.

(...).


