^rinted for Dixy Page 1673

depiction of painter at work

The English Academy.

A DRAVVING BOOK.

Containing Variety of EXAMPLES OF THE External Parts of Men, Women, and
Childrens Bodies; With the Shapes of several Creatures frequently used amongst
Heralds, Goldsmiths, etc.

LIKEWISE The ARTS of Drawing, Etching, Engraving in Copper and Wood, Painting
and Limning: All being carefully Performed.

WHEREIN The aforesaid ARTS are Exemplified, with Plain and Easy Directions to
Guide you to their Attainment, with much Delight. Also the Real Method how to
Wash or Color GLOBES, MAPS, PICTURES, LANDSKIPS, FLOWERS, FRUITS, BIRDS,
BEASTS, FISH and FOWL.

A WORK Worthy Acceptance of all those that are Friends to ART, AS, Drawers
Embroiderers Stone-Cutters Carvers Goldsmiths Needle-Workers Gum-Workers, etc.


Performed according to the Order of the First and most Eminent Masters of
Proportion, VIZ

P.L. H.G. P.R. H* B.

LONDON, Printed by H. L'oyd for D^^^ Page, at the Author and M^rriner on
Fish-street-Hill near London Bridge, who buyeth all sorts of Old-Books, and
makes the best Ink for Records. 1672.

TO THE Ingenuous Lovers OF ART.
Courteous Reader,
AMONGST the Variety of Books of this Nature, here is One puts in for a share.
Its in a plain Garb, without that Enrichment that some are Adorned with; I
mean, that laborious shadowing that beclouds the eyes of Young Practitioners,
for whose Use chiefly this Piece is intended: It is in another kind of
Colored Coat then all its former Brethren; not Clothed in Black, but in Red,
for the convenient Use following. Those that may desire to attain the Art of
Proportion, at the first sight look upon the imitation of these first Rules to
be so hard a task, that it often falls out they rather desist then adventure:
Such therefore I Advise to go over each particular Part, in each Leaf, several
times with a dry Pen, until the Idea of the Part they go over falls in with
their Fancy, which when they do apprehend, then let them with a Pen and black
Ink, go carefully over that part they so conceived in its Proportion; This way
for a Learners Encouragement at his first Attempt, will reduce his first
disheartning to a speedy undertaking of a first seeming impossibility: And this
I Advise, for the Parts in each Leaf, and for so many Leaves as may lead the
Beginner to a capacity of Apprehension of Proportion. If Envy carp, and say,
This is a New Device: It Is soon Answered, But it is a true one. If the Artist
shall say, It Is an Erroneous Rule. It Is Replied, It Is only intended to lead to
the knowledge of the true, and by that I mean the Eye and Hand, Imitation. Vale.

Of Instruments for Drawing and their Use.
A Pen knife, white Paper thick and smooth, Sallow-coals to be had of the
Charcoal-men, Feathers of a Duck Wing, black or red Lead-Pencils; Pens made of
a Ravens Quill, a neat Ruler, and a pair of Compasses.

Slit your Charcoals of Sallow-wood into slender Pieces, and then sharpen them
into the form of a Pencil, the neatest way of using them, is to put them into
a large Quill or a brass Pencil; This way you will avoid soyling, both your
Fingers and the Paper on which you draw; the reason why you are first to draw
with Charcoal is, because it will with the least touch of a Feather be taken
out, as often as you see convenient, until the design you imitate please your
Fancy.

After your Proportion is thus far touched out, then with black Lead, by
degrees, go over those faint Touches remaining of the Cole, and carefully
endeavor the Amendment of those first Touches, with diligence comparing your
Imitation with your Copy, and it will the better confirm your judgment; if now
you try by your Compass the Proportion of the whole, and also each particular
Part therein contained, before you perfect your Design with Ink- for after Ink
you can make no alteration.

My Advice to young Learners is, that they would follow open and visible
Figures, not cumbred with tedious Shadows, until in some measure they apprehend
the real Parts of true Proportion, for all ingenuous Persons, account that
ill-spent time, to bestow great pains in shadowing a lame Proportion, and is no
less ridiculous then a large Knot fixed to a lame Letter; for those that intend
Graving of Figures, or Etching with Aqua fortis, after they understand
Proportion, it will be more advantageous to them to imitate open shadowed
draughts, with the Method of the windings of the strokes in that Piece they
copy; for this will not only inure the hand, but likewise inform and confirm
the Judgment, how to order proper shadows; but if the Practitioner design for
Pointing then after Proportion is accomplished, Bold and free Touches upon blew
or fine gray Paper, with black chalk, heightened with Pastills, of what color
you most fancy, is a most advantageous way of Practice. Some advise first to
begin with Geometrical Figures; and then proceed to the Imitation of Fruits,
Flowers and Plants; after that to Beasts, Fowls and Fish.

And in the last place, to the parts of the Proportions contained in the Body
of Man: I confess, this tedious task of going about may bring something home at
last: but if you grant, that the freest Fancy proves the best Artist, then why
should the Fancy be bound up, since there has been rarely found and Artist
that has been excellent in Proportion in th^s^ (...)

THE ENGLISH ACADEMY, A DRAVVING-BOOK.
Of the EYES, NOSE, MOUTH, CHIN and EARS.
IN which you will find a Medium in the Size presented to your View, in seven
several useful Motions, after the Order of no mean Master in the truth of
Proportion, performed with few Touches, and you may single out at pleasure,
either Eye, Nose or Mouth, if the whole together seem difficult; but the
Printing in Red, as was formerly mentioned, is of excellent Use to bring in
your Hand, and assist your Fancy in your first Attempt.

I have thus expressed these parts of the Face, to inform you how Harmonious
each part answers to the Motions in General, which way soever they turn: which
if not first carefully viewed, and after that conceived of a possibility of
truth in Imitation, your rash Onset will come to little: Go not from Leaf to
Leaf, and from one part to another, until you have made a considerable progress
by Imitation, and have great regard to the Face, whether young or old, fat or
lean, grim or pleasant, laughing or weeping: according to which all the parts
must be answerable.

drawings of faces

Of Heads and their Proportions.
I Have here in this Leaf given you a more perfect Face with few Touches, yet
Truth of Proportion and Motion; And when you attempt their Imitation, be very
curious and careful in touching out leisurely, Part by Part, observing whether
the Face be elevated or dejected, wrinkled Age, or smooth-faced Youth, which
are properly expressed in this Leaf of Heads.

To Imitate which, 1. Touch very lightly if it be a side face, as in these, the
outmost Circumference of the Head and Face, to direct you in the exact bigness.
2. Consider those principal Touches that give life and likeness. 3. In placing
the Features, note the Parts must be equal, from the top of the Forehead to the
Eyebrows, and from the Eyebrows to the bottom of the Nose; And from the
bottom of the Nose to the bottom of the Chin are the Parts equal. 4. The Mouth
Extended, and the Corners turning up, shows a smiling Countenance, a bending
Eye-brow, and the Forehead and top off the Nose between the Eyebrows wrinkled,
shows frowning. 5. The distance betwixt the Eyes, must be the length of one Eye
in the full Face, but in a half or three quarters Face it is lesned by degrees.
6. Place the Nostrils underneath the Corners of the Eyes exactly. 7. Having
touched out the Eyes, Nose and Mouth lightly, make them more perfect, then
proceed to finish the Face; and then proceed, if a man, to perfect it with the
Hair on the Head and Beard. 8. Observe exactly the principal Curies and
Deepnings in the Hair, so shall the Order of the lesser Curls fall in with
Ease, still having regard to the Imitation of your Pattern


drawings of heads

Of Heads and their Proportions.
YOU have here another Leaf of Heads considerably different from the former,
and no less exact; wherein the Method is continued with small pains and proper
Touches, according to their several Representations, whether spritely Youth, or
serious Age.

The lovely Countenance is expressed without any clouded brows, wrinkled
forehead, with ample height and breadth; Also a Majestic Grace, a full Eye, a
sweet shadow at the bottom of the Eyelid, and little at the Corner; a Nose
proportionable, not too wide Nostrils; a clear Cheek tenderly shadowed, a
smiling Mouth, a thin upper Lip, the Mouth-line shadowed at the Corners.

The fearful Countenance is expressed with hollow Eyes, looking heavy and
downward, fallen, thin Cheeks, close Mouth, with careless staring Hair about
the Ears.

The Envious Countenance is expressed with hanging Cheeks, pale Countenance,
and Grinning Teeth.

drawings of heads

Of Heads of several Creatures for Imitation.
THESE Varieties are no less useful then the former, for the Exercise of the
Eye and Hand, done with as little pains, and yet to our intended Purpose.

The Cruel Savage, Bear. The strong Elephant. The wanton Goat. The furious
Lion. The tender Hind. The Swinish Bore. The Antic Ape. The stout Horse and
the Cow.
Each of which, though of various Shapes, yet with a few Touches expressing
their natural and principal Features; Intended for the use of all such as have
occasion for Coats of Arms, Crests, etc. In imitation of which, each
particular Creature requires no less care and observation them the foregoing
Heads, which with care, observation and deliberation, are to be first lightly
touched out, their Proportions measured, and their distinct differences
accordingly performed.

drawings of animal heads

Of HADS.
THE Variety of Postures and Actions of the Hands are more various then the
opinions of Matters concerning their Proportions; some say, the Hand is the
length of the Face; others, that it is three times: the length of the Nose,
against which there are Exceptions; some that has along Face and Nose, has
but a short Hand: and others have a short Face and a long Hand: but to the
drawing of Hand there goes in the opinion of most no less curious Observation
then is required in a Face: its true Proportion with the Fingers, Joints,
Veins, with its bending of the Joints, the Wrist-bone, the small swellings and
bendings of the Finsers; also the Nails and Knuckles.

The Hand by Touches of the Muscles discovers Age, answerable to the faces
Discovery in its place.

The Plump and fleshie, Youth and Courage: The Nail upon the last Joint of the
Finger, and takes about half that Joint.

Observe-carefully these several Proportions, whether backward or forward, and
pass not them by until your Judgment convince you, that the Hand and Face are
the choice Distinguishers of an able and experienced Artist.

drawings of hands

Of Feet and their Proportions.
Concerning these Nine Varieties of Feet, what has been said of Hands is not
impertinent for the Observation of Feet, also especially Considering our Modern
habits, they seldom appearing uncovered as the Hands usually do. Neither think
I it proper to Lead you into that Labyrinth and dubious story, about
Geometrical and Diagonal Lines to form out Proportions, a Practice more fit
for an able Mathematician, or Geometrician, than a Young undertaker for some
particular uses, the forms themselves are obvious to each Eye, and so I leave
it to your serious Imitation: advising you to observe all their Motions and
Windings, whether standing, running or fallen, with their swellings of Ancles
or Joints, and their due Proportions.

drawings of feet

Of Arms and Hands joined.
THESE more Complete Parts of the Body, are (...) Preparatory to our farther
design; which is to lead you on gradually to a higher perfection in truth of
Proportion, wherein your serious Observation of each postures, Action and
Motion is required, as if fixed to the Trunk of the Body, without which you
will never joyn-these Parts properly to the whole: and although there appear
little of shadow in each part, yet the grand Touches that fall in the Bend or
Motion of the Arm directs the true carriage, of shadows, in all such Postures,
Gestures and Actions.

There is, and you will find it so, a vast difference betwixt the natural
Composed Motion, and the enraged or forced Motion.

Let not the Arms length contain any inequality the one part to another; but
with care and deliberation touched out each part: for the pitch of the shoulder
to the Arms bending, and from that part to the Wrist, and accordingly with as
great a care affix the hand.

drawings of arms and hands

Of Thighs, Legs and Feet; their Proportions.
THESE forms of Proportion are the last Part of the Parts of Proportion: our
next will be to the Trunks of Bodies: What our Advice was concerning Arms and
Hands is not to be forgot in these Parts, from the Groyn, the Thigh to the Knee
bears a differenr thickness, falling less and less: and the Muscles about the
Knee have curious Observations, and seldom well expressed: from the Knee the
swelling out as well as the falling in of the calf of the Leg, requires as
exact Observation: And from the Ancle, the Foot, to the end of the Toes no
less, if Harmoniously completed.

If in all these parts of Proportions you run from part to part, before you
understand what you are about: when you come to the Trunks of Bodies, and
Bodies more complete: then your erroneous performance will convince you of that
neglect you all along so much slighted And as sure as he that will write words
before he can shape Letters is ridiculous, so no less guilty is he that
attempts at whole Bodies before he understand the parts.

drawings of thighs, legs and feet

Of the Back-Parts and Fore-Parts of the Bodies of Man and Woman.
THE Trunk of Man's Body seen on the back-part from the shoulder to the Buttocks
is expressed, though with few Touches in his natural Postures, as the Muscles
properly fall: to imitate which, let it appear, that your labor in all the
former parts was managed with such diligence, that now in the close your
Progress expresses so much: the Touches of the Muscles, and the Motion of the
Body must be answerable, you will find swellings out and fallings in of the
body require curious and careful Obserservation: Note the Shoulders breadth,
from thence to the Armpits, and so down: and let all Parallel-veins, Muscles
and Joints be placed proper as they naturally fall in opposition, the one
answering the other: as shoulder to shoulder, side to side, and hip to hip:
still observing the Bodies Motion and Winding.

The Trunk of a Woman's Body is very different from that of a Man, which will
appear to the eye of an Ingenious Observer at the first Glance.

In the plump Roundness, and tender Pleasantness in what shadows are requisite
for that Sex.

drawings of bodies

Of Heads and Trunks of the Body of Man and Woman joined; both seen forward.
IN these Figures the Heads joined to the Bodies come to the nearest of our
last Intention, which is Perfection and Proportion in the complete Bodies of
Man and Woman; The difference is great in the Observation of their foreparts,
as the Proportion themselves best discover: The forepart of Man's Body has the
like strength of Muscles answerable to the back-parts, as will appear in the
Figure from the pitch of the Throat to the Privities, in his Breasts, Sides and
Belly, how unpleasant to that of a Woman, whose beautiful Countenance,
Clearness of Skin, Plumpness of Flesh, Pleasantness of Breasts, and Roundness
of Body, terms her, The Delight of Man for Pleasure, Mirth and Solace.

drawings of bodies

Of whole Figures Naked.
THESE three following Figures of Women Naked, so largely expressed, are not
perfected to the Feet; but our Varieties foregoing, are to that defect, if
any, a sufficient supply, I might have given you, as Albertus Durus, and some
others have the Proportions of Bodies by Lines thus divided, (...) which there
are from the Grown or Top of the Head to the sole of the Foot contained eight
Parts or Measures of the Head, which the Ingenuous may soon examine with a Pair
of Comp^sses, either in the Figures them^^lves designed, or the Pe^^e ^^om
which they do design, in which ^et these Observations continually be remembered.

1. That the Bodies of Women of ordinary Proportion, contain the same Measures
with that of Man.

2. All (...) standing, whether of Men or Women, one Leg generally ^ears the
stress of the whole Body, and the other Legistanding more loose and free.

3. Note, that although the Measures from Head to Foot both of Man and Woman
agree, yet in the breadth of some of the Parts they differ much.

4. For in the Body of Man the breadth of the Shoulders contain two Measures of
the Head; and the breadth of the Hips two Measures of the Face.

5. And the breadth between the Shoulders of a Woman contains but two lengths of
the Face; and from the Hips to the Buttocks two lenghs of the Head.

6. Observe how the Measures of the Body are divided.

The first Measure contains the length of the Head. The second to the bottom of
the Breast. The third, from that to the Navil. The fourth, to the Privities.
The fifth, to the brawny part of the Thigh. The sixth, to the lower part of the
Knee. The seventh, to the small of the Leg. The eighth, to the Heel of the
Foot.
drawings of whole figures

Of the Bodies of Anatomy, and the Body of a Skeleton; both standing backward.
THESE two Figures are added for Variety, and require no less care in their
Imitation then the other foregoing. In the Anatomy-Figure the several parts
distinguished lie visible, from the Nape to the Throat, (...) Bone of knitting;
the Back, Shoulder, Blade, Chine and Loins; Shoulder-Blades, Ribs, Waste,
Reins, Buttocks, Thighs, Hams, Ancles, Legs, Feet and Sole; to imitate these
as the rest foregoing lightly touched out in the outward form before you:
Divide the inward parts, and be sure to finish no one part, until you find
every part placed in its true and proper place, in exact Proportion, which
having done, then wiping out your gross Touches of the Cole, leaving only dim
Touches for your Direction; then with black Lead, eyeing your Pattern, amend
what you find amiss at first; And after, with a Neat Pen go over all again,
and this finishing part, be sure that in it you be most exact.

drawings of musculature and skeleton

The Art of Etching in Brass, Copper, Silver or Steel. Discovering what
Instruments belong to that Art, and the way how to accomplish the same.
FIRST, How to make the Ground to shadow upon.

Take one ounce and an half of Virgins Wax, half an ounce of Asphaltum, half an
ounce of the best Mastick; beat your Asphalt to powder; first, put your wax
into a new clean Pipkin, and set it over a gentle fire, and when it is
thoroughly melted, then put the Asphalt and Mastick into it, and let it be well
mixed altogether; then take a clean earthen Porringer near full of clean water,
then pour your melted stuff altogether into the water, only remember to leave
the dregs behind; and when it is through cooled in the water, then frame it up
into a Ball; and when you are to use it, put it into a clean Lawn, or ^ine
Holland Rag doubled; but let not the Rag have any holes in it, and Tie it up
close for your use.

Your Copper being well polished, which is to be had ready prepared, before you
lay on your Ground, Cole it over, and wipe not off the water, but set it slant
that the water may drain off; and when you perceive it through dry, scrape some
chalk very fine upon it, and then clear it over with a fine linen Rag, and be
sure that you touch not a finger upon the side of the plate cleared, to avoid
any greasiness, which is a great prejudice to the Work.

Then to lay on your Ground.

Put into a chaffing-dish or Fire-Pan, either some small Cole fire, or Embers,
for Charcoal is too vehement a fire, and would quickly burn and dry the
moisture out of your ground; but in laying your Plate upon the fire, let the
fire have Air: then take your Ground in your Rag; and try if your plate will
melt it; if so, then be quick in spreading it over the Copper, but lay it not
too thick. Then take a Duck Feather, or a Raven, with that spread or wipe over
the ground to make it very even, wiping it cross every way to lie even, and
when it is so, set it to cool.

Then to work exactly, and perceive your strokes plain, cover over the
aforesaid Ground with a white color.

Thus, grind a small quantity of white Lead, with a little Gum-water, and let
it be of convenient mixture to spread; then take a large Pencil as big as a
Wallnut or more; but let it be of fine hair, with which take off that Color,
and wipe over your Plate cross-ways to lay it even; after you see it even, then
take a brush made of Squirrils Tails, and with that you may more curiously lay
your white color even.

Then having Needles of several Sizes in readiness well prepared, by whetting
them upon an Oyl-stone, which to keep their Points round, you must let them run
round betwixt your Fingers as the Turners run; being thus prepared, and your
Draught or Design as ready, you are to consider which way your Draught is to
st^nd, when it is printed, and accordingly to place it upon your Plate,
preparing your Draught with Red Lead, and small-coal dust rubbed over upon the
backside of your draught, and so fixing it to the Plate, with a blunt Needle
for that purpose, trace over all the out lines of your draught also; touching
out the folds or shadows, what distances, and how far dark or light.

Before you attempt to shadow draw over all your out-strokes, as aforesaid,
lest otherwise you lose that first mark of your tracing over which will soon be
lost and rubbed out.

Let your Needles with which you work be put into sticks or Pencils the length
of a Common Pen; and at the other end from the Needle, let there be a blunt
Pencil to wipe off the Grounds that flies up before your Hand-working.

In your Working, Lean not hard upon your Pencil; but only to touch through the
Ground to the Copper; when you leave work, wrap up your Plate in Papers; and if
in Winter, in a Woollen Cloth, to keep your Ground from scratches in the one,
and from freezing in the other.

When you have finished all your Work fit to eat with Aqua fortis, first melt
some green wax, and with an old Pencil lay it round upon the Edges of your
Plate, to make your green Wall of Wax round your Plate, to keep your Aqua
fortis upon it to eat; and this Wax must be wrought into long Pieces, the
thickness of a common Paste-board, and half as broad as a Knife, and so fixed
round upon the aforesaid melted Wax; and with a little stick, broad at the end,
sharp-edged, thrust down the Wax to make it stick; when you put on the Aqua
fortis, if it be good, to a third part of that which was never used, mix it at
least with two parts to one of that which has been used, if you intend your
Work to be fine.

Or in case of want of that, you may mix Wine-Vineger with your Aqua fortis.

But if your Work is to be course, you may use a third part of the Aqua fortis
entire.

Only consider the difference betwixt double and single Aqua fortis.

Lastly, for what Parts you would have eaten sweet, first pour off your ^^ua
fortis into a dish, then wash your Plate over with clear water; let ^^^y, and
then melt some Candle-grease with the dregs of your Ground before melted, and
with a Pencil cover those Places you would have

Thus much of Etching.

Of the Art of Graving, the Instruments to be made use of, and how to improve
them, whether upon Brass, Copper, Steel or Pewter.
TO practice this Art, Gravers are to be provided according to the Work you
intend to practice; If for the Goldsmiths occasions of Arms and Letters in
what they call Flat-stitch, several crooked Gravers; If for to engrave Maps,
Portraitures, Frontispieces, and the like, strait Gravers are the most
commodious; To which add an Oyl-stone, a Cushion, a Burnisher and a
Drawing-point.

The Oyl-stone is to be of a Grit, neither too fine nor too course; they are
often sold in Forster-lane; where the several sorts of Gravers and Hafts also are
sold: Before you attempt to whet your Gravers, consider what work you intend
them for, and according to that prepare them, the Square point, and the
Diamond-point are the chief for use.

In whetting your Graver keep the edge firm upon the stone, on which you intend
to fix the point, and be sure to carry an even steady hand, placing both the
fore-singer firmly upon the opposite side of the Graver, resting your Haft-end
against the Palm of the right hand, whetting both the sides alike.

Then setting the end of the Graver sloping upon the Stone, held firm against
the Palm of the Hand; whet the Point very flat in form of a Diamond: Having
thus prepared your Graver, having a Leather-bag filled with sand to lay your
Plate on, hold your Plate with your left hand, so that with freedom you may
turn it according to the Motion of either shadows or Letters you engrave

If your Graver be too hard at first, you may a bate it by holding it to the
flame of a Candle, until you do perceive it to turn yellowish, or a straw
color, then thrust it into the Tallow, in which quench it; but in constant
using in a little time it will become more useful by whetting, which is best.
That the Haft of the Graver may not prejudice you, cut off the part of the knob
of the Handle that lies upon the same line with the Edge of the Graver;
otherwise, specially in a large Plate you will not be able to move it upon the
Copper, but it will both stop you in your stroke, and cause your Graver to run
irregular.

And be sure that your Fingers interpose not between the Plate and the Graver,
for that will be of the like prejudice as the Haft.

He that inures not his Hand to such a Command, that with one and the like
ease, he can both begin and end a stroke, is to learn a chief part.

To imitate any Pattern, if to print forward you must reverse it backward upon
the Copper thus; your Plate being clear polished, heat it over the fire; And
when it is hot, take Bees Wax, put in a fine Rag, and rub the Plate over with
it, until you perceive the Wax to lie even all over your Plate, both thin and
even: you may for a more certainty lightly wipe it over with a Pidgeon or
Duck-Feather to lay it even; then after it is cooled, if your Print be not of
too old a standing, you may rub it off upon the Wax with an Ivory Haft of a
Knife by degrees, and it will leave a perfect Impression; But if it be very
old, then to supply that defect either with black lead, or Franckfort-black,
mixed with clear water, the thickness of common Ink, and therewith go over all
the chief Parts or Proportions you do intend to imitate, and that Impression
will remain upon the Wax, which with a drawing Point you must trace over upon
the Copper, before you attempt to grave, lest you rub out or lose your
Proportion.

But if you are to imitate a Piece, as it stands in your Pattern, to be engraved
upon wax; you may trace it through the Pattern, but it will plainest appear
upon the wax, if you black the backside.

Thus much of Graving in Copper, etc.

Concerning Engraving in Wood.
WHat ever is to be Cut, Carved or Graven in Wood, must be drawn, traced or
pasted upon the VVood; and after that all that is vacant or to remain White
must be Cut clear out with little Narrow-pointed or points of Knives worn if
the Metal and temper be good will serve as well for that purpose.

This Cutting in Wood, is very tedious, difficult and curious, and ^or want of
Encouragement much lost to what repute once it had amongst Famous Masters.

The best Wood to cut upon are Beech, or Box, plained Inch t ick or more
according to what use they are applied.

To draw any Pattern, or Copy upon Wood.

Grind white very fine mux't with fair Watter, and then dip a Rag therein and
Rub over that side of the Wood you intend to cut upon, and when it is through
dry, it will preserve the Ink, when you draw upon it that it shall neither
spread nor sink.

Having whited the Wood what you intend to cut either with black or Red color
the Back-part, and with a blunt Drawing point or Swallows quill trace over all
the parts you intend to Imitate.

If you will reverse what you are to do unless you draw the design again the
contrary way, you must paste and spoil your pattern.

And if you paste it upon the Wood it must not be whited over; but being well
plained, wipe over the pattern on the work-side with Gum Tragacanth dissolved
in fair Water, and lay it smooth upon the Wood, and when it is fast on and dry
thoroughly, then wet it a little all over, and fret off the Paper gently, till
you see perfectly every stroke of the figure or design; than dry it again and
so fall to work.

Thus of Cutting in VVood.

Of Painting.
HE that will Paint in Oil must provide a good Stone, to grind his Colors,
Porphry-stone is best and will do the least damage to the Colors, but in such
a want a Slate, or a very hard Stone may serve, that a Knife will not wear away.

Upon which Stone with what Colors you intend, putting Lint-seed Oil to it
grind it until there remain no sandiness in the Color.

A Pallat is the next material to lay your Colors upon, upon which they are
also tempered; It is of an ovall form, with a hole for your thumb.

Upon which lay your Colors in this order.

Next your thumb lay white-Lead, then next that lay Vermillion,
East-India-Red-Lake, Pink-Yellow- Oker, or Spruse-Oker, than Umber, Flury, etc.

Thus your Pallat is prepared except the Compounding of them, which to be done
for a Face.

Take a little White-Lead, and as much Vermillion, and the like quantity of
Lake, and mix them altogether, and this will serve for the Darkest Carnation
that is, in the Color of the Face, and so consequently at pleasure more white
will make it more pale, then having come to the Palest Color, you must temper
a little White, and Flury together, for a proper faint Shadow for the Face.

Your Colors prepared as aforesaid, use them on the Face, as follows.

First, take your lightest Color, and lay in the lightest place of the
Forehead, and of the Nose, and the least part of the Cheek-bone, and next
place your Carnation Color*

And when you come to any place where a faint shadow is required, then as
abovementioned.

And for the Darkest shadows use East-India-Red, and Fullers-Earth, and
sometimes a little Pink amongst it altogether, and note that these Colors
abovementioned are to express a beautiful Face.

If you would make it a more Tawny complexion, put more East India Red for the
Carnation, and more Pink in the lights or heightnings.

The Pencils for your use are these two.

Swan-quills Pencils, one fige, one pointed. And for Goose-quill Pencils, two
brissels, two figes, and one great brissel on a stick.

These Pencils are sufficient for any use.

Of Colors for Garments.
FOR light Blews, Indigo and white Lead mixed together. For the darkest blew use
all Indigo. Use White only of it self for the light. For Green, use Bise and
Pinck mixed together. Use Masticot for the Lights. Pink and Umber for the Darks.
Reds must be made with East India Red. The Lights with Vermillion. The Darkest
with Earth of Colen. For Whites, use white Lead only. The Darks with Flour. For
Blacks, use Lamb-black. The Lights, with Lamb-black and White mixed together.
Bone-black for the darkest.
These are the most usual Colors for Garments; but note, when all these
Colors are dry, then they must be glazed, which is like washing of Prints with
thin Colors, either mix them with oil or varnish: your Blews must be glazed
with Smalt, Bise or Vltramorine; your Reds with Lake, and your Yellows with
Pink.

This will cause them to be exceeding beautiful.

Of Limning in Watercolors.
TO Limn, prepare a fine ordinary sized Card, or very fine Paste-board, and
polish it well with a Dogs Tooth, as small as possibly you can, on the side you
intend to use.

Then take a Piece of Abortive Parchment of the same size with your Card or
Paste-board, the which paste firm with clean fine starch; but before you use
it, temper it first in your hand with a Knife, or your Finger, that it may be
free from Knots, and then let it dry; then your Stone whereon you use to dry
your Colors being made very clean, lay the Card or Paste-board thereon, the
Parchment-side being downwards, then with a Tooth polish the backside very
hard; but note, that the outside of the skin is best to Limn upon, and
therefore must be outmost.

After this Preparation you must lay a Ground or Prime of flesh Color before
you begin your work, and that must be tempered according to the Complexion of
the face you are to draw; If the Complexion be fair, temper white Lake and
Red-lead, but if a hard swarthy Complexion, then mingle with your white and red
a little fine Masticot, or English Oker, but observe that the Ground should
always be fairer then the Face you take, for it is an easy matter to darken a
light color, but difficult to make a sad one lighter, for in Limning you must
never heighten, but work them down to your just color.

Your Ground being thus fitted, lay upon your piece of Paste-board or Card,
prepared with a bigger Pencil then ordinary, and lay smooth, even and free from
Hairs of your Pencil, which that you may the better do, fill your Pencil full
of colors, rather thin and waterish then thick and gross; Then with two or
three strokes of your great Pencil lay on in an instant; for the sooner it is
laid on and nimbly, the evener it will lie.

Cover rather too much then too little for your primer; this done, take a
shell, and before you begin to work, temper several little parcels of several
shadows for the face, and dispose them about the edge of your shell, that they
may be ready for use.

Note that these Colors are fit for a face.

For the Red in the Cheeks, Lips, etc. Temper Lake, Red-Lead, and a little
White together.

For faint bluish shadows temper Indigo and White.

For deeper shadows take White, English Oker, and a little Indigo, and for the
dark and hard shadows use Lake and Pinck mixed with Umber, where note, that
black must not be used in a face by any means.

Lastly, When you have almost finished, do all the scars, moulds, smiling and
glancing of the eye, descending and contracting of the Mouth, all which must be
sudden to express a bold quick hand; Note farther, that the best light to draw
by is the North-light, and the higher the Window and sloping the better; place
your self so to your desk that the light may strike in sidelong, from the left
hand to the right.

Thus much for Limning.

Of Washing and Coloring; of Maps and Pictures; Discovering how to prepare
them for Colors, with their Use, Order and Mixtures.
THAT Prints or Maps may lie smooth when pasted upon Paper or Cloth, first wet
or damp your Prints with a Sponge or Cloth, but be careful that you wet them as
the Paper will bear it; After you have so done, take your Paste, made either of
Wheat Flour or of starch; and with a brush spread it all over the Paper or
Cloth you intend to put it upon, then take the sheet you damped, and lay it
upon another part of the Board you paste upon, and lay your Print upon the
Paper or Cloth, and smooth it down with your hand; and so do by as many as your
occasion requires, and then either press them; or if you have not conveniencie
take a sheet or two of that Paper you pasted your Prints upon, and lay upon the
Prints you pasted, but let the Paper be dry, then with your hands rub it all
over hard, to cause your painted Prints to stick fast every where; as you take
them one from another, if you perceive any swelling or rising of the Paper like
blisters, then take the point of a Pin or Needle, and prick the same, and that
will let out the wind that lies underneath, and so cause it to lie smooth, if
you rub it with your hands; and then hang them on lines to dry.

You may prepare them to make them bear Colors and Varnish, but first observe
how to paste on Cloth, which is thus, wet your Maps or Prints you intend to
paste, as before you were to wet the Paper you were to paste upon, and then let
them lie, while you wet the Cloth or sheet you intend to paste upon, thus put
the Cloth into a pale of water, and be sure it be thoroughly wet, and after
wring it out, and nail it fast at the top, bottom and sides, so that it may be
strained smooth and even; this done, take your Print wet as beforesaid, and
with your brush paste your sheet you intend to place first or uppermost, and be
sure the paste lie all over, and then place it upon your Cloth, and after take
a Sponge with a little water in it, and so smooth and strike it firm to the
Cloth, thus do one after another until all are pasted.

To strengthen your Print to bear Colors and Varnish, there are three ways;
either with size, or which is best of all with Paste, or with starch. If you
use size, put some fair water to it, or it will soil much; when your starch or
paste is boiled, use it until it be cool; for if it will not strengthen your
Print so much, being cold, with your Sponge be sure you rub it all over with
your Paste, or else if you miss, some parts will bear the Colors, and other
parts will not. After it is once dry, go it over again a second time with
paste, and then after it is through dry you need not fear to lay on your
Colors,

How to choose your Pencils.
Be sure they be fullest next the Quill, falling off with a round sharp point;
if there be any straggling Hairs, take them away by the touch of the flame of a
Candle, you must have several Pencils for several Colors, or else be sure to
wash your Pencil clean, when you take it from one color to use it with
another, or else you will endanger the spoil of all your Colors, you also must
have of several sizes, as your Work requires.

To make Gum-Water.
Take a quart of clean water, and put it into a Bottle or earthen Pan, then
take six Ounces of Gum Arabeck, and put it into a clean linen Rag, and tie it
up with a thread, put that in, let it dissolve in the water; if it prove too
strong, put in more water; if too weak, put in more Gum.

The Names of such Colors that must be washed.
ELEWES. Blew B se. Indiga. Blew Verditer.
GREENS. Verdigreece. Sap Green. Copper Green.
REDS. Vermillion. Lake. Red-lead.
YELLOWS. French-berries Saffron. Light Mastic^t. Cambuga.
WHITES. White-lead picked fine.
BROWNS. Spanish brown. umber, or Hair-colour.
BLACKS. Franck fort-black Ivory burnt. Small-coal black. Sea-coal black.
Lamb-black.

All these must be very well ground before they can be used.

How to order your Colors.
Having very well ground those Colors to be ground; put them upon a
Chalk-stone to dry, when they are dry, lay them up carefully until you use
them, then mingle them with Gum-water

Those Colors that you must wash put into a Galley-pot and cover them with
fair water, and stir them with a stick very well, and after they have stood a
while, pour off that water into another Galley-pot; and let the second stand
until it be settled, then pour the same water back again into the first pot, and
stir it again as before, then pour it into the second pot, as before, and this
do three or four times; and then at last when the color is well settled in the
second pot, throw the water quite away, and then use that color that is in the
second pot.

The color in your first pot will serve for your course work.

Blew Bise well washed is best, but use no Smalt in washing your Prints.

A Liquor to be used with some Colors.
Take an ounce of Potashes of the best, and one Gallon of River-water, then
brush your Ashes to powder, and put it into your water, and boil it a little
while, then set it to settle, after pour off that which is clear, and keep that
for your use.

For a sky Color.
Let the upper part be the saddest blew, and the next lighter, and next that a
flesh color mixed with some of the last and the lowest of all flesh colors,
wrought with light yellow at your pleasure, and for the clouds your Judgment
may direct, they being so various.

To make a Copper-Green.
Take an ounce of white Orgal, and four ounces of Copper-dust, to be had at the
Copper-Smiths, and a pint of fair Water, and boil it half away, then after it
has stood and settled, pour off the thinnest, and keep for your use, if you
would have it a Seagreen, then put into it some blew Vorditor, and if a
Grass-Green, then put in some French Berry-water, or some Cambuga.

For a Red Crimson.
Take off your Liquor made with Potashes, as before is mentioned, and add to
it some rainwater, and then take Scarlet-flocks or shreds, steep them with
ordinary Gum-water; but note, you must let your Colors boil in the Liquor you
steep them in a little while; and then put in your ordinary Gum-water, or weak
size, and let them boil together until they are thick for your use.

For an Oringe Color.
Take Ornotto and boil it in the aforesaid Liquor, and it will make a fair
Oringe color.

To make a good blew.
Take Litmus and wet it in the aforesaid liquour, let it stand all night, and
then boil it in weak size or Gum-water, and if it be too sad, add lime water
to it, and if you would have it a fair purple add White Wind vinegar to it.

To make a fair Crimson.
Take the best Brazil ground or shaved, put of the aforesaid Liquor to it, and
let it stand all night, then boil it with weak size, or ordinary Gum-water,
till the color is to your mind: try it with a stick upon your Nail, when it
fades put Powder of Alum into it to strike it lighter.

Colors that set off best together in Shadows
WHITE sets off with all Colors. GREEN sets off with Red, Browns or Purples.
RED sets off with Red, Brown, or Purple. YELLOW sets off with Purple, Red,
Green or Brown. BLEW sets off with White, Red, Brown, Yellow o^ Black. BROWN
sets off with Green or Yellow.
Colors that must be Ground.
Indigo Lake White-Lead Spanish brown Frankfort-black Umber Ivory burnt Small
Coal These must be wash^ after they are Ground Sea Coal These must be wash^
after they are Ground
Colors that must be washed.
Blew Bice Red Lead Sap Green. Cambuga.
FINIS.

