THE Last WILL and TESTAMENT Of the late Deceased French Jackanaps, Who was
wont to attend the BEARS: With certain Instructions to succeeding English APES.

Published to prevent the counterfeiting the said Will and Testament;

And to obviate the false Slanders of such who maliciously give out, That he
dyed Intestate.

Taken in Shorthand by a Zealous Scribe, who used formerly to take Sermon
Notes out of the grave Mouths of Father Hugh Peter's and Father Venner.

LONDON: Printed for May Day, and are to be sold in Hide-Park. 1661.

The Last Will and Testament of the late deceased French fachanap's, who was
wont to attend the Bears, etc.
FIrst, for my Executor I do hereby appoint my well-beloved Kinsman and Patron
the Tailor that went over to France to make Clothes there, for his Customers
here, in order to the approaching solemnity, whom I also appoint to carry my
Bones, when I have paid my tribute to death, back into France, and inter them
solemnly amongst the French, we being the ancient Inhabitants of that Nation
(according to the most wormeaten Records and Antiquities were ever retrived by
Seldom and Cambden those rat-crobbing Antiquaries) from whence they unto this
day borrow their Mimical gestures, Apish airiness in garb and countenance.

As for my ridiculous Conversation and Courtship affected, I bequeath to most
of our new-returned Travelers, and to all such who would be thought so that
never traveled further then to Bansted downs to a Horse-race, or at furthest
to meet the King at Dover, all whom I leave to be countenanced and admired by
your now Madams, who give the preminence to our Cringing Family, and the more
that Gentlemen participate of our Nature, the more accomplished Persons and
Courtiers they account them; for which Sisterly conceit and opinion, we intail
to their children the perfections only of dancing, dopping forced
face-grinning, called smiling, talking idly, complementing, running dog mad in
love, hugging their Mistrissis Gloves, fetching and carrying like Spaniels, of
being bred up Dunces, Asses, and Puppets, with a strong Antipathy to all
Learning and Arts.

As for the itch of my Tail, I bequeath to stale Chamber-maids,
Green-sicknessed Wenches, to most of your zealous sisters poach'd in the Geneva
Pipkin, and high Capon-fed Citizens wives, and old Ladies that continue to
patch and paint after fifty.

As for my activity I bequeath to the French Nation, beside many other of my
personal Qualities and Endowments, and also to Dancing Masters, Dancers on the
Ropes, Jack-puddings, such as show feats of activity. etc.

And to such as savor nothing but what is French in diet, habit, deportment,
and all other things I do bequeath my Brains, beside my natural aptness to
imitate any thing that is ridiculous.

The nimbleness of my hands and fingers in turning over hair by hair, and
looking of heads, I bequeath to French Tire-women especially, and all such that
dress Ladies heads, and manage their hair a la mode, with a tedious
whole-mornings labor, which in the afternoons is to be seen, and set to the
view into the bargain, with the Plays, at the new Theater, and other
Play Houses.

My Courage and Valor I bequeath to young Carpet-Knights, and such White-bread
and Butter Soldiers that never knew any other hardship but a Feather-bed, no
want of provision, but a Caudle in the morning, or Jeccaletto, no Alarums, but
a noise of Fiddlers, no Skirmishes but with Ladies on Couches and Day-beds, no
Batteries but what they have made in Tavern windows, no Sieges but over
Close-stools, no Wounds but Patches and slash Doublets, have handled no Arms
but Ladies Bodkins, Busks and Fans, fired no Guns but Tobacco-pipes, ride no
Horses but a hunting, commanded no Parties but a pack of Hounds, stormed no
breaches but what Nature in the kinder sort of women has laid open to them;
planted no Ordinance but volleys of Bumbast complements, drawn no Lines but
about Petticoats, led no Soldiers but their Lacqueys, lay on no Guards but on
the Counters for night-walking, know no Tat Towes but a lusty dose to bed
wards, no Parades but dressing themselves, no Patrols but from Bawdy House to
Bawdy House.

As for my Cap and Feather, Jacket, and my other waring Habilliments Cap ape, I
leave to the City Tailors to cut out the next summers fashion by, without the
unnecessary charge of sending into France for Paterns.

Many other things I have to bestow, which I leave to the petty maungy French
Traders, Handicraft-men and women who swarm over into England, to be
promiscuously disposed to those that shall think fit to share in my Legacies.

As for my Epitaph, I desire is may be written in French, and if any modern
Poet shall be pleased to make mournful Ballats of me, I desire they may be sung
to shrill French tunes, in consort with a Flagelet.

To my Successors I shall only leave these Injunctions of a dying Ape, whose
origin, it is true, was from France, but his breeding and bringing up still in
England, but always after the French fashion.

First, I enjoy you to have your French Tutors, French Dancing masters, French
Lacqueys, French Cooks and if ye chance to have young Apes, to provide French
Women, and French Nurses to attend them, lest they should degenerate from our
race; so will they learn the French Tongue, the French impudence, the French
levity, the French letchery, and all other French fantastique manners, without
endangering your pretty Baby in Foreign travail, or divorcing them from the
sucking-bottle at home, and the breasts of their tender mothers.

Secondly, let all your Clothes come out of France, or be made here by French
Tailors, it is no matter if they be Botchers, such who in France, their own
Country, could never earn oil and vinegar to the grass and herbs they pick up
in fields on free-cost, to cramb their horse-sallat devouring maws with, nay
not so much as salt to their onions, and stinking butter to fry their
Toad-stools, yet here they pass for rare needle-shop-board Artists, although in
France they wrought in lousy stalls, in petty Villages to Country Peasants,
and cut out not higher work then Canvass Doublets, and Canvass Breeches,
perhaps might foot Stockings, if any were worn in that Village, which is not
usual.

Thirdly, let all your Petriwigs and Bands be brought out of France, although
they be made of horse tails, and cobbled on a cap like thrums on a map. Let thy
Gloves too come from thence, although so monstrously unshaped, as if they had
been cut out with a Hatchet, not Sissers, and seam'd like a sack with large
stiches, and needle of a Harnass-maker, not of a Glover, and be sure to buy
nothing else, either for ornament or ware, but what is cried up for French.

Fourthly, let nothing please your eyes but French bravery, French shows, and
all other objects appropriate to that sense; nothing please your ears but
French Music, French voices, etc. Nothing your taste but French Gusto's,
French Dishes, French Sawces, etc. Nothing your smell but French Odours,
nothing your touch but French women, and finally, let nothing please your
understanding but French follies.

Fifthly, keep no good not open house, as the ancient Gentry were formerly wont
to do in England, but embrace the French parsimonie. Let your Kitchins be
chafing-dishes, and your Butteries a few bottles of Vin de Pari, with whole
palefuls of water. Give your Families slender board-wages, let them shift for
their livings, and feed sparingly, so will they be a less burden to the tails
of your Coaches, which usually carries the whole Family behind them, beside an
old woman to look to the house at home; with this provident thrist may the
charge of wood, coal, and Chimny-sweeping be saved, and no scraps and offals
prodigally cast away to dogs and beggars at the gates, only the crooked nosed
naked French little dog, my Lady pampers, is to make up the second at the upper
end of the Table, and feed in the same dish.

But alas! I feel the pangs of death upon me (else I had many other things and
instructions to mind you of) and the breath going from me, which I do here
bequeath to all those men or women of the English Nation, who daily plead in
praise of the French, and of their fashions, and customs, to the disparagement
of their own native Country, from whence they receive their breath and
nourishment. And it would not be amiss that all those who are so much for
employing French, and for slighting, villifying, and despising their own
Countrymen, might have all their Beefs and Muttons, which this Island in such
plenty afford, fetched out of France, and sold here at dear rates for their
Bellies, since they let the French gain so much by their back.

With this he bowed his head, kissed his paw, heaved up his shoulders, gave a
French shrug, and expired.

FINIS.

