THE Last SPEECH, AND Confession OF THE WHORE of BABYLON, At her place of
Execution, on the Fifth of November last. Whereunto is added, The Famous Story
of the BELL, used by the Irish Papists, taken out of the Bishop of Down and
Conner's Epistle to his Persuasive against POPERY.

Nola to them did give a Bow,
La Fleche a Dart did bring;
But who upon them will-bestow
What they deserve, A String.
LONDON, Printed for K. B. in Little Britain. MDCLXXIII.

THE WHORE OF BABYLONS Last SPEECH and CONFESSION.
MAy it please your Young Wits, to hearken to me one word or two before you
make me a Sacrifice to your popular Fury; and seeing you must be my Judges; let
it not be said, you were more forward to sit upon my Skirts than upon my Cause;
and so hang me before you try me.

Alas! Good Boys, I am afraid you have sucked in your Enmity against Me, with
your Mothers Milk: and your Tutors, who should have learnt you to rise up
before the Aged, and reverence my Antiquity, has learnt you to call me, (who
pretend to be your Mother) WHORE: Nor is that all; but I must be a Witch too,
and be burnt for one. Had it not been enough for you to duck me, or pump me,
but you must burn me too? well I know what all this is for: it is your Guides
have taught you this, calling me, a Deceiver of the Nations, and one that has
made the world drunk with the Cup of Fornication. Well, well, Gentlemen, when
you burnt me in the City last 5. Nov. I dare appeal to to all the Company, if I
did appear such a Beauty, as to bewitch you, or any body else, with my Face: I
know nothing that was so taking in it but my Roman Nose. When you bid your
Fellow-Wags first take me and hang me upon an approved Gibbet, and be sure
snickle me fast, lest I slipped the knot by some Equivocation, then let me hang
in a perpendicular Line without motion, then turn me gingerly toward the Fire,
as if you had a design to warm me; but I know your Intent -- However pray
consider what you do before you proceed farther: Remember the strange and
mighty Feats that have been done by me: have you heard of none of my Miracles?
Did you never read the Story of St. Francis, who has done more Miracles than
all the Apostles, (if you will believe me, and if you will not, the Devil take
you.) I say, my St. Francis was once at Mass, and as he was going to drink, he
saw a Spider in the Chalice: Now, you must know, he was loath to lose a Drop of
Blood for a sorry Spider and therefore off it goes: Presently his Hipp began to
itch, and he falls to scratching, and out comes the poor Spider, sound wind and
limb, as ever she went in. Do not think, Sirrahs, the Spider afterward spun
this Cobweb-story to catch such young fools as you. No, I can tell you another.

One of my Daughters at Venice, a certain Nun there, (ah poor thing! it would
break her heart, to see me in this pickle.) But to my story. This Nun used to
fast sometimes a week, sometimes a fortnight together, or more, feeding her
self upon nothing else but pious Meditations and devout Prayers all the while.
I know not why this may not go for a Miracle; although it afterward was found,
she had an Alabaster Box, made in the fashion of a Bible, filled with
Marchpanes, Sweetmeats and Spirits, by the help of which she could fast very
handsomely.

Bellarmine tells us of a Mare kept three days without Meat, and when Provender
was offered her in the presence of our Breaden-God, she would not touch it,
(the misery is, she was Chapfall'n) nay she fell down upon her Knees and
worshipped the Host, (because she could stand no longer.) Just when she was
brought to live without Meat, the poor Mare died.

St. Dunstan once upon a time (as all Tales begin) was going to consecrate a
Church, and, finding it did not point full East and West, he set his shoulder
to it, and with one small hitch cured it of its Uncanonicalness.

Valder says (if you will believe him) That Ignatius did more Miracles with
his Name written in a piece of Paper, than Moses and all the Apostles put
together.

A Nobleman of Venice was troubled with Vomiting, that he could not receive the
Sacrament: whereupon the Priest laid it to his heart side, (which opened before
them all) the Host went in, his side closed up again, and all was right.

One Damascene had his right Hand chopped off, but as he was praying before the
Image of the Virgin, his Hand was perfectly set on again.

If these will not prevail upon you, I have no truer stories to give you; you
can but send me to Purgatory, and I have a Bell will soon Ring me out again:
And so I bid the world good night.

A brief Relation of the BELL used by the Irish Papists, taken out of the
Bishop of Down and Connor's Epistle to his Persuasive against POPERY.
I Was lately, within a few Months, very much troubled with Petitions and
earnest Requests, for the restoring of a Bell which a Person of Quality had in
the time of, and ever since, the late Rebellion. I could not guess at the
reasons of their so great and violent importunity, but told the Petitioners, if
they could prove that Bell to be theirs, the Gentleman was willing to pay the
full value of it; though he had no obligation to do so (that I know of) but
Charity: but this was so far from satisfying them, that the importunity
increased; which made me diligently to enquire into the secret of it. The first
cause I found was, that a dying Person in the Parish desired to have it rung
before him to Church, and pretended he could not die in peace if it were denied
him; and that the keeping of that Bell did anciently belong to that Family from
Father to Son: But because this seemed nothing but a fond and unreasonable
Superstition, I enquired farther, and at last found, that they believed this
Bell came from Heaven, that it used to be carried from place to place, to end
Controversies by Oath, which the worst men durst not violate if they swore upon
that Bell, and the best men amongst them durst not but believe him; that if
this Bell was rung before the Corpse to the Grave, it would help him out of
Purgatory; and that therefore when any one died, the Friends of the Deceased
did, whilst the Bell was in their possession, hire it for the behoof of their
dead, and that by this means that Family was in part maintained.

FINIS.

