THE LAST NEVVES FROM IRELAND BEING A RELATION Of the Hostile and bloody
proceedings of the Rebellious Papists there, at this present. Wherein is
declared the many, great, and cruel outrages committed by them, both with fire
and Sword against the Protestants, in several parts of that Kingdom. Also the
names of the Towns and Castles, they have surprised, taken, and burnt. With a
full Discovery of their Traiterous and wicked intentions. Related in a Letter,
and dated at Dublin, October, 27. 1641. And read in Parliament here, November. 5,
1641.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN THOMAS. 1641.

THE Bloody Proceedings of the Irish Rebels, related in a Letter, dated at
Dublin the 27. of October. 1641.
THere was on Friday last a cruel plot of Treason discovered, as great as the
Gunpowder Treason, my Lord Matquers, and diverse others taken and imprisoned in
the Castle of Dublin, my Lord Lenricole came to this Town on Monday night, and
is suspected, he is privately laid for, They plotted to surprise the Castle of
Dublin on Sunday last in the evening at Prayer time; and to have killed the
Warders and possessed themselves of the Kings store, and then to have mastered
the English, but God prevented their bloody intentions, the Rebels have done
much hurt in the North parts of Ireland, they have burned Armagh, Longnall, the
Neuery, and seek to make away my Lord Mar, but he escaped them to Tredath,
they have burned Dundalke, they Massacre the English in those parts, men,
women, and children, my Lord Blaney fled to this Town, but they have taken his
Castles and all that belong to him, with his Lady and children, this City is
all up in Arms, and all from 16. to 60. are warned to be in readiness, there
was two Merchants in Christ's Churchyard killed by the Rebels, last Monday Mr.
Champion and Mr. Hayward. I hear to day that the Lord Burlasses Troop will
bring twelve of the Rebels that they have taken, The Neuery is taken and
Dundalke is beaten down, they have lately killed one Mr. Iremonger, Attorney
of the Kings Bench, Belterbat is taken for certain, all being inhabited with
English, they yielded upon composition, the Rebels are 5000 strong, whereof
2000 are armed with the Arms they took forth of the Nevery.

A True and perfect Relation how this bloody and damnable Conspiracy was first
discovered.
THe Execution of their bloody Tragedy intended against the Protestants, both
in Dublin, and other parts of the Kingdom, should have bin on Saturday, but by
Gods great mercy and goodness, their Hellish and damnable intention was
brought to light, being discovered on Friday night, by Sir John Clotworthies
man, on Sunday after there was a great confusion in the City, where was joy
mixed with sorrow, for our happy deliverance, yet were we much perplexed and
troubled with the fears and terrors of our approaching Enemies, expecting
every moment, when the City should be surprised and taken, such is the
greatness of our fears, that we take no rest neither day nor night, these
disloyal and wicked Rebels, have taken two Castles in the North parts of this
Kingdom, besides two other Towns of great strength with much munition in it,
and it is thought they still increase in great Multitudes, here is a Lord
taken, and diverse others of note, to the number of forty, all which are now in
Prison, the Lords name is Maguere, these Papists or Rebels call it a Religious
War, Ruin and Desolation they threaten to the poor Protestants, for they
are ten to one, throughout this Kingdom, so that unless the King and
Parliament help and relieve us, we shall utterly be destroyed and roted out of
the Land, GOD in his mercy look upon us in these great straights and
extremities, and deliver us out of the hands of these viperous and
blood-thirsty people, who is satisfied with nothing but blood, they increase
daily, committing most bloody and wicked outrages, their first intention was to
murder the two chief Justices, and all the Privy Counsel that were
Protestants, likewise to seize upon all the Kings Ports, Castles, and Magazins
whatsoever, and to murder all persons that should oppose them in their
intentions and designs.

These are their pretenses for the taking up of Arms.
1. To have their Crown not to be dependant upon England, nor to be a
conquered nation. 2. To have their Irish Laws established, and such as should
be made hereafter. 3 To have free liberty of the exercise of Religion.
The Lord Matquers is one of the chiefest amongst these Traiterous Rebels, and
their intention was this.

1. To murder the English and Protestants in the Kingdom of Ireland. 2. To
murder the 2. Lords chief Justices, and Privy Council at Dublin. 3. To seize
upon all the Kings, Castles, Forts, and Magazins throughout all the Kingdom of
Ireland. 4. The City and Castle of Dublin, First if they could get the Castle,
they then would make the City yield presently, by shooting from the Castle the
tops of the chinneys to affright them, but if that prevailed not, they would
batter down their houses about their ears, the Lord chief Justices and privy
Counselors, sat in Consultation all night, for the safeguard and security of
the City, and Castle of Dublin, and the next morning they apprehended many of
these Traitors, together with the Lord Matquers, who the day before, had
forsaken his Lodgings, and hid himself in a Garret, there were found at his
Lodgings great store of skaines, Hammers and Hatchets without halves, the same
day news was brought to Dublin, that several places and Forts was seized upon
in conno, and monno, and in diverse other places, many Villages plundered,
whereupon 500 horse and 500 foot were raised to guard the city. and 100 put
into the Castle under the command of Sir Francis Willoughby, for the defense
and safety of the Castle.
This Conspiracy was first revealed to Sir John Burlacy, and other Justices of
the Peace, by one who was servant to Sir John Clotworthy an Irish Knight, and a
Parliament man.

It is reported that some of these Rebels confessed they were to have an Army
of 7000 men from several parts of Ireland, which should be all Papists and
Jesuits, and to surprise all the fortes and Castles about Dublin, and to cut
the throats of the chiefest Noblemen, Gentry, and others of this Kingdom
that then were present.

The City of Dublin and the Towns and Castles adjoining is in very great
danger, they are gathered to a strong head, still approaching nearer unto it,
taking Towns and Castles in several Provinces where they fall, plundering all
places they come into, the Murders and outrages daily committed by them, is
great and intolerable, the Tyrannical power they exercise upon the poor
Protestants, not to be parrallel'd, amongst Pagans or Infidels, so far do
these bloody Miscreants degenerate from the name of Christians; Thus much have
I thought good to inform you of the miserable estate and condition of this
Kingdom at this present.

FINIS.

