THE DESIGN OF THE FRONTISPICE.
Lo, DEATH invested in a Roab of Ermine,
Triumphant sits, embellished with Vermin,
Upon a Pile of dead men's Skulls, her Throne,
Pell mell sut duing all, and sparing none.
A scrutinuous judgment will the Type ressent,
You may imagine, It Is DEATH'S Parliament.
Upon the World it is powerful Foot does tread,
For, all the world or is, or shall be dead.
One hand the Scepter, the other holds our Mirror,
In courtesy to show poor flesh its error:
If men forget themselves, It tells'em home,
They Are Dust and Ashes, All to this must come.
To view their fate herein, some will forbear,
Who wave all thought of Death as too severe:
But know, Death (though it be unknown how nie)
A Point, on which depends ETERNITY,
Either to live Crowned with peptetual Bliss,
Or howl tormented in Hell's dark Abyss.
With winged haste our brittle lives do pass,
As runs the gliding Sand l'th' Hourglass.
If more you would, continue on your Look
No more upon the Title, but the Book.
THE MIRROVR which Flatters not.
O that they were Wise, that they understood This, that they would Consider
their latter End

Deuteronomy: 32.25 -- MORS sola fatetur
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula.
-- Iuvenal

THE MIRROR WHICH FLATTERS NOT: Concerning the contempt of the World, or the
Meditation of Death, of Philip King of Macedon, Saladine, Adrian, and Alexander
the Great.

By Le Sieur de la SERRE, Historiographer of FRANCE.

Transcribed ENGLISH from the FRENCH, by T. Carry, Esquire

Horat. Om nem creed Diem libi diluxisse Supremum.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. for R. Thrale, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Sign of the Cross-Keyes, at Paul's Gate. 1658.

TO THE KING of Great RITAIN.
SIR,
IF the Greatness of Kings derive its value and luster from the number of
Virtues which they possess; I render you now the homage of my observance, and
submissions, as to one of the greatest Monarchs of the World, since you are the
Majesty of all Virtues together. What an agreeable compulsion is this, to see a
man's self powerfully forced to become the subject of a forain Prince, by the
sovereign authority of his merit? To this point am I reduced, Sir, your
all-royal perfections im pse upon me so absolutely such sweet laws of
servitude, that I have no more liberty, but to accept its yoke. And in this, my
inclination and duty make a fresh injunction over me, which dispute
prebeminence with all the rest: for who can keep himself from rendering homage
to your Majesty, the only fame of whose Renown captivates through all the
Universe, instructing us, that you are as absolute over your Passions, as over
your Subjects; and that you reign as Sovereign in the esteem of men, as in your
Royal Estates: And the Truth of this set your glory at so high a worth, that
the felicity on 't may perhaps be envied you: but the like Merit not to be
reached by others, because Nature is very sparing of the like gifts, and Heaven
does not every day such miracles. For me, I am but one of the Admirers, not of
the greatness of your Dominion (although only the vast extent of the Ocean
marks out its limits) but of all the divine qualities which you only possess
in proper as a Good, Time, Fate, nor Death can take from you. Nor is this the
all in all, to be Wise, Valiant, and Generous, in the height of Native
deduction; All these Titles of Honor have degrees of eminence, which mark out
to us the gradations of their several perfections, and whereof your Majesty
shows us now the only pattern, having in possession all admirable Virtues,
with so much purity and luster, as dazles its very envyers, and forces them to
adore that in your Majesty, which elsewhere they admire not. And it is my
belief, that you stand thus unparalled even amongst your semblables, since
besides the Crowns of your Cradle, you carry above them others, and such as
shall exempt you from the Grave. I a vow, that I have studied long time to
speak condignely of your Majesty; but although my pains and watchings are
equally unprofitable, my defect yet is still glorious howsomever, that it is a
shadow from your Light. It suffices me to have taken Pen in hand, to publish
only, that I am

SIR, Your MAJESTY'S Most humble, and most obeisant Servant, P. de la SERRE.

TO THE QUEEN Of Great BRITAIN.
MADAME,
I Could not approach, but with a MIRROVR in my hand, before your Majesty, the
splendor of whose magnificence dazles so powerfully all the world, that I am
not able to behold the immediate presence on it, but by the reflection of its
Rays. Without fiction, MADAME, your Glory is arrived to the point of rendering
your perfections so unknown, as being so above the commune, that I believe most
men honor you now by observance and example only, as not able otherwise to
reach the depth of the just reasons they might have for it. Nor is this All, to
say that you are solely fair, and perfectly chaste; but it is necessary, beyond
all this, to intimate secretly, in the Language of Thought, all the divine
qualities which you possess of Supereminence in all things, since their purity
cannot descend to the capacity of our discourse, without suffering a kind of
profanation. From hence is it, that if I should call you, The
compleatly-perfect, I might well say in effect that which you are; but never
thus should I represent the greatness of your merits, since every of them in it
self has such particular perfections, as might challenge Altars from us, if
your humility could permit it. These are such Truths (MADAME) as hinder me from
praising your Majesty, not knowing how to express my self condignely. Well
might I perhaps suggest it to remembrance, that your particular inclinations
are the public Virtues which we adore, and that of the same temperament of
humor, Nature composed heretofore the Sages of the World: But of all these
discourses notwithstanding, I cannot frame one only praise sufficiently
adaequate to your worth, seeing it is elevated beyond all Eulogiums. Insomuch,
that if Admiration it self teach not a new Language to posterity, wherein to
proclaim aloud the favors and graces wherewith Heaven has accomplished you; it
must content it self, to reverence your Name, and adore your Memory, without
presumption of speech of your actions, as being ever above all valuation, as
well as imitation. To instance the immortality of your AVGVSTICK Race,
although it be a pure Source of Honor, which can never be dried up; yet all
these Titles of a Kings Daughter, Sister, and Wife, can never add to your
Renown, which derives its value rather from the admirabilities of your Life,
then the greatness of your Birth. Insomuch (MADAME) that the Scepters and
Crowns of your Royalties, are the meanest Ornaments wherewith your Majesty can
deck it self; since the least glymse of the least of your Actions, duskes the
luster of all the other magnificence^, which environ you. And I believe, had
those Wonders of the World been of such a worth, as every day you descry, they
had powerfully resisted against the assaults of Ages: but as they had nothing
admirable in them, but the Name, Memorials have preserved that, and let them
perish. But yours (MADAME) which are too perfect for a suitable Name, shall not
cease to survive the revolutions of Times, as being enlivned by Virtue, which
alone can exempt from Death. Let it not seem strange then, if I hazard the
perils of the Sea, to render Homage to a Queen, whose Greatness perforce
humbles the most arrogant spirits, being not able, so much as in thought, to
reach to the first degree of her Glory. The Graces themselves are hers, and the
VERTVES have allianced their own and her Name; and all the adorable qualities
which are found here below, are admirable in her alone, as in their Source, I
am constrained to be silent (MADAME) being over charged with too much subject
of speech. The number of your Perfections astonishes me, the greatness of your
Merit ravishes me, the splendor of your Virtue dazles me: And in this dazzle,
this transport, this excess of admiration, wherein my senses and spirits are
all alike engaged; I am compeled to cast my self at the feet of your Majesty,
and demand pardon of the boldness which I assume only to enjoy the style of

MADAME Your MAJESTY'S Most humble, and most obeisant Servant, P. de la SERRE.

TO THE QUEEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. Upon the MIRROVR Which flatters not, Of le
Sieur de la SERRE.
SONNET.
PRincess, this perverse Ages glorious gemme,
Whose least of Virtues seems a prodigy;
Illustrious Sien, of the fairest Stem,
That Heaven e're showed this Vniverse's eye;
Though Fate with thousand hind'rances averse,
Bars me the place, to which my duty's bent:
I cannot cheer my Soul from self-torment,
But by design to pourtray you in Verse.
But since that Serres shows in this true Mirror
The Virtues of your Mind's eternal splendor,
As lively as your Body's beauteous measure,
My heed to view you here, lets others pass;
So well I here agnize all your rare treasure,
That I never saw a better Crystal-Glass.
Par le Sr. C.

TO THE AUTHOR, upon the same subject.
STANCES.
DIvine Spirit, knowing Soul,
Which with lovely sweet control
Rank'st our Souls those good rules under,
Which thy Pen lays down with wonder,
Whilst the sweetness of thy Voice
Breathes oracular sacred noise.
All thy Works so well esteemed
Thorough Europe, proofs are deemed
Of thy Gifts, which all admire,
Which such Trophies thee acquire.
And with these thy Muse invested,
Orpheus is by thee out-crested.
Also since blind Ignorance
Makes no more abode in France,
Seldom can we meet with such,
As the works of thy sweet ^'uch:
Such immortal strains of spirit,
As do thousand Laurels merit.
But although thy active Muse
Wonders did before produce,
As we seldom see the like;
This does with amazement strike:
It Is a Mirror, that does shine
More with Fire, then Crystaline.
It Is a Mirror never flatters,
On my eyes such rays it scatters,
That therewith I daz'led am,
Searching for thee in the same,
By some charm, or stranger case,
I see thy spirit, not thy face.
This strange fashion does amaze me,
When I (never so little) gaze me,
I am straight all on a fire,
The more I look, more I admire:
It Is a mirror sure of flame,
Sparkling, more we mark the same.
Yet not every prying eye
Shall itself herein epsy;
It Is not for so commune use,
Free from flattering abuse;
None so clearly here are seen,
As King Charles, and his fair Queen.
Therefore thus the Author meant,
To the World it to present;
Since it is a thing so rare,
And unparallelled fair;
That it should a Tablet be
For the fairest he could see.
Serres, this thy work-man-ship
Does my spirit over-strip.
With such judgment, and such grace,
Thou do show in little space
Three strange Wonders, without error,
Two bright Suns in one clear Mirror.
And by this thy rare composure,
Shall thy Name, beyond enclosure
Of this present Age, obtain
Eternal honor for thy pain:
Writing to these Princes Graces,
Thou art praised in thousand places.
Par le mesme.

Upon the Book.
SONNET.
HEre, undisguis'd, is seen in this true Mirror
The glory, or the shame of mortal story,
As Reason, or the miss-led senses error,
Do win the day, or yield the Victory:
Serres does here lively delineate
Our every-dayes vain wretched passages,
And what is destined after Funeral state,
To innocent pureness, or black wickedness.
Such diverse subjects in this one enclosed,
Such various objects to the view exposed.
Thou little Monarch, Man, small Universe,
Thy Soul it lessons thus, and thee informs,
As thou art Soul, with henvenly fires converse,
As thou art Flesh, thou art a Bait for worms.
To the Reader.
IT may, perhaps, seem strange, that I treat so often in my Works of the same
matter, as of the contempt of the World, and Meditations of Death: But if the
importance of the subject be considered, and the profit to be derived thence, a
Man will never be weary of seeing such fair truths under different
presentations. Besides, the conceptions of spirit upon the same matter, are
like the productions of Nature in the Species's of Tulips: Every year she gives
a Change, both to their Color, and Array. And though they be still Tulips, she
renders them so different from their first resemblance, that they can hardly
otherwise be known, but by the name. The Mind does the same, upon the same
subject; its Fancies, which are its ornature, and emblishment, render it by
their diversity so different from it self, that it is hardly known, but by the
Titles, which it bears, to particularize each conceit. So that if once again I
represent unto thee the pour-trait of Vanity, and the Image of Death, my
spirit, which has steaded me for Pencil, and coloring in this Work, has
rendered it so rare in its Novelty, and so excellent in difference from those
which have preceded, that thou shall find nothing in it commune with them, but
my name. Thou may consider moreover, that I dedicate Books to Kings and
Queens not every day, and that these objects of such eminent magnificence do so
nobly rouse the faculties of my Soul, that I could not have petty thoughts for
such high Personages. It is that, which without ostentation, makes me believe,
that if thou buy once again this Book, and take the pains to read it, thou will regreet neither the Time, nor Money, which thou shall employ therein.
ADIEU.

If thou be of so good an humor, to pardon the Faults, excuse those of the
Impression.

The Scope addressed to the SERIOUS.
LEt merrier Spleens read Lazarill', or laugh
At Sancho Pancho, or the Grapes-blood quaffe;
And tickle up their Lungs with interlace
Of Tales, and Toys, that furrow up the face
With wrinckling Smiles: But if they abusive be
To slight these hints of their Mortality,
Urged by our Author; it is a foolish way,
And weakly does become corruptive Clay.
If they do merely carp, and lie of the catch,
Harm be to them, that only for harm watch.
Solomon said it, the deriding scorns
Of fools are but cracklings of flaming thorns.
Let them that will our sober sadness shun,
Go to the merry Devil of Edmonton,
Or some such Plot, whose Author's drift has bin
To set the people on the merry pin,
Here is no Scope for such as love to jeer,
Nor have we Theme for Panto-Mimicks here.
They that are ravished with each jygging Toy,
Let Them laugh on, and jolly mirth enjoy.
Fairly be this a warning, here is no sport,
And it is all one, if they be sorry for it,
Or if they care not. Sit they merry then,
Here Is sor the Genius of more solid men.
Serres salutes the serious; who are such,
Their better-moulded intrals he does twich
With stirring truths, and weigh'em to the poize
Of equal judgment, without gigling noise.
Sad Meditations here compose the Look
Socratick-like, with no flash-humour shook;
Dust, Earth, and Ashes are the Epithites
Here propriate to the best, and all the Sights
Exposed in this True Mirror to the Eye,
Are Death, the Grave, and the World's Vanity,
The frailty of mankind; and some have try'de,
Such pensive thoughts will lay the dust of Pride.
THE PARAGRAPHS, (So comprised in the Emblemes) giving subject to the Author's
Discourses following.
I.
PHilip, the King of Macedon
Daily was rowz'd, and called upon
By a shrill Page, whose Bon-jour ran,
Remember, SIR, you are a Man.
II.
A Shirt is all remains in fine,
To victorious Saladine,
At Death, a piece of Linen is
All, that Great Monarch could call his.
III.
Adrian slights Triumphal glory,
In the Grave founds his prime story,
Before all pomp he does prefer
His Mausolaean Sepulcher.
IV.
Diogenes, in Cynick guise,
Puts Alexander to surmise,
In The Miscellany of the Dead,
Which is a King's, or Common's Head.
A Morallize on these, Sieur Serres writes,
Nor Comic Gests, nor amotous toy's endites,
Their Paphian Dames whilst others loosely sing,
The Knell of Death his solemn style does ring:
Those subjects, which whole herds of Poets use
Threadbare, his nobler Soul disdains to choose:
While richly such a Reader These will fit,
Whose judgment prizeth wisdom above wit.
A PROLUSON Upon the EMBLEM of the first Chapter.
RIse, for a serene Morn brings on the Day,
The Sun is mounted onward of his way,
The Anthymne's high among the feathered Quires,
A lively breath the agile Air inspires.
Draw-ope the Curtains do not close the Eye
From the fresh beauties of the Azure-Skie.
Mark what a smart Bon-jour his Page did bring
Each Morn to PHILIP, Macedonia's King,
REMEMBER (Royal Sir) YOU ARE A MAN,
The hours are winged, the length of life's a span.
This powerful hint stirred up the King to rise,
Whose name Heroic deeds immortalize.
Gross-vapour'd, heavy-headed sleepers wake,
In the bright Morn no more soft slumbers take:
For Action Man was made Our Life's a Race,
He that would win the Prize, must run apace.
Be not enchanted with the lulling Down,
That charms the senses in Lethargick swown;
Leave the enclosure of Bed-Canopie,
And give the view more spacious Liberty:
Forsake the grave-type Couch, where Death does keep
His nightly Sessions, imaged by Sleep.
He that is a Dormouse for the time is dead,
And is entombed already in his Bed.
Who knows how soon that sheet, whereon he lies,
May single serve to enwrap him when he dye?
How soon these lazy feather-bedded bones
May Coverletted be with Marble-stones?
Where no joint-suppling-warmth shall give refresh
To high-fed veins, nor ease improved flesh;
Where those puff grossures, which o're-curious cost
Has surfet-swoln, are putrified, and lost,
Who would be Epicurian, since it is thus
We that eat all things else, worms will eat Us?
Or who would be o're-haughty, since to Earth
He must return, as thence he had his Birth?
Mean while, 'though life's quick-sand does hourly pass,
A sluggard sleeps out more then half his Glass.
Be Active while you may, for Time's post haste
Spurs on each forward Minu'e to the last.
Such thoughts as these best fit the Morning's prime,
To Rouse Men's Spirits to Redeem the Time.
Let such our Matters be, ere Death's sad Knell.
Summon our wandering Souls to Heaven or Hell.
Sir Remember that you are a Man PHILIP King of MACEDON commanded one of his
(...) to Awake him every Morning, and Call aloud to his (...) SIR Remember that
You are a MAN.


THE MIRROR WHICH FLATTERS NOT.
CHAP. I.
MAN, remember thou art Man, never forget thy name, Homo ab liumo.
if thou will not forget thy safety: Thou art called Earth, thou art made but
of Earth; but the Earth subsists, and thou vanishest; Man is a thing of
nothing, only in appearance somewhat.
but the earth remains firm, and thy dust flies away: Study thy miseries,
Meditate thy disasters. Thou art nothing in effect, but if thou be any thing
imaginable, I dare not so much as compare thee unto a dream, because the
frailty of thy nature has something both more feeble, and less constant: an
Apparition has above thee the simplicity of the Elements, whereof it is
composed, a shadow implies yet the advantage of the Nobleness of its
beginning, since the light produces it. Nay lastly, a very straw, or an atome,
dispute against thee also with reason, One cannot give the description of Man,
but by m^sery, nor of misery but by Man.
for the purity of substance, since they are corruptible, without infection,
but thy hea^ of filth gives horror to thy own thoughts; insomuch that I am
constrained to match thee to thy self for to suggest thee the truth of thy
slightness?

What a goodly School is the world? and our condition a fair book: and all the
sad accidents, to which Nature subjects it, as so many gracious Lessons?

May not a man justly say that the earth is a College, wherein the diversity
of Times and Ages, sign ou^ the diversity of Classes, in which we may equally
make the course bot^ ^f our studies and days, under the way of those miseries,
which accompany us without cease: the poorness of our way of birth, Mishaps
and pains are the fruits of the garden of our life
may stead us as a rudiment in the first Class: the cries and tears of the
cradle, are our Grammar, the creeping weakness, and pitiful infirmities of
Bayage like so much Rhetoric, and now can there be a more subtle Philosophy,
than that of the consideration of the calamities which are destined to youth?
Is it not easy to become a great Naturallist by virtue of meditating the
fruitfulness of our nature in the production both of ils, He which goes out
Doctor in the knowledge of himself, is ignorant of nothing.
and pains which continually afflict us? and what better Metaphysics, than
contemplations of our Being, ever rolling to its ruin? Let us draw then the
conclusion of this Argument, and join with as much reason as interest to these
two Volumes so renowned, the Bible, and the face of Heaven, where all sorts of
Sciences are in their source. Death and immortality are only separated, but
with the length of an instant.
This also of our mortal and decaying nature, since it instructs us the Art to
pry our selves in our Corruptions, that we may recover our selves in
immortality.

When I consider that the Earth was created of nothing, Man of nothing.
and Man made of this nothing, and the greatnesses which environ him, are
nothing at all, The world subsists not, but upon the foundation of its
continual revolution
and all the pleasures which he idolatrizeth, are also of the same stuff: I
remain all confused with astonishment, nor ever able to conceive the subject of
his vanity, nor the reason of his arrogance, poor corrupted Vapor with
advancing it self, A vapor. Man elevating himself too high measures the depth
of the A bysses of his Precipice.
is soon transformed into a Cloud, to conceal its noysomnesse, but yet by way
of this elevation, is resolved into Lightnings and Thunder, and afterward
retumbles into the ditches from whence first it had its beginning. A puff of
wind which rumbles in its own violence, A Blast
angry perhaps that it cannot subsist, but in flying, and that the action of
its concinuall flight, is the beginning of its ruin. Smoke.
A smoke, which with a vain assault will needs scale the Heavens, and yet
hardly can one well distingnish the intervall between its first Being and
extinction: a poor gliste^ing Worm which dazies none but purblind spirits, and
gives light to those worms, which devour it in private, A worm. We are al
already, but rottenness, since already worms begin to devour us. A stream.
Every thing corrupt, the verys eye which now reads these truths shall not be
exempt.
A stream always murmuring, always trilling away, And now why shall all these
goodly nullities, and all these pleasant Chimera's insinuate to us the vanity
which they are of? shall these cozening appearances be stablish'd here below
with Sovereignty? be it then only in desire, or in dream, for with what gilded
rind so ere they be out-sided, Corruption is their Form, and Dust their Matter.

I am astonished that Man should be capable to mistake himself, even to the
point of forgetting what he was, then, when he yet was not: what he is now,
whilst he enjoys the beauty of the day, Nature exhibits us so many Mirrours of
Inconstancy, as she has produced objecis.
and what he must one day be at the Sunset of his life: Assuredly yes, I am
astonished at it, since all created things may serve him for a Mirror to
contemplate therein, apparently the verity of his miseries.

The Heavens, though whirling about with a Motion, always equal in the same
spaces of their carreere, do not cease to wax old, and even their age
represents to us naturally our decay. Since that Nature it self is mortal,
this second cause ceasing ^ the ruin of these effects is infallible.
Though the Stars shine with a sparkling luster, as clear as at the first Day
of their creation, yet as they are attached within those circles of Ages, whose
continual motion is limited, they approach by little and little to their last
West, where their light must be extinct, and the pace of their course shows us
the way of our life, since time conducts us all together, though diversely to
our end. The Fire so greedy, that it devours it self, when finding no more
fuel to nourish it, is it not a Mirror of the Lamp of our life, whose kindled
week goes out, when the Oil of the Radical moisture fails it? The Air, which
corrupts continually, is it not an Image of our corruption? and with out doubt
the Waters transparent body, represents us the fragility of ours, and its
liquid crystalline, Every thing flees away from us, and in running after ^em we
tun to rdeath.
always rolling away makes us see in its gliding, our flitting nature. The
earth could not have figured us better then she does, since we are to day of
the same matter, and to moroow of the like form. The world is a Nosegay of
flowers, which by little and little wither all together.
What fairer Mirror hen that of Flowers, where we may see in one day the whole
course of our life, for at Sunrise the buds resemble out Infancy, at noone the
same now full blown, our youth, and at Dayes-end themselves now quite withered
our last age, I will not speak of all the other Spices of creatures animates,
how every one in its self, though living, is an Image of death. It suffices me
to cherish this remembrance, and leave to you thereof the meditation.

What shall I tell ye of Fortune, of honors, riches, and all these glorious
qualities of valor, Fortune has nothing more her own, then her Inconstancy.
Beauty and a thousand other besides, which vanish away with us? This blind
Goddess has a Mirror under her feet, whose round figure shows us at once,
both her instability, and our inconstancy, as for greatness and riches, the
ashes of those which have possessed them, are as so many fresh Crystals of a
Mirror, which flatters not, wherein we may see the vanity both of their
enjoyment, and of their possessors. Those other qualities of fair and valiant,
There is nothing immortal in man but virtue.
are of the fame nature, as those sensitive and vegetable souls, which die
together with the subject which they animate, without leaving ordinarily so
much as one small memorial, for mark that they have had a being otherwise:
and in sequel to these truths, Man is the Mirror of Man, so that by due
contemplati. of one part, he may save the whole
can you find a truer Mirror, then this of our selves, since every part, (nay
what say I?) every action, and every sigh is an animate pourtrait of Death;
Insomuch that we draw the breath of so many continuate Gaspes, without ability
of dispose of one only instant, to give intervall to this exercise.

How is it then possible that Man should miss know himself, having such
faithful Mirrours before his eyes, All the Objects of the world b^d us Adue,
while we but regard them since they are always fleeing away.
where at all times he may see apparently the Truth of his Nature kneaded in
Corruption, formed by it, and destroyed also by the same; Strange thing! he can
see nothing in the World, but Images of inconstancy, and yet will not apprehend
his own change: whatsoever shall smite upon his ear, will resound nothing but
the bruit of his flight, To mus always of Death, is the way of immortality,
and yet he will not think upon his retreat.

Lastly his other Senses, and his fancy, shall have no other object but this of
the continual vicissitude of all things, and yet he will remain firm and
stable in his vanity, till death ruin its foundation. Thus in the deceitful
opinion, wherein he is, of possessing all things, he loses the possession of
himself, and having too much dreamed on his pleasures, his Life is past as a
Dream without return. I must tell you one of my meditations.

I shall never be able to comprehend the meaning of those, who moan themselves
against Fortune, A man may well complain against Fortune, these vain regreetes,
exempt him not from the pain.
the World and all the pleasures of this life. One forsooth will upbraid to
this foolish Deity, her deceipts without considering that he deceived himself
in giving Trust to a Goddess that near had any. He yet will accuse her to have
conducted him still through craggy ways, and overspread with thorns, as if in
following one that is blind a man should not hazard to run this danger.

Another will make ye fresh complaints against the World detesting it is Sweets,
The world may well be the instrument of our destruction, not the cause.
cursing it is charms and calling it a Thousand times, deceiptfull, but why? one
would say to hear these plaints, that the world began but now to receive its
birth, I mean were but now newly created, that no man knows it yet, and that
its first couzenages began, but now to be discovered? What follyl is not this
to cheat ones self, to have commerce with a cheater? the world never yet bore
any other name or title, The number of those whom the world has deceived, is
so great, that they that still trust it, are now no more excusable.
why then aim we to nourish our selves with its delights, whose after-bitternes
impoysons sensibly our souls? But if its charms be powerful enough to tempt
reason they are yet too feeble to vanquish it, provided that the will consent
not so, that a man remain convict of all the crimes, whereof he may be accused.

What seeming ground then have we to be enraged against those pleasures which
we have received, The will is so free that it cannot suffer violence, but from
it self.
if our selves' only give them both being and form? the Fancies conceive these
delights, and the will gives them birth, they are the works whereof our
imaginations form the Spices, Pleasures are the greatest enemies of life, for
in casting flowers upon our heads, they fill our hearts with thorns.
and our desires make the Metamorphosis, changing them into objects palpable,
and sensible, which are marks of the seal of our depravednesse.

Let a man then abhor pleasures instead of accusing them, detest their vanity
in lieu of complaining of deceitfulness. But if they be criminal, they only
bear the stain of their Fathers, and if they be accomplices of our destruction,
it is we give them Birth, to give us death.

Let men cease to lament of Fortune, since the Mirror of its flying scarf,
Fortune is still her. self, he which trusts her, takes delight to be cheated.
and wings express to the life its lightness, and our folly.

Let none Argue any more that the world is cause of our ruin, since we cannot
choose but tread every hour over the dust and ashes of those, who have too late
repented to have followed it. As for voluptuousness, it is a vain Idaea, to
which our passions give a body, to make it serve as a sensible object of their
brutality, insomuch that it can do nothing, but by our first motions, taking
its vigor from our force, Pleasure still takes its force from our volunt ary
weakness. It Is more then folly, when the folly of others, serves us not for
example.
and its power from our Soverainty, and this renders us doubly culpable,
palleating our faults, instead of acknowledging them, since laments, rather
than excuses, might absolve us them.

Is it not that St. John Chrysostom touched with compassion of our miseries
cries out in astonishment of our weakness: Oh World how many have thou deceved!
but this is its trade and profession. Oh Fortune how many have thou made to
fall! but even yet still, while I am speaking, she gives employment to her
treason, and exercise to her Tyranny. O Pleasures comfitted in Sweets, and yet
steeped in bittersnesse, how many have ye poisoned! but yet their venom is so
common, that the whole earth is infected with it. What remedy then to all these
ils? No other then this, to pry into ones self, in the MIRROVR of his own
Ashes, We can no better contemplate any thing, then in the Mirror of our
Nothing.
AMIRROUR always hanging at the Girdle, and which flatters not. AMIRROUR whose
glass, though more brittle, then one of Crystal, makes us yet to see that
all the objects of the World are false, All the Mirrours of the World flatter,
except this of our miseries.
but that of our Corruption, a Mirrrour, which represents us more lively in our
pourtraict, then in our selves, A Mirror, whose kind of shadow and Chimera
makes us see in effect, that which we are in appearance.

A Mirror all miraculous, which preserves certain Species's of nothing to
render them sensible to our knowledge. A Mirror all divine which
metamorphosing our bodies into shadows, yet expresses us so naturally, that the
most arrogant cannot mistake themselves. A Mirror lastly, which Nature has
charmed with it is own proper spells, to the end, that viewing himself herein, a
Man may be able to resist the charms of the World's allurements.

I am greatly astonished at those that preach us the Knowledge of our selves, to
be so troublesome, and difficult, since at all times, and in all places, of all
sides and of all sorts of fashions, we are nothing at all, or if by an excess
of flattery and vanity, I borrow some names to express truly what we are, If a
wan would still study himself he would become the wisest of the World.
it can be no other then those of dure and mire, whose noysomnesse takes away
all doubt on it, from the most incredulous.

In what then consists this trouble of studying to know one's-self, since the
most ignorant may in this, go out Doctors in the school of our miseries:
Self-knowledge only difficile to the proud.
where lies the difficulty to arrive to this knowledge? when the very wind of
our sighs carries away, every moment, some of that polluted dust, whereof we be
made. Where is this pain, say I yet, since our senses and spirits can have no
other object then this of Inconstancy, as unseparable to their nature, as it is
proper to our condition. And what can be this difficulty, when we are, capable
of no action more, then to destroy our selves? We must break this rind
farther. Humility is a skillful Schoolmasters, to ieach us to know our selves.


I will believe that every one knows from whence he comes and whither he goes,
that his body is but a work of rottenness, and that the worms attend thereof
the prey, as a nourishment which to them is destinated: A man knows no more
then he remembers.
but it is important to consider that these truths, though sensible, are
oftenest put in oblivion, and this default of memory denotes that of knowledge.
He which museth upon his slightness undervalueth (except God) all things and
vanity would never be able to surprise us, during the interim of this
meditation. The remembrance of Death makes us forget the vanities of Life.
Man knows very well that he is Mortal, but whilst he never thinks seriously
of the necessity of dying, this knowledge is forgot, though he dye without
cease, and in loosing the remembrance of his condition, looses the knowledge
thereof.

Remember that you are a Man said his page every morning to Philip of Macedon.
The way to pass our days contentedly, is to think every hour of the last.
This great Monarch made himself to be rouzed every day from sleep, with the
News of Death, fearing to be charmed with the sweets of Life. Greatnesses
environ him on all parts, to make him forget his humility, but understand you
not the delicate air, which he causes to be sung to the tune of his miseries:
the pomp and Magnificence of his riches dazzle his eyes with their luster, The
remembrance of the poorness of Death, is a potent charm to resist the memory of
greatness of Birth.
that he might never consider the wretchedness which is proper to him. But you
see how he makes himself to be awaked with the noise of this truth, ever to
cherish its remembrance: Sir remember that you are a Man; oh how many Mysteries
are comprised in these words! behold the Allegory on it.

Great Kings remember you are subject to many more Miseries, then you have
subjects in your Empire. Great Monarchs remember that of all the great
extention of your Territories there shall not remain you one only foot, If we
be different in manner of life, we are all equal in necessity of dying.
so jealous are the worms of your glory. Great Princes remember that your
Scepters and your Crowns, are such feeble marks of greatness, that fortune
sports with them, Time mocks at them, and the Wind shall sweep away their Dust:
Sovereign Judges of the Life of Men, remember that although you are above the
Laws, This of Dying is inviolable.

The Fable is pretty, of the resolution, which the flowers and plants took to
elect a King and Queen, Cares and anxieties surpass in number the pleasure of
Kings.
and as the number of Voices gave the election, the Marigold was declared to be
the King of the Flowers, and the Bryar Queen of Plants, and under this toy lies
hid serious verities.

Is there any thing fairer in all the borders of the Garden of Nature, then the
flower of the Marigold? Its golden Tincture of the color of the Sun, at first
view dazeleth so delightfully; that the Eye amazedly gazing with admiration of
its fresh-displayed beauty, can hardly retire its regards from an object so
agreeable. But gather it, and dight it on you, and its sent produces a thousand
disliks in the Mind, for that one only, which you hold in your hand, for hence
of a sudda in the humors become dull, and melancholy having been annoyed with
so fair a fulsomnesse. If Crowns and: Scepters were to be sold, wise men would
never buy thew.


Royalty is absolutely the same: The Scepters are as fresh flowers of Marigold,
whose luster and beauty equally ravishing, attract at first glance to their
admiration the Soul by the eyes; but if a Man take them into his graspe, or
deck his head with them, he shall find himself filled with anxious cares by
this coverture. If you doubt of this, ask Seleucus, he will answer, That the
first moment of his Reign, was the last of his Quietness.

The Sweet-bryar also bore away the Royalty; for who would not love it with its
Rose? O how both together have powerful attractives, to tempt aqually, both
the heart to desire them, and the hand to pluck them? And it is in vain that
Nature has given arms to the jealousy of its prickles, Thorns are the Roses
of Kings gardens.
to serve for the defense of its flowers: since these sharps are as so many
baits, which irritate us rather with Desire then Fear. All the world insert it
in their nosegayes; but the prickles remain, the Rose withers.

Say we then also, that Royalty is a fair Sweet-bryar, accompanied with its
Roses; I mean many contentments of the same nature. Both together have great
charms to affect us both with love and desire, Great miseries are destinated to
great fortunes.
but the Briars of the Crown remain, the Rose of delights withers. O how
ponderons is the load of this greatness? And if you believe not me, enquire
hereof of the puissant King Mithridates, The felicity. of Kings has much more
luster, then Reality.
he will often reiterate to you, That he never sighed, but for the ponderous
burden of his Crowns.

SIR, REMEMBER YOU ARE A MAN.

But what is there here to pride in? May it be of the greatness of his
Dominions? This is but an alien good, Kings may trouble themselves to conquer
the earth, it still triumphs over them.
which admits not to be possessed but by vanity, since its honors and pleasures
have nothing else but mere in propriety. To be an amply landed-man, is to have
miry soil to sell, and small profit to make thence.

Sir remember you are a Man. What may be his ambition? may it be to conquer the
whole world, what will he do with it after conquest, since it is a Ball of
snow, which Time melts by little and little, tumbling it without cessation.

Sir remember you are a Man. What might be his designs? He which makes himself
to be adored, is rather sit to be Deaths Victime then to be idolatrized.
Should he pretend to Altars; and Temples, what oblations can be made to a
Victime, whom Death holds continually at a bay? can Incense be offered to a
Dunghill, or an Idol made of a Sink? the very thought shockes common sense.

Sir remember that you are a Man. Man is so miserable, that I am amazed he
pities not himself.
What can he do with his absolute power? A little stone makes him stumble; a
straw can blind him; a shadow, an Atome, a thing of nothing are capable to
reduce him to nothing at all. And is not this an object of pity, rather then of
envy? Great Kings, these are truths too important for you, to lose their
remembrance.

Well you may out-brave the heavens with a birstling eye-brow: the only
imagination of its Thunderclaps holds you already in alarm. Boldly may you
tread upon the Earth with a disdainful foot; the same whereof you are made,
shall shortly be so trodden, when the worms are glutted with it. Remember that
you are a Man, and that all the objects of riches and honors which environ
you, I have said to corruption, Thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art
my mother and my sister. Job. 17.14.
are of the same Nature as you are. You are dying every moment, and every thing
falls away without cease.

When I represent to mind your heads, diadem'd with a rich Crown, I conceive
it a little point infirm'd and closed in a circumference, whose lines abut at
the center of corruption, lines of magnificence, The head that wears the crown,
wears away with it.
which terminate at the point of wretchedness.

If I consider you with Scepter in hand, methinks I see a simple shrub, planted
upon worser Earth, the shrub dries up, and is reduced to dust, the ground
remains that it was before.

Let me contemplate you seated upon your Thrones, decked with your richest
ornaments, my imagination shows me a Jupiter in picture, holding the thunder in
his hand; for you are so weak for all your absolute power, that if you presum
hardily to raise your head, but to look upon the Sun, your eyes will water at
the same time, to expiate with your tears, the crime of your arrogance.

Great Kings, Remember then, that you are not Great, but in misery, Sovereign
Monarchs, Remember, that your Empiredome is but a servitude, since you are
subject to all the disasters of your subjects. Powerful Princes, one gust of
wind defies to the struggle your absolute power. Sacred Majesty's, I salute you
to day by this name: All the at ributes of worldly glory accompany us but to
the grave.
but to morrow I will change terms, and call you Skeletons and carcasses, to
the end that in speaking this cruth, all the world may know you, I will change
my tone.

How ingenious are the Poets in their fancies? They recount us, how that
Inconstancy being banished from heaven, descended upon earth, with design to
have her picture drawn, and upon the resuse, that Painters made of it, she
addressed her self to Time, Man serves for a sheuttlecocke to all things, sime
all things concur to his ruin.
who after he had considered her in all her diversities made use at last of the
visage of Man for the finishing cloth, wherein having represented her to the
life, all the world took her for Man himself, since in effect it is but one and
the same thing. O fair truth discovered by a fable. Man is Inconstancy it self,
rather than its pourtraict.


He then that now would see the Image of Inconstancy, let him consider the
Life-touches and lineaments of it; upon his own visage. Our forehead which
wrinkles every moment, is it not the very same as hers? Our eyes, which by
continual use every hour, do already require spectacles, are they not as hers?
Our cheeks which now chap-fall are in nothing different from hers. In fine our
visages are the only MIRROURS WHICH FLATTER NOT.

But what shall we answer notwithstanding to the objection of this truth, that,
Though a Man hides himself under the veil of hypocrisy his defects always
break through.
that which we see of MAN, is not the MAN. If his visage like a false Horologe
index false, this our pourtraict of Inconstancy is merely imaginary:

But is there any thing more inconstant than the spirit of man? it is a
weathercock for all winds, behold again the first draughts of the visage of
Inconstancy: must we not of necessity compare his changing humor to hers, The
spirit of Mun is much more changing, than his body, for this changes only in
growing old, but that grows old only in changing.
if a man would exhibit thereof but one example; and these are yet new
lineaments, which represent us this levity. In fine, his thoughts, his desires,
and all the passions of his mind, are but objects of vicissitude, capable of
all sorts of impressions: so that in the perfection of the portraicture of man,
Inconstancy is found perfectly depainted. Let us proceed.

The fictions of Poets are yet serious enough, Virtue only can render us
invulnerable. A virtuous Man fears nothing.
to serve us often for sufficient entertain of the time. It Is they which tell
us of one Achilles, immortal in all the parts of his body save only his heel.

Great Kings, I will, if you please take you for Achilles's, and will give out
you are like him, invulnerable, but only in the heel. Every Man would be
immortal but none takes pain to acquire immortality.
But of what temper soever your Arms be, to what purpose serve they you with
this defect? This only blot duskes the luster of your glory. Nature has done
surely well, to prodigallize upon you thus, both her graces and favors; she
has immortalized you but by halfes. All your apparences are divine, but
something within poiles all, each particular is a heel, by which Death may
surprise you.

Shall I say then that you are Achilles's, who will believe me, since your
heads serve but as Buts to the hafes of Fortune? It is only the conscience of
a just Man is of proof, against the stroke of Time and Fortune.
To preach you invulnerable, a small scratch may thereon give me the lie. Truth
more powerful than flattery constraines me to call you by your name, for in
remembrancing you that you are ^ut men, I fuggest you to the life all the
disasters, which accompany your life.

Thou have much to do, Man is so poor a thing that one cannot give him a name
but it advantageous to kim.
to make Panegyricks in praise of man, O Mercury Trymegistus, and to maintain
so confidently, that he is a great miracle, it must be then a miracle of
misery, since Nature produces nothing so miserable as he is.

And thou Pythagoras, which have had the forehead to persuade us, that man was
a mortal God, if thou had made Anatomy of his carcass the stench of his
silth, had soon made thee change this langnage. Plato thou reason'st well upon
this subject, yet without sound consideration, then when with an enforcement o^
spirit and eloquence, thou would oblige us to believe, There is no tongue in
Nature which can furnish us with terms strong enough to express the miseries
of Man.
that man is o^^ the race of the Gods: yes surely, since thy Gods are Gods of
earth, the cause is matched to the effect, for man is of the same matter.
Plotinus, thou also did not miss it, when in favor of man, thou said he
was an abridgment of the wonders of the world, for since all its wonders
heretofore so famous are no more but dust and ashes man may hereof be the
example with good reason.

O how much more expert is David in the knowledge of our condition, when he
compares man, not only to the dust, but to the dust which flies away, to show
us, that, that little which he is, still flies away till it be nothing in the
end.

But how glad am IO Lord, Memento homo quod nihil es, and in nihilu reverteris
that I am but dust, to the end that I may fly toward heaven, for the earth I
undervalue. How I am satisfied that (...) am but Ashes, that I may but be able
to keep in my soul some little sparkle of thy love. What glory and what
contentment too, is it to be devoured by worms, since thou call thy self a
Worm? gnaw O Lord, Ego sum vermis and non homo. Psalm. 22.6.
gnaw both my heart and in^rals. I offer thee them in prey, and regive me new
ones, that may offend thee no more. I know well that my life flits away by
little and little, but now agreeable is this flight unto me, since thou art its
object. I see well that my Days slide away, and pass in continual course.
But O what consolation is it to be sensible of dying at all hours, for to live
eternally. ^ Verities; again, what ravishments ^ave you to consolate the souls
of ^he most afflicted? I return to my subject.

We read of the Priests of the Gentiles, Humility is ever he^oured by all the
world.
that they writ letters every ^eer to their Gods, upon the Ashes ^f the
Sacrifices, which they made upon the top of Mount Olympus, and (...) believe
that this was upon design, ^^at they might thus be better received, being
written upon this ^aper of humility. Let us fetch now ^ome truth from this
fanoy. Let us write every day to heaven upon the paper of our Ashes, all the
parts of the body are as so many Characters of dust wherein may be read the
truth of our nothingness.
confessing tha^ we are nothing else, and let u^ make our sighs the faithful
messengers of these letters, as the only witnesses of our hearts. I will hide
my self under the Ashes. O Lord, t^^ the end that thy Justice may no^ see me,
said David. What Curtain's this? This Sovereign Justice which makes it bright
day in hell, cannot pierce the Ashes to find underneath a Sinner. No, no, for
the vail has the virtue to reflect the beams of thi^ revenging light within the
source, which produced them.

Remember that I am nothing, See thou how Ahab humbles himself. I will not
bring the evil in his days. 1 Kings 21, 29.
(...) Lord, and that thou have made m^ of nothing, and every moment can
reduce me to something less^ then nothing; cries out Job, in hi^ miseries. He
finds no other invention to appease the mild choler (...) his God,
Recordarequ^^ so quod sicut argillam fecist^ me and in pulverem reduces me.
Job. 10^9.
then putting him in min^ of his infinite greatness, and at the same time of
the pitiful estate^ whereunto he is reduced. Wh^^ should you take Arms against
me^^ O Lord, (pursues he) when th^^ breath of your word is able (...) undo the
same, Humility triumphs over all things.
which it has made me, Remember, O Remember, that I am but what the benign
influence of your divine regards permits me to be, for on the instant that you
shall cease to regard me, I shall cease to live.

Deck we then with Ashes our body of Dust, Men remember thy beginning, for thou
art not made of Fire like the Stars, nor of Air like the winds, but of mire,
from whence it is thou soyls^ all the world. He which can over come himself
shail never be vanqui sht by and greater Capta in.
and let us cover with a new earth our own, to make Rampirs of proof against
the thunders of heaven. See you not how its allpowerfull Justice, finds
limitation in the confession of our being nothing. We need fear nothing,
acknowledging that we are nothing. Well may the thunder make a horrid rumbling,
yet the Hyssope outpraves it in its lowliness. Fear and humility ever abandon
each others company. The only means to triumph over all things, is to vanquish
Ambition.

O Lord, I durst scarce believe, that I am, If thy providence alone were not
the prop of my being. But since thy goodness has drawn me from the Abyss of
Nothing; ^et thy grace cause me always to keep the remembrance of my
original. Before Time was, I was Nothing, now Time is, I am yea Nothing. But
what happiness (...) it to be Nothing at all, since thou art All-things? for
if I search my self in vain in my self, is it not sufficient that I am found in
thee? I will then forget even mine owe name, and muse of nothing, but of the
Chimera of my being, since as a Chimera it passes away and vanishes. What a
joy is it to pass away continually with all things, toward him that has
created all things?
The only consolation, that remains me in my passage, is that thou alone
remainest firm and stable, so that without end tho^ art the end of my carreere,
and without bounds limitest the exten^ of my course, as the only object both
of my rest and felicity. Set me now upon return.

With what and ever to be adored luster, Heaven changes the sighs of the Earth
into tears, I mean its vapors into dew.
appears the love of God in his day, in the work of Man. Would not one say,
that it seem he made him of earth, that he might strew thereon, the seeds both
of his blessings and graces! O fortunate Earth, which being diligently
cultured, may bring forth the fruits of eternal happiness! Since we are of
Earth let us suffer this divine Sun of Love, to exhale the vapors of our sighs
for to metamorphose the minto the tears of Repentance.


Boast thy self O Man, to be Nothing but Earth, since the heaven bedews the
Earth continually. But if with a provoked eye, it lancheth out, sometimes its
thunders upon it, her self does afford hereof the matter. Live always Innocent,
and thou shall not know what it is to fear. Employ thy self without cease, to
measure the depth of the Abysle of thy nothingnesse; and though thou never
pierce to the bottom hereof, thy pains shall not be unprofitable, because
seeking thy self ^^ thy baseness, thou shall always recover thy self again
much greater then thou art.

The Sun, We are all amorous of our selves not knowing for what, for our
defects are objects rather of hate then Love.
this fair Planet of the Day, which with a continual aspect, contemplates all
created things, cannot make reflection of his beams to see himself, as if his
mother Nature had apprehended in making him so glorious, that the Mirror of
his light, might not be metamorphosed into a fire of love, to render him
amorous of his own proper luster.

But the Intellect, A Man cannot stumble ordinarily but through perverseness,
since reason enligh tens him in the very worst ways.
this Sun of our Souls, has a faculty with which it can both contemplate our
of it self all things, and repeal again the same power to consider it self,
which makes a man capable, not only of the meditation of the miseries of the
World, but also of that of the afflictions and troubles, which inseparably
keeps him company to the grave.

We read of Moses, that God commanded him to frame the * forefront of the
Tabernacle all of Mirrours, The Laver which was before the Tabernacle. Ex. 38.8.
to the end, that those that should present themselves before his Altar, might
view themselves in thi^ posture of Prayer. O this excellent Mystery! Mortals,
it behooves you to view your selves in the Mirror of your Ashes, if you would
have your vows heard.

God has taught us an excellent way of Prayer, There is nothing assured in
Life, but its continual -- Death.
Give us this day our daily bread. But why O Lord, teach thou us not to ask
thee our bread for to morrow, as well as for to day? O how good a reason is
there hereof! This is because that life has no assurance of to morrow; besides
that it is an excess of grace, that we may be bold to crave of him, the bread
of our nourishment for all a whole day, since every moment may be that of our
Death. Reader, let this verity serve thee yet as a mirror, It is not
sufficient to muse of the necessity of dying, but to consider also that every
hure may be our ast.
if thou would have thy prayers to pierce the heavens. This is not all, to
know thy body is a Colosse of filth, which is trail'd along from one place to
another, as it were by the last struggle of a Life always languishing. It
behooves thee also to call to mind, that every instant may terminate the course
of thy troublesome carriere; and that this sudden retreat, constraines thee to
bid Adieu for ever to all the things of the world, which thou cherishedst most
Thoughts only worthy of a noble spirit!

I have eaten Ashes as bread, Psalm. 102.9. Cinerem tanquam panem manducabam.
says the Royal Prophet; but how is it possible? I conceive his thought. He
entertained his soul with the remembrance of the Ashes of his body, and this
truth alone served as object to his imagination, for to satisfy the appetite
of his Soul. Lord give me both the same relish and desire, to repast my self
still thus, A man to abase himself below that which he is, being so poor a
thing of nothing.
of dust and ashes, in remembrancing my self always, that I am nothing else. O
sweet remembrance of my rottenness, since it steads me for eternal
nourishment of my Soul! O precious memory of my Nothingnesse, since able to
satisfy the appetite of my heart! Let this be the daily bread, O Lord which
thou have taught me to ask thee, to the end, that all my desires together might
be satiated with this dear nourishment. I recollect my self in this digression.

Having diverse times mused of the imbecility and weakness of man, Si vitrei
essemus, minus casus timeremus. S. Aug.
I am constrained to cry out with St. Augustine, What is there that can be more
frail in Nature? If we were of Glass (pursues he) our condition might therein
be better, for 2 Glass carefully preserved, There is nothing more brittle than
glass yet man is more.
may last long time, and yet what pain soever man takes to preserve himself,
and under what shelter soever, he shrowds himself, for covert to the storm, he
breaks and is shattered of himself.

What reply you to these verities, Great Princes? Well may you now be atrogant;
The fragillity of glass cannot admit of comparison, with this of your nature;
what seat will you give to your greatness? Man is fully miserable, since his
life is the source of his miseries.
and what foundation to your vanity? when the wind alone of your sighs, may
shipwreck you upon the Sea of your own proper tears? what surnames will you
take upon you, for to make you be mistaken? That of Immortal would become you
ill, since every part of your body, serves but as a But to the shafts of Death.
Invincible, would also be no way proper, A man may do every thing with virtue,
without it nothing
since upon the least touch of mishap, you are more worthy of pity than capable
of defense. Would you be called Gods? your Idolaters would immolate you to
their own laughter Tread under foot your Crowns, if rightly you will be
crowned with them, you only thus render your selves worthy of those honors,
Heaven cannot be acquired, but by the misprize of earth.
which you misprize: for Glory consists not in the possessing it, but in the
meriting; and the only means to obtain it, is to pretend nothing at all to it.

How remarkable is the custom of the Locrians at the Coronation of their
Kings: they burnt before them a handful of Tow, to represent unto them the
instability of their grandeurs, and the greediness of Time to destroy them. In
effect, all the greatnesses of the Earth, All the grandeur of Kings is but as
the blaze of flaming tow.
are but as a bundlet of Tow; and then when Darius would make of them his
treasure, Mis-hap set fire on them, and reduced them into Cinders, and when he
had yet in his heart a desire to immortalize them, a new fire seaz'd his
intrals by the heat of thirst, which burned him to the end to consume at once,
both the cause, and the effect. So true it is, that the Glory of the world
vanishes away like Smoke, Great Kings, if you build a Throne of Majesty to
the proof, both against Time and Fortune, He which esteems himself the least
of all, is the greatest.
lay its foundation upon that of your miseries. Humility takes her rise in
lowliness, from the lowest footing, when she makes her flight into the heavens.

O how admirable is the Humility of Saint. John Baptist! They would give him
titles of Sovereignty, in taking him for the Messiah: but call to your Memory,
how with an ejaculation of Love and reverence, he precipitates himself both
with heart and thought into the Abyss of his own Nothingnesse, Vox clamantis
in deserto John. 1.23.
there to admire in all humility, both Greatness and Majesty in his Throne. I
am but a Voice, says he, which beat at the cares to enter into your hearts.

A Voice, which rustles in a moment, and passes away at the same instant; What
Humility! Is there any thing which is less any thing than a Voice? It Is a
puff of wind, which a fresh one carries I know not where since both lose
themselves in the air, after its never so little agitation, Christus verbum,
Johannes vox.
with their gentle violence, It Is nothing in effect, yet notwithstanding, the
proper name of this great Prophet. They would elevate him, John. 1.27.
and he abaseth himself so low, that he would render himself invisible as a
Voice, so much he fears to be taken for him, whose shoe-latchet, A Man is to
be estimated in proportion to the under, value he makes of himself.
he judges himself unworthy to unloose.

Lord, what are we also, but a little Wind enclosed in a handful of Earth? to
what can one compare us without attributing us too much vanity. True it is,
that we are the works of thy hands, but all other created things bear the same
Title, but if thy bounty has been willing to advantage our nature with many
graces, proper and ordinated to it alone, these are so many witnesses which
convince us, not to have deserved them, since our very Ingratitude is yet a
Recognizing of this Truth. Insomuch that as our Life is nothing but sin, and
sin is a mere privation, The mest just man sins seven times a day.
it may be maintained that we are nothing else, and consequently nothing at all.

But how Proud am I, O Lord, every time I think thou have ereated me of Earth,
for this is a Principal, which draws me always to it self, by a right of
propriety; from whence I cannot defend my self. What is it for a man to
triumph hereof the world? the earth expects his spoil.
All things seek their repose in their element. O how happy am I, to search
mine in that of Dust and Ashes, whereof thou have formed me? The Earth demands
my Earth, and my body as a little Gullet, separated from its source, speeds by
little and little, to the same source, from whence it had its beginning. And
this that which impeaches me from gathering up my self, to take a higher
flight. I should do bravely, to hoyse my self above my Center, when the assay
of my Vanity, Pridehoyses up, only to gives a fall.
and the violence of my fall, are but the same thing. I give still downwards
upon the side of my weaknesses, and the weight of my misery, overbeares upon
the arrogance of my Ambition. A man no doubt may misknow himself, yet the
least hit of mishap tears the veil of his hood winknesse
O happy defect, and yet more happy the condition, which holds me always
enchained to the dunghill of my Original, since the links of this easy
servitude, are so many Mirrours which represent me that I am nothing,
whenever I imagine my self to be something. Let us change our Tone, without
changing subject.

Ladies, Remember that you die every hour; behold, here a MIRROVR WHICH
FLATTERS NOT It shows you both what you are, and such as you shall be. But if
notwithstanding, you still admire your selves under an other visage, full of
allurements, and sweets. This is but Death himself, A strange thing that death
is still as near us, at life, and yet we never think on it.
who hides him under these fair apparences, to the end you may not discern
him. It is true, you have graceful Tresses of hair which cover your heads,
and his is all Bald, but do not you heed, how he pulls them off from yours by
little every day, and makes those which he leave you, to turn White, to the end
you may pull them out your selves?

It is true, your eyes have a sparkling luster, Time and Deathare the only
inexorables.
and beauty; but of his is seen only the hideous place, where Nature had
seated them: But do you not consider, how with continual action, be Dusks the
glory of this beauty; and in conclusion, puts to Eclipse these imaginary
Pety-Suns.

It is true, your hue is of Lillies, and your mouth of Roses, upon his face is
seen only the stubs of these flowers: but call to mind, that he blasts this
Lilly-teint, as well as Lillies themselves; and that the vermillion of this
Rosie-mouth lasts but as Roses; and if yet you differ to day from him in
something, you may resemble him to morrow in all. I leave you to meditate of
these truths.

Man is a true mirror, which represents to the natural all things, which are
opposed unto it. Man is as one picture with two faces and often the most
natural is falsest.
If you turn it downward to the Earth, we can see within nothing but objects of
Dust and Ashes: but if you turn him to the Heavens-ward, there is to be admired
in it beauties, and graces purely celestial. In effect, if we consider man in
his mortal and perishable condition, hardly can one find any stay in this
consieration, since he is nothing else but a Chimera, whose form every moment
by little and little destroies, to reduce it to its first nothing. And indeed,
not to lie to ye, man, is but a Puff of wind, Man is nothing in himself, yet
compreheods al things.
since he lives by nothing else, is filled with nothing else, and dies only by
Privation of it. But if you turn the Medall (I would say) the Mirror of his
Soul toward his Creator, there are seen nothing but gifts of Immortality,
What though man be made of earth; he is more divine than mortal.
but graces of a Sovereign bounty, but favors of an absolute will. The
heavens and the Stars appear in this Crystalline mirror, not by reflection of
the object, but by a divine virtue proceeding from the Nature of his cause. Let
us to the End.

Me thinks This Page returns again to day within the Chamber of Philip of
Macedon, The slumber of vanities is a mortal malady to the soul.
and drawing the Curtain, cries out according to his ordinary.

Sir, Awake, and Remember that you are a Man: but why rouzes he him to think of
Death, since sleep is its image? Alexander knew himself mortal by his
sleeping; and in effect those which have said, that sleep was the Brother of
Death, have drawn their reason of it, from their reciprocal resemblance. Awake
then Great Kings; Not to ponder that you are mortal, your sleep is a trance of
this, but rather that you are created for immortality. Remember you are Men. A
man should not forget his heavenly beginning having heaven for a daily object.
I will not say, subject to all the miseries of the Earth; but rather capable
of all the felicities of heaven. Remember that you are men; I will no say the
shittle-cock of Time, and the But to all the shafts of Fortune, but rather
victors over ages, and all sorts of miseries. Remember that you are men; I will
not say any more conceived in Corruption, brought forth by it, and also
destroyed by it: But rather, I say, If a man should consider his worth by that
which he cost, he would love himself perfectly.
born for the glory of God, Living for to acquire it, and Dying for to possess
it. Remember that you are Men, I will say no more slaves of Sin, the Flesh, and
the World: but rather free for resistance to the first, strong enough to
vanquish the next, and more powerful yet to give a Law to the third: A man may
do every good thing which he desires, since in his impu^ issance his will is
taken for the deed.
Remember that you are men, I will no more say the pourtraict of Inconstancy,
the object of every sort of ill, and the pasture of Worms: But rather the
Image of God, the subject of every sort of good, and the sole aliment of
eternity, as created for it alone. Remember that you are men, Man is sure a
thing something divine, which is not seen even to it self.
I will not say made of clay, animated with mis-hap, and metamorphosed anew
into rottenness; but rather made by the proper hand of God, animated by his
bounty, and redeemed by his Grace.

I wonder at this, that they should call man a little world, since the least of
his thoughts is able to sign out it is expansion beyond a thousand worlds.
Though he be made of clay, the work: manship is yet all divine.
True it is that he was made of Earth, but the Master which has made him,
having also drawn himself in the middle of his work (as did Phidias) renders
him, more admirable than the Heavens. One might also judge at first view, that
the greatest part of the creatures have many more Prerogatives than he. But
contrarily the heavens, the Stars, and all that nature has most precions, have
in no sort correspondence or equivalence to his grandeurs: let us see the proof
on it.

I grant that the Sea may make ^ admire equally both it is vastness of Empire,
and efficacy of power, the least tear of repentance which a Man sheds is a
thousand times more admirable, since it remounts even to the source of that
grace, which produced it, and consequently beyond the Heavens. I grant that the
Air fills all, The heart of man is so vast, and spacious, that God only can
fill it.
and its emense nature permits no vacuity, through the whole universe. The
heart of man carries him far higher, being never able to find satisfaction in
it is desires, if its' Crearors-self, though without measure, be not its
measure. Let the Fire always greedy and ambitious, scale the heavens in
appearance with continual action by the vain attempts of its ejaculations; A man
who loves God with all his heart, lives upon earth in the same fashion, as they
live in heaven.
The least sparkle of the fire of divine love wherewith man may be enflamed is
so pure and so noble, that one cannot conceive an example of its perfection.
Suppose the transparent heavens have no matter, than that of other for me, and
they render themselves thus wonderful in their simplicity, as in their course
still equal, and still continual; the spirit of man is infinitely more
excellent in its nature, and much more noble also in its actions, since it
works without selt-motion, but with a manner so divine, that its thoughts
carry it every where without change of state or place. Be it that the Sun all
mavelous in himself, The reason of man is a ray beaming from the Sun of
Divinity.
and his effects produces nothing but wonders. The Sun of reason, wherewith
man is illuminate, is wholly miraculous, since it operates in a divine
semblable manner: the virtue of other creatures vegetable, and sensitive is
inseparably adjoined also to the body of man, Man has some titles of Nobility,
to which the very Angels themselves cannot pretend.
as its material: Insomuch that he contains in a degree of eminence above all
the creatures of the world, more perfections himself alone, then all they
together have ever possessed. And I shall well say more yet. That Man has
certain puissances of disposition to elevate himself so high in his humility,
that the Angels shall be below him.

But if I shall yet moreover poize Man, If man were again to be sold, who could
ransom him as he cost?
in the balance of the Cross of his Savior, and set him at the price of the
blood, wherewith he was redeemed, which of the creatures, or rather, which of
the angels will be so bold, to dispute the preeminence?

Great Kings Remember then, that you are Men: but more admirable in your
governments, then the Sea in its vastness. A man makes himself above all
things, if he undervalue them with us isprize.
Remember that you are Men, but also capable to purify the Air, by one only
sigh, though even that sigh be made of nothing else. Remember that you are Men,
but a thousand, thousand times yet more noble then the Fire, since the
Seraphins burn incessantly with those divine Fires, wherewith your hearts may
be enflamed. Man is an abridgement rather of the marvels of heaven, than of the
miracles of earth.
Remember that you are Men: but more perfect then the Heavens, since they were
not created, but to pour upon your heads their benign influences. Remember
that you are Men, but more mavelous without comparison, then the Sun; since
your Reason is a divine light, which can never suffer Eclipse, but by
opposition from a volutary depravednesse. Remember that you are Men; but also
destined to command over all other living creatures. Remember that you are Men:
but also kneaded as it were, by the hand of one All-powerfull, If a max did
often muse of the ends, for which he was created, he would therein set up, his
rest from all the inquietudes of the world
formed after his Image, and redeemed by his blood, what can one say more?

Unto what a point of Glory have thou then elevated me, O sweet Savior? in
abasing thy self even to the grave. After thou had formed me of earth, thou
have also taken the same form for to resomble me in all things. Thou I say, O
my God, whose infinite greatness, cannot admit only the very admiration of
the Seraphins, but through the Traverse of the Vail, of their ordinary
submissions. What prodigy of bounty is this! Cause me then O Lord, if it
please thee, that I may estimate my self at the price which thou have ransomed
me for, and that in such sort, that I may live no more, but in loving thee, to
die also one day of the same disposition. Let me be humbly-haughty, carrying
the lineaments of thy resemblance, that I may always follow thee, though not
able to imitate thee. This is that which I will continually implore thee for,
until thou have heard my vows.

I advow now, The magnificence of man has neither bounds nor limits, since God
is his end.
O Mercury Trymegistus, that thou have reason to publish, that Man is a great
miracle, since God himself has been willing to espouse his condition, ^ show
us in its miseries the miracles of his Love.

I confess Pythagoras, that thou have had no less ground to maintain that Man
was a mortal God, Though a man still fade away, he is yet a lively pourtray of
immortality.
since except this sweet necessity, which subjects him to the Tomb, he has a
thousand qualities in him all immortal. I should finally have been of advise
with thee Plato then, when thou preachedst, every where, All the creatures are
admirable, as the effects of a saveraign and independent cause: but man has
attributes of an unparalleld glory.
that Man was of the race of the Gods, since a piece of work so rare, and so
perfect, could not proceed but from a hand Omnipotent, I mean this Rivelet of
admiration could not proceed but from a source most adorable. I am of thy
opinion Plotinus, and henceforth will maintain every where with thee, that Man
is an abridgement of the wonders of the world: The eight wonders of the world.
Since that all the Univers together was created but for his service, and
pleasure. Say we yet moreover, that those wonders of the world, so renowned,
are but the works of his hands; so that also the actions of his spirit in
divine Contemplation can take their Rise above the Sun, and beyond the heavens,
and this too now in the chains of its servitude.

Great Kings, be it supposed that you are living pourtraits of Inconstancy: Man
flies away by little and little, from one part of himself, that he may entirely
enter at once into himself.
The perfection of your Nature lies in this defect of you powers, for this
Vicissitude, which God has rendered inseparable to your condition, is a pure
grace o^ his bounty since you wax old only, that you may be exempted from the
tyranny of Ages: since (I say) you die every moment, only to make acquisition
of that immortality, to which his love has destined you. This defest of
inconstancy is the perfection of man; since he is changable to day to be no
more so to morrow.


O happy Inconstancy! if in changing without cease, we approach the point of
our sovereign felicity, whose foundations are immovable. O dear Vicissitude!
^rowling without intervall in the du^^ of our original, we approach b^ little
and little, to those Age of glory, which beyond all time assign at our End,
the beginning of a better Carreere. A man is only happy in the perpetitall
inconstancy of his condition.
O Glorio^^ Death, since terminated at th^^ cruel instant, which separates
(...) from Immortality.

It is true, I confess it again Great Kings, that you are subject to all the
sad accidents of your subjects; The greatest misery that can arrive to a man,
is to offend God.
But what happiness is it, if these misfortunes are as so many several ways,
which conduct you into the Port. Be it granted, that you are nothing but
Corruption in your birth, Misery in your Life, and a fresh infection in your
Death: All these truths are as so many attributes of honor to you, since you
disrobe your selves in the grave of all your noisomnesse, for to Deck your
selves with the ornaments of Grace, of felicity and glory, which belongs in
proper to your souls, as being created for the possession of all these Good
Things.

Who can be able to dimension the greatness of Man; Heaven, Earth, Nature, the
very Devils are admirers of the greatness. of man.
since he who has neither bounds nor limits would himself be the circumference
of it? Would you have some knowedge of man's power? hear the commandment which
Josuah made to the Sun, to stop in the midst of his carreere. Would you have
witnesses of his strength? Samson presents you all the Philistines buried
together under the ruins of the Temple, whose foundations he made to totter.
Require you some assurances of his courage? Job offers you as many as he has
sores upon his body. In fine, desire you some proofs of his happiness. Heaven
has fewer of Stars, than of felicities to give him. Man may be what somever he
will be.
What name then shall we attribute him now, that may be capable to comprehend
all his glory? There is no other than this of man; John. 19.5.
and Pilate did very worthily (no doubt) to turn it into mockage before the
Jews; Ecce homo. Behold the Man.
he shows them a God under the visage of a Man. Let the world also expose the
miseries of Man in public; His Image of Earth is yet animated with a divine
spirit, The name Man is now much more noble than that of Angels. With what new
rinds soever a man be covered, he bears still in biforehead the marks of his
Creator.
which can never change Nature. We^^ may they tear his bark, the Inma^^ of it
is of proof against the stroke^ of Fortune, as well as the gripes o^ Death.
The Man of Earth may turn into Earth; but the Man of heaven takes his flight
always into heaven. That Man I say, fickle and inconstant, kneaded and shaped
from dirt, with the water of his own tears may resolve, into the same matter:
Bu^ this stable and constant Man, created by an omnipotent hand, remains
uncessantly the same, as incapable of alteration.

Rouse then your selves from sleep great Princes, He that would always muse of
Eternity, would with out doubt, acquire its glory.
not for to remember Death, but rather to tepresent unto your selves that you
are immortal, since Death has no kind of Dominion over your Souls, which
make the greatest, as being the Noblest part of you,

Awake then great Monarchs, not for to muse of this necessity, which draws you
every hour to the tomb but rather to consider, that you may exempt your selves
from it, if your Actions be but as sacred as your Majesty's.

Great PRINCES Awake, Man is a hidden treasure, whose worth God only knows.
and permit me once more to remembrance You that you are Men, I mean the
Masterpieces of the works of God; since this divine work-Master has in
conclusion metamorphosed himself into his own work, My seathered pen can fly
no higher. Man only is the ornament of the world.


Those which have propounded that Man was a new world, have found out
proportionable relations, and great correspondencies of the one to the other,
for the Earth is found in the matter where of he is formed, the Water in his
tears, the Air in his sighs, the Fire in his Love the Sun in his reason, and
the Heavens in his imaginations. But the Earth subsists and he vaniseth, O
Sweet vanishment! since he is lost in himself, that he may be found in his
Creator, but the Earth remains firm, and his dust flies away: O happy flight,
since eternity is its aim! The Water, though it fleets away, yet returns the
same way, and retorts upon it is own paces: Man may be said to be happy in
being subject to all mishaps.
But man contrarily being settled upon the declining stoop of his ruin, rouls
insensibly without intervall to the grave, his prison, O dear ruin! O sweet
captivity! since the soul recovers her freedom, Death is a grace rather than a
pain.
and this Sepulture serves but as a Furnace to purify his body. The Air,
although, it corrupt, is not for all that destroyed the corruption of man
destroies its material. O glorious destruction, since it steads him as a fresh
disposition to render him immortal. The Fire, though it fairly devour all
things, is yet preserved still it self, to reduce all the world into Ashes:
But Man perceives himself to be devoured by Time, without ability ever to
resist it. Oh beneficial Imporence, since he finds his Triumph in his
overthrow! the Sun causes always admiration in its ordinary luster, The
felicity of man in this world consists in the necessity of death.
but Man's reason is impaired in the course of Times. Oh welcome impairement,
since Time ruins it but only in an Anger, knowing that it goes about to
establish its Empire, beyond both time and Ages. In fine, the Heavens may seem
to wax old in their wandering course: How happy is man in decaying evermore
since he thus at last renders himself exempt from all the miseries which
pursue him.
they yet appear the same still every day, as they were a thousand years agon:
man from moment to moment differs from himself, and every instant disrobes him
somewhat of his Being. Oh delightful Inconstancy, since all his changes make
but so many lines, which abut at the Center of his stability.

How mysterious is the Fable of Narcissus; the Poets would persuade us, that He
became self-enamoured, A long life is a heavy burden to the soul, since it
muct ronder an account of all its moments.
viewing Himself in a Fountain. But I am astonished, how one should become
amorous of a dunghill, though covered with Snow or Flowers. A face cannot be
formed without Eyes, Nose, and Mouth, and yet every of these parts make but a
body of Misery, and Corruption as being all full of it.

This Fable intimates us the representment of a fairer truth, since it invites
a man to gaze himself in the Fountain of his tears, thus to become amorous of
himself, If a man could contemplate the beauties of his soul in innocence he
would alwais be surprised with its love. If a man would often view himself in
the tears of his repentance, he would soon become a true selflover.
not for the lineaments of dust and ashes, whereof his countenance is shap's,
but rather of those beauties and graces, wherewith his soul is ornamented, and
all these together make but a rivelet, which leads him to the admiration of
that source from whence they took their original.

Oh how David was a wise Narcissus! then when he made of his Tears a Mirror,
so to become enamored of himself, for he was so self-loving in his repentance,
that in this He spent both days and nights, with unparalled delights. All the
vain objects of the world are so many fountains of Narcissus, wherein prying may
shipwreck themselves.


But if Narcissus ship-wrack't himself in the fountain of his self-fondnesse;
This great King was upon point to Abyss himself in the Sea of his tears, for
their liquid Crystalline showed him to himself so beautiful, that he burned
with desire thus to drown himself.

Ladies view your selves in this Mirror, since you are ordinatily slaves to
your own self love. You will be fair at what price soever; see here is the
means. The Crystal Mirror of your tears flatter not, contemplate therein the
beauty of this grace, which God has given you to bewail your vanities, This is
the only ornament which can render you admirable. Tears are the faithfullest.
Mirrours of penitents.
All those deceitful Chrystals, which you wear hanged at your Girdles, show
you but fained beauties whereof Art is the workmistrisse and cause, rather then
your visages: Would ye be Idolaters of the Earth which vou tread on? your
bodies are but of Dirt; but if you will have them endeared, where shall I find
terms to express their Noysomnesse? If Ladies would ache as much care of their
souls as of their bodies, they would not hazard the loss both of one and
to'ther.
Leave to Death his Conquest, and to the Worms their heritage, and search your
selves in that original of Immortality, from whence your souls proceed, that
your actions may correspond to the Nobleness of that cause. This is the most
profitable counsel which I can give You: It is time to end this Chapter.

Great Kings I serve you this Morning instead of a page to awake You, and
remembrance You that you are Men: I mean, Subjects to Death, and consequently
destinated to serve as a Prey to the Worms, The meditation of our nothingness
is a sovereign remedy against vanity.
a Shittle-cock to the sinds, and matter for to form an object of horror and
astonishment to you altogether. Muze a little, that your life passes away as a
Dream; think a little that your thoughts are vain; consider at the same time,
Men are so near of blood together, hat all bear the same name.
that all that is yours passes and flies away. You are great, but this
necessity of Dying equals you to the least of your subjects. Your powers are
dreadful, but a very hand-worm mocks at them: your riches are without number,
but the most wretched of men carry as much into the grave as you. In fine, may
all the pleasures of Life make a party in Yours, yet they are but so many
Roses, whose prickles only remain to you at the instant of Death. The horror
which environs You, chaseth away your greatness, Man has nothing so proper to
him, as the misery to which he is born.
the weakness which possesses you, renders unprofitable your absolute powers,
and only then in that shirt, which rests upon your back, are comprised all the
treasures of your Coffers. Are not these verities of importance enough to break
your sleep?

I awake you then for to remembrance you this last time, If the earth be our
mother, heaven, is our father.
that you are Men: but destined to possess the place of those evil Angels,
whose Pride concaved the Abysses of Hell: that you are Men, but much more
considerable for the government of your reason, then your Kingdom. That you are
Men, but capable to acquire all the felicities of Heaven, if those of the Earth
are by you disdained. That you are Men, but called to the inheritance of an
eternal Glory, if you have no pretense to any of this world.

Lastly, Though the body and soul together make up the man, there is yet as
much difference between the one and the others, as between the scabberd and the
sword
that you are Men: but the living images of an infinite and omnipotent one.
Clear streams of immortality remount then to your eternal source, fair rays
of a Sun without Eclipse rejoyn your selves then to the body of his celestial
light. Perfect patterns of the divinity, unite your selves then to it, as to
the independent cause of your Being. Well may the Earth quake under your feet,
your wills are Keys to the gates of its abysses: should the Water or'e-whelm
again all, Although the puissances of the soul, work not but by the senses, the
effects in this point are more noble then the cause.
your hopes cannot be shipwrack'^. That the Air fills all things may be, but
your expectations admit of some vacuum. Though the Fire devour all things; the
object of your hopes is above its flames, let the heavens pour down in a
throng, their malignant influences here below: your souls are under covert from
their affaults. Let the Sun. exhaling vapors make thereof thunders for your
ruin: Man needs fear nothing, being alevated above all.
you are under the protection of him who ejaculates their flashes; insomuch
that instead of hurting you, all things do you homage. The Earth supports you,
the Water refreshes you; the Air imbreaths you, Man could not be more happy
then he is, since God is his last felicity. To die is proper to man.
the Fire warms you; the Sun lights you, and Heaven attends you; the Angels
honor you, the Devils fear you, Nature obeyes you, and God himself gives
himself to you to oblidge you to the like reciprocation. Is not this to
possess with advancement all the felicities which you can hope? I dare you to
wish more.

Awake thy self then Reader, and let thy conscience and thy misery each in its
turn serve thee as a Page every morning to put thee in mind, That thou art a
Man, I mean a pourtraict animated with Death, rather then with Life, since thou
can do nothing but die, but in this continual dying, amid the throng of
evils and pains which are enjoined to thy condition; Consider also that thou
art created to possess an Eternity both of life and happiness, How happy is
man, thus to be able to be as much as he desires.
and that all these infinite good things are exposed as an aim of honor and
glory to the addresses of thy will; for if thou will, Paradise shall be thine,
though Hell gape at thee; Heaven shall be thy share, it is delights thy
Succession, and God alone thy Sovereign felicity.

A PROLUSIVE Upon the EMBLEM of the second Chapter.
SWell on unbounded Spirits, whose vast hope,
Scorns the straight limits of all moderate
Be Crescent still, fix not in the Positive, (scope,
Graspe still at more, reach the Superlative;
And beyond that too, and beyond the Moon;
Yet ala's but vain, and you shall find too soon,
These great acquists are bubbles for a spurt,
And Death will leave you nothing but your Shirt.
Be Richest, Greatest, Pow'rfullest, and Split,
Flames Trumpet with the blast on it, there is it,
That Is all, a Coffin, and a Sheet, and then,
You're dead, and buried like to Common men,
This Saladine foresaw, and wisely stoopes
Unto his Fate, 'midst his triumphant troops,
A world of wealth, and Asiaticke Spoils,
Guerdon his glorious military toils,
Ensigns, and Banners shade his armies Eyes
With flying Colors of fled enemies:
Yet humbly he does his chief Standard rear
Only his Shirt displayed upon a Spear.
Mean while his valorous Colonels were clad
In rich Coat-armours, which they forced had
From subdu'de foes, and't seemed a glorious thing,
Each man to be apparreld like a King.
The very common Soldiers outside spoke,
Commander now, and did respect provoke.
Their former ornaments were cast aside,
Which before the victory were all their pride,
To check their Pomp; with clang'ring trumpet sound.
A Herald loud proclaim's in Tone profound:
See what the Emperor does present your Eye,
It Is all, that you must look for when you dye.
This Shirt is all even Saladine shall have
Of all his Trophy's with him to the grave.
Then be not over-heightned with the splendor.
Of your rich brav'ries, which you so much tender.
Nor let your honors puff you, least you find
The breath of Fame jade ye with broken wind.
This solemn passage of this Monarch story
With greatest luster does advance his glory.
^ALADINE Monarck of ye (...) with him at his death nothing but this SHIRT.
Victorious SALADINE caused to be Proclaimed to all his Army that he carried
nothing with him to the Grave but a SHIRT after all his Conquests.


THE MIRROR WHICH FLATTERS NOT.
CHAP. II.
ARrogant spirits, The horror and ^ misery of the grave, mkes the hair stand on
end to the proudest.
ambitious Hearts be silent, and lend an ear to the public, cry of this
Herald, who with a voice animated with horror, and affright, as well as with
compassion and truth, proclaims aloud, in the view of heaven and earth, and
in the presence of a world of people: That, this Great SALADINE, magnificent
Conquer ^ur of Asia, and Monarch of the whole East, carries away to the grave
for fruit of his vistories but only a shirt, which covers the mould of his
body, and even this scarp of linen too, Fortune leaves him, but to give the
Worms.

Absolute Kings, puissant Sovereigns, what will you reply to these discourses,
for to you they are addressed? I doubt well, This necessity of dying, serves for
temperament to the vanity of the greatest Monarchs of the world.
that shame, confusion and astonishment, bar your speech, and that this
sensible object of your proper miseries, affects you so with ruth, to force
from your bosoms a thousand sighs. The greatest Monarch of the earth becomes
at a clap so little, as not to be found, no, not in his miseries, for the wind
begins already to carry away the dust whereof he was formed. The powerfullest
King of the world, is reduced to such a point of weakness, that he cannot
resist the worms, after vanquishment and subjugation of entire Nations. The
richest Prince of the East, takes a glory of all his treasures, to carry away
but only a shirt to his Sepulcher. What can you answer to these verities?

This famous Saladine, the terror of men, the valor of the earth, and the
wonder of the world, esteems himself so happy, and so advantaged by fortune, in
respect she leaves him this old ragge to cover his corruption, Man cannot
complain of the world, since at his death he gives him a shirt, which at his
birth, his mother Nature refused him.
that he makes this favor, to be published with sound of trumpet in the midst
of his Army, that none might be in doubt on it: what beyond this can be your
pretentions? I grant you may be seated like Xerxes, upon a Throne all of massy
gold, canopied with a glistering firmament of precious stones; and that on what
side soever you turn your menacing, regards, you see nothing but objects
humbled before your Royal Majesty's. You never seat your selves upon these
Thrones of magnificence, but as it were to take leave of the assembly, All the
^ speeches of Men are but discourses of adieu and leave taking, since^ every
day he marches straight forward toward Death.
continuing still to give your last God-bwyes, like a man who is upon point to
depart continually, since he dies every moment. Insomuch, that all this Pomp
which accompanies you, and which gives shadow to the luster wherewith you are
environed, vanishes away with you, and all those who are its admirers, and
idolaters, run the same fortune, being of the same nature.

Be it from me granted, that the report of your glory, admits no vacuity, no
more than the air do, and that your name is as we known as the Sun, and more
redoubted than the thunder, This voice of renown is but as the sound of a Bell,
To what purpose does the renown of a Man make a noise in the world the noise
cease, the renow^ passes,
which redoubles a noise to its own detriment, to advertise those that doubt on
it; and this name so famous, and dreadful, finding no memory here below to the
proof of ages, buries it self at last, in the nothingnesse of its beginning.

Be it again, that all the Gold of the Indies can be valued but to a part of
your Estate, and that all the world together; possess less treasure than you
alone; what advantage think you to bear away, more than the most miserable of
the world that in this you should be vain? Enjoyes not he the same Sun which
lights you? The tranquillity of the mind and the health of body, are the only
riches of the world
has not he the same usage of the Elements, whereof you make use? But if you
have more than he, a gloriousness of apparel, and a thousand other
superfluous things (which are altogether estranged to virtue, as being
imaginary goods, whose appearance alone is the only foundation) he may answer
you with Seneca, that with whatsoever coverture a man hides the shame of his
nakedness, he shall pass for well-clothed among wise men. And to come to the
point; a man has always enough where with to follow his way, and to finish
his voyage. The surplus is but a burden of cares, which are metamorphosed into
so many briars, when Death would discharge us of them. Besides Riches consist
but in opinion, though their treasures be palpable and sensible. A man is Rich,
equal to that which he believes himself to be. And though he has nothing, He
is the most rich, who is most content.
this grace wherewith he is treasured to find rest in his miseries, is above
all the Gold of the world.

What differrnce think you there is betwixt the Rich and the poor? both the
one and the other, are equally pilgrims and travelers, and go alike to the
same place. Then, if the rich pass through the fairer way, they reencounter
when they dye, all the thorns of those roses which they have past upon. All
mortals together maze a dance of blind men, who in dancing run to death without
seeing the way they pass.
There is no arrival to the Haven of the grave, without being tempested sooner
or later, in the storm of those miseries, which accompany u^. And methinks it
is a comfort, to suffer in good time those evils, which we cannot avoid.

Rich-ones, how miserable do I hold you, if the goods of the earth be your
only treasures I Rich-ones how unhappy are you, if your felicities be but of
Gold, and Silver! Rich-ones, The treasure of good works only enriches us
eternally.
how you compel my pity of your greatnesses, if you have no other titles than
those of your Lord-ships! Rich-ones how frightfull only at the hour of Death
are your names, since the misery, wherein you are born, accompanyes you in the
sepulcher.

True it is, that the Air of the region where you dwell, may be very temperate,
the seasons of it fair, and the lands fertile: but you consider not, that while
you live, you often sigh back the air which you receive; that this sweet time,
which smiles on you, entraines you in flying to the season of tears, and that
very soon the dunghill of your bodies shall perhaps render the lands yet more
fertile. The content of riches is like an odor serous fume, but ^ passes, and
so does their enjoyment also, and there is all.


The Rich Men of the world have done naught but pass away with the ages, that
gave them birth: you are born in this, and this very same goes away, and leads
you with it, and all the rest of Men, without skilling what you are, or in what
fashion you are vested, well may you possess an infinite number of treasures;
you must always trot, and rise as soon in the morning as others: but if you
play the slugs, and sleep too long, It is strange, whether we shift place and
seat or no weyet run incessantly to Death.
Death comes in the end to awake you, and interrupt your repose with an
eternal disquiet. What will you say to this? The fable of Midas comprehends in
it important verities; Apollo grants him all that he demands, he satiates the
appetite of his unmeasurable ambition by the virtue which he gives to his
touch, to be able to turn all things into gold. See him now rich for a day, his
hands are as new philosophersstones, which make the grossest, and most impure
metals, change both nature and price, To what purpose is it to be environed
with riches? they are a strange kind of good, Whereof one can enjoy the usage
but for a moment only
he sees himself enrounded in a moment with so great a number of treasures,
that he begins to apprehend the enjoyment of those goods, which he desired with
so much passion; and from fear he comes to astonishment: then, when pressed with
hunger, all the Viands which he touches with his hands, lips, or tongue, are
metamorphosed into Gold. O inseparable amazement; from a mortal grief, caused
by a semblable regreet, that he could not limit his ambition, but to the desire
of his own ruin!

Rich-men, you are as so many Midasses, since with all your treasures, you
never importune heaven for any other thing, but to increase their number, to
which effect you destinate your cares, your watching and your labors. But make
no more imploring vows; behold your selves at last heard. The glistering of
your riches dazles me, your greatnesses and magnificences give you cheerful
tincture; yet let us see the reverse of the Medall.

After your so many strong wishes for Gold and Silver, The covetous grow poor
in measure as he grows rich, since in increasing his treasures, increases the
famine of his insatiable avarice and thus of what be possesses he enjoies
nothing.
their treasure remains to you for to satiate, at least in dying, the unruled
appetite of the ambition of your life. Riches I say environ you on all sides,
after your so passionate covetize of them. But in this last instant, their
possession is the saddest object, which can be presented to your thoughts. And
notwithstanding it is the only nourishment which rests to you, amid the hunger
which torments you uncessantly, as if for punishment of part of your crimes,
heaven did permit, that the instruments of your pleasure should also be the
same of your punishments, considering the greatness of your miseries, A Man
carries away nothing with him at his death, but either a regreet or else a
satisfaction of an evil or a good life.
by that of your unprofitable treasures: for after all you must die, and though
you carry with you this desire, to bear away with you your riches into the
tomb, they remain in your coffers, for to serve as witnesses to your heirs of
the vanity of their enjoyment.

The Silke-wormes, which have so much trouble to spin out their mouths their
little golden threads, think to stablish to themselves a shelter of honor, to
the proof of all sorts of atteints, and on the contrary, they warp the web of
their own ruin. Just so is it with the Rich ones of the world, who by an
ingenious industry, To what effect is it to seek repose in this world it is
never to be found but in God.
employ all their assaies, to lay solid foundations here below of an immortal
life, and yet all their actions cannot but terminate in an end contrary to
their designs; since they search Eternity in the circles of Ages, always in
revolution, and repose in the perpetual instability of all worldly things.
Insomuch, that they trouble themselves to suffer much, and all their cares and
pains, are but as fresh sowings of See the ambiguity of the French word
Souties, in the first Chapter.
Marigolds, which dying in their gardens, respring in their hearts, there to
die never. Behold the end of their journey-work.

Treasures, to what effect serve you me, if I must enter all naked into the
grave? Pleasures, what becomes of your sweets, if my last sighs are but
bitterness? Grandeurs of this life, in what stead you meif you cannot exempt
me from the miseries of death?

LORD, I am rich enough in that I serve for an object of pity to thy adorable
Providence, whose over liberal boundry furnishes me for all my days
nourishment enough to pass them, what can I wish more? on what side somever I
take my way to go the course of Death, Heaven is an object of consolation to
the most miserable.
I can never loose from view the heavens, which are the Gates of thy Palace.
Insomuch, as if any thing fail me, I have but to strike there with my regards,
thou art always upon a ready watch, to succor the miserable. Supply me then,
O LORD, if it please thee, with thy ordinary charities, and since that hope
dies after me, I will rather cease to be, then to hope in thee. These are the
strongest resolutions of my soul.

We read of the children of Israel, We beg of God every day new favors and
every day we render our selves unthankfully for those we have received.
that having received of God an infinity of riches, at their coming out of the
red Sea, by the wrack of their enemies, they made of their treasures, Idols,
and joining in this sort Idolatry to Ingratitude, they erected altars to their
brutalitie, since under relief of a brute beast, they represented their God.

But leave we there the children of Israel, and speak of the Father^ of
BABYLON, I mean those wicked rich ones of the world, to whom God has done so
great favors, in heaping them with so many goods. Are not they every day
convicted of Idolatry, in their unacknowledgement, since the coffers of their
treasures are the Idols of their temples? Are we worthily Christians, when
idolatry is more familiar to us then to infidels since we make idols of all the
objests of our passions?
More beasts then brutes, in their voluntary depravednesse; they offer incense
to their brutish passions; and no otherwise able, but to erect them secret
altars in their souls, they there sacrifice every hour a thousand sighs to a^
unsatiable abition. Insomuch, that the God of heaven is the God of their
dissimulation, and the Calf of Gold, the God of their belief, and opinion.

Say we then boldly, that the objects of our passions are Golden Calves to us,
since our hearts become their Idolaters. One here will sigh for love of
honors, as well as for his Mistress, with design to hazard a thousand lives,
and as many souls, for the conquest of their vain felicities: and see here his
idolatry, making his God of these Chimera's of honor, which vanish away like a
Dream, at the rouzing up of our reason.

Another there, What solly is it, to seek repese in the world, which subsists
only in revolution?
will lose quite and clean, all the peace wherein he is of a quiet life, for to
set up a rest purely imaginary in the amassement of treasures. And if heaven
hearing his votes, with design to punish him, gives some favorable success to
his cares, and watchings, he becomes an Idolater now indeed, an Idoloter of
those goods, which as yet he adored but in hope, and renders himself miserable,
sor having desired too ardently felicities, which only bear the voice to be
so, The goods of the earil are right evils, and at Death each one shall so
experiment them.
but their usage and possession may prove as dangerous upon the earth, as Rocks
within the Sea.

One will have his heart wounded, and his Soul attained with a new trick of
ambition, and as all his desires and thoughts are terminated to the objects of
his designs, he is never in health, while the fever of his passion is
continual. I leave you to consider of what ratiocination he can be capable,
during the malady of his spirit. All sorts of ways seem equally fair unto him,
for to guide him unto the port whither he aspires, having no other aim but this
to acquire, at what rate someever that good whereof he is in Quest; and of this
Good, it is whereof he makes his Idol, after a shameful immolation of the
best days of his Life, to the anxieties of its possession.

Another-will establish his repose in the turmoyle of the word, turning his
spirit to all winds, to be under covert from the tempests of fortune. Blind as
he is, he follows this Goddess with the hoodwinckt eyes. Wavering as he is, he
aspires but after the savours of this inconstant Deity, of which he is secretly
an idolater, but if perchance she elevate him very high, there is no more
hazard of his fall, the laws of this necessity are inviolable, and one cannot
avoid the rigor of them, if not avoiding their servitude. Insomuch, that after
he has sneak't himself a long time amongst the grandeurs of the earth, he
finds himself enlabirinthed in the miseries, wherein he is born without
possessing any thing in propritie, but the usance of a puff of wind, which
enters once again at last into his entrals, to force thence the last sigh. And
thus he becomes the Victime of the Idol of his passions, without purifying
nevertheless from the sacrifice of his life the soil of those offerings, which
he has made upon the altars of Vanity. Behold the sad issue of this Dedalean
labyrinth, If the fruition of all the world together were to be sold, it were
not wort so much b trouble a to open s the mouth only to ^ say, I will not buy
it
wherein so many of the world take pleasure to intricate themselves in.

O how Rich is he, LORD, who has thy love and fear for his treasure? O how
happy is he, who has for object of felicity the contempt of these things of
the world! O how Contented is he, who thinks always of eternal delights! To
have many riches for a hundred years, is not this to possess at the end of
that term a Good, which is as good, as never to have been. Taste greedily the
sweets of every sort of prosperity, during the reign of a long life; is it
not ready to die by little and little for grief to abandon them since in
flying away, they intrain us into the grave. To pant continually for joy in the
presence of a thousand pleasures is it not to prepare in one's breast, the
matter of as many griefs? A wicked rich Man is much astonished at his Death, to
have his conscience void of good works, and his coffers full of money, since with
all the gold of the world, he cannot purchase the grace of the least repentance.
since every contentment is a disposition to a kind of martyrdom, by the
necessary and infallible privation of its sweets, whereof while we taste on it,
it menaceth us. In fine, to have all things at wish, is it not to possess vain
businesses since the world has nothing else to offer us? The riches which
Fortune gives and takes away again when she will, can never enrich a Man, it
behooves him to seek his treasure in the mines of his conscience, so to be
under covert from sin; for otherwise he runs the same hazard, as of the goods
which he possesses, I mean in their decay, to loose himself with them. The
prosperities of the earth, are once more fresh flowers of the garden, fair to
the eye, and of good sent, but it is to much purpose to gather them, and make
nose-gaies; in holding them one holds nothing, because their fragilitie renders
them so slipperie, that they 'scape both from our eyes and hands, and though
their slight be be slow, one day only is all their durance. The pleasures of
the world are of the same nature, I grant they may have some agreeableness to
charm our senses, yet to were too vain to vaunt of their possession, though one
en joys them, for so much as they slip a way, The arrival of pleasures
annunciates us always their speedy departure.
and vanish without cease from our eyes, like the always flitting water trills.
Their sway has so short limits, that each moment may be the term on it. Solid
contentments are only found in heaven, and the only means to relish them
beyond all sweets, is continually to Muze on them, for having always our
spirit arrested upon meditation of an object so delicious, our thoughts draw
thence by their virtue this efficacy, to ravish us with joy. I return to my
first proposition.

That the greatest Monarch of the world, The good or ill which we do,
accompanies us to the grave.
after possession of all things to his wish, and having led a thousand times
fortune her self in triumph, upon the territories of his Empire should in
conclusion be exposed all naked in his Shirt, at the end of his carreere, to
serve for a prey to the worms, and a shittlecock to the winds, certes a man
must needs be very insensible, not to be touched with affright at these truth^.

Great Kings, The misprizall of riches, is the only treasure of life.
if you have not other Mines of Gold more precious than those of the India's;
you shall die as poor as you were born: and as tearer were the first witnesses
of your misery, sighs shall be the last of your poverty, carrying with you this
regreet into the grave, to have possessed all things, If we would acquire
Heaven, we ought to have to pre^nce to Eatrh.
and now to find your selves in estate of enjoying nothing.

Great Kings, if you have no other marks of sovereignty, but this of the large
extent of your territories, the tribute which your subjects shall render you at
the end of the journall, shall be very little, since the long spaces of your
Empire shall be bounded with sevenfoot.

Great Kings, if you have no other treasures than those of the rent of your
Demeanes, all those goods are false, and the regreet of their privation too
true. But if you doubt of this yet, The rents of virtues demeanes are not
subject to fortune.
consult the dumb oracle of the Ashes of your Ancestors, and the truth will
answer for them, that they never have had any thing more proper to them than
misery, nothing more sensible than disasters, and that with all the riches
which they have enjoyed during life, they have not been able to procure at the
hour of Death, more than that piece of linen, wherein they are inveloped.

Great Kings, True valor has no other objest, but the conquest of eternal
things.
if you have no other Philosopher-stone but this, the conquest which your
valor may make, all your greatness, and all your riches, shall be enclosed in
the coffins, wherein you shall be buried. For, all that Fortune shall give you
to day, death shall take from you to morrow, and the day after, one may count
you in the rank of the most miserable. I will again change tone.

What a contagious malady in this age, wherein we are; is this passion of
amassing treasures! All the world would be rich, as if Paradise were bought
with ready money, If one knew the peril of being rich be would only be in
love with poverty.
and that the commerce of our safety were a public Bank, where the most
covetous render themselves the most happy. Every one makes bravado of his
acquists, and poyzeth his felicities to the balance of his riches, being never
able to be otherwise content, but in reference to the measure of what he is
estated in.

There one will assume a pride to have ten thousand Acres of wood, whose
revenue, We may call man a tree, whose root is-the immortal soul, and the
fruits which it bears are of the same nature, either for glory or punishment.
nourishes his passions, and entertaines his pleasures. Insomuch, that he
considers not that these trees are laden but with the fruit of these
world-miseries; and of all togethet he shall bear away, but the branch of one
only, which shall serve very soon for a Bier to his carcass. See in what
consists the profit of his rents, after their account made.

Another will be rich only in medows, and changing his hay into Gold which is
but Earth, he fills therewith his coffers. But Fool, that he is, he thinks not
that his life is a Meadow his body the hay thereof and time the Mower, The world
is a Meadow, and all the objects which therein we admire, are flowers, which
fade every hour.
who by his example makes public traffic of the same merchandise, changing by
little and little the hay of his body into Earth. And is not this to be very
ingenious to cheat a man's self?

Another aim is only to be rich in buildings, some the country, some the
city, and assuming vanity from the number, as well as the magnificenee of his
Palaces, he believes that they are so many Sanctuaries of proof, against the
strokes of fortune, or the thunders of heaven. What a folly is this, to esteem
ones self happy, for having diverse cabbins upon earth, to put himself under
convert from the rain, and wind; during the short journey of life? The rain
ceases, the wind is past, and life dies, and then the tempest of a thousand
eternal anguishes comes to entertain him, without possibility of discovery,
even from hope, one only port of safety. To be only rich then, in aedifices,
is to be rich in castles of paper and cards, such as little children lodge
their pety cares in.

To what purpose steads it us to be richly lodged, We must build upon the
unshakeable foundations of eternity, if a man would be sheltered from all
sorts of storms.
if every hour of the day may be that of our departure? Men trouble themselves
to build houses of pleasure, but the pleasures fade away, and we also, and
these houses remain for witnesses of our folly, and for sensible objects of
sorrow, and grief, in that cruel necessity to which we are reduced to abandon
them. It is to be considered that we are born to be travelers and Pilgrims and
as such, are we constraind to march always straight to the gis^ of Death,
Though we says Sun sets every night, yet it rests not: and so Man, though he
lay himself to sleep, rests not from hisvoyage to Earth.
without ever resting, or being able to find repose even in repose it self. To
what then are all these magnificent Palaces, when our only retreat beats on
to the grave? To what end are all this great number of structures, when we are
all in the way, and point to end our voyage? O how well is he housed, that
lodges his hope in God, and lays the foundations of his habitation upon
Eternity! A good conscience is the richest house that one can have.

Another designs his treasures in numerous Shippings, traficking with all
winds, in spite of storms and tempests: but be it granted a perpetual calm
as heart could wish, and imagine we, (as himself does) that he shall fish with
Fortunes nets, all the Pearls of the Ocean; what can he do at the end with
all his ventures? if he truck them away, he can gain but stuff of the same
price, if he sell them, he does but change white purified earth for yellow,
which the Sun purifies as well within the mines what will he do now with this
new merchandise, or this his gold? behold him always in trouble to discharge
himself of so many burdens. If gold were potable, he might perhaps nourish
himself therewith for a while; but as Midas could not do it in the fable, he
will never bring it to pass in the verity: he must needs keep watch then day
and night to the guard of his riches; and well may he keep sentinel, Death
comes to rob him of them, since at his going out of the world she takes them
away from him. What appearance is there, that the treasures of the Sea should
be able to make a man rich, since the possession of all the world together
cannot do it. The treasure of good works, is eternal riches.
A hundred thousand ships are but a hundred thousand shuttle-cockes for the
wind and a hundred thousand objects of shipwreck. Suppose they arrive to the
Port, the life of their Master is always among rocks, for it is a kind of ship,
which cannot arrive at other shore, but at the bank of the grave. And I leave
you to consider what danger he may run, Our life is a Ship, which loosing from
the Haven, to the cradle at the moment of our birth, never comes ashore again,
till it run aground upon the grave.
if there the storm of his avaricious passion cast him. The sand-blind-sighted
may foresee his ruin, and the most judicious will believe it infallible.
Behold in fine a man rich to much purpose, that would have drained by his
ambition, the bottomless depths of the Ocean, and now to find himself in the
end of his carreere, in the abysses of hell, having an Eternity of evils for
recompense of an age of anxieties, which he has suffered during his life.

Lord, if I would be rich in wood, let it be in that of thy Cross, and from
henceforth let its fruits be my revenues, and my rents. If I would traffic in
meads; Let the meditation of the hay of my life, be my only profit. If I set
my self to build houses, He which puts his trust in God, is the richest of the
world, how poor soever he be.
let it be rather for my soul than for my body, and in such sort, that my good
works may be the stones, and the purity of my conscience the foundation. And
lastly, If I would travel the seas to go to the conquest of their treasures:
let my tears be the waves thereof, and my sighs the winds, and thy grace
alone, the only object of my riches.

Make me then rich, O LORD, if it please thee, by the only misprise of all the
treasures of the Earth, and teach this secret language to my heart, It is
already sufficient enjoyment of rest and quiet to set up ones rest in God only.
never to speak but of thee in its desires, nor of other then thy self in its
hopes, since of thee alone, and in thee only lies the fullness of its perfect
felicity and sove^aign repose. Let us not rest our selves in so fair a way.

I cannot comprehend the design of these curious Spirits, who go seeking the
Philosophers-stone in that Spitle, where an infinite number of their companions
are dead of regreet to have so ill employed their time. They put all they have
to the quest of that which never was, and burning with desire to acquire
wealth, they reduce all their own into cinders, and their lungs also with
vehement puffing, without gaining other recompense at the end of their labors,
The love of God is the only Philosopher-stone, since by it a man may acquire
eternal^ treasures.
but this, now to know their folly: but the Sun sets, the candle goes out, the
bed of burial is prepared, there must be their Enter at the Exit of so many
unprofitable pains. To what purpose serves it now, to know they are fools,
having no more time to be wise.

What cruel Malady of spirit is it to sacrifice both ones body and soul in
and unluckie alymbick, for to nourish a vain ambition, whose irregular appetite
can never be satisfied? Is not this to take pleasure in kindling the fire which
consumes us? to burn perpetually with desire of being rich in this world, An
inclination toward the misprize of Earth, is a presage of the getting of Heaven.
and yet get nothing by it: And then to burn again eternally in hell, without
possibility to quench the ardour of those revenging flames: is not this to warp
ones-self the web of a fate, the most miserable that ever was?

Produce we then of nothing the creation of this Philosopher-stone, and grant
we it made at present to the hearts of the most ambitious. I am content that
from the miracles of this Metamorphosis they make us see the marvels of a new
gallery of silver, like to that which bare NERO to the Capitol. I am content
that they make pendant at the point of a needle, as SEMIR AMISS, the price of
twenty millions of gold. I am content that after the example of Atabili, King
of Peru. The World is aptly compared to the Sea, since as the storms of this,
so are the miseries of that, and like flitting billows ever rolling so are all
the objects which we here admire.
Atabalipas, they pave their halls with Saphirs. I am pleased, that imitating
Cyrus, they enround their gardens with perches of gold. I am content, that the
Dryades of their fountains be composed of the same material, following the
magnificences of Caesar. I am content that they erect with Pompey an
Amphitheater all covered with plates of Gold. I am content they build a Palace
of Ivory, there to lodge another Melaus, or a Louvre of Crystal to receive
therein an other Drusus, and let (I am content still) this Louvre be ornamented
with court-cupboards of Pearls equal to those of Scaurus, and with coffers of
the same price as that of Darius. To what will all this come to in the end?
What may be the reverse of all these medals? The scortching heat of Time, and
the Suns-beams have melted this gallery of silver, its admirers are vanished,
and its propriety. Even Rome it self has run the like fate, and though it
subsist yet, it is but only in name, It Is a Rule without exception, that all
that it included in the revolution of Time, is subject to change.
its ruins mourn at this day the death of its glory. That so Precious Pendant
of Semiramis could not be exempt from a kind of Death, though it were
inanimate. I mean that in its insensibilitie, it has received the attaints of
this Vicissitude, which alters and destroies all things, since it now appears
no more to our eyes. All those Saphir-paved halls are passed away, though Art
had enchained them in beautiful Workemanships. They have had otherwise a
glittering luster, like the Sun; but this Planet jealous of them, has refused
in the end its clearenesse, so much as to their ruins; insomuch that they are
vanished in obscurity. These gardens environed with rails of gold, have (like
others) diverse Spring-times, to renew their growth, but one Winter alone was
enough to make them die. Those Dryades which enrich these fountains are fled
upon their own water-trils, and scarce remains us their remembrance. That proud
Amphitheater of Pompey could not enternize it self, but in the memory of men,
and yet we scarce know what they say, Meditate here a little, how often the face
of the Earth has been varied since its first creation.
when they speak on it. That Ivorie Palace of Melaus goes for a fable in
histories, being buried in the Abysses of nonentitie. That famous Louvre of
Crystal having been bustled against by Time is broken, and shivered into so
many pieces, There it is othing so certain in the world, as its uncertainty.
that not so much as the very dust on it subsist, but in the confused Idea of
things, which have been other-while. All those high cup-boards of Pearl, Fui,
and nihil amplius.
and all those coffers of great price have indeed had an appearance like
lightning, but the thunderbolt of inconstancy has reduced them into ashes,
and the memory of them is preserved in ours, but as a dream, since in effect
it is no more at all.

But if the precious wonders of past ages; have done nothing but passo away
together, with their admirers and owners, is it not credible, that those
covetous rich ones, did run the same fortune with all the treasures of their
Philosopher-stone, and at the end of their carreere, what device could they
take but this very same of SALADINE, since of all their riches, there remains
them at their Death, but only a poor Shirt, * I have been, says this great
Monarch and behold, here is all.

Why, Rich-ones of the World, do you trouble your selves so much, to establish
your glory here below, for to persuade us at the end of the journall only
this, That you have been? An atome has the same advantage, for this creating
power, which we adore, after he had taken it out of the abysses of nothing,
wherein you also were buried, made it to subsist in nature. Be it that you have
been the greatest on Earth, Yet thus is it a blessedness of our condition,
thus to escape by little and little the miseries which are incident unto us.
yet now the fair light of your fair days, is extinguished for ever. The Sun
of your glory is ccclips't, and in an eternal West. And that your fate which
interloomed the web of your greatnesses, together with your lives, lies
entombed with your Ashes, to show us that these are the only unhallowed
relics which your Ambition could leave us.

You have been then otherwhile the only Minions of Fortune, like Demetrius,
but he and you are now no more any thing, not so much as a handful of Ashes;
for less than with an Infinite power, 'twere impossible to any, to reunite
into a body, the parcels of the Dust, whereof your Carcasses were formed,
behold in what consists at this day, the foundation of your past glory.

You have bin then otherwhile the same as SALADINE the only Monarch of the
East, and have possessed (as he) treasures without number, If virtue eternize not
our memory, our life passes away like the wind, without leaving any trace.
and honors without parallel: But (as He) also you have done nothing else but
pass away, and like him again you have not been able to hide your
wretchedness, but under a Scarp of Linen, whereof the Worms have repasted, to
manifest you to all the World.

In fine, you have been other-while the wonders of our days, but now you are
the horror of this present, for the only thought o^ the dung-heap of your
Ashes po^sons my spirit, so delicate is it, and ^ leave farther provocation to
the in credulous, if they be willing to (...) stronger witnesses of it, but let
(...) now leave persouall reflections, an^ trouble we not the repose of
Churchyardes.

I grant that you may be at the instant that I speak unto you, so ri^^ and
happy, that you cannot wi^^ more of Fortune, nor She able ^ offer you more: He
which esteems himself rich and happy in this world, knows not the nature of
worldly happiness and riches.
Yet thus ought you to consider where you are, who you are, and what are the
goods which you possess. You are in the World, where all things fly away, and
it is in this way of flying away, that you read these verities: my meaning is,
you dwell upon the same earth, whereof you are formed, and consequently you
lodge upon your buriall-places, whose entrances will be open at all moments. To
say whoyou are, I am ashamed, in calling you by your proper names, for to
remembrance you your miseries: Corruption conceaves you, Horror infants you,
Blood nourishes you, infection accompanies you in the Coffin. There is nothing
so constantly present with us, as our miseries, since always we are miserable
enough at best.
The treasures which you enjoy are but Chimeras of greatness and apparitions
of glory, whereof living you make experiment, and dying you perfectly know the
truth on it.

To what end then can stead you your present felicities, since at present you
scarce enjoy them at all? for even at this veric inst^^ another, which is but
newly upon pass, robs you of part of them, and even thus giving you hi^^ of
the cosenage of his companions, cheates you too, as well as they; and thus they
do altogether to your lives, as well as your contentments; in ravishing these,
they intrain the others: then what remonstrance can you exhibit of esteeming
your sel^es happy for past felicities, and which you have not enjoyed but in
way of depart? And if this condition be agreeable unto you, still there is a
necessity of setting up your rest at the end of the carreere, and there it is,
where I attend to contribute to your vain waylings, as many resentments o^
Pity. How much better it is to be so happy in fishing, as to angle for grace,
in the tears of penitence?
Take we another track without losing our selves.

How ingenious was that famous Queen of Egypt, to deceive with good grace her
Lover. S^^ caused underhand dead fishes to be ensnared to the hook of Antonie,
as often as the toy took his to go a fishing, to the end to make him some sport
by those pleasant deceits. May we not say that Ambition does the same? for when
we cast our hooks into this vast Ocean of the vanities, of the world, we fish
but Dead things without soul, whose acquirement countervailes not a moment of
the Time, which we employ to attain it.

Had I all the goodliest fardles of the world laded on my back; I mean, had I
acquired all the honors, wherewith fortune can tickle an ambitious soul,
should I thence become greater of body? my growing time is past, It Is to no
purpose to be passiorate for such goods as a man may loose, and the world can
give no better.
would my Spirit thence become more excellent? these objects are too weak to
ennoble her Powers. Should I thence become more virtuous? Virtue looks for no
sa^isfaction out of it self. Should I thence be more esteemed of the world?
This is but the glory of a wind, which does but pass away. What happiness
what contentment, or what utilitie, would remain me then, that I might be at
rest? A Man must not suffer himself thus to be fooled All honors can be but a
burden to an innocent soul, for so much as they are continual objects o^
vanity, which stir up the passion and only serve but for nourishment to them
in their violences to hurrie them into all sorts o^ extremities. And after all,
the necessity of dying, which makes an inseparable accident in our condition,
gloomes the glittering of all this vain glory, which environs us. In the
anguishes o^ Death, a man dreams not of the grandeurs of his life, It Is an
irkssome remembrance of past happiness
and being eve^ and anon upon point to depart finds himself often afflicted m^
with those good things which (...) possesses, measuring already the depth of
the fall by the height (...) the place whither he is exalted.

Galba.
He which found Fortune at (...) gate, found no nail to stay he wheel: But if
She on the one (...) takes a pleasure to ruin Empire to destroy realms, and
to precipitate her favorites: Death on (...) other side pardons no body,
alters the temperament of all sorts of humors, perverts the order of every
kind of habitude, and not content yet to beat down all these great Colosses of
Vanity, which would be taken for the worlds wonders, calls to the sharing of
their ruin the elements, thus to bury their materials in their first abysses,
where she has designed the place of their entombment.

What can a Mau then find constant in the world, Al things pass away, and by
their way tell us that we must do so too.
where constancy does no where reside? Time, Fortune, Death, our passions, and
a thousand other stumbling blocks shall never speak oher language to us but of
our miseries, and yet we will suffer our selves like ALEXANDER to be voyc'd
^mmortall. Our prosperities, our grandeurs, our very delights themselves, shall
tell us, as they pass, a word in our ear, that we ought not to trust them, and
yet for all this, we will never sigh but after them. Be it then at last for
very regreet, to have vented to the wind so many vain sighs, for Chimeras of
sweets, whereof the remembrance cannot be but full of bitterness.

Vain honors of the world, No security of pleasure, to enjoy such things as
may every moment be lost.
tempt me no more: your allurements are powerful, but too weak to vanquish me.
I deride your wreaths of Laurel, there grows more on'^ in my garden then you
can give me. If you offer me esteem, and reputation among men, what should I
do with your presents? Time devoures every day the like of them; and yet more
precious. I undervalue all such Good-things, as it can take away again from me.

Deceit full greatnesses of the Earth, cease to pursue me, you shall never
catch me, your charms have given some hits to my heart, Worldly Greatnesses are
but like Masking^ clothes, which serve him and the other but for that time.
but not to my soul, your sweets have touch my senses, but not my spirit; what
have you to offer me, which can satisfy me? Time and Fortune lend you all the
Scepters and Crowns which you borrow, and as you are not the owners, they take
them away again when they will, and not when it pleases you. So then, I will
have no Scepters for an hour nor no Crowns for a day. If I have desire to
reign, it is beyond Time; that I may thus be under shelter from the inconstancy
of Ages. Trouble not your selves to follow me. This world is a mass of mire,
upon which a man may make impresse of all sorts of Characters, but not hinder
Time to deface the draught at any time. Ambitious Spirits, fair leave have you
to draw the Stell of your designs upon this ready prim'd cloth: Some few
years wipe out all. Some ages carry away all, and the remembrance of your
follies is only immortal in your souls, by the eternal regreet which
remains you of them.

SCIPIO made design to conquer Carthage, and after he had cast the project
thereof upon mould, he afterward took the body of this shadow, and saw the
effect of his desires: But may not one say, that the Trophies of his valor
have been cast in rubbidg within that mass of dirt, whereof the world is
composed, since all the marks thereof are effaced? Carthage it felfe though it
never had life, could not avoid its death. Time has buried it so deep under
its own ruins, that we seek in vain the place of its Tomb. I leave you to
ruminate, if its subduer were himself able to resist the assaults of this
Tyranny.

If ALEXANDER had sent his thoughts into heaven, there to seek a new world, as
well as his desires on earth there to find one, he had not lost his time; but
as he did amuze himself to engrave the history of his ambition and triumphs
upon the same mass of clay, There is more glory to despise the world, than to
conquer it: for after its conquest, a man knower not what to do with it.
which he had conquered; he writ upon water, and all the characters on it are
defaced. The Realms which he subdued, have lost some of them their names, and
of this Triumpher there remains us but the Idea as of a dream, since men are
ready to require Security even of his Memory, for the wonders which it
preaches to us of him

May we not then again justly avow, that of all the conditions, to which a man
may be advanced without the aid of virtue, either by Nature or Fortune, there
is none more unfortunate, then to be to these a favorite, norany more miserable
than to a Great-one? All those who engage themselves to the service of fortune,
are ill paid; and of this, every day gives us experience.
This inconstant goddess has a thousand favors to lend, but to give, none but
haltars poisons, pomards and precipices. It Is a fine thing to see Hannibal
begging his bread even in view of Scipio, after he had called in question the
price of the worlds Empire-dome. Is it not an object worthy of compassion, to
consider Nicias upon his knees before Gillippus, to beg his own and the
Athenians lives, after he had in a manner commanded the winds at Sea, and
Fortune ashore, in a government soveraignly absolute, who will not have the
same resentments of pity, reading the history of Crassus, then when by excess
of disaster he survived both his glory and reputation, constrained to assist at
the funerals of his own renown, All those who hound after fortune, are well
pleased to be deceived, since her deceits are so well known.
and undergo the hard conditions of his enemies, attending death to free him
from servitude? Will you have no regreet, to see enslaved under the tyranny of
the Kings of Egypt, the great Agesilaus, whose valor was the only wonder of
his Time? What will you say to the deplorable Fate of Cumenes, to whom Fortune
having offered so often Empires, gives him nothing in the end, but chains, so
to die in captivity?

You see at what price Men have bought the favors of this Goddess, when many
times the severity of a happy life produces the storm of an unfortunate Death.
You may judge also at the same time, of what Nature are these heights of
honor, when often the Greatest at Sunrise, finds themselves at the end of the
Day, the most miserable. And suppose Fortune meddle not with them, to what
extremity of misery think you is a man reduced at the hour of his departure?
All his Grandeurs, though yet present, are but as past felicities, he enjoys no
more the goods which he possesses, greess only appertain to him in proper, and
of what magnificence so'ere he is environed, I wonder not if rich men be afraid
of death, since to them it is more dreadful then to any.
this object shows him but the image of a funeral pomp, his bed already
Emblemes the Sepulcher, the Sheets his winding linen, wherein he must be
inveloped. So that if he yet conceit himself Great, it is only in misery. Since
all that he see^, hears, touches, smells, and tastes, sensibly persuades him
nothing else.

Give Resurrection in your thoughts, to great Alexander, and then again
conceive him at last gasp, and now consider in this deplorable estate, Fortune
sells every day the gtory of the world to any that will, but none but fools are
her chapmen.
wherein he finds himself involved upon his funeral couch, to what can stead
him all the grandeurs of his life past, they being also past with it. I grant
that all the Earth be his: yet you see how the little load of that of his body
weighs so heavy on his soul, that it is upon point to fall grovelling under the
burden. I grant that all the glory of the world belongs to him in proper, he
enjoys nothing but his miseries. I yield moreover, that all Mankind may be his
subjects: yet this absolute sovereignty, is not exempt from the servitude of
pain. Be it, that with the only thunder of his voice he makes the Earth to
tremble: yet he himself cannot hold from shaking at the noise of his own sighs.
I grant in fine, that all the Kings of the world render him homage: yet he is
still the tributary of Death.

O grandeurs! since you fly away without cease, what are you but a little
wind? and should I be an Idolater of a little tossed Air, Omnis motus tendit
ad quietem.
and which only moves but to vanish to its repose?

O greatness! since you do but pass away, what name should I give you but
that of a dream? Alas, why should I pass my life in your pursuit, still
dreaming after you?

O worldly greatnesses, since you bid Adieu to all the world without being able
to stay your selves one only moment; Adieu then, your allurements have none
for me, your sweets are bitter to my taste, and your pleasures afford me none.
I cannot run after that which flies: I can have no love for things which pass
away; worldly Greatnesses are but childrens trifles, every wise man despises
them.
and fince the world has nothing else, it is a long while that I have bidden
adieu to it. It had promised me much, and though it had given me nothing, yet
cannot I reproach it, finding my self yet too rich by reason of its hardness.
But I return to the point.

Men of the World would persuade us, that it is impossible to find any quiet in
it, to say, The only means to be content is to settle the conscience in peace.
a firm settling of Spirit, wherein a man may be content in his condition,
without ever wishing any other thing. And for my part, I judge nothing to be
more easy, if we leave to reason its absolute power. What impossibility can
there be, to regulate a man's will to Gods? And what contradiction in it, to live
upon earth of the pure benedictions of heaven? What greater riches can a man
wish then this, to be able to undergo the Decrees of his Fate, without
murmuring and complaint? If Riches consisted only in Gold, Diamonds, Pearls,
or such like things of like raritie, those which have not of them, might count
themselves miserable. But every man carries his treasure in his conscience. He
which lives without just scandal, lives happily; and and who can complain of a
happy life?

But if to have the hap of these felicities of this life, Riches are of use to
human life, but not of necessity, for without them a man may live content.
a man judge presently, that he ought of nececessity to have a great number of
riches: This is to enslave himself to his own opinion, abounding in his proper
sense, and condemning reason: for being of the contrary part. I know well that
a man is naturally swayed to love himself more then all things of the world,
and that this love proceeds from the passion of our interest, seeking with much
care and pain, all that may contribute to our contentments; and whereas Riches
seem to be Nurses of them, this consequence is incident to be drawn, that
without them is no contented living. But at first dash, When Reason reigns, the
passions obey.
it is necessary to distinguish this love into Natural and Brutall, and
believe, that with the illumination of reason, we may purify the relishes of
the first, even to the point of rendering them innocent, without departing from
our interests, and consequently the enjoyment of our pleasures, giving them for
object, the establishment of our settled content, in misprision of all those
things of the world, which may destroy it.

As for this brutish Love, which estranging us from God, separates us also from
our selves; the passion of it becomes so strong by our weakness, that without
a special grace we grow old in this malady of Spirit of contenting our Senses,
rather then obeying our Reason, making a new God of the Treasures of the Earth.
But in conclusion, these Gods abandon our bodies to the Worms, and our souls to
the Devils. And for all their riches, the greatest Great ones can only
purchase a glorious Sepulture. Is not this a great advantage, and a goodly
consolation?

Maintain we boldly, He whose will submits to Gods will, lives ever content.
that a man may find quietness of life in all sorts of conditions, with the
only richness of a tractable Soul, resigned to take the time as it comes, and
as God sends it, without ever arguing with his providence. There is no
affliction, whereto our Soul cannot give us assuage. The Spirit of a Man will
bear his infirmity.
There is no ill whereto it self is not capable to furnish us a remedy. A man,
how miserable somever, may find his contentment amidst his miseries, if he
lives for his soul more then for his bodies behalf. God makes us to be born
where he will, and of what Parents he pleases: if the poorness of our birth
accompany us even to death, he has so ordained it; what can else do but let
him so do? Can he be accounted miserable, that obey's with good grace his
sovereigns decrees?

O, It Is a greater danger to be very rich, then viry poor: for riches often
makes men lose their way, but poverty keeps 'em in the straight path.
how is it far more easy to undergo the burden of much poverty then of great
riches! For a man extremely poor, is troubled with no thoughts more important,
then only how to find means to pass his life in the austerities whereto he is
already habituated, without repining after other fortune, as being estranged
equally both from his knowledge and reach; in which respects, he may well be
styled happy. But a man very rich, dreams of nothing but to eternize the
continuance of his days (although his fancy be in vain) instead of letting them
quietly slide away; insomuch, that being possessed with no passion more then love
of life, he thinks always to live, and never to die. But Death comes ere he
thinks on it, and taking from him all to his very shirt, Death cannot be said to
deceive any body, for it is infallible, and yet the world complaint of it.
constrains him to confess, that riches are only profitable by misprision,
since by the contempt a man makes of them, he may become the richest of the
world.

O what a sensible pleasure it is to be Rich, say worldly men always! but I
would fain know, in what consists this contentment? what satisfaction can there
be had to possess much treasure, knowing what an infinite number of our
companions are reduced to the last point of poverty? Some in Hospitals, where
they he in straw, over whelmed with a thousand fresh griefs. Others at the
corner of a street, where a piece of a Dunghill serves them at once, both for
bed and board. Some again in Dungeons, where horror and afright, hunger and
despair tyrannize equally over their unfortunate spirits. And others in some
Desert, to which ill fate has confined them, to make their ills remediless, as
being far removed from all sorts of succors. How with the knowledge of these
truths, There is no emptiness in nature, for miseries fill al
a man shall be able to relish greedily the vain sweets of worldly riches, it
must needs be for want of reason or pity, and consequently to be altogether
brutish or insensible. I shall have (suppose) a hundred thousand crowns in
rents, and all this revenue shall serve but to nourish my body and its
pleasures, without considering, that a hundred thousand poor souls sigh under
the heavy burden of their miseries every Day: and yet men shall esteem me happy
in being rich in this fate. O how dangerous are the treasures, which produce
these felicities!

Is it possible, It is a brave generositie, to be sensible of othermens
miseries.
that the Great-ones of the world do not think at all in the middle of their
Feasts, of the extreme poverty of an infinite number of persons, and that in
themselves they do not reason secretly in this sort. What? in this instant that
we satiate the appetite of our senses, with all that nature has produced most
delicious for their entertain; a million and many more poor souls, are reduced
to this extremity, as not to have one only crumb of bread. And in this
serious thought what relish can they find in their bestcook'd cates, and in
their sweetest condiment? does not this important consideration, mingle a
little bitterness? But if their spirits estrange themselves from these
meditations, and fasten to objects more agreeable. O how hard of digestion is
the second service of their collation! He which cannot love his neighbor, has
no love for himself.

To speak ingenuously, every time when I consider in that condition exempt from
want, wherein God has given me birth, and wherein his goodness (which is no
other than himself) keeps me still alive. I say, when I consider the misery to
which the greatest part of the world is reduced, I cannot be weary of blessing
this adorable Providence, which grants me to see from the haven, the tempests
wherein so many spirits are tossed which grace to me alone (me thinks) is all
extraordinary to see my self under shelter, All in God is adorable, and all
incomprehensible; we must then adore, and be silent.
from so many evils, wherewith so many persons are afflicted. By what means
could I deserve, before the Creation of all things, that this sovereign
Creator should design me from the Abysses of nothing, to give me Being, and a
being moreover of grace, making me to be born in a Golden age, in a Christian
Kingdom, and in a City of the Catholic Faith, for to be instructed and
brought up as I have been in the only Religion, wherein a man may find his
Salvation? and with all these benefits, moreover, to elevate me above the
temptations of poverty and misery.

Are not these most pure favors which would require of this Eternal ONE, (who
has bestowed them me) the term of an Eternity, that I might be able to arrive
to some small condign acknowledgment of them? The most miserable wretch of the
world, wherein did he differ from me in way of merit of some portion of these
favors, which he possesses not; since that before time was; he and I were
nothing at all, and yet from all eternity God has bestowed these things on me
in precedencie, rather than on him? At least (say I) it did behoove me, that
since the first moment, I was capable of reason; I had employed all those of my
life past in the continual meditation of so many, and so great benefits,
whereof to reach the reason 'twere to find the bottoms of the Abysses of this
infinite mercy, to which I remain infinitely indebted? And coming to the
point, ought not I in this pre-eminence of mine contribute all my power to the
succor of him, who enjoys not my happiness, to the end, thus to deserve in
a manner, The nearest way from Earth to He aven is by Charity.
some party of them under the favor of merits from this great God, who only
gives reward to those good actions, which he makes me do. Can I refuse to be
charitable to him, who only begs some good of me, but to render me worthy of
that, which I have received from heaven? I shall have al things to my wish
amidst my pleasures, when Death it self is dease to his plaints, in extremity
of his pains And shall not I give him some sort of consolation, either in good
office, or in pity, being thereunto obliged by yet more powerful reasons?

Great-ones of the World, Earthly greatness it the least gift of Heaven.
you are more miserable then these miserable ones, even in the midst of your
felicities, if the recite of their evils give you not some touch. You have
riches more then they, but God has given you these, but to cheer their
poverty. As well also, though they now are yours, shall they take leave of you,
at the Even of your depart, and if of them you carry any thing away, it shall
be only the interests of that which you have lent these Poor-ones.

Great worldly-ones, how is your sat worthy of compassion rather then Envy, if
you have no other Paradise then your riches?

Grandees of the World, how soon will the source of your contentments dry up,
if only your treasures give it springhead?

Great worldly-ones! He whose hopes are only on the world, must needs at last
despair.
of how short endurance shall be your prosperities, though an Age should be
limit to their course, since at the end of that term you must die eternally,
and die in a pain always living. Suggest to your selves often these
importancies. Visit and turn over the leaf to read more of them.

When I consider the great number of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Lords,
which have governed the World, and the Battles which they have given for its
conquests, since the moment of its creation, I remain all amazed not able to
find bound^ nor measure in this amuzement. How many several Masters may a man
imagine then, that the World has had? Hours, Days, Years, and Ages may well be
different, but the world is still the same.
and how many times conquered, dividing it into diverse Empires, Kingdoms, and
Lordships? Well, yet the World has still remained the same, and in the same
place still: but its Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Lords, are vanished away,
one at the heels of other, and all their conquests have served them only as
matter of Passe-time, since all their combats and battles, have had no other
price of Victory, but upon the same earth, where their glory and bodies remain
together enterred.

O goodly childish sport, to amuze themselves about conquering some little
point within the limits, wherewith the Universe is bounded! Ask but Alexander
what he has done with the booties of his Conquest. When he had taken away all,
he had yet nothing, and of himself now remains there nothing at all. Ambition,
behold the reverse of thy Medall.

LORD, Preserve to me always, (if it please) this humor wherein I now find my
self, Why should any love the world, which deceives all that trust in it?
to misprize all the things of the world, and It too with passion. Give me a
heart wavering and inconstant, to this end, that it may uncessantly change from
all worldly Love, till it be subjected to the sweet Empire of thy Love. Render,
render evermore my spirit unquiet, until that it has found its repose in thee
alone, the foundations of such a rest are unremoveable. I will give for nothing
all my pretentions on earth, for thereto pretend I nothing at all. Heaven only
is my mark and aim. Now you shall see soon the end of the Chapter.

How was it possible that the glory of those brave Romans of sormer time, These
wise worldly ones have had no other recompense of their folly, but such a blast
of Fames Trump.
could any way arrive to that point (though they aimd at it) whereto the renown
of Rome it self could never attain? What a folly was it, that they sought
immortality amid'st this inconstancy of Ages, where Death only was in his
Kingdom, for they assisted every day, at the funeral of their renowned
companions, and after they had seen their bodies reduced into ashes, they might
with the same eye, more over, contemplate their shadows, I mean their statues,
metamorphosed into dust, and all their reputation served but as a wind to bear
them away into an infinity of Abysses, since as a Wind, being nothing else, it
flies away with these heaps of ruin, so far both from the eye, and all memory,
that in the end, there is no more thought on it.

In effect, all these great men of the World did see buried every moment the
hope of this vain glory, whereof their ambition was always laboring to make
acquist; and yet not one of them for all this, flipt back; as if they took a
pride in their vanities, and the folly of them were hereditary. Ambition never
elevates, but to give a greater fall.
CAESAR had seen the death of Pompey, and with him all the glory of his renown,
and Pompey, had seen buried in the tomb of Time, and Oblivion, the renown of
that great Scipio, whose valor more redoubted then the thunder had made the
Eearth tremble so often. Scipio in his turn might have read the Epitaph, which
despair, shame, and disaster had graven in letters of Gold upon the Sepulture
of Hannibal, and Hannibal might have learned to know by the unconstancy of the
Age, wherein he lived, before he made experiment of them, the misfortunes, and
miseries, which are inseparable to our condition. And yet notwithstanding, all
of them stumbled one after other, upon one and the same Stumblingstone.

I am not come into Persia, The richest of the world at last is found as poor
as the poorest companion.
for the conquest of treasures, said Alexander to Parmenio: take thou all the
riches, and leave me all the glory: but after good calculation, neither of them
both had any thing at all. These riches remained in the world still, to which
they properly appertained, and this vainglory saw its lover die, without it
self being seen. Insomuch that after so great conquests, the worms have
conquered this great Monarch, and as the dunghill of his ashes has no sort of
correspondence with this so samous name of Alexander, which otherwhile he bore,
it is not to be said, what he has been, seeing what he is now, I mean his
present wretchednesses efface every day the memory of his past greatnesses.

Ambitious spirits, though you should conquer a thousand worlds, as he did this
one, you should not be a whit richer for all these conquests. The Earth is
still as it was, it never changes nature. All her honors are not worth one
tear of repentance: all its glory is not to be prized with one sigh of
contrition. I grant that the noise of your renown may resound through the four
corners of the Universe: That of SALADINE which went round it all, could not
exempt him from the mishaps of life, nor miseries of Death. After he had
encoffered all the riches of the East, yet finds he himself so poor for all
that, hardly can he take along with him so much as a Shirt.

Embalm then the Air which you breath, with a thousand Odours, be Served in
Plate of Gold, Lie in Ivory, Swim in Honors, and lastly, let all your actions
glitter with magnificence; It Is the greatest horror of death, to render account
of all the moments of life.
the last moment of your life shall be judge of all those, which have preceded
it: then shall you be able at your Death, to tell me the worth of this vain
glory, whereof you have been Idolaters, and after your Death, you shall resent
the pains of an eternal regreet, having now no more opportunity to repent you
to any effect.

Believe me, all is but Vanity, Honors, Glory, Riches, Praise, Esteem,
Reputation, All this is but smoke during Life, and after Death, nothing at all.
The Grands of the world have made a little more noise then others by the way.
But this Noise is ceased, their light is extinguish't, their memory buried. And
if men speak of them sometimes, the answer is returned with a shake of the
head, intimating no more words of them, since such a Law of silence, Time has
imposed hereon. Seek your glory in God, and your Honor in the contempt of this
earthy Honor, if you will enternize your renown, in the perpesuity of Ages. I
have no more to say to you, after these truths.

A PROLUSIVE Upon the EMBLEM of the third Chapter.
A Funeral Hearse with wreaths of Cypres crested,
A Skeleton with Robes imperial vested,
Dead march, sad looks, no glorious circumstance
Of high Achievements, and victorious Chance,
Are these fit Trophy's for a Conquerous?
These are the Triumphs of the Emperor
ADRIAN, who chose this Sable Heraldry
Before the popular gilded Pegeantry,
'Stead of Triumphall Atches he does rear
The Marble Columns of his Sepulcher. Moles Adriani nune Castrum S. Angeli.

No public honors wave his strict intent,
To shrine his Triumph in his Morument.
The Conscript Fathers and Quirites all
Intend his welcome to the Capitol.
The vast expense one day's work would have cost,
He wiser far (since t'ther had been lost)
To build a Mausolaeum does bestow,
Which now at Rome is called Saint Pont Aeliu.
Angelo;
ADRIAN Emperor of Rome Celebrates himself his Funerals, and causes his
Coffin to be carried in Triumph before him.


Where to this Day, from Aelius Adrian's Name,
The Aelian, Bridge does still revive his fame.
Now was the peoples expectation high,
For wonted pomp and glittering Chevalry:
But lo their Emperor does invite 'em all,
Not to a Show, but to his Funeral.
They look for Gew-Gaw-fancies; his wise scorn
Contemns those Vanities, leaves their hope forlorn.
For since all is smothered in the Funeral Pile,
He will not dally with 'em for a while.
This was self-Victory, and deserves more
Then all the Conquests he had won before.
What can Death do to such a man, or Fate,
Whose Resolutions them anticipate?
For since the Grave must be the latter end,
Let our preventing thoughts first thither tend.
Bravely resolved it is, knowing the worst
What must be done at last, as good at first.
THE MIRROR WHICH FLATTERS NOT.
CHAP. III.
O How glorious is the Triumph over Death? O how brave is the Vistory over a
Man's life! You see how this great Adrian.
Monarch triumphs to day over that proud Triumpher Death, after the happy
vanquishment of his passions. He enters into his Empire by the Port of his
Tomb, thus to reign during his life, like a man that dies every moment; he
celebrates himself his own Funerals, and is led in Triumph to his Sepulcher to
learn to die generously. What a glory's this to overawe That, which commands
the whole world? what Courage is this, to assail and combat That, which none
could ever yet resist? and what a power is it to tame That which never yet
yielded? Echo her self has not rebounds enough to resound aloud the wonders of
this Victory.

This is not the Triumph of Alexander, when he made his entry into Babylon,
mounted upon a Chariot as rich as the Indies, and more glistering then the Sun.

In this we see no other riches, but the rich contempt, which ought to be made
of them; no other luster, but of Virtue.

This is not the Triumph of Caesar then, when be was drawn unto the Capitol by
forty Elephants, after he had won twenty four battles. In this we see naught
else but a funeral pomp, but yet so glorious, that Death her self serves for a
Trophy to it.

This is not the Triumph of Epaminondas, where the glorious luster of the
magnificence shamed the splendor of the day, which yet lent its light to it.
The marvels which appeared in this here, seemed as celebrating in black the
Exequies of all the other braveries of the world, since nothing can be seen
more admirable then this.

This is not the Triumph of Aurelian where all the graces are led captive with
Zenobia. To triumph over vice, is the noblest Trophie.
In this are to be seen no other captives but the world, and all its vanities,
and their defeat is the richest Crown of the Victor.

This is not the Triumph of that pompous Queen of Egypt entering into Cilicia,
where she raised admiration to her self in a Galley of unutrerable value, but
in this we contemplate the more then human industry of a Pilote, who from the
midst of the storms and tempest of the world, recovers happily to the Port,
the ship of his life, though yet but in the way to approach to it.

In fine, this is not the Triumph of Sesostris, whose stately Chariot four
Kings drew. Passions are the only slaves of this, and Death being here
vanquished, this honor remains immortal, and the name of the Triumpher.

Say we then once again, All the glory of men vanishes away with them.
O how glorious a Triumph is this, over Death! O how brave is the victory over
our selves! and the only means thus to vanquish a mansself, is to bury his
ambition before his body be ensepulchred, preparing nevertheless the tomb of
both; to the end, that the continual remembrances of Death, may serve for
temperament and moderation to the delights of life.

We read of Paulus Aemilius, that returning to Rome laden with wreaths of
Laurel, after the famous victory over the Persians; he made his entrance of
triumph with so great pomp and magnificence, that the Sun seemed to rouz it
self many times, as if upon design to contemplate these wonders.

Pompy desirous to expose to the view of day, all the magnificent presents,
which Fortune had given him in his last conquests, entered now the third time in
Triumph into the City of Rome, where the noise of his valor made as many
Idolaters, as admirers, gaining hearts, and now conquering souls, as well as
before Realms and Provinces: But it seems, that the glory, which accompanied
him in this action had this defect, not to be sufficiently worthily known, even
of those that were witnesles of it, as surpassing by much, all that they could
possibly express of it.

There was seen advanced before his chariot, Vanity! is a dangerous enemy, it
flatters, only to surprise.
in ostentation, a Checker-worke composed of two sorts of precious stones,
whose beauty set them beyond all price: But yet (me thinks) their sparkling
might have in good time been a light to him, if by a feeling of foresight,
touching the inconstancy of his fortune, he had caused to have been graven
thereon the history of his mishaps. There was admired in sequel; a Statue of
the Moon, all of Gold, in form of a Crescent, and I am astonished, that this
Image of change and Vicissitude, made him not foresee the deturning of the
Wheel, I mean the storm, that was to succeed the calm of his happiness. He
caused moreover to be carried before him a great number of Vessels of Gold,
never thinking that Death might soon replenish some part of them with his
ashes. There was seen to follow a mountain all of Gold, upon which were all
sorts of animals, and many Trees of the same matter, and this mountain was
enrounded with a Vine, whose golden glittering dazzled the eyes of all that
considered its wonders. This proud Triumpher was the Orpheus which to the
Lyrick sound of his renown, Ambition is an incurable disease of the soul, if
in good time it be nor looked too.
attracted this mountain, these Animals, these Trees, this Vine. But as
Orpheus, so him also, Fortune destinated a Prey to the fury of Bacchinals, I
mean the Eunuchs which put him to Death. Three Statues of gold, first Jupiters,
then Mars, and then of Pallas, came after. These were his Gods and his
Goddess: what succors could he expect from these Deities, which had no
subsistence, but in statue, and the copy of whose portraict had no principal?
There was had in admiration moreover, thirty garlands all of gold, A man had
need to have an excellent memory, not to forget himself among his honors.
and Pearls: but these Crowns were too weighty for his head, from whence it
came to pass, that he tell under the burden. A golden Chapel followed after,
dedicated to the Muses, upon which was a great Horologe of the same materials.
And as the Index still turned, ought not he to have considered, that the hour
of his triumphing began to pass away, and that of his overthrow would
presently sound, being sequel to the Laws of that vicissitude, to which Face
has subjected all things? His statue of gold enricht with diamonds, and pearls
whereof nor he himself, nor he that enwrought them, knew the value followed in
its course, and in fine, this his shadow, was more happy than the true body, as
having never been scuffled with, but by time, and the other was vanquished with
misery. Then appeared the great Pompey, seated upon a throne where he and
Fortune seemed to give laws to the whole world, ^or his triumphall Chariot
was ^o richly glorious, so magnificent ^n rarities, so splendide in new, and
ne're-before-seen wonders, that a ravishment surprised men's ^pirits, elevating
them at once from admiration to ecstasy, not giving them leisure to make
relection upon the present realties. Be it our constant meditation, of the
inconstancy to which all worldly things are subjected.
But this Triumphall Chariot still ^owled about, and though the Triumpher
remained seated in his place, yet his Fortune turned about likewise. Insomuch
that in going to the Capitol, he approacht by little and little to the ^ank,
where his life and happiness were equally interred.

In fine, for the fullness of glory, These proper names of the conquests, which
he had made, were read in golden Characters: See Pliny's Not. History, 7 Book,
26 Chapter. Pride is the passion of fools: for what a sense-lessenesse is it,
to be proud, having so many miseries about us, which are incident to mortal man.
The Kingdom of Pontus, Armenia Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Medea Colchis, the
Hiberians, the Albanians, Syria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, Palestina,
Judea, Arabia, and the Rovers of all the Seas. Who can be comparable to this
proud Conqueror? and yet (I say it) having conquered and subjugated the
greatest part of the Earth, Fate permits him not so much, as to expire upon it,
and the Sea yet more treacherous, prepares him shipwreck in midst of the Port.

What resemblance, and what correspondence can there be now between this
Triumph so sumptuous, so stately, and magnificent and that, whose presentation
show you, How poor is the vanity of man, having no other grounds but humane
frailty?
where lowliness, humlity and misery hold the first rank and possess the
highest places. Assuredly the difference is great but yet this inequality here
is glorious, since it brings along with it the price of that virtue, where of
Pompey despised the conquest. He in his Triumph, raised wonder to the beauty of
those two great precious stones. But the Sepulchrall Marbles, which appeared in
this of ADRIAN, were of another estimate, because prudence values them above
all price, putting them to that employment, to which she had destinated them.
Again, if he expose to view in vessels of gold, Mountains, Animals, Trees,
Vines, Statues of the same matter; This Hearse covered with black, which serves
for ornament to this Funeral Pomp, contains yet much more treasure, since the
contempt of all together ^^ graven therein. He makes ostentation of his statue
of gold, enricht with Pearls: but our Monarch ^akes as much glory without
them, showing in his own bare Pourtraict, the original of his ^^iseries.
Except the crown of virtue all other are subject to change.
That proud conqueror ^ad a thousand Garlands and ^olden Coronets, as a novell
Trophy: But ours here crowns himself with Cypress during his carreere of
life, to merit those palms which await him in the end. In fine, Pompey is the
Idol of heatts, and souls, and his Triumphall Chariot serves as an Altar,
where he receives the vower and Sacrifices: But this-Prince, instead of causing
Idolaters, during the sway of his Majesty, immolates himself up to the view
of Heaven, and Earth, dying already in his own Funerals, and suffering himself
to be as it were buried by the continual object which dwells with him of Death
and his Tomb. But if Pompey lastly boast himself to have conquered an
infinite number of Realms, of all the world together: Adrian.
Th^^ Man having never had worse enemies than his passions, has sought no
other glory but to overcome them, and in their defeat, a Man may well be styled
the conqueror of Conquerours; for the Coro^^ wreaths of this Triumph, fear^
not the Suns extremity, nor the Ages inconstancy. We must passer farther.

Isidore, All the objests of Vanity are so many enemies, against which we ought
to be always in arms.
and Tranquillus, do assure us, that to carry away the glory of a Triumph, it
was necessarily required to vanquish five thousand enemies, or gain five
victories, as it is reported of Caesar. The consent of the Senate was also to
be had. And the Conqueror was to be clothed in Purple, and Crowned with
Laurel, holding a Scepter in his hand, and in this sort he was conducted to
the Capitol of Jupiter, where some famous Orator made a Panegyricke of his
prowess.

What better Allegory can we draw from these profane truths, ^hen this of the
Victory, which we ^ught to have of our five Senses as of five thousand enemies)
whose defeat is necessary to our riumph. These are the five Vi^tories, which he
must gain, that would acquire such Trophies, Still to wage war against our
passions, is the way to live in peace.
whose glory is taken away, neither by time nor Death.

This consent of the Senate is the Authority of our reason, which alone gives
value and esteem to our actions, and it is of her that we may learn the means in
obeying her to command over ou^ passions, and by the conquest o^ of this sway,
triumph over our selves, which is the bravest Victory of the World.

These Scepters and Crowns are so many marks of Sovereignty, which remain us
in propriety after subjection of so many fierce enemies, Heaven is the
Capitol, whither our good works conduct us in triumph, and where the voice of
Angels serves for Orators to publish the glory of our deeds, whose renown
remains eternal.

These great Roman Captains which made love to virtue though without perfect
knowledge of it, It Is not all, to love Virtue, It Is the practice
have sought for honor and glory in the overthrow of their enemies, but they
could never find the shadows of solid Honor, which thus they sought; from
whence it came to pass, that they have fashioned to themselves diverse
Chimera's, for to repast their fancy too greedy of these cheating objects. Nor
that there is no glory in a Conquest: but 'twas their ambition led them along
in Triumph, amidst their own Triumphing.

What honor had Caesar born away, if he had joined to his Trophies the slavery
of Cleopatra? he had exposed to view a Captive Queen, who otherwhile had
subjected him to her Lovedominion. He triumphs with an ill grace, ^'rewhom his
vice triumph.
But if the fortune of the war had delivered him this Princess, the fate of
Love would have given, even himself into her hands. Insomuch, that the Death of
Cleopatra immortalliz'd the renown of Caesar.

Asdrubal, according to Justin, triumphed four times in Carthage, ^ut this
famous Theater of honor where glory it self had appeared ^o often upon its
Throne, serves ^n conclusion for a Trophy to ^ Conqueror, insomuch, that it
^uried at once the renown, and ^emory, even of those that had presented
themselves triumphant personages.

To day Memphis is all-Triumphant, and on the morrow this proud City is reduced
to slavery. To day the report of its glory makes the world shake, and on the
morrow Travelers seek for it upon its own site, but find it not. O goodly
triumph! O fearful overthrow! What continual revolution of the wheel!
Marcellus shows himself at point of day upon a magnificent Chariot of Triumph,
and at Sunset his glory and his life finish equally their carreere. I mean, in
the twinkling of an eye, Fortune takes away from him all those Laurel-wreaths
which she had given him, and leaves him nothing at his death, It may be some
consolation in all our miseries, to see all else have their changes, as well as
we.
hut the regreet of having lived too-long.

Marius triump head diverse times, but with what tempests was the Ship of his
fortune entertained? Behold him now elevated upon the highest Throne of Honor
but if you turn but your head you shall see him all naked in his shirt,
half-buried under the mire of a common Sink, where the light of the day
troubles him, not being able to endure the Sun, a witness of his misfortunes.
Behold him first, I say, in all abundance of Greatness, and Sovereignty,
whereof the splendor dazles the world; but stay a little, and you shall hear
pronounced the sentence of his death, being abandoned even of himself, having
no more hope of safety.

How pompeous and celebrious was the Triumph of Lucullus? In which, he raised
admiration to the magnificence of an hundred Galleys all-armed in the Prow; a
thousand Chariots charged with Pikes, Halberts^, and Corselets, whose shocking
rumbles sounded so high, it frighted the admirers, though they celebrated the
Fetivall of the Victory. The number of Vessels of Gold, and other Ornaments of
the Triumph, was without number. The Statue of Mithridates also of Gold, six
foot high, with the Target all covered with precious Stones, served anew to the
Triumph. And of this Glory all the world together was an adorer; for the renown
of the Conqueror had diverse times surrounded the Universe.

But, what shame after so much glory! Great Men cannot commit little faults.
What infamy after so great honor! Lucullus, victorious over so many Empires,
is found in fine subjected under the dominion of his pleasures: his valor has
made may slaves every, where, and yet his sottishness renders hm in the end
slave to his own passions. Insomuch, that after he had exalted the splendor of
Rome's beauty, by his brave actions, worthy-admiration, he again blouzeth it is
luster by his excessive deboshes, all black with vice. And now it is in vain to
seek for Lucullus triumphant, since he is only to be found overthrown in
reputation, in which he survives; thus rendering himself doubly miserable.

We read of Epaminondas, Plutarchu, in Apophtheg. Reg. and Imp. Tr^^lis
sollicitusque circum ivit urbem.
that returning victorious from the Louctrians, he received with regreet the
Present of the honor of Triumph, which the Senate had prepared him,
apprehending evermore the deturne of the Wheel: so that the next morrow after
the Festival, he took on him mourning habit, to prepare himself betimes to
suffer the change of his fortune.

It is remark't in the history of Demetrius that entering in Triumph into
Athens, the people cast flowers, and an infinite number of golden Globes up and
down the ^treets, for a sign of a sumptuous ^ongratulation. But what sign of
Vicissitude and frailty, We are but as so many flowers planted by Nature in the
garden of the Earth, and only Death gathers us.
could there ^e more apparent, than this, which these flowers represented, ^nce
there is nothing more frail a Nature than they? And these ^alles showed also
by their round, and still rouling figure, that the Glory whereof they were the
^mbole, and Hieroglyphick, could ^ot be firm, and stable according as Truth it
self soon after published by a sudden change, which rendered the fate of this
Victor deplorable.

Consider a little upon the same subject, what revolutions has the Ball of
Empire made since the first Monarch, In like respect also we are as Bowls, for
still we roll along to the grave.
let it fall at his Death is it not credible, that it has ^u^ over diverse
times the circuit of the Universe, and its figure instructs us, that in the
inconstancy which is proper to all created things, it will still roll
incessantly from one to another; without ever staying, since its Center is n^
where at all? For so long as the world shall endure, a continual vicissitude
will be its foundation And what means can there be ^ find a seat upon the
earth, which may be sheltered from inconstancy which reigns soveraignly an^
necessarily, as essential to a^ whatsomever subsists here below I have not
been far, behold me upon return.

Tertullian assures us, that in t^^ Triumphs of the Romans, the ^ was a man
waged to cry aloud to the Triumpher,

Remember thou art a Man. Pliny passes farther yet, Worldly honors are so
many temptatiom, to make us idelatrize ou^ selves.
and tells us, that they were accustomed to put an iron ring upon the
Conquerours finger, in sign of servitude, as if silently to intimate unto him,
that he was besides himself, by an excess of vanity in this amplitude of
honor, wherein he saw himself elevated above his companions. And upon the
same subject, a great number of Historians do add, that about the Chariot of
the Triumpher, there were two men assigned, the one carrying a Deaths-head, the
other the Image of a Peacock, and both continually crying, Vanity is a
dangerous enemy, since it betraies us while it seems to oblige us, by the
complaceace which it gives us,
REMEMBER THAT THOU ART A MAN.

Certainly, vanity makes great Prize of us, then when we are elevated to some
eminent degree of honor. And though our heads be but as of dead-mens, for we
are dying uncessantly, and our miseries resemble us to those Images of
Peacocks, which cannot bear uptrain but upon ugly Feet: Yet our blindness is
so great, and this Self-love so extreme, that men are dazzled with too much
splendor and ama^ becomes slave to himself by loving himself with too much
passion Greatness and prosperity never let themselves bepossest, but to take
greater possession of us. And as they have allurements to charm us, and sweets
to ravish us; a Man had need implore the succor of Divine grace, if he would
escape their pleasing tyranny, and not thing but flight from them, or
contempt, can give us weapons to resist them. Let us still return to the point.

We read of Judas Macchabens, that returning victorious from Galilee, the
people conducted him to the Temple, by a way all tapistred with flowers.
Abraham after he had vanquished five Kings, was received in Triumph into Salem,
now called Jerusalem.

Judith received the honor of Triumph by the destruction of Holofernes, and
all the people of Bethulia laden with Palm, to make her triumphall wreaths,
cried out in her favor, Behold the glory of Jerusalem, and the joy of all her
Nation.

Joseph shows himself in Triumph also upon the Chariot of Pharaoh, Genesis 41.41,
42. etc.
who puts his royal Ring upon his finger, gives him his chain of gold and
makes him publicly, to be acknowledged for the second person of Egypt.

David triumphs over Goliath, with a magnificence worthy of his victory, and the
Virgins chant to his glory, Saul has killed his thousands and David his ten
thousands. 1. Sam. 18.7.


Mordecai also had his turn of Triumph, mounted upon the horse of Ahasuerus,
and had his praises Heraldized by Haman, in these terms: Thus shall it be done
to the man, Esther 6.1^.
whom the King will honor

All these triumphs are worthy of admiration, I avouch it: but the Triumph over
our selves, is worthy astonishment, as having to combat our passions, and
conse quently the winning'st enemies of the world, I say, the winning'st, or
the pleasing'st, since they guard themselves only with such kind of weapons,
whose hurtings make us often sigh rather for joy than grief.

Certainly, the Victory of reason over all the revolten faculties of our
souls, merits alone the honor of a Triumph; and what advantage soever a man
has over his enemies, he himself is yet still vanquished, if his vices be not
subdued. I pursue my design.

They which have enthronized Virtue in their breasts, have laid their
foundations upon the ruins of their passions, to testify to us, that a Man
cannot be virtuous with their predominancy. And after essay of diverse means
upon design to vanquish them, I have found none more powerful, than this, The
Meditation of Death, but if any doubt this, the trial on it will be profitable
for him.

How is it possible that a Man should let himself be mastered with the passion
of Revenge, if he but muze of that Vengeance, which his sins may draw down
every moment upon his head, as being every hour in estate to dic? He shall
hear rumble in his ears the thunder of Divine Justice, by the continual
murmur of his sighs, which advertize him of the approaches of Death. What
courage can he have to avenge himself, being upon point himself to suffer the
torment of eternal vengeance?

Thou that art Vindicative, will thou then quench the ardour of thy Choler,
feel thine own pulse, and consider that this pety slow fever, wherewith thou
art stormed, leads thee by little and little into the grave.

Who can be Ambitious, It is more honor for a man to avenge himselfe^ of his
choler, than of his enemy.
if musing of Death, since he must quit all with his life? Let us ponder a
while the fate of those arrogant spirits, which have mused themselves to
conquer the vain greatnesses of the Earth. What has been in fine their share
at the end of the carriere? They have had nothing but unprofitable regreets to
have so ill employed their time, finding themselves so poor with all their
treasure, as if they had been born the wretched'st of the world. Thou
Ambitious-one, will thou be cured of the disease of thy Passion, think each
hour of the day, that that which thou now hear strike, may be thy Last.

Who would sigh for profane love, Mortal frailty brings blemish to the
fairest visages, and mightily takes from their opinion being well considered.
after these objects of dust, and ashes, if he often considered, that he
himself is made of nothing else, and that this noisome and corruptive matter
seeks nothing more, than abysses of the grave, there to hide within its loath
somnesse, in effect who would give his flesh a prey to pleasures, if he would
consider that the worms do in expectation, make their fees thereof already.
The meditation of Death, serves for temperament to all sorts of delights. And
if a Man be capable of love in this muze, it cannot be other than of his
Salvation, since this object is eternal, but all others of the world
perishable. Unfortunate Lovers search the solace of your immodest passions in
the Anatomy of the subject whereof you are Idolarers. Be assistant at that dead
view. Think of your own Death. Behold you are cured.

What wretched rich man would be so much in love with his treasures, He which
considers of that wretchedness which is adjunct to Death, easily mispriseth
the riches of this life.
if he would consider, that Death robs him from them every day, making him die
continually, and that at the end of the term of his life, he carries along with
him but the good, or the evil which he has done, to be either recompensed or
punished, but with a glory or a punishment, whereof Eternity alone must
terminate the continuance? Covetous Misers, the only means for you to be so
no more, is to celebrate your own funerals, by your Meditations, and often to
consider the Account, not of your riches, but that which you must render one
day of their fruition, since your Salvation depends thereon.

Who, in fine, would make a God of his Belly, seeking with passion all the
delights, which may tickle the sense of Taste, it he represented to himself the
miseries of the body, which he takes so much pains to nourish, and the rigor
of those inviolable decrees, which destinate him a prey to the worms, and the
remains of their leavings to rottenness? This consideration would be capable
to make him loose both appetite, and desire, at the same time, to nourish so
delicately his carcass, O souls all of flesh, repasting your selves with
nothing else, there is no invention to make you change nature, but this, to
Hear your selves dye by the noise of your sighs, to See your selves dye by the
wrinkles which furrow every day upon your visages, and to Feel your selves dye
by the beatings of your pulse, which indexeth this your hectic fever,
wherewith you are mortally attainted. This is a Probatum-remedy, the experience
thereof is not dangerous.

May not a man then maintain with much reason, If a man should forget all
things else but the miseries of his condition, this last were enough to
exercise the vastest memory.
that the thought of Death alone is capable to cure our souls of the disease of
their passions in doseing them both the means, and the Virtue to triumph over
them. But if of this you desire an example, call to mind that, which I have
proposed you in the beginning of the Chapter. How mavelous is it that a great
Mornarch, who is able to maintain all manner of pleasure in his heart, with all
the delights which acompany it; celebrates himself his Funerals in midst of
his carriere of life, beginning to reign at the end of his reign, since that
last object is always present before his eyes. His Passions do assail him, but
he vanquisheth them, they give him combat, but he leads them in triumph, and
buryes them altogether in the Tomb, which he prepares himself. Consider a
little the glory which is relucent in this action.

We read of the Kings of Arabia, that they triumphed upon Dromidaries, the
Kings of Persia upon Elephants, of Croatia upon Bulls, the Romans upon horses,
and yet it is remarkt of Nero, that be made himself be drawn in Triumph by four
Hermaphrodite Mares. Camillus by four white Horses. Mark Antony by four Lions,
Aurelian by four Hearts, Caesar by forty Elephants Heliogabulus by four Dogs.

Moreover, the Poets do assure us, that the triumphant Chariot of Baccus was
drawn by Tigers, Neptunes by Fishes, of Thetis by Dolphins, Diana's, This
Vanity is a most contagious malady, and the only preservative, is the
remembrance of Death.
by Hearts, of Venus by Doves, Juno's by Peacocks.

All these objects of pomp, and magnificence, whereof histories, and Fables
would enternize the vanity, have for all that done nothing but pass away, and
though a little remembrance of them stay with us; it is but the memorial of a
Chimera, and of a fantasme, since it preaches nothing else to us, but the ruin,
and nonentity, of that which has been otherwhile. O how glorious a Triumph is
it, These things ruminated on, will make us wise.
when we our selves are encharioted over our passions now enslaved and
subjected under the Empire of Reason? There is nothing so glorious, there 'is
nothing so magnificent: For these Dromidaries, these Elephants, these Bulis,
these Horses, these Hermaphrodite Mares, these Lions, Stags, and Tygres
aforementioned, are but brute beasts, which draw along in train after them
others as as brutish as themselves, as suffering themselves to be transported
with vanity, which only reduces them to this beastlysemblant vanity. Let us
turn our face unto another side.

SA^^LLIC^S in his ENNEADS, actively peswades us to believe, that the
Christians of Aethiopia do carry in their processions, great vessels full of
ashes, Let the fire of Divine Love glow upon our ashes.
to emblematize apparently the frailty of our nature. But may not we say upon
too much reason, that we are earthen vessels full of ashes; and what object
more sensibly can be presented before our eyes, to show us the truth of our
miseries, then this of our selves? From Earth is our production, and the same
serves us with nourishment, and for sepulture also, as if ashamed the Sun
should afford his light to out wretchedness.

Make we then every day Funeral processions, or at least visit in meditation
every hour our Tomb, as the place where our bodies must take so long abode.
Celebrate we our selves our own Funerals, The thought of our end is a sovereign
remedy against our passions.
and invite to our exequies Ambition, Avarice, Pride, Choler, Luxury,
Gluttony, and all the other Passions, where with we may be attainted, to the
end to be Conquerours, even by our own proper defeat: For when a Man yields to
the Meditation of Death, then reason commands sense; All obey to this
apprehension of frailty, and feebleness. Pleasures by little and little
abandon us, the sweets of life seem sour, and we can find no other quiet, but
in the hope of that, which Truth it self has promised us, after so much
trouble.

Proud Spirits: be ye Spectators of this Funeral Pomp, which this great Monarch
celebrates to day: He invites the Heaven and the Earth to his Exequies, since
in their view he accompanies his pourtrayed Skeleton unto the Tomb: his Body
conducts thither its shadow, the original the painted figure in attendance,
till a Metamorphosis be made both of one and the other. O glorious action! where
the Living takes a pride to appear Dead, as dying already by his own choice, as
well as necessity. O glorious action! where the Triumpher takes a glory in the
appearance of his overthrow. O glorious action! where all the honor depends
upon the contempt of the worlds honor. O glorious action! where Garlands of
Cypress dispute the pre-eminence with Laurel and Palm. O glorious action!
where the Conqueror under-going the Laws of Nature, elevates himself above it,
making his puissance to be admired, in his voluntary weakness. But I engage my
self too far in it.

Herodotus remarks, that the Queen Semiramis made her Sepulcher be erected upon
the entrances of the principal Gate of the Babylon.
City, to the end, that this sad object of wretchedness might serve for a
Schoolmasters to passengers, to teach them the Art, to know themselves. O
blessed Lesson is that, which the Tombs can afford us. O gracions Science is
that, which they instruct us!

Strabo testifies, No better School then the Churchyard.
that the Persians made Pipes of dead-mens bones, which they used at Festivals;
to the end, that the sad harmony which issued thence, might temper the excess
of joy. But may not we say our Lungs to be to us such kind of Whistles, and
that our dolorus sighs, which produce thence the harmony, are capable to
moderate the violence of our contentments? A strange thing it is, that all the
animated objects, which are affected by our senses, bear the image of Death,
and yet we never think but of Life. Let our eyes but fairly turn their regards
on all sides, All that lives, they may see dies; and what has no life, passes
away before 'em. Our ears are tickled with the sweet harmony of Voices, or
Instruments, or Tabors, or Trumpets: But these sonnds are but Organs spirited
with blasts, whose borrowed wind is lost, when the motion cease; and there
behold the Fail of their life. And for Instruments, The objest of our
nothingnesse has a grace and allurement capable to ravish the best spirits.
it is true they warble delightfully, yet their melody is often doleful to the
mind, when it considers that it proceeds from certain guts of dead beasts,
which Art has so contrived. Tabors being of the same nature, must also
necessary produce the same effects and Trumpets also do but sob in our ears,
since their clangor is forced only by the violence of a blast of sighs: Our
Taste cannot satiate the hunger of its appetite, but with dead and breathless
things: and all our other senses are subject to the same necessity. Insomuch,
Death is ever present, and at hand, to our heart, but still absent from our:
memory.
that Death environs us on all sides, though we be always her own, and yet we
never think on it, but in extremities: as if we were only to learn at the last
instant, that we are Mortal, and the hard experience which we make on it, were
the only Lesson, which by Nature is given us.

LORD render me capable, if it please thee, of this Science, which may
effectually teach me the Art, to know my self; to the end, that this knowledge
may represent to me always the reality of my wretchedness. Make me that I may
see my self, may understand and feel my self to die every moment: but so, that
I may see it with the eyes of my heart, perceive it with the eyes of my soul,
and feel it, by the sense of my conscience, therein to find my repose and
safety. I know well, that Nature mourns uncessantly the death of its works,
which are devoured every hourby time; and though no where thus can I see but
Sadness it self, yet ne'rethelesse remain I insensible of the horror of these
objects; and though they be terrible, my spirit not is afrighted. Render me
therefore, if it please thee, render me fearful, and make me even to tremble
in thinking of it, since the thought of it is so important, suffer me not to
live a kind of Death, without meditating of that life which is exempt from
Death, and whereof Eternity is the Limit. All my votes do terminate at this,
and all my wishes, which I address to thy bounty, that I may one day see the
effects of my hopes. Let us advance on our first proposition.

O how celebrious, and glorious is the Triumph over our selves! Let us leave
the Laurels, A Mnn has no greater enemy than himself,
and Palms to those famous Conquerours of Sea and Land. Their Crowns are now
metamorphosed into dust, their renown into wind, themselves into corruption,
and for a surplusage of mishap after the conquest of the whole World, they die
in the miseries, whereunto they were born.

Cyrus could not bound his ambition less, than to the vast extention of the
Universe; and yet a Tomyris
simple woman only prescribed him an allay, and placed his head in the range
of his own Trophies, Arthomides plays Jupiter upon Earth, his pourtraict is
the only Idol of his subjects: There is nothing more vain, than Vaineglory:
it is a body without soul or life, having no subsistence, but in imagination.
and yet one turn of the wheel casts him a sacrifice upon the same altar,
which he had erected to his glory his life glistering with triumphs, but his
death in such a ruin, clouded even the memory of his name All those stately
Triumphers, of whom Antiquity trumpets-out wonders, have had no other
recompense of their labors, but this vain conceit, that one day men would
talk of them. But what felicity is it to be praised in this world, to which
they are dead, and tormented in the other, wherein they live even yet, and ever.
I care very little, that men should talk of me after my Death, the esteem of
men is of so small importance, that I would not buy it so dear, as with a wish
only. It behooves to search reputation in the purity of the conscience, if a
man would have the glory of it last for ever. The renown of a good man is much
greater, than that of Caesar or Alexander; for this has no other foundation,
than the soil where it was sowed, and where the goodliest things display
themselves like flowers, and like flowers also have but a morning-flourish: But
the other having for a firm stay Eternity, The renown of a good man only
lasts always.
this object ennobleth it to perfection, and thus desiring nothing else but
heaven, it remains to us at the end for recompense.

Blondus in his Treatise of Rome, in its triumphant glory, reckons up three
hundred and twenty triumphs, all remarkable: but where are now these pompes,
these magnificences, this infinite number of Trophies, and a thousand other
ornaments, which ratled out their glory. Where are I say these conquerours?
where are their slaves? their Idolaters, their admirers? These pomps have but
flash't like lightning, and so passed away with the day, that accompanied their
luster. These mngnificences have been but seen; It is some comfort yet to a
wise man though himself fade away, to see that all things else do so too.
and so took their passage in flight. These trophies being only bravadoes of
the time, times inconstancy made them vanish in an instant, and all those other
ornaments made but ostentation of their continual vicissitude, as being an
inseparable accident of their nature. These vanquishers only had the name
on it, since Death led them away also in triumph, for all their triumphings.
Their captives were rather slaves of the miseries whereunto they were born,
than so by the absolute power of him who captived them. Their idolaters have
been immolated to the fury of years, which spare none; and their admirerers
have incurred the same fate with the subject, which they admired: Insomuch,
that of all together, remains nothing but a faint remembrance, which as it
waxes old, is effac't by little and little out of memory, and scarcely will it
subsist so much in the imagination, as to be in the end buried among fables.
Since Eternity only triumphs over Time, we should only strive to attain that.
Behold here the Anatomy of the glory of the world, see the true portraict of
its false Image. Contemplate, meditate, you will avouch with me, that All is
full of vanity.

O how stately and magnificent is the Triumph of Ages! what trophies may a man
see at their ever-rowling Chariot! what Conquerours are not in the number of
their subjection? what sovereign power can resist their violence? what newer
Triumph ^en this of years? Who can give in account the number of their
victories, and less the captives which Death serves in for their trophies?
What newer triumph again evermore then of months, of days, of hours, and
moments? For consider to your self, how many Kings, Princes, and Lords, die in
one age in all the places of the world. All these vanquishers are vanquished,
and led in triumph to the grave. Every Year makes its conquest apart, gives
battle, and carries away the victory over so many, A righteous man only
stands exempt ^^ from the terror of death.
and so many men, that hardly can one conceive so lamentable a truth; Months,
Days, Hours, and Moments, triumph in their courses; who can number all those
who died yesterday outright, or are dead to day? Nay more, how many die at
this hour, and at this very instant, that I entertain you with this discourse.
And all these defeats of mortality mark out to us the Triumphs, whereof time
only bears away the glory: But let us not pretend to share in it, it is not
worthy our Ambition. Let Ages, A good conscience is ever under shelter from all
the inconstant tempests of Age.
Years, Months, Days, Hours, and Moments, triumph over us: Virtue always
limits their puissance, and with it we may prescribe a bound to all these
Triumphants. Fair leave may they take to ruinate out-ward beauty, but that of
innocence is of proof against all their strokes. Well may they impair outward
graces; but those of heaven contemn their assaults. No doubt they may change
the visage of all the marvels of Art, and miracles of Nature: Our Resolution is
a rock in midst of all their storms, and may remain always it self without
undergoing other rules then its own. So that thus we may lead Time it self
along in triumph, if we live for nothing more then for Eternity.

I scorn the Tyranny of Ages, He which lives for eiernity, dreads no death.
my aim is beyond 'em all. I despise the power of years, my Ambition raigns
already out of their reach. Let Months, Days, Hours, and Moments, entrail all
things along with them; I for my part, franchise their carreere, since my scope
is much more farther yet. Let them triumph fully, my very defeat shall lead
them in triumph at the end of their term, for the eternity whither I aspire,
already assigns out their tomb. Let us stay no longer in so cragged a way.

The Emperor Trajan caused his Sepulcher to be enfram'd in the midst of Rome's
greatest place, as upon a stately Theater, on which his successors were to act
their parts. Every man dies for himself; Serius aut citius metam properamus ad
unam.
sooner or later we must arrive to the place, to which uncessantly we walk. Be
it to morrow, or to day, at the end of the term all is equal. Nor old nor young
can mark the difference in their course, being arrived to the end of their
carreere, for a hundred Ages when past, and one instant make but the same
thing. It Is only necessary to muze of our last gist in the grave, since
thither we run till we are out of breath, from moment to moment.

The Trojans would have the burying-places of their Princes to be in the most
remarkable places of the City, Places of burial are sad Theaters, where every
day are acted none but Tragedies
to the end, that this sad object might serve as a fixed Memento to remembrance
them, that the Tragedy, which had been acted by these yesterday, might again be
represented by some other to day.

The Philosophers know that objects move the faculties, and that according to
the quality of their impressions, they work upon the spirits, which contemplate
them. Let us say now, that of all the direful objects, which are presented to
our eyes, there is none more powerful over our apprehensions, then this of the
Meditation of Death, and the horror of the grave. The most courageous yield
themselves to these assaults, the most valiant resist not their violences. All
droop at approach of an enemy so redoubtable. But our defeat, it rightly
carried, is more glorious then our Triumph. What success is this, by being
overcome, to bear away the crown of victory? such submission is a mark of
Sovereignty.

Petrus Gregorius tells us of the Emperor Charles the fifth, If the meditation
of death make not a sinner change his life, nothing will do it.
that he caused his winding head-kercher to be carried before him for a
standard in all his Armies, six years before he died, to the end, that the
continual object of his greatness, might not be too powerful to tempt him to
misconceive himself.

We do the same every day, without thinking on it, for our shirts are in a
manner as so many winding sheets, which we carry always with us in all places
where we go: But if this sad object be not enough to moderate our ambition, and
rebate our vanity, this voluntary is inseparable from pain, we must needs
undergo the Law, It Is best to let Death be welcome. to us, since it is inevitable
which we impose upon our selves.

LORD suffer me not, if it please thee, so far to mistake my self, as never to
come to the point of meditating of this blessed Decree, which thou have imposed
on me, to die one day. But illuminate my spirit with the light of thy grace,
which may stead me as a Pharos, to show me the haven of the grave, where the
ship of my life must put ashore. Make me also, if it please thee, to be
ignorant of all things else, but the knowledge to live well, that I may also
dye so; and thus, let the miseries which accompany me, the mishaps that follow
me, and all the other afflictions which thy goodness has subjected me to, be
the ordinay objects of my thoughts, to the end, that I stray not from the way
of my salvation. And now have I no other passion, but to see the effects of
these prayers. Let us go to the end.

Those that have averred, that the world is to us an hostile Army, composed of
so many Soldiers as there are objects in nature, capable to agitate the power
of our passions, had very good reasons to defend the truth of their Thesis.
These objects of it make war against us continually, with all the assaults,
inventions, and stratagems of a cruel enemy. Beauty, that assaults our souls,
by the way of our eyes, with as much cunning as force; for at first view, it
amuseth the Sense with admiration, by a slight of complacence, to which its
sweets and allurements insensibly engage it. Afterward the Sensus Communis,
receiving the fair Species of the Idea of this fair enemy, presents them to the
Fancy, the Fancy to the Understanding, which after it has examined them
according to its capacity, offers them to the Will, which by a natural
apprehension finds it self obliged to love the subject from whence these
amiables do proceed. And now then it is the Cue of Reason, either to condemn or
authorize this love; but most often that becomes charmed it self, and we
vanquished. Not that Reason is not sufficiently strong and powerful, Our
passions are the flatteringest enemies of the world, for they assault us with
those semblant satisfactions to us, as may seem most agreeable; and thus they
are most ^o be feared.
but whereas its force and virtue depends merely upon grace, the contempt which
ordinarily it makes of this, renders both alike unprofitable. This is that
which obliges us in all these conflicts, to implore the help of heaven, rather
then to trust upon our strengths, and evermore to have a jealous eye to this
our subtle enemy, which yet can never get other advantage upon us, then that
which our wretchlesness suffers it to acquire.

The very fairest objects of the world, We cannot justly complain of our
defeat, since it is voluntary.
may well enforce admiration, but not love, since love cannot be formed in our
hearts, but by a powerful reflection of the amiable qualities which are found in
the subject, and in this it is necessary, that the understanding do operate,
and the will consent. And this cannot be done without a free deliberation,
which we absolutely authorize. Insomuch, that we cannot be overcome, if we rush
not into it with desire of our own overthrow. And this not so neither, as if
there were no trouble in the resistance; but rather it is a way to acquire much
more glory in the victory over beateous objects, by the power of reason. which
is more troublesome and difficult, then that which one gets over an enemy by
force of arms. But the honor also surpasses always the difficulty, The
rewards which God has prepared after all our troubles, do infinitely surpass
our deserts.
and what pain soever a man can possibly take, the prize and crown at last can
admit of no comparison.

We must then bravely combat those proud beauties, which make public
profession to enchain our hearts in irons, and put our souls upon the rack, and
let them see, to their confusion, that the natural Magic of their charms is
to us a new Art of Logic, which informs us to make Arguments, both to give
for granted their power, and yet destroy their force. Fair leave have they to
expose to view their blandishments, and graces: the light of Reason produces a
livelyer Day, whose luster duskes the midday-splendour; for by the aid of this
light a man may see, that all their quaintnesses are but dawbings, their
delicacies but artifice, and their attractives but only composed by
distillatories. And how can one Idolatrize them then, after meditational
presentment of these verities? Behold the only means to prescribe a rule over
these Sovereigns, who would impose it on the whole world. He commands best,
that can obey reason.
Not that this kind of combat requires force of courage, but rather of
prudence, after first a misprise of them to fly away, and not to put the
victory into hazard.

There are yet other enemies, which render themselves as redoutable as the
former, such are Ambition, riches, etc. what means is there to resist them, or
to speak better, to vanquish them? they have no less allurements, and sweets,
then the beauties aforespoken of, and though the force of them be different,
they cease not nevertheless, to excite and move the passions with all sort of
violence.

Ambition has its particular delicacies, and charms, to ravish men's hearts,
and soveraignize, over their souls; and I believe, that its Empire extends it
self far beyond that of Love: for all the world is not capable of this latter
passion, but of the other every man has a smatch from that defect, from our
original, where with a man is tainted. Vanity is bred and born with us, but it
is in our choice, whether to let it ever keep us company.
And this passion is so much the more to be seared, as it is natural, and
growing up with us in measure as we grow our selves. The means to vanquish it,
is to study to know ones-self, and thus plainly to see the frailty of our
foundation.

What Ambition can a man have, that knows the number of the greatest part of
the miseries and mishaps which accompany his life! To what can he pretend,
being not able to dispose of one only moment? Nay, what can he wish for beyond
himself, since for any long time together, It is the best Mystery of all humane
Trade, to learn to die daily, and in this Vocation they that are active
apprentises, are Masters.
he has not strength enough to look down to his own feet? What high aim can he
give his designs, since all his thoughts, his desires, and hopes, have their
limited scope beyond his power, as depending upon the Future, whereof he cannot
dispose. All lies then in this, to know our selves, that is, to consider the
certainties thus sensible, both of our defects and infirmities.

The Passion for Riches is always extreme, allowing no moderations in our
hearts. It is a kind of hydropick malady, wherein thirst increases the more
one drinks. A rich man of ten thousand pounds a year, wishes thirty thousand,
and if perhaps he see the effects of his desires, he soon conceives new ones,
being never able to find content in the enjoiment of the goods which he already
possesses.

That temperament of spirit, which Philosophy teaches us to live content in,
The true knowledge of Vertae, would soon insinuate its love.
whatsomever condition a man is in, is a virtue so chaste, that it suffers it
self to be possessed by no body in this age, wherein we are; not that a man
cannot enjoy it, but it is to be sought in the purity of the conscience, rather
then in the world, where it is unknown but only barely in name.

This greedy passion of heaping treasure upon treasure, is so proper to our
criminal and corrupt nature, that a man cannot guard himself from it, without a
special help from Heaven. Since that robbery, which our first Parents made in
the terrestrial Paradise, all our thoughts and hopes are so thievish, that they
would rob the future of those goods, which we wish for then, making no esteem
of those which we already possess; our hearts sigh uncessantly with
impatience, in attendance of a new acquist. What remedy now is there to cure so
contagious a malady, whose insensible dolor makes us often contemn a remedy?
Poverty of spirit is the greatest riches.
what means I say, to triumph over a passion so strong and puissant, and to
which our nature it self lends a hand? It is certainly an action of study,
where reason with time must get the advantage. It is necessary to consider
every time that this desire to amass riches, does press and force us; what
shall we do with all these treasures, after we have heapt them up? To leave
them to our heirs, it is to make them rich with our own loss, which they too
perhaps will laugh at, in the possession. It is, I say, to damn our selves for
others profit, as if we had never lived for our selves. To carry them into the
grave with us, is to have labored for forms; what shall then become on them?
We must of necessity leave 'embehind. It is the best providence in this world,
to lay up treasures for the other.
O cruel necessity! but yet most sweet and pleasing in its continual
meditation, since it teaches us to under-value all that may be lost.

There are a great number of other Passions, which may master us with the same
violence, according to the disposition of the predominating humor which
possesses us; such are Choler, Envy, Detraction, etc. but with the only force
of Reason, assisted with the usual grace, which concurs in all good actions, we
may easily be able to triumph over them.

We read of Pyrander King of Egypt, that being one day in choler against one of
his slaves, he heard a clap of thunder so terrible, that he became suddenly
quite appeased; as if he had had this thought, that the gods were angry with
his fury, since they clamoured louder then he. Let us have often the same
thoughts, but with more truth and illumination, every time that this blind
passion would exercise over us its tyranny. My meaning is, that in the
violentest heat of our choler, we lend an ear of imagination to the noise of
the thunder of divine Justice, that thus we may be appeased at the same time,
It is a good methed, first to fear God, then to love him.
for what ground have we to be armed with fury, against our neighbors, when
heaven is animated with just vengeance against our selves?

The Passion of Envy as black as hell, and the most criminal of all together
proceeds from an invenomed mischievousness, to which nature contributes nothing
at all. It is a devilish passion, Envious men are most their own enemies, and
rob themselves of their own quiet.
whose fury and rage keeps the soul in fetters, and whose thievish jealousy
robs away the goods of others in a hounding after them, and yet possesses none
of them. What means is there then to vanquish this untameable vice? No other
but this, to consider the Justice of that adorable Providence which imparts
never its favors and graces, but with weight and measure. God cannot do but
justly, since his Justice is no other then himself. Then if this man have 10000
pounds a year, and I but a 100, whereof can I complain? shall I doubt the
reason from Reason it self? shall I accuse Justice of injustice? To take for
granted that the Sovereign of all does what he will, and the Almighty what he
pleases, I will always rely to that balance which God bears in his hand,
and by which himself weighs his actions to the poize of his will, and
consequently to the measure of his Justice. What objection can be made against
this truth?

Envious Maligner, The envious man is nover is health, tortured with the
Hectic Fever of this everburning passion.
adore that, which thou can not comprehend, and then instead of pining for
the good, which thou enjoiest not; give thanks to Heaven for those which thou
possessest, and how small soever they be, they are ever great enough to amuze
thee all thy life-long to the study of thankful acknowledgment.

The Passion of Detraction is easily overcome by a fresh consideration of our
own proper defects, for of all the Vices whereof we accuse one another, our
hearts may convince us. If I call a man thief, am not I a greater thief then
he, since against the Laws of charity, I rob him of his honor by this injury?
Suppose he be a false villain, yet in calling him by this name, I betray the
secret, which his fault should in charity impose upon me. But if he be nothing
so; It is more important to learn to bold ones peace, then to hold up the talk.
lo I my self am now a Traitor both at once of his reputation, and mine own
conscience. There is no fault more unpardonable, then this of Obloquie, and in
regard that for a just expiation of the crime, it is fitting that the tongue
which did the hurt, should give the remedy.

Thou Detractour, if thou can not moderate thy passion, speak ill only of
thy self, Study thine own vices, Meditate thine own faults, and Accuse thy self
of them before Heaven, which is already witness of thy crimes; and by this way
of reproching, thou shall obtain one day to be praised eternally. Behold me now
at the end of the Chapter.

After all these particular remedies with which a man may learn easily to
resist the tyranny of the Passions, He that often muzes of Death, will every
day learn to live well.
there is none more sovereign then this of the Meditation of Death. All the
rest abbut at this only, as the most authorized, by daily experience.

Great Kings, suffer your selves to be led in triumph by your own thoughts to
the grave, and by the way consider how your greatnesses, your riches, your
delights, and all the magnificence of your Court, follow you step by step,
being brought along by the same fate, whose absolute Tyranny spares none. And
since you may dye every hour, think at the least sometimes of this truth, to
the end that that hour of your life's dyall surprise you not. Much good do it
you to nourish up your selves deliciously, yet all these Viands where with you
repast your selves are empoisoned, as containing in them the Caliditas,
Frigiditas, Humiditas, Siccitas.
four contrary qualities, whose discord puts into skirmish your humors, and
this battle is an infallible presage of your overthrow: well may you chase away
Melancholy, by virtue of fresh pleasures, these very contentments cheat away
your life, for though you think of nothing but how to pass away the time, it
passes ere you think on it, and Death comes before you have forseen his
arrival. Well may you cocker up your bodies, content your senses, and satiate
the appetite of your desires: Pleasures make us grow old as well is griefs.
the Taper of your life has its limited course, as well as that of the day.
Every man pursues his carreere, according to the inviolable Laws of Heaven,
which has assigned them out at once, both the way, Fata volentem ducunt,
nolentem trahunt.
and the bounds. Suffer Time to lead you by the hand to the Tomb, for fear he
hale you thither. But in dying muze at least of that Life, which never shall
have end. All the felicities which you have possessed, are vanished with the
flower of your age, and all those which you will yet enjoy, will fly away with
the rest. What will remain with you then, at the last instant of your life,
Those pleasures cost very dear, which are worth nothing but repentance.
but an irksome remembrance, to have tasted a thousand pleasures, which are
past, and to have lost so many means of having had others which would have
lasted eternally. Disinvest your selves then, for one hour every day, of all
your greatness, and in the presence of your own selves, meaning in review of
all your miseries, and mishaps, which are proper to you, confess the truth of
your nullity, and of your corruption; by this search you shall recover your
selves, and by this confession thus shall you Triumph over your selves.

A PROLUSION Upon the EMBLEM of the last Chapter.
VIewing the Ranges of a Library
Of Dead men's bones pil'd in a Coemitarie
Great Alexander finds Diogenes,
And thus they Dialogue.
Alex. Cynick, among these
Ruins of frail Mortality, what do look?

Diog. For that wherein I fear to he mistook,
I seek thy Father Philip's Scull among
This pell-mell undistinguishable Throng.

Alex. Let Us see, which is it? show me.


(Diog.) Sure it is that,
Whose nose is bridge-faln.

Alex. Dead men's all are flat.


Diog. Why then it is that where shrowds perpetual night,
Cav'd in those hollow eye-holes, void of sight.

Alex. Still all are so,


Diog. Why it is yon' skinless brow,
Chap-faln, lip sunk, with teeth-disranked row,
Yond' peeled scalp

Alex. Thus still are all alike.


Diog. So shall both You and I. and let this strike.
Thy knowledge Alexander, and Thy sense,
'Twixt King and slave once Dead's no difference.

L'envoy. THere is no difference, Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat. Her.
Death has made
Equal the Scepter, and the Spade.
No dreader Majesty is now
In The Royal Scalp, then Rustic brow.
Fair NEREVS has no beateous grace,
More then Thersites' ugly face,
Now both are dead, odds there is none
Betwixt the fairest, and fowlest One.
Tell me among'st the hudled pile
Of Dead men's bones, which was ere while
The subtil'st Lawyer's, or the Dull
And Ignoramian Empty Skull?
Was yond' some valourous Samsons arm?
Or one that never drew sword for harm.
Or wink and tell me, which is which,
Irus the poor, or Croesus, rich?
What are they now, who so much stood
On Riches, Honors, and high Blood?
There Is now no Difference, with the Dead
Distinctions all are buried,
Only the Soul as Ill, or Well,
Is Differenc't or in Heaven, or Hell.

Alexander, and Diogenes discoursing among th^^ Sepulchers of the Dead, the
Cynick tells the Ki^^ That in the Grave, Monarchs and Meaner M^^ are all alike.


THE MIRROR WHICH FLATTERS NOT.
CHAP. IV.
WHat a horrid spectacle is this? what a frightful object? See you not this
great number of Dead Men's sculls, which heaped one upon another, make a
mountain of horror, and affright, whose baleful, and contagious umbrage,
insensibly invites our bodies on to the grave. What a victory is this over
these? but what an inhumanity? what a defeat? but what a butchery? May we not
say, that sury and rage, have assassinated, even Natures-self, and that we now
alone remain in the world, to celebrate its funerals by our lamentations, and
regreets. Fathers, Mothers, Children, Nobles, Death is a severe Judge, and
pardons none.
and Plebeians, Kings, and their subjects are all pell-mell in this stacke of
rotten wood, which Time like a covert, but burning fire consumes by little and
little, not able to suffer, that ashes should be exalted above dust.

Proud Spirits, behold here the dreadful reverse of the medall. All these sad
objects of mortality, and yet actively animated, with horror and affright, by
their own silence enjoin the same to you thus to amuze your Spirits in the
contemplation of their deplorable ruins. If you be rich, See here those, who
have possessed the greatest treasures of the world, are not now worth the
marrow of their own bones, whereof the worms have already shared the spoil. If
you be happy; The greatest savourities of fortune, are reduced to the same
noisomness as you see the filth that enrounds them. If you be valiant, Hector,
and Achilles, are thus here overcome, behold the shameful marks of their
overthrow. If you be men of Science, Here lies the most learned of the world.
It Is the Epitaph on their tomb, Read it.

I grant more-over, Death may be contemned, but not avoided.
you may be the greatest Princes of the earth. An infinite number of your
companions are buried under these corrupted ruins. Suppose in fine, that your
Sovereignty did extend it self over all the Empire of the world; A thousand and
a thousand too of your semblables, have now nothing more their own, then that
corruption, which devours, even to the very bones.

Ambitious Heart, see here a Mirror which flatters not, since it represents to
the life the realty of thy miseries. Well may thou perhaps pretend the
conquest of the Universe; even those, who have born away that universal Crown,
are now crowned, but with dust, and ashes.

Covetous wretch, behold the book of thy accounts, It Is no wonder the Miser
never thinks of Death, his thoughts are only taken up for this Life.
calculate all that is due to thee, after payment of thy debts: learn yet after
all this, that thy soul is already morgaged to devils, thy body to worms, and
thus, notwithstanding all thy treasures, there will not abide with thee one
hair upon thy head, one tooth in thy chops, nor one drop of blood in thy
veins, nor never so little marrow in thy bones, nay the very memory of thy
being, would be extinguish't if thy crimes did not render it eternal, both
here, and in the torments of hell.

Proud arrogant man, measure with thy bristled brows, Pride is but like the
nooneflourish of a flows or, which at Sunset perishes.
the dilatation of the earth, Brave with thy menacing regards the heavens, and
the stars. These molehills of rottenness, whereof thy carcass is shaped,
prepare toward the tomb of thy vanity. Seneca Epist. Quotidie morimur, quotidie
enim demitur aliqua par, vitae.
These are the shades of Death inseparable from thy body, since it dies every
hour. If thou elevate thy self to day, even to the clouds; to morrow thou shall
be debased to nothing. But if thou doubt of this truth, behold here a thousand
witnesses which have made experience of it.

Luxurious Wanton, give thy body a prey to voluptuousness; deny nothing to thy
pleasures, but yet consider the horror, and dreadfunesse of that
Metamorphosis, when thy flesh shall be turned to filth, and even that to worms,
and those still to fresh ones, which shall devour even thy coffin, and so
efface the very last marks of thy Sepulture.

How remarkable is the answer of Diogenes to Alexander? What art thou musing
on, Cynicke, says this Monarch to him one day, having found him in a
Charnellyard, I amuze my self here (answers he) in search of thy father Philips
bones among this great number, which thou see; but my labor is in vain, for
one differs not from another.

Great Kings, the discuss of this answer, may serve you now as a fresh
instruction, to insinuate to you the knowledge of your selves. You walk in
triumph to the Tomb, followed with all the train of your ordinary
magnificences: but by being arrived at this Port, blown thither with the
continual gale of your sighs, your pomp vanishes away, your Royal Majesty
abandons you, your greatness gives you the last Adieu, and this your mortal
fall equals you now, to all that were below you. The dunghill of your body,
has no preeminence above others, unless it be in a worse degree of
rottenness, of being of a matter more disposed to corruption: But if you doubt
of this truth, Corruprio optimi pessima
behold and contemplate the deplorable estate, to which are reduced your
semblables. Their bald scalps have now no other Crown, then the circle of
horror, which environs them; their disincarnated hands hold now no other
Scepter but a pile of worms, and all these wretchednesses together, give them
to see a strange change, from what they were in all the glories of their Court.
The seriout meditation of his miserable condition, it is capable to make any man
wise.
These palpable and sensible objects, are witnesses not to be excepted against.
Let then your souls submit to the experiment of your senses.

But what a Prodigy of wonders here! do I not see, the great Army of Xerxes,
reduced and metamorphosed into a hand full of dust? All that world of men in
those days, which with its umbragious body, covered a great part of the earth,
shades not so much as a foot on it with its presence. Be never weary of thinking
of these important truths.

Seneca in the Tragedy of Hercules brings in Alcmena, In Hercule Oetaeo. Ecce,
vix totam Hercules Complevit urnam, quam leve est pondus mihi, C^totus ether
pondus incubuit leve?
with grievous lamentation, bearing in an urn, the ashes of that great
Monster-Tamer; And to this esfect makes her speak; Behold, how easily I carry
him in my hand, who bore the Heavens upon his shoulders. The sense of these
words, ought to engage our spirits to a deep meditation upon the vanity of
things, which seem to us most durable. All those great Monarchs who sought an
immortality in their victories and triumphs, have mist that, and found Death at
last, the enjoyment of their Crowns and splendours, being buried in the same
Tomb with their bodies. See here then a new subject of astonishment.

The Mathematicians give this Axiom, The world is a Game at Chesse, where
every of the Set ha^s his particular Name and Place designed: but the Game
done, all the pieces are pellmell^d into the Bagg: and even so are all mortals
into the grave.
All lines drawn from the Center to the Circumference are equal, Kings and
Princes, abate your haughtiness, your subjects march fellow-like with you to
the Center of the grave. If life gave you pre-eminence; Death gives them now
equality. There is now no place of affectation, or range to be disputed: the
heap of your ashes, and their dust, make together but one hillock of mould
whose infection is a horror to me. I am now of humor not to flatter you a
whit.

We read of the Ethiopians, that they buried their Kings in a kind of Lestall:
and I conceive thereof no other reason, then according to the nature of the
subject, they joined by this actiotion, the shadow and the substance, the
effect with the cause, the stream with its source; for what other thing are we
then a mass of mire, dried and baked by the fire of life; but scattered again
and dissolved by the Winter of Death; and in that last putrefaction, to which
Death reduces us, the filth of our bodies falls to the dirt of the earth, as
to its center, for so being conceived incorruption, let us not think strange to
be buried in rottenness.

Earth, dust, and ashes, It Is well men hide themselves after death in the
Earth, or the enclosure of Tombs, their sulth and noysomnesse would else be too
discovert.
remain still the same, be it in a vessel of gold, or in a coffin of wood, or
in a Mausolean Tomb of marble. Great Kings, well may you cover your
wretchedness, with a magnificent Sepulcher, they will for all this not altar
condition, the noisomeness of your bones is never without the abhorment, and
putrefaction proper to them. And if (suppose) their mass be reduced into dust,
and the wind carry it away, the very wings of the wind are laden with
rottenness, and can scatter nothing else in a thousand places, where ere they
fall. I will a little straggle out of the way without loosing my aim.

Fabius Paulus reports, that upon the Tomb of Isocrates, there was a Siren
seated upon a Ram, and holding a Harp in her hand. And this gave to understand,
This famons Orator charmed men's souls through their ears, by the sound of his
admirable eloquence. But whereas no melodious air was heard from the mute Harp
of this Siren, it was required of the Spectators, How unsufferable is the
vanity of men, who even upon their Tombs, will have the display of their
vainglory.
to take for granted in imagination, the harmony of her sweet touches, as
emblem of the sweetness of this great Orators voice: But Death imposes
silence on both, and thus remained they a sad sight, both in object, and
mysteries contained under; since now of these passages remains no more but a
weak remembrance, and whereof Time by little and little, effaceth even the
Ideas.

Johannes Baptista Fontanus relates that upon the Sepulcher of Q. Martius there
was 'graven a Ram supported upon the two fore-feet, and a Hare dead by its
side. The Ram represented the generosity of this great Captain in all combats,
and the dead Hare, his vanquished enemies: But what honor now remains him after
their defeat? This vanquisher of an infinite number of miserable wretches, is
at the last overcome with his own miseries. Though Triumphant in a thousand
combats, one marble stone now contains all his trophies. and glory. O
deplorable fate! to have but seven foot-earth, after conquest of the greatest
part of the earth.

Plutarch assures us, that upon the Tomb of Alexander, there was represented in
Emblem Asia, and Europe, appearing vanquished, and in the chains of their
captivity, with this mot, which served as a fresh Trophy, The victory of
Alexander. O poor victory O sorry triumph! for where are now its Laurels, and
Palms? This great Monarch conquered the whole world, but being never able to
conquer his ambition, This in the end, has taken away all the glory, which it
made him acquire. Great Princes, advance then on to the conquest of the
Universe, The misprise of the world is more glorious then all its honor
but I advertise you one thing, All those that are returned from the same
action, have much repented themselves, to have taken so great pains for so small
a matter. Le jeu ne vant pas la chandelle
The Game's not worth the Candle, as the Proverb. But if you love to Conquer,
and triumph; your passions will furnish you with such subjects every hour.
Let Us once see the end of our carriere.

We read of Cyrus, that he caused to be engraven these words upon the stone of
his Monument, HERE LIES THE CONQVEROVR OF THE PERSIANS: But what excess of
mishap could have reduced so great a Monarch to such an excess of
wretchedness, must it be said? Here Lies, of one that lately stood so
triumphant? Would he have men admire his past glory in view of that vault,
where he was enterred? would he have men adore the magnificences of his Life
upon the same Altar, where Death exhibits him as a victim? Is not this a vanity
more worthy of compassion, than envy?

The History of the life of Themistocles was to be read upon the marble of his
Sepulcher, but 'twas forgotten, there to depaint also the story of his Death.
Behold the high deeds of Themistocles, It Is but a poor satisfaction to have for
recompense of so much pains, but the estentation of a glorious Sepulcher.
this was the inscription. But to us it may be of importance to consider, that
although the wonders, which he had done, were only graven upon the port of his
Monument, yet for all that, they also made their entry into it, and followed
the fate of their author: so that now rests nothing of Themistocles, but Name,
for of all that he has done, the wind has carried away the glory, and the
small remembrance on it, which sticks by us, is but a pourtraict of vanity.

There was represented upon the Tomb of Joshua, the Sun with this inscription.
Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon. Josh. 10.12.
True it is, the Sun stood still in the midst of his carreere, to give full
Triumph to this great Captain over his enemies: But after they were overthrown,
this Planet jealous of his glory conducts him also to his grave, as not
enduring to see any thing upon earth, as durable as it self. There is no course
swister, then that of Life to Death.
So true it is, that all things here flit away, with the swiftness of a
Torrent; though their flight to us seem much more slow.

The Epitaph, which some Sit fides penes Authorem.
writings report us of Adam, has not so much splendor and magnificence, as the
others. He is Dead, says his Epitaph, speaking only of him. O excellent
Epitaph! Men shall say no more of you one day, Great Kings. Well may you with
Q. Martius come off victorious from all combats, and enter in triumph into
Cities with Alexander. Well may you cause to be insculp't the History of your
Acts, upon the marble of your Sepulchers, like as Themistocles; and well may
you Subpoena the Sun for a witness of the reality of your triumphs, like
Joshuah: Yet for all this, men shall say no more of you, then was said of ADAM,
HE IS DEAD. They are dead, and there is all.

The Epitaph of David composed by some, from consequence of Scripture, is
worthy remark: Here lies the invincible Monarch, who in his childhood overcame
Bears, in his adolescency Lions, in his youth Giants, and in his age himself.
Travellour envy not his repose, for thou art in the way to it thy self. These
words are express in a near regard to the sense of those, which are couched in
Scripture upon this subject, and I thereto can add no more then this discourse
of my astonishment, and rapture.

What! so great a Prince as David, favored by heaven, and redoubted upon
earth, and so endowed by Nature, shall he glympse out a little but like a flash
of lightning, and pass away like a puff of wind? where then shall a man find
constancy and assurance? Inconstancy is the only foundation of created things.
What can be the site and foundation of all these our new wonders of the world,
whose beauty seems to contest for luster with the very Sun? O LORD, to me it is
a most agreeable consolation, to see in my race to the tomb, how all things
follow me. I am well apayd, that there is nothing here below durable, but thy
Word alone, since this makes me hope for an Eternity, which shall never be
subject to the inconstancy of times. Let all things LORD change with me, and
thus I love this change for in rolling along, from time to time toward the
grave, I still approach toward thee, and consequently to my sovereign repose,
and last selicity. Let us follow our first traces.

The first Epitaph which was was put upon Tombs, was that of the fair Rachel,
as is partly remark't from Scripture, and Borchardus assures us it was a
Pyramide, which Jacob erected, Genesis 35.20.
sustained upon a dozen precious stones, with this inscription, HERE LIES
BEAVTY AND LOVE.

Ladies, let your sweetness and blandishments now change language, and let them
tell us no more that you are fair, since Beauty is buried in the Tomb of the
fair Rachel: But if you make bravado of your crisped hairs, whose glistering
charms dazzle the eyes, and captivate men's souls at once: Her bright locks
dispersed into a thousand golden wreaths, had the power to enchain men's hearts,
and yet her virtue was to despise this power. But for all this, Ladies, if you
be fair to day, there is a tomorrow when you shall not.
notwithstanding Nature was never able to exempt from rottenness this M^stris,
or Masterpiece of the works of her hands. Suppose that Majesty it self, has no
better Mirror then from the clear reflections of your ivory foreheads:
Rachels was so perfect, that it is in vain to seek terms to express its,
accurateness, and yet now it is nothing but ashes, if so much.

Let your Eyes (suppose) be more clear and beatiful then the Sun, able to make
a rape upon men's liberties, and enamourate the sternest hearts; those of Rachel
were so admirable and bewitching, that she her self redoubted their force and
power. Looking her self in a Mirror, All the tenures of bodily perfections are
held of time, whose inconstancy steals away with them every moment.
her own eyes enflamed her, and of this pleasing heat, she apprehended the
influence, being her self even tempted to desire it: But for all this, those
two sparkling wonders, quickened with Natures sweetest, and most amiable graces,
are now nothing but rottenness and corruption.

Be your Cheeks half Lilyes, half Roses, your lips Carnation-Gilly-flowers,
your teeth Orient Pearl, your bosom purest Alabaster, and all these lovely
parts enlivened with a spirit divine: fair Rachel possessed all these perfections
soveraignly, and more then ever you saw, or wished, as elevated above your
knowledge. But (O mishap) she herself, in whom all these rare beauties were
united, and assembled, is now no more ought at all; Every thing fades sooner in
us, then vanity and sin.
or if she be somewhat, it can be but a little dust, and earth, and ashes,
which the worms keep possession of in deposite. O fearful metamorphosis.

Ladies, will you yet presume your selves fair, after you have thus now
assisted in imagination and thought, to the funerals of Beauty it self after
you have read, I say, the Epitaph, which Truth it self has written upon her
Sepulture. I grant you have a thousand sweets, and graces: yet now at least
confess ye, that these blandishments are but of so thin aerial worths, that the
wind carries them away, as if they were composed of naught else; for scarcely
have they birth, but you see them decay, and then the misprise, that each one
makes of them, renders them more capable to produce pity then love.

It is remarked in the life of the happy Francis Borgia, of the Society of the
Jesuits, that being engaged in the world to seek a fortune, although the
greatness of his birth, and merits, were of very great consideration; the
Emperor Charles the fifth committed to his charge the dead body of his dear
Spouse, to be conducted and carried to the Sepulcher of her ancestouts, which
he undertook, holding for an excess of honor the commandment which he had
received, and the particular choice which his Majesty had made of his person.
But then, when being arrived to the place, where were to be performed the last
Exequies of this Princess, they were desirous to visit the corpse, according to
the ordinary formalities accustomed to be practiced in an action so important.
Never was seen so much horror, and dismay, There is no object more affrightful
then mortal misery, but the daily habit of our sad experiences, takes away the
horror. But O the worm of conscience is to weak souls much more dreadful,
then those which devour the body.
as upon overture of the Coffin, on the countenances of the Spectators. They
look for the body of this Princess in his presence, and it is not to be found,
for none can know it; her visage heretofore full of blandishments, and all the
graces, both of Majesty, and sweetness is now but a heap of filth, whereof the
worm^ in swarms, and still encreafing, keep the Court of guard upon the
putrefaction. And the rest of her body is still a fresh stock for these
vermin, who have now already reasonably welll satisfied their hunger with this
prey.

Even those that enwrapped this Princess in her winding linen, dare not
maintain 'twas she, and he to whose care the body was deposited, knows not
what to say, finding himself so confounded, and astonished with so sudden and
affrightful a Metamorphosis, that he straight resolved at that instant, to quit
the world, and divest himself of all his greatnesses, since they are not able
to exempt the body from corruption.

Ladies, suffer your selves to be no more surprised by vanity, you see to what
extremity of horror and misery, are reduceable your allurements and charms.
All beauties but of virtue are still changing.
The greatest Princess of the world, and one of the fairest as has been, being
now fallen from her Imperial Throne into the grave, not one of her attendants
can retain any knowledge of her in so short a space. The worms having effaced
the lineaments of her resemblance, have inveloped it so deep into corruption,
that no where is it to be found else being but Rottenness. Reader, render up
thy self to the hits of a Truth sa sensible.

It is reported of Semiramis, that she caused to be put upon her Tomb this
Inscription. The King that shall have need of money, shall find within this
Sepulcher as much as he would have in it. And sometime after, King Darius
transported with a violent passion of Avarice, caused this Sepulcher to be
opened; but found within no other riches, ^hen of so much gold as was
necessarily employed, in the engraving of these words. Covetous wretch, It is
an insolence to the privileges of nature, to trouble the repose of the Dead.
which come to disturb the repose of the dead, satiate thy greedy passion
upon the treasure of my miseries, since this object is powerful enough to make
thee undervalue all the riches of the world.

You that are Covetous, Enter often, at least in Meditation, into Tombs; visit
to such effect the Churchyards, and you shall find therein more riches then
you wish for, considering the horror of that rorten earth, wherein your
semblables are enterred, you will reason without doubt thus;

To what purpose at last will stead me all the treasures, which I amass up in
my coffers, if the very richest of the world be but earth, and ashes before my
eyes? What shall I do at the hour of my death, with all the goods which I now
possess, if even my body be a prey destinated to worms and rottenness?

LORD, I aim at nothing of this world, but that glory alone, which a man may
acquire by the contempt of it, but as it is a glory, whereof the acquisition
depends of thy grace, All our hopes depend from grace, nothing from our selves
more then my force; give me the Courage, if it pease thee, to surmount all the
temptations, which shall oppose themselves against my design of Victory, to the
end, that my vows may be heard, and my pains recompensed. I return to my self.

When I consider, that all the world together, is but as it were a Caemitary or
Churchyard, wherein every hour of the day, some wretchedness, or other,
brings to the grave those whom such their miserable condition has destroyed, I
have no more passionate desire of life, since evils and troubles are
proprietaries of it rather then we. He which meditates of another man's death,
puts himself in mind of his own, since we are all slaves to to the same fate
Who can keep account of the number of persons, that expire at this very
moment, that I am now speaking to you, or the different deaths, which terminate
the course of their carreere? All is universally dreadful, and yet we quake
not, either in horror, or astonishment.

A Walk into Churchyards, and Charnels, though it be sad and melancholy, by
reason of the doleful objects there obvious, has yet nevertheless something
in it agreeable to content good souls, In many of the Churchyards of France,
are thousands of dead men's skuls and bones, piled up, as at S. Innocents at
Paris, S. Croix at Orleans, etc. Meditation upon the vanities of life is a
piece of serious felicity before death.
in the contemplation of those very objects, which they there find. How often
have I taken pleasure to consider a great number of Deadmens sculls arranged
one in pile upon another with this conceit of the vanity, and arrogance,
wherewith otherwhile they have been filled? Some have had no other care but of
their Hair, employing the greatest part of their time, either to frizle or to
empouder them; and represent unto your selves by the way, what recompense now
betides them for all their pains. Others all full of ambition, had no other
aims but at Coronall wreaths, consider a little in this their misery, the
injustice of their pretentions.

I have remark't in sequel how a little worm did gnaw the arm of some late
Samson, reducing thus all his force to an object of compassion, and
wretchedness, since that arm heretofore so strong, and dreadful, had not now
force enough to resist a little worm. Reader muze often of these truths, and
thou shall find therein more joy then sadness.

Typotius reports of John Duke of Cleveland, that to testify the frailty of
our nature and the miseries of our condition, he had taken the Emblem of a
Lilly, with this device.

Hodie hoc, cras nihil. Hodie Lilium, Cras Nihilum.
It flourishes to day, to morrow it is nothing.

Great Kings, Even those things which seem most durable, have in effest but a
morning prime like flowers.
your life is like this Lily, it appears like this flower, at Sunrise with
glittering and pomp, but at noon its vivacity and luster begin to fade, and at
the end of the day it vanishes away with it, and scarce its being is remembered.

We read in Apianus of Pompy, that after he had triumphed over three parts of
the world, he carried nothing away with him to the grave, but these words, Hic
situs est magnus Pompeius, Pompey is here buried with all his pomp.

O World, how poor art thou, since thou have but such a thing of naught to
give? O Fortune, how miserable art thou, when thy favorites are exposed to
public view, as objects of compassion? Let him trust in them who will, a man
shall never be able to escape their tromperies, but by despiting their favors.

Here lies Hannibal: Behold all the honor, which posterity rendered to the
memory of so great a Captain. Time is as inexionable. as Death, and neither of
them spare any.
And Time, even jealous of the glory of his name, though not able to bury it in
the Abysses of Oblivion, has yet devoured the very marble of his Sepulcher.
Are not these things truths worthy to raise astonishment?

It Is remark't in Suetonius, of one of the Roman Emperors, that being now at
last gasp, and as it were at a bay with Death, he cried out in excess of
astonishment; Fui omnia, sed nihil expedit: I have been all in all, but now it
nothing helps me. I have tasted all the pleasures of all the greatness of
the world, but the sweetes are changed into sowres, and only their bitter
disgust stays with me.

Experiment all the delights of the Earth, Great Kings, the distaste will ever
at last only remain to your mouths, and sorrows to your hearts, and if these
do no good on you, a thousand eternal punishments will possess your souls.
Represent to your selves, that all the felicities of Life, are of the same
nature as that is, That decaies every moment, and they flit away without cease.
Contentments. cause in their privation as extreme discontents.
The contentments which men receive here below, are like the pleasures of the
Chase, which are only rellish't running. I draw to an end.

Belon in his Monuments of the Kings of Egypt, says, that they were enterred
with such a splendor of pomp and magnificence, that even those who had diverse
times before been admirers of it, were for all that often in doubt, whether the
people went to place the corpse in the Throne again, rather then in their
Sepulcher. O how ill to the eyes is the luster of this sad kind of honor! For
if vanity be insupportable barely of it self, these excesses of it, put the
spirits upon the rack.

Diodorus Siculus, speaking of the Tomb which Alexander caused to be erected,
for his favorite Ephestion, assures that the magnificences, which were there to
be admired, were beyond as well all value, as example, Marble, Brass, Gold,
and Pearl, were profusely offered to most cunning Artisans, to frame thereof
such works wherein sadness and compassion, might be so naturally represented,
that they might affect the whole world with the like. Diamonds, Rubies, and all
other precious stones, were there employed, under the Image of a Sun, A Man
should never be angry with his hard' fates the decrees on^t are inviolable.
Moon, and Stars. It seems this Monarch blinded with Love, thought to hold the
Planets captive in the glorious enchainments of those fair Masterpieces, as if
he would revenge himself of them for their malign influences, which they had
powered upon the head of his dear Ephestion. But this conceit was vain, for the
same stars, whose captivity he ostented upon this Tomb, conducted him also by
little and little to his grave.

The Romans transported with passion, to honor the memory of the Dictator
Sylla, caused his statue to be framed of a prodigious height, all composed of
perfumes, and cast it into the funeral pile, where his body, whereof this was
also but a shadow, was to be burnt to ashes: Being desirous by this action, to
give to understand, that as the odor of his statue dispersed it self through
all the City of Rome, the much more odoriferous savor of his peculiar virtues
would spread it self through all the world. But to go to the rigor of the
litterall sense, it is credible, they had not cast in this aromaticall statue
into the stack, but only to temper the excess of the stench of the body,
which was to be consumed with it. And I proceed to imagine beside, that the
odor of this statue, the cinders of his body, and all the glory of the actions
of Sylla, had all the same fate, since the wind triumph't over them
altogether. Behold the reverse of the Medall of Vanity,

It Is remark't in the life of the Emperor Severus, by the report of DION, that
he made to be set at the gate of his Palace an Vrne of marble, and as ost as he
went in or out, he was accustomed to say, laying his hand on it; Behold the
Case that shall enclose him, whom all the world could not contain.

Great Kings, have often the same thoughts in your souls, if you have not the
like discourses in your mouths, the smallest vessel of earth is too great for
the ashes of your bodies, which shall remain of them, after the worms have well
fed on them: for the wretchedness of your human condition, reduces you at
last to so small a thing, that you are nothing at all. But if I must give a
name to those grains of corrupted dust, which are made of your deplorable
remains, Man only is considerable in respest of his noble actions.
I shall call them the Idea's of a dream, since the memory of your being can
pass for no other together with the time. Behold a fresh subject of entertain.

Some of our Ethnic Historians report to us, that the Troglodites buried their
kindred and friends, with the tone of joyful cries, and acclamations of mirth.

The Lothophagi cast them into the Sea, choosing rather to have them eaten of
fishes in the water, then of worms in the earth.

The Scythians did cat the bodies of their friends, in sign of amity, insomuch
that the living were the Sepulcher of the dead. The Hircanians cast the bodies
of of their kindred to the Dogs. The Massagetes exposed them as a prey to all
manner of ravenous beasts.

The Lydians dried them in the Sun, and after reduced them to powders, to the
end the wind might carry them away.

Amongst all the customs, which were practiced amongst these strange Nations,
I find none more commendable then the first, of the Troglodites looking for no
hell, they had good reason to celebrate the funeral of their friends and
kindred, with laughter and acclamations of cheerfulness, rather then with
tears, and lamentations.

For though that Life be granted us by divine favor, There is more contentment
to die then to live, if we consider the end, for which man was created.
yet we enjoy it but as a punishment, since it is no other then a continual
correction of our continual offenses. Besides the sad accidents which
accompany it inseparably, even to the grave are so numerous, that a man may
justly be very glad at the end of his journey, The body of Man being made of
earth is subject to earth; but the soul holds only of its sovereign Creator.
to see himself discharged of so ponderons a burden. Not that I here condemn
the tears, which we are accustomed to shed, at the death of our nearest
friends, for these are ressentments of grief, whereof Nature authorizeth the
first violences. But neither do I blame the virtue of those spirits, who never
discover alteration upon any rencounter of the mishaps, and miseries of the
world, how extreme soever they be. The living are more to be bemoned then the
dead, they being still in the amidst of this life's tempest, but these are
already arrived to their Port.
And what disaster is it to see dye, either our kindred or friends, since all
the world together, and Nature it self, can do nothing else. What reason then
can a man have to call himself miserable, for being destinated to celebrate the
funerals of those, whom he loves best, since the divine Providence, has
soveraignly established this order, and since moreover in this carreere of
Death, to which all the world speeds, the Present on it, being not distinguished
but by Time, it will appear when all is come to the upshot, that one has lived
as long as another, since all ages though different during their continuance,
are equal then when they are past. Change we the discourse

I advow once again, There is no remedy more sovereign to cure the passion of
arrogance, then this of the consideration of Caemitaries, and Tombs. The most
vainglorious and ambitious are forced to yield themselves at the assaults of
these sad objects. For a spirit never so brave and valourous, To what purpose
is Courage against those perils, which connot be avoided
cannot but be astonished, when he sees at his feet the bones and dust of an
infinite number of persons, who were as valiant as he, what thoughts can he
have but of submission, and humility, considering that one part of himself is
already reduced into dust and filth? I say a part of himself, since he himself
is but a piece of the same matter, which now serves him for object, and to the
same last point will be extended one day the line of his life.

When Virgil tells us of the fate of Priam, Aencid. lib. 2. Jacet ingens litore
truncus Avulsum que humeris caput, and sine nomine corpus.
he brings in Aeneas astonish'c at it, that so great a Monarch should leave to
posterity no other Monument of his greatness, but a Tronck of flesh, a head
separated from the shoulders and a carcass, without name: or shape.

Great Kings, He which makes himself rightly sensible of his miseries is partly
in way to be exempted from their tyranny.
This truth is a Mirror which flatters not. Gaze here often in these
meditations, and you will surely at length consider, that All is full of
vanity, and that this glory of the world, whereof you are so strongly I
dolaters, is but a Fantasy, and Chimera, to which your imaginations give that
beauty, which charms you, and that delicacy, which ravishes you. What think you
is it, to be the greatest of the world? It Is an honor, whereof misery and
inconstancy are the foundations, for all the felicities which can arrive us,
are of the same nature as we are, and consequently, as miserable as our
condition, and as changing. This Earth whereon you live, is the lodging of the
dead, what eternity believe you to find in it? Eternity of honors, riches, and
contentments? there was never any but in imagination, and this Idea, which we
have of them, is but a reflection from the lightning of Truth, wherewith heaven
illuminates noble souls, There is nothing eternal in this world but this scope
of truth
thus to guide them to the search of the true source of all, by the aid of
these small rivolets. It is time to finish this work.

I have made appear to you in the first Chapter, the particular study which a
man ought to take, Seneca.
to come to the Hoc jubet illa Pythicis oraculis adscripta vox. Nosce Te.
Knowledge of himself, wherein lies the accomplishment of perfection. And
herein the precept is, The Consideration of the miseries, which are destinated
to our Nature, as being so many objects capable enough, to force up the power
of our reason, to give credence to the resentments of frailty, which are proper
to us. But this is not all to be merely sensible of our wretchedness. Serious
Consideration must often renew the Ideas of them in our souls, more then the
hard experience of them. And this to the end, that vanity, to which we are too
incident, He that searches into himself shall not loose his labor
may not surprise us, during the intervals of a meditation, so important. We
must often dive into our selves, and seek in the truth of our nothingnesse,
some light to make us thus to know our selves. Afterward making a rise a
little higher, it is necessary to consider the End, for which we were creaated,
and in this consideration to employ all the powers of the several faculties of
our souls, to the generous design of getting possession of that glory. Behold
the Corollary of my first Argument, or Chapter.

The second instructs us a new means, to resist powerfully the hits of the
vanities of the world, from the example of the wretchedness of Saladiae.
of one of the greatest Monarchs of the world. Fortune had refused him nothing,
because she meant to take all from him, Poverty and Riches depend upon opinion,
and a noble soul is above his fortune in what condition soever he be.
for in the height of his glory he finds himself reduced to the poorness of
his shirt only, which is all he carries with him into the grave. And this
makes us sensibly perceive that the greatnesses of the earth are Goods, as good
as estranged from human nature, since in this mortal and perishing condition
we can only possess their usance, and the term of this possession is of so
short endurance that we see as soon the end as the beginning. Reader represent
unto thy self, how thou shall be dealt with at thy death, both by Fortune and
the world, Et quae veneraris, and quae despicis unus exaequabit cinis. Sen.
since the Minion of this blind Goddess, and the greatest of the Universe is
exposed all naked in his shirt in sight of all his subjects to be given in prey
to the worms, as well as the most miserable of the Earth.

The Third Chapter, where Life leads Death in Triumph teaches us the Art to
vanquish this untamable, The horror of Death, is purely in the we aknesse of
imagination.
by considering its weakness: for in effect, if Death be but a privation, it is
to be deprived of reason and judgment, to give it a being, since it cannot
subsist but in our impaired imaginations. The fantasme of an Idea is it, whose
very form is immateriall, as having no other subsistence, I say but that which
the weakness of our spirit gives it. And again, to come to the most important
point; Let this be the close of the recapitulation, Sen.
that you may have means not to stand in fear on it; Incertum est, quo te loco
mors expectet: itaque tu illam om i loco expecta.
Muze on it always, look for it in all places, and overcoming your selves,
you shall triumph over it. Never did an unblemisht life fear Death.

The last Chapter, where the object of Caemiteries, and Sepulchers, is laid
before your eyes, may now again serve for the lact touch, since it is a
Theater, where you must play the Tragedy of your lives. All this great number
of Actors, Hodie mihi Cras tibi. Think on that, Reader, it may be thy turn to
morrow.
whose bones and ashes you see there, have every one played their part, and it
may be, that the hour will soon Knell, that you must act yours. Reader, live
ever in this providence, a Man cannot too soon resolve to do that well, which
howsoever must be done of necessity. God Grant, that these last lines may once
again reproach thee, the bad estate of thy Conscience; delay not too long this
Check to thy self, least too late the regreets be then in vain. Momentum est
unde pendet aeternitas
Thy salvation is fastened to an instant, consider the infinite number of them,
which are already slip't away, when perhaps at that moment, thou were in estate
(if dying) to incur the punishment of a second Death, and that eternal. If
thou trust to thy youth, put thy head out of the window, and thou shall see
carried to the grave some not so old as thy self. If thou rely upon the
health, which thou now enjoyest, Saepe optimus status corporis
periculosissimus. Hip. Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive hodie.
it is but a false-going dyall. The calm of a perfect health, has oftentimes
ushured the Tempest of a sudden Death. What hop'st thou for? hope is
deceitful; what stayest thou for. A wise man ought never to defer till to
morrow, what should he done to day. Lastly, what desire thou? The peace of
conscience is the only desirable good. Go on then right sorward, thou can not
miss the way which I have chalk't thee.

FINIS.
PERLECTORI, The TRANSLATOURS COROLLARIE.
SO, Now it is done, although it be no Task,
That did much Brains, or toylesome Study ask:
The meaning I 'vouch good, but Merit small,
In rendering English, the French Principal:
It is but a Translation I confess
And yet the Rubs of Death in it nerethelesse
May trippe some capering Fancies of the Time,
That Domineere, and Swagger it in Rhyme,
That Charge upon the Reader, and give Fire,
On all, that do not (as they do) admire,
Either their rugged Satyrs cruel vein,
Or puffe-paste Notes 'bove Ela in high strain:
Then in prevention quarrel like a cursed,
Scold, who being guilty, yet will call Whore first.
When any dies whose Muse was rich in Verse,
They claim Succession, and profane his Hearse,
They only are Heirs of his Brain-estate,
Others, are base, and illegitimate.
All but their own Abettors they defy,
And Lord it in their Wit Supremacy.
Others they say but Sculke, as lie i the lurch,
As we hold Schismatics from the true Church,
So hold they all that, do decline their way,
Nor swear by Heaven, All Is excellent they say,
Twere well they would see the fing'ring on these frets,
Can neither save their Souls, nor pay their Debts
Or would they think of Death as they should do,
They would live better, and more honored too.
It Is base to do base deeds, yet for false fame,
To Keep a stir, and bustle into Name:
Whilst each applauds his own contemns anoth^rs,
Becons his own deserts, but his he smothers,
They fear Fame's out of breath, and therefore they,
Trumpet their own praises in their own way.
Or join in Trick of State Confederacy.
Call Quid pro Quo, Claw me, and I Will Claw thee.
Marry, at others ( Tooth and Nail) they fly,
That do not tread their Path, but would go by.
Farewell to these, my aim not here insists,
Leave we these wranglers unto equal lists.
To Nobler Natures I my breast expose,
The Good I bow to in an humble Cloze:
To such as knowing how vain this Life is,
Exalt their thoughts to one better then This.
It Is the best Method to be out of Love;
With things below, and thence to soar above.
To which effect my souls integrity,
In L'envoy thus salutes each courteous eye.
Lenvoy.
INgenuous Reader, thou do crown
The Moral active course laid down,
By De. la ^erre, what is penned,
If thy Actions tecommend.
Relating to the first. EMBLEM.
WHen haughty thoughts impuff thee, than
Dictate thy self, Thou art but Man,
A fabric of commixed Dust,
That's all the prop of humane trust.
How dares a Clod of mouldring Clay
Be Proud, decaying every day?
And yet there is a way beside,
Wherein may be a lawful Pride.
When sly Tempatations stir thee, Than,
Again the World, Thou art a Man.
Rouse up thy Spirits, do not yield,
A brave resistance wins the Field:
Shall a soul of Heavenly breath,
Grovell so tar, its worth beneath:
Foully to be pollute with slime,
Of any base an ^ shameful crime?
Thou art a Man, for Heaven born,
Reflect on Earth disdainful scorn,
Be not abused, since Life is short,
Squander it not away in sport:
Nor hazard heavens eternal Joys,
For a small spurt of worldly Toys.
Do Something ere do thou bequeath;
To Worms thy flesh to Air thy breath;
Something, that may, when thou art dead,
With honor of thy name be read.
Something that may, when thou art cold,
Thaw frozen Spirits, when it is told,
Something that may, the grave control,
And show thou had a noble Soul.
Do something to advance thy bliss
Both in the other World, and This.
Relating to the second EMBLEM.
WEre both the Indies treasures Thine,
And thou Lord of every Mine;
Or had thou all the golden Ore,
On Tagus or Pactolus Shore,
And were thy Cabinet the Shrine,
Where thousand Pearls, and Diamonds shine,
All must be left, and thou allowd,
A little linen for thy Shroud.
Or if 'twere so thy Testament,
Perhaps a goodly Monument.
What better is a golden Chase,
Or Marble, then a Charnel place?
Charon hence no advantage makes,
A half penny a soul he takes,
Thy heirs will leave thee but a Shirt,
Enough to hide thy rotten Dirt.
Then be not Greedy of much pelf,
He that gets all, may lose himself.
And Riches are of this Dilemne,
Or they leave us, or we must them.
Death brings to Misers double Woe,
They lose their Cash, and their souls too.
Change then thy scope to heavenly gains,
That wealth eternally remains.
Relatory to the third EMBLEM.
BE not curious, to amaze
With glittering pomp the Vulgar gaze,
Strive not to cheer with vain delight,
Those that are caught with each brave sight.
How soon will any gaudy show,
Make their low Spirits overflow,
Whose Souls are ready to run-ore
At any Toy nere seen before.
Rather thy better thought apply,
For to address thy self to dye.
Be never so glorious, after all
Thy latest pompe's thy Funeral.
Shall a dress of Tyrian Dye,
Or Venice-gold Embroydery,
Or new-fash'on-varied Vest,
Tympanize thy out-strutting breast,
There Is none of these will hold thee tack.
But thy last color shall be Black.
Be not deceived There comes a Day,
Will sweep thy Glories all away.
Mean while, the thought on it may abate
The Excesses of thy present 'state.
Death never can that Man surprise
That watches for it with wary Eyes.
Do So, And thou shall make thereby
A Virtue of necessity;
And, when thy Dying-day is come,
Go like a Man that is walking home.
Heaven Guard thee with Angelick power
To be prepared for that hour,
When every Soul shall feel what It Is
To have lived Well, or done Amiss.
Relating to the fourth EMBLEM.
LEt not the Splendor of high Birth
Be all thy Gloss without true worth,
Let neither honor, nor vast wealth
Beauty, nor Valor, nor firm health
Make thee bear up too high thy head,
All men alike are buried.
Stare not with Supercilious brow,
Poor folks are Dust, and so art Thou.
Triumph not in thy worldy Odds,
They dye like men whom we count Gods,
And in the Grave it is all one,
Who enjoyed all, or who had none.
Death cuts off all superfluous,
And makes the proudest One of us,
Nor shall there differ'ence then between,
The dust of Lords, or slaves be seen.
Together under ground they lie
Without distinctive Heraldry;
Unless it be that some brave Tomb,
Do grace the Great-ones in Earths womb.
But better it is that Heaven's door,
ls oft'nest open to the poor;
When those, whose backs and sides with sin,
Are bunch't and swollen, cannot get in.
Beware the Bulk of thy Estate,
Shock thee from entrance at that Gate.
Give Earth to Earth: but give thy Mind
To Heaven, where it is seat's as signed,
If, as it came from that bright Sphere;
Thither thou tend, not fix it here.
Live, that thy Soul may White return,
Leaving it is Partuer in the Urne,
Till a Blessed Day shall reunite,
And beam them with Eternal Light.
Ainsi Souhaite Vostre treshumble Serviteur Thomas Carry.
Tower Hill, Antepenultim a Augusti. 1638.
To my endeared Friend, the Translatour, Mr. Thomas Carry.
1.
It Is Moral Magic; and Wis Chemistry,
Out of Deaths Ugliness
T'extract so trim a Dress:
And to a Constellated Crystalt tie
Such an imperious spell,
As who looks on it well,
By sprighty Apparitions to the the Eye
Shall See he must, and yet not fear to dye.
2.
No brittle toy, but a tough monument
(Above steel, marble, Brass)
Of Malleable Glass:
Which also will (while Wisdom is not spent)
Out-price the adored wedge,
And blunt Times Sickle's edge:
Ushered with gracious safety in its vent,
For, to disfeaver Spirits fairly lent.
3.
Friend, here remoulded by thy English hand,
(To speak it, is no fear)
Is now as slick and clear.
Nay, when Thy own Minerva now does stand
On a Composing state;
'Twas curt'sie, to Translate.
But most thy Choice does my applause command;
First for thy Self, then for this crazie Land H. L.
LECTURO.
COnspice, quod vani undat tectoria Factus:
Et penetrabundi concipe vera Libri,
O falsis animose bon is: Sirenane rerum
Deductus, vitreas exue delicias.
Interpres Genium, quo vivax Author, habebit:
Nec tantiem Archetypi claustra decora soni.
Tam been Cinname a ping it feralia canna,
Phoenicis miro quae quasi rapta rogo.
E gemitu solatiolum, e paedore venustas,
Eque cadavereo vita reculta situ.
Alter in arcanis sapiat subtle docendis
Sublimique suus stet ratione liber:
Alter amet flores, bibuli mulcedo popelli;
Sur descens tandem plausibus ipse suis.
Praesentem Libitina librum sibi vendicat illa;
Corripens artem Rhotoris, illa Sophi.
H. I.

(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
HEN. JACOB.

Advertisement au Lecteur.
Generous READER,
'TWas upon occasion of the Summer's sad effects generally over all England,
and some ressentments of mine own; when the Reading and Copying English this
Author's French Original, seasonably engaged my thoughts, and Pen. I think
all is not forgotten yet: But in longer intervall, and indeed always, there
ought still to be a deep apprehension of our Mortality. This our Author
inculcates to us in Notions quick and pertinent, though in some historical
allusions he may a little o're-trust his Memory.

Valebis. Thomas Carry.

-- Laudatus abunde
Non fastiditus --

Imprimatur.

Lingua Vernacula, SA. BAKER.

BOOKS printed for, and are to be sold by Richard Thrale, at the sign of the
Crosse-Keyes at St. Paul's gate, going into Cheapside.
Anotations of all the Books of the Old and New Testament, wherein various
readings are observed, Scripture Paralleled, doubts resolved, by diverse learned
and eminent men. fol. The Mirror of Pure devotion, or six excellent Sermons of
the discovery of Hippocracy, by that learned man Mr. Ball. 12. Contemplatio
mortis and Immortalitatis a Contemplation of Death and Immortality, an
excellent Book of Eternity: and to teach men how to dye: in this last Edition
all the Latin sentences are put into English. in 12. A short view of the long
life and reign of Henry the fourth, by that learned Antiquary Sr. Rob. Cotton,
lately deceased, 4. A discourse of the whole Art of war, by Mr. Cruso with
diverse figures of fortifications 8 The Psalms of David in meeter, by Mr.
Barker. in 12. The largest sort of Bibles used in Churches fol. A defense of
Infant Baptism, by Mr. Choute, to convince his wife, lately turned Anabaptist.
4. Antiquities of Canterbury, or a Survey of that ancient City, Cathedral, and
suburbs by Will. Summers. 4. Arraignment of the whole Creature, at the Bar of
Religion, Reason and Experience, explained in the Parable of the Prodigal Son.
4. Articles of peace between Spain and England in the year 1630. 4. Carminum
Proverbialium totius humanae vitae statum delineantium nec non utile de moribus
Doctrinam jacunde propentium loci communis in gratiam javentutis selecti, 8.
Complete Gentleman, fashioning him absolute in the most necessary and
commendable qualities concerning mind and body that may be required in a noble
Gendeman, together with the Gentleman's exercise, or an exquisite practice as
well for the drawing of all manner of Beasts, as also the making of all sorts
of colors for limning, painting, etc. by Henry Pecham. M^. of Arts, in 4.
Summa moralis Theologiae, Authori Johanni Dawson. Draining of the Fenns, 4 A
Commentary on the Colossians, delivered in sundry Sermons by Edward Elton, fol
Every days Sacrifices, a Prayer book made by Martin Luther a little before his
death 12. Fraus honestae, Authori Mr. Stubbe, in 12. Fundament. Graecae
Linguae. in 8 A vindication of the Annotations on Jeremiah 10. chapter 2d. v.
against the scurrilous aspersion of that grand Impostor Will. Lilly, by The.
Gataker B. D. in 4, The Herbal, or general History of Plants gathered by John
Gerrard, since enlarged by The. I^hnsen, in fol. The life of Edward the sixth,
by Sr. John Hayward, 4. Holy Table name and thing. 4. History of Prince Arthur,
and the Knights of the round Table, in 4. A return from Algear by Doctor Kellet
in 4. A strange and dangerous voyage of Captain Tho. James, in his intended
discovery of the Northwest passage into the South Sea, 4 A Treaty of
pacification between God and man, with diverse considerations fit for those
woeful times, also 12. The Sum and substance of Christian Religion, set down in
Catechistical way, by Mr. Henry Isackson, 8 King James on the Lords-prayer. 8.
-- Inauguration. 8 The English Catechism explained, or a comment on the small
Catechism in the book of the Common prayer by John Mayer D. in D. 4. The
Mirror which flatters not, concerning the Contempt of the world, and
meditation of Death: a book very seasonable for these times, with the lively
Pourtraictures of four famous Emperors, Philip King of Mecedon, Saladine,
Adrian Emperor of Rome, and Alexander the great: Tran slated out of French
into English, by Tho. Carry Esquire The institution of Christian Religion written in
Lat. by I Calvin: translated into English by T. Norton, in folio. Danes
Orthoepia Anglicana, a Book concerning the right pronunciation of the English
tongue useful for strangers. 4. A Spiritual Duel between a Christian and Satan
about certainty of Salvation, an excellent Book for those that are troubled in
conscience, by H. Isackson in 12. Paradici in soli Paradisus terrestis, or a
Garden of all sorts of the Rarest Flowers, with their nature, place of birth,
time of flowring, useful in Physic, or admired for beauty, to which is added
a Kitchen-Garden furnished, with all manner of fruits, and roots, and herbs,
used with us for meat or sauce: also the art of planting an Orchard; with the
right way of preserving and conserving of them, with their select virtues, by
John Perkinson, fol. The works of that famous Physician Dr. Alex. Read,
containing Chirurgical Lectures of Tumors and Ulcers, and a Treatise of Wounds,
with a Treatise of all the Muscules in the body of man, in 4. The Manuel of the
Anatomy and dissections of the body of Man with sundry figures thereunto
belonging, by Dr. Alex. Read. 12. A Treatise of all the Musculs of the body of
man, by Dr, Read. 120. Reformatio Legum, 40. Scots Poems, 80. Virgilii
Evangelizantis Christiados libri 13 in utroque sunt ab Alex. Rosaeo. 8. Dr.
Davis Welsh Dictionary, fol. Dr. Webbs Puerilis Confab. 4. An exposition on
both the Epistles of St. Paul to the Thessalonians, by Dr. Will. Sclater. 4.
Posie of Godly Prayers, an excellent Prayerbook with a discourse to forsake the
world, and not to fear Death, the three and thirtieth Edition, 12. Gods
Statutes for general judgment, by the man Christ Jesus, a Sermon Preached at
the Funeral of an honorable Lady, by John Brocket 4. Plays, 4. Antipodes, an
excellent Comedy, by Richard Brom, concerning these times, 4. Sparagus Garden,
by Richard Brom. Miseries of Inforst marriages, by G. Wilkins 4. Wit in a
Constable by Slapthorne Ladies Privilege by Slapthorne An excellent Comedy,
called a woman will have her will: where likewise you may have many excellent
Books of all sorts, and most of the sorts of Plays.
FINIS.

