Ethice Christiana, OR THE School of Wisdom.

Wherein the GROUNDS of MORAL PHILOSOPHY Are Demonstrated to comply with the
Principles of Christian Religion: By a mixed Exercise of GRACE and VIRTUE.

Written Originally in French, by the Exqu^^^^e ^en

M. DE LA SERRE, And done into English by J. A.

LONDON, Printed by D. M. for Henry Marsh, at the sign of the Princes Arms, in
Chancery Lane. 1664.

TO THE Right Noble and Excellent PRINCE JAMES Duke of MONMOUTH, etc. AND His
most Illustrious Consort, ANNE, etc.
May it please your Highness,
THE Deity which attended your Cradle, being most affectionately fond of your
Glory and Happiness; does yet officiously pursue the care of your Illustrious
Person, and the Conduct of your Affairs. Often has she appeared to your
Highness in broken reflexes, and imperfect sight, vayled and weakened by your
Infant years, but now she represents her self to you in her most August and
Divine Form and Image, and gives you her Hand, inviting your Adult Age, to the
due exercise of your Heroical virtues;

And O Dea Certe!

I cannot doubt therefore, but your Highness will readily own these Features of
such an excellent and indulgent Tutress, which she has commanded to be drawn
to public view; and inscribed to your Name, as wherein she has placed the
resembling veneration of her great self.

These sentences, the first fruits of a foraign growth, I do most humbly offer
to your Highness, as an earnest of the full Increase which the universal world
shall certainly pay to your arrived and Completed Felicity, the Progress and
perfection whereof is and shall ever be my most assiduous and earnest prayer.

And Madam, having had the good Fortune to be a Servant in that Honorable
Family, where your Highness had your first Education, My Inclinations being
more particularly devoted to your Highness service, I have presumed also to
dedicate this Translation of Christian Moralls, to your most Noble Duke and
most Virtuous self; before whose happy time, the world is pregnant in their
desires and expectations of some eminent effects, of whatsoever can be taught
in the School of Honor and Wisdom, I hope your Highness will be pleased to
accept of this small Endeavor of mine, as a Testimony of the Dutiful Respects
that are born you.

By Your Graces most humbly Devoted Servant in all Obedience, James Alardis.

TO The Noble READER.
FOr to such only did the Author direct his Original, and such chiefly will
find themselves concerned in it. There is nothing mean in the whole Discourse,
for it is above that Region, There are some Exercises appropriate only to great
spirits, and vindicated to be so by their sole competence thereunto; (yet if
any man dare try his ability, we are not so nice or curious of his adventure:)
Only thus much the world may be now informed, that it has passed Ten
Impressions in France, lodged altogether in Gentlemen's hands; and might have
sooner spoke English, but that it scorned our late Democracy, as a most
profane, brute, and indocible Herd.

There are many things which we have vainly and ridiculously learned from the
French Nations, but we justly own them nothing but this Treatise; for the
fashion of wisdom is altogether immutable and invariable; and upon that score
leaves us eternally obliged.

We promise much, but whether we now injure the Renowned Author, or the Equal
Reader, let the perusal determine.

IMPRIMATUR

Ex Aed. Lamb. Dec. 14. 1663. Geo. Stradling S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Patr. D.
Gilb. Archi. Cant. a Sac. Domest.

TO THE READER.
EXpect not in these leaves to find,
The trifles of an airy mind;
No froliques of a jovial Pen,
No Words for children here, but men;
Not Wit, but Wisdom, that best thing
Preferred by Israel's mighty King;
Wisdom that double-guild's a Crown
And make's a man's best part his own.
He that observe's these rules has found
That solid Rule, that certain ground,
That constant and unerring Guide
Shall hold him up what 'ere betide:
For though the world's tempestuous sea
Should roar, and very angry be,
Mount up it is foaming waves on high,
And with it is waters dare the sky,
Though every gust destruction breath,
And every billow threaten death;
Where Wisdom shall the wary Pilot be,
Thou can not shipwreck in the deepest Sea.
T. F.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. I. THat we ought to have God for the Object of all our Actions, Page. 1.
CHAP. II. That in this Life we can find no true case, but in peace of
Conscience. Page. 9. CHAP. III. That we ought to draw our consolation against
the miscries which be fall us, from the consideration of the Original whence
they are derived. Page. 16. CHAP. IV. That true glory does only consist in
living vertnously. Page. 26. CHAP. V. That Integrity and upright dealing only,
makes a virtuous man. Page. 33. CHAP. VI. That in what condition soever we be,
we ought therein to seek for our Repose and Salvation. Page. 49. CHAP. VII.
That he that knows how to live well, is the most learned man in the World.
Page. 48. CHAP. VIII. That Moderation in Riches, is more to be desired then
Excess, because it is more profitable. Page. 56. CHAP. IX. That our Salvation
and Repose depend of the knowledge of our selves. Page. 63. CHAP. X. That we
ought to derive our Nobility from our selves, as well as from our Ancestors.
Page. 70. CHAP. XI. That we ought to be dis-engaged from all things; to the
end, That we may live without disquiet, and die without sorrow. Page. 76. CHAP
XII. That the Good we do in this World, is of greater value than the Goods we
possess in it. Page. 83. CHAP. XIII. If we we would leave the World cheerfully,
we must dis-engage our selves from it, ere we leave it, Page. 89. CHAP. XIV.
That the World is a Theater, where every man acts his Part in Time, for an
Eternity. Page. 95. CHAP. XV. That the Wise man waits for Death, without
either wishing or fearing it. Page. 101.
Books sold by Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane.
1. A Compendious Chronicle of Portugal, from Alfonso the first King, to
Alfonso the sixth now Reigning; together with a Cosmographical Description of
the Dominions of Portugal, by J. D. Gent. 8.

2. The useful Book for Gentlemen and Travelers, being an exact Description of
the several Countries and Shires of England: by Edw. Leigh Esquire 8.

3. Blood for Blood, or Murder revenged, in 35 Tragical Histories; some
whereof have been the sad Product of our Times. 8.

4. Royal History completed, in the Life of his Sacred Majesty Charles II.
James Duke of York, and Henry Duke of Gloucester, with their Restoration,
happily concluded by his Grace the Duke of Albemarle. Fol.

5. Rumps Looking-Glass, or a Collection of such Pieces of Drollery as were
prepared by several Wits to purge the Rump. 4.

6. The Faithful Lapidary, being a History of all precious Stones: very useful
for Gentlemen, Merchants and others. 40.

7. A short view of the Life and Actions of the Illustrious Prince James D. of
York, with his Character. 4.

8. The States man, or Modern Policy: the second part. 8.

9. The Devils Gabinet-Council discovered, or the Plots and contrivances of O.
Cromwell and the Long-Parliament in order to the taking away the Life of his
Sacred Majesty of blessed memory 8.

11. The Sovereigns Prerogative, and the Subjects Privilege: Comprised in
several Speeches, Cases, and Arguments of Law, discussed between the Kings most
Sacred Majesty, and the most eminent Persons of both Houses of Parliament:
Collected by Dr. Tho. Fuller. Folio.

11. Fathers Blessing, or a Legacy to his son, fitting him to carry himself
through the various Encounters of this world. 12.

12. The History of the affairs of Scotland, under the conduct of the
Illustrious and truly valiant James Marquess of Montross. 8.

13. A short view of the Lives of those-excellent Princes Henry D. of
Gloucester, and Mary Princess of Orange, deceased. 8.

14. Lessius of health, with Cornaro's Treatise of Temperance. 24.

15. A new English Grammar, prescribing certain Rules for Foreiners to learn
English: with a Grammar of the Spanish or Castilian Tongue, with special
Remarks upon the Portugees Dialect, etc. to which is annexed, a ^erambution of
Spain and Portugal, which may serve for direction to travel through both
Countries, for the service of Her Majesty, whom God preserve. 8.

16. Overbury Revived, or a Satirical Description of the Vices of our late
Times, in Essays and Characters, by L. G. 12.

17. The true Portraiture of Her most excellent Majesty Donna Catherino Queen
of Great Britain, Fol.

17. Summum Bonum, or a Plain Pathway to Happiness, conducting the Soul to its
Haven of Rest, through the stormy passage of Worldly troubles: to which is
added a short Dialogue of that excellent Virtue of the Submission of Man's Will
to the Will of God. 8.

18. The History of Independency complete; being the first, second, third,
fourth and last Part, which may be had single by such as have bought the other.
4.

Choice Poems, by eminent Wits of this Age.

19. Regale Lectum Miseriae, or a Kingly Bed of Misery: in which is contained
a Dream, with other Poems: by J. Quarles, the last Impression. 8.

20. A New Survey of the Turkish Empire and Government, in a brief History
deduced to this present Time; and the reign of the now Grand Seignior Mahomet
the fourth, the present and 14 Emperor, with their Laws, Religions, Customs,
as also an account of the Seige of Newhausal.

FINIS.
Ethice Christiana, OR The Precepts of Christian Morals.
CHAP. I. That we ought to have God for the Object of all our actions.
1. ALL Worldly Actions do nothing but strike the ear with their noise; and
what Glory soever does accompany them, passes away with us. This does oblige
us to have Eternity always ways before our eyes, because Time destroys all
that it brings forth, in making it self the first object of its fury.

2. Although God be the Judge, as well as the witness of our Actions, we ought
to consecrate them unto him rather out of love then duty, to the end that that
voluntary submission preventing the constraint of necessity, may make us hope
for a favorable success thereof.

3. All that we do out of the sight of God, must needs redound to our confusion
and disadvantage, for seeing we work in darkness, the pain of our unprofitable
labor is the only reward thereof.

4. Rejoice not at the success of your designs, unless God has given you the
first thoughts thereof; the joys of Fortune are never of long continuance; and
if they happen to last for a space, you ought to fear that that long calm will
at last bring forth a storm, where you may find your shipwreck.

5. If you consult the Wisdom of the World in your attempts, you shall never
come to a happy conclusion; for the light of humane Prudence not being able to
penetrate into the obscurity of that which is to come, does often take the
appearance of Truth, for the Truth it self; so that of a bright day it makes a
dark shadow.

6. The counsels of the men of this World ought always to be suspect unto us,
not because they are hurtful, (for they may sometimes happen to our
advantage;) but we must consider, that as those counsels which belong to our
salvation are of greatest concernment, so all other cannot be but unprofitable.

7. Do not expect the success of your designs from your Industry: For she is
a Work-woman that is ever learning, and continues always in her Apprentiship;
and we know by experience, that when she works alone, all her work is to no
purpose.

8. Whatsoever a man does in Time, his Actions in the end, have neither Witness
nor Judge, seeing he is the first that accuses himself. I would have all
Actions performed as in the public view of the whole World, for they must
needs perish with it, seeing they are enclosed within its circumference.

9. They that labor only for that which is to come, do enjoy a present
satisfaction; for as much as when they wax old in a sensible hope to be
crowned with their labors, they come to taste of that good which they formerly
hoped for.

10. Consider with your self, that all your actions have a certain relation to
Eternity, if to Eternity you ought to be rewarded or punished. Do all what you
will, God reserveth to himself the final judgment of your works, leaving you
free liberty to make choice either of Heaven or Hell.

11. Again consider, that all our actions have no other object but our
salvation or destruction, and that they are always present in the sight of
God, either to reward or punish them.

12. Render an account of all your Actions unto your self, that you may shun
the censure of others, and if you be afraid of Gods chastisement, punish your
self first; voluntary penitence may appease his wrath.

13. Like as good actions crown themselves, by reason of the glory that does
accompany them, so do the evil Actions carry their punishment along with them,
through the shame which follows them. This obliges us to do the good, and
shun the evil, even out of the consideration of their own nature, although we
should have no other object.

14. Behold always the end of your actions, if you would prevent the repenting
of them; and be you the first Judge of them, to the end you may never have any
other. We must not be indulgent to our selves when it concerns our salvation,
or Honor.

15. Do no action that may be unworthy of you, although you should have no
other witness but your self, seeing your own memory does sufficiently know it;
and as your memory would upbraid you with it every day, so you should suffer
the punishment thereof every hour.

16. He that has an eye toward God in all his Actions, heals himself of the
evil of Fear, and may challenge a propriety in Hope; and as he lives without
reproach, so he dies without sorrow.

17. What should it avail us to remove both Heaven and Earth in quest of our
repose, if both of them fail us in the end, so that we be not able to find it?
and if the Earth remain to us, it serves for a tomb to our hopes, as well as to
our selves.

18. We must of necessity work in the Lords Vineyard, if at the end of the day
we would receive our wages; all other employments are unprofitable, as well as
our sorrow for the mispending of time, seeing the want thereof renders us
incapable to repair our losses.

19 Whatsoever Actions you do here below, all the recompense that the World can
give you for them cannot enrich you; and if you do not take your aim beyond
Time, all the hours thereof are fatal to you, seeing every moment may sound
your retreat, but such a retreat as has no return.

20. Undervalue all things here below, seeing all that you set your eye upon
changes countenance with you; and let your apprehension be continually filled
with this truth, that only the good which we do in this life, is the sole
consolation which remains unto us at our death.

21. Know then, that Good has this property, it replenisheth with joy the
heart of him who exercises himself in the practice thereof; and although a man
should never expect any other reward, yet the good it self is always our
Glory, our Happiness and our Prize.

22. Our Actions are only rendered considerable by their Object and End; and
although the event of them be happy, yet if their Object be not just and
lawful, both shame and loss are inseparable companions to their success.

23. It is not enough, not to do evil, we do it always when we cease from
doing of good. We must diligently work out our own salvation, without the
intermission of one moment, for that one moment may prove most fatal to us.

24. Consider, that in this World every man lives as he pleases, and although
the manner of living and dying be quite different, all must undergo the same
judgment for an Eternity.

25. If you desire to establish your repose firmly, lay the foundation thereof
upon your Salvation, which ought to be the only scope of all your actions, else
they are to no purpose. Suppose you were eminent in Honor and Riches, this is
as much as to enjoy a temperate Air in the Country wherein you are; but seeing
you are always upon your journey, the change of the Climate will breed an
alteration in the countenance of your Fortune, and in the end you shall be only
happy in remembering that you have been so.

26. Consider, that the virtuous actions of our life, are as so many pictures
of our good fortunes, whereof the object being always present, renders us
still happy: So that the honest and virtuous man has this advantage, that he
surviveth himself before his death, seeing he enjoys the felicity of his life
past, by the pleasant remembrance thereof which abides with him.

CHAP. II. That in this Life we can find no true ease, but in peace of
Conscience.
1. YOu may well look for Ease here below, but you must give it to your self
before you can find it; it must be a piece of work of your own making, seeing
you cannot obtain it but only by the force of your own Industry.

2. Suppose that Messengers bring you glad news every day, and that your
affairs are regulated by your wishes; yet you cannot deny, but that the remorse
of Conscience hinders your mind from enjoying that rest which it desires.

3. Consider that all sins carry their torment along with them, and that God
punishes them in the Thought as well as in the Will, and that with a continual
punishment, seeing the remembrance of them is both the Torment and Executioner.

4. The Sinner never takes his Pastime with delight, because the justice of
God pursues him always, to punish him without intermission, and mingleth so
many thorns among his Roses, that the sighs of his heart do often belie the
cheerfulness of his countenance.

5. Imagine the greatness of the disturbance of a Malefactor, fain would he
flee from his punishment, but the thoughts of his crimes do torment him
incessantly; so it is with the Sinner: as God is every where, so the Sinner
feels his justice in every place, which keeps his soul upon the rack by the
remembrance of his sin.

6. Think not to find any delight, yea in your very pleasures, having your soul
contaminated with the stains of your crimes, God is pleased to change the
nature of your contentments, and to turn the subject of your consolation, into
that of your torment.

7. Let the wicked man withhold no delightful thing from his Senses, and let
Voluptuousness be their nursing-mother: her breasts are always filled with
bitterness to seed them, seeing that by chastisements from above, they find an
unsavory taste in the most delicious dishes.

8. Trust not to the testimony of wicked men, for God lays his hand upon them
to such an extremity as to make them insensible of his correction: and as this
stupidity is a mark of their reprobation, so it witnesses, before hand, the
Eternity of the torments to which they are destined.

9. Innocence carries always Heaven with it, and it is never found in any
soul, without communicating unto it the sweetness of that Repose which does
properly belong unto it, it being the effect, and Innocence the cause.

10. Hell also follows Sin unseparably, so that Sin causes its own torments
in bringing them forth, by reason of the necessity of justice which does
always punish it.

11. Know for a truth, that the repose of the Conscience brings forth peace
to the Soul; and as both these, together make up a Heaven upon Earth, so there
is no other Hell but that which consists in the privation of them.

12. As often as you make a divorce from your Conscience, you proclaim war
against your self; and it is a war wherein no Truce is to be looked for,
seeing justice gives none.

13. Study to employ well the precious moments of your days, if you would not
die a Death, which will admit no return to life again, unless it be to make you
the eternal object of the wrath of an angry God.

14. O how unhappy is he, at the hour of Death, who has misspent the time of
his Life! because as his sorrow for this fault is in vain, so he feels
himself instantly stricken with an evil, both sudden and incurable.

16. That God has a love toward his creatures, does manifestly appear, by the
trouble they are in when he withdraws his presence from them, for they can
find no rest, but in him alone.

17. There is no pleasure that can satisfy our mind, or fill our heart; because
it is the property of our Envy to be irregular, and from the satiety thereof,
there arises always a new appetite.

18. All that you do without consulting the Oracle of Heaven, passes for an
improfitable labor, whereof the pain abides, although the work be ended,
seeing the grief thereof is continual, and the reward imaginary.

19. Do not lull your self asleep in the success of your wicked designs, the
justice of God is so much the more rigorous, as it appears slow; and if you
do not prevent it by correcting your self first, you shall never be able to
shun it.

20. Learn to admire the mercy of God, that gives your heart leave every
moment, to justify it self before him, seeing the least of the sighs thereof,
can expiate the crimes of it.

21. Establish unto your self a way of living, wherein Honor may be your
object, and Reason your guide, and be not slack in your duty; this is the only
means to find repose in the troubles of the World, and to enjoy a calm amidst
the storm whereby we are continually agitated

22. Every body loves life, and yet no body learns to live: all the world
dies, and yet there is none that knows rightly how to die. This Science ought
to be the only study of the Wiseman, seeing it alone can sufficiently instruct
us in the Art of working out our own Salvation.

23. A Soul deprived of Grace is always in Alarm; being continually disturbed
with the horror of the crimes it has committed; and it may be said truly of
it, that it is a blind thing walking along the brink of a precipice.

24. Imagine the disquiet of a sickman in the heat of a continual Fever; He
has no rest night nor day, feeling himself by little and little consumed by a
secret fire, which burns him, without being perceived; devoureth him without
being known, and at last reduces him to ashes, without giving the least moment
of intermission to his painful burnings.

25. This poor afflicted man is the true picture of a guilty Soul, which seeing
it self buried in a body tormented with a continual agony, feels it self
already burning, in apprehension, in those Eternal Fires which are destined for
the punishment thereof. No wonder if his disquiet be great, seeing every moment
may be the last of his life, and the first of the just vengeance of an angry
God.

CHAP. III. That we ought to draw our consolation against the miseries which
befall us, from the consideration of the Original whence they are derived.
1. COmplain not of the Crosses which are inflicted by the Divine Majesty, they
are presents sent from Heaven, your patience will shortly make you know the
value of them.

2. Complaints are unseemly in the mouth of a Malefactor; if you can do no
other thing but provoke God; do not augment the number of your offenses, in
murmuring against his justice.

3. You must know, that God does commonly afflict his Elect, in strowing under
their feet, those Roses wherewith his head was crowned; therefore seeing he
has been a sharer in them, his Elect can have no part in his glory, but by
right of that succession.

4. What cause have you to complain of the justice of God, seeing his very
rigours are the effects of his compassion: he punishes you in this World, to
the end that he may show mercy to you in the next; in his vengeance he
constrains you to admire his Bounty.

5. In all your afflictions, let Reason prevent Time in comforting you, and be
indebted to none but your self, for the healing of your pain, seeing you may
find the remedy in your submissive Spirit.

6. He that complains of the evil that he suffers, must needs have forgotten
the evil he has done; if he does remember it, his complaint passes for a new
crime, greater then any that went before.

7. As often as Heaven punishes you, do reason to justice, in suffering,
without murmuring, the chaste sement which it inflicteth upon you; silence and
Submission do always appease the wrath of God.

8. There is no greater misery then to complain of those miseries that happen
unto you; because in murmuring against Justice which punishes you, you
constrain it to augment the force thereof, and to fall more heavily upon you,
by reason of this last crime which you commit.

9. A heart filled with God does never sigh but for joy, amidst the greatest
afflictions: so that seeing he loves much more then he suffers, the excess
of his love does so vehemently moderate that of his pain, that by little and
little he loses the feeling thereof.

10 Consider that you are the cause of your own afflictions; to the end that,
punishing your self by the sorrow which you ought to have for them, this sorrow
may be your first comfort.

11. How unhappy are the favorites of Fortune to follow the blind in their
blindness! suppose she should lead them a pleasant way, yet that is no other
then the way to their grave, where they shall find the thorns of all those
Roses which they have trampled upon.

12. In all your calamities, look up to the hand that smites you, before you
complain of the stroke it has given you: God does never punish us in Time, but
to make us afraid of his vengeance in Eternity.

13. The Time of afflictions is of short continuance in respect of that
Eternity of glory which is to succeed it; the evil of our sufferings soon
passes away, but the good of our constancy ought never to have an end.

14. Generous spirits have always carried a respect and reverence toward the
unfortunate, knowing that they are sick persons, who should at least be
comforted, if they cannot be cured.

15. Never refuse comfort to an afflicted person, to the end that God may repay
it you, when you stand in need of it; As all the evils are punished in this
world, so is all the good recompensed.

16. Flee not from the unfortunate, seeing that to morrow, you may be of their
number; but render to them what you would expect from others, if you were in
their condition. The afflicted have no enemies, seeing their misery makes
truce with all those who have proclaimed war against them.

17. If it be true that the Object has influence upon the Power, or Faculty,
there is no afflicted person which may not receive abundance of consolation in
the apprehension of a crucified Savior; never was any frustrated that came to
him in sincerity.

18. Be not weary in suffering; as the Rose fades, the prickles thereof become
blunt; it is not a small comfort to you in your crosses, that you can reckon
the hours thereof. Those evils that must needs take an end, are never of long
continuance.

19. O how happy a thing it is to grow old in affliction! He that dies upon
the Cross, carries his death so far into the second Life which he hops for,
that he feels himself reviving, according to the measure that he feels
himself dying.

20. The livery of the unfortunate, is the livery of the Predestinate; and it
may be truly said, that their silent constancy is continually working at those
Crowns which are appointed to be the reward of their labors.

21. They that rejoice at the miseries of others, prepare their own punishment,
after they have condemned themselves, seeing they render themselves guilty
anew, by believing that they are not guilty, yea they are far more guilty then
those that are punished.

22. The just man is commonly afflicted; and he is very happy, in this World
that knows how to improve his sufferings: a life crowned with Roses produces
always a Death filled with Thorns.

23. It is a great Comfort to look for none here below in all the crosses that
happen unto us; because, if Patience cannot receive the final recompense from
any other then Heaven, it is to be believed, that this recompense is bestowed
upon us for no other end, but to crown our Patience.

24. Do not shun the approaches of afflicted persons, God looks upon them
continually as the objects of his compassion, rather than of his Justice; and
believe it, it is very lamentable not to improve aright the frowns and
severities of Fortune, seeing the last day of a voluptuous life, is far more
terrible than all the days that went before it, have been pleasant and
delightsome.

25. I do not much wonder that some holy persons would choose either to suffer
or die. It is impossible to love a crucified God, without partaking of his
sufferings: and as sorrow is the object of this love; so the heart, which is
filled therewith, does sigh for joy amidst the greatest crosses.

26. There is no man more miserable then he that is born and dies Fortunes
darling, because when death seizes him unawares, he knows at the end of the
day, that his light has served him for no other use but to find the way to
Hell.

27. A great Calm is always held suspect by the wise Pilot; he complains of
that good-lucke, because the excess of a Calm is an infallible presage of the
short continuance thereof.

28. Light disgraces fortify the mind: and as they keep it in a continual
Alarm, by the fear of a greater mishap, so the mind by a prudent foresight
puts it self in a condition to shun it; thus our first wound shelters us from
many others, which might tend to our hurt.

29. How pleasant is it, to do that promptly and handsomely, which we must do
of necessity! The Cross is our portion; he that will not bear the burden
thereof in Time, prepares his own punishment to Eternity.

30. Do not refuse the Cup that God presents to you, seeing he has quenched
his thirst, with the bitterness of that, whereof he makes you taste but a
little; is it not an excess of bounty to make a trial first, of all the
sorrows that you can be able to suffer, to mitigate the violence of them.

31. When God afflicts you by the death of any of your nearest Relations, he
comforts you at the same instant by a new adver tisment of the necessity of
your departure, seeing they are gone to their mansion place, but one days
journey before you.

32. If you have lost your Wife, that buried half waits for the other to be
joined with it; and seeing that union is certain and infallible, the moment
which perfects it ought to be continually present with you, although it be to
come.

33. The loss of any temporal Good ought not to afflict you; if so be that of
Grace abide with you. An innocent person afflicted is never miserable, because
he ever finds his consolation in Gods Will, who has so decreed it.

34. All the miseries, and all the happiness that can befall us, are in Gods
hands; the first is the correction of his Justice, the second the favor of his
Goodness; but seeing both these proceed from him alone, the one obliges us to
silence out of respect, the other to thankfulness through acknowledgement.

35. Christian Wisdom consists in this, to will that which God wills; not
out of necessity, but rather out of a submission that prevents it, to the end
that this necessity may find us always disposed to undergo the laws thereof,
how hard soever they be.

36. He that is jealous of the happiness of others, increases his own miseries
by his envy, which is both criminal and unprofitable; and in wishing an
imaginary good, he feels a real evil.

37. I do not much wonder if a Soul totally resigned to the will of God, be
under covert from the storms of Fortune, seeing the calm, which it enjoys,
draws the continuance thereof from him who has deminion over Time.

38. All our disquiet proceeds only from our contempt of Providence, Orders:
for if we did really believe this truth, that all that happens unto us comes
from Providence, our very afflictions would yield us comfort, seeing their
bitterness would be changed into sweetness.

CHAP. IV. That true glory does only consist in living virtuously.
1. ALthough you should ransack the whole Earth for Laurels, there would
nothing remain to you, in the end, but the ashes; and although all the people
thereof were your Subjects, yet the small compass of your Tomb would limit the
greatness of this Empire.

2. The same stairs which serve for ascending, serve also for descending. All
Thrones have their steps: The last step of our elevation, marketh always the
first step of our fall.

3. Be not dazzled at the splendour of Fortune's honors; her inconstancy does
infallibly presage that the day of your prosperity shall not pass without a
storm; and althoug it be at the declining, the last moment thereof may be
fatal to you.

4. All the honors which we receive here on Earth, are of the same nature with
the praises bestowed on them: the latter are made of wind, and the former are
nothing but smoke, the one passes over our head, the other strikes the ear
in passing by.

5. I do not much wonder that Glory has nothing else to give but Laurels and
Palms, the Crowns made of these, last as long as the head that wears them;
the one is withered in the Sun, the other grows white by the scorching of
Time, and both, at last, are reduced to powder.

6. How many triumphs have you seen? and how many crowned victorious? but those
fair days are past, and the memory of those famous Conquerours passes also,
until at last the History of them, by the length of Time, becomes a fable.

7. Suppose that Posterity should preserve the remembrance, both of your name,
and exploits; yet the Time ought to be limited, and of what extent soever the
limits thereof be, they are always very short, seeing they can be measured.

8. Wonder not that the Romans have acquired a false Glory, they never had a
love for the true Glory; they followed Virtue, without being willing to know
it; and as they were contented to do noble actions out of vanity, so the vanity
abides with them, their reputation being nothing but wind.

9. He is base and low-minded who encloseth his ambition, and hopes within the
Circle of his life, seeing the Tomb is the Center thereof: We must seek for a
Glory that is far beyond Time, and that has no dependence from it, which may
fill the emptiness of our hearts, that are always disquieted in their
expectation.

10. All the World does breath after nothing so much as Glory, and no body
takes pains to acquire the true Glory; the contempt of worldly honors is most
safe, a man cannot deserve them, but in shunning them.

11. Purity of Conscience is the fountain of true Glory, and it is in vain for
wicked men to run after the Crowns thereof, God, for their sakes, changes the
nature of these Crowns, seeing they cover them with infamy, instead of adorning
them with honor.

12. In this World, every man is the Artist of his own Glory; but to the end,
that this work may be the better effected he must be for a long time Virtues
Apprentice, seeing she alone is able to make him Master.

13. True Glory is the effect of a virtuous life, and good works are so many
glorious actions. Care not for the verdict which the World may pass on them,
your own judgment ought to give you the first approbation of them, and your
conscience the last crown.

14. It is not enough to live honorably; the Morals of Jesus Christ are far
different from those of the World; for these teach us the love of our selves,
but our Savior the contempt; and because Example is more powerful then
Precept, he does persuade us to it by his own Practice.

15. We may well seek for Glory in Combats, but we can only find it in the
victory we obtain over our Passions: Suppose you could gain Battles, take
Cities, and conquer Kingdoms and Provinces, yet you must triumph over your
self, if you would bear the title of a true Worthy.

16. The World has her Persons of honor, but I do pity them with all their
Glory; they adorn themselves with many specious Titles, and they forget that of
Miserable, which does properly belong unto them; they muster up all their
qualities, and remember not that of their perishing nature, which blemisheth
all the rest.

17. If you desire to acquire true Glory, let the Glory of God be your object.
The World has nothing to give but false honors; and if you would be of the
number of true Heroes, let your ambition extend only to the conquest of Heaven;
all those that have busied themselves in conquering the Earth, have been
constrained at their death, to content themselves with seven foot.

18. After that the Rival of Caesar had made his conquest, there could hardly be
found so much room as to write upon his grave, Here lies Pompey. This shows,
that the vanity of the Glory of the greatest men is altogether nothing.

19. True Glory has no original in nature, the fountain thereof comes from
above; and as Eternity is the object of it, Eternity ought to serve also for
the reward thereof.

20. Covet no other quality but that of an Honest man, seeing that alone is
able to accomplish your Glory; he that lives well, lives gloriously; the
quiet of his Conscience is the honor of his life, as well as the happiness
thereof.

21. It will not be asked, at the hour of death, if the honors you have
received, have been great; but rather, if the works you have done, have been
good. True Glory lies in the contempt of the Glory of the World.

22. As all things created return to their Original, the World sees all that
Glory die which it bred; and if you draw not from Heaven those thoughts of that
Honor which you profess, you shall ere long be ashamed to survive it, seeing
you shall be a witness of the ruin thereof.

23. The contempt we ought to have of the honors of this life, is never known
but at the hour of death; but seeing that knowledge is unprofitable, we must
then prevent it, by doing that to day, which we would have done to morrow.

24. Time surpriseth the wisest men, although it be always present, you may
well hear a Clock, or carry a Watch in your pocket, but it is to no purpose,
seeing you do not profit by he counsel they give you; which is, that Time
passes away, as well as the Glory we have acquired in it.

CHAP. V. That Integrity and upright dealing only, makes a virtuous man.
1. WHether you be rich, or great, or happy, all these qualities can make no
impression capable to gain Reputation, Integrity only can give that; and
without this title of honor, a man is nothing but a mere shadow.

2. You are very glad to purchase, with money, the most eminent dignities and
Offices. But after examination of your Conscience, if you find your self
incapable to discharge them, you do but expose your self in public view upon
an Altar, there to serve for the sacrifice.

3. Men of Integrity are the true Heroes of their Age, because they have their
souls filled with true Glory: and seeing it is impossible for a man to live
with honor, unless he live without reproach; labor therefore, in all your
actions, to make your duty here below your first object, and last reward.

4. What does it avail you, to possess large Offices, and to receive great
Honors, if being incapable of the one, you render your self unworthy of the
other: your Office gains respect, whereas your person deserves contempt, as if
your Livery were more to be esteemed than your self.

5. Suppose your were served in State, and had your Ushers marching before you,
etc. Yet all the honor or disgrace that encompasseth you, do proceed from your
good or bad reputation: and whatsoever pomp does accompany you, your way of
living produces either your esteem or contempt.

6. A Righteous man carries his rank about with him, all his words and
actions are stirred up by an honest boldness, and that is it that draws
respect and esteem by a secret virtue; whereof the first cause is never known,
seeing it is above nature.

7. The first enquiry that is made after your manners, serves instead of a
Judge of your life. This does oblige you to give proof of your virtues,
betimes; that the esteem of your person may take the deeper impression, because
public Fame renders it self the sovereign Umpire of your reputation.

8. The respects that are rendered to a man of a corrupt life, do cover him
rather with infamy then glory; so that when he challenges respect in regard of
his Authority, he receives nothing but forced acknowledgements, which do
shamefully reproach his sovereignty, yea upon the very Throne of his Empire.

9. Seeing virtuous actions are valued according to the reputation of him who
performs them, they must needs be built on a solid foundation, lest they be
attributed to chance, and Fortune have all the glory: Every one, in this world,
is worth so much as he makes himself to be worth.

10. It is Uprightness and Integrity alone that does distinguish us from one
another, all other qualities are strangers to us; seeing they follow us but to
the grave, but this alone can exempt us from it.

11. Frame unto your self certain wages of Honor, which can be filled by no
other but your self, and walking openly in the sight of the whole World, make
it the witness of your life, although it be the judge thereof: the approbation
of the World is necessary here below, for the establishment of your repose.

12. Do not desire to appear an Honest man, unless you be truly such; your
hypocrisy will stain your reputation with a new blemish which can never be
blotted out, you may endeavor to hide it, but in vain; for He who inlighters
the darkest corners of your heart, will manifest the wickedness thereof by a
public vengeance.

13. The wise Christian has no other Looking glass then that of his
Conscience; seeing it is such a one as cannot flatter, it represents him such
as he ought to be, who should, next to his own satisfaction, labor to please
all men.

14. Let your behavior be adorned with such Integrity, as may purchase credit
to your words, and esteem to your actions; to the end, that prepossessing the
minds of men, to your own advantage, you may find friends in all places, and
admirers at all times.

15. Consider that every one is Master of his own Honor and Salvation, seeing
the one and the other do depend of us; and because uprightness is the
foundation of both, we may enjoy with it the repose which it gives us, in
expectation of that which it makes us hope for.

16. You may well project a thousand designs, and execute them too, and that
happily by your ordinary tricks and subtilties; but I declare unto you in Gods
name, that his just Providence shall cause your misery to rise out of their
success, and shall draw your disquiet from that very repose, whereof (as you
believed) you had laid the solid grounds.

17. He that deceives others, first deceives himself; and it is bad policy to
establish a commerce, whereof our ruin is the object, and our damnation the end.

18. The deceitful man is quickly known, and immediately cried down; and this
discredit breeding contempt, and contempt hatred, he does but breath in an Air
infected with reproaches cast (justly) upon him.

19. The Virtuous man makes himself known and beloved both at once, and without
any other charm then that of Virtue, he subdueth to himself all hearts that are
worthy of his Conquest.

20. Let Honor regulate your interest, to the end that your only interest may
be to preserve your Honor; and believe it, to live without reproach, is the
only paradise here below.

21. Be not proud of those advantages Nature has bestowed on you; they are
goods, whereof in passing by you have but the use: Virtue alone is a glorious
succession, which takes its aim beyond Time.

22. Carry your heart upon your lips, that from the Concord of your words and
actions, you may draw a Harmony, which may charm all the World. There is
nothing sweeter to a man, than to survive himself, in making the memory of his
life past, to be honorable before his death.

23. Be always jealous of your Honor, and careful of your Salvation; and
seeing the Honor of the World is nothing but a Chimaera, seek for your
Reputation in Virtue, because Virtue alone can make your Reputation Eternal.

CHAP. VI. That in what condition soever we be, we ought therein to seek for
our Repose and Salvation.
1. EVery man is the Workman of of his own Repose in this World; and Christian
Morals being the study of all Wisemen, make them, at last, so expert in
learning to obey the laws, that Providence imposes upon them, that they pass
their life without disquiet, and wait for death without fear.

2. When you are tied in that condition which has been the object of your
choice, let your duty be the only Compass that regulates your actions, to the
end, that you may live without reproach, and die without sorrow.

3. Consider not the moral virtues which you practice, upon the account of
acquiring the esteem of the World; it is a deceitful Fame which will perish
with you, you must live like a Christian, if you desire to die like a Christian.

4. Labor to settle your self in that Condition whereunto you are called,
according to the rules of Conscience, as well as those of Honor, and do not
confound the one with the other; the Glory of God, and the Honor of the World,
have their Objects quite different.

5. Consider that every man carries his Heaven or his Hell about with him,
according to the good or bad employing of his life; and seeing Life has no
returning, you do continually work, either your own Salvation or Destruction.

6. Why do you disquiet your self in that bondage to which you are reduced,
seeing the chains thereof cannot be broken? your disquiet makes new bonds to
enthral you the more, because it augments the grief, without shortning the
term thereof.

7. If God has called you to a solitary life, make it your Heaven, lest it be
your first Hell; there is no chain so harsh which Time and Necessity will not
sweeten, as well as Reason or Death.

8. He is very happy in his misfortune that does support it patiently;
Constancy is continually at work in making the Crown of our sufferings, and the
Science of suffering without repining, is one of the greatest perfections of a
Christian life.

9. He that consults, with submission, the Oracle of Heaven, before he make
choice of his condition on earth, a never in disquiet, although he find himself
engaged; because since that Providence has made the bonds of it, it makes the
bondage thereof so pleasant, that he has greater occasion of thankfulness,
then of complaint.

10. When a man is enlightened only with the light of humane Prudence, he cannot
go far, without stumbling; he must make use of another Lantern, the light
whereof is never extinguished; and he must always look up to Heaven, to the
end that he may not go astray here on Earth.

11. Think not to find the Repose of your condition, in the success of your
affairs; that is too weak a foundation to build upon; for seeing that they
change countenance every hour, they can make you unhappy every moment.

12. It is not enough to be at ease in your condition, this Ease is ill
grounded, unless your Conscience give it you; and he that is acquainted with
the employing of your time, is as skillful as your self, in knowing the
happiness and miseries of your life.

13. There are few that will say they are happy, although they have cause to be
so; because being over-swayed by their ambition, which is always unsatiable,
they must needs be always disquieted.

14. They may call themselves truly happy, who desires no other fortune, but
what God is pleased to send them. And being disposed to receive Good and Evil
with an equal cheerfulness, (considering the hand whence they are sent.) Time,
that changes always, never changes to them.

15. In what condition soever you be, consider that from all Eternity, God has
designed out that place for you; and if you do not discharge it instead of
possessing it, the same Eternity shall be the measure of your torments.

16. It is not our part to make out own destiny, unless it be for our salvation
or destruction, seeing every man has liberty to do what he can for his own
salvation or damnation; the events of our life are, in the hands of Him, who
has numbered our days. We must undergo with submission the laws which he
imposes upon us.

17. He is most unhappy, who wishes always for the good he has not, and is
never contented with that he has. The Wiseman is never in quest of his
repose, because he finds it within himself.

18. Although a man be considered in regard of his Condition, yet that does
not-render him considerable. Suppose his name make a noise, and his greatness a
splendour, yet the noise is dissipated, and the splendour vanishes, unless his
virtue preserve the memory of the one, and the beauty of the other.

19. All men do complain of their fortune, notwithstanding they have cause to
be contented therewith: If God suffers, you to enjoy riches, are you not sati
fy'd? and if it be his will to withhold them, you have no ground of discontent,
provided he give you patience; a Poor contented, is far more happy than a Rich
disquieted.

20. Never cast your eyes upon other men's goods, lest Envy give you a salfe
possession, making you Proprietary of them, without enjoying; content your self
with what God is pleased to bestow upon you; how can you pretend to new favors
from his Bounty, if his Justice have cause to upbraid you with unthankfulness
for that which he has donal ready.

21. Consider, that the felicity of this life consists not in passing it
without trouble, but rather in passing it without offense; so that the troubles
of our life pass away with it, but the torments of our sins are everlasting.

22. What mattereth it in the Running of our Race, whether it be at high
noonday, or in the evening, I mean with magnificence, or without pomp? All
consists in this, to run happily, to the end we may obtain the Crown.

23. The Favorites of Fortune may well rejoice in the light of the Sun, as they
walk in their favor upon Ice; but the same Star that beholds them continually,
makes the Ice melt away suddenly, whence it comes to pass that they vanish in
an instant, leaving us nothing but the memory of their mifery, with that of
their name.

24. Suffer not you self to be tempted with Ambition, the good thereof is to
come, and the trouble of it is present. It gives nothing but unprofitable
desires, and vain hopes. It argues great weakness to lose the Repose we enjoy,
in expectation of a greater.

25. Do not take much heed to the roughness of the path of your life; that part
of it which is past will trouble you no more, and that which is before, may
become fairer, and more pleasant, by walking on in a continual cheerfulness.
All consists in your skilful entering the gate of death; of all the moments of
life, the last is only to be feared.

26. The Wiseman finds his Repose every where; all times are his season; and
all places his abode; he waxes old with contentment, because his old age makes
him draw near his grave, whence after he is sown in rottenness, he is to arise
in glory.

27. This should be a great comfort to us, to know, that we breath continually
under the protection of Providence; seeing that a hair cannot fall from our
head, without the appointment thereof, in all our distresses, this ought to be
our consolation as well as our remedy.

CHAP. VII. That he that knows how to live well, is the most learned man in
the World.
1. IF it be true, that the object of Knowledge is Truth, then know that there
is nothing more true than this, that we are born to work out our own
salvation, and that we are to be rewarded according to our works.

2. The most learned man in the world knows nothing, if he be ignorant of the
means to be saved; and seeing Time and Nature can teach us only to die, we must
seek for other Schoolmasters, who can teach us to be born again out of our own
ashes, to enjoy that immortality which we hope for.

3. Put the case you were a great Astrologer, and by the rules of this Scienc
(...) could foresee your good or bad (...) foresight were unprofitable to you,
because, during the course of your lise, you have nothing to do but to shun the
misery of your damnation to be esteemed happy.

4. It is not enough to be a good Divine, to comprehend (according to the
capacity of your understanding) the mysteries of the Trinity; Faith and
submission are the Principles of true Divinity; it is better to believe, then
dispute.

5. I grant that Philosophy may inlighten your mind in the knowledge of the
wonders of Nature; but you must ascribe the glory of all to the Creator, and by
means of these pleasant streams, re-ascend to their scource.

6. Logicks may teach you the Art to put Arguments in form; but you must
always come to the conclusion of this last, that being born to die you must
die to revive.

7. The science of true Physic consists only in this, to find out sovereign
remedies against the fever of our passions; because if we die of this disease,
our loss is irrecoverable for all Eternity.

8. Suppose you were a great Lawyer; then do reason to your self, do it to all
the World; the only practice of this Law of Nature, does briefly comprehend the
whole science of the Institutions.

9. What does it avail to be learned in Languages; is it not sufficient if a
man can speak the language of Reason? where works are necessary, words are
needless.

10. There are many who are curious to learn, by Cards and Maps, to know the
extent of the Earth; but never reflect upon this truth, that if one little
point does there represent a whole City, in what space can they remarke that of
their grave?

11. True Morals do only consist in living without reproach, to die without
sorrow; and the means to compass this, is to consider the end of our actions,
having always Honor for our object, and duty for our guide.

12. Not that Sciences are to be contemned, the study of them is as commendable
as necessary; but it is a sa^^ thing for a man to employ the whol^ time of his
life in the diligent search of their Truths, without making profit of this,
that he who knows how to obey the Commandments of God, is the most learned
man in the World.

13. O how learned he is in all Sciences, that knows how to love God! and
which may satisfy us in this, it is the Will alone that can render us learned,
without standing in need of any other Master.

14. Wonder not if the Spirit of God says, that The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom, seeing the Love of him ought to be both the progress, and
end thereof. They who can fear and love him, have past all their studies.

15. How many do we see that follow the World for to know it, as if the
knowledge thereof were very difficult; if you would study it to purpose, you
must do it in shunning it, because the frequenting it is contagious.

16. Learn nothing in this World, but to despise it; the Science of the
Contempt thereof, is the most profitable of all Sciences. A Traveller should
think of nothing but his journey, to follow the straight way, without staying
at those places where he passes.

17. Consider that the World is a School, where men learn all sorts of
Sciences; but, Vanity being their Teacher, makes so bad Scholars, that they
perish together with their Learning.

18. The greatest Doctors are in a confusion at the hour of Death, with all
their Sciences, if they have been still ignorant of the Art of Living well;
what does it avail them to have employed all their time in the reading of good
books, if their names be blotted out of the Book of Life?

19. Be your own Master, and be instructed rather by the example of your
actions, than by the Precept of others: a habitude to good, serves us for a
lesson to keep us in our duty, as an object always present, which does
powerfully move our understanding.

20. It is dangerous to be very learned, unless a man have the spirit of
Humility; because the light of Nature so dazleth our eyes with its splendour,
when we approach too near, that we become, for the most part, idolaters of
those objects we admire; and our idolatry prepares our punishment, in being
the cause of our crime.

21. Seeing that no man has ever been able to find happiness in Life, I wonder
why they seek it not in Death. Truly the Wiseman has good cause to possess
our minds with thoughts thereof, seeing these alone can render it as pleasant
as profitable to us.

22. Think not that the reading of good Books can make you learned; Practice
must needs follow Speculation; and besides, it is not enough to instruct
others, unless your Actions go before your Precepts.

23. The study of Meditation is very profitable for your advancement in Piety,
if so be you draw Conclusions from all the Arguments you make. For, to have
nothing but some fine reflections, without drawing any profit from them, is to
be engaged in a pleasant way, that has no issue.

24. He that renders himself capable of his Office and Calling, is not ignorant
of any thing he ought to know for his Salvation; and as this alone ought to be
the object and end of his thoughts and actions, so I think him happy, if he
employ all his time in this study.

25. It is hard to know the vanity of Sciences so long as we live; and seeing
the knowledge thereof at death, is as unprofitable as the sorrow for having
misspent our time, shun the detriment that may ensue thereupon, by the
forewarning I give you thereof.

26. We know nothing, for the most part, but those things which we should not
learn; we may well fill our understanding with the knowledge of Good and Evil,
but the only Idea of the one remains with us, whereas the other is our constant
practice.

27. If you know not how to live, learn, at least, to die; and although the
Science of living and that of dying are often confounded together, yet the
study of them is quite different; many lessons may be learned in the Science of
living, but in that of dying one lesson is sufficient.

28. Frequent no other School, but that wherein you may learn the Art of
working out your own Salvation; because without this Science, all others are to
no purpose.

29. The study of a man's self makes always good Scholars, and he that studies
to know himself, may be said to be truly learned.

CHAP. VIII. That Moderation in Riches, is more to be desired then Excess,
because it is more profitable.
1. COvet neither to be Great nor Rich; a Moderation in this is to be wished,
as the Excess is to be feared; and although we must give an account of Poverty,
as well as of Riches, This is often miscounted, but That is always receivable.

2. Suppose Rich men have a thousand fair days in their life; how many foul
nights have they which they hide from us? They that see the Roses of their
garden, know not how many Thorns they have in their soul.

3. If you be reduced to win your living, win it in effect, in stead of losing
it; this life lasts but one day; you must labor to purchase another which is
eternal.

4. If God has given you Riches, beg for grace to make a good use of them,
because of the use of them depends the acquiring of true Treasures.

5. Be not too sollicitous in purchasing of Riches by unlawful means, lest the
torment of this crime abide with you; you acquire Goods in suffering much Evil;
and God permits the one to be perishing for your first punishment, and the
other to be eternal for your final torment.

6. We reap no advantage by goods ill acquired; and God is not only pleased to
make us witnesses of the loss of them, but also makes himself Judge of the
purchase of them, to punish us and avenge himself.

7. Ask nothing of God, but what is necessary for Life, and seeing it is
transitory, gather Riches only to make your journey. If you have Children,
enrich them by your good Example, rather than by other men's goods; the straight
path of life never leads to the Hospital.

8. There are few Rich men happy; they make a God of their treasure, and this
false God forsakes them in returning to the true one, who punishes eternally
for their idolatry,

9. The Rich man has no greater enemies then his Treasures; because they are
the objects of a continual temptation, to taste the pleasures of the world; and
seeing in this he thinks no desires unprofitable, in that power wherein he
is, he renders himself miserable, by being too happy.

10. I never saw a Rich man content; their greed increases according to the
measure of their Riches; and they never consider, that living and dying in
disquiet, they begin their Hell in this World, never to end it in the other.

11. If you could be able to moderate your Ambition, you would find that Repose
which all the World seeks after. He who does limit his desires with the
enjoyment of that Good which he has, finds himself securely sheltered from all
sort of evils, except those that cannot be shunned.

12. They that employ both their cares and pains to heap up Riches, are much
astonished, when time fails for enjoying of them; They sow, for the most part
for unknown Heirs, who make their harvest, without having any Right in their
succession.

13. Not to be poor, is to be very rich; wish only for what is necessary;
despise what is unprofitable; and be afraid of abundance, as of a torrent of
pleasure which carries us headlong with it.

14. He that is not tied to the World is contented with little, he burdens
himself only with necessaries for his journey, living from day to day, in
expectation of that day which is to put a period to his life.

15. The wise Christian longs for nothing but after God; for seeing he
resigns himself absolutely to the conduct of his Providence, he has no other
thoughts, but what his bounty inspireth in him.

16. If it be a pleasure to be rich during our life, it is a grief to leave our
riches at death; and this is it wherein covetous men are deceived, for seeing
this grief can never be felt but once, they never make trial thereof but to
their disadvantage.

17. I know very well that all men abhor Poverty; but they know not that
Patience with it does work miracles. The Poor-man content is a voluntary
Martyr, who is offered in sacrifice as often as he breaths in the air infected
with his miseries, seeing he dies every moment.

18. Consider, that Rich men cannot be saved but by the Poor; for God heapeth
Riches on Those, for no other end, but to be charitable to These; and it is an
infallible sign of the reprobation of a Prodigal, when he becomes covetous
toward the Miserable. He that refuses compassion, can never look for any.

19. They that ask for Riches, do not know what they desire, the good of the
Earth is an unavoidable Evil, unless it be used aright, and the good usage of
it is so rare, that we see few examples of the practice thereof.

20, When you envy the Riches of your Neighbor, you murmr against
Providence, which has deprived you of them, and given them to him; the actions
of God, accompanied with their justice, do at once impose upon you both silence
and respect.

21. Be not dazzled at the splendour of Riches, it is the light of a deceitful
Beacon, that draws you on to shipwreck. Begin to make your Heaven in that
condition wherein you are, to the end that stream may be joined one day, to its
scource, to heap upon your true Treasures.

22. The Trade of a Rich man is a base Trade, because as it is very difficult,
in the exercise thereof to save himself, so we see nothing but Apprentices in
it, no body passes Master.

23. Know for certain that Hell is filled only with wicked Rich men; hence you
may draw this advantage, in making the example of their destruction serve for a
lesson to shun it. When God makes us witnesses of the miseries of others, the
same chastisement threatens us.

24. It is not hard for wicked men to make themselves rich; but God suffers
eternal torments to be the success of their pains past, they have sown in
labor, and they shall reap in sorrow.

25. He that seeks his Riches in God, has found the Philosophers Stone,
seeing he is rich according to the measure of his desires, and as this Treasure
is of its own nature insinite, so it abouneth always with Riches, whether it
be in Time, or in Eternity.

CHAP. IX. That our Salvation and Repose depend of the knowledge of our selves.
1. COnsider that God formed our first Parents of clay, to the end that the
memory of his Original might be the Tomb of his Pride; and the chastisement of
the Angels, the continual object of his fear.

2. Take notice of your faults every moment, correct them every hour, if you
would enjoy the light of your days at ease. He is very unhappy, who to the
weakness of his mind, adds that of contemning the remedies thereof; although
our Will alone can be able to cure us of it.

3. They who do not know themselves are wilfully blind, and are neither to be
envyed, nor pitied, how can they beget compassion in others, if they have none
for themselves: and how can they be envyed, seeing those who have imitated
them, are not otherwise known than by the memory of their ruin.

4. The Wiseman lives only to know himself, to the end that knowing himself he
may live happily: Because this Life is pleasant in nothing, but in the hope to
exchange it for a better, therefore he studieth his miseries for to contemn the
World that produces them.

5. Let your own unworthiness be your object; because you are truly nothing at
all; to run always toward our grave, without being able to stay, but to enter
therein, is not this to die, rather then to live? yet think at least, when you
are running, that every step may be the last of your journey, and that in going
out of the Empire of Time, you enter into that of Eternity.

6. Study your misfortunes, that you may be happy; study your miseries that you
may be exempted from them; so that, as the study will make you know the nature
of your condition; you will without doubt, mitigate the bondage, by the
necessity which you will impose upon your self, to suffer it without repining.

7. I do not much wonder that the Prophet preaches no other thing to us but
the knowledge of our self; seeing this study alone can render us learned. Learn
to live, learn to die, these are the lessons which are taught in Wisedoms
School.

8. All the faults of our life proceed only from the ignorance of our miseries,
for it is impossible to know them, and go astray from our duty; we live in
appearance, and we die indeed; we are under the Empire of Time, because every
moment we change countenance with it; we do sensibly breath under the Tyranny
of Fortune; what cause have we then to be proud?

9. Examine your self often how you employ your time, that you may give account
thereof to your self before it be asked of you; to the end you may benefit your
self in the time to come, by the memory of what is past, in being a good
husband of the time present.

10. Every man that is ignorant of himself, cannot go far without stumbling in
his blindness; and it is to no purpose for him to be led, for if he fall not to
day, he will surely fall to morrow, since that his Fall is unavoidable.

11. Attribute nothing to Chance, nor Fortune, and receive all from Providence,
without making a distinction of the Presents thereof. Because Good and Evil
come from the hand of Providence, they ought to be alike acceptable to you. A
humble spirit never murmureth.

12. If the whole Knowledge of Wisdom be comprised in this one precept, To
know our selves, you cannot be wise but according to the measure of this
Knowledge. Frequent Schools, turn over Books, follow the Learned, yet you must
study your self if you would become such.

13. What does it avail you to know all the Maxims of Law, unless you
practice them, in doing your self Justice first? Is not this a foolish
Argument, when you are upon your way never to think of the journey you are
making, because you are not to turn back.

14. It is hard to believe, that a man finding himself taken with an incurable
disease, should not feel his Pulse sometimes. You perceive your self dying
every day, how is it possible that you cannot lift up your head often, to see
what it is a clock by your Dyall.

15. If you enjoy a Life without thinking of it, you deserve not to live. The
Wiseman gives an account to himself, before he gives it to others; and as he
is born to die, and dies every hour; so, every moment he thinks of that
Necessity, whereof the laws cannot be violated.

16. O how hard it is for a man to learn to live, after he has lived a long
time! the evil habits and customs he has contracted, do so fortify themselves
against reason, that as long as they preside in his Council, the voice of Rule
is useless.

17. Let not Time surprise you; study your life betimes; and though it be still
sliding away, yet the profit of your study remains; he that has a desire to be
learned, is already such.

18. Never draw vanity from any thing you know; seeing that Knowledge, how great
soever it be, is as vain as you, unless your Salvation be the object thereof.
It is far better to be skillful in tilling the Earth, without pretending to any
more then so much of it as may make us a grave, then to walk sumptuously on it
with magnisicent or naments, without making reflection that we are formed of
the dust thereof.

19. I esteem to body learned but them who walk continually in the way of their
duty: for since that that is the Wise man's guide, we have forgotten all that it
could teach us, if we do not keep it company.

20. This is not all, to begin to know your self; you must perfect your Studies
in the School of this Knowledge. If you be learned to day, you shall yet be more
learned to morrow; and you shall aver at the end of your time, that you have
employed it to good purpose; because after it is past, it still remains in the
advantage you have made thereby.

21. Make you a solitude in the midst of your Palaces, to entertain your self
in secret: mark out a withdrawing-room for your self, to enjoy your own company
in quiet. It is one of the most profitable pleasures of Life, to know how it
passes, to the end we may not sorrow for it when it is past.

22. In fine, let every man do for himself. I have learned these Precepts which
I lay before you; and in this, I wish my example had out-stript my Pen; to
teach you, by Practice, what I have endeavored to persuade you by Discourse.

CHAP. X. That we ought to derive our Nobility from our selves, as well as from
our Ancestors.
1. IF you are not Noble of your self, as well as by Descent, draw no advantage
from your Nobility; virtue alone gains estimation, as Vice causes contempt.

2. What does it profit you, that the Name you bear is recorded in History, if
yours darken the luster thereof? Muddy streams make us lose the belief of the
clearness of their spring.

3. Let your brave Actions be your noble Ancestors; and forget your ancient
Nobility, to enable your self anew. There are no Crowns so rich as those of our
own making.

4. We ought to be ashamed, when our Predecessors are praised, that we cannot
have a share in the praises they receive, seeing they make us blush for not
having deserved them.

5. Set your self on work about the History of your own life, that it may serve
for an ornament to the History of the Age; and let not your Ancestors have any
other advantage of you, but, to have gone before you in the path of Glory,
following their footsteps to fill their traces.

6. It is not enough for a man to be Noble by Birth and Condition, he must be
so by his way of living; and must take notice of his own manners, to correct
them, rather than of his Nobility to prove it.

7. Neither the splendour of your Name, nor the greatness of your House, are
sufficient titles of Nobility, you must produce some that are newer, it is too
great a trouble to enquire how your Ancestors have lived, it is enough to know
how you live, because your life should be the best mark of your Nobility.

8. It will be inquired, at the hour of death, if you have lived like a
Christian, rather then like a Gentleman. And though you cause the Titles of
your Nobility to be engraven upon your Tomb, your actions alone will follow you
beyond it.

9. A Noble man ought to live nobly, both for himself and for others, and
seeing he is elevated above the rank of the vulgar, all his actions must be
extraordinary, to the end that they may serve as lights to them that are below
him.

10. There are some that take great pains about their Pedigree, to prove the
antiquity of their Race; as if they could challenge any thing from the
reputation of their Ancestors. They may well call themselves Heirs of their
Goods; but the succession of their Glory is of such nature, that they cannot
enjoy it, unless they deserve it.

11. Although you were descended of the Race of Kings; if your actions be not
answerable to your Birth, a man may lawfully question the Nobility of your
Original; and if you prove the Antiquity thereof by your Titles, these are
false witnesses, for your life does belie them.

12. If you be born Great, do Great things; but though you labor in Time, take
your aim in Eternity; the Earth is the Grave of all that it produces.

13. If you be of a condition not very eminent, raise your self above it by
your virtue, and render your self considerable of your self: An excellent
Picture carries its lust with it.

14. Although Nature has made you Noble, yet draw the confirmation of your
Nobility from Virtue, for that only can justify it; and live always for the
time to come, to the end, that the memory of what is past, may be delectable to
you: Time cannot surprise us, when it is well employed.

15. Know, that true Nobility consists in doing no action unworthy of it. You
may well fill History, with the Fame of your Exploits; but the generous
thoughts of your heart, must be answerable to the glorious actions of your
life; and you must be at agreement with your self, by the straight Alliance of
your Virtue, with your Glory.

16. It is far better to be Noble in Mind, than by Birth: It is seldom
enquired, quired of what condition our Fathers were, but every Body is curious
to know what Trade we drive; not because they pretend to any interest therein,
but the World being a Stage, where every Man actoth his part, all the
Spectators are our Judges.

17. How many do we see take pains to obtain Patents of Nobility, as if the
Title could bestow the Merit thereof. They had rather exempt their Wealth from
Taxes, than their Life from Reproaches, without considering the necessity, to
which they are reduced; to forsake that Wealth which they would gladly
preserve, and to give an account of that Life, whereof they have contemned the
reputation.

18. If your Name be not known by your Condition, make it known by your
Exemplary Life. Virtue is a Balm, whereof the sweet Odor is spread every where.

19. We have no cause to call Nature, Stepmother, what inequality soever we
find betwixt the Noblemen, and the Peasants, since that by Birth and Death we
have the same destiny. And if there appear a great difference in their Life,
yet know, that the different ways which they keep, do meet at the Grave.

20. If you draw Vanity from the outward qualities of the Body, Time will make
you know your Folly every day, because it destroys the ground thereof every
moment, In ruining the subject that causes it.

CHAP. XI. That we ought to be dis-engaged from all things; to the end, That we
may live without disquiet, and die without sorrow.
1. CAll not your self the Owner of the Goods you possess; every moment
renews unto you the favor of the use of them: We have nothing that is our
own, but miseries and unhappiness.

2. If your heart be fastened on any Object, consider the perishing nature of
it; and seeing you cannot love it, but as a transitory thing, justify your
love by the necessity of its ruin.

3. When we love any thing passionately, we expose our selves anew to the view
of Fortune, which can wound us in as many parts, as we are divided.

4. The Covetous man, whose heart is in his Treasures, feels it plucked out as
often as they are diminished, without considering, that as streams return to
their source, so this Piece of Earth, wherewith he is entrusted, must be
re-joyned to its whole.

5. The Ambitious man, who renders himself Imaginary Possessor of all the goods
he wishes, believes, that he is robbed of them, when he is prevented in
acquiring them. This lets us see, that as we live in our Passions, so we feel
our selves dying with the causes of their Birth.

6. All that you would love, love it in God; to the end, that your Love may
produce your Repose, rather than your Trouble. All the Affections which we
contract in this World, do nothing else but breed, and die, seeing every moment
may be the first and last of their continuance.

7. What an ingenious thing it is, for a man to torment himself, in being
willing to die for every object he loves! Is it not enough to give up his
heart to one love, that is allowable and lawful, without dividing it amongst a
thousand other Passions, to resent as many different torments.

8. The Chains wherewith we are tied here below, are easy to be made, and hard
to be broken. And if death alone restore us to liberty, yet we lose it in
recovering it, seeing that, commonly, we carry the guilty remembrance of our
pleasant Bondage to the Grave with us.

9. A man's love toward himself, is to be excused, when his Salvation is the
object thereof; he is permitted to love himself in a lawful way, yea, with
excess too, using extraordinary endeavors, to testify the violence of that
Love, by the contempt of all other.

10. Happy is that man who is altogether his own, that he may give himself
wholly to God: Unhappy is he, that after he has given his heart to the World,
sees himself constrained to leave it with the World, not having so much power
as to take it back.

11. The Wisemans Love is never blind, because Reason (which is nothing else
but Light) produces it: Whence it comes to pass, that he loves with pleasure,
drawing his delights from the Object of his Affections, which are as harmless
as himself.

12. Every Body loves Liberty, yet every Body is engaged: They that have no
Master, become Slaves to their own Passions; and in this shameful Bondage, they
render themselves unworthy of compassion, because they have no compassion on
themselves.

13. Seeing that Christian Perfection consists in the contempt of all things,
and in the dis-engagement from our Selves, we must be our own; to the end, that
we may give our selves: Unless our hearts be emptied, they shall never be
filled with God.

14. Every man goes about his own business, and we do always forget the most
important, which is that of our Salvation: All others are unprofitable at the
end of our days work, seeing an account will not be required of them, no not so
much as of their success.

15. I know very well, that all our desires do divide our heart; and it is so
possessed with a continual longing after their object, that it lives out of
its self for another sake: But though it be divided during life, it must needs
be united in it self, at last, to die all alone for its self only.

16. Do not wait till Age draw you from the World; but, preventing Necessity by
Reason, triumph over your self, before Time become your Conqueror.

17. Consider that your Habits and Customs are as so many Bonds, which
strengthen themselves continually; and seeing Nature does much contribute
thereunto, all endeavors, at last, are too weak to break them, without the help
of Grace.

18. O what a contentment it is to a man, to be free to die, and to be wholly
his own at the hour of death! The Objects of our Passions, are as so many
Chains, which fasten us to the World, when we are upon the point of departing
from it: We must bid them adieu betimes, that we may make our retreat without
sorrow.

19. It is very hard for us to hinder our selves from being surprised by Time,
in those Affections that we contract here below; because, as the hour of our
departure is uncertain, and the hope that dies after us, deceives us too, so
we do not commonly forsee our mishap, but when it is unavoidable.

20. Dis-engage your self from your Children, and, after you have put them
under the Protection of Providence; it is enough to show them the way wherein
they should walk, to work out their own salvation, by going before them your
self.

21. Be not tied with your Dignities; these are the Liveries of Fortune, which
she gives and takes away at her pleasure: Content your self in that you
deserve them, seeing you must give an account of the use of them.

22. Let not your heart find any place in your Palaces, to lodge its
Affections there, least the Chains thereof be too strong. Do not establish your
dwelling there, all the steps of your walks are numbered; and in going under the
covert of the shady Allies in your Gardens, you draw nearer your Grave.

23. Every Man loves his Repose, and no body takes pains to acquire it. It is
not enough to be rich in this World, and to taste of a thousand pleasures
therein; because these riches remain in the World, and the pleasures pass away,
leaving us nothing but a troublesome remembrance, and an unprofitable sorrow.

24. It is not enough to live at Liberty, we must die so; and what tie soever
we have here below, the failing of the heart is that of the Soul, because the
will of this, follows the thoughts of the other.

25. If you be addicted to the World, quit this bad Master betimes, and restore
you to your self, that you may offer your self totally to God. All streams
return to their Fountain; all Beams are joined to the Body of their Light. You
must render your Soul to its Creator, in the Innocence of Baptism, and in the
Freedom of your Cradle.

CHAP. XII. That the Good we do in this World, is of greater value than the
Goods we possess in it.
1. THink not that you are Rich according to the worth of the Goods you
possess; but rather according to the measure of the Good which you do. Your
Treasures remain with your Heirs, but your Works follow you. Those are
Strangers to your Soul, but these do properly belong to it.

2. The Inventory of your Goods serve only for a memory of the Account you
have to make, both of the Purchase, and the Usage of them: So that when you
die, you shall know, that you have taken pains only for others; seeing they
are to reap the fruit of your labors, and also of the torments appointed for
you.

3. He is truly miserable, who has his Coffers filled with Money, and his Soul
stained with the guilt of the purchase thereof. Suppose your Riches did level
the path of your life, to render it more pleasant, and you cease not to go on
in your journey; but when you are at the end of your course, you shall be
afraid of him whom you shall find there, after you have forgotten him, to whom
you should rather have betaken your self.

4. Every body takes pains for this Life, as though it were immortal; and no
body thinks on Death, which we carry in our bosom: Whence it comes to pass,
that after we have spent our time in gathering of Riches, a stranger enjoys
them for our first punishment, and Hell waits for us, for our final torment.

5. To what purpose do you put out your Money to Usury, to assure your self of
this Life, seeing, that by Grace you wait continually for the Life to come, to
prolong it? The Fire of Covetousness, devoureth you in the behalf of a Life,
which is nothing but the smoke thereof; since that, like smoke, it is
dissipated by the blast of our sighs.

6. You keep an exact account of your Revenues and Disbursements, without
considering, that you have nothing, which is to be valued but the time you have
to live; and because that is uncertain, and Death infallible, you must make
good the use and possession of a Good which you forsake for ever.

7. What pleasure can you take in walking abroad upon your Territories, if at
every step you walk upon your Grave? You take all your Walks in a Circle,
whereof your Grave is the Center.

8. You enjoy, indeed, a great satisfaction, in having many Houses of Pleasure,
there to pass the different seasons of the year; but the year passes, and your
pleasures too, and from season to season, your last approaches, wherein you
must give an account of the Fruits, which all these seasons have yielded you.

9. It is a sad pleasure for a man to contemplate himself in his greatness, as
in a Looking-Glass; because, though this Looking-Glass did flatter us, yet it
cannot represent us, but in a continual motion, seeing our life has no stay;
and what delight can we have in a way, how pleasant soever it be, if it end at
the Grave.

10. How astonished may a Man be, at the reading of his Testament, when he
hears the Inventory of the Goods he has purchased; but has no body to
represent to him, the Good he has done! Yet he forsakes Those eternally, and
to all Eternity he can pretend to nothing, but the fruits of These: Judge of
his astonishment by this thought.

11. Do not reckon Greatness and Riches in the number of the Felicities of this
Life, they are either the Goods of Nature or Fortune, whereof the use is much
more dangerous, than the possession seems pleasant. He is Great before God, who
is willingly Small before Men.

12. Consider, that the Goods which the World yields, are false, but the
Miseries true: And if, when you die, you be rich only in pieces of Land, that
Earth will remain to you, both for your Grave, and for your share.

13. You cannot enrich your Soul, but with Eternal Goods, seeing those that are
perishing, are not for its use. You cannot heap up Treasures in your Soul,
unless Heaven be the Fountain of them.

14. It is a great ease to our Mind, that we have only purchased Goods to do
Good withal; and that we can be able to distribute that before we die, which we
would give after death: For, by making it pass through strange hands, we run
the hazard of diminishing our Charity, although we enjoy the advantage thereof.

15. Although we should not keep an Account of the good Deeds which we do, yet
it is lawful to preserve the remembrance of them; so that the Memory being
filled with a habit so commendable; this Object always present, powerfully
moves the Will, whereon depends our future concernment.

16. He that does much Good, gathers much Goods. A good life fills the
House with Riches, in filling it with gladness. A voluntary, or patient
Poverty, may enrich us with Real Treasures.

17. Be not disquieted for the meanness of your Estate; what is Necessary, is
sufficient to the Wiseman: Abundance never produces Repose, but Mediocrity is
able to give it.

18. He is free indeed, who wills always that which God wills: But since
that we are blind in our Liberty, not knowing to what we shall direct our
determinations, we preserve our Freedom, in putting it into the hands of him
who gave it us, to make a good use thereof; seeing He is the Object, and the
End of that Usage.

19. Covet no more riches, than God bestows on you, or what comes of the sweat
of your Labors: And though your Children have no more, know, that the Seed
thereof is so fruitful, that it increases continually, and is never diminished.

20. If you knew how great a pleasure it were to do good, you would contract so
powerful habits of it, that it were impossible to break them. But if you be so
unhappy, as to doubt of it, let this disadvantage yield you some profit,
because experience may make you happy.

CHAP. XIII. If we would leave the World cheerfully, we must dis-engage our
selves from it, ere we leave it.
1. STudy to know the World, that you may learn to contemn it, seeing the
contempt thereof proceeds from the knowledge we have of it: No man ever knew
it, and loved it; and they that tie themselves to follow it, are wilfully
blind, who settle their chief happiness here below.

2. If Examples are able to instruct you, you have no more to do, but to cast
your eyes on every side, to look on the miserable People the World has made,
and is every day a making. You may draw your advantage from their loss, in
considering, from the Haven wherein you are, the storms wherewith they are
encompassed.

3. It is true, that the World has nothing to give but Roses; but afterward
it afflicts our spirits, and to increase our miseries, the Roses thereof last
but for a Morning, but the Thorns are Everlasting; the Pleasures thereof pass
away, but the Torments follow us beyond the Grave.

4. I know very well, that it is hard to resist the Worlds allurements, and
that Reason must needs employ her uttermost endeavors to render her self
Commandress of its Charms; but a humble spirit, and a zealous heart, may hope
for all things from Grace. It is this alone that makes us triumph in Combats,
to give us the Crown of the Victory.

5. If the World tempt you with Riches, it is a Good, whereof the ill-imploying
may render you eternally miserable: And truly it is so difficult to employ them
well, that the wisest men in this point, are in continual fear, because they
are in continual danger.

6. If the World tempt you with Greatness of Birth, consider that it is a
Rose-bud, whereof you are both the Sun and the Dew, because you cannot be truly
Great, but by your own Virtue. Nature, indeed, may crown you from your Cradle;
but it is only the crowns of your own making, that must render you truly
Glorious.

7. If your Youth suggest any temptation to engage you to follow the World,
consider, that it is the Hand of a Clock which commonly goes false; because
every moment may be that of your Retreat, but such a Retreat as has no Return.

8. Be not surprised by the smiles of Fortune: All the Calms of the Sea
thereof, are so many presages of an ensuing Tempest; and Shipwreck is so much
the more unavoidable, as the Calm has been of long continuance. Fortune alone
never rendered a Man happy.

9. There is no condition in the World to adventure upon; and although Crowns
and Scepters be as Laurels, under the shelter of which, we may be safe from
Lightnings; yet Fortune has settled on Earth, her Right of taking them away,
though she do not give them: Every Age furnishes us with said examples of this
Truth.

10. The Chains which tie us to the World, are hard to be broken, unless we
break them betimes; because, when we use our strongest endeavors to make them
take effect; the trouble does astonish us, and courage fails us, with so much
the more reason as we endeavor the ruin of our own Contentments.

11. We must live in the World, as in a strange Country, where we are every day
taking our Farewell, being always ready to depart; and because the moment of our
departure is uncertain, we ought to wait for it every hour. The Wise Christian
that hearkneth to the minutes of his breathing, can never be surprised, when
the hour of his l^st sigh strikes.

12. The World never made but unhappy men; these are works of its own making,
and it can make no other. It is a fine thing for the Slaves thereof, to live
and die in the pomp they are in: But the splendour thereof, does only dazzle
feeble spirits, because strong ones breaking the berk of appearances, do
evidently see their mi^fortunes.

13. I do not wonder that our first Parents were deceived by the World, seeing
they were deprived of those Precepts that Example might give them: But I think
it very strange, that walking on the Sepultures of those whom the World has
deceived, we become not wise by the remembrance of their folly.

14. Take leave of your self, before Necessity constrain you to take your last
Farewell; and seeing it is the Trade of the World to make men slaves, as well as
miserable, follow it without being tied to it; to the end, that dying in that
freedom wherein you was born, you may have no other Master to give an account
unto, but one.

15. They who devote themselves to the World for a time, render their Vow
eternal, before they are aware, having neither leisure nor courage to violate
it; and if, by good luck, this does not fail them, the want of the other makes
their destruction infallible, and their loss unrecoverable.

16. All the lovers of the World, die commonly Idolaters thereof; but the
misery is, that Time exposes them for Sacrifice upon the Altar of Eternity;
seeing they are to be Martyrized for ever.

17. Flee, shun the World, in Will, and in Thought, seeing you are not able to
shun it in Deed. True, every moment separates you from it, in making you draw
near your Grave; But in that, your Heart must go before your steps, and you
must go swifter in mind, than in body, to make the way pleasant which you are
to go.

18. Prevent those Farewels the World is to take of you, in the Necessity to
which you are reduced, to forsake it for ever; to the end, that the hour of
your departure may be without hinderance, and without any other disquiet, than
what grief, not to have lived better, might have caused in you.

CHAP. XIV. That the World is a Theater, where every man acts his Part in
Time, for an Eternity.
1. WHen I consider this sad Theater of the World, wherein Time destroys all
that Nature produces. I bless that adored Providence which has so ordained
it, seeing that the Necessity of Death, persuades us of the Neccssity of a New
life.

2. Although we be born free, yet Nature makes us subject to Reason; and though
this Subjection be voluntary (as the Will has no other object but Good) there
is a far greater pleasure in following it, than there is in shunning it.

3. Life has no returning; and though our Souls be Immortal, the second Life
which succeeds to the first, is but the Fruit of the Seed of our Labors: If we
walk in darkness here below, darkness will be our portion.

4. The Immortality which the World promises, can last no longer than it; and
it is sufficient that Time can mark the limits thereof to contemn it;
whatsoever is not Eternal, is unworthy to be the object of our desires; but
Eternity is to be feared, as well as desired. And seeing it is unavoidable, we
must render it happy to our selves by a Godly life.

5. How worthy of Compassion are some profound Wits! They spend their whole
life in the search of Immortality; and in the end, they find nothing but Death
Eternal. Except we be inflamed with the Fire of Charity, we cannot happily rise
again out of our Ashes.

6. You must never make trial of a danger, whereof the hurt is unrecoverable:
They who put their Salvation in hazard, are men wilfully unhappy, who run blind
to their own destruction, after they have foreseen it.

7. Because we can only be good Husbands of the time present, we must employ
it as it comes; it is the only means to stay it, though it do continually
flee away, since that the memory of the flight thereof is pleasant to us.

8. Because at death, vows are to no purpose, we ought to make and accomplish
them during Life: the occasion of well-doing is not always prefent. Though the
seasons be ordered, as well as the Days and Nights, yet it is not so with Life,
because the moments thereof succeed one to another, without having so much as
one assured.

9. The mere necessity of dying, does persuade Wisemen to work out their own
Salvation, while it is day, without standing in need of any other Clock, to
mark the hours of their work.

10. Wise men do never sorrow for their Life past, because they live only to
die: And though the time to come be not theirs, yet they dispose of it before
hand to their own advantage, in the resolution they are, always to employ it
well.

11. Life has nothing that is its own, but death: all the Goods which it
injoyeth are imaginary, because they subsist only in the Fancy. And seeing that
subsistence depends of Time and Fortune, if This take away from us the use of
it, That can limit the continuance thereof.

12. He is happy, upon the account of Justice, who sees himself die in doing
of his duty: the Race of this Life, how painful soever it be, becomes
pleasant, when we run it happily.

13. To live but for one day, is to live a whole Age, provided we spend that
day to good purpose: A thousand years of Life are reckoned only by the last
moment which does finish it, because that alone must Crown all the former.

14. There is nothing so dreadful at Death, as the remembrance of a long Life:
because, as we must give an account of all our days past, seeing they are
present with God, either to justify, or condemn them; so the doubt of our
happiness, or misery, keeps our Souls on the Rack.

15. We cannot go, but once, from Time to Eternity; it is a journey that has
no returning; and seeing that all Wise men prepare themselves to make it, as
soon as they are capable of reason, he must needs be quite deprived of reason,
who is surprised at the hour of retreat.

16. As the Pilgrim does accomplish his vow, when he puts himself on the way to
make his Pilgrimage, so we begin to go about our Mission as soon as we are
born, in the Path which we hold; it is enough that Reason be our Lantern, and
Duty our Guide, to keep us from going astray, without measuring the paces of
our Race.

17. Although we do but pass away here below, yet every man may work out his
own Salvation here, in passing: All consists in the employing well the Time
allowed us, without being solicitous for more, or less; a good life is always
long, though it should last but for one moment.

18. Endeavor, every day, to dosome good work, to the end you may enjoy what
is past, as you do what is present. The Wise man never searches in vain, for
his Repose is in his Memory.

19. Seeing that the Way which we are to hold in our Life is marked out, let us
go on cheerfully, and consider, that the more painful it be, it is the safer,
provided that Patience be our Guide.

20. Know that Death is the reward of the just, and the punishment of the
Wicked; because Those, when they die, may lawfully hope for the Crown of their
labors; but These, for the chastisement of their crime.

CHAP. XV. That the Wise man waits for Death, without either wishing or
fearing it.
1. HE that wishes for Death, has cause to fear it, because the guilt of his
desire, prepares his punishment; as we are born here below, by a secret Order
of Providence, so this alone can sound our retreat: and of all the miseries
which can befall us, Desperation is the greatest.

2. We should never fear the Evils which we cannot avoid: because Fear is a new
Evil far more painful than that which we are to incur; and if, in these
encounters, Nature overcome Reason, we ought to implore the help of Grace,
because it triumphs always.

3. Death frights none but the Wicked; not, but that the Godly do fear it, but
their Hope being stronger than their Fear, the one is diminished by the growth
of the other.

4. Wise Christians do never dispute with Providence: they undergo the laws
thereof without repining, and how rigorous soever they be (seeing there is more
glory in suffering, than in complaining) they beg for Constancy in their
distresses, rather than for Comfort.

5. They that have a love to Life, know not what they love: For, if it be a
Good, the imaginary propriety and uncertain usage thereof, make us sensibly
know the contempt we ought to have of it.

6. A good Life is always long, how short soever it be; and seeing the greatest
Heroes reckon their years by their Heroic acts, the wise Christian ought to
keep an account of his age, by the Good he does.

7. Although we be born here below, unwitting to us, we have liberty to live
here as we please; but seeing that we must give an account of our Life, we
ought to be good husbands of Time, for it conducts us to Eternity.

8. Life may be justly compared to a Dream, because we live in a continual
dotage, taking the false Good, for the real, and the way of Vice, for the path
of Virtue.

9. Know, that the preparation to Death does mitigate the fear thereof, as the
continual thoughts of it, takes away the horror; and as Experience cannot
choose but be profitable to you, so the profit you shall receive by it, will far
surpass the pains you shall take for it.

10. If you would forsake Life without sorrow, enjoy it without being tied to
it; we should never think but of finishing our journey, so much the rather,
because we cannot stay by the way.

11. This Interval of days and nights, whereof our Life is composed, lets us
see by the Image of Sleep, that it is so confounded with Death, that it is but
one and the same thing.

12. Nature causes us to be born like unto Posts in this World, where every
man carries the sealed Letter of his Destiny, directing to Death; and seeing
Time leads us thither, if we do not go, it will pull us. This obliges us to
follow our Fate, with that submission which becomes a creature.

13. Seeing we do not live, but to die, and that we do not die, but to live
again; let us drive the Trade of the Virtuous man, because he alone can find,
at the end of his Course, that Eternity which he waits for.

14. He that lives only to live, does deprive himself of. Hope, which is the
sole Good of Life. What would become of us, in the miseries wherein we are, if
we did not pretend to Eternal happiness, seeing our Souls can never die.

15. Life is not otherwise considerable, than by the good use we make of it;
though you should live a whole Age abounding with Riches and Happiness, if the
last moment do not justify all the former, you may be reckoned in the number of
the most miserable men in the World.

16. Every body wishes to live long, not considering that a long life, is a
long receipt of Time bestowed on us, seeing that we must give an account of the
employment of our days. The felicity of our Life, depends of the happiness of
our Death.

17. Consider, that every Age sees die, all that it has seen born, and that
it draws along with it, all that has appeared like it, in the World, without
hope of returning; because the years whereof it is composed, are never twice
counted.

18. As soon as a man has attained to the years of Reason, he lives long
enough, if he live but one day, provided that one day be well spent: The rest
of the Time which is allowed us, turns to our reproach, rather than our
advantage; if we do not spend it to good purpose.

19. When we wish for Death, we manifest our Cowardice, more than our Courage,
because this fails us, through want of resolution to endure the memory of what
is past, the trouble of what is present, and the fear of what is to come,
whereof the only Hope of Eternity can sufficiently instruct us.

20. Know that the Life of Great Men is a path strewed with Roses, whereof the
Thorns are at the end. For, after they have smelled the sweet odor of Those,
they must needs feel the sting of These.

21. There is none but God and Virtue, that can prolong the Life of Man; God,
in adding to it that which is to come, and Virtue, in recalling what is past,
by the satisfaction we enjoy in having spent it well.

22. He that loves Life in his miseries, to suffer them constantly, has cause
to fear Death, because in suffering new torments, it takes away from him the
means to acquire new Crowns.

23. Live only to die, if you would live without reproach; he that thinks on
that which is to come, does not sorrow for what is past, and enjoys what is
present without disquiet.

FINIS.

