THE VOYAGE OF ITALY.

PRINTED AT PARIS. Anno dn^i. M.DC.LXX



THE VOYAGE OF ITALY, OR A Complete Journey through ITALY. In Two Parts. With
the Characters of the People, and the Description of the Chief Towns, Churches,
Monasteries, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statues,
and Antiquities. AS Also of the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of
all the Princes. With Instructions concerning Travel.

By Richard Lassels, Gent. who Traveled through Italy Five times as Tutor to
several of the English Nobility and Gentry.

Never before Extant.

Newly Printed at Paris, and are to be sold in London, by John Starkey at the
Mitre in Fleet Street near Temple-Barr, 1670.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST TRVLY NOBLE LORD RICHARD LORD LVMLEY VICOVNT
WATERFORD etc.
MY LORD
It were needless to tell you, by how many titles this little Orphan book,
claims the honor of your Lordps protection. First, by the law of nature, its
parent dying in your service, you stand bound to be a foster father to it;
again it haueing been my fortune to contribute something to the bringing it
forth to light, it has a new relation to you under the title by which I have
long ago consecrated all my endeauours to your service. But to pass by these
two, there is yet a third reason, whereby it will appear, not the effect of
choice, but of necessity, that it should come forth under the favor of your
name: The wellgrounded experience which you have gained in your trauells; the
exact and judicious account you are able to give of the places you have seen,
which make a great part of the subject of this book; the mature judgment of
the interests of states, and manners of people whereof it treats, which in you
is not the after fruit of age; the Gentile and courteous behavior which you
have acquired, and which charms all those who have the honor to converse with
you: These, I say, are virtues so peculier to your Person, and so conspicuous
in the eyes of all the world, that the design of this Book being to form the
like in the rest of the Gentry of our Nation that pretend to travel; It would
be a wrong to the public to let it appear under the Patronage of any other
then of him that is the Idea of an accomplished and consu^mate Traveler. And
this, I doubt not, was the reason, why the Author haueing had the honor to
have been a Governor to so many of the flower of our Gentry, made choice of
your Lordship to bequeath this work unto, by his last Will and Testament: And
which imposes upon me a necessity, both in compliance to the memory of my
worthy friend and fellow traveler, and to the duty I owe unto your Lordship,
by the honor I have to succeed unto him in his last engagement, to offer up
this his last work to you, as an everlasting monument of esteem and
gratitude, of him who while he lived ever was, and of him who liueing ever is.

MY LORD Your Lordships most humble and most obedient servant S. Wilson.

A TABLE OF THE NAMES OF THE CHIEF TOWNS contained in this first part.
A.
AIguebelle. 69 Aiguebellet Mt. 66 Aix. 42 Alexandria. 103 Apennins Mts. 154
Aquapendente. 241 Auignon. 38
B.
S. Baume. 43 Beauuoysin. 66 Berlin. Mt. 58 Bologna. 141 Bolsena. 242 Briare.
32 Briga. 6^
C.
Caprarola. 247 Cassale. 103 Castelfranco. 141 Chambery. 67 Cenis. Mt. 70
Coire. 57
D*
Deuedra. 65 Domodoscela. 65
F.
Florence. 155 Fontainbleau. 27 Fort-Vrban. 140
G.
Geneua. 48 Genua. 82
I.
S. John Morian. 69 Isere. Riu. 68
L.
Lake of Geneua 49 Lake of Bolsena. 243 Lakes of Wollinstade and Isee. 59 Lake
Mayor. 65 Lasneburg. 69 Lausanna. 50 Ligorne. 232 Lodi. 133 Lucca. 225 Lions.
32
M.
Marseiles. 42 Marguzzi. 65 Marignano. 133 S Maurice. 59 S. Maximin. 44 Milan.
112 Modena. 138 Monferat. 103 Montargis. 32 Montefiascone. 243 Monterosa. 249
Montmelian. 68 Murat. 52
N.
Neuers. 32 Noualese. 71 Noui 10^
P.
Parma. 135 Pauia. 105 Piacenza. ^4 Piemont. 72 Pisa. 228 Pistoia. 225 Po. Riv.
72 Poggibonzi. 235 Pont S. Esprit. 38 Pougues. 32
R.
Radicofino. 241 Regio. 238 Riuiera di Genua. 82 Roanne. 32
S.
Sampion. M. 63 Sauona. 80. Sauoy. 76 Sesto. 66 Siena. 235 Sion 62 Soleur. 52
Splug. Mt. 58 Susa. 71 Swisserland. 51
T.
Terrara. 32 Ticinum. 105 Tortona. 104 Tournon. 38 Turin. 72
V.
Valance. 38 Valtaline. 57 Valetians. 59 Veij. 250 Vienne. 38 Viterbo. 246
Y.
Yssonne. ^^.
Z.
Zuric. 54
A PREFACE TO THE READER, CONCERNING TRAVELING.
WHEN I first set pen to Paper to handle this subject, I had not the least
thought of the press; nor of erecting my self into an Author. J only
discharged my memory hastily of some things which J had seen, in Italy; and
wrapped up that untimely Embrio in five sheets of paper, for the use of a noble
person, who set me that task. Yet this Embrio likeing the person for whom it
was conceived, obliged me to lick it over and over again, and bring it into
better form. Second thoughts, and succeding voyages into Italy, have finished
it at last; and have made it what it is; A complete Voyage, and an exact
Itinerary through Italy.

And here I thought to have drawn bridle and rested, after so long a journey;
when a learned friend having perused this my Description of Italy, desired much
to see a Preface to it, of my fashion, and Concerning Traueling. I could refuse
nothing to such a friend; and have done it here willingly, both for my own,
and my countries sake.

For my own sake; to preexcuse some things in my book, which some perchance
may dislike.

For some, I fear, will quarrel with my English; and justly, seeing three long
voyages into Flanders, six into France, five into Italy, one into Germany, and
Holland, have made me, live half of my life time in foreign countries, to the
disturbance of my own language. Yet if J bring not home fine language, J bring
home fine things: and I have seen great Ladies, both in France, and England,
buy find things of chimney-sweepers, and Pedlars, that spoke but course
Lombard language, and gross Scotch.

Others perchance will find fault, that J write merrily sometimes: And why
not? Seeing I write to young men, and for them: and mirth is never so lawful
as in traueling, where it shortens long miles, and sweetens bad usage; that is,
makes a bad dinnar go down, and a bad horse go on.

Others will say, that I fill my book with too much Latin: But these must be
minded, that I am writing of the Latin country; and that I am caruing for
Scholars, who can digest solid bitts, having good stomachs.

Others will say, J ieere now and then: And would any man have me go through so
many diverse countries, and praise all I see? Or in earnest, do not some things
deserve to be ieered? when things cannot be cured but by ieering, ieering,
says Tertullian, is a duty: and I think the Cynick Philosophers struck as
great a blow at vice, as the Stoics.

Others will say, I change style often, and sometimes ru^n smoothly, sometimes
joltingly: Tru^ ^raueled not always upon smooth ground, and paceing horses:
Swisserlande and Sauoye, are much different, from Campania, and Lombardy; and
its one thing to describe a Pleasant garden, an other thing to describe a
Venerable Cathedral: and if in the one, and the other, we have several looks;
much more ought we to have several words in describing them.

Others will say, I affect a world of exotic words not yet naturalized in
England: No, I affect them not; I cannot avoid them: For who can speak of
Statues, but he must speak of Niches? or of Churches, Wrought Tombs, or inlayd
Tables; but he must speak of Coupolas; of bassi rilieui; and of pietre
commesse? If any man understand them not, its his fault, not mine.

Others will say, I hunt too much after Ceremonies, and Church antiquityes. No,
I only meet them. And as a man cannot speak of Hercules, but he must speak of
clubbs, of combats, of Labors, and victories: so I cannot speak of Rome the
Christian, but I must speak of Relics, Ceremonies, and Religion. Yet I
believe, I give my Reader a full drought to^ of profane antiquityes,
Mascarades, Shows, dressings, and passetimes.

Others in fine will say, that I do but a thing done already; seeing two
others have written of this subject in English. Well; if others have written
upon this subject, why may not I? They did the best they could, I believe; but
they drew not up the ladder after them. The one writes much of Italy, M.
Warcupp. M. Raymond.
and says little: the other writes little and leaves out much; which I impute
to the ones writing out of old Geographers, long after he had been there: and
to the others short stay in Italy, when he was there. And if these ingenious
gentlemen have painted out Italy in busto only, and profile; why may not I
paint her out at full face, and at her full length? If they, like ancient
Statuaryes, have represented Italy unto us like a naked statue; I have set her
out in all her best Attire, and Jewels. And thus much for my own sake.

For my countries sake; To read to my countrymen two profitable Lessons. The
first, of the Profit of traueling. The second: of Traueling with profit.

1. For the first, to wit the Profit of Traueling, its certain, that if this
world be a great book, The profit of traueling.
as S. Augustine calls it, none studdy this great Book so much as the Traueler.
They that never stir from home, read only one page of this book; and like
the dull follow in Pliny, who could never learn to count further then five,
they dwell always upon one lesson. They are like an acquaintance of mine, who
had always a book indeed lyeing open upon a deske; but it was observed that
it lay always open at one and the same place, and by long custom, could lie
open no where else. He then that will know much out of this great book, the
world, must read much in it: and as Ulysses is setforth by Homer as the wisest
of all the Grecians, because he had traueled much, and had seen multorum
hominum mores and Vrbes, the Cittyes and customs of many men: so his son
Telemachus is held for a very shallow witted man: and Homer gives the reason,
because his mother Penelope, instead of sending him abroad to see foreign
countries, had always kept him at home, and so made him a mere Onocephalus,
and a homeling Mammacuth. So true is the saying of Seneca, that Imperitum est
animal homo, and sine magna experientia rerum, si circumscribatur Natalis soli
sui fine.

2 Traueling preserues my young nobleman from surfeiting of his parents, and
weanes him from the dangerous fondness of his mother. It teaches him wholesome
hardship; to lie in beds that are none of his acquaintance; to speak to men he
never saw before; to travel in the morning before day, and in the evening after
day; to endure any horse and weather, as well as any meat and drink. Whereas my
country gentleman that never traueled, can scarce go to London without making
his Will, at least without wetting his handkercher. And what generous mother
will not say to her son with that ancient? Malo tibi male esse, Senec.
quam molliter: I had rather thou should be sick, then soft. Indeed the
coral-tree is neither hard, nor red, till taken out of the Sea, its native
home. And I have read that many of the old Romans put out their children to be
nurced abroad by Lacedemonian nurces, till they were three years old; then
they put them to their Uncles, till seven, or tenn; then they sent them into
Toscany to be instructed in Religion; and at last into Greece to studdy
Philosophy.

3. Traueling takes my young nobleman four notches lower, in his self-conceit
and pride. For whereas the country Lord that never saw any body but his Fathers
tennants, and M. Parson, and never read any thing but John Stow, and Speed;
thinks the Lands-end to be the Worlds-end; and that all solid greatness, next
unto a great Pasty, consists in a great Fire, and a great estate. Whereas my
traueling young Lord, who has seen so many greater men, and Estats then his
own, comes home far more modest and civil to his inferiors, and far less
pufft up with the empty conceit of his own greatness. Indeed nothing cured
Alcibiades his pride so much, as to see in a Map (showed him for the nonce by
Socrates) that his house and lands, of which he was so proud, either appeared
there not at all, or only a little spot, Senec:
or dab: and nemo in pusillo magnus.

4. Traueling takes off, in some sort, that aboriginal curse, which was laid
upon mankind even almost at the beginning of the world; I mean, the confusion
of tongues: which is such a curse indeed, that it makes men, who are of one
kind, and made to be sociable, so strangely to fly one an other, that, as great
S. Austin says, A man had rather be with his dog, then with a man whose
language he understands not. Nay, this diversity of language, makes the wisest
man pass for a fool in a strange country, and the best man, for an
excommunicated person, whose conversation all men avoid. Now, traueling takes
off this curse, and this moral excommunication, by making us learn many
languages, and converse freely with people of other countries.

5. Traueling makes us acquainted with a world of our kindred we never saw
before. For seeing we are all comne from one man at first, and consequently all
akinn to one another; its but a reasonable thing, that a man should, once at
least in his life time, make a journey into foreign countries, to see his
Relations, and visit this kindred: haueing always this saying of young Joseph
in his mouth; quaero fratres meos

6. Traueling enables a man much for his countries service. It makes the
merchant rich, by showing him what abounds, and wantes, in other countries;
that so he may know what to import, what to export. It makes the mechanic come
laden home with a world of experimental knowledge for the improueing of his
trade. It makes the field officer, a knowing Leader of an army, by teaching him
where an army in foreign countries, can march securely, pass rivers easily,
incamp safely, avoid ambuscades and narrow passages discretly, and retreat
orderly. It makes the Common soldier play the spy well, by making him speak the
enemies language perfectly, that so mingling with them, he may find their
designs, and cross their plottes. In fine, it makes a nobleman fit for the
noblest employment, that is, to be Ambassador abroad for his king in foreign
countries, and carry about with him his kings person, which he represents, and
his kings word, which he engages.

7. Traueling brings a man a world of particular profits. It contents the mind
with the rare discourses we hear from learned men, as the Queen of Saba was
ravished at the wisdom of Solomon. It makes a wiseman much the wiser by making
him see the good and the bad in others. Hence the wiseman says: Sapiens in
terram alienigenarum gentium pertransiet: bona enim and mala in hominibus
tentabit. It makes a man think himself at home every where, and smile ^t unjust
exile: It makes him welcome home a gain to his Neighbors, sought after by
his betters, and listened unto with admiration by his inferiors. It makes him
sit still in his old age with satisfaction; and travel over the world again in
his chair and bed, by discourse and thoughts. In fine its an excellent
Commentary upon historyes; and no man understands Liuy and Caesar, Guicciardin
and Monluc, like him, who has made exactly ^he Grand Tour of France, and the
Giro of Italy.

8. Traveling makes my young Nobleman return home again to his country like
a blessing Sunn, For as the Sunn, who has been traueling about the world these
five thousand and odd years, not only enlightens those places which he
visits; but also enrich^th them with all sorts of fruits, and mettales: so the
nobleman by long traueling, having enlightened his understanding with fine
notions, comes home like a glorious Sunn; and does not only shine birght in
the firmament of his country, the Parliament house; but also blesses his
inferiors with the powerful influences of his knowing spirit.

9. In fine, Examples (the best Philosophy) show us, that the greatest Princes
Europe has seen, these many years, to wit, Charles the V. and the King of
Sueden, Gustauus Adolphus, Strada de Bello Belg.
where both of them great trauelers; the first had been twice in England, as
often in Africa, four times in France, six times is Spain, seven in Italy, and
nine in Germany: The second had traueld incognito (as M. Wats writes of him)
into Holland, France, Italy, and Germany in his youth: which made him say
afterward to the French Ambassador Mareshal Breze, in a kind of threatening
way, that he knew the way to Paris, as well as to Stockholme. Add to this, that
the wisest and greatest among the ancien^ Philosophers, Plato, Pythagoras
Anaxagoras, Anacharsis, Apollonius, Architas, and Pi^tacus, (which last left
his supreme Command of Mytelen to travel) were all great trauelers; and that
S. Hierome (who being no Bishop, and consequently not obliged to residence)
having traueled into France, Italy, Greece, and the Holy Land, purchased to
himself such rare acquisitions of learning, by his travels and languages, that
among all the ancient Fathers and Doctors, The Church, in her Collect on his
day, calls him onel^, Doctorem maximum, the greatest Doctor. And so much for
the profit of Traueling.

Now for as much as concerns the second Lesson, to wit, The Traueling with
profit*
the Traueling with profit, diverse things are to be taken notice of; some by
the Parents of those that travel; others by those themselves that travel: of
all which I will speak breefly.

As for the Parents, their greatest care ought to be of prouideing there
children (I speak to men of high condition) a good Governor, to travel with
them, and have a care of their Persons, and breeding: that is, play the part of
the Archangel Raphael to young Tobie, and Lead them safe abroad, and bring them
safe home: Ego sanum ducam and reducam filium tuum. Tob. 5. v. 20. And here I
could* wish indeed that Parents could be as happy in their choice, and find
men Angels for Governors to their children, upon condition they should requite
them, as young Tobie offered to requite the Archangel his Governor, whom he
took to be a man. For the education of children is a thing of that high
concern to the Commonwealth, that in this, Parents should spair no cost
whatsoever; but rather imitate the old Lacedaemonians, who took more care of
their youth, then of any thing else in their Commonweath. In so much that when
Antigonus and of them fifty young youths for hostages, they answered him, that
they had rather give him twice as many made men. Seeing then young youths are the
future hopes of families, and Commonwealths, their education ought not to be
committed but to men of great parts and excellent breeding. For I have always
thought, that a young Noblemans train ought to be like his Clothes; His Lacquais
and footmen are like his Galoshes, which he leaves at the doors of those he
visits: His Valets de Chamber, are like his night gown, which he never uses
but in his chamber; and leaves them there when he goes in visits: His gentlemen
attendants, are like his several rich suits, which he wears not all at once,
but now one, now an other, and sometimes none at all of them: His groom is
like his rideing cloak, and never appears near him but upon the road: But his
Governor* is like his shirt, which is always next unto his skinn and person;
and therefore as young Noblemen are curious to have their shirts of the finest
linen: so should they have their Governors of the finest thread, and the best
spunn men that can be found. Hence the ancients as they were careful in
honoring the memory of those that had binn Governors to great Heroes, as of
Chyron, Governor of Hercules, Jason, Paris, Achilles, and other brave heroes;
Miscus Governor of Ulysses; Eudorus of Patroclus; Dares of Hector; Epitides of
Iulus, Connidas of Theseus; all of them choice men: So they were in chooseing
the rarest men for that great employment, to be their childrens Governors;
that is in their language, Custodes and comites iuuentutis Principum and
magnatum. For not every honest and virtuous man (as some Parents think) is fit
for this employment* Those parts indeed would do well in a Stuard and a
Soliciter; but many things else, besides these, must concur to make up a good
Governor. I would have him then to be not only a Virtuous man, but a Virtuoso
too: not only an honest man, The Character of a good Governor.
but a man of honor too: not only a gentleman borne, but a gentile man also
by breeding: a man not only comely of person by nature; but graceful also by
art in his garbes and behavior: a good scholar, but no mere scholar: a man
that has traueled much in foreign countries; but yet no fickleheaded man: a
man of a stout spirit, but yet of a discreet tongue, and who knows rather to
wave quarrels prudently, then to maintain them stoutly: a man cheerful in
conversation, yet fearful to offend others: a man of that prudence, as to
teach his pupil rather to be wise, then witty; and of that example of life,
that his deeds may make his pupil believe his words: in fine, I would have him
to be an Englishman, no stranger. I speak not this out of an envy to strangers,
but out of a love to my own countrymen. For J have known diverse English
gentlemen much wronged abroad by their Governors that were Strangers. Some I
have known that led their pupils to Geneua, where they got some French
language, but lost all their true English allegiance and respect to Monarchy;
others I have known who, being married and haueing their setlements and
interest lyeing at Saumur, kept young gentlemen there all the time they were
abroad; and made their parents in England believe, that all good breeding was
in that poor town, where their wifes were breeding children. Others I have
known who having their mistresses in the country, persuaded their young pupils,
men of great birth, that it was fine living in a country house, that is, fine
carrying a gunn upon their necks, and walking a foot. Others have been observed
to sell their pupils to Masters of exercises, and to have made them believe,
that the worst Academyes were the best, because they were the best to the
cunning Governor, who had tenn pound a man for every one he could draw
thither. Others I have known who would have married their pupils in France,
without their Parents knowledge; and have sacrificed their great trust, to
their sordid avarice. Others J have known who have locked their pupils in a
chamber with a wanton woman, and taken the Key away with them. Nay, this I can
say more, that of all those strangers that I have known Governors to young
Nobleman of England (and I have known seven or eight.) I never Knew one of
them to be a gentleman borne; but for the most part, they were needy bold men,
whose chief parts were, their own language and some Latin; and whose chief
aim was, to serve themselves, not their pupils.

But to return again to our subject, the Parent having found out such a
Governor for his son, as we have described here above, he must resign over
unto him his full Authority, and command his son to obey him: otherwise let
the Governor be the wisest, and the most complete man in the world, if his
pupil do not obey him, and follow his counsel, all will go wrong. I have seen
great disorders befall for want of this. Hence I have often thought of great
Clemens Alexandrinus, who says wisely, that our Savior Christ is the only
true Pedagogue, or Governor, because he can not only give the best
instructions to young men, but also can give them grace to execute those
instructions: whereas other Governors (Cassandra like) telling their pupils
many excellent truths, are not believed by them; nor can they force their
inclinations to execute them, except the Parents commands come in to their
assistance: and it is but reasonable, that as Governors are the Seconds of
Parents, in the breeding of their children, so Parents should second Governors
too, in making their children obey them. And so much for the Parents care.

For the son^s care, it must be this. First to take a view of England before
he enter into foreign countries. This will enure him to travel, to see company,
to observe towns and rarityes, and sharpen his appetite for foreign
curiosi^yes. I would wish him withal in traueling over England, to fall in, as
often as he can, with the Judges in their circuits, not only to see how his
country is governed in point of judicature, but also to see the gentry of
several countries, who flock to great towns in the assise week. It would be
also profitable to him, to cast to be at all the chief Horsraces, where he
will easily see also the gentry of the several counties in a compendious
view. Haueing thus seen his own country in a summers space, and haueing got
his Majesty's license to travel beyond the seas (in which License I could wish
this clause were inserted, That all young gentlemen should at their return,
present themselves to his Majesty, to give him an account of their travels and
observations) I would have him depart England about the beginning of October.

2. At his going out of England, let him take his aim right; that is, let him
aim altogether at his profit, and not at his pleasures only. J have known
many Englishmen who for want of right aiming, have missed the white of
breeding, whole heavens breadth. For some in traueling, aim at nothing but to
get loose, from their Parents, or schoolmasters, and to have the fingering of a
pretty allowance; and these men when they come into France, care for seeing no
court, but the Tenniscourt; delight in seeing no Balls but Tennisballs; and
forsake any company, to toss whole days together with a tattered Marker in
the Tripot.

Others desire to go into Italy, only because they hear there are fine
Curtisanes in Venice; and as the Queen of the Amazons, in Justin, went thirteen
days journey out of her country, only to have a nights lodgeing with
Alexander the Great, so these men travel a whole month together, to Venice, for
a nights lodgeing with an impudent woman. And thus by a false aiming at
breeding abroad, they return with those diseases which hinder them from
breeding at home.

Others travel abroad, as our ship-boyes do into the Indies: for whiles these
boys might bring home Jewels, Pearls, ad many other things of value, they
bring home nothing but firecanes, parots, and Monkies; so our young trauelers,
whiles they might bring home many rich observations, for the governing
themselves, and others, bring home nothing but Fire-canes, that is, a hotspur
humor, that takes fire at every word, and talks of nothing but duels, seconds,
and esclaireissements: or else parots, that is, come laden home with rubans
and feathers of all colors like parots, and with a few borrowed compliments in
their mouths, which make them talk like parots: or else Monkies, that is, some
affected cringes, shrugs, and such like Apish behavior.

3. At his embarking let him have a special care not to carry Himself abroad
with Himself in traueling. Many men, says Seneca, return home no better then
they went out, because they take themselves along with themselves in traueling:
and as a man in a fever, finds himself no better then he was, by changeing
his bed; because he carries his feauour with him wheresoever he lies: so many
young men return home tired, and dirted, but not better and wiser; because they
carried abroad their bad customs and manners with them. I would then that my
young traueler should leave behind him all willfulness, and stubborness; all
tenderness, and seeking his ease too much; all effeminatnesse and delicateness;
all boyish tricks with hands or mouth, and mocking of others; all delighting in
being the best man in the company; all familiarity with servants, and mean
men; all Tauernes, and intemperancy of eating and drinking; having that saying
of Seneca often in his mouth, and mind; Major sum and ad majora natus, quam vt
mancipium sim corporis mei: I am too great a man, and borne to too great
things, for to become the slave of my body. In fine I would have him imitate
that young gentleman of whom S. Ambrose speaks; who returning home from foreign
travels, and meeting with his old mistress, a wanton woman, seemed not to know
her; whereat she wondering, told him that ^he was such an one: it may be so,
said he, but I am no more I. A rare Apothegme, which I would wish my young
Traueler to take for his motto, as well as this young man for his exemple.

4. Being thus got out of England, its a great question into what country he
should first go, to make his abode. The common course is, to go first into
France, and then into Italy, and so home by Germany, Holand, and Flanders, as J
did once: but my opinion is, that its better for a young man to go first into
Italy, and returning by Germany, Holland and Flanders, come into France, to
give himself there the last hand in breeding. And my reason is this; For seeing
the intention of traueling, is to make a man a wise man, not a finical man, its
better to season his mind betimes with a stayed wise breeding, then to fill it
up to the brime at first, with a fantastical giddy breeding, which having once
gotten possession of the mind, bolts the door on the inside, locks out all
staydness, and makes my young man delight in nothing but vanity, clothes,
danceing, liueryes, bals, and such mere outsides. I would therefore have my
young noblemans Governor to carry him immediately into Italy at fifteen or
sixteen, and there season his mind with the gravity, and wise maxims of that
Nation, which has ciuilized the whole world, and taught Man Manhood. Having
spent two, or three years in Italy in learning the language, viewing the
several courts, studdying their maxims, imitating their gentile conversation,
and following the sweet exercises of music, painting, architecture, and
mathematics, he will at his return, know what true use to make of France. And
having spent three years more there, in learning to fence, dance, ride, vault,
handle his pike, musket, coulors etc. The Map, history, and books of Policy;
he will be ready to come home at twenty, or one and twenty, a man most complete
both in body, and mind; and fit to fill the place of his calling.

5. I say, make true us of France: For I would not have my young traueler
imitate all things he sees done in France, or other foreign countries. What to
be learnt in France, and what not.
I would have him learn of the French a hansome confidence; but not an
^mpudent boldness. He must learn of them to come into a Room with a ^onne
mine; but not to rush into a man's chamber, as they do, without so much as
knocking at the door. He must learn of them to dance well, to get a good
grace in walkeing, and saluting, as they do: but he must not dance as he
walks, as many of them do. He must learn of the French, to become any clothes
well; but he must not follow them in all their Fantastical and fanfaron
clothings. He must learn to fence well, as they do; but I would have his sword
stick faster in the scabbard then theirs do. In fine, I would have him open,
ayry, and gallant, as they are: but not affecting to be the Gallands of all
Ladies, as they do.

What in Italy, and what not.
So in Italy, J would have him learn to make a fine house; but J would not have
him learn of the Italians to keep a good house. He may learn of them to be
sober, and wise: but I would not have him learn of them be gealous and
distrustful. I would have him learn of the Italians, to receive those that
visit him, with great ciuility and respect; but I would not have him stand
upon all their little forms and incommodious puntiglios. I would have him to
be free of his Hat, as they are: but I would have the heart to go to the Hat,
as well as the hand.

Jn Germany I would have him learn to offer a man a cup of wine at his comeing
in; What in Germany, and wha^ not.
but I would not have him press so much wine upon him, as he shall not be able
^o go out again, as they often do. I would have him learn of them to go
freely to war for the defense of his country: but I would not have him learn
the custom of those vendible souls there, who carry their life's to market, and
serve any Prince for money. I like well their shakeing hands with you, when you
first enter into their houses; but I like not their quarreling with you for not
pledgeing a health of a yard long, which would ruin yours. I like very much
their singular modesty and chastity, which allows not bastards to be freemen
of the most ordinary trads: but I like not their endless drinking in feasts,
which is able to make them freemen of all vices.

In Holland also I would have him learn to keep his house and harth neat,
What in Holland, and what not.
but I would no^ have him adore his house, and stand in such awe of his harth,
as not to dare to make a fire in it, as they do. I would have him learn of
them, a spare diet; but I would not have him drink so much, as would keep him
both in good diet and clothes, as they do. I would have him learn of them
their great industry, and economy: but not their rude exacting upon Noblemen
strangers in their Inns, for their Quality sake only, as they do. I would have
him learn of them a singular love to his country: but he must take heed of
their clownish hatred of Nobility. Thus in all countries I would have my young
Traueler do, as men do at a great feast, where there is no fear of staruing;
that is, not eat greedily of all that's before him, but fall to the best meats,
and leave the worst for the waiters.

6. That he may follow the foresaid rule the better, and pick out of every
country what is the best in it, let his Governor lead him betimes into the best
company; for there the best lessons are to be learned. Now by the word best, I
do not mean the greatest men in birth, but in parts. For the world is not so
happy, as that the greatest men are always the best: but by the word best, I
mean those that a^e the wisest, the best bred, the best principled, the best
behaved, and the most cried up by civil persons: for of such men much is to be
learned: Their life is a perpetual lecture; their words so many oracles; their
discourses so many wise maxims: and though young men be not able to bring their
dish with them, and clubb wit equally with these men, yet its a great matter to
sit still in their company, and be a respectfull catechumen to them. For if it
be true which Quintillian says of those that love Cicero, Ciceronem amasse,
profecisse est, its also most certain, that a man that loves good company,
must be good himself in time.

7. And that he may be able to appear in good company without blushing, his
Governor must get him, as soon as he can, to speak the language of the place
in hansome terms, and with a good accent. Next he must have a care that he be
well adjusted and set out in apparel. For if anciently Jewels were called the
Vshers of Ladies, because all doors flew open to them that presented
themselves so richly adorned: so now a days good clothes may be called men's
vshers, seeing they make way for them into all companyes. He must have a care
that he know his Congies perfectly, and have a free garb or carriage; a
Cauallier way of entering into a Room; a grateful manegeing of his mouth and
smiles; a chyronomie, or decent acting with his hands, which may humor his
words gravely and freely, yet not affectedly or mimically: in fine, a liberty
or freedom in all his actions, which The French call liberte du corpse; and it
must appear to be a la negligence, and yet must be perfectly studdyed a fore
hand. And though these things be but the Elements and Alphabet of breeding, yet
without them he can never spel gentleman rightly, though his inside be never so
good. Indeed its long ago, that great men dwell no more in thatched houses.

8. But it is not enough to get him into Language and Garbes, if he get him not
into Coach and Liueryes, without which he can never appear at Court, or in
good company, especially in Rome and Paris; the two chief towns of long abode
abroad. For let a man be of a Race as ancient as the Autocthenes of Athens, who
said they were as ancient as the Earth; Plutarch.
and let him quarter his coat of Arms with the three Lions of England, and the
three Flower de-lys of France, as I know a gentleman of little Britany does,
(by the grant anciently of both those kings) yet I dare boldly say this, that
in Paris no colors blazon a man's nobility behind his coache so much, as three
Lacquais and a Page, in a hansome Livery. In other towns of France, where young
gentlemen use to live at first, till they get the language, a couple of sadle
horses would be very useful, both to take the air on, as also to visit the
gentry in the country at their summer houses, where a Man will fine great
ciuilityes, and diuertisments. Besides rideing out so in the fresh euenings of
summer, will not only weane my young gentleman from little company, and the
crowd of his countrymen who will be then pressing upon him; but will also
afford his Governor many fine solitary occasions of plying him alone with good
counsels and instructions.

9. And seeing J have touched something above of his servants, and Lacquais, I
will add this, that seeing it is none of the least blessings of a young
gentleman to have good servants about him, it belongs to his Governor, not
only to choose him good ones, but also to have power to turn away bad ones.
Many men carry over with them English servants, because they were their
schoolfellowes, or their tennants sonns: and these are little useful for a
long time, and even then when a man has most need of servants. Besides, they
are often too familiar with their masters, their old play-fellowes; and as
often troublesome to their Governors, by taking their young masters part
against them; and by raueling out at night, as they get their masters to bed,
all that the prudent Governor has been working in the day time. Others carry
over Frenchmen with them; but these often, by reason of their prerogative of
language, which their masters want at first, get such an ascendent over them,
that they come oftentimes to be too bold, and saucy with them. For my part, I
would have his Governor, to take him new servants in every place he comes to
stay; and those sightly, rather then too sprightly youths: Dull people are made
to tugg at the oar of obedience, says Aristotle, w^iles witty people are
fitter to sit at the helm of command.

10. But I am to blame to give advice to Governors whom I suppose to be wiser
men then my self; and therefore will end here, by wishing them a good journey,
and safe return: To the effecting of both which, I found no better secret,
them that in my last journey, which was to be mounted upon our own horses,
(five of us together) and to spare for no cost: for by this means, we went at
our own rates, and eat to our own minds: so true is the Italian Proverb;
Picole giornate, egrandi spese, ti conducono sano al tuo paese.

In fine, I would have my young traueler make the same prayer of God, as
Apollonius Thyanaeus made to the Sunn, at his going out to travel, that is,
that he would be so favorable to him as to show him all the Brauest and Best
men in the world.

THE VOYAGE OF ITALY.
BEFORE I come to a particular description of Italy, as I found it in my Five
several voyages through it, I think it not amiss to speak something in
General, of the Country it self, its Inhabitants, their Humors, Manners,
Customs, Riches, and Religion.

For the Country it self, it seemed to me to be Natures Darling, The Fertility
of Italy.
and the Eldest Sister of all other countries; carrying away from them, all the
greatest blessings and favors; and receiving such gracious looks from the Sun
and Heaven, that if there be any fault in Italy, it is that her Mother Nature
has cockered her too much, even to make her become Wanton. Witness luxuriant
Lombardy, and Campania antonomastically Foelix, which Florus, Trogus, and Liuy
think to be the best parts of the world, where Ceres and Bacchus are at a
perpetual strife, whether of them shall court man the most, she by filling his
barnes with corn; he by making his cellars swim with wine: Whiles the other
parts of Italy are sweating out whole Forests of Oliue-trees, whole woods of
Lemmons, and Oranges, whole fields of Rice, Turkey wheat, and Muskmillions; and
where those Bare Hills, which seem to be shaven by the Sun, and cursed by
Nature for their barren^es, are oftentimes great with child of precious
Marbles, the ornaments of Churches and Palaces, and the Reuenews of Princes:
witness the Prince of Massa: whose best Revenues are his Marble Quarries:
Nature here thinking it a far more noble thing to feed Princes, Then to feed
sheep. It abounds also in silks and silkwormes; out of which they draw a
notable profit; and for the feeding of them they keep a world of Mulberry trees
whose leaves are the food of those little worms, whose excrement is our pride;
thus, Adam like, we are clade in leaves again, but leaves once removed. Its
rich also in pasturage and cattle, especially in Lombardy, where I have seen
cheeses of an excessive greatness, and of a Parmesan goodness. The surface
also of the earth is covered with many curious simples, and wholesome herbs:
Hense so many rare essences, cordials, parfumes, sweet waters, and other
odoriferous distillations so common here, that ordinary Barbers, and Landresses
will spinkle them in your face and parfume your linen with them, over and
above your bargain. Hence none of the meanest things to be seen in Italy, are
the fondaries or stilling houses of the Great Duke of Florence, the speciarie
or Apothecaries ^hops, of the Dominicans of S. Marco, and of the Augustins of
S. Spirito in Florence; of the Roman College, and of the Minimes of Trinita di
Monte in Rome: where even death it felf would find a cure in nature, if it were
not a curse from the author of nature. In fine, it excells in all kind of
provisions, either for diet, or sport; and I have seen in Rome whole cartloads
of wild boares, and Venison, brought in at once to be sold in the market; and
above threescore Hares in Florence brought in, in one day by the two companyes
of Hunters, the Piaceuoli and Piatelli, on a general hunting day.

An objection against Italy.
Yet after all this, some cryout against Italy, for being too hot; and paint us
out its air as an unwholesome pestilential air; its sun, as an angry Comet,
whose beams are all pointed with plagues and feauers; and the country it self,
as a place, where staruing is the only way to live in health; where men eat by
method and art; where you must carry your body steddily, or else spill your
life; and where there are so many prouincial sicknesses and diseases; as the
catarres of Genua, the Gout of Milan, the Hemorrhoids of Venice, the falling
sickness of Florence, the Feauers of Rome, and the Goistre of Piedmont.

For my part, when I am told that there were in Plynies time, Answer.
fourteen millions of men in Italy: Baltazar Bonifacius in hist. Ludicra l. 13.
c. 1^.
when I read, that there are now above three thousand Cittyes in Italy, and
most of them Cittyes of Garbo: when I meet with national diseases in every
other country, as the Kingseuil in Spain, the Pox in France, the consumption
in Portugal, the cholick in England, the dessentery in Gascony, the headacke in
Tolouse etc. when I reflect, how this Sun has blessed Lombardy, and made
Campania Happy: when I call to mind, that it has filled the Cellars of Italy
with above Thirty several forts of wines: when I remember, what health it has
powered into several herbs here, what admirable fruits it furnishes the
markets with all, what ornaments it affords to Gods houses, ouercrustting
almost all the chief Churches of Italy, Sol and homo generant hominem.
Plutarchus in Graccho.
with exquisit marbles; when I consider in fine, how this Sun has helped to
make so many brave Soldiers, and Scholars, I dare not speak ill of the Sun, or
air of Italy, least Balzac check me, as Gracchus did him who spoke ill of his
mother, with a Tu Matri meae maledicis, ^alzacin 1. volum: liter.
quae Tiberium Gracchum genuit? Dare thou speak ill of that Sun which helped
to make Caesar?

The Inahbitants and their wits.
Yes, yes, its this great blessing of God, warm Sun, which has so thoroughly
baked the Italian wits, that while (according to the observation of Charles the
V) the French appear not wise, but are wise: the spaniards appear wise, but
are not wise: the Dutch neither appear wise, nor are wise; The Italians only
both appear wise, and are wise. Hence the Italians anciently afforded us those
prodigies of wit and learning, and set us those fair coppies in liberal arts
and sciences, which all men follow, but none attain unto so much, as those that
write the Italian hand; that is, the modern Italians themselves.

For if the Italians anciently had their Virgil, their Ovid, Poets Ancient, and
Modern in Italy.
their Horace, their Persius, and Propertius in Poetry; the modern Italians
spurr close up to them, and have their Taso, their Petrarck, their Sannazarius,
their Marino, and Guarini.

If the old Italians had their Salust, Historians.
Liuy, Tacitus, and Valerius Maximus in history; the modern Jtalians have
their Guicciardin, Bentiu^glio, Dauila, Strada, and Baptista Fregosus, surnamed
the second Valerius Maximus.

If the ancient Italians had their pompous Orators, their Cicero, Orators.
Hortensius, Porcius Latro, Iunius Gallio, Aulius Fuscus etc. The modern
Italians have their Panigarola, Manzini, Varchi, and Loredano.

If the ancient Italians had their Vast knowing Varro; Prodigies of learning.
the modern Italians have their omniscious Baronius, who red almost all that
other men had written, and wrote more almost, then other men can read.

Divines.
If the ancient Italians had their Divines, writing of the Number and Nature of
their Gods, to wit, Varro and Tully; the modern Italians have their Divines
too, their inimitable S. Thomas of Aquin, and his learned second Cardinal
Caietan.

Philosophers.
If the ancient Italians had their Philosophers, their Pliny, their Cato, their
Seneca etc. the modern Jtalians have their Ficinus, their Cardan, and their
Picus Mirandula.

Architects.
If the ancient Italians had their rare Architects, Statuaries, Painters; the
modern Jtalians have their Brunelleschi, Palladio, Fontana, and Cronaco, in
Architecture; their Bandinelli, Donatello, Oli^^ri^, and Bernini in Sculpture;
Sculptors.
their Raphael, Michel Angelo, Titian, and Sarto, in painting. Painters.


If in fine, the ancient Italians had their brave Captains, their Scipio,
Ancient and modern Captains.
Duilius, Marius, and Caesar, the modern Italians have their Scipio too, towit,
their Alexander Farnese, whose true actions make Romances blush, having done
that really, which Fables can scarce faigne in galantry: Their Duilius too,
towit, their Andrea Doria, the Neptune of the Ligurian Seas, who alone taught
his country not to serve: Their Marius also, towit, their brave Castruccio, who
from a Comman soldier mounted up by deserts to the highest military commands in
the Emperors army; and so stitched his fortune as he went along to honors,
that it never raueled out again, or failed him: In fine, their Caesar too,
towit, the Marquis Spinola, or rather, the Achilles of Jtaly, who took that
Troy, of Ostende, after three years Seige. This Seige was far more famous
then that of Troy, because far truer. For in the Seige of Troy, it was Poetry
only that made the war, that framed and filled the wooden horse with
worthyes; See Verstegan in his restitution of decayed intelligence.
that draged Hector round about the walls. It was pen and inck that killed so
many men somno vin^que sepultos; and Troy was easily burnt, because it was
built of Poets Paper. But at Osten all was real, and all Europe almost, who
had their forces, or eyes there, were witnesses of it; and all this done by
Spinola an Jtalian.

The Jtalian Humor.
As for the Jtalian humor, it is a midling humor, between too much gravity of
the spaniard, and too great leuity of the French. Their gravity is notwithout
some fire, nor their leuity without some fleame. They are apish enough in
Carneual time, and upon their stages, as long as the visard is on; but that
once off, they are too wise to play the fools in their own names, and own it
with their own faces. They have strong fancies, and yet solid judgments; A
happy temper, which makes them great Preachers, Politicians, and Ingeniers; but
withal they are a little too melancholy and gealous; They are great lovers of
their brethren and near kindred, as the first friends they are acquinted
withal by nature; and if any of them lie in pass and fair for advancement,
all the rest of his relations will lend him their purses, as well as their
shoulders, to help him up, though he be but their younger brother. They are
sparing in diet, both for to live in health, and to live hansomly: making their
bellyes contribute to the maintenance of their backs, and their kitchen help to
the keeping of their stable. They are ambitious still of honors, remembering
they are the successors of the masters of the world, the old Romans; and to put
the world still in mind of it, they take to themselves the glorious names of
Camillo, Scipione, Julio, Mario, Pompeo etc. They are as sensible also of
their honor, as desirous of honors; and this makes them strickt to their
wifes even to gelousy, knowing that for one Cornelius Tacitus, there have been
ten Publij Cornelij; and that Lucius Cornificius is the most affronting man.
They are hard to be pleased, when thy have been once read hot with offense;
but they will not meet revenge in the face, and field; and they will rather
hire it, then take it. In fine they affect very much compounded names, as
Pi^colomini, Capilupo, Bentiuoglio, Malespina, Boncompagno, Maluezzi,
Riccobono, Malatesta, Homodei, and such like married Names.

Their ma^ners.
As for their Manners, they are most commendable. They have taught them in their
books, they practice them in their actions, See Monsignor Caza, Stephano
Guazzo, Baltazar Castiglio^e
and they have spread them abroad over all Europe, which owes its Ciuility unto
the Jtalians, as well as its Religion. They never affront strangers in what
habit soever they appear; and if the strangeness of the habit draw the
Jtalians, eye to it, yet he will never draw in his mouth to laugh at it. As for
their apparel, or dress, its commonly black, and modest. They value no bravery
but that of Coache and horses and Staffiers; and they sacrifize a world of
little satisfactions to that main one of being able to keep a Coache. Their
Points de Venice, ribans and goldlace, are all turned into horses and liueries;
and that money which we spend in treats and Tauernes, they spend in coache and
furniture. They never whisper privately with one another in company, not speak
to one another alowd in an unknown tongue when thy are in conversation with
others, thinking this to be no other then a loud whispering.

They are precise in point of Ceremony and reception; Their Ceremonies.
and are not puzzeled at all, when they hear a great man is comeing to visit
them. There Is not a man of them, but he knows how to entertain men of all
conditions; that is, how far to meet, how to place them, how to style and
treat them, how to reconduct them, and how far. They are good for Nunciatures,
Embassies, and State employments, being men of good behavior, looks, temper,
and discretion, and never outrunning their business. They are great lovers of
Music, Meddales, Statues, and Pictures, as things which either divert their
melancholy, or humor it: and I have read of one Jacomo Raynero a shoemaker of
Bolognia, who gathered together so many curious Meddals of Gold, silver, and
brass, as would have becomne the Cabinet of any Prince. In fine, they are
extremely civil to one another, not only out of an awe they stand in one
toward another, not knowing whose turn it may be next, to come to the highest
honors; but also out of a natural gravity, and civil education, which makes
even schoolboyes (an insolent Nation any where else) most respectfull to one
another in words and deeds; treating one another with Vostra Signoria, and
abstaining from all gioco di mano. Nay masters themselves here, never beat
their servant, but remitt them to justice, if the fault require it, and I
cannot remember to have heard in Rome, two women scold publicly, or man and
wife quarrel in words, except once; and then they did it so privately and
secretly, and scolded in such a low tone, that I perceived the Italians had
reason about them even in the middst of their choler.

Their particular customs.
As for their particular customs, they are many. They marry by their ears,
oftener then by their eyes; and scarce speak with one another, till they meet
before the Parish Priest, to speak the indissoluable words of wedlock. They
make children go barehead till they be four or five years old, hardening them
thus against rhumes and catarres when they shall be old. Hence few people in
Italy go so warm on their heads, as they do in France; men in their houses
wearing nothing upon their heads but a little calotte; and women for the most
part, going all barehead in the midst of winter it self. Women here also wash
their heads weekly in a wash made for the nonce, and dry them again in the
Sun, to make their hair yellow, a color much in vogue here among Ladies. The
men throw of their hats, cuffs, and bands, as well as their cloaks, at their
return home from visits, or business, and put on a gray coat, without which
they cannot dine, or supp; and I have been invited to dinner by an Italian, who
before dinner, made his men take of our hats and cloaks, and present every one
of us (and we were five in all) with a colored coat, and a little cap to dine
in. At dinner they serve in the best meats first, and eat backwards* that is,
they beginn with the second course, and end with boyld meat and pottage. They
never present you with salt, or brains of any foul, least they may seem to
reproach unto you want of wit. They bring you drink upon a Sottocoppa of
silver, with three or four glasses upon it; Two or three of which are strait
neckt glasses (called there caraffas) full of several sorts of wines or water,
and one empty drinking glass, into which you may power what quantity of wine
and water you please to drink, and not stand to the discretion of the waiters,
as they do in other countries. At great feasts, no man cuts for himself, but
several caruers cut-vp all the meat at a side table, and give it to the waiters
to be carried to the ghests; and every one has the very same part of meat
carried unto him, to wit, a wing and a leg of wild foul etc. least any one
take exceptions that others were better used then he. The Caruers never touch
the meat with their hands, but only with their knife and forke, and great
Silver spoone for the sauce. Every man here eats with his forke and knife, and
never touches any thing with his fingers, but his bread: This keeps the linen
neat, and the fingers sweet. If you drink to an Italian, he thanks you, with
bending, when you salute him, and lets you drink quietly, without watching (as
we do in England) to thank you again when you have drunk: and the first time
he drinks after that, will be to you, in requital of your former courtesy.

They count not the hours of the day as we do, from twelve to twelve; but they
beginn their count from sunset, and the first hour after sunset, is one a
clock; and so they count on till four and Twenty, that is, till the next sunset
again. I have often dined at sixteen a clock, and gone abroad in the evening,
to take the air, at two and twenty. They call men much by their Christen
names, Signor Pietro, Signor Francesco, Signor Jacomo etc. and you may live
whole years with an Italian, Nomen, quasi no^amen. S. Aug.
and be very well acquinted with him without knowing him, that is, without
knowing his distintiue surname. People of quality never visit one another, but
they send first, to know when they may do it without troubleing him they intend
to visit: by this means they never rush into one another chambers without
knocking, as they do in France; nor cross the designs, or business of him
they visit, as they do in England with tedious dry visits; nor find one another
either undressed in clothes, unprovided in compliments and discourse, or
without their attendants, and train about them. In the streets men and women
of condition seldom or never go together in the same coache, except they be
strangers, that is, of an other town, or country: nay husbands and wifes are
Seldom seen together in the same coache, because all men do not know them to
be so. In the streets, when two persons of great quality meet, as two
Ambassadors, or two Cardinales, they both stop their coaches, and compliment
one another ciuily, and then retire; but still he that is inferior must let
the others coache move first. If any man being a foot in the street, meet a
great man, either in coache, or a foot, he must not salute him in going on his
way, as we do in England and France, without stopping; but he must stand still
whiles the other passes, and bend respectfully to him as he goes by, and then
continue his march. In fine, of all the Nations I have seen, I know none that
lives, clothes, eats, drinks, and speaks so much with reason, as the Italians
do.

As for their Riches, Their Riches.
they must needs be great. That which is visible in their magnificent Palaces,
Churches, Monasteries, Gardens, Fountains, and rich furnished Rooms, speaks
that to be great which is in their coffers: and that which the King of spain
draws visibly from Naples every year, shows what the other parts of Italy
could do for a need, if they were put to it by necessity. Nay, I am of opinion,
that the very Sacristy of Loreto, the Gallery of the Duke of Florence, and the
Treasory of Venice, would upon an emergent occasion of a Gothic, or Turkish
invasion, be able to maintain an army for five years space; and the Plate in
Churches and Monasteryes, would be able to do as much more, if the owners of it
were soundly frighted with a new Gothic irruption. As for the Riches of
particular Princes in Italy, I will speak of them, as I view their Stats here
below.

In fine, as for their Religion, its purely that which other countries call by
its true name, Their Religion.
Catholic; and which in England they commonly call, the Religion of the
Papists. And though there they think to nickname the Catholic by calling him
Papist, yet the well instructed Catholic knowing that the name of Papist,
comes not from any Sectmaster, as Caluinist, Lutheran, Socinian, and Brownist
do; nor from any Sectary meeting place, as Hugonots from the Gate of Hugo in
Towers in France, near unto which they met privately at first to teach and
dogmatise: nor from any public sectary action, as Anabaptists, Dippers,
Quakers etc. do: but from the word Papa, which signifies Father, and is not the
name of any one man, or Pope, but only signifies his Fatherly office of
Pastor; tho Catholic I say, is no more troubled at this name of Papist, then
he was when he was called in the late troubles, Royallist (for adhearing to
the king, which is not the name of any of our kings, Rex est nomen officij. S.
Ambr.
but his office only) and not Cromwellist, which was the name of one adhearing
to a particular man called Cromwell, and an unlawful usurper of Power. As for
the true name indeed, which is Catholic, it is so known to belong to those of
the Roman Church, that besides that all those of that Church have ever called
themselves by no other name then this of Catholic, the wisest of Protestants
also acknowledge it publicly to be their distinctiue name: witness that
solemn meeting at Munster, some years ago, about the General Peace of
Christendom, where the Public Jnstrument of that Peace shows plainly how
that the Protestant Plenipotentiaries (the wisest men of that Religion) treated
with the Papists, as some call them, under the name of Catholics: and though
in many other titles and denominations, they were very wary and scrupulous,
even to the long suspension of the Peace, yet they willingly concluded,
subscribed, and signed that Peace made with them, under the name of Catholics.
I say this only, for to make men understand, what the true name of the
Religion practiced over all Jtaly is, to-wit, Catholic.

Haueing said thus much of Italy in General, I will now come to a particular
Description of it, according to the ocular observations I made of it in five
several Voyages through it. In which Description if I be a little prolixe, it
is because I rid not Post through Italy, when I saw it; nor will I write post
through it in describing it; being assured, that Epitomees in Geography are as
dissatisfactory, as Laconick Letters would be in state Relations; and that the
great Atlas, in nine great volumes in folio, is not only Atlas Mayor, but also
Atlas Melior.

The several ways by which a man may go into Italy.
THE ordinary ways which an Englishman may take in going into Italy, are five:
Flanders and Germany; and so to fall in at Trent, or Treuiso, and so to Venice.
France, and so to Marseilles, and thence to Genua by Sea. Lions through
Swisserland, the Gris^ns country, and the Valteline, and so pop up at Brescia.
Lions again through the Valesians country, over Mount Sampion, the Lake Mayor,
and so to Milan. Lions still, over Mount Cenis, and so to Turin, the nearest
Posteway. I have gone, or come, all these ways in my five voyages into Italy,
and though I prefer the last for speed and conueniency; yet I will describe
the others too, that my young Traueler may know how to streere his course,
either in time of plague or war.

My first Voyage into Italy.
MY first voyage was through Flanders and Germany, and so to Trent. The way is,
from England, to Dunkerque; from thence to Furne, Newport, Ostend, Bruges,
Gant, Brussels, Louain, Liege, Colen, Mayence, Francfort, and so crossing to
Munichen, the Court of the Duke of Bauaria, and from thence to Ausburg, and
Inspruck, you come soon to Trent, which stands upon the confines of Germany,
and lets you into Italy, by Treuiso belonging to the Venetians. To describe all
these foresaid places would take me too much time from my design of describing
Italy, and therefore I content my self only to have named them.

My second Voyage.
MY second Voyage was by the way of France, where I started from Paris, and
made toward Lions; in the way I took notice of these places.

Yssone a neat house belonging then to Monsieur Essolin. Yssone:
The house is so pretty, that I think it worth the trauelers seeing, and my
describing. It stands in the shade of a thick grove of trees, and is wholly
built and furnished al' Italiana. Under the side of the house runns a little
brook, which being received into a Basin of freestone, just as long as the
house, and made like a ship, (that is, sharp at both ends and wide in the
middle) it is cloven, and divided in two, by the sharp end of this ship, and
conueighed in close channels of freestone, on both sides of the ship or basin,
into which it emptyes it self by several tunnels, or pipes: so that all this
water spouting into the open ship on both sides, by four and twenty tunnels,
makes under the windows of the house such a perpetual purleing of water, (like
many fountains) that the gentle noise is able to make the most jealous man
sleep profundly. At the other end of the house this water yssueth out of the
other end of the said ship, and is courteously entreated by several hidden
pipes of lead, to walk into the house, instead of running by so fast: Which it
does, and is presently led into the Cellars, and Buttery; and not only into
these, but also into the kitchen, stables, chambers, and bathing room, all
which it furnishes with water either for necessity, or pleasure. Then being
led into the curiours garden, its met there by a world of little open channels
of freestone built like knots of flowers; all which it fills brimfull, and
makes even Flowers of water. Then running up and down here and there among the
fragrant delights of this garden, as if it had forgotten its errand to the Sea,
it seems to be so taken with those sweet beds of flowers, and so desirous of
resting upon them, after so many miles running, that i^ offers to turn it self
into any posture, rather then be turned out of this sweet place.

From Yssonne I came to Fontainbelleau, Fontainbelleau.
where I saw that Kingly house, the Nonesuch of France. It stands in the midst
of a great Forest full of Royal game, and was the place of delight of Henry
the Fourth. The house is capable of lodgeing four kings with their several
Courts. The Court of the Cheual blanc is a noble squaire of building; The Court
of the Cheual Blanc
but the lowness of the buildings and lodgeings shows, they are for the lower
Sort of people, and the seruant-lodgings to the Royal appartiments. The Oual
Court is a good old building. The Oual Court.
The Kings and Queens lodgings with their Cabinets groan under their rich
guilt roofes. The Gallery of staggs heads is a stately room, The Gallery of
staggs heads.
then which nothing can be more Caualierly furnished; except such an other
gallery hung with Turkish standards won in war. The other long Galleries of
Romances and Fables, The Galleries of Roma^ces.
painted by Simon Voyet and other, are much esteemed: the only pity is, that
such true painting should not have been employed upon true histories. The Salle
of the Conference, The Salle of the Conference.
is a stately Room, where the Bishop of Eureux (afterward called the Cardinal
du Perron) in presence of king Henry the Fourth, See the Public Acts of this
Conference printed an. 1601.
the Chanceler, five Judges of both Religions, and the whole Room full of
learned men, so confuted Monsieur Plessis Mornay, the Achilles of those of
Charenton, that after the first days Conference, he durst never enter the list
again, as he promised; but dyed soon after fuller of shame, then years. The
Hall for maskes, and the Lodgings of Madame Gabrielle with her picture over the
Chimney like a Diana hunting, Madame Gabriells picture.
are fine Rooms: yet the fair picture cannot hinder men from blameing her
foul life; nor from censureing that solaecisme of the painter, who made chaste
Diana look like Madame Gabrielle. The Chapels.
There are also here two Chapels, the old, and the new. The old one is a poor
thing; and seems to have been built for hunters: but the new one is both neat
and stately, and built upon this occasion, as a Bishop in France told me. A
spanish Ambassador resideing in Paris in Henry the IV. his time, went one day
from Paris to Fontainbleau, to see this French Escurial. Arriueing, he lighted
after his countries fashion, at the Chapel door (the old Chapel) and entering
in, to thank God for his saif arriual, he wondered to see so poor and dark a
chapel, and asking with indignation whether this were the Casa di Dios? The
house of God? he turned presently a way with scorn, Saying, No quiero Veer
mas; I care for seeing no more: not staying to see that place, where the king
had so a fine a house, and God so poor a Chapel. This being told the last
king Lewis the XIII. he commanded forth with the new Chapel to be built in
that sumptuous posture we now see it.

Going out of the house, you find a hansome Mail, and Rare Ponds of water,
which even baptize this place with the name of Fontainbelleau. In these Ponds,
as also in the moat about the house, are conserved excellent Carps; Old Carps
some whereof were said to be a hundred years old: which though we were not
bound to believe; yet their very white scales, and dull moueing up and down,
might make men believe that there are gray scales, as well as gray hairs; and
decayed fishes, as well as decrepit men: especially when Columella speaks of a
fish of his acquaintance, De re Rust
in Caesar's fish ponds near Pausilipus, which had lived threescore years; and
Gesnerus relates, that in a fishpond near Haylprum in Suabe, a fish was
catched anno 1497, with a brass ring at his gills, in which were engraven
these words: I am the first fish which Federic the second, Governor of the
world put into this Pond the 5 of October 1203. By which it appears, that this
fish had lived two hundred and sixty odd years. But to return again to our
Carps of Fontainbelleau, its an ordinary diuertissement here to throw a
halfpenny loaf into the moat among the Carps, and to see how they will mumble
and iumble it to and fro; how others will puff and snuff and take it ill, not
to have part of it; and how in fine, they will plainly fall to blows, and
fight for it. You would wonder, how such hot passions should be found in cold
water: but every thing that lives, will fight for that which makes it live, its
Vittails.

Having seen Fontainbelleau, An old Inscriptio^ concerning Englishmen.
I saw on extraordinary thing in the rest of the way to Lions, but an old
Inscription in letters of gold, upon a wooden Fabric, a mile before I came to
Montargis, importing, that the English being encamped here, had been forced to
raise their Seige before Montargis, by reason of great raynes and sudden
inundations. Some of the French historians will have it, that it was the Count
de Dunois, that forced the English to raise the Seige here: but I had rather
believe public inscriptions, then private flattery: and it was more honorable
for the English to be overcome by God, then by men.

Montargis.
From hence I passed through Montargis, a neat pleasant town; in the great Hall
of whose Castle, is painted the history of the dog that fought a Duel with the
Murderer of his Master; and it is not strange that the Dog, that had put on
humanity, overcame him that had put it of, to espouse the devouring humor of a
Dog. This is the chief town of the Gastinois.

Briare.
From hence I went to Briare where I saw the cut channel that ioynes Loire and
Seen together in trafick, The Conjunction of Loire and Seen.
whose bedds oftherwise stand wide from one another in situation.

From thence to Cosne, la Charity, Pougues famous for wholesome stinking
waters; Neuers, famous for glass houses; Moulins, famous for knives and
Cizars: la Palisse where they make excellent winter boots: Roanne where Loire
beginns to be nauigable: and so over Terrara hills to Lions.

Lions is one of the greatest and richest towns in France. It stands upon the
rivers Saone, Lions.
and Rhosne, (Araris and Rhodanus) and intercepting all the merchandise of
Burgondy, Germany, and Italy, It licks its fingers notably, and thriues by it.
It expresses this in its looks: for here you have hansome people, noble
houses, great jollity, frequent balls, and much bravery: all marks of a good
town: and could it but intercept either the Parliament of Aix, or Grenoble, it
would be as noble as its name, or as its Catedral Chapter, A noble Chapter.
whose Deane and Prebends are all counts, and noble of four descents* they got
the title of counts thus: A great contest arriseing between the Chapter of S.
John's Church, and the Count de Forests called Guigo, for some rights over the
town of Lions which they both pretended to; at last anno 1166. they came to an
agreement, upon this condition, that the Count should leave to the Chapter his
County of Forests; which he did; and so ever since the Decane and Prebends have
been called Counts of S. John.

The chief things to be seen in Lions are these.

1. The great Church, or Cathedral, called John's Church. S. John's Church.
Its the Seat of an Archbishop, who is Primat of Gaul. S. Irenaeus was a great
ornament of this Church, as was also Eucherius. Upon solemn days the Canons
officiate in Miters like Bishops. They sing here all the office by heart, and
without book, as also without pricksong music, organs, or other instrumens,
vseing only the ancient plainsong. The High Altar is like those of Italy, that
is, open on all sides, with a Crucifixe and two little candlestiks upon it. I
never saw any hangings in this Church, not upon the greatest days, but
Venerable old walls. The clock here is much cried up for a rare piece.

The Town house.
2. The stately new Town house, of pure white freestone, able to match that of
Amsterdam; and indeed they seemed to me to be twinns; for I saw them both in
the same year as they were in building. The curious staircase, and Hall above,
are the things most worthy taking notice of, the own for its contriuanc; the
other for its painting.

3. Other Rarities.
The Jesuits College and fair Library. 4. The Carthusians Monastery upon a
high Hill. 5. The Minimes Sachristy well painted. 6. The rests of the old
Aqueduct upon the Hill. 7. The Mail, and the sweet place of Belle Cour. 8. The
Heart of saint Francis de Sales in the Church of the Visitation in Belle Cour.
9. The Charity where all the poor are kept at work with admirable economy:
It looks like a little town, haueing in it nine courts, all built up with
lodgeings for the poor, who are about fifteen hundred, and divided into
several Classes, with their several Refectories and Chapels. 10. The Head of
S. Bonauenture in the Cordeliers Church. 11. The Castle of Pierre Ancise, built
upon a rock. 12. Nostre Dame de Fouruier standing upon a high hill, from whence
you have a perfect view of Lions.

13. The rare Cabinet of Monsieur Seruier.
Lastly the rare Cabinet of Monsieur Seruier a most ingenious gentleman; where
I saw most rare experiments in Mathematiks and Mechanics; all made by his own
hand: as the sympatheticall balls, one springing up at the approach of the
other held up a pretty distance off: the demonstration of a quick way how to
pass an army over a river with one boat, and a wooden bridge easily to be
foulded up upon one cart: the mouse dyall, where a little thing, like a mouse,
by her insensible motion, marks the hours of the day. The Lizard Dyal is much
like the former, only the mouse moves upon a plain frame of wood which has
the hours marked on it; and the Lizard creeps upward from hour to hour. The
night dyall, showing by a lighted lamp set behind it, the hours of the night,
which are painted in colors upon oyled Paper, and turn about as the time
goes. The Tortoise dyall, where a piece of cork cut like a Tortoise, being put
into a puter dish of water, which has the twelve hours of the day marked upon
its brims, goes up and down the water a while, seeking out the hour of the
day that is then; and there fixeing it self without stirring. The Rare engine
teaching how to throw Grenados into beseiged towns, and into any precise place
without failing. The way how to set up a watchtower with a man in it, to look
into a town from without, and see how they are drawn up within the town. a
way how to change dineing Rooms three or four times, with their tables, the
Seats and ghests being by the turning of a wheel transported sitting, out of
one Room into another; and so into three or four more Rooms variously hung
with tables covered. The Desk dyall, which throws up a little ball of yuory
without rest, and thereby marketh the hour of the day, and shows what a
clock it is: the Dyall of the Planets representing the days of the week by
several figures in iuory of the planets: the Oual dyal in which the needle that
marks the hours, shrinketh in, or stretches out it self according as the
oual goes: the dyall showing to every one that touches it his predominant
passion; with a world of other rare curiosityes, all made by this ingenious
gentleman.

Leaving Lions, I embarked in a Cabanne, or little covered boat, and descending
the rapid Rhosne, I came post by wather, to Vienne; Vienne.
were Pontius Pilate, bannished hither, threw himself off a high Tower, and
killed himself. The Cathedral of this town is a fair Church dedicated to God,
in the honor of S. Maurice: there are neither Pictures, nor hangings in this
Church.

Tournon.
From hence I went to Tournon, where I saw a good Library in the College.

Valence.
Thence to Valence in Dauphine, where Law is taught.

Pont S. Esprit.
From whence I came to Pont Saint Esprit famous for its long bridge of therty
three arches, and for the bones of a Giant which are conserved in the
Dominicans Convent here; And from hence to Auignon.

Auignon.
Auignon is the head town of a little country, called Vulgarly the Le Contad
d'Auignon. It belongs to the Pope, having been purchased by one of his
predecessors anciently of Jane Queen of Naples and Countess of Auignon: and it
served for a saif retreat to diverse Popes consecutiuely, during the troubles of
Italy which lasted above seauenty years. At last, Italy, and the Popes
territories there, being cleared by the admirable courage and conduct of brave
Cardinal Albornozzo, who conquered again all the Popes estate, The Pope, Greg.
the XI, returned home again to Rome* of the foresaid Cardinal Albornozzo I
cannot omit to tell one thing; that after his great services rendered to the
Pope, being enuyed by some of the Court, who had persuaded his Holiness to call
him to an account for the great sommes of monye he had spent in reduceing
again the whole state of the Pope unto its obedience; he brought the next
morning a cart laden with chains, bolts, locks and keys belonging once to
those towns which he had retaken for the Pope, and placeed it under the Popes
window: then going up, and desiring his Holiness to draw to a window to see his
accounts the better, he opened the window, and showed him below, the Cart laden
with chains, bolts, locks and keys, saying: Holy Father, I spent all your
money in making you master again of those towns whose keys, locks, bolts and
chains you see in that cart below. At which the Pope admireing, desired no
more account of him, who proved his honesty by whole cart loads of services.
Ever since that time, Auignon has belongd to the Pope; and he governs it by
a Vice-Legat immediately, the Popes Nep^ew pro tempore being always Legate of
this town.

The rarities.
The things I saw here were these. 1. The Cathedral Church with diverse tombs of
Popes in it that dyed here. 2. The Church of S. Didier, with the tomb of
Peirus Damianus who followed the Pope hither: He was famous for his learned
works, and his known sanctity. 3. The Church of the Celestins, with the tomb,
and neat Chapel of Cardinal Peter of Luxenbourg, a young man of a great family,
and of a greater sanctity. 4. The Carthusians Monastery in the bourg of
Villeneuue, where you shall see much good painting. 5. The Dominicans fair
Convent, with the Chapel and true Picture of S. Vincentius Ferrerius a holy
man of this Order. 6. The Cordeliers Church famous for its wideness, and yet
not supported by any pillars. Here lies buried Madame Laura rendered so famous
by Petrarchs Verses: not that the was a dishonest woman, but only chosen by
him, to be the poetical mistress of his sonnets. 7. The Church of the Fathers
of the Christian doctrine, with the body, yet entire, of the Founder of their
order P. Caesar de Bus, a man of such singular sanctity, that Cardinal Richlieu
banished hither, whiles he was only Bishop of Luson, offered and vowed a
silver Lamp to God at the tomb of this holy Bea^^. 8. The fine freestone
walls of this town, the admirable Bridge, many hansome Palaces, and curious
gardens. 9. The trading of this town, which consists much in silkstuffs,
parfumed gloves, rubans, and sine paper. 10. The inhabitants here, who love to
go well adiusted and appear in fine clothes.

Aix.
From Auignon I went by Land to Aix in Prouence, an University, a Parliament
town, and one of the neatest towns in France: of the Parliament of this town
Monsieur du Vair was the first President, and a singular ornament, by reason of
his famous eloquence. This town is the seat of an Archbishop; and is now
possessed by Cardinal Grimaldi who is Archbishop here. From hence I went to
Marseilles.

Marseilles.
Marseilles is a very ancient town, built 633 years before our Saviors time,
and so famous anciently for learning, that it was compared with Athens. It
stands upon the Medeterranean Sea, and has a most neat haven and harbor for
ships and gallyes. I stayed here eight days to wait upon the return of two
Galleys of Genua, that had brought an Ambassador from thence into France, and
were to return within a few days. In this time I had leisure to make a little
excursiue Voyage to the famous place of devotion called La Saint Beaume, La
saint Baume.
where S. Mary Magdalen lived a most penitential life in these mountains and
deserts, See Baronius ad an. 35. Gordons Cronology. Gerard of Nazareth in a
treatise ex professo.
even after she had been assured of her pardon by out Savior himself. The
place it self is able to make any man that considers it well, melt into some
penance too, and sigh at least, to see how much she (a woman) did, and how
little he (a man) does; for excellentissima animaduertenti, ne mediocria quidem
praestare, rubori oportet esse, says a great Author. In Marseills it self
there remain some prints of her begunn penance: Valor. Max.
but she that had been a sinner in the City (and perchance by that occasion
only) thought the Desert a safer place; Mulier peccatrix in ciuitate.
and so showed her conversion to be true, by flying the occasions of her former
sins.

If you ask me, how Mary Magdalen came hither; I must ask you, See Baron. an.
35 Genebrad Gautier. Chassanus. and Monsieur du Vair.
how Joseph of Arimathia came into England: and learned Baronius will answer us
both, by telling us, that upon a persecution raised against the Christians in
Jerusalem; Mary Magdalen, her Sister Martha, her brother Lazarus, with Joseph
of Arimathia and diverse others of the first Christians, were exposed to Sea in
a ship without sails, without rudder, without anchor, without pilot, and yet
the ship came happily to Marseills; where Lazarus preaching the faith of
Christ, was made the first Bishop of this town; and Joseph of Arimathia came
into England.

Near to Saint Beaume stands, the town of S. Maximin famous for the Church
of S. Maximin governed by Dominican Friars: S, Maximin.
In this Church are to be seen many famous Relics of S. Mary Magdalen; as her
head in a Crystal case enchased in gold: her body in a guilt chasse, and
diverse other rich things.

Haueing seen Marseilles, I embarked in the foresaid Galleys, and was nine days
in them before I arrived at Genua; haueing seen in the way, Toulon, Nice,
Antibo, Monaco, and Sauona.

Thus I passed, though tediously, yet securely from France into Italy by Sea:
and I could almost wish my Traueler to take the same course, if he were sure
to find two Galleys well manned as I did, to carry him thither. Otherwise to
venture himself (as men ordinarily with extraordinary danger do) in a little
Feluca, a boat little bigger then a pair of oars, Pyrrho dicebat, nihil
interesse, inter vitam and mortem.
is a thing I would wish none to do, but Pyrrhonians, and Indifferents who
think danger and security to be the same thing. For my part, though I dare not
say with that cowardly Italian, who being laughed at for running away in a
battle, answered: I was not affrayd, but only had a mind to try, how long a
man's skinn, well kept, would last: yet I dare say with Generous Cato, that I
repent me soundly, if ever I went by water, when I could have gone by Land.

My third Voyage.
MY third Voyage into Italy was again by the way of Paris and Lions: but now
by Geneua and Swisserland.

Parting then from Lions I passed over the Grand Credo, a smart hill; through
Nantua standing upon a Lake, and in two days came to Geneua.

Geneua, Geneua.
like a good sink at the bottom of three streets, is built at the bottom of
Sauoye, France, and Germany, and therefore fit to receive into it the
corruption, of the Apostatas of the Roman Church.

The things which I saw in Geneua were these: 1. The great Church of S. Peter,
The rarities.
the Cathedral anciently of the Bishop of this town. In the Quire I saw yet
remaining the Pictures of the twelve Prophets on one side, and the pictures of
the twelve Apostles on the other side, all engraven in wood. The pictures also
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and S. Peter, in one of the windows. Here also I
saw the Tomb of the Duke of Bouillon General of the army of Germans, called
then in France the Reiters, who in the battle of Aulneau were beaten by the
Duke of Guise and forced to fly to Geneua, haueing last 1800 of their men upon
the place, most of them with charms about their necks, which they thought
would have made them shot free. Mounting up to the steeple, I saw a fair Bell
with a Crucifix cast upon it, showing whose it was; and four good pieces of
ordinance, that none may say, the Church of Geneua wants Ecclesiastical
Cannons. And a little below in the Belfree, there live in several Chambers,
three or four families of husbands and wifes and sucking children begotten
there; contrary to the Canons of any other Church, except those of Geneua. From
the top of this Church you have a fair prospect upon the lake and neighboring
countries; which makes them brag here, that they can see from their steeple,
into six several principalities, to wit, their own, France, Sauoye,
Swisserland, the Valesians, and the Franchecounty: But I told them, it would be
a greater brag, to say, that they could see into no other country, or dominions
but their own. 2. I saw the Arsenal, little, but well stored with defensive
arms. They never forget to show the Ladders of the Sauoyards, who attempted to
surpize this town by scaleing, but were themselves taken and beheaded a la
chaude, least some Prince should have interceded for them. 3. The Town house
with the Chamber where the Magistrates (something like the Hogen Mogens of
Holland) sit in Counsel. 4. They showed me here a Library but none of the best.
5. The admirable Trouts here, able to make the poor Apostatas wish for their
Lent again; were it not, that the Capons here are full as good in their kind.

As for the Government of this town, it was anciently Monarchical, and the
Bishop was Prince of it under the Duke of Sauoye: but Farel and Calvin comeing
hither with their anarchical Presbytery, drove the Bishop Peter de la Beaume
out of the town; and established there a kind of Democratie, or rather, a
kind of Aristocratie, mingled of Laymen and Ministers. Yet the Bishop keeps
still his title, and the Chapter its reuenews and Lands, which happily lie in
Sauoye out of the reach of the short jurisdiction of Geneua. Both the Bishop
and Chapter reside in Anisy in Sauoye, and officiate in the Cordeliers Church.
of this Seat was Bishop the late Canonized Saint, S. Francis de Sales, a man of
singular sweetness and piety, Petrus a S. Romualdo in Diario.
mingled with zeal and discretion. I have red of him, that in his life time,
he made four thousand sermons to the people.

Having thus seen the little All of Geneua, I made toward Swisserland, leaving
the Lake on my right hand; The Lake of Geneua
or rather taking it on my right hand; for it would needs accompany me to
Lausanna, where it took leave of me, or I of it.

This Lake is absolutely the fairest I have seen: its fairer then either the
Lake Mayor, the Lake of Como, the Lake of Zuric, the Lake of Walenstat, the
Lake of Jsee, the Lake of Murat, or the Lake of Garda. In some places this Lake
of Geneua is eight miles broad, and well nigh fifty miles long. I have red of a
stranger, who traueling that way alone in winter, when the Lake was all frozen
over, and covered with snow, took the Lake for a large plain, and rid upon it
eight, or ten miles to the town: Where lighting at his Inn, and commending the
fine plain over which he had ridden, was given to understand, that he had
ridden, if not in the air, at least fifteen fathom above ground; at which, the
poor man reflecting upon the danger he had been in, fell down dead with the
conceit of it. Thus we are troubled not only at evils to come but at evils
past; and are never so near the danger of death, as when we are newly past it.
No animal but man, has this folly.

Lausanna.
Leaving then, as I said, the Lake I came soon after, to Lausanna in
Swisserland, belonging to the Canton of Berne. Here I saw an ancient Church of
a noble structure, and once a Bishops Cathedral, but now possessed by Ministers
of Caluins communion; and the man that showed us the Church (though no
Catholic) assured us, that the records of that Church bore, that Mass had
been said in it thirteen hundred years ago. Swisserland.


From Lausanna I went toward Soleur, skirting through the Cantons, sometimes
of Berne, sometimes of Fribourg, and sometimes in one days journey, I passed
into a Catholic Canton, and by and by, into a Protestant Canton again: for
here Catholic and Protestant Villages are mingled together, and make the
country look like the back side of a pair of tables checquered with white and
black. In one Village you have a Cross set up, to signify that it is
Catholic belonging to the Canton of Friburg; by and by in an other Village, a
high flag with the picture of a Bear in it, to signify, Berne signifies as
much as Bear.
that it belongs to the Canton of Berne, and is Protestant: and yet they live
ciuilly and neighbourly together without quarreling about Religion.

Soleur,
Passing thus a long, I came to Soleur (Soloturrum in Latin) a neat town and
Head of a Canton. They are all Catholics here: and here it is that the French
Ambassadors to the Swissers, always reside, as the Spanish Ambassadors do at
Lucerna. This town is very ancient, as the golden Letters upon the clock
testifye; Petrus Romualdus in Cronolog. Tresor. to. 1. page 83. in fol.
for those words make Soleur to be only younger then her Sister Treuers, which,
as Aeneas Syluius writes, was built 1300 years before Rome. As for Soleur, I
find in good Cronologers that it was built 2030 years after the creation of the
world.

From Soleur I went to Murat, a little town famous for a great battle fought
hard by it, by the Duke of Burgondy, and the Swissers. For the the Duke of
Burgondy beseiging Murat, Murat.
the Swissers came upon him with a great army, and defeated him. I was told
here that the Duke seeing his army defeated, and himself environed on one side
by the Lake here; and on the other side, by the enemies conquering army, chose
rather to trust himself to the Lake, then to his enemies. Whereupon spurring
his horse into the Lake, The Lake of Murat.
one of his Dages, to save himself also, leaped up behind him as he took
water. The Duke out of fear either perceived him not at first, or dissembled
it till he came to the other side of the Lake which is two miles broad: The
stout horse tugged through with them both, and saved them both from drowning,
but not both from death. For the Duke seeing in what danger his page had put
him, stabbed the Page with his dagger. Poor Prince! thou mighst have given an
other offering of thanks giueing to God for thy escape then this; nay, thou
mighst have been as civil as thy horse, and have spaired him, whom beasts and
waves had saved: At least by that means, thou mighst have saueed thy own
honor, by saueing that poor page who offended rather out of fear of death,
then out of malice; and thereby thou mighst have truly said, that thou had
not lost all thy men in that battle. But passion is a blind thing: Nothing is
so dangerous to man, as man; and, as I observed above, we are never in greater
danger, then when we think we are past danger. Thebones of the Burgundians
slain in this battle, are seen in a great Chapel, which stands a little
distant from the town, and upon the road, with an inscription upon it touching
the time and circumstances of this defeat.

From Murat I made toward Zuric, a head town also of a Canton. It stands most
sweetly upon a Lake whose crystalin waters would delight any body else but
Swissers. They are all here, Swinglians; and when Mareshal D'Estree the French
Ambassador to Rome, passed that way, and lodged at the great Jnn of the Sword,
as he was combing his head one morning in his combing cloth, with his chamber
window open, some of the towns men, who saw him (from an other opposite window)
putting on that combeing cloth, and thinking it had been a Priest putting on
the Amice and vesting himself for to say Mass before the Ambassador in his
chamber, began with a Dutch clamor to stir up the people to a mutiny about
the Ambassadors house, and to call for the Priest, that was saying of Mass:
The Ambassador at first, not understanding the cause of this vproare about his
house, rann down with sword in hand, and in his combeing cloth, to check the
first man that should darre to enter his lodgings: but understanding at last,
that his combing cloth had caused this iealousy, he laughed at their folly,
and retired away contented.

The best things to be seen in Zuric are these. 1. The neat Arsenal furnished
with store of fair Cannons and arms of all sorts. 2. The great Library, but
in this much less esteemed by me, because a woman had the Key of it, and let
us in to see it. This piece of false Latin at the entrance, disgusted me with
all that I saw there, and made me hasten out quickly: Good Libraries should not
fall en quenouille.

3. The Wheels which draw up water from the Lake of themselves, and empty it
into several Pipes, and so conueigh it all over the town.

4. The public great drinking hall, where there are a world of little tables
for men of several corporations or trayds to meet at, and either talk there of
their business, or make drinking their business. Over every table hangs the
sign of each trad, as a Last for shoomakers, a saddle for sadlers, a sword for
cutlers etc. There is a great Bell that rings to this meeting place every day
at two a clock, and when I heard so solemn a ringing, I thought it had been to
some Church devotion, not to a drinking assembly.

From Zuric I went by water, that is, upon the lake a whole days journey, A
long Bridge.
and passed under a bridge of wood which crosses quite over the lake for two
miles. Its entertained at the cost of the King of Spain, to pass the soldiers
which he often rayseth in the adjacent countries.

From hence I went to Coire, Coire.
or Cear, the head town of the Grisons. The Bishop and the Clergy of the great
Church, with some few others living within the precincts of the Cloister of the
great Church, are Catholics, and perform their devotions in the Church
without control: the rest of the inhabitants are Swinglians, and possess the
town; yet they suffer the Bishop, and his Clergy to live quietly in the midst
of them. They showed me here in this Church, diverse fine Relics, especially
the Head (enchased in silver) of our ancient Brittan King Lucius, S. Lucius the
first Christian King.
the first Christian king that ever made profession of Christian. Religion, and
the first who helped to plant it here. The ancient Church office here relates
all this, as their Church books showed me.

From the Grisons I went to the Country of the Valtaline; The Valtaline.
a country subject to the Grisons and keeping its fidelity to them even when it
would not have wanted assistance from Spain and Italy, if it would have been
false to its Superiors the Grisons under the color of Religion: those of the
Valtaline being all Catholics, and their souuerains the Grisons Caluinists. In
a little town of the Grisons (called Herberga) I was showed a cheese (and
given to taste of it too) by mine host, the Mayor of the town, a Caluinist in
Religion, and a Venerable old man, who assured me seriously, that that cheese
was a hundred years old* a Venerable Cheese indeed! and well nigh as old as his
Religion.

Mount Berlin.
Between these two countries of the Grisons and the Valtaline, stands the great
Hill Berlino: over which I passed; and fell from thence upon Posciauo a little
bourg, and so to our Ladies of Tirano a neat Church with a fair Inn hard by it.

Le Splug.
Others, to avoid the snow of Berlino, are forced now and then (as I was once)
to pass over the mountain Splug, which is hill enough for any traueler.

Mount Aurigo.
From our Ladies of Tirano I went up a smart hill called Mount Aurigo, and so
making toward the Lake of Wallinstade, The Lakes of wallinstade, and Jsee.
I passed it over in boat; as I did also soon after, that of Isee; and so
fell into the territories of Brescia in Italy belonging to the state of Venice.

My fourth Voyage.
MY fourth voyage into Italy was from Lions again and Geneua, S. Maurice.
where I now took the Lake on my left hand, and passing along the skirts of
Sauoye, I came to Boueretta, a little Village, and so to S. Maurice the first
town in the Valetians country, This town is so called from S. Maurice the
Brave Commander of the Theban Legion, in the primitive times, and who was
martyred here for the profession of Christian Religion together with his whole
Legion. Hence an Abbey was built here by Sigismond King of Burgondy, and called
S. Maurice.

Now, this country is called the country of the Valesians, The Valesians.
from the perpetual Valley in which it lies. The people have for their Prince
the Bishop of Sion the chief town of the country. Their Valley is above four
days journey long, besides their hills which are two more: Most of their
little towns and Villages stand upon hill sides, leaving all the plain country
for tillage and pasturage. Their houses are low and dark, many of them having
no windows, and the rest very little ones. Sed casa pugnaces Curios angusta
tegebat. As for the people here, they are all Catholics, sinceare honest men,
of stout courage, yet of innocent lives, much snow quenching their lust, and
high mountains staueing of from them all luxe and Vanity, the harbingers of
Vice. They have short hair on their heads, but beards in folio. They are got so
far into the grande mode, as to wear breeches and doublets; but that's all:
for otherwise their clothes look as if they had been made by the Tailors of
the old Patriarcks; or as if the fashion of them had been taken out of old
hangings and tapistry. In fine, both men and women here are great and massiue,
and not easily to be blown away: so that I may justly say of this people, as
Cardinal Bentiuoglio said of the Swissers, that they are good for the Alps,
and the Alps for them. One thing I observed particularly in this windy
country, which is, that they have many natural fools here, which makes me
thinck it no vulgar error, which is commonly said, that the climats that are
most agitated with winds produce more fools, then other climats do.

As for their strength, Their Strength.
upon a defensive occasion, they can assemble forty thousand men together under
their known Commanders, who are often times the Innkeepers in whose houses we
lodge; but out of their own pit they are not to be feared, haueing neither
spirits, nor sinnews: that is, neither ambition, nor money, to carry on a
foreign war.

From S. Maurice I went to Martigni a great Inn in a poor Village, Martigni
and from thence to Sion.

Sion.
Sion (anciently Sedunum,) is the chief town of the country, and stands in the
center of it. Here the Bishop, who is Prince, resideth with his Chapter and
Cathedral on one hill, and his Castle stands on another hill hard by. The Court
of this Prince is not great, because of his, and his peoples quality. A good
Bishop has something else to do, then to be courted, The best Gards of a Prince.
and good plain people must follow their trads, not Courts. This Prince has no
Gards, because no fears: and if danger should threaten him, his people, whose
love is his only Arsenal, Plus tutatur Amor
have hands enough to defend him. So that the Prince and People, that is* the
Body Politic of this state, seemed to me like the Body natural in man, where
the soul and the body being friends together, the soul directs the body, and
the body defends the Soul.

Lucia.
From Sion I went to Lucia, but lodged a quarter of a mile from the town; and
from thence I reached Briga at night.

Briga.
Briga is a little Village standing at the foot of great hills; where haueing
rested well all night, at the Colonels house (the best Inn here) we began the
next morning to clime the hills for a breakfast. For the space of three houers
our horses eased us, the ascent not being so surley as we expected from so
rugged a brow of hills: but when we came to the steep of the hill it self
Mount Sampion, Mount Sampion.
(one of the great Staircases of Italy) we were forced to compliment our
horses, and go a foot. It was toward the very beginning of October when we
passed that way, and therefore found that Hill in a good humor; otherwise its
froward enough. Haueing in one hours time crawled up the steep of the Hill, we
had two hours more rideing to the Village and Inn of Sampion: where arriueing,
we found little meat for our great stomachs, and cold comfort for all the hot
stinking Stone.

At last haueing paid for a dinner here, though we saw nothing we could eat,
we were the lighter in purse, as well as in body, to walk well that
afternoon, rather then that afterdinner. To describe you the rough way we had
between Sampion and Deuedra, down hill always, or fetching about hills upon a
narrow way artificially made out of the side of those hills, and sometimes
sticking out of them, as if it had been plaistered to them, were able to make
my pen ache in writing it, as well as my legs in walkeing it. And here I found
the Proverb false which says, that its good walking with a horse in ones hand:
for here we could neither ride, nor lead our horses securely, but either the
one, or the other were in danger of stumbling, that is, of falling five hundred
fadome deep. For here, as well as in war, semel tantum peccatur, a man need
but stumble once for all his lifetime: Yet by letting our horses go loose with
the bridle on their necks, and making a man go before each horse, least they
should iumble one another down (as I once saw the like done by horses in
Swisserland) we arrived safely at Deuedra that night. Deuedra.
You would do well also to light from horse at the going over all the little
trembling Bridges of wood which you will find there, remembering the Italian
Proverb, which says: Quando tu Vedi un Ponte, falli piu honor che iu non fai
a un Conte.

Haueing reposed all night in the house of the Signor Castellano, Domodoscela.
we went the next morning to Domodoscela a little garrison town of the state of
Milan, troublesome enough to trauelers that pass from Milan this way, and
carry pistols and gunns without license.

From Domodescela we passed through a fine plain country to Marguzzi, Marguzzi.
Lake Mayor.
a little Village standing upon the Lake Mayor (anciently called Lacus
Verbanus) where making our bargain with our boatmen to carry us in one day from
thence to Sesto, and keep aloof of from the command of all the Castles, which
now and then warn boats to come in; and under pretense of searching them for
merchandise, stopp passingers till they have screwed a piece of monny out of
them.

S^sto.
Arriueing saif at Sesto that night we took Coache the next day for Milan, and
dineing at Ciuita Castellanza, Ciuita Castellanza.
arrived be times at that great town which was called anciently Altera Roma: a
second Rome.

My fifth Voyage.
MY fifth voyage into Italy was still from Lions, but now by the way of Mount
Cenis, and Turin, the ordinary Post rode, and I think the easyest way of all
the rest.

Parting then from Lions on horseback, we passed through Verpillier, La Tour du
Pin, Beaunoysin (whose bridge parts France, and Sauoy) and came in two days to
the foot of Mount Aiguebellet, the threshold of the Alps: This is a pretty
breathing hill, Mount Aiguebellet.
and may be called, the Alps foul over, or the Alps in a running hand and
not in that fair Text hand which I found Mount Cenis to be in. It has all the
lineaments and shapes of the great Alps, that is, much winding and turning;
deep precipices, Marons, or, men with little open chairs, to carry you up and
down the hill for a crown; and much stumbling work. In fine this hill
ressembles Mount Cenis, as a proper man may do a Giant.

Having passed this Hill, and by it through the very clouds, we fell as it were
out of the skies, upon Chambery the chief town of Sauoy, Chambery.
and where the Parliament resides,

We cast to be there at the solemn Entry, which this Duke made for his new
Spouse the third daughter of the late Duke of Orleans, The Entry of the
Duchess of Sauoy.
when she came first into this country. To describe all the Triumphal Arches in
the Streets, with their Emblems and mottos rarely painted; the stately Throne a
little out of the town, where the Duke and Duchess received the compliments
of their subjects; the rich liueries of the young townsmen on horsback; the
gallantery of the Noblemen and gentlemen of the country (800 in all) their
horses at fine as they; the Parliament men, and other officers of Justice all in
black velvet gowns; the Clergy and Religious marching in the mean time humbly
a foot and in procession; the Dukes two companies of horse in velvet coats of
crimosin color embrodered with gold and silver; The Pages and footmen of the
Duke and Duchess in crimosin Velvet laid thick with gold and silver lace; in
fine, the Duke and Duchess on horseback as brillant as the sun, would fill a
book alone, which I have no mind to do, seeing there is one extant already in a
just volume.

Leaving then Chambery the next day after the Show, Montmelian.
we went to Montmelian to dinner. This is a strong Castle upon a high rock,
ouerlooking the river Isere, Isere.
and commanding the passage here which is straight between the hills. The
strength of this Castle appeared when it withstood the Royal army of Lewis the
XIII of France for fifteen months, and made him raise the Seige when he had
done. Here is still a strong garrison in it, and store of ammunition, and all
things necessary for the defense of a strong place. They showed us in it their
deep well for fresh water in the midst of a high rock; their excellent pieces
of Artillary, one whereof is said to carry four miles, that is, to Fort Barreau
a little Fort belonging to France, which is two leagues from hence, and which
you see from this Castle.

From Montmelian we had rough way to Aiguebelle; Aiguebelle S. so
thence to S. John Morian, S. John Morian.
to S. Michel, and at last to Lasnebourg, which stands at the foot of Mount
Cenis the highest of all the hills I passed over in my several voyages into
Italy, Lasnebourg.
or out of it; to wit, Sampion, Berlin, Splug, and S. Godarde.

This Hill of Mount Cenis parting Sauoy and Italy, shall be the place where I
will now begin my Description of Italy, haueing hitherto only described the
several ways into it.

The description and Voyage of Italy.
Mount Cenis.
ARRIVEING then, as I said before, at the foot of Mount Cenis, anciently called
Cinisium; and resting all night at Lasnebourg we agreed with the Marons, to
carry us up the hill, and down the Hill, as also ever the plain, and in fine,
all the way to Noualese it self. All this is to be expressed in your bargain
with then, otherwise they will cauil with you, and make you go over the plain a
foot. The price is, a Spanish pistol for every man that's carried. Those that
are strong and vigorous, ride up upon mules, and walk down a foot.

We began to mount at our going out of our Inn at Lasnebourg, and having passed
by La Ramassa (where men are posted down the Hill upon the snow in sledges
with great celerity and pleasure) after two hours tugging of our chairmen, or
Maro^s, we came to the top of the hill, and a little after to the Posthouse,
and the little Hospital upon the plain: Thence passing by the Chapel, of the
Transis (that is, of those who are found dead of cold in the snow, and are
buried here) we came to the great Cross and Tavern, where we began to
descend. This Hill of Mount Cenis is four miles in the going up, four miles
upon the plain, and two in its descent to Noualese.

Arriving about noone at Noualese, Noualese.
we dined, horsed, and went that night to Susa.

Susa, anciently Segesium, is a strong town, and one of the gates of Italy.
For this reason, Suza.
the French in their late long war with Spain, kept it a long time in their
hands, as well as Pignorola, which they still keep upon treaty, to let them
into Italy, when they have a mind. Its strength consists wholly in a Castle
built upon a high rock close to the town, and commanding all the passage
betwixt the two mountains. Le pas de Suse.
This town is famous in the latter history, for the smart action of the
French, when they beat down the twelve several Barriers, whereby the Duke of
Sauoy thought to have choked their passage. Piedmont
This ^action is famous in history, by the name of le Pas de Suze. S. Ambrosio.
Here at Susa begins Piedmont.

From Susa we went to S. Ambrosio, and passed by Riuolle a fine house of the
Dukes, Riuolle.
standing in good air, and at night we came to Turin.

Turin.
Turin, anciently called Augusta Taurinorum, is situated in a plain near the
foot of the hills and upon the bancks of the river Po, The River Po.
which begins here to be nauigable, and from hence carries boats to Ferrara,
Chiosa and Venice. This Po is a noble river, and very large in some places,
Petrus a S. Romualdo Cron. to. 1
especially a little below Ferrara; yet I have read that in a great drouth
which happened in the year of the world 2470 it was dried up and rendered
innauigable.

The Duke of Sauoys titles, and greatness.
This Turin is the Seat of one of the greatest Princes in Italy, the Duke of
Sauoy, and Prince of Piedmont, who is also treated with the title of Altezza
Reale, and Vicario Generale del Imperio in Italia. This house of Sauoy which
now gouerns here, came anciently from Siguardo King of Saxony, in the year of
Christ 636, and has conserved it self ever since, that is, for a thousand and
odd years in a continual series of heroical Princes, whose Pedigree was never
vitiated nor interrupted by any degenerate offspring. Five Emperors, and four
Kings have issued out of this house.

Anciently the Dukes of Sauoy kept their Court at Chambery, or else at Bourg en
Bresse, a country now belonging to France, upon exchang with the Marquisat of
Saluzzo; as many of their tombs curiously cut in marble in the Augustins
Church there yet show. It was Amadeo the Vof that name, Duke of Sauoy, that
transferred the Court to Turin. It was also this Amadeo who in memory of his
Granfather Amadeo the IV, who had defended Rhodes so bravely, instituted the
kinghthood of the Annunciata, with this single motto in the collar of the order
F. E. R. T. signifying, that Fortitudo Eius Rhodum Tenuit. His Subjects.


The subjects of this Prince are said to be about eighteen hundred thousand
souls. His whole country with Piedmont and all, His countries extent.
is judged to be two hundred miles long, and fifty broad. His forces thirty
three thousand foot, His forces
and five thousand horse: and his Reuenews to be about a million of crowns,
Reuennues.
besides what he can now and then raise out of that fat country of Piedmont.
His Jnterest is, His interest.
to keep well with France, and not fall out with Spain.

As for the town it self of Turin, its almost squar, and has four gates in
it; The town of Turin.
a strong Citadel with five bastions to it; its well furnished with good
provisions in the market; it stands in a fat soil, which makes it a little too
durty in winter, and it is an university.

The things to be seen in Turin.
The chief things which I saw here, were these.

The Holy Syndon.
1. The Domo, or Great Church, in which is kept with great devotion the Holy
Syndon, in which our Saviors body was wound up and buried: of the Verity of
this Relick see Baronius in his Ecclesiastical History ad an. 34 number. 138. Its
keept in a Chapel over the High Altar and shown publicly upon certain days,
and privately To Ambassadors and Prelates, as they pass that way. The late
Duchess Madame Christina, began to make a fine Chapel for to keep it in, but
is was not quite finished when I passed that way last. The Chapel is all of
black marble adorned with stately black marble pillars: indeed winding sheets
(such as this Relick is) are things of mourning, and are best set out in a
mourning way.

2. The Cittadelle standing at the back of the town, The Citadelle.
and keeping it in awe. This Duke and his mother found the conuenience of this
Cittadelle, when by factions within the town against them, they were forceed
to this Cittadelle, and there weather it out stoutly, till succor comeing to
them from France, made them masters again of the town, and their enemies.

3. The Dukes new Palace hansomely bu^lt with a fair Court before it, The
Palace.
a great Piazza, and a large open street leading up to it. The Chambers are
fair, and hung with hangings of cloth of Tyssue of a new and rich fabrik, with
rich embrodered beds, chairs, stools, cloth of State, and Canopies. The
Dutchesses Cabinet, the curious bathing place above, hund round with the true
pictures in little of the prime Ladies of Europe: The bathing place.
The curious invention for the Duchess to convey her self up from her
bedchamber to that bathing room, by a pully and a swing, with great ease and
saifty: the great Hall painted curiously: the Noble staircase: the old long
Gallery 100 paces long, The old Gallery.
with the Pictures in it of the Princes and Princesses of the house of Sauoy,
with the Statues of the ancient Emperors and Philosophers in marble, with a
rare Library locked up in great cubbords, are the chief rooms and ornaments of
this Palace. I saw also the Appartiments or lodgeings of the old Duchess
Madame Christina, which join to the old Gallery, and in her Cabinet I saw many
choice pictures.

4. The new street, The new street.
which runeth from the Palace to the Piazza Reale, is a fair street and built
uniformly. The shops below afford great conueniency to the towns men, and the
fair lodgings above to the noblemen and Courtiers.

5. The Piazza Reale.
The Piazza Reale is built hansomly upon Pillars, like our Covent Garden, and
is full of nothing else but noblemens houses.

6. The Augustins Church.
The Augustins Church called S. Carlo, standing in this piazza, adornes it
much, being a neat Church and the best contrived that I saw in this town.

7. The Capucins Church.
The Capucins Church upon a hill out of the town, is above the rate of
Capucins: but you must know who gave it, not who have it. From hence I had a
perfect view of Turin with the country about it.

8. La Venerie Royale.
Some three miles out of the town I saw a neat house of the Dukes, called La
Venerie Royale. The Court set round with stagg^ heads; the chambers full of
good Pictures; the Hall painted with great Pictures of the Duke, his mother,
his sisters, and other Ladies all on horseback as if they were going a hunting;
the place where they keep pheasants, partridges, and other such like birds, the
stable for 100 horse, and the neat dogkennel, are the best things to be seen in
this house.

La Valentine.
9 On the other side of the town, about a mile of, I saw the old Dutchesses
house called La Valentine. It stands pleasantly upon the banks of Po, and is
adorned with great variety of pictures. In five or six rooms, on the right
hand of the house, they showed me a world of pictures of all sorts of Flowers:
on the left hand, as many of all sorts of birds, with other pictures curiously
painted. The four pictures representing the four Elements, with all that
belongs to them, as all the birds that fly in the air; all the beasts that are
found upon the Earth; all the fishes and shells that are found in the water;
and all things that belong to fire, are so curiously painted in their several
particular shaps and colors, that these four pieces are and abridgment of all
nature, and the admiration of all that behold them. There are some other good
pieces here too; as the Magdalen fallen into an ecstasy: the rapt of the
Sabins; and diverse others. The others houses about the town, as Millefleur
belonging to the Duke; the Villa of the Princess Marie; with diverse others
which show themselves upon the Hill side, are very stately, and worth seeing.

Having thus seen Turin, From Turin to Genua.
we left the ordinary road, which leads to Milan (to wit, by the way of
Vercelle and Nouara, two strong towns frontier to one another, through which I
passed in another voyage) and to avoid two armies which lay in the way, chose
to steer toward Genua by the low way of Sauona. And passing through a
melancholy country by Altar and other little towns for the pace of three
days, we came at last to Sauona.

Sauona.
Sauona (anciently called Sabatia, or Sabatium) is the second town, or eldest
daughter of Genua; and like a good daughter indeed she stands always in her
mothers presence, yet keeps her distance: it being within sight of Genua, yet
five and twenty mils off. It stands upon the Mediterranean Sea, or, as they
call it here, upon the Riuiera di Genoa. Its fortified both by art and nature,
thar is, by regular Fortifications toward the Sea, and by lusty Apennin hills
toward the Land. Yet whiles Sauona feared no danger from either Sea, or Land,
it was almost ruined in the year 1648. by fire from heaven, to wit, ligthning;
which falling upon a great Tower, in the midst of the town, where gunpowder
was kept, blew it up upon a sudden, and with it, threw down two hundred houses
round about it, and houses of note. For passing that way six months after, and
walking among the ruins, I saw in many of the houses, which were but half
fallen down, curious painted chambers and fine guilt roofes, which showed me of
what house many of these houses had been; and of what weak defense guilt roofes
and painted walls are against the artillery of heaven thunder and lightning.

This town is famous in history for the interview of two great kings here, to
wit, Lewis the XII of France, and Ferdinand King of Naples. This interview
passed with demonstrations of mutual ciuilityes, not ordinary in interviews of
Princes. For Lewis feared not to go into the Gallyes and ships of Ferdinand
without gards and unarmed: and Ferdinand remained for many days together in
this town belonging the^ to Lewis, whom he had lately stipt of the kingdom of
Naples, and beaten him to boot in a battle.

Of this town were Julius Secundus, and Sixtus Quartus, two Popes of the house
of Roueri: and two great Cardinals, Peter, and Raphael Riarii.

Embarking at Sauona in a Feluca we rowed along the Shore (called la Riuiere
di Genoa) unto Genua it self; and all the way long we saw such a continual
suburbs of stately Villas and Villages, that these scantlings made us in love
which the whole piece it self, Genua. La Riuiera di Genua.
I confess, I never sew a more stately abord to any City then to this: and if
we had not had Genua full in our sight all the way long, we should have taken
some of these stately Villages for Genua it self; and have imitated Hostingus
the leader of the Normans, who comeing into Italy about the year 860 with a
great army, and finding Luna (a town in the confines of Genua) so sumptuously
built, thought really it had been Rome, and there upon taking it, Dreido a S.
Quintino lib. 1. de morib. and Act. Norman.
he gloryed that he had sacked the mistress of the world; Gratatur tenere se
Monarchiam totius Imperii, per vrbem quam putabat Roman^, says his Historian.

Sailing thus along this pleasant coast, we came betimes to Genua.

Genua.
Genua is one of the chief towns that stand upon the Mediterranea^ Sea, and
one of the best in Italy. The common Italian Proverb, calls it, Genua la
Superba: and if ever I saw a town with its holy day clothes always on, it was
Genua. It stands upon the side of a hill, and riseing by degrees, appears to
those that look upon it from the Sea, like an Amphitheater. Heretofore it was
only fortified by marble bullworks, The walls
that is, great hills of marble which backed it up: but some forty years ago, it
was environed, with new-walls, carrying six miles in compass, and yet finished
in eighteen months.

The Haven heretofore was very unsafe, and many ships which had tuggd through
the most dangerous Seas abroad, were seen to sink here in the haven at home;
The Hauuen.
the French then masters of Genua, not suffering her to shut up her haven,
least she should shut them out. But since she has shaked off the French yoke,
she has looked up her Treasures, and bolted the door on the inside, by that
admirable Mola which crossing almost quite over the baye, or, haven, does not
only bolt out all enemies, but even locks up the boisterous Sea it self, and
makes it tame in the haven. Its a prodigious work, and able to have puzzeld
any two Kings in Europe to have done it.

The Pharos.
At one end of this Mola stands the Pharos upon a little rock, with a Lantern
upon it, to give notice, by known signs, what ships, how many, and from what
side they Come: or else to guide their own ships home safely in the night. At
first it was only a little Fort for to help to bridle Genua, and it was built
by Lewis the XII of France.

As for the town it self of Genua, its most beautiful to behold: The Cittye
it self.
many of the houses being painted on the outside, and looking as if they were
turned inside out, and had their Arras hangings hung on their outsides. The
tops of their houses are made with open galleries, where the women sit together
at work in clusters, and where also they dry their hair in the Sun after they
have washed it in a certain wash a purpose for to make it Yellow, a color much
affected here by all women.

The streets are very narrow: The streets
so that they use here few coaches, but many Sedans and Litters. This makes the
noise in the streets less, and the expense in the purse smaller. But for want
of ground and earth, they make heaven pay for it; taking it out in the height
of their houses what they want in breadth or length. So that Genua looked in my
eye like a proad young Lady in a straight bodyed flowered gown, which makes her
look tall indeed and fine, but hinders her from being at her ease, and taking
breath freely.

Yet I must except the Strada Noua here, which for a spirt, Strada Noua.
surpasses all the streets I ever saw any where else for neatness and
proportion; and if it had but breath enough to hold out at the same rate, a
little longer, it would be the true Queen Street of Europe: Ordinary houses are
so out of countenance here, that they dare not appear in this street where
there is nothing but Palaces, and Palaces as fine as art, and cost; or as
Marble, and Painting can make them.

Haueing said thus much of Genua in general, I will now come to the particulars
that are to be seen in it.

The Domo.
1. The Domo, or great Church of S. Laurence presents it self to my sigth: Its
the Cathedral of the Archbishop, who, when I passed that way last, was Cardinal
Durazzo, a man of great Virtue and Piety. This Church is of a noble structure,
all of black and white marble intermingled, and all massiue squair stones. In a
Chapel over against the Pulpit, is kept reverently an authentic Relick of S.
John Baptist, under the Altar; and the great Dish of one Emmeraud, in which
they say here that our Savior eat the Paschal Lamb with his disciples. Both
these where given to the Genuesi by Balduin King of Jerusalem, for their great
service done against the Turks in the Holy Land. Baron. ad an. 1101. n. 13.
Of the Relick of S. John Baptist, Baronius, speaks credibly in his
Ecclesiastical History* but for the dish of Emmeraud, I find no authority for
it, either in Baronius or any ancient author, that our Savior used it.
Especially seeing Venerable Beda writes, Beda l. d^ loc. sanct. c. 2.
that the Dish in which our Savior eat the Paschal Lamb was of silver.

2 After the Domo, I saw the Church of the Annunciata, The Annunciata.
which draws up the Ladder after it for neatness. Its still in building, and
not quite finished. Gli Signori Lomelini.
Its thus beautifyed at the cost of two Brothers Rich Gentlemen and merchands
of this town who allow the third part of their gaynes to the adorning of this
Church. The roof of it is all guilt, and set with curious pictures in
Platfound. The Altars round about the Church, are cheeked with exquisit
pillars, and adorned with rare pictures. The two rows of Vast Pillars, which
hold up the roof of the Church, are so beautiful, being of a red and white
marble, that they look like Jasper, and ravish the beholder: They are
curiously wrought and chanelled.

S. Am^^sio.
3. The Churh of S. Ambrosio, belonging to the Jesuits is neatly ouercrusted
with marble and guilt above in the roof. It wants a little lenght, for want of
room to build on: it being too near the Doges palace, and not daring to
advance a step further for fear of treading upon his heels.

S. Cyro.
4. The Church of the Theatins called S. Cyro, is very hansome, with its double
row of white marble pillars, which set it out very gracefully. The Cloister
also is very neat, and the Fathers very civil.

The Palaces.
5. The Palaces here are most sumptuous. Those of the Strada Noua are the best,
and the best of those, is that of the Prince d'Oria: its built upon white round
marble pillars, which support its Galleries, and those galleries let you into
noble rooms adorned with all the Abellimenti of Italian Palaces. The other
Palaces too, in this street, deserve particular mention in this my description
of Genua, and may take it ill I say nothing of them; but they must excuse my
breuity, and impute the fault partly to themselves; seeing admirable things are
liable to this inconvenience, that they are also inexpressible.

6. I saw also the two Palaces of the Signori Balbi, The Palaces of Signori
Balbi.
in the Street of the Annunciata. In the one whereof (on the left hand) I saw,
among other rich things, a Looking Glass valued at threescore thousand crowns.
Its much of the size of those Looking glasses, which Seneca calls, specula toti
corpori paria, that is, as big, and brickle, as those that look themselves
in them. The frame of it is all of silver, set thick with a thousand little
armed figures, like Cupids: as if the plain Mirror of this Looking Glass were
the plain field where Cupid pitcheth his Tents, and begins his conquests over
fair Ladies. The round pillars set in the porch of this house, and the Giuochi
d'acqua in the garden, will make themselves be taken notice of.

7. The Palace of the Doge, The Doges Palace.
or biennial Prince here, with the Several Chambers of Justice, and the Armory
in it for thirty thousand men aught to be carefully seen. The Armory.
In one of the great Halls of this Palace, are seen twelve Statues of white
marble, representing twelve famous men of this town, who had rendered great
service to the Commonwealth. In the foresaid Armory you see a halbard with two
pistol barrels in the lower end of it. You see also the Armor of the Genuesian
Amazones, who went to the war in the Holy Land, and carried themselves
gallantly. Here Is also a cannon of Leather so light, that a man may carry it.

8. But that which is the most taking in Genua, is that which is out of Genua;
I mean, the stately Suburbs of San Pietro in Arena, San Pietro in Arena.
where for a mile together, Villas adorned with marbles, painting, statues,
Gardens, Arbours of Gelsomin, Orange, and Limon trees, grotts, ponds, Giuochi
d'acqua, fountains, high wales, with shades borne up by Marble Pillars etc.
compose of many palaces and gardens, such a beautiful Landscape, that the
whole place seemed to me, to be the charming Paradise of the King of the
Mountains anciently; and I was almost going to say, that we durst not bless
our selves, least this enchanted place should have Vanished. The best Villas,
or Palaces here, are those of Hieronymo Negro, and that of the Imperiali: the
first beautifyed with all the graces of Italian furniture, as also with
Gardens, Walks, Ponds, Water works, Allees etc: the other, besides all these,
has an excellent Prospect: for the master of this house can see out of one
window of it, twelve thousand crowns a year of his own, only in let houses.
The other Palaces here expect I should say something of them, and they deserve
it well; but realy to give them their full due, I can only say this of them,
that they aught to be seen by the eye, not described by the pen.

9. The Villa of the Duke d'Oria.
As you return from San Pietro in Arena to the town not far from the Gates,
stands the Villa, or Palace of the Duke d'Oria. I reserved this for the last,
pour fair bonne bouche. It stands upon the Seaside, and its garden toward the
Sea is built upon three rows of white marble Rayls borne up by white marble
pillars, which ascending by degrees, is so beautiful to behold from the Sea,
that strangers passing that way to Genua, take this garden for a second
Paradise. In the midst of it stands the rare Fountain of Neptune, representing
the true looks of Brave Andrea D'Oria the Neptune of the Ligurian Sea, and the
man who put his country out of Livery, and taught it, not to serve. All along
one side of this Garden, stands a Cage of Iron, about a hundred paces long; and
so high that it fetches in a world of laurel and other trees, clad with
chirping birds of several sorts; and to make the poor birds believe that they
are rather in a wood, then in a prison, the very Cage has put even the wood it
self in prison. Then entering into the Palace, we found it most curiously
adorned with rarityes, and riches, suitable to the countries humor, and the
masters purse. Its true, when this Queen of Spain passed from Germany into
Spain, by the way of Milan and Genua, the Governor of Milan told her, that
she should see in d'Orias palace here, many fine things, but all borrowed of
the townsmen. Which d'Oria hearing of before hand, caused to be written over
the great Gates of the Palace, where the Queen was to enter and lodge, these
words in Spanish, By the grace of God, and the Kings favor, there is nothing here
borrowed. It may be, the cunning Governor of Milan thought by telling the
Queen this, to oblige the Duke D'Oria to present some of his best things to the
Queen, to show her that they were his own; as its said, the late Duke of
Buckingham did in France, by breaking his dyamond hatband among the Court
Ladies, who said he had only borrowed it; but the wise Italian by this trick,
both kept his own, and yet satisfied the Queen. Indeed he has things here
both too good to be given away, and too great to be carried away: witness those
rare Silver tables which are in his Warderobe, one whereof weighs twenty-four
thousand pound weight. From the Palace we were led over the street to his
great garden upon the hillside, where all the graces that can make up a garden,
are found.

As for the Government, fashions, Wealth, strength, and Interest of Genua, I
found them to be thus.

Their Government, is Democratical, or Popular, by a Dog^ (chosen every two
years) and eight Senators, The Government.
who live with him in the Palace, and assist him with their counsel. The
great Counsel here, which is the foundation of the Government, consists of four
hundred men chosen indifferently out of all the families of the town. These
deliberate with the Signoria of all things that belong to war or peace.
Anciently, as I hinted before, Genua was under the French domination, till
Andrea D'Oria set it free. Histories write of it that Berengarius the third,
and the Sarazins, so ruined Genua, that they left it swiming in its own blood:
Which ruin was forewarned by a prodigy of a fountain of blood which rann in
the very streets of Genua. It had like to have swmme a second time in its
blood, when Lewis the XII of France entering into Genua victoriously with sword
in hand, threatening the utter ruin of that people; was pacifyed by the
mournful cries of four thousand little Children, who clad in sackcloth and
placed in the great Piazza cried out to the King in a piercing accent,
Misericordia e Pieta, Mercy and Pity. But since Genua shook off the French
Yoke it has lived perpetually Gealous of the French, especially since it
discovered, some years past, diverse attempts of France against it, whiles the
French had Portolongone and Piombino.

For this reason, the Genuesi lean much to the Spanish Faction; and Fashions
following Faction, Their Fashions.
they lean also much to the Spanish Fashion both in humor and apparel. Hence
I found here broad hats without hat-bands, broad leather girdles with steel
buckles, narrow britches with long wasted doublets and hanging sleeves, to be a
la mode, as well as in Madrid. And I found all the great Ladies here to go like
the Donnas of Spain in Guardinfantas, that is, in horrible ouergrowne
Vertigals of whale-bone, which being put about the waste of the Lady, and full
as broad on both sides, as she can reach with her hands, bear out her coats in
such a huffing manner, that she appears to be as broad as long. So that the men
here with their little close britches, looked like tumblers that leap through
the houps: and the women like those that danced anciently the Hobbyhorse in
country Mummings. Two of these Ladies meeting one another in these narrow
streets, make as great an Embarras, as two carts of hay do upon London bridge:
and I have seen their Ladyships strangely puzzled, how to iuggle themselves
into a narrow Sedan, or Littar: indeed half of my Lady hangs out. For my part I
admire that this jealous Republic does not fear, least some of these Ladies
(upon a disgust) should carry a set of little short gunns under her coats, and
under pretense of preferring a petition to the Senate assembled, give them a
broad side or two, and make a horrible confusion in the Republic. If all this
bulk of clothes, which make the women here look like haycocks with arms and
heads, be allowed them by their wise husbands, to render them more visible, and
less able to go privately into any suspected houses, its good policy:
otherwise, most certain it is, that the wifes gowns cheat horribly the
Husbands britches, of almost all the stuff. Guardinfanta signifies a
Child-preseruer
I have only heard (and it was from a Nobleman of Genua) of one Lady here that
made right use of these Guardinfantas; and it was she, who seeing her only
son (a young nobleman of Genua about eighteen years old) already condemned to
prison, and ready to be condemned to the scaffold for a heinous crime, got
leave to visit him in prison as often as she pleased; and at last, by means of
a good Guardinfanta of steel, instead of whale-bone, she took up her son
under her coats in that Guardinfanta, and marching out of the prison gravely,
as she used to do, by leaning upon two ancient women, as the Fashion is here
for great Ladies to do, she carried him home so; and being there delivered of
him a second time, without a midwife, she sent him presently out of the country
to be nursed and kept. Thus she saved her families honor. Was not this a true
Guardinfanta, which preserved thus the life of a child? But was not this also a
gallant mother that went with a child who was full eighteen years old when his
mother bore him? The only pity was, that this gallant mother had not the
happiness once to be mother of a gallant son, seeing she had had the trouble
of bringing forth such a son twice.

Their Riches.
As for their Riches, I am told they pass not a million and two hundred
thousand crowns a year. Indeed the King of Spain Philip the II above a
hundred years ago, borrowed of this Republic the sum of eleven millions, and
keeps them still in his hands, to keep this Republic in awe; yet paying the
interest duly unto them. So that the Common purse here is nothing so rich as
that of Venice, though the particular men here are far richer then those of
Venice. They have great trading both with France and Spain, and are great
Banquiers making the Change, in all the bancks of Europe go as they please.
Besides, they utter a world of Taffetas, Veluets, Sattins, Points of needle
work and diverse other things of Value.

As for their Strength, Their Strength.
its enough to defend themselves, scarce enough to offend others. For Genua is
backd up by the Apennins, where all passages are easily made good against
inuaders; and it is so well fortifyed on the other side by the Sea it self,
twelve or fourteen good Gallyes, twenty ships of war, and its incomparable
Molo, that they could scuffle notably in their own defense. Besides, Genua is
fortifyed not only with its Hills and Sea, but also with its new walls and
bullworks of stone; nay, and with its Bonewalls too, that is, with a
Lacedemonian wall of a world of inhabitants, and with the Illustrious Families
of d'Oria, Spinola, Grimaldi Sauli, Durazzi, Catanei, and others, whose several
names would go almost for several armies. Yet for a need, they can raise thirty
thousand men, and arm them well out of their Arsenal. I confess heretofore
they were strong enough to offend others; For they made war against the
Pisani, and worsted them: They set also upon the Island of Corsica, distant from
Genua about a hundred miles, and took it. This Island gave the Republike of
Genua more honor then profit: for it being once a Kingdom, gives still to
Genua the title of Serenissima, and a Close Regal Crown over its Coat of
Arms. In fine, the Genuesi were strong enough heretofore, to lend great
succors to Godfrey of Bullen in his holy conquest of Jerusalem. Hence upon
the very Arca of the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem, are written these words:
Praepotens Genuensium praesidium.

As for their Interest, Their Interest.
it seemed to me to be far more Spanish, then French, by reason of the great
profit they draw from Spain, which corresponds with the rich State of Milan in
men and monyes, by means of the Gennesi: yet they are well with all Christian
Princes, except with the Duke of Sauoye who pretends to Sauona.

As for the Learned men of this town, Their learned men.
I find them not to be so many. The rich Banquier is more esteemed here, then
the learned Divine. Yet I find here also some famous for learning, to wit,
Baptista Fregosus, or, Fulgosus, who for his singular parts being chosen Doge
of Genua, and by his own disloyal kindred chased from Government and country,
comforted himself in his studdyes; and haueing observed many particular things
in history, he reduced them to heads, and left us a just volume of Memorable
sayings and Deeds of the ancients: for which work he is styled by Alberto
Leandro, the Valerius Maximus of Italy. He wrote in Italian, and dedicated his
book to his Son. The other learned men of this town are Iustinianus, Balus,
Mascardi, and Christopher Columbus.

Genua also has given to the Church three Popes, Adrian the V. Innocent the
IV, and Innocent the VIII.

The Academy of Wits.
Here is an Academy of Wits called the Adormentati; which together with the
other Academyes of the like nature in all the towns of Italy, I would wish my
Traveler to visit particularly, that he may see how far the Jtalians excel
us in passing their time well, and how its much better to spend the week in
making of Orations and Verses, then in drinking of Ale and smoking of Tobacco.

Their Historian.
He that desires to know more of Genua, let him read Augustinus Iustinianus of
the History of Geuua.

Having spent six days in Genua we agreed with an honest Vetturino to conduct
us to Milan which is about four little days journey from hence. Monferat
In another voyage I went from Genua to Turin by Monferat and saw in my way
Noui (of which by and by) Trino, Cassale one of the strongest places of Italy;
Cassale.
having a strong Cittadelle, a strong Casile, strong towne-walls and ditches;
and Alexandria della paglia a strong town standing upon the Po. Alexandria.


But now at this time, leaving Genua, and intending for Milan, we rid through
San Pietro d'Arena, by the Carthusians Monastery, over the Apenniu Hills, and
in a day and a half, came to Noui.

Noui is a little strong town belonging to the Genuesi, Noui.
and Frontier to the Milanesi. Its some twelve miles distant from Tortona the
first frontier town of the State of Milan: and because these Frontiers were
then pestered with Bandits, a noble man of Genua, who was in our company, beggd
of the Governor of Noui, a Couuoy for himself and us to secure us to Tortona:
The Governor presently granted us a Conuoye of eight or ten horsemen: but
those very men he gave us for our Conuoye, were Bandits themselves, who being
banished from the State and town of Genua for their misdemenours, had two
months a year allowed them to come freely into frontier towns, and negotiate
with the State. These men were thought by the Governor to be our safest gards
in danger, who were the only men that caused danger. Having been thus conuoyed
safely by out honest rogues past all danger, we paid them some three Pistoles;
and feared no more danger, till we should meet with such servants as these
another time. I confess, it seemed at first a fearful thing, to see our
selves in the hands of those, who had their hands often in blood: yet there is
such a charm in a Governors parole, that we thought our selves as well armed
with it, as if we had been shot-free, and had had all the Spells of Lapland
about us. Tortona.


We had no sooner parted from these our guards, but passing over a little river
on horsback, we entered into the Milanese, land came at night to Tortona a
strong frontier town of the Milanese, where Charles the VIII of France, in his
return from the conquest of Naples, beat the Venitians and the Milanesi in a
battle.

From Tortana we went the next day to Pauia, the second town of the state of
Milan, and once the Seat of twelve Kings of the Longobards. Pauia.
It stands upon the river Ticinum, and hence its also called in Latin Ticinum.
Ticinum.
Here Is an University, either founded or furnished at first, with readers, or by
readers of the University of Oxeford. The Chief Colleges are, that of Pius
Quintus, and that of S. Charles Boromaeus. The other remarkable things here,
are. 1 The Domo, in which lies buried the body of a holy Bishop of this town,
called Sauli, The Domo.
who was contemporary to S. Charles Borromaeus and of the same Pastoral spirit
and zeal. Near the great door of this Church (on the inside) they show you a
little mast of a boat which they make ignorant people believe (for sport) to
have been the Lance of Orlando Furioso.

The Equestris statua of Autoninus.
2 Near the Domo, in the Piazza, stands A Brazen statue, which some affirm to
be the Statue of Constantin the Great; others, more probably, of Antoninus
Pius. It was brought from Rauenna hither by victory; and it had like to have
been carried back again to Rauenna by Victory. For Lotrech the French general
in the taking of this town haueing granted this Statue to a soldier of
Rauenna (who served under him, and who haueing mounted the breach first, asked
nothing for his recompense, but that statue taken anciently from his native
town) Yet afterward moved with the generosity of the townsmen (who having
left all things else with some patience, to the prey of the soldiers, burst
into tears when they heard that this statue was to be taken from them) Lotrech
changed his gift to the soldier, and left the Citizens of Pauia their dear
Statue.

3. I saw the Augustins Church, S. Augustins body.
where the body of that great Father of the Church S. Augustine lies buried.
Baron. an. 725.
It was translated hither out of Sardinia by Luitprandus King of the
Longobards; an arm of which S. Augustine a King of England redeemed at a great
rate, Baron. an. 1027.
and yet cheap too, if it where his writeing arm, wherewith he wrote such
admirable books. The new Tomb in the Sacristy is all of white marble most
exquisitly carved with historical statues representing the most remarkable
actions of that Doctor.

4 In the same Church we were shown the Tomb of Seuerinus Boethius author of
that great little book de Consolatione Philosophica which he wrote in his
exile, The tomb of Seuerinus Boethius.
to comfort himself. He was a Consul of Rome for dignity, an other S. Denis for
learning and loosing his head; See Baron. an. 525.
and held a Martyr by many.

5 In the Cloister of this Convent of the Augustins, lie buried two Englishmen
of note, the Duke of suffolk, and an English Bishop called Parker of the house
of Morley, I read their several Epitaphs upon the wall of this Cloister near
the little door that goes from hence into the Church, but have forgot them
since.

6 The Chapel where the Bones of the Frenchmen killed in the Battle of Pauia
are kept and shown to strangers.

7 In the Franciscans Church here, lies buried Baldus the famous Iurisconsult.

8 The long wodden Bridge covered over head with a perpetual penthouse, to
deffend men as well from the Sun, as from the rain.

Learned men.
Of this town were Ennodius Ticinensis, and Lanfrancus Archbishop of
Canterbury, who wrote so learnedly against Berengarius for the Real Presence.

The Historians.
He that desires to know the particular history of Pauia, let him read Antonio
Spelta, and Sacco.

From Pauia we went to Milan same twenty miles off; and in the way, saw the
famous Monastery of the Carthusians, near unto which, upon S. Mathias his day
(a day favorable to Charles the V, seeing he was borne on that day; The Battle
of Pauia.
crowned Emperor on that day; and got this Victory on that day) was fought
that memorable battle between the said Emperors forces, and the French King,
an. 1525. where Francis the I. of France was taken prisoner, haueing lost the
day, not for want of courage, but conduct: for he had a little before, sent
away half of his army to the conquest of Naples; by which he so weakened the
rest of his army here, that he both lost the day, See Monlukes Commentaries
and did nothing against the kingdom of Naples; A great fault, observed by one
that was present there, to wit, Monsieur Monluc. Francis being thus taken
prisoner was presently conducted to the Carthusians Monastery, which was hard
by. Entering into the Church, and finding the Monks singing in the third hour
this verse of the Psalm, Coagulatum est sicut lac cor eorum, egovero legem
tuam meditatus sum, he struck up with them at the next verse, and sung aloud
with a piety as great, as his loss, or courage, Bonum mihi quia humiliasti me,
vt discam iustificationes tuas: that is, its well for me, that thou have
humbled me, that I may learn thy iustifications. After he had heard Mass
here, he was carried to dinner in the Monastery, and was served by three
Generals of the Spanish Army, Launoy, Bourbon, and the Marquis of Vasti: the
one holding the basin, the second pouring water upon his hands; and the third
presenting him the Towel. Some say he refused to be served by Bourbon, looking
upon him as a revolted Trayter, rather then as an ennemy: indeed the brave
French Knight Bayard (surnamed, the Cheualier sans peur who died in this
battle,) being found expireing in the field, by Bourbon, who said to him, Poor
Bayard! I pity thee; answered him with all the courage and life that was left
him; No, Traitor, J am not to be pittyed, who dye nobly serving my King and
country: but thou rather art to be pitied, who live a Traitor to thy king
and country. As for the King he was led prisoner into Spain, where he was kept
at Madrid till he paid his ransom. Hence the Spaniards brag, that they had
once a French king prisoner, and the French had never any King of Spain
prisoner: but the French answer, that their King had not been prisoner had he
fought as the Kings of Spain do of late, that is, by Proxy, and not in
person. Howeuer this Francis the first deserved better fortune, being A Prince
of great courage and honor, and a great lover of his soldiers. For not long
before, he had beaten the Swissers in the battle of San Donato, where his
soldiers fought for him with singular courage and zeal. And he had deserved
it all: For he was so good to his soldiers in that expedition, that he would
ride up and down the camp in the night, to visit the wounded soldiers, and
help them to all necessaries; commanding even His own sheets to be cut in
pieces to bind up their wound^.

The Carthusians Monastery.
As for the Monastery it self of the Charthusians, its one of the most stately
Monasteries of Jtaly, and I believe, the second of that Order. The great
Cloister is all covered with lead. The Church is one of the hansomest of Italy,
though built a la Tedesca. The Frontispice of it is adorned with a world of
heads and figures of white marble. The Chapels within are richly adorned and
painted. The Tabernacle is worth fourscore thousand crowns. The tomb of their
founder, John Galeazzo Visconti Duke of Milan, which stands a little without
the Quire, with the cumbent statues of Ludouico Moro the last Duke of Milan and
his wife, lyeing under the other, is a stately Monument. In the Sacristy we
were shown many fine Relics, much rich Church-plate, and a curious back of an
Altar of Yuory cut into histories after a rare manner.

Passing from hence we came to Milan. Milan.
This town is surnamed the Great; and rightly, seeing it carries full ten miles
in compass within the walls. It has ten gates to it; two hundred Churches
within it, and three hundred thousand souls dwelling in it. Hence it was
anciently called Altera Roma a second Rome, The Duchy of Milan.
both because of its greatness, and because of its other titles, which made it
look like Rome. Its the Head of the best Duchy in Europe, which is a hundred
miles long from North to South, and contains four hundred towns in it. Its
called Milan quasi Midland, being a pure Mediterranean Town, and having (which
is a wonder) not so much as a river of its own running by it; but is only
served by two Channels cut out of the Ticine and the Adder. This town has
heretofore suffered much by war; great towns being the fairest Marks to
shoot at, and Milan has been forty times shot at by Sieges, and twenty times
Hit and taken, haueing had the misfortune to have been under diverse factions
and Rulers: as the Emperors, the Turriani, the Visconti, the Sforze, the
French, and the Spaniards, who now keep it, merce al Castello, which staueth of
all tempts of strangers. France pretends to this Duchy as heir of Valentia
Visconty, who was married to Lewis Duke of Orleans, whose house was excluded
from this Duchy by Francis Sforza, who possessed himself of this State.

As for the things which I saw in Milan, they are these.

Store of Gentry.
1. The store of Gentry and Nobility here, which I perceived to be very
numerous, because of a hundred coaches (no hackneys) which I saw standing
before a Church upon a private Festiual day of that Church.

Store of Artizans
2. Great store of Artisans, as Goldsmiths, Armourers, Gunsmiths Weauers, silk
stocking makers, Refiners of Gold, those that work in Crystal, and a world of
others: which give occasion to the Proverb, which says, that he that would
improve all Italy, must destroy Milan first: for if Milan were destroyed, the
many artizans that are there, would spread over all Italy, and furnish the
other towns, which want artizans.

3. The Churches here, and first that of S. Ambrose, S. Ambrose his Church.
where that glorious Father of the Church refused stoutly to Theodosius the
Emperor, entrance unto that Church, S. Ambrose his Tomb.
because of his passionate commanding the Massacre at Thessalonia, where seven
thousand men were murdered for the fault of a few. Under the high Altar of this
Church lies the body of S. Ambrose; as also the bodies of S. Geruasius and
Protasius, two primitive Saints, whose bodies were found whiles S. Austin lived
at Milan, Read S. Augustine lib. 9 Conf c. 7.
and who also relates a famous and known miracle to have been wrought by God,
at the Translation of those holy Martyrs bodies into this Church. In this
Church also is seen upon a high Pillar of a round form, a Brazen Serpent, like
that erected by Moses in the Desert and commanded by God himself to be made.
Numb. 21 v. 8.
I imagine it was set up here for the same end, for which it was commanded by
God to be set up mystically in the desert, that is, to put men in mind of our
Saviors exaltation upon the Cross for mankind, John 3.14.
the frequent memory of which is a Souerain antidote against the stings of the
infernal serpent the Devil.

4. Near unto the foresaid Church of S. Ambrose, stands the little Chapel,
where S. Augustine with his little Adeodatus and his friend Alippius was
baptized, as the words over the Altar testify; and from this little Chapel S.
Ambrose and S. Augustine (now a Christian) going processionaly to the Great
Church, made the Hymn Te Deum, The Hymn Te Deum.
as they went; one making one Verse, the other another.

5. The other little Chapel on the other side of S. Ambrose his Church, is
built upon the place where S. Augustine was first converted by a voice which
said to him, Toll lege: Toll lege: meaning S. Paul Epistles: which he doing,
pitched just upon those words to the Romans, Non in cubilibus and impudicitiis,
The place of the Conversion of S. Austin
sed induimini Iesum Christum etc. And so of an impure Manichean, he became a
chaste Christian.

6. I saw adjoining to this Church of S. Ambrose the Stately Monastery, The
Cistertians Monastery.
with two curious Cloisters built upon round pillars. This Monastery, as well
as S. Ambrose his Church, belongs to the Cistertian Monks.

7. S. Victors Church.
Then I saw the Church of S. Victor belonging to the Oliuetan Fathers; with the
admirable picture of S. George killing the Dragon, of the hand of Raphael
Vrbin. This is a neat Church when it is adorned in its best hangings, as it was
when I saw it. The double Cloisters here of the Monastery built upon round
pillars ought to be seen.

8. S. Nazario.
In the Church of S. Nazarius are to be seen the Tombs of the Triuultii:
stately Monuments.

9. In the Church of S. Eustorgius I saw the Arca, or old Tomb, in which
reposed the bodies of the three Magi who came to adore our Savior in Bethleem,
S. Eustorgio.
whose bodies were translated from hence to Colen in Germany, where I have seen
them, by reason of the Destruction of Milan.

10. I saw also the Church of S. Laurence, built like that of Sanctae Sophia in
Constantinople. Here lies buried Placidia the Sister of Honorius the Emperor.

11. There are diverse other Churches here, all worth particular visiting, by
reason of some rare thing in them: as in that of S. Mark, the rare piece of
Simon Magus his fall from the skies. In that of the Passion the rare picture of
the last Supper, by Christophoro Cibo. In that of S. Celso, a rare picture of
Raphaels hand in the Sacristy. The Theatins, and the Jesuits Churches are very
neat.

12. But the best of all the Churches of Milan is the new Domo, The Domo
in the midst of which lies buried the new S. Ambrose of Milan; I mean S.
Charles Borromaeus, an other S. Ambrose in Pastoral dignity, zeal, and
sanctity. This Church I take to be the second in Italy for solid work; being
built all of white marble, with Isles and Pillars, Each Pillar worth ten
thousand crowns, and there are a hundred and threescore such Pillars in all,
S. Lorenzo.
of massiue white marble; not candied and frozen over with a thin crust of
marble, as most of the other fine Churches of Italy are. There are also six
hundred white marble statues set round about the outside of this Church, each
of them cost a thousand crowns. That of S. Bartholomeus with his skin upon his
arm; and that of Adam, are two pieces much admired, and are of the hand of
Christophero Cibo. The Frontispice is not yet finished: but if that be the true
design of it, which I have seen in pictures, in the Capucins Cloister in Rome,
it will be most stately. The Church it self is said to be 250 cubits long.
Near the Quire, and almost in the middle of the Church, lies the body S.
Charles Borromaeus in a low vault, turned now into a Chapel, open at the top
with low rayles round about it; The inside of this Chapel is hung with
hangings of cloth of gold, over which runns a cornish of silver plat nailed to
the wall. Upon the Altar, lies the body of S. Charles at length in a fair
Crystal coffin made of several great squars of cristal, through which (the
wodden Caze being opened by special leave from the Archbishop) we saw his body
lyeing all a long in his Episcopal robes. His face, hands, and feet, are only
seen, and his nose and lips are shrunck and parched. The true picture of this
Saint Hangs at the entrance below into this Chapel* and his history and
wonderful actions are hung up in painting round about the Church on high. Over
the high Altar, in the Very roof of the Church, is kept one of the Nails of
the Cross of our Savior, The Holy Nail.
given anciently to the Milanesi by the Emperor Theodosius. There burn
always before it a number of little Lamps, set in cross wise, and drawn up
thither with a pully, to show the people where that holy Relick is. In fine The
Steeple of this Church is not to be Forgotten. Its not quite finished yet, but
its high enough to tire any man, and to show him from the top of it, the whole
town of Milan, the whole compass and circumference of the rare Castle; and
the whole country round about for Twenty miles on every side: a sight to
pleasant, that I would wish my Traueler, not only to mount up to the top of
this Steeple, but (for this Steeples sake) to make it his constant practice (as
I did) to mount up the chief Steeple of all great towns.

13. The Hospital.
The great Hospital built in a quadrangle upon arches and round pillars is a
most magnificent thing. Really if sickness where not a little unwholesome and
troublesome, a man would almost wish to be a little sick here, where a King,
though in health, might lodge hansomely. The place where the sick people are
kept, is built crossewise, and in the middle of that cross, stands an open
Altar where all the sick people from their several quarters and from their very
beds, may hear the Divine service at once. Four thousand men are entertained
daily in this Hospital, and therefore it has great reuenews. S. Charles was a
great benefactor to it, and gave away to it, and other pious uses, in half an
hour, five and twenty thousand crowns of inheritance, which were fallen to him
(being a man of eminent birth) half an hour before. Indeed he had no other
wife then his Church, nor other children then the poor.

The Seminary.
14. The stately Seminary; and the College for the Swissers, are noble
buildings, The college of the Swissers.
and the Eternal works of the foresaid. S. Charles.

15. The Lazzaretto is a Vast building, carrying in compass a thousand and
eight hundred yards. It stands near the town walls, yet out of the town, The
Lazzaretto.
and it is to receive into it Those that are sick of the plague. There are as
many chambers in it, as there are days in the year. In the middle of the
squar of this vast court, or quadrangle, stands a round Chapel, covered at the
top, but open on all sides in such a manner, as that all the people from their
several chambers and beds, may behold the Priest saying divine service, and
join their devotions to his. I have read in the life of S. Charles Borromaeus,
that in a plague time, he visited those that were infected, and ministered the
holy Sacraments to them himself in person; and went in a solemn Procession in
the head of the Clergy, with a rope about his neck, and barefoot upon the
stones, to move stony hearts to repentance, and to appease the wrath of God
angry with his people.

16. The Biblotheca Ambrosiana is one of the best Libraries in Italy, The
Library.
because it is not so coy as the others, which scarce let themselves be seen;
whereas this opens its doors publikly to all comers and goers, and suffers Them
to read what book they please. It was begun to be builded by S. Charles, and
continued by his Nephew Cardinal Federico Borromaeo: but it was much augmented
since by the accession of Vincentius Pinellis books, which after his death,
being shipped by his heirs for Naples, and taken by the Turks, were many of
them thrown over board by those analphabet Rogues, who looked for other
merchandise then books. Yet many of them were recovered again for money, and
set up here. Over the heads of the highest shelues, are set up the pictures of
learned men, a thing of more cost, then profit; seeing with that cost many more
books might have been bought, and learned men are best ^een in their books and
writings. Loquere, vt te videam.

The Gallery of pictures.
17. Behind the Library stands the Gallery of pictures, where I saw many choice
Originals of prime masters, and some exquisit Coppies, as those four pieces of
the four Elements, which certainly are coppied after those that I described
above in the house of the Duchess of Sauoy near Turin, called la Valentine.
But the rarest piece of all, either in the Library, or here, is the rare
Manuscript kept here, of Alberto Dureo. Three hundred pounds have been refused
for it.

The Dominicans.
18. The Dominicans Library is very considerable too. But you must not omit to
see the Refectory here, where you shall find an admirable picture of the last
supper, made by Rare Laurentius Vincius. The painted Cloister here deserves a
visit too.

19. The Gratie.
The Monastery also called the Gratie, is one of the best in Europe, in whose
Church is a rare picture of Christ crowned with thorns of the hand of Titian.

20. The famous Gallery and curiosities of Canonico Setali, The Cabinet of
Canonico Setaly.
far better then that of Monsieur Seruier in Lions, of which above. And here I
wish my pen were as ingenious to describe all the rare things of this Gallery,
as the noble Canon setali has been in gathering them, and courteous in showing
them: some of these curious things I yet remember, for my Readers sake; as a
great variety of burning glasses, and yet not Conuexe, as ours ordinarily are;
one of them set fire presently to a piece of board an inch thick that was
brought forth. 2. A Mandragora. 3. a bird without feet called by Aristotle
Apodes. 4. a stone out of which is drawn a thread, which being spun and wouen,
makes a stuff like linen indeed, but of an incombustible nature: The stone is
called Asbestos, and the stuff Amyanthus, which being foul and soyled, is not
be made clean by washing in water, but by throwing into the fire. Baltazar
Bonifacius in his Historia Ludicra tells of many who had such stuff. 5. a world
of rare Meddals of the old Consuls and Emperors in silver, gold, and brass,
making diverse series. 6. a world of wooden things, as also fruits, and fungi,
all petrifyed and turned into stone; and yet no metamorphosis neither, the
things retaining their pristin forms. 7. Diverse curious clocks, whereof one
shows the time of the day (strange) even in the night by a quadran. 8. The
little round Cabinet flat above, like a child's drum, with a smooth glass: The
master setting little ships, coaches, etc. upon the glass, they wheel and
move up and down as it were of themselves: when all is done by a sympathetical
virtue and by the masters turning secretly a little wheel where there is
fastened some loadstone, and the little ships and coaches having also some
piece of iron in their bottoms which touch the glass; and so the iron running
after the loadstone moved by the wheel, makes these ships and coaches seem to
move of themselves. 9. A piece of a thunderbolt, which the Canon himself said
he had cut out of a man's thigh stricken with it. 10. Diverse pieces of Coral
just as it grows in the Sea. 11. A little Pillar two handful high of marble,
so carcked, that it gapeth wide on one side with the crack, and yet holds
together fast on the other side, as a great stick of green wood does, when it
is bent so far on one side as to gape, and yet sticks together on the other.
12. A world of rich jewels, strange stones, cameos, pictures, crystals, little
infants in wax in glass cases, and many other exotic rarityes, which are
better seen then described.

21. Some Palaces here: Some Palaces.
as that of the Governors, rather vast then curiours; and fitter to lodge
Regiments of Gards in, them Viceroys. The Palace of Marini is of a noble
structure. That of the Archbishop is very hansome. I saw also the Palace of
the Borromaei painted within at the entrace, with the Motto of S. Charles (who
was of this family) HVMILITAS. Its related in the life of this Holy Prelate
that in twenty years space that he was Archbishop and Cardinal here, he went
but twice to visit his own near Relations in this Palace, and descended but
twice into his own garden in his Archiepiscopal Palace: so much work found
he it to play the part of an Archbishop well. The Palaces also of the Visconti
of the Sfortii, of the Triuultii, and many others, deserve to be seen exactly.

22. The Castle, The Castle.
or Citadelle, one of the best in Europe, in the opinion of the Duke of Rohan a
competent jugde. It stands within and without the town, that is, at the back
of the town, like a rod tied at the child's back, to keep him in awe. Its
guarded by a garrison of five hundred natural Spaniars with a special Governor
of its own, independent of the Governor of Milan. It looks more like a
town, then a Castle; being a mile and a half about, and furnished withal
conueniences a soldier can require. The large streets in it; the stately houses
and Palaces for the chief commanders; the neat piazzas; the number of well
furnished shops in all kinds, even goldsmiths too; the five fountains, or
Wells, not to be dried up; the Mill; the Hospital; the Church; with eight or
ten Chaplains in it, and a Curate; the fair place of arms capable of six
thousand men; two hundred great pieces of Cannon upon the walls; the six Royal
bastions, the regular fortifications or outworks; the underground way from one
bastion to an other; the infinite heaps of Cannon bullets, some whereof weigh
800 pound weight; the three large and deep ditches round about the Castle; the
stately entrance gate, and two strong towers, make this Castle one of the most
Caualier curiositys a man can see in Italy. They showed me here the Cannon
which killed Mareshal Crequy before Breme, and for that service its allowed to
rest here for ever.

The shops
23. The shops of Crystals, where you have a world of curiositys in crystal: as
watch cases, twizercases, little boxes, pictures cut in crystal, crosses and
beads of crystal etc. The shops also of silkstockings which are hugely esteemed
in Italy because they are twice as strong as ours, and very massiue. The shops,
in fine, of embroderers, whose embroderie in gold and silver is the best in the
world, and the cheapest.

The Academy of wits.
24. Here is an Academy of wits, called the Nascosti, or Hidden men. But Why
Hidden? seeing Wit, like the Sun, should shine publicly, and not bury it self;
except it be to show us, that as the Sun never shins brighter, then after he
has been hidden in a Cloud: so wit never shins more, then after it has been
hidden in Study. Hence was that saying of a grave Philosopher, Absconde vitam;
that is, lie hidden a while, at the dug of the book. Indeed Demosthenes caused
his hair to be shaued off, that by that deformity he might be ashamed to go
abroad, and so be obliged to study at home. As for this Academy, it helps much
to animate with wit this great town, which otherwise would look like
Polyphemus (having lost his eye) great, but blind. Tumor, non est magnitudo.

25. The learned Men.
The most famous men of this town for learning, have been these: Valerius
Maximus for history: Alciatus, Decius, and Jason for Law: Cardan for
Philosophy: Panigarola, and Paulus Aresius, for Sermons: Bonacina for Canon
Law; and Octauius Ferrarius (whom I knew lately in Padua) for belle lettere.

26. Two other men here are famous for other things; A strong body.
to wit Vberto Crucio, and Gulielmo Pus^erula; the first so strong, Leandro
Alberto
that he could stop a horse in his full gallop with one hand; lift up upon his
back a horse laden with corn; and stand so stiffly upon his legs, that no
man, though running against him with all his force, could push him out of his
place or posture. A Strong mind.
The other without any learning at all, except his first Grammar Rudiments,
could with his natural wit only, decide law cases, and make such good orders,
that the best Lawyers could not find what to add to them, or what to diminish
from them. Its pity these two men had not been melted into one, to have made
one excellent man, by their clubbing wit and force together, and their mingling
of Sana men's, with Corpore sano.

Its revenues.
The Revenues that Spain dawes from Milan yearly, are two millions and four
hundred thousand crowns: besides the thirds, to which they are obliged in time
of war.

Its strenth
This state for a need, can raise fifty thousand men.

Its Historians.
He that desires to know the History of Milan, let him read Corio of the history
of Milan: Ripamontius, Scipio Barbono, of the lives of the Duks of Milan; and
Paolo Morigi.

Having this seen Milan in six days time, we took horse for Bologna, six
days journey from hence, and passed through Marignano, Lodi, Piacenza, Parma,
Regio, Modena, Fort Vrbano, and so to Bologna; of each I will say something.

Marignano is a little town about ten miles distant from Milan, Marignano.
and from thence to Lodi the way is most pleasant, and leuel as an alley. Near
to this town Francis the first of France fought with the Swissers a famous
battle, and killed 16000 of them; and took Ludouicus Sforza the Duke of Milan,
who thought to have escaped in Swissers clothes, but was discovered.

Lodi is a good just town, Lodi.
and frontier upon the Venitians, the river Adda runs under its walls. Its
called Lodi either because its built upon the ruins, or near to old Lodi,
which was called Laus Pompeia, because Pompey had restored it. This town is
famous for excellent neats tongues, and cheeses as big as mils^ones. A
gentleman of this town, caused four cheeses to be made each one weighing 500
pound weight. The people here mow their Hay three times a year; and I am
affrayd they are powled as often with taxes.

Piacenza
Piacenza, or Pleasance, deserves its name, by reason of its sweet situation in
a rich country near the Po and Trebia, two great rivers. Near the last of
which Hannibal overcame Sempronius the Roman Consul. The country round about
this town, is very rich in pasturage: Hence their excellent cheeses and rare
cream. It abounds also in Saltpits which afford no small profit. This town
belongs to the Duke of Parma.

Its Rarities.
The best things to be seen here are, the Equestris statua of the second
Alexander the Great, or the first Alexander of Parma. Its in brass in the
market place. The old Fountain made by Augustus Caesar. The rare picture of
Raphaels hand, in the Benedictius Church behind the high Altar. The Churches of
the Dominicans, and the Canon Regulars are no contemptible ones.

I observed in this town, a notable piece of thriftiness used by the
Gentlewomen; A piece of thrift.
who make no scruple, to be carried to their country bouses near the town, in
coaches drawn by two Cowes yoaked together: These will carry the Signora a
pretty round trot unto her Villa, There afford her also a dish of their milk,
and after collation, bring her home again at night without spending a penny.

He that desires to know more of Piacenza, Its History.
let him read Vmberto Loccati,

Of Piacenza where, Cornelius Musso Bishop of Bitonti a great Preacher and a
Trent Father; as also Ferrante Pallauicini.

Parma belongs also to the Duke of Parma, Parma.
of the house of Farnese. This Duchy was given to Pier Luigi Farnese by Paulus
III, upon condition it should hold of the Pope, and pay him yearly ten thousand
crowns. Its worth to the Duke two hundred thousand crowns. This town of
Parma is three miles in compass, has the river Parma running through it, over
which is built a ha^some stone bridge. The country round about the town is
most fertile, and begets such credit to the Cheeses, that Parmesan Cheeses are
famous over all the world.

The Dukes Palace.
The Chief things so be seen in Parma, are these. The Dukes Palace, with the
gardens, fountains, wildbeasts, the admirable Theater to exhibit Operas in.
The exquisite Coaches of the Duke; one whereof is all of beaten silver, with
the Seats and crutains embrodered with gold and silver; an other so well guilt
and adorned, that its almost as rich as the former* lastly the stables where I
saw horses suitable both in strenght and beauty to the foresayd^ coaches.

The Domo
Then I went to the Domo, whose Cupola was painted by the rare hand of Corregio.

Lastly to The Capucins, The Capucins.
in whose Church lies buried my noble Heroes, Alexander Farnese Duke of Parma,
Alexander Farnese.
whom I cannot meet in this my voyage without a compliment. He was the Third
Duke of Parma, but the Tenth worthy. Indeed his leaping the first man into the
Turks Galleys in the battle of Lepantho, with Sword in hand, and in the
eighteenth year only of his age, was such a prognostik of his future worth;
his reduceing Flanders again, with the prodigious actions done by him at the
taking of Antweep, was such a making good of the prognostic; Some Critics
hold Quintus Curtius to be a Romance
and his comeing into France in his slippers and Sedan to succor Rouen
beseiged by Henry the IV, was such a crowning of all his other actions, that
his history begets belief to Quintus Curtius, and makes men believe, that
Alexanders can do any thing.

The Revenues of this Prince are said to be six hundred thousand crowns a
year. The Dukes Revenues.
He is now of the French faction; His interest. His forces
and in all his territories he can raise 28000 men.

Here is an Academy of wits called the Innominati, The Academy of wits.
as they that had rather be wise, then be talked of, or famed for such.

This town has furnished Italy with two excellent Painters, Corregio, and
Parmigiano.

Its History.
He that would know the particular history of Parma, let him read Bonauentura
Arrighi.

Regio.
From Parma we went to Regio a town belonging to the Duke of Modena* here is a
neat Cathedral Church, of which Church S. Prosper was Bishop. Of this town
were these three learned men, Guido Pancirola, Cardinal Tosco, and snarling
Casteluetro.

Modena.
Modena is the town where the Duke keeps his Court. Its a hansome town, and
by its high steeple shows it self to trauelers long before they come to it. It
has also a strong Citadel, which lyeing flat and even with the town, shows
the town that indeed it can be even with it, whenever in shall rebel.

The Palace of the Duke has some rooms in it as neat, and ri^h, as any I saw
in Jtaly; witness those Chambers hung round with the pictures of those of his
family, and wainscotted with great Looking Glasses and rich guilding.

This Duke is of the Family of Este, The Family of Este.
but not of the true line. Wherefore, for want of lawful heirs male, Ferrara
and Commachio fell to the Church, in Clement the VIII time, and remain there
ever since.

Of the true house of Este, was the brave Countess Matilda, Countess Matilda.
the dry-Nurse, as I may say, of the Roman Church. For it was she defended
Gregory the VII, against the Emperor Henry the VI, and brought him to
aknowlegde his fault, and cry the Pope mercy. It was she also that by Will and
Testament left the Pope, Parma, Regio, Mantua, and Ferrara. Hence Urban the
VIII, out of gratitude to this Princess caused her Statue and Tomb to be set
up S. Peter's Church in Rome. The will and Testament of this Princess, are kept
in Lucca to his day.

The last true Consuls.
Hard by Modena was fought the famous battle, where Hirtius and Pansa being
Consuls, the Senate lost in them its authority.

Its Learned Men.
Of Modena were these famous men in learning, Cardinal Sadoletus, Carolus
Sigonius, and Gabriel Falopius.

In Modena are made the best visards for mascarads; and its no small profit
which they draw from this foolish commodity, seeing stultorum plena sunt omnia.

The Dukes Revenues.
The Revenues of this Duke are three hundred thousand crowns a year; and he is
now of the French faction. He can raise 30000 men.

His interest.
From thence passing the river we came soon to Fort Urban, a Citadel most
regularly built by the command of Pope Urban the VIII, from whom its called.
His forces
Its so strong, that it is not afraid to stand, night and day, Fort Urban.
alone in the fields, and upon the frontiers of the Popes Estate. Passing from
hence through Castle Franco, Castle Franco.
anciently called, Forum Gallorum, we arrived betimes at Bologna.

Bologna is one of the greatest towns of Italy, Bologna.
and one of the hansomest. Its the second of the Popes Dominions; and the Chief
University of Italy for Law. Hence the Iurists say it is Musarum domus, atque
omnis nutricula Iuris, and the very common coin of the country tells you that
Bononia docet.

Its named, by the Common Proverb, Bologna la grassa, because of the fertile
foil in which it stands, to wit in the very end of Lombardy; and the many
springs which humect it from the Apennin hills, at whose feet it stands.

This country was anciently called Felsina, Gallia Cisalpina, Gallia Togata, to
distinguish it from Gallia Braccata, The country in France near Narbonne, And
from Gallia Comata, The Country in France called la Guienne. In midling ages it
was called Romagnola, because Bologna, Rauenna, Cezena, Forli, Faenza, and
Imola stood constant to the City of Rome against the Lombards, for a long time.

The town it self.
As for the town of Bologna now, its excellently well built* and for the most
part, upon arches, like the Covent Garden in London; only the pillars are
round. These Arches bring great conueniency to the inhabitants who can walk all
the town over cool and dry, even in July and January. Its five miles in
compass, and an excellent summer town, were it not that the air is not
altogether so pure, and the wines heating. Jts Government.
Its governed By a Legate a Latere, sent hither by the Pope, and in change, it
sends an Ambassador to Rome, to reside there: so that Bologna is treated by
Rome, rather like a Sister, Its Privileges.
then a Subject; and deservedly, seeing Bologna fell not to the Church any other
way but by her free giving her self to the Pope; reserving only to her self
some particular Privileges; as power to send Ambassadors to Rome; and that if
any towesman kill another, and can but escape away, his goods cannot be
confiscated.

I stayed six days here, in which time I saw these things.

1. The Dominicans Church and Convent. The Dominicans Church.
In the Church, I saw the tomb of S. Dominick, Founder of that Order. Its all
of white marble cut with curious figures relating to his life. In this Church
is kept a famous manuscript, to wit, the Bible it self written in parchment by
Esdras himself, says Leandro Alberto the Camden of Italy, and a Friar of this
Convent. They show you also here a curious Lamp sent to S. Dominicks tomb by
the new converted Indians. Its of a most rare workmanship. Behind the high
Altar stands the Quire so famous for the Seats, which are of a rare Mosaic
work of colored wood inlayd into pictures representing the old and new
Testaments, and all wrought by one Laybrother called Fra Damiano di Bergamo.
This kind of Mosaic work in wood was anciently (says Vasari) called Tarsia,
and in this kind of work Brunelleschi and Maiano did good things in Florence.
But John Veronese improued it much afterward by boiling wood into several
colors, and then inlaying it into what postures and figures he pleased. This
Quire is shown to strangers as a rare thing; and worthily, since the Emperor
Charles the V, had the curiosity to see it, and with the point of his dagger to
try whether it were inlayd, or only painted; and the piece which he picked out
with his dagger, was never put in again for a memorandum. In this Church, as
also in the Chapterhouse and Cloister of this Convent, lie buried many Readers
of the Law, who having lived here by the Law, dyed here also by the Law of
Nature.

The Dominicans Convent.
2. The Convent here is one of the fairest in Europe, in which 150 Friars
constantly live and study. The little Chapel, which was once S. Dominicks
Chamber; the vast Dorm^tory; the fair Library; the great Refectory, and the
curious Cellar are shown courteously to strangers.

3. The Nunnery of Corpus Christi. Its of S. Clares Order, and famous for the
body of Beata Catherina di Bologna* a most holy Nun of this Order and Convent.
The Body Beata Catherina
I saw her body sitting straight up in a chair, in her Religious habit: She
holds her Rules in her right hand; and we see her face, and and feet plainly,
but those black and dried up.

4. From hence I went on to the town Gate, The Corso
a little out of which gate lies a fair street where they make the Corso of
coaches in summer euenings.

5. Turning from hence on the left hand, I went to S. Michael in Bosco a
stately Monastery of Oliuetan Fathers, S. Michael in Bosco.
standing upon a high hill. From this Hill I had a perfect view of Bologna
under me, and of all the country about it; which being leuel and strowed with a
world of white houses and Villas, looked like a Sea laden with ships under
sail. Entering into this Monastery, I saw the Oual Court painted by several
prime masters, of which Guido Rheni of Bologna was one. Then mounting up to the
Dormitory, I found it to be one of the fairest I had ever seen.

Other stately Monasteries.
6. The Monastery, or Convent of the Franciscans, with the rare row of pillars,
and portico toward the street, the excellent Cloisters, and the curious Cellar.

7. The Monastery of S. Saluatore with its two Vast Courts or double Cloister
built upon galleries above, its a noble building.

8. The Monastery of the Seruits, that of the Augustins, and that of the
Carmelits are all of them such stately buildings, that I may boldly say, that
no town in Europe is comparable to Bologna for fair Monasterys.

S. Petronios Church.
9. Then I visited San Petronio standing in the end of the great Piazza, of
which Church Leandro Alberto writ a hundred years ago, that he thought it would
not be ended but with the worlds end. And I am half of his opinion: for when I
passed that way last I found the scaffolds yet standing, which I had found
there one and twenty years before; and yet in all my five Voyages into Italy, I
found them always knocking and making as much noise and dust, as if this
Church should be finished within half a year, when as yet half of it is only
finished. In this Church Charles the V. was crowned Emperor by Clement the VII.

10. The Domo, The Dom^
which is not yet half funished neither: yet that which is finished promises
fair for the rest.

11. Other Churches
The new Church of S. Paul has a curious High Altar. In the Church of S.
Giouanni in Monte is the rare picture of S. Cecily of the hand of Raphael
Vrbin. The Jesus is Church, the Church of S. Stephen, and that of the Passion
deserve to be seen.

12. The Legates Palace.
After the Churches and Monasterys, we went on with visiting the rest of the
town, and saw the Palace of the Popes Legate: in this Palace I saw the rare
Cabinet and Study of Aldrouandus, to whom Pliny the Second if he were now
alive, Aldrouan dus his Study and Cabinet.
would but be Pliny the Sixth, for he has printed six great volumes of the
natures of all things in nature, each volume being as big as all Plinyes
works. They showed me here two or three hundred manuscripts, all of this man's
own hand writeing, and all of them Notes out of the best authors, out of which
Notes he compiled his six great Volumes which are now in print. Seeing these
Manuscripts I asked whether the man had lived three hundred years, or no, as
its said Ioannes de Temporibus, In Charles the greats time did: but it was
answered me, that he lived only fourscore and three: a short age for such a
long work: but it shows us how far a man may travel in sciences in his life
time, if he rise but betimes, and spurr on all his life time with obstinate
labor. Certainly had he wrote before Salomons time, Solomon would have changed
his saying, and instead of sending the slothful man to learn of the pismire
how to labor, he would have sent him to Aldrouandus his study and example:
Vade ad Aldrouandum piger.

13. The Great Schools here where the Doctors of the University read are
stately both within, The Schools.
and without.

14. The Spanish College founded here by noble Cardinal Albornozzo, The
Spanish College.
deserves to be taken notice of. Its well built, with a hansome Church and five
Priests to serve it. The intention of his College is to furnish all the King
of Spayns dominions in Italy with able Magistrates and officers of Justice. None
can live in it but Natural Spaniards (except the Chaplains) and those Spaniards
must be Doctors of the Law before they can be admitted here* they only learn
the language and customs of the countries, and perfect themselves in the study
of the Law, that they may be fit to fill up the first vacant places of
Judicature that fall either in the State of Milan, in the kingdom of Naples,
or in Sicily. They have a reuenew of twelve thousand crowns a year. They keep
two Coaches, live very nobly, and lodge all Spanish Ambassadors, Cardinals, and
Prelates of their nation that pass this way. In the College you see the
pictures of many great Statesmen and Cardinals, and others, who have been of
this College: but no picture pleased me like that of their brave founder noble
Cardinal Albornozzo which is in the Church, and representing him in the same
posture he was in, when he recovered all the Popes state in Italy, unto the
Pope then at Auignon; of which I have spoken sufficiently above in describeing
Auignon.

The 2 Towers.
15. The two Towers here in the midst of the town, the one very high and
straight called, de gli Asinelli; the other low and bending, called la
Carisenda. They would make us believe that this bending tower was made crooked
a purpose; and its strange to see how most men make it their business rather to
see this low crooked tower, then the other, which is hoth higher and
straighter. But there is no mastery to make things ill, and to miss of our aims:
and I rather think the Carissenda or low Tower, went not up higher, because the
Architect perceived it went up awry. But we strangers admire every thing in
strange countries, and that makes that none admire us: Upon which occasion I
would wish my young traueler never to admire any thing in outward show, but to
look curiously at every thing without crying out, o che Belae Cosa! This will
get him and his Nation far more honor, for Admiration is but the daughter of
Ignorance; and Magnanimus, (says Aristotle) nihil admiratur.

16. Then the Houses here, The Houses in Bolognia.
which are generally well built, and in Summer time, setting open their doors
and gates toward the street, you may look quite through their courts,
entryes, portches, houses, and a huge way into their gardens, which even from
thence, will salute your eye with dainty perspectiues, fountains, and fresh
verdure; and your nose too with curious smells of Iesmin, and Orange flowers,
as they did mine often. Now the best Palaces here are those of Maluezzi,
Campeggi, Pepoli, Fachinetti, Cespi and others.

The Nobility.
17. These fine houses are full also of Nobility, and I remember to have seen
here at a Corsodi Paglio upon Midsommer day the long great, street lined quite
through with coaches on both sides, and those coaches double lined with Ladies
and Caualiers of Garbo. Indeed it would be pity, that such a stately town as
Bologna, should like Leyden in Holland, be full only of Hanses and Boren.

18. Their traffic here consists much in silks, The Traffic.
veluets, olives, leather bottles, gellies, wash balls, and little dogs for
Ladies, which here are so little, that the Ladies carrying them in their muffs,
have place enough for their hands too.

19. Their markets here are also exquisitly good for all provisions of mouth,
The Markets.
witness their salsiccie only whith are a regalo for a Prince.

20. The Academy of wits.
But that you may not think them better fed, then taught; they have erected
here an Acadamy of wits called, Gli Otiosi, or, Jdlemen, by a figure of
Rhetoric called a Lie, or per antiphrasim, because they are not idle. Its this
Academy (I believe) which has helped to set out three rare modern writers of
this town, The Learned Men.
Cardinal Bentiuoglio, The Marquis of Maluezzi, and John Baptista Manzini; the
first, the Titius Liuius of his age, the second, the Lucius Florus of his age;
and the third, the Marcus Tullius of his time. To whom I may add Leandro
Alberti, the Chamden of Italy.

21. He that desires to know the particular history of Bologna, let him read
Bartholomeo Gal^otti, The Historians.
and Giouanni Garzo, where he shall find how Bologna suffered much anciently
by the two opposite factions of the Lambertazzi and the Geremei. But now they
enjoy quiet and repose under the Pope.

Having thus seen Bolognia, and being armed with a Bolettina di Sanita,
Remember this Bolettina, Traueler.
taken here, to make us be let pass into the State of Florence, we steered on
horseback toward Florence and reached it in two days. The first days journey
by Pianora, Loiano, Scarga L'Azino, Pietra Mala, and over the Apennins, The
Apennin Hills.
was long and tedious enough, till the night came, at which time we were much
recreated with the sight of a Fire which appeared some two miles off in the
side of a montain on our left hand. This fire appears here frequently
especially in clowdy wheather: and it appeared to me for an hour together as I
road along, to be still of the same bigness, and of the same glowy color
(furnace like) and of a perfect round form, and not pyramidal, as other flames
are. The country people here call this fire, La Bocca d' Inferno, Hells mouth;
and I know not why they may not as well call this fire so, as Tertullian calls
Vesuuius and Aetna (two burning montaines) Fumariola inferni, Tertul. l. de
Poenitent. c. 12.
Hells chimneys. Taken in fine, with this fixed meteor, we forgot the
tediousness of the way and came to Fiorenzuola. Fiorenzuola.
The next morning passing by Scarperia and Il Ponte we arrived betimes at
Florence

I confess, I stirred not out of my Inn that night, because fair Florence (as
the Proverb calls her) is not to be seen in foul linen, My arriual at
Florence.
and rideing boots: but getting up betimes the next morning, I gave my eyes
such a breakfast as Princes eyes would be glad to feed upon.

But before I come to the particulars of what I saw in Florence, I will
consider it in great, and then come to the Detail of it. Florence.


Diverse good Authors are of opinion that this town was first built by Syllas
soldiers, to whom he had given this soil for their services done him in his
Civil wars. They built it near the current of two rivers ( Arno and Munio)
and from thence it was called at first Fluentia (as Coblentz in Germany, from
the meeting of rivers, is called Confluentia.) Afterward by the Inhabitants it
was called Florentia, by reason of the fruitful soil which made it flourish
with all delicacies; as also for the flourishing wits of the inhabitants, who
were so famous anciently in point of wit, that the very Romans used to send
their children first into Toscany, to be bred in learning and Religion, and
then into greece to learn Greek and Philosophy.

Haueing enquired the name of this town, I began to desire its better
acquaintance, and attained it easily in a months space which I spent here: The
things I observed most were these.

The Chapel of S. Laurence.
1. The Chapel of S. Laurence, which is the nearest thing that ever eye beheld.
All the inside of it is to be ouercrusted with Jasper stones, of several
colors and countries, with other rich stones, all above marble, and all so
neatly polished and shining, that the Art here exceeds the materials. This
Chapel is round, and round about are to by fixed within the walls, as high as
a man can reach, the Tombs of all the Great Dukes of Florence, in a most
gallant manner, and of most exquisit polished stones, with a great cushen of
some richer stone, and a Ducal crown of precious stones reposeing upon that
cushen. Over these Tombs the Statues of all the Great ^ukes, at full length,
and in their Ducal habits, all of brass guilt, are to be placed in Niches
round about the Chapel. The roof is to Vaulted all over with an ouercrusting
of Lapis Lazuli (a blew precious stone with veins of gold in it) which will
make it look like heaven it self. Between each tomb are inlayd in the walls,
the arms, or Scutchions of the several towns of the Great Dukes dominions,
all blazoned according to their several colors in herauldry, by several
precious stones which compose them: and these are not made in little, but are
fair great Scutchions made purposely of a larg sise for to fill up the void
places between the Tombs. The towns are these; Florence, Siena, Pisa,
Liuorno, Volterra, Arezzo, Pistoia, Cortona, Monte Pulciano etc. which
contributed (I suppose) something each of them to this costly Fabric in fine,
this Chapel is so rich within with its own shining bare walls, that it scorns
all hangings, painting, guilding, mosaic work, and such like helpers off of
bare walls, because it can find nothing richer and hansomer then its own
precious walls. Its now above threescore years since it was begun, and there
are ordinarily threescore men at work daily here, and yet there is only the Tomb
of Ferdinand the Second perfectly finished. The very Cushen which lies upon
his Tomb, cost threescore thousand crowns, by which you may guess at the
rest* indeed these stately Tombs make almost death it self look lovely, and
dead men's ashes grow proud again. As for the Altar and Tabernacle of this
Chapel, I will speak of them by and by, when I describe the Gallery of the
Great Duke, where they are kept till the Chapel be finished.

2. The Church of S. Laurence, which belongs to this Chapel, The Church of S.
Lorenzo.
or rather to which this chapel belongs; is a very hansom church designed by
Brunellischi himself. The things that grace this church are the neat double row
of round pillars which hold up the roof of this Fabric. The picture over the
Quire painted in the roof, representing the genaral judgment, Its a bold piece
and of Pontorno: The two Brazen pulpits wrought into hystorys by rare
Donatello: The curious designed picture of S. Anne and our Blessed Lady, in
chiaro e oscuro, by Fra Bartolomeo, commonly called Del Frate, is so well a
designed piece, that a Duke of Mantua, haueing seen it, offered to buy it at
any rate, but was refused. The new Sacristy (made to serve the fine Chapel
described above) deserves to be carefully visited, because of the bodies of the
Princes of the Family of Medices, which are depositated here, till the Chapel
mentioned above, be finished. In this new Sacristy also are seen, the four
statues made by Michael Angelo representing The Day, the Night, Aurora, and the
Evening; the four parts which compose Time, by which all men are brought to
their Graves: That which represents Night, is a rare statue, and hugely cried
up by all Sculptors and Virtuosi. See also in the Wall of the old Sacristy the
neat Tomb of John and Peter Medices sonns of Cosmus surnamed Pater Patriae;
Its the work of Andrea Varochio. In the midst of this Church, before the High
Altar, lies buried Cosmus Pater Patriae the Rayser of the Medicean family. In
the Cloister joining to this Church, is erected the Statue of Paulus Iouius the
Historian; and near to this statue you mount up a pair of stairs to the rare
Library of Manuscripts called, The Library.
Bibliotheca Laurentiana, the Catalogue of whose books is printed at
Amsterdame an: 1622, in octauo.

The Great Dukes Gallery.
3. The Gallery of the old Palace. This is that Gallery so famous, and so
frequently Visited by all Strangers. At your entrance into this Gallery, you
see a Vast long room made like an L: on the left hand of this Gallery, there
runns a perpetual glass window; on the other side are set a row of pictures in
great, of those of the Medicean Family: under the windows, and also under the
said Pictures stand a row of curious Marble statues, ancient ones all, and of
prime hands. Over the said windows and Pictures runns a close row of less
Pictures, representing to the life, the most famous men of later times for
learning, and Arms; the soldiers being on the right hand, and the scholars on
the left. The statues aforesaid are well nigh a hundred in all, but all rare
ones: Some whereof I yet remember, and they are these: That of Leda, of Diana,
of Bacchus, of Hercules, of the Gladiator standing on his guard, of Scipio
Africanus in brass, showing the ancient habit and dress of the old Romans,
far different from our modes: that of a little young youth in brass with his
sword in his hand: that of a little boy sleeping upon a touchstone: The head of
Cicero in marble: that of Seneca: the Head of Michael Angelo Bonarota in brass
of his own hand making: in fine, the head of Brutus one of Caesar's murderers;
It was begun in marble by Michael Angelo, but informedly; and so left by him:
If you will know the reason why he finished it not, read the distick written in
brass under this head by the said sculptor himself, thus: M. Dum Bruti
effigiem Sculptor A. de marmore ducit,
B. In mentem sceleris Venit, and F. abstinuit.
The four corner letters signifying that Michael Angelus Bonarota Fecit.
Pictures of famous Soldiers.
Among the pictures, I took particular notice of these Soldiers, of Hannibal
that frighted Rome: of Scipio that took Carthage and vanquished Hannibal: of
Pyrrhus that made the Romans glad to make peace with him: of Scanderbeg that
made the Great Turk afraid to fight with him: of Venerius that helped to winn
the battle of Lepento: of Alexander Farnese that never lost battle: of
Cortesius that found out new countries: of Magellanus that found out new Seas*
of Andrea D'Oria who beat the French by Sea: of Gaston de Foix who had beat the
Spaniards by land if he had but known how to use his Victory: of the Duke of
Alua, who only lamented deying that he had never fought a pitchd battle with
the Turks: of Anne de Montmorency who dyeing was glad to dye in a pitchd batle
against the Hugonots: of Eccelino the Paduan Tyrant, of whom no man can Speak
any good: of Castrucio of whom no man can speak any ill; with a world of other
brave Heroes with whose true looks I was very glad to be acquainted. Pictures
of Learned Men.
Among the pictures of the learned men I took particular notice of these
Italians, to wit, Petrarck, Ariosto, Ioannes Casa, Poggio, Macchiauel,
Guiciardin, Paulo Iouio, Sannazario, Bocaccio, Platina, Brunelleschi, Michael
Angelo, Raphael Vrbin, Columbus, Americus, and Galileo, with many others too
long to relate, and too many to be rememberd. Having thus gazed our fill at
these statues and pictures, and by particular taking notice of-them,
complimented the great Worthyes they represent, we where let into the great
Cabinets, or Chambers which join upon this Gallery.

The Armory.
First, we saw the Armory, that is, three or four great chambers full of exotic
curiosityes: as, the habits of two Indian Kings made of Parrats Feathers sowed
together: the habits of some Ianissaryes in Turkey, of read velvet set thick
with little nails of gold, which they can take out and dress up other suits
with: the habit of the King of China: the skin of a horse pasted upon a wooden
horse, the mane of which horse is kept there in a box all at length, and it is
above five else long: This horse had been sent to the Great Duke by the Duke
of Lorraine. Then we were shown Hannibals Helmet: the Helmet of Charles the V;
the sword of Henry the IV of France; a curious Helmet thin and light, and yet
of musket proof; a huge heavy Helmet and sword of one of the old Paladins of
France; the true sword of Scanderbeg, a world of Cimetars, scabards, capps,
saddles and other Turkish furniture set thick with Turquoises in gold; a great
gunn, whose thick barrel is of pure gold, and yet as long as an ordinary
fowling piece, and as heavy as a strong man can well leuel with: its valued at
1500 pistols, and shoots twice as far as another gunn of iron does, but kills
(I believe) with the same pain that others do, though with a little more
honor. Here is a great pistol of gold. Then the buona notte, or set of pistols
(five pistol barrels set together in an iron Frame) to put into your hat, and
to be all shot off at once from thence, as you seem to salute your enemy and
bid him, Good night. The pistol with eighteen barrels in it, all to be shot off
at once and scattering desperately about a Room* six little cannons set in
star wise. The little Brass Cannon which may be taken in pieces presently,
and set together as soon, and so be carried easily into any steeple, or tower:
such Cannons as these might easily be carried in deep countries, and over high
mountains, every Soldier carrying a piece. The statue in brass of the King of
Spain, Philip the fourth on horseback, just of the bigness of that of gold
which the Great Duke sent to the said King of Spain for a present; It was made
by rare John di Bologna. Then I saw the armor for horse and man of two Kings
of Persia. The armor of the Great Duke Ferdinand, a goodly man. The King of
Swedes Cornet taken in Germany in a battle. The buckler with the Medusas head
on it, painted by Michael Angelo. A Turkish Bell to ring in time of battle. A
horn used in Turkey to call men to their Moskyes instead of bells, as we have.
The head of a halbard ringing like a bell. A halbard to fould up in three, and
to carry under your cloak privately. A staff of a white cane, in which are
curiously engraven in black, the hystoryes of the Apocalipse. It was the Duke
of Vrbins. In fine, the loadstone holding up threescore pound weight of iron,
and holding one key to an other, for a matter of five, or six keys.

After the armory, we were let into the five Cabinets full of precious jewels,
The 1. Cabinet.
pictures, and other rare curiosityes. In the first Cabinet, I was shown a
curious Clandlestick to hang up in the middle of a room with several branches
spreading from it, and all of yellow Amber, including within it a world of
little figures of white marble or wax, neatly cut in little, and appearing
through the transparent yellow amber: This Candlestick was given by the
Duchess of Lunebourg, to the Duke of Saxony, and by him to Prince Mathias
brother to this Great Duke of Florence. In the same Cabinet I saw a Table of
polished stones of several colors and luster, inlayd into birds and flowers.
The head of Tiberius Caesar in one Turkey stone, as big as a Ducks egg, and of
an inestimable value. A curious cabinet, or two, of yuory cupps brought out of
Germany by Prince Matthias. In the same Cabinet I saw the picture of Cardinal
Bembo in a neat Mosaic work; and an other piece of diverse birds in mosaic
also, rarely done by Marcellus Prouincialis. I saw also there diverse little old
Pagan Idols in iron; and brass. A design of Raphaels own hand; and some good
pictures.

In the 2 Cabinet I saw two great Globes; which were made in this room, being
too great ever to be carried out, or brought into it by the door. The 2.
Cabinet
I saw also here a curious table of polished stones representing a town in
Bohemia, with diverse pictures of men, horses, and Landskips: where there is a
tree represented most naturally, because it is represented by the very wood of
a tree Petrifyed into stone, and looking like wood as it was; and shinning like
polishd stone, as it now is. The statues, or bustos of three or four of the
Great Dukes, in Porphyry. A curious looking glass over the inside of the
door, which placed directly over the picture of a man, contracts into it the
picture of a woman (that man's wife) which you see plainly in it: drawing thus
Eve out of Adam again by a curious reflection.

In the 3 Cabinet I was shown a curious table of polished stones representing
perfectly the town and haven of Ligorne. The 3. Cabinet.
A great Cabinet of Ebeny beset with precious stones on the outside, and with
the history of the holy Scriptures curiously expressed in miniature in several
little squars of rich stones set here and there. In the top of it, there is a
German clock, now out of order, and no man dare mend it. Within this great
Cabinet I saw the passion of our Savior curiously cut by Michael Angelo in
yuory (say they) but I believe its in white wax. There is also in it the
figures of our Savior and his twelve Apostles in yellow amber with their heads
in white amber: All these several pieces are not seen at once, but come up into
sight one after another, as the man turns them. This Ebeny Cabinet was sent ^o
the great Duke by the Duke of Bauaria, and its valued at fourscore thousand
crowns: I believe, if it were to be sold, it would not yield forty thousand
crowns; but its hansome, says Seneca, for those that receive courtesies, to
value them high. Here are also some pictures of great value, as the Adam and
Eve of the hand of Alberto Dureo, an original piece valued at 1500 crowns. An
original Venus of Titian, that in the Poggio Imperiale here (of which below)
looking but like a good copy of this. Here are also several Persian chairs,
and other good originals of prime hands.

In the 4. Cabinet, called Jl Tribuno we saw more riches then in all the
others. This Tribuno is a great room built round with a Cupola, whose vault is
painted with a deep sanguin red, set full with the shells of Mother of pearl.
The 4. Cabinet.
The walls of this room are hung with green silk, and laden with excellent
pictures of the prime masters of the world, Titian, Raphael, Andrea del Sarto,
Vinci, Hans Holbain, Vandike and others. The S. John Baptist is of Raphaels
hand; as is also that of Leo the X. with two Cardinals, Iulio Medici, and
Cardinal Rossi behind him. The picture of Southwell privy Counselour to Henry
the VIII, is of the hand of rare Hans Holbain. The picture of our Lady with our
Savior in her arms is of the hand of Andreo del Sarto. The picture of
Cardinal Bentiuoglio sitting in a chair, is of the hand of Vandike. There is
also a rare picture in miniature of Giulio Glorios hand, and three fair pieces
in miniature of an Augustine Friar yet living, and a man of great esteem;
having taken the right course to be famous, that is, to make but few pieces,
but these finished with all the patience which miniature requires. In this
tribuno I saw also the famous Nail half gold, half iron, made by the famous
Alchimist Thurnheuser. They showed me also a great lump of gold, not yet
stamped into coin; two shells of Mother of pearl with their two pearls still
sticking to them, and just as they grow: The Pearls, are rich pearls and
round. The two pieces of Emmeraud-rock, the one scarce formed yet into perfect
Emmeraud, but only begun: the other quite finished and green. Then two close
cupbords within the walls of this room, in which I saw a world of curious
cupps and Vases of crystal, Agate, Lapis Lazuli, and other such curious, but
brickle matter, yet of rare fabric and shape: They value them at two hundred
thousand crowns. The Unicorns horn, and the alabaster pillar are not to be
forgotten. The great Cabinet of Ebeny standing at the further end of this
Tribuno, full of ancient meddals of gold silver, and brass, of the ancient
Consuls, and Emperors, all digested into their several series; and yet this
Cabinet is almost as rich without, as it contains riches within; being set
without with precious stones of a vast biggness and value; to wit, a Saphir as
broad as a twenty shilings piece, and half an niche thick; a ruby full as
great, but far richer; an emmeraud not inferior to the rest; a pearl as big
as an ordinary wallnut; a world of Diamonds and other lesser stones, but all of
so great value, that this Cabinet, with that which is in it, is valued to be
worth five hundred thousand crowns. Lastly, I saw here the great round table
made of inlayd precious stones, polished neatly; a table able to make the most
hungry stomach forget its gumbing, to feed its eyes upon the vnroasted birds
which together with curious flowers compose this admirable table; Pearls,
Rubies, Saphirs, Cornelians, Emmerauds, Lapis Lazuly etc. are employed here
artificially to the making of these birds and flowers. You Will conceive better of
this table when I shall tell you that it is worth a hundred thousand crowns,
and that it was fiftheen years in making, and yet thirty men wrought at it
daily. The 5. Cabinet.
In the midst of it is the great Balle of the Arms of the Duke of Florence in
precious stones.

The 5. Cabinet standing at the further end of this Gallery, contains the
Altar and Tabernacle, which are to be set up in the new Chapel of S. Laurence
described above. Having viewed them six several times exactly (as I did) you
will perchance be of my opinion, that this Tabernacle made for to keep the
Blessed Sacrament in, is able, or nothing is able, to make a mends in same
sort, to our Savior for his course lodgeing in Bethleem, when he was borne in
a stable and lodged in a manger. The crystal pillars curiously wrought, and
being a full elle long, with their Capitelli of pure gold: the four like
pictures of precious stones which were five years each of them in cutting: the
Variety of other precious stones set thick here and there, and of great size:
the neat contexture of other polished stones of seuetall colors and luster:
the pictures of inlayd precious stones, which compose the Antependium of the
Altar: the variety of rich Cameos which are set here and there, and cut into
pictures: in fine, the whole composure of this Altar and Tabernacle, being the
height of wit and riches, I can neither describe enough, nor you admire
sufficiently.

4. The Argentaria.
Having thus seen the Gallery and adjoining Cabinets, I was presently led into
another quarter of this Palace, where I saw the Great Dukes Argentaria, or
Plate. Entering into this great squar room, I saw twelve great cupbords as high
as the room, set with excellent plate in all kinds. In one of them they
showed me a whole service of beaten gold, as dishes, plats, forks, spoones,
knifes, with a world of other rich vessels set in gold; also little pictures
in miniature; curious little Cabinets beset with gold and jewels; a Turkish
Cimetar whose handle and scabbard of gold, are thick set with diamonds and
precious stones; two other swords with their hilts of gold curiously wrought
with Diamonds; a Dagger suitable to one of them and of the same richness; a
great Cross set think with Diamonds, and other precious stones; a rare cup of
one great Emmeraud, with a cover to it of the same; a basin and Eure of gold
set very thick with Turkey stones. In another Cupbords I saw great variety of
silver plate in all kinds. In an other, they showed me a saddle and bridle
with stirops of gold, all set thick with Turkey stones, Diamonds, Pearls, and
other rich stones, with the saddle clot^, or housse, all embrodered with Gold
and Pearl: this was a present from the Emperor to the Grand Duke. In an other
cupbord they showed me the four great silver bedposts enameld here and there,
and set with polished stones of diverse colors: They were made for the marriage
bed of the now Great Princess daughter to the late Duke of Orleans. In an
other they showed me a curious Antependium for an Altar, all of beaten gold set
with Pearl, precious stones, and the picture of Cosmus the second in the
middle of it, of curious enameled work, with his Ducal crown set with Diamonds
very richly; all along this Antependium above, runns an Inscription in letters
composed of many rubies, each letter being two fingars long, and importing
these words: COSMVS II DEI GRATIA MAGNUS DVX ETVRIAE EX VOTO. In another
cupbord I was shown the foot of an Elan, and a Visard all set, and covered
with Turkey stones. The great Hall.


5. Descending from hence, we where led into the great Hall of this palace, a
vast room painted on all sides of the Walls with bold painting, representing
the Victoires of the Florentins anciently. Here it is that on midsommer day,
the country people come and dance before the Great Duke, and the best dancers
are recompensed with an honorable reward.

6. From hence I was let into the long Corridor, The long Corridor.
or close Gallery which runns from the new Palace to the old, over the river,
and over the topps of houses; for the space of half a mile, with many turnings
and windings. Its very useful for the Prince when he will go see his precious
Treasure in the old Palace, or else go privately and hear how justice is
ministered there. For the Great Duke Francis gave order to Buontalenti, a rare
Architect, to break a window from this Corridor into the great room in the old
palace, where the magistrates render justice, but yet so privately that none
should perceive it. The Architect did it, by setting up there the Dukes arms
at large, and breaking a window behind them so imperceptibly, that the Great
Duke through the little holes made in the six boules of his arms, could both
hear and see how Justice was rendered there by his officers. And one day
hearing a poor woman oppressed by an unjust sentence, he sent for the Judges,
and reprehending them severely, he reuersed the former sentence, and hearing
the cause a new himself, pronunced Sentence for the poor woman.

The new Palace.
7. This long Corridor led us to the new Palace, called the Palazzo di Piti,
because it was begun to be built by Luca Piti, after the design of
Brunellischi: but the expenses growing too great for Pitis purce, it was bought
by the mother of great Cosmus the II, and afterward carried on by her to that
perfection we now see it in, and which makes it one of the prime palaces of
Europe. The design of it (for it is not yet all quite built* is to be a
perfect Roman H, with double rooms on all sides. As you ascend up to it, by an
easy ascent from the street, it presents you with a fair broad side of
building, in which I counted two and twenty great windows all in a row, and all
a like, and all of them cheekt up on either Fide by Sine stone pillars. The
fashion of building in this palace, as in most of the best palaces of
Florence, is that which they call in architecture, la maniera rustica; where
great freestones are made aduanceing a little one over the other. Entering into
the Palace, we saw the fair court; and in the end of it, the Grotta or
fountain with a larg basin, in which they keep fish for present use. This Court
is squar, and open only on one side toward the garden, but hedged in with a
high terrasse of stone, whose top is leuel with the ground of the garden. The
Garden.
Beyond this terrasse and court, lies a fine green spot of ground leuel with
the first story of the palace, and half compassed about with a demicircle of
laurel trees high and thick. Under these trees of the demicircle, rise up stone
seats, six rows high, like the seats in an Amphitheater; and capable of two
thousand men, who may all sit here with ease, and behold the sports of Caualry
which are often exhibited upon this fair green spot of ground by the nobility:
the Great Duke and the Court beholding all this from the windows of the
palace, while the rest of the nobility and Ladies are seated conveniently in
the Amphitheater under the trees. The rest of this garden is curiously setforth
with thickets of bays, close shady walks, fine high open walks over looking
both the town and country, great ponds of water, a world of statues of marble
and stone, a rare round basin of water, with fountains and much wetting sport;
the place for birds and beasts; the curious Ice house and cool Cellar under
it, where the melting ice dropping down upon the barrels of wine, refresh it
so exceedingly, that in all my life time I never drunck so cool, as I did at
the tap in this cellar. But to return again to the palace, from whence this
garden has led me; from the garden, we ascended into the chambers of the Great
Dukes appertiment, The Dukes Appartiment.
and found them most sumptuous, both for contriuance and furniture. Some of
them are painted over head by Pietro di Cortona the prime painter now living:
others expect his return again from Rome, and scorn to be painted by any
hand but his: in another chamber, we were shown the history of Saleucus giving
to his only son Antiochus (languishing and pincing away with the love of his
mother in law) his own beloved wife Stratonica; showing by this strange, and
vnick example, that paternal love is greater then Conjugal. All this is rarely
painted upon the wall over the hangings. A Rare suit of Hangings.
In another chamber (the Great Dukes chamber of Audienc) I saw a suit of
hangings Valewed at a hundred and fifty thousand crowns: The Ground of them is
cloth of gold, upon which are embrodered a world of birds, beasts, flowers,
trees, rivers, Land-skips in silk and silver; and in such a rich manner, that I
take this to one of the fairest suits of hangings in Europe. In an other
chamber here, I saw a rare collection of pictures, all originals, and of the
best hands in the world, Titians, Raphaels, Michael Angelos, Andrea del Sartos,
and many others. The best of them is that of Raphael, and painted by his own
hand. This is the best collection of pictures that ever I saw, and it belongs
to Prince Leopold the Great Dukes brother, and a great Virtuoso. In the Great
Dutcesses chamber, I saw half a dozen of excellent pieces of Raphael and
others. In another chamber (The Dukes Bedchamber) we saw his curious
Thermometers, or weather glasses, which are most curious. In an other chamber
(the doors being set open for the Nonce) we looked through sixteen chambers at
once, and all of them fair great rooms upon one floor. And after all the
rooms of this house (as, the cool low summer rooms, the masking room, the
several appartiments of the Great Prince son of the Great Duke, and of
Cardinal John Carlo, Prince Matthias, and Prince Leopold all three brothers of
the Great Duke, and all lodgeing at once in this great Palace) by special
favor, we got the sight of the Great Dukes fair Diamond, The famous Diamond.
which he always keeps under lock and key. Its absolutely the fairest in
Europe, It weighs 138 charats, and its almost an inch thick: and then our
iewellers will tell you what its worth. I am sure Monsieur Simonet in Lions (a
famous ieweller) to whom I showed the weight and thickness of it, valewed in to
be richly worth a hundred thousand crowns between merchant and merchant, and a
hundred and fifty thousand crowns between Prince and Prince.

The Augustins Church.
8. Going from the Great Dukes Palace, we fell presently upon the Augustins
Church. This is a neat Church designed by Brunelleschi, and much beautifyed
with hansome pillars. The Tabernacle and High Altar cost a hundred thousand
crowns, and yield to few in Italy for neatness and state. Behind the High
Altar in the very end of the Church, is a rare picture of our Savior absoluing
the poor woman catched in adultery. The confusion that appears in the face of
this woman, makes it appear what a rare painter Allori was, who made this
picture.

The Piazza.
9. Passing from hence over the bridge (where four white marble statues
representing the four seasons of the year stand, all made by Michael Angelo)
we came to the Piazza of the Gran Duca, where I saw the Equestris statue of
Cosmus the Great in Bronze, with his Victoryes and prime actions in the
pedestal, of the same metal. At the corner of the old palace in this Piazza,
stands the brave Fountain, with a Neptune, Tritons, and Nereides. Near the
gates of the palace here, stand two statues of more then Gygant can bulk: that
of David is the hand of Michael Angelo: and that of Hercules killing Cacus is
of the hand of Bandinelli. The other statues here in the Portico hard by, are
much cried up for rare pieces, as that of Perseus in brass; that of the rapt
of the Sabins, in marble; and that of Judith in brass holding a sword in one
hand, and Holofernes his head in the other.

10. Looking up from this Piazza to the top of the palace, I beheld the high
Tower mounted thereupon. Its a hundred and fifty yards from the ground, and
which is the wonder, it has no other foundation then the wall of the palace
and the top of the house: Hence its said, that the Florentins have three
wonderful Towers: Three admirable Towers.
one in the ayr'^ to wit, this Tower: an other in the water, to wit the Fanal
of Ligorne: and the third in the Earth, to wit, the Campanile of Florence,
whose foundations are exceeding deep in the ground.

11. Going from the Piazza toward the Domo, we were presently stopped by the
Church of S. Michael a square flat Church, The Church of S. Michel.
whose outside is adorned with rare statues, if not of gold, yet worth their
weight it gold. The best are* that of S. Matthew in brass made by Laurentius
Cion: that of S. Thomas in brass thouching the side of our Savior with great
demonstration of diffidence in his looks, is of Andrea Varrochios hand. That
of S. Peter in marble is excellent for the Drappery of it. That of S. George in
marble, is compared to to the best in Rome, and has been praised both in Prose
and verse: that of S. Mark has so grave and honest a countenance, that Michel
Angelo (a competent judge) stopping one day to behold it, and being asked what
he thought of it, answered: if S. Mark had Such a countenance as this, as its
likely he had, a man might almost, for his looks sake, believe all that he
wrott: for never did I see (said he) any man have more the looks of a good
man, then this.

12. Going from hence we were presently at the Domo. The Domo.
This, I believe, was the finest Church in Italy when it was built. It was
anciently called S. Reparatas Church; but since it is called Santa Maria
Florida, a fit name for the Cathedral of Florence. The foundations and
architecture of it were contriueed by Arrolfo di Lapo, a Dutchman, and a la
maniera rustica, says Vasari of it, In his life's of painters. Its one of the
neatest Churches without, that I ever beheld; being elad in white, red, and
black marble, but its only white plastered within, with pillars of a dark
colored freestone. What if the Architect of this Church were somewhat of
Diogenes his mind? and as Diogenes thought the world would be turned up side
down one day; so this Architect thought that the world would be turned inside
out one day, and that then his Church would be the fairest in the world, and
all lined with marble: As it is, it looks a little hypocritically; though the
structure within be of a notable contriuance. On the top of it stands mounted a
fair Cupola (or Tholus) made by Brunelleschi a Florentin. The Cupola.
This was the first Cupola in Europe; and therefore the more admirable for
having no Idea after which it was framed; and for being the Idea of that of S.
Peter's in Rome, after which so many young Cupolas in Rome, and else where, have
been made since. Hence it is said, that Michael Angelo comeing now and then to
Florence (his native country) whiles he was making the Cupola in Rome of S.
Peter's Church, and viewing attentively this Cupola of Florence, used to say to
it; Como te non voglio: meglio di te non posso. Its said also that Brunelleschi
making this Cupola caused Tauerns, cookeshops, and lodgeings, to be set up in
it, that the workmen might find all things necessary there, and not spend time
in going up and down: and he had reason: for this Cupola from the ground
below, to the top of all the Lantern, is two hundred and two Braccie, or yards
high. The straight passage from the top of the cupola to the round brazen ball,
is thirty six yards high. The Ball is four yards wide, and capable of four and
twenty men: and the cross at the top of this ball, is eight yards long. The
straight passage up to the Ball is neatly contrived, like a round chymney of
white marble, with hols on both sides, and brazen steeps cross those holes, to
climb up easily, by hand and foot, the passage being clane and smooth. From
the top of this Cupola, taking a perfect view of Florence under us* and of the
whole country about it, with the sight of two thousand Villas or country houses
scattered here and there, round about the town, we came down again to view
the inside of this Church. It is about three hundred foot long, from the great
door to the Quire, and from thence to the end almost two hundred more. The
Quire is round, and perpendicularly under the Cupola, being of the same
bigness: and upon solemn days when the wax candles are lighted round about
it, it looks gloriously: otherwise in wintertime it seems too dark. The High
Altar, which stands in this Quire, is plain, like those of ancient Cathedrals,
and adorned with a rare statue of a dead Christ in white marble made by the
hand of Bandinelli. Looking up from the Quire to the Cupola, you see it painted
on the inside with the representation of heaven, hell and Purgatory. The
painters were Georgio Vasari and Thaddeo Zucchari. Behind the high Altar are
the rare statues of Adam and Eve, by the hand of Bandinelli. near the door of
the Sacristy, you may read an inscription, importing how that in this town of
Florence had been held a General Ceuncell, where the Reunion of the Latin and
Greek Church had been made. The golden Diploma of this union written both in
Latin and Greek, and subscribed unto by the hands of the Pope and Cardinals on
the one side; and by the Emperor of Constantinople with the Patriarch of
Constantinople and the Greek Bishops on the other side; Leandro Alberti in
Descript: Jtal.
and authenticated by the leaden seal of the Pope, and the golden seal of the
said Emperor, is kept in the Archiuiis or Registers of Bologna. The Council
of Florence.
In this Council both the Pope of Rome Eugenius the IV. and Paleologus the
Emperor of Constantinople, were present, with the cream of Bishops, both of
the Eastern, and Western Churches; and in this Council not only the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son was vindicated; but
also Purgatory was proved to the Greeks out of their own Greek Fathers, as
well as out of the Latin Fathers; and diverse other points of coremony and
practice were asserted and made good. Unto all which the said Emperor and
Patriarch, and the other Greek Bishops (except restless Marcus Ephesinus)
subscribed; as did also the Armenians, Ethiopians, Georgians, and Iacobites,
who all hereupon were admitted to Communion by the Roman Church. In fine, in
this Church you see the statues of diverse Saints who have been Archbishops of
this town; and the Tombs of diverse famous men; as of Marsilius Ficinus the
Platonic Christian Philosopher: of Dante the Florentin Poet, whose true
picture is yet to be seen here in a red gown: of Ioannes Acutius an English
Knight and General anciently of the Pisani, as the old Gothic letters set high
upon the wall under his picture on horseback, In his restitution of decayed
intelligence
told me. Yet Verstegan will not have him to have been called Sr. John Sharp,
but Sr. John Haukwood. But it imports little to me what his name was, See Baker
in Edward the 3.
seeing he was a brave Englishman, and deserved to have his tomb and
inscription here, and his picture among the other worthyes in the Dukes
Gallery. Here Is also in this Church the tomb of Brunelleschi, or Philippus
Brunaltius, who made the Cupola of this Church: as also the tomb of Giotto,
who made the Campanile, or fine steeple here. In fine here lies also Cimabue
the famous painter of his time. Vassari in the Lives of Painters, in Cimabue.
It was he that first restored painting again which had been lost for many
years in Italy, and taught it to Giotto, Gaddi, Taffi and others who carried it
on to a great height.

13. The Campanile.
Near to the Domo stands the Campanile, or high Steeple of Florence made by
Giotto. Its a hundred and fifty braccie, or little yards high, and half as deep
in the ground. Its flat at top, and crusted all over with curious little
polished marble stones, marble pillars, and statues: so that (as Charles the V.
said of it) if it had a case to cover it withal and hinder it from being seen
too frequently, men would flock thither at the taking off of this cover, as to
see a wonder. Indeed its a kind of wonder to see, that in three hundred years
space, not the least part of that steeple (all crust^d over with marble) is
perished. There are diverse good statues on all sides of it, but the best of
them all is that of the Zuccone, or bald man, made by Donatello, which he
himself esteemed so much, that when he would affirm any thing seriously, he
used to say: Alla fe ch'io porto al mio Zuccone: and the same Donatello having
finished it, spoke to it in jest, and said: Fauella, horsu, fauella; o ti venga
il ca^asangue: such good conceits have fantastical men of themselves and their
own works.

The Baptisterio.
14. Near to the Domo also, stands the Baptistery, or round Church of S. John,
where all the children of the town are baptized. The brazen doors of it (three
in all) are admirable, especialy that which looks toward the Great Church, of
which Michel Angelo being asked his opinion, answered, that it was so well
made, that it might stand at the entrance of Paradise. These doors are all of
Brass historied into figures, containing the remarkable historyes of both the
Testamen^s. They were the work of brave Laurentius Cion, who spent fifty
years in making them: a long time, I confess; but this is it which Apelles
called aeternitati pingere, to work things that will out-last brass and be
famous for ever. Within this Baptisiery, I saw a statue of S. Mary Magdalen of
the hand of Donatello; and its a rare piece; if you consider Magdalen in her
penance. Here Is also a neat Tomb of Baltassar Cossa, once called John the
XXIIII, but deposed in the Council of Constance, for the peace of the Church.
The Tomb of this Baltassar looking something like a cradle, may be called the
cradle of the greatness of the Medicean Family. For some writers say, that
Cosmus Medices surnamed afterward, Pater Patriae, Alfonso Loschi in his
Compend Histo.
being heir of this Baltassar Cossa (who died at Florence, In the house of
John Medices) With the money that he found belonging to him after his death,
did such good deeds to the people, that he won to him self the name of Pater
Patriae; and to his Family, that credit, which got it afterward the supreme
command.

15. I cannot omit here to take notice of a little round pillar in the Piazza,
near this Baptistery, with the figure of a tree in iron nailed to it, and old
words engraven upon it importing, that in this very place stood anciently an
Elmetree, which being touched casualy by the hearse of S. Zenobius, as they
carried it here in procession, the tree presently hereupon budded forth with
green leaves of sweet odor though in the month of January. In memory of which
miracle, this pillar was set up in the same place for a memorial.

16. From thence going to the Church of S. Mark belonging to the Dominicans,
The Church of S. Mark
I saw there the Tomb of S. Antoninus Archbishop once of this town, and a
Friar of this order. The Tomb is under the Altar in a neat Chapel on the left
hand, made by John di Bologna. In this Church also I saw a rare picture of S.
Mark, made by Bartholomeo del Frate, it stands full in your sight as you enter
into the Church; and a man must be blind not to see it, and dull not to like
it. On the left hand, as you enter into the Church is the Tomb of Picus
Mirandula commondly called the Phoenix of Princes, with this Epitaph written
upon the side of the Wall, Ioannes iacet hic Mirandula, caetera norunt
Et Tagus and Ganges, forsan and Antipodes.
Near this tomb is a fine picture upon an Altar, where two Little Angels are
made playing upon Musical instruments. These Angels are held to be the rarest
pieces that can be seen in painting. They are of the hand of Bartholomeo del
Frate. In the Convent of these Friars I saw often their still house, where they
make, and sell, excellent extractions and cordial waters. There is also a neat
Library here filled with good books.

17. Turning from hence on the seft hand, I came presently to the Annuntiata,
The Annunciata.
a place of great devotion. The pictures of Faith and Charity over the Arch in
the Antiporto, or open portch built upon pillars, are of the hand of Iacomo
Pontorno being but yet nineteen years old; which when Michel Angelo first saw,
he said: This Iacomo if he continue thus, will carry up painting to the skies.
Entering into the little court that stands before the Church door, you see it
painted round about in Fresco by rare hands. Those pieces that Andrea del Sarto
made, are the best, and his head in white marble, is set in the wall. In the
cloister, over the door that goes into the Church is seen a rare picture in
fresco upon the wall^ of the hand of Andrea del Sarto. It represents our B.
Lady with our Savior upon her knee, and S. Joseph in a cumbent posture leaning
upon a sack full stufft, and reading in a book. The picture of the Blessed
Virgin is admirable for sweetness and majesty. This picture is called La
Madonna del Sacco, it got Andrea such credit, that Titian himself preferred it
before all the pieces he had ever seen, and used often to say: that it grieved
him, that he could not often satiate his sight with the beholding of so rare a
picture: and Michel Angelo talking once in Rome with Raphael Vrbin concerning
painters, said thus to him: There is un huom^e^tto, a little fellow in Florence
(meaning this Andrea) who had he been employed in great matters as thou art,
would make thee sweat again. Virtuosi make a great dispute which of those
three painters was the most excellent: Raphael Vrbin, Michel Angelo, or Andrea
del Sarto. But the wisest give every one his particular praise or excellency:
Raphael was excellent in colori: Michel Angelo in design: and Andrea in
making things seem to be of rilieuo, and look as God made them, that is,
pulpy and riseing up like living flesh. Haueing thus admired the work of
Andrea we entered into the Church of the Annunciata, and there saw the curious
silver Altar, behind upon the wall, is kept the miraculous picture of the
Annunciation which gives the name of Annunciata to this Church. The little
picture of our Savior, about a foot and a half long, which is seen upon the
outside of the Tabernacle, is of the foresaid Andreas hand, and much esteemed.
In this Church lies buried Baccio Bandinelli a famous Sculptor, in a curious
marble tomb, with his own, and his wifes picture, engraven in marble by his
own hand. Behind the Quire lies buried Ioannes di Bologna, a famous Sculptor
also, as his several works in Florence show him to have been; as the Rapt of
the Sabins, Before the old palace. The Centaure in the streets. The Chapel of
S. Antoninus in S. Marks Church. This Chapel in the Annunciata here; and the
golden horse and man spoken of above in the Dukes Armory, do wittness.

18. From hence having first seen the Statue of the Great Duke Ferdinand on
horseback in brass, which stands in the piazza before the Annunciata, I went
to the Church of the Franciscans, called Santa Croce. Sancta Croce.
This Church is of a large bulk and height, but somewhat too dark. The side
Altars are many, and cheeked with round pillars, and adorned with excellent
pictures. The pulpit would become A Chrysostom, or A Chrysologue: Its of white
marble, in which are graven the most notable actions of S. Francis in a basso
rilieuo. I never beheld it, but I found some new graces in it. Somewhat behind
it, near to a little door, is the Tomb of Michel Angelo, the Trismegist of
Italy, being the greatest Painter, the greatest Sculptor, the greatest
Architect of his time. Hence over his tomb, and under his picture, are placed
three women in white marble, representing Architecture, Painting, and
Sculpture, holding in their hands the several instruments belonging to these
professions. If you ask me whether of the two, Painting, or Sculpture, is to
be preferred, though a blind man being chosen judge once of this question, when
he was given to understand that in the smooth painting there were head, arms,
legs, hands and feet, as well as in the bulky statue which he had felt, judged
presently for painting; yet Michel Angelo himself preferred Sculpture before
painting, as the body is to be preferred before the superficies of a body. But
to return again to the Tomb of this great artist, I found some words upon
the tombestone, but those so dull and hard to be read in that dark corner,
that one in the company chose rather to make him a new Epitaphe, then read that
which is written there: and it was this: Cur indignemur mortales morte perire?
Ecce, stupor mundi! hic Angelus ipso perit.
And I think the modern Roman was of the same mind too, when he chose also to
make him this Epitaph: Roma mihi mortem tribuit, Florentia vitam.
Nemo aliis vellet nasci, and obire, locis.
In the midst of this Church I found buried an English Bishop called Catrick,
who had been Ambassador here from England, and likely in the time of the
Council of Florence. His arms were three catts argent in a sable field. In
fine, at the very end of this Church, on the left hand, stands a neat chapel
with a painted Cupola, belonging to the family of the Nicolini, in which
Chapel there are excellent statues and pictures.

19. The Abbey.
Not far from hence stands the Abbadia, an Abbey of Benedictin Monks. In the
Church is the tomb of the Founder of this Abbey a German nobleman called Conte
Hugo, who commanded Toscany under the Emperor Otho the III. The occasion of
building this Monastery and many others by this Hugo, is too long to tell, and
perchance would not find belief every where. Its told publicly every year
upon S. Thomas his day in high Mass time here, by some one or other of the
chief wits of the Academy of the Crusca; and he that's curious to know it, may
hear it there, as I did, with great satisfaction.

S. Maria Nouella.
20. From thence I went to the Church of Santa Maria Nouella belonging to the
Dominicans. Here it is, that the Council of Florence, spoken of above, was
held. There are many good pictures in this Church, as also diverse neat tombs
of holy men and women, and others: among which that of Joseph Patriarch of
Constantinople, who had been the blessed occasion and instrument of reduceing
the Greek Church to the right faith again, is remarkable. Its on the right
side of the Church.

The statue of Justice.
21. Returning from hence along the river side, we came to the high pillar with
the Statue of Justice in porphyry upon it. It was erected here, because it was
in this very place where Cosmus the great, heard the news of the reduction of
Siena. A witty nobleman seeing this statue of Justice upon so high a pillar,
said that Justice here was too high placeed, for poor men to arrive to it. An
other observed, that Justice there turns her back to the Courts of Justice,
which stand not far from thence.

22. Having thus visited the chief things in the town, I visited some places
out of the town; and chiefly, the Poggio Jmperiale, Poggio Imperialle.
a Villa belonging to the Great Duchess, and about a good mile distant from
the town. In this house I saw rare pictures, and great store of them, the
house being furnished with nothing else. In one gallery are the true pictures of
diverse late Princes of the house of Austria, of the house of Medices, and of
other Princes their Allies. In other rooms we saw a world of rare pictures, as
the Venus of Titian, though I think it be but a copy: the admirable S. Hierome
of Alberto Dureo: a Magdalen of Raphaels hand: a S. John Baptist of Carauagios
hand: an Adam and Eve of Alberto Dureo: the Piety of Pietro Perugino, that is,
the picture of our Blessed Lady with our Savior dead upon her knee; S. John
Evangelist and three other persons standing, or kneeling by, with weeping faces
and most sad looks; its one of the most moueing pieces that I ever beheld.
Then the picture of the Assumption of our Lady in the Chapel, of the hand of
Andrea del Sarto; with a world of other most exquisit pictures. The little
neat Oratory in this house, called the Oratory of the Great Duchess,
curiously inlayd into flowers by polished stones of diverse colors; that is, a
whole closet of shineing marble inlayd into flowers, is the neatest little
room that ever I saw. In fine the little Grotte, and the Statue of Adonis made
by the hand of Michel Angelo are much esteemed.

Prato-Lino.
23. An other day we went to Pratolino a Villa of the Great Duke, some six
milles distant from Florence. Here we saw in the garden, excellent Grotts,
Fountains, water works, Shady walks, groves and the like, all upon the side of
a hill. Here you have the Grotte of Cupid with the wettings stools, upon which
sitting down, a great spout of water comes full in your face. The Fountain of
the Tritons ouertakes you so too, and wassheth you soundly. Then being led
about this garden where there are store of fountains under the Laurel trees, we
were carried back to the grottes that are under the stairs, and saw there the
several Giuochi d'aqua: as that of Pan striking up a melodious tune upon his
mouth-organ at the sight of his Mistress, appearing over against him: that
where the Angel carries a trumpet to his mouth, and sounds it; and where the
country clown offers a dish of water to a serpent, who dinks of it, and
lifts up his head when he has drunck: that of the mill which seems to break
and grind olives: the paper mill: the man with the grinding stone: the Sarazins
head gapeing and spewing out water: the grotte of Galatea who comes out of a
door in a sea chariot with two nymphs, and sayleth a while upon the water, and
so returns again in at the same door: the curious round table capable of
twelve or fifteen men, with a curious fountain playing constantly in the midst
of it, and places between every trencher, or person, for every man to set his
bottle of wine in cold water: the Samaritan woman comeing out of her house with
her buckets to fetch water at the fountain, and having filled her buckets,
returns back again the same way: in the mean time you see smiths thumping;
birds chirping in trees; mills grinding: and all this is done by water, which
sets these little inventions a work and make them move as it were of
themselves: in the mean time an organ plays to you while you dine there in
Fresco at that table, if you have meat. Then the neat bathing place: the pillar
of petrifyed water: and lastly the great Pond and Grotta before the house, with
the huge giant stooping to catch at a rock, to throw it at heaven: This giant
is so big, that within the very thigh of him, Lampeggio.
is a great grotte of water, called the Grot of Thotis and the shell fishes,
all spouting out water.

24. I went also to Lampeggio a Villa some five miles distant from Florence,
belonging to Prince Matthias. Its curiously adorned with pictures, especialy
battles of the hand of Tempesta. Here I saw a curious cabinet of Coral and
enamelled work. The fine Giuoco di Mecha, or Turkish play. The curious
glasses; and little Armory.

25. The stable^.
Returning to the town again, we saw the Great Dukes stables full of
excellent well maneged horses.

26. The Wild beasts.
Near to the stables stands the serraglio where the wild beasts are kept,
which they make fight often against one another. Here I saw Lions, Leopards,
Tigers, Bears, Woolfs, wild boares and foxes, all which they can let out
seueraly at the doors of their several denns, into a fair court to fight, and
when they have done, they can bring them back again into their denns by a
fearful machine of wood made like a great Green Dragon, which a man within it
rowles upon weeles; and holding out two lighted torches at the eyes of it,
frights the fiercest beast thereby into his denn. The Prince and the Court in
the mean time, standing high above may see the combats of these wild beasts
with ease, In the Cronology of Petrus Romualdus to 1. page 15.
and without danger. I have read, that a Lion here one escapeing out of this
place by chance, and running up and down the streets, met at last (all others
flying into houses) a little child, who had neither fear nor wit enough to
retire; and seized upon him. The mother of the child hearing in what case he
was, ran out presently, and casting her self upon her knees with tears in
her eyes, and humble postures of supplication, she moved so the Lion to pity,
that he rendered her the child without hurting it, or the mother of it.

27. I saw also here diverse Palaces of noblemen upon occasion of their
Festine. For it is the custom here in winter, to inuit the chief Ladies of
the town (married women only) to come to play at cards in winter euenings for
three or four hours space; and this one night in one palace, another night in
another palace. Thither the Ladies go, and find the house open to all comers
and goers both Ladies and gentlemen, that are of any garb. In every chamber
the doors are set open, and for the most part you shall see eight, or ten
chambers on a floor, going out of one an other, with a squar table holding
eight persons, as many chairs, two silver candlesticks with wax lights in
them, and store of lights round about the room. At the hour appointed,
company being comne, they sit down to play, a Caualier sitting between every
Lady, and all the women As fine in clothes and jewels, as if they were going to
a Ball. The doors of all these rooms being open, the light great, the women
glittering, and all glorious, you would take these palaces to be the enchanted
Palaces of the Old King of the Montains. Any gentleman may come into these
palaces and stand behind the gamesters, and see both how modestly they play,
and how little they play for. In the mean time there is a side chamber always
open for gentlemen to go in to, and refresh themselves with wine standing in
snow, or with limonade, or some such cooling drinks, which are also offered to
the Ladies. In a great room bellow, at the entrance of the palace, there is a
long table for gamesters that love to play deep, that is, that love to play
only for money.

Their Sports.
The Florentins enjoying by the goodness and wisdom of their excellent Princ,
the fruits of peace, have many other recreations, where the people pass their
time cheerfully and think not of rebellion by muttering in corners. For this
reason, both in winter, and summer, they have their several diuertisments. In
winter their Giuoco di Calcio (a play something like our football, Jl Giuoco di
Calcio.
but that they play with their hands*) every night from the Epiphany till Lent,
with their Principi di Calcio. This being a thing particular to Florence,
deserves to be described. The two factions of the Calcio, the Red, and the
Green, choose ecih of them a Prince, some young Caualier of a good purse. These
Princes being chosen, choose a world of Officers, and lodge, for the time, in
some great palace; where they keep their courts, receive Ambassadors from one
another, and give them publik audience in state, send post to one another,
complain of one another subjects, and take prisoners from one another; hear
their counselors one after another, disswadeing from, or perswadeing to war;
give orders for settling their affairs at home, hear the complaints of their
subjects, ieere their enemy Princes in embassyes; and at last resolve to,
fight, with proclayming war. Dureing these serious treatyes which last for
many nights the Secretaryes of state (two prime wits) read before their
several Princes bills for regulating and reforming the abuses of their
subjects; and read openly petitions and secret aduises: in all which they ieere
a world of people in the town, and show prodigious wit. In fine, having spunn
out thus the time till near Carnauale, or shroftide, the two Princes resolve
on a battle at Calcio, to be fought in the Piazza of Santa Croce, before the
Great Duke and Court. Upon the day appointed, the two Princes of the Calcio come
to the place in a most stately Caualcata with all the young noblemen and
gentlemen of the town, upon the best horses they can find, with scarfs, red,
or green, about their Arms. Haueing made their several Caualcatas before the
Great Dukes throne or scaffold, they light from their horses, and enter into
the lists with trompets sounding before them, and accompanied with a stately
train, and with their combatants in their several liueryes. Having rancked
themselves a pretty distance one from the other, their standard bearers at sound
of trumpet, carry both at once, their standards to the foot of the Great Dukes
scaffold. This done, the Ball, or Ballon is thrown up in the midst between
them, and to it they go with great nimbleness, slight, and discretion; and
sometimes they fall to it in deed and cuff handsomely: but upon pain of death,
no man must resent afterward out of the lists, what ever happened here; but
all animosities arriseing here, end here too. At last, that side which throws,
or strikes the Ballon over the rayles of the other side, winns the day, and
runns to the standards, which they carry away till night, at what time the
conquering Prince enterteins them at a Festino di Ballo at Court, made to some
Lady; and where all his chief Officers and combatants dance alone with the
Ladies at the Ball, none else being permitted to dance with them that night.
Besides these passtimes, Other Pastimes.
they have once a week, danceing at the Court from twelfth day till Lent, at
which Balls, all the Ladies of the town are invited, to the number sometimes
of two hundred, and these all married women, and all invited by a particular
ticket. Then their several Operas, or musical Drammata acted and sung with rare
cost and art. Lastly their public running at the ring, or at the facchin, for
a piece of plate. And in summer, they have their several danceing days, and
their frequent Corsi di Palio upon certain known days and for known prizes,
and all before the good Prince, who countenanceth all these sports with his
presence, thinking wisely, that there is less hurt in puplick mirth, then in
private mutinyes:

The Court.
Having said thus much of Florence, I will now say something of the Court, the
Government, strength, Gentry, Riches, Interest, Language, and Learned men of
this town.

For the Court its clearly one of the best of Italy. Great riches make it look
plump, and give it an excellent en bon point. The noble Palace the Prince, his
Title of Serenissimo, his Train and Retinew of noble Officers and gentlemen,
his store of Pages, Palfreniers, Gards of Swissers with halbards, his Troop of
horse waiting upon him, make this Court appear splendid. The Duke himself also
who makes this Court, The Great Duke.
makes it a fine Court. His extraordinary Ciuility to stangers, made us think
our selves at home there. He is now above fifty, and has a Austrian look and
lip, which his mother Magdalena of Austria Sister to the Emperor Ferdinand the
II. lent him. He admits willingly of the visits of strangers, if they be men of
condition; and he receives them in the midst of his audience chamber standing;
and will not discourse with them, till they be covered too. Its impossible to
depart from him disgusted, because he pays your visit with as much wit as
ciuility: and having enterteined you in his chamber with wise discourse, he
will entertein you in your own chamber too with a regalo of dainty meats, and
wines, which he will be sure to send you. The Great Duchess too is an other
main pillar of this Court. The Great Duchess
She is of the house of the Duke of Vrbin, once a Souerain Prince in Italy, but
now extinct in her Father who was the last Duke: and she had been souerain of
that Duchy, had she been of the Souerain sex: but what nature refused her in
sex, it has given her in beauty, and so made her a greater souerain, even of
Florence. In a word, Florence the Fair, was never so fair, as was the fair
Duchess of Florence when I saw her first. Of her the Great Duke has two
sons. Cosmus the Prince of Toscane has married one of the Daughters of the
late Duke of Orlians. He is a great Traveler and has visited most of the
Princes courts of Christendom. The name of this family is Medices; a family
which h^ah given to the Church four Popes, and to France two Queens. This
family is ancient, and came first out of Athens. It was always considerable
dureing the Republic of Florence, The Medicean Family.
but far more since it has got the start of all the other families to far,
as to become their Souerain. The beginning of the greatness of this family came
from Cosmus Medices surnamed Pater Patriae. See Alfonso Loschi in his compendi.
Histor.
This man being very rich and of a liberal mind, spent four hundred thousand
crowns in public and private buildings, and one hundred thousand crowns more
in loan monyes to the poor citizens. These generous actions which should have
got him the love of all men, purchased him the hatred of some of the great
ones, who accuseing him of affecting Souerainty, raised a strong faction
against him. The heads of this faction where Rinaldo Albizzi, Pala Strozzi,
Ridolfo Peruzzi, and Nicolo Barbadori. These men corrupting the suffrages of
the Senate, caused Cosmus to be clapped up, with an intention to take away his
life. Cosmus in prison, fearing poison, abstained from meats four days
together, and dyed almost for fear of being killed: At last he was rescued
from this melancholy humor by his honest keeper; who gave him such assurances,
that he should not be poisoned, that he took meat again, and kept in his
vital breath which was almost come to his lips. Then his keeper (not content to
be half courterous) haueing recovered his body, strove to recover his mind too,
which was sore spent with fears and melancholy; and for this purpose, brought
unto him the buffon of Bernardo Guadagni then Confaloniero, The chief
Magistrate of the Republic, who with his witty ieasts, so cheared him up with
mirth, that he began not only to think of living again, but also of getting
out from thence, that he might live long. To this end he works with the buffon
to carry a promise in writeing from him to the Confaloniero, of 1000 crowns of
gold, upon condition he would free him. The buffon undertakes it, and money
takes with the Confaloniero, who under pretense of examining the cause to put
him to death, finds him only worthy of ba^nishment; to which he condemns him;
and the place of his banishment was Venice. This was it that he desired. For
being at Venice, he wrought so well by Friends with the people, that loved him,
that he was restored again to his country, and got the title of Pater Patriae
by a public decree. By this title his family grew into that esteem, that it
ouertopt the rest, and in time wrought it self into Souerainty.

For the Government of Florence, it is now Monarchical, and despotical, The
Government.
the Great Dukes will being absolute; all great businesses passing through his
knowledge and likeing: so that he wants nothing of a King, but the name; and
that too he almost has under the name of Great Duke.

As for the Strength of this State; The strength.
it has 20 Episcopal cittyes; 500 little walled towns; strong Forts on the
confines: and can make an army of forty thousand foot, three thousand horse,
twelve Galleys, two Galleasses, two Galleonies, and twenty ships of war.

For the Gentry, it is a Gentry dyed in grain, that is, its both witty, and
rich. The subtle air of this country, and the Academy of the Crusca have
sharpened them into much wit: and their good husbandry, The Gentry of Florence.
and underhand traffic has put them notably into purse. For they think it no
disgrace to have a banco at home, and meet daily at the exchange about traffic
and trayding; while their wifes Lady it in coach with their hansome liueries.
This makes them hold up their nobility by the chinn, and not only preserues
their familyes from sinking; but rather makes them swime in a full sea of
honor: they being enabled thereby to buy great offices for their children in
other courts, whereby they often make them mount to the highest dignityes: when
they are there, no man reproaches unto them the way they took to come thither,
whether by water, or Land; by traffic, or by the sword; by the schoole-booke,
or count-booke. If the French gentry would follow this way, they might have
shoos and stockings for their children (which some of them want in the country)
where with to keep their noble blood warm in winter.

For the Riches of this Prince, Riches.
they are about a million and a half of Piastri, or crowns. These are his
annual reuenews; besides his jewels; forfeitures; and his Datij: which last,
are of vast profit to him.

The Interest of this Prince is much Austrian, Interest.
and consequently Spanish: yet not so far, as to break with France, to which
he opens his ports and passages for his own sake. He loves to have no war in
Jtaly, because he has something to loose: and though he love to have the Pope
his friend, yet he cares not for having any of his subjects Pope. A Pope of his
family, Clement the VII, having made him what he is, he is affrayd a Pope of
some other Florentin family would strive to make him what he was.

As for the Language of Florence its pure, but in their books, The Language
not in their mouths: They do so choke it in the throat, that its almost quite
drowned there; nor does it recover it self again till it come to Rome, where
Lingua Toscana in bocca Romana is a most sweet language. The Academy of the
Crusca has much contributed to the enriching of this language with choice
words. The Academy of Wits.
The rich Dictionary made by this famous company, and called from them, the
Crusca, was forty years in compileing, but it will be in vogue as long as men
shall speak Italian.

The learned men.
Finally, for the Learned men of of this town in later times, they are these;
Marsilius Ficinus the Christian Platonic; Dante and Petrarck in Poetry:
Guicciardin in History: Poggio in raillery: Vesp^cius in Geography: Accursius
in law: Michel Angelo in painting: Ioannes Casa in practical morality:
Naclantus in divinity: Galilaeo in Astronomy: Doni, Luigi, Alemanni, and others
in belle lettere.

He that desires to know the History of Florence, The Historians.
let him read Giouanne Villani, Matthaeo Villani, Scipione Ammirato, and the
life of Gran Cosimo.

Having thus seen fair Florence, we desired to see Ligorne, and make an
excursiue journey by Pistoia, Pistoia.
Lucca, and Pisa. Pistoia is an ancient town in a plain country. Of this town
is Clement the IX, this present Pope, of the ancient Family of Rospigliosi: and
that is all I can say of it. For it looks baldly of it, either out of pure old
age, else by reason of our neighborhood to Florence, which has fleeced it, or
which I rather think, by reason of its civil factions heretofore, which almost
ruined it quite.

Lucca is a pretty little Commonwealth, Lucca.
and yet it sleeps quietly within the bosom of the Great Dukes State. But that
State may wisely fear none, which no State fears; and the great Duke is
unwilling to measure his sword, or take up the cudgels against little Lucca,
least the world should cry shame upon him, and bid him meddle with his match.
This little Republic looked in my eye, Its Government.
like a perfect mapp of old Rome* in its beginning. Its Governed by a
Confaloniero and the gentry. The great Counsel consists of 160 citizens who are
changed every year. Its under tho Emperors protection; and it has about
thirty thousand souls in it. Approaching unto it, it looked like a pure
low country town, with its brick walls, large ramparts set round with trees,
and deep moates round about the walls. It has eleven bastions, Its strength.
well guarded by the townsmen, and well furnished with Canno^s of a large sise.
The town is three miles in compass; it has thirty thousand muskets, or half
muskets in its Arsenal, eight thousand pikes, two thousand breast pieces of
musket proof, and store of great artillery. The whole State, for a need, can
arm eighteen thousand men of service, Its Reuenews.
and it has about five hundred thousand French livers a year. It was in this
town that Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus met, and agreed among themselves that
all things in Rome should pass as they pleased.

The chief things to be seen here are, The Cathedral, called S. Martins, whose
Bishop has the ensigns of an Archbishop, to wit, the use of the Pallium, and
the Cross; and whose Canons in the Quire wear a rochet and Camail, and miters
of silk like Bishops.

2. The town house, or Senate house, where the Confaloniero lives dureing the
time of his charge.

2. The Church of S. Frediano belonging to the Canon Regulars, where, in a
Chapel on the left hand, is the Tomb of S. Richard King of England, who dyed
here in his pilgrimage to Rome.

4. The Augustins Church, where is seen a hole where the Earth opened to
swallow up a blaspheming gamester.

Of this town was Pope Lucius the III. the two famous men of this town, the
one for soldiery, the other for learning, were, brave Castrucio, and Sanctes
Pagninus a great Hebrician.

There are five towns more belonging to Lucca, to wit, Ca-magior, Viareggia,
Montignoso, Castilione, and Minucciano.

Pisa.
From Lucca we went to Pisa, some ten miles off. This was once the head town of
a flourishing Republic, and then the Numantia of Florence, and scorning its
yoke: but now it croucheth to it. It stands in no very good air, and therefore
has been vexed with diverse plagues. The grass in the streets of this
University, read me this lecture, and I believed it. Whereupon I resolved to
stay here one day only, in which time I saw.

1. The Domo, The Domo.
whose Canons officiate in Scarlate like Cardinals. This is a neat Church for
structure, and for its three brazen doors historyed with a fine basso rilieuo.
Its built after la maniera Tedescha, a fashion of building much used in Italy
four or five hundred years ago, and brought in by Germans or Tedeschi, says
Vasari.

The bending Tower.
2. Near to the Domo stands, (if leaning may be called standing) the bending
Tower, so artificialy made, that it seems to be falling, and yet it stands
firm: Ruituraque semper, stat (mirum) moles.

3. On the other side of the Domo, is the Campo Santo a great square place
cloistered about with a low cloister curiously painted. It^ called the Campo
Santo, because therein is conserved the Holy earth brought from Jerusalem in
50 Galleys of this Republic, an. 1224. These Galleys were sent by the
Republic of Pisa, to succor the Emperor Aenobarbe, in the Holy Land* but
hearing of his death when they came thither, they returned home again laden
with the earth of the Holy Land, of which they made this Campo Santo.

4. Some good Colleges there are but unfrequented then by reason of a late
plague: Some Colleges.
none running faster from the plague then scholars, especialy when it comes
near to the schools.

5. The Library.
The public Library is much enriched with the accession of Aldus Manutius his
Library.

6. The Physic garden.
The garden of Simples may be rare, but we not understanding this herb
language: hastened to the house of the Knights of S. Steven.

The Knights of S. Stephano.
7. This is the only Order of Knighthood that I perceived in Florence; and its
very common. They wear a red cross of satin upon their cloaks; and profess
to fight against the Turks. For this purpose they have here a good house, and
maintenance. Their Church is beautifyed without with a hansome faciata of white
marble; and within with Turkish Ensigns and diverse Lanterns of capitanesse
galleys. In this house the Knights live in common, and are well maintained. In
Their Treasory they show you a great buckler all of Pearl and Diamonds, wonn
in a battle against the Turks. Indeed bucklers of Diamonds, do but show our
enemies where we are, and what they may hope for by killing us. They have in
their Cancellaria, a Catalogue of those Knights who have done notable service
against the Turks; which serves for a powerful exhortation to their
successors, to do, and die bravely. In fine, these Knights may marry if they
will, and live in their own particular houses, but many of them choose
celibate, as more convenient for brave soldiers: wifes and children being the
true impedimenta exercitus.

Heretofore, during the great disorders of the Guelfs and the Gibelins, Anno
1282, this town was governed by Vgolin a proud man, who ruled here
despotically. This man inuiteing one day all his friends to a great feast,
began in the midst of it to brag, that nothing was wanting to him: yes (said on
of his best friends, because on who flattered him not) there is one thing yet
wanting to thee, Vgolin, to-wit, the Anger of God, which is not far from
thee. And it proved true, for presently after, the Gibelins russhing into the
palace of Vgolin (chief of the Guelfs) killed in his sight one of his sonns
and his nephew, and taking him with two other of his sonns and three nephews
they shut him up in a strong Tower, and threw the Keys into Arno: where the
poor man that braged even now in a feast, dyed soon after of hunger; having
first seen his children and nephews dye of hunger in his arms. A rare example
to teach proud men, that there is often but one day between a powerful man, and a
poor man: between a great Feast, and a great Fast. Here in Pisa were called
two Councils, the one 1409. the other 1511.

Ligorne.
From Pisa we went to Ligorne, (Portus Liburnus in Latin) through a pleasant
forest. This is the only haven the Great Duke has; and the mouth which
lets in that food which fatteneth this State. We stayed not long here, the
season pressing us to be gone, and this town, being soon seen. For the town
its but little, yet one of the neatest haven towns a man can see. Heretofore
it was not sufferable by reason of the bad air; but since Ferdinan the first
built it a new, and dried up the neighboring Fenns (gathering much of the water
into a cut channel, which goes from hence to Pisa, and carries great boats) the
town is twice as wholesome, and thrice as rich as it was.

The things I saw in this town were these. 1. The Mole which shutts up the
haven. 2. The Lantern which with seven lights guides in ships in the night,
3. The Haven it self where ships lie safe, and the little haven within that,
which serves for a withdrawing room to the great haven, where the Gallyes
retire themselves. 4. The statue of Ferdinand the first in marble, with the
Statues in bronze of four slaves at his feet. These are the 4 slaves that would
have stolen away a galley and have rowed here themselves alone; but where taken
in their great enterprise. 5. The Greek Church. 6. The Castle. 7. The Tower in
the Sea where they keep gunpowder. 8. The Jews Synagogue. 9. Two windmills
which are rare things in Italy, and therefore must have a place here among the
rarityes of this town.

I found not any Academy of wits here, nor any records of any learned men of
this town. All the Latin here is only, Meum, and Tuum, and their wits are
exercised here, how to make good bargins, not good Books. Indeed what should
the Muses do here amongst the horrible noise of chains, of carts, of balling
Sea men, of clamorous porters, and where the slaves of Barbary are able to
fright all learning out of the town with their looks, as all Latin with their
Language. Yet I must confess, they study here belle Lettere: for if the true
belle Lettere be Letters of exchange, your marchand here, if you present him a
Letter of exchange from his correspondent, will read it over, and over again,
and study upon it, before he give you the contents of it in money.

Having finished this excursiue journey, we returned again to Florence; and
having rested our horses a day or two, we took a new rise from thence to Rome
which seemed to becken en us, and whither the main torrent of our curiosity
hurryed us.

Some three miles Beyond Florence we passed under a Monastery of Carthusians
seated upon a round hill; whose several celles and little gardens (walled
about) branching out on all sides, like several Bastions, made this Monastery
look like a spiritual Fort, or devout Citadel.

From hence passing through san: San: Cassiano.
Cassiano we arrived at night at Poggi-Bonzi a little town famous for perfumed
Tobacco in powder, Poggi Bonzi.
which the Italians and Spaniards take far more frequently then we, as
needing neither candle nor tinderboxe to light it withal; nor vseing any other
pipes, then their own noses.

From Poggi-Bonzi we came at dinner to Siena. Siena.
This is the second town of the Florentin State. It was heretofore a powerful
Republic commanding threescore miles into the country, and now and then,
beating the Florentins: but a last, after much struggling, this woolf received
the muzzle, The arms of Siena, are a Woolf.
and Siena is now the humble servant of Florence. This happened an^ 1555.

This town is seated in a very wholesome air and soil, and therefore much
frequented by strangers. Its called Senae in Latin from the Senones, people of
Gaul, who comeing into Italy with Brennus, built this town. The streets are
all paued with bricks set up edgeway, which makes the town always dry and
neat. Its built high and low, with many high towers in it, built anciently in
honor of its well deserving citizens who had done some special service in the
Republic; and this makes it seen thirty miles off on Romes side. The people
here are very civil, and even sociable too; which together with the good air,
the good exercises for gentlemen, the good language, and the great privileges,
make many strangers draw bridle here, and summer it at Siena, the Orleans of
Italy.

The prime things I saw here were these.

The Domo.
1. The Domo, one of the neatest Cathedrals of Italy, though it be built a la
maniera Tedescha. Its all of black and white marble within and without. The
Fontispice is carved curiously and set thick with statues. Yet it wants a
larger piazza before it, to give it its full grace. The inside of this Church
is very taking. Under the roof immediately runns a row of white marble-heads of
all the Popes till this time. The Pauement is the best in the world; The rare
Pauement.
and indeed too good to be trod on; hence they cover a great part of it with
bords hansomely laid together, yet easy to be taken up, to show strangers the
beauty of it: Its of marble inlayd into pictures, and those very great ones:
several great marbles of several colors making the shadows and the lights,
and composeing all together such a new kind of Mosaic work, as all men
admire, but none dare finish. This work was begun by Duccio Sanese, and
afterward carried on by Domenico Beccafumi, but not finished by him, says
Vasari. They told me here that is was Meccharini, that made this pauement; but
I had rather believe Vasari. That part which they uncovered for us, represented
the history of Abraham going to sacrifice his son Isaac; and the history of
the Machabees; and the like. I confess, I scarce saw any thing in Italy which
pleased me better then this pauement. On the left hand (within the Church)
stands the Library painted with a rare Fresco which is yet rauishing and lively
after two hundred years: The Library.
Indeed the brave actions of Aeneas Syluius (afterward Pope Pius II) which
these pictures represent, deserve to be painted by the sun beams. The pictures
are of the hand of Pietro Perugino, Raphaels Master: but when alls done, give
me books in a Library, not pictures. In the Church you see the statues of
Alexander the III, of Pius II, of Paulus V, and of Alexander the VII. all
Popes, and natives of Siena.

S. Katharine of Siena.
2. I saw here the several places which S. Katharine of Siena had made famous
by her devotions: as, her Chamber, where she received the holy stigmats, now
turned into a Chapel: the Chamber where she lived: with other memorials of her
devotions, in the Dominicans Church; where they also show her head, and finger:
her body being transferred to Rome, and lyeing in a little Chapel within the
Sacristy of the Dominicans, at the Minerua.

3. Other Rarities.
The other things ordinarily shown here, are the great Hospital: the house of
Pius II, of the family of the Piccolomini: the great Piazza: the pillar with
the woolf of brass upon it: the marble Pillar as you come into the town from
Florence, with the arms of the Empire and of Portugal upon it; because here it
was, that the Emperor met Eleonora of Portugal and married her in presence of
Aeneas Syluius then Archbishop here, and afterward Pope Pius II.

I saw here the Academy of wits called gli Intronati: The Academy of Wits.
why they should take that ambitious name I know not, unless it be in
reference to the saying of a Philosopher, who said, that then finally kingdoms
should be happy, when either Philosophers should be chosen Kings, or Kings
played the Philosophers. Indeed Aristotle holds that they that are strong of
body, are made to serve, and tug at the oar of commands: and they that are
strong in wit, are borne by nature to sit at the helm, and command others.

5. This town has furnished the Church with a General Council of a hundred
and thirty Bishops, called by Nicolas the III: with three great Saints, S.
Bernardin reformer of the Minorits; S. Katharine the holy Virgin; and Beatus
Colombanus Institutor of the Order of the Iesuati, a man of great learning and
Sanctity: with five good Popes, to wit, Alexander the III of the house of
Bandinelli; Pius II, of the house of Piccolomini; Paulus V, of the house of
Burgesi; and Alander the VII, of the house of Chisi: And in fine, it has
furnished the world with two champions in learning Ambrosius Politi (or
Catharinus) who wrote learnedly against Luther and Erasmus; and Adriano Politi
who wrote against Ignorance by his learned Dictionary.

He that would know in particular the history of Siena, The History.
let him read Orlando Maleuolto.

From Siena we went to Bon Conuento, Tornieri, San Quirico, inconsiderable
places upon the rode, and so to Radicofino a strong Castle upon a high hill
built by Desiderius King of the Longobards. Radicofino.
This is the last place of the Florentin state, but not the least in strength.

Dineing here at the Great Dukes Inn at the bottom of the hill, we went to
lodge at Aquapendente, which is some 12 miles off, and the first town of the
Popes state.

This town stands upon a hill, Aquapedente.
from which the waters trickling down softly are said to hang there, and give
it the name of Aquapendente. Of late this town is made a Bishops Seat by the
Demolition of Castro, and the remooual of the Bishops Seat from thence hither,
which happened upon this occasion. Castro was a town belonging to the Duke of
Parma, Thither Pope Innocent the X. sent a good Bishop to govern that flock;
but the Bishop upon his arriual being killed there, the Pope sent Conte Vidman
(General then of the Church) with order to demolish Castro; and he himself
transfered the Bishops seat from thence to Aquapendente, and all this according
to the Canon law, which ordains, Can. ita nos 25. qu. 2.
that that City which kills its Bishop should be deprived of the Bishops seat
ever after.

From Aquapendente we came to a little town called San Lorenzo, and not long
after, Bolsena.
to Bolsena, anciently called Vrbs Volsinensium. Here it was that happened the
famous Miracle in confirmation of the Real presence of Christ's body and blood
in the Blessed Sacrament, which happened an 1263, and which gave occasion to
Pope Urban the IV to command that the Feast of Corpus Christi should be kept
holyday ever after. The Miracle is related by Leandro Alberti the Camden of
Italy, and by learned Onuphrius Panuinus in the life of Urban the IV.

We passed also that morning by the side of the Lake of Bolsena; The Lake of
Bolsena
in the middle of which is a little Island in which Amalasuinta Queen of the
Ostrogoths, a woman of singular parts, was miserably murdered by her nearest
kindred. Here Is also a little Convent of Capucins.

Having passed along this Lake a great while, Bosco Helerno.
we entered at last into a wood called anciently Lucus Volsinensium, and now,
Bosco Helerno. It was formerly a dangerous passage for Bandits: but now its
free from danger, since Sixtus Quintus purged the Ecclesiastical State of that
Vermin, by making a Law, that whosoever should bring in the head of a Bandit,
should have pardon, impunity, and recompense too of some hundred crowns, where
upon the Bandits soon destroyed one another.

From this wood we soon came to Montefiascone standing upon a hill. Its a
Bishops Seat, Montefiascone.
and famous for excellent Muscatello wine; and this wine is famous for having
killed a Dutchman here who drunk too much of it. The story is true, and thus. A
Dutchman of condition traueling through Italy, sent his man before him always,
with a charge to look out in the Inns were the best Wine was, and there write
upon the Wall of the Inn the word, EST, that is to say, Here it is. The servant
comeing hither a little before his Master, and finding the wine excellently
good, wrote upon the Wall EST, EST, EST, signifying thereby the superlatiue
goodness of this wine. The Master arriues, looks for his Man's handwriting; and
finding three ESTS, is over ioyed. In he goes, and resolves to lie there; and
he did so indeed: for here he lies still; buried first in wine, and then in his
grave. For drinking too much of this good wine, he dyed here, and was buried by
his servant in a Church here below the Hill, with this Epitaph upon his Tomb,
made by the same servant, Propter EST, EST, EST, herus meus mortuus est. It was
here also, that the gallantry of the brave Roman General Camillus appeared very
much. For while he was besieging this town, called then P^aliscum, or
Phalerii, a treacherous schoolmaster having brought unto him the chief of the
young youths of the town, whom he had deceitfully drawn unto the Roman Camp,
under pretense of taking the air a broad: by which means Camillus might have
frighted their Parents to an unworthy rendition: the brave Roman who scorned to
overcome by any other way then that of Gallantry, caused the school master to
be stripped and his hands to be tied behind his back, and to be led into the
town again, with the little youths whipping him as he went, till he had
brought them home again. This nobleness of Camillus took the town presently,
because it took with the townsmen; who admireing the Romans Generosity,
submitted willingly to Camillus, who had chosen rather to take towns By this
own Valor, then by other men's iniquity: Indeed (as Valerius Maximus says) it
did not become Rome built by the son of Mars, to take towns otherwise then
Martially.

From Montesiascone we went down the Hill by an easy descent unto Viterbo.
Viterbo.
This is an Episcopal Seat, standing in a wholesome air, and therefore called
Viterbium, as it where, Vita Vrbium. Here are excellent fountains of water, and
store of them: but its pity none of them runn with good wine, to make a mends
for the bad, which are most of them Vini cotti. The two factions here of the
Gatti and the Maganesi (these standing for the Vrsini, those for the Colonnesi)
ruined heretofore Viterbo over and over again. In the Domo there are the
tombs of 4 Popes, as also in the Franciscans Church some tombs of Popes, and
of S. Rosa: you see the body of that Saint yet entire though buried above 100
years ago. She lies along in her tomb, and is seen by the drawing of a curtain
from before her.

Here Is an Academy of wits called Gli Ostinati, to show perchance, The Accademy
of Wits.
that a man cannot be learned without obstinate labor and pains. Hence the
Poet makes his learned man to be one who multum sudauit and alsit: and Persius
tells us, that his delight was to grow pale with obstinate night study: Velle
suum cuique est etc.

At me nocturnis juuat impallescere chartis. About a mile from Viterbo stands a
neat Church and Convent called Madonna del Querco, and as far again beyond
that, a fine house with a garden of water works and Fountains, worth seeing.

From Viterbo (being upon our own horses) we went to see Caprarola a stately
House belonging to the Duke of Parma. Caprarola
The house is held to be one of the finest in Italy for Architecture. Its
stands a little out of the trauelers rode, but not of his way: for its much in
a man's way to see such a lovely house as this. It stands upon the side of a
hill, and from one of the Balconies it shows you Rome some two and thirty miles
off. Its built in a Pentagone (if I remember well) without, and round within.
The chambers for all that, are square, and well proportioned. The chief of
these chambers are painted by the hand of Pietro Orbista, flourishing thus upon
the noble actions of Paulus III. Among the other chambers, the whispering
chamber is curious: for four men here standing each one in one of the four
corners of this great chamber, hear distinctly what any of them whispers in a
low tone in his corner, their faces being turned to the wall; and yet those
that stand in the midst of the chamber cannot hear it. The other chamber is no
less curious where standing in the midst of it, and stamping hard with your
foot, those that are without at the door think they hear the cracks or reports
of Pistols. The other rooms here also, as the kitchen all of one stone, the
low Cave also with the pillar in it, cut likewise out of a rock, and bearing up
the whole pauement of the round court which lets light into this Cave by diverse
round grates of iron, are worth the beholding: Then the Garden upon the
Hillside with the great variety of waterworks, grottes, and wetting sports, are
all curious things. Having walked this garden about, you will deserve after so much
water, a little wine, which will not be wanting to you from the rare cellar
lyeing under the great Terrasse before the house: and perchance you will think the
wineworks here as fine as the waterworks.

From Caprarola we fell into our way again at Monterosa, Monterosa.
from whence passing by Bacano, and the Hosteria del Storto, we came at night
to Rome.

All the way from Monterosa to Rome almost, belonged anciently to the Veientes
(so called, says Berosus, from their carrying about with them in carts, all
their goods) Near to Bacan is a lake out of which runns the river Varca, Varca.
anciently called Cremera, near unto which the Veientes killed in one battle,
three hundred Fabii, that is, the whole family of the Fabii (who had vowed
themselves to death for the commonwealths service) except one little boy not
able to bear arms, from whom Fabius Maximus, The terror of Hannibal, and
Romes buckler descended.

Upon this rode also stood anciently the town Veii, Veii.
a town which held out tenn summers against the Romans, and stood in need of
no less man then Camillus to take it. This town was once so great, that Rome
being destroyed almost by the Gauls, the Senators held a consultation in the
Comitium, whether they should retire to Veii, and leave Rome quite, or rebuild
again Romes walls: but during this consultation, the troops returning out of
garrison arrived by chance into the Comitium, where the Centurion entering, and
not thinking the Senators had been there, cried out to the Standardbearer,
Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 5.
Signifer Statue signum, hic optime manebimus: which words the Senators
hearing, cried out to one an other; Accipimus omen; and presently laid aside
all further thought of retireing to Veii.

Some twelve miles before we came to Rome, we saw the Cupola of S. Peter's
Church, and were as glad to see it a far off, as the weary Trojans in Aeneas
his company, were glad to see Jtaly after so much wandering. Some few hours
after, having passed by an old tomb, which some call Neros Tomb, and over the
Ponte Molo (of which more in my 2. part) we entered into Rome by the Via
Flaminea, and Porta del Populo.

The end of the First Part.
THE VOYAGE OF ITALY: OR A COMPLETE IOVRNEY THROVGH ITALY. THE SECOND PART WITH
THE CHARACTERS OF THE People, and the description of the chief Towns,
Churches, Monasteries, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures,
Statues, Antiquities: AS ALSO OF THE INTEREST, Government, Riches, Force, etc.
of all the Princes.

By RICHARD LASSELS Gent. Opus posthumum: Corrected and set forth by his old
friend and fellow Traveler S. W.

PRINTED AT PARIS By VINCENT DV MOVTIER, M.DC.LXX.

THE SECOND PART OF THE VOYAGE OF ITALY.
BEING arrived at Rome, we lodged in an Inn for three, or four days, till we
had found out, and furnished, a house to our satisfaction. That done I began
presently my Inquest, and made Hue and Cry after every little thing which time
seemed to have robbed us of.

But as we approach not to great persons in Italy without informing our selves
first of their titles; that we may know how to style them: so before. I bring
my Reader acquainted with Rome, I think it not a miss to tell him how this
great City is commonly called.

And although Rome were anciently styled the Head, and Mistress of the world;
an Earthly Goddess; The Eternal City; The Compendium of the World; The Common
Mother, and Nurce of all Virtues; (while she was yet Heathen;) Yet sinc her
Ladyship was Baptized and became Christian (though she have had great Elogies
made of her by the Holy Fathers,) I find no Title so honorable to her as that
of Roma la Santa, How Rome is styled.
Rome the Holy; which is given her by the Common Proverb; and common Proverbs
are nothing else but the observation of common Sense: For whereas the other
Cities of Italy are Prouerbially called either Fair, Gentile, Rich, Proud,
Fat, or Great; as Florence, Naples, Venice, Genua, Bologna, Milan; Rome only
is styled the Holy: Roma la Santa.
and this deservedly, for many reasons.

First, For being the Seat of Christ's Vicar upon Earth, S. Peter and his
Successors, to the number of 240 and odd Popes.

2. For having been watered at the roots by the preaching and blood of the two
glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. Which made S. Leo, speaking to Rome of
these two great Apostles, Sermon. 1. de Natal. Apost. Petri Paul.
make her this Apostrophe. Hi sunt qui te ad hanc gloriam prouexerunt, vt gens
sancta, populus electus, ciuitas Sacerdotalis and Regia, per sacram Beati Petri
sedem caput orbis effecta, latius praesideres religione diuina quam dominatione
terrena.

3. For having been looked upon in all ages, as the Center of Catholic
Communion: and the place where the Matrix and Radix Ecclesia, the Mother Church
and the Radical Church (as S. Cyprian calls her) did flourish always.

4. For having been washed and purged in the blood of so many thousand Martyrs
in the primitive times, which even baptized Rome a new, and made it be called
by Holy Fathers Nona Sion: a New Sion.

5. For having so many Saints bodies lyeing in its Churches; and so many
Churches within its precincts, which are above there hundred in all.

6. For having been the happy occasion of converting most of the Nations of
Europe, and many others out of Europe, unto the faith of Christ, by Prachers
sent from thenc.

7. For haueing been the Depositary (as S. Irenaeus calls her) of the Holy
Apostolical Traditions and doctrine, which have always been conserved in her
Church.

8. For having always conserved the Symbol of the creed inuiolably (says S.
Hierome) and for never having runn in a by-channel of error.

Besides these foresaid reasons, Rome may deservedly be called Holy, for the
many and singular acts of Charity which are done there daily more then in any
other place. Great Charityes in Rome.
Charity is the Queen of Virtues; and if ever I saw this Queen in her throne,
it was in Rome. For there I saw no evil, either of body, or mind, but it had
its remedy, if curable; at least its comforts if incurable.

For the first, to wit, Evils of body, Remedies for evils of the body.
it has is Hospitals, and those many, and many of those are Hospitals in
folio. Besides no Pilgrim comes to Rome, but he finds Rome, as Adam did
Paradise, with the table covered, and bed made ready for him. Poor young girls
find portions either for husbands or nunneries, according to their choice;
Infants whom cruel and unlawful mothers, like wolfes, expose to death, Rome
receives to life; Meretrices lupas vocabant vnde Luparia. Augustine. de Ciuit.
Deil. 18. c. 21.
and thinks it but a suitable Antipelargesis to nurrish wolfes children, seeing a
she wolf nurrished her Founder being exposed by men. Fools too and Madmen,
so much the more miserable, as not being so much as sensible of their condition
(for saepe calamitatis solatium est nosse sortem suam) have here those that
take care of them. Poor men find Hospitals when they are sick; Quint. Curt.
and gentlemen, whom nature has not exempted from common miseries, Rome
exempts from common Hospitals; and not being able to give them better health,
she gives them at least better accommodation in their sickness. Here you shall
find an Apothecaries shop, founded by Cardinal Francis Barberin with an yearly
revenue of twelve thousand crowns, and this for ever; to furnish the poor
with physic gratis.

Here you shall find the Hospital of the Holy Trinity which in the Jubily
year of Clement the VIII, is found to have treated at table in one day fifteen
thousand pilgrims: and in the whole year five hundred thousand. The last
Iubily year 1650, I my self was present one day, when the said Hospital
treated nine thousand Pilgrims that day: the Pope himself ( Jnnocent the Tenth)
and many of the Cardinals having been there to wash the feet of the pilgrims,
Almost every nation has an Hospital in Rome.
and to serve them at table. Add to this, that every nation has here its
several Hospital and Refuge, with Church and Churchmen to serve it. As the
English College, once an Hospital for the English: That of the Anima, for the
Germans: That of the S. Lewis, for the French: That of S. Iacomo, for the
Spaniads: That of S. Antony of Padua, for the Portuguesi: That of S. Julian for
the Flemmings: That of S. Ambrose for the Lombards: That of S. Iuo for the
Britons: That of S. Hierome for the Illyrians: That of S. Marie Egyptiaca for
the Armenians: That of S. Stephano for the Hungarians: That of S. Stanislaus
for the Polonians. Besides a world of others. Nay almost every corporation or
body of artisans have their Hospital among themselves, which they maintain. In
the Church of the 12 Apost. they choose yearly 12 noblemen and one Prelat who
is called their Prior: These go into every corner of Rome to seek out poor
men who are ashamed to beg, and yet are in great want. These bashful poor men
put their names into a coffer well locked up and standing in a public place,
by which means these charitable noblemen find them out and relieve them.

What shall I say of the public charity of the Pope himself well known to
all? Besides a world of private charities which he gives by his Secreto
Limosini^ro to those that are ashamed to beg publicly.

The like do many Cardinals by their own hands; and in that high measure, that
Cardinal Montalto (to name no more) is found by his books of Accounts, to have
given away above a hundred and seven thousand crowns to the poor. Of which
pious Cardinal I cannot omit to write this following story, as I have learned
it from very good relation.

An ingenious piece of Charity.
A poor widow of Rome mother of one only daughter both young and hansome, got
her living honestly by her own, and her daughters labor; and rubbed out
poorly, but yet honestly: Now it happened, that this widow falling sick, and
her daugther haueing enough to do to tend her, their wrork went on so faintly,
and their gains came in so slowly, that at her recovery* she found her purse as
much spent, as her person. Whereupon being called on for the quarter rent of
her chamber, and not knowing what to do, she was advised by her Confessarius
to go to Cardinal Montalto (who gave public audienc thric a week to all the
poor in Rome) and to beg as much of him, as would pay her little debt. Pressed
therefore by her great necessity, and emboldened by the fame of the charity of
this good Cardinal, she entered the palace, and found him in his great hall,
giving care and alms to all those that could give him a good account of their
wants. In her turn she, and her young daughter approached unto him sitting at
his tables end; and expresing modesty her wants caused by her three months
sickness, she humbly besought his Eminence, to give her five crowns for to pay
the rent of her chamber, and pacify her Landlord who otherwise threatened to
put her out of doors. The Cardinal seeing as much modesty in her looks as
sickness in her countenance; and likeing well, that she did not go about to
fright him into charity, by vrgeing the danger of being forced one day to
expose her daughter to lewd courses (a common Rhetorical figure of begars in
all contryes) wrote down in a little paper, 50 crowns to be given to her; and
folding up the paper, he bid her carry it to his servant below at the entrance
of the palace, who kept the Cardinals bills and paid the contents of them.
She did so with humble prayers of thankfulness; and the servant upon sight of
the paper, presently threw her out 50 crowns, and bid her make an acquittance
for it. The poor woman seeing 50 crowns counted out for her who had asked but
5; and fearing least the servant upon sight of her hansome daughter, might have
done this by way of bribery, told him smartly, that though she were poor, yet
she was honest, and that she scorned to go by one corruption to an other. The
honest servant ciuily replied, that he understood not her words: nor I your
deeds, said she, I asked the Cardinal 5 crowns, he granted me my request, and
why then do you offer me 50 crowns? The honest servant, to show his innocence,
shows his masters hand writeing importing 50 crowns. Then your masters hand,
said she, for haste, out shot his intentions: I asked him for 5 crowns, and
more in conscience I cannot take. The servant, though he knew his masters
generosity, yet to take all scruple from the poor woman, locked up his monye
and papers, and desired the poor woman to go up with him to the Cardinal
again, to clear this doubt. The Cardinal hearing from his servant the whole
passage and that the poor woman was affrayd his hand had been mistaken in
writeing 50 crowns instead of 5; it is true, said he, my hand was mistaken
indeed; and calling for his pen again, as if he would have corrected the
cipher which made the bill 50, he put in an other cipher, and so made it 500
crowns; reading it now a loud to his servant and the poor woman; commanding
her to bestow her daughter with that money; and if it where not enough, to come
again to him, and he would make it up. A true Roman Charity.

Remedies for evils of the mind.
As for those Charityes which concern the mind, if a Great King of Egypt wrote
over his Library door, Osymunduas: apud Herodot.
Medicina Animi, Physic for the mind: here in Rome I find store of such
Physic in Libraryes, Colleges, Monasteries, and devout companies. And first
for Libraries; you shall find here (beside the Libraries of every Religious
house) the incomparable Library of the Vatican: Public Libraries
(of which more below) those also of Cardinal Barberin; of the Duke of Altemps;
that of the Sapienza; and that of the Augustin^; the last two being open to all
men every day, with a courteous gentleman to reach you any book, and a learned
Manuscript in folio adressing you to the authors that treat of any subject you
desire to be informed of, which affords great help to the painful student.
Then the Colleges and Seminaries of almost all nations where youths are both
fed and bred up in learning for nothing. Colleges.


Add to this, the Variety of Monasterys and Conuents, Monasteries.
both of men and women, where they may hide themselves securely donectranseat
iniquitas.

Then the taking away of young girls, Houses for young girls.
at ten or twelve years old, from their poor suspected mothers; and the
bringing them up virtuously under careful matrons of known Virtue, till they
either choose the Nuptial Flammeum, or the sacred Velum.

Then the Remedies for ill married women, Remedies for ill married women.
whose unadvised choice (marriages being often made for Interest) or
incompatible humors force to a corporal separation* and least such unfortunate
women should either live incontinently indeed, or give suspicion of it they are
provided here with a house where they live retiredly under Lock and Key, till
they either reconcile themselves again to their husbands; or upon just
occasions, leave them for ever. Over the door of this house is written, Per le
done mal maritate,

The Convent of Penitents.
Then the Convent of Penitent whores (that none may perish in Rome who have a
mind to be saved) called Sancta Maria Magdalena in Corso; where many of those
poor Magdelens have led such penetential lives (as the bloody walls of their
Celles, caused by their frequent disciplining, showed to all Rome in a
conflagration of that monastery) that Paulus Quintus himself being informed of
it, would needs be carried thither, to see those bloody chambers from the
street; and having seen them, wept for joy; and I can scarce hold from cryeing
out: O foelix culpa!

What shall I say of the Congregregation of Aduocats and Attorneis, Charity of
Lawiers in Rome.
instituted in Rome, where they meet once a week to examine poor men's law
suits; and either dehort them from proceeding in bad causes; or prosecute good
causes for them at the cost of this Congregation?

What shall I say of several pious Clergy men (especially the good Priests of
the Oratory, Broken-friend-setters.
happy in this employment, who make it their task to reconcile disagreeing
families, and with great zeal and piety exhort first the one, then the other
of the parties, interuene between them, speak well of the one to the other,
clear and take away jealous misvnderstandings, and in fine, piece again
broken neighbors?

What shall I say of the four Sermons daily in the Chiesa noua by the most
learned and good Priest of the Oratory, Four Sermons daily in one place in Rome.
who being most of them learned men, as Baronius, Bosius, Iustinianus, Renaldus
etc and able to fly high, yet in their sermons stoup to a low pitch, and a
popular facile way, which aims rather at conversion, then ostentation; and
does great good, though it make little noise? Dominus in le^i aura.

Weekly sermons to the Jews.
What shall I say of the weekly sermon to the Jews upon Saturday; where they
are bound to be present to the number of three hundred, and where the Pope
entertains a learned Preacher to convince them out of their own scriptures;
and those that are converted, are provided for in the Hospital of the
Catechumens, till they be thoroughly instructed? I have seen diverse of them
baptized.

The scholae Pi^.
What shall I say of the Scholae piae in Rome, a company of good Religious men,
who look like Jesuits, save only that they go barefoot in sandals? These good
Fathers make a profession to teach poor boys gratis their first grammar
radiments, and to make them fit to be sent to the Jesuits schools; and having
thaught them thus in the schools, they accompany them home in the streets,
least they should either learn waggery as they go home, or practice it. Nay
these humble men make it their profession not to teach higher schools, where
there might be some profit and honor, at least some satisfaction and pleasure:
but they content themselves to go bare foot, and teach only the lower schools
and first rudiments; by which they neither grow wiser, nor richer: A strange
mortifyed trade; But Beati pauperes spiritu.

What shall I say of the Fathers of the Agonizants, The Fathers of the
Agonizants.
whose vocation is to be the Seconds of those who f^ght against death in self;
that is* whose profession is, to assist those that are in the agony of death;
and to help them to make then those pious Acts which Christians should most of
all then rouse themselves up to?

What can be said more? yes Rome not content, to have fed, to have bred, to
have converted, baptized reconciled the living; and assisted the dyeing; she
extends her charity even beyond death it self, and has institued a pious
Confraternity called, La Compagnia de' Morti, La Compagnia de Morti.
whose office is to bury the dead, and to visit those that are condemned, and
by praying with them, exhorting them, and accompanying them to the execution,
help them to dye penitently, and bury them being dead, and pray for their souls
being buried; After which, charity can do no more to man: and therefore I will
conclude, that seeing such singular acts of charity, both for body and mind,
are practiced no where so much as in Rome, its true which I assumed above, that
Rome deserves to be called, The Holy.

Haueing said thus much ^f the title of Rome, I will now, make my Reader better
acquainted with her, by describing the particularyties which I observed here.
And that I may not ramble in writeing of Rome, as most men do in visiting of
it, I will begin at the Bridge called now Ponte Angelo, and from thenc make the
whole gyro of the City in order. Ponte Angelo.


Arriving then at the Bridge called anciently Pons Aelius because it was built
by the Emperor Aelius Adrianus, but now called Ponte Angelo, because it was
upon this Bridge that S. Gregory the Great saw an Angel upon the Moles Adriani
sheathing his sword after a great plague: here we saw the stately new
decoration of Iron work with the twelve Marble statues set upon it by this
present Pope Clement the IX. and looking down into the river on the left hand,
we saw the ruins of the Triumphal bridge.

This bridge was called the Triumphal Bridge, The Triumphal Bridge.
because over it, Triumphs were accustomed to pass anciently to the Capitol.
This made it so proud, that it scorned that any rustiks, or country fellows,
should pass over it; and got a Decree of the Senate for that purpose. But
pride will have a fall; and the proud Triumphal Bridge has got such a great
one, that there is but just so much of it left, as to show, where it was once; so
true is the saying of Ausonius, Mors etiam saxis nominibusque venit.

At first the Romans were modest enough in their Triumphs, as in all other
things: hence Camillus was content with four white horses in his Chariot; but
afterward luxe and excess banishing out of the City, old modesty, they began
to strive who should be the most vain in this point. Hence Pompey was drawn
in triumph, Vanity in Triumphs
by four Elephants; Mark-Antony, by four Lions; Nero by four Hermaphrodites,
which were all four both horses and mares: Heliogabulus by four Tigers;
Aurelianus by six staggs; and Firmicus by eight Austridges.

Castle Angelo.
At the end the Ponte Angelo stands the Castle Angelo, so called because, as I
said before, S. Gregory in a solemn Procession during the plague saw an Angel
upon the top of Moles Adriani sheathing his sword, to signify, that God's anger
was appeased. Before this Miracle happened, it was called Moles Adriani because
the Emperor Adrian was buried here. It was built anciently in a round form,
of vast stones, going up in three rows, or stories lesser and lesser, till you
came to the top; where stood mounted that great pineapple of brass guilt, which
we see now in the garden of the Beluedere. Round about it were set in the wall
great marble pillars, and round about the several stories stood a world of
Statues. This Moles being found a strong place, Bellisarius put men into it to
defend it against the Goths; and they defended themselves in it a great while,
by breaking the Statues in pieces, and throwing them upon the heads of the
Goths that besieged them. Since that time, Diverse Popes have turned it into a
formal Castle. Boniface the VIII, Alexander the VI, and Urban the VIII, have
rendered it a regular Castle, with five strong bastions, store of good Cannons,
and a constant garrison maintened in it. From this Castle I saw diverse times
these Fortifications; and below diverse great pieces of artillary made of the
brass taken out of the Pantheon; and they showed us one great Cannon which was
made of the brazen nails only that nailed that brass to the walls of the
Pantheon; the length and form of those nails, is seen upon that Cannon, to
show unto posterity how great they were, with these words upon it, ex cla^is
trabialibus Porticus Agrippae. In this Castle are kept prisoners of State; the
5 milions laid up there by Sixtus Quintus; the Popes rich triple crowns called
Regni, and the chief Registers of the Roman Church. From the top also of this
Castle you see distinctly the long Corridor, or Gallery, which runns from the
Popes Palace of the Vatican to this Castle, The long Corridor from the Palace
to the Castle.
for the Popes use in time of danger. It was made by Pope Alexander the VI. and
used by Clment the VII. who by it got safe into the Castle from the fury of the
German Soldiers, who being many of them Lutherans, swore they would eat a piece
of the Pope.

From hence entering into the Borgo, we went toward S. Peter's Church, and in
the way stepped into the Church of the Carmelits called Santa Maria Transpontina,
Santa Maria Transpontina.
were in a Chapel on the left hand as you enter, are seen two pillars of stone
enchased in wood, to the which S. Peter and S. Paul were tied when they were
whipped before their death, according to the Romans custom. Here Is also the
Head of S. Basil the Greek Father surnamed the Great. Here Is also a curious
picture of S. Barbara in the Vault, by Caualier Gioseppe.

Going on from hence, we came presently to the Palace of Campeggi, so called
because it belonged to Cardinal Campeggi the Popes Legate in England, to whom
Henry the VIII gave it. Heretofore it belonged to the English Ambassadors, The
English Ambassadors Palace
and was one of the best in Rome, both for being near the Popes Palace, and
also for that it was well built by famous Bramante. It belongs now to Cardinal
Colonna.

Over against it stands a little Piazza, with a fine fountain, and joining to
it, a little Church called, San Jacomo Scozza Caualli, S. Iacomo Scozza Caualli.
in which, under an Altar on the right hand, I saw the stone upon which Abraham
offered to sacrifice his Son Isaac: and under an other Altar on the left
hand, the Stone upon which our Savior was placed when he was presented in the
Temple. Both these were brought, or sent to Rome, by Helen mother of the
Emperor Constantin the Great,

Presently after, you come to the Piazza of S. Peter, The Portico of the Piazza
of S. Peter,
built round about with a noble Portico of freestone borne up by four rows of
stately round pillars, under which not only the Procession upon Corpus Christi
day, marches in the shade; but also all people may go dry, and out of the sun,
in summer, or winther, unto S. Peter's Church, or the Vatican Palace. This
Portico is built in an oual form, and fetches in the great Piazza, which is
before S. Peter's Church, and therefore can be no less then half a mile in
compass. This noble structure was begun by Alexander the VII, and half of it
finished, and the other half is now almost finished. I never saw any thing more
stately then this. The number of the pillars, and of the statues on the top, I
do not justly remember. In the midst of this Piazza stands the famous Guglia;
The great Guglia before S. Peter's.
which was brought out of Egypt in the time of the old Romans, and dedicated to
Augustus Caesar and Tiberius, as the words upon it import. It lay hid long in
Neros Circus, which was there where now S. Peter's Sacristy is; and at last
Sixtus Quintus having proposed great rewards to him that would venture to set
it up here without breaking, it was happily undertaken, by Dominico Fontana a
rare Architect of Como; and so placed as you see it now. The manner of bringing
it out of Egypt, and of erecting it here are both painted in Fresco upon the
Walls of the Vatican Library: This Gulia is all of one stone except the basis;
and it has no Hieroglyphes upon it. The stone is a Granite, or speckled
marble, which together with its Basis, is a hundred and eight foot high. It
rests upon four lions of brass guilt; and at the top of it is planted a cross
of brass mounted upon three Montains with a starr over them (the arms of
Sixtus Quintus whose name was Montalto.) Within the Cross is a piece of the
Holy Cross of our Savior, encluded here by Sixtus Quintus. The whole Guglia
is said to weigh 9^6148 pound weight. I wonder what scales they had to weigh it
with.

The Fountains.
On each side of this Guglia is to stand a fair Fontaine, one whereof is that
which is seen there now; which throws up such a quantity of water, that it
makes a mist always about it, and oftentimes a a rainbow, when the Sun
strikes obliquely upon it.

The Piazza,
This Piazza is capable of two hundred thousand men, and delivers you up to the
Stairs which lead you up to the Church of S. Peter.

Comeing therefore near to S. Peter's Church, S. Peter's.
I was glad to see that noble structure, where greatness and neatness, bulk
and beauty, are so mingled together, that its neither neat only, like a spruce
gallery; nor vast only, like a great hall; but its rather like a proper man,
and yet well proportioned. You mount up to this Church by an easy ascent of
four and twenty steps of marble stairs, The marble steps up to S. Peter's Chapter
as long as the frontispice of the Church is wide; These stairs where those of
the old Church of S. Peter; and Baronius observes, that when the Emperor
Charlemagne mounted up those stairs first, Baron ad an. 774.
he kissed every step as he went up.

These Stairs lead you up to the Frontispice of the Church, The Frontispice.
which has five doors in it, letting you into the Porch; and these doors are
cheeked with vast round pillars of freestone twenty four foot in compass, and
eighty six in height. Over these pillars runns the architraue, and over it, the
Lodge or great Balcone, where the Pope is crowned, and where he gives his
Benediction upon Easterday. Over this Lodge runns a continual Baluster or row
of rayles, upon which stand thirteen vast statues of our Savior and his
Apostles cut in stone.

Entering into the Porch, The Porch
you will admire the length, breadth, and height of it. For the length of it,
its two hundred eighty nine foot: the breadth forty four foot: tho height, a
hundred thirty three foot. Its adorned on both sides with great marble pillars,
and a curious guilt roof. In fine, this Porch any where else would be a hansome
Church. The Church it self.


Over against the fiues doors of this Porch, stand the five doors of the
Church; one whereof is called, the Porta Sancta, Porta Santa.
and only open in the Iubily year: the others are daily open; and the two
principal doors are called, Valuae Sancti Petri, Valu^ S. Petri,
and are covered with brass by the command of Eugenius the IV, whose memorable
actions, to wit, the crowning of the Emperor Sigismond, and the reunion of the
Greek Church with the Latin, are expressed in them. These Valuae are thirteen
foot wide, and forty five high; and to them all Popes Bulls are nailed at
their publication.

The inside of the Church of S. Peter,
Entering into the Church, I found it to be built in cross wise; containing in
length five hundred and twenty foot, and three hundred eighty five in breadth.
So that it passes in greatness the famous Temples of antiquity, to wit,
Salomons Temple, long threescore cubits: the Temple of Diana in Ephesus, long
four hundred twenty five foot; and the great Mosky at Fez, long a hundred and
fifty cubits.

The roof, To roof.
or vault of this Church, is arched with great squar^, and each squar is
adorned with a great guilt ^ose, which almost fills the squar. This roof is
borne up by great pillars of freestone of a squar form, whose capitelli are
curiously wrought after the Corinthian order, and joined to one another above
by arches and a perpetual cornice, over which are cut in stone the statues of
several moral virtues. These pillars are a hundred and five foot in compass,
and distant forty foot one from another. On that side of them which looks
toward the body of the Church; they are to be ouercrusted with white marble,
with two rows of niches in them for great statues of Brass guilt. The other
sides of these pillars are already adorned with a neat ouercrusting of a redish
marble beset with the heads of the p^imitiue martyred Popes, held up by two
Angels, and with the pigeon of Innocent the X, (who made this decoration) and
all these are in mezzo rilieuo, and of pure white alabaster. Behind these
pillars is a large I Will, or passage, and behind that I Will immediately, stand fair
Chapels which flanck up this Church notably, and each Chapel is graced with a
little Cupola of its own.

In the midst of the Cross building of this Church is mounted the great
Cupola, which looks like a great crown wherewith this Queen of Churches is
crowned. It rests upon four Pilastri or great pillars which make the corners of
the cross of this Church, and from them it rises into such a high Vault, that
it seems to walk into heaven. Its full as round as the Pantheon in Rome, that
is, it carries the compass of an hundred and seauenty paces, as you may
easily measure upon the circle of white marble in the pauement, which
enuironeth the Altar of S. Peter, and is made there a purpose perpendicularly
under the Cupola to show its greatness. The inside of this Cupola is curiously
painted with pictures in Mosaic work representing a ^eauen: indeed nothing
but heaven it self can be finer, or higher. So that I may say truly to Rome
with Rutillius, Non procul a coelo per tua templa sumus. In a word this Cupola
is the boldest piece of Architecture that perhaps the world has seen; and it
was the last and greatest work of Sixtus Quintus his purse.

The four Pilastri upon which this Cupola rests, The four great Pilastri.
are vast squar pillars a hundred and twenty foot in compass, and capable of
stairs within them, and large Sacristyes above, for the Holy Relics that are
kept in them; to wit, the Volto Santo, or print of our Saviors face, which he
imprinted in the handkercher of S. Veronica: The piece of the Holy Cross: the
top of the lance wherewith our Saviors side was pierced: and the Head of S.
Andrew the Apostle^ translated hither into his Brothers Church by Pius
secundus. Hence in these great pillars, are cut Niches and in them placed four
vast Statues of white marble. Under the Relick of the Volto Santo stands the
Statue of the Veronica: under the piece of the Holy Cross, the statue of S.
Helen. Under the top of the lance, the Statue of Longinus: under the Head of S.
Andrew, The statue of S. Andrew. These statues are of Colossean greatness, and
made by masters as great as themselves.

The High Altar.
In the midst of the Cross of this Church, and perpendiculary under the very
Cupola, stands the High Altar of this Church. This Altar may well be called,
the High Altar (Altar quasi alta Ara) or the Altar mains, being the noblest
Altar in the world, both for matter and form. The Altar it self stands over
the Tomb S. Peter, The Tomb of S. Peter.
half of whose body, together with half of S. Paul's, lies buried here; and the
other half of their bodies in S. Paul's Church. Over this Altar four stately
pillars of brass bear up a Canopie of the same metal, wrought about the edge
like a Canopie indeed, with Valances and a guilt fringe, yet all of brass.
Over the corners of this Canopie stand four great Angels of brass guilt, and
in the midst of it, is mounted high a round ball of brass guilt, and a fair
Cross upon it of the same metal.

These four pillars are as great in compase (I speak by experience having taken
the measure of them upon their model) as three ordinary men are thick. The 4.
brass pillars of the Altar.
Their form is is serpentine, wreathed about with vinetrees and leaves; but
all of brass; as also adorned with little Angels of brass clambering up those
leaves and branches, and with Bees here and there also, relating to Pope Vrbans
arms, who made them. These pillars are fifty foot high from the ground. Every
on of them weighs five and twenty thousand pound weight; and all of them
together make this Altar, The Altar antonomastically, as this Church is The
Church of the world. So that if the Climax be true (as ^rue it is) that
Churches are for Altars, Altars for Priests, Priests for God, I know no
Religion which pays such honorable Tributs of worship to God, as the Roman
Catholic religion does, which has the noblest Church, the noblest Altar, the
noblest Priest, the noblest Sacrifice, and all this to the noblest God; Deus
Deorum Dominus. Hence the Pope may say with Solomon: 2. Paxalip. c. 2.
Domus quam aedificare cupio magna est, magnus est enim Dominus noster super
omnes Deos.

The Confessio S. ^etri.
Behind this Altar (not in respect of him that comes into the Church by the
great door, but in respect of him that stands at the Altar) stands the
Confession of S. Peter; so called because that in the primitive times, the
place where the bodies of Saints and Martyrs where kept, was called Confessio,
and in the Greek Church, Martyrium. For in ancient writers the word Confessor
was taken often for a martyr, who had confessed Christ so far as even to dye
for him: so that martyrs were sometimes called Confessors, and Confessors
Martyrs, though they did not actually dye in tormens; as you may see plainly in
the Anotations of learned Pamelius upon Tertullians book ad Martyrs. Now,
number. 1.
this place because it conserues the body (at least, half of the body) of S.
Peter, is called, the Confession of Peter. As for this Confession, its made
like a hollow cave open above, and rayled about with low rayles, so that the
people kneeling, may look down to the iron door and grate, behind which the
Tomb of S. Peter stands under the Altar: for these rayles fetch in a
demicircle from one corner of the Altar to the other. There are also a double
pair of open stairs, of some twelve steps a piece, for those to descend by who
officiate, and there are two little half doors which let them in to those
stairs. And I conceive, at the bottom of these little doors, the Limina
Apostolorum to be. The Limina Apostolorum.
For though I know its generally held, that to visit the Limina Apostolorum
(which Bishops by the Canon law are obliged unto) is to visit S. Peter's Church;
and that diverse learned Authors think the Limina Apostolorum, to be the very
steps of the entrance of the great door of the Church; yet I am of opinion,
that these little half doors, and the steps about the Altar are most properly
the Limina Apostolorum, because I found these very words written in golden
letters in the bottom of the like little doors which stand about the High Altar
in S. Paul's Church, where the other half of the bodies of S. Peter, and S. Paul
are intombed. Cubicularii S. Petri.


Round about this Church stand side Chapels, some six and twenty in all, Vid.
Anastas. Biblioth. in Marcello.
called ancienly Cubicula, and those whom we call Chaplains, were anciently
called Cubicularii: hence the title of Cubicularius S. Petri. Now these
Chapels have, for the most part, Paulin. Epist. 12. ad Sever.
some remarkable thing in them. In one of them, is always reserved the B.
Sacrament for the daily use of Pilgrims that desire to communicate in S. Peter's
Church, and other devout people. In that of S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Greg.
Nazianzens tomb.
is the body of that Saint translated hither out of the Church of the Nunns of
Campo Marzo. In the Chapel of the Canons, reposeth the body of S. Chrysostom.
S. Chrisostoms tomb.
In the Chapel called the Clementina, reposeth the body of S. Gregory the
great, S. Gregory's tomb.
who being Pope of Rome and moved by Godly instinction (as John Stow says)
sent Augustine, Iustus, Melitus, and other Monks living in the fear of God, to
convert the Angles, Stow in his Chronicles in Kentish Saxons.
or English to the faith of Christ; and therefore I took particular notice
often of his tomb, as being (as Venerable Bede calls him) our Apostle. In a
Chapel at the very further end of the Church, is set up the Chair of S. Peter;
The Chair of S. Peter.
held up by four Doctors of the Church, all cast in brass in a stately
posture. This Chair is of wood, but much spent with old age; and therefore Pope
Alexander the VII, caused it to be set up here and enchased curiously, to
preserve it. I once saw it near at hand, being exposed to public view in the
middle of the Church upon the Feast day of S. Peter's Chair in Rome. In an other
Chapel, is the Crucifix made three hundred years ago by rare Pietro Caualino.
In an other Chapel, you see cut in white marble the history of S. Leo's
meeting Attila out of Rome, and his deturning him from comeing any nearer to
the City.

The Chief Relics.
As for the Relics and bodies of Saints which are in this Church, besides those
mentioned already, there are the bodies of SS. Simon and Jude, of S.
Petronilla, of SS. Processus and Martinianus, of ten first Popes after S.
Peter; with a world of other precious Relics Kept in the Sacristy.

Some Tombs.
As for the Tombs which are in this Church above ground, they are these. That
of Sixtus IV. of Paulus III; of Urban the VIII; of Leo the XI. of Innocent the
VIII; of Gregory the XIII; of Innocent the X; and lastly that of the Countess
Matilde, the only secular person that I find to have a Tomb in this Church
above ground. Indeed she deserves well to lie in S. Peter's Church who deserved
to be called S. Peter's daughter; and she deserved this surname, for having
defended the Church so galantly it is greatest conflict Against Henry the IV.
Emp. and having endowed it with a good part of its Patrimony. Her body was
translated from Mantua hither in the year 1633. by the command of Pope Urban
the VIII.

Near the Confession of S. Peter, is an old brazen statue of S. Peter sitting,
with his hand up as giving his blessing; and holding his right foot a little
out, to be kissed. At first, some wonder to see devout people flocking thither,
and kissing the fotte of that statue, and putting their heads under that foot
when they have done; but when they are well informed, that all this is done
only to testify, that they submit themselves to the authority which was given
by our Savior, to S. Peter, and his Successors, they rest satisfied.

Over the Holy water pot on the left hand as you enter into the Church is seen
fastened to the wall, an old inscription upon a squar stone, importing, that
that was the very stone upon which the bodies of S. Peter and S. Paul where
divided, when half of their bodies was buried here and the other half in S.
Paul's Church, by S. Siluester.

Some prime Pictures.
As for the prime pictures that are in this Church; they are these: That of S.
Michel in Mosaic work is of the design of Caualier Gioseppe: as also the
design of the Masaick work in the Cupola. That of S. John Evangelist, and S.
Luke just under the Cupola are of the hand of Giouanni de Vechi. The picture
where S. Peter cures the lame man, is of the hand of Ludouico da Ciuoli. That
of the fall of Simon Magus is of the hand Vanni of Siena. That where S. Peter
is painted with Annanias dead before him, is of the hand of Caualier Rancalli.
That of the Altar of S. Gregory, is of the hand of Andrea Sacco Romano. That
of the creation of the world, is of Pietro Berettino de Cortona. That of Medica
fidei, is of the hand of Lanfranco.

Having thus seen the Church I went to see the Sacristy of this Church where by
express leave from the Monsignor, The Sacristy of S. Peter.
who has the chief care, as well as the Keys of it, I saw the Holy Relics, and
neat Church plate belonging to this Church. The Relics are many, and richly
enchased in gold and silver. The Church plate is both plentiful, and of great
value, as many Chalices of pure gold set with jewels, hugo syuer Candlestiks
with a Crucifix of the same as heavy as a man can lift, with a world of other
such like plate. But that which pleased me most here, was the ancient Picture
of S. Peter and S. Paul, An ancient Picture.
which saint Syluester showed to Constantin the Great to confirm the truth of
his Vision. The Picture is very old, yet the faces are perceuable, and that is
all. Its set in a frame of silver. The history of it is both long and known:
and if any man be ignorant of it, let him read it in Baronius. There is also in
the said Sacristy an other picture nailed high upon the wall, which was made by
N. Carpi with his fingers instead of a pencil.

The Grotte under S. Peter's Church.
Being now in the Sacristy, I got leave to go down into the Grotte under this
Church, with a practical Clericus with a lighted torch to show me and explicate
unto me the most considerable things that are there: as the Tomb of S. Peter
with an Altar over it, at which any Bishop or priest may say Mass: a world of
ancient statues (set in the low Chapels, and in the wall of this Grotte) which
belonged to the old Church of S. Peter, and showing the antiquity of pictures
in Churches: the Tomb of the most honorable Churchman of our Nation, Pope
Adrian the IV, the only English Pope that ever was: Adrian the IV an English
man.
the Tomb of the Emperor Otho the second, in a great porphiry shrine: the
Tombs of diverse other great Popes and Cardinals: and in sine, the tombestone
of Charlotte of Luzignan, Queen of Jerusalem, Cyprus, and Armenia, who having
been driven out of her kingdom by her Bastard Brother, came to Rome in Sixtus
Quartus his time, and there dyed. She transfered before her death, her right to
the kingdom of Cyprus, to the Duke of sauoy her brother in law; which makes
that Duke give a close crown over his arms, and be styled by his subjects,
Altezza Reale, Royal Highness.

Having thus seen this Church both within and underground, S. Peter's Church
above.
I was desirous to see it also above. Ascending therefore by a fair staircase I
arrived at the great terrasse over the Lodge, and there saw the thirteen
statues of our Savior and the twelve Apostles near hand, which seem below
little taller then the stature of our tallest men, and yet here above are
eighteen foot high. There also I saw the several little Cupolas, which give
light to the side Chapels of this Church, and look like the issue and spawne
of the Great Cupola. Then mounting a little higher. I beheld the rare fabric
of the mother Cupola, both within and without. The stairs to mount up into it:
the double vault in it, and stairs between the two vaults: the lantern upon
the Cupola: the narrow stairs in one of the pillars of that Lantern up to the
Ball: lastly the straight neck of the passage into the Ball, and the Ball it
self, are all worth particular observation, The round Ball capable of 30 man.
as being the height of Architecture. The Ball it self of brass guilt is
capable of thirty men, though from below it looks only as big as twice a man's
head. We were eight in it at once; and I am sure we could have placed thrice as
many more. Upon the round Ball is mounted a great Cross of iron guilt to
signify, that the Virtue of the Cross by our Saviors passion, has triumphed
over the world, of which this round Ball is the express emblem. From this
Cupol^ we had a perfect View of Rome under us, and of all the Villas about it.
But nothing was so wonderful, as to see S. Peter's Church and Palace, look
like a town under us, which we knew to be but one Church and house.

You will wonder perchance too, when you shall hear that this Church is the
eight wonder of the world, Praise of S. Peter's Church.
that the Pyramids of Egypt, the walls of Babylon, the Pharos, Colossus, etc.
were but heaps of stones compared to this fabric: that it has put all
antiquity to the blush, and all posterity to a Non plus: that its several parts
are all incomparable Master-peeces: its pictures all originals: its statues
perfect models: That it has a revenue of above twenty thousand pounds a year
only for the fabric: that it has cost till the year 1654, The revenue of S.
Peter's Church.
(The accounts being then summed up) Forty millions of crowns: that most of
the Popes since Julius the II his time (and they have been twenty three in all)
have hartened and advanced this work* that the prime Architects of the world,
Sangalla, Bramante, Baldassere, Buonarota, Giacomo della Porta, Giouani
Fontana, Carlo Maderno, and now Caualiero Bernino, have brought, it on to this
perfection: that the whole Church it self is nothing but the Quintessence of
wit and wealth strained into a religious design of making a hansome house to
God, and of fulfilling, the divine oracle which promised; Aggae^^ 2.10.
that magna erit gloria domus istius nouissimae, plusquam primae.

Going at last out of this Church, and summing up in my thoughts all the
rarityes I had seen in it, I began to think of Ammonius (a holy primitive Saint
and afterward Bishop in the Council of Sardis) of whom its written, Baronius
an. 390 n. 5.
that comeing to Rome with S. Athanasius, he desired to see nothing there but
S. Peter's Church, and knew not the way to any place else; I think, that if this
good man had seen S. Peter's Church as it is now, he would never have cared for
seeing any thing else in the world, and would even have forgot his way home too.

The Vatican Palace.
Near to the Church of S. Peter, stands the Vatican Palace, where the Popes
use to winter. To describe it to you all at length, would take me up too much
time; nor indeed is it fit for me to dwell there. I will therefore pass
through it quickly, and rather point you out what is to be seen there, then paint
you out in words what I saw there.

1. From the Church of S. Peter you ascend into this Palace by an easy and
stately pair of stairs capable of ten men a breast. These stairs render you up
at the great Hall; called Sala Regia, The Sala Regia.
because the Pope receives here Ambassadors of Kings in their Embassies of
state. It is beautifyed with rare pictures in a great volume: as that of the
Emperor Frederick kissing the Popes foot, of the hand of Gioseppe del Saluiati
Garfagnino. That of the Ligue in France: that of Coligni: that of the Pope
condemning heresy: That of the Pope returning from Auignon, are all of the hand
of Georgio Vassari. That of the Emperor Charles the Great signing the Brief of
the donation, is of the hand of Thadeo Zuccari: that of the battle of Lepanto
with the picture of Faith at the side of it, is of the hand of Donato Formello.

2. This great Hall stands between two Chapels, the Paulina and the Sista. In
the Paulina is seen a rare picture of the crucifying of S. Peter by Michel
Angelo. The roof of it also was rarely painted by Federico Zuccari, but the
smoke of the candles upon Manday Thursday, when this Chapel serves for the
Sepulcher, has so defaced these pictures, that a far worse hand would have
served there.

The Popes Chapel.
3. The Chapel of Sisto is that in which the Pope holds Capella upon certain
days, and were all the Cardinals interuene. In the end of this Chapel upon
the wall, is painted the last Judgment by Michel Angelo, a piece famous over
all the world. The green garments of S. Katharine and the ^ead of S. Biagio are
of the painting of Daniel of Volterra, who was presently set a work to make
those garments, when the Pope had given express order, that this rare picture
should be defaced, because of some nakedneess in it. Upon great days this
Chapel is hung with a rare suit of hangings of the design of Raphael Vrbin
wrought with gold and silk, containing the Acts of S. Peter and S. Paul.

4. Beinde this Chapel stands the Popes Sacristy; The Popes Sacristy.
a place scarce known to strangers, and therefore seldom seen by them; though
very well wroth the seeing. Its kept always by a Prelat, who is always an
Augustine Friar, and a Bishop, and called Monsignor Sacrista. In authors of high
times we find mention of this officer under the name of Cimiliarcha, or chief
Sacristan. Here I saw rare Church ornaments for the Popes use. These in
particular I cannot let pass without mentioning: The cope of saint Syluester
Pope, thirteen hundred years a go. The neat Chasuble of cloth of tyssue with
the pictures of the ministering the seven Sacrements, all embrodered in it in
silk and gold so rarely, that the late Lord Mareshal of England Tho. Earl of
Arundel. got leave to have it painted out, and so much the more willingly,
because it had been given to the Pope by King Henry the VIII a little before
his Schism. Then the incomparable suits of ornaments for Priest, Deacon, and
Subdeacon, to be used in high Mass, which were given by King Sebastian of
Portugal, and set all over with pearl, and these pearls were the first that
came out of the Indyes, and were in all eight hundred pound weight of pearl.
The other rare things here were the Head of S. Laurence, S. Laurence his Head.
which I saw near at hand, through a crystal: a piece of the sponge, in which
the Jews gave our Savior gall to drink: the Camisia of S. Prisca a primitive
Saint martyred in it 1400 years ago: the Crucifix in which is set under a
crystal, a piece of the Holy Cross carved with the passion of our Savior in
it: a thorn of our Saviors crown of thorns, which belongd to Pius Quintus:
a cross set with Diamans and Pearls, which the Pope wears at his breast in
great functions: a great ring which he also wears in such functions; its set
with a fair Saphir, and four great pearls: a fair Crucifix enameld and beset
with store of pearl and Jewels: the Popes Pallium which he wears in great
functions: the fistula, or pipe of gold wherewith the Pope receives the
consecrated blood of our Savior in the Chalice upon great days: the rare
Chalices of gold set with pearl, and yet more precious for their workmanship
then for their matter: the great Chalice of gold, into which the Cardinals put
their written Votes in chuseing the Pope by scrutiny: the five triple crowns
called Regni, four wereof are set thick with precious stones and pearl of
great value, and therefore ordinarily kept in the Castle Angelo: two miters of
the same richness: the crystal Pixe in which the Blessed Sacrament is kept in
the Sepulcher upon Manday Thursday: in fine the book of the Ghospels painted
in miniature by the famous Giulio Glorio, for whose first picture here (of the
last Judgment) Paulus Tertius sent him fifteen hundred pistols, as Monsignor
Sacrista assured me.

5. Passing from hence through the Sala Regia again, I was led into the great
room hard by, where the Pope washes the feet of thirteen Pilgrims upon Manday
Thursday; and then gives every one of then a great Meddal of Gold with four
pistols, and an other of silver.

6. Thence I was led into the open gallerie which looks upon the court; The
Gallery painted by Raphael.
I mean, the second lodge, (for there are three such open galleries) where the
histories of the Bible are painted most curiously in the roof of it by prime
masters. That of Adam and the Creation: that where Adam sowes: that where the
sheep drink: that were Jacob saw the ladder: that of the last Supper of Christ
with his Apostles: that where Moses shows the Laws, are all of the hand of
Raphael Vrbin. That of the Deluge: and of the adoration of the golden Calf, are
of the hand of Raphael dal Borgo. That where Josue commands the Sun to stop:
that of Bersabee, and the like, are of the hand of Pierino del Vago. That of
the Chariot, and some others are of the hand of Carauagio. That of Moses
strikeing the Rock; that of the judgment of Solomon; and some others are of
the hand of Iulio Romano. That of the Baptism of Christ, with other such like,
are of the hand of Pellegrino da Modena. Yet because in all these pictures
Raphael Vrbin give either the design, or some touches, this Gallery is called
Raphaels Gallery: indeed nothing but the divine history it self can be finer
then this painting of Divine Raphael. And it belongs only to Rome to have the
Bible set out thus in its own colors: and if pictures be the best books for
ignorant people, who can say that the Bible is kept from the people here, seeing
its painted and printed here in the most Vulgar tongue, and known language,
pictures? In a word Raphaels colors seemed to me to illustrate the text very
much, and to be an excellent Comment upon the Holy scripture,

7. From this gallery I was led into the great chamber, where Constantins
Victory over Maxentius is so rarely painted upon the walls by Raphaels own
hand, Constantins battle with Maxentius.
that this painting serves this chamber not only for a rich Tapistry; but also
for an eternal Trophee to that Emperor. The several postures here of men and
horses, all in confusion, yet all in such due proportion make this picture (in
the judgment of Monsieur Poussin a famous painter) the rarest thing in the
world for design. The best designed picture in the world.
In the other fellowing rooms there are diverse other rare pieces of the same
hand; as that of Attila and Pope Leo: that of S. Peter in prison, a piece much
admired for the perspectiue of it: That of the B. Sacrament: that of the
burning of the Borgo: that of Aeneas carrying his Father Anchises out of the
flames, are of Raphaels hand. The history of HoHeliodorus over the chimney, is
of the hand of Iulio Romano, Raphaels scholar.

8. Going up from hence into the highest open gallerie, you will find it painted
with Geographical Maps of the hand of Antonio da Varese. The roof of it is also
well painted by Pomerancio, Paris Romano, and Bronzini, excellent painters all.

9. Then comeing down, I saw the Sala Clamentina a noble room. Sala
Clementina.
The rare perspectiues in the roof, and in one of the corners, both of them
expressing the arms of Clement the VIII are worth your attentive consideration.

10. Then the diverse Chambers of his Holiness hung all with Damask hangings in
summer, and velvet hangings in winter, are very neat. In the Popes bed chamber
I saw the grave picture of our Lady with her Son in her arms, called Saint
Mary Mayor, its painted curiously upon a white transparent stone three fingers
thick, and yet showing the picture on both sides if held before the sun.

11. The great room guilt ouerhead, where the Pope treats at dinner great
Princes when they come to Rome.

12. The old appartament of Pius Quintus; with the great wodden bed, or rather,
the little wodden chamber of Paulus Quintus.

A rare piece of perspectiue.
13. The rare piece of perspectiue over the door of the long room leading to
the Gallery of Maps. At the first looking upon it, you see nothing but certain
types, or figures of the Blessed Sacrament out of the old Testament, but being
placed directly under it, and looking upwards, you see all the foresaid types
contracted into the form of a Calice and an host over it; so show, that those
old types and shadows prefigured only the body and blood of our Savior in
the holy Sacrifice of the Altar.

The rare Gallery of Maps.
14. The long gallery of the Maps of Italy painted upon the walls on both sides
by Paulus Brillus a Flemming, and others; and that so distinctly, that you see
plainly every State, Province, City, River, Village, Castle, highway of Italy,
and where any famous battle was fought either in the Romans time, or since: A
Gallery which I wish I had spent as many hours in, as I spent days in going
up to Rome. Diverse other Galleries there are in this house which I pass over
in silence.

14. But I cannot pass ever so the long Gallerie leading to the Beluedere, The
Gallerie of the Conclaue.
in which is kept the Conclaue of all Popes: in this one great room fifty, or
thresecore, Cardinals lodge, and have every one two chambers, one for himself,
and the other for his Conclauist. Ex vngue Leonem you may judge by this what
the whole house is; or else by this what they assure you, when they tell you,
that there are five thousand Chambers in that Palace. 15. From the middle of
the foresaid Gallery, you enter into the Vatican Library, The Vatican Library.
famous all the learned world over, for having in it, besides the Registers of
the Roman Church. the choycest manuscripts of the world in holy languages. This
Baronnius found, who drew from hence notable succor for the maintaining of
this Ecclesiastical history against the Centuriators of Magdebourg, who
wanting these assured aims, and being otherwise wrongly biassed, made faults
in their history, as many as their Centuries, and as great as their Volumes.
The description of this Library has been made by learned Angelus Rocca in
Latin, and by Mutius Pansa in Jtalian: yet for the sactisfaction of my curious
countrymen I shall say something of it. First the room is a vast long room
speading it self in the furter end, into two wings of building, which are all
full of presses where the manuscripts are kept carefully from mice and rats,
and moist weather. At the entrance into this Library, you are let into a fair
chamber full of desks for a dozen of writers, who have good stipends to copy
out books in all languages; and they are bound to be writeing so many hours
in a morning. Round-about this room hang the Pictures of all the Cardinals
that have been Bibliothecarii since Sixtus Quintus his time. Then entr^ng into
the Library it self, The Library it self.
I saw the vast wide room supported (like a Church) by great squar pillars,
about which are as many cupbord were the manuscripts are conserved. On the wall
on the right hand, are painted in Fresco the General Councils of the Church,
with the Bible in the midst laying open upon a stately throne, and with the
order and place of precedence observed in them: as also some notable accidents
in Ecclesiastical history. On the left hand are painted all the famous
Libraryes anciently mentioned by authors: and upon the great pillars are
painted the first Inuentors and promotors of learning. This long room spreads
it self at last into two wings on each hand; both which are full of curious
books, both manuscripts, and printed books; diverse of which were shown me
with great ciuility, by Monsignor Holstenius then keeper of this Library whom I
had formerly known. The chief of these books were these.

Some rare books here.
A vast Hebrew Bible too heavy for any man to lift up.

An ancient copy of the Septuagints translation in Greek, after which the
Bible has been printed both in Rome and London.

The Acts of the Apostles in Greek curiously written in golden letters.

The Ghospel written by S. Chrysostoms own hand.

An Hebrew Bible written in sheets of parchment pasted to one another, and
rolled up: hence the word Volumen, for a book.

A little book written in bark of trees: hence the word folium, for a leaf in
a book.

Certain old Roman Table books.

A China Tablebooke of wood, in which they wrote with a pointed steel.

A curious China book all in Hieroglyphs, and folded up in many folds: our
Purchase in his curious nauigations has both printed and deciphered it.

Polidor Virgils history of England written with his own hand.

An old book of Sermons in Latin in whose margin S. Thomas of Aquin had made
notes with his own hand.

An old Virgil with the pictures of the history in old painting.

An old Terence written twelve hundred years a go, and the ancientest that
ever Politian saw, as he testifyeth under his own hand in the inside of the
cover of this book.

Baronnius his Annals in his own hand writeing.

The rare quotations out of the ancient Fathers, painfully and faithfully
collected out of the best copies, by learned Cardinal Sirleto in the time of
the Council of Trent, and sent by him weekly, by the Post, from Rome, to the
Fathers in the Council, who proceeded to their definitions by the ancient
tradition of the Church, found so plainly and unanimously in those Fathers.
Those quotations make six Volumes in folio: and this was it, which out
adversaries call, the sending down of the Holy Ghost to Trent in a cloak-bag;
when it was only the seding down of these faithful testimonies of the
Tradition of the Church, gathered out of the most ancient and authentic copies.

K. Henry the VIII Letters to Anne Bolen.
The letters of Henry the VIII of England to Anne Bolen his mistress then, in
his own hand writeing, Some in English, some in French, but all amatory. It is
easy to imagine them written by him, if you compare the handwriting of these
letters, with those two Verses written by the Kings own hand in the
frontispice of the following Book, to wit.

K. Henry the VIII book against Luther.
The book which the said Henry wrotte against Martin Luther, and dedicated it
by a couple of Latin verses written with is own hand in the Frontispice of it,
to Pope Leo the tenth: which book purchased to King Henry the honorable title
of defender of the faith.

The Library of the Duke of Vrbin.
Then I was shown the Library of the Duke of Vrbin, who dyeing without heirs
male bequeathed his Library to the Vatican Library here. In this, I saw many
rare manuscripts written in parchment, and painted in miniature: especialy that
book in whose margins are painted by a rare hand, and wonderful diligence,
all the insects in nature, in their lively colors and true resemblance.

Over against this Library, they showed me, in the same room, the Library of
Heidelberg, The Library of Heidelberg.
sent to Rome by the Duke of Bauaria after he had dispossessed the Elector
Frederick Prince Palatin of Rhein, of his country, as well as of the kingdom
of Bohemia which he had seized on, at the instigation of Bethleem Gabor and
others. See the Mercure Francois. They showed me here, among diverse other
books, the book of designs of the said Prince Elector Palatin, which he had
designed being young. Happy Prince if he had not designed to himself an other
man's crown.

In the great room of this Library, there is an iron door which leteth you
into a more secret room, The place of Registers.
where the Registers of the Church of Rome are kept: the keeper of which
Registers was anciently called Chartularius; an office much like to that in the
Greek Church, called Cartophylax.

In fine, I was shown here diverse letters of great persons and Princes, Some
Letters of great P^^sons.
written with their own hands, as of S. Charles Boromaeus, to Cardinal Sirleto
who had had a hand in his education: of Queen mary of England: of King Philip
the second of Spain her husband, stileing himself King of Spain, England,
and France; of Francis the First of France: of Margaret of Parma that Governed
Flanders when it revolted: of President Vargas a Spaniard, and a great
statesman in Flanders, but no great Latinist, as it appeared by his answer to
the Doctors of Louain (petitioning him in Latin for their privileges) when he
se said; Harsh Latin.
Non curamus vostros priuilegios. Mali faxerunt templa, boni nihil faxerunt
contra: ergo debent omnes patibulari: the terms of the expostulation being as
harsh as the Conclusion of it* and some old polite Orators had rather have been
hanged indeed, then threatened in such bad Latin.

A little before I went out of this Library I saw near the door, the Statue
of Hippolitus Bishop of Portua, (who lived 1400 years ago) sitting in a chair
of stone, upon which is cut in Greek letters the ancient Canon Paschalis, Canon
Paschalis.
upon which Scaliger and others have written. Its a curious piece of learned
antiquity, and worthy to he taken notice of.

16. Having seen the Library we were led on by the long Gallery mentioned
before, unto the Beluedere, The Belueder^
were we descended into the Popes private garden, full of orange trees, fine
walks, and fountains. Here are three or four, unavoidable wetting places to
those that are not acquainted with them. Henc you go down to see the rare
fountain of the iron ship. In this garden I saw the Pineapple of brass guilt,
The great Pineapple
which is as great as three men can fathom about, and twice as high as the
tallest man can reach. Here also stand by it the two great Peacocks of brass
guilt, The two Peacocks.
which stood anciently upon Scipio Affricanus his tomb, and are some three or
four yeards long.

The Beluedere of the Maschere.
17. From hence we were led hard by to see the Beluedere of the Maschere, which
Michel Angelo called, his Study. Its a squar Court set with Orange trees, in
whose walls are great Niches, with leaves to them of wood, where the choice
statues of the world are conserved under lock and key, and free from ill
weather. The chief statues here, Rare statues
are these: that of the river Nilus, and that of Tyber, both in cumbent
postures: That of Antinous, minion of the Emperor Adrian; its of pure oriental
marble, and rarely cut: that of Cleopatra: that of Venus comeing out of a bath:
that of Commodus the Emperor: that of Laocoon and his sonns inuolued about with
serpents. This statue of Laocoon is the master piece of sculpture. That in the
middle of the Court, of Hercules without arms, legs, or head, is so rare a
trunck, that Michel Angelo professed, Michel Angelos study.
he had learned more skill out of that broken statue, then out of all the whole
ones he had ever seen. Hence you see always a world of sculptors designeing it
out: A piece of the Lions skin yet appearning made me not doubt but that it was
the statue of Hercules.

18. From hence we stepped into the great garden of the Baluedere, The great
Garden of Beluedere
full of exotic trees, curious fountains, shady walks, and great variety of
Grottes and wetting sports.

19. Lastly, in our return again through the Vatican palace, we saw the
Armory full of arms, The Armory.
for thirty thousand men, horse and foot, and well kept.

Having thus seen the Vatican Palace, I went on with the rest of the
curiosityes of the town, and took them in order as they lay. Henc going from
S. Peter's, and leaving the Palace of the Santo Officio on my right hand, The
Santo Officio.
I came presently to the Hospital of San Spirito which is hard by. The Hospital
of S. Spirito.
The situation of this Hospital near to S. Peter's Church, was not done
casually; but without doubt, upon design and for this end, that men might
learn by the very situation of Hospitals near unto great Churches (as I
observed in many other places both in Italy, and France) that Christians after
they have performed their duties to God, ought to pay in the next place their
duties to their neigbour; and let that faith, which they came from exerciseing
in the Church toward God, be made appear by good works exercised presently in
Hospitals toward men. Now this Hospital of San Spirito, is one of the fairest
in Europe both for bigness, and revenues. It has a thousand beds in it for
the sick: a Prelate to govern it: store of Priests, Physicians, and under
Officers, to attend on them, and a revenue of seauentie thousand crowns a
year. There is also a Monastery of women in it, in a place separated from the
rest, capable of 500 young girls. In the appartiments above stairs there is
hansome accommodation for poor gentlemen, founded by the gentleman like charity
of Pope Urban the VIII, to this end, that those whom Fortune had privileged by
better birth, might not be inuolued in common miseries. There is also a grace
toward the street, where little infants are put into a squar hole of a Turn,
and so turned in by night by their unlawful mothers, who not dareing to own
them, would otherwise dare to destroy them. Lewis Guyon in diuer. lec. l. 2. c.
16.
Constantin the Great founded such hospitals for exposed chrildren. The person
that brings the child in the night rings a little bell whose rope hangs at the
outside of that grate, and an officer within comes presently and receives it;
and having first asked whether it be baptized or no, carries it presently
away, and recommends it to a Nurse, of which there are always store in
readiness entertained there at the cost of the Hospital on the woman's side of
the house. When the children are grown fit for instruction, they are set to
trads. The girls are carefully brought up by religious women there, till they
be fit for Marriage or a Nunnery, according to their vocation.

S. Onofrios. Church.
From hence I went to S. Onofrios Church upon the hill, where I saw the Tomb
and picture over it, of rare Torquato Tasso, The Tomb of Torquato Tasso.
whose warlike Muse is able to inspire mettle into his Readers breast, and
dispose him to the engagement of a new Croisade against the Turks. This I can
say of him, that if Virgil hindered him from being the f^rst of Poets, he
hindered Virgil from being the only Poet.

Returning down again, and going along the Longara, Longara.
I saw the stately palace of the Duke of Saluiati on the right hand, and the
Villa of Chisi (now called the garden of Farnesi, Villa Chisi.
on the left hand. In this Villa I saw rare painting attributed to Raphael
Vrbin.

Queen Christinas Palace.
Over against this garden, lives now the Queen of Suede, in whose Palace
besides the rare hangings of cloth of gold, and of arras hangings of silk and
gold, I saw a curious collection of pictures, originals all, and of the prime
masters of the world: That of Sr Thomas Moor^ is, without doubt, of Hans
Holbains hand, and a rare piece.

Passing on the Longara still, I came to the Porta Septimiana, so called from
Septimius Seuerus who built here his Therme; and so up the Hill to Saint
Pancratius his Gate, S. Pancratius his Church.
and to the Church of that Saint possessed now by discalced Carmelits. Under
this Church is the Caemeterium Calepodit, Caemeterium Calepodii
where many Martyrs bodies were buried. Here was buried Crescentius the tyrant,
who seazing upon the Castle Angelo swayd all in Rome for a while.

From hence I went to the Villa Pamfilia, Villa Pamfilia.
which is hard by. Its a new Villa, but seated high, and from the terrasse upon
the top of the house, you have a fine prospect. There are diverse good pictures
and statues in the house, and fine waterworks, and a grotta in the garden. The
best pictures here are, the Crucifixion of S. Peter, and the Conversion of S.
Paul, of Michel Angelos hand. The entry of the Animals into the Ark of Noah, is
a rare piece the best statues are the wrestling of Jacob with the Angel in
white marble: Senecas statue: and the Busto of Innocent the X of porphyry: and
his head in brass.

Returning again into the town the same way we came, I saw the brave Fountain
made by Paulus Quintus, The Fountain of Paulus V.
who caused the water to be brought thither from the Lake of Bracciano above
thirty miles off, by a stately Aqueduct; and from hence it is dispersed into
the City and there makes new fountains.

Hard by stands the Convent of Franciscans upon a Hill, called S. Pietro
Montorio, San Pietro Montorio
where S. Peter was crucified with his head downward, in that very place of
the court where there is now a round Chapel* entering into the Church I was much
taken with the picture for the high Altar representing our Saviors
Transfiguration. It was the last and best piece of Raphael Vrbins making, and
then I may say, it is the best in world: I guess it to be the best of Raphaels
pieces, because dyeing he commanded that this picture, of all his pictures,
should be set up at his feet after his death. In this Church lies buried the
Earl of Tyrone who fled from Ireland hither in Queen Elizabeth's time. Here are
two fine statues in marble of S. Peter and S. Paul, of the hand of Michel
Angelo.

Going out of this Church, Mons Janiculus
you have a fair sight of Rome under you from this hill. This Hill was
anciently called Ianiculus; and upon it was buried Statius the Poet; and at the
foot of it Numa Pompilius.

Near the foot of this Hill stands the Church and Convent of the Scala, La
Scala
belonging to the Discalced Carmelits. The High Altar is very ^eat; and the
good Fathers showed us in a little Chapel within the Convent the foot of S.
Theresa, which ^s plainly seen through a crystal in which its kept.

Not far from hence stands Santa Maria Trasteuere, Santa Maria Transteuere.
the first Church built in Rome (says Baronius) and built there where
anciently stood the Tabernae meritoriae; Tabernae Meritoriae.
where the maimed soldiers received their pittance daily. The Guilt roof, and
the two rows of marble pillars, do much beautify this Church. Under the High
Altar is yet seen the place where oil issued out, as from a Fountain, a little
before our Saviors birth, as denounceing his birth to be at hand, who was to
be called Christus, that is anointed. In this Church lie buried Cardinal
Hosius a most learned Trent Father, and Cardinal Campegius the Popes Legate in
England in Henry the VIII time. You see here the stone that was tied about the
neck of S. Calixtus Pope when he was thrown into a Well.

Here also you see great round stones which where hung at the fee^ of the
Martyrs to torment them.

S. Francesco in Ripa Grande.
The Convent of Franciscan Fryer^ called S. Francesco in Ripa Grand^ is hard by;
where I saw the Chamber where great S. Francis lodged when he lived in Rome.
Its now turned into a Chapel. In the Church there is an excellent picture of
Piety, made by Caraccio. Here in the Church is the tomb of Beata Ludouica
Mathei of the the third order of S. Francis.

I took the Ripa grande in my way, Ripa Grande.
and saw there the boats of merchandise which come to Rome from Ligorne,
Giuita Vechia, Naples, and other places, and disembark their goods here.

From the Ripa I went to S. Cicilies Church built where her house was, S.
Cicilies Church.
and where she was put to death for the Christian religion. Under the High
Altar of this Church is the tomb of this primitive Saint, S. Cicilyes Tomb.
with her statue in a couchant posture, and just as her body was found in
Clement the VIII time, wrapped up in vayls stained with blood; and covered with a
robe of gold. The neat decoration before the High Altar, with the silver lamps
burning before the Tomb of this Saint, was the foundation of Cardinal
Sfondrati. At the end of this Church, as you come in, are seen yet the stoues
in which S. Cicily was shut up in her own house, to be stifled, but that
failing, she was beheaded. The stoues are yet entire, and showing the manner of
the ancient stoues. In the Church portch I found the Tomb of one Adam, an
English Bishop of London, and Cardinal of this tittle; Cardinal Adams Tomb.
who dyed in Rome an. 1397. it has these verses upon it.

Artibus iste pater famosus in omnibus Adam
For, fuit.
Theologus summus, Cardinalisque erat.
Anglia cui patriam, titulum dedit ista Beatae
Aedes Caeciliae, morsque suprema Polum.
S. Chrysogono.
Not far from this Church stands S. Chrysogonus his Church, a neat Church
repaired some years ago by Cardinal Burghesi. The four pillars of the High
Altar, look as if they were of sand and cristal petrifyed together. On the
left hand of the wall near the great door, lies buried Robert Archbishop of
York, Cardinal Robert Archb. of York.
and titular of this Church but this was all I could learn out of the
Tombstone.

Having thus wandered over the Trasteuere, I made toward the I Will of S.
Bartholomew in, which stands a good Hospital and a Convent of Franciscans, in
whose Church reposeth, under the High Altar, in a fair porphyrie Tomb, the
body of S. Bartholmew Apostle. S. Bartholomews Tomb.
This I Will was anciently called Insula Tiberina, and it was first made by the
corn of Tarquinius Superbus, which being (after his ejection out of the City)
plucked up by the roots, and thrown into the river, by reason of the quantity
of earth that stuck to the roots, stopped here where the water was low; and
this stoppage once begun, all the mud of the river came afterward to stop here
too, and so in time, to form a little I Will in the midst of the river.

Going out of the I Will by the bridge of four heads (anciently called Pons
Fabricius) which ioynes this I Will with the City, Ponte quatro Capi.
I looked down the river on my right hand, to see the Pons Sublicius, Pons
Sublicius.
which Cocles alone defended against an army, till the bridge was cut down
behind him: which he perceiving, leapt into the river armed, and swome safe to
his fellow Citizens, who were as glad to see him come off safe, as to find
themselves safe. It was called Pons Sublicius, from the word Sublica in Latin,
which signifies great beams of wood, of which it was made: it was afterward
built of stone by Aemilius. From this bridge the wicked Emperor Heliogabalus
was thrown into the river and drowned with a great stone about his neck.

The Iewry.
No sooner was I over this bridge, but I saw on my left hand, the great back
door of the Jewry; for here the Jews live all together in a corner of the
town, and are locked up every night. I entered into their Synagogues here
(which they call their schools) where they meet upon Saturdays and sing and
pray. I wondered at first, that they had learned no more manners in these their
schools then to enter into them to pray, without either putting of hats,
lifting up eyes, or bending of knees, to the Great Iehoua, whom they rather
fear then love. Moses going to him, put of this shoes, and I expected, that
these men should, at least, have put of their hatts at the entrance into their
Synagogues: but they are Archclownes; and their foul towels, at the entrance
into their Synagogues, told me as much. I once saw a circumcision, but it was
so painful to the child, that it was able to make a man heartily thank God
that he is a Christian. And realy If the little child could speak and wish, I
believe he would wish him self the greatest curse in the world, and to be a
woman rather then a man upon such terms. I saw also a marriage here performed
with many ceremonies.

Returning out of the Jewry by the same gate I entered, I saw on my left hand,
the Palace of Princ Sauelli: its built upon the ruins of the Theater of
Marcellus, Theatrum Marcells.
built by Augustus in honor of his Nephew Marcellus: it was capable of
fourscore thousand men.

Santa Maria in Cosmedin
Passing on, I came to an ancient Church called Santa Maria in Cosmedin, or in
Schola Graeca, where S. Austin before his conversion, taught Rhetoric. In the
portch of this Church stands a great round stone cut into the face of a man,
with a great wide mouth, commonly called, La bocca della Verita, Bocca della
Verita.
The mouth of Truth; but this not being affirmed by the Mouth of truth, I dare
not believe it. I rather believe it served in some old building for a gutter
spout: I know, truth may speak loud, and have a wide mouth; but he that takes
every wide mouth for the mouth of Truth, is much mistaken.

S. Maria Egyptiaca.
The next Church I came to was Santa Maria Egyptiaca: it was the Temple of the
Sun and Jupiter. This Church is neatly adorned with curious chanelled pillars.
It belongs to the Armenians, who have an Hospital also here belonging to the
Catholic Pilgims of that country: and the Pope allows them to celebrate Mass
here after their own Armenian rite.

On the other side of the great piazza, stands the Church of S. Steven. Its
rounded with chanelled pillars also. It was anciently the Temple of Juno
Matutina morneing Juno, or Alba Dea, the Break of day Goddess: a Goddess
which our Ladies, that never rise till noone, would never have been devout to.

Close by this Church (which stands by the river side) the great Sink of Rome,
The Cloaca Naxima.
called Cloaca Maxima, emptyed it self into Tyber. And though this were but a
Sink, yet it deserves to be mentioned among the rare magnificencies of ancient
Rome. For it was noblely built by Tarquinius Priscus, of freestone, arched
ouerhead, with a world of springs running into it: and it was so great, that a
Cart might have gone in it. This sink was one of the evident tokens of the
greatness and magnificence of Rome anciently; Marks of Romes greatness
anciently.
and indeed a far greater evidence then that of Heliogabulus, who caused all
the spiders webbs of Rome to be gathered together and weighed, that by so many
poundweight of Spiders-webbs, the greatness of Rome might the better be
conjectured.

Going on from hence by the river side, I came to the foot of the Mount Auentin
and left on my left hand a Chapel belonging to the Knights of Malta. Our
antiquaries tell us, that near to this place stood the Temple of the Bona Dea,
The Temple of Bona Dea.
into which no man was to enter: and that Cacus his denn was also in the side
of this Hill, into which he dragd Hercules his oxen by the tails, Cacut his
denn.
that no man should find out his theft by the footsteps. Upon the side of this
hill stood also the Scalae Gemoniae, Scalae Gemoniae.
down which criminal persons were tumbled into Tiber.

S. Alexius his Church.
Going up this Hill I went to S. Alexius his Church, where I saw, the wooden
stairs under which this Saint lodged for seauenteen years in his own Fathers
house (after fifteen years absence) without being known to any body, till
after his death. The body of this Saint lies under the high Altar, together
with that of S. Bonifacius the Martyr.

Hard by upon the same Hill, stands S. Sabinas Church, S. Sabinas Church.
whither the Pope comes upon Ash wensday in a solemn caualcata accompanied
with the Cardinals.

Here also upon this Hill, stood anciently the Temple of Liberty and the Romans
Armilustrium. The Armilustrium.


Descending from hence I made toward S. Paul's Gate; and in the way I saw on my
right hand the Hill called Mons Testiacius, Mons Testacius
which was made of the broken pots thrown there in the Romans time by the
Potters. Its half a mile about, and 160 foot high.

A little nearer the Gate of S. Peul I saw the Tomb of Caius Cestius, The
Tomb of C. Cestius.
built like a Piramid of Egypt, and all of pure white marble. This is the most
entire work of all the ancient Roman works. This Cestius (as the words upon
his Tomb importe) was septemuir epulonum, that is, one of those seven men
called Epulones anciently, Epulones.
because they had the devouring of those banquets which were set before the
Gods in their Lectisterniis, in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus.

The Gate of S. Paul.
Passing thence through the Gate of S. Paul, anciently called Porta Tergemina;
and Porta Ostiensis; I went to S. Paul's Church a little mile from the town. In
the way I took notice of a little Chapel on the left hand, where S. Peter and
S. Paul took leave of one another; before they were led to Martyrdom.

S. Paul's Church.
Soon after I came to S. Paul's Church* here S. Paul was buried by Lucina a
Roman Lady, and therefore Constantin the Great built this Church in the honor
of S. Paul as he had done that of S. Peter mentioned above. Its built
crossewise, and the body of it is 477 foot long, and 258 broad; with a hundred
pillars in all, set in four ranks, all of them ancient round marble pillars
taken out of the Baths of Antoniuns, In proaemio.
says Vassari. Yet in all this vast body of the Church there are no Chapels,
nor any decoration, except at the very end of it, near the great door, where
there is an Altar with these words in a stone over it; Hic inuentum est caput
S. Pauli. The most remarkable things which I saw here, were these.

1. The high Altar, with a Canopy of stone like a Tabernacle, borne up by four
porphyry pillars, and adorned with statues. Under the Altar reposeth half of
the bodies of S. Peter and S. Paul (as I observed before in S. Peter's Church)
and as the inscription upon the side of the Altar here affirms in these words:
Sub hoc altari requiescunt gloriosa corpora Apostolorum Petri and Pauli pro
medietate. Behind this Altar sta^ds the Confession of S. Paul like that of S.
Peter described above. Under the little low doors which let the Priest into the
steps of the Altar are written these words in golden letters, Limina
Apostolorum, Limina Apostolorum.
which make me bold to hold against some modern writers, that this was the
precise place, and not the door of the Church, which was called Limina
Apostolorum.

2. In the old Arche in the top of the roof, is yet seen a piece of Masaick
work representing our Savior in the midst of the four and twenty Elders of
the Apocalypse. This piece was made there twelve hundred years ago in the time
of S. Leo the great; and at the cost of Placidia Galla (daughter of Theodosius,
and sister of Honorius) as the two verses in that Arch testify thus: Placidiae
pia men's operis decus homne reportat,
Gaudet Pontificis studio splender^ Leonis.


The miraculous Crucifix.
3. The famous Miraculous Crucifix (standing in a Chapel on the Epistle side of
the High Altar) which spoke to S. Bridgit. Baron.
This Crucifix favors the opinion of those who affirm that there were two
nails in our Saviors feet.

4. The neat Chapel and Tabernacle of the B. Sacrament; with the rare pictures
relating there unto, made by Caualier Lanfranco.

5. The picture of the Altar of S. Steven made by a Lady of Bolognia called
Lauinia Fontana.

6. Baron ad Ma^^^ Rom^ ^^0 Mar^^^.
The chief Relics kept here are, the Head of the Samaritan woman converted by
our Savior: the Arm of S. Anne mother of our blessed Lady: and the Chain of
S. Paul.

From S. Paul's Church I went to the Tree Fontane above a mile and a half off,
and in the way, I passed over the place where S. Zeno, and ten thousand
Christians were martyried at once by the command of Diocletian the Butcher.
Their blood made this way holy all along.

Arriueing at the Tree Fontane I saw there three Churches standing within a
place anciently called, Tree Frontane.
Ad Aquas Saluias. The first of these three Churches is that of S. Vincent and
Anastase, The Church of S. Vincent and Anastase
because of their Relics sent hither. For about the year 627. the Emperor
Heraclius sent the Head of S. Anastasius with the picture of the same Saint
unto Pope Honorius the First. Baronius an. 627.
A courteous Father, of S. Bernards Order here, did me the favor to show me
near the high Altar, this Head, and this Picture. These two are most
authentical things; for the attestation of them is in the very Acts of the
second Council of Nice held an. 789, where to prove the lawfullness of sacred
Images against the Iconoclasts, ^^e sacred Council cites a miracle wrought by
this very picture of S. Anastasius: Baron. An. 627 and an. 713.
and Baronius quotes diverse others wrought by the same picture.

The round Church.
In the second Church here, to wit, the little round Church on the righ^ hand,
there is a famous picture of S. Bernards Extasis. Under this Church I was led
into a Vault where many of the bodies of the foresaid ten thousand Christians,
who were martyred with S. Zeno, are buried. This vault goes a mile underground.

Tree Fontane.
In the third place stands the little Church of the Tree Fontane, so called
because S. Paul was here beheaded, and where his head iumpt thrice, three
fountains gushed out. Upon an Altar on the left hand, is an excellent Picture
of S. Peter's crucifixion, of the hand of Guido Rheni. On the other side is seen
a little block (within an iron grate) upon which they say S. Paul's head was cut
off.

Going from hence I went over the fields to the Church of the Annuntiata one of
the nine Churches of Rome visited by Pilgrims; The Annunciata.
and from thenc to S. Sebastians.

S Sebastians Church, S. Sebastians Church.
is one of the seven Churches, and of great devotion by reason of the
Catacombes which are under it. Here I saw the Tomb of S. Sebastian under an
altar on the left hand: many relics kept over an altar on the right hand: and
the Vault underneath where Pope Steven was beheaded in his own Seat of stone,
and where S. Peter's and S. Paul's bodies were hidden many years.

Thenc I was let into the Catacombes which are under this Church, The
Catacombes.
and which from thenc running many miles under ground, made anciently a
Christian Rome under the Heathen. There were diverse of these Catacombes in the
primitive times, and they were called diversely: Arenaria, Cryptae, Areae,
Concilia Martyrum, Poliandria, but most frequently Caemeteria, that is,
dormitoria, because here reposed the bodies of the holy Martyrs and Saints qui
obdormiuerunt in Domino. But the greatest of all these Caemeteria was this of
Calixtus. Caemeterium Calixti.
In these Catacombes dureing the persecutions raised against the Christians by
ten Heathen Emperors, the faithful believers, together with their Popes and
Pastors, used privately to meet to excercice their Religion, and steal their
devotions; that is, to hear Mass in little round Chapels painted over head
poorly; Minister the Sacraments; bury the dead Martyrs and Confessors in the
walls of the long alleys, preach, hold conferences; and even celebrate Councils
too sometimes. I descended several times into several parts of these Catacombes
with a good experienced guide (which you must besure of) and with wax lights
(torches being too stifeling) and wandered them up and down with extraordinary
satisfaction of mind. The streets under ground are cut out with men's hands and
mattocks. They are as high as a man, for the most part, and no broader then for
two men to meet. All the way long, the sides of these Alleys are full of holes,
as long as a man, and sometimes there are three rows, one over an other, in
which they had buried their Martyrs and Confessors: and that posterity might
afterward know which were Martyrs, which Confessors; they engraued upon the
stone which mur'd them up, or upon one of the bricks, a Palm branch, in sign
of a Martyr; and a Pro Christo in Ciphers for a Confessor. Its recorded, that
during the foresaid persecutions, a hundred seauenty four thousand Martyrs were
buried here in this Cametery of Calixtus: among whom were nineteen Popes
Martyrs. Hence these Catacombes have always been esteemed as a place of great
devotion, and much frequented by devout persons. The words over the door, as
you descend into them from the Church of S. Sebastian, tell you, how S. Hierome
confesses, S. Hierom. in Ezechiel. c. 40.
that he used every Sunday and Holyday, during his stay in Rome, to go to these
Catacombes. And a picture hung over the same door shows how S. Philip Neri
used to frequent these holy places in the night; and from whence, I believe, he
sucked that true spirit of the primitive Church, which reigned in him, and
still reigns in the breasts of his most virtuous children, the pious Priests
of the Oratory of Rome, whom I must always praise wheresouer I find them,
because I always find them either writeing holy things, or living them; that
is, either writeing books fit to be lived, or living lives fit to be written.
Indeed its incredible how much the presence of these Holy Martyrs bodies, has
sanctified this place: in so much that no man enters into the catacombes but he
comes better out, then he went in. Catholics come out far more willing to
dye for that faith, for which so many of their ancesters have dyed before them.
The Adversaries of the Roman Church come out more staggered in their faith, and
more mild toward the Catholic Religion, to see what piety there is even in
the bowels of Rome; Atheists come out with that belief* that surely there is a
God, seeing so many thousands of Martyrs have testified it with their blood.

From S. Sebastians I went to the place hard by called Capo di Boue standing
upon the Via Appia. It is a great building faced about with marble stones. It
was the Sepulcher of Metella wife of rich Crassus. Capo di Boue.
Its now called Capo di Boue because of the ox heads cut in marble which
compose the cornice that runns about the top of this Moles. Entering into it
you will wonder at the thickness of the walls which are above eight else thick.
It was begun to be pulled down, especialy the great marble stones on the
outside of it, to make up the Fontana di Treui; but Cardinal Barberino would
not suffer it to be so defaced.

Close by stand the ruins of the Pretorium, The Pretorium.
the Quarters of the Pretorian Bands, which the Emperors lodged here, a little
out of the throng of the town, that they might not occasion so easily tumults;
and that they might exercise themselves often in the Circo of Caracalla which
was hard by.

Circus Caracalla
This Circus was made by the Emperor Caracalla, and is the most entire of all
the Circos that were in Rome. You see where the Carceres, or starting place
was, where the Meta; where the Guglia were. You see how long it was, and the
walls yet show you what compass it carried. In the midst of it stood that
Guglia which now stands in the midst of Piazza Nauona. I saw it lie here broken
in three pieces, and neglected quite till the Earl of Arundel our late Lord
Mareshal, Offering to buy it and having already depositated threescore crowns
in earnest for it, made the Romans begin to think that it was some fine thing,
and stop the transporting of it into England. At last it light upon a good
stone-setter, who joined it so well together that it now stands straight again
upon a rare basis, and adornes the very heart of Rome: Thanks to that ingenious
architect Caualier Bernini who set it up there in the anno Sancto, and whom it
set up too again in the Popes favor Innocent the X. which he had lost, by a
crack in the roof of the Portch of S. Peter's Church, caused by the heavy
steeple which he had placed upon it.

Near the end of the Circus of Caracalla, stands an old round Temple, The
Temple Virtue and Honor.
with an other little Ante-Temple, close joined to it; and out of which you go
into the other. what if this were the Temple of Honor? into which there was no
passage, but through the Temple of Virtue, which was joined close to it, as
this is: to manifest, that Virtue is the way to Honor. Now its certain that
these two Temples stood not far from the Porta Carpena (now called S.
Sebastians gate) as these two do. But I declare, that this is but ghesing.

Hard by the foresaid old Temple there is an Echo which heretofore (as they
say) would repeat after you a whole verse of Virgil, The Echo.
but if so, it was my fortune to find her when she had catched a cold: for I
could get nothing from her but the two last words of a sentence. Indeed
Ausonius calls the Echo, the tail of words; and symposius says, that the
Echo is like a modest Virgin: which speaks nothing but when she is asked.

Returning from S. Sebastians toward the town again, I passed by a little
Chapel called, Domine quo Vadis? and ancienthy called, Sancta Maria ad passus.
Its called Domine quo vadis? because our Savior appareing here to S. Peter
flyeing out of the prison of Rome, was asked by Peter, Domine, quo vadis?
Domine quovadis.
Lord whither go you? And he answered: Vado Romam vt ibi iterum ^rucifigar. J
am going to Rome, there to be crucified again: which words Peter understanding
rightly, of Christ's suffering in his members, the faithful believers, returned
again to Rome, and was soon after crucified. In the middle of this Chapel
are seen the prints of our Saviors feet in a white marble stone with an iron
grate over them.

Entering into the town by S. Sebastians gate, I went on straight to the Church
of S. Nereus and Achilleus, S. Nereus and Achilleus
of which Church Baronius was Cardinal. The bodies of these Saints are under
the High Altar. Cardinal Baronius caused this Church to be painted with the
histories of Saints and martyrs, to excite others to devotion by their exemples

Almost over against this Church, San Sisto.
stands the Church of S. Sisto with its monastery made famous by S. Dominick,
who made it his habitation, and by whom God rought many miracles here. It
stands in a most unwholesome place called anciently the Piscina publica, because
the people used to wash themselves here. Here are buried S. Sixtus, Antherus,
Lucius, Lucianus, Sotherus, and Zepherinus, Popes and martyrs.

Here Is a fine picture of S. Vincentius Ferrerius.

From thence I went toward the the Porta Latina, and there saw the Church
where S. John Evangelist was put into a caldron of boiling oil. S. John A^
Portam Latinam.


Then Following the walls of the town for a good while, I came at last to S.
John Laterans Church, S. John Laterans Church.

The Popes Cathedral.


the Mother Church of all Churches in the world, and the Popes Cathedral. In
saying this, I have said enough; and I say this after the words which are
written in the architraue over the Portch of this Church, and after the Bull of
Gregory the XI. who declared this Church to be the Popes chief seat, and to
have the preeminency over the other Churches, Orbis and Vrbis; even over S.
Peter's Church too by name. It was built by Constanti^ the Great upon mount
Caelius, and dedicated to our Savior himself, for whose sake it deserves the
headship over all the other Churches in the world, as he, to whom it is
dedicated, is the Head of all the Elect. yet it is called diversely by
Ecclesiastical Authors, Sometimes Basilica Constantiniana, because Constantin
built it: sometimes Basilica Saluatoris, because it was dedicated to our
Savior. Sometimes Basilica S. Ioannis, because it was near to the two
Chapels dedicated to the two S. John's, in the Baptistery of Constantin:
sometimes it was called, Basilica S. Ioannis in Laterano, or S. John Laterans
Church, because it was built upon the place where Plautius Lateranus the
designed Consul, had a fair house and a garden, which Nero the Tyrant made bold
withal, having first made bold with their master, by killing him. Now this,
Tacitus, and Iuuenal. sat. 10.
and the other great Churches of Rome are called Basilicae, either because they
are built after a Royal and stately manner, or else because they are built to
the King of Kings.

As for this Church of S. John Lateran, It is here that the Pope takes
possession of his Papal charge, after he has been chosen, and consecrated
Bishop (if he were none before) in S. Peter's Church. For this reason all the
chief Episcopal functions of the particular Diocese of Rome, are performed
here; as the consecrating of Bishops and Priests, the conferring of the
Sacrament of Confirmation: the Baptizeing of converted Jews and Infidels. For
this reason its looked upon by the Popes with great respect, and has been not
only beautifyed by them with costly decorations, such as those, that Clement
the VIII, and Innocent the X made; but also favored by them with great
prerogatives; one declareing by his Papal Decree, that this is the Mother
Church of all Churches; another fixeing her the every altar it self (of wood)
on which S. Peter and the primitive Popes had offered Sacrifice; another
allowing the Clergy if this Church the precedence over the Clergy of all other
Churches in public processions, and to carry before them two Crucifixes;
another fixeing here the Heads of Saint Peter and Saint Paul.

As for the things most to betaken notice of here, they are these.

1. The Soffita or roof of this Church most richly guilt.

2. The body of the Church all made new almost by Pope Innocent the X, as to
the inside of it.

3. The rare painting that runns cross the Church from the stately Organs to
the Altar of the B. Sacrament, containing the chief actions of Constantin the
Great, and other histories. That of the Ascension of our Savior, with the
Apostles looking up after him, is of the hand of Caualier Gioseppe. The
Histories and figures about the Chariot of Constantin, are of the hand of
Bellardino. That of the apparition of our Savior, that of Mount Soracte, that
oueragainst Constantins Baptism, are all of the hand of Paris Romano. That of
the Baptism of Constantin is of the hand of Caualier Ricelli. In the Quire of
the Canons the picture of the S. John is of the hand of Cauallier Gioseppe. In
fine, the picture of our Savior in the very Tribuno, or Abside, was the first
picture that appeared publicly in Rome, and which was miraculously co^serued
in the burning of this church There are diverse in others pictures in that
Vaulted Tribun in Masaick work; and some simbolical figures relating to our
Saviors life and passion, which were much used anciently in Churches, as you
may see in many other Churches, and in the rare book called, Roma Soterranea.

4. The High Altar here, within which is shut up the Wooden Altar which S.
Peter and the primitive Popes made use of in saying Mass upon it during the
persecutions, and before they had any settled Churches. S. Syluester in the
dedication of this Church, fixed it here, and none can say Mass at this Altar,
but the Pope, or dureing the Popes indisposition some Cardinal, with a
particular dispensation, or Apostolical Brief which must be fastened to one of
the four pillars of the Altar, during the Cardinals saying Mass there. Over
this Altar stands a great Tabernacle of Marble borne up by four pillars, not
only serving for a Canopy to the Altar, The Heads of S. Peter and S. Paul.
but also for an Arca to the Heads of S. Peter and S. Paul which are kept
within it, and shown there to the people upon great days through an iron
grate which enuirons them.

5. The Altar of the B. Sacrament adorned by the cost of Clement the VIII, With
a curious and precious Tabernacle of rich polished stones, and with four
pillars of brass guilt, about fifteen foot high. Over this Altar is the Table
it self upon which our Savior eat the Paschal Lamb before his Passion, and
then presently instituted the Holy Sacrament, of which the Paschal Lamb was
but a figure.

6. The brazen Tomb of Martin the V, of the house of Colonna, who was chosen
Pope in the Council of Constance.

7. The Tomb of Alexander the III, of the house of Bandinelli in Siena, neatly
adorned by Pope Alexander the VII, who took his name of Alexander from him.

8. The Tomb of Laurentius Valla a learned Roman, and Chanon of this Church;
of whom, as the restorer of pure Latin language after Gotick Barbarousness,
Latonius sung thus: Apud ^um in Elog. doct^r. viror.
Romulus est Vrbis, Valla est idiomatis author:
Hic reparat primus, primus vt ille str^it.


9. In old Gotick Letters upon the Architraue of the portch of this Church you
read these Leonine verses, Dogmate Papali datur ac simul Jmperiali.
Quod sim Cunctarum Matter and Caput Ecclesiarum.


10. In the Cloister of this Church, I saw the Chair of Porphiry, which uses
to be placed near to the Great door of the Church on that day the Pope takes
possession of his charge in this Church; in which Chair the Pope is placed a
while, and at his riseing from it again, the Quire sings this verse of the 112
Psalm, Suscitat de puluere egenum and de stercore eregit pauperem: and this
Ceremony and pierced Chair are only to put the Pope in mind of his humane
infirmityes, Caeremia le Roma number l. 1 sect. 2. c. 3.
amidst His glorious exaltations, and the peoples applauses. For so also the
Greek Emperors on the day of their coronation, had a great many marble stones,
of several colors, presented to them, to choose which of them they would, to
make their Tomb of. This was, Zenar. and Cedren.
to put them in mind of their mortality admidst those great honors.

But its strange to see how the enemies of the Popes, give out maliciously,
that this Chair (whose use we see so plainly in the vety Ceremonial of Rome)
was only intended, ad explorandum sexum, and to hinder the inconueniency of
another Pope Ioanne. For this reason I think it not amiss to examine a little
this fable of a she Pope, or of a Pope Ioanne.

I am not affrayd at all to call this a fable, The Fable of Pope Ioanne.
both for the vnlikelinesse of it in general; as also for the suspected
authority of its first broachers; the contrarietyes in the story; and the
little credit given unto it by the learnedest adversaries of the Roman Church.
First, what can be more unlikely then that a woman should surprise such a wise
nation as the Italians are, Vnlikeliness of this fable.
and so grossly? what more unlikely, then that a woman should pass her youth
in those severe studyes, which are required in Popes, without being known to
have wronged, or discovered her sex; and that she must just do it, when she was
in a declineing age, at which age Popes ordinarily are chosen? What more
unlikely, then that a woman findeing her self great with child, should venture
to go so far a foot in a procession? What more unlikely, then that, if there
had been such a she Pope, the Greek Church (which then was at odds with the
Roman Church) should have passed it over in silence, and not have obraided her
with such a disgraceful Pastor, especially seeing the Roman Church had obraided
the Greek Church with having an Eunuch for her chief Patriarch? What in fine
more unlikely then that there should have been such a she Pope so publikly
convinced to have been a woman, and that Anastasius Bibliothecarius who worte
the lives of the Popes some thirty years after that pretended time, and who
must have lived in her time, speaks nothing of any such woman, Enemies charge
no proof.
or any such strange accident?

Secondly, the first broachers of this story make it Very much suspected, seeing
Martinus Polonus, and some others of the Emperors faction (then at Vari^nce
with the Popes) are the first that mentioned this fable: and Platina, Hearsay
no conviction
who quotes no higher authors for it, grounds a story of this consequence upon
no better authority then a weak, si dice, us fayd.

Thirdly, the apparent contradictions in the Tale, Contradiction in the tale, a
sign of falsity.
convince it of falsity: as that this Ioanne was an English woman borne in
Mentz, which all men know to be a Rhenish town in Germany: and that she had
studied at Athenes in Greece, which long before this time had been destroyed.

Fourthly, the little credit given to it by the learnedest adversaries of the
Roman Church, Adversaries confess it to be a fable.
to wit, four prime Ministers of France (who take this history for a mere
fable) proves sufficiently that its worse then an old wifes tale. For M.
Blondel a French Minister (whom I knew in Paris above twenty years ago) and a
man of that account there, that he was chosen to answer the learned book of
Cardinal Peron: this Blondel, I say, made a book in French (printed at
Amsterdam by Bleau Anno 1647 in octauo) On purpose to show, that this story of
a she Pope called Joanne, was a mere fable. And that we may not think that
Blondel alone of all Protestant Ministers, held this for a Fable, Monsieur
Serrauius a great Caluinist and Counselor of the Parliament of Paris, in a
letter of his to Salmasius, having mentioned to him this book of Blondel,
adds these words: Epist. Serrauii
Noli autem credere primum aut solum e nostris Blondellum ita sensisse: quamuis
Fortassis nemo vnquam fortius and pressius istud solum conclaueait. Fuere enim
in eadem sententia non incelebres inter Reformatos Theologi: and adhuc vigent
in hac Vrbe insignes fide and pietate viri, Chamier.
qui audierunt ex ore Camerii, se istam historiam Vulgo creditam, fabulosis
deputare. Vidi nuper scriptas literas docti and vegeti senis, tibique and mihi
amicissimi, Petri Molinaei, Du Moulin.
quibus idem semper sibi esse visum affirmabat.

Penes me sunt literae Samuelis Bocharti, Bochart.
quibus testatur sibi esse pro comperto vanum and fictitium, quicquid hactenus
de ea sit proditum. Thus Monsieur Serrauius in a private letter (though his
son after his death printed his litters) to a friend of the same religion: And
thus you see, how this fable maintained highly a long time by the Adversaries
of the Roman Church, expired at last (as all lies do) and was carried to its
grave upon the shoulders of four French Ministers, Blondel, Chamier, du Moulin,
and Bochart. If I have been a little too long in this digression you will
pardon me: We are all debtors to Truth; and all men ought to be glad to see
themselves disabused.

The Bapistery of Constantine.
Going out of the little back door of this Church, I went to see the Baptistery
of Constantin the Great, Our most Noble Countryman, and the first Emperor that
publicly professed Christianity. This Baptistery is built round, and in the
center of it, in a descent of four steps, stands the very Font, in which the
said Emperor was baptized by Pope Syluester. Its environed with low rayles of
marble, and adorned with ten, or twelve great pillars of Porphyrie (the fairest
in Rome) which bear up the painted Vault over the Font: so that people standin
about these rayles, may see conveniently the baptizeing of Jews and Infidels
in the pit below. Upon the Walls of the round Chapel, are painted in Fresco,
the most memorable actions of Constantin the Great: as his Vision of the Cross
in the air, with these words above it, In hoc signo Vinces: his ouercomeing
the Tyrant Maxentius; his baptism here by S. Siluester: his burning the Libels
against Catholic Bishops, preferred to him by the Arrians: his kissing the
wounds of those good Bishop in the Council of Nice, who had either their
fingars cut off, or one eye put out by the Tyrants.

On the other side of S. John Laterans Church, stands the Scala Santa, The
Scala Santa.
and the Sancta Sanctorum. The Scala Santa is called from the stairs, twenty
eight in all, up which our Savior was led in this passion to Pilats house.
Upon some of them you see the places where the precious blood of our Savior
had fallen: and for that reason they are covered with little grates of brass,
which let in eyes, but keep of knees: I say knees; for none go up these holy
stairs otherwise then kneeling, and this out of reverence to him who often fell
upon his knees, as he was draggd up and down these stairs. Its painful enough
to go up these stairs upon your knees; yet I saw it done hourly in the Iubily
year, by continual flocks of devout people both men and women; of great
condition as well as of great devotion* these holy stairs were Sent from
Jerusalem to Constantin the Great, by his Moter Queen Helen, together with
many other Relics kept in S. John Laterans Church. They are of whit marble,
and above six foot long.

The sancta Sanctorum.
At the head of these stairs stands the Chapel called Sancta Sanctorum, because
of the Holy things kept in it. Hence over the Altar in this Chapel, are
written these words.

Non est in toto Sanctior Orb Locus. Upon the Altar is kept the miraculous
picture of our Savior, it represents him about thirteen years old, See
Pancirola.
and only his half body. Its about a foot and a half long: and its said to
have been begun by S. Luke, but ended miraculously by an Angel. Others say,
Lib. Della Nottia de Vocaboli Ecclesiastici, in verbo Achyropoeta.
that S. Luke having only prepared the ground, and before he had drawn one
stroke, fell to his prayers to beg of God that he might draw his Son right, and
riseing up again he found his picture already finished. Hence Domenico Magri
(a learned Antiquarie) is of opinion, that this pisture of our Savior is that
very picture which Anastasius B^bliothecarius in the life of Steven the II,
calls Achyropaeta, that is, made without hands. Round about this picture goes a
set of great jewels enriching the frame of it. Under the Altar reposeth the
body of S. Anastasius, of whose head and picture I spoke above in the
description of the Church of this Saint at the Tree Fontane. Here are also kept
the Heads of S. Agnes and S. Praxedes, with many other precious Relics..
Anciently, (as the Records here mention) the Holy Prepuce, or Foreshin of our
Savior was kept here too: but being taken away in the sack of Rome, by one of
Bourbons soldiers, it was left in a a country town called Calcata, Calcata.
some fifteen wiles distant from Rome by the same soldier, Menochio Centuria 1.
c. 10.
who could not rest day nor night, as long as he had that relick about him. I
once passed by that town (Calcata) by chance, and by the ciuilityes of the
Lord of the town, Count of Anguillara, at whose house we were nobly
entertained all night, had the happiness the next morning, to see this precious
Relick through the crystal case: This Count keeps one key of it, and the Parish
Priest the other, without both which it cannot be seen.

Triclinium Leonis
Near to the Scala Santa is seen a famous piece of Antiquity of Christian Rome,
called Triclinium Leonis: where is seen a Mosaic picture of our Savior
resuscitated, and holding out a book to his Disciples, in which are written
these words: Pax vobis: Peace be to you: Which picture Leo caused to be made
eight hundred years ago, as an emblem of his peaceable return again to his
seat, after he had been chased out by his enemies. Upon a pillar on the right
hand, is painted our Savior sitting upon a Throne, and giving with one hand,
the Keys of the Church to S. Peter, and with the other, the Imperial standard
to Constantin the Great. Upon the other pillar on the left hand, is represented
in Mosaic work also, S. Peter sitting in a Chair, and with one hand giving
unto Pope Leo the III the Papal stole; and with the other, the Imperial
standard unto Charlemagne, who had restored this Pope Leo to his seat again.

From hence passing again by S. John Lateran^ Church, I saw first, the palace
of the Pope here, built by Sixtus Quintus: then the great Guglia (with Egyptian
Hyeroglyphes figured upon it) which had stood anciently in the Circus Maximus:
its above 100 foot high, and was brought from Alexandria to Rome by Constantin
the Great* lastly in a low room joining to the Church, I saw the Statue in
Bronze of Henry the IV of France, set up here by the Canons of S. John
Laterans, for having caused ten thousand crowns a year to be restorest to
this Church, which was due to it in France.

I looked also into the fair Hospital which stands hard by the foresaid
Church, The Hospital of S. John Laterans.
and so well served and tended, that many person of quality in their sickness
desire to be transferred hither, that they may be better looked to, then they
can be at home.

S. Stefano Rotondo.
Taking the wall of the old Aquiduct of Claudius along with me I went to San
Stefano Rotondo, standing upon the Mount Caelius too. This Church now belongs
to the Seminarists of the German College. Upon the round walls are painted
curiously the martyrdoms of ancient martyrs, with the diverse instruments of the
Heathens, wherewith they tormented the poor Christians.

S. Maria in Nauicella.
Over against this Church stands the Church of Santa Maria della Nauicella, so
called from a little stone ship which stands before it, being a vow of certain
boatmen. This Church in ancient authors, is called in Dominica, or in Ciriaca
because of a holy woman called Ciriaca, in whose house here, S. Laurence
distributed all the Church goods, he as Deacon had in his hands, unto the
poor.

Villa Mathei.
Hard by stands the Villa of the Duke Matthei, where I saw the neat house full
of curious statues, and crusted on the outside with rare anticaglie. Among the
rest I took particular notice of the Heads of Brutus and Porcia, man and wife
in one stone: the statues of Cleopatra: of Hercules: of three little boys
sleeping and hugging one another: the head of Cicero rarely well cut: the statue
of Marcus Aurelius. A rare table of precious stones. In an other house here
(looking toward San Sisto) I saw the incomparable Statue of Andromeda exposed
to the Sea Monster, its of pure white marble, and of the hand of Oliuiero. That
other there of Apollo fleaing Marsias, is an excellent piece too, and in white
marble: so is also that of the Satyr pluking a thorn out of his foot. The
curious alley, waterworks, grotts, walks, wetting places, and the intricate
labyrinth, are all very delightsome.

Descending from hence I went to the old Amphitheater, The Amphiteat^r.
called now the Coliseo, because of a Colossean statue that stood in it. This
is one of the rarest pieces of antiquity in Rome; and though Rome be grown
again, by her new palaces, one of the finest Cities of Europe, yet her very
ruins are finer then her new buildings. And though I am not ignorant how Rome,
since her Ladyship governed the world, and was at her greatness, has been six
several times ruined, Rome sacked six times.
and sacked, by the envy and avarice of barbarous nations ( Visegoths, Wandals,
Erules, Ostrogoths, Totila who set fire on Rome 18 days together, and the
Germans under Bourbon) whose malice was so great against Rome, Vesari in prefa
that of thirty six Triumphal Arches once in Rome, there remain but four now
visibly appearing; that often Thermae anciently, but two remain any way
visible; that of seven Circos, but one now appears* yet as of fair Ladies,
there remain even in their old age, fair rests of comeliness: so the very
ruins of Rome which malice could not reach to, nor avarice carry away, are yet
so comely, that they ravish still the beholders eye with their beautyes, Pliny.
and make good the saying of an ancient author, that Roma iacens quoque
miraculo est: Rome is a miracle even in its ruins. But to return to the
Coliseo; its an other wonder of the world: and I wonder indeed, how such
prodigious stones could either be laid together in a building, Omnis Caesareo
cedat Labor Amphitheatro; vnum pro cunctis fama loquatur opus.
or being laid together, could fall. Vespasian began it; but Domitian finished
it; and Martial flattered it as a wonder which outstript all the wonders of
Egypt, and its Pyramids. It was of a prodigious height, as that part of it yet
standing shows. The form of it was round without, and oual within, and the
out side of it was adorned with tho three orders of pillars; great Arches
below, open galleries above, both to walk in, and to let people into the
Amphitheater, and out again without crowding: so that two hundred thousand
people could go in, or out, in half an hours time, with out crowding. Within,
it went up from below by steps of stone unto the top: and afforded room enough
to all that world of people, to sit conveniently, and see the combats and
sports that were exhibited in the Arena. Anciently the top of it was set rownd
with Statues; and in time of great heats or raynes, it was all ouerspred with
great sails. From its roundish form it got the name of Amphitheater, from
seeing on all sides. Underneath were the caves for the wild beasts, out of which
they turned them loose to feight, sometimes against condemned men; sometimes
against innocent Christians. Nero made the Christians be clad in the skins of
beasts; and so to be exposed to Lions and Bears. Sometimes also gladiators
fought against gladiators; and one gladiator against twenty others: nay the
very noble Romans themselves would now and then feight here publicly, either
to show sport. or valor. And all this was done by the politic Romans, to
teach men not to be affrayd of bloodshed and death in time of wars, with
which they had been so acquainted in time of peace.

The old round rubbage of brick which is here near the Anphitheater, was
anciently a fine Fountain called Meta Sudans, Meta S
serving for the use of those that came to the sports here. It was all faced
with marble, and had a Statue of Jupiter of brass upon it.

Hard by stands the Triumphal Arch of Constantin the Great. The Thriumphal
Arche of Constantin the great.
Its all of marble, with a world of curious statues anciently, but now
headless, and with histories in bassi rilieui. It was erected to him in memory
of his victory over the Tyrant Maxentius, as to the Freer of the City, and
Founder of public Quiet. As the words here import, Liberatori Vrbis, Fundatori
Quietis.

From hence I went to the Church of S. John and Paul; and thene to S. Gregory's
Church, S. Gregory's Church.
which anciently had been his house. They show us yet the place, and the table,
where this holy man, in recompense of his charitable hospitality to the poor,
deserved to have an Angel, and the Lord of Angels for his guests. He treated
daily here 12 poor men, in honor of the 12 Apostles. In one of the Chapels
you see a fine statue of white marble of S. Gregory, in his Pontifical robes;
it was erected to his honor by Cardinal Baronius, who was a devout admirer of
him.

In the garden belonging to the monastery of S. Gregory, there is to be seen a
Cave in which I saw upon the wall some old painting of the highest times of
Pagan Rome: pitiful stuff, yet considerable for its ancientness.

From hence I went to the Bathes or Thermae, Antoninus his Bathes.
of the Emperor Antoninus, lookeing more like a town, then a bathing place.
Indeed Ammianus Marcellinus out throws me, and calls these, and the other
Thermae in Rome, Lauacra in modum Prouinciarum exstructa: Bathing places built
like provinces. And judge whether of us has more reason, by that which we read
in the Exceptis Olymp^odori, where its said, that these bathes of Antoninus had
a thousand six hundred seats of polished marble; for as many persons to sit and
bath in a part: nay, some of those bathing places were paued with silver, and
were adorned so curiously with silver pipes for the water, with statues,
pictures, and precious stones, that Seneca cries out: Eo deliciarum Venimus, vt
nisi gemmas cal^^re nolimus; we are comne to that delicacy that we scorn to
trend upon any thing but jewels: Now these bathes serve only for the Roman
Seminarists to recreate in.

Returning from hence between the Mount Auentin and the Mount Palatin, Circus
Maximus.
I saw the place where the Circus Maximus stood. This was the greatest of all
the Circos in Rome, as its name shows. It was begun by Tarquinius Priscus, but
afterward much augmented by Julius Caesar, and Augustus. It was three stades
long, and four akers wide (The Roman stade was 625 foot, or 125 paces) At last
it was adorned with statues, and pillars by Traian and Heliogabulus. A hundred
and fifty thousand men could sit conveniently in the three open galleryes. One
of which was for the Senators, the second for the gentlemen, and the third for
the common people. The two great Obelicks, to wit, that before Porta del
Populo, and that before S. John Laterans stood in it. Under this building were
many Vaulted Caves called in Latin, Fornices, where lewd women prostituted
themselves for money, and so from these Fornices came the word Fornication.

Going from hence to S. Georges Church, I saw on my right hand, the goodly
ruins of the Emperors palace, The Emperors Palace.
called Palazzo Maggiore. It possessed almost all the Palatin hill, as the
ruins show. Stately ruins I confess: but ruins, and Imperial ruins. And
here I could not but wonder to see, the palace of the persecuting Emperors
ruined quite, and the Church of the poor Fisherman standing still, more
glorious then ever.

Before I came to S. Georges Church I stepped into S. Anastasias Church, which
was anciently the Temple of Neptune: and from thence to the old square Temple,
commonly held to be the Temple of Ianus Quadrifrons: Templum Iani.
and with some reason, because it has four doors in it, and twelve Niches upon
every side of the squar out side. The four doors represented the four Seasons
of the year: the twelve niches, the twelve months of the year: yet others
will have it to have been only an Arche, or Portick* or a Lodge: S. and while
they dispute it ^lego on to S. Georges Church.
Georges Church hard by to which Church is joined on old Arche curiously carved
in marble, which was erected here, by the merchants, or goldsmiths, to the
Emperors Seuerus, and M. Aurelius.

Near unto this Church of S. George came anciently the water of Tyber: and
this water or creek of the river, was called Velabrum, The Velabrum.
because men passed over the river here by boat, and sometime with a little
sail, when the wind stood fair.

From hence I went to the round Church of S. Theodoro standing in the Foro
Boario. Forum Boarium.
This was anciently the Temble of Romulus and Remus, because it was here that
those two brothers where exposed, and nurrished by a she woolf which found
them here.

Not far from hence I stepped into the Hospital of our Lady of Consolation.
This was once the Temple of Vesta. The Tomple of Vesta.
And here it was that the Vestal Virgins (instituted by Numa) kept the Eternal
fire; the extinguishing of which was held by the superstitious Heathnes, fatal
to the state; and therefore they committed the keeping of this fire to Virgins
of great repute and honor. The Vestal Virgins.
These Virgins were to be ten years in learning their profession, ten years
more in exerciseing it, and other ten years more in teaching it to others. See
Plutark in Numa.
And for this reason, they had great privileges given them. For if in going up
and down the City, they met by chance, a criminel man going to be executed,
they had power to free him. If any of these Vestals forgetting her self had
wronged her Virginity, they would not, out of reverence to her profession, lay
Violent hands on her by the common executioner, but they buried her alive in a
low vault made for the nonce.

From hence I entered into the Campo Vaccino, The Campo Vaccino.

The Temple of Jupiter Stator.


and presently fell upon three pillars of admirable structure: They helondg to
the Temple of Jupiter Stator built by Romulus: The occasion was this. Romulus
in a battle against the Sabins, seeing his men give back, made a vow presently
to Jupiter that if he would stop their flight and make them stand to it, he
would build him a Temble: Siste foedam fugam, said he to Jupiter: The men
stood, and the Temple was built to Jupiter stator who made men stand. But this
Jupiter Stator could not make his own Temple stand; for its now so ruined,
that antiquaryes are scarce sure where it stood.

Close to these three pillars stands the Church of Santa Maria Liberatrice at
the fott of the Pallatin hill. Why this Church is so called, both a long
writeing in the Church, Ad an 324*
and Baronius in his Annals, tell at length.

Near to this Church stood the Lacus C^rtii, Lacus Curtij.
a stinking puddle which annoyd the Romans much, and which the Oracle assured
was not to be stopped up but by casting into it the most precious thing in Rome.
Hereupon the Ladies threw in their best jewels; and the noblemen every one what
he had the most precious, but all in Vain. At last Curtius a brave young
nobleman, thinking that there was nothing more precious then a gallant man;
mounting on horseback in a brave equipage, in sight of all the people, iumpt
into this Lake alive, as a victime devoted to his countries service; See Tit.
Liuius and others
and the hole hereupon closed. I confess, a brave Caualier is a precious jewel
indeed: and I remember that a Roman Lady having showed her jewels to Cornelia
the mother of the Grachi, and having desired her to show also her jewels, she
called for her two young sonns (brave youths) and said; here Madame, are my
jewels: The finest Jewels.
and in my opinion, Curtius was somewhat vainglorious, to think himself to be
the brauest man in the City: if the Votes and judgment of all the people had
declared him to be so (as they did afterward declare Scipio Nasita to be the
best man of all the Romans; and the matrons declared sulpitia to be the
chastest matron of her time) then he might have devoted himself more freely for
his countries safety.

Going on from hence on the right hand still, I came to the door of Farneses
garden. Farneses garden.
This garden stands upon the Mount Palatin where anciently the Emperors had
their Palace; which took up all the upper part of this hill, but not all the
skirts of it: for I find, that the Goddess Fever, and the Goddess Viriplaca
had their Temples here, and Catalin and Cicero their houses. Entering into this
Garden I found some pretty waterworks and grottes at the entrance, and fine
high walks above, ouerlooking the place where the Circus Maximus stood
anciently. The scholars of the English College in Rome have a piece of this
Hill for their Vinia and recreation place, The English Vineyard.
to breath on upon days of Vacancy.

The Arche of Titus.
Following still my right hand, I came to the Arche of Titus: a Triumphal Arche
erected to him upon his victory over the Jews. Hence you see here engraven in
mezzo rilieuo the said Emperor in a Triumphant Chariot: and on the other side,
the Holy Candlestick of the Temple of Jerusalem, the Arc of the Alliance, and
the Tables of the Law, which this Emperor brought with him after his taking
of Jerusalem, to grace his Triumph. This is the most ancient Triumphal Arche
in Rome, and it stood in the Via Sacra which went under it.

Wheeling about the Campo Vaccino, still on the right hand, I came to the
Church of Sancta Francesca Romana, The Church of S. Fra^cesca Romana.
otherwise called Santa Maria Nuoua. Here I saw the neat Tomb of that Sa^nt in
brass guilt, made at the cost of Pope Innocent the X. Here Is also cut in white
marble, and standing upon an Altar the history of the Popes returning again to
Rome from Auignon. I saw also here a rare suit of hangings belonging to this
Church, and given by the Sister of Pope Innocent the X.

Hard by, stands the Temple of Peace, The Temple of peace.
that is, some remnants of that Temple. It was once the most noble of all the
Temples (as the pillar before S. Marie Majors Great door, which belongd to this
Temple, shew^th) It was 200 foot large, and 300 long: but now little signs of
its beauty remain: wars and time defaceing the monuments of Peace. It was
built by Vespasian who placed in it the spoils of the Temple of Jerusalem
brought to Rome by Titus.

Behind this Temple stands a neat garden belonging once to Cardinal Pio, where
I saw neat water works. Its now sold to another master.

Going on still in the Campo Vaccino on the right hand, I came to the round
Church of S. Cosmo and S. Damiano, The Church of S. Cosmo and Damiano.
anciently the Temple of Castor and Pollux: because the Romans haueing seen two
men upon sweating horses, that told them news of a battle wonn by their Consul,
and so vanished, they imagined them to be Castor and Pollux, and thereupon
decreed them this Temple. The Masaick work in the roof of the Tribune deserves
your particular attention, for the Symbolical figures sake.

Going on still, I came to the Church of S. Lorenzo in Miranda. S. Lorenzo in
Miranda.
It was once a Temple dedicated to Faustina the Emperesse by her husband
Antoninus Poor man! he could not make an honest woman in her lifetime, Messia
in vita M. Aurelij: and Sabellic lib. 4. c. 11.
and yet he would needs make her a Goddess after her death. The Portch of this
Church is stately still, by reason of its great marble pillars.

A little further stands the Church of S. Adriano, S. Adriano.
anciently dedicated to Saturn who first taught the Italians to make Money,
and therefore the Romans placed their Aerarium publicum, The Public Treasory in
this Temple, and had their Mint hard by it.

S. Martinas Church follows the next; and in a low Chapel, neatly adorned, I
saw her Tomb; Here stood anciently the Temple of Mars the Revenger.

Before this Church stands the Triumphal Arche of Septimius Seuerus rarely cut
with figures in marble in mezzo rilieuo. The Triumphal Arch of Seuerus.
Half of it is buried under ground, the other half is sore battered with the
air. Who would think the air and the Earth to be devouring elements, as well
as the fire and the water? But why do I accuse the Air, when its only Time
(which takes a pride to triumph our Triumphs) that has bettered this
Triumphal Arch, and moultered even marble?

A little higher on the hill side stands the little Church of S. Joseph, S.
Joseph's
where I saw in the low grotte underneath, the prison called anciently
Tullianum, The Tullianum.
into which prison S. Peter and S. Paul where shut up. I descended into the low
dungeon where S. Peter baptized Processus and Martinianus, his two keepers,
with diverse others. The Fountain of water that sprung up miraculously for that
holy function, is still seen there in the bottom of that dungeon.

Many other brave buildings stood anciently in this Foro Romano, worth
remembering, as the Comitium, The Comitium.
or public place of assembly; so called a coeundo: it being the Great Hall of
Justice, in which was erected a large Tribunal, were the Praetor (our Lord
Chief Justice) sat in an Iuory chair, called Cella Curulis, and ministered
justice to the people. In this Comitium stood the Statue of Horatius Cocles;
and in the corners of it, those of Pithagoras and Alcibiades. In this Foro
also, stood the Rostra (a great Pulpit made of the Rostra or brazen snouts of
the ships wonn from the Antiates) where Orators used to plead, and were Tully
thundered. Behind the Rostra stood Romulus his Tomb, and before the Rostra,
the Tomb of Faustulus the Foster Father of Romulus.

Mounting up from hence to the Capitol by the Coach way, I saw, upon the side
of the Hill, the pillars that belonged once to the Temple of Concord, built by
Camilus, and not far from hence, three other pillars of neat Fabric which
belonged to the Temple of Jupiter Tonans, Thundering Jupiter, built there by
Augustus Caesar, after he had escaped a thunderclap which killed his Litterman
close by him.

Arriving at the Capitol, The Capitol.
I was glad to see that place, so famous in the Roman story. Its name of
Capitol came from the Head of a man ( caput in Latin) found underground when
they first laid the foundation here of the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus.
Iustus Lypsius, as if he had been the Godfather of that man whose head was
found here, says, that his name was Tolus, and that from Caput Toli came
Capitolium. This head found here portended, that Rome should one day be the
head of the world. And this title is so universally known to belong to Rome,
that all authors affirm it, and every petty artisan in Rome, will tell you so,
though in false Latin, as one did me, when hearing me praise Rome, and thinking
that I did it not enough, cried out to me, half in Italian, and half in Latin;
Caspitra, Signore, Roma est capus mundi* which saying made me both smile, and
say to my self, that such a Head as this fellows, found now underground, would
portend the ruin of the Latin tongue.

Rupes Tarpeia.
I went first to the highest part of that Hill, called anciently Rupes Tarpeia.
It looks down upon the Theater of Marcellus; and is nothing so high a hill as
I conceived when I first read Liuy. For I expected to have found here a hill at
least like that in India called Dorin, which Curtius describes, Munster paints
out, and Hercules could not take; but comeing to it, I found it to be a hill of
that easy ascent, that I had ridden up far higher in Sauoy and Swisserland.

The Equestris statua of Marcus Aurelius.
2. Then returning the same way again to the piazza of the Capitol, I saw there
the famous Equestris Statua of Marcus Aurelius, once guilt over, but now
appearing to be plain brass. This is the noblest statue in the world; and I
was going to say, the noblest statue living; for it seems almost to live and
breath by the workemans art: it is noble also because it represents a man so
noble as Marcus Aurelius, who was a double Emperor, being both a great
Emperor and a great Philosopher.

Hard by this Equestris statue are seen two Colossean statues, pouring out two
rivers, the one representing Nilus, the other Tigris. Over them stands a statue
of Rome something like Pallas, her face is of white marble, her garments of
Porphiry.

3. The trophies of Marius.
I saw the Trophies of Marius cut anciently in stone in honor of that great
General, who from a common soldier came by his warlike virtue, to be seven
times Consul.

4. I viewed the two great statues of Constantin the Great in white marble,
with the Horses.

5. I saw the Milliarum, The Milliarium,
that is, a little pillar of stone with a great round brazen ball upon it. This
pillar stood anciently in the Fore Romano before S. Adrians Church and it was
erected by Augustus Caesar. It was called Milliarium because from it the Romans
counted the miles, that were from Rome to every great City of Italy, or of the
Empire, and the first mile distant from this pillar, was called primus ab Vrbe
Lapis; and so of the rest.

The Conseruatorio.
6. Then entering into the Conseruatorio, that is the palace of the Conseruatori
or Senators, I saw there the Statues of Julius Caesar and Augustus Caesar. Then
in the little court I saw marked up upon the out wall in a marble stone, the
Roman measures, as their Canna, Palmo etc. (as we have all measured by the
Elle, and yard.) that all merchants may know where to find whether his
measures be lawful and just, or no. Then the foot, hand, thighs, and head, in
marble scattered here and there in this court, yet all looking as if they had
belongd to the great Colossus of Apollo, made by the command, of Lucullus. Then
the rare statue of a Lion tearing a horse. The Tomb of Mammea, and Alexander
Seuerus her son, with the rape of the Sabines upon it in a basso rilieuo. The
little Egyptian Idol set high up over this tomb. The head of the Emperor
Commodus in brass, with a hand of the same.

7. Hard by the stairfoot as you mount up to the Chambers, stands the Colonna
Rostrata, Colonna Rostrata.
a marble pillar some twelve foot high, decked with stemms of ships cut in
marble, and sticking out of the pillar, with an Inscription in the bassis below
in scuruey old Latin. I found it spoke of a Sea Victory wonn over he
Carthaginians, and of Duilius; and I cared for no more, because Liuy, in better
Latin, tells me the rest: to wit, that it was Dulius that of all the Romans got
the first Naual Victory; and then I easily concluded, that this pillar was
erected to him for that service. Its almost as hard a thing to conster this old
Latin, as to have wonn that Victory; and therefore I Will leave the words to
Petrus Ciaconius a phlegmatic spaniard, to comment upon. Yet I learnt out of
this left handed Latin, this observation, that the brave Romans of the highest
times, cared more to do well, then to speak well; and that the Roman
commonwealth was turning toward her decline, when fine language was in vogue.

8. Hard by this pillar stand mounted two little quarter Cannons: a poor
Arsenal for the Roman Senators now a days.

M. Aurelius his Triumph
9. Then mounting up some ten steps, I came into a little Court whose walls are
all encrusted over with four excellent pieces of Marcus Aurelius his Triumph
cut in marble. In one of them he triumphs in his open chariot: in another he
sacrifices: in another he gives largesses to the People. In the forth he
receives the presents of the Romans. They are all so well cut that you doubt
whether it be the Emperor, or the Sculptor that triumphs here. Indeed the
Emperors Chariot has got new wheels, of late, and his horses new shoos and
feet, else all is old.

10. Then going up the stairs higher, I saw an old plate of brass, Leges December
Tabularum.
nayed up, in which the Roman Laws of the ten tables, were written: good Laws,
but few. And I was glad to see them yet kept: if that be to keep laws, to
keep them nailed fast to the Wall.

11. Then entering into the Chambers and great Hall, I saw the statues of
Alexander Farnese Duke of Parma: of M. Antonius Colonna the Popes General in
the battle of Lepanto: and of Don John of Austria Generalissimo. I saw upon the
walls painted in fresco, the rapt of the Sabins, the duel of the tergimini
Fratres, three brothers against three brothers, Horatii against Curiatii:
Sceuola holding his hand over the burning coals: Cocles defending the bridge
alone against an army of men: Scipio, and Hanibal with their several armies, so
rarely painted by Pietro Perugino that the Romans now are in love with Hanibal.
Then the picture of the first Consul Brutus commanding the death of his own
Son: that of the Tarquinii: that of the conquering of the Sabins etc. all
pieces as bold as the very actions they represent. Here also in the other
Chambers, I saw some fine statues, as that of Caius Marius; that of Hercules in
brass being but yet a lad; That of Iunius Brutus in brass; the heads in
marble of Diogenes, Plato, Socrates: the Statues of Cicero, Virgil, and Plato;
the brazen statue of the Woolf that gave suck to Romulus and Remus. But the
best statue here, is that of the young man picking a thorn out of his foot. Its
only of brass, but worth its weight in gold. The story of it is this. A young
foot post bringing letters of singular importance unto the Senate, and
pricking his foot as he ran, would not stay to pick out the thorn; but
hastening to Rome with all speed, delivered his letters in full Senate
prodigiously soon, as it appeared by their dates. But then claping himself
down upon the ground before them all, he began to pick out the thorn, in the
posture you see him here. The Senate seeing the haste he had made, and the pain
he had endured, decreed presently that his statue in that posture, should be
erected in the Capitol.

Thus the old Romans not having then recompenses enough for well deserving men,
or else not willing to recompense them otherwise, persuaded men, that no
recompense was like to that of a statue in the Capitol, or to walk up and
down the streets with a crown of Laurel, or Oak leaves upon their heads.
Poor fools! Was a crown of leaves such an honor, when even baudy houses and
priuyes, Says Tertullian, Tertul. de Corona Milit.
Were crowned too? Or was it such a solid honor to have a statue in the
Capitol, when geese, and woolfes were honored so too? But quod rarum, charum
est. Seneca l. 1. de Benefi. c. 13.
And as Alexander the Great hearing that the Corinthians would make him a
Citizen of their town, scorned it at first: but after he had been assured that
they never offered that honor to any man but to Hercules and him, he was well
pleased with that offer: so the rarity of having a statue in the Capitol being
an honor granted to few, and those well deserving men, made men think it the
highest of recompenses. Among those few, where Scipio, for having ouercomne
Antiochus: Aemilius Lepidus for having, while he was but yet a boy, freed a
Roman citizen in a battle: Metellus for saving the Palladium out of the burning
Temple of Vestae: Cornelia for having furnished corn to the people in a
dearth, out of her own moneys, and some few others.

Having thus seen the Capitol, I went into the Noble Church of Ara Caeli which
is joining to the Capitol upon the same hill, Ara Caeli.
and built in the same place where anciently stood the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus, or Jupiter Feretrius. Here it was the Sibylle showed unto Augustus
Caesar, at the birth of our Savior, that a greater Lord then he was borne;
where upon Augustus forbad, that any man should call him Lord from that time
forward. In this Church is the Tomb of S. Helen Mother of Constantin the Great.

Descending from hence by the marble stairs, The Jesuits Church.
which are a hundred in all, and all so large, that twelve men in a breast may
go up at once, I came to the Jesuits Church and house called the Casa Professa.
The Church is neat and capacious, the Chapels well painted, and the ornaments
in the Vestery Very rich. Under the Altar where S. Ignatius his picture is,
lies the body of that Saint, Founder of the Order of the Jesuits. Near the
high Altar on the Gospel side is the Tomb of Cardinal Bellarmin. In the house
of these Fathers I saw the Chamber of S. Ignatius, now turned into a Chapel:
and a fair Library.

Passing from hence, I stepped into the Palace of S. Mark, S. Marks Palace.
belonging to the state of Venice, and the lodgeing place always of the
Venetian Ambassadors resideing in the Court of Rome. This palace, as also that
of the Cancellaria, and that of Farnese, are said to have been built of the
stones that were taken from the great Amphitheater; and yet a great part of it
remanes still; and I I believe, as much as would make three more such palaces.

From S. Marks Palace I went toward the Mount Quirinal now called Monte
Cauallo, and as I went, passed through that part of the town which anciently
was called Forum Traiani, and there saw that which Traian himself never saw, to
wit, the wonderful pillar of white marble erected there to Traian, and
therefore called Colonna Traiana, Colonna Traiana
but never seen by him: for he dyed in foreign expeditions returning from
Persia without ever seeing it. This pillar is made of four and twenty great
stones of marble, in which are carved the exploits of Traian, especially in his
wars against the Dacians. Its a hundred twenty eight foot high, without its
basis which is twelve foot high. Within it there are a hundred fourscore and
five stairs, which deliver you up to the top of it, and there are forty little
windows which let in light enough for you to go up. On the top of all this
pillar where anciently buried the ashes of Traian the Emperor: but Sixtus
Quintus caused, in place of them, the statue in brass guilt of S. Peter to be
set up here. Here to fore all the basis of it was buried under ground in the
ruins, but now they have diggd about it and cleared it; yet by this we may see
how much the streets of Rome are higher then they were; Rome now being built
upon the ruins of Rome.

From hence going up the hill I came to the Palace and garden of Aldobrandini.
The Palace of Aldobrandini.
The house is but little yet neatly furnished with statues and pictures. Some
whereof are these: An old picture made in the time of the Pagans representing a
marriage after the old Romans fashion. I take this to be the ancientest picture
in Rome, and the r^rity of it is so great, that Caualier Pozzo (a brave
Gentleman and a great Virtuoso,) got leave to copy it out, and this copy is
to be seen in the house of his brother, among other rare curiosityes, near S.
Andrea della Valle. Next after this, I was shown in the foresaid palace, the
true picture of Martin Luther: a rare S. Sebastian in the Chapel, of Raphaels
hand: Upon the stairs a statue of a man hanging by the hands, with great stones
at his feet weighing him down: a torment much used by the Heathens, and
practiced by them upon Christians: with a world of other pictures and statues
in the Chambers.

The palace of Mazzarini.
From hence I went to Cardinal Mazzarinis Palace; and there saw in the garden,
the famous picture of the Aurora made by Guido Rhent famous over all Rome. In
the court of this Palace I saw the best Rideing Masters of Rome teach young
Gentleman to ride the Great horse: but I found them here far short of the
masters in France, both for good horses, and good scholars, and graceful
rideing. In the same Court in the summer euenings, they play at ballon, a manly
exercice much used in Italy, and far more gentile then our rude football
sport.

Near to this palace stand the Popes stables where I saw all the Genets that
had been presented to the Pope, The Popes stables.
since his creation, by the king of Spain for the kingdom of Naples; every
year one, with a purse of gold. The other horses here were only coach horses;
for when the Pope goes any whither abroad upon public ceremony, the Cardinals,
and Prelates upon Mules, and the noble men of Rome upon their own horses, wait
upon him: and when he goes out of town his own horse gards attend him.

From hence I was presently in the piazza of Montecavallo, Monte Cauallo.
where I saw the two famous horses in marble, with each one a man holding him,
they were sent to Nero for a present by Tiridates king of Armenia. In the
Pedestal of the these statues are written, under The one of them Opus Phidiae:
under the other, Opus Praxitelis. Its said that these two horses and men were
made by these two ancient Sculptors of Greece to represent Bucephalus and
Alexander the Great. Howeuer these horses give name to this hill, and whereas
it was formerly called Mons Quirinalis; its now called Montecauallo. Upon this
hill stood anciently the Thermae Constantinianae, or Bathes of Constantin the
Great, of which there are seen some remnants in the Garden of Colonna which
lies behind the wall of this piazza.

The Popes Summer Palace.
Oueragainst the foresaid horses stands the Popes Palace, where he ordinarily
lives in Summer. The house is of a noble structure, and the rooms stately: but
I saw nothing rare in them but themselves. The Garden of this house is curious
for fine walks, store of fountains, and the cool Grotta under great shady
trees, where there are fine waterworks, and an organ playing without any
fingers to touch it. Over against the backdore of this garden stands the
nouitiate of the Jesuits, with the ne a new Church, and fine gardens.

Returning from hence, S. Syluesters Church.
I stepped into the Church of S. Syluester over against the Palace of Mazzarini
belonging to the Theatins; and there saw the tomb of Cardinal Bentiuoglio the
modern Liuy of Italy. The garden here standing in a fair prospect, is very
pleasant and delightsome.

Descending from hence by a private street, S. Agathas Church.
I went to S. Agathas Church in the Saburra near the foot of the Quirinal
Hill. The body of S. Agatha lies under the Altar. Before the door of this
Church, are some ancient s^atues of little boys in the habit of the Praetexta,
a habit belonging to noblemens children.

From hence passing by the Church of Madonna del Monte (a Church of great
devotion) I went up the Hill to S. Peter's ad Vincola; S. Peter's ad Vincola.
where I saw the famous statue of Moses sitting. Its of white marble and
adorning the Tomb of Julius Secundus. Its enough to tell you, that it was made
by Michael Angelo, and admired by all Sculptors. Here Is near unto the door of
the Church, an Altar with the statue of S. Sebastian, at the erecting of which,
the plague ceased in Rome, says Baronius. Baron. an. 680.
In the Sacristy of this Church I saw the chains in which S. Peter was
fettered in prison; and which make this Church be called S. Peter ad Vincula.

S. Martino in Monte.
S. Martino in Monte fellows the next, and is a neat Church now. In a cave
below there were two Councils held by S. Syluester in the primitive times of
persecution, as the words upon the wall, as you descend into the Cave, and
Baronius, testify. Its said that in this place was exercised the first public
profession of Christian Religion.

S. Praxedes.
Then the Church of S. Praxedes, were I saw the pillar at which our Savior was
whipped. The pillar at which our Savior was whipped.
Its a low round pillar of speckled marble. It stands within a little grate of
iron. The old writeing over the door of that Chapel tells you that it was
brought to Rome from Jerusalem four hundred years ago by a Cardinal Colonna.
In the mistd of the Church is a Well (now covered) where S. Praxedes hid the
Relics and bodies of Martyrs. In an other Chapel I saw the Picture of the
Descent of our Savior from the Cross, made by Guido. In the Balcones above in
the pillars, I saw, by special favor, many curious Relics.

From hence I went to S. Mary Majors Church, Santa Maria Maggiore
so called because it is the greatest of all the Churches of our Lady in Rome.
Its built upon the Monte Esquilino, and upon the place which was covered
miraculously with snow on the V of August. The history of it is known by the
solemn Feast in the Calendar, called Sancta Maria ad Niues, and it is
expressed in the old Mosaik pictures which are set here in the wall over the
pillars that bear up the roof. The most remarkable things I saw here, were
these.

1. The Tomb of the founder of this Church, Patritius, whose body lies in a
tomb of Porphyrie near the great door.

2. The noble guilt roof, or soffita, which was guilt with the first gold that
came out of the Indies in Alexander the VI time, whose arms are set up in this
roof.

3. The Mosaic pictures which runn along this Church containing the history of
the old and new Testament, and the history of the building of this Church.

4. The High Altar under which reposeth the body of S. Mathias the Apostle,
whose head is exposed upon the Altar in a crystal upon his day.

5. The Tomb of an Ambassador of Congo to Paulus V. Its over against the
statue in brass of Paulus V. near the Sacristy.

6. The little back Court there with the Echo in the well, which answers you
indeed, but like a sharp scold, too quick, and short.

The Chapel of Sixtus V.
7. The Rare Chapel of Sixtus V. made by Domenico Fontana, which cost seven
hundred thousand crowns. The most famous actions of Sixtus Quintus, and of
Pius Quintus, who made Sixtus Cardinal, are carved in white marble round about
the Chapel. S. Hieromes ashes are buried here in a side Altar on the left
hand: S. Hieromes tomb
and where should we look for S. Hierome, but near our Saviors Crib? The
holy Crib of our Savior.
which is here enchased in crystal in a low Chapel under the high Altar of
this Chapel. Its shown publicly upon Christmasse day. The Tabernacle of
brass borne up by four Angels of brass with one hand, and holding each one a
torch in the other hand, is most stately.

8. Oueragainst this Chapel, stands the Chapel of Paulus V. much like the
other in all things, The Chapel of Paulus V.
except that the chief Altar stands not in the middle, but at the end of it.
This Altar is of a Very neat contriuance, and of as rich materials. Four great
Pillars of Jasper polished, adorned with Capitels and bases of brass guilt,
hold up the back of this Altar which is all of Lapis Luzuli, or Oriental blew
azule stone; in the midst of which is a little Nichio in the Wall, where the
picture of our Blessed Lady with our Savior in her arms, made by S. Luke, A
Picture of our B. Lady made by S. Luke.
is conserved and seen. This Nichio is surrounded with a row of rich precious
stones of great value set thick about it; and shut up with two little half
doors, of two whole Agates, each of them two foot long, and a foot large.
Theodorus Lector an ancient Author, makes mention of this picture, and says,
Pulcherioe, Eudocia Imaginem Matris Christi, quam Lucas Apostolus Pinxerat,
Theodor. Lector in initio Collectaneorum.
Hierosolymis misit: That is: Eudocia sent unto Pulcheria from Jerusalem the
picture of the mother of Christ which Luke the Apostle had painted. The picture
it self is so old, and placed so high, that its hard to perceive the lineaments
of the faces, unless you see it with a wax taper at the end of a long pole,
as I did. In fine, this was the picture which S. Gregory the Great a thousand
years ago, carried in procession upon Easier day, when he saw over the Moles
Adriani, an Angel sheathing his sword in sign of the ceasing of the plague.
The roof or little cupola of this Chapel is painted by the hand of Guido Rheni
of Bologna. The side walls of this Chapel are of white marble cut in mezzo
relieuo, and containing the chief actions of Clement the VIII, and Paulus V,
whose statues are also here in white marble.

9. Without the Church stand two great pillars at each end of it: the one an
Egyptian Guglia cut with Hieroglyphs; the other a Roman Pillar taken out of the
ruins of the Temple of Peace; which is of a prodigious height, with the statue
of our Savior and our Lady upon it in brass guilt.

From S. Marie Majors I went to the Church of S. Vito and Modesto. SS. Vito and
Modesto.

The Arch of Galienus.


Its built near the ruins of the Triumphal Arch of Galienus the Emperor. The
great Keys that are nailed to the top of that foresaid Arch, were the Keys of
the City Tusculum (now called Frescate) and hung up here in memory of a
Victory wonn over that town, under Honorius the V. almost five hundred years
ago.

From hence I went to the Church of S. Eusebio S. Eusebio*
built upon the ruins of the Termae of the Emperor Gordiano, and his Palace,
whose court had fifty pillars on every side. Near unto this Church were found
the Trophies of Marius, which J spoke of above in the Capitol.

Santa Croce in Jerusalem.
Continuing on my way, I came at last to Santa Croce in Jerusalem. Its one of
the seven Churches of Rome, and built by the Emperor Constantin the Great. It
stands near the walls of the town in the end of the Mount Caelius. See
Baronius in his Annals.
Hard by it appear some prints of the Temple of Venus and Cupid, which the
said Emperor ruined, to build a Church in the place of them, in honor of the
holy Cross, and so repair the injury which the Jnfidels had done to the Holy
Cross in Jerusalem, by placeing the Statue of Venus upon Mount Caluary, and
striving to blot out the name of Mont Caluarie, and bring in that of Mont
Venerie. This Church is called Santa Croce in Jerusalem, because of the earth
of Mount Caluarie, which was brought from Jerusalem and laid here. The things
I observed here, were these.

1. The painting in the Tribune or roof of the quire, containing the history of
the Exaltation of the Holy Cross. It looks like the painting of Pietro
Perugino, or some of his scholars; and it was thought fine work before
Raphael raised painting to a greater height.

2. The Chapel below where the Holy Earth sent by S. Helen from Jerusalem, to
her son Constantin the Emperor, was put.

3. The Relics in the Sacristy above, to wit, three pieces of the Holy Cross;
one of the nails of the Cross of our Savior; two thorns of the holy Crown
of thorns; a great piece of the title of the Holy Cross, a finger of S.
Thomas the Apostle; and one of the thirty pieces of money for which our Savior
was sold.

Not far from hence stands the Church of Santa Bibiana. S. Bibiana.
This Church stands in the place called anciently Vrsa Pileata, because of the
statue of a Bear with a hat on, which stood there. This place is also famous
for the Church yards sake, or Caemeterium, called, inter duas lauros. Here is
some good painting in this Church, of Campelli, and Pietro Cortonese. The
statue of the Saint is of Berninis hand.

From hence I found away that led me to the Gate of S. Laurence, S. Laurence
his Church.
through which, I went to the Church of that Saint called San Lorenzo fuori
delle mura by reason of diverse others built in honor of that Saint within the
Walls. This Church was built by Constantin too, and enriched by him with many
presents and ornaments. It was built upon the Caemeterium Sanctae Ciriacae,
where that holy woman used to bury the bodies of the holy Martyrs. It stands in
the Via Tiburtina, and is one of the seven Churches of Rome; and one of the
five Patriarchal Churches, and therefore is not titular of any Cardinal. The
things that I saw here, were these.

1. The Tomb of S. Laurence, under the High Altar.

2. Behind the high Altar the stone upon which the gridiron stood upon which
S. Laurence was broiled. Its covered with a great glass through which you see
it.

3. In the roof of this Church I found these words cut in great Letters of
wood; Quam clarificata est Hierosolyma Stephano, tam illustris facta est Roma
Laurentio, taken out of S. Leo in his sermon upon the feast of S. Laurence.

4. The Catacombes under this Church, where many Saints bodies were buried
anciently.

Returning again into the town I stepped into S. Antonyes Church and Hospital,
S. Antonio.
near to S. Mary Majors; before which Church stands a Pillar with a Cross
upon it, erected here upon the conversion of Henry the IV of France.

Passing behind S. Mary Majors, I went to Santa Pudentianas Church standing in
the ancient street called Vicus Patritius. S. Pudentiana.
This Church was built upon the place where the house of Pudens a Senator and
Father of S. Pudentiana, lived. And here it was, that S. Peter at his first
comeing to Rome lodged, Baronius ad an: 44.
having converted this Pudens and his two daughters Pudentiana and Praxedes.
Here I saw these things.

1. The dry Well into which S. Pudentiana put many Relics of Martyrs, to
conserve them. I looked into it with a lighted taper let down in a string, and
saw many curious relics desked up in the side of the wall.

2. The wooden Altar upon which S. Peter said Mass at his being here.

3. The two marble statues of our Savior and S. Peter. They are both
excellently well cut, and perchance by rare Oliuieri.

4. The neat Chapel of the Caetani, with the back of the Altar in white marble
curiously cut by Oliuieri in a bass^ rilieuo, representing the adoration of the
Magi.

Near the high Altar, is the picture of the forementioned Senator Pudens, in
his Senators robes.

From hence I went to S. Lorenzo in Panisperna. S. Laurenzo in Panisperna.
Here it was that S. Laurence was broyled upon the gridiron by the command of
the Emperor Decius whose palace stood where this Church now stands. Upon the
wall of this Church is painted the martyrdom of S. Laurence in Fresco. Here
lie buried the bodies of S. Bridgit a Holy Virgin of Scotland; and of Cardinal
Sirletus.

Going from hence by a little unfrequented street running under the foot of
Mo^tecauallo, I came to the Church of S. Vitalis which stands joined to the
garden of the Jesuits Nouitiat. S. Vitalis
Its said that the Temple of Quirinus, or Romulus stood here; and that it was
here that Proculus swore he saw Romulus after his death, who bid him go tell
the Romans, that he would be adored by them under the name of Quirinus: when
indeed it was thought, that the Senators had torn him in pieces in the Senate
house, See Plutarke.
and carried away under their gowns every one a piece of him; and findeing the
people to mutter much at his not appearing; had got this Proculus to depose as
above; and so quieted the people, who are as easily pacifyed again with a vain
tale, as stired up with a found rumor.

Quatro Fontane.
From hence I went to the Quatro Fontane, which stand at the head of four
streets which meet here. These fountains issue out from four statues which lie
here in cumbent postures; and they were made here by Lepidus.

Then following that fair street, I went to Sancta Maria della Vittoria so
called from the victory wonn in the battle of Prague. Santa Maria della
Vittoria.
The flags and cornets taken in this battle are set round about the Church* in
one of the flags, over the door, I found Cross Keys, Cardinals Caps, Miters
and Priests corned caps all turned topsy turuy, with this single motto,
Extirpentor. Here are very neat Chapels especially that on the left hand,
where is seen the representation of S. Teresa wounded by a Seraphin. Its an
admiraole piece of Beruini. In the Convent you see painted in a Sala, the
battle of Prague, and in the Sacristy a sepulcher of our Savior all of Iuory
extraordinarily well wrought.

Before the door of the foresaid Church, stands the great Fountain, called
Fontana Felice, where the Aqueduct of Sixtus Quintus (who before his assumption
to Ecclesiastical dignities, was called in his Monastery ^ra Felice)
disburdeneth it self into a great stone basin, and from thene is carried into
diverse parts of the town.

From hence I went to the garden of Montalto, The Garden of Montalto
which is hard by. This is one of the best gardens in Rome, and therefore
deserves well to be seen.

At your entrance into it, you see a round table of a bluish stone, upon which
the arms of the house of Montalto are engraven; at which while you gaze
curiously and near at hand, the gardener, by pressing his foot upon a low iron
pump under the table, presses out water on all sides of that round table, and
well-cometh the strangers that come to see his garden.

Then mounting into the little Palace near that door, I saw diverse good
pictures and statues, of the house of Montalto, and others. There also I saw a
wooden organ, pipes and all, and yet of no vngreatfull sound. There also I saw
the picture of David killing Goliath: It turns upon a frame, and shows you
both the foreside of those combatans, and their backsides two, which other
pictures do not. Here are curious Vrnes; the true busto of sixtus V. a
tabernacle of richstones. There is a pictures in stones of several colors,
which held one way, represents nothing but a bunch of herbs; but held up an
other way, it represents a man's head and face. in fine here is in this little
palace, a neat Library in a cool room, over the door of which, on the in
side, are written these words: Medicina animi; as if Libraries were nothing but
physic gardens for the mind.

Descending again into the garden I saw store of wetting sports, and water
works, most curiously co^triueed: and most stately walks. From hence we went
to the Carthusians Church which is hard by. This Church and Monastery are built
upon the ruins of the Bathes of Diocletian. The Bathes of Diocletian.
For this cruel Emperor with his associat Maximian, condemned forty thousand
Christians to work in this building for the space of fifteen years together,
and afterward condemned many thousands of them to death for their religion.
Thus men work for Tyrants. But such is the wonderful providence of God:
Churches of Christians now stand where Christians were condemned to death and
torments. The blood of these martyrs was but the seed of Christians; and when
Diocletian condemned Christians to work here, me thinks he did but bid them go
lay the foundation of a Monastery for Carthusians, and of a Church for the
worship of that God he so much persecuted.

Having seen this Church and Monastery, I went to see the Popes Graneries, The
Popes Graneries
vast buildings two stories high, and always full of wheat for the present use
of the whole city. A world of officers and overseers belong to these Graneries,
and are always turning over, and keeping the vast heaps of wheat from
spoiling and corrupting. By sticking up canes in the heaps of wheat, they can
tell, smelling at the ends of these canes, whether the wheat begin to moisten
and corrupt, or no, and accordingly give order either to turn it, and air it,
or presently to give it out to the bakers. These Graneries were also built upon
the ruins of Diocletians Baths.

The Church of S. Agnes.
From these Graneries I went to the town Gate, not far off, called Porta Pia,
and from thence straight along for a good mile, to S. Agneses Church. Under the
high Altar reposeth the body of that tender Virgin, who being as innocent as
her name, suffered martyrdom at thirteen, and triumphed over the world before
she could know it.

Close by stands the Church of S. Constantia an other holy primitive Virgin.
Here I saw the famous Tomb, commonly called Bacchus his Tomb, but falsely,
seeing it was the Tomb of S. Constantia. Its a vast arca, or Chest of one
Porphyrie stone, above half a foot thick, and six foot long. Its all cut on
the outside with a basso rilieuo in a most admirable manner.

From hence crossing over the fields, I went to Borghesis Villa and garden,
Burghesis Villa.
which are a little half mile from the town. This is the greatest Villa that's
about Rome. For here you have store of walks, both open and close, fish ponds,
vast cages for birds, thickets of trees, store of fontaines, a park of dear; a
world of fruit trees. statues of all sizes, banqueting places Grottas, wetting
sports, and a stately palace adorned with so many rare statues and pictures,
that their names make a book in octauo, which I refer you to. As for the
palace it self its compassed on both sides by a fair demicircle of statues,
which stand before the two doors, like old Penates and Lares. The wall of the
house is ouercrusted with a world of Anticallie, or old marble pieces of
antiquity: as that of Curtius spurring into the Vorago: that of Europa hurryed
away by Jupiter becomne a Bull, with a world of such like fables. Entering into
the house I saw diverse rooms full of curiosityes.

In the great hall stands the statue of Diana in Oriental Alabaster, which was
once a Deity adored by Augustus Caesar. Here also hang two great pictures, the
one representing a Caualcata when the Pope goes abroad in ceremony; the other
a Caualcata when the Great Turk goes abroad in pomp.

2. In an other room stands the statue of one of the famous gladiators
anciently, who fought alone against twenty others, and being wounded to death
seems to threaten with his looks all his beholders. Its terribly well made.

3. In one of the chambers above, is the head in profile of Alexander the Great
cut in marble.

4. In an other room below I saw the Statue of Seneca bleeding to death. Its
of a black stone like Ieat, then which nothing can be blacker but the crimes of
Nero the Magistricide, who put this rare man his master to death.

5. The statue also of Daphne and Apollo in alabaster; Apollo running after
Daphne, and she stiffening into a tree being over taken: her fingers shooting
into branches, and her toes into roots, are admirably well done. It must be
Berninis work.

6. The statue also of Aeneas carryeing his old Father Anchises upon his back
out of burning Troy. The young man is brawny and strong; the old man is made
lean and weak: as also the young man shows a great deal of tender affection
toward his Father; and the Father as much fear in his looks.

7. The Statue also of David slinging at Goliath. He frowns so terribly as he
slings, that you would swear he intends to fright him with his looks, and
then kill him with his sling. These two last statues are also of the hand of
Caualier Bernini.

8. In an other chamber above I saw the Great Chair which locketh fast any man
that sits down in it. Its said to be a chair of revenge, or a trap-chaire
for an enemy: but me thinks it would be a fine chair for a restless student,
or a gossiping wife.

I saw here also Some toys for young men; as the clock which being wound up
plays a tuneable dance, and little men and women of iron painted hansomely,
dance in a ring to that tune by virtue of the wheels. The fools paradise,
representing first a fine green garden of flowers, then a palace, and lastly a
neat Library, is made also to recreate children.

Returning from this villa by the back door which leads to the Porta del
Populo, I stepped into the Church of Madonna del Populo. Madonna del Populo.
This Church has been much beautifyed of late by Pope Alexander the VII,
because of some of his ancestors buried here. Here I saw the famous statue of
Jonas made by the command of Raphael Vrbin, who showed the Sculptors of his time
how perfectly he possessed the theory of Sculpture, if he would but have
durtyed his fingers with that durty art. In a chapel near the Ghospelside of
the High Altar I saw a good picture of the hand of Guido Rheui. Where now the
High Altar stands, stood anciently the Tomb of Nero.

Going on from hence on the left hand, toward the Piazza di Spagna, I first
passed by the great Guglia, or Egyptian pyramid carved all over with
Hieroglyphs. Its looked upon by three streets, and seen a far off. Then
passing a little further, I came to the Greek Church and College, The Greek
College.
where upon certain days, I saw their Ceremonies, and heard the Mass sung in
Greek after the Greek Manner. These Grecians are in union with the Roman
Church, and have a Seminary of young students of their country maintained by the
Pope to reurne to their country in Mission.

Mounting from hence on the left hand, The Villa of the great Duke.
to the top of the hill by the coach way, I went into the Villa of the Great
Duke, where I saw the neat garden, with fountains, two or three huge vessels of
marble, and store of statues both in the palace, and in the long gallery. That
of the two gladiators wrestling; that of the clown, whetting his sithe and
hearing the conspirators of Cataline speaking of their conspiracy, which he
discovered, is one of the best pieces of sculpture in Rome. That of Cupid and
Venus are admirable. From the chamber window of this palace you have a perfect
sight of Rome under you. In the garden there is a little Guglia, with many
other curiosities.

Going out from this garden by the back door, I crossed over the street, and
was presently at the backdore also of the Villa Ludouisia, Villa Ludouisia.
belonging to the Prince Ludouisio. This Villa stands in excellent air being
seated high. There are two houses in this garden, and both furnished with
exquisit rarityes. The first house
That which stands near this backdore afforded me these curiosityes. A rare
picture of the B. Vjrgin Mary made by Guido Rheni. Its the best picture of her
that ever I saw. A rich cabinet with the picture of Pope Gregory the XV. in a
Cameo, and other rich stones adorneing it. A neat little closet full of diverse
rarityes; as a true hydras skinn with seven necks: a petrifyed fungus: the
true picture of Francis the First of France with that also of his Physician,
both made by Laurenzo Vinci, and esteemed rare pieces; with many other little
curiosityes. In an other room, the heads in white marble, of Gregory the XV,
and his nephew Cardinal Ludouisio. A chamber full of curious glasses. Upon the
stairs a little Cupid so laden with a quiver of arrows, that an other little
Cupid is forced to hold them up behind him. But that which is the most rare
thing in this Villa, or perchance in any in Rome, is the incomparable Bedstead
which is seen in one of the Chambers of this palace. Its all of precious
stones, and valued at a hundred thousand crowns. The four bedposts are all of
Oriental polished Jasper. The rest of it is of other rich stones: but the head
of it exceeds far the rest for riches and art, especially the midst of it,
where the arms of the family of Ludouisio are curiously set in rich stones of
several colors according to the colors of the coat of arms. Here you have
bunches of grapes, some red, some white, but all of rich stones. Here vast
Amithysts, one square, an other round in pyramidal form. Here Phaeton in his
Chariot in a Cameo, with the wheels of his Chariot of precious stones; and a
world of such rich work, which makes this Bedstead the non plus of art and
magnificence, I do not know for all that, why beds should be made of stones
though precious ones. If it be for the Princess of this house to be brought to
bed in, it po^tends unto her a hard labor: if to lodge in it the everlasting
Fame of the greatness of this Family, its a vain labor; seeing precious stones
will moulter ^way in time, as other stones do ^mnia mortalia mortalitati
damnata. for my part, the best use I know for it, is, to lay the petrifyed man
in, whom we shall find presently in the other palace of this Villa: beds of
stone are fittest for men of stone.

Hard by this house stand the fountains and Waterworks, which with their shady
trees, correct the hotest beams of the Italian Sun, and afford unto the owner
of this Villa, rain and clouds of his own at will, even in June and July.

From hence crossing through the garden, The second house.
I went to the other house that stands in it, where I was shown in the several
chambers many curious things: as, two brave old gladiators in stone sitting
down: four rare pieces of Guido Rhem, to wit a S. Francis, a Lucretia, a
Judith, and a Conversion of S. Paul: Diverse curious pictures of the hand of
Titian, Raphael, Michel Angelo, Carraccio and others: a rare head in marble of
Scipio Affricanus: the head of Seneca in busto of great value. Ciceros head
also in busto: some rich tables of inlayd stones: the little boys in Iuory
greater then I thought it possible for Iuory to have furnished: two rare
Apollos in white marble: the oracle of Porphyrie which spoake once: the statue
of an old gladiator dyeing of his wounds in a great squar box lined with
velvet, I saw the body of a petrifyed man, A petrifyed man.
that is, a man turned into stone. One piece of the leg (broken to assure an
ambassador doubting of the verity of the thing) showed me plainly both the bone
and the stone crusted over it. The head and the other parts lie iumbled up
together in the box. If you ask me, why they do not put this body into some
tomb, to bury it, I answer you, that it needs no other Tomb then this crust
of stone. Indeed I never saw a body so neatly entombed as this: you would
swear that this Tomb is a pure Iustaucorps rather then a Tomb: it sitts as
close as if a Tailor had made it. And that you may not think it an impossible
thing. that men should be thus petrifyed, Ortelius in Tab. Geograph Russiae.
I must mind you what Ortelius says, that upon the mountains situated in the
Werstern parts of Tartary are seen figures of men, cammels, sheep and other
beasts, which by an admirable metamorphosis, Aristot lib. de An. c. 50.
were changed into stones about three hundred years ago. And Aristotle himself
speaks of men petrifyed in the hollow cave of a mountain near Pergamus. In an
other chamber stands a great clock of brass guilt, as tall as a man; and it
stands indeed; for I think it has not gone since it went out of Germany to
Rome. They tell us pretty things that this clock did, when it was young: but now
it cannot so much as stir its hand: thus Time cashers at last, its own
Heralds; and breaks the cloks by which we know her. In an other chamber of
this house I saw a new statue in pure white marble, of the rapt of Proserpina:
its of the hand of Berninj. In an other room I saw the rare statue of Cestius
Marius killing himself with his dagger, upon sight of his dead daughter who had
killed her self for fear of falling into the hands of a lustful Emperor.
Descending from hence into a long low Gallery of statues I found here some very
good ones, as that of Iunius Brutus, of Nero, of Domitian etc. But the best
thing I saw there was the head of Olympias, (mother of Alexander the Great) in
a basso rilieuo, and in a frame.

The Capucins
Going out of this Villa by the great door behind the Capucins, I stepped into
the Church of the said Capucins, and saw there in the second Chapel on the
left hand, the Tomb of Santo Felice, a Lay brother of this Order, famous all
Rome over for his known sanctity. Here lies also buried Cardinal Antonio
Barberino brother to Pope Urban the VIII, otherwise called Cardinal Sant'
Onofrio, who having been long a Capucin, was made Cardinal by his brothers
express command; and being Cardinal lived still a Capucin in the esteem of all
that knew him. His humility would not so much as let his name be set upon his
tombestone; but instead of it, and his other titles, I found only these words,
hic iacet vmbra, cinis, nihil. This Cardinal, and Cardinal Mazat made by
Clement the VIII, are all the Cardinals that the Capucins Order has had.

Over against the Capucins stands the Palace of the family of Barberini
possessed now by the Prince of Palestrina of that family. Palazzo Barberino
This is one of the noblest Palaces in Rome, for its stately situation upon a
hills side; for the two neat staircases; the noble painting in the roof of the
great hall by Pietro di Cartona; the world of statues and pictures in the
Gallery; the rare sequens of chambers one going into an other; the double
appartimenti, each Capable to lodge any king in, and each rarely furnished; in
fine, for the rare Library of Cardinal Francesco Barberino.

Descending from hence toward the Minims of Trinita di Monte, I stepped into a
little Church of Spanish Augustins called santo Ildefonso, S. Jldefonso.
which I cannot pass by without taking notice of; because I think no body else
does, it is so little: yet haueing described the greatest Church of Rome (S.
Peter's) so exactly; The least Church in Rome.
I cannot but say something of the least Church in Rome: dwarfs are men as well
as Giants; and though this Church may seem rather to be a map, or model of a
Church, then a true Church, yet seeng it has not only all the lineaments,
features, and mien of a Church, but also all the noble parts of a Church, as
High Altar, side Chapels, Cupola, Quire etc. I fear not to call it a Church,
though for bigness, it would not make the little finger of S. Peter's.

The Church of Trinita di Monte
From hence I went straight on to the Minims of Trinita di Monte belonging to
France and S. Francis of Paula^ Order. This Convent is the best seated of any
in Rome, and one of the noblest, being founded by king Lewis the XI. of France,
ouerlooking all Rome, and looked upon reciprocally by the best places in Rome.
In the Church I saw diverse good pieces: as the Assumption of our Lady by
Zuccarj: the picture of the taking down of our Savior from the Cross, by
Raphael: the picture of our Saviors appearing to S. Mary Magdalen, by Julio
Romano Raphaels Scholar, and imitating very much in this picture, Raphaels
colors. See in the dormitory of this Convent the curious perspectiue of S.
Francis of Paula, and a rare sunn dyal ingeniously contrived.

Descending from hence into the Piazza di Spagna, Piazza di Spagna
I saw the fountain of the ship, which in summer nights they let over flow, to
cool the Piazza and the neighboring streets. In this Piazza stands the Palace
of the Spanish Ambassador, belonging always to him who is Ambassador here. In
the end of the Piazza stands the College de Propaganda Feed, Collegiode
Propaganda feed.
of propagating the Faith, founded by Urban the VIII to maintain diverse studens
of the Eastern contryes, and even of India and Ethiopia too, who having
finished their studies in this College, are sent back again to their several
countries with great profit and advantage to those poor Infidels who would sit
still in the darkness of infidelity, were it not for the Popes care and Charity.

Fontana de Treui.
From hence I steered to the Piazza of the Fontana de Treui, and in my way, saw
diverse stately palaces inhabited by Cardinals, because they stand near the
Foot of Montecauallo where the Pope resides. This Fontain of Treui is not yet
finished as to the structure that was intended; but only the water is brought
hither, and in that quantity, that it seems to make three little rivers, at
the three mouths out of which it gusheth.

The Maronites College.
From hence I went nearer unto the foot of the hill of Montecauallo, and stepped
into the College of the Maronites, in whose Church, I heard them singing Mass
in their own language, and after their own rites, as the Christians of Mount
Libanus have immemorably used to do. Their language is Arabic, and they have
always kept themselves free from heresies; and in Union with the Roman Church
these 500 years.

From hence I went to the Church of the SS. Apostoli built in honor of the
twelve Apostles by Constantin the Great, SS. Apostoli.
who in honor of those holy Apostles, carried out of the foundation twelve
baskets of earth upon his own shoulders. In this Church lie buried S. Philip
and Jacob two Apostles. In the Piazza before this Church, stand four fine
palaces; that of the Prince Colonna, that of Cardinal Ghisi, that of Cardinal
Sforza, and that of the Signori Muti.

Crossing from hence into the Corso I took an exact observation of this
street, The Corso
which is the fairest in Rome. Its called the Corso, because here it is that
they make horses run against horses, Jews against Jews, boys against boys,
and the like, in Carneual time. Here also it is, that the Mascarades march in
Carneual time, and make themselves and others merry: and and all this is
allowed the Italians that they may give a little vent to their spirits which
have been stifled in for a whole year, and are ready else to choke with gravity
and melancholy; most men here living alone in their houses and chambers. If our
Statesmen in England had gone on in the course their wise ancestors had
showed, and had suffered, as they did, some honest recreations to the people,
as bowling, shooting, raceing etc, to give vent to their active spirits, we had
all been happyer: but while both the Tribunals, and the Pulpits thundered out
against moderate recreations and assemblyes, out of fear and faction, they
made the humor of the Englishmen grow so sour and bitter, that nothing would
please them, but flat rebellion, and fanatic heresies. Now here in Rome, once
a year, In Carneual time every one vents his humor according to his fancy,
and (as it seems) according to his need. One plays the Doctor of the Law, and
goes up and down the streets with his book in his hand disputeing with every
man he meets and uttering pure raillerie: and if by chance two such Doctors
meet, they make sport enough for half an hour by their abuseing one another.
Four of these pretended Doctors, with their gowns and caps on, and their
books of the Codex before them, got an Ass into their coach who had also an
open book before him; and thus they went along the streets studyeing, and
turning over their books. Another takes himself to be a Grand Cyrus, and goes
a horseback with a rich Persian habit and Plumes highly mounted. One went a
foot gravely with a cloak on, and cried a secret against mice, and opening his
cloak, showed a cat that he had under his arm? Another went up and down the
street combeing his hair like a spaniard saluting the Ladies and twirling up
his mustaches with a stayed gravity. Some go in coaches and there play on
instruments: others go on great carts, with little stages of bordes thrown
upon them, and there act little plays as they go along, and abuse tradsmen.
One rides like a physician upon a mule with a world of vrinals hung round about
him. Others ride gravely through the streets with great clackbags behind them
as if they came from Polonia. Some Princes here make glorious Carro's, with
four horses on a breast drawing them, and with rare pageants upon them, and a
great train of horsemen and trumpeters, clad exotically, accompanying the
Carro in a most glorious manner. Some noblemen of highest quality, as Dukes,
and Princes, I have seen going a foot pelting with sugar plums those that were
in coaches and windows; and angering them with their sugar affronts. But never
did any Mascarade please like that speculatiue Italian who mocked both the
French and the Spaniards at once, by walking up and down the street clad half
like a Don, and half like a Monsieur. Oneside of his hair hung down in a long
curled lock powdered white: the other side was black and sweaty Half of his
beard was turned downwards: the other half was turned up with yrons and
twirled in like the hilt of an old dragger. One eye was bare: and the other had
a glass, or half spectacle before it held on by a small wyar from under his
hat. Half his hat was a narrow three-fingered-brimd hat, with a little half
feather upon the brim: the other half of it was a broad brim with out so much
as a hat band. One half of his band about his neck was of a broad bonlace
startched white: the other half was made of course lawne startched blew and
standing out upon a picky illy of wyar. Half of his face looked white with
meal and powder: the other half looked black and tawny. Half of his doublet
was white satin with an open sleeue and a world of shirt huffing about his
wrist and half of his waste: the other half was of black freeze with a black
taffetty sleeue close and strait to the arm, and a hanging sleeue of freeze.
One half of his breeches was of scarlat and vastly wide at the knee, with a
confusio of rubans of six colors: the other half was of black taffety close at
the knee. Upon one leg he had a linenen stocking with a great laced canon
turned down to his half leg: on the other he had a black silk stocking drawn
up close. In fine, on one foot he had a white spanish-leather shoo, with a
stiff knot of six colored ruband a quarter of an ele long: on the other a
little black flat soled shoo tied with a short narrow ruband. Thus this moral
Hermaphrodite and walking Emblem of peace between the two nations, walked up and
down the Corso gravely; yet laughing within himself, to see how he carried
about him two such antipathetical nations in one suit of clothes. By this you
may guess at their other fooleries in Carneual time, and see how innocently
they divert themselves: for you must know, that none are suffered to carry
swords or arms while they go masked thus; nor to enter into any house; nor to
be abroad masked after it grows dark; nor to do, or speak any thing
scandalously that may shok ciuility or public view: for which reason here are
always gards set, and sargeants rideing up and down the street of the Corso,
to keep all in order, and to make even mirth observe decency.

In this street also of the Corso it is that noblemen and Ladies take the air
every fair evening in their coaches. For this reason there are many fine
palaces built in this street; as the Palace of Signor Vitelleschi, Some
Palaces in the Corso.
where I saw tenn chambers on a floor, and all of them filled with a rare
collection of pictures and statues. Among the statues I was pleased exceedingly
with that of Cincinnatus, and with that of Brutus defaced by the command of the
Senate, where the very marks of the punches of the Halbards wherewith they
defaced it, are yet seen. Not far from it stands the palace of Prencipe
Pamfilio, The Palace of Pamfilio.
in which I saw more riches and rare furniture then in any house in Rome or
almost in Italy. For here they showed me excellent plate of gold and silver: an
Agate Cross fixed upon a foot of the root of Saphirstone, and under it a
basis beset round with Cameos cut into pictures: a great silver Crucifix upon
an ebeny frame, the whole worth 12000 crowns: a rare cabinet with the picture
of our blessed Lady in it, the whole valued at 6000 crowns: a sword whose hilt
is of three great Turkey stones of great Value: a basin of gold set thick with
Turkey stones: three or four great Besoars stones as big as pearmanes, which had
been presented to Clement the VIII from all parts because he stood in need of
them: a rich miter set with precious stones of great Value: a world of curious
originals of the best painters hands: curious saddles, harness, liueryes of
show embrodered with gold and silver, with many other rich curiosities. The
other palaces in the Corso are these; that of Prencipe Carboniano; that of
Cardinal Franciotti; that of Don Augustino Chisi, that of Prencipe L^douisio,
that of the Duke Caetano.

There are also in this street some Churches worth taking notice of; as that
of S. Maria in Via Lata. Santa Maria in Via Lata.
which stands near the Palace of the Prince Pamfilio. Its an ancient Church,
and a Cardinals title. Baronius says, that its built there where S. Paul
lodged at his first comeing to Rome. Its said also that in the Oratory here S.
Luke wrote the Acts of the Apostles.

There is also in the Corso the Church of S. Marcello, S. Marcello.
a title of a Cardinal. It was built in the place where anciently stood the
Temple of the infamous Egyptian Godesse Isis, which Tiberius himself caused to
be pulled down, the Idol thrown into Tyber, and all the Priests of it to be
crucified, for having favored a great crime committed by a Roman Lady. Behind
this Church stands the Oratory of S. Marcello, called the Oratory of the holy
Crucifix, where there is a famous Confraternity in which many noble men of Rome
are enrolled. Every friday in Lent there is excellent music, and one of the
best preachers in Rome. From hence also in the Holy year I saw march a
procession of 15000 men, all in black buckram coats to the heels, with a white
torch in their hands; and they went from hence on the night of Manday Thursday
unto S. Peter's Church.

S. Carlo in Corso.
Then the Church of S. Carlo in Corso, where J saw the heart of S. Charles
Borromeo in a Cristal case. This Church belongs to the Milanesi.

S. Jacomo de gl'Incurabili.
Then the Church of S. Iacomo de gl'Incurabili, a neat round Church belonging to
the Hospital here where they that are afflicted with incurable diseases, are
entertained and well tended.

The Convent of the repented whores.
Lastly the Church of the penitent whores with their Convent; where all those
poor souls that repent themselves of their bad life, are received, and kept
all their life time, at the cost of this Convent. And here I found a great
difference between this Convent, and the house in Amsterdam, where whores are
clapped up. For here these poor souls are locked up with their own consent and
desire: there they are locked up by force and violence. Here the poor women do
great acts of austerityes and penance, as the bloody walls of their Celles laid
open by a conflagration showed unto all the City: there the young women laugh,
and are merry. Here no man is permitted to speak alone with them, except their
Confessor, and physician: there many men go to prattle and pass their time
with those wanton girls, at a separation of rayles. Here a Veil hides these
poor women's faces: there I saw diverse with black patches on their faces. Here
all signs of true repentance are seen: there none. Here the love of virtue and
penance locks up these: there the Vice of Love locks in those, and not true
repentance. For really all the repentance I saw there: was, that it repented
me, that I had suffered mine host (who would needs show me all the rarityes of
Amsterdam) to lead me thither.

Objection.
O but, said a Holander to me, the Pope allows whores in Rome.

Answer.
To whom I answered: no more Sr, then your states do drunkenness, which is a
greater sin of the two, because it rides double, and carries luxury behind
it. Do not drink wine in which is luxury. Ephesians. 5.

Object.
But says an English writer; I am told, that the Pope both permits them, and
takes money of them too for that permission.

Answ. Fenton in his treatis of usury l. 2. c. 9.
You have been told many other false tales by those who think it lawful to tell
untruths, so they speak but against the Pope: in the mean time, I that have
been five times in Rome, can tell you the contrary, if by permitting you mean
allowing and aproueing of them in that course. There Is a great difference
between allowing, and permitting a thing. Moses allowed not, but yet permitted
the libel of divorce to the Jews for the hardness of their hearts. So usury is
permitted, Matthew. 19.8.
but not allowed in diverse countries, for trades sake.

But why takes he money of them?

This money is taken up by you upon credit not, the Pope. Object. Answ.
For the Pope is so far from receiving any money of these drabbs that he goes
to great cost, to hinder their trading. No man perhaps has told you this, and
therefore, I Will tell it you, know then that the Pope to hinder all young women
from being naught, has founded Hospitals for poor girls, where they are
carefully brought up till they become either married wifes, or Nunns. Nay, he
gives them dowries also to execute this their choice, distributeing yearly upon
the Feast of our Ladies day in Lent, in the Church of the Domicans supra
Mineruam, a purse of money a piece, to three hundred young mayds who are
presented to him by the overseers of the foresaid Hospitals. Nor is this all:
for he causes young girls of tender years, to be taken from their poor
suspected mothers, least poverty, quae cogit ad turpia, should make them
sacrifice those tender virgins to rich men's lusts. In fine, he has caused a
Monastery to be built in Rome to receive those poor unfortunate women in,
Petrus a S. Romualdo in his Cronologicall Treasur.
who would leave that infamous course, if they had but means to live on. Nay,
he grants Indulgences to any that will marry any of those women, to free them
from that lewd course, and make them mend. All this the Pope does; and much
more; which would be a destroying of his own trade and gain, if it were true,
that he countenanceth and allows of whores for his gain. No miller ever
deturned the current of water from his own mill.

But why does not the Pope discountenance and punish whores that are known to
be such?

Object. Answ.
He does so. For is it not a discountenanceing of them, to forbid them to come
to public meetings, and assemblyes, where women of honor meet? as, at the
Corso, in the euenings; at public marriages; at their sung operas; and the
like? is it not a discountenanceing of them to forbid the^ to go in coaches in
the day time; or to stir out of doors in the night? Is it not a punishment to
them; to forbid them to live together, where they might encourage one an other,
and pass their time more cheerfully? But for the most part they live alone,
condemned to the melancholy horror of their crimes, and the solitude of seven
whole weeks in Lent, when upon pain of rigorous punishments and imprisonment,
they dare not admit of any customers. The like rigor is used against them
also in Aduent, that dureing the space of those holy times, these unholy women
may have time to think of themselves, and admit of Gods holy inspirations for
their amendment. Is it not a punishment to them to be obliged to enter their
names publicly in the list of whores? For, Tacit. annal. 2.
if Tacitus observes that the old Romans, satis paenarum aduersum impudicas in
ipsa professione flagitij apud Aediles credebant, thought it punishment enough
against unchaste women, in their very profesing themselves to be such before the
Aedils; I cannot but think it a great punishment to Christian whores (who are
at least as sensible as the heathens, of the horrible disgrace of haueing their
name listed) to be thus defamed for ever, by remaining whores upon Record. Is
it not a punishing of them, to deprive them all their life time (as long as
they live whores) of the holy Sacraments; and after their death, of Christian
Burial? Is it not a punishment, and a deterring of them from vice, to throw
their bodies when they dye, into an obscure place out of the walls of the
town, as if they deserved no other Burial place then that of Asses? Is it not,
in fine, a punishment to them, not to be allowed to make any Will, or
Testament, but to leave all their goods confiscated either to the Hospitals of
poor honest girls, or to the maintaining of those gards, that are to watch
over their deportments? If these punishments both of body, soul, and honor, be
inflicted upon whores in Rome, as they are, do not urge any more, that whores
are not punished in Rome, nor discountenanced.

But why does not the Pope punish them home, Object.
and root them quite out by banishment?

This has been attempted by diverse Popes, Answ.
and namely by Pius Quintus of happy memory (as Thuanus in his history writes)
but seeing greater inconveniences, and greater sins arose upon it, prudence,
which is the salt that must season all moral actions, thought it not fit to
carry on that rigor; nor yet allow of fornication neither. So that all the
permission of whores in Rome that can colourably be imagined; is only a not
punishing of them in all rigor; and even that too, for a good end; and to
hinder greater evils.

But the Pope being both a Temporal, and an Ecclesiastical Superior, Object.
is bound, in my mind, to break through all respects, and settle innocence in
the world.

Answ.
Its zealously spoken; and I wish he could do it: but difficilem rem optas,
generis humani innocentiam: he wishes a hard thing who wishes for the
innocence of mankind, Seneca.
says a wiseman. And if Princes sometimes do not punish factious subjects;
when they see, that the punishing of them would pull the whole State in pieces
over their heads, and put the whole kingdom in danger, as it did in Henry the
Thirds time in France upon his causeing of the Duke of Guise to be killed in
Blois: If Generals of armies take no notice of some treacherous commander, who
is universally beloved by the soldiers; least the punishing of one man, loose
them the affection of the whole army, as we saw latey in the case of Lubemirsky
(how truly guilty I know not) and some years ago I remember in the case of
Walstein, whose punishment had almost undone the Emperor: why may not the Pope
without approueing the sin of whores, prudently wave the punishing of it with
all rigor, when he sees that such rigor would cause greater disorders in that
hot nation, and in that city where all nations seem to club vices, as well as
virtues? Hence learned Abulensis, In c. 8. l. 1. Reg.
a great Divine says; Licet leges humanae aliqua mala permittant non puniendo,
nullum tamen malum permittunt statuendo.

But the Pope should not govern according either to human policy, Object.
or human Laws and Examples.

You pretend zeal, Answ.
but you would do well to take her sister Prudence with her, as our Savior
did, who when he heard his disciples desireing him to let them call down fire
from heaven upon the criminal Samaritans, answered them calmely, Luke 9.
you know not of what spirit you are. Nay, does not God himself, who being able
to punish all criminal persons, and root them quite out of the world, suffer
both his Sun to rise and shine upon sinners, and sinners to offend in this
sunshine, and often by it? S. Tho. 2.2. q. 10. art. 11. in corpore.
Hence S. Thomas says much to my purpose: Humanum regimen deriuatur a diuino
regimine, and ipsum debet imitari. Deus autem quamuis sit omnipotens, ac summ^
bonus, permittit tamen aliqua mala fieri in vniuerso, quae prohibere posset; ne
iis sublatis, maiora bona tollerentur, vel maiora mala sequerentur. Humane
government is derived from divine government, and ought to imitate it. Now God,
allthough he be allmighty and highly good, yet he permits evils to be done in
the world, which he could hinder, least by taking away them, greater goods
should be taken, away or greater evils should follow. But I wade too far into
this puddle: yet remember who thrust me into it, and you will pardon me.

S. Syluestro in Capite.
Behind the Church and Convent of the foresaid Penitents, stands the Church of
San Syluestro in Capite, so called from the picture of our Saviors head and
face, which our Savior himself made by miracle, and sent to Abagarus King of
Edessa, as you may read at length in Baronius, and in Bosius in his rare book
called Roma Sotterranea. Now this picture is kept here in this monastery; and
with great probability, seeing it was here that diverse Greek Monks driven out of
their country by Constantin Copronimus for the defense of sacred Jmages, were
entertained by the Pope Paul the First; and its very likely that these good men
brought with them this famous picture of our Savior to save it from the fury
of the Iconoclasts.

Returning from hence into the Corso again I went to see there the Colonna
d'Antonino, Colonna Antonina.
the Great Pillar of Antoninus the Emperor. Its built just like that of Traian
described above. It was built by Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Emperor in
honor of his Father Antoninus Pius. Its all of white marble engraven without
with a basso rilieuo from top to bottom, containing the memorable actions of
Marcus Aurilius. Its 175 foot high, and has in it 206 stairs which lead up to
the top of it, and 56 little windows giving light to those stairs: and yet this
high Pillar was made of 28 stones of marble. The caruing that is upon it,
contains the brave actions of Marcus Aurelius over che Armenians, Parthians,
Germans, Wandals and Sarmats, or Polonians: but age has so defaced these bassi
rilieui that its hard to decipher them. He that's curious to know them, may buy
them in the printed cutts sold in Rome. Upon the top of this pillar stands
mounted the statue in brass guilt of S. Paul set up here by Sixtus Quintus.
From the top of this pillar I had a perfect view of Rome, and of almost all the
Seven hills upon which it is built, The Seven hills of Rome. Mons Capitolinus
and are within the walls: which are these.

1. The Capitolin hill where now Ara Coeli stands and the Conseruatorio.

2. The Palatin hill I could not see because it stands behind the former. It
was so called from the Emperors Palace that stood upon it. Palatinus


3. Auentinus
The Auentin hill so called from Auentinus king of Alba buried here where now
S. Sabinas is.

4. Coelius.
The Coelian hill beginning at S. Gregory's and running to S. John Laterans.

5. Esquilinus.
The Esquilin hill, exquilinus quasi excubinus, because of the nightly watch
and guard upon it. Here stands S. Mary Magiors.

6. The Viminal hill, Viminalis
so called from Vimina, that is, Osiers, where with it was anciently covered.
Here stand the Thermae Diocletiani and the Villa of Montalto.

7. Quirinalia.
The Quirinal hill so called from the temple of Quirinus, or Romulus which
stood upon it. Here now stands Montecauallo. These were the Seven ancient
Hills of Rome, to which were added three more, to wit; The Ianicule Hill,
Ianiculus.
so called, from Ianus buried here. Here stands S. Pietro Montorio.

The Vatican Hill, Vaticanus
so called from the Vaticinations and southsayings made here. S. Peter's Church
stands now upon it.

Pincius or Hortuoru^.
The Pincian Hill, now called Montrinita. Descending from hence I went to the
Pazzorella, where they keep madmen and fools; and saw there strange variety of
humors in folly: yet I was pleased to see with what charity and care those
poor men were tended there.

The Pazzorella.
From hence I stepped to consider, in the piazza di Pietra, the row of curious
pillars which adorned the Basilica of the Emperor Autoninus who had his palace
here, and his Forum.

The Roman College.
Then turning by little unfrequented streets, I came to the Roman College
belonging to the Jesuits.

Its a fair building, and stands conveniently for concourse of scholars from
all parts. Here I saw the schools, and Gallery of famous Athanasius Kerkerius,
Kerkerius his gallery.
full of pretty curiosityes and experiences both mecanical, mathematical, and
hydraulical: yet in my opinion, its far short of Canonico Settalas gallery in
Milan, or Monsieur Seruiers in Lions. Here Is also a fair Library having no
fault in it but the common fault of most Libraries, to-wit, Locks and keys to
it. Good books should be as common as the sun, seeing they are the lights of
our minds and made public by the press: and I camot but pity a book that's
emprisoned and locked up in a Library, by saying unto it: Odisti claues and
grata sigilla pudicae, Paucis ostendi gemis, and communia laudas. In fine, I
saw here the Apothecaries shop where a Lay brother maKes excellent Roman
Treacle, and other odoriferous distillations of souerain Virtue. The Church
belonging to this College is designed to be a noble thing, but its but half
built for want of a whole founder.

From hence I went to the Dominicans Convent, called la Minerua, La Minerua.
because its built upon the Place where anciently stood the Temple of Minerua.
Hence also the Church is called Sancta Maria supra Mineruam. In this Church I
saw many neat Tombs, as those of Leo the X, and Clement the VII, both Popes of
the house of Medices: they stand in the Quire, and are neatly wrought by that
great artist Baccio Bandinelli. Then the Tomb of Cardinal Pimentelli a modern
Cardinal. The tomb of great Cardinal Morone, Legate for the Pope in the
Council of Trent, and a man who had been thirteen times Legatus a Latere. Here
also lie buried the ashes of Egidio Foscarari Bishop of Modena called in the
Council of Trent, Luminare Maius. The tomb of a Lady of the family of the
Raggi, is very neat for the new manner of spreading (as I may say, and as you
would think) of black marble upon an other colored marble; and both of them
upon a round pillar. Here on the gospel side of the high Altar stands a
statue of our Savior made by Michel Angelo, of white marble, a rare piece. At
the entrance of the great door of this Church, lies buried under a plain flat
stone, Thomas a Vio Caetanus S. Thomas of Aquins Second, his Brother in
Religion, his Namesake, his learned Commentator, and only not he. Out of
humility he would not be buried within the Church, but out of it. In the
Sacristy of this Church, I saw the Chapel of S. Katherine of Siena, and this
Chapel was once her very chamber in Siena: Cardinal Antonio Barberino
Protector of this order, caused it to be transferred hither from Siena. Her
body lies under the Altar of the Rosary in this Church.

From the Minerua I went to Saint Andrea de la Valle, Sant Andrea della Valle.
a fine Church belonging to the Theatins. Its built upon the place where the
Theater of Pompey stood anciently; and where in latter times stood the Palace
of the family of the Picolomini; and perchan^ this was the reason why two Popes
of that family, to-wit, Pius Secundus, and Pius Tertius are now buried in this
Church. The Cupola was painted by Caualier Lanfranco; the three corners under
the Cupola and the tribune are of the hand of Domenichini. The neat Chapel of
the Barberini made by Pope Urban the VIII while he was but yet Cardinal, is
built upon the very place where S. Sebastian was beaten, and thrown into a
sink after he had been shot. There had been formerly a little Church built upon
this place, and over this sink, but Sixtus Quintus gave leave it should be
pulled down, upon condition a chapel of the new designed Church should be
built in place of it. In fine, take all this Church together, and it is one of
the neatest Churches (except the Basilicae) that are in Rome, being of the
Architecture of Maderna.

In the piazza, or rather, the street which goes before this Church, lived not
long ago, Pietro della Valle that ingenious Roman gentleman, Pietro della
Valle.
who having spent great means in traueling, has left us three volumes in
quarto of his curious relations of Voyages. In his house here he had three
whole Mummies with their coffins or cases painted anciently, and adorned with
diverse hyeroglyphs. He spent much money in buying many other rarityes, which he
kept also here.

Behind this Church lived, when I first was acquainted with Rome, an other
great Virtuoso and Gentleman of Rome, I mean the ingenious Caualier Pozzo with
whom I was brought acquainted, Caualier. Pozzo.
and saw all his rarityes, his curious pictures, medals, bassi rilieui, his
excellent books of the rarest things in the world, which he caused to be
painted, copied, and designed out with great cost.

From hence I went to the Palace of the Duke Matthei, The Palace of Matthei.
where I saw many good pictures and statues, especially that long picture
representing fully the manner of Clement the VIII his going from Rome to take
possession of Ferrara.

Thence falling in at S. Carlo in Catenari, a neat round Church, I went to the
Cancellaria. The Cancellaria.
This palace was built of the stones of the Coliseo by Cardinal Riarij. The
chief thing I saw in it was the gallery of pictures of Cardinal Barberin, who
being Vicechancelour, lives always in this palace to exercise his charge the
better.

San Lorenzo in Damaso.
This palace looks into the Church of San Lorenzo in Damaso, a Collegiate
Church. Under the high Altar reposeth the body of S. Damasus Pope. The walls of
the body of the Church are rarely painted with the history of S. Laurence.

Not far from hence stands the Palace of Farnesi belonging to the Duke of
Parma. The Palace of Farnese.
Before it stands a noble piazza with two rare fountains in it. The Palace it
self is one of the best in Rome, or elsewhere. It makes an I Will, that is, it has
no houses joining to it. The form of it is square, and it has in the midst of
every square, a great door letting you into the court. This Courtis built upon
pillars and arches, with a fair open gallery above letting you into several
appartiments. In this Court I saw the famous statue of Hercules leaning upon
his club, which was found in the Thermae of Antoninus Car^calla: one of the
legs is modern, the rest old, and made by Glyco an Athenian, as the Greek
words upon it told me. There is an other statue of Hercules opposite to it, and
just like it, but not so good, being but a copy of the former. The other
statues here of the two Floras, the two Gladiators, and others, are excellent
pieces. Mounting up the great stairs to go into the chambers and open Gallery,
I saw the curious Statue of the boy and the Dolphin: and at the door of the
great Hall, the statues of two Parthian captive Kings. Entering into that hall I
met presently with the rare statue of Alexander Farnesi, The statue of
Alexander Farnesi.
Duke of Parma, trampling upon two prostrate statues representing Heresy and
Rebellion; while Fame crowns him. All these four several persons are of white
marble, and of one entire stone. Its pity that such a statue stands not in
some more public place, to teach men to beware of the mother and the daughter,
Heresy and Rebellion; and show them, what long hands Kings have. In the same
Hall I saw the two excellent statues of Charity, and Plenty, in cumbent
postures; and they are the fellows to those two statues which adorn the Tomb
of Paulus Tertius, the rayser of this Family, in S. Peter's Church. Round about
this room also stand a world of statues of gladiators, standing with their
swords in their hands, and in several postures, upon their guard. In the next
chamber I saw rare pictures containing some actions of Paulus Tertius; and they
are of the hand of Saluiati and Federico Zuccari. There is also the picture of
Luther disputeing with Caietan: and a picture of the four Latin Doctors of the
Church, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and S. Gregory, of the hand of
Perdonini. In an other chamber, a world of ancient statues of Philosophers and
Poets: as Euripides, Plato, Possidonjus, Zeno, Seneca, Diogenes, Bacchus,
Meleager, and others. An other room full of pictures of choice hands, and a
curious table of pietre commesse about 12 foot long and 5 wide. Then the rare
Gallery of statues, with the roof of it painted most admirably by the rauishing
hand of great Hannibal Caraccio, and containing the representation of the loves
of the Heathen Gods and Goddesses. This painting may be compared, if not
preferred, before all the Galleryes of Rome, or Europe; and the very cutts of
it in paper pictures, sold at the stationers shops, are most admirable, and
worth buying. In the same gallery also stands the incomparable statue of Apollo
in a flint stone. Here is also a curious Library in which besides the curious
books, are many rare pieces of miniature, and rare pictures of Raphael, and
Titian, and diverse excellent designs of the same Raphael, and of Michel
Angelo; that especially of his Judgment. Returning again through the same
rooms, I could not but gaze again at the statue of my favorite. Heroes,
Alexander Farnesi, and began at last to think that I was mistaken even now when
I said, that Hercules his Statue stood in the Court below; for upon better
reflection, I find no statue in the palace to resemble Hercules so much, as
this of Alexander of Parma; of whom I may say, as Sulla said of Caesar, In vno
Caesare, multi sunt Marii: in one Alexander of Parma, there are many Herculeses.

Then mounting up into an appartiment over the former, I saw diverse chambers
exquisitly furnished with pictures, and lesser statues. In the long gallerie
there are diverse rare pieces of the hand of Caraccio. In the other rooms many
ancient curious things, as an ancient piece of painting found in Adrians Villa
and made fifteen hundred years ago; an other ancient picture of Eugenius the
IV studyeing, and S. Bernard standing by him. A rare design of Vassari
representing a town in Flanders taken by Alexander Farnesi. Michael Angelos
true picture. The Venus of Michel Angelo. The little old picture of our Lady
and S. John Baptist in a small mosaic work. A Crucifix in Iuory of Michel
Angelos making. The design, or rather the perfect model of the bridge thrown
over the Sceld, by which Alexander Farnesi took Antwerp. A great cabinet of
Medalls; with a world of other rarityes too long to be related, but never
enough to be seen.

Then descending into a little back court, I saw there the famous Toro. The
famous Bull.
It is a statue of a great Bull, to whose horns a rope being tied at one end
and at the other end of it a woman's hair, two lusty fellows are striueing to
push this bull from a promontory into the sea below, and the woman together
with him, to make her away. The story is known, and it is of Amphion and
Zetus, who to revenge their mother Antiope, for the wrong done her by Dirce
(who had got Licus King of Thebes to repudiate Antiope for to mary her) took
this Dirce, and tyeing her to a bulls horns threw them both, the Bull and the
woman, into the Sea. The Bull, the two brothers, the woman, a little boy, and a
dog, are all cut out of one marble stone. The snaffling fellow that keeps this
Bull, or rather, whom this Bull keeps, will tell you another story of this
statue through the nose: but seeing he sells his story, as well as tells it, you
had better give him a Iulio betimes to be rid of him, then hear another long
and new fable.

Going from hence into the great Piazza again, I stepped into the house of the
signori Pighini, which stands over against the Palace of Farnesi, to see two
statues, the one of Venus, the other of Adonis; both ancient ones, and so
rarely made, that the Earl of Arondel, late Lord Marshal of England, offered
twelve thousand crowns for them, but was refused.

Passing from hence toward the palace of Cardinal Spada, I entered into it,
and there saw many exquisit pictures.

Ponte Sisto. The Hospital of the holy Trinity.
Thence I went to Ponte Sisto, and from thence to the Hospital of the Trinity,
which receives all Pilgrims comeing to Rome, for three days, and treats them
plentifully. I confess, I went often hither, and as often admired the
wonderful charity which is done here daily; but especially in the holy week in
lent, by the Confraternity of this Hospital, of which, most are gentlemen. Here
Noblemen, Bishops, and Cardinals wash the Pilgrims feet, and then serve them at
supper in the long Refectory, where there are frequently in the holy week, four
hundred pilgrims at once, at table.

Returning from hence I went to S. Girolamo della Charita, S. Girolamo della
Charita.
a Church, and house of good Priests, and most of them Gentlemen, living of
their own expenses, yet all in community. S. Philip Neri instituted them, and
lived among them thirty years. In the Church I saw upon the High Altar, an
excellent picture of S. Hierome.

Hard by stands the English College, The English College.
once an Hospital for the English, and built by the English merchants in Rome,
to receive English pilgrims in; because a poor English woman had been found
worryed by dogs in the night, for want of a lodgeing. In the Church of this
College, lies buried Cardinal Alan, the last English Cardinal of our Nation.

From hence I went to the Chiesa Nuona The Chiesa Nuona.
belonging to the good Priests of the Oratory. This is one of the neatest
Churches in Rome, and the best served. Its all painted in the roof by the rare
hand of Pietro di Cartona, and richly guilt. Here I saw the neat Chapel of S.
Philip Neri, a primitive Saint in all things but time. He was the Institutor of
this holy Company of Priest, who are Religious men in all things but in vows,
and name. The Chapel and Altar of this great Saint is on the Gospel side the
of High Altar, his true picture there, was made by Guido Rheni. Under this
Altar, in a lower Chapel, or Vault, lies the body of this Saint in an iron
chest: if you desire to know his merits and life, ask all Rome which lately
saw them, and daily feels them. On the other side of the High Altar within the
rayles, lies buried Caesar Baronius, once a Priest of this house, and forced,
after much reluctance, to be made Cardinal by Clement the VIII. Cardinal Caesar
Baronius.
He deserved this honor in the opinion of all men, for having written his
incomparable Ecclesiastical history; and if Hercules, for helping Atlas to
bear up heaven one day only, was feigned by Poets to have deserved to be
taken up to heaven; I may justly say, that Baronius deserved well the purple of
the Church, for haueing alone borne up the cause of the Church of God, against
a whole troop of Centuriators. For my part, I reckon it among my felicities,
to have lived after Baronius, and to have spent a good part, of three years
study in reading his Sacred Annals, which cost him ten times three years study
in writeing. And here I could enter into a fair field of his praises; and like
the Eagle in the story, having nothing else to give him, give him a feather,
that is, one cast of my pen; but that I write of countyes now, and not of men;
and that his full praises may be included in those three short encomiums;
Ecclesiae Cocles; Caesar Christianus; Orbis Locupletator.

The house of these good Priests deserves also to be seen for the Libraryes
sake, which is one of the best in Rome: The Oratory.
and for the great Oratoryes sake, where there is every Sunday and Holyday in
winter at night, the best Music in the world.

La Pace.
From hence I went to the Church de la Pace, a neat Church and adorned with
excellent painting and statues. Here many famous painters have signalised their
memoryes, as Peruzza of Siena, Vasari, Lauinia a Lady of Bolognia, Fontana,
Gentileschi, Caualier Gioseppe, Rossi, and Raphael Vrbin himself, who painted
the Prophets and Sibylls in the Chapel of Augustin^ Chigi: and some think that
he made the little boys that are so well done. The statues of S. Peter and S.
Paul, are of the hand of Michel Angelo.

Going from hence through the street of the Stationers, I came to the Piazza di
Pasquino, which is thought to be the very center of Rome. And here I cannot
forget Pasquin himsefe, Pasquin.
who forgets no man. This Pasquin is an old broken statue, something like that
of Hercules in the Beluedere described above, and of some rare hand. And bcause
it stands near three, of four streets, whereby to escape when they have fixed
their Libells ^eering wits set up here, and father upon poor Messer Pasquino,
their Satirical ieasts, called from him, Pasquinades; which Morforius, another
statue near the Capitol, uses to answer.

From hence passing on to the Church of S. Pantaleon belonging to the Fathers
of the Scholae Piae, S. Pantaeleon.
I was willing to enter into it, and see it, because four hundred years ago,
it was a Collegiate Church, and possessed by English Priests, as may appear by
the Inscription upon a Bell which was cast then.

From hence I stepped into Piazza Nauona, Piazza Nauona.
called so by corruption from Piazza d'Agona, because this piazza was anciently
a Circus for sports, and it was called Circus Agonalis. In the midst of it
anciently stood a great Egyptian pillar with hieroglyphs upon it; and now of
late it has gotten an other such pillar set up here by Pope Innocent the X,
with a rare fountain yssuing forth at the foot of it, and adorned with four
great statues of white marble representing the four parts of the world. In this
place also stands the new Church of S. Agnes built upon the place where she was
condemned to the stews. The Church of S. Agnes,
This Church is built at the cost of Prencipe Pamphilio, whose Palace ioynes
upon it. This Palace over looking the Piazza Nauona deserve not only a glance
of an eye, but also an hours inspection within. The Palazzo Pamphilio.
The chambers are many and fair, and the great Hall a most lonely room, if
painting, and variety of pictures in frames can make a house hansome.

In this Piazza also I saw the palace of the Duke of Bracciano, of the house
of Orsini: and that of the family of Torres.

The Spanish Church here, called S. Iacomos, S. Iacomo
is not to be forgotten: Here lies buried in it Petrus Ciaconius a learned
Critic for a Spaniard. The picture here in oil of San Diego is of Annibal
Caracio.

Oueragainst the back door of this Church stands the Sapienza, The Sapienza.
a fair College, where the public Lectures are read. This College was begun
by Eugenius the IIII, but much beautifyed of late with hansome schools and a
neat Church, by Urban the VIII. and a public Library by Alexander the VII. We
have had, in my time, two Englishmen that were Readers here; Doctor Heart; and
Doctor Gibbs a Noble Caesarean Laureat Poet, and the Horace of this age.

From hence passing through the Piazza Madama, and before the Palace of the
Grand Duca, I went to S. Lewis his Church belonging to the French Nation. S.
Lewis.
Its a hansome Church, and well served with French Priests. There Is also an
Hospital belonging to that Church and Nation. In the Church I found upon a
pillar on the left hand, the picture of great Cardinal Dossat a French man,
whom I may justly call Great, because he was both a great Statesman, and yet a
very good man; that is, he was a great servant to his King; and yet a great
servant of God. His rare Letters show the one; and his life written by Du
Verdier, shows the other. Here lies also buried in the middle almost of this
Church, an English Priest of great virtue, by name, More, of the family of
great Sir Thomas More, and heir of that family, if I mistake not. His younger
brother and he striving whether of them should be Priest, it was his
prerogative of age, which making him to be four and twenty before his brother,
made him enter into Orders before him and become Priest; leaving the Estate to
his brother. It was he, that set us out the life of Sir Thomas More in
English: at last, retireing to Rome to be Agent for his brethren the Clergy,
having ended his business there happily (which was the procureing of a
Catholic Bishop) he ended his life so too, and was buried here by his own
choice.

From hence I went to the Palace of Iustiniani, The Palace of Iustiniani
which is hard by. Here I saw so many statues of the old Heathen Gods, and such
rooms full of old marble feet of them, that you would almost swear the
Heathen Gods, when they were banished out of the Pantheon, had been committed
hither as to a prison: or that some of the ancestors of this house, had been
shoomakers to the old Gods, and therefore was obliged to have their lasts and
measures. For they had Gods of all sizes, seeing (as Varro says) they had 30000
Gods* a world of these statues are yet seen in the Gallery above, and in every
room in the house, which they clog rather then adorn. And yet scarce one of
them, but is a Palladium to this Family; and would portend its sudden ruin if
alienated. For, as I remember, the old Prince Iustiniani dyeing without heirs
male, left this man his heir, with this prouiso, that he should not so much as
alienate one statue upon pain of forfeiting the whole house and goods. Judge
then, whether he had not need to keep these statues chayned up, as the Tyrians
did their Gods in a Siege: or whether the throwing of one of these statues out
of the window, would not be properly a throwing the house out of the windows.
Upon which occasion, I cannot omit to tell you how the ancient statues of Rome
were grown at last to be so many in number, Cassiod. l. 7.
that (as Cassiodore says wittily of them) posteritas pene parem populum vrbi
dedit, quam natura procreauit, posterity had made almost as many men by art in
the City, as were made by nature. And these statues grew to that excess too,
that marble ones were thought too Vulgar, and gold and silver ones were erected
by riotous men, who scorned to be like others in any thing but in being mortal.
But to return again to this house, I cannot leave it without minding you of
some rare pictures, of Titian and other prime masters, which are shown in the
Gallery above; especially the rare picture of S. John the Evangelist of the
hand of Raphael Vrbin; and that of our Lady and S. Joseph in an other room,
which is a rare copy of that famous picture in the cloister of the Annunciata
in Florence, of Andrea del Sarto.

From hence I went to the Church of S. Eustachio, S. Eustachio.
having seen in the way, the goodly ruins of the Therme of Alexander Seuerus.
In the Porch of this Church I saw an Inscription in a stone, which told me that
Alexander of Parma was Christened here with his brother, being twinns. This
Church stands in the place where S. Eustachius with his wife Theopista, and his
sonns Agapitus and Theopistus, were put into a brazen bull and martyred by the
brazen heart of Trajan, whom Eustachius had served twice as General of his
Armies, and gained him as many Victories.

From hence J went to the Rotonda, otherwise called anciently, the Pantheon,
The Rotonda or Pantheo^
because it was dedicated to all the Gods. This is a bolder piece of
Architecture then men think. For whereas other Vaults are strengthened and made
good by being shut up close at the top, and in the center of the Vault, which
hinders the Vault from shrinking; here this great massiue vault is left wide
open at the top, with a hole above three yards wide in diamenter. Indeed
Sebastianus Serlius, an experience^ man in Frabriks, thinks this Church to be
the vnick example of perfect Architecture; and Pliny in his time, placed it
among the rarest works that were then extant. It has no windows in it, nor any
other light, but what comes in at the wide hole mentioned oboue. Anciently it
was covered with brazen tiles, and those guilt too, as Lipsius thinks; but now
its covered with great flatt stones. Its a hundred and forty foot high, and as
many broad: and yet it has no pillars to bear up that great roof. Indeed it
has thrust all the Pillars out of doors, and makes them wait in the Porch;
where there are thirteen great pillars all of one piece, each one 53 foot high,
and six in diameter, all of a garnite, or spackled marble. The Capitelli of
these Pillars are the best in Rome of Corinthian order. Here is the Tomb of
the incomperable Painter Raphael Vrbin. Ille hic est Raphael, timuit quo
sospite Vinci
Rerum magna parens, and moriente mori.
In this Temple stood anciently the famous Minerua made by Phidias of which
historyes ring. Here also was placed the Statue of Venu^, in whose ear that
incomparable pearl of Cleopatra hung, which upon a ryotous wager with M.
Antony (whether of them should make the most costly supper) she was going to
throw into a glass of vieger to macerate it (as she had done another before)
and drink it up: But M. Antony stopping her hand, and confessing himself
ouercomne, the Pearl, says Pliny, was put in the Ear of Venus in the
Pantheon. In the round holes over the Altars, where set those heads of the Gods
of the Heathens, which are now seen in the Beluedere of the Maschere. This
Temple and its Porch, were so lined anciently with brass, that there was
enough of it to make diverse great Cannons, by Pope Vrbans command, and the
great Canopy with the four pillars which adorn S. Peter's High Altar. And
though the People and Pasquin, two equaly senseless things, murmured much at the
taking away of this brass, yet seeing the Pantheon received no damage thereby,
and seeing it was improued to that height, that it became Ecclesiae Ornamentum
and Vrbi Munimentum, the wiser sort of men thought it well employed, and let
the people and malice talk. I had almost forgot to tell you, that this Temple
was made by Agrippa, who had been thrice Consul, as the words in the Architraue
of the porch yet show.

From hence I went through the Campo Marzo, unto the Church of S. Lorenzo in
Lucina, S. Lorenzo in Lucina.
which is served by Cherici Regolari Minori. Its an ancient Church neatly
repaired of late, and the greatest Parish Church in Rome.

The Palace of Burghesi.
From hence I went to see the Palace of Burghesi which is hard by. This is one
of the noblest Palaces in Rome. It gives you a fair broadside of windows,
three stories one over another; and its lenght is prodigious. Mounting up to
the Chambers J found a fair open Gallery built upon arches and pillars round
about the Court. This Gallery lets you into several appartiments; and on that
side which ouerlooks the Piazza, J saw a row often or twelve great Chambers
through which I looked at once. In these chambers and the other rooms, I
observed these things. 1. Rich hangings, and over them rare painting made by a
Capucin Lay-brother. The history of the Queen of Sabas comeing to visit
Salomons Court, and the rapt of the Sabines, which make this Fregi^ over the
hangings, are so rarely well done, that Raphael and Michel Angelo would not
have mended them for colors. 2. A great Cabinet of Ebeny, set with historyes
cast in gold, and set with rich precious stones; its valu^d at threescore
thousand crowns. 3. A rare picture of Hercules and Anteus. 4. Raphaels own
picture. 5. The last supper by Titian. 6. The Terrasse and garden with box
kotts and fountains of water, all at the very top of the house and over looking
the street, river, meadows, and S. Peter's. 7. The little back gallery of
pictures, where among others, I was shown the pictures of Martin Luther,
Nicolas Macchiauel, and Caesar Borgia; There great Corruptors; of Religion,
Polioy, and Manners 8. The low cool gallery full of statues and pictures,
especially of the Borghesian Family. That of Paulus Quintus in a small Mosaic
work is scarce to be discovered from painting: as also the Assumption of our
Lady in the same work. There I saw also Titians own picture, and the rare
Crucifix made by Michel Angelo, so to life, that some men have fabulously given
out that he drew it after a crucified man.

Mausoleum Augusti.
From hence I went to see the Mausoleum Augusti, or the Tomb of Augustus
Caesar, standing near S. Rocks Church in a private place hard to be found out.
It was once one of the neatest structures in Rome. And it was but fitting that
the first of the Emperors should have an honorable tomb; and that he who
having found Rome built of brick only, had left it all of marble, should have
a marble monument erected to him after his death. Vrbem Lateritiam inueni,
marmoriam relinquo: said Augustus. Sueton.
The Mausoleum was a round building of white marble, going up with four stories
set round with pillars, and each story growing lesser and lesser, with green
trees set ab^^t every story; having at the top of ^ll, the brazen statue of
Augustus, It was two hundred and fifty cubits high. But how its much defaced,
and we see something of the greatness of it, but little of its beauty.

Going from hence to the Church of S. Antony of Padua belonging to the
Portughesi, S. Ant. di Padua.
I saw the Tomb of the Great Canonist and Casuist Navarre or Martin
Aspelcuita, with his statue in busto over it. This good man hearing how his
great friend Caranza was called to Rome to answer for himself in points of
doctrine, which he was falsely accused of; followed him thither of his own
accord, to deffend his cause and clear his innocence, and having done it, died
here.

Near to this Church stands the Church and Convent of the Austin Friars. S.
Augustino.
In the Church I saw the Tomb of S. Monica mother to S. Augustine. Here also
lies buried Onufrius Panuinus, a Friar of this Convent, learned in sacred
antiquityes, and in the Hebrew tongue. In the Convent I often saw the neat
Library, called Bibliotheca Angelica, Bibliotheca Angelica.
bec^se Angelus Rocca, a Bishop and Master of the Popes Sacristy, gave it at
his death to his Convent; with an obligation of letting it be open in the
mornings. Among many curious books, I remember to have seen there the
Prophecies of Joachim, Ioachims Prophecy of the Turks.
where among other things, he says, that the Turks shall be ouercomne and
ruined by three nations: by the French, propter bonos equos: by the English,
propter bonos marinarios: and by the Venetians, propter bonum consilium. These
are his very words.

S. Apollinaris.

The German College.

The Pallozzo d'Altemps.


Near to the foresaid Church stands the Church of S. Apollinaris, and the Germa^
College. Here the best singers of Rome meet constantly.

Over against this Church stands the Palace of the Duke of Altemps* In which I
saw the great Hall, and in it, the Triumph of Bacchus in a basso rilieuo cut in
marble with exquisit art. I saw also here the representation of a Town cut in
wood, an ancient and curious piece. The picture of our B. Lady with her son in
her arms, valued at five thousand pistols; it is of Raphaels hand. The neat
Library full of diverse good manuscripts and other books. In fine the noble
Chapel with the Tomb of S. Anaclet Pope under the Altar with the head of this
Saint in the Sacristy, enchased in silver and set thick with rich stones. The
rich ornaments here for the Church service, cost the Duke a hundred and twenty
thousand crowns.

From hence, in fine, I went to S. John Florentins a neat Church belonging to
the Florentins, S. John Florentins Church.
at whose cost it was built. Here is in one of the Chapels the picture of our
Saviors Resurrection made by Lanfranc a rare piece. And being lodged near
this Church, I found that I had wandered over all Rome, and was now come again
to the Bridge of S. Angelo, were I began my first days journey through Rome.

But seeing that in such towns as this, there is always something to be seen
after all, I made many irregular excursions up and down Rome, to view many
things, which I had not taken in my direct way before: as some palaces, some
rare fountains, diverse antiquities, studies of virtuosi, and the like, which I
have been forced, for methods sake, to pass over: yet because there are whole
books of all the palaces, fountains, statues, and antiquityes, set forth in
cutts and pictures, I remit my Reader to them, while I ask one question.

Where are now those rare pieces of antiquity which historyes rather mention,
then we find now in Rome? as the Cymboum Marij; the Gregostasis; the Curia
Hostilia; the Golden House of Nero; the Theater of Pompey, Tertull. Lib. de
Spectac. c. 10.
of which Tertullian says, Pompeius Magnus solo suo theatro minor; the Forum
Neruae; the Theater of Statilius Taurus; the Septizonium Seueri; the Tower of
Mecenas; the Hippodromus; the House of Gordianus; the Circus Flaminius; the
Circus Maximus; the Atrium Libertatis; Scipios house; the Triumphal Arch of
Augustus Caesar, of Domitian; and a world of other such rare buildings, whereby
the Romans thought to have eternized their memories; if you ask for these
things in books, you shall find their names only; if you look for them now
in Rome, you shall find no marks at all of them: which makes me cry out with
Petrark; Creed mihi aliis quam lapideis fundamentis eget gloria, Petrarc. In
Remed. vtriusq. Fort.
vt sit mansura: believe me true permanent glory stands in need of other
foundations then those of stone. Hence Ianus Vitalis an ingenious Italian Poet,
having observed, that all the old massiue buildings of Rome are moultered away,
and that Fluide Tyber only remains still, cries out with this sweet moral.

Disce hinc quid possit fortuna; immota labascunt,
Et quae perpetuo sunt fluitura, manent.
But I cannot leave Rome without taking notice of the Devotion, Music,
Ceremonies, shows, Government, and the inhabitants of this place: of each of
which I will give a touch, both for my Trauelers sake, and my Readers.

Devotion in Rome.
And first, for the Devotion of Rome I found it to be very great and real in
those places where the Quarante Hoar and Stations are kept. For all the year
long the Quarante Hoar go from one Church to an other, through all the Churches
of Rome* and there you shall always see a world of devout people praying and
meditating, and hearing the sermons, and giving of alms, and all this with
that profund respect and silence, with that assiduity and concourse, with that
fervor and zeal, that you need not ask where the station is, but only
observe where you see the people flocking so fast in the morneing, and where
the poor make the greatest hedge and lane. In other Churches of Rome upon
their festiual days (which happen almost every day, in one place or other)
they have the best music can begot and though this seems to draw men's ears to
the Church, rather then their hearts; yet when I remember what elevated
thoughts it breeds in the mind; and how innocently it detaines men from doing
worse, I cannot but place Church music among the acts of devotion.

Now, as for this music, The music of Rome.
it is the best in the world, and in the best kind, which is voices. For my
part, having read in a learned Author, that the hateing of music is a sign of
a soul quite out of tune, and not right strung for predestination; and that the
Scythian king, who held the neighing of his horse, to be far better music,
then the pipe of famous Thimotheus, was held for an ass himself; I thought it
both comely and lawful to love music: and being in a place where the best
music was, I frequented it often with singular satisfaction. Now the best
music I heard, was the music of the Popes Chapel consisting of pure voices,
without any organ, or other instruments: every singer here kowing his part so
well, that they seem all to be masters of music. Then the music of the Chies^
Noua; of S. Apollinaris; upon S. Cecilyes day in the Church of that Saint the
Patroness of singers; of the Oratory of S. Marcello every Friday in Lent; of
the Jesuits dureing the Quaerante hoar in Shroftide; of every good Church of
Nunns upon their patrons day; especially that of the Nunns of Campo Marzo,
where I heard often Fonseca sing sorarely well, that she seemed to me, to
cheer up much the Church in its combats; and to make the Church Militant
either look like the Church Triumphant, or long for it. In a word, whosoever
loves music and hears but once this of Rome* thinks he has made a saueing
journey to Rome, and is well paid for all his pains of comeing so far.

Haueing given my ears many a breakfast upon the music, I gave my eyes many
a Collation upon the Ceremonies of Rome, The Ceremonies.
which were chiefly these. The Ceremony of the Popes opening of the Porta
Santa, of S. Peter's Church in the Iubily year. The Ceremonies of the Popes
Chapel, when he assists there, especialy upon Candlemasse day, Palmesunday,
Mandy Thursday etc The Ceremony of the Popes washing of thirteen pilgrims feet;
of his singing mass publicly in S. Peter's Church upon S. Peter's day and other
great days; the Ceremony of Beatifyeing and of Canonizeing of Saints; the
Ceremony of his creating new Cardinals, and giving them their capp in public
Consistory, the Ceremony of the Mass sung in Greek and according to the Greek
rites, in the Church of the Greek Seminary, upon the Feast of the Epiphany, and
S. Athanasius his day; the Ceremony of baptizeing the Jews; with a world of
others. One ceremony I was not unwilling to miss in my five several voyages,
because it always implies the death of a Spiritual Father, I mean, the
Ceremony of a Sede Vacant: and of all the bad complimen^s that ever I heard
made, I like none so ill as that of a noble man of Germany, who being asked by
Pope Innocent the X, whether he had seen all the Ceremonies of Rome, answered,
that he had seen all, but a Sed^ Vacant, as if he had said; Holy Father, I
have seen all the fine sights of Rome, but your death. A horrible Tramontane
compliment, which put even the Pope himself to a smile.

As for the Shows, I saw diverse, both Sacred and Profane. As the wipping
Processions in the Holy week. The great Procession from S. Marcellos Oratory to
S. Peter's Church upon Mandy Thursday in the Holy year. The Shows of Rome.
Sacred.
The Spanish Procession in Piazza Nauona upon Easter day in the morning in the
Holy year. The Procession of the Zitelle upon our Ladies day in Lent. The
Procession of the Priests of the Oratory upon shrof-tuesday to the seven
Churches* with five or six thousands persons following of them, all whom they
treat in an open field, giving every one a couple of hard eggs, and a slice of
salsigia, with bread and wine. The several Caualcatas of the Pope and
Cardinals. The Spanish Caualcata upon S. Peter's Eve, when the Spanish
Ambassador presents the purse of gold, and the Gennet. The Girandola and fire
works upon S. Peter's Eve, and diverse such like sacred triumphs.

For the Profane Shows, Profane
I saw the solemn Entryes of Ambassadors, especially those of Obedience,
wh^ere each Princes Ambassador strive to out vye the other, and by excessive
expenses make their masters greatness appear above that of others. Their
Caualcatas to Court upon their public audience: their reception in a public
Consistory: their audience of Leave, are all stately. Then the curious Opere,
or musical Drammata recited with such admirable art, and set forth with such
wonderful changes of Scenes, that nothing can be more surprizeing. Here I have
seen upon their stages, rivers swelling, and boats rowing upon them, waters
ouerflowing their banks and stage, men flyeing in the air, serpents crawling
upon the stage, houses falling on the sudden, Temples and Boscos appearing,
whole towns, known Towns, starting up on the sudden with men walking in the
streets; the sunn appearing and chaseing away darkeness, sugar plumms fall upon
the spectators heads like hail, rubans flash in the ladies faces like
lightning with a thousand such like representations. In fine, the Carneual
pompes in the streets exhibited by noblemen with great cost and glory.

The Government of Rome.
As for the Government of Rome, I found it divided into two parts: the Government
of the City; and the Government of the Church. That of the City is exactly
performed by a Governor (some Prelate of great parts) constituted by the Pope
to watch over the City carefully, That of the City.
and to render him an acount weekly of all that passes. This Governor lives
always in the heart of the City, and has besides his own gards, a Barigello
or Captain of the Sbirri or Sergeants, to keep all in order and awe, both day,
and night. This Barigello has, Argus like, a hundred eyes to spy into the
deportments of all that live in Rome, and, Briareus like, as many hands, to
carry to prison those that infringe the Laws. Hence justice here is as exactly
performed, as orders are discreetly given out. The prices of all things are
printed and affixed in public places and shops; Inns and Tauernes are bound to
have them set up in their entrance, that strangers may know the rates of all
provisions, and blame none but themselves, if they be couzened. So that its as
hard a thing to be couzened here, as its hard not to bo cozened in other
places. And for those that cannot read, or speak the language well, Sbirri will
ask of them, what they paid a meal, how much for a pound of meat, how much
for a pint of such and such wine, etc. and if they find them to have been
cozened either in the quantity, weight, or price, they will right the stranger
beyond his expectation, and punish the delinquent beyond his desire. The last
Iubily year I was shown some of the Sbirri in Pilgrims habits on purpose, to
mingle themselves with the other pilgrims, the better to observe how they were
used or abused by their Hosts in Inns and Tauernes, and accordingly punish
them. In fine, justice is so well administered here, and imprisoning cases so
many, that the last Prince of Conde being in Rome, said he wondered much at one
thing there, which was to see so many men go out of their houses in the
morneing, and return home again to dinner without being imprisoned. A kinfe
in a man's pocket, a dark Lantern, a sword worn without leave, etc. will
suffice to make a man be sent to prison: and a pockes pistol found about you,
or in your cloakbag, is enough to make you be sent to the Gallyes with tree
tratti di corda, that is, the strappada thrice: yet they mitigate the rigor of
these laws to strangers who offend out of ignorance.

That of the Church.
As for the government of the Church, that's done partly by the Pope himself in
several Congregations held before him: partly by his Vicar General, a Cardinal
who has under him a Vicegerent (a Bishop) to help him. There Is scarce a day in
the week but the Pope holds one Congregation or other, about Church affairs, in
which Congregations not only Cardinals interuene, but also Bishops and
Doctors; and where all businesses are headed, as well as handled with great
deliberation. Every three weeks the Pope holds a Concistory, where all the
Cardinals that are in Rome, meet his Holiness, as at a Grand Counsel, to advise
with him concerning the necessary affairs of the Church. And its pretty to see
how like the motions of a well ordered watch, all businesses here move at once,
and yet never interfere or clash with one another.

As for the Inhabitants of Rome, The Inhabitants of Rome.
they follow the fortune of their City; and as when Rome was but yet a new
town, the inhabitants where but three thousand in all, says Dionysius, and
when it was comne to its full grouth, it had three or four millions of people,
in so much that in a great plague the Bills of mortality came to ten thousand
men a day, Eusebius. in Chronico.
and this for many days together: so now Rome haueing been six times s^ckt and
ruined (as I said above) is not the tenth part so populous as heretofore it
was; and even those inhabitants that are now in Rome, are for the most part
originary from other parts of Italy and Europe; and have been drawn to take up
here either by preferments or business. The Nobility it self is for the mayor
part foreign and sprung out of such families of Popes, Princes, and Cardinals
as have been foreign before their promotions and preferments. The true ancient
and illustrious Roman families I found to be these few, Vrsini, Colonna,
Sauelli, Frangepani and some few others.

Having thus, as Painters do, taken Rome in all her postures, I confess it
happened to me, as it did to Apelles taking the picture of Compaspe; that is,
by looking so often and so attentively upon Rome I began to be so far in love
with it, as not only to subscribe to Cassiodorus his opinion, Cassiod. Epist.
who affirms it to be akind of crime not to live in Rome, when you can do it.
Piaculi genus est absentem sibi Romam dintius facere, qui in ea constitutis
possit laribus habitare; but also to subscribe to our old Britain Kings,
Cadwallader, Cedwalla, Coenred, offa, Ina and Burrhed, who thought Rome also to
best place to dye in. For if those places be thought by all men, the best
places to live in, Rome a fine place to live in.
where a man may learn the most experimental knowledge, and how to menage
great affairs; where can a man learn more knowledge then in Rome? where all
languages are spoken, all sciences are taught, the ablest men of Europe meet,
all the best records are found, all wits appear as upon their true theater,
all foreign Ambassadors render themselves, all Nuncios at their return to Rome
unload themselves of the observations they have made abroad; and where every
stone almost is a book; every statue a master; every inscription a lesson,
every Antichamber an Academy? And again, if those places be the best to dye
in, And a fine place to dye in.
where all comforts of the soul are best had; what place can be better to dye
in then Rome? the very center and bosom it self of Catholic Communion; and
where there is so much Devotion, and so much Virtue partised; and where you
have this comfort also in you grave; that you lie in a ground which has been
bathed in the blood of so many thousand martyrs.

And thus much of Rome, in the describeing of which, if I have been too
Frolixe, remember that great Ladies are long in dressing: if too short,
remember that I only relate what I saw there, not all that is to be seen there.

My journey from Rome to Naples.
Having thus seen Rome, I agreed with the Procaccio, to carry me to Naples.
Others take with them a Vetturino, that lets them have horses, and dyets them
to; I mean, defrayes a man for meat and drink and horst hire both going, and
comeing, and your horse five days at Naples (but not your diet there) and lets
you have his horses two days, to go see Vesuuius and Pozzolo; and all this for
fourteen, or fifteen corwnes a man. Its true, a man is ill lodged, and bad by
treated in that journey, but it does a gentle man good to be acquainted with
hardship.

Parting then from Rome by the Gate of S. John Lateran we passed through these
places.

Marino, Marino.
a neat little town belonging to Cardinal Colonna. It looks like a painted
town.

Veletri, Veletri.
famous for the birth of the ancesters of Augustus Caesar. Here Is a brazen
Statue of Urban the VIII, and a neat palace and garden of Cardinal Ginetti.
Its an Episcopal town.

The Tree Taberne where S. Paul was met, Tree Taberne.
at his first comeing to Rome, by the Christians of Rome. Act. 28. v. ^5.

Peperno where Camilla the Amazon was borne. Peperno.


Fossa N^oua where S. Thomas of Aquin going to the Council of Lions, Fossa
N^ona*
fell sick and dyed.

Taracina (old Anxur) the head town of the Vols^ians, Taracina
but now bare and bald; showing nothing but some old ruins of the haven which
Antoninus Pius here adorned; and of an old Temple. Its an Episcopal town.

Not far from hence stood anciently the town Amyclae, Amiclae.
that Pythagorical, or Puritanical town, which was ruined by Serpents, because
none would kill them; Pythagoras his doctrine forbiding men to to kill any
living creature. Seru. in lib. 10. Aeneid.
An other time it was ruined by silence; no man dareing to speak of the enemies
comeing; too many false alarums haueing made the magistrates forbid under pain
of death, that no man should speak any more of the enemies comeing: so that
when they came indeed, no man durst speak of it. Amyclas silentium perdidit.
Proverb. apud S. Hieron.
Thus not only Philosophy, but even Silence it self and Obedience, two noble
Virtues, are hurtful to men, if they be not accompanied with discretion.

From Taracina we went to Fundi to supper, having passed through a forest of
baye trees, and through an open gate called Portello, which lets men into the
kingdom of Naples.

Fundi is so called because its built in a low flat. Its ancient if you believe
you ears, not your eyes. For it looks younger, Fundi.
then the other towns I had passed through before. The reason is, because this
town was burned some 130 years ago by Caradin Barbarozza, admiral of the
Great Turk Solomon. Leo Afer*
It was this Caradin, who of a famous Pyrat, became King of Algiers, having
persuaded those of Algiers to shake off the Spanish yoke. This Caradin being
upon the Mediterranean Sea, and hea^ing by his spies, that Julia Gonsaga
(widow of Vespasian Colonna, and the hansomest woman in the world) lived here
in Fundi, landed his men in the night, and sent them to catch her napping;
resolueing to make a fine present of her to his lewd master Solomon. But she
leaping out of her bed, rid a way in her very linen, escaped so narrowly, that
had she stayed to put on any clothes, she had for ever, put off all liberty. The
Pirates missing of this fair Helena, failed not to make a burning Troy of
Fundi; ransacking it and carryeing away the best of its inhabitants: such
dangerous things are great beauties to weak towns.

From Fundi we went to Mola, upon the Via Appia, The Via Appia.
so called because Appius Claudius a noble Roman made it at his own cost
dureing his Consulat. This Cawsey is one of the greatest proofs of the Romans
greatness and riches. For it was five days journey long, beginning at Rome, and
reaching through the kingdom of Naples, to Brundusium. It was as broad as two
carts might easily meet upon it and pass: it was all of great black flint
stones, each one as big as two men can carry, See Plutarch in Graccho.
and laid so close together, that they have held together these 1800 years,
and Seem, as Procopius says ingeniously, to be rather congeniti, then
congesti, borne together, Procop. l. 1. d^ bell. Goth
then laid together. The frequent passing of horses and mule^ (for so many
years) upon this cawssey, have made it both so smooth and shyneing, that when
the Sunn shine^ upon it, you may see it glitter two miles of, like a silver
highway.

Mola. Formiae.
Arriueing at Mola, called anciently Formiae, I went to see Ciceros Tomb which
stands in a garden not far off. And I the more willingly believe it to be his
Tomb, because its certain, that Tully had a Villa in Formiis (which was this
place) and thither he was going in his litter, when he was overtaken by the
executioners of the Triumuiri and beheaded. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 4.
There are no words upon his Tomb; of which if you ask me the reason, I can
only tell you, that either words in prose could not speak, their Tully being
dead; or verses would not, out of envy, praise him, who had made prose so
famous.

Having seen this, some of our Company and I, took a boat and four lusty
watermen, to row us to Caeta and back again, Caeta.
while the rest stayed at Mola to provide dinner. Arriueing in little more then
half an hour at Caeta, we went up to the Castle, where we saw the skelleton of
Charles Bourbon, once Constable of France, but afterward taking against his
own King upon a disgust, he served the Emperor Charles the V, and was made one
of his Generals, and Governor of Millan. Where haueing borrowed money of the
Milanesi, and having laid a deep curse upon Himself (wishing the might dye in
the first enterprise he under took) if he paid not back the monye by such a
time, The Bp. of Belley in his historyes.
he failed in his word, but his curse did not. For his next enterprise was to
go sack Rome: and there his curse met him as he scaled the walls; and being
shot with a musket bullet he was forced to pay his debt to nature. His body was
carried to Caeta, Bourbons Body.
where it stands with its clothes, boots and spurrs on, in a long box
straight up, with this Spanish Epitaph over his head.

Francia mi dio la lecche,
Fspagna los y Ventura,
Roma mi dio la muerte,
Gaeta la Sepoltura.
France gave me milk, Spain great employments gave,
Rome gave me death, and here Gaet a grave.
This Castle standing upon a Promontory over looks the town, and thirty
miles of Sea. In the end of the town, toward land side (for this town is a
pure Peninsula) I saw the Cloven Rock, The Cloven Rock.
which Tradition here holds to have been thus cloven at our Saviors death: The
long stairs going down between the two mountains in the very open gash, and
rendering you to a neat chapel below, strike you all the way long with a
sacred reverence, and are able almost to rend also a stony heart in two, with
the thought of our Saviors passion.

Upon the top of all this Promontory there is an ancient monument of Manutius
Plancus an old Roman, with a great deal of old Latin upon it; but my rideing
boots put me out of all reading humor, and I was very willing to let Plancus
lie quietly in his monument above, so I could but recover again our boat and
there sit still. Of this town was the famous Cardinal Caetanus, of S. Thomas
Aquinas his name, order, and almost learning. This town was built by Aeneas in
honor of his Nurse Caeta who dyed here.

Returning again to Mola we went after dinner to see Ciceros Grotte, Ciceros
Grotte.
and so away.

We had not ridden three houre^ but we came to the Ferry of Carigliano, The
Ferry of Carigliano.
near to which J saw the fair rests of an old amphitheater standing alone in
the fields, with the rests also of an Aqueduct. I wondered at first to see an
Amphitheater standing alone, and far from any great town: but upon enquiry,
I found that here had stood once a noble town called Minturna, Minturna.
but now so ruined, that not one stone of it appears. Indeed we are often at
this fault in Italy, and look for towns in corn fields. Luna, Populonia,
Cuma, Baiae, and Minturna cheat thus our expectations, and leave us no monument
of themselves, but a poor Fuit Jlium: which though it be Trauelers loss* yet
its man's comfort, that towns to dye as well as he: Hence Rutilius: Non
indignemur mortalia corpora solui;
Carnimus exemplis oppida posse mori.


Having passed over the river in a Ferry boat, we entered upon the medows, in
whose fennes called (the Fens of Minturna) Caius Marius lay hid a while, and
there with his stern looks and manly voice, saying, Dare thou kill Caius
Marius? so terrifyed the slave that was sent thither to kill him, that he let
him escape to his ship, and so into Africa. Plutark.
He may speak big that speaks for his life; and any looks become a man, when
he looks to himself well in dangers.

While we rod along these medows we saw before us the mountain of Garo,
anciently called Mons Massicus, famous for excellent wines; as well as the
country there about, which was called Ager Falernus, so famed by Poets for its
Vinum Falernum.

Passing thus along we came at night to S. Agathas, and the next morneing
betimes we enterd into Campania Foelix, Campania Foelix
so surnamed because of its admirable air, wonderful plenty of corn and
wine, and pleasants prospects on all sides, which makes an Ancient call it,
C^rtamen Cereris and Bacchi, the Strife of Ceres and Bacchus. It was this
country which with its delights, broke Hannibals army; which neither snow could
cool, nor Alps stop, nor Romans Vanquish, says Seneca. Indeed the
pleasantness of this country made us a full mends for all the ill way we had
had before: nature having set that scuruie way there a purpose, that men might
like her Favorite Campania the better after it. I call this country Natures
Favorite, in imitation of Pliny, who calls it, Opus gaudentis naturae, that is,
a country made by nature when she was in a good humor. Its a Heathen that
speaks, and you must pardon him.

We intended that day to have gone to Capua to dinner, Capua.
but when we came thither, we did not find it at home. For this town now
called Capua is two miles distant from the place where old Capua stood. Indeed
the old Capua was a town of importance: for it was either the second, or third
in the world; and stood in competition, as Carthage did, with Rome: Nay, it
demanded of Rome to be used like a Sister, not like a Subject; and stood high
upon it, that one of the annual Consuls should always reside here. But that
Capua is vanished with its vanity; and this Capua has no reason to be so
proud, being famous for nothing but that action of many noble women here, See
S. Aug. c. 2. de morib. Eccles. And S. Thom. 2.2. qu. 64. art. 5.
who to avoid the insolences of the French soldiers (received into the town
friendly) leapt into the river Vulturno to save their Virginity and honor,
from their lewdness: an action rather wonderful, then warrantable. There is a
Castle here of pretty strength, a good river, and an Archbishops Seat.

From Capua we passed through Auersa, Auersa.
a sweat Seat of a town, and once great, till Charles the I, King of Naples,
almost ruined it. Its a Bishops Seat still. Here it was that Queen Ioanne of
Naples strangled her husband Andreasso; and was her self not long after, served
so too in the same place. Traueling some eight miles further we came to Naples
before we could see it. Naples.
This town was anciently called Parthenop^ from one of the Sirens. Its now
called Neapolis, Petr. a S. Roma aldo in his Cronolog. Treasor.
a new City; because the inhabitants of Cumae having, out of iealousy, ruined
Parthenope, were sore vexed with a plague, till they had built it up again
better then before. This happened about the year of the world 1449.

As for Naples, its now the head of a great kingdom so called. This kingdom
belongd once to the Emperor: The Kingdom of Naples.
but after that it had been ouerun by Sarazins, and freed by Pope John the
Tenth united with Alberic^ Marquis of Toscany, it acknowledged the Church for
its mistress, and the first man that was invested by the Pope (Innocent the
Second, an. 1130) was Roger the Second, a Normand. Since that time, the French
and the Spaniard have strugled hugely for this kingdom: sometimes the one
plucking it to him, then the other. But now its under the Spaniard, who holds
it of the Pope, and for it pays every year the purse of gold and the Gennet
spoken of above.

This kingdom is of great importance to Spain. Its importance to Spain.
It makes his party too strong for France in Italy. It corresponds conveniently
with Sicily, and Milan, and strengthens them both. In fine, it bears up
notably the interest of spain in the Court of Rome: and it squeizeth it self
now and then, into huge sums, four millions of crowns, to send tribute into
Spaynes coffers. For this kingdom is a thousand five hundred miles in
compass, four hundred and fifty wide. It has in it twenty Archbishops Seats;
Its Greatness.
a hundred and twenty five Bishops Seats; a thousand five hundred Bourgs; two
millions of souls: Its strenth
ten principalityes; twenty three Dutchies; thirty Marquisats; fifty four
Countyes; and about a Thousand Baronies, whereof four hundred are ancient. It
can raise a hundred and fifty thousand foot, and a hundred thousand horse. Its
ordinary squadron of gallyes are but 20.

As for the town it self of Naples, The town of Naples.
if it be the third of Italy for greatness, it is the first for strength and
neatness; and therefore deservedly surnamed, La Gentile, the Gentile. It has
Compania on one side of it, and the Mediterranean Sea on the other: so that its
fed by Natures best duggs, Sea and Land. Its air was always esteemed so pure,
that the great men of Rome had either their Villas in Naples, or hard by. Its
well built, well paued, well furnished with excellent provisions, well filled
with nobility, and the nobility well mounted. The chief street is strada di
Toledo, paued with freestone, and flanckt with noble Palaces and houses. We
entered into some of them, and others we saw which had not recovered their
embonpoint since they had been sick of Mazaniellos disease. Their very looks
showed us that their sickness had been Conuultion-Fitts. The chief Palaces are
these: The stately Palace of the Viceroy, that of Grauina, Caraffa, Vrsino,
Sulmone, Toledo, etc. Most of the houses of Naples are made flat at top, to
walk upon: a most convenient thing to breath upon in the fresh Euenings, and
easy to be imitated by other countries.

I saw here also the several public places of Assemblyes of the nobility,
according to their several rancks. These places are like open walking places,
rayld about with high iron rayles, and painted within.

Then the Molo running a quarter of a mile into the Sea,(...) and affording
great refreshment to the towns men, who walk here in the euenings in summer,
where they are sure to cool their lungs with a sweet fresco. At the end of the
Molo stands mounted the high Lantern to direct ships home safe in the night;
and a fine fountain of fresh water.

As for the Churches here they yield to none in Italy. The Churches of Naples
The Domo is ancient, and therefore out of the mode a little: yet it has a
modern Chapel, which is very beautiful: and is one of the finest in Europe,
both for brazen statues and rich painting. The Cupola was painted by the rare
hand of Domenichino. In this Chapel, is the tomb of S. Ianuarius Bishop of
Beneuent, and now Patron of this town; whose blood being conserved in a little
glass and concrete, melts and grows liquid when its placed near to his Head,
and even bubles in the glass. Baronius. and Breuiarium Romans
A French nobleman Count of la Val, was converted from Caluinisme to the
Catholic Religion upon sight of this wonder. On the left hand of this Chapel
without, lies buried Pope Innocent the IV, Petrus a S. Romualdo in his Treasor
Cronolog. ad an. 1604.
who ordered first, that Cardinals should wear red hatts. The Verses upon his
Tomb^ told me this. In the Sacristy are kept many precious gifts of Princes,
and diverse Relics of Saints enchased in gold and silver.

The Annunciata.
The Annunciata is both neat and devout: the Cupola and roof are well painted
and guilt. The two Infants of Bethleem with their several wounds, one in the
head, the other in the body, are shown here. The Hospital is ioyneing to it,
and is of great reception. It maintains two thousand sick and decrepid in it;
besides above 800 orphans and poor children.

Near the great Hospital stands S. Peter's Church, and before it the Altar,
upon which (as the Inscription says) S. Peter said mass at his first comeing
to Naples.

The Theatins Church called S. Paul's, S. Paul^.
is very neat: and if you saw it with its best hangings on, you would think it
one of the neatest Churches in Italy. The roof is curiously painted and guilt.
Here I saw the rich Tomb of Beato Caetano a holy man of this Order; and the
Tabernacle of the High Altar, both* very rich. In the Sacristy they ha^^ as
rich ornaments as in any Church of Italy.

The Jesuits Church here is the best they have in Italy, The Jesuits Church.
if it be not a little too wide for its length. In the Sacristy I saw the
richest ornaments for the Altars, and the best silver candlesticks, that I have
seen any where else. Its rich in painting, sculptures, and marble. The High
Altar was not yet finished, but promises wonders.

S. Maria No^
The Franciscans Church, called S. Maria Noua, is very trim with its neat
Chapels, and Tombs, and guilt roof. Here I saw the Tomb of Lotrech, who
commanded so long the French forces in this kingdom. His virtue in military
affairs, was so great, that his very enemye^, admireing his worth, have caused
his body to be translated out of an obscure place, where it lay before, into
this Church, and Tomb. I wonder they did not cause those words of Virgil to be
put upon it. Si Pergama dextr^ defendi possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent.

The Dominicans Church.
The Church of the Dominicans is very hansome too, if you do not surprise it,
and take it before it be dressed. I saw it once in its best attire, hung with a
rare suit of embrodered hangings, which set it out with great advantage. I saw
also here the Crucifix, which spoke to S. Thomas of Aquin, the Doctor of this
Order and Country, and said: Been de me scripsisti Thoma. In the Sacristy of
this Church are kept in several coffins (some covered with white, some with
black velvet) the bodies of several great persons, depositated here till their
Tombs should be made: as of Alphonso the first, King of Naples and Arragon: of
Queen Ioanne the unfortunate: that of an Emperor of Constantinople: that of
Durazzo: that of the Marquis of Vasti: with diverse others.

The Church of the Oliuetan Fathers is stately: The Oliuetan
here lies buried Alexander ab Alexandro a great antiquary, whose ingenious
book Genialium dierum, gives light to many books by the vnshelling of a world
of ancient customs of the Romans. In this Church also is the Tomb of brave
Marchese di Piscara, surnamed the Thunderbolt of war. The words upon this
Tomb are so ingenious, that (though I profess not to set down many Epitaphs
in this my voyage) I cannot but strive to carry them into other countyes. They
are these. Quis iacet hoc gelido sub marmore? Maximus ille
Piscator, belli gloria, pacis hon^s.
Nunquid and hic pisces cepit? Non, Ergo quid? Vrbes,
Magnanimos Reges, oppida, regna, duces.
Dic quibus haec cepit Piscator retibus? Alto
Consilio, intrepido cord, alacrique manu.
Qui tantum rapuere ducem? Duo Numina, Mars, Mors.
Vt raperent quidnam compulit? Jnuidia.
Nil nocuere ipsi; viuit nam Fama superstes,
Quae Martem and Mortem vincit, and Inuidiam.


The Church of S. John Carbonare is considerable for it self, but much more for
the stately Tomb in it, of King Robert. In the Church of the Nunnery which
stands at the foot of the hill as you go up to the Carthusians; I saw a most
curious Tabernacle upon the Altar, of precious polished stones. Its one of the
richest I have seen any where, but that of Florence described above,

Then we mounted up that windeing hill, The stately Monastery of the
Carthusians.
to the Carthusians Church and Monastery called S. Martins. Its the most
sumptuous thing in all Europe for a Monastery, whether you regard its
situation, or its fabric. Its situated upon a high hill, lvnder the wing of the
Castle S. Elmo; to put Castles in mind, that they ought to defend and protect
Religion. The whole quandrangle, or cloister, of this Monastery, is of pure
polished white marble, paued with marble squars, and adorned round with a
baluster, and white marble pillars. Then entering into an open gallery we had as
fine a prospect as Europe can afford, not excepting that of Greenwich, thought
by Barclay, Barclay. Icon Animorum.
the best prospect in Europe. For here I saw all Naples under me, with the
perfect sight of the two other Castles, with the haven, the Molo, the Arsenal,
the Ships, the country round about Naples, Mount Vesuuius, Pausilipus, the
Ships at Sea, the Promontoryes of Misenum and Minerua, the I Will of Caprea, with
a world of other delightful sights. Then I was led into the apartment of the
Padre Visitatore, where I saw most neat rooms, and some good pictures. Then
going to the Church I found it to exceed the cloister, which before I thought
to have exceeded all other things. Its all of marble, guilding, and painting.
The pauement is all of curious red and white marble squars, as is also the
Sacristy. The Chapels and pictures match the roof, and the pillars, with their
particular graces. The Sacristy is absolutely the richest I ever saw. The great
cupbords are of such a rare mosaic woodworke inlayd into pictures, that it
disputes hard with the Quire of the Dominicans in Bologna. Here they showed me
a great Crucifix of silver, which had been fifteen years in making. The
Remonstrance to expose the B. Sacrament in, is made like a sunn, whose beams
are mingled with silver and coral. The great Candlesticks of massiue silver,
and the great flower pots, are curiously wrought.

Then I went to see the three Castles; That of S. Elmo, Castle S. Elmo.
which is hard by the Carthusians, was built by Charles the V. It stands well
upon its own guard by reason of its high situation: but I doubt whether it can
offend any enemy, except Naples it self which is under it.

The Castle Vouo, Castle Vouo.
was built by William the third of Normandy, upon a rock in the Sea; and from
its oual form, its called Castle Vouo. There is a digue leading unto it from
the Land.

The Castle Nuouo, Castle Nouo.
was built by Charles of Anjou, designed King of Naples. It stands near the
Molo, and leuel with the town and Sea, as if it could defend and offend both.

These there Castles are guarded by natural Spaniards; and well furnished with
great Cannons, by whose language (which is vltima Ratio R^gum, Kings last
arguments) the Neapolitans are either catechized into duty, or threatened into
obedience. Indeed such a people and town, are not easily bridled: such a
wanton Courser as Naples, is not to be ridden with snaffles, it has often
plunged under the King of Spain, but could never fling him quite out of the
saddle, merce a gli tree Castelli.

The Markets.
Then I went to see the markets here, and found them most admirable, especially
those of fruit, which Campania sends hither: and where but the taxes taken off,
or reasonably moderated, Naples would be the cheapest and richest place in the
world. But the Kings officers if they suck in Milan, and Fleece in Sicily, they
Flea in Naples: which usage drove the people some years past, into such a
desperate humor, an. 1647
that they took up arms under the co^ma^d of Mazaniello: his true name was
Thomas Angelus Maia, a poor fisherman without stokings or shoes, who for ten
days together, swaggered here so powerfully in the head of two hundred
thousand mutinous people, that when he commanded them to burn a house, they
did it: when he commanded them to cast into the fire all the goods, papers,
plate, beds, hangings etc. of the Gabelliers, they did it without reserueing
the least precious piece to themselves: when he commanded them to cry out:
Down with the Gabells, they did it: when he put his finger to his mouth, they
were all silent again; as if this poor fisherman had been the soul that
animated that great body of people. It was prodigious indeed that such a poor
young man (not past 23) in wastcoat and drawers, and his fishers cap on, should
find such obedience, from such rich and witty citizens. But as tumultuous
people make arms of every thing their fury meets with, so they make Captains
of every man that will but head them; and as the Proverb goes, In seditione
vel Androclides belli ducem agit. They showed me the house of this fisherman:
but the other houses showed me his fury. Thousands have not yet recovered those
ten days tumults. Thus we see, that when men are ripe for rebellion, Cromwells
and Mazaniells are cried up for great men: or rather when God has a mind to
punish, flies and gnats are powerful things even against Princes.

The Academies of wits.
Here are two Academies of w^ts the one called the Ardenti, to show their ardour
in studyeing: the other the Otiosi, wisely instituted as an allay to the others
heat.

Learned men.
Some of the famous men for learning of this town were, old Statius, rare
Sannazarius, Alexander ab Alexandro, and John Baptist Marini: three excellent
Poets, and one Antiquary. Naples has furnished the Church with 18 Popes.

Having thus seen the town it self of Naples, I was most willing to see the
wonders of nature which are near unto it. Horseing therefore betimes one
morneing, we went with a guide to see Vesuuius the burning mountain, The
Mou^tain Vesuuius.
some seven miles distant from Naples. Our honest guide had studied the
history of this hill, and could tell, how often it had broken forth into flames
since the beginning of the world, that is, twenty times. Xiphilinus the
Epitomist of Dio, relates at length one that happened under the Emperor Titus.
But the last which happened in the year 1631, he rememberd very well, and
related it to me as we went along, with a sad preface, of Infandum Peregrine
iubes renouare dolorem, because he could also say; Et quorum pars magna fui,
haueing been an Actor in that disorder. For he was son to a rich husbandman
here, and with much a do, Aeneas like, he had rescued his old Father from the
ashes of Vesuuius, which overwhelmed and buried whole Villages. Here said he,
pointing to the place, stood a great vineyard one of the best of the Country;
but now three fathom deep in ashes. Here stood a Village full of rich
husbandmen and goodly houses; but now ruined by the stones shot at it from
Vesuuius. Here stood once a pleasant Villa beautifyed with curious walks,
orange trees, fountains, and arbors, but I am cinis est vbi Villa fuit. In a
word, above two thousand people were burnt, lamed, or stifled in this eruption.
Then he showed me the vast stones which ouerchargeing the stomach of Vesuuius,
he had vomited up, with such a boaking, that Naples thought the day of
Judgment had been at hand. Then he showed me a channel, where a River of fiery
green matter mingled with brimstone, alum, iron water, and saltpeeter, had run
from that spewing hill. The manner of this breaking out was thus. The hill
began first to smoke more vehemently then before. Then it flamed and cast out a
cloud of ashes, which, had the wind stood toward the City, had covered all
Naples, and buried it in those ashes. Then it began to roar as if Madame
Nature her self had been in labor. Thunder was but pistolcrack to this noise:
and the mouth of a Cannon a full mile wide, must needs give a great report. It
bellowed and thundered again: Naples trembled: the ground swelled: The Sea it
self shiuered for fear; when the hill tearing its entrals with huge violence,
was brought to bed of a world of vast stones, and a fludd of Sulphurious matter
which ran from the top of the mountain into the Sea for the space of three
miles. All this he told me, and this he showed me afterward, in a public
inscription upon a fair marble stone erected hard by. And all this made me but
the more desirous of seeing this mountain. Wherefore spurring on, we came soon
after, to the foot of the hill; where leaving our horses, we began to crawle up
that step hill for a good mile together, to the midlegg in ashes. At last, with
much a do, we got to the top of the hill; and peeping fearfully (remembering
Plinyes accident) into the great hellow from the brinck of it, found it to be
like a Vast Kettle, See Bakers Cronicle in Henric. ^
far greater then those Hell Kettles near Deslington in the Bishopric of
Durham, made by earthquakes. For the orifice of this Kettle is a mile or two
wide, and very nigh as deep. In the bottom of it is a new little hill riseing
out of the hollow of the old, and fumeing perpetually with a thick smoke, as if
it also would play tricks too in its turn. Having gazed a while at this
Chimney of Hell (for Tertullian calls Aetna and Vesuuius, Hells Chimneys
Fumariola inferni) we came faster down then we went up. He that is not
content with this my short description of the burning of this Hill, let him
read Julius Caesar Recupitus, who has made a little book alone of it, called,
De Vesuniano incendio Nuntius.

Having recovered our horses again, we came back to Naples; and the next
morning taking a new guide, we went to see the wonders of Nature about Baiae
and Puzzu^lo. Our journey to Puzzuolo.


Horseing then again betimes in the morneing, we passed by the Castle Vouo,
and soon after to Margelino, to see the Tomb of Sannazarius the Poet, who
lies buried in the Church of Santa Maria del Parto, which was once Sannazarius
his own house, Sannazarius his tomb.
which dyeing he left to be made a Church of, under that title: so that in his
Testament he wrote de Virginis partu, as well as in his book: and he might as
well have written upon the Frontispice of this Church, as upon the Frontispice
of his Book, opera Sannazarij de Virginis par^u. His Tomb here is adorned
with marble figures and with this ingenious Epitaph made of him by Cardinal
Bembo. Da sacro cineri flores. Hic ille Maroni
Sincerus Musa proximus, vt tumulo.
His name was Iacobus Sannazarius, but he changed his name for that of
Sincerus, at the request of Pontanus, who also changed his name too, and caused
himself to be called Iouianus, as Iouius in Elogiis virorum Doctorum says. Not
far of this place, nor far from the entrance of the Grotte of Pausilipus, in
the Gardens of S. Seuerino, stands Virgils tomb, Virgils tomb.
covered almost over with Laurel, or Ba^-trees: as if that Poets Laurel were
grown into a Shadybower, to make a whole tomb of Laurel for the Prince of
Poets.

From thence we returned again into our way, and presently came to the
entrance of the Grotte of Pausilipus. this Mountain lyeing at the very back of
Naples, and rendering the passage to Naples extremely inconvenient for
carriages, it was thought fit to cut a cart way under ground, quite through the
mountain: some say it was Lucullus, that caused it to be thus boared: others
say, it was Cocceius Nerua. Certain it is, that it is ancient, seeing Seneca
makes mention of it.

The Grotte of Pausilipo.
Entering into the Grotte of Paulisipus, we found it to be about forty foot high,
and broad enough for two carts laden to meet with ease. They say here, that it
is a full mile long; but I thought it scarce so much. We rid some forty paces
by the light of the wide entrance; but that Vanishing, we were left in the
dark a good while, till we came to the halfway, where there hangs a burning
Lamp before the picture of our Savior in the B. Virgins arms. The light of
this Lamp was very grateful unto us; and I am confident, a Puritan himself,
were he here, would be glad to see this Lamp and Picture, and love them better
for it ever after. All the way of this Grotta is very even and Leuel, but
hugely dusty; as a room must be, that has not been sweept these sixteen
hundred years. The people of the country meeting here in the dark, know how
to avoid one another, by going from Naples on the right hand; and returning on
the left; that is, by keeping on the moutain side going, and returning on the
Sea side: and this they express by cryeing out often; A la Montagna, or, a la
Marina; To the mountain side, or to the Sea side, to give notice whether they
come, or go. Our guide understood the word, and he giving it unto me, and I to
my next man, it rann through our whole Brigade, which consisted of a dozen
horsemen in all. Almost all the way we rid in it, we shut our eyes, haueing
little use of them; and our mouths and noses too, for fear of being choked
with the dust: so that our exterior senses being thus shut up, our interior
began to work more freely, and to think of this odd place. My thoughts,
comeing newly from Sannazarius and Virgils tombs, fell presently upon Poetry
(for all this country is a Poetical country) and I began to think whether this
were not Polyphemus his den, because Homer makes it to have been near the
Seaside, as this is; and capable of holding great herds of sheep as this also
is. Sometimes I thought that it might have been here, that Jupiter was hidden
from his devouring Father Saturn, who came into Italy for certain; as also
because Sophocles makes mention of Jupiter Pausilipus. But at last I concluded
that this was the place where the merry Gods and Goddesses, after their iouial
suppers, played at hide and seek, without being hood-winckt. By this time we
began to see the other end of the Grotte a far off, by a little light which
grew greater and greater till at last we came to the issue of it.

Being got out of this Cymmeran rode, we began to open our eyes again to see
if we could find one an other; and our mouths too to discourse upon this
exotic place. Thus we rid discourseing upon this wonder, till we came to the
Grotta del Cane a new wonder. Grotta del Cane.


Arriueing there we presently had a dog ready (though for the most part the
dogs here runn whineing away when they see a troop of strangers arrive) and
saw the experiment of that famous Grotta, which being but three yards within
the side of the hill, may be seen without entering into it. The experiment is
this. A man takes a dog alive, and holding down his head with a wooden forke
to the ground, the dog begins first to cry, and then to turn up the white of
the eyes, as if he would dye. Then letting him hold up his head again, he
recouers. And haueing thus, twice, or thrice, showed us the experience of this
infectious place, he putts down the dogs head again, and holds it down so
long, till the dog seems to be dead indeed. Then taking him by the stiff leg,
and running with him to the Lake Agnano, some forty paces off, the throws him
into the shallow water of this Lake, and presently he begins to recover, and to
wade out. They would make us believe, that as it is the nature of this Grotta
to kill: so it is the nature of this Lake to revive dead things again. But if
the dog were dead indeed, all the water of Agnano, though it were Aqua Vitae,
would not recover him: he is only astonished with the infectious vapor which
breaths out of this Sulphurious ground below. The pestilent nature of this
Grotte was showed us plainly by a lighted torch, which as long as it was held
high from the ground, burnt clearly: but as it was approached by little and
little, near to the ground, it grew dimmer and dimmer, till at last it burnt
blew, and being held close to the ground, it went quite out.

The stones of S. Gennaro.
Then we were shown hard by, the stones of S. Gennaro, which by a natural
sulphurious vapor yssueing strongly from low causes, put a man presently into
a sweat, and are excellent remedies for the Neapolitan disease, called by some
authors, Campanus Morbus: Nature, an indulgent mother, thinking her self bound
to afford a remedy to the discorders which she her self has inclined the
Neapolitans unto.

Then fetching about the hills by a norrow unfrequented way, we came to the
Convent of Capucins standing there where S. Ianuarius was beheaded. The
Capucins.
In a little Chapel on the right hand as you enter into the Church, they showed
us the stone upon which he was beheaded; the blood is still upon it.

From hence we descended down into the Sulphatara, The Sulphatara.
where the burning Sulphur smokes out perpetually from under ground. This
Sulphatara is a kind of pit environed on all sides with banks, and it is about
1500 foot long and 1000 broad. We rid down into it on horseback, and it
sounded hollow under our horses feet, as if we had been rideing over a wooden
bridge. There are diverse spiracula, or Vents round about it, out of which the
thick smoke presses furiously, as out of a furnace; and makes Poets and
Potters find matter enough; those for their Fables calling it, Forum Vulcani:
These for their Medicinal pots, which they make of this brinstony earth.

Near to Sulphatara stands a round poole of black thick water, which always
boyleth; and what soever you throw into it, it comes out boiled indeed, but not
entire; something or other of it being always diminished, says Leandro
Alberti. One putting in four eggs in a long ladle, pulled out but three again:
I wonder Poets feigned not this Lake, to be that part of hell allotted to punish
usurers, seeing it takes use for every thing that's put into it.

Descending from Sulphatara to Puzzolo, we wondered to see the very high way
smoke under our horses feet, when yet we found not them so fiery under us: but
I found the smoke to come out of little chinks of the dried ground: which showed
us that the whole country was on fire under us. Before we came to the town, we
saw the remnants of a fair Amphitheater, and Ciceros Academy.

Immediately after this we came to Puzzuolo, Puzzuolo.
so called, either from the multitude of springs about it; or else a putore,
from the smell which this brinstony country affords. The town is but little,
yet anciently a Bishops Seat. Taking boat here presently, we passed over the
creek of the Sea to Baiae, which is three miles from hence; and as we rowd
along, I admired the wild design of Caligula who built a bridge from Puzzuolo
to Baiae: some of the Arches yet standing on both sides, show us that his folly
was real: and I believe Suetonius meant this work, when he taxes the insanas
substructiones, the mad buildings of this Emperor. That which contributed much
to the bold attempt; was the nature of the sand of this country, which made
into mortar and let down into the water, Pliny, and Vitrunius
grows hard and solid, even to petrify there at last. Puteolanus puluis, si
aquam attigit, Baiae.
saxum est.

Reaching the other side of the bay, and leaving our boat to attend us, we
rambled for an hour and a half among the Antiquityes of this ruined Paradise of
Baiae: for you know, Nullus in orb locus Baiis praeluxit amaenis.

Mercato di Sabato.
First we were led to the Mercato di Sabato, looking still like a street with
ruins of houses on both sides.

Thence we went to the Elisian Fields, The Elizian Fields.
which are much beholding to Poets for their fame: otherwise they are but a
very common plot of ground without any gracefulness at all, except only that
if Baiae were a town still, a man might make a fine Bowling ground here. But
Poets who have power and License to ^rect Ithacum into a kingdom, have
out-poeted it here, by erecting this little spot of ground into a Paradise.

Thence we came presently to the Piscina Mirabili, Piscina Mirabili.
a vast building under ground, borne up by forty or fifty great squar pillars,
long 150 paces, 40 wide, and 30 high. We descened into it by many steps, and
its so well walled with stone and lime on all sides, that water cannot sink
through. and all this was only to keep fresh water in, either for the Roman
Gallyes that used to lie hereabouts in these harbors; or else for the Romans
gusto; who having their curious Villas here abouts, had no mind to drink of the
springs of this bituminous country. At the top of this Piscina Mirabili, I
espied some spoutes of stone yet remaining, by which they used to let the water
from above into this Vast Reseruer.

Returning again, we were shown the Promontory of Misenum a far off; and
the Mare Mortuum hard by. Promont: Miseni. Mare mortuum. Cento Camerelle.


Then we went into the Cento Camerelle, so called from a hundred little rooms
that were built together like chambers within one an other, to keep slaves in,
who served the Gallyes.

Going again toward our boat, we were shown the place where Agripina should
have been drowned by a false bottomed boat: but that failing, her son Nero
caused her to be stabed here. Indeed breasts that had turned their blood into
milk to give suck to such a monster, could expect nothing else but to be
emptyed of all their blood; but she was designed to this ill usage long before.
For being foretold, when she was with child of Nero, that she had in her womb
a son who should be Emperor, but withal, who should kill her, she cried out:
Occidat modo imperet: Let him kill me, so he be but Emperor; and she had her
wish. Its said also that this Parricide (for, Nero nunquam sine publici
paricidii praefatione nominandus est, says Valerius Maximus) after his mother
was killed, would needs have her ripped up, that he might see where he had lodged
nine months together: and I believe that nothing hastened more the conspiracy
of the Romans against him, then rhat they could now no longer endure him, who
could not endure his own mother. Hard by the Shore stands yet the Tomb of
that unfortunate Princess. Agrippinas Tomb


Then taking boat again we rowed by the ruins of Marius, and Caesar's Villas,
and diverse others scrapps of antiquity, and all along in the water (in a clear
day) you may see the foundations of Baiae, and some Arches, and the pauement of
the very streets; all now in the Sea. Omnia fert aetas; and Tim^, which in all
other places, is called Edax rerum, may here be called Bibax rerum, haueing
sipped up here a whole town.

Rowing on still by the Shore, we came to the foot of Neros Palace near to
the ruins of which, stands mounted a strong Castle, built a la moderna, upon a
high Hill. Leaving here our boat again, we were wished to put our hands into
the sand of the very sea, which we found to burn under the cold water.

Then we went hard by to Ciceros bathes, Ciceros bathes.
a great squar place, where anciently were written over head in old letters,
the names of the diseases which these waters cured: which letters some
Physicians caused to be defaced, pretending that they where superstitious
characters; when indeed they where unwilling men should be cured by anything,
but the strange characters in their recipes.

Near these foresaid Bathes, are those of Tritola, The Bathes of Tritola.
where we were led into the long Grotte, and presently put into a sweat by a
stifling heat which met us violently in that long entry. I followed my guide,
and findeing the steme to be choking, I stouped down low behind the guide, to
let him break the hot air before me. As I thus stooped, I found out by
experience, what others find by hearesay, that the nearer the ground a man
stoops here, the cooler he finds himself. Thus, Anteus like, fetching now and
then succor from my mother earth, I found humility to be a safe remedy. In the
middle of this long narrow Entry there is a place, for those that stand in need
of sweating, to stand on, stradling wide, and so sweat abundantly. They told me
that at the end of this Grotta, there are bathes of souerain Virtue; but I
being well without them, had no mind to be choked in seeking out health.

Returning from hence we had a huge walk of it to the Lacus Auernus, Lacus
Auernus.
made by the River Acheron, idest, sine gaudio: a fit name for the river of
Hell. This Lake is famous for its stinking air, which was observed to kill
birds as they flew over here. On the further side of it, was the Temple of
Apollo.

Leaving this Lake on our right hand, we made toward the Grotte of Sibylla
Cumaea, The Grotte of Sibylla Cumaea.
so called from the City Cumae, which stood not far off* this long Grotta was
once a subterranean passage to the City of Cumae, (as that of Pausilipus is yet
to Naples) and the Sibylles Grotte is that little dark Entry which stikes out
of the long Grotta. This leads you to the Chamber of the said Sibylle and her
bathes. Its a fine retireing place for a chaste maid, that fears as well to
see, as to be seen: Tertull.
Tam timet Videre, quam videri and such the Sybills were; who for their
Virginyties sake, had the gift of Prophecy given them, says S. Hierome. This
Sibylla Cumaea prophesied very particularly of our Saviors birth, and for that
reason Julian the Apostata burnt her prophecyes, says Ammianus Marcellinus, a
Heathen Historian of those times.

As we returned again from hence to our boat, we gazed upon a great Mountain
called Monte Nuouo, Monte Nuouo.
because it was cast up in one night (on Michelmasse night anno 1536) by an
earthquake, which the Philosophers call Brasmarichus, that is, when the earth
is thrown up, and mountains are formed. Some hold this mountain to be three
miles high but I think it enough to give it a full mile. It covered (at its
riseing up) a great part of the old Lacus Lucrinus which was quite sucked up by
this great sop.

Then taking our boat again we returned to Puzzuolo, and at night to Naples;
where we stayed but one day more, as well to rest our horses, as to see the silk
shops, where they make curious silk wastcoats, stokings, scarfs etc.

The History of Naples.
He that desires to know the History of Naples, let him read the book called,
Il Compendio dell' Historia di Napoli, di Collenuccio.

Having thus seen Naples, we returned again toward Rome the same way we came,
without any danger of Banditi, but not with out some trouble caused us by the
officers of the Gabella at Fundi, Take heed of the Gabellers of Fundi.
who met us a quarter of a mile out of the town, and stopped us upon the rode to
search us, and see whether we had any thing liable to the Gabella; or more
money of the country then the Law allows men to carry out. For my part, I had
taken care of all this a forehand, and had nothing liable to the greatest
rigor. But some of our company that did not believe the rigor to be so great,
found it. For to some they pulled of their boots, searched their pockets,
breeches, doublets; nay, even their saddles, horses tails, and the very horses
feet. From one gentlman they took four pistols of gold, because he carried so
much more then was allowed: though with much ado we got the gentleman his
money again; I have know diverse that have not escaped so well, having been
stripped in the open fields even to their shirts etc. their watches taken from
them, though they had brought them with them to Naples, and not bought them
there. This is to learn my traueler to be inquisitiue in all his iourneys, of
the Laws of the country where he traueleth, especially such obuious ones as
concern public passages, bridges, ferryes, bearing of arms, and the like;
the knowledge of which customs will make thim avoid many inconveniences, which
I have known others fall into.

In an other voyage to Naples, in our return to Rome we made little
excursions, to take in some places about Rome, which we had not seen before, as
Albano, Castle Gandulfo, Frescati, and Tiuoli, which lay almost in our way.

Riseing therefore betimes at Veletri, we crossed over the hills, and came to
Albano, Albano.
(anciently called Longa Alba) and now one of the seven Bishops Seats, about
Rome which are given to the Eldest Bishop Cardinals, that they may be at hand
always, and ready to assist the Pope in his affairs of importance. The others
are Porto, Ostia, Frescati, Tiuoli, Preneste, Veletri. In Albano, I saw nothing
of moment, but an old Church, and some old houses: yet seeing it stands in so
good an air, I wonder the great men of Rome have not built houses here, where
the wine is so exquisitly good. Indeed this wine makes this town be much
taken notice of by all strangers, as being the best wine that's constantly
drunck in Rome.

Hard by Albano stands Castle Gandulfo, Castle Gandulfo.
the Popes country house in summer. It stands very pleasantly haueing on one
side of it a Lake and woods, and on the other the Campania of Rome and the
City it self in view. I stepped into this Castle, but found nothing but bare
walls, it being then unfurnished.

From hence We went to Frescati called anciently Tusculum. Frescati.
This is absolutely one of the sweetest places in Europe. The town is but
little; but round about it, especially on the hill side, there are so many
curious Villas, Palaces, Gardens, Fountains, Shady walks, and Summer
delights, that I wonder not if Princes, Cardinals, and other great persons
retire hither in summer. In a word, here Cato was borne, here Lucullus
delighted himself, and Cicero studied and wrote his Tusculans Questions. The
first place we went to see here, was the Villa Aldobrandina. The Villa
Aldobrandina. Beluedere
This Villa is also called, the Beluedere of Frescati, because it stands so
pleasantly; haueing the Campania of Rome, and Rome it self in sight on one
side; and on the other, the hill side all covered with Laurel trees, curious
fountains, cascatas, and other delightsome water works, which afford here a
cool season even in the months of July and August. The variety of these water
works are so many and so curious, that I cannot but describe them.

The Cascata.
First then, the rare Cascata presents it self: and its made thus. At the
turning of a vast Cock, the water (which is brought throught a great Hill, from
a source five miles off) spouts out of the top of two high windeing pillars of
stone, which stand mounted upon the head of a high pair of open stairs, and
then falling down upon the same pillars again, it follows the winding bent of
them cut into channels and little gutters, and so warbles about these pillars
visibly till it arrive at the foot of them. There findeing issue, it falls upon
the foresaid stairs, and couers them all with a thin glideing streme, which
mikes an open staircase of water. Besides, this water sets a number of little
fountaeins on work, which stand on either side of these stairs, and descends
by degrees with them: so that in a moment the whole hill side is spowting out
water, and filling the air with a sweet murmur.

2. Then the Gardener turneing an other cock above, gives at once, such store
of wind and water to the great Girandola below the stairs in the Grotte of
Atlas, The Girandola.
that it imitateth perfectly Thunder, Hale, Rain and Mist.

3. By this time, the great Statue of the Centaure with a hunters horn at his
mouth, The Centaure.
windeth it duly, and in perfect measure.

Pan.
4. Pan also plays on his mouth-organ tuneably

The Lion and the Leopard.
5. Whilst the Lion and the Leopard feighting together spit angerly in one
another faces, though all pass in cold blood, because in cold water.

6. These waters also afford innumerable and inauoidable wetting places; as the
false stepped in the stairs: the wetting place behind Pan: the other wetting
place behind the Centaure; and the little underground spowts on all sides.

The Hall of Apollo.
7. Then the Hall of Apollo is opened, were he sitting upon Mount Parnassus, and
the nine Muses under him in a circle, with several wind instruments in their
hands, strike up all together melodiously; whilst an untouched organ
underneath the hill, plays a soft ground to the Muses instruments.

8. During this melody, a little round hole in the midst of the room blows
out from below such a cool and stiff wind, that it bears up a little hollow
ball of copper, a yard from the ground. Over the door is this distick. Huc ego
migraui Musis comitatus Apollo.
Hic Delphi, hic Helicon, hic mihi Delos erit.
Then being led to see this hydraulick organ, The water Organ.
and to view what fingers art had lent unto water; I found the Organ to be
made thus. First, the Pipes are like other organ pipes of lead, and set in a
close frame as the manner is, with stops and touches to them. Close to these
stops the force of water turns a we will, made like a great drum, and as long as
the organ. This wheel has in it, here and there, diverse pieces of brass,
about the thickness of a half crown piece, and just as broad as the stops of
the organ. These brass pieces sticking out just so far, as to reach the
stops, in their turning about, and to press them down as the organists
fingers do, and being placed here, and there, in that musical distance, as to
strike their note in tune as they turn about leisurely, they all together
compose a perfect and sweet harmony; the wind pipe of this room (mentioned
even now) serves sufficiently for bellows to his organ, as well as to the
wind ^nstruments of the Muse^: and all is caused by force of water. But as we
were taken with these water works, which make this organ play in tune, A
terrible wetting place.
we were suddenly overtaken with another watter work, which playing terribly
upon us put us quite out of tune: so seldom does wind come without water.

Having seen this garden and Palace, we went to the Villa of Prince Ludouisio
which is hard by. Villa Ludouisia.
The house is but little, but the garden is both large and adorned with store
of waterworks: so that if the gardener befriend you not, you cannot escape
without being soundly we^. One thing I observed in this Palace here, that the
curtains of the beds are so wrought with little holes by neadle work, that the
air may enter by them, but not the gnatts.

From hence we went to the Villa of Prince Burghese called Montedragone,
Montedragone.
from the Dragon in his arms. It stands a mile and a half from the Beluedere,
and the way to it is through curious walks of laurel trees. The house is
stately, and capable of lodging a King with his whole court. The Chambers are
neat and fit for both seasons, winter and Summer. I saw diverse good pictures in
them. The last Supper is of Alberto Dureos hand, and hugely esteemed. The story
of Polyphemus is of the hand of Lanfranco. But that which pleased me best, was
the hall below, full of the true pictures of famous men, both for learning and
arms. Its an excellent school where a man may learn much true skill in
physiognomy, and see how Worthyes looked. This Hall lets you out into the
little neat garden where you find water works, wetting sports, and a pretty
girandola.

Having thus seen Frescati, we went to Tiuoli Tiuoli.
some fifteen miles off. This is an ancient town, standing upon a hill some
fifteen miles distant from Rome, and in sight of it. It was anciently called
Tybur, Old Tybur
and held by the Romans for a delicious place. We saw here the old Temple and
the house of Sibylla Tyburtina. Then we saw the Cascata, The Cascata.
much admired here by those that never were in Swisserland, or at Terni. This
here is made by the River Anio, which falls suddenly down a stony rock, and
fomes for anger to see its bed grown too short for it. Indeed it makes such a
murmuring complaint against nature to the stones below, that it almost deafs,
like the Catadoups of Nilus, all its neighbors.

Villa d'Este.
Thence we went to the Villa of Cardinal D'Este. It stands high and ouerlooks
the Campania of Rome. But the gardens of this Villa, is that which is here most
looked after. They lie upon the side of a hill, and are placed in four, rows
of gardens, with four degrees in in the descent, all furnished with Cascatas,
Grottas, and other admirable waterworks* the water is let in hi^her from the
River Anio, which runns behind this Hill. For they have tappt the very Hill,
and bored the rock quite through to the river; so that the gardener here by
turning a great cook, can let in as much water as fills the Fountains, the
Cascatas, the Grottas, the G^randola, and the other rare waterworks. Hence is
made the great Fountain of Leda; the stairs of water; the long walk of two
hundred paces, set all along with little stone fountains and bassins, purling
in your ears, and casting out little iets of water as you walk along them. And
here you shall see as rare things for sight and deligth, as the world can
afford in this kind. Here a perfect representation of old Rome in a
perspectiue: where you see the Capitol, the Pantheon, the chief triumphal
Arches, the Circos, Theaters, Obelisques, Mausoleas, and even Tiber it self:
here curious groves of trees making a green spring in the midst of winter: here
cool grottas and fountains, making a cold winter in the midst of Summer: Here
false birds chirping upon true trees, every one according to his true nature;
and all of them chattering at once at the sight of a false owl appearing and
houling in a tree. Here curious Grottas, especially the Grotte of Nature,
adorned with Nymphs, shelles, statues, and unavoidable wetting places, and
organs playing without any man touching them: there a fearful Girandola of the
Dragons, thundering as if they would set heaven on fire with cold water, and
pelt Jupiter from thence with hailes stones. But I wrong these things which are
rather to be seen, then described: and my traueler will wrong himself much, if
he stay not here three or four days, to view munitamente these wonders of
art. Having seen these famous places, we returned to Rome again; where we saw
its chief rarityes over, and over again: for Romam juuat vsque videre and all
men that have seen Rome only once desire to see it again: Hence the Romans
taking leave of a stranger departing from Rome, after his first Voyage, say
iestingly to him, a Riuederci; that is, Farewell till I see you again; knowing
that every man who has seen Rome but once, will desire to return again. For
my part, I confess I was of this sentiment in my first journey; but now having
seen it five several times, I took a long leave of it, and began to think of
returning homeward by the way of Loreto, and Venice. And that we might be sure
to be at Venice at the great solemnity of the Ascension, we left Rome the first
week after Easter.

We set out of Rome by the Porta del Populo, all along the via Flaminia, Via
Flaminia.
which rearched as far almost on this side of Rome, as the Via Appia did on
the other; that is from Rome to Rimini. Its called Flaminia, because the Consul
Flaminius made it by his soldiers in time of peace, least they should grow
idle, and have their strength to seek when the war should break out. The rest
of the way from Rimini to Bologna, was paued by Aemilius Lepidus the Colleague
of Flaminius, and from him called Via Aemilia.

This Via Flaminia led us first to Ponte Molo (Pons Miluius) a good mile
distant from the Gates of Rome, Ponte Molo.
where Constantin the Great overcame Maxentius the Tyrant, and drove him and
his men, into the river. Here it was, I saw Tiber first; Tiber.
and I wo^dered to find it such a small river, which Poets with their
hyperbolical ink had made swell into a river of the first rate.

Following on the way, we passed by Castle Nuouo, Ciuita Castellana, Vtricol^,
and so to Narni: Narni.
so called from the river Nar. It was anciently called Nequinum (wicked town)
because of the inhabitants, who being pressed with hunger in a Siege resolved
to kill one another rather then fall alive into the hands of their enemies.
They began with their children, sisters, mothers, wifes; and at last fell upon
one another; leaving the enemies nothing to triumph over but bare walls and
ashes. This town is an ancient Bishops Seat, and S. Iuuenalis (whose body
lies in a neat low Chapel in the Domo) was the first Bishop of it. A little
out of the town are seen high Arches belonging anciently to an Aqueduct.

From hence we went to Terni a Bishops Seat too. Terni.
It was called anciently Interamna, because of a world of little brooks here.
This town stands in a most pleasant soil, and is famous for being the birth
place of Cornelius Tacitus the great Historian. Arriueing here betimes we went
four miles off to see the fomous Cascata, in the Mountains, which far excells
that of Tiuoli.

From Terni we went to Spoleto. Spoleto.
This is a neat town, which gives denomination to the Duchy of Spoleto.
Anciently the country hereabout was called Vmbria, but in aftertimes it was
called, the Duchy of Spoleto, upon this occasion. The Emperor Justin having
called Narses (the Great General) out of Italy, he sent Longinus with the power
and title of Exarch, in his place. This Longinus settled himself in Rauenna, and
governed the rest of Italy by his Captains and Officers called Duces, or Dukes.
Hence Rome lost her Consuls, Narses and Basilius being the two last Consuls)
and was governed by a Duke too, as well as Spoleto. This town has been famous
anciently for holding out against Hannibal, even then, when he had newly
ouercomne the Romans at the Lake Thrasimene hear Perugia; in which Siege of
Spoleto, happened that famous prodigy (which I may call in a manner, a
Metaphysical transmutation, rather then a metamorphosis) mentioned by Leandro
Alberti, who coats Liuy for it; of a man in Spoleto changed into a woman in the
time of the Siege. Surely it was some notable Coward whom Nature disauowing,
degraded him of his breeches. Hence I remember that Plato says, abiectori
armorum maxim conueniret, vt in mulierem ex Viro translatus, sic puniatur:
Plato l. 12 de Legib.
a man that casts away his arms in a battle, ought to the punished, by being
changed from a man into a woman. This town of Spoleto gives the name to the
pleasant Valley of Spoleto, The Valley of Spoleto.
which lies near it. Its above thirty miles in compass, surrounded on all
sides with Hills, and those Hills, are clad with many fine towns: people
willingly dwelling here were the air and the earth, our chiefest nurces, are
so purely good.

From Spoleto we went to Foligni (Fulignum in Latin) famous for Confectioners.
Foligni.
Not far from hence stands Assisium famous for S. Francis, Assisium.
Founder of the Franciscan Order; The Convent here is stately, and much visited
by devout Pilgrims: And Montefalco famous for the miraculous Heart of B. Clara.
Montefalco.


From Poligni, climbeing up the Apennins, we came to Tolentino, Tolentino.
famous for the Tomb and Reliks of S. Nicolas Tolentinas* of this town was
Philelphus a learned and noble Knight, who desirous of possessing the Greek
Tongue in perfection, was not only content to go into Greece in person, and
there visit the ruins of Athens, and the tombs of the ancient Philosophers;
but brought thence with him a Grecian Lady, whom he had married at
Constantinople, by whose daily conversation he might learn the pure accent of
the Greek tongue. And this he did in such perfection, that he triumphed over
the Grecians themselves in their own language. Witness that dispute which he
had with Timotheus a Grecian, about the force and accent of a Greek word, where
both of them growing hot, and betting at last their beards, which they both
wore then long, Philelphus wone the others beard; and caused it to be shaued
off immediately, and kept it in his family as a Trophey: though the poor
Grecian, would have redeemed it with a considerable Sum of Money. Indeed they
deserved both to loose their beards, that could be so hot about such a hairs
matter, as the accent of a word. The statue of this notable shauer, victorious
Philelphus I saw here in the town house.

Macerata.
From Tolentino we went to Macerata a neat town of la Marca; and passing
through Recanata, Recanata
another hansome town of the same country, we came betime to Loreto. Loreto.


Resolving but to stay here one day, we put out all our time to use presently,
and spent that afternoon, and the next day, in viewing exactly this sacred
place which is so much frequented by the devout Pilgrims of all Christendom.
This place at first was nothing but a plain highway, till the Chamber of our
blessed Lady (in which the Angel announced unto her the mystery of the
Incarnation of our Savior in her womb) was translated thither miraculously by
the hands of Angels, about the year 1294, when Infidels and Turks
ouerspreading the Holy Land, would otherwise have profaned that holy place,
which even from the Apostles time had been turned into a Chapel. For my part,
though this be no article of faith, yet when I remember what was said in this
Chamber by the Angel to our Lady, to wit, non est impossible apud Deum omne
Verbum, nothing is impossible to God, I easily believe that he, who placed
this great world it self in a place where there was nothing before, can easily
place a house there where there was no house before; and that he who makes an
Angel wheel the primum mobile, and the vast machins of the heavenly orbs,
quite round in four and twenty hours, may easily make Angels translate this
little chamber of our Lady from one part of the world to another. Now that it
was so translated de facto, both ancient records, solid depositions, See
Turselinus his history of the House of Loreto.
constant tradition, and the belief of all, almost, the Catholic of Princes of
Europe (who have sent rich presents hither* do testify. Besides, I can say
this, that the walls are of such a stone as is not used in any house in all the
country round about: a great presumption, that this wall is exotic. Again,
the Holy House here having no foundation in the ground (as we see plainly) it
is not credible that it was built here by men, who would have given some little
foundation at least to walls of that thickness, and to a house of that
bigness, especially standing alone in the fields, as it did at first, and
exposed to all weather. Add further, that the very old painting which is seen
upon part of the wall on the inside, shows the high antiquity of this house.
In fine, the whole country would have given the lie to this Tradition at First,
or as soon as men had begun, to cry it up for a house brought thither
miraculously.

Now, as for the Holy House it self, The Holy House of Loreto.
it stands in the midst of a great Church, which has been built over it in
Later times, for the better co^ueniency of the peoples devotion, and the Church
service: and round about it more immediately, there has been built a decoration
of white marble, which stands half a foot distant from the Holy House, that men
may see it was not intended so much for a prop, as for a decoration to it, as
also to keep is from the hands of devout pilgrims who otherwise would have made
no scruple to have bine nibling at the stones of the walls here, and so in
time, have much defaced the Holy House, with their Pious thefts. This
decoration is set round with two rows of statues of white marble cut by the
rarest workmen of Italy in those times, to wit, Sansouino, Bandinelli, San
Gallo, Monte Lupo, and others. The lower row of these statues expresses the
figures of the ancient Prophets: and the other row above expresses the Statues
of the Sybills, who prophesied among the Gentiles and Heathens of our Saviors
birth of a Virgin; and his Passion; as you may read at large in Lactantius.

As for the matter and form of this house; I found it to be of a hard red
stone, like brick, but far harder and bigger then our brick: the form
somewhat square about the bigness of a reasonable lodgeing chamber. There Is but
one window in it; and anciently there was but one door: but now there are
three; one at either side, and one behind the Altar, for the Chaplains that
have care of the lights and lamps which are always burning here. Toward the
upper end of the house, there is an Altar, where the Holy sacrifice of Mass is
offered from four in the morneing until one in the afternoon. This Altar is of
silver, and was given by Cosmus II. Great Duke of Florence. Before it hangs a
Lamp of gold as great as two men could carry. It was the gift and Vow of the
Senate of Venice in a plague time. On either side of the walls, are fastened
two great Clandlestiks of pure gold, made like Cornucopias and neatly wrought:
they were the guife of the great Duchess of Florence Magdalena d' Austria, as
her arms upon them told me. On the Gospel side of the Altar, there is an old
cupbord within the wall, in which are yet kept some little earthen dishes,
which were brought hither with the house, and therefore tradition holds them to
have been our Saviors plate, and our Ladies Vessels. now this cupbord is
adorned with a door of silver given (if I remember well) by a Duke of Parma. In
the end of the Holy House, there is a window, where it is imagined the Angel
entered when he came Ambassador to the Virgin Mary concerning the great
business of the Incarnation of his Lord and Master. This window is now cheeked
and enriched with silver. Round about above hang silver Lamps; and on the
sides of the walls there remains yet some very old painting wherewith this
Chamber was painted when it was first consecrated in to a Chapel in the
primitive times. In the very bottom of this Chamber, they showed me, by a
lighted candle, how that it has no foundation in the ground; but stands here
just as if it had been let down from the air, and set upon the plain ground.

Close behind the Altar runns quite cross the Chapel, a great iron grate,
through which you see the Statue of Cedar of our blessed Lady, with her son in
her arms. Its said to have been made by S. Luke, and was brought hither
together with the Chapel, or Holy House. It stands up high in the Very farther
end of the Chapel. Its about four foot high, and adorned with a particular
kind of Veil hung before it, looking something like a woman's garment. They
call these Vayles here, Vesti, and there are of diverse colors and stuffs; but
all rich and glittering; witness that which I saw in the Treasory, which was
given by the Infanta Isabella of Flanders, which is valued at forty thousand
crowns. Its set thick with six rows of diamands down before, to the number
of three thousand; and its all wrought over with a kind of embrodery of little
pearl set thick every where within the flowers with great round pearl, to the
number, of twenty thousand pearls in all. Upon the Heads of our Savior and
our Lady in that Statue, are set two rich crowns (close royal crowns) of
diamands, given by the Queen of France Anne d' Austriche. Before the breast of
this Statue hangs a Royal Tosone, or Fleece, of rich Jewels, given by a Prince
of Transylvania: a Collar of Rubies, pearls, and diamonds, and a rich cross
hanging at it, all given by Cardinal Sfondrati. Round about the Niche, in which
this Statue stands, there goes a close row of precious stones of several sorts
and Lustures, but all great, both in bulk, in Value, and in number; being
seauenty one in all, and all together composeing a rich Iris of several
colors. Between this Statue of our Lady and the Iron Grate, hang a row of
Lamps, (about twelve in all) of pure gold, and all as big as a man's head; one
were of exceeds the rest in curious workmanship; and it was the gift of
Sigismond King of Polonia. All the rest of the Chapel, where those Lamps
hang, is laden with the rich Vows and Presents of great Princes. These I yet
remember: to wit, The image in silver of the eldest Son of Ferdinand the III
Emperor with a chain of diamands about it. An Angel of sylver holding out, and
as it were, presenting to our Lady a child of gold in swathing bands upon a
silver cusben. It was the gift of the foresaid Queen of France being brought
to bed of the Dolphin, now Lewis the XIIII. The picture of this Prince of Conde
in silver kneeling, a vow of his mother when he went first to war. The Busto
of S. Barbara in sylver, set with jewels; the gift of an Archduke of Austria.
An other Busto of S. Girione, set with Jewels also; a gift of a Queen of
Bohemia. The Statue of S. Ladislaus in silver; the gift of Ladislaus the IV.
King of Polonia. A fine kneeling stool, or pew, of silver given by Cardinal
Colonna, with a world of other silver presents wherewith this place is filled.
In fine I saw there the very chimney which was anciently in this chamber; its
under the statue of our Lady and now adorned with silver.

Haueing seen the Holy House, or Chapel, we were led the next morneing into
the Treasory, The Treasory.
where many other rich presents are kept. This Treasory is a larg room 40
paces long and about 15 wide, like a long Chapel vaulted and painted over
head. On the left hand of this room, stand great cupbords, which opening
above, have little nets of strong wyar before them, which let in eyes to
behold, but keep of hands from touching the inestimable Treasor contained
within them. Some of these presents were given by Popes, some by Kings, Queens,
Princes, Cardinals, Generals, Ladies, and noblemen of several Nations. In one
cupbord they showed us a whole service for the Altar, that is, Crucifix,
Candlestiks, Cruets, Basin and Bure, and the foot of the Chalice, all of Amber.
In an other, such a whole service, of Agate. An other such a service all of
lapis Lazuli, given by Count Oliuares. An other all of coral given by the
Archduke Leopold. In an other, such a service in Crystal. In an other such a
service of silver with flower potts neatly wrought, given by Don Thadeo
Barberino Prefect of Rome. In an other, a stately Crucifix of Ebeny adorned
with many curious pictures in miniature, given by Pope Clement the VII^I. In an
other, the Spread Eagle of diamands, the gift of mary Queen of Hungary. Two
crowns of gold enriched with pearl: the gift of a Queen of Polognia. A crown
of gold set with great Rubies of extraordinary size; the gift of a Duchess
of Neuers. In an other, the Crown and Scepter of gold enamelled, given by
Christina Queen of Swede at her first comeing into Italy. In an other the
enamelled Pigeon with a rich jewel in its breast, the gift of the Prince
Ludouisio. The heart enriched with Diamands, with a great Emeraud in the middle
of it, of an excessive bigness the gift of Henry III. of France at his return
out of Polognia. In an other, the rich enamelled three cornerd jewel, with the
picture of the Blessed Virgin in the middle of it; the present of two Bohemian
Counts and a Gentleman, who being thrown out of a high window in Prague by the
Calumnists, and recommending themselves to Gods protection and our Ladies
intercession, fell down all three gently without the least hurt. Their names
were Count Martinitz, Count Slauata, and a Gentleman that was Secretary to
Count Slauata, who being thrown out the last, and falling upon the Count his
master, cried him mercey for his rudeness in falling upon him; a great argument
that they were little hurt, when they could compliment with one an other. There
are now three pillars before that house in Prague, out of which these three men
were thrown. In an other cupbord I saw several great chains of gold, given by
great men; and some of these by great Generals. In an other, A great Heart of
gold, as big as both a man's hands, enameled with blew, and set on the outside
of it with these words in pretty big Diamands, JESUS, MARIA, and within it are
the pictures of the blessed Virgin on one side; and of the Queen of England
Henrietta Maria on the other; the Heart opening it self into two leaves. In an
other, a neat little heart also of gold enameled, and set with jewels; the
present of Madame Christina Duchess of Sauoye, and sister to the Foresaid
Queen of England, with her own and her sonns picture in it. In an other, the
picture of our blessed Lady with her son JESUS in her arms, cut in a great
pearl, and set in gold. In an other cupbord, I saw a picture of our B. Lady
wrought curiously in Indian Feathers of several colors, and cut short as
plush, which picture changes colors as often as you change its situation, or
your own posture. In an other, a great custodia of crystal given by Christina
of Toscany. In an other, a custodia of Lapis Lazuli. In an other a Diamand
valued at twelve thousand crowns, the gift of the Prince d'Oria in Genua. An
other of almost equal price given by a German Prince. In an other a curious
book of gold covered with Diamands with the leaves of gold, but rarely painted
in miniature, the gift of a Duke of Bauaria. In an other, the Samaritan* Well
of gold, with the pictures of our Savior, and the Samaritan woman in gold
also; the present of Cardinal Brancaccio. In diverse other cupbords I saw a
world of Jewels of all sorts, which confounded my memory as well as dazeled my
eyes. In other great cupbords, they showed me excellent Church ornaments of
most rich stuffs embrodered with silver and gold, but one there was (to wit a
whole complete suit for the Altar, Priest, Deacon, and Subdeacon) so thick
covered with an embrodery of pearl, and those no little ones, that I could not
preceiue the ground of the stuff for pearl: all these were the present of
Catherine Zamoisky wife of the Chancelour of Polonia; and they are valued at a
hundred and thirty thousand crowns. I know not whether this suit of Church
ornaments, or that described above in the Popes Sacristy, be the richer.

On the other side of this room, are great windows, betwixt every one of
which, are set upon long tables, diverse great towns so precisely expressed in
silver, with theit walls, ramparts, Churches, steeples, houses, streets,
windmills, etc. that whosoever had once seen these towns, would easily know
them again in their pictures here: they were all Vows and gifts, and all
ingenious German work, as well as German towns.

This is all I can remember, though not half I saw in this Treasory: and
having thanked the civil Priest that showed us this fine place, we went out
again into the great Church; where I observed upon the great Pillars that make
the Isles of this Church, the history of the Holy House engraven in stone, or
written in patchment in a fair text-hand, in twelve or thirthen several
languages, for the use of the Pilgrims who flock hither from all countries.

Going out of the Church I saw before the Church door the statue in brass of
sixtus Quintus: and a stately Fountain.

From hence we went to see the Celler of the Holy House which furniseth with
wine, not only the Governors house, the Canons and the Church men, the
College of the Penetentiaries, the Convent of the Capucins, the Seminarists,
the Hospital and all those that belong to the Church any way; but also
furnishes all Pilgrims, yea even all Princes, Cardinals, Bishops, Ambassadors,
and great-men of known quality, with wine as long as they stay here upon
devotion. For this reason there belong large revenues to this Church, and this
Celler is absolutely the best I saw in Italy. The Vessels are hugely great, and
not to be removed from hence. They have away to take out a piece of their broad
sides, and so make them clean. They are all hooped with iron, and some of them
are so contrived, that they can draw three several sorts of wine, out of one
Vessel, and by the same tap. The experience is pretty, but the wine is better.
Now whether these Vessels be too many, or the revenues of the Holy House too
great, you may easily conjecture, when so many persons are fed daily, as I
mentioned above, and so many thousand pilgrims pass so frequently that way.
Turselinus In his hist. of Loreto l. 3. c. 25.
writs, that between Easter and Whitsontide, there have flocked thither;
sometimes five, sometimes Six hundred thousand communicants; and in two days
space in September (about the Feast of the Nativity of our Lady) there have
appeared two hundred thousand communicants, most of which were pilgrims.

Having refreshed our selves in this Celler, we went to the Apothecaries shop*
The Apothecaries shop.
belonging to the Holy House also, and furnishing physic to sick pilgrims for
nothing. There we saw those famours pots which make even physic it self look
sweetly, and draw all curious strangers to Visit them. For round about a great
inner shop, stand pots of a great size painted by Raphael Vrbins own hand, and
therefore judged by Virtuosi to be of great Value, Witness those four only,
on which are painted the four Evangelists for the which were offered by a
French Ambassador in his Kings name, four pots of gold of the same bigness, and
were refused. Brave Raphael, whose only touch of a finger could, Midas like,
turn gally pots into gold. But as Phidias his statues of clay were as much
adored anciently, as his golden ones: so Raphaels hand is as much admired in
the Apothecarys shop of Loreto, as in the Vatican Palace of Rome. These pots
were given to the Holy House by a Duke of Vrbin whose subject Raphael was, and
for whom he had made them with more then ordinary art.

He that desires to know more of Loreto, let him read Turselinus his history of
Loreto. For my part, my time being out, I must be gone.

Taking therefore horse again, we made toward Venice, and saw these places
in ou^ way:

Ancona.
Ancona the Capital town of the Marca, and one of the best Havens in the
Gulf: corresponding with Slauonia, Greece, Dalmatia, and many other countries.
Its built upon a Promontory, and backed up land-way, with a good Castle. The
Haven was built by the Emperor Traian, whose triumphal Arch is yet seen here,
and is the chief monument of this town. Here is a M^lo strikeing 200. paces
into the sea. Pius II. whilst he stayed here to animate in person, the great
expidition against the Turks which he had zealously given beginning to, died.
In the vaults of the Great Church are kept many saints bodies, and precious
Relics. Its called S. Ciriacos, Church and it is the Cathedral.

From Ancona we went to Senegallia all along the Sea side. Senegallia.
This town is so called from the Senones Galliae. Its a very neat and pleasant
town standing in a sweet air. Its a Bishops seat. Here began anciently Gallia
Cisalpina.

From hence we went to Fano Fano.
( Fanum fortunae) because of the Temple of Fortune built here in memory of a
battle wonn by the Romans near the River Metaurus hard by were Asdrubal
Hannibals brother was slain. Here Is an ancient Triumphal Arch yet standing. Not
far from this town also Narsetes overcame Totila. Its an Episcopal town.

Pesaro.
From hence we went to Pesaro standing also most pleasantly by the Seaside. Its
called Pesaro, and Pesaurum in Latin, from the weighing here of the gold which
the Romans, beseiged in the Capitol, sent hither to be paid to the Gauls,
says Seruius. It once belonged to the Dukes of Vrbin, but for want of heirs
male, fell to the Church by right. From the bridge of stone, which is here,
beginns the Marca d'Ancona. The air here is thought by Vranoscopists, to be
the best in Italy; as are also the figgs here.

Catholica.
From hence we passed by Catholica a poor Village, adorned with nothing but a
stately Name, and an Inscription upon the wall of the Chapel, rendering you
the reason why this town is called Catholica, which was this. When the
Emperor Constantius a fierce Arrian used violence to the Fathers that had been
assembled in the Council of Arimini [a town not far off) and would not
suffer them to depart (their business being done, which they came for, to wit;
the Catholic Faith of the Council of Nice being here asserted and confirmed)
till they had complied with the Emperors faction consisting of Arrians; Many of
them too weakly (being weary of so long a stay from their Seats) fell to an
unworthy compliance with the Arrian party. Which the zealous orthodoxe Fathers
seeing, left Rimini, and came into this little Village, because they would not
communicate with the Arrians: Whereupon this Village got the name of Catholica,
because the true Catholic and orthodoxe Fathers retired hither. If you ask me
then, whether this Council of Rimini were good or no; I answer you, that the
Council was good and orthodoxe, and confirmed the Faith of the Nicen Council
against the Arrians; which was the business it was called about. And what
happened afterward when the Council was ended by the oppression of the
Emperor, is not to be imputed to the Council; but to some weak Fathers as an
error of conversation, and a too unworthy complance.

Rimini.
From Catholica we went to Rimini, called Arriminum in Latin, this is a pretty
town, in which the foresaid Council was kept. In the market place I saw the
stone (set now upon a pedestal) upon which Caesar stood when he made a speech
to his soldiers to make them resolve to march up to Rome. Hard by in the same
market place, stands a little round Chapel famous for a miracle wrought there
by S. Ant^ny of Padua in confirmation of the ^eall Presence. The History is too
long, but seen here painted round the Chapel, with a cast of an eye.

From hence we went through Cesena an Episcopal town; Cesena.
and Forli, Forli.
Forum Liuij an other BPs. seat; in the way before we came to Cesena we saw an
old inscription in stone set up by a little rivers side, which I found to be
the very Decree of the old Senate of Rome, forbiding in general, any Officer,
or soldier whatsoever to pass over the Rubicon upon pain of being judged an
enemy to his country and guilty of High Treason. By which words I gathered that
this little river here now called Pistatello, was Rubicon, Rubicon.
mentioned in the Decree of the Senate; and that this Decree pointed at Julius
Caesar and his army. Yet Caesar being resolved to march up to Rome with his
army, made aspeech to his soldiers; and finding a compliance in their
resolutions, passed over Rubicon, cryeing out: Iacta est alea: ^e must now
either sink or Swim, and so passed on to Rome, which he soon possessed himself
of and then of the world. When once powerful men draw their swords, they throw
away their scabbards: and when once they have offended beyong pardon, they
strike at the very throat of authority; running upon that horrid maxim, that
scelera sceleribus sunt tuenda.

From Forli we passed on the right hand to Faenza, Fauentia in Latin* (leaving
the way on the left hand, which leads to Imola and Bolognia.) Faenza is a neat
town as all the others we had passed by before: Faenza.
but having no considerable thing in it but white earthen pots, called Vessel
of Faenza, we stayed not long in it, but made toward Ferrara. In the way I
found little worth observation, except only that as we traueled one night
somewhat late, for cooleness, I saw millions of little flies in the air,
carrying a bright light about them like glowwormes, They continued all the way
to our Inn for two hours after sunset, especially upon the corn fields and
high grass. It was huge pretty me thought, to see heaven upon earth all most,
and flyeing stars conduct us to our lodgeing. A Po^t would have sworn by all
the cords of Apollos harp, that Jupiter then was making Vulcan paue the
Vault of heaven with a Mosaic work of Diamands, and that these were only the
sparks that fell from him: or that he was repareing the old caussey of the Via
Lactea with fresh stars, and that these were the old ones which he had thrown
away. I catched some of these fiery flies, to see where it was that they
carried their little Lanternes and candles, and I found it was in their tails.
The country people call them Lucciole. And I believe, Plin. l. 18. c. 26.
Arist. l. 1. de partib. animal. c. 3.
these are those flies which Pliny calls Cicindelas, and Aristotle calls (...).

Passing thus along we came late to a little Village, and the next morning
betimes to Ferrara. Ferrara.
This town of Ferrara was once the Seat of a Sovereign Prince of the house of
Este, but for want of heirs male after the death of Alf^nso the II. it fell to
the Church, and Clement the VIIII took possession of it in person by an Entry
and Ceremony worthy of the pen of Cardinal Bentiuoglio who was there. The town
stands in a plain, carrying above four miles compass; it has a good
Citadell, strong walls, ramparts, bulworks: and a good garrison of soldiers.
Here are fair streets, and very hansome Palaces; but people are somewhat thin:
The things which I saw here where these*

The Rarities.
1. The D^mo, ancient rather then beautiful.

2. Oueragainst it, two Statues in brass of the Princes of the house of Este;
the one Duke; the other Marquis: the one Sitting, the other on Horseback.

3. Behind these Statues is the House of Justice, or Town house.

4. The strong palace of the Dukes anciently, is in the middle of the town,
with a great mote about it, the court within is painted with the pictures of
all the Dukes of Ferrara* ^ere the Popes Legate lies.

5. The Diamand Palace, The Di^mant Palace.
as they call it, is of white marble without, whose stones are all cut diamant
wise into sharp points. Having seen it without, I longd to see it within
hopeing that a diamant palace without, would be all carbuncle and Pearl
within. But I was deceived; for entering in, I found nothing worth the pains of
going up the ugly stairs: and the poor woman that kept the house told me as
much, as well as the cold kitchen. I wonder the master of this house does not
keep it always locked up, that strangers might value it by its outside only,
which is admirable indeed.

6. The Monastery of the Benedictins is stately, in whose church I found the
Tomb of Ariosto author of the long Poem called Orlando Furioso. Ariosto Tomb.
He was esteemed in his life time a great Poet, and as such was crowned Laureat
Poet by the Emperor Charles the V. but he was oftentimes seen, even in the
streets, to be too much transported with Poetic fury, and to become Ariosto
furioso, while he was penning his Orlando He had a rich Vain, but a poor
purse; and while his head was crowned with Laurel, his breeches were often out
behind, as well as those of Torquato Tasso, of whom Balzac says, that though
he were a good Poet, yet he had des fort mauuaises chauses.

7. The Carthusians church is neat and full of good Pictures.

8. The Church and Convent of the Carmelits is also neat, in whose Library I
saw a Manuscript of John Bacon, and an other of learned Thomas Waldensis, both
Englishmen, and both Learnedmen.

The Acadimy of wits.
Here Is an Academy of Wits called Gli Elevati. of this town was Hieronymus
Sau^narola author of the Triumphus Crucis; The Learned men.
and Baptista Guarini author of the Pastor Fido.

He that desires to know the history of Ferrara, let him read GioGiouanni
Baptista Pigna, The history.
who has written of it ex profess^.

From Ferrara we went to Padua in two days, the season being good and dry;
otherwise in winter, its too deep a way to go by Land* therefore most men
embarke at Ferrara, and go by boat to Venice. The first day, Passing over the
Po in boat at Francalino, We reached Ruigo the first town of the Venetian
State. Ruigo.
This town is built near where Adria (from whence the Adriatic Sea is
called) once stood, Adria.
and almost upon its ruins. Its governed by a Podesta and a Capitano Grande,
as the other towns of S. Mark are. Of this town was Coelius Rodiginus a man
of Various learning, as his books show; and Bonifacius Bonifacij an other
learned humanist.

From Ruigo we arrived at Padua betimes, but the desire of seeing Venice made us
hasten away the next day; deferring to see Padua till our return from Venice.

Embarking then betimes in the morning at Padua in a Pi^tta, a neat little
barge, taken to our selves, and much more honorable then to go in the great
tiltboate, where all sorts of loosy ruffians and idle people throng you up; we
saw a world of stately Palaces and gardens standing upon the banks of the
river Brenta, and sewing us that we were approaching to a great town indeed.

Some five miles short of Venice, we left the river and the horses that drew
us, and ^owed through the Shallow Sea which enuironeth Venice on all sides for
above five miles space. This low Sea is called here La Laguna; La Laguna.
and the water is so shallow, that no great ships can come to Venice: little
vessels come by certain channels which are well fortifyed with castles, forts,
and chains: so that no man can come to Venice but with Leave, or knocks. We
arrived there betimes; and all the way we admired to see such a stately City
lyeing as it were at anchor, in the midst of the Sea; and standing fixed where
every thing else floats.

Venice at first* was nothing but a company of little dry spots of ground, The
origin of Venice.
which held up their heads in a Shallow Sea furnished by Saeuen rivers, Piaua,
Sila, Liuenza, Po, Adige, Brenta, and Tagliamento, Which runn into it. To these
little dry spots of ground fisher men repaired anciently for their fishing, and
built little cottages upon them. But afterward Italy being one runn by Goths,
Huns, and Vicegoths, diverse rich men from several parts of Italy, as well as
from Padua, fled hither with the best of their goods, to save them and them
selves in these poor cottages unknown to those Barbarous nations: and
findeing by experience this to be a safer place then any else, they began to
provide against those frequent disasters of barbarous incursions, by building
good houses here. This many men did: and made at last a fine town here, and
greater then her mother Padua. This happened twelve hundred years ago, which
makes Venice glory, that she is the ancientest Republic in Europe. To which
purpose I cannot omit to tell here a pretty story which was told me in Paris of
a Venetian Ambassador, who resideing in the Court of France, and finding
himself in a visit where there were many Ladies, was seriously asked by a
grave old Lady (who heard him speak much of the Seignorie of Venice). Est-elle
belle?
Whether the Seignorie of Venice were fair or no? yes Madame, said he; one of
the fairest in Europe. Est elle grande?
Is she great? said the Lady again: yes, Madame, said the Ambassador, she is
great enough. Is she rich? Est elle rich?
said the Lady (...) worth millions, replied the Ambassador. Me thinks then,
said the Lady, she would be a good match for Monsieur the Kings Brother: yes,
Madame, replied he again, but that she is a little too old. Quelle aige a
elle?
Why how old is she I pray you? said the Lady. Madame, answered the Ambassador,
she is about twelve hundred years old. At which the company smileing, the good
Lady perceived her error with blushing, and Monsieur was unmarried for that
present. Indeed Cosmography, and Topography are hard words; and as the old
saying is, aliud sceptrum, aliud plectrum, a looking glass is not the same
thing with a Map.

As for Venice now, Venice now.
its one of the fairest Cities in Europe, and called by the Proverbial
Epithete, Venetia la Ricca, Venice the Rich. Its well nigh eight miles in
compass, and in form something like a Lute. It has no walls about it to
defend it: but a mote of water that is five miles broad which surrounds it. It
has no suburbs, but a world of little Islands close by it. The Streets of
Venice are all full of water; and for this reason they use no c^aches here, but
visit in boats.

These boats they call here Gondolas, The Gondolas.
and there are above twenty thousand of them. For besides that every noble
Venetian or rich man has two or there of his own, there are always a world
of them standing together at several public wharfs; so that you need but cry
out, Gondola, and you have them lanch out presently to you* these Gondolas are
pretty neat black boats like ou^ oars, holding six persons conveniently upon
the Seats, which are covered over head with a thick black cloth, with windows
at either side, which in winter defends you from the wind, and in summer from
the Sun. The multitude of these Gondolas help to employ a great many poor men,
and to make a world of mariners for public service in time of need. Ordinary
people here may go up and down the town by little back allies, which they
call here Call; these by winding up and down, and delivering them over
several bridges, hugely puzzle strangers at first. Of these bridges there are
above 1500 in Venice, Bridges in Venice.
all of stone and of one arch reaching from one side of a street to the other,
while the Gondolas run under the Arch. The greatest of these bridges is called
the Rialto, The Rialto.
built over the Canal Grande, all of white marble. This is one of the finest
bridges in Europe, because of the one arch only, and of the vast wideness and
height of that arch; the Chanel here being as wide as any man can throw a
stone. This bridge bears upon its back two rows of shops, and little houses
covered with lead; and least this great weight should make the foundation sink,
they built it upon piloties, that is, great trees ramed into the ground, to the
number of six thousand in all. In fine, this bridge cost two hundred and fifty
thousand crowns. It were a fine sight, to see in a hard frost, the streets of
Venice all frozen, and people walkeing up and down upon diamant streets, or a
crystal pauement. In the mean time its no unpleasing sight to see the streets
full of water, and such stately palaces on either side, especially the Canal
Grande, which runns quite through the middle of the City, and is hedged in on
either side with stately houses, among which are counted two hundred palaces
fit to lodge any King. The whole City has in it 32 Monasteryes of Religious
men, 28 of Religious women, 70 Parish Churches; and about a hundred and
fourscore thousand inhabitants.

Having said thus much of the situation of Venice, I will now speak of the
Government, Strength, Riches, Religion, and Interest of this Republic, and then
fall to the particulars I saw in it.

The Gourement.

The Great Counsel.


For the Government here, its purely Aristocratical, by the Doge, and the Nobles.
The great Counsel consists of two thousand Gentlemen. This is the basis of the
state Government: because that out of these are chosen all the other Magistrates,
Podestas, Generals, Capitani G^andi, Prouidetori Generali, Embassadori, etc.
This great Counsel assembles frequently in one great Room of the Doges
palace, where their are seats for them all, and where businesses are voted by
Baloting; that is by putting into a close double box of two colors, a little
ball, about the bigness of a button, which is made so soft, that no man can
hear into whether part of the double box the ball falls. Every Gentleman in
this great Counsel has two of these balls given him, one white, and the other
red: the one signifyeing, the affirmative vote, the other the negative: so that
they give their votes secretly, and without being known afterward for what
party they stood; or without giving example to others to follow them in their
votes, as leading men would do; and so draw all into faction and cabals;

To run through all the Maegistrats and Officiers of this Republic, the
Pregiadi, the saui Grandi, the saui di Terra ferma, the saui de gli Ordini, the
consiglio de dieci, etc. would be aworke too long for a traueler, and too
tedious for my reader. I will only speak of the supreme Magistrate here, the
Doge, The Doge.
or Prince, as they call him, who represents the head of this Republic. He is
now chosen by the whole Senate, and is for life: heretofore he was hereditary
till the year 1032. the manner of baloting in choosing the Doge is such a
puzzle, that I had rather you should read it in Sabellicus, then I give my self
the trouble of describing it. For the most part, they choose a man well
stricken in years, and one who has made his circle of Embassyes: that is,
has been fifteen years Ambassador in all the chief courts of Europe, three
years a piece in every one: and so acquired unto himself a perfect knowledge of
all states and state affairs. Being chosen once, he cannot stir out of the
Laguna without leave. Nor at home can he do all things of his own head, but
with the advice of his Counselours, who are six, chosen out of the most
honorable gentlemen of the City. These six sit with him in Counsel, and
execute with him all businesses, as to give audience, read letters, grant
privileges, and the like: which cannot be executed by the Doge, if there be
not four Counselours with him; and yet they can execute and act without the
Doge: and its they that have authority to propose in the Great Counsel, things
of concern. In giving suffrages, his suffrage is no more then an ordinary
Senators, in the Sanate; but he has two voices in the Great Counsel. The Doge
and these Counselours are called Il C^llegio, but then in main public affairs
there enters into this Counsel, six Saui Grandi, five Saui di Terra Ferma, five
Saui de gli Ordini, and tree Capi de Quaranta Criminali. This full College
distributs businesses to the other Magistrates to be handed, having been headed
here.

The Habit of the Doge is ancient, and has something of the Pontifical habit
in it. His Pomp, Train, and Lodgeing, are all Princely; and in public
functions he has, carried before him the eight silver trumpets, the great
Vmbrella of cloth of tyssue, the cusshen, the Chair, the guilt sword, and a
w^ite wax candle carried by a child. All letters of State are written in his
name, and money is coined in his name, but the impronto, or stamp of it, is
always the figure of S. Mark, or S. Marks Lion. For the most part the Doge is
chosen out of those, whom they call here, Procuratori di S. Marco. Procuratori
di San Marco.
These Procuratori are of high rank and esteem in this Republic. Heretofore
there was but one Procuratore di San Marco, whose office was, to have a care of
all things belonging to S. Marks Church and the Treasor. But now there are
twentyfiue, most of which have made their circle of Embassyes in foreign
Courts, and are fit wood to make Doges of: though some of them of late have
been assumed to that dignity for money; the State now making money of all men,
as well as of all things.

Their Strength.
As for the Strength and Power of Venice, its very Great; their possessions in
Italy, being full as great as the Popes; and out of Italy, far greater. In
Italy they hold fourteen Provinces under them. They are Lords of the Gulf, or
Adriatic Sea.

They possess the coast of Dalmatia beyond the Gulf. They hold the Isles of
Corfu, Cephalonia and Zante.

Candia, or the I Will of Creta, belongs to them by due. The kingdom of Cyprus
also is pretended to by them; and by it, and Candy, whose two crowns they show
us in the Treasor, Venice is styled Serenissima. The kingdom of Cyprus came to
the Venetians by Katherine Cornaro* who was made heir of it by her son the
King thereof, who dyed young and with out issue about the year 1438. The stoty
is this. Loschi in Compendi^ Histor.
Katherine was daughter of Marco Cornaro, and niece of Andrew Cornaro two
noblemen of Venice. Andrew was sent Auditore Generale into the Kingdom of
Cyprus, in the time of James King of that Island, and helped him to many thousand
crowns, where by he settled his tottering crown. One day as the King was
talkeing familiarly with him, he let fall (whether by chance, or design) a
little picture in miniature, of a Very hansome Lady. The King curious to see
it, called for it ciuilly, and viewing it well, fell hugely in love with the
Original of it, which Andrew assured him to be far hansomer then the copy*
and withal added, that if his Majesty liked her, she was his Niece, and that
therefore he offered her freely to him, for his wife, with all the money he had
already lent him, and a hundred thousand crowns more. The King bit willingly
at these two baits, beauty and Money, and was not quiet till he had married
her. Of her he had but one son, whom (dyeing) he left under his mothers
protection: but he dyeing also not long after, left his mother heir of the
kingdom; and she at her death, left this crown and kingdom to the Venetians
by Will and Gift. This whole history I saw painted in the Palace of Cornaro
by the hand of Paulo Veron^se. As for the strong holds which the Venetians
possess in Italy, they are these: Crema, Bergamo, Brescia, Pesch^^ra, Chiosa,
and Palma Nuoua in Fruth. Palma Noua.
This last is one of the best places in Europe Is has nine royal bastions;
eighteen caualiers, which command all the neighboring campagnia; it has
di^ches of water about it thirty paces broad, and twelve deep; Its ramparts
behind the wall are high and covering, and they are always fringed with a
hundred pieces of Cannon, and ready to receive six hundred more, which are
always in its magazin ready upon all occasions. And for men and armor, as the
great Arsenal in Venice has always arms in readyness for a hundred thousand
men; so this State being peopled with three millions of men, would easily find
three or four hundred thousand men of service, and a hundred Gallyes: yet their
ordinary militia is but of fourscore thousand foot, and some 6000 Horse; and
about thirty Gallyes.

As for their Riches; Their Riches.
though their ordinary revenues (before these late wars with the Turk)
exceeded not four millions, yet now they spur themselves, and the country^,
up to excessive sums. Few dye but they bequeath something to such a Christian
service as this war is. Besides this, the taxes are much augmented, and
seizures and forfetures more narrowly looked into, to help public expenses. In
fine, besides the great trading which Venice drives, ( Aleppo alone bringing in
some years, four millions of gold) the Venetiant have found out a Very
compendious way to raise, in one quarter of an hour, and by one deash of a
pen, fifty hundred thousand crowns, to help themselves withal at a dead lift,
and incommodate no man. This they did An 1646, when fifty rich familyes in
Venice gave to the State a hundred thousand crowns a piece to be made noble
Venetians. The like course they took to raise money, about a hundred years
ago, when they were set upon by most of the Princes of Europe at once.

Their Religion.
As for their Religion, its Roman Catholic, and they have never changed it
since the beginning of their Republic. Hence Mr. Raymond in his Mercurio
Italico page 188. says truly, that Venite has this property above all other
States; that she is a Virgin, and more, from her first infancy, Christian:
having never yet fell, from her Principles either in Government, or Religion. It
began to be built the Very same year, that S. Augustine dyed, (as Baronius
observes.)

As for the Interest of this Republic, Their Interest.
they are now well with the Emperor; not out with Spain, no^ too secure of his
Friendship; kind with the French, as long as they keep out of Italy; well
affected to England; and just friends with the Pope.

Now for the particulars which I saw in Venice, they were these.

1. The men Themselves here, The noble men of Venice.
who looked like men indeed: and as a Philosopher anciently said, that when he
came from Corinth to Sparta, he seemed to come from horses to men: so me
thought, when I came from France to Venice I came from boys to men. For here I
saw the hansomest, the most sightly, the most proper and grave men that ever I
saw any where else. They wear always in the town (I speak of the noblemen)
a long black gown a black cap knit, with an edgeing of black wool about it,
like a fringe; an ancient and manly wear, which makes them look like
Senators. Their hair is generaly the best* I euersaw any where; these little
caps not presing it down as our hats do; and Perywigs are here forbid. Under
their long gowns (which fly open before) they have hansome black suits of rich
stuffs with stockins and garters, and spanith leather shoos neatly made. In a
word, I never saw so many proper men together, nor so wise, as I saw daily
there walking upon the Piazza of S. Mark. I may boldly say, that I saw there
five hundred gentlemen walking together every day, every one of which was able
to play the Ambassador in any Princes Court of Europe. But the misery is, that
we strangers cannot walk there with them, and talk with them, but must keep out
of their way, and stand a loof off. The reason is this: This state (as all
Republics are) being hugely gealous of her liberty and preservation, forbids
her Noble men and Senators to converse with Foreign Ambassadors, or any man
that either is an actual servant or follower of an Ambassador, or has any the
least relation to any Princes Agent, with out express leave; and this upon
pain of being suspected as a Traitor, and condignly punished. This makes them
shy to all strangers, not Knowing what relation they may have to some forain
states man of Agent. For the same reason they will not let their wifes visit
the wifes of foreign Ambassadors resideing in Venice, for fear of being
suspected to commit treason by proxy. They have in the wall of the Palace, in
diverse places, certain wide mouths of marble stone, over which I found written
these words: Denuncie secret, Private informations, into which they cast
secretly papers of accusations, by which they accuse secretly any officer, or
nobleman, whom they durst not accuse publicly. This maKes men stand hugely
upon their guard, and be wary with whom they converse, and what they say.

The noble women of Venice^
2. As for the women here, they would gladly get the same reputation That their
husbands have, of being tall and hansome; but they over do it with their
horrible cioppini, or high Shoos, which I have often seen to be a full half
yard high. I confess, I wondered at first, to see women go upon stilts, and
appear taller by the head then any man; and not to be able to go any whither
without resting their hands upon the shoulders of two grave matrons that vssher
them: but at last, I perceived that it was good policy, and a pretty ingenious
way either to clog women at home by such heavy shoos (as the Egyptians Kept
their Wifes at home by allowing them no shoos at all); or at least to make them
not able to go either far, or alone, or inuisibly. As for the young ladies of
this town that are not married, they are never seen abroad, but masked like
Moscarades in a strange disguise, at the Fair time, and other public
solemnityes or Shows, Being at other times brought up in Monasteries of Nunns,
till they be married.

3. S. Marks Church.
Then I went to the Church of S. Mark the Evangelist, whose body lies here,
having been translated hither from Alexandria, 820 and odd years ago; having
ever since been one of the chief Patrons of this state, as his Lion has
euer-since been the Arms of the Republic, and its seal in all Public
writeings. This church is built a la Thedesca, as they call it, and as the best
Churches built about those times, were. Its neither great nor high; but so rich
for the materials, that nothing but Mosaic work and marble appear in it. The
roof and the walls a good way down, are curioutly painted with Mosaic
histories and pictures; and the rest of the Wall is rare marble. Among those
Mosaic pictures, there are to be seen in the vault of the Arch, over the door
of the Treasory, two old Pictures, the one of S. Dominick, the other of S.
Francis; both made before they instituted their several Orders, and yet both in
the religious Habits which those of their Orders wear; and all this out of the
predictions of Ioachim (Abbat of Curacium, Baronius, an. 1190.
and not of S. Fleur, as some wrongly call him) who lived before these Orders
were instituted. The picture also of the Pope, near to the Pictures of the
foresaid Saints, is said to be a Prophetical picture of the said Abbats
describing; representing the last Pope that shall govern the flock of Christ,
when all the world shall be of one Religion. The pauement of this Church is
suitable to the rest, being in some places composed of vast marble stones
naturaly representing the waves of the Sea; in other places its curiously
inlayd with stones of several colors expressing Flowers, stars, birds, beasts
and the like: among which stones I perceived here and there some Turkey stones
of great value among us, but here not scorning to be trod upon. Thirty six
marble pillars of a round form, and two foot thick in diameter, hold up the
roof of this Church. The High Altar is a rare piece, especially when you see
the back of it open as I did upon the Ascension Eve. This back of the Altar is
richly adorned with diverse rows of little enamelled pictures, a la Greca, set
in gold, and enriched with brave pearl and precious stones intermingled every
where between the pictures. This most rich ornament, or back of the Altar, was
given by a Doge of Venice, and brought from Constantinople^ Behind the High
Altar stands the Altar of the B. Sacrament, where there are two transparent
round pillars four yards high. In the Sacristy which is hard by, I saw neat
Mosaic work in the roof; and an admirable picture of S. Hierome of the same
work also. Round about the inside of the Church, over the pillars, hang the
Scutchions of Several Doges, in a large size. For the Doges at their creation,
cause three things to be made. First their picture which is set up in the Sala
of the Great Counsel: Secondly their Arms or Scutchion, which are sometimes of
silver and of a huge si^e; and are set up after the Doges death in the Church
for ever. Thirdly they must make their Picture in the Collegio, or Pregiadi.

The Treasory of S. Mark.
4. From the Church we were let in to see the Treasory of S. Mark, which ioynes
to the Church. It was shown us by special leave from above, and by two Noble
Venetians who are always present when it is shown. We were first shown the
Spiritual Treasor, The Spiritual Treasor.
and then-the Temporal; that is, first the Relics, and then the Jewels. The
Reliks were these principaly. A great authentical piece of the Holy Cross,
above a span long. It is the greatest piece I have seen any where, except that
in the Holy Chapel in Paris: and though some enemies of the Very Cross of
Christ, as well as of other Relics, do ieeringly say, that there are so many
pieces of the Holy Cross shown in the world, that if they were all put
together, they would make a carte Load of wood: yet I dare maintain more
probably, that all the pieces any one man can say are shown in Europe (and I
have seen a good part of it) would not make so much of the Cross, as one of
those parts on which our Saviors hands were nailed: seeing the greatest part
that we find of it, is no thicker then an ordinary man's finger, and little
longer then a span; and that very part of it which I saw in the Popes own
Sacristy in the Vatican, is no longer then a man's little finger: and if the
King of France (S. Lewis) in his two expeditions into the Holy Land, could get
only so little a piece of it as that which is shown in Paris in the Saint
Chappelle, and if the Pope himself could get no greater a piece of it, then
that mentioned above, I do not wonder if in other places, they show such little
shreds of it, as all together would not make two foot of timber, much less a
Cart load. We saw also here a finger of S. Mark. His Ring with a stone in it,
which our Lapidaries cannot tell how to name. Some of our Saviors blood
gathered up in his Passion, with the earth it was spilt upon. A thorn of the
Holy crown of thorns. A nail which nailed the two pieces of the Cross
together. A finger of S. Mary Magdalen. A piece of S. John Baptists Cranium. A
tooth of S. Mark. A piece of S. John Baptists habit. Some of our B. Ladies
hair. An anciet picture of S. John Baptist, enamelled in gold. A piece of our
Saviors white robe when he was scorned. A Very ancient picture of our B. Lady
carried about anciently by Constantin the Great, who had it always with him.
One of the Stones of the Torrent, wherewith S. Steven was stoned. And in fine,
the sword of S. Peter.

The Temporal Treasure.
Then leading us to the Temporal Treasure in an other room, they showed us (by
candle light, as they did also the Spiritual Treasure) these things. First, the
twelve crowns of gold, and the twelve breast and backpeeces (like women's close
Bodies) of beaten gold also, set thick, as well as the Crowns, with exquisit
pearl, both round, and big: Twelve young Virgins used to wear them anciently
upon a Feast day. Then three great Carbuncles, one whereof weighs six ounces,
and is bigger then an ordinary henns egg: They Value it at two hundred thousand
crowns. Then the two Crowns of gold set thick with precious stones; one being
the Crown of the kingdom of Cyprus; the other of the kingdom of Candie. After
this they showed us the Doges Crown, called here il Corno, because its made
somewhat sharp and turning in at the top, like a horn. Its set round with a
close row of excellent pearl, each one as big as a hasel nutt, with a Vast
Ruby in the front, of it, worth a hundred thousand crowns, say they, and one
of the fairest diamants in Europe in the top of it. Then they showed us many
other rich things, as the Flower de Luce of gold with a rich Diamant in it,
given by Henry the Third of France at his passing by Venice when he came out of
Poland. The two Unicorns horns, far less then that at S. Denis in France;
but no less true. The two Crucifixes set with pearl and rich jewels, and in
great number. The Great Candlesticks and Thurible of beaten gold, and curiously
wrought; each one being almost as heavy as a man can carry in both hands. The
Great Chalice of gold, as great as a man can lift with both hands. A Saphir
weighing ten ounces. A cup, or dish, as broad and deep as an ordinary caslotte
(or cap which we wear under our hatts) and all of one Turkey stone entire, and
of huge value; It was sent unto this Republic by a King of Persia. A Vessel
like a tankard, of a rich Cameo; its handle being curiously engraven with a
diamant. A little Vase of the roots of Emmeraud. An other of Sardonick. A
great cup of Agate. An other of Roman Agate far finer then the former, and
more transparent. A rich Pax of Mother of Pearl. A Spanish Ambassador, once
viewing this Treasure, took a candle and looked curiously under the long
tables upon which these rich things are exposed; and being asked what he looked
for, answered: that he looked whether this Treasure had roots or no, as his
masters Treasure had, and therefore grows yearly: meaning the India Fleet of
Spain which brings home yearly to the King of Spaynes coffers and Treasure,
twelve millions.

5. The Doges Palace.
Having seen this Treasure and thanked the two noble Venetians that stood by;
and requited the under officers that showed it; we went into the Doges Palace,
which ioynes to S. Marks Church; and mounting up the open stairs into the open
Gallery, we saw the two great marble Statues of Mars and Neptune, which stand
at the head of these stairs, and signify the strength of the Venetians both by
Sea and Land. They are excellent pieces, otherwise great Sansouinus would never
have owned them by writeing under them: Opus Sansouini. This open Gallery led
us into a world of Chambers of Justice, and Clercks offices, all throngd with
business and busy men. Going up from hence into a higher story, we saw the
Doges Chamber of audience, his Antichambers, his dineing room, and the like.
From thence we were led into Several great Chambers of Counsel, all rarely well
painted. After that we saw the Great Chamber, or Sala of the Senate house,
where the Nobles meet upon affairs as great as the Chamber. For here they meet
about the chuseing of public Officers, either for the governing of the City,
or Army: and sometimes they have been forced to stay there eight days (says
Sabellicus) not being able to agree about the Elections; they not being
permitted to depart thence till they agree. This Senate house, or Great
Chamber, is above threescore paces long, and thirty wide. Its full of Seats for
the Noble Venetians, to the number of two thousand men, who have right to enter
in here. Its painted on all sides by the rarest painters that were in Italy
when this room was made. Over the Doges Throne, is a rare piece of painting
covering the whole end of the room above, and representing heaven in a
glorious manner. Its of the hand of Tintoret. The great pictures upon that side
of the room which looks toward the court of the Palace, contain the
history of Pope A^exander the III, and the Emperor Federick Barbarossa. I saw
also in this great room, and in the next joining to it, the true pictures of
all the Doges of Venice. In the other Chambers of this Palace, in the
Churches, and other Palaces of this town, I saw so many, and so rare pieces
of painting, of Titian, Tintoret, Bellino, Gentile, Castle Franco, Bassano,
Paolo Veronese, Perdonone and others, that with Madame Romes leave, I dare
bodly say, that no place of Italy has so many rare pictures in it, as Venice
has: and perchance, you will be of my opinion, if you read the curious book
of Rodolfi, who has written the lives of the Painters of Venice, and the
Venetean State; and sets down where their prime pieces are to be seen.

The little Arsenal.
6. Having seen these Chambers of Judicature, we were led about to the Sala of
the Consiglio de Dieci, (otherwise called, the little Arsenal) in the Palace
still. Its a curious sight, and therefore not to be omitted by my Traveler.
There are arms in it for a thousand men, ready upon all occasions of sedition
or reason. The muskets are always charged and primed; and every six months
they discharge rhem, to charge them a fresh. Pikes, and swords, are also so
ordered here, that by plucking a string, they fall into the hands of those that
should use them: so that in less then half an hour, a thousand men may sally
our armed. In the end of the great room where the muskets hang, stands a great
iron ball pierced through like a basket hilt, and four times as big as a
soldiers helmet; within which there is a spring, which being vncockt by the
pulling of a cord, strikes fire into gunpowder which lies round about within
this Ball in a train, and there are so many several ends of match as there are
muskets here; half of the match hanging out of the holes of the Ball, the other
half being within, and reaching into the train of powder: so that the first man
that should come in, and pluck the foresaid cord would presently strike fire,
and light the matches all at once; and then every man catching a musket, and
one of these matches lighted, they are armed in a moment. This armory is to
secure the Doge and the Senators (while they are assembled in counsel) from
such like treasons as have been plotted against them whilst they were sitting
in counsel. And for this purpose, there is a door which opens out of the Senate
house into this Armory; and the Keys of it are always laid near the Doge when
he sitts here in consultation: Nor is this so much an Italian Iealosy, as a
prudent caution caused by past dangers. For they show us in the great Arsenal,
the armor (with one arm only, to be worn under a Venetian gown, while the
other arm was showed bare, to take off all suspicion) of Bajamante Theopoli
and his accomplices, to the number of eight hundred men, who intended to kill the
whole Senate while it was assembled; and make Baiamante master of Venice. But
the plot was dashed in the execution; because Bajamantes brains were dashed out
by a poor woman, who seeing him march under her window in the head of his
rebellious crew, Sabellicus ^ec. 2 l. 1.
threw down from her window a great earthen flower pot upon his head, and
killed him dead. His party seeing this, retired, and were soon subded: and his
house was turned into a Shambles for Butchers; a fit disgrace for him who would
have been the Butcher of his Prince and countrymen. here also in this Arsenal
we saw the sword and arms of brave Scanderbeg Prince of Albania, who won
seven battles over seven the most illustrious Bassas the Great Turk had, and
dyed after all, peaceably in his Estates, in spite of Amurath. Its said, that
the great Turk hearing how Scanderbeg with his Sword, had cloven men in two,
sent to him; and desired him, to send him his sword, his cutting sword: which
he did; the Turck tried it upon his slaves, and findeing that he could not
cleave men as Scanderbeg had done, sent him word, that he had not sent him his
true sword: to whom scanderbeg replied, that he had sent him indeed his sword,
but not his arm. As for this sword, which they call here Scanderbegs sword,
its a broad thin blade, of a reasonable length, but light, and of as good
metal almost, as its master. We saw here many other curiosityes: as the
standard of the Doge Zani, who restored Pope Alexander the III unto his Seat
again; with his sword, Buckler, and Helmet. The standard of the great Turk.
The standard of horses hair belonging also to the great Turk, and which he
hung out always before battle, as a signal of combat: it was taken by a
Franchman called Ciotar. The Statues of Ludouico Sforza Duke of Milan, and of
his wife Visconti. The statue or head of Carara, whom they call the Tyrant, but
how truly I know not. The Statue or head in brass of brave Venerio, General of
the Venetians in the battle of Lepanto. The head in brass also of brave
Bragadine, flead alive by the Turks for his countries service. The picture of
santa Iustina in a great case set with rich stones. This case was made for a
great Lookeing glass which the Venetians sent unto the Sultanesse of the great
Turk; but the ship that carried it, meeting in the way a Fregat which brought
the news of a great Victory gotten over the Turks by the Venetians upon Sancta
Iustinas day, it returned back again with the present, and the Senate caused
the glass to be taken out, and Santa Iustinas picture to be set in place of
it. Then we saw a rare Carpet, or rather a curious piece of stuff with figures
in it, sent to the Republic of Venice by a King of Persia. The habits of two
noble Chinesi who were baptized at Venice. The amor, of brave Gatta Mela, with
the picture of a catt in his headpeece. The armor of some of the ancient Doges
of Venice, who to the number of forty or fifty, went to war in person, and
did such things there, as to make their very armor to be honorable. The habit,
buckler, and sword of a King of Persia; the arms are set with rich stones. The
armor of Henry the IIII. of France with his pocket pistol. The armor of the
Duke of Rohan. The complete armor of a little boy about ten years old, who was
found dead in a battle feighting for the Venetians and his country; and not
known who he was. Poor brave child! who being worthy never to have dyed,
do not so much as live in history* Indeed I did not think till then, that
Mars had his abortiues too, dyeing before their time, and before they were
named. Then they showed me Attilas Helmet, with the head piece of his horse. A
Cannon shooting seven shoots at once, as if death with his single dart went
too slowly to work. An other Cannon shooting threescore thotts in ten barrels.
A halbard with a barrel within it, shooting fourteen shotts. An other halbard
shooting seven shotts. A Cannon of iron carryeing two miles, and curiously
wrought into flowers with the points of chizels. The collar of iron of the
Paduan Tyrant (as they call him here) Carara. The little iron Crosbow of the
same Tyrant, with which he is said to have shot needles a spann long, and
killed many men privately, who knew not how, or by whom they were hurt. Then the
devils Organs, or a trunck of leather with ten pistol barrels in it of a foot
and a half long, and so disposed in oder like organ pipes, that upon the
opening of the lock of this trunck, all these barrels being charged with
several bullets, should let fly at once, and so seattering wide, kill all
those that should be in the room. This trunck was contrived by a reuengefull
man, who having a mind to be revenged both of his enemy, and of his enemies
friends at once, sent him this trunck by an unknown bearer (as a present from
a friend) while he treated his friends at a dinner. The holes through the sides
of it, made by the bullets, show the devilish effect of this Trunck; and how
well it deserves the name of the Devils organ. The box of botargos here is
just such another invention. A pistol in a pocket book here, is as bad as the
others, which being charged and let off, would presently read your doom.
Swords and daggers, with pistol and little gun barrels running along their
blades, which being held drawn with the broad side to a man, appear to be
only plain swords and daggers, and yet they discharg thrusts not to be parried
by any fenceing guard. I saw also here a fine Tabernacle of Cristal: a burneing
Lamp found in Antenors tomb in Padua, a burning glass, which burns half a
mile off: a rare Adam and Eve with the Serpent and the Tree, all cut out of one
piece of wood by the rare hand of Alberto Dureo: and in fine, the picture of
King James of England, the only picture of any foreign Prince that I saw there.

The Piazza of S. Mark.
Having thus seen this Cabinet of Mars, we went out of the Palace into the
Piazza of S. Mark, upon which both the foresaid Church of S. Mark, and the
Doges Palace look. This is one of the noblest Piazzas that a man can see in
any town. It runns from the Sea side up along the Palace to the Church of S.
Mark, and from thence turning on the left hand, it spreads it self into a more
large, and longer open place, most beautiful to behold: for the whole piazza,
even from the Sea side, to the further end, is all built upon arches and marble
pillars; and raised up with beautiful lodgeings, fit to lodge all the
Procuratori of S. Mark; all the rich foreign merchants; a world of persons of
condition; the Mint, and the famous Library. In that part of the piazza which
lies under the Palace, the Nobili Venetiani walk altogether, twice a day, to
confer about business of State. This meeting here of the Noblemen is called
the Broglio. And in the end of it, close by the Sea side, stand two great
pillars of rich marble, the one bearing upon it the Image of S. Theodorus; the
other, the Lion of S. Mark, these two Saints, S. Mark and S. Theodore, being
the two Patrons of this City. These two pillars were erected here by a Lombard,
who required no other recompense for his pains, then that it might be lawful
for dice-players to play at dice between these two pillars without being
punished or molested, nay though they played false play. Here also between these
two pillars, they execute malefactors, to show that they deserve not the
protection of those two patrons, who break the orders of that town which is
under their protection. Its pity that the Lombard himself was not whiped here
at least, for making himself the Protector of idle rogues there, where the
Saints are Patrons of honestmen. Over against the Palace stands the Mint, in a
place called La Zeccha, and from hence the gold coined here is called Zecchino,
a piece of gold worth some seven shillings fixpence of our money. Hard by it,
stands the Library famous both for the quantity and quality of the books that
are in it. Petrark (once Canon of the Church of Padua) gave his Library to it:
and Bessarion a Greek Cardinal of great Learning and worth, gave as many Greek
Manuscripts unto it, as cost him thirty thousand crowns: and yet by this
Legacy, Bessarion was but even with the Venetians, who honored him in such a
particular manner, as to send out the Bucentauro it self to bring him into
Venice, being sent thither Legate by the Pope.

8. Going from hence into the other part of the Piazza which stands before the
Church, I espied upon the very out corner of the wall of the Church (as you
come out of the Palace) four Porphiry Statues of four merchants embraceing one
another. Haueing enquired what those Statues were set for there, I was told by
a grave old gentleman of Venice, that those, whom these Statues represent, were
four merchants and strangers, who brought hither most of the Jewels mentioned
above in the Treasury; and that afterward poisoning one another, out of
couetousness, left this State heir of all. Just before the Church stand three
tall masts of ships upon curiously wrought Piedestals of Brass, and each mast
bearing, upon great days, a stately flag and streamers. These three mast^
signify the three noblest parts of the Venetians dominions, to wit the
kingdoms of Cyprus, and of Candy, and the State of Venice. In this Piazza I
found always a world of strangers perpetually walking and talking of bargains
and traffic, as Greeks, Armenians, Albanians, Slauonians, Polonians, Jews,
and even Turks themselves; all in their several habits, but all conspireing in
this one thing, to sell dear; and buy cheap. Here also they have every night
in summer, a world of Montibancks, ciarlatani, and such stuff, who together
with their drudges and remedies, strive to please the people with their little
comedies, puppet plays, songs, music, stories, and such like buffonnerie. Its
strange to see how they find daily either new fooling, or new fools, not
only to hear them but even the throw them money too for such poor
contentments. In this Piazza also stands the Campanile, or High steeple of
Venice, distant some fifty paces from the Church of S. Mark. Its built forty
foot squar on all sides, and two hundred and thirty six high. The top of it is
covered with guilt tiles, which in a sunshine day, The High steeple.
appear gloriously a far off. The foundation of it is almost as deep
underground, as the top of it is high above ground; a wonder, if you consider
rhat it stands in Venice. From the top of this Campanile we had a perfect view
of Venice under us, and of all its neighboring Islands, Forts, Sea, and Towns
about it; as also of the outside of S. Marks Church, its Frontispice, its
Cupolas and the four horses of brass guilt which stand over the Frontispice.
These horses came out of the shop, not out of the stable, of Lisippus a famous
statuary in Greece, and were given to Nero by Tiridates King of Armenia. They
were carried by Constantin the Great from Rome to Constantinople; and from
thence they were transported hither. In fine, from the top of this steeple, we
saw the compass of the great Arsenal of Venice, which looked like a little
town in our sight. Indeed some make it three miles about; but I cannot allow
it so much. The sight of this Magazin of war a far off, made us hasten
down from the steeple to go see it nearer hand.

The Arsenal.
9. Taking therefore a Gondola, we went to the Arsenal, Where after the
ordinary formalityes of leaving our swords at the door, and paying the Porters
fees, we were admitted, and led through this great Shop of Mars. Its so well
seated near the Sea side, and so well built, that it might serve the Venetian
Senators for a Castle in time of danger: and in it there is a Well of fresh
water, not to be poisoned, because of two pieces of Unicorns horn set fast in
the bottom of it. I confess, I never saw any where such Oeconomie as is here
observed. Fifteen hundred men are daily employed here, and duly paid at the
weeks end, according to their several employments and works. The expenses of
these workmen amount to a thousand Ducats every day in the year: so that they
make account that they spend in this Arsenal four hundred and thirty thousand
crowns a year: Enough almost to maintain a pretty army constantly. Every
workman here has wine twice a day, and that very good too, but that it is a
little mingled with water. We were led through all the vast rooms of this
Magazin, rooms like vast Churches. In one of them I saw nothing but great ^ares
for Gallyes, seven men going to one oar. In another, nothing but vast
sternes. In another, nothing but vast nails for Gallyes and ships. In another
they were making nothing but Salpeeter for gunpowder. In another they were
casting great Cannons, Mortar pieces, and Chambers. In an other they had
nothing but a pair of vast Scales to weigh Cannons with. In another, Masts for
Gallyes and ships of a prodigious greatness and length; and yet of such a rare
timber, that one filipping upon one end of them, you hear it easily at the
other end, by applying your care to it. Some of these masts are worth fourscore
pounds. In other vast rooms I saw store of Cannons of all sizes both for ships
and Gallyes: where also I saw some Turkish Cannons with words upon them in the
Turkish Language. There I saw also one Cannon shooting three shotts at once:
another five: one great Cannon found buried in Candy-full of gold medals: the
great Cannons cast here while Henry the III. of France dined in this Arsenal.
They had heretofore a prodigious quantity of Cannons here, but now these rooms
are much emptyed by reason of this war with the Turks. In other great rooms
I saw huge heaps of Cannon bullets of all sizes, with some Ensigns wonn over
the Turks. Then mounting up into the Chambers above, I saw in two vast rooms,
arms for fifty Thousand men. in another, arms for twelve Gallyes: in another,
arms for Fifty Gallyes. Here also I saw the suit of armor of Scanderbeg: that
of the Doge zani, the Lantern of Don John of Austrias ship in the battle of
Lepanto: the Lantern of a Turkish Galley: the armor of Baiamante Theopoli and
his accomplices, with one arm only: some arms taken from the Turks in the
battle of Lepanto, other arms taken from the Genuesi; a great Crossebow,
shooting Vast arrows of iron above five quarters long: an invention of great
use before Gunne were found out. A cannon bullet with four long irons, like the
tops of halbards, which shut up close into it when you put it into the Cannon,
but open again of themselves, as soon as the bullet is out of the Cannons
mouth; and so spreading into four parts, cut all they meet, with strange fury:
a dangerous invention in Sea battles, to to spoil cordage and tackling. Here
also they show us the description of the town and Fort of Clissa, and how it
was taken by the Venetians some 20 years ago. Then descending from thence, we
went to see the places where they make new Gallyes, and mend old ones. There I
found a vast square court three hundred paces broad in every square, and full
of vast penthouses capable of holding in them, Gallyes of fifty paces long a
piece. In the midst of this Court is a vast square Pond of water, let in from
the Sea, where the new Gallyes are tried; and the old ones are let into the
Arsenal to be mended and rigged a new. Here I saw a world of Gallyes, and a
world of men workeing about them most busily. There were heretofore diverse of
these great Courts full of Gallyes, but now they are much exhausted; the
Gallyes being abroad in war. Hence it is observed that This Arsenal, before
these wars, could arm 200 gallyes, and two hundred thousand men. Here it was
that they made a Gallye, and set her out at Sea while Henry the III dyued here
in the Arsenal; which made that King say then, that he would give three of his
best towns in France (except his Parliament towns) for such an Arsenal. Indeed
the Arsenals of Paris, Genua, Zurick, Naples, and Geneua, seemed to me to be
little gunnsmiths shops in comparison of this. They were then making here two
new Galleasses (when I was last there) of vast bulk and expenses. In fine I saw
here the old Bucentoro; and presently after the new Bucentoro. This last is the
Gally of State, of the Doge, when he goes forth upon the Ascension day
accompanied with the Senate, to espouse the Sea, as they call it here. This is
a noble Gallie all guilt without, and wainscotted round about the Deck, with
guilt seats. There runns a partition of wood quite along the Deck of the
Gallie, with seats on both sides and with a low open roof of wood, to let in
air, and yet keep off the sun; and all this is guilt and painted, and capable
of five hundred Senators, who in their scarlat robes, wait upon the Doge that
day. The Doge fitts in the Puppe, in a Chair of State, with the Popes Nuncio on
one hand of him, and the Patriarch of Venice on the other, and a place for
music behind them. The slaves are all under hatches, and not seen at all: but
their oars, (twenty on each side) move all at once like great wings which make
the Bucentoro move most maiesticaly. And this is all that I can remember in
this Arsenal, except the Cellar of Wine, and the great rooms, (as I came out)
where women only are employed in mending old sails; and men (a part) in
making great cables: and indeed those wast Anchors which lie near the wooden
bridge here at the entrance, stand in need of cables of the greatest size.

The Assensa.
10. I happened to be at Venice thrice, at the great Sea Triumph, or feast of
the Ascension, which was performed thus. About our eight in the morneing, the
Senators in their scarlat robes, meet at the Doges Palace, and there taking
him up, they walk with him processionaly unto the shore, wete the Bucentoro
lies waiting them; the Popes Nuncio being upon his right hand, and the
Patriarch of Venice, on his left hand. Then ascending into the Bucentoro, by a
hansome bridge thrown out to the shore, the Doge takes his place, and the
Senators sit round about the Gallie as they can, to the number of two, or three
hundred. The Senate being placed, the anchor is weighed, and the slaves being
warned by the Capitains whistle and the sound of trumpets, begin to strike all
at once with their oars, and to make the Bucentoro march as gravely upon the
water, as if she also went upon cioppini. Thus they steer for two miles upon
the Laguna, while the music plays, and sings Epithalamiums all the way long,
and makes Neptune jealous to hear Hymen called upon in his dominions. Round
about the Bucentoro flock a world of Piottas and Gondolas, richly covered
ouerhead with somptuous Canopies of silks and rich stuffs, and rowed by
watermen in rich liueryes, as well as the Trumpeters. Thus foreign Ambassadors,
diverse noblemen of the country, and strangers of condition wait upon the Doges
gallie all the way long, both comeing and going. At last the Doge being arrived
at the appointed place, throws a Ring into the Sea, without any other ceremony,
then by saying: Desponsamus te, Mare; in signum perpetui dominij: we espouse
thee, o Sea, in testimony of our perpetual dominion over thee: and so returns
to the Church of S. Nicolas in Lio (an Island hard by) where he assists at high
Mass with the Senate. This done, he returns home again in the same state; and
inuites those that accompanied him in his Gally, to dinner in his palace: the
prepatiues of which dinner we saw before the Doge was got home. This ceremony
of marrying the Sea, as they call it, is ancient, and performed yearly in
memory of the grant of Pope Alexander the III, who being restored by the
Venetians unto his Seat again, granted them power over the Andriatick Sea, as
a man has power over his wife; and the Venetians to keep this possession, make
every year this watery Caualcata. I confess, this sight is stately, and a
Poe^t would presently conceive, that Neptune himself were going to be married
to some Nereide.

11. Having seen this Ceremony in the morneing, we went after dinner to see the
Evening Corso at Murano, The Corso at Murano.
where we saw those fine Gondolas and Piottas, which we had seen waiting upon
the Doge in the morneing, now rowing in state up and down the great Canale of
Murano to the sound of Trumpets; and with all the force of the brauny watermen
that row them. Sometimes meeting too thick in the arches of the wooden bridge
here, they crack one an others Gondalas, breack one an others oars, ouerturne
their boatmen, and are stoppt for an hour together without being able to
vntangle. Ambassadors themselves of Foreign Princes appear in Corso this
evening with all their bravery (five or six Gondolas all in one livery) as well
as all the gallants and gentry of Venice, who appear here this evening at
Corso.

12. The next morneing no sooner appeared, The Fair
but new sights appeared too, and now upon land, and the Scene was S. Marks
place, where the Fair opening this day, and lasting for ten days, drew all
the gallants of Venice to come and behold all the gallantry and riches that
either domestic, or foreign marchands could set forth to sale. But the most
part of the young Ladies that came to see the Fair, came in an odd dress, with
a false nose, and a little beard of black wool, disguiseing their mouth and
nose: so that they could see all the Fair, and be known to no body. Thus they
go often to marriages, and other assemblyes when they have no mind to be known.

S. Georges.
13. Having thus seen these foresaid sights, we went on with visiting the other
things in the town. and one day we went to the Island of S. George Major, where
we saw a stately Monastery, Church, Cloister and Garden, which take up this
whole Island. The Church is one of the best in Venice, and built by Palladio the
famours Architect. In the Church I was shown the great silver Lamp, as great
as two men could carry. In a pillar of marble standing over a side Altar I was
shown the picture of a Crucifixe, which was discovered, at the polishing of
this stone, to have been naturally in the Vain of the marble. In the
Refectory, I saw an admirable picture of the supper of Cana in Galilaea, made
by Guido Rheni. I visited it often, and could never satiate my eyes with such a
rare piece. It takes up the whole end of the great Refectory.

14. The Palace of Signore Nani.
From thence we rowed to the Palace of Procuratore Nani which stands in an
Island beyond S. Georges. The Palace is richly furnished with the true pictures
of many modern Princes and Ladys of France, England, and Germany. This
Palace, has one strange thing belonging to it, beyond the Palaces of Venice:
to wit, a neat garden, for Gardens in Venice, are as wonderful things, as
Coaches: and I cannor remember, that looking upon the whole city from the top
of the high Steeple, I saw two places where there were any green trees. But the
best thing that I saw here, was the Procuratore Nani himself, the greatest
Ornament of the Venetian Senate, whose learned pen has already given us an
exellent history of Venice.

15. The Capucins.
From hence we walked to the Capucins Convent which is in the same Island, and
Church neately built, and far above the rate of Capucins; but it was a Vow of
the Senate in time of the plague; and they regarded more, in building it, their
own honor, then the Capucins simplicity.

Madonna di Salute.
16. From hence returning again toward the town, we steered our Gondola to
the Church of Madonna di Salute, a new round Church, vowed by the State in
another plague time, and likely to be one of the finest Churches in Venice when
it shall be ended. In the Sacristy I saw a rare picture of a feast by Tintoret;
and others in the roof by Titian.

La Carita.
17. From hence We went to the Church of the Canon Regulars, called La Carita,
in whose Monastery Pope Alexander the III, lay hid privately like a poor
Chaplain of this Church, unknown to the Very Fathers of this Place, till at
last he was discovered by a Devout Pilgrim, who haueing seen him often in Rome,
and hearing him say Mass here, discovered him to the Senate; and so, he was
both acknowledged by the Senate, and defended by them, as we said above. Over
the entrance of the Quire, is seen the picture of Alexander the III receiving
the Emperor Federick to the kissing of his feet, by the means of the Doge of
Venice, who stands by. Here Is also a good picture of our Saviors raising up
Lazarus again to life: its of the hand af Bassan.

28. An other time I went to the Dominicans Church, called S. Giuanne and
Paulo, Ss. Giouanne and Paulo.
where I found among the Tombestones, that of the Lord Henry Aubigni (second
brother to the Duke of Lenox and Richemond) who dyed here in his travels.
Before the door of this Church stands the Equestris statue in brass guilt of
Bart^lomeo Coleone Bargamense a great Commander, to whom (as the words bear,
ob militare imperium optime gestum) the Senate decreed this statue to be
erected. The Tabernacle and Altar are very stately. The Chapel of S. Hyacinth,
and the miracles of this Saint are of the hand Bassan and Palmarino. the
Martyrdom of S. John and Paul is a Masterpeece of the hand of Titian. The
Convent also of S. John and Paul is one of the most stately ones in Italy. The
Refector^ is famous for painting.

S. Saluatore.
19. The Church of S. Saluatore is a fair Church, and well adorned with neat
Tombs of diverse Doges and great persons. Upon the back of the High Altar is
seen a picture of the Transfiguration, of the hand of Titian: Upon an Altar on
the right hand of the Wall, is a picture of the Annuntiation, under which
Titian wrote these words, Titianus fecit, fecit, to assure men by this double
affirmative, that it was a good piece, worth his twice owneing. There Is an other
picture of the Last Supper, made by Titians master. Upon the Epistle side of
the High Altar stands a little Chapel, over whose Altar is the Tomb of S.
Theodorus with his body in it. He is one of the Patrons of this town.

S. Chrysostom.
20. In the Church of S. Chrysostom I saw upon a side Altar on the left hand,
the statues in stone of our Savior and his twelve Apostles, neatly cut by
Tullius Lombardus, whose rare statues adorn also S. Antonyes Tomb at Padua.
His statues are easily known by the neat hands.

21. In the Church of the Apostoli I saw a rare picture of S. Lucie, but now
somewhat old.

22. In the Church of the Jesuits I saw the Tomb of S. Barbara Virgin and
Martyr.

23. In the Domo (the Cathedral of Venice, The Domo.
but standing much out of the way) I saw little considerable but the Tomb of
S. Laurentius Iustinianus, a holy man, a great Preacher, and the first
Patriarch of Venise; the Patriarchal seat of Grado, being removed hither in his
time.

24. I saw also the Church of S. Iacomo, S. Iacomo.
the first Church that was built in Venice, and built twelve hundred years ago
in the infancy of Venice, as an old inscription here told me. Here are some
good pictures of Lanfrancus, and Marcus Titianus, old Titians nephew and
scholar.

The Greeks Church.
25. And being in Venice upon S. Georges day (the 23. of April) we went to the
Greek Church, I mean to the Greek schismatics Church, which is dedicated to
God in honor of S. George, and therefore this day was one of their greatest
solemnityes. Their ceremonies and Service differed little from the Catholics
Greeks: and if any one desire to know their tenants, and how near they come to
the Roman Catholics, let him read a book in a thin folio printed at Wittemberg
an: 1584. under this title, Acta and scripta Theologorum Wittembergensium and
Hieremiae Patriarchae.

The Jews Synagogue
26. We went after diner one Satturday, to see the Jews Synagogue. Among other
things I heard here a Rabbin make a Homily to his flock. He looked like a
French Minister, or Puritanical Lecturer, in short cloak and hat. The
snaffling through the nose made all the edification that I saw in it: It was
in Italian, but the coldest discourse that I ever heard in any language. Indeed
it was their Sabbath day, and they eat no other meat that day, but cold meat.

27. The Glass houses at murano.
An other day we went to Murano again, to see the glass houses which furnish
amost all Europe with drinking glasses, and all our Ladies cabinets with
Looking glasses. They utter here fot two hundred thousand crowns worth a year
of this brickle ware; and they seem to have taken measure of every nations
belly and humor, to sit them with drinking glasses accordingly* For the High
Dutch, they have high glasses, called Flutes, a full yard long, which a men
cannot drink up alone, except his man, or some other, hold up the foot of this
more then two handed glass. For the English that love toasts with their drink,
they have curious tankards of thick crystal glass, just like our silver
tankards. For the Italians that love to drink leasurely, they have glasses that
are almost as large and flat as silver plats, and almost as un easy to drink
out of. And so for other nations. In one shop they were making a set of
glasses for the Emperor, of five crowns every glass: They were drinking
glasses with high couers made like spread eagles, and finely guilt. Sometimes to
show their art, they make here pretty things. One made a ship in glass, with
all her tacklings, gunns, masts, sails, and streamers. An other made an Organ
in glass three cubits high, so justly contrived, that by blowing into it, and
touching the stopps it sounded musically. A third made a perfect Castle, with
all its Fortifications, ramparts, Cannons, Sentry houses, and gates. Here also
I saw them make those vast Looking glasses, whose brickleness shows Ladies
themselves, more then their reflection does. In fine, in Murano you see the
Palace of signor Camillo Treuisano with the rare garden and fountains a la
Romana.

The shops.
28. After this, we went up and down the town of Venice, sometimes a foot, to
see better the Shops, as those of silks, clothes of gold; of Books, and the
Apothecaryes shops, where I saw them make their famous Treacle: sometimes in
gondola, to View over and over again, the Canale grande, and the brave
Palaces which hemme it in on bothsides: sometimes entering into the best of
those palaces, The Palaces.
to see their rich furniture and contriuances. The best are, of Iustiniani,
Mocenigo, Grimant, Priuli, Contarini, Foscoli, Loredano, Gussoni, and Cornaro.

29. Then I enquired what learned men had adorned Venice, The Learned Men.
and I found these to have been the chief, Laurentius Iustinianus, Hermolaus
Barbarus, Petrus Bembus, Aloysius Lippomanus, Paulus Paruta, Baptista Egnatius,
Ludouicus Dolce, Paulus Manutius, with diverse others. I saw some years ago the
noble and ingenious Loredano, whose witty books make him famous over all the
Academyes of Italy and Europe. As also the Procuratore Nani, whose excellent
History has got him immortal fame.

The Academy of wits.
30. Here Is an Academy of wits called Incogniti, and for their arms, they have
the river Nilus, with this motto; Incognito, e pur noto: unknown, and yet
famous.

The Historians.
He that desires to know the history of Venice, let him read Andrea Morasini,
Paolo Paruta, Sabellico, Bernardino Tomasino, Corid^, and Nani.

Having thus seen all Venice, over and over again, in a months stay there, I
was most willing to leave it; having found it true of Venice, what Socrates
said of Athens, that is was melior meretrix, quam uxor; a fine town for a
fortnight; but not to dwell in always; The Defects of Venice.
and this, by reason of some stinking channels; bad cellers for wine; worse
water; and the moist air of the Sea not the most wholesome; scarcity of earth
even to bury their dead in; and little fuel for fireing. So that findeing the
four elements wanting here in their purity, I was willing to leave these
polished Holanders, and return to Padua.

Padua*
Padua is the second town of the Venetian State, though once the Mother of
Venice. Its old enough to be mother of Rome it self; haueing been built by
Antenor, whose Tomb is yet seen here. The town is very great, and fuller of
good houses, then of men of condition: taranny, and too frequent murders
haueing much depopulated it, in point of nobility. It stands in the Marca
Treuigiana. The walls about it are strong, and backed up with fine ramparts. It
lies near the Euga^ian hills, in a fertile soil, and plain, which makes the
Proverb say: Bologna la grassa, ma Padua la passa. Its famous for the study of
Physic, as many of our thrice worthy Physicians in England can testify. The
chief things I observed in it are these.

1. Antenors Tomb.
Antenors Tomb, with Gotick letters upon it: which makes me doubt whether this
Tomb be so ancient as they make it.

2. The public Schools, called here Il Bue, or Ox; what if the first Readers
here came from Oxford, as they did to the University of Pauia?

3. The Physic garden, to acquaint the Students in Physic, with the nature of
simples.

S. Antonies Church.
4. The Church of S. Antony of Padua, whose body lies in the open Chapel on the
left hand; and this Chapel is adorned with curious figures of white marble
representing the chief actions of this Saints life. Under the Altar reposeth
his body* and before it, hang some 27 great Lamps of silver, or silver guilt.
Oueragainst this Chapel, stands just such another open Chapel, called, the
Chapel of San Felice, which is rarely painted by famous Giotto, who made the
Campanile of Florence. In a side Chapel on the right hand, is the tomb of
brave Gatta Mela, whose true name was Erasmo di Narni, of whom more by and by.
The Tomb of Alexander Contareno General of the Venetians, and it is one of the
best cut tombs I have seen: Its fastened to a side pillar. The Quire of this
Church is all of inlayd wood* In the Cloister of the Convent are seen many
tombs of learned men: and in that quarter of the cloister, which lies upon the
Church, I found written upon a black marble stone, these words: Interiora
Thomae Howardi Comitis Arondeliae: The bowels of the Earl of Arondel, late
Lord Marschal of England. No wonder if his bowels be enchased in marble after
his death, who in his life time, loved marbles con todas sus entranias, with
his whole bowels. His Marmora Arondeliana, commented upon by learned Mr.
Seldom, show this sufficiently. This great man dyed here in Padua, and yet in a
manner at home; because he had made Italy familiar to him while he lived at
home.

5. Going out of this Church I saw the Equestris Statue of Gatta Mela, the
Venetians General, whose tomb I saw even now in the Church. He was nicknamed
Gatta, because of his watchfulness in carryeing business.

6. The Church of S. Iustina is one of the finest Churches of Italy; S.
Iustinas Church and Monastery.
and no wonder, seeing its architect was Palladio. Under the High Altar of this
Church, lies buried the body of S. Iustina. The fine Cupolas; the curious
Pauement of red and black marble; the rich High Altar all of pietre commesse;
the curious seats in the Quire, with the historyes of the old and new Testament
cut in wood in them; the fine picture at the end of the Quire, over the Abbots
Seat, containing the martyrdom of S. Iustina, by the hand of Paolo Veronese;
the Tomb of S. Luke the Evangelist; and that of S. Matthias; the Well, full of
Relics; and the Tomb of S. Prosdochimus S. Peter's disciple, and first Bishop
of Padua, do all make this Church very considerable. Before this Church and
Monastery, lies the Campo Santo, and a fair field where they keep monthly a
mercato franco, and where the evening Corso is kept, by Ladies and noblemen in
their coaches in summer.

7. The Monastery here is also one of the fairest in Italy, and the second of
that Order. The painted cloister, the neat Library, and the picture of S.
Iustina in the Abbats chamber, made by Paolo Veronese, are all worth your
curiosity. The Domo is not so well built, as it is endowed with rich
prebendaries. A hundred thousand cownes a year go to the maintenance of a
hundred Cleigy men, and officers belonging to it. The Prebends are 27, and
ordinarily gentlemen.

28. The Palace of the Capitano Grande is stately without: here stands the
curious Library.

9. The great Hall called here, The great Hall.
Il Palagio di Ragione, is a vast room 180 paces long, and 40 broad, without
pillars. It has four great doors to it, and over every door the Statue of a
learned Paduan. This Hall is also painted in the roof with astronomical
figures, representing the influences of the superior bodies over the inferior.
At one end of it you see a round stone, with these words written about it,
Lapis opprobrij, The stone of disgrace, upon which whosoever will sit
publicly, and declare him self not to be soluendo, cannot be clapped up in
prison for debt. At the other end of this Hall stands Liuys Head in white
marble, and out of a little back door there, joining to the wall of this Hall,
stands Liuyes busto in stone, with this Epitaphe under it in old Gothic
letters; Ossa Titi Liuij Patauini vnius omnium mortalium iudicio digni, cujus
prope inuicto calamo inuicti Populi Romani res gestae conscriberentur.

S. Augustino.
10. The picture of the High Altar in the Augustins Church, made by Guido Rheni;
and that of S. John Baptist in the Sacristy, of the same hand, are both
exquisitly well done.

11. The ruins of an old amphitheater are seen hard by the Augustins Church.
L'Arena.
There Is now a house built upon the place, yet the Court is ouall still, and
carries the name of Arene. Here they tilt, and use other sports of Caualry.

S. Dominico.
12. In the Dominicans Church there is a very stately High Altar of pietre
commesse. Behind the Altar (in the Quire) are the neat Tombs of the Carari,
once Signors and Princes of Padua, till they were put out by the Venetians.

13. S. Francesco.
In the Church of San Francesco Grande I saw a curious Altar of white polished
marble, which pleased me vety much, and the tombs of Caualcante and Longolio.

14. In the little neat Church of the Oratorians, called the Church of S.
Thomas of Canterbury, S. Thomaso di Cantuaria.
lies buried the Lady Katherine Whitenhall, in a vault made for the nonce, and
covered with a white marble stone. She was daughter to the late Earl of
Shrewsbury, and wife to the Noble and Virtuous Thomas Whitenhall Esquire. If
you would know more of her, read here the ingenious Epitaphe written upon her
tomb, and made by her sad husband. For my part, having had the honor to see
her often in her Travels, I cannot but make honorable mention of her here in
mine; She haueing so much honored my profession of Traueling by her generous
humor of Traueling. She was as nobly borne as the house of Shrewbury could
make her: as comely, as if Poets had made her. Her behavior was such, that if
she had not bien noble by birth, she would have passed for such by her
carriage. Her good qualityes were so many, that if they had been taken in
pieces, they would have made several women Noble, and Noble women happy. She
was wise beyond her years; stout above her sex; and worthy to have found in
the world all things better then she did, except her Parents and Husband. Her
only fault was that, which would have made up other Ladies praises, too much
courage; which befell her with the name of Talbo^. But whilst her only courage
haled her on to journeys above her sex and force (haueing seen Flanders,
France, and Italy, accompanied by her noble Husband, and a hansome train) In
her return back; like a tall ship, comeing laden home and fraughted with
precious acquisitions of mind, she sunck almost in the haven, and, alas! Dyed.

15. Here are two Academies of wits; The Academies of wits.

The learned Men.


the one called Gli Ricouerati: the other, Gli Infiammati.

The most famous men of Padua for learning, were these, Liuy, Apponius, Paulus
the Iurisconsult, Sperone Speroni, Antonius Querenchus, Iacobus Zabarella: and
Titian the famous Painter.

He that desires to know the History of Padua, The Historians.
let him read Angelo Portinari delle felicitade di Padua: Antonio Riccobono, de
Gymnasio Patauino, and de eius praeclaris doctoribus: as also the book called
Gl'Origini di Padua.

Having thus seen Padua, we steered toward Milan again, to make the complete
gyr^ of Italy. The first days journey was to Vicenza, Vicenza.
a fine town belonging to the Venetians, and standing upon the two rivers of
Bachilione, and Rerone. Here we saw, the neat Townehouse and large piazza: the
house and fine garden of Count Valmerana, with the curious Labyrinth in the
garden: the Arcus Triumphalis made by Palladio at the towns end, letting you
into a fair field called the Champo Marzo, where Ladies and Caualiers, in great
store, meet at the Corso in their coaches every summer Evening: the admirable
Theater The Theater.
for plays and Operas; it was made also by rare Palladio, and is capable of
three thousand people, who may all sit, and see with conueniency. The fine
palaces here, and those full of people of condition.

The Academy of ^its.

The Histo^ians.


Here Is an Academy of wits called Gl'Olympici,

He that desires to know the History of Vicenza, let him read Iacomo Marzari,
and Alfonso Loschi.

From Vicenza we went to Verona, called Verona la Nobile, belonging to the
Venetians also. It standt in excellent air, Verona.
and no man ever saw it but liked it. Its watered with the river Addesis, which
comeing out of Germani, runns by Trent and so to Verona. Hence this town
abounds with good provisions, wines, and rich merchants: Which makes me of
opinion, that Verona would be a bettet summer town for strangers to live in,
then Padua. The things that I saw here, were these: The three Castles, which
with the new bulworks make this town able to defend it self against any enemy.

2. The Cathedral, or Domo, ancient rather then stately. In it is buried Pope
Lucius the III, with this ingenious Epitaphe upon his tomb: Luca dedit lucem
tibi, Luci, Pontificatum
Ostia, Papatum Roma, Verona mori.
Imo Verona dedit tibi Lucis gaudia, Roma
Exilium, curas Ostia, Luca mori.


3. The famous tomb of the Signori della Scala, who once were Masters here,
and from whom Joseph and Julius Scaliger pretend to have comne. This tomb is
seen from the Street, and is much esteemed for its height and structure.

4. In the Monastery of S. George, the rate picture of S. George made by Paolo
Veronese, for which the late Lord Marschal of England offered two thousand
pistols.

5. The Amphitheater*
The rare Am^hitheater, built at first by the Consul Flaminius, and repaired
since by the townsmen; and now the most entire amphitheater in Europe.

Here Is also an Academy of wits called Gli Philarmonici. The Academy of wits.


The famousest men for learning here, The learnmened.
were these: Zeno Veronensis, an ancient Father and great Preacher. Cornelius
Nepos, Pliny the sec^nd, Catullus According to that, Mantua Virgilio gaudet,
Verona Ca^ullo. Fracastorius, Onuphrius Panuinus, Paulus Aemilius the
historian: Francesco Pona; Al^ysius Nouarinus; and Paolo Veronese, the
ingenious Painter.

Near Verona, upon the Plains before you come to the town, was fought a
famous battle, where C. Marius defeated the Cimbers. Near this town also was
fought a famous battle between Theoderick and Odeacer, where the latter was
defeated.

He that desires to know the history of Verona, let him read Torello Saraina,
The Historians.
Girolamo di Corte Compendio dell Istoria di Verona; and the Antiquitates
Veronenses of Onuphrius Panvinus.

From Verona we went to Brescia by the way of Peschiera and Disensan^.
Peschiera is a strong Fort belonging to the Venetians, Peschiera.
and guarded by a constant garrison. It stands upon the Lago di Garda, Lago di
Garda.
Lacus Benacus anciently, and is almost surrounded by its Crystalin waters. Its
a most Regular Fortification, with five Bastions, and high Rampar^s, which
cover the whole town.

Disenzano is a little town upon the Lake of Garda also. Disenzano
Here they have excellent fish, and Vine; that is, rare Carpioni, and
muscatello, which they call Vino Santo.

From hence after dinner, we arrived betimes at Brescia, Brescia.
another strong town of the Venetians. We saw here the Castle; the Town
house; neat Churches; the ramparts and walls of the town; the crystalin Brooks
running through the streets; and the shops of the gunnsmiths, especially that
of famous Lazarino Comminazzo.

The best Historians of the Brescian affairs, is Ottauio Rossi, The History.
in his book called Memoria Br^scianae.

From Brescia I went once to Crema and Bergamo, Crema.
two strong towns of the Venetians, and both frontiers to the State of Milan.
The first is very strong and famous for fine linen made here. Bergamo.
The latter is strong too, both by its Castle, good walls, and its high
situation upon a hill, which gives you a fair prospect into the Milanese for
twenty or thirty miles. In the Church of the Augustins lies buried Ambrosius
Calepinus author of the excellent Latin Dictionary, which learned Passeratius
has set out since with great additions. Its in six languages.

From Bergamo I went to Milan, one days journey. An other time I went from
Brescia to Milan by the way of Mantua, and Mirandola.

Mantua.
Mantua belongs to a Sovereign Duke, or Prince, of the house of Gonsague. Its
stands in the midst of Marshes which are nurrished by the river Mincius: so
that there is no coming to it but by two long bridges over the Lake. And yet this
town was taken some forty years ago: no town being impregnable where an Ass
laden with gold can enter; or where faction keeps one gate. For about that
time, the Emperors Army, by secret intelligence, presenting it self before it,
was let in; and sacked the town. At the entrance of the town gates, they
observe the fashion of many other towns in Italy, to make Trauelers leave
their pistols and carabins at the gate where they enter, and not see them
again till they meet them at the other gate where they go out; giueing them,
for all that, a contrasegno or little talley, where of you keep one piece, and
the other is tied to your pistols, where by you may claim and challenge them.
This is an ancient custom in the Romans times, as I find in Valerius Maximus,
who says, it was the practice of those of Marseilles (then a Roman Colonie) vt
hospitia sua, Valor. Maxim. l. 2. c. 1.
quemadmodum aduenientibus humana sunt, ita ipsis tuta sint. As for Mantua it
self, its well built, and full of good houses. The Dukes Palace was heretofore
one of the richest of Italy. I was told that it had seven changes of hangings
for every room in the house; besides a world of rare pictures, Statues, plate,
ornaments, cabinets, an Unicorns horn, an Organ of Alabaster; six tables, each
one three foot long, the first all of emerauds, the second of Turkey stones, the
third of hyacinths, the fourth of Saphirs, the fifth of Amber, the sixth of
Jasper stone. But the Imperialists swept all away. The origin of the house of
Gonsague is from Germany. The Dukes Family.
For a long time they were only Marquises of Mantua, till Charles the V. made
them Dukes. The Revenues of this Prince are about five hundred thousand
crowns. His Revenues.

His Interest.


His Interest (as that of the other lesser Princes of Italy) is to join with
the stronger of the two Nations France, or Spain. And he has bine often
forced to put now and then a French ga^rison, now and then a Spanish garrison
into his strong town of Casal, Casal.
one of the strongest places I saw in all Italy: His strenth.
having an excellent Citadel at one end of it; a strong Castle at the other,
and strong ditches, walls, and ramparts every where. In fine, this Duke can
raise, about fifteen thousand foot, and two thousand horse.

Of Mantua were these two excellent Latin Poets; old Virgil, its Learned Mem.
and modern Baptista Mantuanus a Carmelit.

He that desires to know the history of Mantua, Its History.
let him read Mario Aquicola.

From Mantua we went to Mirandola, Mirandola
being invited thither by its wonderful name. It is a principality far more
ancient then great; and it is so called, from Three children borne here of a
great Lady, Franciscus Pius. Leander Albatus.
at one birth. The story as it is pretty, so it is related by good authors, and
therefore I will give it you here, in the end of this my Italian journey, as a
fair well. And it is this. Constantius the Emperor, Son of Constantin the
great, had a daughter called Euridis; who being grown up in years, fell in
love with Manfred a courtier of her Uncle Constantin, a hansome well bred young
gentleman. Manfred was both courtier enough, and wise enough, to understand
this to be no small honor; and therefore embraced her affection with a
corresponding flame. In a word, they meet often; talk of it; give mutual
promises; make all the money they can, and jewels, and fly away secretly. They
come into Italy, land at Naples, from thence to Rauenna; and at last pitch upon
this country where now Mirandula stands. It was then a place ouerspred with
thickets and underwoods, and furnishing some pasturage for sheep, and cottages
for shepherds. Here then they choose to live privately and converse with none
but country swains, and shepherds. Blind love whither do thou hurrey,
Princesses, to make them prefer cottages before Courts? At last with their
money they buy land, and Manfred grows Soon to that authority among his
neighbors, that they choose him for their Head; and recurre unto him, upon all
occasions for his advise and protection: In the mean time (haueing solemnly
married Euridis at his arriual in Italy) she brings him forth three sonns at
once, Picus, Pius, and Papazzo; and Manfred grows far more considerable
daily in these parts. At last the Emperor Constantius comeing into Italy upon
his accasions, and being complimented by all the several provinces thereof,
this Province among the rest, chose Manfred as their Ambassador to the said
Emperor, to carry to him the tender of their respects and homage. Manfred
accepted of the employment, and carried himself so gallantly in the Embassy,
that the Emperor knighted him, and upon further trial of his worth, raised him
to high favor. Manfred seeing the realityes of the Emperor, thought it now high
time to discover himself unto him. Whereforecasting himself one day at the
Emperors feet, and begging his pardon, he discovered himself unto him, and told
him his whole story, and adventures. At fitst the Emperor was a little
troubled; but findeing such freedom and gallantry in his carriage, mingled
with such humble ingenuity in the Confession of his fault; he not only
pardoned what was past, but presently sent for Euridis and her children to come
to him, and live at court with him. This done he makes Manfred Count and
Marquis, of a great part of these countries, and gives him leave to build
towns and Castles there: and for his arms gives him the black Eagle. In fine,
in memory of the three children borne so wonderfully at one birth, he commands
that the chief town thould be called Miranda. After the death of Constantius,
Manfred and his Lady returned with great riches unto their old dwellind place,
and there began to build Miranda, which in process of time was called
Mirandola. This true story if it look like a Romance, you must not wonder;
seeing Romances now a days, look like true stories.

The Prince of Mirandola receives yearly fourscore thousand crowns.

The greatest ornament of this country, was that famours Ioannes Picus
Mirandulanus; Io Picus Miranduilanus.
whose life S. Thomas Moore wrote, and having written it, lived it.

From Mirandula I struck to Parma, and so to Piacenza, Lodi, and Marigno,
described all above; and at last to Milan again, where I had been before, and
where my giro of Italy ended, as now my Journey and description does. I taking
here a new rise from Milan, and crossing through Swisserland by the Lake of
Como, and over mount S. Godart, came to Basil. Where embarking upon the Rhene,
I saw Strasbourg, Brisac, Spire, Philipsbourg, Openhem, Coblentz, Hamerstede,
Worms, Francfurt, Mayence, Colen, Dusseldorp, Skinksconce, Raise, Wesel,
Arnehem and diverse such fine Rhenish towns. Then haueing Viewed Holand and
Flanders, I came at last to Calais, and so home to my own Dear Country
England, by the way of Dover.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE NAMES OF THE CHIEF TOWNS Contained in this second part.
A.
ADria. 361 Albano. 306 Amiclae. 259 Ancona. 350 Assisium. 321 Auersa. 269
B.
Baiae. 297 Bergamo. 440 Brecia. 439
C.
Caeta. 263 Capua. 268 Campania. 267 Carigliano, River. 266 Casal. 442
Catholica. 352 Ceraualle. Cesena. 355 Crema. 339 Cuma. 303
D.
Disensano. 439
E.
Elisian fields* 298
F.
Faenza. 356 Fano. 351 Ferrara. 357 Foligni. 321 Forli. 355 Formiae. 262 Fossa
Noua. 259 Firscati. 307 Fundi. 260
G.
Gandulfo. 307 Grotta dell Cane. 292 Grotta di Posilipo* 290
K.
Kingdom of Naples. 207 Kingdom of Cyprus: 373
L.
La Laguna. 362 Lacus Auernus. 302 Lago di garda. 439 Loreto. 322
M.
Macerata. 322 Mantua. 44^ Marino. 259 Minturna. 266 Mirandola. 443 Mola. 262
Mons Massicus. 267 Monte Falco. 321 Monte Garo. 267 Murano. 423
N.
Naples. 269 Narni. 318
P.
Padua. 426 Palma noua. 575 Pansilipus Mt. 290 Peperno. 259 Pesaro. 352
Peschiera. 438 Puzzolo. 296
R.
Recanata. 322 Rimini. 354 Rome. 3 etc. Ruigo. 361 Rubicon, Riv* 355
S.
Senegallia. 351 Spoleto. 319 Sulphatara. 295
T.
Taracina. 259 Terni. 319 Tiber, Riv. 318 Tiuoli. 313 Tolentino* 321 Tres
Tabernae. 259
V.
Veletri. 259 Venice. 363 etc. Verona. 436 Vesuuius, Mt. 284 Via Appia. 261 Via
Flaminia. 317 Vicenza. 435

