A LASH For the Parable-Makers, Under the Allegory of APES and MONKEYS.
NAY then, cried one Grave Pug to another, why may not the Monkeys and Apes be
allowed to prate and chatter as well as the Bulls and the Bears, and the
Mastiff-Cur^? I know no reason at all against it, quo' the the other Pug; for of
all Beasts under the Sun, a Monkey is the nearest Resemblance of Man, and the
greatest Imitator of his Actions. It Is very true, Brother Pug, quo' the first
Monkey, I have heard 'em call one another Ape's-Faces, and Monkey-Faces, and
twit one another with their Monkey-Tricks a thousand times. And, by my Troth,
under the Rose be it spoken, I think there are some of 'em, and those not a
few, greater Imitators of Us than we are of Them: For as Worms in their Tongues
make Puppies mad; so Maggots in their Pates make Men Apish. By the Bones of my
deceased Mother Dame Quinaude, there it is then, cried the second Pug; for I
have been a great looker of Men's Heads in my time; and as I can see through a
Millstone as far as another; I have peeped into their Sculls, and have seen
Worms crawling in their Brains as long as my Tail. But all this while, I am of
opinion, that these sort of Men are wiser than we; for who among us can pretend
to Knowledge, and Learning, and Philosophy, nay, and Divinity too, as they do?
That Is for want of Education, Brother Pug, quo' the first Monkey. I am a Dog of
a Monkey if I don't believe, that if I had been bred at the Versity, as they
call it, I could have strutted it as conceitedly as some of these
Parable-Mongers that I have observed about the Streets. Preferment and
Education alter the Monkey as well as the Man: And therefore when our Brother
Jackanapes came to be preferred to be Gentleman Usher to the Bears, he became
his Horse as well as some Knights. Now then, Brother Pug, you cannot but know
there are a great number of Apes and Monkeys about this Town, under several
Masters and Mistresses here and there, that chatter any thing for Bread; and
therefore do thee but go and set up a Coffee-House in some eminent Street of
the City, (I Will warrant thee Custom enough) and then thou shall see whether we
have lost the strength of our Imaginations or no. By the Mass, Brother Pug,
quo' the second Monkey, I like your Advice; for there is good Profit to be got
by a Coffee-House amongst our Brother Monkeys, if I can keep my Brethren from
breaking my Pipes and Dishes; and I long to be one of your Rich Monkeys: I have
known some of your Rich Monkeys have come to be Masters of their Companies. But
have my Brethren any Money in their Pockets? Oh -- never fear it, quo' the
first Pug; did you never hear of Ape's Money? It Is such as your Alsatia-Men pay
their Creditors with.

The second Pug thus inflated with his Brother's Encouragements, presently got
him a House, furnished it with Tobacco-Pipes, Dishes, and Wax-Candles, Coffee,
Tea, Mum, Ale, etc. and then set up his Sign with this Motto on the one side,
Aujourdhuy Seigneur, domain Singe -- on the other, Tout pass par ses Tripes,
comme par le Cul du Singe.

And now to see the luck on it; no sooner had he opened his Doors, but in comes
a Spruce Monkey, and called for the News-Letter; where he had not read above a
dozen Lines, but he was followed by a Black Monkey, with a little plain Band,
who clapping down just against the Spruce Monkey, This Coffee-Monkey, quo' he,
must certainly have a great Trade, if all the Monkeys, Apes, and Baboons in the
Town resort to his House. If they don't, quo' the Spruce Monkey, they are very
disobliging to one of their own kind. But I wonder how he will do to engage the
Cercopitheculi; ^udolphus Hist. Ethiop. l. 1. c. 10.
for though they are altogether like us in Shape, yet they are quite of another
Temper, and vary from us both in Conditions and Opinions. We are, as all the
World knows, Wicked and Mischievous, to the Perdition of all that comes near
us; they Gentle and Harmless; and for the Beauty of their outward Shape, and
Integrity of their inward good Qualities, highly caressed and taken care of by
their Great Master and Preserver Augustus. But let the Cercopitheculi go where
they please; there are certainly Apes and Monkeys enough to do one Monkey's
Business. Well, Sir, quo' the Black Monkey, ( viz. one of the wicked
Blackbirds) What d^ ye hear of News from our Chief Master the great French Ape?
Is the Monkey Tyrconnel landed in Ireland, with Succors from the great French
Baboon, as they say he is?

Rot these Baboons of News-Mongers, quo the Spruce Monkey; they say nothing as
yet of the matter, and yet to my knowledge they have a Sallary from us Apes and
Monkeys, to write the News in favor of the French Ape, Cudds Fish, these
Baboons of News-mongers have not the right stroke at invention; I Would be bound
to be chok'd with rotten Figs, if I did not make more and better every hour of
the day. I Will forfeit my Tail close to my Buttocks, if I don't raise a Hundred
Thousand Men on one side, and a Hundred Thousand a the other, and make which
Party I please get the Victory, in ten Minutes and three Seconds. Here Is a do
indeed with Winter Quarters and Campaigns -- when they are out ye can hardly get
'em in again; and when they are in ye can hardly get 'em out again; and thus
they spend the Winter and Summer to little or no purpose. Ask for the Gazette,
and every body cries, there is nothing in it, but Hue and Cries after lost
Horses, Gray Hounds, and Lap-Dogs. I Would have nothing, Lippis and Tonsoribus
notum, but still Fresh and New, Fresh and New, as May-Butter out of the Churn.

With that, Fresh and New! quo' a two-handed Baboon, that sat at the upper end
of the Table, wrapped up in Smoke, like Ixion in a Cloud, why, I Will undertake to
tell ye all the News of this next Year before hand -- In March the Great French
Baboon will pour into Ireland an Army of Forty Thousand of his choicest
Baboons; and upon the 1st of April his Fleet will put to Sea, and if they find
the Cercopitheculi out before, then they will go in again. In May the French
Baboons will regain Ireland; and in June the French Ape shall land either at
Lyme or Melcomb, and sweep all before him, like an Ostler's Broom. For to my
certain knowledge, the Emperor is resolved to make a Peace with the Great
French Baboon, and then the Confederates may go whistle -- Nay, if this Frost
hold long enough, I question, my dear Brethren of the long Tail, whether
Amsterdam and the Hague be so safe as they think they are -- Which put the Apes
and Monkeys into such a fit of Exultation, that they fell a chattering as if
they^d had a Coster-Monger's Basket before 'em.

But though the House were not so well filled at the first opening, you may be
sure at their next meeting it was crowded like a Playhouse upon the Poets day.
Thither came the Passive Obedience Monkeys, and the Non-Resistance Monkeys; who
at first seemed to be very friendly, shook hands together, and were glad to
meet one another, till at length, by an unlucky Chance, and the Industry of the
Black Monkeys, who favored the great French Ape, the rest of the Apes and
Monkeys having no more Reason than such kind of Creatures should have, they
were so distracted with Passive Obedience and Non Resistance on the one hand,
and the Obligations of Annihilated Oaths on the other, that they all became
Apostates to their own Interest, and gave themselves over to the Delusions of
the Black Monkeys with that violence, that when one of the Black Monkeys, who
had been in great Reverence and Esteem among them, fell off, and asserted
Non-Resistance, and Lawfulness of Oaths to a Prince in Possession, they
expelled him the Coffee-House, or if he came in among 'em, entertained him with
nothing but Mopps and Mows after their manner, which put the Apes and the
Monkeys into such Heats and Quarrels among themselves, that they did nothing
but throw Vindications, Replies, and Remarks at one another Heads for half a
year together. One little Ape there was that set a couple of Weasels upon the
Black Monkey, which had done him more mischief than they did, but that they
were encountered with two Anti-Weasels; so that the Cercopitheculi had enough to
do to hold their sides, and laugh at the terrible Combats of Monkeys against
Monkeys, and Weasels against Weasels, and all for a Rice-Pudding of Passive
Obedience and Non Resistance.

At another Table sat the Rapparee Monkeys; who having received a late foyl in
a Contest with the Cercopitheculi, one cried, he was merely drawn in; another
cried, his Paw was set to the Petition against his consent; Cuds Fish, cried
another, were it to do again, I Would do it: What, shall we lose our Privileges!
I Would fain know what we got by our Petitioning, cried another? Cried the other,
we kept Peoples Tongues from lying idle i'their Mouths; and we pursued our
Nature, which is still to be doing Mischief. Upon which, up stepped a Reverend
Baboon, and, Come, Brothers, quo' he, Fame's Fame, whether it be good or bad.
Herostratus had never lived till now in our Memoirs, but for burning the Temple
of Ephe^us, as I learnt when I went to Paul^s School. For my part, I am well
satisfied, that we have occasioned the spoiling Paper enough in single Sheeted
Remark^ that will serve all the young Monkeys in the Torn to make Paper Kites of,
whereby our Names will be advanced to the Skies: which, if the Poets don't lie,
is one of the great Rewards of Honor; at least we shall be quartered in the ^ext
Chronicle, and that is better than, Here lies the Body of such one, in a Nasty
Churchyard.

But this Discourse was interrupted by a She-Monkye of a Mercury, that cried
about the Coffee-House, the Restored Maidenhead. Presently cried one of the
Monkeys, Sister, let me see your Restored Maidenhead; and smelling to the
Title, surely, quo' he, this Monkey of a Writer must ride in his Coach and
Eight Horses, if he can but perform what he says. What would not some
She-Monkeys about this Town give to have their Maidenheads restored, that they
might lose 'em as often. By the Tears of my sweet Mother of happy Memory, cried
another Monkey, 'twas more than all the Gods in Ovid durst ever attempt, for
fear of failing; they only turned their deflowered Mistresses, when they
bewailed their Losses, into Trees and Flowers. Truly, quo' the She Monkey, if I
have any skill, this Quack of a Monkey, I fear me, has undertaken more than he
can perform, and as I hear, his Receipt gives offense too. Nay then, quo'
another Monkey that sat by, let our dear Brother take heed it does not fare
with him, as it did with the Monkey that would needs be imitating the
Log-Cleaver; for that Monkey, while the Fellow was gone to dinner, cleft on so
long, that the first Wedge that kept open the Wood fell out, at the same time
that the Monkey's Foot slipped in; so that the two Pieces closing again, put the
poor Monkey to those dismal Lamentations as brought out the Log-Cleaver, who,
seeing the officious Pug in that distress, This ye get, Sirrah, quo' he, for
meddling with that you have nothing to do withal. Ah, Master, Master, could this
Monkey of a Writer but do as he says, I Would give him more Money than ever he had
for his Copy, as poor as I am, for a Daughter of my own that has had a
Mischance.

So soon as the She Monkey was gone, up starts the first Monkey; quo' he, I
told ye at first, that Men call us Monkies, but we believe them to be as much
Monkeys as our selves. For I would fain know, Cui Bono was this Restored
Maidenhead Written? If it were for the General Benefit of the Female Republic,
I know not what to say to it; in regard (...) may be presumed the Female
Republic has need enough of such a Project: But ^^ it were only to make sport,
and create laughter, and consequently to get Money, it is no more (...) one of
us Monkeys could have done: Besides, that Female Honor is too tender a thing
to be exposed to the 'rude Blasts of public Satyrs. But letting this pass, I
have got another thing here in my Pouch, which makes me believe there is some
sudden Change in the World at hand. Here Is a thing called, The Parable of the
Bear-Garden.

By the Mass, quo' a Senior Pug, that listened to the First Monkey's Speech, I
tremble to think on it. For if Man be transmuted thus into Bulls and Bears, and
Mastiffs, and Lap-Dogs, what will they turn us Monkeys into? There Is no fear of
that, quo' another Monkey; for there is no Creature under the Sky that will so
well fit our Nature as our own selves. But as for Men, they had rather a great
many of 'em be Beasts as they are, than what they were created. And therefore
what said Gryllus in Plutarch to Ulysses, when he came to entreat Circe to
restore the Grecians she had changed into Swine, to their Original Form?
Gryllus told Ulysses, he was a Coxcomb to come thither about such a Fool's
Errand; for that he and his Companions were well contented with their
condition, and that for his part he had rather continue a Swine, and wallow in
the Mire, than be King of Ithaca. And therefore who knows, in regard the World
is in a perpetual posture of change, whether the World is not to undergo the
same changes again which it has done already: For first the Men spoke, and then
the Beasts and Birds spoke, then the Men spoke again, and now the Beasts and
the Birds a second time. But the Fish never spoke in this World; for which
reason it is said, As mute as a Fish (and therefore by the way, I condemn the
Parable of the Shark and the Herring-Pond to the Father of Lies) However it is
well the limits of the Bear-Garden are so spaciously extended. For whereas
there was before but one Jackanapes a Horseback, there may be now occasion for
a Hundred; and so there is more room for Preferment among us.

While the Monkeys were thus descanting upon the Parable of the Bear-Garden, in
comes a bold Cercopitheculus; Gentlemen, quo' he, I have heard your discourse
upon the Parable of the Bear-Baiting: But what think you of the Parable of the
Magpies? 'twas the invention, they say, of a Monkey of a Bookseller; a Meager
soul'd Monkey, with a Countenance like a sows'd Hogs-Face, looking as if he
never eat a good Meals Meat in his life, but had always lived upon
Penny-Porringers of Scalding-Alley Mutton-Broth; who because he lives at the
Sign of the Raven, thinks he may take the liberty to croak over the Reputation
of all Men. Upon this, one of the more serious Monkyes, in a sullen tone, Of
all the Birds that fly, I love Magpies, quo' he, because they are so roguish
and unlucky like our selves (for which we are called Wits amongst the Beasts,
by a modern Wit amongst the Men) and therefore no fit Emblems to reproach the
Reverence due to that Sacred Order which seems thereby to be reflected on.
There Is your mistake, cried another Monkey; it is not for their unlucky tricks
so much as for their White Breasts, and White Slips upon their Wings, that the
Monkey of a Bookseller made use of Magpies. With that the Cercopitheculus
putting in, Did he so, quo' he, then hang up the Monkey of a Bookseller, with
his Parable about his Neck, for abusing the decent Habits of a Sacred Order.
No, no, replied one of the Monkeys, it is enough he is so well known to be one
of our number; and besides, he is so very covetous that he will abuse any body
for the prospect of getting Sixpence; Quando dolosi spes refulserit nummi. Such
Magpies as these will speak Parables at any time. It Is in fashion now a days,
because People are not to be named, to make pleasant Satyrs upon 'em, under the
Shapes and Characters of Beasts and Birds. Thus you shall hear a Parrot call
the Mistress and the Maids Whores, and the Master of the House Knave; and the
thing perhaps may be true -- Yet because a Parrot only speaks it, no body
regards it; and therefore being a new Mode, and the Humor taking, Men must
bear their Crosses with Silence and Patience.

These Two Parables have begot seve^^^ others of lesser Note, as one
Street-Boxi^^ of two great Boobies, sets all the little ^ys a Cuffing. But
here is enough for one ^me.

LONDON, Printed for C. B. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall. 1691.


