The last, best, and truest NEVVES From Ireland, That came since the Rebellion.

Sent From a Gentleman in Dublin, to his Friend, a Divine, in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, March 18. 1641.

The last, best and truest News from Ireland.
Upon Friday the 4. of Feb. the governor of Drogedah Sir Henry Tichburne with
some horse and foot, sall^^d out of the E^st gate, with an intention to fetch
in some corn from a place called the Green Hills, being a quarter of a mile
out of the Town, but they we^e scarce out of the Town gates, before they were
encountered by Hugh Boy O Neale, the enemies Marshall of the fi^ld, who was
there waiting an opportunity with about seven hundred men; the enemy at the
first assault made a great show of courage and resolution, but as soon as
Captain Fortescue, and Captain Owens had fired on their flanks, they
instantly ran away, and the horse and foot of our side fell to execution,
and in the chase killed about two hundred, together with the said Hugh Boy O
Neale, and some other officers, and that without the loss of one m^n on our
side, but one who afterward dyed of his hurt.

Upon the fourteenth day Captain Martyn was sent with fifty musketeers, and
falling into a qu^rter of the enemies, there was some twenty of the enemies
slain, and but one of ours. Upon the eighteenth the Governor having resolved
to beat upon a quarter of the enemies at a place called Ramullin, half a mile
off the Town, he being accompained with Sir Patrick Weymes, with some of the
Lord of Ormonds horse, together with the Lord Moors, Sir Adam Loftus, Sir
Thomas Lucas, their horse, and Captain Weynman, Captain Byrone, Captain
Fortescue, Sir John Burlasse, Captain Billingsly, Captain Roper and Captain
Cadogan, with 450. foot marched out of the Town upon break of the day, and
the forlorn hope of horse, and 40. commanded musketeers marched a good way
before the body, and being come within musket shot, the enemy played stoutly
and very hotly at them; but our musketeers having killed about ten of them,
Lieutenant Francis Moore who commanded the forlorn hope of horse being
accompained with his cornet, and C^ptaine Cadogan, and the Lord Moors horse
charged into the town, but with much ado, the enemy having baroc^ded the
ways, and having entered the Town* they discerned the enemy flying by the
river Boyne toward the old bridge, they pursued them, and in the chase they
killed some sixty of them, and if the musketeers had come in, there had been
an hundred more killed at least, for so many of them had got under a mighty
great and steep rock on the water side, where the horsemen could not possibly
come at them, and withal* their own fellows Colonel Mac Brians men being on
the other side of the Boyne shot very thick at us, but hurt not one, though
they spent a great deal of powder and lead; when we retreated we could
discern a great body of the enemy making toward us from old bridge, and as we
came toward our main body, which all the while remained entire, we could see a
great number of the enemy marching in good array toward our body; but before we
could come up, though we road hard, the enemy betook themselves to their
heels, and Da^^ies son of Plattine, being one of their Captains, lost his
horse, and ran away a foot over the great ditches toward his fathers house,
which had he not done, he had gone home shorter by the head; here again we
killed about a score of them, both executions done by the horse, the foot not
stirring but when the governor led them toward the enemy; in this last
skirmish the Earl of Ormonds, and the Vice Treasurers horse gained good
applause for their valor and forwardness, as likewise did the Lord Moors,
and Sir Thomas Lucas in the first; the horse had no sooner retreated to the
body, but we could discern Colonells Mac Brians men hard by us, the sight of
them drew us to a belief that we should have a hot fight now with both the
divisions, those that before had fled to Plattine, having rallied themselves
into a body again, and that with such celerity* as was to be wondered at, but
howsoever they let us depart quietly, and we came seasonably into the town, for
had we stayed a little longer, some 800. of the enemy had got betwixt us and
the town, and then we had been engaged to fight with all their divisions,
which did consist of 1500. or 1600. men at least.

Upon the 24. being Saint Matthias, most hppily arived our relief of provision
and ammunition, it came seasonably, for we were come almost to the last
morsel: The enemy labored hard to hinder the bringing of it in, who hoped
that famine should force us to yield up the Town* they had two pieces of
Ordinance* and a world of muskets playing from either shore; but God be
praised, our ships came up safely to the Key without the loss of one man, or
so much as one hurt but one, which was a great wonder, the channel being not
in most places a musket shot over, ^^y the vessels sometimes were forced to
come within a stone cast of the shore.

On the next day in the morning we were not aware before 500. of the enemy had
entered the Town of Tradagh, and the whole gross of them without, making all
haste to enter in at an old low door, which by the treachery of some of the
townsmen, who are not as yet certainly known, was broken open for them; it
was a strange thing to hear, for the air ecchoed with their hellish cries,
being entered, and the allarum taken, they were forthwith encountered in several
p^ces, a great number of them made for the mill mount, the only strength of the
Town, where Captain Cadogan kept his guard, it was dark, and a man could not
well distinguish between a friend and a foe; the enemy immediately upon their
advancing up the hill, laid Captain Cadogans out centries dead, which he
perceiving from the hill, caused fire to be given at them, which they
perceiving to be hot, faced about, and as they were taking themselves to their
heels, Captain Cadogan arrested their leader with a musket from the mount,
who being pilladged, was found to be an officer, the rest failing of their plot
ran into orchards and gardens, where they were cut in pieces by Cap. Owens men,
and their companies being encountered by the governors own men, and Sir Thomas
Lucas his horse were quite broken and routed, diverse other companies coming
in, they were slain and taken, or the greatest part of them: one Captain
Conner a Mead man was slain, and amongst others an old traitorous servant of
Captain Cadogans; diverse of the Captains and others are concealed by the
Townsmen in their houses, and although upon peril of their lives they were
required to bring them forth, yet they have hitherto failed.

It was a happy deliverance, for which we are bound to give God thanks* for
truly had any understanding enemy had the same advantage of us as these men
had, we had been all lost, besides the centry we lost one hors^ man* and two
or three footmen, and very few hurt, but so soon as day appeared, with our
great and small shot were beaten from our wales like dogs. Captain Roper and
Captain Morice had like to have been taken by them, as conceiving the enemy
upon their entrance to be our own men; truly both officers and soldiers
behaved themselves like men, they were both valiant and resolute, so that we
are confident the rebellious blades will not be very forward to come to such
another breakefast as this in haste.

This day came Sir Philemon Oneale from the f^rther northern parts to these
enemies who had beleagured us, he was as we hope and believe very well beaten
by the Scotchmen, but we have no certainty of it as yet. As I am a Gentleman
all this is true, you may report this to the whole world. So I take my leave,
desiring thee to pray for us, and we will fight for thee and the rest, not
doubting but that our God whom we serve, will still so bless us and grant us
victory to the glory of his name, which is the prayer of,

Thy truly affectionate friend.


