A LETTER To a Friend, touching Dr. Jeremy Taylor's Disswasive from Popery.
Discovering above an Hundred and fifty False, or Wrested Quotations, in it.

Psalm. 26. 12.

Mentita est iniquitas sibi.

Printed in the Year, 1665.

The Publisher to the Reader.
MEeting with this Letter, I thought it worth the publishing, as a means (in
the interim till the Book it self be Answered) to give the Admirers of Dr.
Tailor, and of that Book, some cause to lessen their great Opinion of him, and
it, and the Cause it maintains. For indeed after that, Juel, Mornay, Morton,
Potter, and other of the prime Protestant Controvertists, had been found so
guilty of this Fault of False Quotations, and been so cried out upon by our
(Catholic) Writers for it, and the Protestant Cause had suffered so much shame
and prejudice by it, who could have expected it in Dr. Jeremy Tailor, a man so
Eminent among them for Place, Learning, and Abilities in Controversy, and who
therefore it might be presumed would not discredit himself, or his Cause, by
Quoting any thing upon Trust, or Varying from his Author's either Words, or
Sense? Or though he might be incurious in this kind, when he wrote only as a
Private Divine, or in a book of Devotion, (as ex. gr. when in his Book Of the
Life of Christ, he tells a story out of S. Gregory, and cites the very Book and
Chapter, How S. Herminigilda chose to dye rather then she would receive the B.
Sacrament from the hand of an Arrian Bishop: when many Punies of our Clergy,
nay, many of our ordinary Women could have told him, that the person there
mentioned by S. Gregory, was not Herminigilda, a Woman, but Herminigildus, a
Man, and Prince of Spain:) Yet in such a Work as this, to which (as himself
says) he was appointed by a Synod of the Protestant Irish Bishops, In Preface.
and published with design to Convert all the Catholics of that Nation; and
entertained with that applause here in England, as it has been already in a
short time twice or thrice Reprinted; who could think but he would have been
most exact in his Quotations? which therefore since he has not, but sometimes
quoted Books that never were, or that, in the places quoted, have not any least
syllable to the purpose they are quoted for; and frequently quoted them in a
Sense they never dreamt of; yea, and diverse times by adding, curtailing, or
otherwise altering them, misquoted the very words themselves, (of all which the
ensuing Letter will give sufficient instances:) What can be said, or thought of
it, but that had it been possible for him to have upheld his Cause otherwise,
he would never have used such sinister practices?

If it be said, that diverse of the Exceptions are little material; be it so:
but then the least that is, will be a false or wrested Quotation, and help to
show the insincerity of the Author.

If it be said, that diverse of them are perhaps but Errors of his Pen, or of
the Press only; it may be so: but till they appear to be so, they are justly
charged.

In fine, if it be said, that many of them are not so much as pretended to be
False, but Wrested only; it is true: but then, 1. These also will be of avail
to my end as well, though not as much as those that are false. 2. Of False
Quotations, and where cannot be supposed any Error of his Pen, or the Press,
there are enough (though all the other had been omitted in the Letter) to my end;
namely, for instance in some of the chief only, these six and forty, viz. 8.
12. 14. 16. 17. 26 Pol. Virg.
27. Id.
28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 34. 36. 46. 47. 50. 53. 56. 57. 58. 61. 71. 76 Eginard.
77 Hinemarus.
78 Blondus.
79 Amonius.
93. 114. 115. 116. 118. 130 Driedo,
. 136. 137. 139. 140. 143. 144. 147. 149. 150. 152. 153. 155. 156. If any one
therefore shall take upon him to justify Dr. Tailors Quotations; to save
labor and time, let him in the first place justify these, or which six of
them he thinks the most justifiable, and try it first in them, and by their
success, let judgment be made of all the rest. Vale.

Errata.
Page 6. line 21. in the break, insert 16. Page 21. line 15, in the break, dele
48.
A Note of above an Hundred and fifty False or Wrested Quotations in Dr. Jeremy
Taylor's late Disswasive from Popery, sent by a Catholic to his Friend.
SIR,
WHen I told you Dr. Tailors Disswasive, beside other faults in it, was full of
false or wrested Quotations, you wondering at it, desired of me a Note of them;
which I here send you, of some which I have observed, by examining those
Authors which I could come by here: And I doubt not but most of his other also
would be found ejusdem farinae, if the Authors were examined.

In the Preface.
1. AGainst unwritten Traditions taught by the Church, he quotes Tertullian, as
speaking against all Traditions absolutely, Cont. Hermog.
[ I adore the fullness of Scripture; if it be not written, let Hermogenes fear
the woe that is destined to them that detract from, or add to it:] when had he
set down the words sincerely, it would have appeared, he spoke only of one
point taught by that Heretic painter, not without, but against express
Scripture: viz. that God made the World of some preexisting matter. [ Igitur in
principio fecit Deus coelum and terram. Genesis 1. 1.
Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, quae mihi and factorem manifestat and facta.
John 1. 1.
In Evangelio vero, and ministrum atque arbitrum rectoris invenio Sermonem. An
autem de aliqua subjacenti materia facta sint omnia, nusquam adhuc legi.
Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina: si non est scriptum, timeat vae
illud, etc.] Therefore (says he) in the beginning God made Heaven and Earth. I
adore the fullness of Scripture, (meaning, of this Text, as to this point) which
manifests to me both the maker, and the things made. And in the Gospel, I find
the Word, both the minister and arbiter of God. But whether all things were
made of some subjacent matter, I never have yet read. Let Hermogenes's shop
show that it is written: (viz. his Doctrine, that the World was made of some
matter) If not written, let him fear that woe, etc.

2. Against the same, De vera fide, and in Mo^al. reg. 72 c. 1. and 80 c. 22.
he quotes three places of Basil, as saying thus, [Without doubt it is a most
manifest argument of infidelity, and a most certain sign of pride, to introduce
any thing that is not written, etc.] Whereas in two of the places quoted De
vera fide.
S. Basil has no such words; and in the third, he spoke only of certain
particular Heresies devised by Heretics, not without, but against express
Scripture, and which S. Basil there confuted, not by Scripture alone, but by
Tradition also. [ Whilst I was to fight against diverse factions of Heretics,
etc. I thought it consequent to repress the blasphemies introduced, by opposite
sayings, (...).
(or sentences) and those sometimes unwritten, etc. But if our Lord be faithful
in all his words, etc. without doubt it is a most manifest argument of
infidelity, either to detract from the things that are written, or to introduce
any thing that is not written, seeing our Lord has said, My sheep, etc.
wherefore we also, as heretofore we have ever had that determined in our
minds, to avoid all voice or speech contrary to the Doctrine of our Lord, A
Dominica doctrina ali3nam.
so at this time, etc.] But in all his discourse, he has no such words, as the
Dr. quotes for his, [ to add any thing to the Faith that is not there found.]

3. To the same purpose, he quotes Theophilus Alexandrinus, Ep. Pasch. 2.
[ It is the part of a devilish spirit, to think any thing to be Divine, that
is not in Scripture;] when he spoke likewise only of a particular Heresy that
Origin had devised of his own proud head, against express Scripture, viz. that
Christ was at one time or other to lose his Kingdom. [ I cannot know with what
temerity, Origin feigning such things, and following, not the authority of
Scriptures, but his own error, etc. But being ignorant, that it is an instinct
of a devilish spirit, to follow the sophismes of humane minds, (which words
the Dr. craftily left out) and to think any thing Divine, extra Scripturarum
authoritatem, without the Scriptures authority.

4. To the same purpose, he quotes S. Athanasius, De incarn. Christi.
[ The Catholics will neither speak nor endure to hear any thing in Religion,
that is a stranger to Scripture, it being, immodestiae vecordia, to speak those
things which are not written:] when he spoke it likewise only of a particular
Heresy, contrary to Scripture; viz. That Christ's flesh was consubstantial to
the Godhead. [ If therefore ye be Disciples of the Gospels, speak not against
God iniquity, but walk by the Scriptures. But if ye will prate things dissonant
from the Scripture, why do ye contend with us, who endure not either to speak
or hear any thing beside what is written. What is therefore the madness of your
immodesty, that ye speak things which are not written, and think things that
are dissonant from piety, (which words likewise the Dr. craftily left out) as
who presume to say, that the flesh (of Christ) is consubstantial to the Deity?]

5. Against our veneration of the Images of Christ, and his B. Mother, and
Heavenly Saints, he quotes Lactantius, [Without all peradventure, L. 2. cap. de
orig. error.
wherever an Image is (meaning for worship) there is no Religion:] when he
knew Lactantius spoke only of worshipping with Divine honor, the Idols of the
Heathen Gods: as his whole discourse before and after manifests; which it would
be too long to set down.

6. To the same purpose, and in the same fraudulent manner, he quotes Origin,
L. 7. con. Ce^.
[ We ought rather to dye then pollute our Faith with such impieties:] when
Origin spoke only of the worshipping of Idols of the Heathen Gods;] But the
Christians, not only shun the Temples, Altars, and Idols of the Gods, but go
more readily to death, lest with any excess or impiety they should altogether
pollute that which they most rightly believe of God the Creator of all things.]

7. Against our giving the Communion in one kind, he says, [ The Primitive
Church did Excommunicate them that did not receive the Sacrament in both
kinds,] and quotes for it the Canon, Comperimus: when the Canon spoke not of
receiving the Sacrament by the Communicants, but of the consummating of the
Sacrifice by the Priest; as appears by the reason given, [ Because the division
of one and the same Mystery (or Sacrifice) cannot be without great Sacrilege:]
and by the title of the Canon, [ The Priest ought not to receive the Body of
Christ without his Blood.]

8. To the same purpose he quotes S. Ambrose, [ He who receives the Mystery
otherwise then Christ appointed, (that is, says the Doctor, in one kind,
when he has appointed it in two) is unworthy of the Lord, etc.] where to wrest
it to his purpose, he first corrupts the words, for S. Ambrose says not, who
Receives, but who Celebrates it, plainly meaning the Priest alone: nor does he
say, otherwise then Christ appointed, but otherwise then it was given by him.
2. He corrupts the sense, with his ridiculous gloss devised out of his own
brain, without any least color of ground for it in the place; nay, S. Ambrose
gives another reason for it: [ Quia sine disciplina traditionis, and
conversationis, qui accedunt, rei sunt, etc. They who come, without the
discipline of tradition, and conversation, are guilty, etc.

In his 1. Chap. 1. Sect.
9. To prove, Page 1.
that all who believe the unity of substance and Trinity of persons in the
Godhead, are Catholics, he quotes the Imperial Law, Cod. l. 1. 4. 4. ^^x 1.
[ All who believe this Doctrine, that is, in the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
etc. are Christians and Catholics:] when he could not but know that that Law
meant not that they were Catholics absolutely, but only as to those points:
for after that Law, the Novatians, Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians, etc. were
proceeded against as Heretics, and Schismatics, notwithstanding their belief
of the Trinity, and Unity of the Godhead.

10. To prove that in the Church of Rome there is a pretense made to a Power,
Page 10.
not only to Declare, but to Make new Articles of faith, and new Creeds, he
quotes the Bull of Pope Leo X. condemning this Article of Luther, [ It is not
in the power of the Pope to constitute Articles of faith:] when Luthers word
was not constituere, but statuere, i.e. to decide, declare, determine, or
settle Articles of Faith: which may be, without making them such.

11. To the same purpose, he quotes Turrecremata, l. 2. c. 203. Page 10.
where he has no such words as he is quoted for; but cap. 107. he has; but
then the words say not that the Pope has power to make Articles of Faith, nor
do they mean any more but (as the title of the Chapter proposes to prove) that
to him belongs to declare or determine matters of Faith; nor do they say
absolutely, as the quotes them, [ The Pope is the measure, and rule, etc.] but
only that because the Pope is primus and maximus Praelatorum, ad eum maxim
pertinebit, etc. To him most, or above any other, it will pertain, to be the
measure, etc.

12. To the same purpose, he quotes Augustinus Triumphus, Page ^^d.
who says no such thing as he quotes him for: viz. that the Pope can make new
Articles of Faith, or new Creeds; nor did he mean, that he could multiply any
new Articles, or put them into the Creed, that were not always of Faith, and
implicitly at least contained in holy Scripture: as is manifest, 1. from the
reason given by him, [ For in the Creed are put those things which universally
pertain to Christian Faith:] which words are fradulently left out by the
Doctor. 2. From his express Doctrine, in his Resolvendum: [ There has been one
Faith of the Ancients and Moderns.] 3. From what he says Art. 2. in resp. ad
2. [ To add a truth, which is contained in holy Scripture, to explicate, or
declare, has always been lawful for the Church.]

13. To the same purpose, he quotes Petrus de Ancorano, who spoke not of making
new Articles of Faith, as making opposes declaring, which was the sense for
which he quoted him, (for this was his charge, The Church of Rome pretends to a
power, not only of declaring, but of making new, etc.) but only of making
them such, quoad nos, by declaring them to be of Faith, as appears by his own
explication; [ The Pope may make new Articles of Faith; that is, that a thing
ought now to be believed, when before it ought not so, etc.]

14. To the same purpose, he quotes Panormitan, when he says no such thing
neither, but rather the contrary: viz. that the Pope cannot make, but only
declare; as would have appeared had the Dr. set down his words at length, which
he fraudulently curtailed, for these are his words; [ The Pope can induce a new
Article of Faith, declaring this Divine right, (of which he had before spoken)
and of this is inferred that this Constitution (or Canon, cum Christus) looks
back upon things past.]

15. To prove our corrupting the writings of the ancient Fathers, he says,
That when not long since we printed Origin, we left out that whole 6. Chap. of
S. John, and Origens Commentary upon it, and so maimed the Author, for the same
cause, that is, because Origin argued there against Transubstantiation. A mere
slander; as is manifest by the very Protestant Editions; for in the Edition of
Basil by Froben, Anno 1545 there was no Commentary at all upon John: And in a
later Edition of Basil, 1620. his Comment upon John is set out in the same
manner as it is in our Catholic Editions, and no other; viz. without any
Comment either upon the 5, 6, or 7. Chap. of that Gospel.

To the same purpose, he quotes our Index Expurgatorius, in which in S.
Chrysostoms Works printed at Basil, these words, [The Church is not built upon
the Man, but upon the Faith,] are commanded to be blotted out; and these,
[There is no Merit, but what is given us by Christ.] And the like, he says, we
have done to S. Ambrose, and to S. Austin, and to them all: insomuch that
Ludovicus Saurius the Corrector of the Press of Lions, complained of it to
Junius, that he was forced to blot out many sayings of S. Ambrose in that
Edition of his Works which was printed at Lions, 1559. so that we think it not
sufficient, to feign some convenient sense, when they are opposed in
Disputation, but the words which make against us we wholly leave out of our
Editions: Nay (says he) we correct the very Tables or Indexes made by the
Printers or Correctors, etc. A notorious slander, as appears, 1. Because the
Index Expurgatorius was not appointed till the end of the Council of Trent,
which was in Anno 1563. and therefore that could put no force upon Saurius for
maiming S. Ambrose in Anno 1559. 2. Because the Index Expurgatorius extended
not to any Writings or Works of the Fathers, but only to the Indices, or
marginal Notes, or other corruptions made by Protestants: as is confessed by
his own Author Junius, that published the Index; for in his Preface to that
Book, he makes this Objection, [ But here the Fathers are not purged:] and
answers it, 1. That yet by the purging of later Authors, the truth of Doctrine
and History, is in many places expurged. 2. That what they dare not with the
Fathers, they practice upon us, (Protestant Printers and Writers) and with
their little forks they thrust out our Annotations in the Margin, and Sayings
in the Indices, although consonant to the Fathers mind. For example (says
Junius) In the Index of S. Chrysostom printed at Basil, this is commanded to be
blotted out, [The Church is not built upon the Man, but his Faith.] And
likewise this, [There is no merit, but what is given us by Christ.]

17. To the same purpose, he quotes Sixtus Senensis, Page 13.
as saying to Pope Pius V. [ Expurgari, and emaculari curasti omnium
Catholicorum Scriptorum, ac praecipue veterum Patrum Scripta. Thou have taken
care for the purging of the Writings of all Catholic Writers, and especially
of the ancient Fathers: most shamefully corrupting the sense of the Quotation,
by leaving out the words that follow; [ Haereticorum aetatis nostrae fae^ibus
contaminata, and venenis infecta: Contaminated with the dregs, and infected
with the poisons of the Heretics of our age.

18. Against the power of the Church to add any Articles to the Creed, Page
14. Part. 2. act. 6. c. 7.
he quotes the Ephesine Canon, [ That it should not be lawful for any man to
publish or compose another Faith or Creed, then that which was desined by the
Nicene Council, etc.] when that Canon did not mean, adding Articles to the
Faith defined by that Council (for how could the supreme power bind its own
hands, or make that unlawful for another General Council, which the Council of
Constantinople had already done, in adding diverse Articles to the Nicene
Creed?) but publishing any Creed repugnant, by adding, or detracting, to the
Nicene.

19. To prove that the Council of Constance declared not for the Popes
Supremacy, Page 15.
he quotes John Gerson, as saying, De pot. Eccl. Consil. 22.
[ That the Council of Constance did abate those heights to which slattery had
advanced the Pope: and that before that Council they spoke such great things of
the Pope, which afterward moderate men durst not speak:] whereas he says no
such words, nor had any meaning against the Popes Supremacy; for this is all he
says, [ Fallor, si non ante celebrationem hujus S. Constantiensis Synodi, etc.
I am deceived, if before the celebrating of this holy Council of Constance, this
Tradition (which slattery suggested; viz. that the Pope was supreme Monarch
even in Temporals, that he was above the Law, could take away men's rights from
them, etc.) had not so possessed the minds of the most, that he that should
have taught the contrary, would have been noted or condemned of Heretical
pravity. Take a sign of this, that after the determination and practice of the
same Council, there are found who fear not to assert openly such things.]

20. He puts down these for the words of the Council of Trent, Sess. 21. c 4.
[ Although the ancient Fathers did give the Communion to Infants, yet they did
not believe it necessary, etc.] whereas the words of the Council are not with
any such Antithesis, but thus only: [ Nor therefore is antiquity to be
condemned, if sometime they used that custom in some places. For as those most
holy Fathers had a probable cause of their so doing, according to the condition
of that time; so truly, it is without question to be believed, that they did it
with no necessity of salvation.]

1. Chap. 3. Sect.
21. He quotes Bishop Fisher, Page 16. In art. 18. Luth.
as saying [ That in the beginning of the Church, there was no use of
Indulgences; and that they began, after the people were a while affrighted with
the torments of Purgatory.] When he has no such words, for this is all he
says, [ That it was not without the very great dispensation of the holy Ghost,
that after so many curricula of years, the faith of Purgatory, and the use of
Indulgences was generally received by the Orthodox. So long as there was no
care of Purgatory, none sought Indulgences.]

22. To prove that the Fathers do expressly teach, Page 22.
that Pilgrimages to holy places, and such like inventions, which are now the
earnings of Indulgences, are not the way of salvation, etc. he quotes S.
Gregory Nyssen, in an Oration made wholly against Pilgrimages to Jerusalem:
when he made it not wholly against Pilgrimages, but only to show Religious
people tending to perfection of piety; and counting it a part of piety to visit
the holy places at Jerusalem, that it was no necessary part of piety, and that
it was liable to some inconveniences misbecoming Religious people. [ Cum itaque
sint aliqui ex iis, etc. Seeing there are some of those who have chosen to
themselves a solitary and private life, who count it a part of piety to have
seen the places at Jerusalem, etc.] Hom. 1. in ep^ ad Philem.


23. To the same purpose he quotes S Chrysostom, who in the place quoted never
dreamt of Pilgrimages, for he only says this; That to obtain pardon for our
sins, it is not necessary to lay out moneys, to travel into foreign countries,
to undergo dangers and labors, etc. but only to have a good will.

24. To the same purpose he quotes S. Bernard, Page 22. Sermon. 1. de Adu.
when he might as well have quoted Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. 14. for S. Bernard only
alludes to that Text: [ It is not necessary for thee to pass over sea, to
penetrate the clouds, to go beyond the Alps, there is (I say) no great journey
proposed to you, meet God within your self; for the word is nigh unto thee, in
thy mouth, and in thy heart, etc.]

25. To the same purpose, Page ^a^. Sermon. de mare^
he quotes these as S. Austins words; [ God said not, Go to the East, etc.] in
his Sermon De Martyribus; whereof there is but one, in S. Augustins Works, with
that title, to wit, his 117. Sermon De Diversis; and in that, there is not the
least word to any such purpose.

Sect. 4.
26. He says, Roffensis and Polydor Virgil affirm, Page 27. Artic. 18 cont.
Luth. De Inv rer. l. 8. c. 1.
That who so searches the writings of the Greek Fathers, shall find, that
none, or very rarely any one of them, ever makes mention of Purgatory. Whereas
Polydor Virgil affirms no such thing; nor does Roffensis say, That very rarely
any one of them mentions it, but only, that in those ancient Writers, he shall
find none, or but very rare mention of it.

27. He says, they (Roffensis and Polydor) affirm, that the Latin Fathers did
not all believe it, but by degrees came to entertain opinions of (...): but for
the Catholic Church, it was but lately known to her. When Polydor affirms no
such thing: nor does Roffensis say, The Latin Fathers did not all believe it,
but they did not believe it all ( simul) together, or at once; (meaning but by
parts) nor does he say, That by degrees they came to entertain opinions of it;
but, they conceived the truth of it.

28, 29, 30. Page cad.
To prove that the Prayers and Oblations uesd in the Primitive Church for the
Dead, that God would show them mercy, etc. do not infer their belief of
Purgatory, he says, That they also made Prayers and offered for those, who by
the confession of all sides never were in Purgatory; as for the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and even for the B. Virgin Mary; and quotes for it
Epiphanius Haer. 75.
, S. Cyril. Cat. mist. 5.
and the Canon of the Greeks: which if he meant not, that they prayed for them
in the same sense, as for the rest of the Dead in general, ( viz. that God
would show them mercy, remit their sins, etc. which is that alone from whence
we infer their belief of Purgatory,) it is an abusing of his Reader, and
inferres nothing to his purpose: and if he meant it, they are three false
Quotations; for the Authors quoted, precisely and expressly, distinguish the
Prayers for the one and the other: viz. For the Dead in general, or the other
persons prayed for particularly, for mercy and pardon for them. But for the
Patriarchs, Apostles, and the B. Virgin Mary, etc. they begged nothing for
them, but only prayed, and offered, in their honor, and for the honor of
Christ; and that they might be helped by their intercession.

So Epiphanius; We make mention both of Just and Sinners. Of Sinners, imploring
the mercy of God (for them.) Of the Just, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
etc. that prosecuting our Lord Jesus Christ with a singular honor, we may
separate him from the rank of other men, etc.

So S. Cyril. When we offer this Sacrifice, we afterward make remembrance of
all those that before us have slept. First, of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, that God by their prayers and intercessions may receive our
prayers. Then we pray for the deceased Fathers and Bishops: and finally, all
who among us who have departed this life, believing it to be a very great help
of the Souls for which is offered the obse^ration of that holy and dreadful
Sacrifice.

So the Mass of S. James. Let us make commemoration of the B. Virgin, and of
all the Saints and Just, that by their prayers and intercessions, we may all
obtain mercy.... Remember all Orthodox from Abel the just unto this day, make
them to rest in the land of the living, in thy kingdom, and the delights of
Paradise, etc.

So the Mass of S. Basil. For rest and pardon for the Soul of thy servant N.

So the Mass of S. Chrysostom. In memory and honor of the B. Virgin Mary, by
whose intercessions receive, O Lord, our Sacrifice to thy heavenly Altar: Of
the B. John Baptist, Apostles, etc. by whose prayers, O Lord, protect us....
And remember, O Lord, all those who have before slept in hope of resurrection of
life eternal.... For rest and pardon for the Soul of thy servant N.

So the Greek Mass of S. Peter. Before Consecration: Worshipping the memory
first of the B. Virgin, mother of our Lord, etc. Of the holy Apostles, Martyrs,
etc. by whose merits and prayers, grant that in all things we may be guarded by
the help of thy protection. After Consecration: Remember, O Lord, thy servants
N. and N. who have gone before us in the sign of faith, etc. To them, O Lord,
and to all that rest in Christ, we pray that thou indulge a place of
refreshing, light, and peace.

31. To the same purpose, he says, Page 28. De Ritib. Eccl. l 2. c. 35.
So it is acknowledged by our own Durantus, (viz. That the Fathers of the
Primitive Church made Prayers also, and offered for the Patriarchs, Apostles,
Martyrs, B. Virgin, etc, who never were in Purgatory:) where if he mean
likewise (as he must, or it was impertinently urged) that Durantus acknowledges
that they prayed for them as for the rest of the dead; and namely, that God
would show them mercy, or pardon them: Durantus says no such thing, but the
direct contrary. [ Truly in Epiphanius, and Cyril, and the Canon of the Greeks,
is read, that they offered Sacrifice to God, for the Patriarchs, Apostles,
Martyrs, etc. which signifies the same as in our Canon, [Communicantes, and
memoriam venerantes, gloriosae semper Virginis, etc.] For when the Greeks say,
[We offer for the Martyrs, etc.] it is not understood that we commend them to
God, but we commemorate them for their glory, and to give God thanks for the
glory he has bestowed on them.... The Priest prays nothing for them, but
rather prays them, that he may be helped by their prayers, etc.]

32. He quotes Sixtus Senensis, as saying, Page 29. in marg. I. 6. annot 345.
That Pope John 22. not only taught and declared the Doctrine, (that before
the day of Judgment, the Souls of men are kept in certain receptacles, etc.)
but commanded it to be held by all, as says Adrian P. in 4. Sent. When Sixtus
Senensis says not so of Pope John, but only reports the opinion of others;
nor does he quote Pope Adrian as saying so, but only as reporting also what
others said: for these are Sixtus Senensis his words. [ It is said, that Pope
John 22. subscribed to their opinion, and decreed that it ought so to be
believed. Witnesses of this Decree, are Occham and Adrian VI. whose words are
these: [Finally, it is reported of John 22. that he publicly taught, etc.]
And afterward Sixtus Senensis shows the uncertainty of that report: [ Know
that it is not altogether certain with approved Authors, that which Occham,
being offended with him, and in this, condemned by the Council of Trent, wrote
of him; yea, there want not Authors of highest authority and credit, that
relate the contrary; and among them Benedict. XI. etc.]

33. To prove that S. Augustine doubted of Purgatory, Page 30.
he quotes these words of his, Enchir. c. 69. l. 21. de Civ. Dei, c 26.
[ Whether it be so, or not, it may be enquired, and possibly it may be found
so, and possibly it may be never.] And he quotes two places for it. In neither
of which S. Augustine speaks of Purgatory directly, but of grief for the loss of
temporal good things too much loved, burning some just men here, and perhaps
hereafter too. In Enchiridion, [ For, this wood, hay, and straw, C. 68.
may not absurdly be interpreted, such affections to secular things, although
lawfully had, as they cannot be lost without grief of mind. But when this
grief burns, if Christ have in the heart place of the foundation, (that is,
that he who is so burnt, had rather want those things which he so loves, then
want Christ) he is saved through fire.... For the grief of the lost things
which he loved, burns him, but consumes him not, being guarded by the stability
of the foundation. C. 69.
That some such thing (such a burning grief for loss of temporal things) is
done, even after this life, is not incredible; and whether it be so or not, may
be enquired, and either be found, or lie hid, that some faithful men, are later
or sooner saved by a certain Purgatory fire, by how much they more or less
loved perishing goods.] And much to the same sense, is the other place quoted;
De Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 26.
[ If in this interval of time (betwixt Death and the Resurrection) the spirits
of the dead may be said to suffer this kind of fire, which they feel not who
had no such manners and loves in the life of this body, but others feel which
carried these kind of buildings with them, (of wood, hay, and stubble, upon
Christ the foundation) either there alone, or both here and there, or therefore
here, that not there, they find a fire of transitory tribulation, burning
saecularia (worldly affections, delights, offenses, etc.) although venial from
damnation, I oppose (or censure) it not, because perhaps it is true, etc.]

34. To prove, that in the time of Otho Frisingens. Page 30.
in Anno 1146 the Doctrine of Purgatory was uncertain, and gotten no further
then to a Quidam asserunt; he quotes these words of Otho, [Some do affirm, L.
8. Chron. 2. 26.
that there is a place of Purgatory after death:] shamefully corrupting both
the sense and words of this Author; for neither does Otho say [ after death]
nor mean it; but, after the day of general judgment: as the Doctor himself
could not but see, if he read the place. For the title of that Chap. is, [ An
post judicium, extra infernum inferiorem, ad leviores poenas locus remaneat? Et
quid de parvulis, qui solo originali tenentur? Whether after judgment, (i.e.
the day of doom) there remain any place without the nether most hell, for
lighter pains? And what will become of Infants, that dye in only original
sin?] And in the Chapter he treats of it thus: It is to be enquired, if after
the judgment is finished, there remains, etc. For some do ^^^^^m, that there
is in hell, a place of Purgatory (meaning after the day of judgment) in which,
they who are to be saved, etc.
[ His dictis, indagandum puto, si transacto Judicio, extra inferum inferiorem
ad leviores poenas locus remaneat: Esse quippe apud inferos (seil. after the
day of judgment) locum Purgatorium, in quo salvandi, vel tenebris tantum
assiciantur, (that is, for some time) vel expiationis igne decoquantur, quidam
asserunt, juxt a illud Apostoli, Ipse autem salvus erit, sed quasi per ignem.
At si terminatis in judicio causis singulorum, pro qualitate meritorum,
aeternis poenis deputatis, nullus ultra purgabitur, quomodo locus ille superior
Purgatorius residuus erit? si vero non remanebit, ut de aliis taceam, quid de
parvalis, qui solo originali renentur delicto, fiet? nunquid in puteum inferni
inferioris and ipsi trudentur?]

35. He says, that in the Speculum Exemplorum, Page 31. Did. 3. Exem. 3.
it is said, that a certain Priest in an ecstasy saw the Soul of Constantinus
Turritanus, in the eves of his house, etc. when in the place quoted, is not a
word to any such purpose.

36. He says, Page 33.
that the Greek Church did always dissent from the Latins in this particular,
(touching Purgatory) and in the Council of Basil, published an Apology directly
disapproving the Roman Doctrine of Purgatory. And that, how afterward they
were pressed in the Council of Florence by Pope Eugenius, and by their
necessity, how unwillingly they consented, how ambiguously they answered, how
they protested against having that half consent put into the Instrument of
Union; how they were yet constrained to it by their Chiefs, being obnoxious to
the Pope; how a while after they dissolved that Union, and to this day refuse
to own this Doctrine, are things so notoriously known, that they need no
further declaration.] All which things are so notoriously false, as there needs
no further declaration of the falsifying spirit of this Doctor. But for the
other falsities I must wave them, my business at present being only to note
his false Quotations: and such are these, out of the Councils of Basil and
Florence. For as to the Council of Basil I have examined it over, and can find
no such Apology as he speaks of, published by the Greeks in that Council. And
for what he says of the Council of Florence, there is not only not one word
of it true, but the direct contrary passed in that Council. In the very first
meeting at Ferrara, the Latins proposed the Catholic Doctrine in writing
thus: [ There is a Purgatory, Act. Conc. Flor.
that is, the Souls of such as dye in Venial sin are purged in the world
present (meaning temporally, after death, and before the future world after the
day of judgment) by fire, the Church also helping by the Priests prayers; and
moreover those Souls are delivered from pains by Sacrifices, and Alms....] To
which the Greeks, by their Prolocutor, the Bishop of Ephesus, instantly
answered thus; [ Whatsoever you have said, and the testimonies of holy men that
you have recited, the Greek Church receives and reads, and there is little
difficulty betwixt us in this point, (meaning, only about those words, by
fire:) but we shall give our answer in writing, etc.] And ten days after, they
gave it, in these words: [ The Italians (or Romans) confess (or believe) a
fire, both in the present world, and Purgatory by it, and in the world to come,
but not Purgatory, but eternal.... But the Greeks, hold a fire in the world to
come only, and a temporary punishment of Souls, that is, that they go into a
place dark, and of grief; but that they are purged, that is, delivered from
that dark place and affliction, by Priests Prayers, and Sacrifices, and by
Alms, but not by fire.] About a fortnight after, the Italians brought their
Proofs for their Doctrine, (touching the purgation by fire) to which the Greeks
delayed to answer. After, the Council was removed to Florence, and the point of
the procession of the Holy Ghost had been there long debated and brought to an
issue, the Pope called to the Greeks to debate the other points which remained,
touching Consecrating the unleavened Bread, Purgatory, the Supremacy of the
Pope, the Addition of Filioque to the Nicene Creed, and the Consecrating of the
Eucharist by words deprecative. The Greeks answered, [ For leavened or
unleavened Bread, let them be indifferent. Touching Purgatory (meaning the
fire) we neither divided for that, nor is it necessary; let there therefore be
an Union, and we will treat of that afterward.] Afterward the Greeks proposed
to treat, about Consecrating in unleavened Bread, the Popes Supremacy, and the
additament of Filioque: But for Purgatory, and Consecration by Prayer, nothing
should be said. The Latins answered, there could be no Union, unless those two
controversies were added. The Greek Emperor not yiedling to it, the Latins
proposed, that in the definition should be only mention of Purgatory; touching
the Consecration it might be transacted viva voce. The Pope said, [ we are
united in that for which the division was made, (meaning the procession of the
Holy Ghost) and is this which has no harm in it, an impediment to us? Was not
the point of Purgatory often examined at Ferrara? ought it not to be put in the
definition, as a Doctrine of our Church.] But because the Greek Emperor said he
was willing to hear touching the Primacy of the Roman Church, and consecrating
in unleavened Bread, those points were debated.

Afterward, (say the Greek Bishops) we met at the Emperors, and examined the
Proposals of the Latins, and found them five, all equal and right: 1. Of the
Procession. 2. Of unleavened Bread. 3. Of the Popes Primacy. 4. Of the
Additament. 5. Of Purgatory. And we urged mightily the Emperor, saying, we
receive all, let an end be determined to the business. What controversy have
we touching Purgatory? We doubted of this, because they said the Saints see God
without any medium, and that the Souls of penitent sinners are purged by
prayers. This thing therefore delayed us; but we embracing these things also
piously, pressed the Emperor, to bring the work (of Union) to an end. But he
would not. Afterward, the Emperor calling together all the Greek Bishops, the
rest of the Bishops endeavored to draw the Bishop of Ephesus (who was the
only stickler against the Union) to agree with them. The Bishop of Ephesus
argued against the procession from the Son, and that the Creed needed neither
addition, nor application, and many other things, until it was evening: But I
find not that he argued against Purgatory. Afterward there was a Congregation
appointed, of the Greek and Latin Prelates, to draw up the Instrument of the
Definition; which being shown to the Emperor, he objected against the Title of
it, (because in the name of the Pope alone) and the form of the Article
touching the Popes Supremacy, Secundum dicta Sanctorum. These being amended,
the Instrument was agreed on. Thus far the Records of the Council. By all which
appears how notoriously false was all that as the Doctor here alleged touching
the Greek Church denying Purgatory.

37. As a clear testimony of Antiquity, Page 34. Ad Demetrian. sect. 16.
expressly destroying the new Doctrine of Purgatory, he quotes S. Cyprian; [
When we are gone from hence, there is no place left for repentance, and no
effect of satisfaction:] where he fraudulently translates S. Cyprian, [ When we
are gone from hence,] as if he had spoken it absolutely, or of Christians and
Catholics in general; when he spoke it of impenitent Pagans only: and so the
words relate not at all to Purgatory, or Souls dying in Venial sin, but only
to the Hell of the damned, and Souls dying out of Christ's faith; such as
Demetrian was, to whom he then wrote. [ Hortamur, etc. We exhort (you) whilst
the opportunity is present, to satisfy God, and come out of the deep and dark
night of Superstition into the bright light of true Religion. quando isthinc
excessum suerie
When you shall be departed this life, there is no place more for repentance.

38. To the same purpose, and in the same fraudulent manner, he quotes Greg.
Nazianzen; for he affirms not, Orat. 15. in Plag. grand.
that after this life there is no purgation, (meaning for any one, as he quotes
him) but only that there is none for those that dye in mortal sin, or that are
in the Hell of the damned, as would have appeared by the words before and after,
had he set them down. [ I know the concussion, and excussion, the ebullition
and confraction of heart, and dissolution of the knees, and such like
punishments with which the sins of wicked men are plagued. I omit to speak of
the tribunals of the future life, to which the indulgence and impunity of this
life delivers them over; so that it is better now to be chastised and purged,
then to be transmitted to that torment, when it will be now the time of
punishment, not of purgation.]

39. To the same purpose, Orat. 42. in Pasch.
he quotes another Oration of the same Saint; but there is nothing in it to
that purpose.

40. To the same purpose, Page 35. Ep. 59.
he quotes an Epistle of S. Leo: but there is not a word in it of those he
quotes.

Sect. 5.
41. He quotes Scotus, Page 36. In 4. Scnt. d 11. q. 3.
as declaring, that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is not expressed in the
Canon of the Bible: which he says not.

42. To the same purpose, Ibid q. 6.
he quotes Occham; but I can find no such thing in him.

43. To the same purpose, Cap 1 cont. Capt. Babyl.
he quotes Roffensis; but he says no such thing.

44. To prove that the Decree of the Lateran Council was but a pretended one,
he quotes Platina; Page 37.
[ Many thing's indeed came then in consultation, yet nothing could be openly
decreed:] leaving out the next words giving the reason of it, which showed,
that he meant not of Decrees of Faith, but of raising Force to send to the Holy
Land, against the Saracens, which was the cause of calling that Council. [ The
Pope, when he saw the power of the Saracens to increase in Asia, called a
Council, etc. Many things came then in consultation, but nothing could be fitly
decreed, because both the Pisans and Genowayes by Sea, and the Cisalpins by
Land, were at war among themselves, etc.]

45. To prove, To. 3 ^ sp. 46. sect. 3.
that our own men have affirmed that Transubstantiation is not expressed in
Scripture, he quotes Suarez, That Cajetan affirmed, that the Article of
Transubstantiation is not expressed in Scripture: when Suarez says no such
thing, but only this; [ But of Catholics, Cajetan alone, taught, that
secluding the authority of the Church, those words, [This is my body] sufficed
not to confirm this truth.]

46. To the same purpose, Loc. Com. l. 3. ^. 3. fund. 2.
he quotes Canus; who says not, that it is not expressed, but not so express,
i.e. not plainly, or clearly; and ranks it with the Procession of the Holy
Ghost from the Son, and the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead; and in his next
Chapter, passes to things which belong to Christian Faith, which are neither
clearly nor obscurely in Scripture. [ Not all things which pertain to Christian
Doctrine are expressed in holy Writ. For the conversion of Bread and Wine into
the Body and Blood of Christ, the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son,
the equality of three Persons in one substance, and their distinction by
relative proprieties, you shall not find so express in the Canonical Books:
wherefore as the Article of the Resurrection was contained in that, [I am the
God of Abraham, etc.] which afterward Christ expounded to the less intelligent;
so the Church, by the Spirit of truth, has explicated some things, which are
had obscure in the holy Scriptures.]

47. He says, Henriquez affirms, that Scotus says, Sum. l. 8. c. 20.
Transubstantiation was not ancient; when Henriquez says no such thing.

48. To prove, Page 38.
that in Peter Lombards time, Transubstantiation was so far from being an
Article of Faith, or a Catholic Doctrine, that they did not know whether it
were true or no; and after Peter Lombard had collected the Sentences of the
Fathers in that Article, L. 4. Sent. did. 11. lit. A.
he confessed, he could not tell whether there was any substantial change or
no; he quotes these words: [ If it be enquired what kind of conversion it is;
whether it be formal, or substantial, or of another kind, I am not able to
define it. Only I know that it is not formal; because the same accidents
remain, the same color and taste. To some it seems to be substantial, saying,
that so the substance is changed into the substance, that it is done
essentially. To which the former authorities seem to consent. But to this
Sentence, others oppose these things: If the substance of Bread and Wine be
substantially converted, etc.] And says, they are a plain demonstration, that
in his time, this Doctrine (of Transubstantiation) was new, not the Doctrine of
the Church. Which is a notable falsifying of that Author, and the Doctor (if he
read him) could not choose but know he quoted him directly against his meaning.
For there were two Questions: one, whether the substance of the Elements be
converted into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood? and this question alone
pertains to what we believe in the point of Transubstantiation. And this
question Peter Lombard had treated of before, and resolved positively, Did. 9.
1. That it is undoubtedly to be held, that under the visible species, the
Flesh of Christ which he took of the Virgin, and the Blood which he shed for
us, is received by the wicked: and the contrary he counted a Heresy. The next
Section, Did. 10.
he entitles, De Haeresi aliorum, etc. Of the Heresy of others, who say that
the Body of Christ is not upon the Altar, but in sign. And thus he speaks of
it: [ There are other, transcending the madness of the former (Heretics,) who
measuring the power of God by the model of natural things, do more audaciously
and dangerously contradict the truth, affirming that in the Altar, is not the
Body or Blood of Christ, nor the substance of Bread and Wine converted into the
substance of Flesh and Blood: who take occasion of erring, from the words of
truth, whence began the first Heresy (against this truth) among Christ's
Disciples; [It is the Spirit that quickens, etc.] And they cite those words of
S. Augustine, [Non hoc corpus quod videtis, etc.] And there are other sayings
also, ministering fomitem to their madness. [The poor ye have always with you,
but me not.] These and other (sayings) the aforesaid Heretics use in
maintenance of their Error.] Then he sets down his Proofs to the contrary,
which were the Sentences of the Fathers in that Article: which having set down,
he concludes thus; [ By these, and other more, it is manifest, that the
substance of the Bread is turned into the substance of the Body, and the
substance of the Wine into the substance of the Blood.] Having thus dispatched
that first question, in the next Section (which is that which the Doctor
quotes) he comes to a second, which is a mere School nicety, touching the
manner of this substantial change; whether it be formal, or substantial, or of
some other kind? And touching that, he uses the words quoted by the Doctor, [
I am not able to define it, etc.] Nay, and even in that too, he quotes him
fraudulently to abuse the Reader. For these words which he sets down, as Peter
Lombards argument against the modus substantialis, were only set down as an
Objection, to which he there gives an answer, which the Doctor conceals. [ To
which may be answered in this manner, that the Body of Christ is not said to be
made, in that sense as if the Body which was formed in the Virgins womb were
formed again, but because the substance of Bread or Wine, which before was not
the Body or Blood of Christ, is by the celestial Word made his Body and Blood.]
And a little after: [ Therefore after Consecration, there is not the substance
of Bread or wine, although the species of Bread and Wine remain.] And to one
that should object against this, how this can be? he answers briefly, [ A
mystery of Faith, may salubriter be believed, but may not salubriter be searched
into.]

48. To the same purpose, Page 38. In 4. Sent did. 11. q. 1. Sect. Propter
tertium.
he quotes Durandus, as even after the Lateran Council, maintaining, That even
after Consecration, the very matter of Bread remained: which Durandus maintains
not, but the contrary; for his first conclusion there is, [ The substance of
Bread and Wine are converted into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood.] And
in the very next words, the Doctor himself says, that Durandus says, That by
reason of the authority of the Church, it is not to be held. How then did he
hold it? All that he there maintained was, the possibility of it, supposing it
were true; which he says it is not.

49. To the same purpose, Page 39.
he quotes Alphonsus de Castro fraudulently, as if he had meant, of the thing
(or Doctrine) of Transubstantiation; Rara est in antiquis scriptoribus mentio:
when he meant it only of the name. Of the Transubstantiation of the Bread into
the Body of Christ, there is rare mention in ancient Writers: Of the Procession
of the Holy Ghost from the Son, much rarer, etc. yet who but an Heretic will
dare to deny these, because in ancient Writers they are not mentioned under
these names?

50. Against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Page 41. Dial cum Tryph.
he quotes Justin Martyr, [ The Bread of the Eucharist was a Figure which
Christ commanded to do, etc.] when Justin Martyr says no such thing, but only
that the oblation of a Cake in the old Law was a figure of our Eucharist. [
Truly the Oblation also of the Cake, was a figure of the Eucharistical Bread
which our Lord Jesus Christ commanded to do (or make) in remembrance of his
Passion.]

51. To the same purpose, Page 41.
he quotes Eusebius, Demonstrat. Evang. l. 1. c. 1. when the first three
Chapters of that Book are not extant.

52. To the same purpose, he quotes another saying of Eusebius; Demon Evan. l.
1. c. ult.
[ The Apostles received a command according of the constitution of the New
Testament, to make a memory of this Sacrifice upon the Table by the Symbols of
his body and healthful blood:] when he says not so, but thus. [ Seeing
therefore we have received the memory of this Sacrifice, to be celebrated in
certain signs on the Table, and the memory of that body and healthful blood, as
is the institute of the New Testament.]

53. To the same purpose, Homil 27.
he quotes S. Macarius; [ In the Church is offered Bread and Wine, the antitype
of his Flesh and of his Blood:] when Macarius says not so, but rather the
contrary; [ Bread and Wine, exhibiting the exemplar (or antitype) his Flesh and
Blood.

54. To the same purpose, Page 42. In Ps. q. 8.
he quotes S. Augustine, as denying a real eating of Christ's body in the
Eucharist, but in figure only; when he denied not that, but only the eating
it in that gross, carnal, or sensible manner, as the Capernaites conceived; as
would have appeared, had the Doctor set down the words before, which he
fraudulently suppressed: [ Durum illis, etc. It seemed hard to them what he
said, Except ye eat the flesh, etc. they took it foolishly, they understood it
carnally, and thought that our Lord would cut off some gobbets of his body, and
give them, etc. But he instructed the twelve, etc. understand spiritually what
I speak. You are not to eat this body which you see, etc.]

55. To the same purpose, Page 43.
he quotes S. Augustine, lib. 10. cont. Faustum, as saying, [ That which by all
men is called a Sacrifice, is the sign of the true Sacrifice, etc.] when S.
Aug. has no such words in that book.

Sect. 6.
56, 57, 58. In citing the Decree of the Council of Constance, Page 47.
against Communion in both kinds, to make it fit his purpose, and render it
more odious to the Protestant Reader, he commits three gross Falsifications,
and which unless he took not the words out of the Decree himself but upon
trust, could not but be wilful. For, 1. Whereas the Decree recites three
Errors, and Innovations, as the causes of it; viz. 1. The maintaining it
necessary to communicate the people under both kinds; and the practice of that
innovation. 2. The maintaining that the Eucharist ought to be given, after
supper. 3. Or otherwise to people that were not fasting: [ Whereas in some
Countries, partibus.
some temerariously presume to assert, that the Christian people, ought to
receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both kinds, passim.
and do ordinarily communicate the Lay people under the species of wine; also
affirm, that the people ought to be communicated after supper, or otherwise not
fasting, etc.] He recites it as made against the first only, concealing the
other two fraudulently, under a line of pricks. [ Whereas in certain parts of
the world, some temerariously affirm, that the Christian people ought to
receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both kinds of Bread and Wine, and
do every where communicate the Laity, not only in Bread but in Wine also....
Hence it is that the Council decrees and defines against this error, that
although, etc.] 2. That he sets down the Decree, as containing an express, and
direct opposition to the institution of Christ, and practice of the Primitive
Church, for communicating the people under both kinds. [The Council decrees
and defines against this error, (of giving the Chalice to the Laity) that
although Christ instituted after supper, and administered this venerable
Sacrament under both kinds; yet this notwithstanding.... And although in the
Primitive Church this Sacrament was received of the faithful under both
kinds.] Here is the acknowledgement, both of Christ's Institution in both
kinds, and Christ's ministering it in both kinds, and the practice of the
Primitive Church to give it in both kinds; yet the conclusion from these
premises is, [ We command that no Priest communicate the people under both
kinds.] The opposition is plain, etc. Thus far he. Whereas in the Decree,
there is no such thing: for these are the words of it. [ Although Christ
instituted after supper, and administered this venerable Sacrament to his
Disciples under both kinds, yet this notwithstanding, the laudable authority
of holy Canons, servat.
and the approved custom of the Church, observes, that this Sacrament ought not
to be Consecrated after supper, nor received of the faithful not fasting,
(unless in case of the Article of death.) And as this custom, was reasonably
introduced, to avoid some dangers and scandals; that although in the Primitive
Church this Sacrament was received under both kinds; afterward it came to be
received under the species of Bread only by the Laity, it is to be had for a
Law, which is not lawful to reject or alter without authority of the Church.]
3. That he sets down these as the words of the Decree, [ We command under the
pain of Excommunication, that no Priest communicate the people under both
kinds:] whereas in the Decree are no such words; for this is all it says, [
Wherefore to say, that it is sacrilegious or unlawful to observe this custom or
Law, ought to be judged erroneous; and they that pertinaciously maintain the
opposite of the Premises, are to be expelled as Hereticks] arcendi.



59. Against Communion in one kind, Page 49. De Corp. and Sang. Dom. c. 19.
he says, Paschasius resolves it dogmatically, that neither the flesh without
the blood, nor the blood without the flesh is rightly communicated, because the
Apostles did all of them drink of the Chalice. When he resolves it not
dogmatically, but only argues it in way of discourse; nor does he give any
such reason, [ Because the Apostles, etc] nor says any thing there but what is
verified in the Priest celebrating, or in a Communicant in either kind only.
[ The sense is manifest, that now (his) flesh is broken, because in the Chalice
is the blood that flowed out of (his) side. And therefore very rightly is the
flesh sociated with the blood, because neither the flesh without the blood,
jure.
nor the blood without the flesh, is rightfully (or lawfully.) communicated:
But the whole man who consists of two substances is redeemed, and therefore he
is saginated with the flesh and blood of Christ together. And therefore they
are well rendered together in the Chalice, because from one cup of Christ's
Passion these two flowed to us unto life.]

Sect. 7.
60. Against our Latin Mass, Page 51.
he says, S. Chrysostom urging the Apostles precept for Prayers in a Language
understood by the hearers, says, That if a man speak in the Persian tongue,
and understands not what himself says, to himself he is a Barbarian; and
therefore so he is to him that understands no more then he does. When S.
Chrysostom neither urged there any precept of the Apostle, nor spoke of
Prayers, nor used altogether that form of words: for these are his words. [ If
one speak in only the Persian, or some other strange tongue, but knows not
what he says, certainly he will be now a Barbarian even to himself, and not to
another only, because he knows not the force of the word.]

61. To the same purpose, In 1 Cor. 14.
he quotes Lyra, That in the Primitive Church, Blessings, and all other things
in the Church, were done in the vulgar tongue; when Lyra says not, caetera
omnia, but caetera communia; Blessings, and other common things.

62, 63. He says, we are told by S. Chrysostom Hom. 1. in. ^ Joan.
and S. Augustine De Doct. Chr. c. 5. Page 52.
, That the Bible was translated into all Languages; when they tell us no such
thing.

64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69. To prove that the Fathers tell us, That a Service or
Prayers in an unknown tongue do not edify, he quotes S. Basil l. Quae ex
vaeriis scrip locis.
, S. Chrysostom in 1 Cor. Hom 35
, S. Ambrose in 1 Cor. 14.
, S. Augustine Sup. Psalm. 18. Com. 2.
, Aquinas in 1 Cor. 14.
, and Lyra in 1 Cor. 14.
, when S. Basil has no such Book as he quotes, and none of the other has any
such words.

70. Against our Latin Mass, Page 54. Con. Lat. 3. c ^.
he quotes a Canon of the Lateran Council, as if that had ordained, that all
people should have Mass in their vulgar tongue; when it only took care, that
where those who used Mass in diverse Languages, and with diverse Rites, as
Greeks, Latins, Maronites, etc. lived in one City or Diocese, the Bishop
should provide, every of them might have Mass and other Rites, according to the
manner of their own Church. [ Because in most parts within the same City and
Diocese, the people of diverse Tongues are mixed together, having under one and
the same Faith diverse Ceremonies and Rites: We command that the Bishop provide
men fit, who may celebrate according to the diversity of Ceremonies and
Languages.]

Sect. 8.
71. He says. Page 58.
S. Cyril denies that the Christians did give veneration to the Image even of
the Cross it self: But he names not which Cyril he means, and if him of
Alexandria, (as is most like) what Book of his he means; and if his 6th. Book
against Julian, where Julian objects to the Christians their folly in
worshipping the Cross; (as there is no other so probable to be meant) S. Cyril
does there not only not deny that the Christians worship it, but seems rather
to avow and justify it. For this was the Apostates Objection, [ O wretched
people! whereas the Arms are preserved which great Jupiter sent down, (...).
ye refuse to adore and worship them, and in the mean time ye adore the wood of
the Cross, painting Images of it in your foreheads, and before your houses.] To
which S. Cyrils answer is, [ He says, they are wretched, who have care always
to sign their houses and foreheads with the sign of the precious Cross; we will
show that these kind of speeches favor extreme ignorance. imperi^iam.
For the Savior and Lord of all, etc. all these things (that he did and
suffered for us) the health-giving wood makes us to remember.... satutare.
We make a Cross of the precious wood in remembrance of all good and virtue.]

72. He says, the Epistle of Epiphanius, Page 59 Ep. ad Job. Hier^s.
in which is the story of his cutting in pieces a picture of Christ, or some
Saint, which he found in a Church, was translated into Latin by S. Jerome, by
which we may guess at his opinion in the question: when S. Jerome translated
indeed that Epistle, but it appears not that this story was in that Epistle
that S. Jerome translated, which is a great argument that that story was foisted
into that Epistle after S. Jeroms time.

73, 74, 75. He says, Page ead.
S. Augustine complaining that he knew of many in the Church, who were
worshippers of Pictures, calls them Superstitious; and adds, that the Church
condemns such customs, and strives to correct them: and quotes for this three
places: De mor. Eccl. l. 1. c. 34. De Fid. and Symb. c. 7. Con. Adim. c. 13.
when in the two latter of them, he has not a word to any such purpose; and in
the first, he neither speaks of worshippers of Pictures, apart, or by it self
alone, (as here he quotes him) nor does he formally call them Superstitious,
nor does he add, that the Church condemns such customs; for these are his
words. [ Do not follow the routs of the ignorant, imperitorum.
who even in the true Religion it self are superstitious, or so given to lusts,
etc. I know that some are adorers of Sepulchers and Pictures: I know some who
most riotously drink over the dead, and exhibitting banquets to the Carcasses,
upon the buried bury themselves. I know there are many that have renounced the
world, etc.]

76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82. He says, Page 59.
Eginardus, Hincmarus, Aventinus, Blondus, Adon, Amonius, and Regino tell us,
that the Bishops of Francfort condemned the second Synod of Nice, (or the
seventh General, that established the worship of Images) and commanded it should
not be called a General Council; and published a Book under the name of the
Emperor, confuting that Antichristian Assembly: when one of his Authors (
Eginard) mentions not any of this; and not one of them mentions that the
Council of Francfort published any such Book under the name of the Emperor; and
Amonius says not, it condemned the second Nicene, but the Synod which had
assembled at Constantinople: and Hincmarus says only, it condemned the Synod
which had assembled at Nice without the Popes authority, (which could not mean
the second Nicene:) and Blondus says, it abrogated the seventh Synod, and the
Felician Heresy for taking away of Images.

83, 84, 85. Page 61.
He says, it appears in the writings of Clemens Alexandrinus Strom l. 6.
, Tertullian Adv. marc. l. 2. c. 22.
, and Origin l. 4. co. Celf.
, that in those times they would not allow the making of Images: when
Tertullian says no such thing, and neither of the other two speaks of the
Images of Christ, or his Saints, but of Jupiter, and the other Heathen gods.

Sect. 9.
86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92. Page 62.
Against picturing those forms wherein God has appeared, (which is all that
some of ours do allow and practice) he quotes Tertullian De Cor. Mil.
; Eusebius De Praep. Evang^l. l. 1. c. 5.
, Athanasius Orat. Co. Gent
, S. Hierom In c. 40. Es.
, Theodoret in Deuteronomy. q. 1.
, Damascen L 4 de Fid. Onth. c. 17.
, Nicephorus L. 18 c. 53.
, and others; when diverse of these (as namely, Tertullian, Eusebius, and Jerome)
have nothing to this purpose; and the rest spoke only against representing
God, as in his own essence, shape, or form: as appears by their words, which it
would be too long to set down. But to instance in one or two; Theodoret,
Theodoret. in Deuteronomy q. 1.
[ Ye saw no likeness, etc. He says this, instructing them that they should
not make any Idol, nor at any time attempt to counterfeit the Divine Image,
when they never saw the species of the archetype, L. 18. c. 53.
etc.] Nicephorus, [ They made Images of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which
is most absurd: for Images are of bodies that may be seen and circumscribed,
not of those who are invisible and incomprehensible by our understanding.]

Sect. 10.
93. To prove, Page 64.
that Christ left his Apostles without any Eminency in one above the rest, he
says, S. Paul gave the Bishops congregated at Miletum caution to take care of
the whole flock of God: Acts 20. 28.
when the Text has no such thing, but rather the contrary; [ The flock over
which the H. Ghost has made you Bishops.]

94. To the same purpose, De unit. Eccl.
he quotes S. Cyprian, [ The other Apostles are the same that S. Peter was,
etc.] wresting them against that which S. Cyprian did in that very place
expressly assert, to wit, an Eminency in S. Peter above the rest of the
Apostles, though not in the species of the power, yet in the manner and degree
of it, viz. that Christ gave it first to S. Peter's person, as the origin of
unity; as would have appeared, had he set down the words immediately before and
after; which most plainly and solidly maintain S. Peter's Primacy
notwithstanding that parity. [ Our Lord said to Peter, Upon this Rock I will
build my Church; and again, Do thou feed my sheep. Upon him one (person,) he
builds his Church, and to him he commends his Sheep to be fed. And although
after his Resurrection, he gave to all his Apostles equal power, and say, As my
Father sent me, so I send you; yet that he might manifest unity, (that the
Church was to be one, by the unity of the Governor) he constituted one Chair
(in S. Peter's person) and by his authority disposed the origin of unity
beginning from one (person S. Peter:) Then follow the words quoted by the
Doctor, [ The other Apostles are the same that S. Peter was, etc.] After which
these. [ But the beginning comes from unity; the Primacy is given to Peter,
that one Church of Christ, and one Chair may be monstrated. That is, they were
all equal in power and honor; but Peter had it with this Eminency above the
rest, that it was settled first in his single person.

95, 96, and usque 113. To prove that all Antiquity does consent and teach,
that all the ordinary power of the Apostles descended to the Bishops as their
successors, though it be a truth, and maintained by us, yet of his twenty
Quotations brought for it, no less then eighteen are false or wrested: viz. 1.
Irenaeus l. 4. c. 43. says only, [We ought to obey the Presbyters, that are
in the Church, that have succession from the Apostles, who with succession of
Episcopacy have received the certain Charisma of truth. 2. Id. ib. c. 44. Has
not a word to this purpose. 3. S. Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 6. Has not a word to this
purpose. 4. Id. l. 2. Ep. 10. He says only this, [ The unity delivered by our
Lord, and through the Apostles to us successors.] 5. Id. l. 4. Ep. 9. Says
nothing of Bishops, but what is as true of Presbyters; [ Christ said to his
Apostles, and by this to all that are praepositi, who by Vicarious Ordination
succeed to the Apostles: He that despises you despises me.] 6. S. Ambrose, de
dign. Sacred. c. 1. Says nothing but what rather makes against the Doctor:
viz. That all Bishops received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven in the B.
Apostle Peter. 7. S. Aug. de Bap. co. Donat. l. 7. c. 43. only sets down the
Sentence of one of the African Bishops, Clarus a Muscula, for the rebaptizing
of Heretics. 8. Id. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 24. says nothing but what pertains to
Priests as much as Bishops. [ He that despises you, despises me. If he had said
this to the Apostles alone, despise us. But if his word have come unto us, and
called us, and placed us in their room, see that ye despise not us.] 9. Conc.
Romans sub Sylv. says nothing, but that men should not detract from the
Disciples of our Lord, that is, the successors of the Apostles. 10. Anacletus
P. Ep. 2. says nothing, but that the Pillars of the Holy Church, which the
Apostles and their successors are not unrightly called, should not be easily
shaken or accused. 11. S. Clem. P. Ep. 1. says nothing, but that the Bishops
supply the place of the Apostles, as Priests do, of the 72. Disciples: ( whose
successors properly they are not.) 12. S. Hieron. Ep. 13. has not a word to
this sense. 13. Id. Ep. 54. says no more, but that Bishops with us
(Catholics) hold the place of the Apostles, whereas the Montanists put them
down to the third place. 14. Euthym. in Ps. 44. has nothing to this purpose.
15. S. Greg. in Evang. Hom. 26. says no more, but that Bishops hold now in the
Church the place of them to whom Christ said, Whose sins ye forgive, etc. 16.
S. Jerome (whom I suppose the Doctor meant, for S. Gregory has no such Epistle)
Ep. 1. ad Heliodor. speaks not of Bishops properly, but of Priests: [ God
forbid I should speak any sinister thing of them, who succeeding to the
Apostolic degree, with their sacred mouth make Christ's Body.] 17. S. Damasc.
de Imag. Or. 2. only uses the words of the Apostle, [God has set in the
Church, first Apostles, then Prophets, etc.] 18. S. Greg. Naz. Orat. 21. de
Laud. Athanas. (not as he quotes it, Basilii) has not a word to this purpose.


114, 115. Page 65.
He says, Bishops are, in express terms, called by S. Ambrose, Vicars of
Christ; and quotes two places for it: in neither of which S. Ambrose speaks of
Bishops, but only of the Apostles. In 1 Cor. 3.
[We are the helpers of God. This pertains to the person of the Apostles, who
it is manifest are Gods helpers, because they are the Vicars of Christ.
Therefore they ( the Apostles) received from God the Father by Christ our Lord
this power, In Roman. 1.
that in our Lords stead, they should make the Doctrine of our Lord
acceptable.] Vice Domini.


116. He says, Page 66.
The Pope calls himself the Universal Bishop, and the Vicarial Head of the
Church, the Churches Monarch, he from whom all Ecclesiastical authority is
derived, to whose Sentence in things Divine, every Christian under pain of
damnation is bound to be subject.] And quotes for this, the Canon, Unam
Sanctam; Extrav. Com. l. 1. tit. 9. de Major. and Obed.
when in that Canon there is not any one of these Sentences, but only that he
is the Vicarial Head of the Church. [Of one only Church, there is one only
Head, to wit, Christ, and his Vicar Peter, and his successors; we define it to
be altogether necessary to every humane creature to salvation, to be subject to
the Roman Bishop.]

117. He says, S. Ambrose says, Page 67.
the Bishop holds the place of Christ, and is his substitute; and quotes for
it, S. Ambrose, ubi supra: and we have seen before, that S. Ambrose, in none of
those places, says any such thing.

118. To prove, Page 67.
that the Bishops of Rome had no superiority by the Laws of Christ over any
Bishop, and that his Bishopric gave no more power to him, then Christ gave to
the Bishop of the smallest Diocese, he quotes Pope Symmachus; Apud Baron. to.
6. Anno 499 n. 36.
[ As it is in the Holy Trinity whose power is one and undivided, (or to use
the expression in the Athanasian Creed, none is before or after other, none is
greater or less then another) so there is one Bishopric amongst diverse
Bishops, and therefore why should the Canons of the ancient Bishops be violated
by their successors.] When, 1. there is no such saying of Symmachus in the
place quoted. 2. The Epistle which he meant, and is to be found in the Tomes of
the Councils, is not a little altered and mangled by him in the very words. 1.
Symmachus says not, as he quotes him, [ As it is in the Holy Trinity, etc. So
there is one Bishopric, etc. And therefore why should, etc.] But thus. dum.
[ For whilst, there is (like unto the Trinity, whose power is one and
individual) one Bishopric, etc. convenit.
how agrees it, (or is it becoming) etc.] 2. Symmachus says not, there is one
Bishopric, inter multos, amongst many Bishops, as he renders it, as if
equalling all Bishops then living one to another; but there is one, per multos,
through many; that is, through the line of Bishops succeeding to one another in
the same See: and so it only equals the successor to his predecessor. 3. Where
Symmachus says, priorum, of former Bishops, or predecessors, in that See, he
translates it, of the ancient Bishops. 4. Finding, that these words, would make
nothing to his purpose, he wrests them to it with a Gloss; [ None is before or
after other, none is greater or less then another,] and then inferres, that
these words do fully declare, that the Roman Bishopric gave no more power to
the Pope, then Christ gave to the Bishop of the smallest Diocese: when he could
but know that his gloss and inference, had not only no foundation in
Symmachus's words, but were directly contrary to the whole substance and drift
of the Epistle; it being an answer to a Letter of Complaint of the Archbishop
of Arles to the Pope, against the Archbishop of Vienna, for invading the rights
of the Church of Arles, for ordaining some neighbor Bishops, upon pretense of
some Breve or Rescript of Pope Anastasius, (Symmachus his predecessor) wherein
he had contraried the Grants of former Popes to the Church of Arles; and
desiring from the Pope redress in it: and he promises to redress it, and gives
for his reason the words quoted by the Doctor, because it was not well done of
Anastasius, to contrary the Acts of his predecessors: all which proves, that
the Roman Bishop was superior to those Archbishops of Arles and Vienna, and had
jurisdiction over them, and that Symmachus himself thought so. [ We have
received your Letters, by which appears there is a controversy betwixt the
Churches of Arles and Vienna, concerning ordaining of Bishops in neighboring
Cities: caused by this, that our predecessor of happy memory, Anastasius, had
commanded some things to be observed contrary to the ancient custom;
transgressing the Ordinance of his predecessors; which he ought not to have
done for any necessity whatsoever. For seeing there is but one Bishopric
through diverse Bishops, (like the Trinity, whose power is one and individual)
how is it becoming, the Statutes of former Popes to be violated by them that
follow? etc.]

119. To the same purpose, Page 67. Eccl. Hier. de Sacerd. perfect. cap. 5.
he quotes S. Dionysius, [As the whole Hierarchy ends in Jesus, so does every
particular one in its own Bishop:] As if he had meant that every Bishop was
supreme Governor next under Christ in his own Diocese: when he meant only,
that the order of Bishops was the supreme Hierarchical order, in compare to
Priests, Deacons, etc. [ The Divine order therefore of Bishops, is the first of
those Orders which see God; and he is also the highest and the last. For in him
is finished and completed all the distinction of our Hierarchy. For as we see
all our Hierarchy to end in Jesus, etc.]

120, 121, 122, 123. To the same purpose, Page 68.
he quotes Origin, Gelasius, S. Jerome, and Fulgentius, as teaching, That the
Bishops have the supreme place in the Church: But, 1. for Origin; he quotes no
book, nor has Origin any saying to that sense, to exclude the Primacy of the
Roman See. 2 For Fulgentius, he quotes him in Council. Paris. l. 1. c. 3. but
tells not what Council of Paris he means, nor what Fulgentius, nor in what
Collection the book is to be found; I can find no such, in Fulgentius his
Works, nor in the Tomes of Councils, nor in the Councils of France set out by
Syrmondus. 3. For Gelasius, he teaches no such thing: for all he says is this,
D. 97. C. Duo sunt.
[ There are two things by which this World is principally governed, the sacred
Authority of Bishops, and Regal power. Betwixt which, the burden of Bishops is
so much the heavier, by how much they are in the divine examen to give an
account even for Kings themselves, etc.] 4. For S. Jerome, he quotes two places;
one is in Hom. 7. in Jerem. when he has no such work of Homilies upon Jeremy:
and if he meant his Commentary upon the seventh Chapter of Jeremy; there is not
a tittle in it to any such purpose. The other is, in his Book, adversus
Lucifer; in which likewise I can find nothing to this purpose.

124. He says, Page 68.
that when Bellarmin is in this question (about the Pope's Supremacy) pressed
out of the Book of Nilus, by the authority of the Fathers standing against him,
he answers, the Pope acknowledges no Fathers in the Church, for they are all
his Sons. As if Bellarmin had answered this in contempt of the authority of the
Fathers urged by Nilus, against the Pope's Supremacy; when there was no such
thing. For the objection of Nilus there urged was not from Fathers, but from
Reason; and it was only to prove that the Pope ought to be subject to the
Canons of holy Fathers, because he had his Dignity from the Fathers, and Popes
themselves had made diverse Canons; and he were unworthy to be honored as a
Father, if he contemned the Fathers. To which reasons Bellarmin answered, That
the Pope had not his Dignity from the Fathers, and that if he made Canons, he
could not bind himself; and that if he be honored as a Father by all, he has
no Fathers in the Church, but all Children; and therefore he cannot be subject
to them; and that he contemns not the Fathers, etc.]

125. He says, Page 69.
this speech of S. Cyprian in the Council of Carthage, [None of us makes
himself a Bishop of Bishops, or by tyramical power drives his Colleagues to a
necessity of obediance, etc.] was spoken and intended against Pope Stephen, to
reprehend him for his Lording it over God's Heritage, and excommunicating his
brethren; and this his chastising of Pope Stephen for this usurpation, was also
approved in him by S. Augustine: De Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 3. c. 3.
when S. Augustine in the place quoted, says no such thing, nor understood it
as spoken against Pope Stephen, but as spoken modestly and humbly, to encourage
the Bishops to deliver their Sentence without fear of excommunication; and he
interprets the words not to mean, as if the Bishops were exempted absolutely
from being judged by their Superiors, but only in such cases as that, which
were undetermined by the Church. [ None of us makes himself a Bishop of
Bishops, etc. What more meek? what more humble? Certes no authority should
deter us from inquiring what is true. Since every Bishop, etc. I suppose he
means, in those questions which have not yet been discussed by the most
eliquate perspection. For he knew how great a profundity of Sacrament then the
whole Church did by various disputation discuss; and he made free the choice of
enquiring; that by examination the truth might be manifested. For he did not
lie, or desire to catch his more simple Colleagues in their words, that when
they had discovered themselves to hold contrary to him, he should censure them
to be excommunicate.] This was it he approved in S. Cyprians speech; and this
was all he approved.

126. Against S. Peter's Primacy, Page 70. In Act. Apost Hom. 3.
he quotes S. Chrysostom, [He did all things with the common consent, nothing
by special authority or principality:] when in that very place he most strongly
asserted S. Peter's Primacy, as would have appeared had the Doctor set down the
words before and after. [Peter arising up in the midst of the Disciples, said,
etc. How fervent is he? How does he acknowledge the flock committed to him by
Christ? How is he Prince in the Chair, and ever first begins to speak? Now
consider that also, how he does act all things by the common vote of the
Disciples, nothing by his own authority; nor did he simply say, we set up this
man in the place of Judas. And although he had a right equal to all, of
constituting him, yet out of virtue or modesty congruently he did it not. But
deservedly does he first exercise authority in the business, as who had them
all in his hand, for to him Christ said, Confirm thy Brethren.]

127. He says, Page 70. Loc. Com. l. ^. c. 8.
Canus confesses, That there is in Scripture no revelation, that the Bishop of
Rome should succeed S. Peter in his special authority. But Canus says not all
out so; but that it is not indeed per se there revealed. And in the next words
he says, That it is had out of the Gospel, that the Pastor substituted by
Christ in the Church after Peter, has all the ordinary power of Peter, and all
other privileges granted to Peter for the Churches sake.

128, 129, 130, 131. He says, it is confessed by Cusanus, Conc. Cath. l. 2. c.
34. Sent. 4. d. 24. q. 2. a. 5. De Eccles. Dogm. l. 4 c. 3.
Soto, Driedo, and Canus, that this succession (of Peter's Chair) was not
addicted to any particular Church, nor can be proved that the Bishop of Rome is
Prince of the Church: which last, is not confessed by any out of them; and for
the first, Driedo says to the contrary, in the very place quoted; [ Not rashly
therefore, but with pious faith, we believe with the Fathers our predecessors,
that the Faith and Primacy of the Church, and the Chair of Peter are
inseparable from the Roman Diocese.]

Sect. 11.
132, 133, 134, 135. Page 72. De Cons. d. 2. C. Peracta. Ib. C In Cae^a. C. Si
quis. D 1. C. Omnes.
He quotes four Canons, as showing, that private Mass is against the Doctrine
and practice of the ancient Church of Rome, and the Tradition of the Apostles,
and is also forbidden under pain of Excommunication; when not one of them has
any such thing, nor forbids the Priest to celebrate without Communicants, but
only enjoins the Deacons, or people at due times, to communicate with the
Priest. So C. Peracta. [When Consecration is done, (that is, when the Priest
has consummated) let all Communicate that will not be excluded from the
Church; for so the Apostles have appointed, and so holds the holy Roman
Church.] Which Canon yet meant not of the Lay People, De Cons d. 2. C. Et si
non.
(who, as appears by another Canon made within twenty years after, were obliged
to Communicate only three times a year, Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide,
when yet the Priests said Mass every day) but only of the Deacons who assisted
at Mass. For so declares the Title of it; [ Let the Minister, who after
Consecration contemns to Communicate, be excluded from entering into the
Church.] And so the Gloss, [Let all Communicate, that is, all who minister the
body and blood.] So C. in coena. [ Upon Maundy Thursday, the receiving of the
Eucharist is by some neglected, which that it is to be received on that day by
all the faithful, (except those to whom for great crimes it is prohibited) the
use of the Church demonstrates, seeing even Penitents are on that day
reconciled to receive the Sacraments of our Lords body and blood.] So C. Si
quis. [ If any one come into the Church, and hears the sacred Scriptures, Pro
luxuria sua.
and out of wantonness averts himself from receiving the Sacrament, and in
observing the Mysteries declines from the constituted rule of Discipline, we
decree such a one to be cast out of the Church.] So C. omnes fideles. [ All the
faithful who come to the Church in the sacred Solemnities (of Easter,
Christmas, etc.) let them hear the Scriptures of the Apostles, and the Gospels;
but they that persevere not in Prayer whilst Mass is finished, nor receive the
holy Communion, it is fit they be deprived of Communion, as raising
disturbances of the Church.]

Chap. 2. Sect. 1.
136. He says, Page 76. Euchir. c. 1. n. 31.
It is taught by Navar, that though the Church calls upon sinners to repent on
Holy Days, and at Easter, yet by the Law of God they are not tied to so much,
but only to repent in the Article or danger of Death; and he says that for
this, Navar quotes Pope Adrian, and Card. Cajetan, and affirms is to be the
sense of all men: When Navar has not a word to any such purpose, in the number
quoted. And n. 27. (where he purposely speaks of this matter, and was perhaps
meant by the Doctor) Navar neither affirms it to be the sense of all men, nor
teaches it himself, nor quotes P. Adrian, or Card. Cajetan for it; but only
teaches, That though a man ought all the while that he is in mortal sin to take
care to repent of it; according to S. Thomas and the common opinion, and namely
Card. Cajetan; yet he is not bound to it by a Precept obliging to new mortal
sin, unless at that time when it occurs to his memory as to use, (that is, to
desire or refuse it, to commit or omit it) according to the common opinion.
Nay, nor at that time neither, for those reasons for which Adrian and Cajetan
affirm it. And at length concludes, that according to all, we are bound to
procure an act of contrition, in imminent danger of death, and whenever we
are to administer or receive any Sacrament, (which all are bound to, at Easter,
or once a year) nay, and whenever there is any great necessity of the people
which requires servor of prayer to provide against it, according to Pope Adrian.

137. To the same purpose he quotes Reginaldus, Page 76. Prax sori Poenit. l 5.
c. 2. Sent. 4. n. 23.
as denying, that men are bound by the commandment of God, to an act of
contrition, but only in the Article of death; when he only denies, that they
are bound to it on Holy Days, and affirms, that by the common opinion of all,
the time in which a man is bound to it by any special commandment given by God
touching contrition, (which word, special, the Doctor leaves out) is the
imminent danger of death: but then adds, that besides the Article of death,
there are other times in which we may be bound to an act of contrition,
(meaning, when we are to administor or receive any Sacrament) all which the
Doctor leaves out.

138. He quotes Gultelmus de Rubeone, Page 80. and 81.
Tolet, Maldonat, etc. as teaching, that if a man he never so little sorrowful
for his sins, it is sufficient with the Sacrament to obtain pardon for the
greatest sins: whereas they spoke not of any little intention or degree of
sorrow absolutely, but within the species of contrition; which contrition no
sorrow can be, as they teach, unless it be a detestation of sin above all
things detestable.

Sect. 3.
139. He says, Page 86. V. Satisf. n. 10.
the Penitent may get some body else to do his penance for him, and quotes for
it Sa: whereas Sa says no such thing absolutely, (as he quotes him) but with
two conditions, which the Doctor conceals: viz. 1. That it be with the license
of his Confessarius. 2. Or when he cannot do it by himself.

140. To the same purpose, L. 3. Instr. Sac. c. 11. n 6.
he quotes Tolet, who has not a word to that purpose, in the place quoted; and
where he does speak of it, n. 13. he says not, The Penitent may get some body
else to do his Penance for him, as he quotes it, but directly denies it, unless
in some case. [ If the Confessarius do not impose Penance with a liberty to the
Penitent to do it by himself, or another; the Penitent has no faculty to
fulfill it by another, unless there be a necessity, as by reason of infirmity,
or some impossibility.

141. He says, Page 99. Qu. 37. de Iud. Prop. 3.
Cordubensis expressly affirms, that he that sins in hope of an Indulgence gains
it: when he does not affirm it absolutely, but only says, that standing in
the rigor of such a grant, it seems to be probable.

142. He says, Page 102.
Espenceus gives this account of our Taxa Camerae Apostolicae, that it is a
Book in which a man may learn more wickedness, then in all the Summaries of
Vices published in the world; and yet to them that will pay for it, there is to
many given a License, to all an Absolution for the greatest and most horrid
sins: setting down these later in such a manner, as the Reader may easily think
them the words of Espenceus; when they are not; nor does Espenceus say, in all
the Summaries of Vices, but simply, in all the Summaries: nor does that Book of
Taxa Camerae, give any Absolution, and much less License for any sin, to such
as will pay for it, but only to abridge the Court from unlimited and arbitrary
impositions in that kind, taxes a mulct, to be paid for some pious use, by way
of penance, before Absolution shall be had.

Sect. 7.
143. He quotes these as Tolet's words, Page 113. L 5. c. 6 n. 15.
If a Noble man be set upon, and may escape by going away, he is not tied to
it, but may kill him that intends to strike him with a stick;] But falsely: for
Tolet's words are these, [If a Noble man being set upon, might save his life by
flying, he is not bound (if thence he contract infamy) to fly, but may kill
his enemy, if he cannot otherwise defend life with honor. Likewise, if he
cannot avoid a notable injury to be put upon him (as if there be preparation to
beat him with bills (or staves) for then he may kill his enemy. fustium
percussionem paratam


144. He quotes these as Tolet's words, Page 114. L. 5 c. 13. n. 10.
[If a man desires carnal pollution, that he may be eased of his carnal
temptations, or for his health, it were no sin:] when his words in the place
quoted were these; [Mollities (or voluntary carnal pollution) is not lawful,
either for health, or life, or any end whatsoever.] And n. 4. (which perhaps
the Doctor means) Tolet says only this; [If a man should desire involuntary
pollution in sleep, for a good end, as for health, or for easing the tentations
of the flesh, with which in the day time he is afflicted, it would be no sin,
so that the desire be not such as may be cause of the pollution, etc.]

145. He quotes these as Tolet's words; It is lawful for a man to expose his
Bastards to the Hospital, Page 114. L. 5. c 11. n. 5.
to conceal his own shame:] when, in the number quoted, Tolet has nothing to
that purpose; and n. 10. where he has these words that the Doctor quotes, he
clogs them with a condition, which the Doctor omits, and much alters the case,
[ So that the Father and Mother restore to the Hospital, all Charges, if they
be able.]

146. He quotes these as Tolet's words out of Soto, Page ead. L. 8. c. 39. n. 4.
and he from Tho. Aquinas; If the times be hard, or the Judge unequal, a man
that cannot sell his Wine at a due price, may lawfully make his measures less
then is appointed, or mingle water with his wine, etc.] when in the Chapter and
number quoted, Tolet has nothing to that purpose: and cap. 49. n. 5. where he
speaks of this matter, he states not the case in that manner as the Doctor
quotes him, but thus: [One cannot sell his wine, at the just ( that is, the
taxed price) either by reason of the iniquity of the Judge, or the malice of
buyers, (who agree among themselves that few shall buy, to the end to bring
down the price) or some other reasonable cause: then he may lessen his measure,
or mix a little water, and sell it for pure wine, and complete measure, taking
the just price, etc.]

147. He says, Page ead. Aphor. tit. Deb. Conjug 6.
Emanuel Sa affirms, That if a man lie with his intended Wife before marriage,
it is no sin, or a light one; nay, it is good to do so, if the benediction, or
publication of marriage, be much deferred: which is a gross falsification, for
Sa spoke not of lying with her before Marriage, but only before the Benediction.
[To come together before the Benediction, is no sin, or a light one; yea, it
is expedient, if it ( that is, the Benediction) be much delayed.]

149. He says, Page ead. De Ador. l 3. Disp. 1. c. 2.
Vasquez says, That not only an Image of God, but any creature, may without
danger be worshipped with God, as his Image: which he says not, but that any
other creature, out of the nature of the thing, and danger seeluded, may be
worshipped, etc.]

150. He says, Page ead. De Ador. l. 3. Disp 1. c. 5. sect. 33.
Vasquez says, That it is no sin to worship a ray of light, in which the Devil
is invested, if a man supposes him to be Christ, and quotes for it, his Chap.
5. sect. 33. whereas that Chapter has no Sections; nor does Vasquez say any
such thing in that Chapter, but only this; That in a ray of light which
appears, a man may out of a right intention and affection toward God, worship
that ray; and although the Devil should be there, yet no affection of
servitude, or exterior note of submission, would be exhibited to him.

Sect. 9.
151. He says, Page 124. Com. in Prove. 8 17.
Quirinus de Salazar affirms, That the Virgin Mary by offering up Christ to God
the Father, was worthy to have (after a certain manner) that the whole
Salvation and Redemption of mankind should be ascribed to her, etc. whereas
Quirinus affirms there the direct contrary. [Illud imprimis exploratum est apud
Catholicos, etc. In the first place, that is most certain among Catholics,
that the Virgin was not the principle, or cause of our Salvation, (for Christ
alone finished the whole business by his Passion, entirely satisfying our debt)
but only that by her impetration she in some manner promoted and helped it.]
That therefore which he Rhetorically adds afterward, in confutation of one
that compared her scornfully to a purse full of Gold, which when the Gold is
out of it is little worth it self; [That because she had that in common with
Christ, that she may be truly and properly said, to have given and offered the
price of our Redemption, as he had before cited out of S. Jerome, and other
Fathers, therefore also with him she carries all those Titles and Names which
are used to be given to Christ, etc.] meant no more, then as he explicated
himself both before and after out of the Fathers, that she contributed to our
Salvation, by her prayers for it, and offering up her Son willingly to that
end. Before, thus. [That is to be premised, that the holy Fathers do attribute
so much to the B. Virgin, that they will have her to be some cause of our
Salvation: not by satisfying or satis-giving for sin, son that belongs to
Christ alone, but by impetrating it for us. So Irenaeus; She was made the cause
of Salvation to all mankind. So S. Chrysostom, etc.] And presently after these
words, thus. [Therefore because the Virgin, by her Prayers, contributed
somewhat to our Salvation, truly in my opinion that seems to be sufficient,
that she may be called, a Cause, Auctress, or Mediatress of our Salvation, as
others who also prayed, etc.]

152. He says, Page 133.
It is a famous saying of S. Gregory, that the Bodies of many persons are
worshipped on Earth, whose Souls are tormented in Hell. But he quotes no place
for it, nor has S. Gregory any such words in any place.

153. He quotes Augustinus Triumphus as affirming, Page 133. Q 14. ad 4.
that all who are Canonized by the Pope, cannot be said to be in Heaven; who
there says no such thing.

154. He quotes Prateolus, Page ead. Verb. Hermanus.
how the body of one Herman, after he had been for twenty years honored for a
Saint, was taken up and burnt; as if he had been honored for a Saint by
authority of the Church: whereas Prateolus meant no such thing, but only that
he had been so honored, by the simple vulgar, or perhaps the Heretics his
followers.

Chap. 3. Sect. 2.
155. He qoutes Sa, Page 162. Aphor. verb. Clericus.
as expressly teaching, That the rebellion of a Clergyman against his Prince is
not treason, because he is not his Princes Subject: when Sa has not a word to
any such purpose. And he says, These words, though left out of the Edition of
Paris, yet still remain in the Editions of Antwerp and Colen: which is false
too; for my Edition is of Antwerp, and in that, they are not.

Sect. 3.
156. He says, Page 170. Resp. ad Apol. pro Juram. fidel.
Bellarmin dares not deny, the Oration published under the name of Sixtus V. to
be none of his; when, in the very place quoted for it, he does expressly deny
it. [ I answer, that there is no Oration of Sixtus V. extant, but among the
enemies of the Church, who set out Anti-Sixtus. But although no credit ought to
be given to an enemy, nor although he were no enemy, credit could be given to
him, etc.]

FINIS.

