The Last LETTERS, To the London-Merchants AND Faithful Ministers CONCERNING
The further Proceedings of the Conversion and Restoration of the Jews; With
most strange and wonderful Miracles performed by the Holy Captain General of
the Wa^d^ing-Israelites; A Prophecy touching the Downfall of Babylon in 66,
and the time of the Gosp^l to be Preached throughout the whole World; The
Number of their Great Armies; A Des^ription of their Persons, Habits, and
We^pons; the routing of the King of A^abia, and killing many thousand Tu^ks.
And the fearful Dream of the Turkish Emperor, worthy of Observation by all
good Christians.

Imprinted for G. Cotton, 1665.

The last Let^ers from Dr. Serarias, and the City of Jerusalem, concerning the
further Proceedings of the Jews, in order to their Conversion:
SIR,
YOurs I have received, and was glad of that Return of Your Love: In part of
Retalianation I shall communicate the further Proceedings and Ratlings of the
House of Israel: For since my last. We have had several Expresses not only
from Jerusalem, but Tun^^^ also; That this Year no Carrivan is to go to Mecha,
by reason the City is besie^ed by the Israelite^, who appear in great Numbers,
and are said to be sent by the Ten Tribes to be the Forerunners: From
Jerusalem we have received very good News, and likewise many of our Christian
Mercha ts have received the like from Alexandria, The Particulars of which is,
that the Bashaw or Alexandria, with the King of Arabia, made use of a Carravan,
that is, an Army of Sixty Thousand Men, and marched toward Mecha, and being
within one days Journey of the City, sent out a Troop to take notice how
things were, which Troop having seen this People lying in Tents about the
City* and hearing that they professed themselves to be Israelites* reported this
to the Bashaw, who for all that resolved to march on with his Forces, and
coming within sight of the City, discovered an innumerable Multitude of People
coming out of their Tents. Whereupon the Turks advanced up against them, gave
fire, and discharged several Volleys of round shot; but after a little fighting
a pannick fear took them and terror seized on them, making them cry out, Who is
able to fight with these People, seeing our Arrows and Shot return back upon
our selves. So the Turks leaving off fighting, returned Home, and the
Israelites unto their Tents without pursuing them. This Affront caused the
Bashaw and King of the Moors, through out all Egypt and Arabia, to impose on the
Jews in all their Dominions, a new Tax five times greater then it was before.
And the Bashaw, the better to inform himself what this People were sent ten
Jews to them who found them to be Israelites, and that they spoke Hebrew,
saying, they were sent before to remain at Meka till the rest of their Brethren
came, for that the time was now come, that they should return unto their own
Land of their Forefathers, which others had usurped and taken from them.
Another Letter says that the Commander of Meka sent 4 Troops to oppose them,
but not one returned, and that diverse Caravans and great Bodies have bin wholly
defeated by the said Israelites; and that twelve thousand Turks coming from a
City called Metai, near Meka, were also routed, and eight thousand slain upon
the Place, their own Swords and Muskets turning against themselves. Of the ten
Jews that were sent sir remained with their Brethren, and but 4 returned to the
Turks. As for the great Prophet in North. Skilton, Doctor Collonest has bin at
his House in a Town called Long-Ditch, where he heard these things out of his
own Mouth, That in the Year, 1661. he meditated on the Scriptures speaking of
the Latter Times; as Math. 2^. Esaias 24. Jer. 50. Ezekiel. 28. Dan. 7. It happened
that he being awake in his Bed near Morning he heard a distinct Voice telling
him, that Babylon was to fall in 66. and that at Midnight even as it happened to
Beltshazer; and that Her Fall would cause such a Terror and Consternation to
fall upon Men, that from that time until 70, there would be a stand in Divine
Worship, and many Judgments would fall on diverse Cities and Towns, whereof some
would suddenly be swallowed up and Long-Ditch ruined, and few escape; yet
notwithstanding he has no freedom to return. But in the Year 71. there will be
some Meetings again though no Communion held all that time, only a beginning
of Practice: But in 72, there will be a full Communion and Restitution of the
Apostolical Worship, And then will the Gospel be preached throughout the whole
World.


This is the substance of a Letter sent to Doctor Homes.

From Saley in Barbary, August 16. 1665.
Worthy Sir,
THE Tidings of the 15. of July, concerning the March of our Brethren, the Ten
Tribes of Israel, i^ now from several places confirmed to Us, all Things being
so full of wonder, that for s^^e few days we could scarcely b^lieve, or give
credit to it, from the City of Sus, otherwise called Sama-Crew. But now We have
certain Information, that they are on the side of the Desert, and move from
several places to the said Desert Go^h of Morocco* being not ar from Cape de
Ver, but more within the Land. And they appear daily more and more in great
Multitudes, having suddenly and unep^ctedly manifested themselves, covering a
vast Tract of Ground, and consisting of about eight thousand Companies or
Troops, each of which containing from one hundred to a thousand Men.

They who went thither to see and enquire who they were, found them to be
Strangers, and an unknown People, whose Language they understood not, only
some few of their Commanders speak Hebrew. Their Arms are Swords, Bows, Arrow^,
and L^nces, each Man being well armed therewith, but no Guns at all. They have
for their Chief Leader, or Captain, a Holy M^n who understands all Languages,
and marches before them, doing Miracles.

These, with several of their Actions, were all related to me by a Convert
Rabby, who has been discoursing amongst them and has affirmed it by an Oath,
upon the Book of the Law.

But in Confirmation of all which, here are now arrived several Gentlemen of
good repute and Credit, who relate, passing by the Places abovementioned, That
they understood the same Things, which the Rabby and others, who had seen them
before, had related, and many Things more; amongst the rest, that this unknown
People were come from the Mountainous Countries in the Wilderness, and were
advanced as far as Mecha^as. There is a certain Jew in the City of Sus, who
has testified and declared, that he has seen the People called Israelites,
and going amongst them, discoursed with many of their Commanders in He^rew, but
understood not the Language of the great Multitude: yet withal heard of other
Jews that several of them spoke the Holy Tongue; and that whosoever goes to
contend with this People in Battle, are presently vanquished, and slain.

They have already possessed themselves of several Places and Cities, putting all
the Inhabitants to the Sword, the Jews only excepted. They are a People of a
middle stature, their Bodies comely, their Complexions fair: This Party saw no
Woman amongst them, nor any other Ar^^ besides those abovementioned* their
Horses are many, their Attire blew, and their Tents black. From the aforesaid
City of Sus, the whole Host of them might be plainly and distinctly viewed the
whole Week, and might see their Fire^ and Smoke ascending; but on the Sabbath,
neither of both could be discerned throughout the whole Camp, or Host.

Several of them being got up on a very high Sand, the Mountain where they are
employed to dig is very deep in the said Sand, where they expect to find a
Brays Tamber; that is, a Trumpet, with the which they are to sound 2 times, and
then all Nations are to be gathered into one Universal Church. Their Leader is
of an extraordinary discerning Spirit, and as soon as he sees a man he knows
his Mind, and what is in his Heart. It Is said, that coming to a great River not
Foordable, he consulted the passage, and the whole Army went to Prayers,
imploring the most High, that as he was pleased to divide the Waters of the Red
Sea for their Ancestors and as the great Messiah was born of a Virgin, so He
would now show some Sign thereof to them, to evince them of the Truth, by
working of a Miracle; and it is said, that as soon as they had ended prayer, the
Waters divided, and the whole Army marched over. Great Signs now of a
Conversion* and many signal Signs in the Heavens and on ^^e Earth to teach Us
the great Work of Redemption. A Meteor, like a Cob-Web, as if a Spider had spun
it, fell in Norway, which covered the Fields, and killed the Corn, they were
(...) in length, and as much in breadth. In Franconi^ fell Hailstones of a
pound and a half weight. And in B^rd^s(...) to be seen on a Mount a huge Stone,
which 8 horses were not able to stir, this Stone lay deep in a Ditch, and came
up of it self out of the ground, and bare it self ^0 Cubits in height. This
seems as strange to some, as the Great Turks Dream did to himself* which was,
That a Jew had taken the Crown from his Hevd: Which possibly may be
accomplished in


THE END.

