Imprimatur.

June 13. 1664. Roger L'Estrange.

A DISCOURSE OF SUBTERRANEAL TREASURE. Occasioned by some late Discoveries
thereof in the County of NORFOLK, And sent in a LETTER To Thomas Brown, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for J. Collins, at the Kings Head in Westminster Hall, 1668.

TO THE Reader.
READER,
I Am unwilling to make those Common Pleas (with which thou have been
sufficiently tired already) for my exposing this to the public, lest I become
as censurable for those, as for the Tract it self. I must confess that I sent
it willingly into the light; and although I cannot pretend any general good in
it, yet it may be useful to some that are studious of Natures book, as another
man's discoveries or rational Discourses may be to me. I do not fear to say,
that I have so much doated on the Volumes of the Creation, that as I cannot
think the meanest of Gods creatures so despicable but that its contemplation
deserves to be matter of business as well as of diversion to the wisest; so (to
those that are considerate and observing) the Arcana Naturae, or (if it be
lawful so to call these) the magnalia Dei, are much more valuable and worth our
search. If I have discovered any thing in this little handful, as I hope I
have; or if the discovery can be to any, any way useful, as I hope it may be,
either to satisfy, or at least to actuate them to a further inquiry (the Field
is large enough, we need not just) I have my design. And though it were, or be
but a partial detecting of a concealed truth; yet even that will hide some
indiscretions in the management. However as he said of Evils, (...). I may say
of my faults, The secrecy of the business discoursed will hide the errors of
the discourser. But if thou should judge me fond of a fancy or invention, I
shall not fail of thy excuse, since I am not the first that have run naked into
public with an (...) in my mouth; what is amiss amend, and

Farewell. T. L.

Mercurius Centralis: OR, A DISCOURSE OF Subterraneal Cockle, Muscle, and
Oyster-shels, found in the digging of a Well, etc.
DOctor, I have made the best inquiry I could in so short a time, after the
truest cause of that vein of Cockle and Muscle-shels that was dug up in
Norfolk, so many foot deep under the surface of the Earth. And upon my most
serious examination do believe, that that reason which I casually bolted out
when you first mentioned it to me, is the most likely and probable, if not the
only that can be given of it; of which I will give more than empty conjectures
in the following Discourse. But before I come to unfold that my opinion; I will
insist on some things that relate to it, both for method sake, and to gain a
little the more Reputation to it; and then will give you, or any else leave to
judge of it as you shall think fit; nor shall it displease me if any are of a
different judgment.

God that made the Universe for Man's use and delight, has beautified it with
infinite varieties. In the animal kingdom, what diversity of Creatures,
Volatile, Reptile, Natant, and Gradient? How different their shape, use,
color, greatness, and smalness, their sents, their tempers, natures? How
various their amities, enmities, sympathies, and antipathies? In the Vegetable
kingdom, how different their shapes, proportions, colors, orders, tastes; the
first, second and other qualities of their leaves, flowrs, roots, barks, seeds,
fruits, tears, and gumms? Nor is Nature less skilful in generating and ordering
the strange Forms and Figures of Subterraneal bodies. Amongst an hundred
thousand stones on a strand, a man shall not find two that in all things
exactly agree; and yet there is many times some more general and gross likeness.

But if we examine the several species of Mineral bodies, there will be visible
an admirable and pleasing variety. Some are seen in the form of Cylinders, of
which I have been present when many thousands have been taken out of
Marle-pits. Some are exactly spherical like Bullets, but much bigger; so
equally round that no art can be more exact, and of them many Ship ladings,
^^vied. ^.17.
between two Hills in Cuba. Many hundred flints in the same form I have found
dispersedly near the place I live in: In which also I have observed that their
coat and external covering is white; next to that the stone is very black; but
nearer to the Center it is of a brighter color, in which by the help of a
Microscope I have seen as it were little sparkling Diamonds; in others of the
same form I have found with my naked eyes many thousand such sparkling stones
as big as pins-heads, and some as big as small barley-corns, of an excellent
luster when they are held in the Sun. I have seen likewise Fossiles Aetites, if
I may so call them; stones in an Oval shape as big as Pigeons Eggs, hollow in
the inside, and impregnate with lesser stones, which on the shaking betrayed
themselves by their sound, as the kernels in the dry stones of Peaches.
Diamonds, and our Cornish and Bristol stones are all generated with spires or
points. Mr. S.S.
A friend of mine imparted to me a fluor that grew on a rocky stone that is
very clear and shoots in the same form, and is so hard that it will cut glass.
Some are seen in the form of Cones, some of Pyramids, some of Semispheres, and
gutter'd and furrowed on the sides like the pummels of some Swords; some
smooth, some writhed. Crystal does shoot in sexangulos. I saw stones dug out
of a little Cavern by a Springs-side between St. Ives and Somersham in
Huntingdon-shire, every one of them had the same Figure, and were in compass
sexangular, with two broader and more depressed superficies, on either side it
made a perfect Rhomboides, clear as Crystal, but very soft and apt to scale; of
which none knew any considerable use: only the powder of it was found good to
Cicatrize green wounds. And indeed almost all sorts of stones, whether more
choice and orient, or more base and vulgar, have for the most part besides
their different virtues, several Figures and Colors. But these are mean, low
and common observations. What shall we think of that, Cornu Monocerotis
fossile; those ossa subterranea and fossilia, which are very often generated of
osteocolla and the like substances, and have given conplexion to those stories
of Not that I deny that there have been men of vast bodies in several ages. The
Sons of Anak were without question very great men. Goliath and others mentioned
were Giants. We read of Giants famous from the beginning, that were of so great
stature and so expert in war, Baruch 3.26. of the Sons of the Titans and high
Giants, Judith 16.7. At Coggeshall were found two teeth that might have been
cut into two hundred of an ordinary size. Camb. de Trinobant. St. Augustine saw
such an one at Utica. But these even in the Scripture, the most exact history
in the World, are recorded as rare; so that I do not believe that they have
been common in any Country, much less that any Country has been inhabited by
only such. An old Poet cited by our Antiquary speaking that Cornwall was the
seat of some, says they were but few. -- Titanibus illa
Sed paucis famulosa domus.
Vid. Hackwell in Apolog. de hoc subjecto.
Gyantick races in several Countries; because this, like bones of men, has
been found of a vast bigness? What shall we think of those bones of Fish, and
such Subterraneal Muscle and Oyster-shels found at Darmstadt in the Palatinate,
and at other places near Heidelberg, and in Silesia, and those you mentioned to
me? At New-house a seat of one Mr. Eyres in White-Parish in the County of
Wilts, as they were digging of a Well about thirty foot deep (as it was related
to me) between two veins of sand were found infinite numbers of Oyster-shels in
a bed, both shells closed together, and nothing discernable between them but a
little dust. But farther yet, what can we say of those Tables of stone in which
are seen the Pictures of diverse Planets, of Frogs, Serpents, Salamanders; nay,
Principum and illustrium virorum imagines, as Sennertus says are found in
Islebia? Epitom. Phys. lib. 5. cap. 4.
I my self have seen an Agate with a natural foil like a Blackmoores head, and
another like an Oaken leaf, that some have went to brush away, and yet it was
within the stone, and so exact too, that it deceived the very sight. Erasmus
describes one hat he saw in England in a Temple at the feet of the image the
Virgin Mary, in which there was the form of a Toad. I will set it down in his
own words. Erasm: Coll. Pegrin. relig. Ergo.
Og. Ad pedes virginis est gemma cui nondum apud Latinos aut Graecos nomen
inditum est, Galli a Bufone nome^ dederunt, eo quod bufonis effigiem sic
exprimat, ut nulla ars idem possit efficere. Quodque majus est miraculum;
pusillus est lapillus; non prominet bufonis imago, fed ipsa gemma velut inclusa
pellucet. This, Menedemus that discourses with him, imputes rather to the
fancy of the beholder; as Children think they see heads, and faces, and bulls,
and swords, in the Clouds. But he answers. Imo ne sis nesciens, nullus bufo
vivus evidentius exprimit seipsum quam illic erat expressus. And from his
companions incredulity takes occasions largely to discourse the strange forms
of stones. Now although it be impossible to find out the certain causes of
these most noble and recluse works of Nature, these being such things wherein
we have very great reason to admire the providence of God, and his most perfect
work-man-ship, that has given to each creature (as Scroder calls it) rationem
seminalem; or as Severinus, the knowledge or science of its own proper form.
And indeed some of them are in this as certain as the most voluntary agents.
And even those which casually obtain these shapes may be guessed at, for
(besides the lusus naturae, which most fly to) the creatures they represent
may be petrefied, a spiritu lapidescente; or may be enclosed as in a Coffin in
the purer unconcrete matter of stones; which being speedily hardened, and those
in some measure assimilated to that stony substance, their lineaments shine
through, as Flies cased in Amber are seen almost as clearly as if they were out
of it. And particularly for such shells we are now to discourse of, there may be
some conjecture had of some of their forms; and this brings me to distinguish
between Muscle and Cockle-shels really, and such in shape and appearance only;
for I have seen many stones in the shape of these, which I imagine were thus
made. The Oyster, Muscle, or Cockle-shels, lying in such places where they have
been cast out by men, have casually received the succus lapidescens, or
unconcrete matter of stones, and have become a bed or matrix to it; and so has
that stone been shapen according to this mould, as gourds while they are young
put in glasses grow not according to their usual natural form, but according to
the shape and proportion of the glasses.

2. If they were really Muscle and Cockle-shells, that could not be the place
of their generation, but they must be by some violence and impetuosity hurried
thither; and for their loco-motion we can find no other Media than the earth or
air. And first for the air. Those that have sailed to the Indies can inform you
with what force Hircanoes or Turbines (which some distinguish; but I think that
there is no other difference between them, than that the Hircano is a
circumagitation of the air or whirlewind tending downwards; and the Turbo the
whirlewind tending upwards) the meeting together of contrary furious winds,
have taken up whole Seas of water; and what should hinder them that when they
fall foul near a shore, they should not rake the Seas, and carry other bodies
besides the water? Hackluyt. Disc. to. 3. p. 100.
Some Mariners in the North-west discovery were eye witnesses of such a
whirlwind, that for the space of three hours together, took up vast quantities
of water, furiously mounting them up in the air. And altogether as strange has
the force of it been on dry ground; of which Bellarmine gives us a relation
that it is so incredible, Bell. de Ascensment. in Deum, Grad. 2. cap. 4.
that he premiseth this, Quod nisi vidissem, non crederem. He thus describes
it; Vidi ego a vehementissimo vento effossam ingentem terrae molem, eamque
delatam super pagum quendam, ut fovea altissima conspiceretur unde eruta
fuerat, and pagus totus coopertus and quasi sepultus manserit, ad quem terra
illa devenerat. It is ordinary in most histories to read of blood falling in
showers, Anno ab urbe condita cccclxxx lac de coelo manare visum est. Oros.
lib. 4. cap. 5. In the fourth year of Ivor the son of Alan in Wales, it rained
blood in England and Ireland. Welsh. chron. Gabiis lacte pluit. T. Graccho,
Tit. Manlio, Coss. In Graecostasi. C.C. L. Cai. Sext. Coss. Praeneste. L.
Cecil. L. Aurel. Cos^. In Agro Perusino P. Sor. G. Atil. Coss. sanguino per
biduum pluit in Area Vulcani and Concordiae. M. C. Quint. Fab. Coss. Lapid.
Pluviae. In Aventino Tuscis lapidibus pluit. Vid. Jul. Obs. de prodig. ad fin.
Plinii.
or at least of what is analogous to blood, of wood, wool, worms. Munster
Munster. Cosmog. lib. 4. cap. 22.
tells us of Frogs, Mice, and Rats, that fell with some feculent showers in
Norway. There is one at this time living, that walking through a low marish
ground in England, in a foggie morning, had his Hat almost covered with little
Frogs, that fell on it as he walked: and many at some times on the tops of
houses and leads, have found great numbers of such creatures. At Arles in
France in the year 1553. Infinite swarms of Locusts fell on their fields,
Valeriolae obs. lib. 1. obs. 1.
and immediately devoured all that was green, Magna incolarum admiratione and
consternatione. So we read that by an East wind the Locusts which covered the
face of Egypt were brought on it, and by as a strong West wind they were
carried off again; Exo. 10.13, 19. Stones likewise have thus fallen. In Japan,
Organtius.
on a day when they solemnized a great Festival to their Idol, there fell among
them a great shower of stones, which slew many, and put the rest to their heels
to shift for themselves. And it is very likely that those showers of hail that
slew so many in several stories, were grandines lapidum, (as Lactantius calls
those showers of vengeance, Lactant. Dio. Just. l. 7. c. 26.
that God will at the last send on the Devil and his accomplices) to which the
expression of history agrees. Oros. l. 3. c. 6.
At the time of Alexanders birth, Saxea de nubibus grando descendens, veris
terram lapidibus verberavit. And to this is the Scripture consonant, Jos.
10.11. For what is called hail in the later part of the verse, is stones in the
former. And as they fled from before Israel, and were going down to Bethoron,
the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they
died. And that heterogeneous bodies are found in mines, and on the tops of
mountains, Aristotle Arist. Meteoro.
insinuates this to be the cause, viz. that they are brought to such places by
the winds. It seems I must confess the more colorable, that things should be
brought this way from the Sea, because the Sea both of old, and more lately,
has been deemed to be the father of the winds. Erasmus describing
Parathalassia says, Peregr. relig. Ergo.
In propinquo est oceanus ventorum pater, and the old Poet speaking of the
generation of the winds, finds out the same cause: Hesiod. Oper. and dies p. 44.
(...)
(...).
And therefore winds have in some places been observed to be Obsequious to the
course of the Moon as the waters are, which that Roman Poet hints.

Thracio bacchante magis sub interlunia vento. Horat. Carm. lib. 1. Od. 25.
It Is true, no man can tell the force and fury of the unbridled winds, that are
so mad that they know not whence they come, nor whither they will. But yet were
such heterogeneities which are found so deep this way brought, they should be
found in all or most places alike; and they should be found above ground too,
unless we can imagine that immediately on their falling the Earth suffer some
Chasm, and does ingulf and swallow them into its bowels. And therefore it is
most probable they are brought to such places from the Sea, the place of their
Generation, generally under the Earth.

3. If they are brought from the Sea to the place they are found in, under the
Earth, it must be either by a natural or by a supernatural impellent or mover;
by spirits, or by a natural vehicle. No man that is either a Philosopher or a
Christian can doubt of the power of spirits, by Gods command or permission, to
effect this and many more actions that are far more difficult and unlikely. And
Paracelsus with some others would have us believe that there are innumerable
such spirits or genii that inhabit the Earth, as he has projected there are
Inhabitants of the Sun, Moon, and other Planets, which he calls Solar, Lunar,
Saturnine, etc. and of the air which he styles aerial. And to their managements
refers all the natural motions of Generation and Corruption, and the
violent, as of Chasms, Earthquakes, and other alterations in the bowels of the
Earth. Nay, they reduce them to several Classes and Orders, and with a little
invitation would be ready to swear, that many of them are Engineers that
contrive the Waterworks, and make Rivers and Aqueducts; that some are
Blacksmiths by Trade that work in the Vulcanoes; that some are Brewers that
boil natural baths, and use Minerals instead of Malt. But these opinions are
such, that besides their own natural absurdity, our Religion will teach us to
explode, and are then confuted when they are only named. For though we grant
that some such things are possible to be done by the Devil; that is not so the
Prince of the power of the air, as not to be the God of this lower world; yet
to impute all things to them must needs be asylum ignorantiae, and a Remora to
all ingenuous and Philosophical disquisitions, of the nature and causes of all
things and actions in the bowels of the Earth, and a means to make us know no
more of nature than what is obvious to sense. So that I take it for granted,
that some natural, ordinary vehicle there is under the Earth that brings such
heterogeneous bodies from their native and genial seat, and proper place, to
such Vaults, Hills, Veins, and Caverns where they are found.

4. Now the most likely movers of all others to carry bodies of weight under
the Earth are two; either exhalations or waters; for as for vapors, I look not
on them as capable of carrying any thing of weight, especially so low in the
Earth, where they cannot be so much rarefied, by reason of the natural coldness
of that Element. It Is true, May-dew which is a vapor condensed will carry up
an Egg-shell in which it is put, by the help of a Pike or Spear placed by it.
But this is in the sight of the Sun, and if so much as a thin cloud interpose
it falls again immediately: Again, the shell is exceeding light; besides that,
the dew is sealed in it that it cannot get out; and even this moves upwards
toward the Sun, not sidewayes along the Earth. So that it must be concluded,
that vapors cannot be serviceable to our purpose, so as to force whole veins
of shells or other bodies to places so far distant from the Sea, and there to
ram them in. It remains then, that this be effected by one or other of the
former means.

As for exhalations, and that their force is such that can impetuously move
bodies of the greatest weight, we need look no further than our Gunpowder, and
the Machines or Engines that are used by or with it; such as Cannons, Bullets,
Balls of Lead or Iron, Stones, Grenades, etc. of which some, by the help of a
cold and dry exhalation pent in the Niter or Saltpeter, and suddenly by fire
flying out, make as stupend refractions of the air, and obtain a violence equal
to that of our usual thunder and lightnings. And after the same manner is their
force and light caused, the violence and noise of Aurum Fulminans. And these
exhalations which have such effects above, have the same strength under ground,
as appears by Earthquakes, with which there are usually heard a Terra mugi u
tremuit M. Cat. Quint. Mart. Coss. Fremitus infernus ad Coelum ferri visus M.
Anton. A. Posth. Coss. Fremitus terrae etiam Faesulis auditus M. Perpenn. Cai.
Claud. Coss. The City Ferrara in the year 1570. was surprised with a fearful
noise, as if it had been battered with great Ordnance, afterward with a most
violent trembling.
murmur and sound. When Sempronius Gracchus was setting on the Picaeni, and
they were just joining battle; Oros. lib. 4. cap. 4.
tam horrendo fragore terra tremuit, ut stupore miraculi utrumque pavefactum
agmen hebesceret. These make the Earth tremble, the Mountains roll, the Rocks
quake, and especially if the exhalation that causes them be impregnate with
Nitrosulphureous spirits, which have sometimes thrust out hills where there
were plains, Islands in the midst of Seas, made huge Rivers where there were
none, turned the current of some, stopped others, left vast caverns and holes,
depressed Mountains, swallowed Cities and Armies, subverted Temples and
Palaces. Cizicus a City of Misia minor, with the famous Temple of Jupiter
there, were both swallowed in an Earthquake; and so was Philadelphia another
City of the same Misia, and one of the Churches St. John writ to. Apoc. 3.7. In
an Earthquake in Vinianfu in China, the Nitrosulphureous spirits burst out of
the Earth in such an actual flame, that it consumed the whole City and
innumerable people. At Hien in the same Country, the fall of the houses by the
same Earthquake slew eight thousand. At Enchinoen an hundred thousand perished.
Immediately on the bitter persecution of Dioclesian, a fearful Earthquake
happened in Syria, Oros. lib. 7. c. 17.
by which Tire and Sydon were almost destroyed, and many thousands were killed.
Lucan. lib. 1.
-- Quatiente ruina
Nutantes pendere domos. --
Or as the same Author elsewhere describes an earthquake, -- Cardine tellus
Subsedit, veteremque jugis nutantibus Alps
Discussere nivem. --
We read of one in Judeah, Jos. Antiq. l. 9. c. 11.
at Uzzah's usurpation of the Priests office, which rent the Temple, and a Hill
in the East was removed four furlongs toward the West; of another in Herod's
Reign, that slew ten thousand Jews. l. 15. c. 7.
Marcley hill with us in Hereford-shire, Anno 1571. with a great noise removed
it self from its place, and went continually for three days together,
overthrowing Kinnaston Chapel, bearing the earth 400. yards before it. And
therefore Exhalations may be granted to remove stones and sands, and with them
such heterogeneous bodies as lie on them, from one place to another, from the
sea to the hills, from a coast far into a country. But Earthquakes are not
frequent in any places unless near Vulcanoes, and are less usual in these
parts; and yet in most places all over Europe, such heterogeneous bodies have
been found under the Earth, at great distance from the Sea. Again, the force of
Exhalations is most evident in mountainous, rocky countries, because when they
are pent into such places they cannot have vent; whereas these bodies are often
found in mosses, bogs, and marish grounds, as frequently as in other earth.

5. So that they are most likely to be hurried thither by the force of waters,
passing from the Sea through the caverns of the Earth. The reasonableness of
which opinion will the better appear, if we consider that,

1. As the Earth is of a vast compass, and no less than 7000 miles in Diameter,
of which the Water does not make above one third part of the Globe, and that on
the surface of Earth too; and so far as was ever yet discovered of the Earth,
no part of it is destitute of some mineral substance continually generating in
it, unless where either the Sun exhales the force of it, or Nature is otherwise
employed in producing Vegetables. So that if the Earth be kept from the sight
of the Sun, and the production of plants, nor is apt to other generations, yet
it fails not to produce Saltpeter or Nitre in good quantity. And this is the
reason that Saltpeter-men dig in Stables, Cellars, and other houses. So that in
the whole bowels of the Earth, what vast heaps, what mountains of metalls are
there? Some in fieri, some in facto esse; perfect and imperfect; mean metalls,
Stones, Fluors of all sorts, Salts, and concrete Juices; besides the several
sorts of Earths, Chalks, Boles, Bitumina, and the mixtures of all or any of
these, of which it were much too large, and more besides my purpose
particularly to discourse.

2. Where there are so vast and numerous generations, it is impossible that they
should succeed without vast quantities of water. Nay, to speak more home, the
first matter that has been yet discovered of all Minerals, is no other than a
certain Juice or water impregnate with the seminal virtue of this or that
Mineral stone or Metal, which from water (when it has found a convenient
matrix) becomes a gelly, and from a gelly this or that stone or metal. This is
obvious from several springs, whose water impregnate with the seeds of stone,
having found a place of rest convert into perfect stone. Of which sort, we read
of some in Warner. de Aq. Hungar.
Hungary, of others in Peru by Warner. de Aq. Hungar.
Acost. l. 3. c. 17.
Acosta. In Guancavilica there is a Fountain that turns into a Rock, with which
an whole village is built. At Newnham Regis in Warwickshire, our Geographers
tell us of a Well that after the same manner turns wood into stone; of
another in the the North, that dropping from above into a Cave, becomes clear
and very hard stone beneath. Bert. Geog. p. 127.
Rivus est apud Scotos Ratra dictus, in cujus ripa est spelunca, in qua
guttatim ex fornice distillans nnda lapidescit in metas, quae nisi tollantur
humana industria, spatium totum opplerent. Some Minerals are no other than
certain kind of Juices accreted, as Alum, Vitriol, etc. And Mine-masters have
sometimes found Metalls liquid and unconcrete when they have peirced a Mine too
soon; Mathesius mentions liquid Silver found by some. And for this without
doubt among other causes, is water by the Ancients called Panspermia; for that
the seeds of things in the Earth have very little virtue without this, Moses
insinuates, Genesis 2.5. where he gives this reason why no Plants yet grew, viz.
because they lay in arido, for the Lord had not caused it to rain on the earth.
I am very confident that the Poets did not only call Venus the Goddess of
generation, (...), the spume-born Goddess, from the saltness of the spume,
(though some of later date have therefore called her (...)) but from the waters
that bare it. Nor is there any question to be made, but that the Inhabitants of
the waters are therefore more numerous than other creatures, not for any
saltness, which at the most can but Aegyptii ideo a sale abstinuerunt (test
Plutarcho) quod salem venerem irritare persuasu^ haberent. Levin. Lemn. de Not.
Miracul. l. 2. p. 228.
irritate to copulation, but does not render the seed ever the more prolifical.
For fresh water fish are as multiplicative of their species as the other in
proportion. There is not a fish that swimmeth in the deep that has a greater
quantity of spawn considering his bulk, than a Carp; yet it is a fresh water
fish.

Nor can I believe there can any other reason be given, why the Irish women
have so many Children, than because their Country, and consequently themselves,
are so exceeding moist, as appears by their stature, their pale countenances,
their flaccid, soft and phlegmatic habit of body. And indeed I think that it
were as reasonable to seek for taste in an egg, Ex ovo omnia. Harv. And what
taste is there in the white of an egg? Job.
as for salt in the sperm of fish or any other creature; for by virulent
Gonorrhaea's it appears that a sharp and saline quality, is a token rather of
corruption than of any active and generative energy. Et quod verissimum est
dicimus; Novimus and jam nosco mulieres varias conjugatas sat juvenes, quae ab
erroribus dietae a Pica sive Malacia causatis, praecipue a salitorum, vel
potius ab incommisti salis esu, non tandum sordidos pallidos faetidosque
obtinuere colores; cutes impolitas and rugosas, ventriculos nauseabundos;
verumetiam suffocatae omnino evaserunt and steriles. But although I attribute
the effects above mentioned to water rather than salt; yet I would not be
conceived to imbibe Thales Milesius opinion, that aqua is so named, quasi a qua
omnia, as if all things were from it; and yet do believe that it is causa sine
qua non, and a great nurse and fosterer of Generations, if not a Parent of
them. And of Minerals too; especially if we should embrace the opinion of the
Peripateticks, that all mixed bodies are immediately composed of the four
Elements; for then these being the most ponderous bodies, must needs have in
them the most weighty Elements in good quantity, and those are Earth and Water.

3. The Sea is the original of all Waters; nor could any fountain else afford
enough to supply the Earth to all uses. That which by the Neotericks has
lately been found out, of the Circulation of the Blood and Humors in the
Microcosm, was long since discovered (which might possibly hint that) in the
greater world. Eccles. 1.7. All rivers run into the Sea yet the Sea is not
full: unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.
And what huge quantities of water must be necessary for the whole Earth, may be
hence inferred, that the superficies of it needs so much, that besides the
innumerable Springs, Fountains, Channels, Rivers and Lakes with which it is
irrigated, were it not for frequent showers from above, would soon be parched
up, and unable to produce sustenance for Man or Beast; which help the bowels of
the Earth are destitute of; for the moisture of showers peirceth not above ten
foot deep at the most. And indeed, this is the only reason that can be given
of the Seas saltness, because it does wash, and so dissolve much salt from the
rocks of Salt in subterraneal caverns where it does pass, and would long ere
this have caused places, where such rocks have been, to sink in: But that,
first, there is a continual generation and accretion, as well as a dissolution;
and secondly, because that Salt is very hard, insomuch that some stones of salt
there are found in several waters undissolved; as those of which Cambden
informs us in the River Weere near Batterby in the Bishopric of Durham. Cambd.
Brit. Brigant.
And as for that dreadful story of Lots wife turned into a pillar of salt, Genesis
19.26. as we are to believe the thing, so may it not be improbable that it was
termed a pillar, as well for the solidity, durableness, and difficulty of
dissolution, as well as for its shape and form; God striking her in that
manner, as a more durable monument of his anger against Disobedience. And our
glass at this day is but salt after its highest fusion, and yet it is very
solid and durable, and imports no quality to water. Thirdly and lastly, the
Seawater having imbibed so much salt before, is the less able to dissolve more.

4. That though the Sea on the coast near the shore, may communicate its waters
by perlocation, yet to places at great distance it cannot pass so as to afford
a due supply, but by Gulphs and subterraneal In-draughts. In many places of the
world they make the seawater potable and fresh by digging of pits in the sand,
into which the seawater streining it self, leaves its saltness behind. But
this must be done at no great distance from the Sea, and it must be in sand or
clay, or the like; for if the shore be rocky, it will not do; as we see in many
places where they dig a very great depth for fresh water near the Sea, and
cannot be supplied till they find a fresh spring, a great many foot under the
surface of the Sea. So we see that when we filtrate liquors through shop-paper,
if it be thin and bibulous, it passes; if thick and too close, it will not
pass. Some illustrate the percolation of the seawater by this experiment. Take
a round ball of moist clay, make it hollow in the inside, fill it with salt
water, lay it to the fire, and it will extill by the pores of the clay, and
become fresh and insipid.

Now that there are vast gulphs and channels from the sea under the earth, will
easily appear, when we consider, that some great lakes and oceans there are,
that have no other way to vent themselves. What way can the Caspian Sea
exonerate it self by, after it has taken into it Volga, Jaxares, Ochus, Oxus,
and other huge Rivers? What other reason can be given why some lakes are full
of sea fish, and yet at great distance from the Sea? In Bainoa, a Province of
Hispaniola, is a lake of salt water which has 24 Rivers running into it, yet
never increases, and has Sharks and other seafish in it. Again, there are
salt springs in all Countries that ebb and flow as the Sea and the Coasts do.
There are also salt rivers, as Ochus and Oxus; salt lakes, as that before
mentioned. Besides this, it is ordinary for channels and rivers to run a great
way on the earth, and then to ingulp themselves. Georg. Witnerus.
The waters of the Cirknickzerksey lake in Carniola, gush with that violence
and swiftness out of the ground, that they will overtake a swift Horseman,
and presently are swallowed in a deep gulf again. In the Province of Cazcium
in Hispaniola is a great cave in an hollow rock, under the root of a very high
mountain, in which diverse Rivers, after they have run fourscore and ten miles,
pass as into an indraught, and are swallowed up. In most Countries we read of
the like. A mountain there is in Caermarthen-shire, where Careg-castle
sometimes stood, in which are many spacious holes and wide caves, with a Well
that ebbs and flows as the Sea on the Coast does, twice in four and twenty
hours. The Current of one and the same Sea in several parts contrary ways
demonstrates this, as in the Atlantic Sea, in some places from, and in some
places toward the North, like Liquor in a funnel. In some places there are
whirlepools, whose waters turn clean round, insomuch that if a Ship at such
times come over them, they are in most extreme danger of sinking: Such an one
there is in the North Sea, near the coast of Norway.
At other times the waters with that violence come out of the earth, that a
Cannon cast overboard will not sink. This caused Taurellus, and some others, to
think these the only cause of the Tides. Andreas Moralis Moral. decad. 7. c. 8.
on the Coast of Hispaniola was sucked into whirlepools, where with that
violence the water was drawn into the earth, that with extraordinary toil the
Ship hardly escaped sinking. Again, the heterogeneous bodies that are found so
deep, are such usually that either are generated, or most usually dwell in the
Sea; as shells, bones of fish, masts, anchors, parts of ships. Simlerus,
Ortelius.
At Berna in Switzerland, Anno 1460. fifty fathom deep, in a Mine where they
got metall-oar, Fracastorius.
a Ship was dug up, in which were forty eight carkases of Men, with other
merchandise. Out of the Ocean into the Mediterranean Sea, In Greenland a Mast
was dug out of the top of an high Hill with a pully hanging to it.
there is a continual current by the streights of Gibraltar; another Current
into the same out of the Euxine Sea, by the Thrasian Bosphorus; besides, very
many and great Rivers. And which way can it exonerate it self? for those vast
floods do not increase it. And Solomon's Circulation of humors in the Macrocosm
above mentioned, is very considerable; nor is the Analogy in this particular
between that and the lesser World obscure. For the Sea in that answers to the
Fountain of blood in this. The Subterraneal Rivers, and those above ground, may
answer to the vessels containing the blood. And both these answer to the vasa
attrahentia, and deferentia; for the subterraneal channels carry the water from
the Sea, the Rivers return it to the Sea. Again, as both sorts of vessels are
greater near the fountain of blood in the body; so are the channels biggest
nearest the Sea their fountain; and though it may sometimes happen otherwise,
yet if the banks of any are wider, so that they look like lakes a great while
before they discharge themselves into the Ocean; I look on it but as casual,
and bearing proportion with the divarications of vessels in man's body. Again,
vessels in our bodies are from trunks (like trees) branched out, in ramulos,
surculos, and other minute distributions (answering to the stalks of leaves or
fruits) which are again subdivided into capillary conveyances, and thence the
blood and humors pass per poros for the nutriment of the solid parts; so are
the Rivers above (and without doubt the channels under ground in proportion to
them) from their main trunks divided into Brooks, those Brooks into Rivulets,
these into lesser conveyances as it were capillary vessels, and every where
dispersed and disseminated according to the exigence of nature, and thence
pass through the pores of the Earth, that no part may be destitute of a due
supply for the Generation and increase of all bodies. Again, the aestus maris
bears some proportion to the pulse of the blood in the Microcosm, the ebbing
and contraction of the water is the systole; the turgescency, floating, and
dilatation of the water, is the diastole; the space between both the
perisystole. Again, as in the heart and in some vessels only that carry the
blood that motion is to be found; so is the aestus discovered in some vessels
only that conveigh the humor of the greater World. Not that I look on this as
any kind of proof, but as an illustration, the better to guide our conceptions
in Natures Waterworks, by what is seen that we may the better understand that
which is not seen, or at least not so plainly. However enough to our purpose it
is, that such Subterraneal channels there are from the Sea under the Earth. As
for the common scruple of the improbability of the waters rising so high out of
the Sea to the superfice of the Earth, it is the least hindrance of an hundred;
for if there be a continuity of the air, waters will rise as high as the
surface of the waters from whence they came, as appears in Siphunculis; and
therefore may rise to the tops of the highest hills. For the highest places of
the Sea answer to the tops of the loftiest mountains, or else the earth could
not be spherical. Were it not for bounds God has set, the waters are high
enough to turn again and cover the earth, v. 9. He has Chambers or Receptacles
by which to water the hills, v. 13
To this the Psalmist is consonant, Psalm 104. The waters go up by the
Mountains, they go down by the Valleys unto the place which thou have founded
for them. With what violence do the waters gush out of Saint Winifreds Well in
Wales on the top of a great hill? Again, compression of those vast quantities
of water forcing them into Earth, may make them mount the higher; as Hoggsheads
full and newly broached run the faster. I Will illustrate this by the following
experiment. Take two round Boards equally sized, fasten strong Leather to those
Boards above, below, and on the sides so close that they may hold water; from
the lower board let an hollow pipe go up on the outside higher than the upper
board; fill this instrument with water; then put a weight on the upper board,
and proportionable to the weight so will the waters mount to a greater or
lesser height, as in this Figure.

diagram of experimental apperatus to demonstrate the vertical displacement of
water under pressure or pumping A. The upper board. B. The lower board. ccc.
The Leather on every side. D. The Pipe through which the water will leap
upwards. E. The weight of compression.




But it may be objected, that this is an adventitious and external compression;
and not that of the water only. But I answer, that such a compression there is
in the Sea from agitation of the waters by wind, and other causes; and yet that
waters by their own natural compression will mount higher than the brims of the
vessel containing, may be evident from this, that if we take one of a
considerable capacity, with a pipe on the outside something higher than its
brims; and rub the brims with Rosin, or such like Gum, and then fill it full
till no more water can be poured in, stopping the orifice of the pipe in the
mean time with ones finger, then removing the finger, it will presently burst
out at the pipe. It may be demanded then, Why are not all Rivers salt? To this
I answer; That most of them have their waters stopped and percolated, and so
leave their saltness behind. But as for those that have no hinderance, they
are not only salt, but do constantly ebb and flow, as has been exemplified
already. Those that have a stoppage by a bank of earth to such an height
only, issue fresh water at their ebb, and at their flote salt; as that
fountain in the Isle of Gades does. See Ortel. map. epitomixed in the
description of Gades.
Those that are salt, and have no tides, are such as after percolation wash
some rocks of salt before their eruption.

5. Where mighty floods come with violence, as these must of necessity do by
reason of the vast quantity, the mighty compression, and the unspeakable weight
of the waters of the Ocean, they will easily carry with them light, and with no
great difficulty ponderous bodies. This needs not, and therefore shall not,
have any proof.

6. Heterogeneous bodies by the weight and strength of waters forced into a
narrow place, cannot easily by the return of those beyond them, (if they return
at all the same way) be brought forth again. Because there is little or no
compression, and therefore the return of the water is leasurely, and by
degrees. This is obvious to Sense, and therefore needs no illustration.

7. And as much evident to sense it is that any heterogeneous bodies so
remaining unremoved, soon gather slime and sand about them, and in a small
space of time are lodged as it were in firm ground. This is no more wonderful
than to have any vessel in the Microcosm obstructed by crude and heterogeneous
bodies, caeteris paribus. Nor need we seek for rare Waterworks; for every
ordinary gutter and sink will demonstrate this.

And thus (Doctor) you have my Opinion of the way by which those Cockle,
Muscle, and Oystershells you mentioned, were brought and lodged in that place.
If they were truly shells, they were conveyed either above or under ground; but
not so usually above, therefore under. If under ground, then by natural or
voluntary agents. If by natural and necessary, then either by Vapors,
Exhalations, or Waters; but this is done usually and commonly by none of the
former, therefore by the last; which is the more likely to effect it,

1. Because there are numerous generations in the Earth.

2. Where many generations are, much water is necessary.

3. No fountain can supply the earth to these purposes but the Sea, which is
the original of all waters.

4. Though the Sea communicate his waters to places near it by percolation; it
must and does supply that afar off by whole floods, gulphs, and indraughts.

5. Where mighty floods come with violence, they will carry very weighty bodies
with them.

6. Heterogeneous bodies are not easily brought back again when they are forced
into a narrow place.

7. But in a little time gather slime, and earth about them, and so are lodged
in firm ground.

Psalm. 139.14. Mavelous are thy works (O Lord) and that my soul knows right
well.


FINIS.

