Hypocrisy Detected, Or, a Brief ANSWER TO Thomas Crisp's Book.

By Thomas Laurence.

Let this Paper be kept by Friends, and spread only as they see a Service for
it occasioned by Thomas Crisp 's Book, or otherwise.

London, Printed by Andrew Soul, and sold at his Shop in Devonshire-Buildings,
without Bishops-Gate, 1681.

Hypocrisy Detected: Or, A brief Answer to Thomas Crisp 's Book.
I. HE says, He hopes to be instrumental to provoke to Love and Gentleness.

Answer, In thy Title Page thou say, You are Gods Israel, and all those that
oppose you, Pharaohs Taskmasters. And in thy Postscript, That you are
Followers of the Lamb, and all others Worshippers of the Beast. Is this thy
gentle beginning, to provoke to Love? judge thy own words; alack for thee,
Thomas! I pity thee; the Foundation of thy work is not (as thou pretendest)
the Light of Christ within thee, but W. Rogers's Book without thee: Why,
Thomas, can thou not preach without a Text? What! Priest-like? nay, far below
the Priests, they take a Text from the Book of Scripture, which is true, but
thou from William Rogers's Book, which is false.

II. Thou say, Thou will show the necessity of bearing, and not judging one
another about Opinions in Religion.

Answ. I deny thee, and all Evil Opinions, all that are in Truth are out of
them; O Lord keep me sensible in thy Spirits Motions.

III. Thou say, We may belong all to one Shepherd, though not all to one Fold.

Answ. Christ said, Other Sheep I have, which are not of this fold, them will I
bring, and (then) there shall be one Sheepfold, and one Shepherd; but it
appears by thy Book, thou art not yet brought into Christ's one Fold.

John Story, and others, that are Enemies to the Churches Peace, say, The
Apostasy came in FIRST by setting up of outward Orders, Synods and Counsels.

Answ. The cause of the Apostasy was departing from the Spirit of God, which
Spirit leads his People into good Order, and preserves his People in the same.

Now I am come to thy Book; first thou say is Isaac Pennington's Testimony,
which thou toldst his Son before Philip Ford, thou never readst nor saw, but
took thine out of William Rogers 's Book; and William Rogers took but part of
Isaac Pennington's neither, and that he wrested too, and never was Isaac
Pennington's Sense nor Meaning. So, here is a Perversion and Abuse in the
beginning of thy Book, but not Isaac Pennington's Testimony. T. C. how dare
thou to rake up the Ashes of that honorable Person in Truth, and so mingle,
wrest and pervert his Sense and Meaning! blush for shame, and own thy
Condemnation for it, before thy Heart is wholly hardened, and say, a Friend in
love did give thee good Advice and Counsel.

Second, Edward Borough 's Vision of a Flock of Sheep, if his, but it is not
like him, nor like his other Writings; The Sheep fed together, the Shepherd
gathering his Flock into one Fold, he staid by the Fold himself, where all his
Sheep were safely protected; but thou art for several or many Folds, out of
God's Protection, and in the many Errors and Confusions. I can say but little
to this Author, because I do not know certainly who he is; only this I know,
that Isaac Pennington, Edward Buroughs and William Penn have writ with great
zeal against outward Orders set up by Papists, Sects and false Churches, all
out of Truth, which thou and thy own side of unlearned and unstable men do
apply against faithful Friends in Truth.

Third, Geo. Bishop against a Paper of Orders, 1666. by eleaven of your (why
your?) Ministers. T. C. thou keepst close still in thy separation, Yours and
Ours. T. Crisp, George Bishop has finished his course in this World (and I
hope is at rest) but thou makes ill use of his words, to uphold a bad Cause.

1st, Thou say, In the Apostles days were Pastors, Teachers and Elders, but
in this day, the Spirit it self is Pastor, Teacher and Elder, without respect
of Persons.

Answ. By what Scripture do thou prove the Spirit called an Elder? (that
serve Tables.)

2. Answ. The Spirits moving, which is the efficient cause, does not destroy
his instruments, in which he moves, but speaks in them, as in the Apostles
days; and it is the honor of a King, the Multitude of Subjects, not alone;
but it seems thou pretendest, thou have found another Administration than God
gave by his Spirit to his Church at the Pentecost, Acts 2.

2dly, Thou say, Declaring and Speaking is not now in the Disposition of
Persons.

Answ. Why then do thou write, and many Persons of your side declare?

3dly, Thou say, The Seed is come, the Heir is come, and not to be limited
under Tutors and Governors.

Answ. Do thou account the Seed limited when it goes forth in a powerful
Ministry, for the good of them that shall be Heirs of Salvation; but thy
Writings are obscure, and darken Counsel by words without Knowledge.

4thly, Thou grantest, The eleaven Subscribers were Ministers, and the Presence
of the Lord has been with them; but now they think to settle themselves in the
place of the Heir.

Answ. This is unjust and hasty judging, yet your side complain against judging
one another.

5thly, Thou say, Seek not to undervalue that to which you were sent to
minister.

Answ. Here is another Problem; had the Seed of God ever any need of the
Ministry of man, or was the Ministry sent to that which the Seed had begotten
in man? Here is thy great Mistake.

Thomas Crisp, these are Eorronious and Schismatical Opinions, broached by thee
and such as thou art, and they prove plainly that your side are joined to the
man of Sin, the son of Perdition, defined 2 These. 2.3, 4. who separates
Christ's Church, Government and Discipline from his Doctrine.

2. You villifie, and with reproachful terms call Christ's Church Government,
set up by his Spirit and Power in his instruments, Outward Orders, Forms,
Prescriptions, rotten Orders and Idols, not like Christians.

3. You cast away Christ's Church Government and Discipline; for thou toldst me
in our short Discourse, There was no need of any Discipline.

4. You do not only cast away Christ's Church Government, but his Doctrine and
Ministers also, saying, The Spirit it self is Pastor, Teacher and Elder,
without Persons. Yet you own Persons that go about Preaching, which is
Self-contradiction and Confusion in Life and Doctrine.

Fourth is Tho. Crisp's piece of stolen words, which he does not deny, but
says, He took them out of William Rogers 's Book.

1st, Thou say, Some have promoted Government and Orders, to the compelling
of others before convincement.

Answ. But thou have not named any particular Persons, nor do I know any one
amongst us, who so do. But in pretense, to prevent ill orders, thou would
have no outward orders.

2dly, Thou say, There is the Saints Seal and the Beasts Mark described in
Scripture.

Answ. Thou accountest, all that oppose thee, and your side, have the Beasts
Mark; for thou chargest them, proudly saying, Away with calling your selves the
People of God, and judge others.

Answ. How often in thy Book have thou passed severe Judgment on others? and
yet complainst of judging: Thou condemnest others, and do the same things,
therefore thou art inexcusable, Romans 2.

3dly, Let none boast of their Number, and think themselves the only People of
God, because they are many; but as the Apostle said, Esteem others better than
your selves.

Answ. Art not thou a proud boaster, that say, Thou have the Saints seal, and
others the Beasts mark? Do not thou esteem thy self better than others,
contrary to the Apostles counsel, the words of Scripture, which thou have
quoted against thy self.

4thly, Thou say, The Kingdom of Heaven does not consist in speaking one
sort of Speech or Language, or conforming to Orders or Prescriptions from
without.

Answ. Now the rottenness of thy Heart within, and painted Sepulcher of
deceiving Words without is manifest; for thou do not only disown the good
Order of Truth, which is according to Scripture, but also the Language of
Truth, according to Scripture, and ownest the World's Manners, Gestures and
Language; Art not thou a Ranter, who say in thy Title Page, You Quakers?
(giving some cause thereby to judge that thou art none.)

5thly, Have not some of your side said, That God will teach his People
himself? yet now you limit them by your Orders and Directions.

Ans. God teaches his People himself, sometimes inwardly and immediately by
his spirit it self, sometimes outwardly by the same spirit in his instruments;
so he taught by his Apostles and Ministers in the primitive Churches, so he
does now in our Churches. Much more might be said to Thomas Crisp's Epistle to
the Reader, and his own piece of stolen words, but I am weary of raking in such
dirty Puddles.

Fifthly, Thou quotest Isaac Pennington first in thy second Edition; now I may
try how thou dealest with Isaac Pennington's second Testimony; note two things;
first, he owns outward Orders and Uniformity in the Church of Christ, and says:

1. Uniformity is good, and to be desired; and the intent and work of the
Ministry is to bring into Unity, which being kept in, will come into Uniformity
at length, page 7.

2. Isaac Pennington says, The Church was clothed, appearing in the beautiful
and glorious Dress; the Lord himself put upon her, page 17. of thy Book.

Now, if you seek to take away outward Order in the Church of Christ, is not
this to take away from her Glory?

3. The Invisible state of the Church has a Visible way of appearing to the
World, by the Garments that she wears openly, which the Life chooses to appear
in, page 18. Then they that are against outward Order, are against the Life's
appearing in what it chooses.

4. The Form was once true, until the Dragon entered, page 19. This is Isaac
Pennington's Testimony for outward Government and Order in the Church, quoted
by Thomas Crisp against himself, that says, There is no need of any outward
Government, endeavoring to destory the glory and beauty of the Church.

Sixth Author is Edward Buroughs, which is answered already.

Seventh is a further Testimony of a nameless Author, that makes several
Queries, not to force People into outward Orders; which is but a needless
repitition of what your side of erroneous Schismatics propounded before.

Eighth is R. R 's Testimony: Thomas Crisp, why do thou not name Robert Rich?
this Testimony it is like him; but it may be thou art ashamed, and well thou
may, for he was an Enemy to Truth, and to Friends in Truth; and for thee to
have named him, would not have been for the credit of thy Cause. But your
Testimonies are both alike, and so are your false Schismatical Doctrines also.

Ninth is B. F. in a Letter to G. W. Thomas Crisp, if thou do think that G.
W. is guilty of a separating lording Spirit, thou might, nay, thou oughtst to
have told him first, before thou had published him in thy Book, that he might
have satisfied thee of his clearness in this Matter, etc. And as for B. F. I do
not think he is of that treacherous dividing spirit as Robert Rich and thou art
art of. What Isaac Pennington, Edward Buroughs and William Penn writ zealously
against outward Orders, set up by false Churches out of Truth, thou and thy
side of unlearned and unstable men, falsely apply against faithful Friends in
Truth.

Tenth is a few words of James Naylors; but he confutes thee, and all thy side:
Why do thou bring him? first he says, They that are in the spiritual Worship
of God, cannot stay in any form any longer than God stays therein.

Answ. Then there are outward Forms that God owns, and stays in them. The
Apostle spoke against such who had the form of godliness, but denied the power
thereof; he said, from such turn away; but we do own the Power of God, and the
form which he has led us into, and justifies us in. And what James Naylor said
concerning Form, to the Professors, I understand to be concerning outward
Shadows and Figures, which are to pass away, some of which was used by some in
the infancy of the primitive Church.

Eleaventh is William Penn's Address to Protestants, that are as yet carnal,
and not convinced of Truth; and what Isaac Pennington, Edward Buroughs and
William Penn applies to the false Churches concerning outward Orders, you
apply to George Fox, and Friends in Truth.

Twelfth is a Manuscript of James Naylors, added by desire of a Friend. Thomas
Crisp, thy Friend and thou have added nothing to your work, but a needless
repitition of words, which I have spoken to, and answered fully already.

Thirteenth is John Wilkinson and John Story's sense concerning Women's
Meetings, wherein we may take notice, that John Wilkinson and John Story are
unconstant changeable men, as appears by their subtle reserves, as what their
words will bear, etc.

1st, They say, We do approve of Monthly and Quarterly Meetings; and that it
will be our Duty to be at unity with our Brethren in the service thereof. But
in the first of the forty four Charges John Wilkinson declared publicly
against appointing set days aforehand to meet; and John Wilkinson was the
Header of that separate Meeting in Wiltshire, which they continue separate from
our Quarterly and Monthly Meetings set up by the Power of God in his
instruments (they said, They will not say they were not.)

2dly, John Wilkinson subscribed a Paper for erecting of Women's Meetings in the
Country, in singleness of Heart, and for unities sake; but now we [Why we?]
judge there is no necessity to continue them in the Country. It seems John
Wilkinson had changed his Mind from singleness of Heart and Unity, into
Separation.

3dly, Though we conscientiously forbear to assent or encourage to lay
intentions of Marriage before the Women's Meetings, yet our inward Sense is,
that it is not agreeable to the Life of Truth, to oppose others in the Practice
thereof.

4thly, When it pleases the Lord to manifest to us a sense of its Service in
the Country, as in the City, we shall join hand and heart with our Brethren and
Sisters in the Practice of it. Oh, unstable changeable men! who can trust them
in any thing. What! not settled in their Judgment yet?

Fourteenth is an Abridgment of a Judgment against John Wilkinson and John
Story. Thomas Crisp, thy Copy is not the same, but falsely transcribed, the
chief words left out, as [to be reconciled to your Brethren, and united to the
Church] is not in; and other words put in dishonestly, to serve thy own turn,
as the usual manner has been through thy Book.

Fifteenth, Another eminent Opposer of J. W. and J. S. says, [Let not that
spirit be reasoned with, enter not into Articles with it, but feed it with
Judgment, this is Gods decree]

Answ. T. C. is it not God's Decree to pass Judgment upon all wicked spirits?
He does not say, article not with the person; that were uncharitable; but use
means to pull him as (...) Firebrand out of the Fire, by telling him, if he
will not hear thee, tell one or two; if he will not hear them, tell the Church;
if he will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man. Thomas
Crisp, our acquaintance and unity in the Truth, twenty years since, was joyful,
but now to see thee joined to a spirit Error, grieves my heart. If thou
should dislike my plainness of speech, and account it hard Words, or ill
Will, thou art mistaken; I wish thee all happiness, as to my own Soul, and in
true Love counsel thee, rest not in Self-confidence, but search thy heart
deeply, whether thou may not be mistaken. I say unto thee, as in my Answer to
William Rogers, if thou can prove all thy Writings true, and mine false, I
will submit to the Truth in thee; but if thou can not prove thine true, nor
mine false, then thou art to submit to the Truth in me; so all Controversy
betwixt us in these matters, will be ended.

The 6th Month, 1681. Thomas Laurence.

THE END.

