THE TRVE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM THE MOST REVEREND WILLIAM Lord
Archbishop of CANTERBURY to the University of OXFORD, when he resigned his
Office of CHANCELLOR. Published BY OCCASION OF A BASE LIBELL AND Forgery that
runs under this TITLE. And also the Answer of the UNIVERSITY to the said LETTER.



ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS

Veritas in Profundo

Christus Lucrum.

(...)

(...)

printer's or publisher's device

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, Anno Dom.
1641.

TO MY VERY LOVING FRIENDS, THE VICE-CHANCELLOVR, THE DOCTORS, THE PROCTORS,
AND The rest of the Convocation of the University of OXFORD.
AFter my hearty Commendations etc. These are to remember my love to that whole
Body. That love, than which never any Chancellor bare greater, or with more
ferventnesse and zeal to the public good and happiness of that Place. And I
do heartily pray all, and every of you to believe me, for most true it is,
that the unfortunatenesse of my great affliction does not trouble me for any
one thing more, then that I can be no farther useful or beneficial to that
Place, which I so much love and honor.

I was once resolved not to resign my Place of Chancellor, till I saw the
issue of my troubles one way or other. And this resolution I took, partly
because I had no reason to desert my Self, and occasion the World to think me
guilty: And partly because I have found so much love from the University that I
could not make my self willing to leave it, till some greater Cause should
take me off from that which I so resolved on.

That Cause (if I be not much mistaken,) does now present it self. For I see
the University has great need of Friends, great and daily need. I see my
trial not hastened; so that I am neither able to assist your great occasions
my self nor procure Friends for them: I see that if you had another Chancellor
you could not want the help which now you do. And I cannot but know that were
your love never so great to me, it must needs cool, when you see me able to
give no Assistance, and yet fill the Place which should afford it to you. And I
should hardly satisfy my self, that I love you so well as I do, if I did not
further your Good and happiness by all the means I can, and even by this my
Resignation.

The serious consideration of these things, and the foresight which I have,
that I shall never be able to serve you as I have done, have prevailed with me
at this time, to send the Resignation of the Chancellourship, to your Body met
in Convocation. And do hereby pray you that it may be publicly read and
accepted, the time being now most fit, that so your Honorable succeeding
Chancellor may presently appoint an able Deputy for the Government according
to his own judgment.

And now I do earnestly desire of you all, either to remember, or to know,
that I never sought, or thought of the Honor of this Place to my self: And
yet that since it was by the great favor and love of that University laid upon
me, I have discharged it (by Gods grace and goodness to me) with great pains
and care, and Gods blessing (I humbly thank him,) has not been wanting. And I
profess singly and from my heart, if there be any Good which I ought to have
done to that Place, and have not done it, it proceeded from want of
understanding or ability, not Will or affection. And though I do for the
Causes aforesaid resign this Place, yet I shall serve it still with my
Prayers, so long as God continues my life.

And as J doubt not but God will bless you with an Honorable Chancellor, and
one able to do more for that Place than J have been; so J pray God to give you
a peaceable and quiet Election, and to direct it to the Good of this his
Church, and the honor and happiness of that famous University. That you may
have no miss in the least of me, who (after your Prayers heartily desired) now
writes himself the last time

From the TOWER. June 25. 1641. Your very loving poor Friend and CHANCELLOR,
W. CANT.

AMPLISSIMO ET REVERENDISSIMO DOMINO GVILIELMO ARCHI-PRAESULI Cantuariensi.
Reverendissime ARCHI-PRAESUL -- Hoc enim solum Tibi (sic voluisti) Nomen
relictum est --
NOvissimae literae tuae, amoris, sed and doloris, plenae, fecerunt ut dehinc
nos plane are dirutos diruptosque profiteri debeamus. Cum effusissimo amori
tuo, verbis (quod unicum nobis suppetit peculium) ut paria faceremus, nunquam
sperandum fuit; nedum dolori nostro verba nos reperturos paria; Ne si passis
quidem eloquentiae velis vehi, and tota doloris praerogativa frui liceret.
Hodie vero, ut sunt tempora, ad justissimum dolorem nostrum non levis hic
accessit cumulus, quod eum in sinu premere and quasi strangulare necesse
habeamus; Quibus ne illud quidem tuto queri licet, in ea nos tempora incidisse,
in quibus singulari tuae prudentiae and erga nos amori consultissimum visum
sit, nostraque quam maxim interesse, ut Res ac Fortunas nostras a Tuis
segreges habeamus and sejunctas. Quanquam vero supremo Numini sic visum est, ut
illud nobis beneficij loco imputandum haberes, quod maximum beneficioru^
tuorum, Teipsum, a nobis segregares, and Cancellarij munus abdicares; Affectus
tamen tuus erga Academiam nostram propensissimus, tum literis tuis novissimis,
tum aliis frequentibus argumentis abunde testatus, dubitare nos non sinit, quin
deposito invidioso Cancellarij titulo, amantissimi Patroni affectum adhuc in
sinu tuo retineas. Quamdiu Manuscripta MSS Cod. plus quan MCCC. De quibus plus
quam CCCXXX Linguis Oriental. scripti. and paulo minus C. Ling. Gr.
illa (...) Tua, Orientis spolia, and vere (...) Bibliothecam nostram
illustrabunt; quamdiu Lectura Arabica, a Te Salarium Professoris Ling. Arab.
XL. lb. Annuae.
dotata, frequentabitur; quamdiu Antiquitatis vindices simul and testes antiqua
Hebr. Graec. Roman. Famil. and Imper. Britannic.
Numismata visentur; quamdiu castigatior disciplina, mores emendati, morumque
Canon Statuta vigebunt; quamdiu pro studio partium bonarum Artium studia
colentur; quamdiu literis honos, honori Literae erunt, Cancellarium adhuc esse
Te, sentiet praesens Aetas; fuisse, poster a agnoscet. Dehinc, immortalitatis
securus, gloriaeque Tuae superstes, diu hic posteritati tuae intersis; Ac
demum, ubi mortalitatis numeros omnes impleveris, plenus annis abeas, plenus
honoribus, illis etiam quos abdicasti. Ita vovet

Dat: e Domo Convocat: 6o. Iulij. 1641. Amplitudini Tuae omni cultus ac
observantiae nexu devinctissima, ACADEMIA OXON.


