DIEV ET MON DROIT


A COMMEMORATION OF King Charles His INAUGURATION.

OR, A SERMON PREACHED AT Paul's Cross

By WILLIAM LAUD then Bishop of London, late Archbishop of Canterbury,
beheaded on Tower Hill on Friday the 10. of Jan. 1644.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. 1645.

A COMMEMORATION OF KING CHARLES HIS INAVGVRATION.
PSALM. 72.1. Give the King thy Judgments O God,
And thy Kighteousnesse unto the Kings Son.

THe Psalms of David, and his Heart never went sweeter. The Title of the Psalm
does not only tell us that: but it tells us that David had an eye upon his Son
Solomon: An eye, that is true: but not both eyes upon Solomon: no, nor one
absolutely fixed, because a greater then Solomon is here. A greater then
Solomon: who is that? Who? why it is Christ. Solomon was the type and shadow
(if you will) and so one eye may be upon him: but the other eye must pierce
through to the antitype, and body of the Promise, which is Christ. So the
ancient Fathers, Iustine, Tertullian, Origin, Athenasius, and the rest are
clear: and upon very good ground: for there are many things in this Psalm,
that cannot be applied to Solomon, and no Type is bound to represent in all:
and there are some typical Propositions, as one observes upon Deuteronomy. 18. that
are applyable to the Type, or to the Antitype alone. There are many things in
this Psalm, that are not applyable to Solomon. But some are, and none more
then the words of the Text. For these words can as hardly be applied to Christ,
as that after to Solomon. Now that that agreed to Types before Christ's coming,
agrees to all that are like Christ after his coming. Therefore this is
applyable to all godly, religious Kings: For all have direction from, and share
in the prayer of Solomon,

These words that begin the Psalm, I shall take in that sense as applied to
the Type, to Solomon, and in him to all religious Kings. Which so to Solomon,
that I am heartily glad to find Christ, so full in the Psalm, so near the King.

First, I am glad to find him so full in the Psalm, because that is a
confutation of all ^udaisme^ for they received the Psalms as well as we: and
here in this Psalm, there are many things that they cannot fasten upon
Solomon, or any other but Christ. So clear is that, that Tertullian has
observed long since against them The Jews (says he) scorn us for receiving
Christ as a Savior, Prescribemus tamini, etc. yet we prove against them out of
the Scriptures, that they receive, that Christ is come the promised, prophesied
Messius.

Secondly, I am glad to find Christ so near the King: because nothing can be
more honorable, and safe, for David, and Solomon, the Father, and the Son that
is to succeed the King, then to have God the Father, and Christ his Son so
near to them. So near and close, not only as they stand mixed in the Psalm,
but far more close by the P^ayer of David, and by the blessings that follow
in the Psalm upon the Prayer, B^essings, not upon David and Solomon only, but
upon the Father and the Son in any Kingdom, where the Father with a true
religious heart imbraceth Christ, and will teach his Son to follow his steps:
for then, and there, God will give plenty of judgment to the King, and a full
measure of Righteousness to the Kings Son.

My Text then, as it is applyable to David, and Solomon, (for so I shall follow
it, here) is the Prayer of David to God for himself first, and then for his
Son Solomon after; for both have reference.

And the Blessings which follow upon this Prayer made by David, and granted by
God, are very many, and great, and follow in the Psalm; namely.

Here is judgment for the people, and that according to right, at verse. 2.

Then here is defense for the poor, I and for their very Children too, verse. 4.

Then after this here is peace, peace upon all, abundance of peace at verse. 3.

Then here is the punishment, and that as rightly settled as may be; upon the
wrong doer, verse. 4.

And all these come together, that righteous men may flourish, at verse. 7.

So it is a necessary Prayer to be made, a very necessary Prayer: for all
these, and many more blessings follow, and come upon any nation, and any
people, when God comes to Give his Judgment to the King, and his
Righteousness to the Kings son.

My text is a Prayer; and there are two Petitions, and these two Petitions
divide my text into two parts.

The one is, that God would give his judgments unto the King.

The other is, that he would Give his Righteousness to the Kings son: for
all other inferior circumstances fall into one of these. I willl begin at the
first. Give the King thy Judgments O God. My text I told you is a Prayer; and
I have made choice of a praying text. The Age is so bad, they will not endure a
good King to be commended for danger of flattery, I hope I shall offend none by
praying for the King.

The text is a Prayer, and quis ora, who it is that prays, is the first
circumstance that appears in the text; it is David, it is the King, and he
bears a prime, and a great part wheresoever he is. And it was David's honor:
for there was never any King so often found at his prayers as David was; seven
times a day will I praise thee, Psalm 119. This was David's promise, and for
ought we know it was David's performance too. And through all the book of his
Psalms (that devout part of Scripture) all his praises go mixed with prayer:
so he prayed very often. And certainly, there is nothing more necessary for any
King, then Prayer. And therefore St. Austin accounts it one of the greatest
happinesses of a King, not to neglect to offer to God sacrificium orationis,
the sacrifice of prayer.

1. And there is great need it should be so: for of all men (Priests only
excepted) Kings have the greatest account to make God: therefore prayer is very
necessary for them; that since no man is able to keep his accounts even, God
would be pleased to be merciful, and take Christ into the reckoning.

2. Of all men (could greatness let them feel their wants) none have such
burdens on their shoulders, as Kings have; therefore prayer is necessary for
them, that they may call as often upon God, as he calls often upon them that are
weary and heavy laden to refresh them, Mat. 11.

3. Of all men, none have so great troubles as Kings have. Indeed troubles must
needs be great, or else they dare not seize on Kings: therefore prayer is
necessary then especially when the trouble is such, as no wit of man can work
off, and repel; and such troubles there are, when there is no shelter, or
help left in the world; but this Lord remember David, and all his troubles.
But be the troubles never so great, if David pray, and God remember, the King
cannot be lost in any sorrow. Hezekiah found it so when he fasted, and prayed,
and turned to the Lord, Isa 37. for then the Host of Zenacharib was presently
broken, and himself saved. So then David is at this necessary work, he is at
prayer.

I, but for whom is it that David pra^es?

Surely, diev^s ancient, and modern Divines, think that in this place the
King, and the Kings son stand but for one person, the person of Solomon under
two different relations, the King, and the Kings son; and that there is an
Emphasis added by the Repetition. And they think too that David penned this
Psalm when he was dying, when he resigned his Crown to Solomon, and delivered
the Scepter into his hand; which the Jesuit Lorinus tells us (and he is very
exact) that it was just four years: (surely I think he fails of his
reckoning) before David's death, when he made this prayer for Solomon. And he
avoucheth Jerome to be his Author: but it is not so; the Jesuit in this, as in
diverse greater business is too bold: Indeed Jerome says that Dav^d lived after
Solomon was crowned aliquot annus, some years; but he says not just four, it
may be more, or fewer: I will not enter upon the question quando, when David
made this Prayer, and penned this Psalm.

First, because the quando, the time here is not in the text, nor in any part
else in Scripture: therefore I may safely be ignorant. Secondly, because,
suppose this were the last Psalm that ever David made, as some collect out of
the last verse, yet that supposed will not prove that he made this Psalm
after he had crowned Solomon King: for before Solomon was crowned David was
little less then bedrid, 1 King. 1. at which time it is out of question that
David prayed, therefore he did not then compose this Psal^e. Therefore I shall
take liberty to dissent from this opinion, with all submission to better
judgments; but especially to the Church.
Me thinks it was not so near night with the Prophet when he penned this
Psalm. I rather think that David made it when himself was King, and his
purpose was firmly set that Solomon should succeed him, for so he had sworn,
1 King. 3. And I think this prayer here in the beginning of the Psalm was made
first by David for himself, and then for Solomon after. And since this opinion
maintains nothing contrary to the Analogy of faith, nothing that hinders the
context, nothing that crosses any determination of the Church: nay since there
is in it more piety to God, more duty to himself, more instruction to his Son,
and more good example to other Kings, that the prayer begin at himself: I will
take the prayer as I find it in the very words of the Psalm, to be a prayer,
first for David, and then for his Son, and so proceed.

Well then, David's prayer here, is first for himself, (we shall come to his
Son af^et;) And he is an excellent example to Kings in this: for the first
thing that makes prayer necessary; absolutely necessary for a King, is
himself: that a superior hand, even Gods hand would set, and keep him right,
whom so many inferior hands labor to set awry.

I, but what need the King to pray for himself? he wants no prayers whom all
the people pray for.

Indeed it is true, the people are bound to pray for their King, 1 Timothy 2. and
I make no doubt, but that the people perform this duty as they are bound,
since it is a tribute which by the Law of God they ought to pay, and David so
great, and so good a King, had out of question the prayers of all his people,
both for himself, and his son; yet for all that you shall find David at his
prayers for himself too.

And certainly there is great reason for it; for of all acts of Charity, this
of Prayer is aptest to begin at home.

It is true indeed, the King ought to have the prayers of his people, and that
man cannot deserve so much as the name of a Christian, that prays not heartily
for the King; because that is not the Kings good only, but the peoples way to
lead a life in godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 5. Therefore, that man that makes
no conscience of praying for the King, let him pretend what he can, he must
be presumed to have as little care of all godliness and honesty.

I, but though the King ought to have the prayers of his people; yet in the
performance of their duty, I read not of any dispensation the King has to
neglect his own, not to pray for himself. If he be a King like David, he must
be a King at his prayers too, especially in those great things that concern
the King, that concern the kingdom, that concern his Son, and his succession
to his kingdom; there he of necessity must pray for himself.

He may joy in his peoples prayers there, but he must pray for himself too.

And God be ever blessed for it, you have a King that is daily at his prayers,
both for himself, and for you: yet here, I pray take this along with you; that
as it is the peoples duty to pray for their King, and that takes not off the
King to pray for himself. So on the contrary side, the Kings religious care in
praying for himself is so far from lessening, that it augments the obligation
of the people to pray for the King. And when both pray, the King for himself,
and the people for the King, God will not refuse their prayers.

And the prayer granted, though it fall first upon the head of the King (as good
reason it should) yet it becomes as Aarons oil, Psalm. 133. for it runs to the
skirts of all his people; so that they have the benefit, both of their own, and
of his prayer.

I will never misdoubt the piety of this nation in the performing this duty,
of which both here, and in all places they are met this day to make public
proof. For the person that keeps close to this duty, among many others, he
shall be sure of this one great blessing, he cannot fall into the opposite sin
of murmuring against the King. David the King in the text, he had faithful
and religious people; yet there was a Shemei among them, that instead of
praying for the King, cursed and reviled him, 2 Samuel 16. David was very
patient; but I pray remember what Solomon the Kings Son did to Shimei, 2 King.
2. remember that, and if the memory of his punishment would affright other men
from running into this blasphemous iniquity, all would soon be well.

We are to consider in the next place to whom it is here that the Prophet
prays, and that is expressed, A deo, Give the King thy Judgments O God.

Do thou give. And as this is all men's duty; so it it is the duty of the
King too among the rest to go in prayer to God, and to God alone. Therefore
Damascene puts God into the very definition of prayer, prayer says that Father
is petitio decensi a deo, the asking of those things that are fit to be asked
of God. For prayer is one of the greatest parts of divine worship: so great,
that Parmatius disputing against Sermonian, takes prayer for the whole entire
worship of God.

No Pope can dispense with King, or people; either not to pray; or not to pray
to God but Saints, or Angels. As for their distinctions, they are all new; the
ancient Church knew them not; though these have their use sometimes, yet they
are a great deal too nice to be used in prayer, that is so essential a part of
divine worship.

And you have great cause again to bless and magnify God, for a King, so
constant in religion, so devout in prayer, so direct in his devotion to God
alone; as he has ever showed himself to be; and God for his mercy sake ever
hold him there. And indeed to whom should he, or any of you go in prayer, but
to God? for none can give but he; nor none can bless, or preserve that that is
given, but he. If the King look to have his Throne established to himself, or
his Son after him, he must go to God for the settling of it, or else it will
shake then when he thinks it surest. And since God has proclaimed it himself,
By me Kings reign, Prove. 8. Princes have reason to look up to him, that they
may reign by him since against him; nay without him they cannot reign. To God
then the King goes by prayer. But all this is lost except we know for what? And
that follows next in the text. It is for Judgment.

It is indeed for all that a kingdom is, but principally for jndgement.

First, because under God, that is the establishing of the Kings Throne, Prove.
25

Secondly, because that is one of the Kings maine virtues, for the ordering of
his people: for they cannot have their well being but by justice, and
judgment. Therefore i^ the Common Law of this kingdom, justice is rightly
styled, the supporter of ^he Commonwealth.

J will not fill your ears with curiosities, nor trouble you with disputes,
wherein this judgment desired for the King, and this justice and
righteousness for the Kings Son differ one from another. I know they differ in
school learning, Judgment standing usually for the habit; and Justice for
the sentence, or execution accordingly. But here Rufinus, and Austin, and other
Divines, tell me that judgment and righteousness in this place, stand for
that justice, and judgment, that the King is indifferently, and equally to
administer to his people, and so for one virtue. Here is the virtue and the
power, both from the King, and both from God. The benefit of both are the
peoples; but from God by the King. Therefore David prays here not for one
virtue for himself, and another for his son; but for one, and the same virtue
for both. For the Son had as much need of this virtue as the Father, the one
being a King, and the other to be one; they both needed this great comprising
kingly virtue, without which there can be no religious peaceable government
over a people. So justice and judgment in this place (as usually when they
attend the King) contain the virtue it self; and the power that brings this
virtue to act. The execution is as justice, and the power to give sentence,
moderation and equity to smooth over the rigor of justice; and all other
virtues, as far as they serve to strengthen, or direct and keep even the hands
of justice, prudence especially.

Then it is a wondrous necessary prayer here: for if justice should not be in
the Kings will (which God forbid) it must needs grow apt to turn to
soreness. And if judgment, and execution follow not upon the sentence of
justice, the Kings hand must needs shake into remissness. And one of these,
sournesse will make judgment it self, or the pretext of it a scourge ^or the
people. And the other, remissness, will make the people a worse scourge to
themselves, for want of discipline to keep them in order: For of all scourges,
there is none answerable to the unrulinesse of the people.

Now this virtue as large as it is, when it f^ls the heart of the King, it is
called another heart; it puts on other dimensions: for it furnishes the Kings
breast with all rectitude, and prudence; and rectitude is the being, and
prudence the moderation, and guide of all justice: for so without respect of
persons it belongs to the wise, and prudent, Prove. 25.

Nay further, though this virtue be so large, yet the heart of the King is so
capacious, that justice and judgment cannot fill it, if it stand si^gle:
therefore David prays not for judgment single; but in the plural number:
Give thy judgments.

And there is great reason, that he should pray so: for justice continuing, one
and the same virtue, gives many times different judgments, and it must needs
be so, and the King must needs be an instrument in them all. And in the various
occasions that himself, and his people have use of. This David found in his
own heart; therefore he prays for all.

And this pray we always for the King for all judgment for the King. So give
Lord.

And here it is fit for you a little to take a view of your own happiness, and
to bless God for it: for you live under a King that keeps his Laws in his
life: A King that lives so, as if he were a Law himself, and so needed none. A
King that plants his Judges so, as they may equally distribute his judgment,
and justice to his people. A King so blessed by God for your good; that whether
it be for his own prayers, or yours, or both, or neither; but that God is
pleased to show his mercy, and glory upon him to you: certain it is, that God
has given him a very large heatt, and filled it to the brim with justice, and
judgment.

Take heed, I heartily beg it of you. I say it again, take heed I heartily beg
it of you, that no sin of unthankfulness, no base detracting murmuring sin,
possess your souls, or whet your tongues, or sour your breasts against the
Lord, and against his Anointed: but remember in that these two things.

First, remember, that it is as easy for God to take away any blessing (even
the great blessing of a good King) as to give it, remember that. And secondly,
remember, that unthankfulness to God for so gracious a King, is the very ready
way to do it, remember that too: and therefore look to these things in time.
I, but what then, has a King enough, when God has given him justice, and
judgment? May his prayers then cease for himself, as your prayers for him?
has he no more need of God, when God has once given him judgment?

O God forbid; surely he has, and it is to be presumed, that the King daily
prays; I am sure his duty it is, to pray that God would ev^r please to
continue, and increase the righteousness, and judgment he has given to him.
Nor can I think, but that David was very often at this prayer too: for he says,
Psalm. 99. The Kings power loves judgment. And it is more then probable, that
that he loved, he would pray for; he prayed to have it, and to increase it.
And he that prays so often, psalm. 119. I say so often that God would keep him in
the way of his Commandments, and cause him to make much of his Law; he must of
necessity be presumed to pray for justice, and judgment, which is the vigor
of all Laws, divine, and humane.

And Kings have great need often to pray for this grace, and for the continuance,
and increase of it too.

For Kings stand high, that is true; but the higher they stand, the more they
are exposed to tempests, and wind-shakings, that pass over the lower valleys
with less noise, and danger.

And Kings are great. That is true too: but the greater they are, the stiffer
are the blasts of all temptations on them to batter, at least to shake justice,
and judgment. Therefore they have need of God still, when he has given them
most: and doubtless he that has most, has need to pray: for the greater the
King is, he must most be presumed to be careful of this duty, that he prays
to God more then once, and more then others.

Neither is this prayer for strengthening, and increasing of judgment only.
David goes further yet, it is not Give the King judgments O God, But give the
King thy judgments.

For none but thine O Lord will serve the King; nor none but thine will long
preserve the people. I know worldly policy, and the Professors may flatter
themselves too hot in it. They may think that any course of justice, that any
Standard may serve to govern a kingdom without any eye at all to heaven,
without any respect to Gods judgments; without principally aiming at the
judgment that is given, and executed by the Lord, as it is, 2 Chronicles. 29. They
may think this and more; but let no man deceive himself, and then most when
he would be wise: For certainly, there can be no kingdom rightly constituted,
further then God himself comes in, in laying the foundation of it in true^
impartial judgment. When the foundation of a kingdom is perfectly laid
(which is a blessing seldom perfect in all things in any kingdom whatsoever,
yet) no kingdom can continue upon such a foundation, longer then it stands
upright on it. If it sway on either side; if it fall not presently, it grows
weaker still, the more it leans away from justice and judgment which is Gods.

And as it is with kingdoms in their foundation, and superstructure, so it is
with Kings too, that are to manage, and dispose them: for if any King think
himself sufficient by his own virtue against the difficulties of a kingdom,
by his own justice, and wisdom, and integrity: he will find by his loss, as
Nebuchadnezar in his g^eatest greatness, Dnn. 4. that he and all his virtue
cannot long keep up, no not a settled King. Therefore David was wise, as well as
religious, that he went to God for his judgments, without which he nor his Son
after him, he knew was able to hold up the kingdom. Give the King thy
judgments O God.
And what did David with them, when he had them?

What; he resolved to make them the very rule of his government, and he did
so: for

First for himself, he tells us in Psalm. 119. Thy judgem^nts have I laid before
me. There he make them his own rule. Then he prays over his Son Solomon. O
Lord give here to Solomon my son a perfect heart, that h^e may keep thy
commandments, that they might rule his Son. Well then Thy judgments.

But is not all justice, and judgment Gods? Yes, out of doubt; In general
justice and judgment are from him. Therefore it is a great advantage to people
in any kingdom, even among Infidels, to have the kingdom administered by
justice, and judgment. But yet to make a kingdom perfect, and entire, to have
the judgment Gods, and the kingdom firm; then there must these grains be
put into the balance.

First, it must be justice, not only given, but guided all along by God, and
Grace. If this be not, judgment cannot remain firm in any man, or any King.
Now as it holds it works, for work it cannot beyond the strength it has:
therefore if Gods spirit assist it not, it may faint, and fail just there, and
then when on the sudden it may shake a kingdom.

Secondly, it must be judgment that is always Gods; and it must distribute
rewards and punishments, as God commands. If justice, and judgment role this
eye aside, though it may continue for ought may appear to others, and
themselves, yet they begin to look squint, and in part leave God. Therefore if
any pretented cunning way of justice and judgment so called, shall debase, and
sinck the honor of God, and the sincerity of Religion. If any Municipall law
be made in any kingdom to strengthen such designs, as are injurious to God,
and his worship; there must, there will come a failing upon all such kingdoms,
wheresoever they are; and then it will appear, (though perhaps too late) that
the judgments of their King were not Gods judgments.

Thirdly, it must be judgment, that (as much as humane infirmity can bear)
must be free from taint, both within, and without; within at the heart of the
King, and his Judges under him; and without, from all possession in the ear,
and from all corruption in the hand. If this be not, Justice which should only
be blind to see no persons, becoms so blind, that it can see no truth; and
Justice that is so blind cannot be Gods. Therefore if the justice and judgment
of a kingdom cut up its own foundation, can any man think it can build safely
and wisely upon it for the State? it cannot be.

And this Thine in the text (for I must hasten) Thy judgments. It is so full a
circumstance, I cannot leave it yet. For by it you may see how necessary it was
then for David, and how requisite it is now for all Kings to pray to God; and to
him alone for judgment: For no King can master the Scepter well, but by
justice and judgment. And you see it cannot be done by any kind of judgment
neither; but that that is Gods judgment in the upright integrity of it: And
then who can give Gods judgments but God himself? who is as he is called,
Isay 30. The God, and the God of judgment: surely none can have it but he in
perfection, nor none can give it to others, to make them perfect but he.

Therefore Austin asks the question, but merely in scorn. What! is it come to
that? does thou think that thou can give justice and judgment to thy self?
No, thou can not: for no man can give himself that that he has not; and
that that he has already, he needs not. This our Prophet tells us plainly: for
though the King love judgment, yet it is God that prepares Equity, and
Righteousness in Jacob: O blessed are all they that wait for him. For if they
wait, he will give, and that no less then Judgment, his judgments to the
King.

One circumstance behind yet is, that the words are properly a prayer in th
most native sense of prayer. Not a thanksgiving only, that God had given him
his judgments. For though God had given David his judgments; and he was
thankful for such a gift as this: yet thinks here is not his proper work, but
humiliation, and supplication.

And it is an excellent thing to see a King at his prayers: for then you see
two Kings at once; a greater, and a lesser King, God and the King. And though
we cannot see God, as we see the King; yet when we see Majesty humbled, and
in the posture of a Supplicant, we cannot in a sort but see that infinite,
unspeakable Majesty of that God, whom even Kings adore, and are made far
greater by their humblest adoration. For when I pray you was Solomon the Son of
this King at his greatest glory? Surely, you shall find him at his greatest,
then immediately upon the finishing of the Temple. And how do you find Solomon
there? just at his Fathers work; he was there at his prayers upon his knees,
says the text, 1 King. 8. upon his knees: whereas now many mean, unworthy
men, are loath to bow their knees, or stoop in prayer to God.

Now this prayer was a prayer indeed: for prayer is apt to beg, not to buy: he
that pleads desert, challenges reward of duty: but he that prays relies
upon the mercy, and goodness of the Giver. And this is the way that David
comes to God, both for himself, and for his Son.

And I pray mark it, David here, the great example of a praying King, he
says not retribua domine, Lord repay me for the pains of my government; for
my service of the people, or for my worship to thy self; there is none of
this; but da domine, Give Lord, that thou art able to do by thy power, that
thou art ready to do by thy goodness. O Lord let not mine, or my peoples
unworthiness hinder that. Let not their murmuring, and disobedience be hard so
far as to thee; but Lord give the King thy j^dgements, and then I will execute
them to thine honor, and their good. This was David's way, and it was prevalent.

And out of question be he King, or Subject, he that asks no more at Gods
hands, then either of both, asks and shall have too little. But God gives much
to humble Suitors, Judgments, and his judgments. And neither the Prophet did
ask, nor God did give the earnest and pledge of this judgment only, but
judgment it self to the King. And certainly the King had need to pray thus.
And so had the people as great need as the King: for if this prayer be not
made, what assurance have you that God will give? and if God will not give, the
King cannot have; and if the King cannot receive justice and judgment, he
cannot distribute it to the people, v. 2. And if judgment be not distributed
to the people, there will be no peace verse. 3. And where the people do not
receive judgment from the King, and peace from themselves, what are they?
Nothing but a heap of most infirm, and miserable creatures: which you can never
be as long as God gives his Judgments to the King, and his Righteousness to
the Kings sonne^

I have now done with the first general part of the text: and it is time to
descend from the King to his Son, the second part of the Fathers Prayer.

And thy Righteousness to the Kings son, give Lord.

Where first, thoug^ it be not expressed in the text, it may easily be
conceiv^d, that such a King as David prayed for a Son, before he prayed for
Righteousness to be given him: and though David had diverse sons before, yet in
some respect or other, they were all to David as no sons: therefore there is no
question to be made, but he prayed for him. I and therefore too, when God had
given him Solomon, he calls him not bare his son, but his only son, Chro. 29.
And no marvel; since he was that son, that God himself appointed to succeed
in the kingdom for David, 1 Chronicles. 28. and such a son is always worth the
praying for.

Well, but what then? when God had given David Solomon: when God has given any
other King a son, as he has given our gracious King (Gods name be ever
blessed) what then, is the Kings prayers then, or the peoples at an end?

No, nothing less; nay, there is more need a great deal both, for the King,
and for the people to go on in their prayers, as David did; that the same God
that has given his judgments to the King, will proceed, and Give his
Righteousness to the Kings son. For it is a greater blessing to the King, when
God gives his righteousness to his son, then when he gives him a son. For if
Solomon succeed not David in his love to the Temple, as well as the Throne; if
he inherit not the truth of his fathers Religion, as well as the right of his
Crown: if he follow not his Fathers devotion, and pray for Justice, and
Judgment to be given him, as well as other temporary blessings: the very
blessings of the Son would end in bitterness, and be the discomfort, and
dishonor of the Father.

But it is the wise, and prudent son, that is the Fathers Crown, and the
Mothers joy, Prove. 10 And then the blessing of a son is a blessing indeed.
David saw this, therefore he continued his prayers. And it is more then fit for
other Kings to do so too. Thy Judgments Lord give the King, and thy
Righteousness to the Kings son.

And for the people, they have great need, not only to say Amen to the prayers
of the King; but to repeat the prayer, and with fervencie to drive it in at
the ears of God, that so their children after them may be as happy under the
son, as they themselves were under the Father, while God gives both the Father,
and the Son zeal to his truth, and judgment over his people.

And here I should take occasion to tell you of the care, and devotion of our
David in his days, and of his prayers, both for himself, and his Son; but
that the age is so bad, that they will not believe that he is so good beyond
them. And some (for they are but some) are so waspishly set to sting, that
nothing can please their ears, unless it sharpen their edge against autho^ity.

But take heed: for if this fa^lt be not amended, Justice may seize upon them
that are guilty God knows how soon: and the Kings Judgment that God has
given him, may pull out their stings, that can employ their tongues in nothing
but to wound him, and his government.

Well, these must not divert me, or any good subject from praying for the King,
and the Kings Son. The Kings Son! blessed name, what imports then to a King?
surely David knew well: therefore you see he leaps for joy, into this prayer in
the first words of the Psalm. Some tell me this name imports at large, the
King, and his posterity; sons or daughters, not distinct. And I confess the
least is Gods great blessing upon a people. For the wise Historian tells us,
that Plena, etc. The Kings house full of them, is the Kings security; and the
kingdoms too: and our Prophet proclaims as much, for he proclaims him blessed
that has his quiver full of them, he shall not be ashamed when he meets his
enemy in the gate, Psalm. 112. But when I find it Fillio Regis, the Kings son, I
think David made a difference, and had a special eye upon Solomon, that God
had given him to succeed after him, 1 Chronicles. 28. Well then, be it to the Kings
Son.

Why! but then is it but to one? out of doubt where there is but one, there can
be no question: but when there is more sons then one, as David had (and other
Kings may have) there the Kings son in the text, stands for that son, that in
the course of the kingdom, is to inherit, and to be King after him.

Not that prayer is not necessary, or not to be made for Gods blessings upon
them all. But because in the course of time the stern is to be held by that
hand, therefore the prayer is most necessary to fill that hand with justice,
and judgment of the Kings son, and to season the Kings son with justice and
judgment.

So then, the Son in the text was Solomon, not borne first: for he had other
brethren living; but designed by God, and by David himself to be King after
him: designed by David, therefore he had great reason to pray^ designed by God;
therefore David had reason to hope, that God would give him a spirit of
government. And it was so; for God gave him plenty of wisdom, and store of
justice, 2 King. 1.

The Son with which God has blessed our King, and us, as natus h^ri, borne
heir; and I hope designed and marked out by God for long life, and happiness.
In all things like Solomon, God make him, saving in those things in which
Solomou fell from these prayers of his Father.

Now as it was to David, so it is to any King, a great happiness to have a son
to pray for.

For first, there is scarce such another exercise of a Kings piety, as to pray
for his son.

Secondly, there is scarcely such another motive to make the King careful of
his sons education, as this prayer is. For the more David prayed to God, for
Gods justice and judgment, to descend upon his Son, the more he seemed to
see what a want it was for the son of a King to want j^stice and judgment,
and the more he sees what this want is, the more undoubtedly must he endeavor
by prayer to God, and his own endeavor to look to it, for the virtuous
education of his Son. For it is impossible almost, that he that prays to God
to give; should not also endeavor that it may be given. For when we our selves
pray for any thing, that prayer if it be such as it ought, sets an edge on our
endeavors: because in a manner it assures us, that God will give what we ask,
if we endeavor by Gods grace, as we ask.

And for our own particular, I doubt not but we shall see Gods grace
plentifully given to the Kings Son, after his pious Fathers careful
successful endeavor in his education. That his heart may be full of justice,
and his hand of judgment, against the time come, that the judiciarie power
must descend upon him.

And if you mark it here, the blessing that David desires for the Kings Son,
is the very self same that he asks for himself, Righteousness, that is,
Justice, and Judgment. And there is great reason for it: for this virtue is as
necessary for the Son, as for the Father. The same Crown being to be worn by
both. The same Scepter to be welded by both. The same people to be governed by
both. The same Laws to be maintained by both. Therefore the same virtue is
necessary for both

And the copulative in the text, And thy Righteousness for the Kings son,
joins David and Solomon; the Father and the Son in one prayer, for one
blessing.

And this example of David's prayer is a great leading case for Kings; for this
holy and pious King David, this King full of experience, what the greatest want
of a King might be^ he does not ask at Gods hand, for his Son long life, an
enlarged kingdom, heaps of wealth, (though that be very necessary) but the
grace of judgment, and righteousness, that so he may be able to go through
with the office of a King, that is David's prayer. And other blessings come
within the adijcientur, Mat. 6. they shall be cast into the lap of the King, if
he first seek the Kingdom of God, in the administration of Justice, and
Judgment to the people. For Kings are ordained of God for the good of the
people. And this David understood well: for himself acknowledges it, psalm.
78. that God therefore made him King, that he might feed Jacob his people, and
Israel his Inheritance; That he might feed them, and as David knew this, so he
practiced it too: for he fed them with a faithful and prudent heart, and
governed them wisely with all his power.

And even with this goes along the prayer of the Church for the King, that he
may ever, and first seek Gods honor, and glory; and then study to preserve
the people committed to his charge, to preserve them, which cannot possible be
without Justice, and Judgment. For as Austin proves at large, there is no bond
of unity, or concord, that can be firm without it.

And I will not tell you; but Solomon may, what a King is, that has not the
grace of Justice, prove. 28. But how ever, the more are you bound to God
Almighty, that has given you a King so full of Justice, and Judgment, as you
have found him to be.

And it is worthy our consideration too, how David and Solomon agree in their
prayers; and what a Kings Son may learn, when he is exampled by such a Father.
For we find when Solomon came to years, and wore the Crown, he fell to prayer
too: and his prayer was built upon the same foundation. The prayer of David,
and Solomon the Son meet at once. For David did not simply pray for wisdom;
but for that wisdom that might enable him to govern the people. And indeed
all the wisdom of a King, especially to direct Justice and Judgment, is the
very ready way to all Kingly wisdom: Therefore David's prayer went up first for
Justice: because without that there is no wisdom.

There may be wiliness if you will to resemble wisdom: but there was never
any wise King that was not just. And that policy will be found weak in the
end, that persuades any King against Justice and Judgment.

And as before, it was not Judgment alone, that David desired for himself,
but it must be Tuam, thy Judgments. So Righteousness alone does not content
him for his Son, but it must be Tuam too, Thy righteousness.

And indeed moral Justice alone cannot possible be enough for a Christian
King. Religious and pious Justice must come in too. He must take care for the
souls, as well as for the body and goods of his people. Therefore one of the
Churches prayers is, that the King may study to preserve the people; not in
wealth only, and in peace, but in Godliness too. He must so give the people
their own, that is Justice; as that he command the people to give God his own;
that is, Justice with Religion, And there is no King, nor no Kings Son can
possibly do this, unless God give them the spirit of Judgment, and Justice.
God must first give it the King, before the King give it the people.

And it is, Give Lord: For as Moral Justice only will not serve, so neither
will Theological, but only quae dat, as it is given. For as it is aquasita, as
it is learned by study, be it by study or practice, so it is speculative, or
operative by rule (that is the most) but as it is given, so it is at the heart,
and so the King is not only active by rule; but it makes the King, and the
Kings Son to be in love, and to joy in the judgment that they are to put in
execution. Then the King is fitted indeed for government, when there is the
love of Justice, and truth in the inward parts, psa. 51 For then they cannot
but practice what they love, I, and then that Justice which is within at the
heart, is vera tua, truly Gods Righteousness: and for this Justice, and
Judgment, I shall therefore continue David's prayer, and go on, Give Lord thy
Judgment to the King^ and thy righteousness to the Kings son. For if God do
not give, it is not possible for Justice, and Judgment, any other way to
descend into the heart of the King, and the Kings Son.

None but God can see to drop Justice and Judgment, into the deep heart of
the King, none but only pater luminae, the Father of Lights, that stand over,
and sees how to do it.

And yet I must tell you here, that while he prays for Gods Justice, and
Judgment for himself, and his Son, it must be understood with a great deal
of difference, and that in two respects.

First, because Gods Judgment as it is in ^od, is substantial. It is so in
God, as it is his essence himself. This way no King is capable of Gods
Justice, because it is his essence. But Justice as it is given to the King, is
a quality, an accident, and that is separable: if God either leave to give, or
desist from preserving that that he has given. Therefore Kings have great need
to pray for this Justice, because they can neither have it, nor keep it
without him.

Secondly, because Justice as it is in God, is Luminae, all light, so bright,
that even impious men themselves cannot but acknowledge it, even when they are
condemned by it. So clear that no entangled cause can cloud it, no corner
sin can avoid it. And this way again no King is capable of Gods Light,
because that is a thing incommunicable, as his substance as essential as he.
But Justice as it is given to a King, is but Lucerna, but a candle light, an
imparted light; a light that is kindled, and set up in a material substance,
and so darkened with dregs: yet even this light Kings must pray for: and it is
but need they should: for if God give not even this light, it is impossible the
King should see how to do Justice; or that he should discern how to execu^e
those judgments that God has given him.

Therefore ^he lighting up of this Candle in the heart of the King, the light
of Justice and Judgment, is a mavelous blessing, and God himself accounts
it so; and it appears.

First, because am^ng the many and great threatenings, that he thunders out
against rebellious people; this is one, that he will take from ^h^m the light
of a Candle, I^r. 25 he will not leave them so much light: and it was so; for
Gods judgment departed away from the King, the King lost the Kingdom, and the
people were lead^ away in darkness to captivity. So you may see what it is to
want this light of judgment in a King.

Secondly, it appears to be great by the promises of God: for among the many
profe^sions, that he makes to this glorious King David, this was one, that he
had ordained a light for him, psalm. 132. So then you see by the presence of
this light, what the benefit is to have it. But then still Kings themselves,
and the people must remember, it is bnt Lucerna, but a Candle li^hted at that
great light, the Lamp of God. And being but a Candle light, it is easily
blown out, if God keep not his Light about the King to renew it; and if God
provide not a fence for this Light of Justice against the winds of temptation
that bluster about it. Therefore our o^d English Translation read that place
in the Psalm happily. I have provided (says that Translat^on) not only a
light, but a Lanthorn for mine Anointed, to carry this Lig^t. And this
improves the blessing a great deal further: for there is no carrying of this
Light without the Lantern of Gods own ordaining, the temptations that beset
the King are so many, and so strong, that except this Lan^horne defend the
light, all the light of Justice and Judgment will out. And this Lantern is
so hard to make, that God himself must ordain it, or else the King cannot
have it: for who can fence, and keep in Gods blessings, but himself?
Therefore David here went very right in his prayer, marvelous right, both for
himself, and for his Son, da Domine, Give Lord, not the light of thy
judgment, and just^ce only: but give the Lan^horne too for thine Annoyn^ed,
that he may be able with honor to carry through ^his Light of Justice, and
Judgment before his people.

And let me tell you one thing more, that filius regis, the Kings Son here, is
not only a fit object of his Fa^hers prayers, but of yours too, for the peoples
prayers, as well as the Kings: for filius regis, is filius regni too, the Son
of the King, is the Son o^ the Kingdom; his Fa^hers Son by nature, but the
Kingdoms Son by right; all the subjects having equal interrest in ^he Justice
and Judgment of ^he Kings Son. Therefore while David prays, pray you also,
that God would give h^s judgments to the King, and his righteousness to the
King^ son.

I an^ where ever there is want for a Kings Son to succ^ed, and inherit his
Father, surely it is a mark, that God is somewhat angry wi^h a people: For i^
God do not sometime divert the judgment^, and sometime lessen hem, when there
is not a Son to succeed, that judgment u^ually is a Forerunner of sorrows: of
sorrows so^etimes that men can neither see, nor prevent. I know they may
easily foresee that troubles may follow us, but of what kind they shall be, to
what greatness they shall increase, how long they shall continue, what
trembling they may make at the v^ry foundation of a State, whether it will
please God to give them an issue, or not an issue; I suppose none can tell, but
God himself.

Therefor still let the prayer be expressed in what person it will, let it be
made by the King, or by the people, or by both: all shall go well, so we pray,
and give thanks heartily for the King, and the Kings Son. I must bteake off the
rest.

Thus you have se^ne David, praying for himself, and his Son. That it is an
excellent thing to find a King at his prayers: that his prayers cannot better
begin, then for himself, nor better proceed then for his Son; nor be piously
made to any but God, nor for a more necessary kingly virtue, then justice, and
judgment; nor with m^re wisdom, then for the joining of Go^s judgment to
morrall justice: for that will ever be the settling of the Kings ^hrone, and the
honor and safety of the King himself.

This day, is ^he day of the Ki^gs crowning; many years may it ^it fast on his
head, and crown all his days ^horow with justice, and judgment; and this
solemnity in observing with prayer and devotion to God, the innitiall days of
the Crowns of Kings, is old, as well as any other; for T^rtullian tells us, that
it was a practice long before his time. I, and even they which serve no true
God, Infidels themselves were upon such days as this at their vows, and
prayers to such gods as ^hey had for the happiness, and safety of their
Princes; and I hope we shall never fall short of Infidels in our prayers to
God, for the security and happiness of the King: but we shall take up the
prayer here, as David begins it: Give ^hy judgments to the King O God, and thy
righteousness to the Kings Son. And it is the best solemnity of this day to
pray for the King.

This is the day of the Kings crowning; and yet as I have not already, so
neither shall I now break out into any large panegericks, and praises, no, not
of a gracious King. But I come heth^r to preach a kind of Gospel to you, even
glad tydings^ that God in the mercies of Christ (whose the Gospel is) ha^h
given you a wife, and just, and religious King; a King whom God has enabled to
wind up all his other virtues in patience within himself, and clemency
toward his people. A King made by God (for so I hope) not only to bear (^or
that he has done enough already) but to master the great difficulties of his
time at home, and abroad; that so his people may not only be, but may live, and
flourish in peace and plenty.

This is the day of the Kings crowning; and though not just upon this day, yet
within the compass of this year God has crowned him again with a Son, a
Crown far more precious, then the Gold of Ophir. For since children are in
nature the Crown of their parents rejoicing, what joy must this needs be, both
to the King, and to the people, who have an interrest, though not alike in the
Kings Son: In the Kings Son; and he a Son given by God after some years
expectation: and he a Son given after so great a loss of a Son in the former
year; and he a Son after so many fears that this blessing could not, or not
so soon come upon us? So here are two great blessings that God has given you
at once, the King, and the Kings Son; the tree, and the fruit; the King to be a
blessing to you, and the Kings Son to be a blessing for your children after you.

And besides, all other blessings that are to come, here is a double blessing
rising with this Son: for it dispels the mists of your fears, and promises an
influence to them that shall come after. And let me put you in mind of it; for
it is most true, whe^h^r you will believe it or no. There are no subjects in
any State (I speak what I know) whatsoever Christian, or other, that live in
that plenty, at that ease, with those liberties, and immunities that you do.
There is no nation under heaven so happy, if it did but know, and understand
its own happiness. To these, nay far above all these, you have Religion as
free as may be. And all this you have maintained to you by ^he justice, and
judgment that God has given the King for your good.

Take heed, I beseech you take he^d, what return you make to God and the King,
for these blessings. Let not the sins of the time, murmuring, and disobedience
possess any. They are great s^ns when ^hey are at the least; but they are
crying sins, when they fly out against such a King, as God has filled with
justice, and judgment.

Rather set your selves to praise God, and to bless his name, and to give him
thanks for his goodness. And pray to him that he would still preserve the
King, and that his loving kindness may embrace the Kings Son. That so no cloud
no confused darkness may be spread over this kingdom, that no cloud arising
from your ingratitude to God may obscure the King; nor no eclypse caused by
popular Lunacle may befall the Kings Son. For in this the Kng, and the Kings
Son are like the sun in the firmament, seldom or never eclypsed, but by that
Moon that receives all her L^ght from them, nor by that, but when it is in the
head, or poisoned tail of that great red Dragon, the Devil.

In the multitude of people is the Kings honor, Prove. 14. But in the loyalty
and love of the people is the Kings safety; and in the Kings justice, and
judgment is the happiness of his people; and the ready way to make a King joy
in justice, and judgment over his people, is for people to show their loving
obedience to the King. And since none of us can tell how, or what to do
better, let us take up the prayer here, where David leaves it, and proceed to
pray as he did, that as God has given us a King, and to that King justice and
judgment: so he wiil most graciously be pleased to continue these great
blessings to him ^or us; that the King may still receive comfort, and the
people from the King justice, and judgment. That these judgments may be many,
may be all, which may any way fit the King, or fill the people. That these
judgments may be Gods judgement^; that is, as near the uprightness of Gods
judgments as may be, even such as may preserve Religion int^re, as well as
equity. And that God would graciously please, not to look for pay from us, but
to give where we cannot merit. That since he has not only given us the King,
but the Kings Son, he will at last double this blessing upon us, and make the
Queen a fruitful Mother of more happy Children. That to this Royal Prince, he
would give many happy days, and a large portion of his mercy, that the King,
and his Son, and the joyful Mother that bare him, may rest in the midst of
Gods blessings, both spiritual, and temporal, that we may be in the midst
of Gods blessings, and the Kings, till the Kings Son be grown up to continue
these blessings to our Generations, and transmit them to them. And so O Lord,
give and continue, and strengthen, and increase, and multiply thy judgments to
the King, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son, even so Amen Lord Jesus, and
do it. To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons, but one
everliving God, be ascribed all Might, Majesty, and Dominion, this day, and
for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

