CALEDONIAS COVENANT.

OR ANE PANEGYRIC TO THE WORLD.

VVherin is briefly set down the true cause and occasioune of the present
trubles of the kingdom of SCOTLAND.

By G. L.

They have oftentimes afflicted me from my youth: But they could not prevail
against me.
The plowers plowed upon my back and made long furrows.
But the righteous lord has cut the cords of the wicked.
PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DC.XLI.

CALEDONIAS COVENANT A PANEGYRIC TO THE WORLD.
Heavens listen, Earth bear Witness, Time record
My heavy Grieffe, and Speedy help affoard,
My soul half sunk in sad despair does faint,
I scarce have breath to sighe out my Complaint:
My moistened Eyes with weeping almost blind
And parched tongue whose Cries no pity find
Now worn with woaes and wroungs without relief
At last give over hope and yield to Grief.
Yet that the world may know my wretched Case,
And where Tales run Truth may at length take place,
To all good Christians, members of that head
Informations and Protestations.
Whose Cause, and Churches privilege I plead,
And in whose presence here I do protest
To have no other aim but peace and rest,
Relligions purity, the Gospels light
To shine again through Superstitions night,
I here rip up my breast that every Eye
Not bleard with Passion, may my heart descrie,
And all unpartiall Ears may rightly ponder
The load of wroungs which I lie groaning under.
The Reformation.
When from the dauning of the Gospels day,
The sun of Truth (long set) did first display
His glorious beams, and gild the glowing East;
The light so dazel'd Babels blindfold beast
That like a roaring Lion mad he ran.
And cast false clouds of scorn t'ecclypst again:
Yea all that worshipped it with humbled heart
Of his fierce rage did find the fiery smart, The monasteries.

The darkened dens of Ignorance, where sat
Blind Heresy and bowd to knew not what,
To be discovered spewd there spite at heaven
For fear there dwellars should from thenc be driven:
Rome ragd to see a Corner of the world
Where from his thron his triple Croun was hurled,
And I was then with candle, book, and bell
By Antichrist condemnd to lowest hell;
The blessed martyrs that his threats withstood
And sealed the glorious gospel with there blood
With heavenly courage and with constant hop
Preachd Christ above the pardons of the pop, VVishart, and others burnt by
Cardinal Betoune.

For which called Heretics, there lives did pay:
And burnd to ashes drenchd in blood, did lay
The Churches firm foundation, which by time
Did to a fair and beauteous temple climb,
When God set open the eyes of Prince and peers
And made the Gospells trumpet pierce the ears
Of deafned Idoll-worshippers, and call
To mercy penitent believers all,
The mist cleared up, the mass did vanishe quite
At the fair sunshine of the Gospels light,
Then ignorance and superstition fled
To hell again where they were hathd and bred, The Cardinal, once killed all
his sectators vanished.

Proud priests, that on the silly people preyed
Whil the cross staff abou the scepter sweyd,
There knauerie seen did melt away for shame
And simple shepherds in there places came,
That was my golden age, then love and fear
Of God throughout all Scotland did appear,
King JAMES made the covenant and commanded all the contrye to sign it.
My prince a pattern of true piety,
That after ages his great zeal might see,
To Gods pure worship, with a heart upright
His subjects and himself did fast unite
By covenant subscriv'd and sworn with God
On highest pain of heaviest plague and rod,
All superstition, popery, heresies,
Episcopal authority, Hierarchyes,
Will worship and what ere was then rejected
As hurtful, or which had the church infected:
With heart and hand with life estate and might
Still to withstand while they could stand and fight.
No prelat then presumed before another;
Nor called him lord whom office made his brother.
A Bishop and a bugge bear were all one,
And merely names there lordships were not knoune,
Until the time great JAMES, our Solomon
Changd Scotland England into ALBION.
Q. Elzabeth.
ELIZA dead, Sabrina Trent and Thames,
Fell prostrate at the feet of royale JAMES,
There peers in pomp and state louwe homadge made
There prelates of the church did style him head:
And put themselves next him that rank to hold
In Parliament and State they had of old,
The gracious prince was pleased with what he found,
Nor did he change the least thing being cround,
But for to make both one as was his aim
The union.
He labored to make them both the same,
The greattest ods was in the Church indeed
Which to make even did me much mischeeffe breed,
Aspiring priests pufft up with vain ambition,
Told Him this Church was of a base Condition,
When every private preacher durst reprove
The Prince Himself, whom God had set above
The reach of censure, and 't would better suit
The Kingdoms honor, if the King would do it
To settle Bishops, who should have the Charge
Of Spiritual things, would He there power enlarge
And authorize Them, with his Royalle aid;
Both Prince and priest should be feared and obeyed: Bishops established.

Then first began my misery alace!
And pride did from the Church Devotion chase,
A jealous Aemulation straight way filled
My newmade Bishops breasts, who all aspired
To be as great as Romes great beast in pouer:
And govern every state, for all were lower.
The mitre, though it brought no Monarchy,
Yet was an Enseigne of there Hierarchy.
All publicque charges of the croune and State
They either did posses or aimed at, Meluin; and others who were banished. The
first scots Bs. Consecrated in England took there oaths to be conform to the
Church of England, mutatis mutandis Stovve.

Which made my Zealous Pastors to cry out
Against those wolfes who closely went about,
To slave the church to there Imperious will,
Who had combind with England; to fulfill
All there desires to compass there designs:
Wherefore they banishd all my best diuynes,
Emprisond, silencd, whilst might daunted right,
And Souueraignitie for them did fight.
The neighbor world and church did shelter give,
When persecution would not let them live
In peace at home, Thus clad with Royale arms,
Transported from themselves, bewitchd with Charms
Of Greatness; and that high Triumphant state
In which the Neighbor Englands Prelates sat,
(Though great the disproportion was in all
As from the shrub unto the Cedar tall,)
My petty priests would all be Popes at once
And (Basans bulls) into there bulls denounce
Destruction, to all such as durst withstand
Th'usurped pouer of Prelates in Command,
At the last coming of K. James into Scotland. An. 1617.
The first assault they gave was all in vain
There growing pride was soon repulsd again,
Though it had no intention but to bring
Conformity in Church and every thing
That England had retaynd, reforming first
Those errors which Rome fostered had and nursed.
My people were mor sharply gone to work
And had found out what ever hid did lurk
Into the deapest Corners most obscure;
And what could not the light and touch endure
As false was cast away; The King surceast
In wise foresight and would not have it pressed
Upon me more, when he the danger saw
Which such an innovation on could draw,
Heaven called him hence unto a greater Croune
And in his Chair our Mighty CHARLES sat down,
Those Sycophants empoysoning his Ears,
(While thrusting in betuix Him and His Peers)
Vbi nullus Episcopus ibi nullus Rex.
A damned Maxim mad Him understand
No Bischop, then no King into a land:
And which was worse, conspiring with the whore
Whose foul embraces we cast off before
Assisted with the Prime of Englands priests
They framed a service book, my soul detests: The scottish seruische book.

Which I should first receive and make the way
The souls of all great Brittayne to betray,
For Ireland as a page must follow still
And subject be unto her conquerours will.
That stood against my stomach I confess
As't was against the treuth I did profess.
God rousd my conscience and did call me up
The course of popery in the source to stop,
And called to mind the covenant I hade made
With him, when I from slavery first was fred, The covenant renewed.

Never to return to Rome* my soul did bleed
When I reneend that oath, my tears did plead
For pity at my prince, and I besought
No stranger rites might in my church be brought.
But all in vain, what ever I beggd' or prayed
I was a traitor and a rebel made, The proclamations,

That durst oppose whateuer was found good
By those who in the church did what they would,
All my petitions were cast back with scorn,
And ere my prince had seen them, rent and torn;
Great armies raisd by sea and land, to fall
At once upon me, neither durst I call
To God or man for help, and what I did
Was treason still and misinterpreted.
The strongest forts I had for my defense
For my destruction armed, Edinburgh and Dunbartan.
to give offense
And make me guilty, were with strangers clad,
All warrelike engines for invasion made
Against me dressed, yet did I not forbear,
To pray and sue to those that would not hear,
When all that I could think was tried invaine,
And I had still my labor for my pain.
Danger did threaten and at last drew near
Duns longer.
Then in mine oun defenc I armed with fear,
To save my life, as nature does allow,
Nor did I pass my bounds as all men know,
Mine enemies amazed to see me stand
Upon my border still with sword in hand,
When they could not engadge me into blood
Pacification at heretic.
And found that I but for my freedom stood
Of church and contrye, under show of peace
Betrayed me falsely with a faynd embrace:
Whilst what was promisd was not truly meant.
Nor durst I crave, for fear of discontent.
There maine intentions were but to beguile
My rash beleeffe: and foolle me for a while,
Till they could take new breath and strength again
When I had laid down arms: and fall amayne
With all there might upon me unaware,
For which, a fresh they Parlaments prepare
In England and Ireland
With monneys to suplie there mischeefs want,
And ask far more then free consent will grant.
To neighbor princes I am pourtrayd black
My cause and me both hateful for to make,
New thunders forged, the King embarked again
In priests revenge, till Scotland all be slain
And Laud be pope of Britain, it was then time
For me (whoes zeall to Gods house was a crime)
To look about, and if I could prevent
The threatening Tempest which was imminent.
God great and just who tries the heart and reins
Is witness, if to war my heart enclynes, Entry into England.

Or if I mean to England harm at all:
But only banishd Justice to recall,
And have Relligion set al Liberty,
A Captive handmaid late to Tyranny,
Tvved saw my Tears and knows I did not pass
His stream to prey or spoil, but that I was
Constraynd in suertye to march on my way
And seek redress, for what I took to pay: The reasons and cariadge of it.

To offer no man wrounge but freindly aid.
Nor ever meant my neighbors to invade:
The want of justice, breach of promise past.
Relligion slau'd, and utter ruin last
In such extremes made need a law to me;
To seek my safety and her liberty.
My first encounter when I past the Tine
What blood was spilt it was no fault of mine,
And heavens are witness I did never intend
In quiet passadge England to offend,
But with all love and freindship joyntlie go
In Common cause to find the Common foe,
And to remove the wicked from the King
Whose malice seeks on both a scourge to bring,
For though I spoke she thought no less then I:
But durst not shaik the Church authority:
And rather choos'd in silence for to suffer
Then have her nose and ears to be cut off her,
As many had bein served by the High Commission.
Near cousine to the Spanishe Inquisition.
Newcastle found no force but saw us freynds,
Balcanquell
So Durrham did, (whose Deanes unlucky ends
A providence prevented, and will pay
His lies with there reward some happy day)
And when command to march no further, came,
In hope of hearing I obeyed the same,
Till Englands Parliament should weell considder
The justice of that cause that brought me hither,
And well examine if I have done well;
Or with hostility should me expel.
That sacred senate having leave to speak,
And of all state abuse the source to seek:
The L. Deputy of Irland and the Archbishop of Canterbury
Found in her bosom and about the Prince
Those vipers whom high treason does convince.
Those factious firebrands that so falsely deal
With God and King in church and common weal
Shall of there merit find the earned meede;
Far better they should then tuo nations bleed.
Those that have escaped by flight to foreign lands;
A power shall reach which over all commands,
And give the just reward as it is due
The Scottish Bishops and other corrupted Statesmen,
There Is no protection when the heavens pursue.
Those monsters unto whom I once lent birth
Become my bane, a scandale to the earth;
Though now at court a time they shelterd be
With guilty conscience for there wroungs to me:
A day will come I hope when they shall find
There mischeeffs merit in the highest kind.
Will CHARLES but leave them to my Parliament
There they shall have deserved punishment,
So shall great Britain prosper, and his reign
Bring to this isle the golden age again.
But ah! my fears forbid to hope so much: The Spanyshe fa^^ion.

The subtle Spanishe serpents craft is such,
That all our aims houeuer well begun
Even in the budd are presently undone.
That wretched gold, that far fetchd Indian dross
All our attempts and good designs does cross.
Corruption is a court disease become,
And takes no doctors counsel but from Rome;
Which never wholly cures the lame or blind
But always there remaynes some dreggs behind
Which like the fire in ashes hid breaks out
And of a sudden kindles all about:
Though for a time it lie as close as dead
I fear that foul infection forth shall spread:
Unless it please that God by whom kings reign
To give us war against both Rome and Spain:
Which we have now just cause to undertake
For CHARLES his sister and his nephews sake. Q. of Boheme.

But we must wait with prayers on our God
Who'il give us peace at home and war abroad.
Here like the heart that pants for the spring,
My soul awaits good tidings from my King.
My prayers are the weapons which I use
That heaven will in his sacred breast infuse
True wisdom, that his reasons eyes may sie,
Through all the clouds of spyte and flattery
My upright heart, the churches sore oppression,
And scan the truth of every mouths confession,
Reward the good, rebuke the reprobate,
Remeed the greevances of church and state,
Maintain the Gospel in its purity,
Remove false Doctors, root out heresy,
Lay down good laws, do justice unto all,
Curb vice, without respect in great and small,
That those whom God has joined, may under him
And his, live happy to the end of Time.
This is my heartye wish and prayer still:
Which heaven will hear I hope and soon fulfill,
To send me home a song of joye to sing
And pray for fayths defender, CHARLES the King.
SVNT ARTIBVS ARMA DECORI.
FINIS.

