THE INTEREST OF IRELAND IN ITS TRADE and WEALTH STATED.

In TWO PARTS.

First Part observes and discovers the Causes of Irelands* not more increasing
in Trade and Wealth from the first Conquest till now.

Second Part proposes Expedients to remedy all its Mercanture Maladies, and
other Wealth-wasting Enormities, by which it is kept poor and low.

Both mixed with some Observations on the Politics of Government, relating to
the Encouragement of Trade and Increase of Wealth.

WITH Some Reflections on Principles of Religion, as it relates to the
Premises.

By Richard Lawrence Esquire

Dublin, Printed by Jos. Ray, for Jos. Howes, and are to be sold by Awnsham
Churchill at the Black Swan in Paternoster-Row, near Amen-Corner, London. 1682.

TO THE Most Hopeful BRANCH OF HONOR JAMES EARL of OSSORY, etc.
My Lord,
IT is not for Protection this little Treatise presumes to present it self to
your view, let its own Innocence and honest Design be its Guard; its Errand is
only to represent the most natural Causes of the Poverty of your Country, by
discovering not only the grand Robbers of its Treasure, but the lesser Thieves
that creep in at every window, and pilfer every House, and pick every Pocket,
whereby not only the noble and wealthy, but the mean and poor are daily made
poorer; and it chooses to make its Address to your Lordship, as the chief
Concernee, of a Subject, in its Prosperity, as being Heir to the highest Honor
and most noble Patrimony in this I Will, and from thence will probably be in the
best Capacity, after a few more years have ripened your pregnant Parts, to do
it good or hurt; and amongst the other Heroic Virtues you derive from your
most noble Ancestors, it is wished and hoped this may be entailed, that you are
a true Lover of your Country, that it may be said of you in after ages, as of
Mordecai the noble Jew, He was next to the King great amongst his people,
accepted of the multitude, seeking the Wealth of his Country: your Predecessors
have saved you a labor as to the raising your own House, one Stone more would
make that top-heavy, all you have left to do is to keep that in repair, and to
finish the Structures they have begun for the Wealth and Prosperity of your
Country; for as they have been called to the highest Imploys by their Prince,
so have they not disdained to stoop to the meanest Service for the Improvement
of the Trade, etc. of their Country, the many chargeable Attempts made by them
for the erecting and encouraging Manufactures, etc. Chappellizod, Clonmell,
Carrick, and about twelve places more, where Attempts have been made by their
Example and Countenance, will tell the next age of their unparalled
Encouragements to improve the Manufactures and Trade of Ireland; and this
little Book will inform them why they succeeded no better. I am not unsensible
the scornful useless Wits of this Age will insinuate to your Lordship,
Mercantile and Mechanic Studies are below your Dignity; but let me reply, they
have but depraved Fancies that tell you so; ask your most noble Grandfather why
he has admitted such free access. and spent so much time in conference with
men of Mechanic and Mercantile Rank and Breeding, he will tell you, it was
that he might understand the Interest and Intrigue of Trade to promote it, as
the only means to improve the Wealth of his Country; and both divine and
profane History informs us, most of the useful and beneficial Arts, wherewith
the world flourishes, were the Inventions of famous men: It is recorded to the
praise of Tuball Caan, a Prince in his time, that he was the first Instructor
of every Artificer to work in Brass, and Iron; etc. and of holy Noah, the last
King of the old World, that God instructed him to be his chief Ship-Carpenter,
Genes. 6.14. Bezaleele and Aboliab were Princes of their Tribes, whom God
filled with wisdom, understanding and knowledge in all manner of Workmanship,
to devise cunning works. to work in Gold and Silver, and in Brass, in cutting
of Stones, and carving of Timber, Exodus 31.45. So Solomon, Isreal's most
glorious King, was the Inventer of all those curious Works he made to adorn
both Gods House and his own, and the Contriver of his Ships to manage his
Traffic with Ophir for Gold, whereby he became the wealthiest Prince in the
world; and so great a veneration had the ancient Heathens for profitable and
useful Arts, they attributed the Invention of them to their Gods; so that most
acute Wit, and compleatest Statesman of his age, Sir Henry Wotton, in his
Character of the Grand Duke of Tuskany, dedicated to King James, to the rest of
his Qualifications, as that he was a wise and wary Prince, solidly not formally
so, etc. says, He was a great Cherisher of manual Arts, whereby he drew to him
from all parts the most exquisite Artificers, gave them settled Pensions, and
placed them in several compartments of his Palace, where he would come often to
see them work for his own delight, being in truth the greatest Oeconomist of
his age; and as he had much of the Prince, so did he not disdain to have
something of the Merchant: and our brave Prince Rupert has increased not
lessened his Fame in the Field of Mars, by sullying his Hands and smutting his
Face in the Forge of Vulcan: That Glory of his Country for Wit and Learning,
the Lord Bacon, did not spend his time in Philosophical Theory, but in the
practical part of manual Arts, as the Incorporation and refining of Metals and
Minerals, etc. vide his Phisiologica from page 91. to page 146.

And in his Speech to the Parliament, says he, I hope, my Lords, my midnight
Studies to make our Countries flourish, and outvie European Neighbourt in
mysterial and beneficial Arts, have not so ungratefully affected your
Intellects, that you will delay or oppose this Affair, since your honorable
Posterities may be enriched thereby p. 132.

The despising the Study of Mechanic Arts is only the product of Romantic
Fancies, who more esteem the Composer of Plays than the Inventers of Works,
though they are no more useful in a Commonwealth than Fiddlers in a Country
Parish, to incite to Idleness and Debauchery.

Titus Livius tells you, they were first designed to appease the angry Gods in
a time of great Mortality; and well they became the Worship of such beastly
Deities, whose Worship consisting in Antic Gestures and Garbs, with Mimick
motions directed with Music, mixed with abominable Immoralities, especially
their Bacchanalies, etc.

But says he, The Actors were not base Comedians, or Professors of the
infamous Players Craft, who are grown to this Foolery and excessive
Sumptuousmess, as can hardly be defrayed by the most wealthy Kingdoms, but by
the Noble Youth of the City; Livius Supplement. page 205, 206. Virtuous
Heathens are the Reproach of vicious Christians, who retain a greater
veneration for Moral than they for Divine Precepts; if Christians would retain
half the veneration to the Divine Precepts of St. Peter, Paul, etc. that
Heathens gave to the Moral Precepts of Seneca, Socrates and Plutarch,
Preciseness would not be the Reproach and Profaneness the Applause of these
last and worst times of this doting old World as it is: says the deservedly
admired Orinda, For since its grown in fashion to be bad,
And to be vain, or angry, proud or mad,
While in their Vices only men agree
Is thought the only modern Gallantry,
How would some brave Examples check the Crimes
And both reproach and yet reform the Times.


But however Romantic Fancies and Composers of Plays are now admired by a
Generation of men, who are like those Boys that are fond of their play, but
hate their Books: yet Inventers and Improvers of manual Arts have ever been
esteemed the Patrons of the Honor and Wealth of their Country, by all that
esteem public profit before private pleasure.

Sir, it is not the Art of the Tradesman, but the Knowledge of the Statesman I
recommend to your Study: For though it be not necessary your Lordship should
understand when Leather is well tanned, or Wool well ordered, or Flesh and Fish
with their products well saved, nor when Cloth and Stuff is true made, yet it
is very convenient, your Noble Self, and others like to be concerned with you
in State Affairs, should be acquainted how much the right Managing those lesser
matters tends to the Credit and Wealth of your Country, and that the Labor of
the poor, when rightly improved, produces greater Wealth to a Country than the
Revenue of the rich, as is evident in the Chapter of Manufactures.

And as your Lordship may be eminently serviceable herein in your public
station, when you come to be a Chief Minister of State, so at present by your
leading Example in being the chief Member of that honorable Society, proposed
for curing all our Mercantile maladies in the Chapter of Corporation-Trade, few
sober young Gentlemen but would esteem it their Honor as well as their
Interest to be engaged with you in a work so beneficial to their Country, and
convenient to themselves; for it is the Glory of Princes and Nobles to imbarque
themselves in Designs for the public Weal of their Country, wherein your
Lordship has Royal as well as Noble examples in the members of the African and
Canary Companies at London, etc. and it is recorded, to the Honor of the Lord
Chancellor Cromwell, after his grateful Requital of his old Friend Francis
Friscobald, a decayed Banker of Florence, that he highly importuned him to stay
and erect a new Bank in London, offering to go a share with him to the value of
60000 Ducats, a considerable Sum in those times.

And this work of improving Ireland in Trade and Manufactures seems to be
reserved for the Age your Lordship is to act your part on the public Stage;
for, as I demonstrate in the first Chapter, Ireland was never capable of it
until the year 1660. and since then many hopeful Attempts have miscarried for
want of discerning the Defects in their Foundation, for which Experience since
then has supplied Remedies, which this little Book proposes; that as your most
Illustrious Grandfather has had the Honor to regulate and settle the real
Estates of this Kingdom, a work of that weight and difficulty, few Heads or
Hands but his own could have performed so, to the general satisfaction of all
the different opposite Interests; so will it probably be your Lordships work to
build upon that well laid Foundation, by improving the personal Estates of
Irelands Inhabitants, which nothing but the propagating its Trade and
Manufactures can do, and that is a Work will prosper in no hand but that of
Interest, as is asserted in the Chapter of Irelands Interest in its own
Government: and none will question but your Lordship has the greatest Interest
in Irelands Prosperity of any Subject in the Kings Dominions; and as your
Interest, so your natural Genius, if your observes mistake not, inclines you to
Seriousness, a temper this frothy age needs your example in; and it is hoped by
them that love you, it is not only the gravity of your paternal Education and
Example, but the power of your own innate solid Humor, that has preserved you
to this age so spotless, wherein too many young Noblemen are ignobly vicious,
to the reproach of their Dignities: titular Honor abstracted from Virtue is
but the shadow of Greatness, virtuous and heroic Actions are the substance of
it.

Juvenal. fol 279.
Is there in Greatness so much good as will
But only serve to counterpoise the ill?
Each Crime is so conspicuously base,
As he that sins is great in Birth or Place.
Herbert.
But who will honor him that is Honors shame,
Noble in nothing but a noble Name?
Honor consists in VVorth, not Blood,
The Great weigh nothing if not good:
The men whose Virtue is their Birth
Have been the greatest men on Earth.
Which Campion in his Epistle to Robert Earl of Leicester, the Darling of his
Princess, and Glory of his Country in his time, affirms; having enumerated the
excellent Qualifications of his Mind, and loveliness of his Deportment, says;
these are indeed the Kernels that shine through the Shell of your Nobility,
this is the Sap that preserves the Bark of your noble Tree, these are the
Substance that make you worthy of those Ornaments wherewith you are attired,
etc. therein placing the worth of this great Statesman, not in his high Birth
or glittering Titles, which were even of the highest Dignities at Court, but in
his noble and virtuous Qualities shining through the glass of titular
Dignities: vicious great ones are apt to measure their own Fame by their own
Shadows, and by the Flatteries of Sicovants about them, when the better such
speak of them, the worse the virtuous think of them; as a good man once said;
Lord what evil have I done that this wicked man praises me? the judicious will
not judge of others so much by their personal Carriage, as by their Company;
when we observe the Ravens and Crows are gathered together croaking we conclude
there is Carrion near that place, it is the unhappiness of vicious Potentates
to have all the Beasts and Birds of prey following them by their ill scent, and
to have swarms of Flesh-flies buzzing their praise, as if every vice were a
virtue; but it is determined by a more unchangeable decree than that of the
Medes and Persians, that the Name of the wicked shall rot. Prove. 10.7.


Histories acquaint after ages with their Vices as well as Virtues, and tell
the world what cruel Tyrants, the Nimrods, Pharaohs, Herod's, etc.

What gross Idolaters, Ahab, Manasses, etc.

Nay profane Histories penned by Heathens record to posterity what beastly
Drunkards, etc. Great Alexander and his valiant Captains were, that his Darling
Ephestion, and soon after himself drunk themselves dead whilst young.

What effeminate leacherous Sots, Sardanapalis, Galba, etc.

What traitorous Villains to their Country, the Catalines, etc.

What lascivious Goats, the Tarquins, Caligula, etc.

What bloody Persecutors, Domitian, Nero, etc.

What vile Apostates, Julian, etc.

Though the most vicious of Popes in their life time usually enjoy the
flattering Titles of Sacred and Holiness, etc. who though Devils incarnate are
worshipped as Gods, yet after they are dead that irrevokable divine Sentence
Matt. 10.27. is executed, What they do in secret shall be published on the
House-tops: Genebr. Onusoph. Platina, etc.
Histories of their own tell us who were Atheists, who Blasphemers,, who
Conjurers, who Sodomites, who usurping Tyrants, Murderers, infallible
Heretics, and who sensual lascivious Adulterers. Now the Wise man, who tells
us, A good Name is better than great Riches, intends it not only whilst we live
but after death, the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance: present
Applauses are the fading Garlands of all Potentates, good and bad, but future
Fame is only the Crown of the virtuous: which your famous Father now wears, and
will do, to the shame of his Successors that shall degenerate from his
Character, as is declared in the ensuing Poems, picked out of the several
Prints upon his greatly lamented Death.

His Family.
HIs Parantage the alike ascendant Powers
Of a long Line for samed Ancestors,
In Ormond's Heir the last firm Link he bears
Of one unbroken Chain drawn through 4 hundred years,
A Chain which from such ages held so fast,
Must through the whole Platonic circle last,
Till wondering time to the Ormond praise shall tell,
That greatness truly stands that never sell.
His Religion.
His Love to our Religion still was great,
Which he prosest, not as a trick of State,
Lest he should Favor or an Office want;
His Life as well as Faith was Protestant.
His Loyalty.
At Charles his feet, Charles was his Polar Star,
All his ambitions Circle centered there;
His Loyalty and Courage were so paired,
As if one motion and one life they shared:
And three whole Kingdoms Glory but in few
Like him, great, loyal and experienced too;
In him alone our Prince was richly blessed,
Had Death spared him, Charles might have spared the rest;
In his untainted and firm Loyalty,
His constant and often proved Fidelity,
What to his Prince, what to the People due
His honest searching Judgment knew:
Betwixt these two so equally he moved
That he by both was equally beloved.
His Courage and Valor.
In Camp never Hector did out-brave
Deaths whistling Messengers to the grave,
So daringly would he engage
His proudest Enemies in their rage
That who e're once his Courage tried
Either submitted, fled, or died.
No fear of Death could ever his Courage stay,
Wherever dangerous Honor led the way;
As if his Hand still the same Trident bo^e,
When Charles his Thunder shook the Belgic shore;
Whilst Ossory within his floating walls
His valiant sea-born Sons to Honor calls;
Or let him against the insulting Gallick foe
Through lanes of death to mouths of Canons go; At Mons.

Then turn their roaring throats to their own dooms,
Through their own hearts unload their sulfurous wombs.
His Victories.
Here Ossory, let Mons thy deeds proclaim,
And sing an English Generals deathless fame,
Flanders last Battle sought and won by thee,
A Battle against a glorious Enemy,
Flusht with success, and long with Laurels crowned,
Perhaps before untaught to quit his ground,
A Foe who with his Arts of war prepared
Batt'ries and Trenches, and all Natures guard,
Encamped with all the advantage of the Field,
Did only to victorious Courage yield;
Raising that Siege thou did such wonders do,
Raise the universal Siege of Flanders too;
For to that one determinating Blow
The Northern Peace does her foundations ow:
For proud Frances fury, uncontrolled,
Unbounded, like a fiery Deluge rolled,
Till Ossory did that great day appear,
And bid the Conflagration finish there,
Flanders her Peace did to thy Sword assign,
Whilst the lib'ration of a World was thine;
The Belgic Lion from his toil set free,
And the long plagues of War dispelled by thee.
His Public Spirit.
He didn't grasp Commands to scrape up Gold,
When he was chief, all Offices were sold
It Is true; for what d' you think? for skill in Arms,
For Vigilance and Courage, those only Charms
Wrought on his Soul; he that could pay good store
Of Sterling-merit, needed pay no more.
His Diligence.
His Years were few, and may be quickly told,
But multitudes of Conquests speak him old,
Conquests so many, and so speedy too,
That aftertimes will scarce believe them true.
Why should we then complain he is gone too soon?
He perfected his greatest work at noon:
So were the minutes of his life employed,
That no man ever longer life enjoyed:
In hours his active Soul did more atchieve,
Than others that whole tedious ages live.
His Affability.
In Peace's cooler climes he flourisht too,
Shining and sweetning every air he drew;
His Virtues led a Court, as well as Camp,
And taught 'em Honor of the noblest stamp.
So courtly to his Conversation made,
That in his Face all manly Graces played.
Though fate and thunder did his Arm surround,
The fires were lambent which his Temples crowned;
Whilst with those gentle, courteous airs he smiled,
Calm as Loves Mother, than her Son more mild.
His Humility.
Glory his Breast did fill, but never swell;
Never such Height was so accessible:
No Greatness so familiar, and so free
No Temple to the humblest Votary.
His Charity.
How many wronged wretches, poor and blind,
Will grope in vain their Remedies to find?
What will the lame maimed Seamen do, whose Chest
Was Patron Ossory's most munificent breast?
His Modesty.
To all, as their deserts were, he was kind,
Still with right Judgment and unbiased Mind,
Great without vanity, and without ends just,
Humble though honored, faithful when in trust;
The dangerous fruits of too great Praises he
Knew well, and to decline them still was free.
His Sympathy.
Your bleeding Wounds, who shall hereafter dress
With an indulgent tenderness;
Touch with a melting sympathy
Who shall your wants supply?
Since he, your good Samaritan is gone,
O Charity! thou richest boon of Heaven,
To man in pity given!
For when well meaning Mortals give,
The poors and their own bowels they relieve;
Thou make us with alacrity to dye,
^iss'd and bewailed like thee large-hearted Ossory.
Love to his Country.
Well might they love him, one so just and good,
Much greater by his Virtues than his Blood,
Who justly still ambition'd a good Name,
Yet loved his Country more than he loved Fame.
His Fame.
Here, Muse, his Praise like thy Parnassus frame
On two twin-mounts of Greatness build his same,
Thy King his Royal Standard, born by thee,
Could not want Swords, nor they want victory.
Thy Name would rouse all hearts, so strong a charm
Lodged in a Banner waved by Ossorys arm.
But stay, these humble Praises are too small,
To say he led, sought, vanquished, triumphed, all,
When his Heroic Virtues spread so far,
The universal darling Son of War,
When ages shall in monumental Brass
Write thy recorded Praise till times last Glass,
And with such zeal preserve thy hallowed Shrine
Till the expired Worlds last Ashes mix with thine.
His Lamentation.
Lament, lament you that dare Honor love.
And court her at a noble rate
(Your Prowess to approve;)
And blush not to be good, when you grow great,
Such mourners suit his Virtue and his State,
Cannons go weep out flames, Culverins go cry
And roar from every Ship and Battery.
With such a Fall our Ossory expired,
Ossory as far lamented as admired.
A Warning to Survivers.
Shrink ye crowned heads that think your selves secure
And from your mouldring Thrones look down,
Your Greatness cannot long endure,
The King of terrors claims you for his own,
You are Tributaries to his dreadful Crown:
Renowned, Serene, Imperial, most August
Are only high and mighty Epithets of dust.
In vain, in vain, so high
Our towering Expectations fly,
While the Blossoms of our Hopes, so fresh, so gay,
Appear, and promise Fruit, then fade away.
His Example.
Oh that our Lords would their lost time redeem,
And not so much admire as copy him!
Be good like him, if they would like him be great,
And be his peers in Virtue as in State.
No further shall I strive for to express
Thy mighty Deeds, weak Praises make them less.
Plebeius observes, the Romans, to inflame their Noble Youth to aspire to
Honor, would often show them the triumphal Statues of their Predecessors, which
is the design of annexing these Poems to this Epistle to provoke your Lordship
to imitation.

When without your cost, or your great Sires consent,
Is raised to him a stately Monument:
When Tombs and Statues crumble all away,
And gilded Marble Monuments decay,
His History will mortallize his Fame,
To after-ages his great Deeds proclaim:
His Fame is so much famed, that he
Can never here forgotten be,
Till Ireland its self become
To its own Woods and Bogs a Tomb,
Till timeless time all things devour,
By Dooms day Conflagrations shower.
It was a high piece of Prudence in the Romans to lower the value of Pecuniar
Rewards, and raise the esteem of Honor to the height, in regard a Prince or
State by long Wars may drain their Treasury low in Coin, but the Fountain of
Honor can never be drained dry, whilst it is not spilt on unworthy persons,
which (though it does not lessen the bulk, yet) debaseth the Allay of Honor: A
private Roman Soldier refused a Chain of Gold, as a Reward of his gallant
Service, from Libienus, Cesars Lieutenant General, saying, that he would not
have the Reward of the covetous, but of the virtuous.

When Marcus Marcellus built a Temple to Honor and Virtue, he made a pertition;
so that none could come into the Temple of Honor, but they must first pass
through the Temple of Virtue.

Sir,

That your Noble Breast may be as this Temple always close shut against all
sorts of vicious Votaries, and that your Life may be, as your Fathers, a pattern
to all young Gentlemen of truly Noble and Honorable Actions, that your Example
may be a Reproof to the vicious, and a Praise to the virtuous, that you may
live the Joy and dye the Grief of your Country shall be the Prayer of

the most unworthy of your Lordships faithful affectionate Servants R. L.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Have reason to suspect, all to whom I am known will marvel to see me in
Print at this time of day, and the more at the freedom I take both as to
persons and things, for whose Satisfaction, and my own Vindication, I think my
self bound to give the following account as to my motives thereto.

That having been in this Kingdom August next 33 years, one third of my time in
a public capacity in the Civil as well as Military Affairs, and observing my
Ignorance of the State, Temper and Constitution of the Country disabled me from
being capable of giving such an account of several businesses put upon me as
was requisite, I addicted my self to the study both of Books and Men of the
best and longest experience in the civil Constitution of Ireland, by whom I
gained some knowledge and inspection, and committed my Observations to Writing.

That for near twenty years past, in my more private capacity, as a member of
the Council of Trade, where most of the particulars respecting Trade I publish
in this, and design in my Treatise of Traffic, etc. were deliberated by
persons of the highest Characters for Parts and Experience in this Kingdom;
amongst whom I found my self but a Novice in the politics and methods of
Trade; which put me upon studying the several Propositions and Questions there
propounded, not daring to give my Opinion in so honorable and learned an
Assembly without Book, which engaged me to read much History, etc. to find the
Opinion and Practice of past times in the respective cases there debated, in
observance of the ensuing Instructions.

Instructions for the Council of Trade.
ORMONDE,
FIrst you are to take into your consideration all the native Commodities of
the growth and production of this His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, and how
they may be ordered, nourished, increased and manufactured to the Employments
of His Majesty's people, and to the best advantage of the public; and to
consider by what way any of the Manufactures in the said Kingdom are corrupted,
debased and disparaged, and by what probable means they may be restored and
maintained in their ancient Goodness and Reputation.

2. You are to consider whether in the said Kingdom of Ireland the Importation
of Foreign Commodities does not overbalance the Exportation of such as are
Native, and how to advise and propound the most effectual means, that in the
said Kingdom the Importations may not exceed the Exportations.

3. You are to consider how a Manufacture of Linen Cloth and Linen Yarn may
be advanced, and settled in this Kingdom with most advantage to his Majesty and
his people.

4. You are to consider by what means the Fishing Trade may be most improved in
the said Kingdom of Ireland.

5. You are to consider of all other matters relating to Navigation, and the
increase and security thereof.

6. You are to consider by what particular means Bulloin may be best drawn into
Ireland from the Countries of Foreign Princes.

7. You are to consider what Advantages for the Trade of His Majesty's liege
people are provided for by His Majesty's Leagues with any of his Confederates
and Allies, and to advise and propound from time to time what is expedient for
His Majesty, by his Ministers in Foreign parts, or otherwise to take care, that
His Majesty's Subjects may (as Justice requires) reap the benefit intended to
them by such Leagues in relation to their Trade in Foreign parts.

8. You are to consider how there may be that equal Distribution of Trade and
Manufacture, in this Kingdom, which will most conduce to the general good of
His Majesty's loving Subjects therein.

9. You are to consider how convenient and practicable any thing propounded to
you may be concerning new Inventions, and Improvements in any Art, Trade or
Manufacture, and thereof, as occasion may be, to make report unto Us the Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, and Council.

10. You are to consider what means sturdy Vagrants and Beggars may be
compelled to earn their living by some lawful Calling.

11. You are to consider by what ways and means Commerce may be promoted, by
the Employment of some persons in the mending Highways and Bridges, and making
Rivers navigable, and in draining Boggs and Loghs, and recovering Land from the
Sea.

12. You are diligently to enquire into the abuses of Weights and Measures
practiced throughout the said Kingdom, and to consider how the same may be
effectually remedied.

13. You are to consider how Correspondencies may be settled in all places of
great Commerce abroad, that it may be better known with what profit or loss the
native Commodities of this Kingdom are there vented, and what Laws are made,
and Trades new erected there to the advantage of the Trade of His Majesty's
Subjects of this Kingdom.

14. You are faithfully and with speed to deliver your Opinions in Writing, and
so to make reports thereof to Us the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom and Council concerning the Premises; as likewise
concerning such other matters as shall be occasionally at any time referred to
your consideration.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 18th. day of May. 1664. Ja.
Armachanus Massereene W. Caulfield Drogheda Kingston Jo. Bysse G. Wentworth
Arth. Forbes Theo. Jones. Maur. Eustace Canc. Mich. Dublin Joh. Clogher Hen.
Medensis Hen. Tichburne John Temple Paul Davies James Ware


First Meeting May 26. 1664.
Present LOrd Primate, Lord Chancellor, Lord Archbishop of Dublin, Lord Bishop
of Mead, Lord Chief Justice Donelan, Lord Massereene, Sir Paul Davies, Sir
John Percivall, Sir Robert Meredeth, Sir Robert Forth, Sir John Temple Master
of the Rolls, Sir Edward Massey all of the Privy Council; besides the Mayor and
Recorder of Dublin, with seven or eight Aldermen, Sir Audly Mervin, Sir John
Temple the Kings Solicitor General, Sergeant Grissith, and several chief
Lawyers, and other Gentlemen, and principle Merchants, who after reading the
Commission and Instructions chose Committees to prepare Business, appointed
time and place for the weekly Meeting, and adjourned.

And so continued their constant weekly Meetings for several years in debate of
these general Heads of Instruction and their Branches; and after the greatest
deliberation, sometimes two or three months upon one Instruction, agreed and
resolved several of them into Reports to the Council Board the particular Heads
of the said Reports, as they are registered in their Books, take as follows.

A Table to the Register-Book.
REports upon your Graces Commission for regulating the Herring fishing in
Dublin Harbor, fol. 1, 2. Linen Manufacture, 3, 4. Fishing in the Isles of
Buss^n and Clare, 5. Free ports, 6. For Farming the Excise, 7, 8, 9. Reasons
for the prohibiting Foreign growth Manufactures, fol. 9, 10. Light Houses, 11.
For the transporting Felons that receive the benefit of their Clergy, 12. For
the encouragement of the Manufacture of S^uffs, 13, 14. For the better ordering
the Post Office, 15. Small Money. For the regulating the Weights and Measures,
20 to 24. For more easy and speedy Recovery of small Debts, and prevention of
Arrests upon false Actions, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Mariners to be regulated, 26.
Regulating Protections, 29. Arguments against the Act prohibiting our
Transportation of Cattle, 30, 31, 32, 33. Against Importation of Hats, 34, 35.
A general Subscription proposed against wearing foreign Manufactures, 36. About
Fuel to furnish our selves without Foreign supplies with Cole, and Turf, 41.
About regulating the Shooemakers, and lowering the price of Boots and Shoes,
fol. 42, 43, 44. A Report for the printing Colonel Lawrences Directions for the
planting Hemp and Flax, 45, 46, 48, 49. That every Female above twelve years of
age shall produce a proportion of Woollen, Worsted or Linen Yarn every year
47. To prevent abuses in slaughtering Cattle, and packing Beef and Pork, fol.
50, 51. Rules to prevent false packing of Butter, 52, 53. A general Estimate of
Trade, and Experiments proposed for the Improvements thereof, 54, 55, 56.
But the Duke of Ormond leaving the Government before a Parliament met, or
those capable of forming into Acts of State, performed or put in practice; as
the Council of Trade was their Nursery, so the Council Table became their
Sepulcher, where they remain in their Urn to this day, and not like to have a
resurrection whilst the Realm is under such a consternation; and consequently
the Government incumbered with the variety of Affairs relating to the
preservation of the whole; as these late horrid Popish Plots have brought us
under.

For before the Dukes removal most of the Privy Council, and other principal
Ministers of State seemed exceeding fond of all proposals tending to the
Improvement of the Trade and Manufacture of the Nation, and resolved to put the
Act of Parliament for the Linen Manufacture in practice at Chappelizod.

And although I gave my Opinion against the Report in the Council of Trade, and
my Argument at Council Table against the practice of that Act until a
Parliament met to mend it; yet they were pleased not only to make an Experiment
in the case, but also to pitch upon my self (admitting of no excuse) to manage
it; which, after three or four months solicitation, I only submitted to until
some other fit person could be procured: but the Duke removing, what
Discouragements I received, and Loss and Damage I sustained under the Regency
of his Successors I shall give an Account of in my Treatise of Manufacture,
which will give some further Evidence of the difference betwixt a Kingdom being
governed by persons peculiarly interested in its prosperity, and others Aliens
to its peculiar Interest.

Now having been so long and so much engaged in the Affairs of Ireland of this
nature, and being hopeless to live to see such a vigorous Spirit for Irelands
Improvement revived in the Government, as was from the year 64. to the year 69.
lest the succeeding Generation should be discouraged attempting Irelands
Improvement in Trade and Manufactures, from the common Fame of so many
Miscarriages in these former Attempts, I thought it my duty to leave these
Memoires for their Information: though I should have been glad a more polite
pen had performed it: yet having taken so much pains, spent so much time, and
attained so much dear bought Experience in this Affair, I shall submit the
censure of my integrity and prudence in this publication to the charitable
judicious, and slight the Reflections of others.

In Matter of Fact I have not presumptuously erred, sparing no pains to find
out the Truth, by Inquisition of the most knowing persons, and searching all
Records and Histories I could come at: yet in an Affair consisting of so many
Heads some mistakes may happen; but if I have over-estimated some particulars,
others are as much under; and if I do allow Five hundred thousand pounds
deduction from the Balance of our fifteen years Consumption, computed Chapter 4.
the Remain is sufficient to move the Government to take the Consumption into
consideration.

For my intruding upon politics of Government. I endeavor to confine my self
within the verge of such particulars, as have a strong ruling influence over
the Trade and Wealth of a Country, and the most apt Mediums to improve a
Kingdom or State in Trade without proper Maxims and suitable practice in
Rulers, can never reach their Designs, the whole success of Trade depends upon
the Principles and Inclinations of the ruling part of a State.

For my Reflections on Principles of Religion, I designed only to hint those
that relate to the civil Policy and Peace of the Kingdom; and I think I have
confined my self within that verge, not touching on one Controversy betwixt
Protestants; insisting only upon the uncharitable, nay, I may say, unchristian
Severities and Censures practiced by the rigid of both parties, to the grief
and burden of the more pious and moderate.

Empty Casks make the greatest sound, which I only reprove; and plead for a
charitable Union wherein we agree, in order to the Promulgation of our common
Faith, and Preservation of the common Protestant Interest of Ireland, etc.

And I judge the Prosperity of the Trade and Wealth of Ireland is much
concerned therein; as is stated in my Supplement.

What I observe of the bloody Principles and Practices of the Papists is but
Historical, being Collections out of authentic Authors, most of their own; and
that only to these ends.

First, To awaken some drowsy Protestants, who seem to be lulling asleep on
Dallilahs Lap, where they may expect to have their Locks cut, wherein their
great strength lies; and then will soon follow, The Philistines be upon thee,
Sampson. It is grievous to observe how many Protestants greedily lick up the
Papists Debaucheries; as if they were vying which should fill up the measure of
our Iniquity soonest, and provoke a jealous God most, to send new desolating
Judgments upon us; not considering that this is the Jesuited Papists method, to
debauch in Manners in order to corrupt in Principle; knowing that when
Conscience is feared by a custom of Sins against the second Table Precepts, all
Religions will soon be alike to such. And the matter is not great to themselves
which they choose: for God has determined that no impenitent Drunkard,
Adulterer, profane Swearer, etc. shall be saved, Luke 13.3. Acts 3.19.7.13.
whether they be Papists, Protestants, or Dissenters from both; but of all
Religions in the world, if you resolve to spend your days in rioting and
excess, in chambering and wantonness, etc. and venture your Souls on a death
bed Repentance, be Papists, where Pardon of Sin is said to be obtained, at
least, purchased by a mere verbal Confession, though there be no Contrition
appear, nor professed purpose to reform, if you live, as I evidence in my
Supplement from their own Authors.

But let all this sort of Protestants consider, the Papists in October and
November 1641. made no distinction betwixt the precise and profane; the
Protestant and the Puritan were equal Heretics with them, with whom no Faith
is to be kept, nor Mercy to be shown, when their Destruction tends to the
Advancement of the Catholic Cause.

My second End is to warn the more serious and better principled Papists, to
save themselves, their Families and Country from further desolation by these
Jesuitical bloody Principles; whereby some of their Priests have so often
brought upon them, and are now again plotting to compass their total ruin and
destruction; and had before this in all probability caused Ireland once more to
swim in Blood, even the Blood of Women and Children, and other innocent
persons, both of Papists and Protestants, if God had not touched the Hearts of
some of their own Priests, etc. to be Discoverers.

Therefore since it is manifest, all Papists are not poisoned with Tridentine
bloody Principles; pity it is the more Innocent should be involved in the
miserys and mischiefs of the Guilty.

And that less than a total extirpation of Protestantism or Popery can be the
issue of the next Rebellion is irrational to believe; and as irrational to
think it is possible for the Papists to carry the day, if they consider the
Disadvantage they are now under above what they were in 1641. And therefore
have I asserted it their Safety and Interest to promote the potency of the
English Interest amongst them, as the only Medium to prevent their future
Calamity.

The Searcher of Hearts knows I have not the least Gall or prejudice against
Papists quia Papists: I have many intimate Acquaintance and kind Friends
amongst them with whom I willingly exchange kindnesses, whose ruin and misery
would greatly afflict me: and hundreds of them yet living will and daily do
acknowledge, when it was in the power of my Hand to do them harm, it was in my
Heart to do them good: many of them have removed out of other Precincts to come
under my Government and Protection; and in the time of the first Court of
Claims addressed themselves to me, as their common Solicitor, if they had but
the least pretense to Innocence or of Kindness shown to the English in their
distress: and as it never was, so it is not now my design to incense their
English Neighbors against them; but should rather rejoice to further an
increasing neighbourly Friendship betwixt them on equal and safe terms, much
less is it my principle, or the least of my design to provoke the Government to
persecute them, desiring to walk by that Golden rule, to do to others as I
would they should do to me: all I aim at is to lay before the eyes of them
sound in Morals the perniciousness of those Jesuitical Principles, which I have
reason to suspect they have never read or heard of, and if they did, never
seriously consider the malignant nature and desperate consequences of them;
though they have not only made Ireland but all Christendom swim in Blood, as
appears Supplement Sect. 5.

And that torrent can never be stopped, nor Irelands Peace never secured, until
these bloody savage Tridentine principles are renounced: surely the Romish
Church was more Catholic before Ignatius Loyola broached his hellish Doctrines
than it can be since: for the better half of the Christians of Europe then in
their Communion are since broken off; he being the first of their Fathers that
vehemently maintained and rebelliously defended the Popes Supremacy over
Emperors and Kings, etc. so far as to proclaim it lawful, nay meritorious, to
destroy its opposers; a Doctrine that has been exploded, and its Propagaters
banished by all the Princes and States of their own Religion, when they have
found their own Estates in danger by it; as I show in my Supplement.

And why they who so much glory in their Antiquity, and so frequently challenge
our Protestant Divines, to show them where our Religion was before Luther,
should imbibe a Religion they cannot show where it was before Loyola, so many
years his junior, is hard to give the reason of; unless it be this one, that
since the Light of the Gospel has shined in the world, their Deeds of Darkness
could no ways be hid, nor defended either by Scripture or Reason, only by
bloody War and cruel Inquisition, by destroying the Lives of their Opponents in
order to shut their eyes and stop their mouths. And having thus far endeavored
to vindicate my self against the censure of Presumption in treating upon
Politics, and from uncharitable Severity in my Descants on Religion, I shall
submit the whole to the Judgment of the charitable judicious; and for the rest,
as much slight their Censure, as they despise my Labor.

THE CONTENTS. PART I.
CHAP. I. Showing the reasons why Ireland is so little improved in Trade and
Wealth.
I. FRom the Impediments it is subject unto not common to other Countries, Page
1 1 Impediment, The unsetledness of the Country, p. 2, 3, 4 2 Impediment, From
the perplexity of the minds of the people, p. 5 3 Impediment, From its plenty
of Provision, p. 5, 6. 4 Impediment, From the height of the Interest of Money,
p. 7 5 Impediment, From the lowness of Farming, and purchasing Land, p. 7 6
Impediment, From the low esteem the generous and worshipful Calling of a
Merchant is of in the Country, p. 8, 9 7 Impediment, is from the lowness of
the Credit of the Tradesmen of the Country, p. 10 1. Arising from the
delatoriness of Law-proceedings, ibid. 2. From the smalness of their Stocks,
ibid. 3. From the bad payment the Gentry, etc. make to the Tradesmen, ib.

Expediences proposed for remedy of this grand obstruction, p. 11, 12, 13
Honorable Titles are made contemptible by dishonorable qualities, p. 15
Theodosius the Emperor made severe Edicts to reform it, p. 16 Our Virgin Queen
was careful of the Virginity of Honor, ib. The Institution of Baronists by
King James, with their qualifications, p. 16, 17
CHAP. II.
Shows the second Head of the Causes of Irelands not improving in Trade, etc is
from its excessive consumption of foreign growth and Manufacturies, p. 18 Why
some Countries may consume more than others with much less damage, p. 19 The
vast consumption of our Wealth by foreign Silks, etc. exceeding twenty to one
above our Grandfathers, which ruin our own Manufacturies, p. 20, 21 France
gains by their gay Attire and modes, ibid. If poor Ireland imitate rich England
in Garb, it will be beggered, p. 22 Englands care to prevent their ruin by
excess in Apparel, by sumptuary Laws, p. 23, 24, 25 The spruce Garb, especially
of the meaner sort, besides the consumption of our Wealth, is attended with
many other intolerable inconveniences, p. 26, 27, 28 Not only England, but the
Jews and Heathens had their sumptuary Laws, by which Harlots or Women of ill
fame were prescribed their Attire. p. 29, 30 The contempt put upon gay Clothes
by the most Puissant and Wise Emperors and Princes, p. 30, 31, 32 We consume
more by riot and excess than the Kings Revenue amounts to, p. 32, 33 The
opinion of Mr. Fuller, Luther, and Bishop Hall, of this Childish vanity of gay
Clothes, p. 33, 34, 35
CHAP. III.
OF Wealth-consuming, and Trade-obstructing Debaucheries, p. 37 1. Profane
Oaths, p. 38, 39 Bishop Hall's Censure, p. 39, 40 Profane swearing is the
preparatory cause of false swearing, p. 40 The viciousness of the Papals in
point of Perjury, p. 41 Whilst profane Swearing passes for a venial; false
swearing will never be esteemed a mortal sin, p. 42
2. Wealth-consuming Debauchery, is Gaming, p. 42 1. High Gaming amongst the
Gentry, page 42, 43 2. Chiefly peasantly and mechanic Gamesters, that consume
their time and money in Bowling-Alleys. p. 43
3. Wealth-wasting Debauchery is Whoreing, p. 44 1. The wealthier sort in their
costly Misses, alias Strumpets, p. 46, 48 It fills the Country with Bastards,
to the great charge of Parishes, p. 45 The several motives to Strumpets to
prostrate themselves, p. 46, 47 This Vice effeminates a people, and unfits them
for warlike Employment, p. 48, Several Instances of the ruining nature of this
vice, p. 48, 49 The severity of the Laws and punishment of this Sin by Turks
and Pagans, p. 49, 50

CHAP. IV. Of the most Wealth-consuming Debauchery of Drunkenness.
THe dismal effects of it, p. 51 Bishop Hall's Sentence, p. 52, 53 Luther's
opinion, p. 54 The great consumption of Wealth by our Wine-bibbers, p. 54 By
our Ale-topers, ibid. The loss of the labor of many persons able to work,
employed as Drawers and Tapsters, etc. p. 55 The damage of our Manufactures by
Drunkenness, ibid. Youth debauched by drunken Masters, and Masters undone by
drunken servants, p. 56 Drunkenness a sin often inflicted upon a Nation in
judgment, and a forerunner of destruction, p. 57 Expedients proposed for
remedy, p. 57 1. Statutes against it to be executed upon Tiplers and Taverns,
ibid. 2. Observes how the lives and healths (...) many persons are destroyed by
it. 3. The ensnaring practice of healthing t^ be restrained and rejected,
especially a^ the Tables of Magistrates and persons (...) Quality, p. 58, 59
The practice of Healthing sinful both in the Provoker and Accepter, p. 60
Heathens abominated and severely punished Drunkenness, of which several
Examples, p. 61 Drunkenness has been the ruin of many great Kingdoms and
States, instance, p. 62, 63, 64 The opprobius Epithetes given of Drunkards by
Heathens, p. 64, 65 Drunkenness fatal to Armies, p. 65, 66, 67, 68
CHAP. V. Observing the spring from whence all the Debauchery of Christendom
flows.
Debauched Christians worse than debauched Pagans, p. 69 Debauchery in
Christendom proceeded from the Fountain of all filthiness, Rome, p. 70 Holy
Places, holy Ceremonies, etc. crowded holy lives out of the Church, ibid.
Confessed by their own Prelates, p. 71 Declared by Luther in his Genealogy of the
Pope, as Antichrist, p. 72, 73 Consciences once seared by a custom of
Immoralities, can never long struggle for truth in Divinity, p. 73 The present
generation of Debauches in Christendom exceed all we ever read of in former
ages, or Pagan Nations, p. 74 Some live as if they had abandoned all thoughts
of future State, all belief of a God, Judgment, Heaven or Hell. They turn all
seriousness either in Divinity or Morality into a Ridicule, p. 76
CHAP. VI. States the intolerable charge Ireland is at by maintaining
Foreigners to its peculiar interest in the most profitable Employments.
1. BY the Court of Claims, p. 79 2. By Farmers of the Kings Revenue, p. 80 3.
The Contracters for the Treasury, p. 81 4. Pensions and Annuities to Absentees,
p. 82 5 Foreign Merchants and their Factors, p. 82, 83 6. Trading in Foreign
Ships, p. 83 7. By Absentees drawing over the Rents, p. 84, 85, 86, 87 8. The
Attendants of our Nobility, etc. at Court, the charge of new Honors and
Offices, p. 88 The charge of Educating the Sons of Noble Persons, etc. in
Foreign Universities and Inns of Court, p. 87 The whole Charge of Ireland in
the several Branches, computed to nine hundred and thirteen thousand, four
hundred sixty five pounds four shillings per annum. And amounts to for the
period of 15 years, to thirteen millions, five hundred and twelve thousand, six
hundred and sixty pounds, thirteen shillings and ten pence.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
OF Banks and Corporation-Trade, the several kinds of Banks, p. 1, 2. Land or
dry Banks most suitable for Ireland, p. 3. Ireland's great damage by Insolvent
Bankers, p. 4. The Method of this dry Bank, p. 5. Holland and Venice, etc.
raised themselves by Banks and Company Trade, p. 6. The Constitution of the
Dutch East India Company, p. 7. The benefit of the Bankers by their joint Stock
in Trade, p. 8. The Royal Countenance necessary to secure the Credit of the
Bank, p. 9. The benefit of this Bank-Credit to a Country in General, p. 10. It
will lower Interest, ibid. Lower Exchange, p. 11. Propagate Manufactures, p.
11. Banks will enable Tradesmen with small Stocks to manage great Trades, p.
12. Secure the Peace as well as increase the Wealth of Ireland, p. 12. Banks,
etc. will rescue our Trade out of the hands of Foreigners, p. 13. Banks, etc.
will increase our Shipping, and promote the Fishing Trade, ibid. Bank Security
more safe, more ready, and less troublesome than any other Specialty, p. 14.
Banks a great convenience: 1. To Gentlemen possessing Estates in several parts
of the Kingdom, securely to return their rent, etc. p. 15. A great
encouragement to young Merchants with small Stocks, ibid. To Clothiers,
Tanners, Chandlers, etc. where Markets fail, p. 16. To persons surprised by
Judgments before they can raise Money, ibid. A great convenience to the
Nobility and Gentry, ibid. To the poor and needy, p. 17 The Hans-Towns of
Germany raised their Trade by Banks, ibid. The great Trade of the Guild of the
Hance in the Stillyards in London, erected and managed by Banks, p. 18 England,
Ireland's best example, which was as low in Trade as Ireland is now, till
improved by Banks, ibid. The Kings and Parliaments of England have encouraged
and augmented their Trade by countenancing the old, and erecting new
Corporations of Trade, p. 19 No Expedient but this one can promote the Trade of
Ireland, p. 20 Corporation-Trade opposed in England, by whom, and with what
success, p. 21, 22 By Company-Trade the English and Dutch, etc. have diverted
the Trade of Venice, etc. and sell Persian and Indian Commodities where they
used to buy, p. 22, 25 The Indies unknown until Company-Trade discovered them,
p. 23 England and Holland obtained their great Trade and their true Religion
together, by sheltering persecuted Christians, ibid. Spanish, etc.
Inquisitions, a persecution drove away their Trade, ibid. When the Dutch and
English sent their first Fleets to the East Indies, p. 24, 27 Corporation-Trade
has enriched all places of its residence, p. 25, 26 When England prohibited
the Transportation of Wools, and Importing foreign Cloth, p. 25 The Original
and great Wealth of the East India Company at London, p. 27 His present Majesty
has Confirmed the Companies; He Founded and Erected the Affrican, etc.
Honored it with Royal and Noble Members and Dignities, p. 28 The inconveniency
of a confused Trade in the hands of particular Merchants to themselves and the
Country, p. 29, 30 The Authors Experience of it in Tallow and Wools, etc. p.
31, 32 Why, though England, etc. divides their Trade into several Companies,
Ireland should have but one, p. 33 Why the ancient Guild of the Hance after
above 300 years flourishing, was dispriviledg'd, p. 33, 34. The Solvency of
Bank-Security, p. 35, 36, 37. The method of managing the Bank, p. 37, 38 To
place the Authority of the Bank, etc. by Act of State on the Statute Staple
until a Parliament meet, p. 39, 46 The only Expedient to prevent the
Transportation of our Wools, p. 39, 40, 41, 42 The Original of the Guild of the
Hance very ancient, p. 43 The great benefit the Kings of England made of the
Staple, and how it was moved from place to place, and striven for by all
places, p. 44, 45
CHAP. II. The Interest of England to promote the Prosperity of the English
Interest of Ireland.
1 ARgued from the different Constitution of Ireland now to what it was before
the last Rebellion, p. 1. The English the greatest Proprietors of Land, and
chiefly inhabiting Cities and Wall-Towns, p. 48 The last Act of Settlement
differs from all former Royal Grants in several considerable particulars, to
the advantage of the English Interest, p. 50 Ireland under the sole Government
of English Magistrates, p. 51 England can in nothing so much promote the
prosperity of the English Interest of Ireland, as by countenancing its Trade,
p. 51 Englands only way to secure its self against Foreign Invasions, and ruin
of its Trade, is to promote the Potency of the English Interest in Ireland, p.
52 Englands neglect herein was the cause of the late Massacre and Rebellion, p.
53 The neglect hereof has cost England more Money, etc. than Ireland is worth,
ibid. Lord Deputy Sidney of the same opinion, p. 54 Neglecting Trade and
Manufacturie, the cause of the degenerating of the English, and why, p. 55
Multitudes of Irish Papists are now English Protestants, p. 55, 56, 58 Mr.
Spencers and Heilins opinion of the best way to promote the Protestant Religion
in Ireland, p. 56, 57 Ireland now so constituted, it cannot fail of an English
Protestant Parliament, p. 58 The names and numbers of the Corporations of
Ireland sending Members to Parliament, p. 59 to 63 A Catalogue of the present
Peers of Ireland summoned to Parliaments, in two Columns; by which may be
observed, the Protestant Peers far exceed the Papists in number and interest,
p. 63, to 67 A Catalogue of the Nobility of Ireland, anno 1571. And another
1641. by which may be observed the antiquity and precedence of the present
Noble Families of Ireland, p. 70, to 73 It is the interest of the Irish Papists
to promote the Potency of the English Interest of Ireland, p. 73 Though the
subduing of the many Rebellions has cost England dear, yet the Irish at last
paid the reckonings, p. 73 Englands ancient claim to the Sovereignty of
Ireland, and the Legality and Justness of their Title by Conquest, p. 73, to 75
The weakness of the English Interest of Ireland the cause of the many
Rebellions since they derived their States and Honors from the Crown of
England, p. 75 The degenerate English more dangerous Rebels than the Native
Irish, p. d6 The Popes Instigation and Encouragement to Desmond and Thomas
Fitz-Geral^ to rebel, and to root out the Protestan^ Religion, as a mad and
venomous Doctrine, and hellish Opinion, p. 76 Bishop Usher in his Speech to the
Assemblies of the States of Ireland, April 1627 asserts this opinion, that it
is the Intere^^ of the Papists to promote the potency (...) the English
Interest in Ireland, p. 77 to 80 Henry the 4 th. of France refuses, but Ph^lip
of Spain accepts of the Donation (...) Ireland from the Pope. The Spaniar^
never throve since, p. 77 Bishop Usher's Prophecy of dismal times (...) come on
the Protestants by the Papists yet though sharp, will be but short p. 81, 82
The English great Plenty and Debaucheri^ made them ripe for destruction, p. 82
A hint of the most barbarous Tortures an^ inhumane Cruelties of the Irish upon
the naked secure English, p. 82, 83 The excellent natural temper of the Irish
evidenceth that the barbarous Crueltie^ proceeded from the bloody Principles
infused into them by their Priests, p. 85, 86. Their observation of the
weakness of the English as to Arms, their great Encouragement to rise, p. 85
The Dismal destruction God brought on the Irish by the Sword, Plague, and
Famine, p. 87, 88 The most sober of the Irish approved this Notion in the year
1651, 1652. that it is their interest to promote the Potency of the English
Interest, p. 88 All Irish Papists are not infected with Jesuitical bloody
Principles, but many of them good Subjects, and good Neighbors, p. 89 It is
the interest of the Irish Papists in any capacity to live to promote the
English Interest to that Potency, as all attempts to disturb it might appear
irrational and desperate, p. 90 It would encourage their Industry in Planting
and Trading, p. 90 It would incline the the most sober Papists to enquire into
the differences about Religion, if from under the dread of the Potency of the
Popish Clergy, p. 91 Their ignorance of the Scriptures the reason of their
Errors, p. 92 The novelty of the rebellious bloody Principles rejected by the
ancient Roman-Church above 600 years after Christ, p. 93, 94 The equal Peace
and Prosperity, Honor and Trust, Love and Friendship Irish Papists, not
Jesuited, might enjoy, if they would secure the English against the fear of
Massacres, etc. p. 94, 95
Sect. the second, p. 96. asserts it, above all other, the Protestants of
Ireland are obliged to promote the Potency of the English Interest there.
But in regard (through mistake) the Pages are not figured, I can only refer to
the supposed Letter of the Alphabet, which the Reader may soon perform with his
Pen.

The Argument to secure themselves against the miseries of 41. being repeated,
p. 96. 1st. Expedient, to plant our Wall'd-Towns, and erect new where needed to
be done, without charge by Manufacturies, p. A. 2. To Institute Laws against
single life, with the reasons, p. A. B. C. 3. Above all other Expedients, to
endeavor a right understanding betwixt all Protestants sound in Fundamentals,
etc, p. C. Bishop Bramhall's opinion concerning Criminal Schism, p. E. Bishop
Bramhall, Tailor, Sanderson and Hall, etc. differ from our fiery Zealots, who
esteem all Separations Criminal Schism, and more sinful than Drunkenness,
Swearing, Whoring, etc. it is the Jesuits, not the Protestant Divines opinion,
p. F. The sober Dissentors agree with the Church in all Fundamentals both
Positive and Negative, p. F. and G. They maintain not only Internal but
External Communion with the established Church in all Essentials, p. G. The
Jews had their several Sects, yet all esteemed Israelites while they adhered to
Moses Law. The German Lutherans and Calvinists more differ, yet esteem each
other Protestants, p. H. It is a preposterous Zeal, like Hell, hot without
light, that makes different Opinions, different Religions, says Bishop
Bramhall, p. E. The Papists, who glory much in their Unity, are much more
divided in Doctrine, etc. and yet esteem each other Catholics, p. H. I. If the
Protestant Dissenters were as malignant against the Church as the Papists, yet
they could not be dangerous p. I. K. L. Irrational for Dissenters, Papists or
others to expect protection from a Prince o^ State, to whom they will not give
a^ Security in their power for their Loyalty, p. L. M. Dissenters ought to
avoid all occasions (...) appearing, or being engaged in any F^ction in a
State, or reflecting on the Religion established; asserted from Scripture
Instances, p. M. N. O. Errors in Schism more sinful than Error in Conformity,
p. O. P. The Authors Apology for his Essay to Vn^on, with his reasons how much
the safe^ and prosperity in Trade and Wealth d^pend on it, p. Q. R.
CHAP. III.
ASSerts Irelands Interest in its own Government, in what cases excepted, p.
96, 97 ^he most expeditious and effectual way to secure and plant Ireland with
English, is by the Armies, and how to be managed, p. 97, 98 ^he neglect thereof
the ruin of the English the last Massacre, p. 98 (...) what cases, by the
Civil list, etc. Preferments, Ireland may be advantaged by sending persons from
England, p. 99 that reason of State there was heretofore to Govern Ireland by
Ministers of State out of England, etc. are ceast now, p. 100, 101 ^easons why
persons unacquainted with the humor and state of Ireland, cannot so well
secure its Peace, nor promote its Prosperity, as its own Members, p. 102, to
114 that are the discouragements to persons in England from settling upon their
Estates in Ireland, p. 105, 106 ^esidents both ancient and modern of Princes,
etc. Governing their Tributary Provinces by their own Princes and Nobles, p.
107 It has been the practice of the Kings of England since the Conquest, to
Govern Ireland by Interested Persons, p. 108, 109 Cases excepted when England
had reason to send over persons disinterested, but are all now removed, p. 110,
111 The Duke of Ormond has enjoyed the longest Regency, and undergone the
greatest difficulties of any Viceroy since the Conquest, and why, p. 112, 113
His Loyalty not only applauded by the King, etc. but his Service in Ireland
approved by the English Parliament, who offered him great rewards, if he would
have accepted of them, p. 113 Mr. Spencer of my opinion, p. 114 So Giraldus
Cambrensis, p. 115 So Sir Hen. Wooten, p. 107 The Objection answered why I term
English Protestants aliens to Irelands Interest, p. 115, 116, 117 The case of
the English in Ireland differs from all other Tributary Countries, they being
not the Conquered, but the Conquerors, by virtue of whose blood, and the blood
of their Ancestors, Ireland was subjected to the Crown, p. 118 They are more
obliged to secure the interest of the Crown, than that is to protect them,
ibid. 1000 men raised in Ireland worth 2000 fresh-men brought from England for
that service, ibid. The sufferings themselves and their Progenitors have
undergone, deeply engages them to be true to, and resolute in defense of the
English Interest above all others, p. 119 Spencer of the same opinion, p. 120
So Livy, p. 121 A Catalogue of the Lord Lieutenants, etc. in two Columns; to
evidence the authentickness of this opinion by the practice of our Princes
since the Conquest, p. 122 to 156 A Copy of the present Establishment of
Ireland, p. 156 to p. 162 A Table for reducing Plantation-Acres into English,
etc. p. 162, 163 The establishment of the Subsidies of Ireland, p. 164 to 172
CHAP. VI. On Coins.
IN answer to this Question, whether it be advisable to enhance the Value, or
debase the Alloy of the current Money of Ireland, p. 137 to 188
The Contents of the Supplement, p. 181
SECT. I.
THe Objection answered. If the Government of Ireland by its own Members be of
so great advantage to the Trade and Wealth of Ireland, why was it no more
advanced under the Lords Justices and Duke of Ormond in their nine years
Government, p. 181 to 190 Sect. 2. Answering the Objection, p. 93 What those
Popish Principles are that make them so desperately dangerous to humane
Society. 1. Not the Religion of their Church relating to Worship, but the
Policies of their State respecting Government, p. 193, 194 Their Principles
inconsistent with humane Society abstracted, p. 195, 196, to 199 Their
Principles of Treason and Rebellion, etc. collected, p. 200 to 203 The Comment
or Gloss made on their inhumane rebellious Principles by their own Authors, p.
204, to 207 Since all these wicked Principles have attended the Popes pretended
Infallibility and Supremacy; from whence did they proceed. Answered, 1.
Negatively, not from Christ nor his Apostles, nor from the ancient Fathers nor
Councels, p. 208, 209 2. Positively, from Usurpation, Treachery and Rebellion,
p. 210


SECT. II.
Showing the Original of their bloody Principles, p. 211 The Jesuits first
adopted them who are charactered by the locusts, prophesied of to ascend out of
the Bottomless-pit, Rev. 9 p. 211, 212 No other Votaries or Orders of Friars,
etc. answers the description, p. 213 The design of their Institution by the
Pope was to manage his Treasons, etc. against Princes, p. 214
SECT. III.
Shows that no Authority but the Pope and his Illegal Council of Trent ever
confirmed their Institution, p. 214 The Illegality of the Council of Trent
proved, p. 215, 216, 217 Rome is no Mother Church, nor Mistress of other
Churches, and why, p. 218 Rome only has the Primacy in Apostacy, ibid. The
testimony of Rome's vile Apostacy from her own Learned and Applauded Authors,
p. 219, 220, 221 The bloody work Rome's Apostasy and the Pope's Rebellion
against Emperors, etc. made in Italy, p. 222 They enjoyed not the Supremacy
until they had so vexed and wearied the Emperors, that to stay the stream of
blood they kept running in Christendom, they permitted them to do what they
pleased, p. 222 All Papists in Ireland not jesuited Papists, p. 222, 223 Not
only their principles, but their persons and Order exploded, and banished bymost
Popish Princes and States, p. 223, 224
SECT. IV.
Of the natural consequences of their inhumane principles, p. 225 They abrogate
all Laws of Humanity and Divinity, p. 225, 226 The iniquity of their principles
aggravated by fathering their villainies on innocent persons, p. 227 The Popes
advantage above all Tyrants in the World to Massacre and Assassinate by his
Emissaries in all parts, to perform his pleasure, p. 228 Instances of their
detestable stabbing and poisoning of Princes, etc. ibid. They have made Temples
and Sanctuaries their Slaughter-houses in time of Worship, ibid. They have
poisoned their Disciples by the Sacramental Wine, p. 229 What vicious men many
of their infallible Popes have been, ibid. Like Popes like Priests, like
Priests like People, p. 230
SECT. V.
Shows their Tyrannical practice since they usurpt the Supremacy, p. 231
Instances of Emperors and Princes Excommunicated, Deposed and Destroyed by
them, p. 232, 233 Their imperious insultings over mighty Princes submitting to
their censurre, p. 234 The reason why so many High born, Potent Princes have so
sordidly subjected themselves to their Tyranny, is from Gods judgment upon
them, p. 235 Princes no sooner become Slaves to the Pope, but turn Tyrants over
their own Subjects, ibid. After his Holiness became his Mightiness, he
contented not himself to insult over some Christian Princes by the aid of
others, but brought them all to lay their profane necks under his holy feet by
his own power, p. 235, 236 The Popes cruel project by the Jesuits to have
incenst the Turk against the Patriarch of Constantinople, and thereby to have
destroyed all the Asian Christians that would not own his Supremacy, p. 236,
237 The saying of Rodulph the Emperor, as to the danger of Princes, imposing on
their Subjects consciences, p. 237 Shutting the mouth of Gods Ministers, has
usually lifted up the hands of Gods judgments, p. 238 The Jesuits bloody work
in the West and East Indies, ibid. Of all the Countries in the World, England
with its Territories has been the mark the Jesuits have levelled their fiery
darts at for 100 years past, p. 239
SECT. VI.
Of the inconsistency of their principles with the just Power and Rights of
Temporal Princes, p. 140 The most Sovereign Prince under the Popes
Jurisdiction, more Slaves than any Conquered or Tributary Prince is to the
Great Turk, instances, p. 240 No hereditary Title, though of the most ancient
Royal Dissent, can secure them, p. 241 No legal Election, etc. can do it, p.
242 No strength of Arms, nor strong Holds can preserve them against their
Assassinations, p. 243 No Oaths, Articles of Peace, nor public Leagues can do
it, p. 243, 244 No Sovereign Prince in the World that either is free, or knows
how to be so from the Popes Supremacy, if not infatuated, but would choose it,
p. 245 Popish Harmony is only in their Errors Superstitions and Immoralities,
ibid. Popish Slavery not only Corporal but Spiritual; we must believe against
reason and sense, or be damned Heretics, p. 246 Christians must either he
Rebels at home, or Heretics at Rome, if the Pope and their Prince fall out,
ibid. We must believe their Blasphemy is Piety, and their Rebellion Loyalty,
or be perverse Heretics; instances, p. 246, 247 The bloody Massacres of Paris
and Ireland were perpetrated in Gods name, and for Gods Glory and Service, p.
246, 247 Their most horrid Treasons and Rebellions must be esteemed Loyalty,
and for the service of the Prince they rebel against, p. 248 to 252 It would be
better both for the Papists and Protestants, if moral loyal Papists would
distinguish themselves from Jesuited Papists, p. 352 Unity in Loyalty on Civil
Interests much more easy and safe, than in Religious, p. 252, 253 The
Scripture as positive against Subjects Rebellion on the account of Religion, as
any one Wickedness there condemned, p. 254 The Wars betwixt the Protestants of
France, Germany, Belgia, etc. against their Princes, was not primarily for
Religion, but what, p. 255 The difference betwixt Papists and Protestants in
their claims of liberty of Conscience, p. 255 No vengeance of God upon Popish
Persecutors will restrain them; instances, p. 256, 257
SECT. VII.
Jesuitical Principles the cause of Irelands mischiefs and miseries, therefore
their interest to explode them above all the Papists in the World, p. 258 A
brief Narrative of all the Jesuits Treasons against their English Sovereigns,
from Hen. 8. to this time, wherein is observed not only the miseries in
Ireland, but Englands and Scotlands troubles were promoted by them, p. 259 to
264 Their Oath of Confederacy in their last Plot, p. 265 The pernicious
influence of that Plot, though disappointed, 266, 267 His Majesty's great
tenderness and indulgence toward Dissenters for 20 years past, p. 267, 268
Dissenters respect to the Protestant Church of Ireland, as now established, how
far, p. 269 Dissenters the most dangerous Heretics in Ireland to Papists, p.
270 The great advantage Unity in Loyalty would be both to Papists and
Protestants in Ireland, p. 271
An Alphabetical Table of the principle things in the first Part.
A.
ADventurers and other estated Absentees drain Ireland of Cash, p. 84, 85.
Apparel extravagant ruins a Country, page 20, 21. Apparel of Silks destructive
to Ireland. Apparel spruce and costly in the meaner sort many ways inconvenient
besides its Charge, p. 27, 28. Apparel spruce and rich contemned by many wise
and potent Princes p. 30, 31. Ale-topers their Charge to Ireland, p. 55.
B.
Baronets when instituted and how to be qualiffed, p. 16, 17. Bastards their
great Charge to Ireland, p. 45, 46.
C.
Court of Wards well regulated useful to Ireland, and for what, p. 12, 13.
D.
Debaucheries their Charge to Ireland, p. 37. Drunkenness the grand
Wealth-consuming Debauchery, p. 51. Its Trade ruining and Wealth-wasting
influence, p. 54 to 57. Drinking to excess is as sinful in them able to bear
drink, as others sooner distempered, p. 60. Drunkards; etc. are the proper
Fanatics, p. 61, 62. Drunkenness disdained and grievously punished by Turks
and Pagans, p. 63. Drunkenness the ruin of States and Armies, p. 64 to 69.
E.
England no pattern for Ireland in Expenses, and why, p. 22. Effeminacy attends
Debauchery, p. 48, 49.
F.
France gains by their fantastic Garbs, and why, p. 19.
G.
Gentry their bad Payment to Tradesmen ruins Trade, p. 10, 11. Gaming its
pernicious Effects, p. 42, 43.
H.
Holiness-Ceremonial crowded Holiness-real out of the Church, p. 70. Honor
when disgraced, p. 14, 15 Healthing the great provoker of Drunkenness, p. 58,
59 Its sinful, p. 60
I.
Ireland not settled till when, p. 2, 3, 4 Jesuits their under ground work, p. 3
L.
Laws Sumptuary, p 23, 24 Needful in Ireland, p. 26 Laws Mercanture necessary
to govern Trade, p. 10 Laws Common too delatory for Trade, ibid. Laws against
Absentees, p. 86, 87
M.
Merchants Honorable, p. 8, 9 Merchants, few wealthy in Ireland, and why, p. 7
Merchants low esteem in Ireland lowers, etc. Trade, p. 8 Manufacturies ruined
by Silk worn in Ireland, p. 20 Merchants Foreigners, their damage to Ireland,
p. 81, 82
N.
Nobility when ignoble are the shame and ruin of a Country, p. 12, 13, 14.
O.
Oaths profane their provoking destructive nature, p. 38, 39.
P.
Perjury its sad Effects, p. 41, 42. Profane Swearing the mother of false
swearing, p. 40. Perjury abhorred by Pagans, first tolerated by Popes, p. 41.
Perjury will never be esteemed a mortal sin, whilst profane swearing is
esteemed venial, p. 42. Pagans their cruel Laws against Adultery, p. 49, 50.
Profaneness of Christendom whence, p. 69. Prophanenists their Faith
blasphemous and fanatical, if any they have, p. 74, 75, 76.
R.
Rome the Fountain of all Profaneness and Debauchery of Christendom, p. 72,
73. Revenue farmed to Foreigners great loss to the Country, p. 80.
S.
Swearing profane its sad Effects, p. 38, 39. Superfluities not regulated
ruins a Country, p. 18, 19. Strumpets to be prescribed their Apparel, p. 29,
30. Shipping foreign a great Charge to the Country, p. 83.
T.
Trade its Impediments, p. 1, to 11. Trade Ireland not capable of, till when,
p. 4.
V.
Victuals their Plenty obstructs Trade and Manufacture, p. 5, 6.
W.
Whoring its Charge and Damage to Irelands Trade and Wealth, p. 44. Destructive
to Kingdoms and States, page 48, 49. Wine-bibbers their Charge to Ireland, p.
5.
ERRATA.
BY mistake of the Author, and mislaying of some Papers, occasioned by Business
which took up his time, and delayed the Publication of this Book, there are
some Errors escaped the Press, which is made good by reprinting such Leaves
over again, or where any were left out, as between p. 95. and p 96. the several
pages are denoted in the Contents by p A, and p B, etc. calling the first p. A,
the second B, etc. which the Reader is desired to mark with his Pen. And for
Miss-spellings or other Literal escapes I shall leave to his courtesy to
correct, and only note what harms the Sense, which the Reader, or rather
Bookseller, may soon correct with his Pen.

PART I.
Page 20. for families read females, p. 17. for Color r. Collar.

PART II.
Pape 29. for confine read consigne, p. 57. for Minister r. Ministry, p. 190.
line ult. for Object r. An Answer, p. 234. for 1612. r. 1600. ibid. for 812. r.
800. p. H. for momentary r. momentous, p. 115. for Stilling fleet 106. r.
Stillingfleet 206.

Advertisement to the Binder.
At the end of * * in the Epistle Dedicatory there wants the Direction, viz.
Plebeius, g g the Quarter sheet in G Part 1. is to be placed after f f in Part
2. E e the first leaf to be cancelled, the last leaf of F f to be cancelled,
the last leaf of M m to be the first of E e, N n fol. 195, 196, and 199, 200.
to be cancelled; O o fol. 213, 214, 217, 218, 221, 222. to be cancelled; the
said leaves of N n and O o being reprinted.

THE INTEREST OF IRELAND In its TRADE and WEALTH Stated.
CHAP. I. The Reasons why Ireland being so long under the Government of
England, whose Policies in Trade are inferior to few Countries, should yet be
so little improved in Trade and Wealth.
1. FRom the Impediments or Obstructions Ireland has met with, and is subject
unto, not common to other Countries.

The first and chief Impediment proceeds from the unsetledness of the Country,
as to its subjection to England's Government; for though they have long prosest
Allegiance to England's Crown, yet they have paid but a grudging partial
obedience to its Scepter: And upon all occasions, less, or more general, have
been attempting to draw their necks out of England's Yoke; as its briefly, but
fully evidenced by Sir John Davis in his Intelligent Book dedicated to King
James, Entitled A Discovery of the true cause why Ireland was never entirely
subdued to the Crown of England, and he determines until the 9th. of King
James, Ireland was never fully settled in subjection and obedience to the
English Law and Government.

And if we take a view of the State of Ireland since then, and allow the Reign
of King James, and part of King Charles the First to be Halcion days, compared
with former times.

Yet we must consider the former frequent interruptions of its Peace were not
so worn out of memory, but that the aged in the succeeding Generations would be
discoursing of their former sufferings to their Children and younger
Neighbors, which continued a fear and jealousy in the minds of the English,
who were afresh startled by those lesser breakings forth of discontent in King
James's time, etc. who was not Proclaimed King of Ireland without opposition.
Several of the chief Cities, as Waterford, Co^ke, Lymerick, etc. stood out
until forced to their duty: and within less than seven years Tyrone,
notwithstanding all obligations of Honor and Favor the King heaped upon him
to engage his Loyalty, was kindling a new flame with the finders of his old
fire; but being timely by the smoke discovered, and ploclaimed Traitor, stole
into Flanders, and from thence to Rome: And for his good services to that See
was allowed a plentiful Pention the rest of his life, Anno 1607. Borlacy 184.
And about a year after Odoghertyes Rebellion broke out in Ulster, who Sakt and
Burnt Derry, and made havoc up and down the Country, expecting Tyrones and
Tyrconnels return with foreign Aid from Flanders, etc.

About seven years after Alexander Mac Donnell, with Brian Cross, O Neal, and
other principle Gentlemen of Ulster, were discovered contriving another Plot to
take Charlemont, with the principal Towns and Forts in Ulster, and to destroy
the English in that Province, having expectation of Assistance from Spain,
France and Rome.

Now though all these attempts to disturb the Settlement of Ireland were, by
Gods Providence, some of them timely discovered and prevented, others soon
suppressed; yet hereby the Fears of the English, as to the safety of their Lives
and Estates, were renewed: for they did observe, though the Fire did not flame
out of the Housetop, yet it lay smothering under the Ashes of the former
Rebellions, which was manifest in the Discovery of the horrid bloody Rebellion
1641. that the Popish Minors had been at work under ground all along and the
23. of October, 1641. was the day agreed on to spring their Mine: for in the
year 1634. Mac Mahon a Priest discovered to Sir George Ratcliffe, a Design of a
general Rising of the Irish, himself having been engaged in the Conspiracy, and
for several years employed in Foreign Courts, to solicit Aid to carry on the
Work Vid. The Reverend Bishop of Mead 's Letter to Dr. Borlacy in the Preface
to his History of the execrable Irish Rebellion.
.

So that though Ireland had no open War from the year 1600. to the year 1641.
yet these several attempts continued an inward Dread on the minds of the
English, which discouraged their Industry in Trade and Manufactures, and what
they had of Trade were chiefly in the hand of the Irish who had little
Manufacture but Rugs, Mantles and Frizes, etc.

And from the year 1641. to the year 1660. I may spare troubling you with an
account why Ireland was not improved in Trade and Wealth; for thirteen years of
the nineteen were spent in violent and bloody War, and that monster devours
every thing but it self.

And for the other six years the new Landlords of Adventurers and Soldiers had
their Heads and their Hands full, in procuring and settling their new Estates.

And not only themselves, but most persons that could command Money, fell a
trading in Debentures, and thereby obtained better Estates in one year, than by
treble the sum they ever got in seven years before by Traffic.

So that until the year 1660. Irelands not improving in Trade and Manufactures
should not discourage Attempts now: for had the Country been much more capable
than it is; and, I judge, few Countries in the World better qualified as to its
Situation, and natural Product, yet was there no encouragement for attempting
any considerable Trade and Manufactures thus far.

And what has since obstructed the increase of Trade, and frustrated all
attempts propagating the Manufactures of Ireland. Vid. the Chapter of
Manufactures.

The second Impediment arises from the former, the unsetledness of the minds
of the people; for a people inured to War, rather dispose their minds to
idleness and rapine, than innocent Industry; and what is quickly so gained, is
usually as soon spent in riot and excess: And as these sort of people hate
honest labor and industry themselves, so do they by their frequent robberies
discourage others; that when a years industry shall be forced out of their
hands by an hours robbery, they conclude ease and labor will be all one at the
years end; and therefore choose scarcity, with ease and safety, rather than by
labor to gain a little matter about them; which will but make them the more
sit Prey for the violence of Wood-kearns and Thieves.

The third Impediment is the great plenty of provisions, for fullness of Bread
is the cause of abundance of idleness in Ireland as well as in Sodom; which
argument I shall choose to give you in the words of our Ingenious Countreyman
Sir William Temple, in his Observation on the Trade of Holland, page 187, 188.
as follows: Since the ground of Trade cannot be produced from Havens, or
native Commodities, as may well be concluded from the Survery of Holland, which
has the least and the worst; and of Ireland, which has the most, and the best
of both* it were not amiss to consider from what other score it may be more
naturally and certainly derived; for if we talk of Industry, we are still as
much to seek what it is that makes a people industrious in one Country and idle
in another: I conceive the true original ground of Trade to be great multitudes
of People crowded into small compass of Land, whereby all things necessary to
life become dear, and all men who have possessions are induced to Parcemony,
but those who have none are forced to Industry and Labor, or else to want:
Bodies that are vigorous fall to labor, such as are not supply that defect by
some sort of Inventions or Ingenuity: Those customs arise first from necessity,
but increase by imitation, and grow in time habitual in a Country; and where
they are so, if it is upon the Sea, they naturally break out into Trade, both
because whatsoever they want of their own that is necessary, so many men's lives
must be supplied from abroad; and because by the multitude of People, and
smalness of a Country, I and grows dear, that the Improvement of Money that way
is considerable, and so turns to Sea, where the greatness of the Profit makes
amends for the Venture.

This cannot be better illustrated than by its contrary, which appears no where
more than in Ireland, whereby the largeness and plenty of the Soil, and
scarcity of the People, all things necessary to Life are so ch^ap, that an
industrious man by two days labor may gain enough to feed him the rest of the
week, which I take to be a very plain ground of Laziness attributed to the
people; for men naturally prefer Ease before Labor, and will not take pains,
if they can live idle; though when by necessity they have been used to it, they
cannot leave it, being grown a custom necessary to their Health, and to their
very Entertainment: nor perhaps is the change harder, from constant Ease to
Labor, than from constant Labor to Ease, etc.

The fourth Impediment is the Height of the Interest of Money; for Holland that
has Money at three per Cent. and England at six, eat up Traders in Ireland,
where Money is difficult to be procured at ten; whereby the one will underfell
the other at his own doors, and run them down in Manufactures at home, and
Markets abroad; having also the advantage of better and cheaper Workmen. The
dearness of Provisions necessitating their poor to work, the same necessity
moves them to inure their Children to Art from their Cradles, whereby they will
perform more and better in one day than ours in two.

The fifth Impediment is the lowness of the rate of Land; for when a man may
purchase a better Rent for 1000 pound in Ireland, than he can for two in
England, or three in Holland, or proportionably Farm. What prudent man will
undergo the Difficulties and run the Hazards of Trade, when he may dispose of
his Money with much more ease and safety to his better advantage: and from hence
it is we have so few wealthy Merchants in this Country: for if a man begin with
a 1000 pound, and improve it to 9 or 10. in Trade, like wary Gamesters that
have won at Play, they will venture no more, but lay out their Money in Land,
and of a rich Merchant become a Country Gentleman: and then parting with a few
Guineys to procure a Dub, or Patent, the Knights Son will blush if you tell him
his Father got his Estate by conversing with Tarpolins, etc.

Which brings me to the sixth Impediment, The low esteem the generous Calling
of a Merchant has in this Country, where every pedling Shopkeeper and
Pettyfogger is styled a Merchant; that Ireland breeds Merchants as Beggars do
lice, from its poverty and idleness: For turning Merchant is the last shift a
lasie Mechanic or a beggarly Citizen takes to; whereas every Trade ought to
bear the denomination of their peculiar Faculty. For though Clothiers, Drapers,
Mercers, Milliners, Ironmongers, Grocers, Haberdashers, etc. may be of
worshipful Rank, and principal Citizens, yet they are not Merchants; for none
are properly Merchants but the Adventurers at Sea; from whence the most ancient
Corporation of Merchants in London was styled the Company of Merchant
Adventurers: But from this degrading of the reputation of Merchants, that
Honorable Calling is of so low repute, that few Gentlemen, much less Noblemen,
will put their Sons Apprentice to a Merchant, but rather breed them for
Divines, Soldiers, Lawyers, Physicians, etc. though it may happen, under those
Professions, they never attain to be eminent; that had they put another Son to
a Merchant, the Divine might have been glad to become his Brother's Chaplain.
Whereas in all Countries flourishing in Trade, their Nobles and chief Citizens
are Merchants; as Venice, Florence, Genoa, Lisbon, Amst. and Land. where his
Royal Highness and many of the Nobles about Court are enrolled Merchants in the
Affrican and Canary Companies, etc. which his Royal Highness has Honored with
bearing Office, Blooms Geography, in his Cha. of Traffic, page 50.
etc. And this is no novelty; for Solomon, the most glorious King of Israel,
was a Merchant; it was his Traffic, not his Crown-Rents, by which he made
Silver to be as Stones in Jerusalem, and Cedars as the Sicamore 1 Kings, Chap.
10. ver. 27.
.

And the Prophet Isaiah recording the glory of old Tire, calls her the Crowning
City, and Mart of Nations, whose Merchants were Princes, whose Traffickers are
the Honorable of the Earth Isa. 23. ver. 8.
. And this high esteem and noble reputation Merchants has had both in ancient
and modern times in all Countries, knowing the worth of Trade, has commended
them for Counselors and principal Ministers of State to Princes and chief
Senators in all Commonwealths, whereby the interest of Trade has been greatly
promoted, and persons of Honor encouraged to study it as a principal piece of
State Policy to know how to increase their own and lessen their neighbors
Trade; the advantage thereof we have a notorious example in the modern
Politics of France, where it is manifest the Studies and Counsels of one
Colbert has in a few years trebled the Trade and Manufactures of France;
whereby that aspiring Prince is not only become so powerful on Land, but so
formidable at Sea above all his Predecessors, that he checks the swelling Trade
of Holland, and threatens the ruin (...) the famous Trade of England, if not
timely (...) which cannot be done without espousing the Interest of Trade as
the Darling of State, and public Counsels be qualified accordingly.

The seventh Impediment is the lowness of the Credit of the Tradesmen of this
Country, proceeding from their ill performances with their Creditors abroad,
which they are necessitated unto from these three Causes.

First, from the Delatoriness of Common Law Proceedings in our ordinary Courts
of Justice, where a man may be a year before he obtain Judgment upon a
Specialty, and much longer upon a Book-debt, especially if either the Defendant
or his Solicitor be well acquainted with Quirks in Law-proceedings: To prevent
which, all Countries flourishing in Trade keep their Court Merchant, which
within a few days, by a Summery way of proceeding by the Law Me^catore, will
determine a Cause. Lex Mercatoria page 458, etc.


The second Cause of the lowness of their Credit, is the smalness of the Stocks
of our Tradesmen: A person of 500 l. Stock shall accept of 2000 l. Credit,
which by reason of Goods lying upon hand, and Debts out, he is no ways able to
comply with time; but what he buys at six months, may be three 6 months unpaid,
and that intails him upon his Creditor; though his Goods be bad, and dear, he
dare not leave him, being at his mercy for old scores.

The third and chief Cause is, from the bad payment some of the Gentry make to
the Trader, whereby the Trading Stock of the Nation is stopped in its course,
like the Blood stopped in its circulation, threatens the ruin of the Body by
variety of Diseases.

For when the Gentleman pays not the Mercer and Draper, he cannot pay the
Manufacturer, nor he his Workmen, nor they the Woolman, nor he his Landlords
Rent: That could this one obstruction to Trade be removed, most others would
fall in course.

And for removing of this Trade ruining Nation, scandalizing evil, I would
propose that no Merchant or Retayler should recover in any of the Kings Courts
any Debt contracted for foreign Manufactures, but that it should be admitted a
sufficient Bar against Judgment, if the Debtor could prove that the Debt were
contracted for Goods manufactured out of Ireland.

First, This would not only restrain the Seller from trusting where he had
confidence of payment, but excuse his refusal where he only credits, being loath
to disoblige.

Secondly, This would restrain many Buyers, who whilst they can have time, will
be profuse in their expenses; but if every superfluous fine thing they fancy
cost them ready Money, the thought of parting with their Money would something
moderate their fondness of the thing when they much need it not.

Thirdly, This would prevent men's Wives and Daughters from running them into
debt for fine Clothes, if in stead of going, to the Tradesman to be trusted,
they were constrained to go to him that carries the Purse; for Money, it might
admit a debate whether the thing were so necessary as to part with present
Money for it.

The second Expedient to remedy this immoral dishonorable ruin of Trade, is
for the Magistracy in their places, and Ministers in theirs, by their
testimonies on the Bench; and from the Pulpit to show the scandal of it,
especially in persons of Honor and Quality; it being not only a transgression
of all Divine rules in the Christian World, but of all Moral rules in the
Civilized World, not to do to others as we would have others do by us. We read
of several Pagan Nations that are so great abhorrers of this sort of Injustice,
that when their Subjects through sloth or prodigality run more into debt than
they are able to pay, deliver them to their Creditor for Slaves until the debt
be satisfied, as being unworthy to enjoy the freedom of Citizens, much less the
dignity of Senators or Magistrates. Says Solomon, The oppression of the poor
is as a sweeping rain. He means poor Magistrates, who by virtue of their Office
has power to oppress: Therefore it would be an excellent Law, to provide that
all Noble Families decayed in Estate, by serving their King and Country, or
other unavoidable Providence of God, should be repaired by the benevolence of
their Country, which were usual amongst the Greecians and Romans in their
prosperity.

And that others, who ruin their Estates by prodigality and ill courses,
should be degraded from their Dignities; for noble Titles void of noble
Estates, and noble Qualities, renders Nobility contemptible, and not only the
reproach, but the pest of a Country. Therefore such a Court of Wards as might
be entrusted with the Education of the Orphant Nobility, etc. so regulated by
Law, that no Guardian could make a prey of them and their fortune, and also
empowered where they saw need, to secure the Estates of Prodigals, at Age, from
their wasting courses, for the good of their Posterity, would be of great use
to this Kingdom, to secure it from Noble and Worshipful Bankrupts, who do not
only ruin their own Families and Posterities, but usually many other
industrious Families that had the ill hap to credit them.

The third Expedient to secure this Realm from this Trade and Wealth-consuming
evil is, for the prudent and sober part of the Nobility and Gentry both by
their examples and advice, to discountenance these Prodigals in their ruining
courses.

First, by their examples to bring high Gaming, excessive Drinking, and all
voluptuous living out of credit; for the reason why so many young Gentlemen are
so extravagant in their expenses, is, because they think their Quality and
Degree requires it.

Whereas true Beauties need no Paint; a Gentleman shall receive the respect of
his Degree when clothed in Frieze, as fully as if arrayed in Scarlet. I
remember since the Ancient Nobility and Gentry of England, though they kept
noble Houses, went very plain themselves: what Bravery they had was in their
Attendants: And then how glad was a Tradesman to see their Stewards and
Liveries coming toward their Shops; whereas now they dread it in some of them:
and if they part with their Goods, will require the Steward or some of their
mean Tenants to be security for their Lord, my sometimes Citizens; and then,
though the Lord or Master bears the Title, the Servant or Citizen enjoys the
honor of persons sit to be credited; which veils the glory of the Nobility,
etc. of Ireland; who when by the merit of their Ancestors, or by the King's
favor they are raised in their degree above others, should raise their minds
above those ignoble, vicious principles and practices of meaner persons, or be
suspended their Titles till they do it. Shall a Lawyer for dishonouring his
Practice, have his Gown pulled over his Ears, and himself thrown over the Bar?
Or if a Divine scandalize his Cloth, shall he be degraded, and thereby
disgraced? And shall a Nobleman reproach his Dignity, and the fame of his
Ancestors without blame! Heathens did not think so; the Athenians had their
Goddess Nemesis, being styled by them the Goddess of Indignation, for punishing
those who behaved themselves unworthy of their degree and fortune. Heylins
Cosm. fol. 588.
The Nobility of a Kingdom are the Pillars of it, and therefore called Peers;
and if the Pillars of a House be made of rotten wood, wherein then consists the
strength of it? Wise Solomon, when he built his own House, as well as Gods, had
all his Pillars of Cedar, 1 King. 7.2. or Brass, ver. 15. As the King is the
Fountain of Honor, so the Streams should run clear; they reproach not the
Springhead from whence they flow.

Why is the Sentence of a Nobleman in Judgment admitted upon his Honor, of
equal authority to others upon their Oaths; but that the Law presumes, he is as
tender of his Honor, as others are of their Consciences: and though the Wealth
of a Country is disposed by Providence to Fools, and men of rude Education,
Riches, says Solomon, Eccles. 9.11.
are not always to men of Understanding, there are rich Charles, as Nabal, 1
Samuel, 25.25. and rich Fools, Luke 12.20. and for such as these to be
dignified with Honorable Titles, make Honor contemptible, says wise Solomon,
Prove. 29.1. Honor is not seemly for a Fool; Solomon's Fools were not Idiots,
but rude vicious persons: Honorable Titles were not designed to make men
Honorable that were not so before, but to declare to others, it was the
opinion of their Prince they deserved Honor for the worthy Service they had
done for their King and Country: When Titles of Honor are conferred on persons
of mean Birth, mechanic Education, and sordid disposition without respect to
Honorable Service, when they are neither Testimonials of the Kings Favor, or
the persons Merit, it moves virtuous and worthy persons to slight them, if the
most daring Heroic spirit in an Army shall perform, in the sight of his
Prince, the most desperate Service, at his coming off he is dubbed; but whilst
the was fighting, if the basest Coward in the Army be plundering the Enemies
Wagons, forsaken by their Guard, and fill his pockets with Gold, he shall for
a small part of it obtain a Patent for a Baronet, and take place of the other,
as the more Honorable Man; which lowers the rate of Fortitude the highest
virtue, and raises the price of Covetousness the most sordid of vices.

Theodosius the Emperor was so sensible of this prostrating Dignities to the
ambitious humor of unworthy persons, he makes his Edict against it, after this
Preamble: Observing (says he) many persons out of ambition to take place of
others of better merit, had surreptitiously obtained Letters or Codicils for
Titles of Honor; which caused great animosities, and put all things out of
order and decorum, etc. For, says he, how can merit be rewarded, when without
consideration of Service performed, Titles of Honor are conferred; and men
best deserving deprived of their due? But to distinguish them, he ordains that
persons honored for Service should take place of others that had superior
Titles by Codicil, alias Patents: And for time to come, all Titles of Honor so
obtained should be void, and they who procured the Cod^cils fined 20 l. in Gold
Howels History of the World, 356.
. Says Baker, Queen Elizabeth made Honor in her time the more Honorable by
not making it common; She being a Virgin her self, would preserve the Virginity
of Honor, and would not prostitute it to unworthy persons Baker's History of
England, 388.
. To be the Fountain of Honor, is the peculiar privilege of Sovereign
Princes; and though they may trust a Subject with the Key of their Treasury,
and Cabinet; yet the Key of Honor should always be tied at their own Girdles.
King James in the 9th. year of his Reign Instituted the Order of Baronets with
these qualifications. First, that they should maintain 30 Foot Soldiers in
Ireland for three years, at 8 d. per diem. 2. That they should be Gentlemen of
Blood, of three Descents. 3. That they should have Lands of Inheritance, or
immediate Reversion, to the value of 1000 l. per annum; and to keep the Order
from swarming, he stinted their number to 200. in his three Kingdoms; and as
their issue sailed, so their Order to cease.
But, says Baker, he that will look how well the end of the Institution, and
the Laws of it have been observed, shall find it to be here as it was in the
Order of St. Michael in France, into which at first there were admitted none
but Princes, and eminent Persons; but afterward it became a question whether
the Dignity of the Order did more grace the Persons, or the meaness of the
Persons disgrace the Order: So Cambden in his Eliz. records the saying of a
Frenchman, The Chain of St. Michael was once a Badge of Noblemen, but now a
color for all creatures. Says Baker, When the Laws of an Institution are not
observed, it seems to make a Nullity in the Collation Baker's History, p. 514.
. The Nobility of Venice are distinguished by their Habits, and as Affronts
offered them are severely punished; so are their Laws severe against
themselves, if they do any thing to dishonor their Quality; saying, That
Honor and Respect will not follow Titles, but Merit and Virtue.

When Honors Court the Plebeian Race,
It does Nobility much disgrace;
Unless their Merits be so good,
They equalize the Noble Blood:
I Will say no more on this Point, but do affirm the high value of Honorable
Titles, and the low esteem of Honorable Qualities. The humor of quick buying,
and slow paying, is the ruin of the Trade and Wealth of this Country; whilst
being Fine, is more creditable than being Just, neither our Credit or Wealth
can be recovered.

CHAP. II. The Second Head of the Causes of Ireland's not Improving in Trade
and Wealth,
IS from its excess in spending; for where much is spent, and little gained,
poverty and decay necessarily follows: And this consists in its excessive
consumption of foreign Commodities. First, for the Belly, as Wines, Fruit,
Spice, Tobacco, etc.

Secondly, for the Back, as Silks, fine Linnens, Silver and Gold-Laces: all
which may be esteemed superfluous, as not absolutely necessary, only
convenient. Now all superfluities ought to be regulated proportionably to
abilities; for some Families may better afford to drink Wine than others strong
Beer, and clothe themselves in Silks than others can in Serge, in regard they
either come cheaper by them, or have Estates more able to bear. And so it is
with Countries; Naples may as cheap wea^ Silk, as England Woollen-cloth; and
Florence, and most part of Italy, are at no further charge for their gay
Attire, than their hand-labour upon the raw Silks of Persia, etc. which also
costs them little, considering they pay for them by their own Manufacture, or
in Goods received of other Countries for them, which is still but the product
of their labor; they consume nothing of the Stock of their Country. And it is
the same with France; that Country would beggar themselves by their curiosity
in their Apparel, if they bought what they wear, manufactured: Whereas they
gain by their frequent change of Modes, by the great Trade they thereby obtain
from other Countries disposed to imitate them. And so for the Belly; a Peasant
in France may drink Wine, as cheap as a Farmer in England drinks Beer. So some
Countries on the Baltick-Shore may eat Sturgion, as cheap as Ireland can
Salmon; that it is not the quantity, nor quality of the matter a Country
consumes, that hurts them, but the price they pay for it. A person that spends
forty Pounds per ann. in the Manufacture of the Country, consumes not so much
of its Wealth, as another that spends but ten in foreign Manufacture. For the
more full demonstration of the ruining consequence of this excessive
consumption of foreign Manufactures, I shall propose to you this one Instance:

Of Silks; wherein the excess is grown to that height, that where our
Grandfathers spent one Shilling, we spend above a Pound, and twenty to one is
great odds in expenses: Then if a good sufficient Farmer that paid one hundred
Pound a year Rent, or a substantial Yeoman of fifty or sixty Pounds per ann. in
Land, had worn any other Garment than of Cloth or Stuff, produced by the hands
of his own Family, he would have been censured as a profuse Person, and his
Wife for a slack Housewife, you will find he will bring his Hogs to a fair
Market in a little time, would his Neighbors say. And though Citizens went
more Gentile, yet generally grave and plain, according to their several Ranks
and Callings: But now persons of this Rank will clothe themselves above the
Garb of Knights in former days. Yeomen, or ordinary Tradesmens Wives wear not
only Silk-Gowns, but oft-times two or three Silk-Petticoats appear as they
walk, one under another, which is an intolerable expense upon the Country.
For suppose forty thousand Families in this Kingdom that thus wear, and allow
them but five Pound per an. each person, it amounts to two hundred thousand
Pounds a year. And equal, if not more intolerable then this of Garments, is
that universal practice of wearing Silk-hoods and Scarfs, which every mean man's
Wife and Servants, etc. yea Carmens and Porters Wives put on, which increases
the number of the former double.

But compute these sorts of Silken Heads and Shoulders worn by these Gammers,
to sixty thousand persons, and compute that expense but at twenty Shillings
each person a year, it consumes of the Wealth of this Kingdom sixty thousand
Pounds per ann. Besides, it turns ^elt-making, one of the expensivest
Manufactures of Wool in the Country, and consequently one of the
profitablest. For it did not only manufacture a great proportion of our Woolls,
but employed therein a great number of industrious people. And suppose the same
number of Servants, and mean men's Wives and Daughters, etc. that now wear
Silk-hoods, and Scarfs, wore Hats, or Searge-hoods, at five Shillings each, the
Wool being nor valued above half the price: the profit of the Country by the
labor of the people that is now lost, would amount unto seven thousand five
hundred Pounds per. ann. So that by this one consumption of foreign
Silk-Manufacture, with its prevention of consuming of our own, damnifies this
Kingdom sixty seven thousand five hundred Pounds per ann.

Obj. If this be so, how comes it England and France, that much exceed
Ireland's expense in Garbs, and yet both flourishing Kingdoms in Trade and
Wealth?

Answ. First, it is not granted they exceed Ireland, the quantity and quality
of the people considered; for these Countries are not only much more populous,
but far more wealthy, and although the Nobility and Gentry of France are
expensive, yet the Peasant, or ordinary People are restrained both by Law and
Custom to wear the most ordinary product of their own Country. And as I
observed before, the State of France gains, rather than loses, by the Garbs of
particular persons: For they sell more to others than pays for the foreign
matter they manufacture for themselves. But let us compare our selves with
England, the State and Garb whereof being more generally known to us than that
of France, and we shall find we much exceed England in the profuseness of our
expenses this way, if the quality and quantity of persons be considered. First,
England must be considered as a Family, after many years gathering by great
pains and good husbandry, in possession of a great well-setled Estate; but
Ireland as a young Beginner, if it have yet begun in the way to get Wealth. And
if a Gentleman of a thousand Pounds per ann. will keep the Port, and spend at
the rate of another of ten thousand Pounds per ann. the mischief of the Parity
will soon appear, and England does not only possess ten times the Wealth of
Ireland, but drives ten times his Trade, and twenty to one is great odds in
expenses.

Secondly, if England must be Irelands pattern in Garbs and Expenses, then
review Englands Garb and Expenses when its state was more suitable to Ireland,
and you will find it very mean and homely to what Ireland is now; and as it
increased in Wealth, so in the expensiveness of its Garb and Port: and so soon
as the people began to break bounds on that hand, the wisdom of those times saw
reason to restrain them by sumptuary Laws; as in the 17th. of Edward the Third,
the Parliament ordained Rules for the Apparel of all Ranks and Degrees of
persons, as follows.

First / The Apparel of the Servants of Lords / etc. was not to exceed the
value of twenty six shillings and eight pence / their Wives and Children
suitable / and to wear no Deils above the value of twelve pence.

Secondly / Handicrafts and Yeomen / their whole Garment not to exceed the
value of 40 shillings / no Silk nor Silver / etc. their Wives and Daughters
suitable in their Vesture and Apparel / to wear no Veil of Silk / but of Yarn
made within the Realm / no Furs / but Lamb / Coney / Cat and Fox.

Thirdly / All Gentlemen under the state of a Knight / having not above a
Hundred pounds Rent per annum, their Apparel not to exceed three pounds six
shillings and eight pence; if Rents of two Hundred Marks per annum and above /
they might wear Cloth to the value of Five Marks / with Cloth of Silk and
Silver / their Wives and Children any Furs / but no Ermines / etc.

Fourthly / Citizens worth Five Hundred Pounds to the value of Knights of One
Hundred Pounds per annum; if worth 1000 l. they might wear in the manner of
Knights and Gentlemen of Two Hundred Pounds Rent per annum; none of their
Servants to exceed the value allowed to the Servants of Lords before mentioned.

Fifthly / All Knights and Ladies that possess Lands or Rents above the value
of Four Hundred Marks per annum, to a thousand / may wear their pleasure /
except Ermines / and Jewels only on their Heads.

Sixthly / all Ecclesiastical persons / according to the custom of their
Dignity / or proportionably to their yearly Revenue / by the former Rules of
Knights and Gentlemen.

Lastly / all Laborers and other people not worth forty Shillings / are to
wear Cloth not above 12 pence per yard. These Rules were strengthened / with the
penalty of forfeiting all things worn contrary to them; and by the same Statute
/ Clothiers are enjoined to make their Clothes suitable to the Rates.

These Laws, with some addition and increase of Penalties, were again confirmed
by Parliament the ^^ard year of Edward the Fourth; being near one hundred years
after, with power given to the Justices of the Peace to see the Statutes
observed annexed to this Preamble. Prays the Commons Assembled in Parliament
/ to our Sove^^^^ Lord the King / to call to his gracious Remembrance, that in
the times of his Noble Progenitors / diverse Ordi^^^^^ (...) Statutes were made
in this Realm of England for the Apparel and (...) Commons of the said Realm /
no ^^ll Men (...) Women; so that none of them ought to use or wear any
inordinate and ex^ensive Apparel / but according to their Degrees; which
Statutes are not observed / to the great displeasure of God / and impoverishing
this Realm / etc. And again, in the twenty second year of the said King, in
Parliament Regulated and Confirmed, with severe Penalties annexed to this
Preamble. Because that our Sovereign Lord the King has conceived by a Petition
made unto him by the Commons / that diverse Statutes and Ordinances touching
restraint of excessive Apparel / etc. by their not due executions / his said
Realm is fallen into great misery and poverty / and like to fall into more /
unless there be better Remedy provided / etc. Again, in the seventh year of
Henry the 8th. these Laws were corrected, and enlarged, with more severe
Penalties, and all the former Acts repealed; annexed to this Preamble:
Forasmuch as the great and costly Array used within this Realm contrary to the
good Statutes thereof made / has been the occasion of great impoverishing of
the Kings Subjects / and provoked diverse of them to Rob / and do Extortion /
and other unlawful deeds to maintain their (...) Arrayes / be it therefore
Ordained by the Authority of this present Parliament.

It is true, as England increased in Trade and Wealth, so the rigor of these
Laws slackned; not that it was best they should do so, but indulged as a more
tolerable evil, which the Realm was better able to bear; yet to this day the
middle sort of people in England are much more modest and sparing than those of
the same Rank in Ireland.

Now whether it may not be convenient so far to revive Sumptuary Laws, as may
give some Restraint to the great Extravagances of this National Consumption,
that so threatens the Impoverishing of this Kingdom, is worth the Governments
Consideration: And when Ireland arrives to the same state of Trade and Wealth
of England, then these Enormities will be more tolerable; but as the case now
stands, the same Reason that governed our Ancestors herein ought to bear sway
with us.

But this Extravagancy in Garb is not only thus ruinous and destructive to the
Wealth of Ireland, but also is accompanied with many other intolerable
Inconveniences.

First, The most God-provoking Sin of Pride, for which the most dreadful
Judgments of God has laid waste and ruined Nations, as Esaias 3, etc. is
manifested by this Immoderateness in Garb.

Secondly, This Extravagancy of the meaner sort provokes the Nobility and
Gentry to that height of Excess herein, to the weakening of their Estates, that
the same Patrimony their Ancestors lived plentifully on, kept noble Houses, did
many good Works, and yet increased their Estates, without raking their
Tennants, they cannot live on without running greatly into Debt, some of them
till Tradesmen will trust them no more; and all to keep themselves
distinguished from their Inferiors.

Thirdly, It ingenders Emulation, or rather Disdain, in the minds of those of
higher Degree against the meaner sort; when they observe they cannot put
themselves into any Garb or Mode, but they will be in it, nay out do the
gravest of them. Fuller tells us of Sir John Collthrop, a Norfolk Knight in the
Reign of Henry the 7. sent to his Tailor at Norwich as much Cloth of the
Mode-colour as would make him a Garment, which a Shoemaker seeing, employed the
Tailor to buy him of the same; which so vexed the Knight, that he caused the
Tailor to pink his Garment full of Holes, which cured the Shoemaker of his
proud Humor; he vowed never to be of the Gentleman's Fashion again. But let the
Knight now change his Fashion once a month, the Shoemaker will vie with him, if
all the Shoes in his Shop will pay for it.

Fourthly, It abates and wears off that due Reverence and Respect Inferiors
owe to Superiors; for my Gaffer thinks himself as good a man as my Lord, when
he observes himself as fine; and where neither of them are known, shall
contract as much Observation and Respect.

Fifthly, This unlimited Extravagancy of the meaner sort is the chief cause of
our intolerable consumption of Foreign Manufacture: for the Nobility and Gentry
are not the twentieth part of the number that consume our Foreign Silks and
Modes; and their Consumption would not be felt by the Nation, if the other were
restrained, and enjoined to wear our own Manufacture, it would treble the
damage by employing our own poor, and consuming the Growth of the Country,
which would enrich the Tennant, and proportionably raise the Rents and value of
Land.

Sixthly, It necessarily raises the Wages of all Artists, Laborers, and
Servants; for they may better afford to work for two thirds of their wages, and
live better of it, if it were not for the excessive increase of the Charge of
their Families, by this vanity of living higher and being finer. And this
increase of Wages is the greatest Tax on the Nation, though the receiver is
made no richer, only sprucer and lazyer.

Seventhly, This spruce Garb of both Sexes, especially the Female, is the
greatest inticement to those filthy Lusts of the Flesh this age wallows in; as
that Debauching Custom of Healthing is the great provoker to the swinish sin of
Drunkenness, so this spruceness of Garb and Apparel is the great allurement to
those abominable Adulteries, so shamelessly practiced amongst us. For when the
Debauches of a place observe mean men's Wives and Daughters adorned above the
Ranks and Estates of their Parents or Husbands, they fancy they are designed
for Invitations to encourage them to attaque their Chastity, and find
themselves not always mistaken. That it would be seasonable to revive that Law
or Custom in use amongst the Hebrews, that all persons convict, or notoriously
f^med for Strumpets, should wear one sort of Attire; which custom made Judah
suspect his Daughter in Law Thamor, when he saw her in the Attire of an Harlot,
to be one. And in the year 1353. the Parliament of England, on the Petition of
the Mayor and City of London, past an Act that no infamous Woman should wear
any Hoods, or other Attire upon her Head, but stripped Cloth of diverse colors
Stows Survey of London, p. 553
. We have not only abundant testimony in the Old Testament, of these notorious
Remarks put upon lend Women in the Jews Common Wealth, but the Heathen
themselves by Light of Nature provided against the same evil. The Romans had
their Law Oppia, that no Woman of what degree soever might have any Ornaments
or Jewels bove half an ounce weight of Gold, nor wear any rich or gorgeous
Attire, etc. which Law was made when the Punick Wars were at the height in the
Consulship of Fabius, about the time Annaball won the Victory at Can, and
distressed Rome; but about 20 years after, in the time of Portius, Cato, etc.
the Roman Dames clamoured against it. In the defense thereof Cato made a large
and vehement Oration, what would they have, says he, marry this, that they may
glister in their Golden Jewels, and shine in their purple Robes, etc. that they
may not be stinted in their excessive Expenses, in dissolute Profusion, in
costly Varieties and Supefluities, etc. Many a time, says he, ye have heard me
complain of the wastful and sumptuous Bravery of Women, and as often have you
heard me inveigh against the lavish spending of men, not only private persons
but Magistrates also, and how this City of ours is sick of two contrary
Diseases, to wit, pinching Avarice, and superfluous Prodigality; two Plagues, I
say, that have been the bane and overthrow of all great Monarchs, and
flourishing Empires, etc. To conclude, says he, my opinion is, that at no hand
the Law Oppia be repealed, and so I pray all the Gods to vouchsafe a Blessing
on you Titus Livius, p, 1686.
, etc.

Oh! what miserable Christians are such, that are so far from Modesty or Shame,
that they glory in those enormities moral Heathens were ashamed of, that would
rather let Common Wealth sink, and Posterity be ruined, than abate their
Prodigality and Excess.

Zalencus the Lawgiver of the Locrians made a Law, Alian. Ver. l. 13. p. 24.
That no Women should wear Gold, or imbroydered Apparel, but when they design
thereby to declare to all that beheld them, they proffered themselves to any
that would hire them for Harlots; and that the men should not be spruce or
effeminate in their Apparel, but when they went to the Stews or Harlots houses,
by which all persons were restrained from Excess and costly Apparel.

And so high contempt and disdain has several of the most Magnificent
Emperors, and famous Renowned Princes had of this childish Bravery of gay
Clothes, that they have seemed to err on the other hand, that their Glory might
arise from the fame of their Heroic Noble Actions, rather than the
Splendidness of their Garbs.

Lewis the 11th. King of France, who ( as Commin, one of his Council, who wrote
the History of his Reign, affirms) was of so bountiful and generous a Humor,
that none equalled him; yet in his Apparel and Garb so homely and frugal, that
there was sound in his Chamber of Accounts in Paris, in the year 1461. an
Article of two Shillings for ^ustian to sleeve the Kings old Doublet, etc.

The Puissant Emperor Charles the Fifth, Clerks Mirror, p. 233.
when the Citizens of Milan had dressed themselves in their Ornaments, and
adorned their Streets, and beautified their Houses in the most splendid manner,
to entertain so Victorious and Mighty a Prince; provided a Golden Canopy to be
born over his Head, expecting his Appearance in great Splendour: But when they
saw him enter in a plain black Cloth-Suit, etc. they would not believe their
eyes, but cried out, Which is he? Which is he? and then slunk away laughing at
each other for being so disappointed in their expectations.

The Great Emperor Augustus would wear no other Apparel than what was spun and
made by his own Wife, and Daughters Drexas, p. 424.
.

The Emperor Rodulphus did not at all differ from a private person in his
Apparel; that when the King of Bohemia came in a splendid Garb and Port to do
him Homage, his Nobles pressed him to put on his Imperial Robes, etc. No, quoth
he, the King of Bohemia has often laughed at my Gray Coat, and now my Gray
shall laugh at him Lipse Monit. p. 357.
.

Plutarch relates of Marcus Cato the Elder, he never put on a Garment that cost
him more than a hundred pence; and then he used to say, Nothing that is
superfluous can be cheap; and for his part, he esteemed that dear of a
halfpenny, of which he had no need.

Severus when he came to be Emperor, sold the Jewels and Ornaments he found in
the Palace, saying they were of no use to men, and did wear very ordinary and
plain Apparel, saying, the Glory of the Empire consisted in Virtue, not in
Bravery.

It was an expression suitable to a noble mind of Sir Thomas Rookesby, when Lord
Justice of Ireland, being controlled for suffering himself to be served in
Wooden, Cups, replied, These homely Cups and Dishes pay freely for that they
contain: I had rather drink out of Wood, and pay Gold and Silver, than drink
out of Gold, and make wooden payment Campion (91.)
. His humor differed from a modern person, of no mean Character, who swore it
did not become a Gentleman to pay his Debts: To whom I may reply, He that can,
and will not pay his Debts, is more a Knave than a Gentleman.

I do not cite these Examples, as if I esteemed rich and sumptuous Apparel
unseemly for Princes and Nobles, both Morality and Divinity allows, especially
in Solemnities; but to show how far the most heroic noble minds have slited,
and raised their spirits above it. And doubtless the more, least their examples
should provoke their Subjects to excess, who are more apt to imitate their
Princes vices than their virtues. And doubtless it is the interest of Princes
to restrain their Subjects from such enormities as effeminates their spirits,
and unsits them for warlike hardships and actions, or whereby they consume and
weaken their Estates, which disables them from contributing those aids the
safety of his Realms may require.

I could demonstrate, if his Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom would but
contribute what they vainly consume in rioting and excess, it would amount to
more than all the established Revenue; but were the third part of their
voluntary unnecessary Consumption taxed on them by their Prince, they would
groan under it, as an unsupportable burden, so highly do they esteem their
Lusts above their Loyalty.

And least my Notion for regulating Apparel by Law should seem a novelty, I
commend to the Reader Mr. Fuller, an Author universally applauded, who in his
Pisgah Sight spends 14 folio's on the Subject of describing the Attire of the
Hebrews and Romans for every Rank and Degree, faith he, Fuller fol. 99.
They were no Fashion-mongers, English like, but according to the commendable
Gravity of the Germans, kept the same Fashion from Generation to Generation;
and therefore we meet not with the Trade of a Tailor, though Weavers and
Fullers, in Scripture or ancient History; for every one knew how to make their
own Clothes: Heliogabalus was the first that wore Silk in Rome, and Cardinal
Woolsey was the first Clergyman that wore Silk in England; but were the
Cardinal now alive, there are many Parish Parsons would vie with with his
Eminency who should be finest. fol. 106.
Says Heilin, The Women of England were once famous for their Gravity and
Modesty in their Apparel amongst strangers abroad, but since they have been so
apishly addicted to imitate the fantastical Garb of the French, they have lost
their Repute.

Luther's Censure of Pride and Bravery was, The trading into those foreign
parts (from whence are brought hither costly Silks, Cloth of Gold, and Spices,
which serve only for Pride and no Profit, and exhausteth the Money and Wealth of
Country and People) ought not to be permitted, if we had good Government; but I
intend not now to write thereof: for I hold, that at last it will fall of it
self, when we have no more Money. Luther Colloqu. fol. 541.

And so much veneration had the ancient Romans to Virtue, that the Noble Women
threw away their golden Girdles, the Emblems of their Qualities, because Women
of ill Fame were permitted to wear them; saying, A good Name was better than a
golden Girdle: if our virtuous Ladies would manifest the like contempt and
disdain of the vicious, by refusing all Visits and Familiarity with them, it
might shame more of our wanton Madams out of their immodest Behavior, than our
Whipping-post does our Gammer Strumpets, who ought by the Law to be equally
their Entertainment. But that I may vindicate my Assertions herein from precise
singularity as well as novelty, I shall close my Discourse on this Subject with
the words of that famous Light of the English Church Learned Doctor Hall the
pious Bishop of Exon. says he; Contemplations. 383.
From the pampered Belly we pass to the proud Back of the World, whereon he is
blind that sees not a world of Fashions, in all which the price of the Stuff
strives with the vanity of the Form, there is a Luxury in the very Clothes,
which it is hard to look besides; Oh God! how is the world changed with us
since our Britches of Fig Leaves and Coats of Skin, the Earth yields Gold,
Silver, rich Stones, the Sea Pearls, the Air Feathers, the Field his Stalks,
the Sheep her Fleece, the Worm her Web, and all too little for one Back, after
Necessity, Clothes were once for Distinction, as of Sexes so of Degrees, how
curious was God in those Differences, the violation whereof was no less than
deadly, Deuteronomy. 22.5. what shall we say to the Dames, yea to the Hermaphrodites
of our time, whom it troubles that they may not be all man; but if Sexes be
unknown by Clothes, what is become of Degrees? every base Terrivagus wears
Artaxerxes his Coat: soft Raiments are for Courts, but Peasants degenerate to
Gallants, and every Midianitish Camel must shine with Gold, Judge. 8.26. but Oh
the mad Disguises of the world! especially in that weaker Sex, which in too
much variety is constant still to a prodigious deformity of Attire, to the
shame of other Nations, to the dishonor of their Husbands, to the shame of the
Gospel, to the forfeit of their Modesty, to the misshaping of their Bodies, to
the prostitution of their Souls, to the just Damnation of both. Away with this
absurd and apish Vanity of the world, they that glister in Scarlet shall once
embrace Dunghills, Lam. 4.5. yea it were well if no worse, let us that are
Christians affect that true Bravery which may become the blessed Spouse of
Christ. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13* thus fashion
not your Backs to the Disguise of the world. Thus that pious Bishop, who yet
lived not to see half the Vanity now in mode. Says Herbert. By no means run in
debt, take thine own measure,
Who cannot live on twenty pound a year
Cannot on forty; he is a man of pleasure,
A kind of thing that is for it self too dear,
The curious unthrift makes his Clothes too wide,
And spare himself, but would his Tailor chide.
Spend not on Hopes, they that by pleading Clothes
Do Fortunes seek, when Worth and Service fail,
Would have their Tale believed for their Oaths,
And are like empty Vessels under sail;
Old Courtiers know this: therefore set out so
As all the day thou may bold out to go.
In Clothes cheap Handsomness does bear the bell,
Wisdom's a trimmer thing than Shop e're gave;
Say not then, this with that Lace will do well,
But this with my discretion will be brave:
Much curiosity is a perpetual wooing,
Nothing with labor, folly long a doing.


CHAP. III. Of Chargeable Wealth consuming and Trade-obstructing Debaucheries.
THo this Head may be censured, as a Digression from a Discourse of Trade, etc.
especially by such whose fondness of these Wealth-wasting Lusts incites them to
sacrifice all real Interest to their Sensuality.

Yet it will be obvious to all sober and considerate persons, that the
destructive Influence of these evils do not only hazard the eternal safety of
immortal Souls, but also are superlatively destructive to the Trade and Wealth
of this Nation, both by retarding the Increase, and consuming its Stock, which
I shall endeavor to demonstrate in these four particulars. 1. Profane
Swearing and Cursing. 2. Gaming. 3. Adultery and Fornication. 4. And chiefly,
Drunkenness and Tippling, which is the Mother of all the rest of this cursed
Brood.


1. Profane Cursing and Swearing, a wickedness, through custom, grown into
that Credit, it disdains Reproofs; nay, some persons seem to value themselves
by their Wit to invent and Courage to utter the most horrid Oaths, at which
moral Heathens would tremble, who retain so great a veneration to their Gods,
especially their chief Gods, as Jupiter, etc. they will not mention their Names
without great Reverence, and will only swear by their Attributes, as by the
Great, the Wise, the Just, etc. whereas our Prophanenists so glories in this
shame, they will often belch out their filthy Vomit in the face of Magistrates,
who when they reprove them, and demand one Shilling for one Oath, have
contemptuously both to God and the Kings Laws thrown down their Guinny, and
immediately swore it out, like those profane desperate ones the Psalmist
complains of Psalm. 12.4. Who have said, with our Tongue will we prevail: our
Lips are our own: who is Lord over us?

Now though this is the most unpleasant and unprofitable Vice in this world,
yet it is most frequent; for 100 s. of Oaths are uttered at the committal of
any one of the other Debaucheries, and so universal, that from the man stooping
with age to the lisping Infant before it speak plain, shall you hear Oaths and
Curses, to the reproach of their Parents that no better instruct them, so that
this is a long lived Weed, that buds early in the Spring, and continues green
in the depth of Winter; the Food of other Lusts may be devoured by Poverty, Age
and bodily Infirmities; of the later we have had dreadful Examples of some, who
could plainly express horrid Oaths, and not one other word to be understood,
and others so hardened through the custom of this sin, that on their
Deathbeds, when they could not utter a word of sense, they have breathed out
their last breath with dreadful Oaths and Curses, which I have received from
the testimony of credible persons then present.

Object. But wherein does Swearing etc. obstruct Trade and waste Wealth? etc.

Answ. As it banisheth our Blessings, and heaps Curses upon our Labors, for
because of Oaths the Land mourns, and the Beasts of the field languish, Jer.
23.10.

And why because of Oaths? Why, because a fruitful Land God makes barren, for
the iniquity that dwell therein, Psalm. 107.34. that if Plagues and Famines,
Murrains on Cattle, Blastings of Corn, etc. obstruct Trade and waste Wealth,
profane Swearing is not innocent: But if these profane desperate Swearers,
who dare challenge God to confound and damn them, etc. will heed little the
Threatening of Gods Word; let them consider the Voice of natural Conscience in
Heathens, who have been great abhorrers of this sin, whereof you may read
several Instances, as also several lamentable Examples of Gods swift and
dreadful Judgments on common Swearers in Clerks Mirrors, fol. 658. Beadles
Diary, page 24. Beards Theater, etc.

The World, says a Reverend Prelate, cares not how it rends and tears the
sacred Name of their Maker by Oaths and Curses, and Blasphemies. Oh hate ye the
audacious Prophanness, yea this profane Devillism, and tremble at the dreadful
Majesty of the Name of the Lord our God. Dr. Hall Bishop of Exon.
Contemplations 383.

Herbert
Take not his Name who made thy Mouth in vain,
It gets thee nothing and has no excuse;
Lust and Wine plead a Pleasure, Avarice Gain;
But the cheap Swearer, through his open sluice,
Lets his Soul run for naught, as little fearing.
Were I an Epicure I could bate Swearing.
Fair spoken Mendax on the least occasion
Swears by his Faith and by his own Salvation;
Is rash-brain Mendax well advised then,
To pawn his Faith in God, for Faith with men?
Sure small's thy Wit, or Credit, to be drawn
For wares so poor to leave so great a pawn.
But this Iniquity of profane Swearing is the preparitory cause of false
Swearing, which is an immediate obstruction to Trade and Wealth.

1. It discourageth all, but especially Foreigners, to trade amongst us; who
will hazard their stocks or persons in a Country, or amongst a people, where a
false Oath may deprive them of their Estates or Lives, etc. dissolve the best
Bargain, and frustrate the hopefullest prospect of Gain unforeseen,
unremediable?

2. It creates a Jealousy amongst the Tarsiquers and betwixt Neighbor and
Neighbor, that notwithstanding their greatest care in Contracts of all sorts a
false Oath shall dep^ive them of their Interest of all they possess.

3. Perjury increases the number of idle loose people, who find it easier to
get their living by the sweat of their Consciences than the sweat of their
Brows; how greatly has this Vice been abhorred by Pagans, the Egyptians and
Scythians punished it with Death, Plutarch, etc.

And how dreadfully punished by God, vide Clerks Mirror fol. 423. to 432. We
read of none but Rome Papal that could dispense with Perjury, as Eugenius with
Albert the Emperor and Uladislaus King of Hungary to break Faith with the
Turks; so Rodulph Duke of Swavia to break his Faith with the Emperor Henry the
4th. but of later times nothing more frequent with the Pope, etc. than to
absolve whole Kingdoms from their Oaths of Allegiance, etc. to their Princes,
and then has owned their Perjury as meritorious, vid. History of the Council
of Trent; whereby this unhappy Kingdom is in a desperate case; who are in the
midst of a potent people that know they may not only innocently but
meritoriously break their Faith with all Heretics, as they esteem all
Protestants.

Now this is observable, that Perjuries are no where frequent where profane
Oaths are not common; for when the later, through custom, has stupefied the
Conscience, that the profaning and blaspheming the sacred Name of God becomes
a pass-time, it wears off that natural aw and dread of God, by familiarising
the Name of God vainly makes it easy to invoke his Name falsely; the Solemnity
of a Court will not deter them from Perjury to their Neighbors harm, when the
dread of Gods great Tribunal will not aw them from wronging their own Souls.

Therefore whilst profane Swearing passes for a venial (Perjury will never be
esteemed a mortal) sin, and until the Laws be more strictly executed against
the first, the second will not be reformed.

And I estimate the damage this Nation sustains by this impious Vice to amount
at least to 20000 l. per annum, sustained by particular persons, and the
general discouragement it puts upon Traffic and Commerce.

The second Wealth consuming Debauchery is Gaming.
FIrst high Gaming among the Gentry, though whilst the Inhabitants of Ireland
lose to each other it weakens, not only transfers the Wealth of the Country
from one to another, but when with Foreigners that transport their Winnings, it
is so much loss to the Commonwealth, and I hear of few that grow rich by Play,
as our Proverb is, What is got over the Devils Back is consumed on his Belly;
and many, and those of no mean Rank, are known to others as well as my self, to
be reduced to great straights by Gaming, which several prudent Princes, etc.
Observing, have strictly prohibited. Alphonsus Son to Fedinando King of Spain
made a Decree, that none of his Nobles nor Officers should presume to play for
Money at Cards or Dice, or suffer any such Gaming in their Houses on pain of
forfeiting one Months Salary and being expulsed the Court for six weeks. Chilon
being sent from Lacedemonia to Corinth, to treat of a League, and observing
their Rulers used Dice-play, returned without opening his Commission, saying,
He would not stain the Glory of the Spartans with so great an Ignominy, as to
join in Society with Dice-players.

But I shall close what I have to say to this sort of Gamesters with Herbert.
Game is a civil Gunpowder in peace,
Blowing up Houses with their whole Increase.


But this Vice bears hardest on the Commonwealth by the consumption of Time and
Money by our peasantly and mechanic Gamesters, who spend much of their time in
Winter at Cards and Dice, and Shovel-board, etc. and in Summer in petty
Bowling-Alleys and Nine-pins, etc. which are the common Recreations of
multitudes, not only of Journeymen and Apprentices, but the meaner sort of
Masters of most Handycrafts; we will compute this sort of Gamesters to 10000
persons who, besides the ruining of their poor families, and thereby filling
the Country with Beggars, consume at least one day in a week in this sort of
Recreation, which compute at 12 pence a week one with another for loss of Time,
there being more above than under that rate, and 12 pence spent in Money
obstructs of the Wealth of this Kingdom 52000 l. per annum, which the Vigilance
of our Justices, and Watchfulness of our Constables might prevent, by executing
the good Laws of the Land against them.

The third sort of Wealth-wasting Debaucharies is Whoring.
Which amongst the Wealthy, if they can stifle the mutterings of Conscience, as
to slight these dreadful threatenings on the Committers of this sin, I will be a
swift Witness, says God, against the Adulterers, etc. Malach. 3.5. so the
Apostle, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Hebr. 13.4. so Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. I say, if these and multitudes of the like Texts be
esteemed Apochrypha by these sort of Transgressors, then let them assemble
themselves by Troops in Harlots houses, and as fed Horses every one neigh after
his Neighbors Wife, but withal consider the next words, shall I not visit for
these things, says the Lord, shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this is, Jerem. 5.7,8,9.

But if the Wealthy of them would confine themselves to our Country-Strumpets,
and pay well where they debauch, and maintain their Bastard-brood without
Charge to the Parishes, the Wealth of the Country would not so much suffer: But
so far are they from that, there are some particular Parishes in this City that
have forty, some fifty desolate Children upon their Charge, which might be much
remedied by the Vigilance of the Magistrates in executing the Statutes against
Idlers, on young Women living out of Service, and becoming Tapsters to paltry
Alehouses, or otherwise taking a Room in some by-corner, and gaining Credit
for a Barrel or two of Beer, they there drive this filthy Trade, of which sort
our Towns and Cities swarm, by the neglect of the Parish-Officers, who ought to
inquire after all Inmates and vagrant persons residing in their Parish, and
either present them, or carry them before a Justice.

But compute the number of those base born Infants with others left upon the
Parish by their Parents, ruined by this Sin, but 5000. which is two on each
Parish, and allowing, as some compute, 2500 Parishes, their Charge at 3 l. per
annum each, amounts to in the whole Kingdom 15000 l. per annum.

2. Besides the Charge of these base born Children of vagrant Strumpets that
thus run from them, multitudes of Families that might otherwise live well, and
bear Charge in their Parishes, are reduced to great poverty, sometimes by the
means of a Whorish Wife who consumes her Husbands Wealth upon her Paramour, and
oftentimes rob him of all they can get and run away with oath men, etc. of
which we have frequent Complaints; but more common of lewd men, who, besides
their loss of time, spend all they can get on Strumpets, whilst their poor
Families are ready to perish, whereby our Idlers and Beggars are multiplied, to
this Nations damage at least 10000 l. per annum.

For the more wealthy sort of Fornicators and Adulterers, provided they pay
well where they debauch, only obstruct our Trade, and waste the Wealth of the
Country by accident.

1. By their Example, if the Captain keep his Madam Miss, the Corporal
concludes he may keep his Gammer; if Mr. Justice be famed for a Wencher, Gaffer
Constable will not believe it is against the Statute; if the Parson seems to
scruple nothing but being discovered, his Parishioners will conclude it is not
inconsistent with the Gospel; says God, The Leaders of my people cause them to
err, and destroy the way of my paths.

2. As their Example, so their Influence much debaucheth a Country, besides
those Women of better Rank, who entertain them for their pleasure, and permit
other men to beget Heirs for their Husbands Estates, many of meaner estate
admit them for their Credit and Profit; some will be proud of having persons of
superior Rank to be their Servants, and conclude themselves Paragons of Beauty
from their Courtship, when all is Fish that comes to the Net with them; it
being notorious, that persons under the dominion of this impetuous Lust decline
lovely modest Women that are their own Wives, and pursue other deformed and
ugly Creatures comparatively, because nothing lawful is pleasant to them, only
what is sinful.

3. Others for their Profit, if their Husbands Frugality or Poverty restrains
from supplying them with such Fare or Attire as their Luxury and Pride craves,
the Bounty of a Gallant wins them to prostrate themselves to their Lusts for a
delicious Treat or a fine Garment; and when once they have debauched them, they
are at their command, and at any man's else that will supply them with the like
Gratuities; and sometimes these sort of Harlots grow crafty, and will inveagle
and make their Prey of their Paramours, and not always without their Husbands
secret consent, at least their visible connivance, whereby some poor Wittals
have become rich Cuckolds, from whence is the Proverb, Cuckolds Luck is good
Luck.

But notwithstanding all this seems but to transfer Wealth from one hand to
another, yet it is a mistake; where there is one man mended in his Estate by a
whorish Wife twenty are wasted; for they having accustomed themselves to
voluptuousness with their Paramours abroad, know not how to conform themselves
to their more ordinary viands with their Husbands at home, but will be
maintained above their estate; and so as Solomon says, by the means of a
whorish Woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread, to the damage of this
Nation in its Wealth at least 5000 l. per annum.

But there are another sort of a superior Rank cannot content themselves with
our own Country-women, woman, but either bring over their Misses from beyond
Seas, or otherwise catch up such as come hither to seek for Trading; and tho
the numbers of these are not great, yet their Expenses are as superior to
others as their Quality, some 2, some 300 l. per annum, I have been informed
some have been allowed 400 l. per annum, maintaining their Misses in a more
costly Garb than their Wives; and when these Hackneys find themselves neglected
they return with their Gains; and though there be more than a good sort of these,
yet I shall estimate the Consumptions of the Nations Wealth but to 2000 l. per
annum; so that by this one brutish Debauchery, in its several Branches, is the
Wealth of Ireland consumed to the value of 37000 pounds per annum.

Besides, this brutish Vice effeminates and debaseth the masculine Spirit of a
Nation, and metamorphoses the courageous Lion into the effeminacy of the
lascivious Goat, which have ended in the ruin of several warlike Kingdoms and
victorious Armies. Sardanapalus put a period to that Assyrian Monarchy after
1400 years flourishing, being so degenerated from the warlike Spirit of his
Ancestors, his Subjects disdained so many gallant Sons of Mars should be
conducted by such a pusillanimous vassal to Venus, they besieged him in his
Palace at Nineveh, and reduced him to that extremity, he set fire of his House
and burnt himself in the midst of his Minions, with a vast Treasury, estimated
by some to 25000 millions of pounds, Herberts Travels 235,

Thus did Paris ruin Troy, and the Tarquins Rome, Alexander the Great his
World-conquering Army, and split his universal Monarchy into shivers after the
taking of Babylon.

So Mahomet the Great after the sacking Constantinople, became so effeminate,
that his Army were ready to mutiny, to whose fury he sacrificed his beautiful
Irene, Turkish History 353.

And the like Effeminacy of the Greeks so softened their Spirits, the warlike
temperate Turk ran them down with little difficulty; so great a sense has
several warlike Pagan Nations had of the ruining influence of this effeminating
Vice, that their Laws have been rather barbarous than severe against it,
tormenting them by punishments beyond all modesty to repeat, but the civilized
Romans went so far as to fasten their naked bodies together and so bury them
quick.

The Judicial Law stoned Adulterers to death or burnt them.

Solon made it lawful for the Athenians to kill an Adulterer taken in the fact.

The Egyptians punish Adultery in the man by giving a hundred strokes with a
Reed, and a Woman by cutting off her Nose, if with a Woman of Quality the man
was gelt or dismembered.

Zalucus ordained a Law amongst the Locrians, Adulterers should lose their
eyes, after which his own Son being taken in the fact, rather than lessen the
Punishment, lost one of own eyes to save one of his Sons.

Augustus made the Law Julia, by which it were lawful for the person
dishonored to kill the Adulterer. One of Fabius Falutius's younger Sons killed
his Mother for dishonouring his Fathers Bed, which was approved of by the
Senate.

Tiberius crucified the Priests of Ises, and cast their Tempe to the ground for
their Adulteries. Purch. Pilgrimage 732.

The Emperor Claudius and Otho put their Empresses to death for Adulteries,
Langchron.

The Romans had their Funerals at the Gate of Venus Temple, to signify that
Lust was the Harbinger and hastner of Death, Plut.

Multitudes of instances may you read in Clarks Mirror, fol. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

So French Academy chap. 22.

Herbert.
Think you on this, who spend your days and strength,
And means on Whores, Dogs, Parasites, at length
They Will worry you before you feel their wounds,
Look to their Teeth, shun these Acteons hounds.
I shall close this Head with the Advice of wise Solomon, after his dear bought
Experience, Prove. 7. Let not thine Heart decline to her ways; go not astray in
her paths: For she has cast down many wounded, yea many strong men have been
slain by her. Her House is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of
death. So Proverbs the 22. She is a deep pit, he that is abhorred of God shall
fall therein: a wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be
wiped away.

CHAP. IV. Of Drunkenness.
The most Wealth-consuming Debauchery is Drunkenness.
TO whom we may ascribe, as the Damsels to David comparatively, its ten
thousands to others Debaucherers their thousands; other Vices, like petty
thieves, steal here a Hen and there a Sheep, but this lays Families and Farms
waste, this is the Mother and Nurse of all other Wealth-consuming Debaucheries.

We have a Story of a young man that was long tempted by the Devil to commit
one of three sins; either to kill his Father, ravish his Mother, or be Drunk,
he chose the last as most innocent; but when drunk committed both the other.
Says sober Herbert. He that is drunken may his Mother kill
Big with his Sister, he has loosed the ^eins,
Is outlawed by himself; all kind of ill
Did with his Liquor slide into his veins,
The Drunkard sorfeits Man, and does divest
All worldly right, save what he has by Beast.


Lest the Spirit of Wine should reveal to its zealous votaries, that my
Arguments against this Al a mode Vice are tinctured with Fanaticism, I shall
presume to make use of the Sentence of a pious Prelate on the Subject to
conduct me, whose Fame in the Church of England will defy their Censure.

Who thus complains of this tribe of Bacchus, who were but pigmies in his time,
compared with the bousing mighty Giants of this age.

From the Tongue, says he, we pass to the Palate, which (together with the
gulf whereto it serves, the Throat and the Paunch) is taken up with the beastly
fashions of Gluttony and excess, whether wet or dry, of ments or liquors;
Surfeits in the one, Drunkenness in the other, in so much as that the Vice has
taken the Name of the Part, Gula; as if this piece were of no other service;
the Psalmist describes some wicked ones in his time by Sepulchrum patent
guttereorum, their throat is an open sepulcher, Psalm. 5.9 How many have buried
all their Grace in this tomb, how many their Reputation, how many their Wit,
how many their Humanity? how many their Houses, Lands, Livings, Wives,
Children, Posterity, Health, Life, Body and Soul? St. Paul tells his
Philippians, that their false Teachers made their Belly their God; O God, what
a Deity is here! what a nasty Idol! and yet how adored every where! the
Kitchins and Taverns are his Temples, the Tables his Altars! what fat
Sacrifices are here, of all the Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, of all the Elements;
what pouring out, yea what pouring in of Drink Offerings! what Incense of
Indian Smoke, what curiously persumed Cates wherewith the Nose is first
feasted, then the Maw.

I could even sink down with shame to see Christianity every where so
discountenanced with beastly Epicurism; what Street shall a man walk in, and
not meet with a Drunkard? what Road shall he pass, and not meet some or other
hanging upon the Stirrup, waving over the Pummel? St. Peter's Argument from the
third hour of the Day, and St. Paul's from the Night would be now a non
sequitur; Day is Night, Night is Day, no hour is privileged: I cannot speak a
more fearful word than that of St. Paul, whose Belly is their God, whose End is
Damnation. Oh, woeful, woeful condition of that damned Glutton in the Gospel! Oh
the Flames of that delicious Tongue which begged for a drop, but should in vain
have been quenched with Rivers, with Oceans, as ye desire, to be freed from
those everlasting burnings: Awake ye Drunkards, and howl ye drinkers of Wine,
Joel 1.5. Return your superfluous Liquor into tears of Repentance, which only
can quench that fire, and for the sequel put your knife to your throats. Dr.
Hall Bishop of Exeter in his Contemplations on the History of the New
Testament, fol. 382.


Take heed lest at any time your hearts be overtaken with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, Luke 21.34. Thus fashion not your selves to the excess of the
world.

Every Country, says Luther, must have its own proper Devil; Italy has its
Devil, France its, etc. our German Devil is a good lusty Wine-sucker, whose
Name is Swill and Quaff, he is furnished with such a dry and thirsty Liver that
it cannot be quenched nor cooled. This continual Thirst in Germany (I fear)
will remain until the last day of Judgment, Luthers Colloq. fol. 541.

Besides the vehement abhorrency all the Prophets and Apostles, with all their
godly Successors in the Ministry of the Gospel, expresses against this brutish
Vice.

It is worth our observing how all the Mahomitan and civilized Pagan Nations
disdain and punish it, as invading the very Law of Humanity.

But I shall first observe how many ways it obstructs our Trade, and consumes
our Wealth.

To let pass its stupifying Influence on men's Understandings, whereby their
Invention is dulled, their Strengh abated, and a slothful sottish habit of Mind
and Body contracted, which unfits men for ingenious Arts, etc.

1. It consumes of the Wealth of this Nation in Wines and Brandy, if we allow
but three Wine-bibbers to each Parish, one with another, at ten pound per annum
each person, in 2500 Parishes, amounts to Seventy five thousand pound per
annum; which is either paid for in Cash, or in Goods of our Country, as good as
Money.

2. Our Ale-topers, being estimated to five in each Parish, one with another,
amount to 12500 persons; (our afternoon Wine-bibbers being most of them
forenoon Ale-topers) computing their excess in this Liquor to four pound per
annum each man, it amounts to fifty thousand pounds per annum, consumed of the
Growth of the Country, which might either be exported in Beer or Corn, or the
Lands and the Hands employed in breeding Cattle or in Daries, to the Countries
advantage.

3. The multitude of people employed and maintained as Tapsters and Drawers,
etc. by this Trade that might be employed in profitable Arts, or Husbandry, if
we compute them to each Parish two more than is necessary, and value their
Labor at eight pound per ann. each person, its Loss to the Country is four
thousand pound per annum, which might be as well performed by young lads under
sixteen or ancient men above fifty years of age.

4. This second sort of Fuddle-caps, we term Ale-topers, are generally Artists
or Husbandmen, by whose Labor their Families are not only supported, but the
Country enriched, and consequently damnified by the loss of their Time, admit
two pounds per annum, one with another, amounts to twenty five thousand pounds
per annum loss, to the Country.

I might insist upon the Damage attending our Manufactures by these sots; A
drunken Butcher spoils his Beef by ill slaughtering, either killing them hot
after driving, or not well blooding, etc. whereby the Flesh will not take Salt,
or gashing the Hide to the prejudice of the Leather; a drunken Packer shall
spoil it in barrelling, by not well cleansing, and right ordering; a drunken
Tanner, etc. shall spoil the Leather; a drunken Weaver shall spoil the Cloth,
etc. whereby our native Growth is damnified, and loses its Repute in foreign
Markets, to the damage of this Country a fourth part in the value of its
natural Product, amounting, at least, to twenty thousand pounds per annum.

Besides, d^^^ken Masters do not only ruin their Families, but debauch their
Servants and Apprentices, that one fudling Master shall in twenty years time
breed six or seven drunken Sots, which fills the Country with Spendthrifts.

Sometimes they consume their small Stocks, and run away in Debt to several
others before their Ap^^^ntices have near learned their Trades, and then (...)
Parents lose the Money they paid with them, and put them to a new Charge to
dispose of them to new Masters.

Other times drunken Servants and Apprentices ruin their Masters, by
neglecting and spoiling their Work, whereby they lose their Custom, and are
constrained to turn Journeymen themselves.

But this public Damage does not only attend Mechanics, but extends it self
to Factors and Merchants Servants, by which foreign Merchants are discouraged
and draw off their Stocks. And several of our own, though themselves be
industrious, and have a brisk Trades, yet find themselves insensibly decay in
their Stock, till at last they discover a treacherous Servant has wasted their
Estate by lewd courses.

It is endless to observe the several ways this swinish Vice damnifies a
Country, and is prodigious to observe how, of all degrees and conditions of
men, it should be so much in request.

For as it in it self a God-provoking sin, so is it often times inflicted as a
dreadful Judgment of God on Nations as a punishment for other Sins, as on
Babylon, Isaiah 63.6. on Moab Jeremiah 48.26. on Jerusalem Jerem. 13.13. and
always in order to their utter destruction; as is declared in those and
multitudes of other Texts.

Now what Expedient can be proposed to remedy this Trade-obstructing and
Wealth-wasting Vice? but that all Magistrates (since they are past the Cure ofn
the Minister) in their respective places would diligently execute the good Laws
enacted for the punishment of this Vice, not only against Drunkards and
Tiplers, but against Taverns and Alehouses, that permit persons to continue
not only in their Houses above an hour, contrary to the Statute, but seven or
eight hours, often times whole nights, till they have depraved their Reason, and
desperately inflamed their Blood, to the hazard of their Lives, at least,
destroying their Health; many persons, and those no mean ones, have found it a
short journey from the Tavern to the Grave, who might have lived many years
eminently useful to their King and Country.

And if any should take the pains, out of veneration to those highly celebrated
Deities Bacchus and Venus, to write a History of all the Victims offered to
their Altars, it would fill a greater Volume than Clarks Martyrology. Besides a
great number of maimed Soldiers of theirs, that like walking ghosts, appear
daily in the streets.

It is true, the Heathens in their libidinous Feasts of Bacchanalis and
Matronalis gave themselves up to all manner of brutishness; but then their zeal
to their beastly Gods and the Lust of their Flesh were agreed, but they were as
a Seminary of wickedness interdicted by the Senate, Live. fol. 48.

The second Expedient to restrain this national ruining Vice, is, for all
persons of Quality, especially Magistrates, to endeavor to bring it into
contempt by their personal examples, as an Humor below their Quality, and a
Practice inconsistent with their Duty to God, to whom they must all give an
account of their Stewardships; and their Allegiance to their King, whose Laws
require them to suppress all Vice, and particularly Healthing, by Proclamation,
well observing that this Vice can never be restrained, whilst that enticing,
ensnaring custom of Healthing is in such credit, not only in Taverns, but at
Magistrates Tables, whereby often times temperate and sober persons are in a sort
trepanned into excess, to the hazard of their Health, being unaccustomed
thereto: For this snare obliges persons on their civility to their Friend, or
persons of Honor, to pledge their Healths; and having accepted two or three
Glasses, as much as their Constitution will bear without harm, it will be
resented as a disrespect to others succeeding, to refuse; nay, sometimes their
Loyalty is at stake, when the Kings Health comes after several others, if they
find themselves indisposed to drink it now, though the difference between the
form of words remember such a person, or a good Health to him may little differ
in its self, yet the abuse of the later is grown so general.

1. In the frequency and commoness of it, not only in Taverns, and at the
Tables of persons of Quality, but with those of meaner rank; few think their
Drink wholesome until it be seasoned with a Health.

2. In the enticing and ensnaring nature of the thing, though no man be imposed
on; yet so loath are good humored persons to be singular in company, they
adventure it, hoping they may bear it, which often times they much suffer by.

Anacharsis used to say, the first draught was for thirst, the second for
nourishment, the third for pleasure, but the fourth for madness, French Academy
p. 83.

Herbert
Shall I, to please another Wine-sprung mind,
Lose all mine own, God has given me a measure
Short of his Cann and Body, must I find
A pain in that wherein he finds a pleasure.
Stay at the third glass, if thou lose thy hold,
Then thou art modest, and the Wine grows bold.
If Reason move not, Gallants, quit the room,
(All in a shipwreck shift their several way)
Let not a common ruin thee intomb;
Be not a beast in courtesy, but stay,
Stay at the third cup, or forgo the place,
Wine above all things does Gods stamp deface.
Yet if thou sin in Wine or Wantonness,
Boast not thereof, nor make thy shame thy glory;
Frailty gets pardon by Submissiveness;
But he that boasts shuts that out of his story:
He makes flat war with God, and does defy
With his poor Clod of earth the spacious Sky.
Besides, this humor of Healthing is the cause of double, if not treble, the
expense of Wine, that would not otherwise be wasted: but as it is the
destruction of Health and Wealth, so is it in all persons sinful.

1. The enticer or provoker sins, Habakkuck 2.15. Woe be to him that gives his
Neighbor Drink: that put thy Bottle to him, and make him drunken also,
that thou may look on their nakedness: a shameful Spuing shall be on all
thy Glories.

But some think, because they are strong to drink without discomposing
themselves, therefore they are innocent, though they drink more than makes two
others drunken, etc. no, says the Prophet Isaiah 5.22. Woe unto them that are
mighty to drink Wine, and men of strength to mingle strong Drink: there is a woe
hangs over your heads as over your staggering spuing companions.

And if the Threatening of God will not restrain you; though by the same Word
you shall be judged at the last day, where you shall receive the portion of the
Drunkards, which are excluded the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. 6.10.

Yet let the Light of natural Consciense, manifested by civil Heathens, in
contempt of this besotting Vice, be considered; shall Christians not only
practice but glory in Vice Heathens abhor, and are ashamed of.

The Lacedaemonians used to make their Slaves drunk in the sight of their
Children, to beget in them an abhorrency of the Vice, as only becoming Slaves.
The Carthaginians esteemed the Name of a Drunkard hateful; for which they were
thrust out of all public Offices with ignominy. Alex. ab Alex.

There being a drunken Cobbler in Boneventum named Vatinius, they in disdain
called their great Glasses by his Name, to caution persons of better quality
from imitating so sordid a fellow, Juvenal fol. 143. Says Herbert. If men of
meaner sort
Make Drunkenness but a sport:
Yet let no men of place
Their State so much disgrace.


This is a Sense-stupifying and a Reason-depraving Vice, yet its Votaries are
most ready to reproach sober persons for Fanatics, when themselves turn our
Taverns, etc. into so many Bedlams: we have a Story in Burtons Melancholy of a
crew of Fuddle-caps in a House in Agrigentums, had drunk themselves so mad,
they conceited the House was a Ship tossing in the Sea, and ready to sink;
whereupon they fell a throwing all the Housholdstuff out of the Windows to save
themselves: the Magistrates coming to quiet their disorder, they worshipped
them as Tritons or Sea-Gods. Burt. Mel. p. 163.

This Vice does not only obstruct Trade and consume the Wealth of Nations, to
their great impoverishing, but often times is the cause of the utter ruin of
great Kingdoms and mighty Monarchs, etc.

For proof of which take these Instances.

When Benhadad the King of Assyria was drinking himself drunk, with thirty two
Kings his Allies, then a few people came out of Samaria, destroyed them first,
and then his mighty Army, 1 Kings 20.16. So that Traitor Zimri watched his
opportunity to destroy Baasha King of Israel when he was drinking himself drunk
in the House of Arza his Steward, 1 Kings 16.9. Young Belshazzar was surprised
and slain, with 1000 of his Lords and all his Concubines, and his Kingdom
seized by old Darius the Mead, when they were all drunk at a Feast, Dan. 5.
Profane Histories are full of the dreadful consequences of this brutish Vice.
Great Alexander after he had conquered the World was such a slave to this Lust,
it subjected him to all other Debaucheries, wherein Solomon's saying was
verified, Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and
he that rules his Spirit than he that takes a City.

Drunkenness metamorphosed him to such a Bedlam, that he commanded to be killed
his best beloved Clitus when drunk, and when sober was so vexed, he was with
difficulty restrained from killing himself; when drunk set stately Persepolis
on fire at the instigation of Lais his Harlot; so Drunkenness and Whoredom
joined hands in that mad prank; soon after with his beloved Epheston drunk
themselves dead whilst young, with 41 more of his Officers, who drunk with him
for a wager, Justins History, page 139.

Millions of helps cannot support that Crown
Which Sins assault, Fate justly pulls it down,
That all the world shall know, how greatest Kings
Are thrall to change, as well as weaker things.
No marvel thou, great Monarch, did complain,
And weep there were no other Worlds to gain:
Thy griefs and thy complaints were not amiss;
H'has grief enough, that finds no world but this.
Tir Owen the Rebel would drink his Body into such flame, his Servants used to
set him up to the chin in earth to cool him, Camb. Eliz.

Philip of Macedon, Zeno, Bonosus, Phocius the Emperor, Armintus King of
Siracuse, Cleonians King of Lacedemonia, Sliolmus King of the Goths, Touthio
King of the Ilerions, Marcus Antonius, Vortiger King of the Britains, etc. came
all to ill ends, and their States ruined by their Drunkenness.

The Mahometans are such enemies to this besotting Vice, they prohibit Wine. A
Soldier being brought drunk before the Grand Vizier, he sentenced him to have
boiling Lead poured into his mouth and ears, Turks History fol. 1332. No wonder
the temperate Turks should overrun so much of debauched Christendom; for as
this Vice is destructive to Cities and Countries in peace, much more it is
fatal to Armies in war.

As is before instanced Sardanapalus, Baasha, Belshazzer Alexander M. etc.

And that this has been the experience of the Ancients, Histories abundantly
testify; says Juvenal, Victory comes easily when the Foes are tipled, lisping
reeling men are easily overcome, fol. 404.

The warlike Athenians so detested Drunkenness, they prohibited Wine to be
tasted in their Camp. Howels History of the World 395.

Manlius was accused by the Senate for ushering Effeminacy and Luxury into Rome
by the Lax Discipline in his Army, the same Galuenus, Howel 948.

The old Assyrian Monarchy, after 1400 years flourishing, was lost by the
Effeminacy and Debauchery of Sardanapalus, on whose Tomb they writ this
Epitaph, Friend, eat, drink and play, for all things else are not worth a
^ilip. Howel fol. 14.

Agron Prince of Ilyria drunk himself dead for joy of his Successes against the
Atolians. Howel p. 699.

The Indignation Heathens have had against this Vice, appears in the
opprobrious Epethetes they have put upon the greatest Masters in the Art: it
was said of Bonosus the Emperor, he was born not to live, but to drink, and
when he was overcome by Probus and hanged himself, the people in scorn
upbraided him, saying; Here hangs a Tankard, not a Man: Diotinus of Athens for
his excessive Drinking was in scorn called Tundish: young Cicero was termed
Tricongii for his drinking whole Cups.

It was writ on the Tomb of Darius King of Persia, to his disgrace, He could
drink soundly, and bear it bravely; intimating it was all he was good for.

Tiberius the Emperor was called Biberius, for his excess in drinking.

The Egyptians erected a Pillar in the Temple of Thebes, on which were engraven
Curses against their King Minus, he being the first that turned the Egyptians
from their simple frugal way of living, to Voluptuousness and chargeable
Delight, Plutarchs Morals 121.

I know it is the opinion of some, that men are most desperate when drunk; but
that is only in the Tavern, where many have made Challenges when drunk, they
would have been glad, with a saving to their Honor, to have withdrawn when
sober.

So in Battle drunken men may desperately charge at the first onset, though
they are so incapable of levelling, the Birds in the Air and the Moles in the
Earth are as much in danger of their shot as their Enemies; and after a Repulse
will presently be in such a confusion, they are not to be rallied, nor reduced
to order, and so are run down by their Enemies orderly Squadrons, when they are
double, nay treble, their numbers.

I utterly despair on those (says Luther) that fight against the Turks, and
yet are worse than the Turks themselves with blaspheming, with swearing,
Lechery, and all manner of wilfulness: to whom (I know) God neither will nor
can give Fortune, if such insolent people be sent to war for us. It depends
on them that repent and amend themselves, that honor Gods Word and his
Sacraments, that do humble themselves before God, and heartily pray; whereby
God may suffer himself to be softened, and to keep his holy Angels by us in the
field: otherwise all labor is lost, and the punishment (instead of victory)
must proceed. Luthers Col. 540.


So great care did Rome take in her flourishing state, to preserve the Armies
from Effeminacy and Debauchery, they would never suffer them to be idle, but
still employed them in either draining Boggs, paving Causeys over Marshes or
cutting Roads through Woods to gain easy access into Fastnesses, esteeming
Idleness the Mother of all Debauchery, and Debauchery the ruin of Armies.
Heylins Cosm. fol. 56 or 57.

It would fill a Volume to write the Instances Histories give us of the fatal
effects of this Nature-depraving Vice.

But I shall confine my self to one of those many great Captains who have
declared it their Opinion.

Livy records the Speech of Marsellus to his Soldiers, to encourage them to
fight against their debauched Adversary, as follows;

As for them, they are such as are decayed with rioting, and following their
delights in Capua, such as, with Wine-bibbing in every Tavern, Whore-hunting in
every Stew and Brothel-house all the whole Winter, are become infeebled, etc.
as for that lively strength and vigor of theirs, its clean gone; those able
and lusty Bodies, those courageous Hearts wherewith they passed over the
Pyrenean Mountains, and the high Clifts of the Alps are gone, there remains now
nothing but the relics and shadow of those men to fight: adding withal, that
Capua was another Camnae unto Hannibal: there died his warlike prowess, there
lost he is Military Discipline, there was the glorious fame of former days
buried, there the hope of future time for ever suppressed and stifled.

Geraldus Cambrensis, Chap. 38. expresses a deep sense of this sort of
Misgovernment of Ireland: says he, Men were appointed to have the charge of
Rule and Government of Ireland, who were more meet to talk in a Parlour, than
to fight in Fields; better skilled to be clad in a warm Gown, than to be
shrouded in Armor, etc. Moreover the Serving-men and the Soldiers which were
in Garrison, they liking well of their Captains and Masters manners and loose
life, gave themselves to the like, spending their whole time in rioting,
banqueting, Whoredom, all other dissolute and Wantonness, etc.

And albeit they thus lying in the Towns in security, and at rest, wallowing in
loose and wanton life, every day being a Holiday to Bacchus and Venus: yet the
state of the Land at large was most miserable and lamentable, etc.

And thus our men given over to this trade and kind of life became
faint-hearted, and afraid to look upon the Enemy; and on the contrary the Enemy
most strong, stout and bold: thus was the Land governed, and thus the same
posted toward the Destruction of the English Nation and Government.

I could multiply instances of the ruining influence of this Reason-depraving
Vice to Armies, who when once debauched, the safety of a State is endangered by
drunken Guards and Sentinels, etc. and thereby Industry discouraged, the Wealth
of a Nation wasted by Soldiers spending above their pay, and thereby running
into debt with the Inhabitants, much of which they lose, and sometimes a few
drunken Soldiers will stir up a whole Army to mutiny, to the hazard of all;
and in these and many other cases becomes a great obstructor of Trade and
consumer of Wealth.

Remember this, all yau that spend
Your life on Drink, and mark your end:
As often as Cups and Pots you toss,
So often the River Styx you cross.
You have an old and leaking Throat,
Still sucking in like Charons Boat.
CHAP. V. Observing the Spring from whence flow the Debaucheries of Christendom.
NOw to what shall we attribute the great increase of these Trade-obstructing
and Wealth-consuming Debaucheries, that like a mighty torrent overflow the
greatest part of Christendom, as well as Ireland, incomparably exceeding
former ages, and all the Mahomitan and Pagan Countries, we read of? it is not
from a lax Principle in the Christian Religion; for that above all Religions in
the world declares vehemently against Swearing, Whoring, Drunkenness and all
Immoralities; for though men may be good Moralists, and no good Christians, as
Plato, Seneca, Plut. etc. yet none can be good Christians that are not good
Morallists: its better for men they were swearing, blasphemous, lascivious,
drunken Pagans, than such Christians, as our Savior says, It shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for Chorazin, etc.

Therefore, if we trace these Debaucheries to their Springhead, we shall find
their Original in Romes Apostasy from its primitive Principles: For though, as
she decayed in purity of Doctrine and holiness of Life, and grew in Wealth and
Potency, as one of themselves observes, Golden Chalices ushered in Wooden
Priests; yet did she not arrive to her stature in Profaneness till she came to
be burdened with Ceremonies, holy Places, holy Orders of Monks, holy Vestments,
etc. crowded holy Lives out of her Fellowship, and then usurping the Supremacy,
by the aid of that monster of men Phocus, she imbibed his Manners for his aid
sake.

Herbert.
I know not by what virtue Rome deposes
A Christian Prince: did Aaron command Moses?
If sacred Scriptures mention such a thing,
Sure Rome has color to depose a King.
But as soon as this usurped Head over Christendom became potent, and submitted
to by most Christian Princes, as the whole World once became an Arrian; so the
whole Church became a Prophanist, till the intolerable Pride and Insolence of
their Prelates, and Ignorance and Debauchery of their Clergy moved some of the
German Princes, who groaned under their intolerable Yoke, to murmur at it, and
discourse of Reformation, which encouraged John Huss and Jerome of Prague, and
after them Luther, with many other both German and French Divines, to declare
publicly against the Pride and Debauchery of the Clergy, with their cheating
Indulgences; but his Holiness, with their Eminencies, though they confessed
there were cause, yet disdained a sorry Friar should be the Promoter.

When I was at Worms (said Luther) the Bishop of Magdeburgh came unto me, and
said, I know we have an evil Cause in hand, and that your Doctrine is right:
yet for some reasons best known to our selves, we neither may nor will receive
it. In like manner the Cardinal of Saltsburgh said unto me, we know, and it is
written in our Consciences, that Priests justly might marry, and that Matrimony
is far better than the shameless and wicked Whoring which Priests drive and
use; yet notwithstanding (said he) we must neither alter nor reform it; for the
Emperor will not suffer Germany to be disturbed for the Conscience sake. Luth.
Colloq. 325.

In the Council of Lateran, ann. Dom. 1515. they first concluded the Article of
the Resurrection, though the Pope had been infallible long before; and then
also decreed, that a Cardinal might lawfully keep but five Whores and Youths to
be his Chamberlains, etc. But they had his Holinesses stores of his tolerated
Stews to supply their wants: besides his vast treasure of Indulgences to pardon
these venial Sins.

Surely, said Luther, some fearful Destruction attends them who practice such
horrible abominations, that if with my eyes I had not seen them I should never
have believed them, fol. 324. And then writes the Generation, as he titles it,
of the abominable Desolations of Antichrist, the Son of Hypocrisy, the Son of
the Devil: says he;

The Devil begat Darkness, Darkness begat Ignorance, Ignorance begat Error and
his Brethren, Error begat Free Will and Presumption out of Self-conceit, Free
will begat Merit, Merit begat Forgetfulness of God, Forgetfulness begat
Transgression, Transgression begat Superstition, Superstition begat
Satisfaction, Satisfaction begat the Mass-offering, Mass-offering begat the
Priest of Unction, the Priest of Unction begat Misbelief, Misbelief begat King
Hypocrisy, Hypocrisy begat Trading with Offerings for Gain, Trading for Gain
begat Purgatory, Purgatory begat the yearly solemn Vigils, yearly Vigils begat
Church livings, Church Livings begat Mammon, Mammon begat swelling Superfluity,
swelling Superfluity begat Fullness, Fullness begat Rage, Rage begat Freedom,
Freedom begat Rule and Dominion, Dominion begat Pomp, Pomp begat Ambition,
Ambition begat Symony, Symony begat the Pope and his Brethren, about the time
of the Babylonian Captivity, after the Babylonian Captivity the Pope begat the
Mystery of Iniquity, the Mystery of Iniquity begat sophistical Divinity,
sophistical Divinity begat rejecting of the holy Scripture, rejecting of holy
Scripture begat Tyranny, Tyranny begat slaughtering of the Saints, slaughtering
of the Saints begat contemning of God, contemning of God, begat Dispensation,
Dispensation begat wilful Sin, wilful Sin begat Abomination, Abomination begat
Desolation, Desolation begat Anguish, Anguish begat Questioning, Questioning
begat searching out the Ground of Truth, out of which the Desolator the Pope
(called Antichrist) is revealed.

Thus you have the Rise and Growth of Error and Profaneness how they gained
ground against Truth and Piety step by step, by a person that lived in an age
of Discovery, and made it his business to detect their Errors and Profaneness.

Now from this polluted Fountain has flowed all the Debauchery of Christendom;
and since the reformed Churches have so tenaciously contested about the true
Forms, many of them have lost the true power and holy Life of Religion, and
degenerated into Romes Profaneness; and doubtless will lick up their Errors
and Superstitions, rather than part with their Lusts, when they come in
competition; for when once a people have prostrated themselves to all sorts of
vicious Manners, what should restrain them from imbibing all sorts of corrupt
Doctrines? Consciences once hardened by a custom in Immoralities can never much
struggle for the truth of Divinityes.

And no History, sacred or civil, gives an account of any age so depraved in
their Morals, as this we live in.

Never did men so glory in those Vices Turks and Pagans would blush at, as the
debauched Christians of this age; never did any so attempt to outface Sobriety,
Temperance, and Chastity, as if they were the properties of a sneaking
peasantly Humor, compared with their Heroic Vices: how have men learned to
degrade humane Nature, as if the Nature of Brutes were more excellent? that
live as if they had abandoned the common hope of Mankind, relating to a future
state; and even say, as their predecessors in Voluptuousness and Atheism, Let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

The Taverns, etc. are their Oratories, and their Devotion scurrilous Drollery
at all things serious; as if they designed to jeer all Morality and Divinity
out of the world; and esteem all men out of their wits, that are not mad enough
to be free Denisons of their Bedlam: if these men do believe there is either
Heaven or Hell, they must suppose the difference is so little, they would not
give much to choose, or else they dream of a Paganish Elysium, where all
sensual Delights will be enjoyed; and conclude, what is to be the Happiness of
the next world cannot be the Sin or Misery of this: if they do believe there is
a God, it must be as Psalm. 50. a God that is altogether such an one as
themselves: these Fools that make a mock of Sin are near akin to those Fools
that say in their Hearts there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. for they will worship none
devoutly, but Bacchus and Venus, and their Servants ye are, says the Apostle,
to whom ye obey, etc. If their Senses did not convince them of the contrary,
their Reason is so depraved, they would conclude, grim Death durst not arrest
persons of their Quality and Mettle; though every Vice they so welcome are
Deaths Sergeants, and daily seize them, and post them away to their dreadful
Eternity. Had they but leisure to consider how many of their jovial Companions
have been haled out of the world by Adultery and Drunkenness, etc. and would
but observe how many maimed Soldiers to Bacchus and Venus creep up and down
the streets, it might convince them, if God has not given them up to a
reprobate sense, etc. that this way of sin is not the way of safety either to
Body or Soul.

If they believe a Judgment to come, they fancy they shall be there treated
like Gentlemen, they cannot believe their own Consciences, who they have
enslaved and kept silent all their lives, should be so rude, to accuse and
condemn them then, when they will have no other Friend to plead for them, or
that their faithful Ministers, who frequently warned them from the Pulpit, will
be so little Gentlemen, as to witness against them at that Bar; or that the
merciful Judge will be so severe, to send them away with a Go ye cursed into
Hell fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, for the omission of so smaall
a Duty, as they now esteem sincere and timely Repentance.

Or at the worst, if he should, the Devils will be afraid to seize them, lest
they should take it for an Affront that deserves a Cudgelling; or, at least,
will not be so ungrateful, as to torment such faithful Servants to their
Interest in the World, that were always at their beck, and never rejected one
of their Temptations: these are such as the Prophet Isaiah complains of in his
time, who said, We have made a Covenant with Death, and with Hell we are at an
agreement; when the overflowing Scourge shall pass thorough, it shall not come
unto us.

I say no thought can be so vile, nor imagination so absurd; no day-dream nor
Enthusiastical delusion can parallel the depraved Fancies of these Professors
of Profaneness; if we may judge the Tree by their Fruits, or men's Hearts by
their Lives; who Saint Paul reproves with Tears, Philippians 3.18. that they so
walk, as they are a shame to the Christian Religion, whose God is their Belly,
whose Glory is their Shame, etc.

And in vain shall we strive to rescue the Obstruction of our Trade, and
Consumption of our Wealth from the Desolating Influences of these four sorts of
Debauchees, until Atheism and Profaneness are esteemed more God-provoking
Sins, and more ignoble and ingentile Qualities.

Herbert. Oh how corrupt's the Nature of man's Will,
That breaks those Laws which very Beasts fulfill!
When we have lost our way to God, how level,
How easy to be sound's the way to the Devil!
CHAP. VI. Stating the intolerable Charge and Expense Ireland is at, by
maintaining Foreigners to its peculiar Interest in the most profitable
Employments and Offices.
I shall only make my Observations of what Ireland has suffered thereby these
fifteen years, viz. from the 28th of July 1662. the Duke of Ormond first entered
on the Government, until the 24th of August 1677. the Earl of Essex
surrendered, which Charge and Expense I shall reduce to these seven Heads.

1. By the Court of Claims. 2. By the Farmers of the Kings Revenue and
Treasury. 3. By special Grants upon the Treasury of Gratuities and Pentions to
Non-residents. 4. By Foreign Merchants and their Factors. 5. By exporting and
importing on Foreign bottoms. 6. By Absentees. 7. By the Chief Governors.
Yearly Charge Total. 1 BY the Court of Claims, the Commissioners all
Foreigners, besides several Counselors, Assistants and Servants, and though
there were reasons why the Judges of this Court shuold be such as were not
interested in the Estates of Ireland; yet what they gained was so much loss to
the Country: for, Besides what other advantages and profits they made, they
received 1 penny per Acre upon all Lands passing their Court, being 6883 846
Acres, which amounts to 28682 13 10 All other advantages to them and theirs,
coming in and going out with them, cannot be estimated to less than 5000 00 00
2. The last Set of Farmers, with their Commissioners, all Foreigners, and
about 20 of the best sort of their Officers came and returned with them: 1. The
Profit of their Farm estimated at per an 10000 00 00 for seven years amounts to
70000 00 00 Besides the Interest the King paid for their seventy thousand pound
advance-money at per annum 7000 00 00 which for seven years amounts to 49000 00
00 2. The Salary of their five Commissioners, at 500 l. each, is per annum 2500
00 00 which for seven years amounts to 17500 00 00 3. Twenty Officers
Foreigners at 100 l. one with another is per ann. 2000 00 00 which for seven
years amounts unto 14000 00 00 I take no notice of the first set of Farmers,
because they were our Countrymen, and our Commonwealth did enjoy them and
their Gains after their Farm was determined. The Contracters for the Treasury
being not accountable, we cannot so well compute their Gains; but I have heard
some (more capable of guessing) affirm, that when all their Arrears are got in,
they cannot gain less than 60000 l. and 2 thirds of them being Foreigners, is
damage to the Country 40000 l. their Commissioners being most our Countrymen,
or staying with us, I shall not account their Salaries loss to the Country, and
I cannot learn they employed many Foreigners under them. 40000 00 00 3. Special
Pentions and Annuities payable by the Establishment for Ireland to persons not
inhabiting there, computed at per ann. 5000 00 00 which for fifteen years
amounts to 75000 00 00 4. The fourth Expense is by Foreign Merchants and their
Factors, which can no way be exactly computed, but by examining the
Custom-house Books; but at least one moiety of the whole Traffic of the
Nation is carried on by Foreign Stocks; the whole Profit accrewing to the
Foreigner is estimated to be at least per ann. 40000 00 00 Then one half of
this Trade is managed by foreign Factors, which must amount unto at least the
eighth part of the profit of their principals, which is per ann. 5000 00 00
this charge for 15 years amounts to 675000 00 00 For what Factorage is given to
our own Inhabitants it is no loss but gain to the Country, all which may be
easily preserved to them, without obstructing Trade, or lessening the Kings
Customs, as I show in the Chapter of Company Trade. 5. Our trading in foreign
bottoms is a vast Charge to this Kingdom, computed at least to amount unto per
annum 60000 00 00 Besides the loss of the Seamens Habitations, and Families
expenses, the chief Inhabitans of Port-towns, as also the many Artists employed
in building, repairing and rigging of Ships, etc. at least per annum 30000 00
00 damage, as I shall further evidence in the Chapter of Shipping, which may
all be saved by Corporation-Trade, as appears in that Chapter. This expense of
90000 pound per annum for 15 years amounts to 1350000 00 6. Above any of (...)
the Stock drained ou^ of this Kingdom by Absentees, which is now augmented
above treble what it was formerly, by the great Estates the Adventurers
possess, who (being most of them estated men in England) live there, and draw
over a vast sum of Money yearly; they possess of the Lands of this Kingdom
787326 Acres, which valued at 2 s. an Acre one with another (much of their
Lands lying in the best parts of the Kingdom) amounts to 78732 l. 12 s. per
annum; and it is judged the Estates of his Royal Highness, the Earls of Cork,
Anglesey, and Strafford, with other Noblemen and Gentlemen of England, by old
and new Titles, draw over as much more, both which is per annum 157465 40 which
they spend and lay out in Purchases in England, etc. which for 15 years amounts
to 2361978 0 0 So that this one drain, if no sluice can be contrived to stop its
current, must necessarily draw Ireland dry of Wealth, if all the forementioned
impediments were removed, which our predecessors have long groaned under: and
several strict Laws have been made to prevent it; as in the third year of
Richard 2. Sir John Davies gives an account of an Ordinance made in England
against such as were absent from their Lands in Ireland, which gave two thirds
of their Profits to the King until they returned to Ireland, or placed a
sufficient number of Englishmen to defend the same: Which (says he) was
grounded upon good reason of State, and was put in execution for many years
after, as appears by sundry Seisures made thereupon, in the time of Richard
the 2. Henry the 4. Hen. 5. and Hen. 6. whereof there remain Records in the
Remembrancers Office here; amongst the rest the Duke of Norfolk himself was not
spared, but impleaded upon this Ordinance, for two parts of the Profit of his
Estate, and afterward himself, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lord Berkley and
others, who had Lands in Ireland, kept their continual residence in England,
were entirely reassumed by the Act of Absentees, made the 28th year of King
Hen. 8. thus much Sir Jo. Davies p. 199. And though it might seem hard these
Laws should now be executed, yet it is harder a Nation should be ruined: and if
themselves be necessarily detained in His Majesty's Service, or by their
greater concerns in England, yet why they should not consign their Interest in
this Kingdom to their younger Sons, etc. or be engaged some other way to spend
a good part of their Rents here is not easily answered, unless private men's
Interest be to be preferred before the public; for this is a burden this
Kingdom will not be long able to bear. I might also insist upon the great
expense this Kingdom is at in educating the Sons of most persons of Quality in
the Inns of Court and Universities in England, and Foreign Countries, which is
computed to cost this Country at least 10000 pound per ann. as also the
necessary Attendance of our Nobility and Gentry at Court, besides the Expenses
of their Persons and Retinue, their Charge for new Honors, Offices and Estates
computed to 10000 pound per ann. is for both per ann. 20000 0 0 which for
fifteen years amounts to 300000 0 0 7. The chief Governors for eight years of
this Period, aliens to Irelands peculiar Interest, their Salaries and
Perquisites, at least, per annum 12000 l. their Attendants and Dependents
coming and returning with them estimated at 1000 l. per annum, both which for
the said eight years amounts to 104000 0 0 Add to this the voluntary
unnecessary expense of this Kingdom in foreign Manufactures, etc. as stated
Chapter the second is per annum 267500 0 0 which for fifteen years amounts to
4012500 0 0 As also the Expense of Debaucherys treated of in chap. 3. computed
at per anum 294000 0 0 which for the like time amounts to 4410000 00 00 There
is also to be added as a yearly Charge, in case of the Chief Governors being a
Foreigner to Irelands Interest 13000 0 0 The yearly Charge of Ireland is per
an. 913465 4 0 The total for this Period is 13512660 10 A Consumption great
enough to beggar rich England, much more poor Ireland.

The End of the First Part.
THE INTEREST OF IRELAND IN ITS TRADE and WEALTH STATED.

PART II.

Proposing Expedients for Ireland's Relief against its Trade-obstructing and
Wealth-consuming Maladies hinted in the first Part.

By Richard Lawrence Esquire

Dublin, Printed by Jos. Ray, for Jo. North, Sam. Helsham, J. Howes, W. Winter
and El. Dobson Booksellers. 1682.

An Alphabetical Table of the principle things in the second Part.
A.
THe Act of Parliament of 17 Car. 2. Irelands Magna Charta, and why, p. 49, 50
Army of Ireland to be managed for the planting of the Country, and how, p. 97
Army of Ireland, how it ought to be qualified, p. 114, 115 Aliens, why
Protestants of England are to be so esteemed to the peculiar Interest of
Ireland, p. 115 to 122 Apostates first from Primitive Purity and Truth in
Religion, who, p. 218 to 220 Antichrist, who so esteemed by Popish Authors, p.
206 to 221
B.
Of Banks, p. 1, 2, 3, 4 Bankers, their Insolvency has been a great damage to
Ireland, p. 4 Bank, East India, its Constitution, p. 7 Bankers great benefit by
their united Stocks, p. 8 Banks prosperity depends on the Princes countenance,
p. 9. Banks universally useful to a Country lowers, Interest, Exchange, and
nurseth Manufacturies, p. 10, 11 Banks secure Peace, rescue Trade out of
Foreigners hands, increase Shipping, Fishings, etc, p. 12, 13 Banks
accommodate persons of all Ranks and Trades, p. 16, 17 Bank methods of
managing, p. 37, 38 Bank Security is most visible solvent, and freest from
trouble and hazard, p. 35 Babylon mystical, where, p. 220, 221
C.
Corporation Trade the foundation of the great Trade of London, Amsterdam,
Venice, etc. p. 17 Corporation Trade raised the Hance-Towns of Germany, p. 18
Corporation Trade still enriched the place of its residence, p. 25 Governs the
Trade of the Country, p. 32 Catalogue of Irelands chief Governors from ann.
1271 to 1680. p. 122 to 156 Coins, whether advisable to enhance their Value, or
debase their Alloy in Ireland, p. 173 to 181 Council of Trent, their
Illegality, etc. p. 215 to 217 Christians in Asia, Africa, etc. of the
Protestant Faith, exceed the number of Papists in Europe, p. 218
D.
Divisions in Religion much obstruct the Trade and Wealth of Ireland, p. Q. R.
Dissenters ought to avoid being engaged in Factions of State, p. M. N. O.
Dissenters cannot rationally expect protection from a Prince or State, to whom
they will not give all security in their power for their Loyalty, p. L. M.
Dissenting Protestants not dangerous to the State of Ireland, though they were
as malignant against the Religion established, as the Papists, p. I. K. L.
Doctrine of Devils, by whom taught, p. 221
E.
Englands danger, if Ireland were possessed by an enemy, especially by the
French. Englands just Title to what they possess of Ireland, p. 73 to 76
Englands Factions still weakened its Interest in Ireland, p. 75, 76
Establishment of Ireland, p. 156 to 162 Excommunication of Princes by Popes
frequent, p. 233, 234 Errors in Nonconformity more dangerous than errors in
Conformity, when, p. O. P. Essentials in Worship agreed and maintained by
Conforming and Nonconforming Protestants, p. G.
F.
Fishing, how to increase, p. 13 Friars, their several Orders, whence, and why
instituted, p. 212, 213 Fundamentals agreed to by Dissenters with the Church,
p. G.
G.
Governors of Ireland unacquainted with the Country, not capable of well
managing its Affairs, and why, p. 102 to 107 This has been the opinion and
practice of our Kings from its first Conquest, of which, instances, p. 108, 109
In what cases excepted, p. 110, 111
I.
Ireland's English Interest potent above what it was before the last Rebellion,
p. 47, 48 Irelands Interest in being Governed by its own Members, p. 47 to 96
Irish Papists, their interest in the potency of the English Interest in
Ireland, p. 73 to 94 Ignorance in the Scripture the cause of Papists Rebellion,
p. 91, 92 Judges and Juries of Ireland much more engaged to suppress Sedition
and Rebellion in Ireland, than those of England can be, and why, p. 105, 106
Jesuits, their inhumane bloody principles, from their own Authors, p. 195 to
203 Papists reflections and glosses on them, p. 204 to 207 Jesuits, their
Original and Characte, p. 211 to 214 Jesuits, by what Authority their Order
Instituted, p. 214 Jesuits banished, and their Tenants exploded, by whom, p.
222 to 225 Jesuits, the natural consequence of their Principles, p. 225 They
abrogate the Laws of Humanity, Morality and Divinity, p. 226 Their dexterity in
fathering their Brats on innocent persons, p. 227 Jesuits, their suitable
practices to their bloody Principles, p. 231 to 240 Jesuits employed by the
Pope to destroy the Greek Church, p. 236 Jesuits bloody work in the West and
East Indies, p. 238
L.
Lands of Ireland most possessed by English Proprietors, p. 48 Loyalty evidenced
in many of the Irish Papists, p. 89 to 203 Lutherans and Calvinists in Germany
more differ than English Protestants, yet esteem each other Protestants, and
unite against Popery, p. H. Laws against single life useful in Ireland, and
why, p. A. B. C.
M.
Massacre of Ireland, how inhumane and barbarous, p. 81 to 87 Militia of
Ireland is its great Security, p. 98 Militia neglected, the cause of the easy
massacring the naked Protestants 1641, p. 81 Manufacturies of Ireland, by whom
encouraged and erected, how ruined, p. 188 to 191 Mystical Babylon, who, in the
opinion of Papists, p. 220
N.
Nobility or Peers of Ireland most English Protestants, p. 63 to 67 Nobility,
their Catalogue, 1571, and 1641, p. 67 to p. 73 Non-residents enjoying
Salleries, a great loss to Ireland, p. 99
O.
The Original of most Noble and Worshipful English Families of Ireland were
from Offices, p. 96 Ormond Duke, the longest Regency over Ireland, under the
greatest difficulties, and why, p. 112, 113 Ormond, the great confusion he
found Ireland in at his access to the Government 1662. and how soon composed,
p. 182 to 188
P.
Parliaments of Ireland altered in their Constitution, from an Irish to an
English Interest, p. 58 to 63 A good Plea for Irish Papists against their
Jesuited Priests that shall again instigate them to rebel, p. 88 Planting of
Ireland discouraged by restraint of Trade, and being liable to be tried for
capital Offenses by Judges and Juries in England, to whom they are unknown,
etc. p. 106 Poysonings and Stabbings the Popes arguments to convince
gainsayers, instances, p. 228, 229 Principles of the Jesuits inconsistent with
the just power and right of Princes, p. 240
R.
Religion Protestant condemned as a venomous Doctrine, and Hellish Opinion by
the Papists, p. 76 Religion Protestant, why no more received by Irish Papists,
p. 90, 91 Rebellion and bloodiness of Popery above all other Religions in the
World, whence, p. 193, 194 Rome can be no Mother Church, nor Superior to
others, why, p. 218 Rome has only the primacy of Apostasy from the principles
of the Primitive Church, p. 218 to 222 Rome, etc. always promoted and
encouraged the rebellions of Ireland, p. 76 to 85 Romes struggles with the
Greek Church for Supremacy, reduced them to Turkish Slavery, p. 237
S.
Statute Staple, its original use and method, p. 43 to 47 Soldiers, who are
best for Field-Armies, p. 98, 99, to 120 The Statutes of the 10 th. of Hen. 7.
and 23d. of Hen. 8. no bar to persons born in Ireland from being Lord
Lieutenant, etc. p. 100, 101. Soldiers, 1000 bred in Ireland, worth 2000 bred
in England for Irish Service, and why, p. 118 Subsidies of Ireland, their
establishment, p. 164 to 173 Supremacy from the Pope, from whence, p. 208, 209
Supremacy, a Tallent so well improved by the Pope, that he deserves it, p. 234
Schism Criminal, when, p. D. E.
T.
Trade of England ingrost by the Guild of the Hance, p. 18 Trade in Companies
countenanced by the Kings and Parliaments of England since Edward the Third, p.
20 Trade to the East Indies, when first obtained, p. 24 Treasure, the vast sum
Ireland has cost England above what it was ever worth, p. 53 Table reducing
Plantation Acres into English, p. 162, 1^^ Trade, why no more improved under
the Government of the Justices and Duke of Ormond, p 181 Tyrants are those
Princes over their own Subjects who are Slaves to the Pope, p. 235 Turkish
Slavery of the Greek-Church, the Product of the Popes Supremacy, p. 2, 7 Trent
Council illegal, etc. p. 217
U.
Usher Bishop, his opinion declared it was the Interest of Irish Papists to
support and strengthen the Interest of the Crown of England in Ireland, p. 77
to 81 Usher Bishop, Prophecies of the Irish Rebellion 40 years before it was,
and (...) great trouble to the Protestants by the Papists yet to come, p. 80,
81 Vengeance of God dreadful on the Irish for their bloody Massacre 1641, p.
86, 87 Unity, though boasted of by Papists, yet ar^ they much more divided than
Protestants, p. H. I. Union of Papists chiefly in Errors and Immoralities,
Union in Religion, how far necessary amongst Protestants to promote the
Prosperity, and secure the Peace of Ireland, p. C. D.
W.
Weaving Broad cloth, when first set up in England, p. 25 Wools first
prohibited their transportation, p. 25 Wools may easily be prevented
transporting, expedients proposed, p. 39 to 43 Wools transporting the ruin of
our Clothing Trade, p. 39 Wall'd-Towns to be increased and well planted, to
secure the safety of English Protestants in Ireland, p. A. Women drunk with the
blood of the Saints, Rev. 17. who, in the Papists opinion, p. 219, 221
Y.
Guild of the Hance, its Antiquity and great Trade, p. 43 Their dissolution,
and why, p. 34
Z.
Zeal preposterous, like Hell; hot, without light, that makes different
Opinions different Religions, says B p. Bramhall p. E. Zeal Popish and
Jesuitical, that esteems all Separation Criminal Schism, ibid.
Books lately Printed.
A Judgment of the Comet, which became first generally visible to us in Dublin,
December the 13th. 1680. By a person of Quality. Foxes and Firebrands, or a
Specimen of the Danger and Harmony of Popery and Separation: Wherein is proved,
from undeniable matter o^ Fact and Reason, that Separation from the Church of
England is, in the judgment of Papists, and by sad experience found, the most
compendious way to introduce Popery, and ruin the Protestant Religion; in two
Parts, Octav by R.W. Interest of Ireland, etc.
THE SECOND PART OF IRELAND'S INTEREST, etc. Proposing Expedients for Ireland's
Relief against its Trade-obstructing, and Wealth-consuming Maladies hinted in
the First Part.
CHAP. I. Of Banks and Corporation Trade; I join them together, not that it is
necessary in Countries qualified to manage them distinct; but where Members and
Stock is wanting, they are very consistent in the same hands, to be managed by
the same united Stocks and Policies.
BAnks are of diverse kinds designed for several uses, but still aiming at the
same end, which is gain either to the State, or particular Persons, together
with such credit to their Bills, that they become current in all places, and to
all persons where, and to whom assigned.

These Banks sometimes consist of particular persons, but usually Societies, as
the Chamber of London, Banks of Amsterdam, and Venice, etc. Some of which
chiefly designs Exchange, as Placentia in Italy, Lions in France; others Usury,
as Genoa, etc. others both for the public and private benefit, in increasing
Trade, securing and employing Orphans, Widows, and helpless people to money,
etc.

Bodin p 672.
observes, that in Florence, Siana, etc. they had their Banks named Mounts of
Piety, wherein he that would deposite any Sum at the Birth of a Daughter,
should receive ten times so much, when they arrived at the age of eighteen
years; where also Poor men might borro^ Money upon Pawns at low interest, to
prevent excessive Usuries, whereby the poor were oppressed: and that Antonius
Pius, and Servius, etc. delivered the public Money in the Treasury to
industrious men, to employ in Trade on Pawns, or other good security, whereby
the Merchant gained by Traffic, and the public Moneys increased by Interest;
besides (says he) a greater benefit did arise, the public Treasure was
preserved from the paws of Thieves, and Horse-leeches at the Court, and from
being otherwise wasted by the Princes prodigality.

But I shall only treat of Banks, as they relate to Trade and Commerce, and
become useful to others by accident.

Sometimes Banks are erected from the plenty of Money, in places not capable of
Trade, or where persons are not willing to adventure in Trade, and so employ
their Money at Usury, or Exchange, to foreign places, as Genoa, Placentia, and
most of the Banks in Italy, which are the greatest and ancientest Banks in the
World: Heylin observes the King of Spain was indebted to the Bank of Genoa, a
Tun and a half of Gold at one time, and eighteen millions at another.

But since their case is not like to be Irelands, I shall only insist upon
Banks, for the supply of the want of Money, which may properly be called a
Land, or dry Bank, yet not wholly without Money; but like some Merchants, who
with a small Stock, and large Credit, will drive a great Trade.

This sort of Bank must be founded upon undoubted visible Credit, that all
persons who have Money to spare, may covet to lodge it there, rather than in
any other place, having the knowledge of the Solvent Capital for their
security; and the great Credit upon which the whole success of their Bank
depends, it being with them as with some Merchants that are not so much
concerned, to have twenty Bonds sued as one Bill of Exchange protested.

From whence it is, the Rich in Holland are as glad to get their Money secured
in Banks, or Cantors, as the Poor are to get their Children received into the
Hospitals: which our observing Countryman, Sir William Temple 229.
has not omitted in his Observations: Whosoever is admitted to bring in his
Money, takes it for a great savor; and when they pay off any part of the
Principal, those it belongs unto, receive it with tears.

Not will what is proposed be found difficult for persons in Ireland, of very
obscure Capitals, might obtain credit both at home and abroad, for treble the
Goods they take up; and how much more then may be done on the Credit of such a
Bank, especially when we consider how many of our single Bankers, or Exchangers
have failed within these few years, to the ruin of some, and weakening the
Estates of others to this Kingdom, damage upwards of 50000 l. besides the
scandal it has brought on the credit of the Country, that no man knows who to
trust, or where to lodge Money with security; these Bankrupts being as
promising hopeful men as most they have left behind them. But since there is no
security in Ireland can be so solvent, and satisfactory as Land-Security, other
Stocks, though never so great, may be subject to decay, and the Creditor not
discern it, as has been too evident in some of the most creditable Companies,
and chief Bankers in London: Yet a Land-security may be so settled by Law, as it
cannot be weakened, in that it will not be in the power of the Bankers, in any
case to alienate or incumber their Title in those Lands, otherwise than by
Bank-credit, since all are personally and equally concerned therein. As for
Example:

Suppose Dublin being the chief Seat of the grand Bank, and twenty persons
shall secure to each other Lands of 200 Pounds per. ann. by Feofment, or
Statute-staple, in trust on Defeasance for Bank-security; if any former
Settlements, or Statutes be, they will soon be discerned, and there can be no
collateral Encumbrance on that Security; this will be a Security to a Bank of
4000 Pounds per. ann. Lands, being worth twelve years purchase, within ten
miles of the City, which will raise a Bank-Security of 48 thousand Pounds.

And that no place or person might be deprived of the benefit hereof, every
chief Port may likewise have their Banks, as Branches or Members of the
Principal Bank, and take into their Company the near adjacent places, and to
hold a weekly correspondence with each other, and credit each others Bills, or
Bank-tickets. Nor will such Banks restrain, or confine any man from the freedom
of Trade; for though none have the benefit of the Bank-credit, that has not a
Bank-security, yet shall they have liberty, if they desire it, to trade in
Company with the Bankers, and have equal profit with them, proportionably to
their respective Adventures; and at the end of every voyage, liberty to
withdraw or continue their Stocks, as they shall see cause, and choose the place
they will adventure unto, and the Commodities they will export, or import, or
else left to trade by themselves, as they please: by which also all persons
that either want knowledge in Trade, or scruple Usury, etc. may employ their
Stocks, be they great or small, upon equal terms, with the Bankers, allowing
only for Factorage, or provision toward the maintenance of the charge: And so
in Holland, there is hardly a servant in a Merchants Family, but have their
small Adventure in their Masters, by which way of Trade (...) States of Holland
and Venice raised themselves from poor Fishermen, to the height and wealth they
now are in: As I shall show in my Treatise of Traffic, the great Trade which
the World now flourishes in, is but of yesterday: Holland and England were as
low in Trade as Ireland is now, 100 years ago the East and West Indies were
unknown to them; and although the Spaniard and Portuguese made a discovery of
the East Indies, Anno 1417. yet all the Trade we read of, were some Negroes, of
which they sent the Pope a Present; for which, he in requital, gives them all
they could discover in those Indies, which King John the 1st gives his Son, who
discovered the Coast 100 leagues beyond Cape de Verde, and then farmed to
Gomer, on condition he should every year discover 100 leagues more of the
Coast; and in the year 1460. erected their first Fort in the Isle of Arguin,
and named it Mina, from the plenty of Gold that Country afforded; but
inconsiderable was their Trade for near 100 years after, until the King and
State espoused the Trade of the Indies on the public account Mandestos
Travels. page 213.
.

Then the Dutch in the year 1595. having had some of their Natives employed in
the Spanish Indian Fleets, inspected the Trade so far, as to report the
advantage thereof to their Countrymen, upon which they sent three Ships, and
so continued a small Trade on particular Merchants Adventurers to no great
profit, until Anno 1662. the States obs^^ving the many different interests and
humors of several particular Adventurers, would hazard the ruin of that
hopeful Trade; to prevent which, sent for the Merchants, and prevailed with
them to incorporate under the States Conduct for 21 years, the Prince of Orange
to be Governor Mandestos Travels, l. 3. p. 230.
. Since which, the Dutch East-Indian Trade has flourisht to a prodigy.

The Constitution of this Dutch East India Company is said to have in Bank six
hundred thousand Pounds Sterling. of which Amsterdam has one moiety,
Middleborough a fourth part, Roterdam, Delph, Horn, and Enchusen, each a sixth
part; nor is there hardly a Nobleman, or Burgher in the Country, but has some
Stock in this Bank.

For the Government of this Trade, and the Interest of the Associates, they
ordain a certain number of Administrators, of which Amsterdam chooses twenty,
Middleborough twelve, and each of the other Towns seven, and when any of these
dye, the Chamber of the place names three, out of which the States General, or
the Magistates of the Town chooses one; from which number, at the acquipping
of every Fleet for a Voyage, they elect a le^^er number, to contrive and order
the whole transaction of that Voyage: Amsterdam chooses eight, Delph and
Roterdam two, Midleborough four, Horn and Enchusen two; and by this method they
have managed the affairs of this Company about eighty years, and thereby are
become the greatest Merchants in the World, and have obtained the Sovereignty
over several Countries in the East India, and likewise secured to themselves a
great part of the Portugals Trade in the Countries of Siam, Petam, Jeta,
Beretan, the Islands of Amboyna: besides, this great Company, they manage a
great Trade throughout the World, partly by single persons, but most by lesser
Associations, whereby the common Interest of Trade is become the proper
Interest of every particular person in the Country, their greatest Statesmen
being their chiefest Merchants; so that there is no prejudice to any part of
Trade, but all are equally interested and concerned for relief; whereas in a
scattered confused Trade, every man contrives his private profit, though the
general Interest of Trade be ruined thereby. Much the same methods are observed
by Venice, Lisbon, etc. and something like them by the East India, Levant,
Affrican, Eastland, etc. Companies in London.

Nor will the Bankers be without their profit; for each man will enjoy the
Rents and Profits of his own Lands, until the Bank fail with any of its
Creditors, and then they extend what part of the Land they like, till paid, and
the Proprietor must seek his remedy from the Bank; for all their Tickets must
bear the force of Bonds of the Staple against the whole Bank. Besides, the Bank
enjoys the profit of the Interest paid for their Money, or Tickets, not
exceeding one moiety of the current Interest of the Kingdom for their Tickets.

They will also enjoy the profit of Exchange, as likewise the profit of their
Trade, which will be equal to others, at least; and the more profitable, in
regard they will be enabled to trade in their own Ships, and on their own
Credit, and buy at the best hand, and reserve their Goods for the best Market,
without being streighten'd for Stock, or Credit; and therewith likewise they
will merit the favor of their Prince, the love of their Country, and increase
the public Revenue and Trade of the Country, employing and providing for the
relief of the Poor.

In order whereunto, his Majesty's Royal Stamp is requisite to secure them
against all clamor or attempts on their Credit; for it is not the greatest
Credit they can attain unto, by their great Capital Prudence, or Honesty, that
can preserve them, if they are not esteemed the darling of their Prince, and
that he will refuse, upon any occasion, to make use of their Bank to the
weakening its Security.

An Instance of which, we have of Francis the First, who ruined as well as
raised the Bank of Lions, by dying so vastly in its Debt, that though all
Italy, Germany, France, etc. tumbled in their Money for his life, yet they
scrambled it out as fast at his death.

For this reason part of the Oath of the Duke of Venice is, that neither
Himself, nor any of his Ministers of State, upon any occasion or pretense
whatsoever, shall at any time, nor on any occasion, meddle with the Bank; and
so great value has the Great Mogull for the Bank of Agria, that He styles
Himself Protector of it; nor would the States of Holland have been so easily
prevailed with, to exclude the Prince of Orange from future Command, contrary
to the desires of the other States, in their Treaty of Peace with England,
1654. had they not retained a deep resentment of his Fathers menace put upon
the Bank at Amsterdam about two years before, nor can his Majesty manifest his
Grace and Favor more than in supporting so Sovereign and universal remedy
against all the pecuniary and mercantile maladies of this impoverished Kingdom;
by which the Poor will be employed, the Rich supplied, and the Country
planted, and civilized.

This Bank-credit will lower Interest; for when its Bills and Tickets shall be
as acceptable in payment either for Goods, or Debts; and with less trouble and
hazard transferred from one to another, than the best Money current: few will
give ten per cent. for Money, when they can have Bank-credit for half that
rate, which will also necessitate the Usurer either to purchase Land, and
thereby raise the rate of it, or otherwise employ his Money in the Bank, or
some other Trade; who now preys upon the necessities of all persons, those of
the best Quality not excluded, who cannot on their single Bond or Mortgage of
Land raise Money without double Bonds-men, and they must be also Citizens, with
a Warrant of Attorney for Judgment, besides the charge of procuration, etc. and
Interest demanded beforehand, or half yearly, which is the highest Interest
upon Interest, whereby the best landed, and most ingenious persons in the
Kingdom are many times distressed, and are inslaved to the most griping Usuries
which this Bank credit will prevent, as also lower the Interest.

This Bank-Credit will lower Exchange to foreign parts, by increasing Traffic,
and thereby altering the Balance of Trade, as is shown in that Chapter, and
remove all occasions of Exchange for Money at home; for Bank-Bills of 500 l.
will not weigh one ounce, but be safely conveyed from place to place by Post,
or otherwise, without danger of robbing: for the Bank-method of paying their
Bills must secure against all counterfeiting, or misapplications; so that
whosoever shall rob, or otherwise obtain Bills surreptitiously, can make no use
of them: which method of safety being only the concern of the Bank, and not of
the Creditors, I shall forbear to publish it.

By this Bank our Manufacturies will be propagated, this being the proper means
for it, and in which we are now defective, which will hereby be provided
against: For when there are Merchants at Dublin as there are at London, to buy
with ready Money, the Manufactures of the Country will abound, for we neither
want Materials, nor Artists, only Markets, which will be the main business of
this Bank to contrive; and having Shipping and Stock of their own, their
Interest will prompt them unto it, since they can neither traffic into the
Levant, nor Baltick-Seas, the two chief places for the Merchants of Ireland to
enlarge their Trade unto, without woollen and worsted Manufacture, which now
when made, cannot be disposed.

The abuses in our woollen and worsted Manufactures, by which their value and
credit is impaired, will be rectified; for they will not buy a piece but what
is searched, and tried by persons of their own appointment, and place their own
Seals as well as the Makers, upon every piece, which will bring our
Manufacturies into credit in foreign Markets; and the like they will do for
Leather, Butter, Tallow, Flesh, Fish, etc. the want of which is the ruin of
the foreign Trade of Ireland, which is now under so ill repute beyond Sea, that
Irish Goods, and Naught, are terms convertible.

Besides, in whatsoever they shall observe the Artists of Ireland defective,
they can easily procure a supply, which will also put life into the Ingenious,
and Industrious, when they can have Bank-credit for their Ware at any time,
which will enable a poor Clothier, etc. with twenty Pound Stock, to do more
than now with an hundred Pound, not knowing now what to do with Goods when
made, which will employ the Poor, and by their labor double the value of
Lands, and fill the Country with Money; as is showed in the Chapter of
Manufacture.

By which the Peace and Safety, as well as the Wealth of Ireland, will be
increased; for whilst the ^^^er sort of people have nothing but a miserable use
to lose, the Boggs and Rodes will be pestered with ^o^tes; want increases
discontent, and that puts men upon desperate ways for relief, which this Bank
will prevent; for no man need to have in his House, or travel on the Rode with
other than small Sums of that debast Money described in the Chapter of Coins,
and yet have five hundred or a thousand Pounds worth of Bank-Tickets; which, as
was observed, would not be worth a Penny to the unlawful Possessor, and yet be
as good as so much Silver or Gold current in their Houses, and much safer than
other Specialties; which, if lost, he is in danger of losing his Money, but not
so in this case, his Right appearing in the Bank-Books: And as it will prevent
Robberies, so also discourage Rebellions, since the Money passing current, is
of small intrinsic value to them.

Besides, these Banks are the only means to rescue our Trade out of the Hands
of Foreigners, and will wear out foreign Stocks, by which the greatest part of
our foreign Traffic is now driven, to the enriching foreign Merchants, and
beggering of our own: Foreigners having Money at low Interest, and gaining by
their Exchange, they are able to undersell us in foreign Parts; so that our
Merchants choose rather to be their Factors, than trade with their own Stocks;
which is the reason we have so few wealthy Merchants, and those we have, after
they have gained Estates by Trade, instead of increasing their Traffic,
purchase Lands, and decline Trade.

This Bank will also be a means to fill the Kingdom with Shipping to manage the
Trade thereof. which is at present the great gain of Foreigners; which will
hereby redound to the benefit of this Kingdom, as in the Chapter of Shipping.

And hereby also we shall be capable of improving our Fishing upon the Irish
Coast to the utmost: The great advantage of which, you may read in the Chapter
of Fishing

Nor will it be difficult to satisfy persons, that this Bank-credit of paying
or receiving Money will be as ready, and as safe as the ordinary way of paying
and receiving Money in Specia, since with much case these Bills may be
transferred from one person to another; and the trouble and labor of telling,
weighing, and judging of the goodness or badness of Coins, and danger of
miscounting hereby prevented.

In order whereunto, every person that either receives or pays Money in Bank,
has his account in the Bank-book, and at the desire of the Creditor, his Stock
in Bank, either in part, or in whole, is transferred to the account of such
other persons as himself shall assign. As for example; A Clothier sells unto a
Merchant or Draper an 100 l. worth of Cloth, the buyer having Credit in Bank,
assigns 100 l. to the Seller; the Book-keeper makes the Merchant Debtor, and
gives the Clothier credit for so much again. The Clothier being indebted in
whole, or in part of the said sum to the Woollman, the Clothier is made Debtor,
and the Woollman Creditor: The Woollman being a Farmer, etc. owes the like sum
to his Landlord for Rent, the Woollman is made Debtor, and his Landlord
Creditor; the Landlord is indebted, or has occasion to buy Goods in Town; the
Landlord is made Debtor, and the said person is Creditor. If the persons to
whom the Landlord was indebted be Retailers, that have occasion to buy Goods of
the Merchant that first assigned in Bank, the Retailers have Goods, and the
Account cleared without receiving or paying a penny of Money. The which is also
practicable in most other cases, and all these Assignments have the security of
a Bond of the Staple, whereby not only the hazard and trouble of Moneys, (as
before) but the hazard of disappointment, and the charge and delay of Lawsuits
is wholly prevented, and this is not only as to entire sums, but the 100 l. may
be as easily assigned to 20 persons with a little more trouble in writing, and
will not only be useful in this case of Traffic, and prevent the hazard and
charge many Merchants now undergo, by the ignorance or unfaithfulness of their
Casheers, but also accommodate other persons that have occasion to pay or
receive Money.

As for example; A Gentleman having an Estate in several parts of the Kingdom,
far distant from his dwelling, may order his Rents to be paid in the next
adjacent Bank; and being there lodged, he may transmit it to any other Bank in
the Kingdom, and thou assign a Debtor or other person to receive it: And this
sort of payment being all visible in Bank, will be a more certain Discharge or
Acquittance than any other that can be given, and will wear all other
Specialties much out of use, and prompt all men to choose Bank-Security before
any other, where he may have his Money on Rebate at any time, before it is due.

Besides, this Bank-credit will be a convenience, and great encouragement to
young Merchants, who may be both ingenious, and industrious; yet their small
Stocks being lodged in Goods, which they cannot dispose, by reason the Market
is cloyed, or other accidents; whereas upon the security of these Goods, they
may have Credit in Bank to keep up their Trade, and pay off such Debts out of
the product of such Goods, as they can dispose of them to their best advantage.

Or, suppose a Clothier, Tanner, or Chandler, etc. have disburst their Stocks,
in providing Cloth, Leather, or Tallow, and Markets fail at the season
expected; the charge of Warehouses, and Servants, etc. lie upon them, though
they have no free Stock to keep them at work, are thereby eaten up; but if they
have this Bank to come unto, proportionable to the quantity of their
Commodities, they are supplied with Money, or Credit, to go on cheerfully in
their Callings.

Or it may happen, an honest and sufficient Man may be indebted upon a Statute
or Judgment, and cannot raise the Money by the time limited, nor the Creditors
occasions for his Money suffer him to forbear it, the Credit of one is
preserved, and the Want of the other supplied, without extremity of charge, and
damage to either; since the Bank, upon Security, answers the Money.

And besides the general benefit to the Kingdom by increasing Trade and
Commerce, there will not be a person of the highest, or lowest Rank, but will
find a convenience and benefit by the Bank. A Nobleman of 10000 l. per ann. may
have occasion for 500. or 1000 l. more or less, some short time before his Rent
come in; but without Mortgaging part of his Estate, and paying six months
Interest, no man will trouble himself to pay and receive Money, whereas if
himself or any friend of his have Credit in Bank he is supplied for what weeks
or days he pleases.

And so a poor man, ingenious and industrious, could put himself into a way to
maintain his Family comfortably, could he procure but a small Sum of Money; if
he goes to Pawn-brokers, it is ordinary with them to demand Six pence or Four
pence a week for every Pound, which for a year is more than the Principal;
whereas by the Bank Lumber he may be supplied (if not gratis, yet) at less than
legal Interest; and by this the Jews and Dutch preserve themselves from
Beggars; the feeblest amongst them, if not bedridden, are put into a capacity to
get their livelihoods, and for others Hospitals are provided.

Therefore let not this Bank Traffic be rejected, as an unpracticable notion;
for it is beyond contradiction, that England, etc. have raised themselves from
little to great Trade thereby, and so may Ireland, if not wanting to it self.

This expedient of Banks and Company-trade were the first foundation of the
great Traffic of other Countries, flourishing in Trade, as Venice, Florence,
Belgia, etc. where the very Constitutions of their Government are formed
principally for the promotion of Trade, their Princes and Nobles being their
chief Merchants, and their Senates Councils of Trade.

And the Hans-Towns of Germany raised their Trade by this means, who were the
first Corporation of Trade we read of, above sixty Towns and Cities united
their Stocks and Policies, of which Lubeck, Brumswick, Danzick and Cullen were
the chief places of their Residence, and so great was their Trade and Credit
under that Constitution, that all Princes granted them Privileges, and they
kept their Courts by their Deputies, and Councils, at Bergen, Novagrade,
Antwerpe and London, where King Henry 3. granted them great Privileges, and
the Still-yards for their residence, which they enjoyed near 300 years; and
managed their Trade by an Alderman and Council, etc. called the Yield of the
Hans, engrossed the Trade of England for Grain, Cables, Mast, Pitch, Tar, etc.
until, by their example, each Country learnt the knowledge of Trade themselves,
and dismissed them.

And in the year 1551. being the 5. of Edw. 6. upon complaint of the English
Merchants, their privileges were seized into the Kings Hands, and the Trade
ever since enjoyed by the Merchants of London, to the great enriching of that
famous City.

And the best president I can lay before Ireland is England, who until the
Reign of Hen. 3. was as confused, and consequently as low in Trade, as Ireland
is now, but has been especially for these last 140 years, the most flourishing
Kingdom in Trade in the world; and they must commence the rise and growth of
their Trade from their beginning to trade by united Stocks and Policies, for
which a Patent was first obtained by the Merchant Staplers from Edw. 3. from
which time we find our Statute Books crowded with excellent Laws for the
encouraging and regulating Trade, which yet did not arrive to its height, and
splendour, until about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who did
not only confirm what was done by her Predecessors, but augmented and greatly
enlarged the Privileges of that ancient Company of Staplers, and confirmed the
Charter of the Muscovy Company, newly granted by Philip and Mary, and ordained
in her time three new Corporations for Trade, which enlarged the Trade of
England abundantly, viz. the East India, the Levant and Eastland Companies, the
Privileges of all which have been confirmed and enlarged, with great respect,
by all her Successors in Parliament; and His Majesty that now is has added the
African and Canary Companies; that if we had no other Argument, to prove united
Stocks, and Policies in Trade, the great if not the only means to promote and
increase Traffic and Commerce, the Examples of so many prudent Princes and
States, and the Experience of the Kings and Parliaments of England for this 300
years past might serve.

But I shall demonstrate by good reason, and unquestionable authority, when
opposed, that this one expedient shall remove all the considerable impediments
of Trade, in a short time, dam up the current of much of our Expense upon
Foreign Growth, shall reduce our confused Trade to a method, improve the native
Growth of the Country to its height, as to Value at home, and Credit abroad,
shall rescue our Trade managed by foreign Stocks into our own hands, shall
increase His Majesty's Revenue, and enable his Subjects of Ireland to farm it
upon terms more to the Kings profit and convenience, and the Kingdoms benefit
and content, and to advance considerable Sums upon the Security of any Branch
of His Majesty's Revenue, when his Affairs shall require it.

And I will further undertake to demonstrate, that all other Expedients without
this shall never attain these Ends; let a Parliament pass all the Statutes of
England for the encouragement of Trade in Ireland, it shall signify no more
than good Laws without Courts of Justice to execute them; for though Interest
prompts people to Industry, yet it neither qualifies nor governs them in right
methods to attain their ends: A straggling Trade managed by particular persons,
each striving to advance his private Interest, though to the ruin of the Trade
in general, and obstructing it in other particulars, can no more make a Country
flourish in Trade, than a straggling Army without Discipline and Order can
preserve its peace.

But designing brevity, I shall only assert, that Ireland is now much more able
to erect and govern such a Trade, than England was about 300 years ago, when
Ed. 1. encouraged it, and Ed. 3. established by Charter the Company of
Staplers, or Merchant Adventurers, which was the Mother Company of England, and
all it enjoyed until Philip and Mary erected the Muscovy Company yet that one
Company removed the Staple from foreign parts to our own ports, and soon after
the Clothing Trade from Flanders, whereby the Growth of England, especially the
Wools were improved to 5 and 7, and in some cases (after the Worsted-trade of
Stuffs and Stockings was attained) to ten times its value.

I am not unsensible that this Work will meet with opposition from some
particular persons, whose private Interest may seem to be invaded by it; for so
did that ancient and beneficial Company of Staplers in England, as a Monopoly
intrenching upon the Liberty of the Subject, to the Parliaments in Hen. 4. Hen.
7. Edw. 6. and Queen Mary's time, yet all parties being heard, those Complaints
were quashed, and the Privileges of the Companies ratified and enlarged.

Yet again in Queen Elizabeth's time, the importunity of the Clothiers prevailed
against the Company but after a short trial, the Clothing Countries were
ruined, to that extremity, that in the 29th. of Elizabeth the Lords of the
Council sent for the members of the Company, and desired them to reassume their
Privileges, and cheerfully proceed in their Trade, and they should receive all
possible countenance and assistance.

So in the Reign of King James, Alderman Cocken of London, etc. prevailed to
have the Company dissolved, but after two years confusion, Trade so miserably
languished, that the King published his Proclamation, Anno 1617. for the
Restitution of the Company to its ancient Privileges.

In like manner King Charles the first observing the decay of Trade, from the
confusion intruding Interlopers brought upon it, published his Proclamation Dec.
7. 1634. Whereas we have taken into our Princely consideration, the manifold
Benifits that redound to this Kingdom, etc. and finding how much Government and
Order will conduce to the increase and advancement of the same, We have thought
fit, with the Advice of our Privy Council, to declare our Royal Pleasure
herein, etc. and then positively and largely prohibits any to intrude upon the
Companies Privilege, upon pain of his high Displeasure, and of such
Punishments as the Court of Star Chamber, whom We especially charge with the
Execution of our Royal Pleasure herein, shall think fit, to inflict, for such
Contempts. After this, the 11th. of March 1643. both Houses past an Ordinance,
entitled, For the Upholding of the Government of the Fellowship of Merchant
Adventurers of England, etc. near to the same effect as His Majesty's
Proclamation before recited.

And as Corporation Traffic has procured all the flourishing Trade England
now enjoys, so the Portugals, Dutch, etc. have thereby altered the whole course
of Trade that Venice had with India, Arabia and Persia; Venice, being the
ancient Mart for the Commodities of those Countries, now buy of us; so the
English Levant Company has wrested the India Trade from the Turks, and now
sell where Venice used to buy. And that which gives England and Ireland the
advantage in Traffic is, the staple Commodities they sell necessary for Life;
as Flesh, Fish, etc. for the Belly, Cloth, Stuffs, etc. for the Back; that in
most Countries England trades with, they wear Englands Woollen Livery, eat in
English Pewter, Seasons and Sauce with Englands Indian Spices, shod with
English Leather; there is no Clothing in Spain esteemed like the English Bayse
and Stuffs, nor no Food exceeds the English Herring and Pilcher: Sweden,
Denmark, and all those cold Northeast Countries within the Sound, to the bottom
of the Baltic, keep themselves warm by English woollen Cloth; and all this
obtained by virtue of Englands Trade by united Stoks and Policy. For in little
above 100 years Europe was so far from trading with the East and West Indies,
the West were unheard of, as I show in my Treatise of Traffic; and the East
unknown otherwise than by report to our Mariners and Merchants: Italian and
Spanish Merchants were esteemed great Adventurers, until the Turkey and East
India Companies were incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, who God made
instrumental, not only to reform Religion, but to regulate and advance Trade:
Englands and Hollands true Religion and potent Trade came together, God grant
they never go together, it is worthy our observation, how the mighty
flourishing Monarchy of Spain, since Charles the 5. and his Son Philip the 2.
has dwindled away, and decayed in Fame and Potency since they erected their
barbarous Inquisition, which banished their Trade and Wealth to England and
Holland; that Antwerpe and Sevils Ebb tide in Trade has made it full Sea at
London and Amsterdam; and as England and Holland has gained their Trade and
Wealth by being Receptacles and Shelters of persecuted Protestants; so will the
contrary lose it: the Italians have a proverb, He that would improve Italy must
destroy Milan, that is, disperse the multitude of Artists there settled to the
other Cities that want them, which nothing so naturally effects, as
Persecution. Let them beware they lose it not by persecuting them, and driving
them away. The vast Trade Spain had engrossed both in the East and West Indies,
and in Africa they might yet have enjoyed, had not cruel de Alva, by his
inhumane severities, forced the Dutch to cast off the Spanish iron Yoke, and
defend their Liberties; whereby, as Sir William Temple observes, by the great
multitudes of people crowded together in a narrow compass of Land, they were
necessitated to improve their Industry at Sea; and after the Spaniards and
Fortugals, who were then the Subjects of Spain, had entirely enjoyed the
enriching Trade of the East Indies, etc. as before, for almost one hundred
years, viz. from Anno 1498. until 1595. the Dutch sent a Fleet from Amsterdam;
and then in 1600. the English sent four Ships, viz. the Assention, the Dragon,
the Hector and Susan, under the Command of Captain Lancaster, since which, by
the prudent Government of that Company, has equalized the Portuguies and
Dutch, having erected Plantations and Factories at Ormus, etc. in Persia, at
Agria, Cambasan, Sura^, etc. in the Moguls Country at Man, Salupan, Armagon,
Pecana, Siam, on the Coast of Chormandel the Isles of Sumatra, Bantam, etc.
that now they furnish Italy and Turkey with all those Indian Commodities, which
about fifty years ago they bought there, to the ruin of the Trade of Syria and
Egypt, etc. who have now only an Inland Trade by Caravans from Aleppo, Damasco
and Mecha, etc. And out of the Ashes of their Barbary Company, ruined by the
Civil Wars of Fez, arose the Levant or Turkey, the most flourishing and
beneficial, Company now in England, incorporated by King James.

I do but hint these things here to evidence the undoubted advantage of Company
Trade, insisting largely upon them in my Treatise of Traffic, in the Chapter
of Discoveries of new Trades.

And that this way of Corporation-Trade has not only greatly enlarged Trade,
but enriched the places of its Residence, we have manifold instances; the
ancient Company of Merchant-Adventurers, now called the Hamborough Company,
erected by Edward the first, in 1296. was courted by the Duke of Brabant, to
make their Residence at Antwerpe, where they first settled the English Staple,
and had granted to them great Privileges, and made the City flourish in Trade;
which being observed by that inspectious Prince Edward the third, he, to bring
the Trade to his own Ports, prohibited the Transportation of Wools, and granted
great encouragement to Dutch Weavers to set up their Craft in England, and soon
after prohibited all foreign Cloth from being transported into the Realm,
confirmed by Edward the Fourth, who settled their Privileges by Charter in the
year 1406. which has been confirmed and enlarged by all his Successors.

Queen Elizabeth, for the better vending their Cloths, when their Quantity
exceeded home Markets, gave them power under the Great Seal to treat with
foreign Princes and States for places to settle the Residence of their Factors,
and Stores; upon which all the Princes and States in Flanders, Holland and
Germany strove who should enjoy them; and wheresoever they removed, they drew a
vast Trade after them: their present Residence is at Dortrech for the
Netherlands, and Hamborough for Germany, where the chief Court of their
Fellowship now resides: they transport all sorts of Cloths dressed and dyed,
Lead, Tin, Oil, Stockens, Hats, Spanish Fruits, and Wines; and make their
returns in Linnings, Rhenish Wines, Mather, Hops, Soap, Wire, Copper, Brass,
Iron, Steel, Quicksilver, Gunpowder, Flax, Hemp, Allom, Wax, etc. This Company
has power, by their Charter, yearly to elect a Governor, Deputy Governor,
and Assistants, and to settle their Residents and Courts in any parts beyond
Sea, and several places in England, as London York, Hull, Newcastle, etc. with
power of making Acts and Ordinances (so as they are not repugnant to the Law of
England) for the better Government of their Trade, likewise power to hear and
decide Causes, to implead, sine and punish Offenders.

This grew to be the most flourishing Company for Trade in the world, until
Philip and Mary erected the Muscovy Company, which soon wrested a great part of
their Trade from them, which were at first called the Corporation for Discovery
of new Trades, (a Design that would well suit with the present state of
Ireland) whose great Privileges were confirmed and enlarged, as before, by
Queen Elizabeth, much after the method of the other, and their Trade much the
same: and after this studious Princess, for the Improvement of the Trade and
Wealth of her Country, added to these, she found the three other Companies
beforementioned, viz. the Levant or Turkey Company, which made the first
Discovery of that vast Trade, since driven in the Signorie of Venice, and the
Dominions of the Grand Seignior; and thereby oserved the vast Trade betwixt
Aleppo and other Levant Ports with the East Indies, managed by Land carriage,
which encouraged them to enquire into a more cheap and gainful way to obtain
East India Commodities, at first Hand.

And that produced that most famous Country-inriching Company, called the East
India Company, who obtained a Charter for great Privileges from the Queen, and
has managed their Trade by a joint Stock, reported to be 600000 l. whereby
they have built and maintained a gallnt Fleet of stately Ships for War as well
as Burden, employed multitudes of people in their Plantations, Ships and
Factories, to the great Honor and Wealth of their Country.

And after this, in the 21. year of the Reign of that most famous Queen, that
is, in the year 1579. did she incorporate the Eastland Company, and endow them
with great Privileges and Immunities, to trade in Denmark, Sweden, Poland,
Prusia and Pomerland, from the River Odera Eastward.

And it is worth observing how small beginnings in Trade beget great increase;
Trade, like that Grain of Mustard Seed our Savior speaks of, being cast into
the ground, grows up to a great tree, that the Fowls of the air may lodge in
the Branches of it; and it is also observable, if foreign Traffic did live,
yet it never flourished in this part of the world, until it was managed by
united Stocks and Policies, as in the forementioned instances in our own
Country, besides what is of the same kind amongst all our Neighbors
flourishing in Trade.

And as in these many examples from past times evidence that they esteemed this
way of Traffic the only way to increase Trade, so is their Wisdom approved
and confirmed by the prudent in this age, His Majesty that now is has set to
his Seal, that Corporation-trade is the strength of foreign Traffic, by his
not only confirming what his Royal Predecessors before did, but also by his
adding the African and Canary Companies; the first not only endowed with
privilege, that sounds like Princely Prerogatives; as power of Peace and War,
raising Forts, building and equipping Ships of War, etc. to appoint Governors,
to constitute Laws, etc. and dignified with the title of the Royal Company; and
well they may, when His Royal Highness has bore Office, and the chief Princes
and Nobles of England enrolled Members, as Prince Rupert, Duke of Buckingham,
Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Peterborough, St. Albans, Sandwich, Bath, Arlington,
Shastsbury, etc. and the Teritories of this Royal Company is from Sally in
South Barbary to Cape de Bona Esperanza, a Princely Dominion. And having thus
briefly hinted, how the Wisdom and Experience of past ages, and many Nations
have set to their Seals, to the rationality and peculiar advantage to this way
of improving Trade by united Stocks and Policies. I shall hint some
inconveniences attending its omission.

First, the want of settled Correspondency for want of Intelligence is the
ruin of Trade; for when men grope out a Trade, as blind folk do their way,
they stumble at many a stone, and run their heads against many posts which
light would prevent.

And few single persons, at least in Ireland, are able to carry on such a Trade
as will maintain Servants, or Factors, to inform them how the Rates of Goods
rule at the several parts they trade with, but must depend upon the Advice of
such persons upon the place, whose Interest it is to encourage their Principles
to confine to them, let Goods turn to Profit or Loss, they will deduct their
Provision, etc. which contracts much perplexity and confusion in Trade; whereas
Trade in Company, managed with united Stocks, prevents them, being able to bear
the charge of able Factors in the Country they trade unto; and able to bear a
considerable loss, which would ruin a particular person, able to keep their
Goods when Markets are low, till they rise, able to ingross the Bulk of a
Commodity when brought low by unadvised clogging of Markets, and thereby raise
Rates; for by their well governed Correspondency they are informed not only
what Rates Goods go at, but what quantity of them are in the Stores, at each
foreign port, and what time they will probably take for consumption, what kind
of Vintage or Crops is in the Countries producing them, etc. and by these views
can discourage their increase at home, until their Markets mend abroad, that
they may make their Commodities pay Interest for their lying; and without these
and the like expedients, no man can secure a Trade to turn to any certain
Account; but as a mere Lottery, some Voyage brings a prize, and some a blank;
whereby men of small Stocks are often times undone, and the best perplexed and
discouraged.

Secondly, This Trade in Company with a considerable united Stock, will
preserve a Trade from ruin by Interlopers, that will be nibling at Traffic
they understand not; as Pedlars at Land, so these at Sea, perplex and ruin the
Trade of skilful able Merchant, sand do themselves no good: for, as Pedlers may
undersell the ablest Shopkeepers in some small Wares, by living after a
beggarly vagrant way, paying no Rents, nor bearing no charge in their Country,
and maintaining themselves by conditioning where they sell small Markets to
have Victuals, etc. into the bargain; so these Sea-pedlers much after the same
manner maintain themselves, and thereby are able to undersell the Merchants,
who have great Families to maintain at home, besides chargeable Factors abroad,
great Duties to pay to the King, chargeable Offices to bear in their Cities,
etc. and if the Merchants shall have no more privilege from the State than the
Interloper, he will be discouraged, etc. and the Trade of the Country ruined
from these and the like inconveniences, etc. which I have observed to attend
the Trade of Ireland, by the small Trade I have driven there my self.

1. In the Trade of Wools, one of the chief Commodities of the Country, greatly
damnified, their Wools sometimes vended at half their value, near to the
undoing of the Sheep-master, etc.

Proceeding principally from the abuse of Trade by Interlopers: for, although
Wools must rise and fall with the Manufactures of England, where they are
chiefly vended, yet as the principle Clothiers of England will store up their
Cloths and Stuffs when Markets fail, until they can sell them to profit; so
should the principle Sheep-masters reserve their Wools, and the Wool-Merchants
store up poor men's small parcels until Trade mend, and then not tumble over
great quantities, to clog and lower Markets; but to feed Markets as they
observe their Trade requires; by which means the Wools of Ireland were kept up
to a competent Rate for 7 years together by my self, as both the Sheep-masters
and Skinners in the Province of Leinster and Connaght have often owned to me.

2. So for Tallow, and Butter, etc. trading in them becomes a Lottery from the
same cause, as my self experienced several times, and perticularly in the year
1670. having occasion to buy a considerable quanty, I agreed for several Tuns
at 24. and it fell, I bought more at 23. it still fell, to 22. and in some
parts of the Kingdom 21. I marvelled at it, my Intelligence giving no advice
that any great quantities were in the Merchants hands, either at London or in
foreign Markets, but bore a competent rate, only low in the West of England; I
suspected it only proceeded from our Blind man buff Merchants cloging the
Market; I stopped shiping my own, and presently bought up all I could in Dublin
at price current, and writ to my Correspondents and Factors in all parts of
Ireland, to do the same upon my account; upon which the Price presently
started, and rise to 24 and 25. and so held it that season.

By which Experience in these and several other Commodities, I observed the
Trade of Ireland was ruined by disorder; and was preservable, and capable of
Improvement, if rightly managed by considerable Stocks, either in single hands,
conducted by the prudence of an experienced Merchant, or in Company, by a
prudent Governor and Court of Assistance, according to the paterns of the
aforementioned Companies of England, etc.

3. This is the only Expedient to rescue the Government of our Trade out of the
hands of foreigners, at whose mercy we are, whether we shall have a high or a
low Rate for our Native commodities; for they that command the largest Capital,
or Stock of a Kingdom or State, will rule and govern the Trade of it, and set
the Rates on all Commodities exported or imported.

Object. Englands Trade is divided into Companies, which you have named, as
Hamborough, Muscovy, Levant, East India, etc. and would you propose all the
Trade of Ireland to be contained in the circuit of one Company?

Answ. Though the great Trade of England and Holland, etc. may well bear and
fully employ several Companies with joint stock, etc. yet the Trade of Ireland
will not; England began with one Corporation for Trade in Edw. the thirds time,
and erected no more until Philip and Mary, who granted their Patent for the
Muscovy Company, which was upwards of 200 years: for Trades as well as Pastures
may be overstock'd, and thereby starved; for no Trade thrives where the
Merchant grows not rich, as well as the Country benefited, and as the best of
Trades may be made bad by too many of the same Faculty in one City; so the best
expedient for Foreign traffic may be rendered unsuccessful by erecting more
Corporations than the commerce of the Country will bear: for Traffic like
Water runs with the deepest and strongest current, when it is by banks reduced
to a narrower channel; and when it begins with Nilus to overflow its banks it
is time enough to increase its channels; as I show in the Chapter of the
Progress of Trade: and from hence it was, after London began to gain a further
inspection into Foreign traffic, they grew so soon weary of the Yield of the
Hance, which from the time of our Henr. 3. to Philip and Mary were not only
permitted, but courted and encouraged in their Commerce with us, enjoying great
Privileges and paying small Duties; from which time their Customs were
enhanced from one to twenty per Cent. the Hance not only complained, but
clamoured aloud, for breach of their ancient Privileges confirmed unto them by
long prescription, from thirteen successive Kings of England, the which they
pretended to have purchased with their Money: King Philip undertook to
accommodate the business, but Qeen Mary dying, and he retiring, nothing was
effected; complaints being afterward made to Queen Elizabeth, she answered,
that as she would not innovate any thing, so she would protect them still in
the immunities and condition she found them; hereupon their Navigation and
Traffic was suspended a while, which proved very advantageous to the English
Merchants; for upon this they tried what they could do themselves herein; and
their Adventures and Returns proving successful, they took the whole Trade into
their own hands.

This so nettled the Hance, that they devised all the ways that a discontented
people could to draw upon our Staplers the ill opinion of other Nations and
States; but that proving of too small a force to stop the current of so strong
a Trade as they had got footing into, though they applied themselves to the
Emperor, as being a Body incorporated to the Empire, and upon complaint
obtained Ambassadors to the Queen, to mediate the business, but they returned
still re-insecta: hereupon the Queen caused a Proclamation to be published,
that the Merchants of the Hance should be treated and used as all other
Strangers within her Dominions in point of Commerce, without any mark of
distinction; which they so ill resented, they quit the Country; and so ended
the Yield of the Hance, after 200 years flourishing.

Obj. Is there not a great hazard in this affair to the principle Bankers in
the mismanagement of it, either for want of skill, care or fidelity in its
ministerial Officers? etc.

Answ. There is no humane affair but is subject to injury; a Prince runs some
hazard in the choice of his Counselors, and a State in the election of their
Senators, and since there proceed no Angels from Adam, the best of men will be
subject to err.

But this constitution of Corporation-trade is as capable of a solvant rational
security, as is in the power of man to devise; and to that height, we never
heard nor read it ever failed any Undertakers these 400 years in England, or
elsewhere; but on the contrary, as it has raised many Principalities and
States, as is before observed, from poor and low condition to great wealth and
potency, so many particular Families has it raised from low and mean, to
worshipful and honorable Ranks; for the method of managing this Society gives
so clear and full an inspection into its constant state, that each of its
principle Creditors may inform himself at pleasure by the Comptrollers Books,
whether its Capital decays or increases, and what profit or loss the Return of
every Ship at the end of her Voyage produces: besides at every Quarter
Assembly the Governors, etc. are to give an account of the whole Transaction
since the last Assembly, and themselves receive an account every month of the
proceed of the Officers, and how they observe the Instructions and Institutions
of the general Assembly, which are always recorded in the Office.

Then the general Assembly of the original Bankers, etc. at their annual
Meetings have the whole transaction of the year past, with its product
presented to them fairly ingressed by the Register, of which as many of them as
desire it may have Copies, and at the same Meeting they elect their Governor,
his Deputy and Counsel of Assistants for the ensuing year, and regulate what
they find deficient in the last years Transactions; and make a new
Establishment for the ensuing years Proceed, from which the Governor, etc. must
not vary, without first summoning a general Assembly, and proposing the matter
to them; at which Assembly the Divident is to be made of the past years Profit,
which every man may either receive, or otherwise have it added to his Capital
in Bank, and so increase his Stock there.

So that upon the whole, the Stock in Bank is never out of the owners
possession, nor view, but lies as ready and as visible as his Cash in his own
coffer.

And although the original Bankers cannot withdraw their Stock, to the
weakening of the grand Capital, yet they may assign it to others, which the
Company will be obliged to accept; or otherwise give the same Rate others offer
for the Interest; so that a Stock in Bank will not be subject to so much hazard
as in a Merchants own hands, managed by his own Factors or Servants, or in a
Gentleman's hand managed by his Steward, etc. in regard few persons are capable
of keeping a daily check upon their private concerns, either in respect of
capacity, or time to perform it. Thus having not only proposed the erecting a
Corporation, who by united Stocks and Councils will propagate and improve the
Trade and Wealth of Ireland, but also strengthened my Proposition with Examples
of all Kingdoms and States flourishing in Trade, who have greatly increased
their Trade and Wealth thereby, and answered such Objections as I conjectured
might arise against it, I shall only speak of its Method, and submit the whole
to the consideration of the public spirited Judicious.

Object. If we were informed at least something of the Method of managing this
Bank, it might further give satisfaction.

Answ. The Method for managing this Bank, etc. to be settled by common consent
of the original Bankers, according to the Rules of the English or Dutch East
India Companies, or such other Method as they shall agree upon.

1. That the Persons to manage this Affair, viz. the Governor, Deputy and
Council of Assistants be annually chosen by the original Bankers, who shall be
enjoined to observe such Rules and Methods as shall be given them from time to
time, and the said Governor and Deputy, etc. to propose, and the general
Assembly to approve of their Register, Treasurer, etc.

2. That the Trade and Commerce of this Society be prescribed by the major part
of its Members at their annual Councils, at which time the Governor, etc. are
to give an account of their whole Transactions for the time past, and to
propose to the general Assembly what they shall think fit to be then
considered, for the Proceed of the Company the ensuing year.

3. That a known place be provided near the Exchange, and the Office to be open
from nine to twelve in the forenoon, and from three to six in the afternoon,
and as business increases so the time to be enlarged.

4. That a Bank Lumber be erected, to supply the occasions of the poorer sort
with small sums of Money upon Pawns at reasonable rates.

5. That the whole Constitution of the Bank, and Corporation with its
Privileges and Securities, be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

6. For the mutual Security not only against each other, but also betwixt the
Bank and all persons it shall give or receive Credit from; that they do agree,
that all their Bills and Tickets do bear the force of Bonds of the Staple, by
prevailing with the City of Dublin, etc. until a Parliament meet: that the
Governor of this Society to be still chosen Mayor of the Staple, the profit of
all Statutes acknowledge for Debt, not relating to the Bank-trade, to be still
entered in the City Book, and paid to the City Treasurer, or whom they shall
appoin^ to receive it; as also all their Entries and Certificates to bear the
Credit of a Public Notary, by swearing one Clerk of the Office in that
capacity, which will strengthen the credit of their Security, and facilitate
all their transactions.

Besides, this Affair, upon the Foundation of the Law of the Staple, will give
a legal stamp until the Kings Patent be obtained, and a Parliament of Ireland
meet to enact the same. It may be serviceable to both Kingdoms, in executing
the Laws against Transporting our Irish Wools into Foreign parts, which has
been the bane of the Clothing Trade of England as well as Ireland; for by the
advantage of our Irish Wools both France and the Low Countries have been able
to work up their own Wools to the height of our English Staple, which otherwise
they were not capable of; for as the Wools of Spain, and the more southerly
parts of France, are too tender and fine for strong, thick Cloth, so the
Northerly Wools are too course and harsh to produce it; but mixing our Wools
with either, they produce Cloth of what sort they please; by which advantage
the great Trade for Woollen Manufacture of the Hamborough, Eastland and Muscovy
Companies are much damnified, who vended the greatest proportion of our
Northern course and middle Cloths, etc. Poland, Silesia, etc. having not only
much increased the number of their Sheep, but improved the Staple of their
Wools of late years, and encouraged great numbers of the English Weavers, etc.
to settle amongst them; besides the Prince Elector Palatine has carried over
into his Country many thousands of English Families, all Artists in the Woollen
Manufacture, within these twenty years: But if the transporting of our Irish
Wools could be prevented, it would put a violent check to their progress, for
which we have good and severe Laws, only want persons interested to prosecute
and execute them; and it would be the interest of this Corporation, to use
their utmost diligence therein, both in order to increase their own
Manufactures for the supply of their Exportations, and discourage foreign
Manufactures to preserve their Market. And as it would be much their Interest,
so will they be in a capacity to effect it above any other Judicatures, by the
advantage of their Factors and Correspondents in all Ports, who will easily
discover all attempts of that kind, especially having the Authority and
observing the method of the Staple, which,

1. Limits the Transportation of staple Commodities to certain known public
places, to be bought and sold, as Newcastle upon Tine, York, Lincoln, Norwich,
Westminster, Canterbury, Chichester, Winchester, Exeter and Bristol; in
Ireland, at Dublin, Waterford, Drogheda and Cork; and for Wales, Carmarthen,
where all Wools, Wool Fells, Leather, Led, etc. were to be brought, and weighed
at the Kings Beam, and every Sack or Bag of Wool to be sealed by the Mayor of
the Staple, etc.

2. As they are by the said Act confined to places for Markets, so to Ports for
Shipping; as for York at Hull, Lincoln at Boston, Norwich at Yarmouth,
Westminster at London, Canterbury at Sandwich, Winchester at Southampton, to
be again weighed at the Ports before the Customers; and an Indenture signed
betwixt the Mayor of the Staple and the Customers; all which, with the Weight
and Custom paid, to be expressed in the Cocket at that time; every Sack of Wool
paid six shillings eight pence, two hundred Wool Fells twenty shillings, a Last
of Leather thirteen shillings four pence, and every Sow of Lead three pence;
Foreigners paid a third more besides the Merchant, to take an Oath before the
Mayor of the Staple, etc. that they should hold no Staple beyond the Sea of the
same Commodities according to the 27th. of Edward the Third, Chap. 1. State
Staple. Now if our Ancestors found reason to keep this methodical Check upon
the Transportation of Wools only, to preserve the Kings small Duty, before
England attained the Woollen Manufacture, much more ought there now to be a
stricter Check observed, when not only the Kings great Duty, but Manufacture,
which is the Wealth and Glory of the Country, depends upon it.

And for Ireland, the Staple being confined to the four Ports beforementioned,
all upon the English Sea, both for Markets and Shiping, if it were now observed
with these following Rules added, they could never wrong us of a Bag of Wool.

1. That as our Ports are prescribed, so the Markets of the Staple appointed,
as before observed in England, and every Town prescribed its Port to ship, that
the Staplers at every such Market should maintain a sworn Weigher, who should
certify to the Staple Port the Quantity and Quality of the Wool then weighed,
and to whom sold. 2. That no person be permitted to buy or sell Wools, etc. but
a Brother of the Yield of the Staple, who upon their Freedom are sworn not to
transgress its Laws: If Foreigners, to give Security to observe the Staple
Rules. 3. That no Ship be permitted to transport Wool, that do not belong
either to the Port where it was taken in, or the Port in England it is
consigned to. 4. That no Security be accepted, but known substantial
Inhabitants of the Port the Goods are shipped from. 5. That the Clerk of the
Licenses register every License, and issue no more to that person, until he
bring a Certificate or a Copy of the Cocket from the Custom-house, of the due
shiping of the former to be ^il'd. That the Certificate of its true landing be
returned in six months after the date of the Cocket to the Customer, and he to
send a Copy of it to the Clerk of the Licenses, or otherwise the Bonds be
delivered to the Mayor of the Staple to be put in suit.
These Rules being observed, I dare undertake to answer for every pound of Wool
wrong transported, and without some such Expedient, the Manufactures of England
as well as Ireland will be ruined by the Transportation of Irish Wools to
foreign Markets.

This Company of Staplers being the first Corporation of England for the
Regulation of Trade, it was dandled and hugged by the State, as that which
contained the spirit and life of all the Traffic of the Kingdom, not only to
regulate the abuses of Trade, but to recover their Trade out of the hands of
Foreigners, especially the Yield of the Hance beforementioned, who by reason of
their great Stock and Credit from so many foreign Cities incorporated with
them, engrossed the chief Trade of England, particular Merchants being not able
to thrive under their shadow, which was the reason the Staple was so often
removed from Country to Country, and City to City, still to way-lay and
interpose betwixt the Yield of the Hance and the Trade of England.

The original or beginning of the Yield of the Hance I find not; but Fitz
Stephen a Monk of Canterbury, who wrote in the time of King Stephen, observes
that Merchants of all Nations had their distinct Keys and Wharfs in London, the
Hance or Dutch had the Still-yards, the French for the Wines, the Vintry, etc.

William of Malmesbury, who wrote in the time of the Conqueror, called London a
Noble City, frequented with the Trade of Merchandises from all parts of the
World: Malmesbury cites Clifford, declaring the same in Edward the Confessors
time, 1042. and how long before is uncertain; but so long it was that they had
engrossed the chief Trade of England, etc. and had taken such deep root, it
cost the State great trouble, and the Staple great labor before they could
loosen them: Edward the first began it at Westminster, then removed it to
Canterbury, in Honor of Thomas Becket, then to Bruges in Flanders, from thence
to the diverse places in England and Ireland beforementioned, next to Calice, in
order to strengthen and support that Garrison, at which time the King had
granted him in Parliament, the twenty sixth of his Reign, Fifty shillings upon
every Sack of Wool transported for six years, and at the same time there were
yearly transported more than one hundred thousand Sacks of Wool; that during
the six years the said Grant brought into the Kings Exchequer one Million five
hundred thousand pounds sterling.

In the 37th. of Edward the third, it was granted to him for two years, to take
twenty six shillings and eight pence upon every Sack of Wool transported; and
the same year the Staple (notwithstanding the Kings Oath, and other great
Estates) was ordained to be kept at Calice, and twenty six Merchants, the best
and wealthiest of all England, to be Farmers there, both of the Town and
Staple, for three years, every Merchant to have six Men of Arms and four
Archers at the Kings cost; he ordained there also two Mayors, one for the Town,
and one for the Staple; and he took Mala capta, commonly called Mallorth,
twenty shillings, and of the said Merchants, Guardians of the Town, forty pence
upon every Sack of Wool.

In the 44th. of Edward the third Quinborough, Kingstone upon Hall and Boston
were made Staples of Wool, which matter so offended some, that in the 50th.
year of his Reign, in a Parliament at London, it was complained, that the
Staple of Wool was so removed from Calice, to diverse Towns in England, contrary
to the Statute, appointing, that Citizens and Merchants should keep it there,
and that the King might have the Profits and Customs, with the Exchange of the
Gold and Silver that was there made, by all the Merchants in Christendom,
(esteemed to amount to Eight thousand pounds by the year) the Excharge only;
and the Citizens and the Merchants so ordered the matter, that the King spent
nothing upon Soldiers, neither upon Defense of the Town against the Enemies;
whereas now he spent Eight thousand pounds by the year: in the 51th. year of
Edward the third, when the Staple was settled at Calice, the Mayor of the
Staple did furnish the Captain of the Town, upon any Road, with one hundred
Bill-men and two hundred Archers, of Merchants and their Servants, without any
Wages.

In the year 1388. the 12th. of Richard the second, in a Parliament at
Cambridge, it was ordained, that the Staple of Wools should be brought from
Middleborough in Zealand to Calice.

In the 14th. of his Reign there was granted forty shillings upon every Sack of
Wool; and in the 21th. was granted fifty shillings upon every Sack transported
by Englishmen, and three pounds by Strangers, etc.

It seems that all Commodities of the Realm are staple Merchandises by Law and
Charter, as Wools, Leather, Wool Fells, Led, Tin, Cloth, etc.

King Henry the sixth had six Wool-houses within the Staple at Westminster,
those he granted to the Dean and Canons of St. Stephen at Westminster, and
confirmed it the 21. of his Reign. Thus much for the Staple have I shortly
noted out of Stows Survey of London, fol. 496, 497.

Now by this account of the Staple, it is easy to imagine of what a high value
it was both to the Kings and Parliaments of England, for upwards of 200 years
no new Corporations for Trade were constituted; and as they increased in Trade,
it abated of its ancient vigor and splendour, after it had worn out all
Foreigners, and rescued the Clothing Trade from the Dutch, that the Wools of
England were prohibited, the Transportation of which being its chief support.

But Ireland yet transporting most of its Wools, it can lay the Foundation of a
Corporation for the Increase of its Foreign Traffic upon no better basis; the
Statute Staple being yet in force in Ireland, it will make their Constitution
legal until a Parliament be called, and no better Methods and Rules can be
contrived than what the Statute Staple institutes.

CHAP. II. The second Expedient to recover Irelands Decays in its Trade and
Wealth is, to endavour to convince England, that it is the Interest both of
King and Realm to promote it.
1. THat it is the Interest of England, that the English Interest in Ireland
should grow and flourish in Trade and Wealth is manifest, though it has been
its ruining fate, to have it otherwise apprehended by Statesmen of England both
in Court and Parliaments, which must proceed from taking wrong measures of the
English Interest of Ireland, especially since the suppression of the last
Rebellion.

For it is with Politic as with Natural Bodies, whilst the peccant Humor that
seeds the Disease is most predominant, the Body must be kept low; but so soon
as the natural Strength gains the dominion over the Distemper, the more ye
nourish it, the faster Health increases; and that this is Irelands present
case is manifest; for if it be considered, that before the last Rebellion the
Irish Interest was potent.

1. The Irish were far the greater number of Proprietors of Land, possessing
ten Acres for one; whereas now of the Ten millions eight hundred sixty eight
thousand nine hundred forty nine Acres, returned by the last Survey of Ireland,
the Irish Papists are possessed but of Two millions forty one thousand one
hundred and eight Acres, which is but a small matter above the fifth part of
the whole; and as the Proprietors of Lands, so is it in their Plantations; for
where there was one English Planter before the last Rebellion 1641. it is
judged there is three now: and in several of the principal Counties next
adjacent to England, as Wicklow and Wexford, where there was ten Irish Papists
to one English Protestant, the odds now lies on the other hand.

2. Before 1641. their Interest in the Lands and Popularity of the Inhabitants
necessitated the Government to admit them to all County-Offices, as High
Sheriffs, Justices, etc. whereby they had opportunity to encourage the Irish,
and discountenance the English; but now not one Irish Sheriff, or Justice in
the Kingdom.

3. Before the Rebellion the chief Inhabitants of all principal Cities and
strong Towns were Irish Papists, who bore all Offices, and managed the chief
Trade of those places, all which places are now planted, or at least governed
by English Protestants.

4. Before the Rebellion those Freeholders, and Proprietors of Lands, there
were in Ireland, were not the Kings Tenants; but derived their Titles from the
Irish Noblemen and Gentlemen, which contracted an immediate dependence upon
them, and kept an awing influence over them; for though the Kings of England
were owned as Lords of Ireland, yet the Lords of Ireland ruled as Kings, and
were so styled by the Kings of England, as is observed by Sir John Davis out of
several Records; says he, They governed their people by their Brehon Law, they
made their Magistrates and Officers, they pardoned and punished all
Malefactors, they made War and Peace one with another without controlment, and
this to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, page 13, 14. So Hovendon, p. 312. and
were not entirely subjected to the English Laws until the 9th. of King James:
but had that learned Observer lived until the 12th. of Charles the Second, he
would have admitted Ireland was never entirely subjected to the Crown of
England, nor the Lands of Ireland never properly called the Kings Land, until
the Act of Settlement then past; as Sir Audley Mervin, then Speaker to the
House of Commons, in his Speech to the Duke of Ormonde, called that Act
Irelands Magna Charta, it exceeding all former Grants of the Kings of England,
and former Submissions of the body of the People of Ireland in these
particulars.

1. As a free Act of Grace, when His Majesty was under no politic Obligation,
but what mere Grace and Bounty moved him, to which never any Grant before was;
for though they were still styled Acts of Grace, yet Reason of State interposed
for them; which will be easily granted, if the State of England and Ireland be
compared at the time of those former Royal Confessions, when the Irish still
treated with their Swords in their hands, or at least hid where they knew how
to find them, if they were not answered in their expectation; as in the History
of Desmonds and Tyrones, etc. Rebellion is manifest. 2. Former Grants did only
dispose of some Countries, or Lordships, to some few persons who depended upon
the Crown, and all others upon them: but this of the whole Land, that was not
before disposed of; whereby there is more Tenants to the Crown settled by this
Act, above forty for one, than by any former Grants. 3. Not only the Lands of
Ireland, but all the Cities and strong walled Towns are secured in hands true
to the Crown of England by this Act, that never were before. 4. By this Act
there is a Revenue secured to the King, sufficient to maintain a complete Army
to preserve the Peace, which never was before.
Therefore I argue the state of the Interest not only of the Crown but of the
Kingdom of Ireland is altered, as to the Freehold Interest above double, nay
treble, to what it ever was before; the English being in possession, by that
Act, of four millions five hundred sixty thousand thirty seven Acres, and the
Irish but in two millions three hundred twenty three thousand eight hundred and
nine, so that if the majority of Proprietors may give the denominations to a
Country, which usually it does, Ireland is become West England.

Besides this, the governing party universally professes and only incourageth
the English public Worship; it is governed by English Laws enacted by English
Parliaments, and administered by English Judges, guarded by an English Army, and
governed by English Ministers of State, to that degree it never was before; and
all this administered by the absolute Commission from the King of England: and
must it yet be kept under, and esteemed of as an Irish Interest, and Country?
when the very Nature and civil Constitution of Ireland is altered; and
proportionably ought the Wealth and Prosperity of it to be promoted by England
for these Reasons.

1. It is the Interest both of the Crown and People of England to enable the
English Interest of Ireland not only to support its self in peace, but to
defend its self in war; which nothing but promoting its Trade and Wealth will
do, especially the Wealth of its Cities and walled Towns: for the increasing
its Wealth in the Fields, does rather increase its danger, by enouraging the
needy Natives the rather to rise, when they observe how easily they can possess
themselves of so great a Booty; but the Wealth of the Cities and strong Towns,
which is the trading Stock of the Nation, is secure, and ready to be employed
in the defense of their King and Countries Interest, when in danger: besides,
they are the only security and refuge to the distressed English, when banished
from their Country Habitations; and these places of strength cannot subsist
without Trade and Manufacture, but by more chargeable Garrisons than the Revenue
of Ireland will bear.

And what Ireland cannot do in order to its safety, England must supply, to
prevent its own danger; for if ever an Enemy surprise and possess Ireland,
especially the French, England must maintain a greater standing Force to secure
themselves, than would have preserved Ireland, if employed in its Defense: it
is not a groundless proverb, He that would England win must with Ireland first
begin; and if the French, who has already the opposite Coast, and Harbors
from Dunkirk to Breast, ever obtain Ireland, they will then surround three parts
of four of England, and a great part of Scotland, so near that in a few hours
they may invade what part they please; which would necessitate England to be at
the charge of a considerable standing Army and Fleet, to prevent French
Invasion, at double the charge of preserving Ireland now: and the Invader with
two ordinary Squadrons of Ships, one at Breast, and the other at Baltimore,
Bantrie, or any of those bold Western Harbors, they would so distress the
Trade of England, a Ship should with much difficulty pass Southward without a
great Convey, but they would seize him; and then possessing the Wools of
Ireland, they would utterly ruin the Clothing Trade of England; and if nothing
else can, that will convince England, when too late, that the strength of the
English Interest of Ireland is their Bulwark, as to foreign Invasion of their
Country, and violent wresting from thence their Trade.

The second Reason is, because Englands neglect herein has been the cause of
that intolerable charge Ireland has cost England, in preserving and recovering
its Interest in Ireland in times past, more than Ireland was worth to be bought
and sold when Henry the second first conquered it.

Cambden in his Appendix to Eliz. tells us, Tyrones War cost England one
million one hundred ninty eight thousand seven hundred and seventeen pounds:
Borlacy in his History of the Rebellion of 1641. computes the Charge of England
in that War unto twenty two millions one hundred ninty one thousand two hundred
fifty eight pounds three shillings; then compute the Charge of its first
Conquest by Henry the second, with the suppressing of the several Rebellions
from that time unto Tyrones Rebellion 1595. to cost England but double as much
as Tyrones Suppression did, which (if Spencer mistakes not) were every seven
years in the Queens time; and he writ his View of Ireland in the later end of
her long Reign of forty four years, which were at least six Rebellions in the
Queens time; (and it is evident by our Histories, as I have noted in my
Catalogue, Ireland never enjoyed seven years peace together from its first
Conquest to that time;) then Ireland has cost England twenty four millions
five hundred eighty eight thousand six hundred ninty two pounds, which is near
three pounds per Acre, one with another, for all the Land they possess in
Ireland, which is above double its value now, and above four times its worth to
purchase Anno 1172. when Henry the second conquered it; and so sensible were
our Predecessors hereof, that in the 11th. year of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Henry
Sidney Lord Deputy, in the Preamble to the Act of Parliament for a Subsidy they
thus expressed themselves to the Queen, viz. Considering the infinite masses of
Treasure, able to purchase a Kingdom, that your most noble Progenitors have
exhausted for the Government, Defense and Preservation of your Majesty's Realm
of Ireland: and in the body of the said Act thus; We for the Alienation of some
part of your Majesty's inestimable Charge do revive the said Subsidy: yet after
this Desmond, and (toward the later end of the Queens Reign) Tyrone were
chargeable Rebels to Ireland: and that most excellent Governor, of whom
Campion gives this Character; A man much beloved, stately without disdain,
familiar without contempt, very continent, learned in many Languages, a great
Lover of Learning, skilful in Antiquities, in utterance happy, etc. This Noble
person, who had spent the most part of his Life in Ireland, viz. from the third
of Queen Mary to the thirteenth of Elizabeth, March 25. 1571. in his most
elegant Speech in Parliament, printed at large by Campion, in Reply to some
that grumbled at the Charge of the Army, reasons thus; Many a good fellow talks
of Robin Hood, that never drew in his Bow, and many an idle Head is full of
Proclamations, etc. but let me see which of them can justify that Ireland can
spare the Army, etc. Are your Enemies more tractable, are they fewer, are your
selves of force to match them? if you be, then were England stark mad, to
disburse thirty thousand pounds a year, for no other purpose but to vex and
grieve you; that were like the Husband who gelded himself to anger his Wise,
etc. whose Arguments are still in force, for the keeping up a potent Army in
Ireland, notwithstanding the Charge.

I could give many instances of the vast Charge Ireland has put England unto,
above what it was ever worth to purchase; all which intolerable Charge has
proceeded from the not improving the English Interest in Ireland by Trade and
Manufactures; whereby the English Planters have been constrained to betake
themselves to Husbandry amongst the Irish for their livelihood, and the Irish
being better acquainted with the nature of the Soil, and accustomed to a more
frugal way of living, have eaten up the substance of the English, by which they
have been constrained to court their Friendship; and by their Fosterings, and
mixtures by Marriage, multitudes of them have embraced their Religion, Customs
and Manners, and degenerated to their Interest, as was manifest in the last
Rebellion; the strength of the Irish consisted in the degenerate English.

And as Ireland is thus altered in its Estates, strong Holds, etc. treble to
what it ever was before; so the Inhabitants, both Irish and degenerate old
English, are many of them now English Protestants; there are many of the
Tools, Burns, Cavenaghs, Releys, o Neales, o Bryans, o Moors, o Sulivants,
Mac Cartys, Mac Laughlins, Mac Guires, etc. are now English Protestants: and
more might have been long since, says Spencer, if the English Government had
done their parts, to have supplied the Country with learned, pious, and painful
Preachers, that would have out-preach'd, and outlived the Irish Priests in
holy and godly Conversations, which that most intelligent Observer of Englands
Defects in the Irish Affairs, page 113. says thus; In planting of Religion
thus much is needful to be observed, etc. that it be not sought forcibly, to be
impressed into them with terror, and sharp penalties, as now is the manner; but
rather delivered and intimated with mildness and gentleness, so as it may not
be hated before it be understood, and their Professors despised and rejected:
And therefore it is expedient, that some discreet Ministers of their own
Countrymen be first sent over amongst them, which by their meek persuasions and
instructions, as also by their sober lives and conversations, may draw them
first to understand, and afterward to embrace the Doctrine of their Salvation:
for if the ancient godly Fathers, which first converted them, when they were
Infidels, to the Faith, were able to pull them from Idolatry and Paganism to
the true Belief in Christ, as St. Patrick and St. Columb; how much more easily
shall godly Teachers bring them to the true understanding of that which they
already profess? wherein it is a great wonder to see the odds which is between
the Zeal of Popish Priests, and the Ministers of the Gospel; for they spare not
to come out of Spain, from Rome, and from Rhemes, by long toil, and dangerous
traveling hither, where they know peril of Death awaiteth them, and no Reward
or Riches is to be found, only to draw the people unto the Church of Rome;
whereas some of our idle Ministers, having a way for credit and estimation
thereby opened unto them, and having the Livings of the Country offered unto
them, without pains, and without peril, will neither for the same, nor any Love
of God, nor zeal of Religion, nor for all the good they may do, by winning
Souls to God, be drawn forth from their warm nests, to look out into Gods
Harvest, which is even ready for the Sickle, and all the Fields yellow long
ago; doubtless those good old Fathers will (I fear me) rise up in the day of
Judgment to condemn them: thus this great Scholar and true Protestant avers,
the true Religion is not to be planted by penal Laws, or the terror of
punishments, which may fill a Church with temporising Hypocrites, but never
with sincere Professors; nor is it to be propagated by a vicious, slothful
Minister: So Heylin writing of the Irish, says he, For their Religion they
either adhere to the Pope or their own superstitious Fancies, etc. and it is no
wonder they should, there being no care taken to instruct them in the
Protestant Religion, either by translating the Bible or English Lyturgy into
their own Language, etc. And to manifest the Irish are as capable of Conviction
as others, he instances in Ric. Fitz Ralph Archbishop of Armagh, who flourished
an. 1350. a declared enemy to the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome,
Heyl. Cosm. 341.

But notwithstanding these Defects that have been in the Governments and
Clergy, it is evident many of the ordinary sort of Irish Papists are now
Protestants; and not only they, but diverse Noble and Worshipful Families of
great Interest in their Country formerly Papists, are now Protestants; as
appears by the annexed Catalogue of the Irish Nobility; which, as it greatly
weakens the Popish Irish, so it much strengthens the English Protestant
Interest, by reducing the highest Court of Judicature from an Irish to an
English constitution, which does alter the nature of our Parliaments; that as
the House of Commons, if Election be permitted without a Test, will be three
for one on the English side, as they that know the constitution of the
Corporations in the annexed Schedule will grant; so the House of Pe^rs is
hereby reduced at least three for one on the English Protestants side, as by
the annexed Catalogue appears: and while God blesses us with an English
Protestant King and Parliament, Ireland can never degenerate from an English
Protestant Interest: and therefore may safely be trusted under the Conduct of
an Irish Protestant chief Governor; as in the next Chapter is asserted.

A LIST of what PLACES return PARLIAMENT MEN IN IRELAND.
Leinster.
COunty of Catherlough 2 Bor. of Catherlough 2 Borough of Old Leighlin 2 total
6 County of Dublin 2 City of Dublin 2 University of Dublin 3 Bor. of Newcastle
2 Bor. of Swords 2 total 11 Villa de Drogheda 2 County of Kilkenny 2 Bor. of
Callen 2 Borough of Thomas Town 2 Bor. of Gowran 2 Bor. of Kells 2 Bor. of
Emisteoge 2 Bor. of Knoctopher 2 Bor. of St. Kennis 2 City of Kilkenny 2 total
18 County of Kildare 2 Bor. of Kildare 2 Bor. of Naas 2 Bor. of Athy 2 total 8
County Regis 2 Bor. of Philips Town 2 Bor. of Byrr. 2 Bor. of Banagher 2 total
8 County of Mead. 2 Bor. of Trim 2 Bor. of Kells 2 Bor. of Navan 2 Bor. of
Athbuy 2 Bor. of Duleeke 2 Bor. of Ratooth 2 total 14 County Reginae 2 Bor. of
Bellakill 2 Bor. of Maryborough 2 Port Arlington 2 total 8 County of West Mead
2 Bor. of Athlone 2 Bor. of Four 2 Bor. of Kilbegan 2 Bor. of Mullingar 2
total 10 County of Wicklow 2 Bor. of Wicklow 2 Bor. of Caresford 2 Bor. of
Baltinglass 2 total 8 County of Wexford 2 Town of Wexford 2 Town of Ross 2 Bor.
of Eniscourthy 2 Bor of Featherd 2 Bor. of Bannow 2 Bor. of Cloghmaine 2 Bor.
of Arkloe 2 Bor. of Taghman 2 Bor. of Newborough 2 total 20 County of Longford
2 Town of Longford 2 Bor. of Lanesborough 2 total 6 County of Louth 2 Bor. of
Dundalk 2 Bor. of Arthdee 2 Bor. of Carlingford 2 total 8

Munster.
County of Cork 2 City of Cork 2 Bor. of Mallow. 2 Bor. of Baltimore 2 Bor. of
Cloghne Kilty 2 Bor. of Bandonbridge 2 Bor. of Kinsale 2 Bor. of Youghal 2
total 16 County of Clare 2 Bor. of Inish 2 total 4 County of Kerry 2 Bor. of
Traley 2 Bor. of Dinglecough 2 Bor. of Ardfart 2 total 8 Cunty of Limerick 2
City of Limerick 2 Bor. of Kilmalock 2 Bor. of Askeaton 2 total 8 County of
Tipperary 2 Town of Tipperary 2 Bor. of Clonmell 2 Bor. of Featherd 2 Town of
Cashell 2 Bor. of Thurles 2 total 12 County of Waterford 2 City of Waterford 2
Bor. of Dungharvan 2 Bor. of Lismore 2 Bor. of Tallow 2 total 10

Vlster.
County of Ardmagh 2 Bor. of Ardmagh 2 Bor. of Charlemount 2 total 6 County of
Antrim 2 Bor. of Belfast 2 Bor. of Carickfargus 2 Borough of Lisbon 2 Borough
of Antrim 2 total 10 County of Cavan 2 Bor. of Cavan 2 Bor. of Belturbett 2
total 6 County of Down 2 Bor. of Down 2 Bor. of Newtown 2 Bor. of Newry 2
Ballkillaleagh 2 Bor. of Bangar 2 Bor. of Hilsborough 2 total 14 County of
Donnegall 2 Bor. of Lifford 2 Bor. of Ballishanon 2 Bor. of Kilbegs 2 Bor. of
Donnegall 2 Bor. of St. John's Town 2 total 12 County of Farmanagh 2 Bor. of
Eniskilling 2 total 4 County of Londonderry 2 City of Londonderry 2 Bor. of
Coleraine 2 Bor. of Lamnevaddy 2 total 8 County of Monaghan 2 Bor. of Monaghan
2 total 4 County of Tyrone 2 Bor. of Donnegall 2 Town of Clogher 2 Bor. of
Agber 2 Bor. of Strabane 2 total 10

Connaght.
County of Gallway 2 Bor. of Gallway 2 Bor. of Athenry 2 Bor. of Tuam 2 total 8
County of Leitrim 2 Bor. of James Town 2 Bor. of Carickdrumrusk 2 total 6 Couty
of Mayo 2 Bor. of Castlebarr 2 total 4 County of Roscommon 2 Bor. of Roscommon
2 Bor. of Tulsk 2 total 6 County of Sligo 2 Bor. of Sligo 2 total 4

The whole number 285

Of which, considering the present constitution of these Corporations, no man
can think where ten Papists can carry an Election.

A Catalogue of the present PEERS of IRELAND, 1681. not in exact Order as to
Seniority, though I used my utmost endeavors to have done that, designing only
to manifest the Strength of the English Interest in the House of Peers.
PROTESTANTS. PAPISTS. Duke Ormond. Marquess Antrym. Earls. Kildare Thomond
Cork Desmond Barrymore Mead Ossery Roscommon Londonderry Donnegall Arran
Conaway Carberry Ardglass Rannalagh Cavan Inchiquin Clancarty Orrery Mountroth
Drogheda Waterford Mountalexander Down Longford Tyrone
Earls. Clanrickard Castlehaven West Mead Fingall Castlemayne Carlingford.
Viscounts. Grandison Wilmot Loftus of Ely Swords Kilmurry Valentia
Maryborough Castleton Chaworth Sligoe Waterford Strangford Tuam Cashell Carlow
Cullen Shannon Mazareene Dromoor Dungarvan Dungannon Kells Fitz Harding Clare
Charlemont Powerscourt Blesinton Granard Lanesborough Ross
Viscounts. Costalo Mayo Merrion Fairfax Fitz Williams Gormanston Fermoy
Rathcoole Barefore Brunker Galmoy Kingsland Mountgarret Dowth Evagh Kilmallock
Ikerine Glanmaleyra Claine Down Tracy.
Barons. Kinsale Kerry Hoath Mountjoy Foliot Maynard Dundalk Digbey Lifford
Herbert Loghlin Coleraine Leitrim Donamore Blaney Killard Kingston Colooney
Santry Lowth Glawnally Altham Castlesteward.
Barons. Athenry Cahir Baltimore Strabane Slane Trimleston Dunsany Dunboyn
Upper Ossory Castleconnell Brittas.


Besides, the Protestants have the advantage of our reverend Protestant Judges,
and the Kings learned Counsels, to advise and countenance the Protestant
Interest in Ireland in that highest Court.

A Catalogue of the Nobility of Ireland Anno 1571. recorded by Campion fol. 5.
Earls. GErrald Fitz Girald of Kildare, His eldest Son Lord Baron of Ophaly.
Sir Thomas Butler of Ormond and Ossery, His eldest Son Viscount Thurles. Fitz
Girald of Desmond, His eldest Son Baron of Inshycoin. Sir Richard Bourk of
Clanrickard, His eldest Son Baron of Donkeline. Conegher Obrene of Thomond, His
eldest Son Baron of Ibrecane, Mac carty More of Clarcar, His eldest Son Baron
of Valentia
Viscounts. Barrie, Roche, Preston of Gormanstown, Eustace alias Power of
Baltinglass, Sir Richard Butler of Montgaret, Deces,
Barons. Lord Bermingham of Athenry, John Bermingham, Mac Morice alias Fitz
Girald of Kery, Lord Courcey, Lord Fleming of Slane, Plunketof Killyne, Newgent
of Delvin, St. Laurance of Hoath, Plonket of Doonesawney, Barnwell of
Trimleston, Butler of Donboyne, Phitz Patrick of Upper Ossery, Clonagh Mac
Gilpatrick, Plonket of Louth, O Neal of Dungannon, Power of Curraghmore, Mac
Suretan Lord Deseret, Obrene of Inshycoiin, Mac Costilaghe Lord Nangle, Mac
William Burck Lord of Eighter Connaght.

A Catalogue of the Irish Nobility Anno 1641. as I find it in the Heralds
Office, by which may be observed something of the Seniority of their Dignities,
comparing it with that of 1681. But it is useful to inform the great alteration
of the Constitution of the House of Peers, since that time, to the advantage of
the English Interest.
Earls. GEorge Fitz Girald of Kildare, James Butler of Ormond and Ossery, Henry
O Bryan of Thomond, Ulick de Bourk of Clanrickard, James Tuchet of Castlehaven,
Richard Boil of Cork, Randall Mac Dannell of Antrym, Richard Nugent of West
Mead, James Dillon of Roscommon, Robert Bridgeway of Londonderry, George
Fielding of Desmond, William Brabason of Mead, David Barry of Barrymore,
Richard Vaugham of Carberry, Luke Plunket of Fingall, William Pope of Down,
Thomas Cromwell of Ardglass.
Viscounts. Nicholas Preston of Gormanstown, David Roth of Fermoy, Richard
Butler of Montgarret, William Villars of Grandison, Charles Wilmot of Athlone,
Henry Poor of Valentia, Charles Moore of Drogheda, Thomas Dillon of Castillo,
Nicholas Netervile of Louth, Hugh Montgomery of the Ards, James Hamleton of
Claneboy, Adam Loftus of Ely, Sapcot Beumount of Swords, Hugh Magennis of
Evagh, Thomas Cromwell of Lecale, Edward Chichester of Caricksargus, Robert
Needham of Kilmurry, Dominick Scarsfeild of Kilmallock, Thomas Somerset of
Cashell, Edward Conway of Kilultagh, Miles Bourk of Mayo, Thomas Roper of
Baltinglass, Nicholas Sanderson of Castleton, Lewis Boil of Kilmakey, Goerge
Chaworth of Ardmagh, Thomas Savile of Savile, John Scudamore of Sligo, Robert
Chalmundly of Kells, Richard Lumley of Waterford, Thomas Smith of Strangford,
Richard Wenman of Tuam, John Taafe of Cerine, William Mounton of Castlemaine,
Roger Jones of Ranelagh, Charles Mac Carry of Muskry, Richard Mulleneux of
Maryburg, Thomas Fairfax of Emeley, Thomas Bourk of Clanmorris, Pierce Butler
of Ikerine, Thomas Fitz Williams of Merryoung, Terence Dempsey of Glanmaleyra.
Lord Barons. Richard Bermingham of Athenry, Girald Courcey of Kinsale, Patrick
Fitz Morris of Kerry and Lixmew, William Flemming of Slain, Nicholas St.
Laurance of Hoath, Patrick Plunket of Dunsawny, Robert Barnwell of Trimleston,
John Power of Coroghmore, Edward Butler of Dunboyne, Barnabas Mac Gilpatrick of
Upper Ossery, Oliver Plunket of Louth, Murrough O Bryan of Inchequin, Edmond
Bourke of Castleconnell, Thomas Butler of Cahir, Mountjoy Blunt of Mountjoy,
Charles Lambert of Cavan, Theobald Bourke of Brittas, Andrew Steward of
Castlesteward, James Belfoure of Glanawley, Thomas Foliot of Ballishanon,
William Maynard of Wicklow, Edward Georges of Dunalke, Robert Digbey of
Geashell, William Harvey of Rosse, William Fitz Williams of Lifford, William
Caufield of Charlemount, Theodore Dockray of Culmore, Girald Aungier of
Longsord, Henry Blancy of Monaghan, Laurence Esmond of Limerick, Dermond O
Malune of Glan Malune and Curety, Edward Herbert of Castleisland, Cecil Calvert
of Baltimore, William Brereton of Loghlin, Hugh Hare of Coleraine, William
Sherrard of Leitrim, Roger Boil of Broghill, Conner Mac Guire of Iniskilline,
Francis Ansley of Mount Norris.

And as it is the Interest of the Crown and Realm of England, to promote the
prosperity of the English Interest in Ireland; so it is equally the Interest of
the Irish Papists themselves to aid and promote the same; their contrary
apprehensions have been their ruin: for from thence have proceeded all their
bloody Massacres and Rebellions; and though it has cost England vast
quantities of Blood and Treasure to subdue them, yet they paid the Reckoning at
last, to the utter ruin of most of the great Lords and Septs: and just it
should be so, if the Right and Title of England to what it possessed, and
endeavored to keep in Ireland be impartially considered.

If we omit what all our Histories record of the ancient Sovereignty the Kings
of Britain claimed, and enjoyed in Ireland; as that in the time of Gurguntius,
Anno Dom. 359. they were his Subjects, and after that in the time of King
Arthur Anno 519. above 600 years before Henry the second conquered it 1172. the
King summoned all the Kings and Lords of Ireland to attend Gilmarrow, their
Monarch, and with him perform their Homage at Carlisle, which they all did
accordingly.

And only consider the justness of the Cause of Strongbow and his Comrades in
their first Adventure, it was not only with the consent, but at the desire of
their own King; they contracted with Dermot Mac Morrough King of Leinster, a
banished oppressed Prince, to aid him in the recovery of his just Rights, a
quarrel not only approved to be just, but charitable, by all Casuists, Pagans,
Turks, Jews, and Christians, to relieve and assist the weak and oppressed
against the strong Oppressor, and what was the just Right of Mac Morrough to
recover, was in his power to dispose, and lawful for his Aiders to receive; it
being their due by contract before they would adventure, that Strongbow should
have delivered Mac Morroughs only Daughter and Heir in Marriage, and his
Kingdom after her Fathers decease, and that Fitz Steephen and Fitz Girald, etc.
should have the Town of Wexford, and two Cantreds of Land adjoining, which
places were accordingly gained by their Sword, and given them in possession by
the legal Proprietor; and had they been permitted quietly to enjoy this small
part they so rightfully possessed, they had gone no further.

But instead thereof, Roderick King of Connaght, then sole Monarch of Ireland,
raises the whole Kingdom to drive out Mac Morrough and his Welshmen; upon
which he appeals to Strongbow, and renewes former contracts, who hasts over
with about 1200 fresh Men, by them wars with the Waterfordians, who were in
Arms against him, took the City, and married the Kings Daughter, with an
assurance of the Reversion of the Kingdom, and soon after disperses his
Enemies, then surrendered all his Conquests to the King, who came over with a
new Force to secure his Interest, which so terrified the Irish, that all their
Kings and great Lords proffered to to be tributary, and swore Allegiance; and
had they so continued, they had felt no farther damages.

But no sooner was the Kings back turned, but they are again up in Arms, to
disposess the English of what they had so justly achieved, who still subdued
them, and gained ground of them, and obtained Grants of their new Conquests
until all the Irish Kings and great Lords were vanquished, and their Lands,
etc. possessed by the English Victors: the Heirs of Ulster and Connaght married
to the Kings Subjects, whose successive Heirs in process of time were married
unto the Royal Family; and so their Lands and Honors came Hereditary in the
Crown, who of right disposed of them at pleasure.

Now had it not been the Interest as well as the Duty of the Irish, to have
submitted to their first Concessions? Then Dermot Mac Morrough had sustained no
wrong, his right Heir had enjoyed his Dominion, and the rest of the Irish great
Lords had enjoyed their particular Rights; none pretended to disturb them,
until constrained in their own defense.

So if we take a further view of their many Insurrections, and perfidious
Rebellions, since they held their Honors and Lands from the Crown of England;
it will appear they were tempted to it by the weakness of the English Interest;
as in times of troubles in England by the Barons Wars, and Struggles betwixt
the two Roses, etc.

When the Kings of England drew over part of their Army for Ireland, some
taking one side, and some the other, which did not only weaken Englands
Strength in Ireland, but divided what were left into powerful Factions betwixt
the great English Lords of Ireland; which became the cause of the ruin of that
great Family of Desmond, with several others of good Rank, who, though
degenerated from their English Civilities, yet after they turned Rebels against
their Prince, they fell wholly off to the Interest, Manners and Customs of his
and their own former Irish Enemy, whereby Ireland was to be new conquered and
replanted: for the degenerate English were more stubborn Rebels, and with more
difficulty subdued, than the rebellious Natives; for although their Minds and
Manners were degenerated, they had so much English Blood left in their Veins,
as gave them English Courage and Resolution, whereby Tho. Fitz Giralds and
Desmonds Rebellions became harder work to subdue, than any before them, they
also receiving great Encouragements and Aids from the Pope and King of Spain,
upon the account of Religion, they became obdurate; the same Indulgences that
were granted to the Soldiers fighting against the Turk in the holy War being
sent them, whereby their Consciences were not only released from their
Obligations of Allegiance to their Prince, but strongly engaged on the behalf
of holy Church, to extirpate that mad and venomous Doctrine and Hellish
Opinion, as the Protestant Faith was then termed, in a Pamphlet then published,
entitled, A Declaration of the Divines of Salamanca and Vallidolid, dispersed
through Ireland by O Sullivan a Spanish Priest; which, with diverse other
practices of the Irish to shake off the English Government, is rehearsed and
pressed by that pious Prelate, Primate Usher, the Glory of the Irish Protestant
Church, in his elegant Speech to an Assembly of all the States of Ireland,
April 1627. in which he defends my Assertion that it is the Interest of the
Irish, to aid and support the Prosperity of the English Interest amongst them:
and had they had Grace to have believed him, some thousands of Irish Families,
now utterly ruined, might have been in a prosperous state: And after he had
minded them of their traitorous tendering the Regency of Ireland to the French
King, and upon his refusal to the Spaniard, which was by him accepted; for
although Henry the fourth of France was not Apostate enough to invade his
Protestant Neighbors, yet Charles the fifth of Spain and his Son Philip were
Papist enough to admit the Popes Donation which the Irish obtained; for them
Title good enough not only to claim Ireland, and invade it with several Armies
of Italians and Spaniards, who landed at Kinsale and Kerry, to their cost, but
also to attempt England by their supposed invincible Armado in 88. but the
invincible just God did not only deliver us from their power, the Sword
destroying his Land Soldiers in Ireland, and the Sea swallowing up his Naval
Force assayling England, but also from that time blasted the Counsels and
Successes of that aspiring Monarch, that their Fame and Potency has ever since
dwindled away. Portugal and the Low Countries soon after revolted; and the
stately Don, who then talked and acted as proudly as Monsieur does now, was so
far from being able to invade his Neighbors, he has been put to his shifts
to secure his Hereditary Countries: and, as old as I am, I hope to live to see
it the case of Monsieur; who, though now styled the most Christian King, has
declared himself the most inveterate Enemy to the most Christian Faith and
Profession in the Christian World; and let but the Defender of the Faith turn
his Subjects loose, with his Commission in their pockets, they would soon
covince him of it; and let him know that the English Blood that inspired their
Ancestors at the Battle of Agincourt, etc. is boiling hot in their Veins, and
that Charles the Second may be as dreadful to France as ever was Henry the
fifth, etc. when he pleases, if our God has not given us up, for our impious
provocations, to be a prey and a spoil, as he did Israel to the Assyrians, a
bitter and hasty Nation. But to return to my Argument, that it is the Interest
of the Irish Papists to further the Protestant English Interest in Ireland, I
shall return to my reverend Author, says he, They put me in mind of the
Philosophers Observations, that such who have a vehement respect to a few
inferior things are easily misled to overlook many great things; so, says he,
they have so deep a sense of their present burden of contributing small
matters toward the support of the Kings Army, to secure us from foreign
Invasions, that they overlook all those miserable Desolations that will come
upon them by a long and heavy War, which the having of an Army in a readiness
may be a means to prevent: the lamentable effects (said he) of the last Wars in
this Kingdom does yet freshly stick in our memories: neither can we so soon
forget the Depopulation of our Land; when, besides the combustions of War, the
extremity of Famine grew so great, that the very Women, in some places by the
way side, have surprised the men that rode by, to seed themselves with the
flesh of the Horse and the Rider: and that now again here is a Storm toward,
wheresoever it will light every wise man will easily foresee, which if we be
not careful to meet with in time, our estate may prove irrecoverable, when it
will be too late to think of, Had I wist. Neither may you, my Lords and
Gentlemen, that differ from us in point of Religion, imagine that Community of
Profession will exempt you more then us from the danger of a common Eenemy;
what you may expect from a Foreigner, you may conjecture by the Answer which
the Duke of Medina Sidonia gave in this case in 88. That his Sword knew no
difference between a Catholic and a Heretic, but that he came to make way for
his Master, and what kindness they looked for from the Countrymen that were to
join with them, they might judge as well by the carriage which they ordinarily
used toward them both in the Court and Colleges abroad, as by the Advice, not
long since, presented by them unto the Council of Spain, wherein they would not
have so much as the Irish Priests and Jesuits that are descended of English
Blood to be trusted, but would have you, and all yours, to be accounted Enemies
to the Designs of Spain, in the Declaration published about the beginning of
the Insurrection of James Fitz Morice in the South, the Rebels professed, it
was no part of their meaning to subvert Honorabile Anglorum solium, their
Quarrel was only against the person of Queen Elizabeth and her Government: But
now the case is otherwise; the translating of the Throne of the English to the
power of a Foreigner is the thing that is mainly intended, and the
re-establishing the Irish in their ancient Possessions, which by the valor of
our Ancestors were gained from them. This (says he) you may assure your
selves, Manet alta mente repositum, and makes you more to be hated of them,
than any other of the English Nation whatsoever.

The danger thereof being thus common to us all, it stands us upon, to join our
best helps for avoiding of it.

Thus you may see what deep Sentiments this great good man had of Irelands
danger many years before that terrible Earthquake in 1641. tumbled down its
peace and prosperity into its first Chaos, of which this holy Priest became a
true Prophet 40 years before the Blow was given, in several Sermons preached
before the Government, yet in print to be read.

Anno Dom. 1601. from Ezekiel. 4.6. discoursing concerning the Prophets bearing
the Iniquity of Judah 40 days, accounting a day for a year, he made this direct
application in relation to the connivance at Popery at that time; From this
year, says he, will I reckon the Sin of Ireland, that those whom you now
embrace shall be your ruin, and you shall bear this iniquity: which fell out
exactly true both in point of time and thing, he also foretold all the Troubles
that befell England both relating to Church and State, and lived to see them
come to pass accordingly; as Dean Bernard, who writ his Life, and others have
observed; and also recorded some of his prophetical Expressions near his end,
of miseries yet to come upon the Church of God, as follows.

Life of Bp. Usher, p. 35.
He being asked whether he thought that great Persecution (which he had
formerly spoken of to fall upon the Protestant Churches) were past, or yet to
come, he then turned his eyes toward the face of the enquirer, and fixing them
there in a strange kind of manner, as he used to do when he spoke not his own
words, and when the power of God was upon him, said; Fool not your self with
vain hopes of its being past: for I tell you, what you have seen is but the
beginning of sorrow to that which is to come on all the Protestant Churches,
which e're long will fall under a sharper Persecution than ever yet they have
had upon them, and that by the cruel Hands of the Papists. On which words Dean
Bernard makes this Comment.

Now, howsoever I am as far from heeding of Prophecies this way as any, yet
with me it is not improbable, that so great a Prophet, so sanctified from his
youth, so knowing, and eminent throughout the universal Church, might have at
some special times more than ordinary motions and impulses, in doing the
Watchmans part, of giving warning of Judgments approaching.

But doubtless the Spirit of that holy man, like just Lots righteous Soul, was
grieved with the filthy conversation of the wicked; being well skilled in
Divine Astrology might prognosticate from Scripture Constellations, that a
people, like those of Laish, who dwell careless, quiet and secure, when there
is no Magistrate to put them to shame for the most scandalous provoking sins,
Judge. 18.1. Destruction was near when the iniquitys of the Amorites were at the
full; the Deluge destroyed the old world, and were that faithful Watchman now
alive, to behold a deluge of professed Profaneness and Debauchery committed
with a bold contempt of Gods and Man's Laws, to see men glory in actions
Heathens are ashamed of, he would conclude the time of the fulfilling of his
Prophecy was near, even at the doors.

But so obdurate were the Irish then against all that could be said or done to
oblige them to peace, and so stupefied were the English by their long peace,
and great plenty, accompanied with grievous Debauchery, nothing could reclaim
them, but the direful Judgment of God executed on them by those Irish Sabeans
and Chaldeans, or rather Cannibals; for the first did but spoil Job of his
Goods, but these eat the Flesh and drunk the Blood of the English, in a
metaphorical sense; as Psalm 14.4. Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge,
who eat up my people as they eat bread? these, as the Prophet complains,
devoured Israel with open mouth, and drunk their Blood as sweet Wine.

So great delight and pleasure did they manifest in the miserable distresses
and tortures they put the English under, no tongue can express the barbarous
inhumane Cruelties committed by them on all Sexes, Degrees and Ages, that in a
few months they destroyed (say some) one hundred and fifty thousand, others,
two hundred thousand Christians, many of whom knew not their right hand from
the left, and most of them innocent naked people, in no capacity to resist, nor
under the least suspicion of danger; many of them presuming upon their old
intimate acquaintance, and long friendly neighborhood amongst them, would not
slay; concluding their late familiarity and mutual obligations of kindness
could not so soon be forgotten, until they saw the Skean at their throats, and
then they cried out, as Caesar in the Senate House, And thou my Son Brutus! so,
What thou my old Neighbor! thou my Gossip! thou my Foster Father, or Foster
Brother! what thou my near Kinsman! etc. But so vehement was their rage, no
former Allies nor Obligations would be remembered, nor no bowels moved; many who
had been prevailed with to sit up all the night before carousing and drinking
in Taverns and Alehouses, where they had drank so many Healths to the Grandees
they favored, themselves were sick, or rather dead drunk, and were so murdered
in the morning by the same Companions before they were capable of discerning
who hurt them, or had time or sense to ask God forgiveness, their Barbarism
extending to their Souls as well as to their Bodies, frequently refusing them
time to say their Prayers, swearing they would send their Souls presently to
the Devil; and such as, through the terror of sudden Death, would go to Mass,
and promise to turn Papists, were presently murdered, least they should recant,
saying, they should dye while they were in a good mind.

An account of the particulars for the first three months of this dismal
Tragedy is recorded by Sir John Temple, Master of the Rolls, and one of His
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, a person so universally applauded for
his Prudence, Gravity and Integrity, that the Truth of his History never was or
ever will be questioned by any, but those whose works of darkness hate the
light; a Book worth the chaining to every Churches Desk, and reading over once
a year by every Family, to prevent that stupidity that is overgrowing the minds
of too many Protestants, who are sucking in with greediness their debauched
Principles in Morals, which so naturally blind the mind, they will easily, when
it shall seem to be their interest, swallow down full cups of their
Superstition, and close in with that Religion, where the most crying Sins of
profane Swearing, beastly Drunkenness, and abominable Adulteries, etc. may be
pardoned for money, without either Repentance or Reformation, as is cited by the
Author of the Mystery of Jesuitisms out of Father Bauny Filcutius Sagundus
Escober, and other of their Casuists. Vide Letter 10. 137, etc.

Now all this rage and barbarous cruelty could not proceed from inveterate
malice and revenge against their persons; for they had not given any
provocation, nor from any depravity in their Natures from principles of
Humanity; for a more kind, affable, obliging humored people are not to be
conversed with, than the generality of them, who have been educated amongst the
English, or other ways well bred: they are capable of the highest improvements
in all the liberal Sciences, and ingenious Arts; that, as Heylin says of them,
if good there is no better, if bad there can be no worse; but this cruelty
proceeds from these two causes.

1. From the bloody Principles infused into them by their Priests, who
persuaded them it was no more sin to kill a Heretic than a Dog or a Pig, nay
to pluck a bone out of a Dogs mouth, Dog being the frequent Epithete they gave
the English whilst murdering them, and this backed with a persuasion it was not
only innocent but meritorious to destroy them, in order to promote the
Catholic Cause, and that they should receive a great share of that vast stock
of Indulgences sent over by the Pope for their encouragement, blew their
Catholic zeal into such a hellish flame, it put them into such an ecstasy of
joy, they so strove who should most merit, they had no leisure to consider,
those innocent Abels Bloods would cry to Heaven for vengeance against such
cursed Cains. Sir J.T. p. 78, 85, 87.


2. As they were persuaded God would reward this labor, so were they confident
it would never be in the power of man to punish them; and that their opinion
proceeded from the visible weakness of the English Interest, whereby they
concluded the total extirpation of it was an easy work; and observing the
Herds, Flocks and Corn of the English, with the rich Furniture of many of their
Houses, the present possession of which, if they had had no eternal Reward
entailed upon them, was a violent temptation to a company of Beggars, who
little before would have esteemed themselves very rich if they had but two Cows
and four Goats of their own; for the Gentlemen who were Officers had their eyes
upon the Lands, etc. they left the Plunder much to the Scolognes and contented
themselves to buy good bargains of them, and they that were confident of
obtaining as much more before morning would sell good pennyworths over night,
that in a few days thousands of wealthy Families that, as the Prophet says,
were clothed in Scarlet embraced Dunghils, had no other raiment to cover their
nakedness but thum-ropes of straw, which these jovial Catholics would fire in
a frolic, expressing great pleasure in beholding how those desolate miserable
Christians would frisk and fret, or at the best filthy rags thrown away by the
Irish Beggars, whilst the Beggars themselves, like Dives, were well clothed and
sared deliciously every day. But now let the Survivors of them sit down and
cast up their accounts, did they gain by all this any thing but swift
destruction and desolation? what the Sword spared the grievous Famine and
dreadful Pestilence devoured, that within less than ten years after their
delicious Feast they paid such a dismal Reckoning, they wished they had
contented themselves with their own Commons.

About the years 1652, and 1653. the Plague and Famine had swept away whole
Countries, that a man might travel twenty or thirty miles, and not see a living
creature, either Man, Beast or Bird, they being either all dead, or had quit
those desolate places, that our Soldiers would tell Stories of the place where
they saw a Smoke, it was so rare to see either Smoke by day, or Fire or Candle
by night, and when we did meet with two or three poor Cabbins, none but very
aged men with women and children, and those, with the Prophet, might have
complained, we are become as a bottle in the smoke, our skin is black like an
Oven, because of the terrible Famine. I have seen those miserable creatures
plucking stinking Carrion out of a Ditch black and rotten, and have been
credibly informed they have dug Corpse out of the Grave to eat; but the most
tragical Story I ever heard was from an Officer commanding a Party of Horse,
hunting for Tories in a dark night, discovered a Light, which they supposed to
be a Fire which the Tories usually made in those waste Countries to dress their
provision and warm themselves, but drawing near they found it a ruined Cabin,
and besetting it round, some did alight and peep in at the window, where they
saw a great Fire of Wood, and a company of miserable old Women and Children
sitting round about it, and betwixt them and the Fire a dead Corpse lay
broyling, which as the Fire roasted they cut off Collops and eat.

That doubtless the Vengeance of God was as severe upon that bloody Generation,
as it was on Edom, Ezekiel. 25.12. Thus says the Lord God, Because that Edom has
dealt against the House of Judah, by taking Vengeance, and has greatly
offended, and revenged himself upon them: 13. Therefore thus says the Lord
God, I will also stretch out mine Hand upon Edom, and will cut off Man and
Beast from it, and I will make it desolate from Teman, and they of Dedan shall
fall by the Sword. 14. And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my
people Israel, and they shall do in Edom, according to mine anger, and
according to my fury, and they shall know my vengeance, says the Lord God.

And so sensible were the most sober and judicious amongst them of their
misery, that about that time they approved this Notion of mine, that it is the
Interest of the Irish Papists of Ireland to promote the strength of the English
Interest there to that height, that may utterly cut off their hopes of ever
withstanding it; they might be able to reject all tenders from abroad, and all
encitements from their Jesuited Priests at home with this short answer, Put us
not upon impossibilities, and irrational desperate attempts; we now quietly
enjoy our Estates, Lives, and liberties of Religion, so far as can rationally
be expected from a Prince of a different communion, with friendship from our
English Neighbors, equal protection of the Laws for the peaceable enjoyment of
our Estates, and encouragement to trade and planting, etc. And having been so
often deluded by you, to the ruin of so many thousands of good Catholic
Families, and the reproach of our Religion, we are resolved to run no more such
ruining courses, after so many destructive disappointments, that we and our
Ancestors have met with by dancing after your pipe. I say, were the English
Interest so fortified, that all rational hopes of extirpating it were removed,
the Irish would be out of danger of being prevailed with, to make such
destructive attempts to themselves and posterities as they have formerly done:
for although a considerable number of them may be of desperate fortunes, being
Branches of those ruined Families sequestered for former Rebellions, to whom War
is the best Trade, and Revenge desirable Wages, if they gain nothing, they
cannot lose much, but this is not the case of the body of them, there are many
of their Nobility and Gentry enjoy plentiful Estates, with the favor and
countenance of their Prince, some of whom never quitted the Interest of the
Crown in the last 12 years War, and now reap the profit of it: and multitudes
of the Commons are wealthy Merchants in our Cities, and rich Farmers in the
Country, who although they be strict Papists, yet are friendly and good
Neighbors, and just and honest Dealers, who have as much reason to dread a War
as the English themselves when out of their Catholic Frenzy, at least on such
desperate terms as a well fortified English Interest would render it.

I have discoursed many of them about this last Irish Plot, who have not only
blamed but cursed their Priests, for a company of vagrant beggarly fellows, who
having nothing to lose, nor any Families to provide for, would hazard the lives
and fortunes of others that have both, who desire to be quiet; and that the
Priests themselves are not all of a mind, nor act by the same rebellious
Principles is manifest by the Discoveries some of them have made, and Evidence
they have given against their own Primate Plunket and others lately.

Now from these and the like considerations I argue, it is the Interest of the
Irish Papists, that are in any tolerable state to live, to promote and
strengthen the English Interest amongst them to that height, that may render
all attempts against it irrational and desperate; which would not only compose
their minds to Peace and honest Industry, but discourage Foreigners from
invading, when they had little hopes of Welcome or Aid from any of the Natives
of Estates or Interest: this would in time wear off all the Jealousies, and
remove all Animosities of both sides, that a weak and feeble English Interest
in Ireland will continue and nourish: this would discourage Tories and
Wood-Kirnes from robbing and harming the English Farmers, if the Irish Farmer
were convinced it were equally their interest to discover and suppress them.

This would encourage the Natives to build and improve upon the Estates they
have left, if they were convinced, that new Wars and troubles would hazard what
they have, rather than restore them to more.

This would encourage the Tradesman and Farmer to their utmost Industry, when
they could be assured, that what they thereby attained would be peaceably
enjoyed by them and their posterities.

Nay, a potent English Interest would be a powerful motive to moderate and
dispose the better tempered, and most thoughtful amongst them, to inquire into
the Differences about Religion, when they find themselves out of danger of the
Romish Clergies power, who now keep them in such awe, they dare not read the
Scripture, nor any Protestant Author, nor confer with any Protestant Minister,
least the Priest hear of it, and enjoin them severer penance than for
Swearing, Whoring, etc. And from whence proceed this dread and awe, but from a
supposition, it may be possible to retrieve the Popish Interest again, and then
they would be subjected to the severe Discipline of the Romish Clergy for their
Disobedience and Apostasy? and multitudes there are, both Papists and others,
that would change a dangerous for a safe Religion, if they could be secured
there were no danger in the change; for all Religion founded on humane Laws
bind the Conscienses no longer than those Laws are in force: and as the Law is
altered, so must the Religion, when the fear of man and self-safety, more than
the love of Truth and desire to please God, is the motive to profess it.

And nothing is more evident, than that the Fear of God they have, is taught by
the Precepts of Men: and therefore comes within the circuit of that vain
Worship our Savior rejects, Matthew. 15.9. they cannot with David stand in aw of
Gods Word, the Standard of all Divine Worship, and Rule of all humane Society;
whilst they are prohibited the reading it, it may be well said of them, as
Christ says, Matthew. 22.29. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures: if their
Priests tell them, it is not only lawful, but meritorious, to destroy all
Heriticks, yea Heretical Kings, etc. if it tend to promote the Catholic Cause,
they must believe them, having never read, that they that resist the Power
resist the Ordinance of God, and they that resist receive to themselves
damnation: if their Priests affirm the Pope is supreme over all Princes and
worldly Potentates, and has power to excommunicate and dethrone one and set up
another, and from thence all their Subjects are absolved from their Oaths of
Allegiance, etc. they must believe it, having never read St. Peter, though
claimed for their own peculiar Apostle, from whose pretended Supremacy they
usurp theirs, who (as if he had foreseen the abuse they would put upon his
Doctrine) more expressly declares the Supremacy in the Civil Magistrate than the
other Apostles, in his first Epistle, chapter 2. v. 13. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, etc.

So St. Paul, as if he had foreseen the Apostasy of the Roman Church from their
primitive Obedience to the Civil Magistrate, is more express in his Epistle to
the Romans, chapt. 13. from the 1st to the 19th verse. than to any other Church
he writes to, says he, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers: for
there is no Power but of God. The Powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation: So that the Pope and
his Clergy must prove they are no Souls, before they can prove they are not
bound by this Divine Canon: for every Soul is required to be subject.

Object. If it be as you say, that the Irish Papists in the last bloody
Massacre were under no personal provocation to fill them with malice and
revenge, nor are depraved in principles of Humanity, but are of a sociable,
kind, friendly temper, and capable of the highest improvements in the liberal
Sciences, and ingenious Arts; whence is it they have so often been treacherous
and bloody, as their Histories declare? If you place all their Faults upon
their Religion, you might do well to instance what Points of their Religion
render them so dangerous, etc. considering they profess themselves Christians,
and own the the same God, and believe in the same Jesus, etc.

Answ. It is not the Religion of the Church of Rome, viz. what properly relates
to Faith and Worship due to God, but the Policies of the State of Rome that
render them so incompatible with civil Order and Society; multitudes of
Christians live safely mixed with Turks and Pagans in Asia and Africa, under
the Governments of their respective Patriarchs, of Constantinople, Alexandria,
Antioch, Aethiopia, India, etc. without any dread of Assassinations or
Massacres, frequent in Popish Countries; of whom it may be said, as of Manasseh
King of Israel, they have made Cities and Countries to swim with Blood, witness
Piedmont, Bohemiah, France, Ireland, Belgia, etc. besides the multitudes
destroyed by their unjust Wars in vindication of their usurped Supremacy, etc.
whereby Christendom has been made an Akeldima, and all this from Principles
foreign to their own Christianity, and novel to their Church; as was believed
in Gregory the Greats time, who exploded the Title of Supremacy, etc. as
Antichristian; but I shall respit my more particular Answer to the Supplement
at the end of this Treatise, whereto I refer all Answers to Objections, being
not willing to interrupt the argumentative part, that it is the Interest of the
Irish to promote the Prosperity of the English Protestants in Ireland.

And having hinted the miserable Desolation and Ruin a weak and feeble English
Interest has encouraged them to bring upon themselves and posterities, and the
desperate hazards of an utter Extirpation, if they should attempt another
Rebellion; and that an equal Prosperity with their English Neighbors they do
and may enjoy, if they please. I shall close this Chapter with this Repetition,
that if it be more their Interest to be in safety than in danger; to be in
equal capacity of Honor and Trust from their Prince with his Protestant
Subjects, than excluded; if it be their Interest to enjoy the Fruit of their
Labors, and leave their Possessions and Wealth to their Children, rather than
to have them possessed by others; if it be their Interest to enjoy the hearty
good Will and Respects from their Protestant Neighbors, rather than their
Prejudice, arising from their Jealousy and Dread of being massacred, robbed
and spoiled by them; in a word, if it be their Interest to secure to themselves
and posterities a settled prosperous state, rather than to be subject to
frequent ruin and destruction; then it is their Interest to promote the
Prosperity of the English Interest amongst them: for whilst that is weak and
impotent, these things can never be, at best, not long continue, whilst there
is a Pope, that can (not only pardon Rebels and Murderers, but also) approve
and applaud the most barbarous actions as meritorious, or a Foreign Popish
Prince to encourage and aid them, or a Jesuited Priest to instigate them to it.

If this be the present state of Ireland, that the English Interest there has
gained so much ground by the last Act of Settlement, etc. What now obstructs
its progress to that strength and perfection you propose? Vide Supplement.

SECT. II. Showing that above all it is the Interest of the Protestants of
Ireland to promote the potency of the English Interest in Ireland.
IF it be not only the Interest of England, but of the Romanists of Ireland to
promote the Prosperity and Potency of the English Interest, how much more is it
the great Interest of all Protestants in Ireland by all lawful and possible
means to do it? England is obliged more remotely, but the Protestants of
Ireland more immediate; would you not see and feel the miseries of 1641.
repeated? would you not see your Wives ravished, and Infants ripped out of their
Wombs, your Daughters deflowred, your innocent Babes barbarously murdered
before your eyes, your stately Buildings in a flame, your well improved and
planted Estates all laid waste, your Princes Authority despised, and his Laws
rejected, your Religion reproached and suppressed, as a pestilent Heresy? etc.
I say, if these and the like dismal calamities be worth the avoiding, then let
nothing in your power be omitted tending to the promotion and security of a
potent English Interest, which nothing will so naturally effect as a vigorous
propagation of Trade and Manufacture: it is not your building stately Houses,
nor the draining, planting and stocking your Land with the best English Corn
and Cattle, etc. will do it, your 41. Experience may convince you, all that may
be immediately surprised and destroyed by your Enemies, and put them in a
capacity to maintain a destructive War against you, but the well planting our
Wall Towns, and erecting them where they are wanting, and keeping them in a
posture of defense by their own Militia's, which will be ready Receptacles to
the English Families dispersed in the Country adjacent, and by the aid of the
Country Militia's able to imbody against an Enemy, that would fortify the
English Interest; and this may be easily effected, without much charge to the
King or Country, by propagating Manufactures, as I show at large in that
Treatise.

The second Expedient is to procure Laws against single Life, enjoining all
English Protestants to marry, the Males before the age of 25. and Females
before the age of 22. or from that time to pay a yearly penalty by Statute, to
be presented by the Grand Juries, and limited by the Discretion of the Bench
not exceeding the eighth part of their visible Incomes, to be employed toward
the maintenance of poor Orphans.

1. This would somewhat restrain these abominable Fornications and Adulteries,
so frequent, if we would take St. Paul's counsel, Let every Man have his own
Wife, and every Woman her own Husband, etc. other men's Wives would not be so
often debauched, nor our Parishes so charged with Bastards.

2. This would much increase an English Breed for the Countries Defense, as I
elsewhere show, ten of whom are worth twenty bred and brought up in England.

The neglect hereof gives the Irish a great advantage, who are generally more
fruitful, and besides inure their Children more to hardness in their Nursings,
from whence they generally live; whereas our nice English Women destroy their
Children by too tender Nursing, etc. that if they live, many of them are good
for little, but to make Carpet-Knights on, though they do retain Spirit and
Courage, yet their Bodies are so inured to tenderness and delicacy, the
hardships of Winter War would kill more than the Sword.

3. This would much tend to the planting our Towns: for single persons content
themselves with a Room in another House; and Marriage would necessitate them
to become Housekeepers, and Families would require their Industry to maintain,
but while single they live idly, if not debauchedly.

And in order to encourage the meaner sort to marry, to countenance that
ancient English Custom of Bridals, wherein every person not receiving Alms in
the Parish brings in something, according to their ability, toward the young
Couples Housekeeping, to the great encouragement of painful industrious young
people; and obliges them, whilst single, to be the better Laborers and
Servants, that their honest Reports might increase their Bridals.

And further, that a provision be made, where Parents are not able to dispose
of their Children to honest Trades, to put them out Apprentices on the Country
Charge, which would much tend to the planting of our walled Towns, and
promoting the Manufactures, as I show at large in that Treatise.

But that which would, above all other Expedients, tend to the strengthening
the English Interest would be, to endeavor a right understanding and
charitable Union betwixt all sober pious Protestants in matters of Religion,
the want thereof increases groundless Jealousies of each other, and
strengthens the Confidence of the common Enemy to the Protestant Interest,
that they are easily run down, as in the Massacre 1641. they at first declared
their displeasure was only against the Puritannical party, and then only the
English, not the Scots: but, I suppose, I need not inform you how soon all
Protestants became the equal objects of their Fury and barbarous Cruelty.

Therefore by English Protestants I mean all that are not Papists, and agree
with the Religion established by Law in all its Fundamentals, nay in all its
Substantials, that believe the same Creed, and make the same Translation of the
Scriptures their Rule of Faith and Manners; and no people can be esteemed of a
different Religion, that agree in what is Jure Divino; though they differ in
some things that are Jure Humano. Although they may scruple external Communion
with some particular Churches, yet if they retain internal Communion with the
universal Catholic Church in all parts of the world, they are no Schismatics.

Says a reverend Prelate, Bishop B^^^^^alls Vindicatio^ of the Church of
England. page 14, 15.
The Communion of the Christian Catholic Church is partly internal, partly
external; the internal Communion consists principally in these things, to
believe the same entire substance of saving necessary Truth revealed by the
Apostles, and to be ready implicitly in the preparation of the Mind to embrace
all other supernatural Verities when they shall be sufficiently proposed to
them, to judge charitably one of another, to exclude none from the Catholic
Comunion and hope o^ Salvation, either Eastern, or Western, or Southern, or
Northern Christians, which profess the ancient Faith of the Apostles and
primitive Fathers, established in the first general Councils, and comprehended
in the Apostolic, Nicene and Athenasian Creed, to rejoice at their well-doing;
to sorrow for their Sins, to condole with them in their sufferings, to pray for
their constant perseverence in the true Christian Faith, for their Reduction
from all their respective Errors, and their reunion to the Church in case they
be divided from it, that we may be all one Sheepfold under that one great
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls: and lastly, to hold an actual external
Communion with them in votis, in our desires, and do endeavor it by all those
means which are in our power. This internal Communion is of absolute necessity
among all Catholics, p. 16.

But, says he, there is not the like degree of obligation to an exact
Communion in all externals, there is not so great a Conformity to be expected
in Ceremonies, as in the Essentials of Sacraments, etc. in the Explication of
Articles of Faith, as in the Articles themselves, nor in the Superstructures as
in Fundamentals, etc. p. 17. nor in Scholastical Opinions as in Catechistical
Grounds, not to Ecclesiastical Constitutions as to Divine Ordinances, not such
a strict adherence to a particular Church as to the universal.

So in his Answer to the Bishop of Chalcedon, Essentials must not be pressed
too far, least we draw out Blood in stead of Milk, etc. it does not follow,
because true Faith is essential, therefore every point of true Faith is
essential; or because Discipline is essential, therefore every part of right
Discipline is essential; or because Sacraments are essential, therefore every
lawful Rite is essential, p. 4. Whatsoever touches not the Heart of Religion
is not Schism, p. 8.

Says my reverend Author, It Is a preposterous Zeal, like Hell, hot without
Light, that makes different Opinions different Religions, in his Answer to S.W.
p. 40.

Who please to read this learned Author in point of Schism will find, that he
differs from those fiery Zealots, that dare affirm Schism to be a greater Sin
than profane Swearing, Drunkenness, or Whoring, etc. but by the same rule they
like the Religion of Bellarmine, Suarez, Vasquez, etc. (for they say so) better
than Bishop Hall, Sanderson, Usher, Bramhall or Tailor; for not only they, but
all the pious Divines I have read of the Church of England are of another
Opinon; most of the sober Dissenters in Ireland will submit their Cause to be
weighed in these Protestant Scales, and own themselves for Schismatics if
their Character condemn them: and it is required by the Divine Law, Lev. 19.36.
Deu. 25.15. that all men buy and sell by the same Weights and Scales: diverse
Weights and Balances are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 11.1.20.10.

But neither the Numbers nor the Parts of this sort of Antischismaticks are so
considerable, but our Quakers, Muckletonians, etc. may match them; who will
extend Idolatry, Popery, Superstition and carnal Worship as far beyond their
due bounds, etc. as they do criminal Schism; that I shall leave them to agree
upon the invisible Evidence of their unscriptural Principles, and only plead
for a charitable Union betwixt the sober and pious of both parties.

And as they agree in all essential positives, the same Creed, the same
Scriptures, the same Sacraments, etc. so in all reforming negatives they
protest against all Popish Errors, either relating to Faith or Worship,
contained in the first Protestation of the German Churches, or is since
protested against by any of the Protestant Churches in the world, and that with
more vehemence, which makes them not the less Protestants.

They protest against all the old Herisies of the Arrians, Socinians,
Gnostics, Nestorians, etc. so that both in positives and negatives the
difference is little in Substantials betwixt Dissenters and the Protestant
Church of England: they maintain not only internal Communion with the universal
Catholic Church, but internal and external with the Protestant Church of
England.

They do not only make the same Scriptures the standard of Faith, Worship and
Manners, but highly esteem of, and bless God for, the many famous Lights the
Church of England has produced, for the propagating Gospel Principles, and
converting Souls to Christ; they put the highest value on their learned
Writings, next to the sacred Scriptures, and esteem their Expositions,
Annotations, etc. the most Orthodox in the world; they retain a venerable
memory of all her Confessors and blessed Martyrs, and are ready, if God call
them to it, to seal the Truths they dyed for with their dearest Blod; they
bless God for, and heartily rejoice in, all her learned and pious Bishops and
Ministers, that now are, and daily pray that God would increase their Numbers
and bless their Labors in his Work, and grieve for all the Reproach and
Dishonor brought upon the Church by ignorant and scandalous Ministers, etc.
they agree with the Church at least in 36 of the 39 Articles, and are therefore
doubtless of the same Religion. The Jews had their several Sects, as the
Pharisees, the Sadduces, the Herodians, Essins, etc. but were all owned as
Israelites, if they adhered to the Law of Moses and the Prophets,
notwithstanding their Interpretation and Observation in some things of weight
were different.

Some of the German Protestant Princes are Lutherans, and others are
Calvinists, and their Subjects mixed in their Dominions of both Persuasions:
yet they own each other for Protestants, the Lutheran Princes have the same
confidence in their Calvinist Subjects as in their Lutheran; and the like on
the other hand, they all firmly unite to aid and assist their respective
Princes against their Popish Adversaries, if National Interest interpose not;
whereby the Protestant Interest in Germany becomes formidable, and potent: and
yet the difference in Opinion betwixt the Lutherans and Calvenists is far
greater than the difference betwixt English Protestants and the generality of
Dissenters.

The Papists themselves, who glory much in their Unity, have their Jansenists,
Dominicans, Molenists, Jesuists, Scotists, and several Orders, whose
Differences are more momentary by far than any of ours, some of them even to
the shaking of the bottom of their very Faith, as might be evidenced in their
disputes about the Subject of Infallibility, some placing it in a Council, as
the Councils of Basil and Constance, others in the Pope, as the Councils of
Lateran and Trent, some in both; yet they own each other of one Religion. Dr.
Willet in his Synopsis fol. 1325 to 1352 incerts 307 Controversies amongst the
Papists, many of them repeated by Dr. Stillingfleet, vid his Divisions of the
Romish Church, from page 353 to 471. And as they have these many distinct Sects
maintaining contrary Opinions amongst their Clergy and Votaries; so betwixt the
Clergy and Laity, as is at large asserted by Bishop Tailors Disswasive from
Popery, Bishop Jewel, and Dr. Stillingfleet chapter 4, and 5. and the History of
the Council of Trent, fol. 33, 39.44. wherein you may read the bitter Contests
about Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction betwixt Pope and Pope, the Popes
and the Emperors of Germany, Kings of Spain, France, Portingal, States of
Venice, Italian Princes and States, etc. producing bloody Wars, etc. and yet
were all esteemed Roman Catholics.

But admit this were not the case, but the Dissenters were as opposite in
Principle and Interest to the Protestant Church as the Papists, that they
esteemed them all damned Heretics, and their Religion a pestilent Heresy, and
that it were not only lawful but meritorious by all possible means, whether by
War, Massacres or Assassinations, to destroy them, as the Enemies of God and
holy Church; yet they could not be dangerous to the Commonwealth, because of
the paucity of their Numbers, and Indepency of their Interest: if the Papists
were as few in number, and had as few Noblemen and persons of Interest to head
them, and no Foreign aid to back them, more potent, nor nearer than Maryland,
all men would esteem it ridiculous for the State to maintain a potent Army to
secure the Interest of the Crown against them, or to observe the Protestants in
dread of being destroyed by them, especially if this small number of Papists
were so far divided in their Opinions, there were no probability of their ever
agreeing which Faction should sway the Scepter, having no Family or person that
made the least pretense to a right of Sovereignty: I say, if this were the case
we should laugh at persons dreading Popish Plots and Rebellions, as we do at
our little Children when they point to their own Shadows, and cry a Bug-a-bo!
and yet this is the best capacity the Dissenters of Ireland are in to disturb
the State: and if so, surely those Watchmen are blind of one eye, at least,
that warn the State to beware of Puritans, etc. as more dangerous than Papists:
For, admit Dissenters were persons of dangerous Principles and considerable
Interest, there are few of them of despicable Fortunes, the poorest of them by
their painfulness in their Callings and frugality have Bread to eat, and
Raiment to put on, and most of them live comfortably by their Industry; and
some of them enjoy plentiful Estates by Title from the Crown, whereby they are
equally engaged with others to preserve the Peace, and support the Interest of
it, until their case be as desperate as blind Sampsons, when he pulled down the
House on his own head to be revenged on the Philistines for his two Eyes, I see
no reason they should be esteemed dangerous to the Peace of Ireland; but rather
a great additional strength both to Church and State, both against Foreign
Invasions and intestine Rebellions; they own no Government nor Jurisdiction
that is foreign, nor any other but that which the Laws of the Land have
established, to which they have sworn Allegiance, and are and will be subject
not only for Wrath but for Conscience sake, so far as answers the great end of
Government: few prudent Statesmen but will judge it is the Interest of the
State of Ireland, considering its circumstances, not only to continue their
Indulgence toward those they have, but to declare a Toleraon of all
Protestants of what Nation or Opinion soever principled, as before is declared,
which has been the Practice of all Princes and States courting Trade; as I show
at large in the the Chapter of the Policies of Trade.

I never read of any Prince or State that persecuted their dissenting Subjects,
but from one of these considerations.

1. From Conscience, to propagate Truth and suppress Error; but this way of
converting Souls by Prison, Banishments and Death I read not has been much in
use with Protestant Princes or States since the Reformation.

2. Or Jealousy of the Safety of their Interest, and in this case it is
irrational, for any sort of Dissenters, Papists or others, to expect Protection
from that Prince, or State, to whom they will not give the best Security in
their power of their Allegiance and peaceable deportment. The States of Holland
and New England, who pretend the highliest to Liberty, exact it: and it is a
Principle in Nature for every Being to provide for its own saftety, much more
for that Being on whose safety all others depend.

Therefore it is not only the Duty but the Interest of all Dissenters, not only
to give the utmost security for their Loyalty in their power, but to avoid all
occasions of appearing engaged in any Faction that may happen in the State: for
though the matters controverted be only of a civil nature, and have no tendency
to Religion, but rather the safety of the State, and Honor of the Prince; yet
that side Dissenters shall generally appear for will be reflected on by
Churchmen, if not by Statesmen, to design some Faction against the Government;
that were I to choose a Parliament man, or a Magistrate of a City, etc. I would
neither give my Vote for a Dissenter, nor for a profane debauched Conformist,
if there were a sober, pious, good Churchman to be had.

2. As Dissenters in prudence ought to be of no Faction in a State, so to avoid
all manner of just provocations toward the Governors, whilst they enjoy the
liberty of worshipping God in the way their own Consciences dictate, it is not
reasonable they should expect the liberty of reflecting on that Religion the
Law of the Land establishes, by which they are indulged: there is little ground
to believe any of the godly persons we read of, as Joseph and Moses in Pharaohs
Court, good Obadiah in wicked Ahabs, Daniel, Nehemiah and the three worthies,
etc. in Babylon, the Christians in Cesars Household did carry themselves
offensively toward their fellow Courtiers, much less toward their Princes
they served, though most of them Pagans: it is not rational to suppose any of
those good men reproved or censured the Religion of their Princes publicly:
but it is manifest they made a public profession of their own, and more
vehemently when it was most dangerous so to do; as Daniel when the King
published his Decree, Chapt. 6. and Obadiah when by the instigation of Jesabel
Ahab persecuted the Prophets, and Mordecai and Esther when Hammon contrived the
destruction of the Jews: but whilst they were permitted quietly to enjoy their
own Worship, I do not find they either writ or spoke against the Religion of
the Country they were in: and St. Paul disapproves it, being accused by
Tertullus the Orator before Felix for a mover of Sedition, and profaning the
Temple, etc. Acts 24.6. he denies the Charge, v. 12. says he they neither
found me in the Temple disputing with any man, neither raising up the people,
neither in the Synagogue, nor in the City, etc. but this I confess (says he)
by the way they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, v. 14. that
is, I meddle not with their Religion, nor matters of State, but practice my
own, I only preach the Gospel of Peace and walk as becomes it: so in his second
Arraignment before Festus, chap. 25, chap. 18. he makes his defense thus,
neither against the Law of the Jews, neither against the Temple, nor yet
against Caesar have I offended any thing at all, etc.

Now if these things had not been faults St. Paul would not have endeavored to
vindicate, but rather have justified himself; he was no time-server nor
man-pleaser, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.

So in his third Arraignment before Agrippa, chap. 26. how humbly and
condescendingly did he express himself, as before to the other two, and when
the King told him, too much Learning made him mad, v. 24. or a Fanatic, he
humbly replied, I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak the words of truth
and soberness.

Now if these things be written for our learning, how unlike it is, the spirit
and behavior of such Christians under sufferings for Conscience sake, that
think they can never bear a faithful Testimony, except they do it stubbornly
and rudely? therefore let Dissenters, who wish well to the common Protestant
Interest, be cautious whilst they press after Gospel Purity they break not the
bonds of Gospel Unity; and whilst they separate from what they judge humane, to
be wary, they reject not what will prove divine Worship, though there may be a
just and pious Separation, as Bishop Bramhall (before cited) delares.

Yet there may be also a sinful Schism, as every particular Sect allows, when
it is from themselves; and an Error in Schism will be found a greater Sin when
it proceeds from Pride of mind and Self-conceitedness, than an Error in
Conformity when it proceeds from Charity and a godly fear of sinning on the
other hand.

Therefore it is safest to separate from things rather than persons or
Churches, to own every Church so far as they own the Truth, and only separate
from what is in your Consciences manifest Error and Superstition, Bish.
Bramhall p. 271.

Go as far as upright Conscience will give leave to manifest a love to Union
and an hatred of Division; and that it may appear you separate not through
Stubbornness and Faction, but singly to maintain a good Conscience toward God,
and that with all Christian Charity and Humility toward others, especially
your Superiors: this would suit with St Peter's Advice to be ready always to
give an account to every man of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear,
1 Pet. 3.15. and secure you from suffering as evil doers and busy bodies, etc.
for it is better, if the will of God be, that you suffer for well doing than
for evil doing, says St. Peter 1 Epistle 3.17.

If I be censured for this part of my Discourse by the peevish and censorious
of both sides, for a Digression from a Subject of promoting Trade and Wealth;
yet when the more moderate and judicious consider the influence of our
Divisions and Jealousies fomented by rigid uncharitable persons of both
parties, they will vindicate me, and allow that the uniting of Interest in
point of Religion, so far as to beget a mutual confidence in each others
Integrity to the common Protestant Cause, will tend much to the strengthening
the ^ands of our Protestant Governors; and also remove Jealousies, and beget a
satisfaction betwixt Assenters and Dissenters that they will never be dangerous
one to another: and till this be obtained I see no ground to expect the
Protestant Interest of Ireland can ever be potent, nor ever flourish in Trade
and Wealth, for these Reasons.

1. The common Enemy to our common Religion and civil Interest will still be
hoping the Divisions amongst our selves will at last open a door for them to
destroy us all; and that expectation deters them from that Industry in
Manufactury and Traffic, which otherwise, for present profit sake, they would
more vigilantly promote, and the more moderate of them join Interest with the
united Protestants in preserving our common Peace.

2. No greater Discouragements can lie in the way of foreign Manufacturers, and
Merchants coming to settle amongst us, than suspicion our Divisions should
cause a disturbance of the Peace; which the least apprehensive must discern
would be an evident ruin to the whole, and consequently to themselves, if they
should settle with us.

3. Nothing more disheartens the English from engaging in such Manufacturies
and Trade as would fix their Estates on a spot they could not remove from, than
a sense of danger from our Divisions, lest some particular Dissentors or Sect
should so misbehave themselves toward the Government, as to provoke them to
put a general Restraint upon the Liberties of the whole, and thereby
necessitate them to quit the Country, and so lose all their Improvements.

I might multiply particulars to manifest the Damage our Jealousies and
Animosities on the account of our Divisions in Religion threaten, and the great
Advantages a charitable Union would produce to the security and prosperity of
the common English Interest of Ireland.

But being satisfied all moderate and charitable Christians are of the same
opinion, I shall submit what I have offered to their Judgment; and howsoever I
am censured for this weak Essay. I shall comfort my self in the Integrity of my
heart to the common Welfare of the Protestant Interest of Ireland and submit
the Blessing to God.

CHAP. III. The third Expedient to recover the languishing state of Ireland in
its Trade and Wealth is, to assert Irelands Interest in its own Government.
THat it is not only the Interest of Ireland, but of the Crown and Realm of
England, that Ireland be governed by its own members, or persons peculiarly
interested in its prosperity, is manifest.

Although it will be granted to be Irelands great advantage, to have not only
their Lord Lieutenants but most other Ministers of State sent from England,
provided they then purchase, plant, and settle themselves and Families in the
Country; for no other Expedient will advance the Prosperity, and strengthen the
English Interest in Ireland like it: for if the Noble and Worshipful Families
of Ireland would examine the original of their first Ancestors in that Kingdom,
few would be found that came over on purpose to purchase or plant, but rather
encouraged to transport themselves for the sake of public Imploys, either
Civil or Military; but most by the later: every new Rebellion called over new
Troops and Companies, to strengthen the standing Army to suppress it; and at
the end of every War were garrisoned and quartered in those Countries, where
the Insurrection was first raised, or had been most powerful, and in places
most convenient to secure the future peace, where they obtained Grants of
forfeited Lands, and from thence after some time of settlement of themselves
and Familys, their Soldiers would marry, and take Farms, or set up Trades, and
so erect English Plantations in the most dangerous Irish Countries, where none
but Soldiers with their Swords in their hands, or others under their shelter
durst adventure to plant.

Therefore it was a rational project at the end of the last War, in order to
promote the English Plantations.

1. In the disbanding part of that Army, to pitch upon such Troops and
Companies as were best acquainted with the Country, and most likely to plant
their Lots; and then to give some of them peculiar advantages by select places
for their encouragement, whereby many of the reducted Troops and Companies had
the advantage of the standing Army, who were confined to their Lots.

2. To contrive the planting of the Country by the standing Army, by
instructing the Officers to encourage their Soldiers to marry, and plant about
their Garrisons, and Quarters, especially if Tradesmen, and past their middle
age: and then once in 2 or 3 years to change their Quarters at a good distance
from the place, whereupon the married Soldiers that had settled their Familys
would petition to be dismissed, which much increased English Plantations, who for
their encouragement were continued in Muster six months Duty free: and whilst
Pay is to be had a General shall never want Soldiers, and young beardless Lads
that have nothing to care for, but to keep their Arms sixed, and their
Knapsacks furnished, are the best Soldiers for a Field-Army, and so esteemed
by all Authors I have read: and whilst a Troop or Company retains one half old
Soldiers, viz. File-leaders, Half File-leaders and Bringers up, the young
Soldiers will do as well as others to fill up Files, and after a few months
careful Exercise will be as ready for any Service, and perform their parts
equal with the rest: for though Experience and Skill is necessary in Officers,
yet Courage and Subjection are the more necessary Qualifications in private
Soldiers; which none like the young stripling, who is lately come from under
the severer Discipline of Family Government, to whom Military Discipline seems
easy: and these having no Wives nor Children to cry after them, etc. are the
freest from care, and consequently the readiest at the Beat of the Drum to
march where and whenever they are commanded.

The neglect of this was the ruin of the English Interest the last Rebellion,
the standing Troops and Companies consisting much of the Officers Tenants, etc.
could not be drawn together at short warning, without exposing their Families
and concerns to the merciless mercy of the Enemy; whereas had they been
qualified as beforementioned, the King might have had a marching Army, and the
Country a standing Militia consisting of the same Inhabitants, marched from
them in the Kings Pay, to have stood by them, and defended them, at least,
against the small parties of straggling Cutthroats, by whom the greatest
number of the naked English were massacred: therefore it is the Interest of
this Kingdom, it should be penal in the Officers of the Army to inlist and
muster any of the settled Inhabitants capable of serving in the Militia; for
thereby the Country is weakened in its Military strength, and the King
disappointed of a marching Army: whereas were all persons thus qualified
disbanded, and the Officers prohibited listing such, without special License
from the General, you would soon have the Foot Companies filled with young
brisk Lads, who would throng out of England for Entertainment, which would more
tend to increase and strengthen the English Interest in Ireland than any other
Expedient that can be proposed.

As it is the Interest of Ireland to give encouragement to English Protestants
to come and enjoy Military Employments and Preferments among them; so is it the
same for Civil and Ecclesiastical Employments, provided still they settle and
abide with us.

But that which is the Grievance of this Kingdom is, that either Military or
Civil Employments should be enjoyed by Nonresidents, or otherwise persons who
only come over to enjoy the Profit of their Office, and so soon as they have
received what Benefit it affords, to return for England, and carry their Gains
with them; of which sort, Ireland has most suffered by English Chief
Governors, and English Farmers and Commissioners of the Revenue, and their
Attendants and Dependants coming and returning with them; the Damage sustained
by this Kingdom in the period of 15 years thereby is computed in the Chapter of
Irelands involuntary Charge and Expense.

And that which I shall further endeavor to demonstrate is, that it is not
only its damage in respect of the Charge Ireland sustains, but many other ways
inconvenient and prejudicial.

1. For the chief Governor, though there might be some reason of State in
times past, why they should not only be of English Blood, but English by Birth
and Interest; yet the case is altered now: and the Act of Parliament in the
10th. of Hen. 7th. that none but such as were born in the Realm of England
should be Constables of the Castles of Dublin, Trim, Athlone, Leistipe,
Carlingford, Wicklow, etc. had no respect to the civil and politic Government,
but the Execution of penal Laws upon Offenders, those Castles being made use of
as Prisons to secure dangerous persons in, which is declared in the body of the
Statute, viz. Which Castles have been negligently kept / and such as have been
committed to the Constables or Keepers of them for Treason / Felony / etc.
suffered to escape wilfully / to the great prejudice of our Sovereign Lord /
and of all the said Land; therefore be it ordained and enacted / etc. so that
other Act 23d. of Hen. 8th. to regulate the Election of the chief Governor, by
the Council on the death of the Lord Lieutenant, etc. until the Kings pleasure
was known, did not respect preferring English by Birth before English by Blood;
but to secure the Sword from unfit Hands, who by their powerful Interest might
awe their own Election, and be mischievous before the King could declare his
pleasure; as appears by the said Act Irish Stat. fol. 214, 215.
, as follows; The said Counselors have full Power and Authority by virtue
of this Act / to elect and choose one such person as shall be an Englishman, and
born within the Realm of England, being no spiritual person to be Justice / and
Governor of this Realm of Ireland, during the Kings Highness Pleasure / if
there shall be at that time any such person within this Realm / etc. if not /
then to elect and choose two persons of the said Council of English Blood and
Surname / being no spiritual person / etc. which I cite to refute that vulgar
Error, that the Lord Lieutenant, etc. must be born in England, because
otherwise he is not capable of governing in the Castle of Dublin; whereas the
Office of Constable is a distinct inferior thing from the Governor of the
Castle: but whatever reason of State former times might have, the case is
otherwise now: for, as it is shown in the Chapter of Englands Interest in
Irelands Prosperity, the state of the English Interest in Ireland is changed,
from a weak infirm state, that needed Physic, to a strong healthful state,
that only requires Food; the Propriety of Lands, the Plantation of Cities and
strong Towns inhabited and governed by English, the Countries so planted with
English, as all our High Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, etc. all English, and
the English Laws are duly and equally in all parts executed by English Judges
and Officers etc. (...) ^j^rity of both Houses of Parliament Engl^ (...) was
never the case of Ireland ^^fore; that (...) ^ow needs nothing but diligent
(...) c^^roborate and improve its advantag^ (...) which none but such who are
acquainted with (...) and Constitution, and thoroughly (...) prosperity are
capable of (...)

1. Being un^^qu^i^^^^ with intelligent persons of the several Parties, they
(...) understand the various and different ^^^nou^ and Interests of the people:
indeed if the Inhabitants were all Irish Papists, or all English Protestants,
or were these two grand parties of entire Interest among themselves, their work
were more easy; but as they have each their grand Interest and bond of
Friendship; the Papists the Interest of their Church, by whose aid and
countenance they expect their Succor; and the Protestants the Interest of
their Prince, by whose Authority and Favor they enjoy all they possess: yet
they have each amongst themselves their different and peculiar Interests, both
Religigious and Civil; as I shall after show.

And a Chief Governor unacquainted with persons and things will find it
difficult work to carry himself to the equal satisfaction of all parties, with
Security to the Government, and Encouragement of Trade, etc.

2. The short continuance, sometimes two, sometimes three years, rarely four;
we had three in less than eight years, viz. from the Lord Roberts entering
September 18th. 1669. to the Earl of Essex's surrender August 24th. 1677. so
that by that time they understand their Work, they are called from it: says
Borlacy, The vicisitude of Governors has been observed (by some) to be
exceeding prejudicial to the public; private Respects often introducing
notable things in the State, according to their Interests who governed, not the
publicks, diversi Imperatoribus mores, diversa fuere studia, sometimes to the
degenerating of the old English into the Irish customs, through their
negligence, and indulgence, other times to the alienating the Irish by their
severity, from the benefit of a well tempered and orderly Government, both
equally destructive to the Prince. And yet too long a Residence in so eminent a
Place may over-heat a great Spirit, if not bounded with excellent Principles.
Whence the Romans (those great Masters of Government) rarely admitted their
Vicegerents to brood on a Province, that their Continuance there might not
increase Self-interest.

The longest time any continued in this Government (how honorable soever) was
never made up with Happiness suitable to the anxiety of their Mind and Body:
Sir Henry Sidney (who left as clear a Fame as any man that enjoyed the Place)
parted with it with the words of the Psalmist, When Israel came out of Egypt,
and the House of Jacob from a people of a strange Language, Judah was his
Sanctuary, and Israel his Dominion; intimating how little satisfaction could be
took in so slippery a Place, amongst such a people, whose Language he knew not,
and variety of Interests; though the most that have miscarried there, have
fallen through other men's Interest rather than their own failing.

And I judge the three last Noble persons sent out of England to govern Ireland
will set to their Seals, that it is not a short and easy work to understand
their Humor and Interest; none of them could please all, and others of them
very few; although they were persons of eminent Parts and great Integrity, both
to the Crown and English Interest: yet the Interest of our Trade and
Manufactures so withered under their Shadow, that they languish to this day; of
fourteen hopeful Manufactures they sound thriving, they left but the stumps of
one standing; which has put such a Damp upon the hopes of Success, none have
attempted either to erect new, or revive the old since.

2. They often come with a prepossession of the danger of Irelands encroaching
upon the Trade and Wealth of England, and from thence rather fear than design
Irelands prosperity in Trade; and what our chief Governor fears we have little
ground to hope for.

3. As the proverb is, New Lords, new Laws; so new Governors, new Councils; it
is to be observed the Successor very rarely elects the Favorites of his
Predecessor to be his Confidents; and then that natural Emulation the Heart of
man is addicted to diverts them from building on Foundations laid by others;
whereby some public undertakings after a hopeful progress have miscarried, to
the great discouragement of future Attempts; as several notable Instances might
be given if it were convenient.

4. By reason of their immediate Relation to, and probable sudden Return for,
England, they are most concerned so to manage the Affairs of Ireland, as may
consist with the present advantage of their Credit in England. Now though we
honor a Lover of our Country, as being Englishmen our selves, and glory in its
Honor and Wealth, as younger Branches in the Honor and Wealth of the elder
House of their Family; yet we may expect a younger Brothers Portion; and to be
trusted with the Conduct of our own Estates, in Subjection to our politic
Father; and not under the Tutelage of our elder Brother: When Abraham sent his
Sons he had by Keturah from Isaac Eastward, and gave them Portions, he left
them to manage their own Affairs.

We do not read that ever the Sons of Isaac or Jacob were entrusted with the
Affairs of the Children of Ishmael and Esau, though they enjoyed the Birthright
and Blessing; and it is none of the least Discouragements to English Gentlemen,
that have great Estates in Ireland, from coming to live upon them, than that by
quitting their Dwellings in England, they quit their Privilege as Englishmen,
both in respect to their Liberty of Traffic to several parts of the World,
which they before enjoyed, and also their Interest in Magna Charta, of being
being tried for their Lives and Estates by a Jury of known honest men of their
Neighborhood: whereas Noblemen or Gentlemen of Ireland may be impeached in
England, sent for over in custody, and there arraigned before Judges, put upon
their Trial by Jurors, whose Faces they never saw before, and unto whom they
are altogether unknown, further than the Evidence then given in Court describes
them, which is an Issue few would be pleased with when it comes to be their own
case; especially considering the moral impossibility for persons of ordinary
Estates to bear the Charge, and of small Interest to prevail with necess^^y
Witnesses, etc. to go from Ireland to England, to give their Testimony in their
beh^^^ and to imagine that either Judges or Jurors of England can be equally
concerned to suppres^^^^ (...) and Sedition, tending to the disturbance of the
Peace and Safety of the English (...) in Ireland, with English Judges and
Juro^^ Ireland appears very improbable, to such as admit (...) safety is a
stronger motive to all people than Ne^^hbors welfare: and though England may be
grieved to hear of Irelands Troubles, yet the English in Ireland must certainly
more sensibly feel the Misery that befalls themselves. A Merchant on (...) may
be grieved to behold a Ship (wherein he has some Adventure) sinking by a
violent storm at Sea; but the Merchants and Mariners aboard, that see no way to
escape from perishing with her, must be under a different consternation; which
represents the true state of the different case.

2. As there is much Reason of State against Irelands being governed by
Foreigners to its peculiar Interest; so have we many Presidents, both ancient
and modern, of Sovereign Princes governing their Tributary Provinces by their
own Countrymen; the King of Spain discerning the Genoua's were discontented at
his governing them by Spaniards, etc. and impatient for a King of Naples and
Duke of Milan born in Italy; to secure his Interest without that hazard, he
borrowed of them vast Sums of Money, they being great Usurers, designing thereby
to keep them in awe, lest they should lose their Money; so the Kings of England
could never satisfy the Welshmen until Edward of Carnarvan (being their
Countryman born) was made Prince of Wales; which has since been the Title of
the Kings eldest Son.

God himself promises it, as a chief part of Isreal's Prosperity after their
return from their Captivity, that their Nobles should be of themselves, and
their Governors should proceed from the midst of them, Jeremiah 30.21. which
Promise was performed in Ezra's, Nehemiah's and Zerkabal's Government: so Moses
appointed understanding and wise men, who were known amongst their Tribes, to
be Rulers in their respective Tribes, Deuteronomy. 1.13. Says a great Statesman to
King James, To hold Ireland in better obedience, let there be sent over such a
Lord Deputy as is well acquainted with their Humors and Customs, and well
beloved of the people Sir Hen. Wootens State of Christendom. p. 2.18.
: says the same Author, The Spaniards lost the Low Countries by sending
Spaniards or other Strangers to govern them, having engaged to govern them by
men born in their own Country Sir Hen. Wootens State of Christendom. p. 17.
.

And how much this has been the practice of the Kings of England, to place
persons peculiarly interested in the State of Ireland in chief Government, our
Histories give us ample examples: Earl Strongbow, the first Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland 1176. was Prince of Leinster, by right of his Wife; Reymond le Gross,
who married the Earls Sister, succeeded him as Justice; John Courcy, Robert
Fitz Stephen, and Miles Cogan, Adventurers with Strongbow in the first Attack,
and possessors of Lands for their Service, succeeded him; next to them
succeeded Hugh de Lacy and Robert le Power, both interested persons in Ireland;
Le Power being then Governor of Waterford and Wexford, was possessed of a great
Estate in those Countries Cambden of Ireland.
; and Hugh de Lacy marrying the Daughter of Rodorick King of Connaght, had a
considerable Interest in Ireland by her right; the King still approving
interested persons fittest to govern Ireland, that designing to send over his
own Son John, he first made him King of Ireland to give him a peculiar Interest
in that Kingdom Hovenden p. 77.
: from his time, being anno Dom. 1185. until Lionel Duke of Clarence 1361. near
200 years, that Edward the Third's Son was sent over, who by right of his Wife
was Earl of Ulster, and Lord of Connaght, I find Ireland governed, for the most
part, by Butlers of the House of Ormonde, Fitz Morris, Fitz John, Fitz
Gerralds, etc. of the Houses of Kildare and Desmond, with Woggans, Barrys,
Powers, Bourkes, Burminghams, etc. and in intervals by Dignitaries of the
Church, or other Ministers of State in Ireland; I find very few but either had
considerable Interest in Ireland, or otherwise settled on them at their sending
over, or purchased by them in the time of their Service, and settled there with
their Families.

In all which time we read of very few Factions, until that of Desmond, who
raised a Dissension betwixt the English of Blood and English of Birth; which
bred such ill Blood in his own Families Veins, as boiled up to the ruin of it:
afterward, in the Queens days 1583. and from the time of the Duke of Clarence
1361. until 1385. the Earl of Oxford was created Duke of Ireland and Marquess
of Dublin at his coming over, of Twelve Lord Lieutenants and Deputies, etc. in
that time, not above two or three at the most, but Butlers, Gerralds, etc.

Next Richard the Second sent over Mortymer Lord Lieutenant, but first created
him Earl of Ulster, Lord of Trim, Clare and Connaght, 1398. from him until the
year 1449. I find not above four or five, viz. Sir John Stanly, Scroop, Sutton
de Gray, etc. and they but short times, but persons of Ireland, viz. Talbots,
Gerralds and Butlers, the later six times in this short space of about fifty
years.

Then was Richard Duke of York, being Earl of Ulster, Lord of Connaght and
Mead, by Descent from Lionel Duke of Clarence, Lord Lieutenant.

But for a more distinct Account of Irelands Chief Governors since the
Conquest, I shall refer the Reader to the ensuing Catalogue, as I find it
recorded by Borlacy, Spencer, Campian, Hanmer, Marlburroughs, Hooker, etc.
wherein I have only noted some few remarkable things that happened under some
of their Governments, designing only a brief Catalogue of both sorts, to make
good my Position, that the Policy of England has still found it best to govern
Ireland by its own Members, or persons peculiarly interested in its prosperity.
But this is observable, when Noblemen, etc. were sent out of England to govern
Ireland, it was not of choice, but rather of necessity; as in these and the
like cases.

First, to balance Factions amongst the English Lords of Ireland, when their
animosities grew so high that Interest of State required a more indifferent
Hand at the Helm; which proceeded from their great Power ruling their Tenants,
etc. as Sovereign Princes over large Teritories, by the Brehon Laws, whereby
multitudes both of English and Irish more depended upon their Favor than the
Kings: but that sort of Lordship is utterly extinguished root and branch, the
greatest Lords of Ireland are as subject to the Kings Laws as the meanest man,
and the whole Militia of the Kingdom under the Kings immediate Commission and
Pay: therefore that Reason cease.

Second Reason was, to balance Factions in the Court of England, especially in
the Barons Wars, and in the Contest betwixt the two Houses of York and
Lancaster, etc. but the two Roses now are not only graffed, but so well grown
upon one stalk, that danger is over.

Thirdly, in times of considerable Rebellions, when either of these two Reasons
swayed.

1. When the Work required persons of greater Experience in Martial Affairs,
than it it was supposed Ireland afforded: but Ireland is now so well furnished
with Noble persons of approved Courage and Conduct, that it is able to supply
England, if the Kings Affairs should require it, with Officers from the
Truncheon to the Halbert, to conduct a Royal Army.

2. When the great Lords of Ireland were in Factions one against the other,
especially those of English Race; as the Geraldines, and Butlers, etc. which
two Houses mantained an inveterate Feud for several Generations; yet by turns
were chiefly employed by Henr. 7th. and 8th. till the 20th. year of the Reign
of Henry the Eighth, Thomas the Son of Gerrald Earl of Kildare, then Prisoner
in the Tower, broke out into Rebellion; from which time the King sent over
English Governors during his Life, as Skeffington, the Lord Gray, Brereton,
St. Ledger, etc. which course his Son Edward the Sixth, and both his Daughters,
Mary and Elizabeth imitated him in, for the most part; the like King James and
Charles the First: but the reason thereof must be attributed to the Change or
rather Reformation of Religion; most of the Noble Families of Ireland, capable
of chief Trust, still adhering to the Roman Superstition, and consequently
incapable of promoting a Protestant Interest, which case is now otherwise, most
of the ancient Nobility of Ireland are Protestants, as may appear in my
Schedule of Irelands Nobility; and as that reason of State is ceased, so has
the practice since. About two years after the Rebellion, Jan. 1643. James then
Marquess now Duke of Ormonde was sworn Lord Lieutenant; since which time, being
39 years Jan. last, he has born the Honor of Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
except from the 18th. of September 1669. the Lord Roberts entered, until the
^4th. of August 1677. the Earl of Essex surrendered, not full eight years; so
that the Duke has born the Honor 31 years, and actually exercised the Regency
19 years, being interrupted about 12 years, viz. from December 1650. he left
Clanrickard Deputy, until the 28th. of July 1662. when His Grace was again
sworn Lord Lieutenant; and as he has exercised the longest Regency, so has he
had the most difficult Work of any chief Governor since the Conquest: First,
Commander of an Army for some years under great wants, the hardest task to a
noble spirited General. Secondly, Fighting against a people he desired and
endeavored the Welfare of, that would not believe him until they found it to
their cost, that their Ingratitude and Treachery to him and their Princes
Interest, that he asserted, sell upon their own pates. Thirdly, Fighting for a
Prince in no capacity to support him, much less to reward him; yet when his
Princes State and Affairs were at the lowest ebb his Loyalty was at hihgest, at
full Sea, rejecting the greatest proffers of Liberty and Estate from the
Parliament, and chose Poverty in Exile with his Prince before it; as is
elegantly expressed by Orinda, fol. 150. You who three potent Kingdoms late
have seen
Tremble with fury, and yet steadfast been,
Who an afflicted Majesty could wait
When it was seemingly forsook by Fate,
Whose settled Loyalty no storms dismayed,
Nor the more flattering mischiefs could dissuade.
Yet their Proffer did him so much right as to declare to the world his
Services in Ireland were esteemed by Englands Commons (in their worst humor to
the Royal Interest that he served) as useful to the English Protestant Interest
there; but from these and the like causes the Crown of England has had its
Counsels more perplexed, and its attempts for Irelands Reduction and Settlement
more obstructed by its own people in Ireland than by the Irish themselves,
since the time of Edward the Sixth, viz. by the viciscitude of its Government
being so often under the Regiment of persons that were Aliens to its peculiar
Interest, and strangers to its Humors and Customs: it is not rational to
suppose the most judicious Statesman in the world can understand the Interest
and Humor of a Country he never saw before, proportionable to another that
has track'd it from end to side, who must see by others eyes where to place
Garrisons and Quarters for the most Safety and Quiet of the Country, how to
understand the humor and capacity of persons fit to be employed in the Kings
Service civil or military, who are the most dangerous persons, which the most
disquiet people, to have an eye upon, etc. I say, there are many necessary
points for a chief Governor to know not to be learned in three or four years
time, the usual length of our Lord Lieutenants, etc. Regency; and where persons
have neither time to understand their Work, nor to fit and whet their
Instruments they must work by, what performance can rationally be expected?

In Spencer Eudox proposes to Iren how many Men would be a competent Army to
reduce and keep Ireland? he demands ten thousand Foot and one thousand Horse:
says Eudox, Where will you garrison and quarter them for the safety of the
Country? says Iren, Perhaps I am ignorant of the places, but I will take the
Maps of Ireland and lay them before me, and make mine eyes my Schoolmasters to
judge of the place; and then proceeds to garrison and quarter his Men by the
Map. Says Eudoxus, This might do if you knew where to find the Enemy; but it
is well known, he is a flying Enemy, hiding himself in Woods and Boggs, etc.
from which he will not be drawn forth, but into some straight passage, or
perilous so^rd, there will he lie in wait till he find an advantage, and then
will endanger your Army: therefore to seek him that still flincheth, and to
follow him that can hardly be found were vain and bootless. Spencer page 68.

So Geraldus Cambriensis Chap. 38. to the same purpose compares the Difference
between the French and Irish Wars, showing how far Soldiers trained up in
Campaign Countries, fighting pitched Battles with their Enemies always in
sight, would be to seek in Ireland, where the Enemy rarely imbodies, but at
great advantages, but must be driven out of their Fortresses of Woods and
Boggs, etc. where heavy Armor and Weapons were more cumbersome than useful;
But, says he, such Soldiers as are in the Marshes of Wales, who by reason of
continual War are of great experience, and valiant, who can endure any pains
and travels, who can abide watching, hunger and thirst, etc. such kind of
Soldiers were they who first conquered Ireland, and by such must it be fully
subdued and kept.

Obj. Why do you term English Protestants Aliens to Irelands Interest, are we
not all the Subjects of one King, and Members of the same Commonwealth.

Answ. We may be the first, and not the second, though the Scots are Subjects
to the same King, yet Members of a distinct Commonwealth, that as England makes
Laws to secure their Trade from Scotch Invasions, so does Scotland for the
securing theirs from English Retrenchments.

So the twelve Tribes of Israel were all the Children of one Abraham, and the
Subjects of one David, yet had they their distinct Interest peculiar to each
Tribe; the members of one Tribe were never admitted to bear rule, or enjoy the
beneficial Offices of another; the Mosaical and judicial Law were expressly
against it, Numb. chapter 1. v. 4. And with you there shall be a man of every
Tribe: every one Head of the House of his Fathers. chapter 13. v. 2. chapter 34. v. 18.
Deuteronomy. 1.13. which Statutes of Israel were observed in David's time, 1 Chronicles.
8.1. and by his Son Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 8.2. and so continued to the end of that
Kingdom; which were no ways ceremonial, but moral, that every man and every
Country that had not forfeited their Birthright might enjoy the privilege of
it. And not only Divine but Humane Laws and Policies have still observed the
same, where the Interest of the Prince or State was not hazarded: the most
ancient Monarchies, as the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman practiced it
in all their tributary Countries, still committing the management of the civil
and military Governments of their new conquered Countries to the Colonies they
sent to plant and guard them, though they consisted not of their own
Countrymen; as for instance, the new planting of Samaria was by people of
diverse Nations, Ezra names nine, chapter 4. v. 9. as the Dinaites, the
Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the
Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites and the Elamites, and the rest of
the Nations, whom the great and noble Asnapper brought over, and set in the
Cities of Samaria: yet these several Nations being upon the place, incorporated
into one common Interest against the Jews, were all entrusted with the
Government and Safety of the Country; as appears by their joint Letter sent to
the King, to inform him of the danger of his Interest in that Country, if he
suffered the Jews to repair the Walls of Jerusalem, he would not only lose his
Revenue, but his Dominion in Samaria, verse. 13. compared with the 16th. which
they esteemed themselves bound to inform him of being maintained from the Kings
Palace, that is, they enjoyed the profitable Offices and Employments of the
Country, for which they received their Salaries out of his Exchequer.

And from hence it was Paul pleaded the privilege of a Roman, Acts 22.25. who
was no otherwise a Roman, but as he was born of a member of a Roman Colony sent
to Tarsus to plant, and secure the Country to the Roman State, and thereby were
endowed with the privilege of Roman Citizens, to oblige them to Fidelity and
Serviceableness against the Natives, who were never trusted with the Safety of
the Victors Interest in their own Country, unless they submitted, and became
Tributaries under Compact before conquered. Not only these ancient but our
modern Monarchs practice the same, as the Grand Seignior, and the German
Empire, consisting of many distinct Principalities and States; yet all governed
by their own Princes and Senators, except what are in slavery; and they by
those Colonies sent to plant and keep them under: the like are the
Principalities and States of Italy under the Papal Regency; which I hint to
vindicate my Assertion from Novelty, it having been the universal Policy in all
Ages and Countries; as all that are acquainted with History must grant.

But the case of the English in Ireland is far before these other cases, they
are not only English by privilege, as Paul was a Roman, but English by Blood,
and many of them English by Birth; they are so far from being a conquered, or a
tributary people, that they are the Conquerors, by virtue of whose Blood, and
the Blood of their Ancestors, the Scepter of England is there swayed; and the
chief Security the Crown of England has for its Regency is the Strength and
Potency of the English in Ireland: 1000 men raised for the Defense of Ireland
of its own Inhabitants is worth two (for the suppressing a Rebellion) of new
raised men out of England; for besides their subjection to the Diseases of the
Country at first, which usually destroy a great part of them before they have
been six months in the Field, they have no motive to encourage them, nor
Interest to fight for, but Honor and Profit; whereas the other, who have their
Title from the Crown for every Acre they possess in Ireland, are more engaged
to secure the Interest of the Crown, than the King himself is theirs; few of
the forfeiting Irish look so far as the King, who reassumes and disposes of
their Estates, but eye with indignation the present possessors; as was manifest
in the last horrid Massacre, whilst they barbarously murdered the possessors
of their Estates, they both by Addresses, and public Remonstrances asserted
their Loyalty to the King: and though the Kings Interest at present suffer, yet
the Recovery of it is secure so long as England and Scotland can raise
Soldiers to pour in upon them.

But the Subjects, whose throats are cut, and their Houses and Improvements
destroyed, Wives and Daughters ravished, and Children murdered, can have no
reparation in this world; and such as do escape with their lives are utterly
ruined in their Fortunes, often constrained to sell a good part of their wasted
Lands in the Irish Quarters for a third part of its value, to procure Money to
preserve them and theirs from starving. Now the Survivors to these Families are
doubtless above all other people engaged to preserve and recover the Interest
of the Crown in time of War, and consequently most merit to enjoy the
profitable Employments of the Country in times of Peace, being every way more
engaged and better qualified for the Kings Service there, than pro tempore
persons who have no obligation upon them, but their present Honor or Profit,
that if the Kingdom be lost under their Conduct, if they can but preserve their
Lives and Honors, they lose nothing that pincheth afterward; whereas the
Noblemen and Gentlemen of Ireland, some of which having Princely Estates, may
be reduced to extremity of want, of which we had many woeful presidents the last
Rebellion; and all the Politics I have read esteem desperate hazard and danger
will make a Coward valiant; (therefore advise to make a slying Enemy a golden
Bridge) much more engage the Hearts and Hands of persons of Honor and Courage,
when they they do not only fight for the King and their Country, but for their
Wives and Children, their Houses and Lands, as Nehem. 4.14. they cannot forget
how many of their Wives and Daughters were ravished, and innocent Children
murdered in the sight of their dearest Relations and Friends, and from thence
will rather dye than fall into the Hands of such bloody miscreants, whose
tender mercies are cruelties, which is not the case of new English.

Spencer page 8. treating of Military Officers puts a great weight upon
employing Officers acquainted with the Country, says he, The Reducing of
Ireland will ask no long time, nor great charge, so as the effecting thereof be
committed to men of trust, and sound experience in the Country: but if left to
such raw Captains as are usually sent out of England, etc. it will fall to the
ground, etc. for before they have gathered Experience they shall buy it with
great loss to Her Majesty, either by hazarding their Companies by ignorance of
the places and manner of Irish Service, or by losing much time to take out
their lesson, etc. besides, says he, there is a great wrong done to the old
Soldiers, when the Advancement due unto them is cut off, by shuffling in these
new cutting Captains into the places for which they have long served, and well
deserved: To say the truth (says he) me thinks it is meet before men be made
Captains they should be first Soldiers, page 84. for men thoroughly acquainted
both with the state of the Country, and manners of the people, should be still
continued, page 85.

Says Livy, The Romans could perform nothing memorable in their Conquest of
Sicilia whilst they frequently changed the Commanders of their Army, because
new Commanders spent so much time in their new preparations, choosing their
Ground, and insinuating themselves into the old Soldiery, they had no time
left for the management of their Affairs before they were removed; but to
prevent their Consuls from being removed from the head of their Armies, being
annually chosen, they chose a Dictator, Live. Supplement, 79.

And that this has been the Opinion of all our Kings of England, since the
Conquest of Ireland, will more evidently appear by the ensuing Catalogue,
formed in two Columes, to distinguish betwixt English and Irish Chief
Governors; only note that such of them as are in the English Colume, 1. If they
be sent again we esteem them of Ireland, and place them in the Irish Colume,
supposing they were therefore sent because of their experience in and knowledge
they have gained of the Country by their former Service, etc. 2. I do also
esteem all of the Royal Line interested persons, and therefore place them in
the Irish Colume.


A Catalogue of the Chief Governors of Ireland, from the first Conquest to the
Year 1680. by which may be observed, that persons related to, and acquainted
with, and interested in Irelands Welfare have been most employed in its
Government by the Kings of England.
FFrom 1167. unto 1170. was spent by Strongbow and his Assistance in
vindicating the Quarrel of Mac Murrogh King of Leinster, etc.

1171. The King, jealous of Strongbows potency, comes toward Ireland, Srongbow
meets him at Gloucester, surrenders all his Conquests to his Dispose, returns
with him to Waterford, from thence to Dublin, to whom all the petty Kings and
great Lords of Ireland submit, and swear Fealty; the King returns for England,
and leaves Hugh Lacy Lord Justice, to interest him gave him Mead in Fee.

Irish. English. Henry the Second. Anno 1172. Hugh de Lacy Lord Justice, Spell.
331. Orourk Prince of Mead, etc. rebels, Lacy in great danger rescued by
Maurice Fitz Gerald,who killed Orourk. Hanm. 139.

1173. Earl Strongbow L. Warden of Ireland, By right of his Wife Prince of
Leinster, found all in confusion, but with the aid of Raymond le Grossreduceth
them to subjection, Hanm. p. 140.

1175. Strongbow dies, Camp. 64. Donald Prince of Leinster rebels, all in
confusion, Camp. 65

1177. Raymond Le Gross L. Protector, Brother in Law to Strongbow, subdues
Donald, and relieves the City of Dublin.

1177. Fitz Andelm L.J. Courcey, Fitz Stephen and Miles de Cogan his
Counselors, Han. p. 157. The Ancestors of the Bourks, now Earl of Clanricard,
Cambrensis chap. 17. Courcey subdued Vlster, the Kingdom of Cork settled on Fitz
Stephens and Cogan in Fee, Fitz Stephens the Ancestor of the Barrysof Cork.

1179. Hugh Lacy and Robert le Power L.J. Power the Ancestor of the Powers of
Waterford.

1181. Hugh de Lacy Governor, Hollinshead. O Connor King of Connaght rebels
with 2000 men, Lacy subdues him and marries his Daughter, after s lain by a
Scologh in Mead. Hook. p. 60.

1181. John Constable of Cheshire and Richard de Peck Justices, Hovend. p. 685.
1184. Philip de Brees Governor. 1185. Earl John the Kings Son made King of
Ireland and sent Governor, Hovend. 1187. This young Prince, with his
Counselors, ran all into confusion. Young Arms make good Soldiers, but young
Heads ill Couns ellors: Witness Rehoboam, etc.

1185. John de Courcey Earl of Ulster Gov. Chose by the King to be his Champion
against a Frenchman who quitted the Stage and run, being frighted by the grim
looks and great limbs of Courcey. Hanmer p. 181.

Richard the First. 1189. Hugh de Lacy the younger L.J. 1190. Dublin burnt to
ashes. Hanm. 179. 1191 William Marshall and William Pettit Just. Marshall by
right of his Wife Strongbows Daughter Prince of Leinster, who built the Castle
of Kilkenny, and gave the Town a Charter, Hanm. 183.

1197. Hamo de Valis L.J. King John. 1199. Myler Fitz Henry the Kings Son
Governor. Han. p. 183. 1210. K. John in person Composed all Differences,
settled Affairs and returned. Camp. 75.

1210. John Gray Bishop of Norwich L.J. He reformed the Irish Coin to the
Standard of England.

1213. Henry Laundres Arch-Bp. of Dublin L.J. Built the Castle of Dublin.

Henry the Third. 1214. St. Patricks Church founded by Comin Arch-Bp. of
Dublin. Camp. p. 76. 6000 Scots under Bruce invade Ireland. 1215. Geoffery
Marisco Keeper of Ireland, with Sir Edmond Butler L.J. Connaghtup in Arms, Fitz
Gerald built the Castle of Sligo.

1219. Bishop Laundres and Maurice Fitz Gerald L.J. Han. p. 189. 1220. Mead in
Arms, the Castle of Trym builded, the Irish generally rebel, 11000 slain in
Connaght by the Bourks and Berminghams, Bruce routed near Dundalk, Bermingham
for his good Service created Earl of Louth, Baron of Ardee and Athenrie. 1227.
Rich. de Burgo L.J. 1230. The Provost of Dublin made Mayor. 1232. Maurice Fitz
Gerald L.J. 1233. Richard Marshall Brother to William L.J. Slain in Battle near
Kildare.

1245, Sir Jo. Fitz Geoffery L.J. 1247. Theobald Butler Lord of Carick and Joh.
Cogan L.J. 1255. Allen de la Zouch L.J. O Neils of Vlster and Mac Cartys of
Munster rebel.

1259. Stephen de Long Espee L.J. 1260. William Dean L.J. 1261. Rich. de
Rupella L.J. 1266. A great Earthquake Hook. p. 62. 1267. Sir David de Barry
L.J. Who subdued the Mac Cartys.

1268. Sir Robert de Ufford L.J. A great Dearth and Mortality.

1269. Ricardus de Exonia L.J. 1270. Sir James Audley Constable of Ulster L.J.
1272. Maur. Fitz Maurice L.J. 1273. Geoffery Lord Genevil L.J. Lord of Mead by
right of his Wife.

1276. Sir R. de Ufford the second time L.J. 1279. Bish. of Waterf. L.J 1280.
Dublin burnt, Strongbows Tomb spoiled by the fall of Christ-Church when on
fire, Camp. p. 78. Mead rebels. 1282. Stephen de Fulborn L.J. 1288. Arch-Bp.
of Dublin L.J. 1290. Will. Vesey L.J. Who to interest him in the prosperity of
Ireland had given him the Manner and Lords hip of Rahangan, etc. in the County
of Kildare, but engaging himself against John Fitz Gerald Baron of Ophaly lost
himself, and the Baron sent back first Earl of Kildare, and Veseys Estate
conferred on him.

1307. Knights Templers for their Debauchery dissolved, Knights of the Road
constituted, Camp. p. 80. Connaght in Arms. 1308. Lord Bourk L.J. The Ancestor
of the House of Castle Connel and Leitrim.

1309. Lucan Bridge built. 1312. Sir Edmond le Butler Deputy. He unites the
Earls of Vlster and the Geraldines, who caused great troubles, and subdued the
Rebels of Connaght. Camp. 82.

1314. Lord de Verdon L.J. Had a great Estate in Mead in right of his Wife.
Hook. 62.

1314. Sir Edmond le Butler, Earl of Carrick L.J. Subdued the Irish at
Castle-Dermot..

1317. Roger Mortimer L.J. but the Lord Bermingham General. Bruce invades
Ireland, Vlster joins with him overrun the Kingdom, soon after subdued

1318. Will. Fitz John L.J. 1320. Earl of Kildare L.J. He built Loghlin Bridge:
the Pope granted the privilege of an University to Dublin.

1321. Lord of Athenry L.J. Slain with others by Mac Gohagon.

1322. Ralph de Gorges L.J. 1323. Sir Jo. Darcy L.J. The Irish universally
rebel, vanquished by JamesEarl of Ormond, and Bermingham hanged. Camp. 88.

1327. Earl of Kildare L.J. 1328. Prior of Kilmainham. L.J. In his time the
Geraldines, Butlers, Bermingham at variance with the Powers and Bourks, a
Parliament s ummoned to accord them.

1329. Sir John Darcy a second time L.J. Irish of Leinster in Rebellion. Camp.
87.

1330. Prior of Kilmainham L.J. 1331. Sir Anthony Lacy L.J. A great slaughter
by the English of the O Conners, etc. in Leinster. Marleborough 210.

1332. Sir John Darcy a third time L.J. Great slaughter on the Obrians and Mac
Cartys in Munster. Marl. p. 211.

1333. Thom. de Burgh L.J. 1336. On St. Lawrence day ten thousand Irish slain
in Connaght. Marlb. p. 212. 1337. Sir John Charleton L.J. The Irish generally
rebel, are quelled by the Earl of Kildare and Desmond. Camp. 88.

1340. Prior of Kilmainham L.J. 1341. Sir John Maurice L.J. 1344. Sir Ralph
Ussord Husband to the Countess of Ulster L.J. Desmonds first discontents,
Vssord died unlamented by his ill Government. Hook. 71.

1346. Sir Roger Darcy L.J. 1346. Sir John Maurice L.J. In whose time Desmond
made a dissension between the English of Blood and English of Birth.

1348. Sir Walter Bermingham L.J. John Archer Dep. Camp. 90. 1349. Sir Walter
Bermingham L.J. 1349. Baron Carey L.J. 1349. Sir Tho. Rooksby L.J. Whose saying
was, he had rather drink out of Wooden Cups, and pay Gold and Silver for his
Liquor, than drink out of Gold, and make wooden payment; a man of sincere and
upright Conscience, says Camp. 91. he would be deemed a precise Fop in these
days.

1351. Bishop of Lymerick L.J. The Vlsters rebel, and subdued by the Savages.
Camp. 30.

1355. Earl of Desmond L.J. 1356. Sir. Tho. Rooksby a second time L.J. 1357.
Sir Almerick de Sancta L.J. 1359. James Butler Earl of Ormond L.J. He married
the Grandchild of Edw. the first, for which his Son James was styled, by way of
pre-eminence, the Noble Earl.

1360. Earl of Kildare L.J. Appointed 500 l. per ann. Salery, and required out
of that to maintain 20 great Horse for War. Hook. 72.

1361. Duke of Clarence Lord Lieutenant. The third Son of Edw. the third, Earl
of Vlster and Lord of Connaght, he vanquished the Obrians, etc. and conquered
the County of Clare, from which he derived his Title of Clarence.

1364. James Earl of Ormond L.D. 1365. Sir Thom. Dale Governor. 1367. Earl of
Desmond L.J. 1369. Sir William de Windsor L.L. 1370. A great Mortality in
Ireland. 1371. Earl of Kildare L.J. 1372. Sir Robert de Ashton L.J. 1374. Sir
William de Windsor L.L. 1376. James Butler Earl of Ormond L.L. 1379. John de
Bromwhich L.J. Richard the Second. 1381. Dean of St. Patricks and Lord
Chancellor L.J. 1383. Philip de Courtney, L.L. 1385. Robert Vere Earl of
Oxford, Marquess of Dublin and Duke of Ireland L. ^. Of whom Cambden records,
he died in great anguish and penury, leaving nothing to his Tomb but Titles,
nor to the World, but matter of talk of his ill life.

1385. Sir John Stanley L.D. 1387. Bish of Mead L.J. 1389. Sir John Stanley
L.J. 1392. James Earl of Ormond L.J. 1394. Duke of Gloucester. L.J. 1394. King
Richard the Second in person. He landed at Waterford with four thousand men at
Arms and thirty thousand Archers, left Roger Mortimer Earl of Vlster, Lord of
Trym, Clare and Connaght L.L. slain by the Obrians.

1398. Roger Gray L.J. 1398. Duke of Surrey, the Kings Brother, L.L. 1399. King
Richard 2. the second time. Who came to avenge Mortitimers Death. In this Year
broke out that bloody War betwixt the Houses of Lancaster and York, from which
time not only England but Ireland were divided into two powerful Factions; the
Geraldines stood by the House of York, and the Butlers by the House of
Lancaster; the King returns, soon after loses his Kingdom and Life.

Henry the Fourth. 1399. Sir John Stanley L.L. 1401. Stephen Scroope L.D. to
Thomas of Lancaster the Kings Son. 1403. James Earl of Ormond L.J. Chose by the
Noblemen of Ireland.

1405. Gerald Earl of Kildare L.J. 1406. Stephen Scroop L.D. 1407. James Son of
the former Earl of Ormond L.J. 1408. Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings Son, L.L.
left Thomas Butler Dep. The Sword given to the City of Dublin, the Provost made
Major.

Henry the Fifth. 1413. The said Butler continued L.J. 1413. Sir John Stanley
L.L. The Ancestor of the Earls of Derby.

1414. Crawley Archbishop of Dublin L.J. 1414. Sir John Talbot L.L. In whose
time Ireland supplied the King with 1600 men to assist him in his Wars with
France.

1419. Richard Talbot Archbishop of Dublin L.J. 1420. James Butler Earl of
Ormond L.L. His Grandsire James, sirnam'd the Chaste, near Athy vanquished the
Army of the O Moorsand Mac Morroughs, etc. quelled the Obrians in Leinster,
the Bourks, Mac Mahons, etc. in Thomond, in three months time. Camp. 97.

Henry the Sixth. 1423. Earl of Ulster L.L. And died of the Plague.

1425. John Lord Talbot L.J. 1426. James Butler Earl of Ormond L.J. And died at
Ormond-Place in London.

1427. Sir John de Gray L.L. 1428. Edward Dantsey Bishop of Mead Dep. 1428.
Sir John Sutton L.L. Sir Tho. Strange his Dep. 1432 Sir Christopher Plunket
L.D. 1435 Sir Thomas Stanley L.L. 1436 Talbot Arch-Bp. of Dublin L.D. 1438 Lion
Lord Wells L.L. 1440 James Earl of Ormond L.L. 1441 Sir William Stanley L.D.
1441 Stephen Scroop L.D. 1442 Will. Wells Dep. to Lion Lord Wells. 1443 Earl of
Ormond L.L. 1446 Earl of Shrewsbury L.L. 1447 Talbot Arch-Bp. of Dublin L.J.
1449 Duke of York L.L. In Mead the Rebels burnt several Towns and Villages,
destroyed Men, Women and Children without mercy. Camp. 99.

1450 Earl of Ormond and Wiltshire Lord Treasurer of England L. Dep. to the
Duke of York. 1454 Archbishop of Ardmagh L.D. 1454 Earl of Kildare L.D. 1454
Sir Edward Fitz Eustace Lord Deputy to the Duke of York. 1456 Earl of Kildare
Lord Deputy. 1459 Richard Duke of York, Earl of Ulster and Lord of Connaght,
Lord Lieutenant. Who contracted with the King for Two thousand Pounds per
annum, with the Irish Revenue, to support the Government ten Years. The
Nobility of Ireland increasing in Factions betwixt the Houses of York and
Lancas ter; many destroyed, whereby the Irish grew troublesome, forcibly
possessing the Estates of the Engli sh in Ulster, Munster and Connaght.

Edward the Fourth. 1460 Earl of Kildare Lord Justice. 1461 Sir Rowland Fitz
Eustace, Lord of Portleister and Viscount Baltinglass, Lord Deputy to George
Duke of Clarence. 1463 Thomas Earl of Desmond Deputy to the Duke of Clarence.
Beheaded for exacting Coin and Livery.

1467 John Lord Tiptoft Earl of Worcester L.D. 1471 Thomas Earl of Kildare L.D.
1475 Bishop of Mead Dep. 1478 Lord Gray L.D. 1478 Sir Robert Preston L.D. 1479
E. of Kildare L.D. 1483 Edw. 5. Rich. 3. 1485 The said Earl of Kildare L.D. to
John de la Pole, Earl of Lincoln L.L. The Imposture Lambert Simnell made a
Disturbance in Ireland.

Henry the Seventh. 1491 Duke of Bedford L.L. 1492 Fitz Simons Archbishop of
Dublin L.D. 1493 Preston the first Lord Viscount Gormanstown L.D. 1494 Sir
Edward Poynings L.D. Sent over to quell the Imposture Perkin Warbeck; who in a
Parliament at Drogheda the 10. of Henry the Seventh past that Act called
Poynings Act; quelled the O Caryls, Mac Nemarras and Obrians in the County of
Gallaway, received the Honor of the Order of the Garter, etc. for his Reward.
Hook. 79.

1495 Henry Dean Chancellor of Ireland L.J. 1496 Girald E. of Kildare L.L. The
Obrians, Mac Nemarras, ^o Carylls, etc. with the greatest Power of Irish seen
together s ince the Conquest up in Arms, routed and slain, not one Englishman
lost Camp. 105

1501 Henry Duke of York, after King Hen. 8. L L. Earl of Kildare D. 1503 Fitz
Simons Archbishop of Dublin L.D. Henry the Eighth. 1509 Earl of Kildare
continued. This was he of whom the King spoke, If all Ireland cannot rule this
Earl, then this Earl shall rule all Ireland. Campion 107.

1513 Girald the Son of Girald late Earl of Kildare L.J. In his time the 23. of
Hen. 8. it was enacted, that none should be elected L.J. but an Englishman born
in England, except by Patent from the King.

1515 Lord Visc. Gormanstown L.J. 1515 Earl of Kildare continued Lord Dep. In
order to unite the Families, married his Sister with Pierce Butler Earl of
Ossery, Campion 107.

1519 Sir Thomas Fitz Maurice of the House of Kildare L.J. 1520 Earl of Surrey
L.L. Vlster in Rebellion. Campion 108.

1521 Earl of Ormond L.D. 1524 Girald Earl of Kildare L.D. About this time the
Geraldines arrived to their greatest height of Power, and the Butlers to the
greatest height of Spirit against them; but the Earl of Ormond more politic,
and of a cooler temper, gained ground, and ran Kildare out of breath. Campion
106.

1526 Thomas Fitz Girald of Leislipe and Richard Nugent Baron of Delvin L.J.
1528 Pierce Butler E. of Ossery L.D. 1530 Sir William Skiffington L.D.
Vanquished the Tools and the Bourns. Camp. 107.

1532 Girald Earl of Kildare L.D. 1534 Thomas Son to the Earl of Kildare L.D.
Who upon a false Report of his Father, then Prisoner in the Tower, was
beheaded, tauntingly threw up the Insignia Regalia, killed the Archbishop of
Dublin, defied the King and his Authority, proclaimed open War, destroyed and
burnt all before him, none resisting till the Butlers raised their Country to
oppose him; upon which he wrote a Letter to his intimate Acquaintance and
Cousin James Butler, whose Answer thereto is so loyal, pertinent and smart, I
es teemed it worth a place amongst my Annotations, as a good Pattern for young
Noblemen to write by, when under the like temptation. Taking Pen in hand to
write to you my resolute Answer, I muse in the very first line by what Name to
call you, my Lord or my Cousin, seeing your notorious Treason has destained
your Honor, and your desperate Lewdness shamed your Kindred; you are so
liberal in parting Stakes with me, that a man would ween you had no right to
the Game, so importunate in craving my Company, as if you would persuade me to
hang with you for good fellowship: and think you that James is so mad to gape
for Gudgeons, or so ungracious to sell his Truth for a piece of Ireland? Were
it so (as it cannot be) that the Chickens you reckon were both hatched and
feathered, yet be thou sure, I had rather in this Quarrel dye thine Enemy than
live thy Partner. Camp. 119.

1534 Sir William Skiffington L.D. 1535 Leonard Lord Gray Lord Viscount Graney
in Ireland L.D. Thomas Earl of Kildare, etc. tainted.

1540 Sir Anthony St. Ledger D. In his time the King and his Successors enacted
in Parliament to be styled Kings of Ireland, and the Supremacy granted to the
Crown.

1540 Sir Will. Brereton Baron of Loghlin in Ireland L.J. 1543 Sir William
Brabazon L.J. The Cavenaghs rebel.

1544 Sir Anthony St. Ledger the second time L.D. James Earl of Ormond, at the
Kings desire, saileth into Scotland to aid the Earl of Lenox,returns to London,
himself and fifty of his Servants poisoned at a Supper, of which eighteen died,
he by Will ordained his Heart should be interred in Ireland; on whom was made
this Epitaph; ( vid. Hook. 105.) The living Heart, where lay engraven,
The care of Country deer,
To Country lifeless is restored,
And lies engraven here;
Now heartless lives his Country then,
Alas! what Joy is left,
Who se hope, whose hap, whose heart he was
Till Death his Life bereft;
What Honor then is due to him,
For him what worthy Rite,
But that each heart with heartiest love
His worthiest Heart requite.
My Author gives him this character, A man no less politic in Peace than
valiant in War, that as he would not begin any Martial Broil rashly or
unadvisedly, so he would not seem to put it up lightly or easily.

1546 Sir William Brabazon a second time L.J. Edward the Sixth. 1547 Sir
Anthony St. Ledger L.D. He subdued the Byrns, Tools, C Conners, etc.

1548 Sir Edward Bellingham L.D. Dublin Bailiffs made Sheriffs. Camp. 123.

1549 Sir Francis Bryan Marshal of Ireland L. Just. Elected by the Kings leave.

1449 Sir William Brabazon the third time L.J. The Cavenaghs then in Rebellion.

1550 Sir Anthony St. Ledger a fourth time L.D. He subdued the Cavenaghs.

1551 Sir James Crofts L.D. Vlster King at Arms first instituted, and the
Liturgy printed and enjoined to be read in English.

1552 Sir Thomas Cusack and Sir Garret Aylmer L.J. Queen Mary. 1553 Sir Anthony
St. Ledger the fifth time Lord Deputy. 1556 Lord Radcliff Viscount Fitz Walters
L.D. 1557 Hugh Corwin Archbishop of Dublin and Sir Hen. Sidney L.J. 1557 Sir
Henry Sidney Treasurer of Ireland L.J. Shane O Neal rebels.

Queen Elizabeth. 1558 Radcliff Earl of Sussex L.L. Sir Henry Sidney his Dep.
Subdued the O Conners, O Moors, O Dempseys, etc:

1559 Sir William Fitz Williams L.J. 1559 Earl of Sussex returned L.L. Shane O
Neal submitted. Campion 125.

1561 Earl of Sussex L.L. 1565 Sir Nicholas Arnold L.J. 1565 Sir Henry Sidney
L.D. Shane O Neal attainted and the Name extinguished in Parliament: the
Presidency of Munster and Connaght were instituted.

1567 Dr. Weston Lord Chancellor and Sir Will. Fitz Williams Lord Treasurer of
Ireland L.J. 1586 Sir Henry Sidney L.D. 1571 Sir William Fitz Williams L.D.
1575 Sir Henry Sidney L.D. 1578 Sir Will. Drury L.J. Desmond rebels.

1579 Sir Will. Pelham L.J. Rescued Carickfoyle from the Spaniard.

1580 Lord Gray L.D. Who drove the 700 Spaniards and Italians out of Kerry, and
destroyed them with the Irish that joined with them.

1582. Adam Loftus Archbishop of Dublin and Lord Chancellor of Ireland, with
Sir Henry Wallop Treasurer of Ireland L.J. Desmond surprised, and his Head sent
to England.

1584 Sir John Perrot L.D. 1588 Sir William Fitz Williams L.D. Both blamed for
suffering the Irish to be first trained up in Arms: This year the University of
Dublin founded, and endowed with many Privileges by the Queen.

1594 Sir William Russel L.D. Sir John Norris sent as an experienced Soldier
to resist Tyrone, who were then 1000 Horse and 9500 Foot strong.

1597 Sir Thomas Norris President of Munster Lord General of the Army against
Tyrone. 1597 Adam Loftus Lord Chancellor of Ireland and Sir Robert Gardener
L.J. 1597 The Lord Buroughs L.D. 1598 Robert Earl of Essex L.L. Brought over a
fresh Army of 16000 Foot and 1300 Horse, Success not answerable, being maligned
at Court, the fate of too many of his Predecessors, returned for England, and
was beheded in the Tower, 1601.

1599. Sir Adam Loftus and Sir George Carey Justices. 1599 Lord Mountjoy L.L.
Subdued the Spaniards, etc. then possessed of Kinsale, soon after Tyrone, and so
ended that War which had cost the Crown of England 1198717 l. Cambden Appendix
to Eliz.

King James. 1603 Sir George Carey L.D. Sent the first Justices of Assize into
Vlster.

1604 Sir Arthur Chichester L.D. Sent the first Justices of Assize into Munster
and Connaght.

1615 Thomas Jones Arch-Bp. of Dublin, etc. and Sir Richard Wingfield L.J. 1614
Sir Arthur Chichester, then Lord of Belfast, the Ancestor of the now Earl of
Donnegall L.D. In Parliament repealed several Statutes, declaring the Irish
Rebels not Subjects but Enemies. Vide Act. 11. Jacobi, fol. 427. the Harp first
Marshaled with the Arms of Great Britain.

1615 Thomas Jones Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and Sir John Denham Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench L.J. 1616 Lord Grandeson L.D. 1622 Lord Viscount Ely
and Lord Visc. Powers Court L.J 1625 Lord Visc. Falkland L.D. Charles the
First. 1629 Lord of Cork and Lord of Ely L.J. 1633 Lord Viscount Wentworth L.D.
1636 Lord of Ely and Sir Christoph. Wandesford L.J. 1636 Thomas Lord Viscount
Wentworth L.D. 1639 Lord Dillon and Sir Christoph. Wandesford L.J. 1639 Earl of
Strafford L.L. 1640 Chistoph. Wandesford L.D. 1640 Lord Dillon and Sir William
Parsons L. Just. 1640 Sir William Parsons and Sir John Borlace L.J. Under whose
Government on the 23d. of October. 1641. the Bloody Irish most bloody Rebellion
broke out.

1643 Sir John Borlace and Sir Henry Tichburne L.J. Persons eminently qualified
for the time they governed, being both old Soldiers and true hearted
Englishmen, Tichburne gallantly secured and defended Drogheda against the
Rebels, and thereby preserved Dublin and the multitude of poor stripped English
in their slight thither.

1643 Janu. 21. James then Marquess now Duke of Ormond L.L. 1650 Ulick Bourke
Marquess of Clanriccard L.D. 1660 Sir Maurice Eustace Lord Chancellor, Roger
Boil Earl of Orrery and Charles Coote Earl of Montroth L.J. 1662. July 28.
James Duke of Ormond L.L. 1663 May 21. Thomas Earl of Ossory D. September. 1665
James Duke of Ormond L.L. 1668 Apr. 25. Thomas Earl of Ossory D. 1669 Sept. 10.
John Lord Roberts L.L. 1660 April 21. John Lord Berkley L.L. 1671 Michael Boil
Archbishop of Dublin Lord Chancellor and Sir Arthur Forbes L.J. September. 1671
John Lord Berkley L.L. 1672 May 21. Arthur Earl of Essex L.L. 1677 Aug. 24.
James Duke of Ormond the present L.L.

CHAP. IV. The Heads of the Establishment for Ireland, commencing March 25.
1676.
CIVIL LIST.
Exchequer. Yearly allowance. LOrd Treasurer 336 00 00 Vice-Treasurer 50 00 00
Chancellor of the Exchequer 200 00 00 Lord Chief Baron for his Fee and Robes
500 00 00 Second Baron 400 00 00 Third Baron 400 00 00 Prime Sergeant at Law
for his Fee and Robes 33 16 08 Second Sergeant 30 00 00 Attorney General 88 06
08 Solicitor General 88 06 08 Auditor General 184 00 08 and to him more in
full of all Fees due to him upon passing Sheriffs Accounts 31 00 00 Carried
forward 2341 10 08 Brought over 2341 10 08 Surveyor General 60 00 00 Escheator
of Leinster 06 13 04 Escheator of Munster 01 05 00 Escheator of Connaght 01 05
00 Escheator of Ulster 01 05 00 Chief Remembrancer 30 00 00 and to him in full
satisfaction of all Fees due to him upon passing Sheriffs Accounts 21 19 02
Second Remembrancer 07 15 06 and to him in full of all Fees upon passing
Sheriffs Accounts 45 06 09 Clerk of the Pipe 45 00 00 and to him in full of all
Fees due to him upon passing Sheriffs Accounts 111 12 00 Chief Chamberlain 10
00 00 Second Chamberlain 05 00 00 Comptroller of the Pipe 07 00 00 and to him
more in full of all Fees due to him upon passing Sheriffs Accounts 46 10 00
Usher of the Exchequer 12 10 00 and to him for Fees upon passing Sheriffs
Accounts 11 12 06 Transcripter and Foreign Opposer 15 00 00 and to him for
passing Accounts 38 15 00 carried forward 2819 19 11 Brought over 2819 19 11
Summonister 07 10 00 and to him more for the like Fees 36 08 06 Marshal of the
Four Courts 04 00 00 Clerk of the Pells 30 00 00 Clerk of the First Fruits and
Twentieth parts 27 10 00 and for Fees in passing Sheriffs Accounts 11 04 09
Crier of the Exchequer 01 13 04 and for the like Fees 07 15 00 Pursivants of
the Exchequer for carrying Writs 71 05 00 and for the like Fees 07 15 00
Auditor of the Foreign Accounts and Imprests 121 13 04 Three Commissioners of
Appeals 300 00 00 3446 14 10 Court of Kings Bench. LOrd Chief Justice 600 00 00
Second Justice 400 00 00 Third Justice 400 00 00 Clerk of the Crown 007 10 00
1407 10 00 Chancery. LOrd Chancellor 1000 00 00 Master of the Rolls 157 09 11
Four Masters of the Chancery twenty pound each 80 00 00 Clerks of the Crown and
Chancery 25 00 00 Clerks of the Hannaper 35 10 00 1297 19 11 Court of Common
Pleas. LOrd Chief Justice 500 00 00 Second Justice 400 00 00 Third Justice 400
00 00 Prothonotary 07 10 00 1307 10 00 State and Patent Officers, etc. OFficers
attending the State 71589 01 10 Incidents 2187 00 00 Custom Officers 238 06 08
Creation Money 544 11 08 Perpetuities 489 15 06 Temporary Payments 9367 17 01
Concordatams 4500 00 00 To uses to be appointed by Sign Manual 27000 00 00
115916 12 09

MILITARY LIST.
General Officers. LOrd Lieutenant 6593 06 08 Marshal of Ireland 634 12 00
Muster-Master General and Clerk of the Cheques 336 00 00 Six Commissaries of
the Musters 400 00 00 Comptroller of the Musters and Cheques 436 00 00 Advocate
General of the Army 112 00 00 Surgeon General 112 00 00 8623 18 08 Officers
of the Ordnance and Train of Artillery. MAster of the Ordnance 453 09 00 Lieut.
of the Ordnance 117 12 00 Comptroller of the Ordnance 100 00 00 Clerk of the
Ammunition and Stores 67 04 00 Engineer and Overseer of his Majesty's
Fortifications 300 00 00 Inferior Officers of the Train of Artillery 728 00 00
1766 05 00 Horse. KIngs Guard 5502 00 00 Twenty four Troops 45 360 00 00 Lord
Lieutenants own Troop 5 private Horsemen and 3 Trumpets more than other Troops
252 00 00 An Additional Pay to private Horsemen of four Troops doing Duty at
Dublin 756 00 00 Foot. Company of Foot Guards 1128 00 00 Royal Regiment 17035
04 00 Field and Staff-Officers of the said Regiment 1341 04 00 74 Companies
64646 08 00 Earl Dunbartons Regiment 19616 16 00 Sir Nich. Armourer Governor of
the New Fort near Kinsale 365 00 00 Total of the Military List 166392 15 08
List of Pensions 11200 00 00 of which paid to persons in England 5780 00 00
Total of His Majesty's Charge 230969 02 06

A Table for Reducing Plantation Acres into English, in the several Provinces
of Ireland; according to the Explanatory Act; Viz. For every English Statute
Acre in the Province of Leinster, 3 d. Munster, 2 d. ob. Connaght, 1 d. q.
Vlster, 2 d.
Irish. English, Acres, Leinster. Munster. Ulster. Connaght. Ir. a. En. a. R.
P. Pts. l. s. d. q. l. s. d. q. l. s. d. q. l. s. d. q. 1 1 2 19 21 0 4 3 0 3 3
0 3 1 0 2 2 2 3 0 38 42 0 9 3 0 7 1 0 6 2 0 4 3 3 4 3 17 63 1 2 2 0 11 0 0 1 3
0 7 1 4 0 1 36 84 1 7 2 1 2 2 1 4 0 0 9 3 5 8 0 15 105 0 2 1 1 6 1 1 4 1 1 0 0
6 9 2 35 5 2 5 1 1 9 3 1 7 2 1 2 2 7 11 1 14 26 2 10 0 2 1 2 1 10 3 1 5 0 8 12
3 33 44 3 2 3 2 5 1 2 2 0 1 7 2 9 14 2 12 68 3 7 3 2 8 3 2 6 1 1 9 3 10 16 0 31
89 4 0 2 4 0 2 2 8 2 2 0 1 20 32 1 23 57 8 1 1 6 1 3 5 4 3 4 0 2 30 48 2 15 25
12 1 3 9 1 1 8 1 1 6 1 0 40 64 3 6 114 16 2 2 12 1 3 10 9 2 8 1 1 50 80 3 38 82
1 0 3 0 15 2 1 13 6 0 10 1 2 60 97 0 30 50 1 4 3 2 18 2 3 16 2 2 12 1 3 70 113
1 22 18 1 8 4 1 1 1 3 1 18 10 2 14 2 0 80 129 2 13 107 1 12 4 3 1 4 3 2 1 1 7 1
16 2 1 90 145 3 5 75 1 16 5 1 1 7 4 0 1 4 3 2 18 2 3 100 161 3 37 43 2 0 6 0 1
10 4 2 1 7 0 0 1 0 3 0 500 809 3 26 94 10 2 5 3 7 11 1 1 6 14 11 3 5 1 2 3 1000
1619 3 13 67 20 4 11 2 15 3 6 2 13 9 11 3 10 2 5 3 5000 80991 0 27 39 101 4 9 2
75 18 7 0 67 9 10 2 50 12 4 2 10000 16198 1 15 5 202 9 7 0 151 17 2 1 134 19 9
0 101 4 9 0

CHAP. V. The Establishment of the Subsidies of Ireland.
Nobility Subsidy.
DVke of Ormond 100 00 00 Earl of Cork 110 00 00 Marquess of Antrim 60 00 00
Earl of Kildare 56 13 00 Earl of Thomond 40 00 00 Earl of Strafford 35 00 00
Earl of Clanriccard 35 00 00 Earl of Castlehaven 02 10 00 Earl of Roscommon 15
00 00 Earl of Londonderry 10 00 00 Earl of Desmond 10 00 00 Earl of Mead 15 00
00 Earl of Barrymore 30 00 00 Earl of Carbury 15 00 00 Earl of Arglass 20 00 00
Earl of Donnegall 50 00 00 Earl of Cavan 02 10 00 Earl of Clanbrazil 30 00 00
Earl of Inchiquin 10 00 00 Earl of Clancarty 40 00 00 Earl of Orrery 20 00 00
Earl of Montrath 15 00 00 Earl of Drogheda 40 00 00 Earl of Waterford 23 00 00
Earl of Mountalexander 05 00 00 Earl of Castlemain 20 00 00 Earl of Arran 15 00
00 Earl of Carlingford 15 00 00 Earl of Longford 15 00 00 Earl of Tyrone 15 00
00 Earl of Ranelegh 15 00 00

Viscounts.
GRandison 10 00 00 Wilmot 10 00 00 Valentia 30 00 00 Dillon 20 00 00 Loftus of
Ely 12 10 00 Swords 12 10 00 Kilmurrey 12 10 00 Conway 30 00 00 Mayo 10 00 00
Savil 20 00 00 Lanesborough 10 00 00 Castlestone 20 00 00 Chaworth 20 00 00
Scudamore of Sligoe 12 10 00 Lumley 12 10 00 Strangford 12 10 00 Wenman of
Fryan 10 00 00 Molleux 17 10 00 Fairfax 12 10 00 Fitz Williams 07 00 00
Rathcoole 12 10 00 Bareford 12 10 00 Bulkley 15 00 00 Ogle 12 10 00 Bronkart 12
10 00 Cullen 20 00 00 Gallmoy 03 00 00 Kingsland 20 00 00 Shannon 12 10 00
Dromore 12 10 00 Cloin 10 00 00 Mazareen 10 00 00 Cholmondlegh 12 10 00 Fanshaw
of Donnamore 05 00 00 Duncannon 12 10 00 Fitz Harding 20 00 00 Clare 20 00 00
Charlemont 10 00 00 Powers Court 10 00 00 Granard 10 00 00

Lords Barons.
BErmingham 01 00 00 Coursey 02 00 00 Kerry 10 00 00 Hoath 05 00 00 Cahir 05 00
00 Montjoy 12 10 00 Folliot 15 00 00 Maynard 15 00 00 Gorges 05 00 00 Digby 10
00 00 Fitz Williams of Lifford 10 00 00 Herbert 20 00 00 Baltimore 10 00 00
Brereton of Laghlin 05 00 00 Colrain 10 00 00 Sherard of Leitrim 10 00 00
Strabane 05 00 00 Hawley of Dunmote 05 00 00 Allington of Killard 20 00 00
Collooney 10 00 00 Santry 10 00 00 Glanawly 10 00 00 Altham 10 00 00

Ladies Subsidies.
CLanrickard 20 00 00 Thomond 10 00 00 Antrim 11 13 00 Roscommon 05 00 00
Clonbrazill 10 00 00 Cloncarty 15 00 00 Mountalexander 06 00 00 Glamoy 03 00 00
Firconnell 04 13 00 Massareene 05 00 00 Strabane 02 00 00 total 92 06 00

Subsidies of the several Bishoprics of the Diocese of Ardmagh.
Archbishopric of Ardmagh 180 17 08 Bishopric of Mead 206 13 00 Bishopric
of Londonderry 142 08 00 Bishopric of Clogher 105 08 00 Bishopric of Conner
44 00 00 Bishopric of Rapho 86 12 00 Bishopric of Dromore 20 12 00 Bishopric
of Down 16 16 00 Bishopric of Killmore 59 08 00 Bishopric of Ardagh 12 12 00
total 875 06 08

Subsidies of the several Bishoprics of the Diocese of Dublin.
Archbishopric of Dublin 247 14 00 Bishopric of Kildare 101 12 00 Bishopric
of Ossory 88 00 00 Bishopric of Fernes 111 08 00 Bishopric of Leighlin 44 08
00 total 593 02 00

Subsidies of the several Bishoprics of the Diocese of Cashell.
Archbishopric of Cashell 51 12 00 B. of Waterford and Lismore 102 09 06
Bishopric of Cork and Ross 32 16 00 Bishopric of Cloyne 41 04 00 Bishopric
of Limerick 31 12 00 Bishopric of Killalow 20 08 00 Bishopric of Ardfart 04
05 00 total 284 06 00

Subsidies of the several Bishoprics of the Diocese of Tuam.
Archbishopric of Tuam. 22 16 00 Bishopric of Elphin 34 04 00 Bishopr. of
Athconry and Killala 12 00 00 Bishopric of Clonfart 30 08 00 Bishopric of
Kilmacough 07 00 00 total 106 08 00

Provincial Subsidies.
Leinster.
CIty of Dublin 601 18 01 ob County of Dublin 551 18 01 ob County of
Catherlough 147 10 07 ob County of Kildare 477 12 10 ob County of Kilkenny 479
02 00 City of Kilkenny 44 02 04 ob County of Wexford 323 10 09 County of
Wicklow 154 16 06 Queens County 242 13 09 Kings County 224 09 03 County of
Longford 145 07 00 County of West Mead 356 17 04 ob County of Mead 659 13 04
ob County of Louth. 217 13 09 Villa de Drogheda 053 11 06 ob total 4580 08 04
ob Munster.
County and City of Cork 1364 18 00 City of Waterford 97 01 00 County of
Waterford 265 15 00 County of Tiperary 1039 17 00 City of Limerick 97 01 00
County of Limerick 492 08 00 County of Kerry 209 19 03 total 3566 19 03
Connaght.
County of Gallway 153 15 01 ob Town of Gallway 82 10 06 County of Roscommon
350 17 04 ob County of Mayo 385 18 04 ob County of Leitrim 160 05 06 County of
Sleigo 295 10 03 County of Clare 386 14 06 total 2515 11 07 ob Ulster.
County of Antrim and Town of Carickfergus 402 13 06 County of Down 387 16 02
County of Donnagall 461 19 06 Coun. and Cit. of Londondery 374 01 10 ob County
of Ardmagh 258 15 03 County of Monaghan 267 05 03 County of Cavan 272 09 09
County of Fermannagh 237 07 06 County of Tyrone 367 18 10 ob total 3030 07 08
total of the four Provinces 13693 06 11

CHAP. VI. Of Coyns.
INSisting more largely on the original Increase and Value of all the species
of Money, that have been or now are current in the world, in my Treatise of
Traffic, I shall only here briefly insist on this one Question, it having been
more controverted with less agreement in the Council of Trade than any other
point.

Quest. Whether it be advisable for the Government of Ireland to inhance the
Value or debase the Allay of the current Money.

Answ. 1. Such as have been in the negative have maintained their Arguments
from these Reasons. 1. It would be a Dishonor to the Government, Coin bring
the Standard or Measure of all other things, it would weaken our Credit in our
foreign Traffic. And also intringe the Laws of foreign Commerce, and nothing
more reflects upon a Prince or State than being inconstant in their Measures
and Weights respecting Trade.

2. Silver and Gold being foreign materials, we by inhancing their Value raise
the rate of a foreign Specie on our selves. 3. If we raise its value, our
Neighbor Princes, etc. will rise also, and then we are where we were. 4. It
lessens the Repute of the Kings Revenue when estimated by its current Value
much above its intrinsique.


2. It is a great damage to the Subject. 1. All our Lands, Rents, Wares, etc.
are proportionably undervalued, as we inhance or debase our Coin, when the
current value of one Hundred pound in our Coffer is intrinsiquely worth but
ninty five pound, our Estate is no more really, though reputively. 2. It will
cause Controversies and Suites of Law in the paying of Rents and Specialties,
when the Condition is current lawful money of and in England. 3. No man knows
what he sels his Goods for, when he knows what sort of Money he shall receive
payment in.


In brief, if our Money, which must rule the Price of all things, be mutable and
uncertain, no man can make a sure and clear estate of what he has; Contracts,
Bargains, Rents, Taxes, Wages will all be uncertain.

These Objections contain the Substance of what were offered in the negative.

Now though it is granted these Notions are very sound, as to a well settled
Commonwealth; yet, we say, there is no general Rule without an exception, for
sick States as well as sick Bodies Physic is more necessary than Food; and
that this practice of inhancing the Rate and debasing the Value of the Coin,
has been used by the wisest of Statesmen upon some urgent cases, our Histories
give plentiful examples of.

First, for the debasing the Allay, though Monsieur Bodin argues against it,
yet himself gives many instances as well in his own Country of France as in
all other Kingdoms and States of Europe, he determines the finest Gold to be 23
Carrets, and Silver 11 Deniers, that is one 24th. part Alloy in Gold, and one
12th. part in Silver, and yet blames the Goldsmiths of France 688. that they
made their work at 20. yea, oft-times at 19 Carrets, and so it had about the
5th. part of Silver or Copper Allay, and then spend five leaves in instances
both of former and latter times of Princes changing the finest, and value of
their Coins, which may be not only lawful, but expedient in these and the like
causes: First, in time of Wars, or difference of Neighbour-Princes, who may
contrive to draw out our Money from us, in order to weaken our hands, and
Moneys being deservedly called the sinews of War; which project Francis the
First carried on by settling a Bank at Lions, declaring Interest at 8 per C. the
general rate in Italy, etc. being 5. he drew a great part of the Money of Italy
and Germany into his custody. Bodin 673. the Emperor Charles the fifth, and
Henry the 8th. of England did the like, Holl. 674. From German Merchants for
100000 Crowns at 12 per C. and about the same time, viz. 1526. by Proclamation
on the 6th. of September inhance the rate of his own Coin, and raised the value
of Gold to 45 shillings, and Silver to 36 shillings 9 pence; and again in the
year 1544. the 35 th. of his Reign proclaimed Gold to 48. and Silver at 48. the
Ounce in value, and at the same time coin base Money, to wit, pieces of 1 s. 6
d. 4 d. 2 d. 1 d. and continue current at that rate until the 5. of Edward the
6. when they were brought down, the Shilling to 9 pence, the Groat to 3 d. etc.
and so continued until the 2. of Elizabeth: and although the Queen was
exceeding curious in the affairs of her Mint, and tender of her Honor therein,
yet was convinced by her Council, there was a necessity of debasing her Money
for Ireland; the Irish War against Tyrone that cost her 160000 l. per ann.
would drain England dry of Coin; the Arguments Buckhurst Lord Treasurer, etc.
used, were, 1. It would abate the Charge of the War a fourth part, when her
Shilling current in Ireland was not worth above 9 pence. 2. It would much
weaken the Hands of the Rebels, who drew most of the good Money into their power
for Provisions, etc. and made use of it to supply themselves with Arms and
Ammunition, etc. from Foreigners, which a course Coin would prevent. 3. It
would discourage Foreigners from aiding them, when they considered they must
receive their Pay in bad Money, etc.


Upon which consideration the Money she after sent was debased in i^ Allay a
fourth part Brass, the Irish shilling current being but nine pence intrinsique
value. Errata per contra Page in line 4. for 36 s. 9 d. read 3 s. 9 d. in line
6. for Silver at 48 s. the Ounce r. Silver at 4 s. the Ounce.


And it is notorious that France, Holland, and most part of the Hance Towns in
Germany, as they have had as good Money as the world affords, so they have as
bad, which stands them in great stead, as to their petty Commerce, that the
Tradesmen often times give Exchange to have the Rix-Dollar turned into base Money
of current value, though not the sixth part of the intrinsique; so that
although Monsieur Bodin, and others of his opinion, deserve the esteem of
knowing and judicious persons; yet I judge the contrary Practice of all Princes
and States we have any account of may balance them; that such may be the state
of a Commonwealth, that debasing and enhancing Coin may be not only expedient,
but necessary: 1. In case of War, as before. 2. If other Neighbor Princes
inhance or debase their Coin, as in the Examples mentioned. 3. In case of
Scarcity, and thereby increase of the rate or value of Bulloin: for if England
had not enhanced their Coin as Bulloin rose, from 26 in Edward the thirds time
to 60 pence in Queen Elizabeth's, it is not reasonable to believe England would
have had a Silver spoon or a six pence left: and if Bulloin should yet increase
in value to six or seven shillings per Ounce, if we enhance not our Coin
proportionably, it is not rational to believe we shall have a penny left. 4. In
ease of the wrong Balance of Trade, there is a necessity to do something to
alter it, or the Kingdom's drained of its Coin; for so much as we buy more than
we sell must be paid for in Money, as is shown in that Chapter: and there is but
two ways to reform the Balance of Trade, which is either to increase the
Quantity and improve the Quality of our natural Growth, or restrain Consumption
of Foreign Goods: the first is a work of time, and the latter difficult to
effect: and the most rational Expedient to stem the Tide till it turn is, to
make our Money a worse and our Commodity a better Commodity for Transportation:
for the Merchant only considers what is most gainful; and whilst our Coin is
the best Commodity to export, he will not meddle with our Goods: but if Gold
and Silver were the best Commodity to import, and the worst to export, there
would need no other Law but the Common Law of Interest to preserve and increase
Coin.


And although it might be more convenient for me to keep to generals, and leave
Expedients to those more concerned, and capable to reform: yet, considering I
may be misunderstood, I judge it necessary to explain my self more particular
in this case, there being extremes on both hands: for the having of no good
Money in the Body politic would be as dangerous as no good Blood in the Body
natural.

First, I would propose that all our good Money, either English or foreign Coin,
that is near the intrinsique value it goes for. viz. Gold of two in twenty
four, and Silver of one in twelve Allay may inhance five per Cent. above its
current rate in the Countries where we Trade, which cannot fall heavy upon any
but future Cofferers; and I think Five per Cent. is too low a Fine upon them,
and its increase of value would bring out all Money now coffered.

Secondly, that all our course Money may be altered in its specie, and coined in
Shillings, Six pences and Threepences, to its present intrinsique value, viz.
the first rate in Shillings, the second in Six pences, and the worst into
Threepences; whereby all persons will have their own at the same current and
intrinsique value they delivered it into the Mint, and the Mint deducting the
Charge of Coining, which is so inconsiderable, the Money will be little the
worse, and yet the Interest of all persons secured.

Thirdly, A certain Sum, as the Government may judge convenient, of very course
Money, about the Allay of the Dutch double Stiver be coined in Twopence and
Penny pieces.

Fourthly, That the like proportionable Sum be coined of Copper, or rather Tin
compounded with Copper (it being our own Material) in Halfpence and Farthings;
these three last sorts of Money we shall be sure to keep, which of themselves
will be sufficient to manage our Hometrade, if our best Money should be drained
from us, and if our native Growth and Manufactures will not furnish us with
foreign Commodities sufficient for our necessary Consumption, we are better
without them.

If we had fewer Silk-Shops and Taverns, it would be no great Grievance, whilst
we want not Drapers and Mercers Shops, and Alehouses, etc. and no Country in
the world less depends upon Foreign supply than Ireland for Necessaries, and it
is improvident to consume our selves in Superfluities.

THE SUPPLEMENT.
Objection.

IF the Government of Ireland by its own Members be of so great advantage as
you affirm, Part 2. Chap. 3. to the Trade and Wealth of that Kingdom, whence
was it the Trade, etc. were no more promoted under the Justices 1661, 1662? and
why did not the Duke of Ormond in his seven years Government no more improve
the Trade and Wealth of Ireland?

Answer.

1. Though the then Justices were members of Irelands Commonwealth, and
consequently interested in its common Good; yet the various Interests of
Ireland being undetermined, all they could do was to keep all quiet, by keeping
each party in expectation matters might go better with them upon the Settlement
than they feared, the chief Contrivances of the people of each Faction being
how to wipe themselves clean with each others foul Clouts, by alleging
something to extetenuate their own and aggravate others Offenses.

2. The great Confusion the Duke found that Kingdom in at his landing, all
Interests being unsettled, and Minds unsatisfied, both which were necessary to
be composed and determined, before the Improvement of the Kingdom by Trade
could be thought on; for till men knew their Interest in the Country, as to
their real Estates, they had little reason to be much concerned in improving
their personal. Uncertain Titles to Lands are always attended with certain
omissions of Improvements; for men are not willing to build Houses for others
to dwell in, nor to improve Lands for others to possess.

Which was then more notoriously the state of the Inhabitants of Ireland in
general than usually befalls a Country, which will appear, if you do but weigh
the many distinct and contrary Interests, producing several violent opposite
Factions and Parties that Ireland was under at the Dukes access to the
Government. And for your Information or Satisfaction herein, take this brief
view of the state from the year 1660. to the year 1662. the Duke arrived.

1. The Irish themselves, notwithstanding the body of them, could not be
unsensible of their Gui^^ in the bloody massacring of so many hundreds o^
thousands of English in cold blood; yet they allege their Displeasure was not
against the King nor against the Kings good Subjects, but for their own
preservation, against the fury of the Purit^^^ party, then so much favored by
the Parliament of England: and therefore they hoped the worst construction
would not be put upon their Actions; but that the edge of that sharp Law of
Decimo Septimo against their Estates, passed by the King under some sort of
necessity to satisfy the discontented people of England, might be blunted.

A second sort, of them that pleaded they were not concerned in the bloody
Massacre and first Rising; for they tendered their Service to the Crown till
they observed the Commotion to be so general, and themselves so far suspected,
they were not trusted, that they had only choice which party they would be
ruined by; and therefore fell in with the rest of their Country men, hoping by
their Interest in their Councils to prevent further Extremities, and to keep
them in a capacity of accepting reasonable terms of Submission to the
Government of England.

A third sort pleaded they accepted of the Cessation 1643. and closed in with
the Peace in the years 1646, 1648. and from that time were faithful to the
Crown, and bore Arms in the defense of its Interest against the Usurpers; and
many of them, after they could do the King no further Service in Ireland,
served under the Banner of his Friends beyond Sea, without the least defect,
until the time his of Majesty's happy Restoration, and from thence they
concluded they had made amends for all their former faults.

There were a fourth sort, who, though least in number, yet most deserving,
that pleaded Innocence, as without any defect in the whole Transaction, and
they expected not only their own Estates, but Reparation for past Sufferings.

And as these several Interests and Factions of the Irish thus divided them
into parties, so was it with the English Protestants.

1. The unspotted Royalists, that both in the English and Irish War never
served under other but the Kings Banner, they expected to be both first and
best provided for, who had a special provision made for them, though not what
they expected, by the Act of Settlement, under the denomination of the Forty
nine Men.

2. Such who had served the King faithfully in his Wars in England and Ireland
until the Kings Government was removed, and then accepted of Employments under
the Usurpers in Ireland, and these were generally known by the denomination of
the Old Protestant party.

3. They which seemed to be the most considerable, both for Number and
Interest, being possessed of the chief Employments both Military and Civil at the
Kings Restoration was the new Interest of Adventurers and Soldiers, the first
claiming Propriety by the Act of Decimo septimo, and the other by their Service
against the Irish, in which they alleged they had done the King good Service,
though by his Enemies Commissions; and they being suspicious the Lands of
Ireland would not hold out to satisfy the Expectations of all those Interests,
it begat Factions both between the Adventurer and Soldier, and between each
party among themselves.

Those Adventurers that had paid their Subscriptions in due time, pleaded
Privilege before those who failed in that point, then the original Subscribers
found themselves aggrieved the dou^^^ng Ordinance men should invade their first
Security: so amongst the Soldiers those then in Arms pleaded in consideration
of their good Services in the Kings Restoration they deserved to have the Kings
Favors in the the Act of Settlement limited to such as were mustered in the
next Muster after the Kings Interest was avowed, but the others alleged, they
never intended to bring in the King, until they had run themselves into such
confusions in their Counsels and Convulsions in their State they knew not what
to do, which gave a fair opportunity to those Royallists amongst them, in that
shuffle of the Cards, to turn up the Kings Interest Trumps.

Now these many different Interests rendered the work of Irelands Settlement
both tedious and difficult, that required both a skilful and tender Hand to
compose; for these contrary Interests produced contrary Humors, which, until
the ^^ke of Ormond landed, worked to that height (...) opposition, that every
Eye was filled with envy, and every Brow with indignation one against the
other, that if they met on the Road, or passed by e^^h other in the Street,
contempt and prejudice to a strange degree might be read in their deportment;
yet all the Factions, unless that termed Fanatic, bore up with a competent
confidence, but the generality of that party seemed to be much dejected, every
day more and more withering in their hopes, in so much that many of them were
preparing for voluntary Exile, some to Plantations in America, others into
Holland, or such parts of England, as they supposed obscurity might give them
most quiet and safety, and in order thereunto sold considerable Interests in
this Kingdom at very low rates, some giving one moiety, some loss, to
Favorites at Court, to secure the Remain to themselves.

But soon after, understanding that the Act of Settlement was near perfected,
and that His Majesty was graciously inclined to make no considerable distincton
of Interests therein, nor exception of persons included in his gracious Act of
Indemnity, ^^d that the Duke of Ormonde, who of all men had been most
disobliged by the late Powers, they feared would have been their greatest
Enemy, was the most concerned to secure their Interest in the common Bottom out
of his Love to the common Eaglish Interest of Ireland, and was also nominated
when the Act was perfected to come over as Lord Lieutenant, to see it executed;
they then began to take heart, and inclined to see the issue of his Government
before they would further unsettle themselves, conside^ing that if his Humor
were moderte toward them, he had an Interest and Spirit big enough to
strengthen his own Resolutions, and not (...) be diverted from the practice of
his own Reason for fear or savor of any of the Parties, which was not the case
under the present Justices, which soon after his arrival they found made good
beyond their expectations, having equal access with others into his presence,
and that with good acceptance. and also finding they could have equal Justice
at the Court of Claims, and other the Kings Courts, with other the Kings
Subjects, they gave over their thoughts of removing, and disposed themselves to
industry in the Country, or Cities, as their Estates and Educations capacitated
them.

Now it is not to be expressed what sudden alterations this made in the Humor
and Deportment of the persons of several Interests one toward another; this
equal Countenance and Justice of the chief Governor begat an equal Familiarity
betwixt the people of different parties, and so deep a resentment had the
principal persons of that party, before most dejected, they agreed, as many of
the Field Officers as were in Dublin, to make a solemn return of Thanks to the
Duke, and withal a Tender of their Service to his Son the Earl of Ossory, then
Lieutenant General of the Army, that they were ready with their Lives and
Estates when his Majesty's Affairs required, to engage themselves against the
Kings Enemies under his Conduct, which was courteously accepted by the Earl,
who with many affectionate Expressions, in his sweet obliging way, assured them
when, the Kings Affairs required, he should highly esteem their Company and
Assistance.

From which time that party esteemed it their duty, to study how to approve
themselves not only loyal Subjects to their King, but grateful Servants to his
Viceroy.

Thus all Interest being determined by the Act of Settlement, and thereby all
Humors composed; each party and every person bent their minds and industry to
defend their Titles to what the said Act gave them a pretense unto in the Court
of Claims, where such a brisk Trade was driven, in purchasing and prosecuting
Titles to Land, no other Trade or Manufactures were thought on, the bulk of the
Cash of the Kingdom being swallowed up in that gulf.

Yet in that time the Duke considering, Land in Ireland would little differ
from Land in America, without Inhabitants to plant and improve it, was very
inquisitive after the Intrigue of Trade and Manufacture, if he met with any
persons that he apprehended were acquainted with those Affairs: and in May
1664. gave a Commission to a Council of Trade, with full and large Instructions
for them to govern their Proceedings by, which are printed in my Preface, and
most persons of Quality having by that time gained possession of great scopes
of Land, in several of their Lots they found old ruined Towns; and discerning
no other way to get them planted, greweager of Manufactures, to whom the Lord
Lieutenant gave all possible encouragement, that within a few years after we
(...) erected by private persons on their own accounts many considerable
Manufactures.

^he Leinster Alderman Daniel Hutchenson at ^^by, Earl of Arran at Tullagh,
Lord Chancellor Eustace at Baltinglass, Esquire Parsons at the Byrr, the
public Manufacture of Chappelizod on the Kings account, besides several other
lesser Attempts.

In Munster the Earl of Orrery at Charlevil, several Dutch Merchants in
Limerick and Clare, Baron Hartstongue at the Bruff.

Besides very considerable addition of Cloth, Bays, Stuffs and Stockins at Cork
and Bandon, etc.

In Connaght the Lord Kingston at Abbey Boil, Sir James Cuff at

Some time after the Duke, on his particular account, attempted a Manufacture
at Callen, and also gave great encouragement to some Undertakers to erect the
most considerable Manufacture Ireland ever saw, for Cloth and Stuffs, at
Clonmell, which for some years employed many hundreds of people, and made as
good Cloth and Stuffs as England could produce.

In Ulster the Lord Dungannon at Dundalk, but the Scotch and Irish in that
Province addicting themselves to spinning of Linen Yarn, attained to vast
quantities of that Commodity, which they transported to their great profit, the
convenience of which drew thither multitudes of Linen Weavers, that my opinion
is, there is not a greater quantity of Linen product in the like circu^ in
Europe: and although the generality of their Cloth fourteen years since was
sleisie and thin, yet of late it is much improved to a good fineness and
strength, and will in all probability increase daily both in quantity and
quality; but all the other Manufactures mentioned, after the Dukes removal from
the Government, dwindled away to nothing, except two or three that like sick
folk are ready to expire; the Causes of which and Remedies I shall show at
large in my Discourse of Manufacture, supposing this account of the state of
Affairs all the time of the Dukes first Government is a sufficient Answer to
the Objection, and corroborates my Assertion that it is the Interest of Ireland
to be governed by persons peculiarly interested in its prosperity.

An Answer to the Objection page 93.
IT is objected in page 93. of the 2d. Part, if the bloody Massacre in 1641,
etc. proceeded not from any depravity from Principles of Humanity, nor from any
spirit of revenge or personal hatred against the Protestants, but only from
their bloody Tenants in matters of Religion, as you affirm; it were necessary
to instance what Points of their Religion they are that render them so
dangerous, they professing themselves Christians, etc.

Answer,

As I there hint, it is not the Religion of the Church of Rome, viz. what
relates to Faith and Worship, but the Policies of the Court of Rome that
renders them so incompatible with civil Order and humane Society: multitudes of
Christians live safely amongst Turks and Pagans in Asia, Africa and America,
without danger of Massacres or Assassinations on the account of Religion;
though they have no Law of true Religion to influence them, yet the Law of
Humanity is not wholly obliterated; they know what it is to do as they would be
done by; as Gage and other Historians of the Spanish West Indians inform us,
those miserable Pagans will ask what place the Spaniard goes to after death,
vehemently declaring, they will not worship that God whose Servants are so
cruel, lest they should be as barbarously used by them in the other world.

And as their inhumane bloody cruelty is condemned by the Law of Nature, so
much more by all moral and divine Laws.

Therefore what I shall insist on shall be such Tenants as are not only against
all Christian but Moral Principles, nay against the common Law of Nature and
Nations, such as render humane Society more dangerous than brutish, who prey
not on nor devour those of their own kind, but rather unite their strength in
common dangers for common safety.

In the stating of which I shall observe this method: 1. Propose the Principles
themselves, and show you what they are, and how esteemed by their own Authors.
2. To observe their original from whence they proceed. 3. The Authority by
which they are approved and confirmed, and by whom rejected and condemned. 4.
Their natural Consequences what they must produce. 5. The actual or practical
Operation of them, what Work they have already done in the world. 6. Their
Inconsistency with the just Power of Princes and States, etc. 7. Shall give
give some Reasons why it is not only the Duty but the Interest of the Irish
Papists to reject and explode them above all other Papists in the world.


First Sect shows what those Principles are that are so incompatible with
humane Society and civil Peace.

It may be said of them as the unclean Spirit replied to Christ, Mark 15. they
are legions; the detection and rejection of which has engaged many of our
Protestant Authors to write many great Volumes to con^ute them; as Dr. Fulk,
Willet, Field, Jewel, etc. and later, Chillingworth, Stillingfleet, Poole; and
of Ireland Bishop Usher, Bramhall, Tailor, etc. with several of our dissenting
Divines, as Mr. Baxter, etc. besides many German and French Protestant Doctors.

But, to avoid prolixity, I shall chiefly observe what is asserted by the
Author of the Mystery of Jesuitism, Mystery of Jesuitism p. 296.
who is so thorough a Papist, that he asserts the Church of Rome to be the only
true Church, out of which there is no Salvation: and therefore his Testimony
and the Doctors of Sorbon, etc. whom he vindicates in their opposition to their
Casuists and Schoolmen, etc. is without exception. But that they may be known
by their proper names I shall style them Jesuitical Tridentine Tenants; the
Jesuits laid the Cockatrice eggs, and the Council of Trent hatched them into
flying Serpents, into mortal stinging Scorpions; as I shall observe in the 5th.
Section.

The first born of this viperous brood was the Popes personal Infallibility,
which though contended for from Boniface 3. yet was never received nor imposed
as an Article of Faith until that illegal Council of Trent, but attributed to
General Councils only: but this was so needful a point, without which they
could never have attained that one thing necessary the Popes personal
Supremacy: and of these two Parents were begot that litter of bloody Tenants,
which (as I shall show Sect. 5.) has since made Christendom an Acheldama, or
field of Blood.

1. Their Doctrine of probable Opinions, whereby they may not only reject all
Doctrines of Faith, etc. If two, nay if one grave Doctor maintain the grossest
Error, it is a probable Truth. M.J. p. 71.


But they thereby justify the declining all Rules of Morality. 1. No man is
bound to obey his Superior, though the superior Opinion be the more probable,
nay though just; but he may embrace what is most acceptable to himself. M.J. p.
78, 83.
2. It is lawful to kill a man for a Box of the ear either given or offered,
and to kill an Informer, a Witness or Judge, if he suspect they will be
corrupt. page 91.
3. To kill a man for the Lie, or opprobrious speeches, affrontive signs or
gestures. page 94.
4. If a man take our Goods to the value of a Crown, it is no sin to kill him.
page 97.
5. If there be reason to suspect a man will disgrace him by opprobrious
speeches it is lawful to kill him. page 97.
6. To kill a Jansenist if he reflect upon their Society, much more a Hugonite.
page 98.

For the justifying of these Opinions is cited Escober, Molina, Tanerus,
Becanus, Reginaldus, Layman, Lessius, Amicus, Filusius, Carramuel and other
Jesuits. 7. Judges may receive Gifts, and give their Sentence in a probable
Opinion against a more probable Opinion in his own Judgment, cited Castro,
Palata, Escober and Layman. page 103, 104.
8. If a man gain an Estate by violence, rapine, and extortion, etc. in order
to his honorable Subsistence, rather than it should be scattered amongst his
Creditors, he may turn Bankrupt, and delude his Creditors with a good
Conscience; cited Escober, Lessius, etc. page, 108, 109.
9. It is lawful, nay charitable, to direct a Thief about to rob a poor man, to
quit him and rob a rich man; Vasquez, Escober, etc. page 109.
10. If a man entreat a Soldier to beat his Neighbor, or fire his House, that
has offended him, he is not obliged to repair him, especially in Ireland. page
109, 110.
11. Goods purchased by Crimes, as by Murder, etc. is lawfully possessed, and the
person not obliged to make restitution, Escober, etc. page 112, 113.
12. He then asserts the Doctrine of Equivocation and Mental Reservation, and
how to have a false thing believed for a truth without lying, useful to baffle
a true and to prove a sham Plot; vid. Ursinus p. 197. 13. Says Sanchez, page
129.
a man may swear he has not done a thing he really has, by understanding
within hlmself, that he did it not on such or such a day, or before he was
born, etc. this is a thing of great convenience on many occasions, and is
always necessary or advantageous: p. 130.
and is absolutely necessary when confessing the truth would discover Plots
against Heretical Princes, etc. or any ways reflect on the Catholic Cause. 14.
Promises oblige not when a man has no intention to engage himself when he
makes them: p. 130.
this is a probable Opinion; for more than two grave Doctors assert it. 15. A
man may lawfully deflower a Virgin if she consent; provided he direct his
intention aright, to pass for a Gallant, etc. though the Father has just cause
to be troubled at it; yet neither she nor the person to whom she prostitutes
her self is guilty of sin: and lest any bold Heretic should presume to
question the truth of this necessary Point they give this reason for it: For
the Maid is in possession of her Virginity as well as her Body, she may dispose
of it as she pleases, and to whom she pleases. p. 132.

A necessary Doctrine for the better keeping the Vow of Chastity. 16. Says
Escober, p. 134.
a wicked intention, as happily looking on a Woman with an impure desire, joined
with that of hearing Mass as a man often hinders not a man from fully performing
the duty: especially in Venus Temple. 17. That an Ecclesiastic surprised in
Adultery by the Woman's Husband may lawfully kill him in his own defense ( says
Escober. Ad M.J. p. 94.
) The merit of the Murder is to expiate the sin of Adultery. 18. That according
to a probable Opinion if a Tax imposed on Merchandise is not just, it is lawful
to use false Weights to gain the more; and if he be charged for so doing he may
deny it by Oath, making use of equivocal expressions when he is brought upon
Interrogatories before a Judge. Escober ad M.J. p. 93.
A Tenent useful to Merchants, but pernicious to the Farmers of Customs. 19.
That he who has a will to commit all the venial sins that are does not sin
mortally: Granados Diana Muchat. ad M.J. p. 98.
as they do that question the Popes Infallibity. 20. That a man does not commit
any sin, or is guilty of any irreverence toward God, when he presumes to
address himself to him in his devotions having an intent mortally to offend
him. Ad M.J. p. 98.
21. That a religous man having made use of a Woman may kill her, if she offer
to discover what passed between them. Ad M.J. p. 19.
You may easily guess what Religion this religious man is of.


You may read their pious slights (as they call them) Letter 10. p. 137. to
155. in the business of Confession, Penance and Absolution.

They affirm Absolution ought not to be denied or delayed, though the Sinner
continue in habitual sins against the Laws of God, Nature and the Church,
though you discover not the least hope of amendment. M.J. p. 145.
vid. the Bishop of Machlin's Collection and Rejection of 43 horrid Errors. ad
M.J. p. 90.

But what is yet mentioned are but little piccadilloes, only inconvenient to
neighbourly Society and civil Converse betwixt private persons, and to blast
their Reputation, or deceive them of their Good and Lives is but a petty Retale
trade.

Therefore I shall hint a few of their Wholesale Merchants, that trade for
Empires, Kingdoms and States, which are the great Arms of the Tree of
Supremacy, etc. the other but small Boughs, and some of them twigs
comparatively. And that you may believe their deposing and dethroning Kings is
from good Authority, read the Reasons given by Saunders the Jesuit, published
by Ursinus p. 190.

If the Pope be infallible (which no Roman Catholic dare question) there is
great reason he should be supreme, and make Laws for the regulating the
Consciences of fallible erring Princes and States: the first we read of that
assumed this supreme Power, as an Article of the Catholic Faith, was
Hildebrand, which Dr. Paget observes, page 248.
and records his infallible princely Canons.

I shall only mention these few.

That it is lawful for the Bishop of Rome to make new Laws for the necessity of
the times; which all Princes and States are obliged to observe, though they
cross their own Laws, and hazard the ruin of their Interest or Lives.

That the Pope only may use Imperial Robes; lest temporal Princes should
mistake their carnal Emperor for their spiritual Lord and Master.

That all Princes shall kiss the Popes Feet: his Hands being seldom clean from
Blood, or Lips from Blasphemy.

That it is lawful for him to depose Emperors, etc. because they are so much
his slaves as to let him.

That no general Synod might be called without his Holiness Command: lest they
should proceed contrary to his Instructions, which his Council of Trent durst
not do.

That he ought to be judged by no man: lest they should judge him, as others
his predecessors, to be Atheists, Conjurers, Blasphemers, perjured persons,
Traitors, Tyrants, Whoremongers, Sodomites, infectious monsters of men.

That he is not to be accounted Catholic that agrees not with the Church of
Rome; Vid. Ursinus page 204. to 240.
that never yet agreed with her self in any thing, but what tended to the
propagating Error and suppressing the Truth.

That Subjects do not sin when they refuse without reason alleged to submit to
a Law whereof there has been a legal Proclamation made by their Prince. Ad
M.J. p. 92.


That Clergymen are not subject to secular Princes, nor obliged to any
obedience to their Laws, even though those Laws are not any way contrary to the
State Ecclesiastical. page 92.


Says Bellarmine, if the Pope should command us to sin we are bound to obey
him. Others say, if the Pope should lead thousands to Hell we must not reprove
him. vid. Pooles Nullity of the Romish Faith. p. 243.

And admit their Popes to be such as Baronius, Platina, Genbrandus and others
of their own Authors describe them to be, monsters of men, rather Defilers than
Rulers of the Roman Seat, prodigious slaves to all Vices, and the wickedst of
men, none more filthy; that is, admit the Popes be as bad as Vice can make
them: yet (says Bellarmine) Kings are rather Slaves than Lords; Churchmen
being as far above them as the Soul is above the Body, that Bishops who are at
the Popes nod may depose them.

Nay (says Masconius Prins Romish Positions of Rebellion 1650.
) the Pope is above Law, against Law, and without Law; and therefore can do all
things: he is Rex Regnum and Dominus Dominantium: in short, he has the same
Tribunal with God himself. vid. Regula juris Romani quoted by Ursinus p. 193.

Well might one of their great Clergymen say, when he found a Bible, he knew
not who was the Author of it; but sure he was some pestilent Heretic: for he
every where condemns the Doctrines of our Church. Pooles Nullity of the R. F.
p. 218.


Their Sublimity and Immensity is so great (said Cassenius Ursinus p. 186.
) no mortal man can comprehend it, no man can express it, no man can think it.
vide Bishop Tailors Dissu. Part 1.

He can increase the number of the holy Scriptures, dethrone Kings, and dispose
of all temporal Dominions at his pleasure, punish them with temporal
punishments; and this Power is more necessary over Princes than over Subjects:
if he could not depose Kings, and compel their Subjects to execute his Power,
his Power were not only inefficax, but insufficiens. Review of the Council of
Trent.

'An excommunicate King may with impunity be deposed or killed by any one.'
Suarez Des. Fid. lib. 3. cap. 23.

'Nay F. Parsons affirms, p. 149.
that if any Christian Prince whatsoever decline the Roman Religion, etc. he
presently loses all Power and Dignity before any Sentence of the Pope is
pronounced, and his Subjects are absolved from all Oaths of Allegiance, and
ought to reject such a one from the Government of Christians by the strictest
bond of Conscience, and the utmost hazard of their Souls: for he has ipso
sacto lost his Kingdom.' Id. p. 109. 149, 160.


'The Pope is not only advanced by these Papal Janisaries above all the
Emperors and Princes, but above all that is called God.' vid. Prynnes Roman
Positions of Rebellion 1650. Dr. Du Moulins Vind. Answ. to Apolog. 1666.

But to complete all the rest, lest any Promise or Faith engaged to Heretics,
when Policy of State requires it, should after obstruct the Success of the
Catholic Cause; as the performance with John Huss and Jerome of Prague would
have done, had they returned at liberty to propagate their Heresy: the prudent
Council of Constance did not only condemn and burn them, but instituted it an
Article of the Catholic Church, Faith was not to be kept with Heretics. Vid.
Vrsin. p. 184.


I judge these Texts need no Comment, only take some few of the Epithetes given
them by Popelings themselves.

'What Idea can be given of those men whose Maxims dispense with all the
obligations of Evangelical purity, who level the Precepts of the Gospel to the
corrupt passions of men, who make our tendency to future Beatitude consistent
with the pleasures and enjoyments of this world, and who by their artifices of
pious sleights, easy Devotions, and such compliances of humane inventition
bring Religion into contempt, etc.' Preface to M.J.


'For if a man does but seriously reflect on their strange Tenants about
Revenge, Calumnies, Restitution, Equivocation, mental Restrictions, shifting
and directing the Intention, and that Consummation of all extravagance, the
Doctrine of probable Opinions: what can he imagine less than that such
Societies of men are Academies of Dissimulation and Sycophancy diabolically
imbargued in a design not only practicing but maintaining and justifying
whatever is most horrid and abominable in the sight of God and man, etc. they
are to be looked on as the bane of Charity and Sincerity, and the vermin of
all humane Society, etc. they join Blasphemy and Heresy together; Catholics
externally and Heretics internal; Satanically zealous to show themselves the
Patronizers of Homicide, etc.' M.J. Pref. M.J. 30 Ad M.J. p. 14.


'These pernicious Propositions are the destructive Vipers of all Morality.' Ad
M.J. 42.


'Notorious Distracters, Impostors, and Disturbers of the public Peace.' Ad
M.J. p. 48.


'A poisonous Morality more currupt than the the Pagans themselves.' Ad M.J. p.
51.


'Propositions doing violence to the natural right, and the Law of Nations,
excusing Blasphemies, etc. and the most enormous sins; as if they were light
piccadilloes.' Ad M.J. 55.


'What dreadful extravagances does their Doctrine of probable Opinions assert!
they open a door to all immorality, they are the general poison of those
envenomed sources which communicate a far greater infection than sinful
Nature.' Ad M.J. p. 64.


'The most implicit Ignorance is to be preferred before such Knowledge as
teaches men to be Scepticks in all things, and to find out ways to justify the
corrupt Maxims of men, and to practice the grossest Sins with safety of
Conscience.' p. 123.


This is the Opinion of the Doctors of Sorbon, given under their hands in a
general Assembly April 1658. vid Ad M.J. 147.

Affirming it is not only theirs but the Curez of Rouen and many other Cities
of France. p. 146.

Also the Bishop of Maechlin sends his Protest to the Cardinals of the
Inquisition of Rome, and annexeth forty three of their pernicious Principles
not to be tolerated: vid. Proph. Hildegrards p. 51. Page 84 to 133.
'They are (says he) Hypocrites, subverters of the Truth, proud, shameless,
unstable Teachers, delicate Martyrs, covetous Confessors, unmerciful
Calumniators, religious for filthy lucre sake, humbly insolent, of an
inflexible Piety, insinuating Liars, peaceable Persecutors, Oppressors of the
weak, Introducers and Authors of evil Sects, mischievously compassionate,
lovers of the world, Merchants of Indulgences, robbers of Benefices,
importunate Orators, seditious Conspirators (as we shall see in their
Politics) sighing but out of Gluttony, ambitious of Honor, criminally zealous,
graspers of the world, applauders of Men, seducers of Women, sowers of
Dissension; no enemies could ever match these Furies, whose Colleges and
professed Houses are the receptacles of the guilty, the refuges of dishonesty,
the reproach of Christianity, the Shops of Iniquity, the Academies of impiety,
the lovers of Heresy, the Chairs of Infection, the high places of Antichrist,
the Brothel-houses of the Whore of Babylon, the Architects of Blasphemies
against God and all his Saints, the companions of the Sodomites and Onan, the
Emissaries of Devils, etc. Luc. Pref. Hist. Jes. 1627.
they are a hodge podge of old Errors blended together after the mode of a new
Olia, by communicating with the Netetians, Praxeans, Anthropo-Morphites,
Collyndians, Gnostics, Carpracatians, Pharisees, Manichees, Nazarites,
Catharists, Massilians, Pelagians, Mahumitans, Priscilianists, Ebionites, etc.
and what not to overturn the fundamental Articles of Christianity.' page 36.


They who are thus notorious in their Ethics are no better (but worse if it
may be) in their Politics; he who gave us the precedent Elogy of them in their
own words, says also; 'they are the Incendiaries of the whole world, the
Ruiners of Cities, the Poysoners of Kingdoms, the Murderers of Kings, the
Archtypes of Rebellion, the Jesuit reckons it in the number of his Merits, if
he may by any sinister ways ruffle and disorder Heretical Kingdoms (so he calls
them) encourage weak and unstable minds to slight Magistracy, irritate
Divisions, Tumults, Rebellions, absolve from Oaths and sacred Ties; so that
it is hard to find any tragical Scene or bloody Theater into which the Jesuit
has not intruded, and been as busy as Davus in the Comedy, contributing in an
high measure to every Fanatic insolence, justifying the old lemma Loyola's
Picture; [cavete Principes] these are the Firebrands of Europe, the Forge and
Bellows of Sedition, infernal Emissaries, the Pests of the age, men that live
as if huge Sins would merit Heaven by an Antiperistasis: and indeed what have
the Jesuits not done by their Fire-arts both moral and mechanical, to turn all
the stately Fabrics of Government into confusion in France, Portugal, Germany;
yea and Turkey as well as in Ireland and this famous Island of Great Britain?'
vide Modern Policy chapter 4. sect. 1. 1652.

And much more may you read to this purpose collected from their own Authors by
Ursinus, Stillingfleet, Chillingworth, Bishop Tailor and the learned Author of
the Fiery Jesuit, etc. If this be not enough to render them more dangerous in a
State (especially in a Protestant State) than Protestant Disenters let the most
Popish of Protestants judge.

Objection.

Since you charge all these bloody Tenants and rebellious Doctrines against the
Principles of Morality and Dictates of Humanity to be the natural Offspring of
the Popes Infallibility and Supremacy, from whence do they proceed?

1. Not from Christ. He disowns them, Matthew. 20.25. Luke 21.25. St. Joh. 18.36.
My Kingdom is not of this world.

2. Not from the Apostles. St. Paul condemns Diotriphes for loving the
Preeminence, St. John Epist. 3. v. 9. St. Peter (from whom they pretend to
derive their Dignity) utterly explodes them; 1st. Epist. chapter 2. v. 13, 14, etc.
so Romans chapter 13. the first 8 verses.

3. Not from the Pathers. Polycrates and Irenaeus exploded it. vid. Eusebius
lib. 5. c. 21, 22, 23, etc.

Cyprian, lib. 1. Epist. 3.

Hierom, all Bishops are of one Worthiness; neither Riches nor Poverty makes
Bishops higher or lower.

St. Augustine, about a hundred years after St. Cyprian, rejects it. vid.
Council of Africa chapter 9.

So Chrysostom Hom. 3. and 35.

Gregory the Great (the last of good Bishops at Rome) did not only condemn the
Title as Antichristian; but greatly bewailed it, as the forerunner of the
Churches Misery: says he, Ages succeeding shall feel the dismal effects of
that fond Title, which he terms Nomen vanitatis, vocabulum, prophanum,
perversum, superbum, scholestum, superstitiosum.

4. Not from the Councils. 1. The Council of Carthage says, there is none but
a few desperate and loose companions take the Authority of the Bishops of
Africa to be less than that of Rome Cyprian Epist. 3. 2. The Council of Nice
Canon 6. vid. Russinus History of the Church lib. 1. chapter 6. 3. Council of
Constantinople chapter 2. 4. The Council of Africa Canon 26. chapter 5. Council of
Ephesus chapter last. 6. Council of Chalcedon chapter 28. Canon 16. 7. Council of
Constantinople chapter 35. 8. Council of Carthage chapter 4. Canon 26.

But it is manifest both the Popes Infallibility and Supremacy proceeded from
detestable Treachery and intolerable Pride and Debauchery. vide Sect. 2.

Not only our Protestant but their own Authors commence the Reign of Antichrist
from that time; see Luthers Opinion page 72 of my 2 d. Part: viz. the first
that obtained the Supremacy was Boniface the third, the most vicious of Popes
we read of, who by the help of Brasutus cut out his way to the infallible Chair
by poisoning six Popes his Predecessors; viz. Domasus the second, Leo the
ninth, Victor the second, Stephen, Benedict the tenth and Nicholas the second:
vide Paget 244. and after wickedly approving of Phocus his treacherous and
barbarous murdering his Master Maurice the Emperor with his Wife and Children,
for which he was condemned by Cyryacus Patriarch of Constantinople; Phocus in
revenge declares Boniface to be Universal Bishop. vide Plat. in His Life

After him Adrian the second; by flattering another Tyrant Basilius, who
murdered his Master Michael the Emperor, obtained of him that none should enter
the Council of Constantinople, till they first subscribed to the Popes
Supremacy, circa Anno 870. from which time they daily gained ground by Force or
Fraud over the Bishops of other Churches. But Urban the second was not
contented with bare Subscriptions, but required them to swear Obedience to him.

And this Supremacy gained from the Clergy by specious pretenses of zeal for
the Liberties of the holy Church, and to free Clerks from Civil Tribunals and
Taxes by Lay-Princes, who were thereby also deprived of their ancient
privileges of the Investiture of Bishops; and withal prohibited all Appeals
but to the infallible Chair: upon this our Thomas Becket, etc. contested with
Henry the second about Arraigning Clerks before criminal Judges, for Murders,
Robberies, Felonies, etc. which cost Becket his Life, and the King intolerable
Troubles and Vexations, and at last the loss of his Kingdom and Life; which
Vexations were continued by the insolent Clergy against his three Successors
Richard the first, King John and Henry the third, but Edward the first, to be
quit with them, outlawed all the Clergy. Matthew Paris Ann. 1213.

What kind of Creatures the Pope and Clergy were after this, read Sect 2. and
what woeful work they made in the world after they had gained the Supremacy,
read Sect. the 5.

SECT. II. Observes the Original of these cursed Principles.
ALthough they had been long a hatching, and dispersed throughout the Popedom,
asserted by some, and opposed by others; yet never espoused as Articles of
Faith till the Jesuits adopted them.

And if you would know the Divine Original of the Jesuits, you may read St.
John's Prophecy of them Revel. chapter 9. where they are described to the life, by
Characters that suit with no Sect but themselves.

Where they are distinguished from all other Locusts whatsoever. 1. From their
Place, the bottomless pit. v. 2. vide chapter 11. 7. 17. 2. From the Time, when the
Smoke of the Pit had darkened the Air, in the time of deep Ignorance. 3. By
their Shape, like Horses prepared unto Battle, terrible, being movers of bloody
Wars, etc. verse. 7. 4. By their Swiftness in execution, they had Wings. v. 9.
5. By their Cruelty, their torment was as the torment of a Scorpion when he
strikes a man, verse. 5. 6. Their Strength to devour, their Teeth were as the
Teeth of Lions. v. 8. 7. Their Security, they had Breast-plates of Iron. v. 9.
8. Their Grievousness to the world, men shall seek Death, and shall not find
it, etc. v. 6. 9. Their Honor, On their Heads shall be Crowns of Gold. v. 7.
10. Their Visage, or rather Vizard, their Faces were as the Faces of Men, and
they had Hair as the Hair of a Woman. v. 8. 11. Their Attendants, they had
Tayls like unto Scorpions, and there were Stings in their Tayls. verse. 10. 12.
Their King over them, the Angel of the bottomless pit. v. 10. 13. The terrible
Noise they shall make in the world, the sound of their Wings was as the sound
of Chariots of many Horses running to Battle. v. 9. vide Famous Mead his
Remains, and the Learned Broughton on this Chapter.


Now these Characters are only found in the Jesuits, all other Orders of
Friars, etc. are not only defective in most of these Qualifications, but in the
End and Design of their Institution. The first Votaries we read of were the
Hermits or Pilgrims, who were driven into desolate places in the height of
persecution. Grimstones States and Empires, fol. 1197.

And soon after, in Constantines time, when the Church had rest, St. Basil and
St. Hierome gathered these dispersed Hermits into Societies and Convents. Ross
View of Religions p. 249.

After them St. Augustine, in the fourth Century, was moved to institute his
Order, from his sense of the Corruption and Pollutions with which the
generality of Christians were defiled.

In the seventh Century the first Order in the West was instituted by St.
Benedict, who imitated the Augustines in severity of Discipline and strictness
of Morals, but much more superstitious; out of which Hive swarmed twenty four
distinct Orders, the Daughters still worse than the Mothers, Ross 270.
Grimstone fol. 1203. to 1210.

But the Popes having been struggling first with the Clergy, and next with the
Emperors and Princes, for the Supremacy, from Boniface 3. in the beginning of
the seventh Century, to defend their Title, instituted the Franciscans and
Dominicans, as Friars Preachers; that they might from the Pulpit chase Princes
out of their Thrones: but the stubborn Emperors, etc. defending their Rights
with their Swords; as you may read in Urfinus, who abbreviates the History.

His Holiness observed St. Peter's Keys would not do, he threw them into Tyber,
and drew St. Paul's Sword; for the Light of the Gospel broke out with that
strength by Wickliffs Books, etc. dispersed in Germany, Bohemiah, France,
Piedmont, etc. the Popelings observed it to be past the Cure of preaching
Friars; whereupon Paul the third discerned it necessary to raise a more warlike
Regiment, and instituted these Knights of the Virgin Mary, as the Jesuits first
styled themselves. Ross. Stillingf. p. 306.


You have an exact account of their Original and Progress, by that eminent
Protestant Divine Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Fanaticism of the Church of Rome,
page 301. to p. 320. and by Grimstone in his States and Empires, fol. 1213. to
which I shall refer you.

And if you neither laugh at the Ridicule nor weep at the Ignorance and
Stupidity of that age, you must be of a steady temper.

But to give you an account of the bloody Wars, barbarous Massacres, and
treacherous Assassinations since Anno Dom. 1545. the Council of Trent confirmed
their Order and their Hetrodox Articles of Faith, would be, to copy Volumes of
their own and our Authors: but you may read some brief hints in Sect. 5.

SECT. III. Shows the Authority whereby they were confirmed.
EXcepting the Popes, whose vowed slaves they are, the Council of Trent is the
only Council that approved and confirmed their Institutions: therefore it is
worth observing the Qualifications of that Assembly: says Dr. Stillingfleet,
page 106. so contrived as not to condemn the grossest Error.

The occasion of the Council was to suppress Luthers Doctrine in the design of
the Conclave at Rome, but pressed by the Emperor, etc. to reform things amiss
too, and restrain the Imperiousness of the Pope and his Conclave; Hist. Coun.
of Trent. fol. 17.
the Policy of Rome thought it not prudent to deny the calling it, least it
should be imposed, nor safe at present to admit it, least it should impose on
them; fol. 37.
Christendom groaning under their unsupportable Exactions and Tyranny; which
Germany presented in an hundred Grievances. fol. 37.


Therefore the only expedient was to delay it, and to that end raised many
scruples about the Authority of their Summons, fol. 54.
the Qualifications of their Members, place of Sitting, etc. fol. 233. fol. 25,
57.
by which means they drilled out twenty years, the Lives of six Popes before
the first Session 1542. says Grimstone, then transferred to Bolonia, after
back to Trent. fol. 465.


And after that what time they spent in Preambles, etc. vide Council of Trent,
p. 139, etc.

1. About the Title, some of the Bishops were for stiling it the most holy
Council representing the Church universal, others opposed it, the Italians
vehemently, Hist. Council of Trent. p. 138.

So betwixt the Bishops and the Regulars about Privileges, p. 151.
between the Dominicans and Franciscans in several points betwixt the Italian
Bishops and others about Residence and the extent of Episcopal Power: but the
Legates informing the Pope of these Controversies, he sent them these Orders,
Not to broach any new Difficulties in matter of Faith, nor to determine any of
the Points controverted among Catholics, and to proceed slowly in the
Reformation, but vigorously against the Heretics. vide Sleidens 12th Book.

But with what vehemence their proceedings were opposed by most Princes, vide
Field p. 107, etc. by the French King, Sleiden lib. 22. so Charles the fi^^h,
by his Ambassador Mendoza, disclaimed against the Popes Power in calling Synods
to re^ the Church; besides all the Members of (...) Council were enjoined to
take this Oath against their Freedom and Liberty, I will defend (...) ^^^pacy
against all men, so help me God, etc. (...) no (...) durst offer his Reasons,
or ob^^^^^ ^^^^^st what the Popes Creatures proposed, (...) presently expelled
the Council, Sleiden (...) Craken p. 158. Yet for all this Car^^^ ^antar^ etc.
urged for the true Doctrine (...) j^^^^fication the Spanish and German Bishops
^^^^ve to reduc^ the Popes boundless Authority; t^ opp^se wh^m he increased the
number of Bishops, many of whom only titular: and of a sudden created thirteen
new Cardinals, sent his frequent Instructions to direct and lead the Council;
that it became a Proverb, The Holy Ghost traveled from Rome to Trent in a
Packet: Such as they could not expel, as Cardinal Cantaren, etc. they cut off
by Poison: and whilst they were thus amusing the world with an expected
Reformation, the Pope raises an Army, invades Germany, to impose the
Tridentine Faith.

This is the Council of Trent, called by the usurped Power of the Pope, guided
by Fraud and Subtilty, awed by illegal Expulsions and treacherous Poysonings,
ending in bloody Wars; from whence proceeded all their new Articles of Faith.

But with what Dissatisfaction not only to the Emperor and French King, but
most other Princes, except the Popes Vassals the Italians, these things were
received, you may read by their respective Letters printed at the end of the
History of the Council of Trent, fol. 782. to fol. 823. and then judge whether
these Principles were not imposed on their pretended Catholic as well as on
Protestant Princes.

But the History of this Council being writ by an Author so generally applauded
amongst the Romanists, that it became a proverb, Father Paul is so blameless
and pure, that his very Pantables were canonized. vide his Life, fol. 43. but
being voluminous, I shall refer the Reader to Bishop Bramhall's Vindic. p. 351.
to 355. where he demonstrates that Council to be neither general, free, nor
lawful; and yet this is the best Authority the Jesuits and their Principles are
confirmed by; and by which they are grown so presumptuous as to excommunicate
all the Christians in the world for damned Heretics that disown the Pope;
though they cannot be ignorant that their Principles and communion are rejected
by far the greater number of Christians in the world, v. Paget p. 1. to p. 33.
where you may also read their Harmony both in Doctrine and Worship with
Protestants of Europe, and how vehemently they explode the Usurpations,
Heresies and Idolatries of the Roman Church, fol. 59. to fol. 109. in so much
that the Patriarch of Constantinople, etc. excommunicates the Pope and his
Clergy once a year.

Therefore Rome cannot be the Mother Church nor the Mistress of other Churches,
being the fewest in number, and last in being; Jerusalem Antioch,
Constantinople, and Alexandria, nay England were in the Faith before her, if we
may believe the most authentic of Authors, as Bishop Jewel, Dr. Fulk, Willet,
Paget, vid. fol. 146. Bishop Bramhall, Tailor, Stillingfleet, Ursinus, etc.
indeed she was first in Apostasy, in that she deserves the Primacy, in
departing from the Faith and holy Life of the Apostles and primitive Churches;
as is manifest from their own Authors that writ from Boniface 3. the first
debauched grand Apostate to Leo the tenth, who obtained a Confirmation from the
Council of Trent of their Errors and Usurpations. Says Erasmus on the
thirteenth Chapter of the Revelations, When the Roman Kingdom, after the time
of Julianus, was divided into East and West, then began a new Roman
Jurisdiction, namely the Popes Pomp, the Kingdom of the Papists took upon it
all the Power of the first Beasts, the Roman Emperor, and compelled the
Christians to Idolatry and Service of false Gods, under pretense of honoring
Christ and Saints. Again on chapter 17. he does affirm that the Women prophesied of
to be the Mother of Whoredoms and Abominations of the earth, drunk with the
Blood of Saints, etc. to be Christian Rome. Again, on chap. 18. Sect. 3. With
this Babylon have Princes, and Prelates, and whole Kingdoms committed Whoredoms
and Abominanations.

So Hollcot. page 18. complaining of the Priests and Prelates, of Rome in his
time, says, They be like the Priests of Baal, they resemble the Priests of
Dagon, they are the Priests of Priapus, and Angels of Hell.

So Aventine lib. 6. I am ashamed to say what manner of Bishops we have; with
the Revenue of the Church they feed Horses, Hounds, I need not say Whores.

So Mantuan lib. 3. Their Wickedness is in every man's mouth, Cities and
Countries talk of it; the brute thereof has quenched all care of Virtue.

So their Bishop Cornelius Epist. 3. With what monsters of Filthiness, with
what channel of Uncleanness, with what pestiferous Contagion are both Priests
and People defiled, etc.

So their Palingenus, lib. 5. warns the people, Let no Friar, Monk, or any
other Priest come within thy doors; take heed of them, they are the dregs of
men, the fountain of folly, the sinks of sin, Wolves under Lambs skins, etc.
under the shadow of Religion hide a thousand unlawful acts, Committers of
Rapes, abusers of Boys, spending night and day either openly with Whores, or
secretly with Boys.

O shameful! (says he) can the Church endure such Hogs?

Says Plantina Vita Marcellini, What shall we think will become of this our
age, wherein our Vices are grown to that height, that they have scarce lest a
place with God for Mercy? how great is the Leachery of all sorts amongst the
Priests and the chief Rulers. vid. His Life of the Popes.

Says Mantu. lib. 3. They are hateful to Heaven, and loathsome with unclean
Lusts, etc. they rather kindle and provoke God by their Services, than appease
him; never hope for help so long as such pray for you.

Says Hierome, Whilst I staid at Babylon, and was an inhabitant of that purple
Whore, the Senate of Pharisees made an uproar, and the whole Faction conspired
against me; if you would see the barbarous cruelty of one Pope toward another,
plucking out of Eyes, famishing in loathsome Prisons, cutting off Tongues,
Hands, Fingers, Noses, Stones, etc. vide Paget fol. 112.

Says St. Augustine on Psalm 44. They have made us the Citizens of Babylon, we
left him that made us, and worship what we make our selves.

Says St. Ambrose Apocalips lib. 6. Rome is become a second Babylon.

Says Chrysostom Hom. 36. 1 Cor. The Church at this day is like unto a Woman
that has quite lost her Modesty.

Says Vincent, Religious Orders are become unto men's Souls the way of
perdition.

Says Card. Beno. They are led by the Spirit of Error and Doctrine of Devils,
Beno de Vita Hildeb.

Says Matthew. Paris in Hen. 2. Whence Christians were wont to fetch the Waters
of Righteousness, there they find a poisoned puddle.

Abbot Joachim on Jeremiah, chap. 1, and 2. proves the Romish Church to be the
Whore of Babylon mentioned Rev. 17. They have chosen Antichrist for Christ, the
Devil for God and Hell for Heaven.

Nay certain of their own Prophetesses, as Saint Bridget lib. 4. cap. 133. and
St. Hildegrard the Nun in her 2d. Book, etc. declaim vehemently against the
Vices as abominable, and their State as antichristian.

So their Bishop Cornelius in his Oration to the Council of Trent, Would to God
they were not fallen with one consent from Faith to Infidelity, from Christ to
Antichrist.

Says Platina on John 10. The Popes are clean departed from Peter's steps. vid.
Paget fol. 171, etc.

Says Cataldus in his Prediction of Rome, Thou unhappy Babylon, the damned pit
of Priests.

It would be endless to give you the Testimony of their own Fathers, Bishops,
Friars, Nuns, etc. of Romes dreadful Apostasy from Christ to Antichrist, and
from Truth to Error, from Boniface 3. anno 602. to Leo 10. 1520. the Council of
Trent was proposed, and from Leo 10. to Paul 3. the Council was opened, Hist.
Counc. Trent. 97. all which 20 years time were spent in bloody Wars betwixt the
Emperor and the Popes, the Emperors and Francis the first of France, etc. vide
the Life and Reign of Charles the fifth, where you will find, the Pope changed
sides theree or four times, as his advantage lay, to weaken them and strengthen
himself: though contrary to several Oaths and Leagues agreed on. But did they
themselves escape? no: Rome was several times taken, and sacked, the Pope
besieged in the Bastile, and glad to compound on base conditions, though he
kept them not; which Confusions made bloody work all Italy over, that by their
continued bloody Wars the Pope had so wearied the Emperor and Princes in
struggling with him, that Charles the fifth resigned the Empire, and retired to
a Monastry, and all others let him do what pleased him, and did themselves what
he plesaed to be quiet: and then the Council of Trent past their impious
Canons, though not without much contradiction.

Thus you see by whom approved; next consider by whom rejected and banished.

How far their seditions bloody Principles have been exploded and detested by
learned Romanists you may observe Sect. 1. p. 204. to 208. which I there
inserted to this end, that you may observe, all Papists are not Jesuited
Papists: it was evident in the last Irish Rebellion, a considerable number of
the Irish Nobility and Gentry, not only disapproved, but violently opposed the
Nuntio's party, who copied out the Jesuits Principles and Practices; as you may
read in Borlacy's History of the Irish Wars in 1649, 6150, etc. and in this
last Irish Plot I have heard several of good Rank of their party vehemently
declare their abhorrency of it: but diverse of their Clergy have been
Discoverers and Witnesses against their Primate Plunket, etc. which nothing
could move them to but Duty, some of them being in a plentiful condition, and
titular Dignitaries in their Church, are thereby reduced to great wants, even
to extremity, the more is the pity.

And as their Principles have been detested, so their Practices have been
resisted, and their persons banished all Popish Realms and States, as fast as
they discerned their destructive consequences; as in these following Instances
may appear.

1. The State of Venice did not only banish but violently thrust them out of
the Country, never to return; and made it capital for any man, the Duke
himself, to move for their Restoration; you may read the Story at large in
Howels Survey of the Republic of Venice, fol. 161. to 167. their Charge was
for maintaining, that the Rebellion of a Clergyman against the Civil Power was
no Treason, because he is no Subject of theirs.

That to be subordinate to the Bishop of Rome is of necessity to Salvation,
that the Pope can dispense with Subjects from their Allegiance to their Prince,
though lawful and natural. fol. 160.

They were all for Treachery and Sedition seized and imprisoned in Irons for
one month at Constantinople, and were then banished, with their whole Order,
out of all the Grand Seigniors Dominions, vide Turks History fol. 1489. to
1492. the Cause, vide Sect. 5.

For the same Tenants were they banished Bohemiah, after they had been
Instruments of the barbarous Massacre there, and the miserable Desolations of
that flourishing Kingdom, vide Bohemiahs Persecution, chapter 42. 53.

France did not only banish them by an Arrest or Statute of Parliament dated
December. 29. 1594. but appointed a Pyramid to be erected for a Memorial of
perpetual Excretion of the Jesuits and their Doctrines; and by another Arrest
of Parliament August 21. 1597. against admitting them in disguise, or
counterfeiting the abjuring of their Order: again August 18. 1598. prohibiting
Noblemen, etc. from sending their Children to their Schools, or any ways to be
educated by them, L. Luc. Hist. p. 377. to 385. Anti-Cotten p. 48, 52. so the
Austrians, Helvetians, Valesians and Polonians, etc. banished them.

Says a Polonian Nobleman, So many Jesuits, so many Plagues in a Country, Luc.
H. p. 528. So Muscovia, id. 552. so the Swedes, id. 333. so Lithuania, Livonia,
Mazovia, id. 324. So the States General published their Mandate March 1612. to
banish them out of all the United Provinces, imposing great Mulcts on those
that entertained them, or sent their Sons to their Schools, vide Chron. of
Belgia p. 93, and p. 719.

But I need not trouble you with an account of Protestant Princes and States,
where they come not but in disguise: but if the Popish Princes and States have
banished them as Incendiaries, well may the Protestants do it as Traitors; and
above all, England and Ireland, against whom their Treasons have been incessent
above an hundred and twenty years; as I show in Sect. 7.

SECT. IV. Of the natural Consequences of these immoral inhumane Principles and
Practices.
1. THey reduce Humanity into a condition worse than brutish, more unsociable
more unsafe; the Beasts of prey have their societies and places of rest, Isaiah
34.14. so Jeremiah 50.39. but amongst these humane Bruits there can be no safe
society, no secure habitation: the Protestant Interest of Ireland may well
lament with the Prophet, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I dwell in Mesech, etc. my
Soul has long dwelt with them that hate peace.

2. These Principles lay the Ax to the root of the tree of all Morality; not
only the common Law of Nature but of Nations is abrogated, that which
distinguishes betwixt barbarous and civilized Nations is rejected, which is
civil Law that maintained Justice, Truth and Mercy amongst a people.

3. These Principles abrogate the Law of God, the Standard of all human Laws,
like those Pharisees Christ condemned Mark 7.9. Ye reject the Commandments of
God, that you may keep your own Tradition, v. 12. making the Word of God void
and of none effect by your Traditions, v. 13. it is not how it is written in
the Scriptures, but how it is writ in the Canons or Casuists, etc.

Now those Principles who thus make void all Laws, and indemnifie their
Votaries under all transgressions against them, consequently are lawless
Principles: of which Daniel prophesies chap. 7.25. of the man of sin, He shall
speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the Saints of the
most High, and think to change Times and Laws, etc.

And do we read that ever Mortals since Adam spoke such great words against God
as this Beast St. John saw rise up out of the Sea having seven Heads and ten
Horns, and upon his Heads the names of Blasphemy, Apoc. chapter 13. v. 1. to whom
there was given a Mouth speaking great things and Blasphemies? v. 5, etc. vide
Ursinus of the Popes Blasphemies page 211, 212, and 240. And that this is the
consequence of these Jesuitical Principles, to decline all Laws maintaining
Justice, Truth and Mercy is manifest Sect. 1. in their Principles, and Sect. 5.
in their Practices.

Which are aggravated to the height of impiety by their frequent laying their
Cockatrice Eggs at others doors, all their treacherous and barbarous Massacres,
Assassinations and Rebellions have they contrived to father upon innocent
persons.

The bloody Massacre of Paris on our pious Queen Elizabeth and the Calvinists;
for which (says my Author) all the world laughed at them, Luc. Hist. 107. For
as no History makes mention of so ignoble and barbarous a Tragedy acted on the
stage of the world by Princes and Nobles, except the Irish Massacre 1641. so
never was the contrivance of any affair more notorious than that: we never read
that ever Pagan, much less Christian, Prince, that laid so many snares, broke
so many solemn oaths and promises as Charles the ninth of France, under the
conduct of his Italian Mother, did in that affair, to turn the joyful solemnity
of a Wedding of his own Sisters into so doleful a Tragedy, as barbarously to
massacre so many brave Princes, and (as some say) above an hundred thousand of
his Subjects in a few days. vide Thuan. Hist. lib. 52.

The Gunpowder Treason (if it had hit) had been charged upon the Puritans,
under which Character all the serious Protestants of England, etc. had been
immediately massacred, in revenge of that Tragedy acted by the Avengers
themselves: a warning to all Protestants to look before they leap in
confederacy with Papists.

Their last bloody Plot, though after full Examination by two Parliaments,
declared both by King and Parliament to be evidently a Popish Plot; yet how
many Shams have they been hatching to father it upon Protestants: how
industriously have they labored either to corrupt or ruin the Credit of the
Kings Witnesses, and to awe all persons from appearing against them, by
murdering Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and attempting several others who narrowly
escaped them.

By which means the Pope has the advantage of all Tyrants that ever were in
the world: for amongst the rest of his divine attributes, he is omnipresant, to
avenge his Quarrels by his spiritual Janisaries in all parts of the world; of
whom he may say as the Centurian of his Servants; I say to this man go, and he
goes, and to that man do this and he does it; of which many direful instances
might be given out of Grimstones History of the Netherlands, and Mr. Prynnes
Pref. Vindic. of fund. Liberties, etc. as William and Maurice of Nassau in
Belgia 1584. Henr. the third and fourth of France by Stabs; the Queen of Navarr
by a pair of poisoned Gloves; Gregory the seventh poisoned eight Cardinals,
vide Ursinus page 221. Paul the third poisoned his Mother, Sister and Niece,
vid. Ursin. p. 220. so Stephen the Prince of Transylvania by poison, Luc. Hist.
page 614. Innocent the fourth attempted to poison the Emperor Conrade, Ursin.
p. 221. King John poisoned by a Monk of Swinsted: nay, when other projects have
failed, rather than miss effecting their malice, their very Temples, which are
Sanctuaries against others, have been used as Slaughter-houses of these
Ecclesiastical Butchers, two Princes of the House of Medicees assaulted at
Mass, the one killed, the other wounded, by the Order of Sixtus the fourth,
circa ann. 1480.

When Henr. the fourth besieged Hildebrand in the Bastile his Holiness suborned
Traitors to convey great Stones on the Rafters, of the Church over that place
where the Emperor sat, to let them fall on his head whilst at his Devotions,
but were discovered by the fall of one of them before the time, Ursin. p. 32.

But most horrid was their poisoning the Emperor Henry the seventh at Bonavent,
although one of their own Disciples, in their Chalice at the Sacrament, vide
Grimstones State of the Empire fol. 603. its like from thence the Mass became a
Sacrifice: so that the consequences of these inhumane Principles depending on
the Popes Infallibility for Sanction must be desperately dangerous to humane
Society, considering what kind of bruites the Popes themselves have been as
they are described by Platina, etc. on their Lives; but Ursinus has epitomized
their Catholic Virtues, page 198. to 243. and reduced them into their
respective Classes, 24 in number, to be deliberately read in less than one
hour, how many of them were Atheists, Arrians, Conjurers, Blasphemers, Tyrants,
Traitors, Parracides, Adulterers, Sodomites, incestuous persons, Drunkards,
monsters of men, etc. And how like Priest like People they are at Rome, hear
some of their own Poets Characters. Of their Secular Priests.
Mantuan
Hateful to God, polluted with vile Lusts,
Alas, in vain they manage sacred Trusts!
Heaven they provoke, not please: for such to pray
There is no need: nor help at all can they.
Put in new Ministers, and cast them out
From Temples this so sacrilegious Rout.
Nor let a longer stay profess
They make a trade of Wickedness.
Then of their Regulars.
And those men too, who seize that lofty Name,
[Religious persons] bragging that they came
From holy Fathers, under fleece of Sheep,
Vile wretches, Souls of Wolves within them keep;
Thus Virtues visage is abused
To cloak the Baseness by them used.
Pasquil.
Flee Rome, that would be holy; come not near:
Thou may be any thing but godly there.
I Have seen thee, Rome; adieu: never more will see,
Till Bawd, or Whore, or worse I mean to be.


SECT. V. Shows what has been the Practice of this Principle of Supremacy
since usurped by the infallible Prince of Priests.
TO begin with the Apostle of this Profession Hildebrand, I gave you a taste of
his infallible Canons: but observe his suitable Practice.

1. Against his liege Lord the Emperor Hen. the fourth, a warlike brave Prince,
that had fought 60 Battles with success; and yet this bold insolent Prelate
excommunicates him, deprives him of all Regal Authority, absolves his Subjects
from their Oaths of Allegiance, etc. on which some of the discontented Princes
(especially the Duke of Saxony) rebel; whereby he was compelled (to prevent the
shedding of Christian Blood) to humble himself to this man of Pride so low, as
to wait, with his Empress and Son, clad in Canvass, barefooted three days in
cold frosty weather at his Holiness's Gates, before he obtained Absolution: yet
soon after, without any now provocation (we read of) but the Jealousy of this
infallible Tyrant, that the Emperors great Stomach would not digest this
intolerable Indignity, renewes his Excommunication, and instigates Rodulph Duke
of Swavia his Brother in Law to invade him, who after many bloody Bickerings
was routed and slain. After that stirred up the Saxons to create Harman Prince
of Luxemburgh Emperor: after he was slain seduceth Egbert Marquess of Saxony to
take upon him the Empire: after he was slain the Emperor called a Council at
Brixia, which deposed and banished this insolent bloody Pope, for Heresies,
Sacrilege, Factions a Defender of Perjury, Scandal, a Believer of Dreams and
Divinations, a notorious Necromancer possessed with an unclean Spirit, an
Apostate from the true Faith. Thus far infallible Hildebrand, who dyed in
exile. Paget fol. 250, etc.

But this Elijah bequeathed his Mantle to his Successor Pascall the second, who
revives Hildebrands Curse against the old Emperor, and prevails with his own
Son Henry to rebel against his most puissant Father, and to usurp the Imperial
Crown: but some Achitophel told this young Absalom, old David had been a man of
war from his youth: and therefore his infallible spiritual Father advised him
to decline Force, and try Treachery, in English, though a Treaty in Italian,
against his carnal Father: so a Diet was summoned at Mentz, where the old
Emperor, depending upon the public Faith for safety, was treacherously seized
and cast into Prison, where he soon ended his miserable days. Which unnatural
Rebellion against so famous a Father was highly magnified by Cardinal Baronius:
says my Author, What Turk or Savage would be the Oeconomist of such unnatural
Treachery? But after this deposing of Kings became common; as Boeslaus King of
Poland by Childerick the third, the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa by Zechary the
first; Innocent the third excommunicated the Emperor Philip, and then deposed
him, and set up Otho the fourth, and plunged them in bloody Wars, then
excommunicated Otho, and absolved his Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance,
circa ann. 1200. Again, Frederick the second first excommunicated, then
absolved him, upon his promise to assist in the holy War; where, while he was
in person bravely fighting, and had taken Jerusalem, Nazareth, and Joppa, etc.
from the Saracens, the Pope raises an Army, invades his Territories, enters
Naples, wrested diverse places from him, giving out he was dead; but Letters
coming of his great success in Asia, so much vexed his Holiness, he trod them
under his Feet, and deludes his Son Henry to conspire against him, which caused
the shedding much Christian Blood: but at his return he subdued his Enemies,
committed his Son to prison in Apulia, where he shortly after dyed, circa anno
1220, 1244.

Clement the sixth (to keep up the Trade) excommunicated Ludovicus of Bavaria,
and commanded the German Princes to elect Charles the fourth. 1346.

Julius the second excommunicated Lewis the twelfth, and deposed John King of
Navarr, and gave his Crown to the King of Spain, 1536.

Gregory the tenth excommunicated our Henry the eighth, Pius the fifth Queen
Elizabeth. If you read the Histories of those times, especially Ursinus printed
ann. Dom. 1600. who has epitomized them into a small Volume (to be read in a
few hours,) from Charles the Great, anno Dom. 800. to Rodulph the second, 1612.
a period of 812 years; who, though briefly, yet fully relates the treacherous
and bloody tyrannical Practices of the Popes toward the Emperors, Princes and
States of Christendom from time to time; and then consider the bloody Wars,
Desolations of Countries, etc. these Acts produced; you will confess, his
Holiness has been no slothful Servant in improving this talent of Supremacy,
etc. to the utmost, and thereby deserved his Dignity and Power to tread upon
the necks of Princes, as of the Emperor Frederick Barborosa on his submission
at Venice, and be attended on (as before) by the Emperor Henry the fourth three
Winter nights and days barefoot; and to whip Henry the second till the Blood
ran down, by the Monks of Canterbury, after he had walked barefoot fo far upon
the stones, as his Feet wept tears of Blood upon the pavement; though he had
openly purged himself of the Crime of Beckets Death before; and to have his
Stirrup held, and his Horse led by the most potent Emperors and Kings present
in Rome whenever he mounted, and whenever he washes his Hands to have
Emperors or Kings to serve him with water, and to attend at Table till the
first Course be served, and to prostrate themselves at his Feet whenever they
approached his sacred Presence. vide Ceremonia Ecclesiae Romanae.

But that so many high born Heroic Princes should so basely crouch to the
usurped Power of such insolent, imperious Peasants, as many of those Popes have
been, is prodigious and only to be ascribed to that divine Judgment threatened
on them, that the ten Horns shall have one mind, and shall give their Power and
Strength unto the Beast, Revel. 17.13. but our comfort is, the same ten Horns
shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her Flesh,
and burn her with fire; because God has put in their hearts to fulfill his
will, and to agree and give their Kingdoms to the Beast until the Word of God
shall be fulfilled. v. 17.

But this may be observed, as soon as they became Slaves to the Pope, they
became Tyrants over their own Subjects; the Emperor Charles the fifth, though
otherwise a brave Prince, and Philip his Son King of Spain, who murdered his
own Son, vide Ursinus p. 190. Francis the first, the Duke of Savoy, and most of
the Italian Princes, who by their barbarous Inquisitions, Persecutions and
bloody Wars have made all Christendom swim in Blood since they were Vassals to
his Holiness.

But these things were but the beginning of Christendoms sorrows, for the Pope
to insult sometimes over one Prince, and other times over another, and not
bring all their profane necks under his holy Feet at once, were inferior to
his infallible Grandeur, his Holiness by this time was become his Mightiness,
and resolved to let the whole Christian world know his terribleness to his
rebellious Subjects the Kings of the Earth, and discharges his thundering
Canons, and sends out his roaring Bulls against all Princes and States that
would permit a person to live in their Dominions that should open his mouth
against or peep into his Mystery of Iniquity.

But the most unchristian and treacherous design the Jesuits were employed in
by his Holiness was anno 1627, etc. to incense the Grand Seignior against the
Patriarch of Constantinople, accusing him for publishing Books against the
Alcaron, which is a capital crime there, that might have tended to the ruin of
all the Eastern Christians under the Turks Power; but God threw them into the
pit they had dug: also they charged him to counterfeit the Grand Seigniors
Seal, and to stamp false Money, and hold a correspondency with the Cossacks, in
order to join with them in their intended Rebellion, etc.

You may read the Story at large in Turks Hist. page 1489. to 1492. where is
recorded Cardinal Bendins Instructions to Rossi the Jesuit; in the fourth
Article the Patriarchs Errors are declared as follows.

We are advised that he denies the Vocation of Saints, the Worship and
Veneration of Images, the Relics of the Saints, the real Presence of Christ
in the Eucharist; and Traditions, and sends Youths to the German and English
Academies to be educated.

If these Errors are not sufficient to move the Roman Conclave to incense the
Turks to destroy millions of innocent Christians that maintain them.

Let all good Catholics judge the Ignatian tribe thought to have merited
Heaven by this holy project, as the Masterpiece of their good Works; but it
proved a Halter, etc. as bad as the Turk is, he exploded the Treachery and
Cruelty of the Pope.

But considering how Nicholas the fifth, their Predecessor, had not only
permitted but assisted Mahomet the Great to run down the pious Greek Emperor
Constantius the eighth, because he disowned his Supremacy, whereby
Constantinople was taken and sacked, and all the Eastern Churches since
miserably enslaved. vide Turks Hist. fol 340. This project against their
miserable Lives was but to perfect their first against their pleasant
Liberties. Turkish Slavery being too moderate a punishment for the Heresy of
Antisupremacy, etc.

The only way to prosper against the Turks is to destroy the Christians; as a
Jesuit told the Emperor Charles the fifth in an Oration at Auspurg, Till you
make your Horse to swim in the Blood of the Lutherans, never expect any good
Fortune against the Turks. Luc. Hist. p. 186.

Says Father Steward, We must burn and cut the throats of these Heretics, if
ever we prosper.

But Rodulph the Emperor, who (by their clandestine machinations, says my
Author) they prevailed with to sign an Edict to silence the Protestant
Ministers, was convinced of this Error, when news soon after was brought to
him, the Turks had taken Alba-regalis, As a man astonished, said he, I did
expect some Judgment would befall me, after I began to usurp Gods Government
over men's Consciences. vide Bohemian Persecution, chapter 40.

Shutting the mouths of Gods Ministers has usually opened the mouths of Gods
Judgments: they that will not hear the voice of Gods Word, shall feel the smart
of his Rod sooner or later, vid^ Hist. of Boh. Persecution, chapter 48, 49, 50.
Luc. Hist. p. 324. never yet did Prince dance after the Jesuits pipe, but the
Comedy ended in a Tragedy; as the Emperor Charles the fifth, after him his Son
Philip, etc.

So Francis the first, Henry the third and Henry 4th of France, etc. vid.
Serris Hist. of their Reigns.

But, as if the circuit of the old world had been too narrow a stage for them
to act their Tragidies on, no sooner does Spain discover and invade America,
but thither go the Jesuits, by whose instigation and assistance have been
destroyed twenty millions of poor innocent people. vid. Romes Triumphs, p. 126.
and Luc. Hist. p. 256. Dr. Whites Way to the true Church, p. 49. Gages New
Survey of the West Indies, etc.

And that the rising as well as setting Sun might blush to behold their
world-confounding projects, they have been as busy in the East Indies; but,
says my Author, in the Kingdom of Japonia the Catastrophy of these Firebrands
and their Prosylites were miserably extinguished, their Hypocrisy and
Covetousness having rendered them monstrously odious to the Japonians, etc. vid.
Bernh. Var. Relig. in Reg. Japon. chapter 11.

That as their predecessors the old Pharisees compassed Sea and Land to make
Proselytes, etc. these modern Pharisees have trod miles to their steps to
convert alias to destroy Nations and Countries; and of all the Countries in the
world, esteemed by them heretical, England with its Teritories is the mark they
have for this hundred years past and at this day do most level their poisoned
Arrows against: therefore, of all the Protestants in the world, the English or
(at least) the Irish Protestant is not to be blamed for manifesting a dread of
the influence of Jesuited Papists; the burnt Child dreads the fire.

And it being the Jesuits declared Opinion, the Catholic Religion is not to be
recovered in England, etc. by Disputing or Writing, but with an Army, and with
Fire and Sword. vid. Prynnes Compl. Hist. Part 1. page 449, 450. Idem in
Preface to Vind. of Fund. Part 1.

I am of the same Opinion in that point; but were I of their Principle, and
designed to make one trial more of this supposed infallible expedient, I would
advise the next Consult to be sure the Army be strong enough, and the Fire big
enough; for if they miss the next attempt, it is twenty to one but the
exasperated English Heretics will reckon with them for old scores, and
endeavor more effectually to secure themselves against new Massacres. vide
Part 2. chapter 2. p. 83. to p. 89. and Supplement Sect. 7.

SECT. VI. Of their Inconsistency with the just Power and Right of Temporal
Princes and States.
1. THe most absolute Sovereign Monarchs in the Christian world, much more
inferior Princes, etc. have been greater slaves since the Popes usurped
Supremacy, than ever (we read) any conquered or tributary Prince, etc. have
been to the Great Turk, etc.

Vide Ursinus's Compendium of the Lives of the Emperors, and then consider
whether the Turks ever dealt with their Vassals after Submission, as their
Holinesses have done with their lawful Sovereigns, who the Laws of God and Man
enjoins Subjection too: Did he ever insultingly tread on their Necks upon
Submission, as Alexander the third on Frederick the first? or kick their Crowns
off their Heads with his Feet, as Celestin the third did to the Emperor Henry
the sixth? or suffer them to stand with their tender Ladies and Children in a
manner naked, barefoot and bare-leg'd, waiting to acknowledge their Vassalage
in Frost and Snow; or did he ever cause them to be whipped like Vagabonds, as he
did our Henry the second till the Blood ran down, for restraining the Insolency
of their own Subjects? No. Multitudes of instances might be given of this kind
wherein the Antichristian Pope has outdone the Antichristian Turk in barbarous
insultings over Princes, etc.

And this tyrannical slavery exercised against all legal pretense to Royal
Dignities.

1. No hereditary Title, though derived from the most Royal and ancient
Descents, could secure their Claim until confirmed by the Pope. 1. The Line of
Constantine the Great after three hundred years Regency rejected by the Pope,
and Phocus, of base birth and vile conditions, set up for granting Rome the
Supremacy. Grimstones State of the Empire 594. 2. In the year 800. the Line of
the Grecian Emperors rejected, and Charlemaine set up by Leo the third,
Grimstone fol. 596. from which time you may read in Ursinus the abstract of the
frequent Treacheries of the successive Popes, sometimes instigating Sons to
rebel against their Fathers, etc. laboring to extinguish all lineal Descent,
and after suppressing due Elections to usurp the sole power of creating and
deposing Emperors, etc. at their will and pleasure, to whom I shall refer you.


2. No legal Election nor general free choice of inferior Princes and States,
though of never so long prescription, could fix a Crown on their Heads till set
on by the Pope: as in the case of Frederick Barbarossa, Ursin. p. 47. his
predecessor Conrade the third, p. 43. so Lodowick of Bavaria, p. 112. the like
that brave Prince Charles the fifth, and his Successor Ferdinand, etc. vid.
Urs. 141. to 177. Fred. the second, p. 102.

3. No Concession or submission to the Popes Sentences could obtain Absolution
longer than his Holiness could pick the least hole in their Coats; instance the
Emperor Henry the fourth; so the Emperor of Greece, Constantine the seventh
being in distress consented to the worshipping of Images, etc. yet soon after
the Pope sets up Charles the Great as Emperor of the West, after him the
Emperor John Paleologus, to make the Pope his Friend when distressed by the
Turk, owns the Popes Supremacy in the Council of Florence, 1439. yet he
assisted his Enemies and obstructed his Aids, to the utter ruin of the Greek
Empire and Eastern Churches: Henry the fourth of France turns Papist to please
the Pope, and extends all possible respect to the Jesuits to preserve his Life
from Assassination, revoked all Edicts made for their Banishment by his
Predecessor, pulled down the Pillar erected in memory of their barbarous
Assassination of Henry the third, and other treacherous Villainies; yet after
all was stabbed in the Heart by Raviliac, because he tolerated two Religions: in
which Christ's words were verefied, He that will save his life shall lose it;
but he that will lose his life for my sake shall find it.

4. No strength of Arms nor strong holds could ever secure them from the Popes
vengeance, when once he resolved to rid the world of them; as is evident in
Henry the third of France, stabbed by a Friar in the midst of his mighty Army,
besieging Paris, though a great Persecutor of the Hugonites; and this after the
good Emperor Rodolph the second told him there was no greater sin than to force
men's Consciences, supposing thereby to win Heaven, did oftentimes lose what
they possessed on Earth. French. Hist. p. 318. which when dying he declared to
his Nobles, that Piety is a duty of man to God, over which worldly force has
no power, page 319. so that most warlike Prince Henry the fourth after all his
Conquest and his changing his Religion to preserve his Life was stabbed in the
midst of his warlike Captains, by that wicked Regicide Raviliac: read
Grimstones State of the Empire, etc. you may find many other instances.

5. No Articles for Peace or public League will secure them: they have always
snap'd like Sampsons new Cords and green Withs; for as there is no Faith to be
kept with Heretics; so not with Catholics, if they stood in the way of the
Popes Interest, nay Humor; as multitudes of presidents might be given, even to
fill a large History: I can but give hints. 1. John the thirteenth perfidiously
broke his Oath solemnly given on the Body of St. Peter to Otho the Great; says
my Author, the Emperor was scarce out of Rome Gates before his Holiness
perjured himself, Ursin. 13. 2. The like after Clement the second and the
Romans solemnly took Oath never to presume to meddle with the Election of a
Roman Bishop without express Commission first obtained from the Emperor; this
honest Pope was presently poisoned, and Gregory the seventh that mischievous
monster (says my Author) after he had poisoned six Popes, decreed upon pain of
Excommunication, all that should deny he had not only power in Heaven to bind
and loose, but Jurisdiction on Earth to take away and give Empires, Kingdoms,
etc. to whom he pleased, Urs. p 24. which he exercised in the most insolent and
vile manner over the Emperor Henry the fourth, Ursin. p. 28.


Now if this be the case of Christian Princes, that no hereditary Title, no
legal Election, no public Leagues or Covenants, no humble Submission nor
strength of Arms can secure them from Deposing, nor their loyal Subjects from
Massacres and Assassinations, what miserable Servitude are they reduced unto!

They dare not practice the dictates of their own Reason in prosecuting the
Interest of their States, they dare not correct or punish their rebellious
Subjects for the highest Insolences and Contumacy, as in the case of Anselm and
Thomas Becket; they dare not indulge their most loyal Subjects in their dissent
from the Papacy in the smallest point that touches their Supremacy, nor
protect them from the highest Exactions the Pope and his Clergy shall think fit
to impose on them, as in the case of Henry the fourth of France and our King
John, they are in the worst condition of Viceroys, having no Standard or fixed
Rule to govern by, but the arbitrary contingent Will and Pleasure of the Pope,
which is as variable as the Weather, vide Platina.

Now is it to be imagined, that any Sovereign free Prince in the world, not
infatuated, will choose to dwell in this house of bondage, except they who like
Error better than Truth, human Tradition better than divine Institution, and
scandalous Sins better than holy Life?

If any shall allege, the Protestants are full of Divisions and Confusions, it
is manifest Part 2. Chap. 2. that the Papists have far more Divisions and
different Opinions amongst them in matters more momentous, their Harmony is
only in their Errors, Superstitions and Immoralities, vide Dr. Hornebeck p.
172. King James's Monitary Epistle. And would any man in his wits turn Papist
for the sake of so cursed an Union? vide Platina on the Life of Stephen the
sixth, and Bishop Hall his Book called the Peace of Rome. They were esteemed
Rebels againgst God, Sons of Belial, that did but talk of choosing a Captain to
return to Egypt to the house of Bondage; it was for that Sin all their
Carcasses fell in the Wilderness, Numbers chap. 14.

The Israelites had a Law, that the Servant who so undervalued his Liberty in
the year of Jubilee as to choose bondage, his Ear should be bored at the
Door-posts, and to continue a slave for ever: but Popish slavery is worse than
Israelitish bondage; theirs was only corporeal, but this is not only corporeal,
but spiritual; we must believe against all dictates of common Reason, nay
against our Senses their corporeal presence, legions of lying Miracles, their
Infallibility, etc. or be damned and burnt for Heretics: Subjects must either
be Rebels at home, or Heretics at Rome, if his Holiness see cause to quarrel
with their lawful Princes.

Nay we must believe all their Blasphemy against God is Piety, and all their
Treason against Kings and Princes to be Loyalty, or be perverse Heretics.

1. Their Blasphemy against God when they play the Devils for Gods sake by
pretending Gods Commission, and designing his Glory by all their inhuman
barbarous Acts, although they thereby violate all solemn Oaths and Leagues,
etc. it is alleged to be for Gods Glory; as in the bloody Parisian Massacre,
etc. never did Prince make and break so many solemn Oaths, Imprecations and
Royal Grants, to trepan his Subjects into the pit of destruction, as Charles
the ninth of France for Gods Glory.

That most barbarous of Murderers the Duke of Guise, after by his Order, the
brave Admirals dead Body was thrown out of the Window into the street, he
kicked and trampled on it crying out to his Fellow Bloodhounds this is he, a
blessed beginning let us now go on in the name of God; in which name they,
before morning (says my Author) sacked and plundered 4000 Houses, barbarously
murderded above five hundred Lords and persons of Quality, and ten thousand of
inferior rank; no Age, Sex, nor Quality, not the innocent sucking Infant nor
decrepacy of old age found mercy until above 100000 innocent Souls were
destroyed in France, and this perpetrated in the name of God, and for his
Glory; and so agreed unto by the Council of Trent, with Spain and France, etc.
in the Confederacy, to extirpate all the Protestants in the world within their
power, styled the Holy League; in pursuance of which, not only France, but
Piedmont, Bohemiah and Belgia, etc. tasted of the same bitter cup: yet when the
news of this inhumane barbarous Massacre came to Rome, his Holiness and their
Eminencies in their Pontificalibusses marched in procession to their great
Church, and caused Te Deum to be sung, and all expressions of Popish Devotions
to be expressed, as a Thanksgiving to the most merciful God for this most
unmerciful barbarous work, and a Jubilee proclaimed in honor of it.

Its only perfect Copy (we read of) ever acted on the stage of the world was
the Irish Massacre, and that was done in the name of God, and for his Glory:
vide the Popes Letters to O Neal October 18. 1642. and to the Clergy and Nobles
of Ireland, dated at Rome Febr. 1. 1642. and in the Popes Bull dated May 25.
1643. signed M. A. Miraldus.

In which, after observing the holy Zeal of their pious Ancestors to root out
Heresy, and propagate the Catholic Faith, proceeds to his Benediction, In the
name of the merciful God and the blessed Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul is
granted a full and plenary Indulgence and absolute remission of all their Sins,
Trespasses, Transgressions, Crimes and Delinquences, how heinous and atrocious
soever.

I instance in these two Presidents, as being in our sight and memories; but if
you please to read the Popes Bulls and Excommunications, etc. against any
Prince or State, they are all in the name and for the Glory of God. And if
their Piety and Virtue consist in these barbarous inhumane Treasons and
Massacres, what shall we think of their Vice and Wickedness?

2. As their Blasphemy against God must be believed for Piety, so their most
horrid Treasons against Princes, etc. must be esteemed Loyalty; in which
multitudes of instances might be given out of the Histories of other Countries.
But we need not go far from home to find them: for all their Rebellions against
the King, and most barbarous inhumane Cruelties exercised upon his most loyal
Subjects in Ireland did they transact in the Kings Name, to which they
counterfeited his Great Seal, vide Borlacy fol. 29. and declared all they did
was for the Kings Service. See their Remonstrance at Trim March 17. 1642. with
their other Addresses, but especially the grand Bond of their Catholic
Confederacy, their Oath of Association, they declare thus in the Preamble, As
also for the defense and safeguard of his Majesty's Person, regal Power, just
Prerogatives, Honor, State and Rights: in the body of the Oath thus; I A.B. do
prosess, swear and protest before God, his Saints and Angels, that I will,
during my life, bear true Faith and Allegiance to my Sovereign Lord Charles,
etc. that I will, to my power during my life, defend, uphold and maintain all
his just Prerogatives, Estates and Rights, etc.

Now to say this in that very act in which the Bond of their treasonable
Rebellion consisted, which after the greatest deliberation they agreed to
publish, in contempt of the Kings Laws and Sovereign Power, puts dull Heretics
to a stand what to make of Popish Loyalty; unless they can loyally rise in
Rebellion against their King, and barbarously murder two or three hundred
thousand of his loyal Subjects for his Honor and Service. Sir John Temple p. 6.

The Lords of the Pale desired Commissions and Arms to resist the Rebels, and
then employed them to assist them, for his Service. Sir John Temple p. 60.

They maintained a long and bloody War against His Majesty's Viceroy and Army
commissioned by him, for His Majesty's Service.

After near two years, viz. June 1643. they, by the utmost extremity of War
against the Kings Viceroy, had reduced his Majesty's Army into great
extremities of wants, etc. yet in their Instrument impowering their
Commissioners to treat about the Cessation, they style themselves His Majesty's
most faithful Subjects necessitated to take up Arms for the Defense of His
Majesty's just Prerogatives and Rights. vide Dr. Borlace page 126.

And this near two years after His Majesty had declared them and their
Adherents and Abettors lewd and wicked persons, that had robbed and massacred
multitudes of his loyal Protestant Subjects, Rebels and Traitors against his
Royal Person, Enemies to his Crown, etc commanding his Justices and Army to
prosecute the said Rebels and Traitors with Fire and Sword, as persons unworthy
of Mercy or Favor. vid. Dr. Borlaco's Hist. fol. 53, 54.

It is evident His Majesty esteemed that Treason and Rebellion they called
Loyalty and good Service: yet so confident they were all they had done
consisted with their Loyalty, they menaced the Lords Justices and Council, July
1643. if any Messenger brought any Papers to them containing other Language
than to His Majesty's loyal and obedient Subjects, they should not return safe.
Dr. Borlace p. 128.

And to pass by all the Breaches of their Articles of Cessation, which you may
read a Brief of in Dr. Borlace's Hist. fol. 147, 148.

Take but a brief view of their Behavior after the Peace was proclaimed 1646,
and 1648.

1. They treacherously contrived to cut off the Lord Leutenant and his Army,
who in confidence of the Articles of Peace they had got into their Quarters as
far as Cashel. Borlace p. 161

Their Excommunicating all that adhered to the Peace, and joining with the
Nuntio's Army to besiege and distress the Lord Lieutenant, with the Kings Army
in Dublin. Borl. p. 162, 165.

Their treacheorous Consult at Waterford to cut off the Lord Lieutenant and his
Party, who visited them in kindness to contrive their Security, and was
instrumental (to the great hazard of his Person) to preserve a Body of Foot,
that had otherwise been cut off in their Retreat from passage; were these
things for His Majesty's Service? Borlace's Hist. fol. 231, 232.

Nay from that time all their Affronts, Indignities and Contempts put upon the
Kings Authority, in the Persons of the Marquesses of Ormond and Clanriccard,
were still for the Kings Service, you may read in Borlace's History of the
Years 1650, 1651.

When not only the Lord Lieutenant was daily affronted, to that height as is
not to be paralleled for Rudeness and Ingratitude, and after all his patience,
bearing with and winking at so many repeated affronts (which his high Spirit
would have disdained the least part of, if the Kings Interest had not weighed
down all) they excommunicated and rejected his Person and Authority with all
imaginary reproach and slander. vide Borlace 259. to 273. but it was still for
the Kings Service.

And little better Treatment did that most loyal and upright Catholic Peer,
the Marquess of Clanriccard, meet with from his Countrymen. vide id. 291. to
295.

But after all, for that unpardonable sin of Loyalty, etc. was excommunicated,
as a Contemner of the Authority of the Church, because he would not betray his
Trust from his Prince. vide idem fol. 287.

But all these intolerable Affronts and Contempts put on the Kings Authority
from the Peace 1648. was only by the Clergy and Nuntio's Party: for not only
the Marquess of Clanriccard but many other Catholic Noblemen and Gentlemen,
with a considerable party of the Popish Army adhered steadfastly to the Kings
Authority to the last; the other only pretended to it.

Which fully evidenceth, all Papists (as is before asserted) are not Jesuited
Papists. And it would be better both for themselves and us, if they would more
visibly distinguish themselves, that we might know our Fiends from our Enemies.

My Opinion is, those Subjects indulged by their Prince in the Liberty of their
Consciences ought not only to explode all pernicious Principles to the Peace of
his State in themselves, but detect them where they discover them in others of
their Sect or Persuasion; or otherwise they justly suffer those Miseries that
shall ensue by their neglect: for though Unity in Religion is an excellent bond
for Christian neighbourly Society, where it can be obtained without violence to
Reason and Conscience.

Yet I judge an Unity in Loyalty, that is, mutually to adhere to the Civil
Constitutions of the Government they live under is much more steady and safe:
Civil Interest being much more inclusive and less disputable than Religious:
for since St. Paul withstood St. Peter to the Face, Galat. 2.11. and that sharp
Contention betwixt Saint Paul and Barnabas, on which they separated Acts 15.39.
I do not find either in sacred or other History, but there has been
Contentions and Divisions in the Church: but still their Civil Interest was the
same against Pagan Persecutors, until that wicked Error of the Arrians became
potent, and persecuted the Orthodox, since which time that Antichristian Spirit
of Persecution has rendered Christians less sociable than Pagans.

That were I to choose my Habitation in the world, I should think my self more
safe and comfortable in the Neighborhood of moral Turks, or Heathens, that
retain the Principles of Humanity, than amongst such Christians as the
Evangelical Prophet foretold, that shall hate me and persecute me for Gods Name
sake, saying, let the Lord be glorified, Isaiah 66.5. and also our blessed
Savior says, the time comes that whosoever kills you will think they do
God good Service; which must intend the true God: which Prophecies are
fulfilled by Papal Rome; Pagan Rome never pretended Gods Service: which
Principle of Persecution has been the cause of shedding Seas of Blood in
Christendom this last thousand years: and (as I elsewhere show) is more
pernicious to civil Peace when Subjects rebel against their Prince under
pretense of Religion, than when Princes punish their Subjects for their
Differing Persuasions.

For we read of frequent Concessions and Grants of Liberty from Princes, but
rarely of Submission in Subjects taking Arms for Defense of Religion, until the
Country has been near desolated: therefore happy is that Kingdom, or State,
where Prince and Subjects are united in one common bottom of National Relation
and Interest, which no pretense of Religion can dissolve or perplex. History
informs us of Christian Legians that fought under the Banners of their Pagan
Princes to defend the Interest of their Prince and Country from Invasions. vid
the Life of Marcus Aurelius, etc.

Since Gods Word requires us not only to pray for but seek the Peace of the
Country wherein we are Captives, that in their Peace we may have Peace; how
much more our native Country, under the Regency of our native Prince, wherein
we are Freemen?

But with Papists, as I showed before, no unquestionable Descent, nor legal
Election, etc. can secure a Prince from the Rebellion of his Subjects, if
Religion come in competition. And it is not only a Heresy in Civils, but in
Religion, to maintain in any case, that Subjects may rebel against their lawful
Prince to propagate Religion; against which there is as positive express
Precepts in the Divine Law, as against any one Wickedness there forbidden,
which is so well known to all that read the Scriptures, I need give no
instances.

Objection.

If all Protestants were so persuaded, how came it the Hugonites of France, the
Protestants of Germany, Belgia, Bohemiah, etc. have maintained War with their
lawful Princes for Religion.

Answer.

They that will please to read the History of those Wars, may observe Religion
was not primarily the cause of those Wars, Civil Rights invaded by arbitrary
Princes, contrary to their Oaths and the fundamental Constitutions of their
Governments except those of Piedmont, whose Slaughters and Butcheries were so
barbarous, and their Prince so obdurate, as to reject all ways of Pacification,
which by all humble means, as Petitions, etc. they endeavored, that they had
no choice, but either to lie down under all the unjust Calumnies of their
Popish Adversaries and suffer themselves, Wives and Children, etc. to be
sacrificed to the Lust of inhumane Monsters, or flee to the Law of Nature and
Necessity, to defend themselves as well as they could: and if this was ever the
case of Papals under any Protestant Prince or State; their own Historians have
not done them so much right as to mention it; and that it was as far from the
case of the Irish Papists 1641. as it was possible for the Government to make
it. vide Sir John Temples History of the Irish Rebellion, p. 16.

The Difference is no other but this, the Protestants in all humble manner
supplicate their Princes they may enjoy the Liberty of their Conscience in
matters of Worship, whilst they are loyal and obedient in all civil Subjection.

The Papists insolently impose upon their Princes to be of their Religion, and
persecute all others on the pain of being destroyed themselves, if they refuse
it; as is sufficiently manifested in Sect. 5. and 7.

And if this be the case, unjust and uncharitable are their Censures, who so
frequently couple Papists and Protestant Dissenters as equally dangerous to the
State; says he that shall judge us all e're long, Judge not, that ye be not
judged, etc. Matthew. 7.1,2.

And as nothing in the power of mortals can secure them against Papal
vengeance, so no vindictive Justice of the immortal God executed on these
bloody Persecutors for their Cruelties will either convince or restrain them:
many do we read of that dyed blaspheming, vide Clarks Martyrologie, but very
few repenting. And very many of them have increased their fury and rage by the
Vengeance of God upon them, but very rare have the Judgments of God on some
restrained their Survivors from proceeding in the same steps; which stupidity
is Gods brand of Reprobation upon them, as upon the Father of Murderers Cain.

Pope Paul the fourth, notwithstanding the ill success seven Popes his
Predecessors had against the Emperor Charles the fifth, and the miseries not
only Rome but all Italy sustaind by their perfidious Rebellions against that
brave Prince: yet did he repeat all over again with Addition. Multitudes of
instances might be given, both of Popes and tyrannical Princes: but take these:

That monster of Princes, for Treachery and Blood, Charles the ninth of France,
soon after he had made Paris, etc. swim with the Blood of his innocent
Subjects, breathed out his inhumane Soul, wallowing in his own Blood, vid. M.
Seres History of France p. 809. yet would not this restrain his Successor Henry
the third from treading in his steps, though his way was too rough to run his
pace: for though he joined not in that bloody Confederacy to extirpate all the
Heretics in Europe, called the Holy League, yet maintained a violent War
against them, and obtained of the Pope to excommunicate the Prince of Conde and
King of Navarr; yet after all was murdered by a Friar in the midst of his
Nobles, in the very same Room in which himself with that bloody Cabal agreed on
that most barbarous Massacre of Paris, his last words to his Nobles were, Learn
of me, that Piety is a duty of man to God, over which worldly Force has no
power: and in him was extinguished that bloody Race of the Capets. vide
Monsieur Seres History of France, fol. 880.

Says the Poet, Who'd trust in Greatness now, whose Food is Air,
Whose Ruin sudden, and whose end despair?
Who would presume upon his glorious Birth,
Or quarrel for a spacious piece of Earth,
That sees such Diadems become so cheap,
And Heroes tumbling in a common heap?
Oh! give me Virtue then, which sums up all,
And firmly stands when Crowns and Scepters fall.


SECT. VII. Gives Reasons why it is not only the Duty but the Interest of all
the Papists of Ireland, to explode and reject these Jesuitical Principles above
all the Papists in the world.
I Knowing several that detest them, and being persuaded many others are of the
same mind, both of the Clergy and principal persons of the Laity, as was
manifested in the last Rebellion, and by the Witnesses against the late Primate
and others in the last Irish Plot, and for the sakes of such unbloody Papists
do I offer these things to their consideration, etc.

1. Because whilst they tolerate or indulge them, they will never be safe; as
is asserted in Part. 2. page 73. all those miserable Desolations that have
befallen them since F. Allen and Parsons were sent over to Desmond and Tyrone
with consecrated Banners to encourage them to rebel, were the product of these
Principles which operated to the ruin and utter desolating many Noble and
Worshipful Catholic Families, besides multitudes of common people, vid.
Spencer, Campion, Sir John Davis, Stainhurst, etc.

2. If they would but consider the many traitorous Attempts that have been made
against the Regency and Lives of their English Sovereigns since Henry the
Eighth cast off the Popes Supremacy, they may easily guess what deep
impressions of jealousy and dread that Nation from the Throne to the Plough
retains of them; as for instance.

Henry the Eighth was excommunicated and deposed, the Kingdom interdicted and
tendered to whomsoever could conquer it. The Pope in his Bull sent to James
King of Scotland, declared him deprived of his Kingdom as an Heretic, a
Schismatic, an Adulterer, a Murderer, a sacrilegious person, and lastly a
Rebel, and Convict of Le se Magistratis, for that he had risen against him the
Pope who was his Lord. vide. Speed l. 9 c. 21.

Innocent Edw. 6. was filled with troubles from them, and strongly suspected to
be poisoned by their Contrivance.

Their cruel Persecution by burning, etc. of five eminent pious Prelates, and
one and twenty other eminent Divines, and many good people in their short Reign
by Queen Mary.

The many Attempts made against the Life and State of that pious Queen
Elizabeth, against her State in England, by that invincible Armado in 88.
against her State of Ireland by invading it with an Army of Spaniards and
Italians 1580. contriving to bring her Title in question, and raise up the
Title of Mary Queen of Scots to the Crown of England.

Campion, Parsons and Haywood; the three first Jesuits that came for England,
says Sir Henry Baker, I wish they had been the last made it their business to
hire Assassinates to destroy the Queen.

Summervil to kill her 1582. the like Parry 1584. L. Luce Hist. 429, etc. Moody
hired by the French Ambassador of the Guisin Faction to poison her ann. Dom.
1592. Holt the Jesuit hired Patrick Coleman an Irish Friar to kill the Queen,
who of all Friars love the work; after Dr. Lopez, Her Majesty's Physician hired
with 50000 Crowns to poison her 1593. again ann. Dom. 1594. Williams and York,
etc. conspired to fire her Navy: ann. Dom. 1595. Edward Squire, an Officer in
her Stable, hired by Walpoole the Jesuit to poison the Pummel of the Queens
Saddle: after all this their College at Salamanca sent over Winter the Jesuit
with Instructions to raise an Army to make war against the Queen, who by the
aid of fifty disguised Jesuits in England, listed 25000 Popish Souliers, Winter
assuring them, the Jesuits of Spain had a Million of Crowns already collected
for the Service, and many of the Catholic Princes engaged to aid and assist,
but her God who had wonderfully preserved her all her long Reign, took her to
himself, and so ended hers but not Englands troubles. Luc. Hist. page 405. to
509.

King James was designed to be destroyed the day of his Coronation. Luc. Hist.
p. 509, 510. And his Title to the Crown rejected as being no Catholic and on
that account Waterford, Limerick, Kilkenny and Wexford, etc openly opposed his
Proclaiming, until forced by the Lord Deputy Mountjoy, after the several
Attempts to rebel, as is hinted Part. 1. p. 2, 3.

But all these hellish Plots by Gods Mercy being frustrated, Garnet, Catesby,
Fawx, etc. contrived to do their work thoroughly by the Powder Plot, November 5.
1605.

A Project not presidented in History for horrid Cruelty and hellish Treachery,
to kill King, Queen, Prince, Lords and Commons at a Clap: and then to have
charged it upon the Puritans, under which Character they would have destroyed
the Body of the most stanch Protestants in the the Kingdom; and then who should
oppose what they would have done? Yet Invincible Father Garnet was not
discouraged, but was at other Devices, but was taken 1608. and executed, and so
ceased plotting, Luc. Histor. p. 513. yet the King having further Evidence of
their plotting his Destruction, published his Declaration, June 1610. to banish
the Jesuits and Priests, Luc. Hist. 513.

Yet did they so swarm in England, that Jo. Gee a converted Priest (by the fall
of the Mass-house at Black Friars, where he narrowly escaped his Life) in his
Book called the Foot out of the Snare, printed in the year 1624. does give an
Account of a Congregation of Jesuits de Propagando Fide; and how some of them
boasted they contrived the poisoning of King James, vide Prynnes Royal Favorite
page 54. and Romes Masterpice p. 34. yet in the Reign of Charles the first they
were still active; anno Dom. 1627. they kept their College at Clerkenwell, and
behaved themselves so insolently, the House of Commons petitioned the King to
put the Laws in Execution against them, Romes Masterpiece page 34. and Prynnes
Introd. p. 88, 89. they were the Fomentors of the Wars betwixt England and
Scotland 1639. Prynnes Compl. Hist. fol 449, 450. and were preparing an Army to
invade the South of England, whilst the King with his English strength was
engaged against the Scots in the North; but the Hollanders fought and dispersed
their Navy on the English Coast before they landed, vide Prynnes Preface to his
Vindication of Fundamentals Part 1. but all Projects sailing in England, they
remembered the proverb, He that would England win
Must with Ireland first begin.
They managed their Consults for the Irish Massacre, vid. Sir John Temples
Preface to the History of the Irish Rebellion. And at the same time plotted the
poisoning of the King, discovered to Sir William Boswel the Kings Agent at the
Hague, vide Romes Masterpiece.

And this General Rebellion and bloody Massacre, in Ireland did not only lay
that Kingdom desolate, but also influenced England into that unnatural War that
cost it so much precious Blood and Treasure; for until the news of that
unsuspected amazing destruction of so many innocent Souls in Ireland, there was
not the least appearance of a breach betwixt the King and his Parliament, all
things in Scotland were so well pacified by the Kings presence there, that when
His Majesty upon advice of the Irish Rebellion suddenly hasted for London, it
became a common speech amongst the Scots, Never did a more contented King part
with a more contented People: and so far were the Parliament at Westminster, or
the People from the least Jealousy of the King, that he was received into
London with all imaginable expressions of Joy and Gladness.

But such an impression did the news of that horrid Massacre make, it begat a
spirit of Indignation against the Papists, and such a dread of the like
Miseries that might be perpetrated in England by them, moved the Parliament to
desire of the King the Ordering the Militia, on pretense for the better
security of the Nation against Papists, and speedier Suppression of the Irish
Rebellion, upon which Head arose that woeful Breach, on which that unnatural War
with all its dismal consequences succeeded; from that time began the rude
Tumults of London Apprentices, etc. and all other misbehaviour; as you may read
in Scobels Collections of that years Transactions. And on that occasion
succeeded that Petition and large Remonstrance from the Parliament, presented
to the King December. 14. 1641. which laid the foundation of all our succeeding
Miseries: so that all Englands, Scotlands and Irelands Troubles, since Henry
the eighth shak'd off the Papal Yoke, have arose either from the Papists
Struggles to recover their tyrannical Dominion over these Kingdoms, or the
Divisions they have made amongst Protestants by their wily sleights.

And what their Plots have been against the Life of Charles the second, and the
Peace of England of late, we are wearied with reading the Discoveries and
Evidences in Print. I shall only insert their Oath of Secrecy, which will
serve for an Epitome of the whole Plot, at least the Design of it; and indeed
it is the truest Explanation of all their former Oaths of Confederacy extant.
In this the Monks Hood, is thrown by, of defending and maintaining His
Majesty's just Rights, etc.

They here clearly renounce and disown any Allegiance, and do swear to help his
Holiness's Agents, etc. to extirpate and root out and destroy the said
pretended King of England, etc.

The Oath of Secrecy, given by William Rushton to me Robert Bolron, February 2.
1676.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
I Robert Bolron, being in the presence of Almighty God, the blessed Mary ever
Virgin, the blessed Michael the Archangel, the blessed St. John Baptist, the
holy Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, and all the Saints in Heaven, and to you
my Ghostly Father, do declare, and in my heart believe the Pope Christ's Vicar
General to be the true and only Head of Christ's Churh here on Earth, and that
by virtue of the Keys of Binding and Loosing, given his Holiness by our Savior
Christ, he has Power to depose all Heretical Kings and Princes, and cause them
to be killed. Therefore to the utmost of my power, I will defend this Doctrine,
and his Holinesses Rights, against all Usurpers whatever; especially against
the now pretended King of England, in regard that he has broke his Vows with
his Holinesses Agents beyond Seas, and not performed his Promises in bringing
into England the holy Roman Catholic Religion. I do renounce and disown any
Allegiance as due to the said pretended King of England, or Obedience to any of
his inferour Officers and Magistrates; but do believe the Protestant Doctrine
to be Heretical and Damnable, and that all are damned which do not forsake the
same; and to the best of my power will help his Holinesses Agents here in
England, to extirpate and root out the said Protestant Doctrine, and to destroy
the said pretended King of England, and all such of his Subjects as will not
adhere to the holy See of Rome, and the Religion there professed. I further do
promise and declare, that I will keep secret and private, and not divulge
directly or indirectly, by Word, Writing, or Circumstance, whatever shall be
proposed, given in charge, or discovered to me by you my Ghostly Father, or any
other engaged in the promoting of this pious and holy Design; and that I will
be active, and not desist from the carrying of it on: and that no hopes of
Rewards, Threats, or Punishments shall make me discover the rest concerned in
so pious a Work; and if discovered, shall never confess any Accessaries with my
self concerned in this Design. All which I do swear by the blessed Trinity, and
by the blessed Sacrament, which I now purpose to receive, to perform, and on my
part to keep inviolable: and do call all the Angels and Saints in Heaven, to
witness my real intention to keep this Oath. In testimony whereof I do receive
this most holy and blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist.

By this Oath it is evident Popelings are no Changelings, Hildebrands
Principles commencing an. Dom. 606. are here repeated in their full strength
above a thousand years after, and why these treasonable Plots and Principles
were not since the time of this Oath effectually perpetrated is so notoriously
manifest in the multitudes of Prints published on that occasion, it evidenceth
it was not for want of good will on their parts.

And although God has graciously and wonderfully preserved the precious Life
of the King, and in him the Lives of us all that value our Religion.

Yet have these Incendiaries not lost their labor, but have accomplished that
which is next to cutting all our Throats, viz. the fomenting a Misunderstanding
and Jealousy betwixt the most indulgent and compassionate Prince and his
faithful and loyal Subjects.

A doleful consideration it is to all serious loyal Hearts, to observe a Prince
so lately received with all expressible passions of Joy, not only by those that
expected Gain and Advancement, but by others that knew they should suffer Loss
as to their private Fortunes; yet were so weary of their past and then present
Confusion, and so well satisfied in the Kings Gracious Declarations and
Intentions, they could and did say, as Mephibosheth to David, For as much as
our Lord the King is come again in peace, let Zibah take all, let Royalists
(but not Papists) take our Crown and Bishops Lands, our Regiments and Troops,
etc. our Hearts shall join with our Hands, to lift the King into his Throne,
(which we defy all other Hands to do without us) so England, etc. may be once
more settled.

And with what mutual content both King and People have enjoyed each other till
the very day this last Hell-hatch'd Plot broke out is notorious to all Europe
as well as Great Britain and Ireland, till then we heard of no Court nor
Country Parties, no Whiggs nor Tories, etc. but in Irelands Boggs, etc. no
Petitioners, Abhorrers, or Addressers, but what the King was pleased with, no
executing penal Laws on Dissenters; but on the contrary, Subjects entirely and
universally endeared to a Prince, in his own nature, compounded of of
Tenderness and Sympathy, pleading with Parliaments against penal Statutes; and
proposing to their Consideration, that some Provision might be made to enable
him to dispense with such Protestants, who through misguided Conscience could
not conform to the Ceremonies, Discipline, etc. of the Church, vid. Speeches
October. 26. 1662. and again Mar. 6. 1678. His Majesty did not only press the
House, but also commanded the Lord Chancellor to commend to their
consideration, not only what might tend to preserve the Protestant Religion in
general, but for an Union amongst all sorts of Protestants to distinguish
between Popish and other Recusants, between them that would destroy the whole
Flock and them that only wander from it, etc.

And though Parliaments were not then inclined to so great Moderation; yet has
His Majesty indulged Dissenters, and suspended the Execution of penal Statutes
against them in a great measure, for these twenty years past; and more
particularly has governed this Kingdom by Lord Lieutenants, etc. that have
imitated his Royal Clemency to the utmost Dissenters could expect, that they
would show themselves the most ungrateful, disingenious people in the world to
be disloyal, or give the Government the least cause of Jealousy of them.

As I observed before, their Interest is as entirely involved in the Safety of
the Crown and Potency of the English Protestant Interest, as the Conformists
themselves, and they contentedly see them- enjoy all Honors and beneficial
Offices, either Civil, Ecclesiastical or Military, etc. under the Government,
and cheerfully perform their Duties in all troublesome and chargeable Services
to their King and Country, and desire no greater Reward than that their Loyalty
may not be suspected till they give cause.

And notwithstanding they may be dissatisfied with some things relating to the
Hirarchy and Ceremonial part of the established Religion, yet not to that
height, but they will allow there is a necessity of a National Religion, to
prevent Atheism, etc. and if so, it follows, there is the like necessity of a
National Constitution and Discipline to prevent Confusion; and until the Wisdom
of the Nation in Parliament see cause to reform things some think amiss, most
Dissenters judge it their Interest as well as their Duty, to support the
Protestant Church as now established against all illegal Opposition whatsoever,
as the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion in Ireland against Popery and
Confusion, etc.

There is not any thing the Conformists can design for the promotion of
Godliness, which is the chief end of all Forms, but the sober
Nonconfor-heartily join with them; so that the pious Conformists and
Nonconformists are both of the same true Religion, pertakers of the same Grace
on earth, Phil. 1.7. and Heirs of the same Glory in Heaven, Romans 8.17. And the
impious of both sorts of one false Religion, pertakers of the same spirit of
Formality and Hypocrisy on Earth, 2 Timothy 3. and shall receive the same
Condemnation, Psalm. 9.17. John 5.29.

And if this has been and is the case of the dissenting Protestants of
Ireland, etc. can they be blamed for expressing a sense of their Damage and
Danger by the Jesuited Papists their Neighbors, especially when sometimes from
the Pulpit, and other times from the Bench, they are represented to be as
dangerous persons as themselves, and that is dangerous enough, if it were true,
and whatever their Protestant Neighbors apprehend of them, their Popish will
believe it; because they proved the most dangerous Heretics to them, from the
year 1649 to 1653. that ever they met with in Ireland, (but I hope the
Protestant Interest fares not the worse for that:) and therefore would be as
glad to see Bonefires made of them, as their Predecessors were of Cranmer,
Ridley and Latimer, etc. being convinced, burning such surly stubborn Heretics
by three or four at a time is a more safe way than sighting them with the Kings
Commission in their Pockets.

But from the whole I argue, it is the Interest of the Loyal moral Papists of
Ireland above all the Papists in the world to disown and reject the Jesuits
Principles expressed Sect. 1. from the consideration of these past woeful
consequences not only to the Protestants, but to the total ruin of multitudes
of Noble and Worshipful Catholic Families, many of whom are utterly extinct,
and others reduced to a very mean and contemptible state, to what their
Ancestors enjoyed. And if so; Herberts Travels fol. 290.
Why do the Windings of inconstant State
Molest us Mortals, since the self same Fate
Turns high and low ones with an equal doom,
That Servants often possess their Masters Room.
Men are but Men, and be they strong or wise,
All their Design subject to Hazard lies.


And if this has been the issue of their former Struggles, can it be their
Interest to hazard what is left by another desperate Attempt? for (as I before
asserted) it must be an Have at all; another such Act as that of Decimo septimo
would not leave a nocent Papist an Acre of Land in Ireland. And if these
Jesuitical Principles, mentioned Sect. 1. be indulged, they are such a sort of
Horse-leeches so greedy of Blood, as Sect. 5. and such Salamanders, whose
natural Element is the fire of Contention, as Sect. 4. long Peace cannot be
expected, 2 King. 9.22. and if no solid settled Peace in a Country, no
Improvement of Trade, etc. as Part 1. Chap. 1.

And whilst these just causes of jealousies and fears remain upon the Spirits
of the English, etc. there can be no true Friendship, nor comfortable
Neighborhood, which their Errors in Worship could not hinder, if their
Principles in Morals were but safe.

And therefore I assert it their Interest above all the Papists in the world to
explode these Jesuitical Principles, expressed Part 2. page 93, 94. and then,
though we retain different Church Rites, yet may we firmly unite in one common
State-Interest, as natural Subjects of the same King, governed by the same
Laws, interested in the same common Peace and Safety of our native Country
against all Invaders or intestine Disturbers whatsoever.

By this means the cares and perplexities of our common politic Father will be
removed, to his great content, all prejudices and animosities betwixt
Protestants and Papists will vanish, all Tories and other Robbers that
discourage English Planters will be restrained, when the Irish are equally in
danger, and consequently equally engaged to apprehend and suppress them, all
foreign Invaders will be discouraged, when they understand all Irelands
Inhabitants, notwithstanding their different Religions, are united in the
Interest of their King.

It is not to be expressed the manifold common Benefits that would accompany
this Unity in Loyalty, which is the main Design of what is before declared in
these seven Sections.

Says the Poet; As he, who did against great Jove Rebel,
Was struck with Thunder, and knocked down to Hell:
So God will all you Monsters overturn,
Who'gainst the King, the Church, the State dare spurn,
Your Glory shall be Shame, black Hell your Mansion,
Furies your fellows, Brimstone and Fire your Pension:
Your motions like Aegaeons; when he turns
Aetna does shake, and for a while it burns:
But when you move, you shake the World asunder,
Whose Bowels burn and roar till you be struck with thunder.


FINIS.

