A RELATION OF THE CONFERENCE BETWEEN William Laud, Late Lord Archbishop of
CANTERBURY, AND Mr. Fisher the Jesuit, By the Command of King JAMES, of
ever-blessed Memory.

WITH An ANSWER to such EXCEPTIONS as A. C. takes against it.

The Third Edition Revised: with a TABLE annexed.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Tho. Bassett, T. Dring, and J. Leigh, at the
George, the White Lion, and the Bell in Fleet Street. MDC LXXIII.

To his Most Sacred Majesty, CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, KING of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
DREAD SOUERAIGN:
THIS Tract will need Patronage, as Great as may be had, that is Yours. Yet,
when I first Printed part of it, I presumed not to ask any, but thrust it out
at the end of another's Labors, that it might seem, at least, to have the same
Patron, your Royal Father of Blessed Memory, as the other Work, on which this
attended, had. But now I humbly beg for it Your Majesty's Patronage; And leave
withal, that I may declare to Your Most Excellent Majesty the Cause why this
Tract was then written: Why it stayed so long before it looked upon the Light:
Why it was not then thought fit to go alone, but rather be led abroad by the
former Work: Why it comes now forth both with Alteration, and Addition: And why
this Addition made not more haste to the Press, than it has done.

The Cause why this Discourse was written, was this: I was, at the time of
these Conferences with Mr. Fisher, Bishop of S. David's; And not only directed,
but commanded by my blessed Master King JAMES to this Conference with him. He,
May 24. 1622.
when we met, began with a great Protestation of seeking the Truth only, and
that for it self. And certainly, Truth, especially in Religion, is so to be
sought, or not to be found. He that seeks it with a Roman One of these Biasses
is an Aversion from all such Truth as fits not our Ends. And Aversus a
Veritatis luce, ab hoc luci Veritatis adversus (fit) etc. S. Aug. l. 2. cont.
Adversarium Legis and Prophet. And it is an easy Transition, for a man that is
Averse from, to become adverse to the Truth.
Bias, or any (b) Other, will run Counter, when he comes near it, and not find
it, though he come within kenning of it. And therefore I did most heartily
wish, I could have found the Jesuit upon that fair way he protested to go.
After the Conference ended, I went, whither my Duty called me, to my Diocese;
not suspecting any thing should be made Public, that was both Commanded, and
acted in Private. For W. I. the Publisher of the Relation of the first
Conference with D. White (the late Reverend and Learned Bishop of Ely) In the
Epistle to the Reader.
confesses plainly, That M. Fisher was straightly charged upon his Allegiance,
from his Majesty that then was, not to set out, or Publish what passed in some
of these Conferences, till He gave License, and until Mr. Fisher and they might
meet, and agree, and Confirm under their Hands, what was said on both sides. He
says farther, that Ibid.
Mr. Fisher went to Dr. White's house, to know what he would say about the
Relation, which he had set out. So then, belike Mr. Fisher had set out the
Relation of that Conference, before he went to Dr. White, to speak about it.
And this notwithstanding the Kings Restraint upon him, upon his Allegiance.
Yet, to Dr. White it is said he went; but to what other end, than to put a Scorn
upon him, I cannot see. For he went to his house to know, what he would say
about that Relation of the Conference, which he had set out before. In my
absence from London, Mr. Fisher used me as well. For with the same Care of his
Allegiance, and no more, These words were in my former Epistle. And A. C.
checks at them, in defense of the Jesuit, and says: That the Jesuit did not
at all so much as in Speech, and much less in Papers publish this, or either of
the other two Conferences with Dr. White, till he was forced unto it by false
reports given out to his private disgrace, and the prejudice of the Catholic
Cause. Nor then did he spread Papers abroad, but only delivered a very few
Copies to special friends, and this not with an intent to calumniate the
Bishop, etc. A. C. in his Preface before his Relation of this Conference.
Truly, I knew of no Reports then given out to the prejudice of the Jesuit's
either Person or Cause. I was in a Corner of the Kingdom* where I heard little.
But howsoever, here is a most plain Confession by A. C. of that which he
struggles to deny. He says he did not spread Papers. What then? What? Why he
did but deliver Copies. Why but does not he that delivers Copies (for instance,
of a Libel) spread it? Yea, but he delivered but a very few Copies. Be it so* I
do not say, how many he spread. He confesses the Jesuit delivered some, though
very few; And he that delivers any, spreads it abroad. For what can he tell,
when the Copies are once out of his power, how many may copy them out, and
spread them farther? Yea, but he delivered them to special friends. Be it so
too: The more special friends they were to him, the less indifferent would they
be to me, perhaps my more special enemies. Yea, but all this was without an
intent to calumniate me. Well: Be that so too. But if I be calumniated thereby,
his intention will not help it. And whether the Copies, which he delivered,
have not in them Calumny against me, I leave to the Indifferent Reader of this
Discourse to judge.
he spread abroad Papers of this Conference, full enough of partiality to his
Cause, and more full of Calumny against me. Hereupon I was in a manner forced
to give M. Fisher's Relation of the Conference an Answer, and to publish it.
Though for some Reasons, and those then approved by Authority, it was thought
fit I should set it out in my Chaplain's Name R. B. and not in my own. To which
I readily submitted.

There was a cause also, why at the first, the Discourse upon this Conference
stayed so long, before it could endure to be pressed. For the Conference was in
May, 1622. And M. Fisher's Paper was scattered and made common, so common, that
a Copy was brought to me ( being none of his special friends) before
Michaelmas. And yet this Discourse was not printed till April, 1624. Now that
you may know how this happened, I shall say for my self, It was not my
Idleness, nor my Unwillingness to right both my self, and the Cause, against
the Jesuit, and the Paper, which he had spread, that occasioned this delay. For
I had then Most Honorable Witnesses, and have some yet living, That this
Discourse (such as it was, when A. C. nibled at it) was finished long before I
could persuade my self to let it come into Public View. And this was caused
partly by my own Backwardness to deal with these men, whom I have ever observed
to be great Pretenders for Truth, and Unity, but yet such as will admit
neither, unless They and their Faction may prevail in all; As if no Reformation
had been necessary. And partly because there were about the same time three
Conferences held with Fisher. Of these, this was the Third; And could not
therefore conveniently come abroad into the world, till the two former were
ready to lead the way; which till that time, they were not.

And this is in part the Reason also, why this Tract crept into the end of a
larger Work. For since that Work contained in a manner the substance of all
that passed in the two former Conferences: And that this third in diverse points
concurred with them, and depended on them; I could not think it Substantive
enough, to stand alone. But besides this Affinity between the Conferences, I
was willing to have it pass as silently as it might, at the end of another
Work, and so perhaps little to be looked after, because I could not hold it
worthy, nor can I yet, of that Great Duty, and Service, which I owe to my Dear
Mother, the Church of England.

There is a cause also, why it looks now abroad again with Alteration and
Addition. And it is fit I should give your Majesty an Account of that too. This
Tract was first printed in the year 1624. And in the year 1626, another
Jesuit, or the same, under the name of A. C. printed a Relation of this
Conference, and therein took Exceptions to some Particulars, and endeavored to
Confute some Things delivered therein by me. Now being in years, and unwilling
to die in the Jesuits debt, I have in this Second Edition done as much for
him, and somewhat more. For he did but skip up and down, and labor to pick a
hole, here, and there, where he thought he might fasten; and where it was too
hard for him, let it alone. But I have gone through with him; And I hope, given
a full Confutation: or at least such a Bone to gnaw, as may shake his teeth, if
he look not to it. And of my Addition to this Discourse, this is the Cause; But
of my Alteration of some things in it, this. A. C. his Curiosity to winnow me,
made me in a more curious manner fall to sifting of my self, and that which had
formerly past my Pen. And though (I bless God for it) I found no cause to alter
any thing that belonged either to the Substance, or Course of the Conference:
Yet somewhat I did find, which needed better, and cleerer expression; And that
I have altered, well knowing I must expect Curious Observers on all hands.

Now, Why this Additional Answer to the Relation of A C. came no sooner forth,
has a Cause too, and I shall truly represent it. A. C. his Relation of the
Conference, was set out, 1626. I knew not of it in some years after. For it was
printed among diverse other things of like nature, either by M. Fisher himself,
or his friend A. C. When I saw it, I read it over carefully, and found my self
not a little wronged in it; but the Church of England, and indeed the Cause of
Religion, much more. I was before this time by Your Majesty's Great Grace, and
undeserved favor, made Dean of Your Majesty's Chapel Royal, and a Counselor
of State, and hereby, as the Occasions of those times were, made too much a
Stranger to my Books. Yet for all my Busy Employments, it was still in my
thoughts to give A. C. an Answer. But then I fell into a most dangerous Fever;
And though it pleased God beyond all hope to restore me to health, yet long I
was before I recovered such strength as might enable me to undertake such a
Service. And since that time, how I have been detained, and in a manner forced
upon other many, various, and Great Occasions, your Majesty knows best. And how
of late I have been used by the Scandalous and Scurrilous Pens of some bitter
men (whom I heartily beseech God to forgive) the world knows; Little Leisure,
and less Encouragement given me to Answer a Jesuit, or set upon other
Services, while I am under the Prophets affliction, Psalm. 50. between the Psalm.
50. 19. 20.
Mouth that speaks wickedness, and the tongue that sets forth deceit, and
slander me as thick, as if I were not their own Mothers Son. In the midst of
these Libellous outcries against me, some Divines of great Note and Worth in
the Church came to me, One by One, and no One knowing of the Others Coming (as
to me they protested) and persuaded with me to Reprint this Conference, in my
own Name. This they thought would vindicate my Reputation, were it generally
known to be mine. I Confess I looked round about these Men, and their Motion;
And at last, my Thoughts working much upon themselves, I began to persuade
myself, that I had been too long diverted from this necessary Work. And that
perhaps there might be In voce hominum, Tuba Dei, in the still voice of men,
the Loud Trumpet of God, which sounds many ways, sometimes to the ears, and
sometimes to the hearts of men, and by means which they think not of. And as S.
Aug. S(...) 63. De Diversis, c. 10. He speaks of Christ disputing in the Temple
with the Elders of the Jews. And they heard Christ the Essential Word of the
Father with admiration to astonishment* yet believed him not: S. Luke 2. 47.
And the Word then spoke to th^^ by a means they thought not of, namely per
F^l^um De^ in puero, by the Son of God himself under the Vail of our human
nature.
S. Augustine speaks, A word of God there is, Quod nunquam tacet, sed non
semper auditur: which though it be never silent, yet is not always heard. That
it is never silent, is his great Mercy; and that it is not always heard, is
not the least of our Misery. Upon this Motion I took time to deliberate: And
had scarce time for that, much less for the Work. Yet at last to every of
these men I gave this Answer. That M. Fisher, or A. C. for him, had been busy
with my former Discourse, and that I would never reprint that, unless I might
gain time enough to Answer that, which A. C. had charged a fresh both upon me,
and the Cause. While my Thoughts were thus at work, Your Majesty fell upon the
same Thing, and was graciously pleased not to Command, but to Wish me to
reprint this Conference, and in mine own Name; And this openly at the
Councel-Table in Michaelmas-Term. 1637. I did not hold it fit to deny, having
in all the Course of my service obeyed your Majesty's Honorable, and Just
Motions, as Commands: But Craved leave to show what little leisure I had to do
it, and what Inconveniences might attend upon it. When this did not serve to
excuse me, I humbly submitted to that, which I hope was Gods Motion in Your
Majesty's. And having thus laid all that Concerns this Discourse before your
Gracious and most Sacred Majesty, I most humbly present you with the Book it
self, which as I heartily pray You to protect, so do I wholly submit it to the
Church of England, with my Prayers for Her Prosperity, and my Wishes that I
were able to do Her better Service.

I have thus acquainted Your Majesty with all Occasions, which both formerly,
and now again have led this Tract into the light. In all which I am a faithful
Relater of all Passages, but am not very well satisfied, who is now my
Adversary. M. Fisher was at the Conference. Since that, I find A*C. at the
print. And whether These be two, or but One Jesuit, ^ know not; since scarce
One amongst them, goes under One Name. But for my own part (and the Error is
not great, if I mistake) I think they are One, and that One, M. Fisher. That
which induces me to think so, is First, the Great Inwardness of A*C. with M.
Fisher, which is so great, as may well be thought to neighbor upon Identity.
Secondly, the Style of A. C. is so like M. Fishers, that I doubt it was but one
and the same hand that moved the pen. Thirdly A. C. says expressly, That the A.
C. p. 67.
Jesuit himself made the Relation of the first Conference with D. White: And
in the Title Page of the Work, That Relation as well as This, is said to be
made by A. C. and Published by W. J. therefore A. C. and the Jesuit are one
and the same person, or else one of these places has no Truth in it.

Now if it be M. Fisher himself, under the Name of A. C. then what needs these
Preface to the Relation of this Conference by A. C.
words: The Jesuit could be content to let pass the Chaplains Censure, as one
of his Ordinary persecutions for the Catholic Faith; but A. C. thought it
necessary for the Common Cause to defend the sincerity and Truth of his
Relation, and the Truth of some of the Chief Heads contained in it. In which
Speech give me leave to observe to your Sacred Majesty, how grievously you
suffer him, and his Fellows to be persecuted for the Catholic Faith, when your
poor Subject and Servant, cannot set out a true Copy of a Conference held with
the Jesuit, jussu Superiorum, but by and by the man is persecuted. God forbid
I should ever offer to persuade a Persecution in any kind, or practice it in
the least. For to my remembrance, I have not given him or his so much as course
Language. But on the other side, God forbid too, That your Majesty should let
both Laws and Discipline sleep, for fear of the Name of Persecution, and in the
mean time let M. Fisher and his Fellows Angle in all parts of your Dominions
for your Subjects. If in your Grace and Goodness you will spare their Persons:
Yet I humbly beseech You see to it, That they be not suffered to lay either
their Weels, or bait their Hoooks, or cast their Nets in every stream, lest
that Tentation grow both too general, and too strong. I know they have many
Devices to work their Ends; But if they will needs be fishing, let them use
none but And S. Aug. is very full against the use of Mala retid, unlawful Nets.
And says, the Fishermen themselves have greatest cause to take heed of them.
S. Aug. L. de Fid: and Oper. c. 17.
Lawful Nets. Let Us have no dissolving of Oaths of Allegiance: No deposing, no
killing of Kings: Noblowing up of States to settle Quod Volumus, that which
fain they would have in the Church: with many other Nets, as dangerous as
these. For if their Profession of Religion were as good, as they pretend it is,
if they cannot Compass it by Good Means, I am sure they ought not to attempt it
by Bad. For if they will do evil, that good may come thereof, the Apostle tells
me, Their Damnation's just, Romans 3. Romans 3. 8.


Now as I would humbly Beseech Your Majesty to keep a serious Vatch upon these
Fsher-men, which pretend S. Peter, but fish not with His Net: So whould I not
have You neglect another sort of Anglers in a Shallower Water. For they have
some ill Nets too. And if they may spread them, when, and whore they will, God
know, what may become of it. These have not so strong a Back abroad, as the
Romanists have, but that is no Argument to suffer them to increase. They may
grow to equal Strength with Number. And Factious People, at home, of what Sect,
or fond Opinion soever they be, are not to be neglected. Partly, because they
are so Near. And it is ever a dangerous Fir^, that begins in the Bedstraw. And
partly, because all those Domestic Evils, which threaten a Rent in Church or
State, are with far more safety prevented by Wisdom, than punished by Justice.
And would men consider it right, they are far more beholding to that man that
keeps them from falling, than to him takes them up, though it be to set the Arm
or the Leg that is broken in the Fall.

In this Discourse I have no aim to displease any, nor any hope to please all.
If I can help on to Truth in the Church, and the Peace of the Church together,
I shall be glad, be it in any measure. Nor shall I spare to speak necessary
Truth, out of too much Love of Peace. Nor thrust on Unnecessary Truth to the
Breach of that Peace, which once broken, is not so easily s^der'd again. And if
for Necessary Truths sake only, any man will be offended, nay take, nay snatch
at that offense, which is not given, I know no fence for that. It Is Truth, and
I must tell it. It Is the Gospel, and I must preach it. 1 Cor. 9. And far 1 Cor.
9. 16.
safer it is in this Case to bear Anger from men, than a Woe from God. And
where the Foundations of Faith are shaken, be it by Superstition or
Profaneness, he that puts not to his hand, as firmly as he Can to support
them, is too wary, and has more Care of himself, then of the Cause of Christ.
And it is a Wariness that brings more danger in the end, then it shuns. For the
Angel of the Lord issued out a Curse against the Inhabitants of Meroz, because
they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. Judge. 5. I
know it is a Great Judge. 5. 23.
ease to let every Thing be as it will, and every man believe, and do as he
list. But whether Governors in Stat^ or Church do their duty there while, is
easily seen, since this is an effect of no King in Israel, Judge. 17. Judge. 17.
6.


The Church of Christ upon Earth may be compared to a Hive of Bees, and that
can be no where so steddily placed in this world, but it will be in some
danger. And men that care neither for the Hive, nor the Bees, have yet a great
mind to the Honey. And having once tasted the sweet of the Churches Maintenance
swallow that for Honey, which one day will be more bitter than Gall in their
Bowels. Now the King and the Priest, more than any other, are bound to look to
the Integrity of the Church in Doctrine and Manners, and that in the first
place. For that is by far the Best Honey in the Hive. But in the second place,
They must be Careful of the Churches Maintenance too, else the Bees shall make
Honey for others, and have none left for their own necessary sustenance, and
then all is lost. For we see it in daily and common use, that the Honey is not
taken from the ^ees, but they are destroyed first. Now in this great and Busy
Work, the King and the Priest must not fear to put their hands to the Hive,
though they be sure to be stung. And stung by the Bees, whose Hive and House
they preserve. It was King David's Ca^e (God grant it be never Yours.) They came
about me (says the Psalm. 118. 12.
Psalm. 118.) Apum Similitudine ardorem notat vesanum; Non est enim in illis
multum roboris sed mira Excandescentia: Calv: in Psalm. 118.
like Bees, This was hard usage enough, yet some profit, some Honey might thus
be gotten in the End. And that is the Kings Case. But when it comes to the
Priest, the Case is altered, They come about him like Waspes, or like Hornets
rather, all sting, and no Honey there. And all this many times for no offense,
nay sometimes for Service done them, would they see it. But you know who said:
Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man according
as his Works shall be. Revel. 22. And he himself Revel. 22. 12.
is so Genesis 15. 1.
exceeding great a Reward, as that the manifold stings which are in the World,
howsoever they smart here, are nothing when they are pressed out with that
exceeding weight of Glory, which shall be revealed: Romans 8. Romans 8. 18.


Now one Thing more let me be bold to Observe to Your Majesty in particular,
concerning Your Great Charge, the Church of England. It Is in an hard Condition.
She professes the Ancient Catholic Faith; And yet the Romanist condemns Her of
Novelty in her Doctrine. She practices Church Government, as it has been in
use in all Ages, and all Places, where the Church of Christ has taken any
Rooting, both in, and ever since the Apostles Times; And yet the Separatist
condemns Her for Antichristianism in her Discipline. The plain truth is, She is
between these two Factions, as between two Milstones; and unless Your Majesty
look to it, to Whose Trust She is committed, She Will be grownd to powder, to an
irrepairable both Dishonor, and loss to this Kingdom. And it is very
Remarkable, that while both these press hard upon the Church of England, both
of them Cry out upon Persecution, like froward Children, which scratch, and
kick, and bite, and yet cry out all the while, as if themselves were killed.
Now to the Romanist I shall say this; The Errors of the Church of Rome are
grown now (many of them) very Old. And when Errors are grown by Age and
Continuance to strength, they which speak for the Truth, though it be far
Older, are ordinarily challenged for the Bringers in of New Opinions. And there
is no Greater Absurdity stirring this day in Christendom, than that the
Reformation of an Old Corrupted Church, will we, ^ill we, must be taken for the
Building of a New. And were not this so, we should never be troubled with that
idle and impertinent Question of theirs: Where was your Church before Luther?
For it was just there, where their's is now. There is no other difference
between Us and Rome, than betwixt a Church miserably Corrupted, and happily
purged, etc. Jos. Hall. B. of Exon. In his Apologetical Advertisement to the
Reader, p. 192. Approved by Tho. Morton, B. then of Cov. and Lich. now of
D^resm. in the Letters printed by the B. of Ex^ter, in this Treatise called,
The Reco^scile^, p. 68. And D. Field. in this Appen to the third part. c. 2.
where he cites Calv. to the sa^^t purpose, L. 4. Inst. c. 2. ^. 11.
One and the same Church still, no doubt of that. One in Substance, but not One
in Condition of state and purity; Their part of the same Church remaining in
Corruption: and Our part of the same Church under Reformation. The same Naaman,
and he a Syrian still, but Leprous with them, and Cleansed with us; The same
man still. And for the Separatist, and him that lays his Grounds for Separation
or Change of Discipline, though all he says, or can say, be in Truth of
Divinity, and among Learned men little better than ridiculous: yet since these
fond Opinions have gained some ground among your people; to such among them as
are wilfully se^ to follow their blind Guides, through thick and thin, till S.
Matthew. 15. 14.
they fall into the Ditch together, I shall say nothing. But for so many of
them, as mean well, and are only misled by Artifice and Cunning; Concerning
them, I shall say thus much only: They are Bells of passing good mettle, and
tuneable enough of themselves, and in their own disposition; and a world of
pity it is, that they are Rung so miserably out of Tune, as they are, by them
which have gotten power in and over their Consciences. And for this there is
yet Remedy enough; but how long there will be, I know not.

Much talking there is ( Bragging, Your Majesty may call it) on both sides. And
when they are in their ruff, they both exceed all Moderation, and Truth too; So
far, till both Lips and Pens open for all the World like a Purse without money;
Nothing comes out of this, and that which is worth nothing out of them. And yet
this nothing is made so great, as if the Salvation of Souls, that Great work of
the Redeemer of the World, the Son of God, could not be effected without it.
And while the one faction cries up the Church above the Scripture; and the
other the Scripture to the neglect and Contempt of the Church, which the
Scripture it self teaches men both to honor, and obey: They have so far
endangered the Belief of the One, and the Authority of the Other, as that
neither has its Due from a great part of Men. Whereas according to Christ's
Institution: The Scripture, where it is plain, should guide the Church; And the
Church, were there is Doubt or Difficulty, should expound the Scripture; Yet so,
as neither the Scripture should be forced, nor the Church so bound up, as that
upon Just and farther Evidence, She may not revise that which in any Case has
slipped by Her. What Success this Great Distemper caused by the Collision of two
such Factions, may have, I know not, I cannot Prophecy. This I know, That the
use which Wise men should make of other men's falls, is not to fall with with
them; And the use which Pious and Religious men should make of these great
Flaws in Christianity, is not to Join with them that make them, nor to help to
dislocate those main Bones in the Body, which being once put out of Joint, will
not easily be set again. And though I cannot Prophecy, yet I fear That
Atheism, and Irreligion gather strength, while the Truth is thus weakened by an
Unworthy way of Contending for it. And while they thus Contend, neither part
Consider, that they are in a way to induce upon themselves, and others, that
Contrary Extreme, which they seem most both to fear, and oppose.

Besides: This I have ever Observed, That many Rigid Professors have turned
Roman Catholics, and in that Turn have been more Jesuited than any other: And
such Romanists as have changed from them, have for the most part quite leaped
over the Mean, and been as Rigid the other way, as Extremity it self. And this
is there be not both Grace, and Wisdom to govern it, is a very Natural Motion.
For a man is apt to think he can never run far enough from that, which he once
begins to hate; And does not Consider therewhile, That where Religion Corrupted
is the thing he hates, a Fallacy may easily be put upon him. For he ought to
hate the Corruption which depraves Religion, and to run from it: but from no
part of Religion it self, which he ought to Love, and Reverence, ought he to
depart. And this I have Observed farther: That no one thing has made
Conscientious men more wavering in their own minds, or more apt, and easy to
be drawn aside from the sincerity of Religion professed in the Church of
England, than the Want of Uniform and Decent Order in too many Churches of the
Kingdom. And the Romanists have been apt to say, The Houses of God could not be
suffered to lie so Nastily (as in some places they have done) were the True
worship of God observed in them: Or did the People think that such it were.
^istrue, the Inward Worship of the Heart, is the Great Service of God, and no
Service acceptable without it: But the External worship of God in his Church is
the Great Witness to the World, that Our heart stands right in that Service of
God. Take this away, or bring it into Contempt, and what Light is there left to
shine before men, that they may see our Devotion, and glorify our Father which
is in Heaven? And to deal clearly with Your Majesty, These Thoughts are they,
and no other, which have made me labor so much, as I have done, for Decency
and an Orderly settlement of the External Worship of God in the Church. For of
that which is Inward there can be no Witness among men, nor no Example for men.
Now no External Action in the world can be Uniform without some Ceremonies. And
these in Religion, the Ancienter they be, the better, so they may fit Time and
Place. Too many Over-burden the Service of God; And too few leave it naked. And
scarce any Thing has hurt Religion more in these broken Times, than an Opinion
in too many men, That because Rome had thrust some Unnecessary, and many
Superstitious Ceremonies upon the Church, therefore the Reformation must have
none at all; Not considering therewhile, That Ceremonies are the Hedge that
fence the Substance of Religion from all the Indignities, which Profaneness
and Sacrilege too Commonly put upon it. And a Great Weakness it is, not to see
the strength which Ceremonies (Things weak enough in themselves, God knows)
add even to Religion it self; But a far greater to see it, and yet to Cry Them
down, all, and without Choice, by which their most hated Adversaries climbed
up, and could not cry up themselves, and their Cause, as they do, but by them.
And Divines of all the rest might learn, and teach this Wisdom if they would,
since they see all other Professions, which help to bear down their Ceremonies,
keep up their own therewhile, and that to the highest.

I have been too bold to detain Your Majesty so long; But my Grief to see
Christendom bleeding in Dissension, and which is worse, triumphing in her own
Blood, and most angry with them, that would study her Peace, has thus
transported me. For truly it Cannot but grieve any man, that has Bowels, to
see All men seeking, but as S. Paul foretold, Phil. 2. their own things, and
not the things which Phil. 2. 21.
are Jesus Christ's. Sua, Their own surely. For the Gospel of Christ has
nothing to do with them: And to see Religion so much, so Zealously pretended,
and called upon, made but the Stalking-Horse, to shoot at other Fowl, upon
which their Aim is set; In the mean time, as if all were Truth and Holiness it
self, no Salvation must be possible, did it lie at their Mercy, but in the
Communion of the One, and in the Conventicles of the Other. As if either of
these now were, as the Donatists of old reputed themselves, the only men, in
whom Christ at his coming to Judgment, should find Faith. No (faith S. A^g.
Epist. 48.
S. Augustine: and so say I with him) Da veniam, non Credimus. Pardon us, I
pray, we cannot believe it. The Catholic Church of Christ is neither Rome, nor
a Conventicle. Out of that there is no Salvation, I easily Confess it. But out
of Rome there is, and out of a Conventicle too; Salvation i^ not shut up into
such a narrow Conclave. In this ensuing Discourse therefore I have endeavored
to lay open those wider-Gates of the Catholic Church, confined to no Age,
Time, or Place; Nor knowing any Bounds, but That Faith, which was once (and but
once for all) delivered to the Saints. S. Jude 3. And in my pursuit of this
way, I have S. Jud. 3.
searched after, and delivered with a single heart, that Truth which I profess.
In the publishing whereof, I have obeyed Your Majesty, discharged my Duty, to
my power, to the Church of England, 1 S. Pet. 3. 15.
Given account of the Hope that is in me; And so testified to the world that
Faith in which I have lived, and by God's blessing and favor purpose to dye;
But till Death shall most unfainedly remain,

Your MAJESTY'S Most faithful Subject, And Most Humble and Obliged Servant, W.
CANT.

A RELATION OF THE CONFERENCE BETWEEN WILLIAM LAWD, Then L. Bishop of S.
DAVID'S, afterward Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY; AND M. FISHER the JESUIT.
F. The occasion of this Conference was.


B. Third Conference you should know sufficiently. You were an Actor in it, as
well as in two other. Whether you have related the two former truly, appears
by D. White, the late Reverend L. Bishop of Ely his Relation, or Exposition of
them. I was present at none but this Third; of which I here give the Church an
Account. But of this Third, whether that were the Cause which you allege, I
cannot tell. You say,


F. It was observed, That in the second Conference all the Speech was about
particular matters, little or none about a continual, infallible, visible
Church; which was the chief and only Point in which a certain Lady required
satisfaction; as having formerly settled in her mind, That it was not for her,
or any other unlearned persons, to take upon them to judge of particulars,
without depending upon the judgment of the True Church.


B. Honorable Person in this, was never opened to me. And it is very fit the
people should look to the Judgment of the Church, before they be too busy with
Particulars. But yet neither 1 Cor. 10. 15.
Scripture, nor any good Authority, denies them some moderate use of their own
understanding and judgment, especially in things familiar and evident; which
even Quis non sine ullo Magistro, aut interpret ex se facile cognoscat, etc.
Novat. de Trin. c. 23. Et loquitur de Mysterio Passionis Christ's. Dijudicare
est Mensurare, etc. Unde and Men's dicitur a Metiendo. Tho. p. 1. q. 79. a 9. ad
4. To what end then is a Mind and an Understanding given a man, if he may not
apply it to measure Truth? Et (...). i. ab to quod considerat, and discernit.
Quia decernit inter verum and salsum. Damase. l. 2. Fid. Orth. c. 22. And A. C.
himself, p. 41. denies not all Judgment to private men; but says, They are not
so to rely absolutely upon their private judgment, as to adventure Salvation
upon it alone, or chiefly: which no man will deny.
ordinary Capacities may as easily understand, as read. And therefore some
Particulars a Christian may judge without depending.


F. This Lady therefore having heard it granted in the first Conference, That
there must be a continual visible Company ever since Christ, teaching unchanged
Doctrine in all Fundamental Points, that is, Points necessary to Salvation;
desired to hear this confirmed, and proof brought, which was that continual,
infallible, visible Church, in which one may, and out of which one cannot
attain Salvation. And therefore having appointed a time of Meeting between a B.
and Me, and thereupon having sent for the B. and Me; before the B. came, the
Lady, and a Friend of hers, came first to the Room where I was, and debated
before me the aforesaid Question; and not doubting of the first part, to wit,
That there must be a continual visible Church, as they had heard granted by D.
White, and L. K. etc.


B. White and L. K. granted, I heard not: But I think, both granted a
continual, and a visible Church; neitherof them an Infallible, at least in your
sense. And your self, in this Relation, speak distractedly: For in these few
lines from the beginning hither, twice you add Infallible between continual
and visible, and twice you leave it out. But this concerns D. W. and he has
answered it.

A. C. steps in, and says, The Jesuit did not speak distractedly, but most
advisedly: For (says he) where he relates A. C. p. 42.
what D. White or L. K. granted, he leaves out the word Infallible, because
they granted it not; But where he speaks of the Lady, there he adds it,
because the Jesuit knew, it was an Infallible Church which she sought to rely
upon. How far the Catholic Militant Church of Christ is Infallible, is no
Dispute for this place, though you shall find it after. But sure the Jesuit
did not speak most advisedly, nor A. C. neither, nor the Lady her self, if she
said she desired to rely upon an Infallible Church. For an Infallible Church
denotes a Particular Church, in that it is set in opposition to some other
Particular Church that is not Infallible. Now I, for my part, do not know what
that Lady desired to rely upon. This I know, if she desired such a Particular
Church, neither this Jesuit, nor any other, is able to show it her: No, not
Bellarmine himself, though of very great ability to make good any Truth which
he undertakes for the Church of Rome. Veritas vincat necesse est, sive
Negantem, sive con^itentem, etc. S. Aug. Epist. 174. Occultari potest ad tempus
veritas, vinci non potest. S. Aug. in Psalm. 61.
But no strength can uphold an Error against Truth, where Truth has an able
Defendant. Now where Bellarmine sets himself purposely to make this good, That
L. 4. de Romans Pont. Cap. 4.. 1. Romana particularis Ecclesia non potest errare
in Fide.
the Particular Church of Rome cannot err in matter of Faith: Out of which it
follows, That there may be found a Particular Infallible Church; you shall see
what he is able to perform.

First then, after he has distinguished, to express his meaning, in what sense
the Particular Church of Rome cannot err in things which are de Fide, of the
Faith: He tells us, this Firmitude is, because the Sea Apostolic is fixed
there. And this he says is most true. Ibid. 2.
And for proof of it, he brings three Fathers to justify it.

1 The first Saint Cyprian, Navigare audent ad Petri Cathedram, and Ecclesiam
Principalem, etc. Nec cogitare eos esse Romanos, ad quos Persidia habere non
potest accessum. Cyprian. L. 1. Epist. 3.
whose words are, That the Romans are such, as to whom Persidia cannot have
access. Now Persidia can hardly stand for Error in Faith, or for Misbelief;
but it properly signifies Malicious Falsehood, in matter of Trust, and Action;
not Error in Faith, but in Fact, against the Discipline and Government of the
Church. And why may it not here have this meaning in S. Cyprian?

Bin. Council. Tom. 1. p. 152. Edit. Paris. 1636. Baron. Annal. 253, 254, 255.
In the Year 255, there was a Council in Carthage in the Cause of two
Schismatics, Felicissimus, and Novatian, about restoring of them to the
Communion of the Church, which had lapsed, in time of danger, from Christianity
to Idolatry. Felicissimus would admit all, even without Penance; and Novatian
would admit none, no not after Penance. The Fathers, forty two in number, went
as the Truth led them, between both Extremes. To this Council came Privatus, a
known Heretic, but was not admitted, because he was formerly Excommunicated,
and often condemned. Hereupon he gathers his Accomplices together, and chooses one
Fortunatus (who was formerly condemned as well as himself) Bishop of Carthage,
and set him up against S. Cyprian. This done, Felicissimus and his Fellows
haste to Rome with Letters Testimonial from their own Party, and pretend that
twenty five Bishops concurred with them; and their desire was to be received
into the Communion of the Roman Church, and to have their new Bishop
acknowledged. Cornelius, then Pope, though their haste had now prevented S.
Cyprian's Letters, having formerly heard from him, both of them and their
Schism in Africa, would neither hear them, nor receive their Letters. They grew
insolent and furious (the ordinary way that Schismatics take.) Upon this
Cornelius writes to S. Cyprian, and S. Cyprian in this Epistle gives Cornelius
thanks for refusing these African Fugitives, declares their Schism and
wickedness at large, and incourages Him, and all Bishops, to maintain the
Ecclesiastical Discipline and Censures, against any the boldest threat^ings of
wicked Schismatics. This is the Story; and in this is the Passage here urged
by Bellarmine. Now I would fain know why Perfidia (all circumstances
considered) may not stand here in its proper sense for cunning and perfidious
dealing, which these men, having practiced at Carthage, thought now to obtrude
upon the Bishop of Rome also, but that he was wary enough not to be
over-reached by busy Schismatics.

Secondly, Let it be granted that Perfidia does signify here Error in Faith
and Doctrine. For I will not deny, but that among the African Writers (and
especially S. Cyprian) it is sometimes so used; and therefore here perhaps. But
then this Privilege of not erring dangerously in the Faith, was not made over
absolutely to the Romans, that are such by Birth, and dwelling only; but to the
Romans, qua tales, as they were such as those first were, whose Faith was
famous through the World, and as long as they continued such; which at that
time it seems they did. And so S. Cyprian's words seem to import, eos esse
Romanos, that the Romans then under Pope Cornelius, were such as the Romans 1. 8.
Apostle spoke of; and therefore to whom at that time (or any time, they still
remaining such) perfidious misbelief could not be welcome; or rather indeed,
perfidious Misbelievers or Schismatics could not be welcome. For this very
Phrase, Perfidia non potest habere accessum, directs us to understand the word
in a Concrete sense: Perfidiousness could not get access, that is, such
perfidious persons, Excommunicated out of other Churches, were not likely to
get access at Rome, or to find admittance into their Communion: It is but a
Metonymie of speech, the Adjunct for the Subject, a thing very usual in Elegant
Ego tibi istam scelestam, Scelus, linguam abscindam: Plaut. Amphit. Ex hac enim
part pudor pugnat, illinc petulantia, etc. Cic. -- Latuit plebeio tectus
amictu Omnis Honos. Nullos comitata est purpura fasces. Lucan. L. 2.
Authors, and much more in later times; as in S. Cyprian's, when the Latin
Language was grown rougher. Now if it be thus understood (I say in the
Concrete) then it is plain, that S. Cyprian did not intend by these words to
exempt the Romans from possibility of Error, but to brand his Adversaries with
a Title due to their Merit, calling them Perfidious, that is, such as had
betrayed, or perverted the Faith. Neither can we loose by this Construction, as
will appear at after.

Perfidia non potest, for non facile potest; It cannot, that is, it cannot
easily: Or what if S. Cyprian do but Laudando praecipere, by commending Nec
cogitare eos esse Romanos, quorum fides Apostolo praedicante, etc
them to be such, instruct them, that such indeed they ought to be, to whom
Perfidiousness should not get access. Men are very bountiful of their
Complements sometimes. Epist. 67.
Syne^ius writing to Theophilus of Alexandria, begins thus: (...), etc. I both
will, and a Divine Necessity lies upon me, to esteem it a Law, whatsoever that
Throne (meaning his of Alexandria) shall determine. Nay the word is (...), and
that signifies to determine like an Oracle, or as in Gods stead. Now, I hope
you will say, this is not to be taken Dogmatically, it is but the Epistolers
Courtesy only. And why not the like here? For the haste which these
Schismatics made to Rome, prevented S. Cyprian's Letters: yet Cornelius very
careful of both the Truth and Peace of the Church, would neither hear them, nor
receive their Letters, till For so S. Cyprian begins his Epistle to Cornelius.
Legi literas tuas frater, etc. And after: Sed enim lecta alia Epistola tua
frater, etc. S. Cypr. L. 1. Epist. 3.
he had written to S. Cyprian. Now this Epistle is S. Cyprian's Answer to
Cornelius, in which he informs him of the whole truth, and withal gives him
thanks for refusing to hear these African Fugitives. In which fair way of
returning his thanks, if he make an Honorable mention of the Romans, and their
Faith, with a little dash of Rhetoric, even to a Non potest, for a Non facile
potest, it is no great wonder.

Cyprian had no meaning to assert the unerring Infallibility of either Pope, or
Church of Rome. For this is more then manifest, by the Contestation which after
happened between S. Cyprian, and Pope Stephen, about the Rebaptization of those
that were Baptized by Heretics; For he Stephanus Frater noster Haereticorum
causam contra Christianos, and contra Ecclesiam Dei asserere conatur. Cypr. ad
Pompeium contra Epist. Stephani Edit. per Erasmum Basil p. 327.
says expressly, That Pope Stephen did then not only maintain an Error, but
the very Cause of Heretics, and that against Christians, and the very Church
of God. Stephani fratris nostri obstinatio dura. Ibid. p. 329. And it would be
marked by the Jesuit and his A. C. that still it is Stephani fratris nostri,
and not Capitis, or summi Pastoris nostri.
And after this he charge him with Obstinacy and Presumption. I hope this is
plain enough to show, that S. Cyprian had no great Opinion of the Roman
Infallibility: Or if he had it, when he writ to Cornelius; certainly he had
changed it, when he wrote against Stephen. But I think it was no change; and
that when he wrote to Cornelius, it was Rhetoric, and no more.

Rebaptization S. Cyprian himself was in the wrong Opinion, and Pope Stephen in
the right, I easily grant that; but yet that Error of his takes not off his
judgment, what he thought of the Papal or Roman Infallibility in those times.
For though afterward Caranza in Coucil. Carthag. sub Cornel. fine.
S. Cyprian's Opinion was condemned in a Council at Rome under Cornelius, and
after that by Pope Stephen; and after both, in the first Can. 1.
Council of Carthage: yet no one word is there in that Council, which mentions
this as an Error, That he thought Pope Stephen might Err in the Faith, while
he proclaimed he did so. In which, though the particular Censure which he
passed on Pope Stephen was erroneous (for Stephen erred not in that) yet the
General which results from it (namely, that for all his being in the Popedom,
he might err) is most true.

Bellarmine cites is Saint Jerome: Attamen scito Romanam fidem Apostolica voce
laudat^m ejusmodi praestigias non recipere, etiamsi Angelus aliter an^^nciet,
quam semel praedicatum est, Pauli Authoritate munitam non posse mutari. S.
Hieron. L. 3. Apol. contra Ruffinum. Tom. 2. Edit. Paris. 1534. sol. 84. K.
Peradventure it is here to be read (and jam st) For so the place is more plain,
and more strong, but the Answer is the same.
His words are: The Roman Faith commended by the Apostle, admits not such
Praestigia's, Deceits, and Delusions into it, though an Angel should preach it
otherwise then it was preached at first, (and) being armed and fenced by S.
Paul's Authority, cannot be changed. Where first I will not doubt, but that S.
Jerome speaks here of Faith; for the Praestigiae here mentioned, are afterward
more plainly expressed; for he tells us after, Deinde ut Epistolas contra te ad
Crientem mitteret, and cauterium tibi Harescos in^reret. Diceretque libros
Originis (...), a te translatos, and simplici Ecclesiae Romanae ple^i traditos,
ut fidei veritatem quam ab Apostolo didicerant, per te perderent. S. Hieron.
ibid. fol. 85. K.
That the Bishop of Rome had sent Letters into the East, and charged Heresy
upon Ruffinus: And farther, that Origen's Books (...) were translated by him,
and delivered to the simple people of the Church of Rome, that by his means
they might loose the verity of the Faith, which they had learned from the
Apostle. Therefore the Praestigiae beforementioned, were the cunning illusions
of Ruffinus, putting Origen's Book under the Martyr Pamphilus his name, that so
he might bring in Heresy the more cunningly under a name of Credit, and the
more easily pervert the peoples Faith. So, of the Faith he speaks. And
secondly, I shall as easily confess that S. Jerome's speech is most true, but I
cannot admit the Cardinal's sense of it: for he imposes upon the word Fides.
For by Romana Fides, the Roman Faith, he will understand the particular Church
of Rome; which is as much as to say, Romanos Fideles, the Faithful of that
Church: And that no wily delusions, or cousenage in matter of Faith can be
imposed upon them. Now hereupon I return to that of S. Cyprian: If Fides Romana
must signify Fideles Romanos, why may not Perfidia before signife Perfidos?
Especially since these two words are commonly used by these Writers, as Terms
Qui cum Fidei dux esse non potuit, perfidiae existat. S. Cyprian. L. 1. Epist.
7. Fidem perfidi, etc. Ibid.

Facti sunt ex Ovibus Vulpes, ex ^idelibus perfidi. Optatus. L. 7. Quomodo iis
pro^it q^^m baptizantur Parentum Fides, quorum iis non potest obesse perfidia.
S. Aug. Epist. 23. Quanto potius Fides aliena potest consulere parvulo, cui sua
perfidia, etc. S. Aug. L. 3. de lib. Arbit. c. 23.


Opposite: And therefore by the Law of Opposition may interpret each other
proportionably. So with these great Masters, with whom it is almost grown to be,
Quod volumus, rectum est, what we please, shall be the Authors meaning:
Perfidia must signify absolutely Error in Faith, Misbelief; but Fides must
relate to the Persons, and signify the Faithful of the Roman Church. And now I
conceive my Answer will proceed with a great deal of Reason. For Romana Fides,
the Roman Faith, as it was commended by the Apostle (of which S. Jerome speaks)
is one thing; and the Particular Roman Church, of which the Cardinal speaks, is
another. The Faith indeed admits not Praestigias, wily delusions into it; if it
did, it could not be the whole and undefiled Faith of Christ, which they
learned from the Apostle; and which is so fenced by Apostolical Authority, as
that it cannot be changed, though an Angel should preach the contrary. But the
Particular Church of Rome has admitted Praestigias, diverse crafty Conveyances
into the Faith, and is not fenced, as the Faith it self is. And therefore
though an Angel cannot contrary that, yet the bad Angel has sowed Tares in
this. By which means Romana Fides, though it be now the same it was for the
words of the Creed; yet it is not the same for the sense of it: nor for the
super and praeter-structures built upon it, or joined unto it. So the Roman
Faith, that is, the Faith which S. Paul taught the Romans, and after commended
in them, was all one with the Catholic Faith of Christ. For S. Paul taught no
other then that One; and this one can never be changed in, or from it self, by
Angel or Devil. But in men's hearts it may receive a change; and in particular
Churches it may receive a change; and in the particular Church of Rome it has
received a change. And ye see S. Hierome himself confesses, that the Pope
himself was afraid Ne fidei veritatem quam ab Apostolo didicerant, per te
perderent, ut supra.
ne perderent, lest by this Art of Ruffinus, the people might lose the verity
of the Faith. Now that which can be lost, can be changed: For usually Habits
begin to alter, before they be quite lost. And that which may be lost among the
People, may be lost among the Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy too, if they
look not to it, as it seems they after did not at Rome, though then they did.
Nay, at this time the whole Roman Church was in danger enough to swallow
Origen's Book, and all the Errors in it, coming under the name of Pamphilus:
And so S. Hierome himself expressly, and close upon the place cited by
Bellarmine. For he desires Muta titulum, and Romanam simplicitatem tanto
periculo libera. Ibid. fol. 84. K.
Ruffinus to change the Title of the Book (that Error may not be spread under
the specious name of Pamphilus) and so to free from danger the Roman
Simplicity. Where, by the way, Roman unerring Power now challenged, and Roman
Simplicity then feared, agree not very well together.

3 The third Father alleged by Bellarmine, is S. Vetus Roma ab antiquis
temporibus habet rectam Fidem, and semper eam retinet, sicut decet Urbtm, quae
toti Orbi praesidet, semper de Deo integram fidem habere. Greg. Naz. in Carmine
de vita sua. Ante medium. p. 9. Edit. Paris. 1609.
Gregory Nazianzen. And his words are: That Ancient Rome from of old has the
right Faith, and always holds it, as becomes the City, which is Governess over
the whole World, to have an entire Faith in, and concerning God. Now certainly
it became that City very well, to keep the Faith sound and entire. And having
the Government of a great part of the World then in her power, it became her so
much the more, as her Example thereby was the greater. And in S. Gregory
Nazianzen's time, Rome did certainly hold both rectam and integram Fidem, the
right, and the whole entire Faith of Christ. But there is nor Promise, nor
Prophecy in S. Gregory, that Rome shall ever so do. For his words are plain,
decet semper, it becomes that great City always to have, and to hold too,
integram Fidem, the entire Faith. But at the other semper, it is The words in
the Greek are, (...) Haec quidem fuit diu, and nunc adhuc est rectigrada.
(...), Est; So S. Gregory says; but of an (...), or a retinebit, he says
nothing: Nor is semper in the Text of Nazianzen.
retinet, that City from of old holds the right Faith yet: But he says not,
retinebit semper, that the City of Rome shall retain it ever, no more then it
shall ever retain the Empire of the World. Now it must be assured, that it
shall ever hold the entire Faith of Christ, before we can be assured, that that
particular Church can never Err, or be Infallible.

Cardinal names Cyrillus, and Ruffinus; but he neither tells us where, nor
cites their words. Yet I think I have found the most pregnant place in Petram
o^inor per agnominationem nihil aliud, quam inconcussam and firmissimam
Discipuli fidem vocavit. In qua, Ecclesia Christi ita fundata and firmata
esset, ut non laberetur, and esset inexpugnabilis inferorum portis, in
perpetuum manens. S. Cyril. Alex. Dial. de Trin. l. 4. p. 278. Paris^^s, An.
1604.
S. Cyril, and that makes clearly against him. For I find expressly these three
things. First, That the Church is Inexpugnable, and that the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it, but that it shall in perpetuum manner, remain
for ever. And this all Protestants grant. But this, That it shall not fall
away, does not secure it from all kinds of Error. Secondly, Bellarmine quotes
S. Cyril for the particular Roman Church; and S. Cyril speaks not of the Roman
at all, but of the Church of Christ, that is, the Catholic Church. Thirdly,
that the Foundation and firmness which the Church of Christ has, is placed not
in, or upon the Et ego dico tibi] i tuae Confessioni, qua mihi dixisti, Tu es
Christus, etc. Dion. Carthus. in S. Mat. 16. 18. Et super hanc Petram] i. Fidei
hujus firmitatem and sundamentum. Vel super hanc Petram quam confessus (...),
i. super M^ipsum Lapidem Angularem, etc. Ibid.
Person, much less the Successor of S. Peter* but upon the Et ego dico tibi] i
tuae Confessioni, qua mihi dixisti, Tu es Christus, etc. Dion. Carthus. in S.
Mat. 16. 18. Et super hanc Petram] i. Fidei hujus firmitatem and sundamentum.
Vel super hanc Petram quam confessus (...), i. super M^ipsum Lapidem Angularem,
etc. Ibid.
Faith, which by God's Spirit in him he so firmly professed: which is the
common received Opinion both of the Ancient Fathers, and the Protestants. Upon
this Rock, that is, upon this Faith, will I build my Church, S. Matthew. 16. So
S. Mat. 16. 18.
here is all the good he has gotten by S. Cyril, unless he can cite some other
place of S. Cyril, which I believe he cannot.

Ruffinus, the place which Bellarmine aims at, is in his Exposition upon the
Creed; and is quoted in part, the Bellar. L. 4. de Romans Pont. Cap. 3.. penult.
Chapter before. But when all his words shall be laid together, they will make
no more for Bellarmine and his Cause, then the former places have done. Illud
non importun^ commonendum puto, quod in diversis Ecclesiis aliqua in his verbis
inveniuntur adjecta. In Ecclesia tamen Urbis Romae hoc non deprebenditur
factum. Pro eo arbitror, quod neque Heresis u^^a illic sumpsit exordium, and
mos ibi servatur antiquus, eos qui gratiam Baptismi suscepturi sunt, publico,
id est, Fidelium populo audiente, Symbolum reddere: Et utique adjectionem unius
saltem Sermonis, eorum qui praecesserunt in Fide, non admittit auditus. In
caeteris autem Locis, quantum intelligi datur, propter nonnullos Haereticos
addita quaedam videntur, per quae novellae Doctrinae sensus crederetur excludi,
etc. Ruffin. in Exposit. Symbol. (ut habetur inter Opera S. Cypriani) Prae^at.
Expos.
Ruffinus his words then run thus: Before I come to the words of the Creed,
this I think sit to warn you of, that in diverse Churches some things are found
added to the words (of the Creed.) But in the Church of the City of Rome, this
is not found done: And as I think, it is, for that no Heresy did take its rise
or beginning there: And for that the Old Custom is there observed, namely, that
they which are to receive the grace of Baptism, do publicly repeat the Creed
in the hearing of the people, who would not admit such Additions. But in other
places (as far as I can understand) by reason of some Heretics, some things
were added, but such as were to exclude the sense of their Novel Doctrine. Now
these words make little for Bellarmine who cites them, and much against
Ruffinus that uttered them. They make little for Bellarmine. First, because
suppose Ruffinus his speech to be true, yet this will never follow: In Ruffinus
his time no Heresy had taken its beginning at Rome: therefore no Heresy has
had rooting there so many hundred years since. Secondly, Bellarmine takes upon
him there to prove, That the particular Church of Rome cannot Err. Now neither
can this be concluded out of Ruffinus his words. First, because (as I said
before) to argue from Non sumpsit, to Ergo sumere non potest: No Heresy has
yet begun there; therefore none can begin there, or spring thence, is an
Argument drawn ab Actu ad Potentiam negative, from the Act to the Power of
Being; which every Novice in Learning can tell proceeds not Negatively. And
common reason tells every man, it is no consequence to say, Such a thing is not,
or has not been, therefore it cannot be. Secondly, because though it were
true, that no Heresy at all did ever take its beginning at Rome, yet that can
never prove, that the particular Church of Rome can never Err (which is the
thing in Question.) For suppose that no Heresy did ever begin there, yet if
any that began elsewhere were admitted into that Church, it is as full a proof,
that that Church can Err, as if the Heresy had been hatched in that Nest. For
that Church erres, which admits an Heresy in it, as well as that which
broaches it. Now Ruffinus says no more of the Roman Church, then non sumpsit
exordium, no Heresy took its beginning there; but that denies not, but that
some Heretical Taint might get in there: And it is more then manifest, that the
most famous Heresies, in their several times, made their abode even at Rome.
And it is observable too, that Bellarmine cites no more of Ruffinus his words
then these ( In Ecclesia Urbis Romae neque Haeresis ulla sumpsit exordium, and
mos ibi servatur antiquus) as if this were an entire speech, whereas it comes
in but as a Reason given of the speech precedent; and as if Ruffinus made the
Church of Rome the great Observer of the Customs of the Church, whereas he
speaks but of one particular Custom of reciting the Creed before Baptism. But
after all this, I pray did no Heresy ever begin at Rome? Where did Novatianism
begin? At Rome sure. For Baron. ^b. 2. A^. 254. Number. 62.
Baronius, Pamel. in Cyprian. Epist. 41. and 73.
Pamelius, and Petavius in Epiphan. Haeres. 59.
Petavius, do all dispute the point, whether that Sect was denominated from
Novatianus the Roman Priest, or Novatus the African Bishop; and they conclude
for Novatian. He then that gave that Name, is in all right the Founder, and
Rome the Nest of that Heresy; and there it continued with a Succession Onuph.
in Notis ad Plat. in vita Cornelii.
of Bishops from Cornelius to Caelestine, which is near upon two hundred years.
Nay, could Ruffinus himself be ignorant that some Heresy began at Rome? No
sure. For in this I must challenge him either for his weak memory, or his
wilful error. For Ruffinus had not only read Eusebius his History, but had
been at the pains to translate him. Now Haeretici alii in morem venenatorum
serpentum in Asiam and Phrygiam irre^serunt, (...), quorum Dux Florinus. Eusebius.
L. 5. cap. 14. And in Ruffinus his Translation, c. 15. And then afterward, c.
19. and 20. (...) etc. Now these taught that God was the Author of Sin.
Eusebius says plainly, that some Heretics spread their venom in Asia, some in
Phrygia, and others grew at Rome; and Florinus was the Ringleader of them. And
more clearly after. Irenaeus (says he) directed diverse Epistles against this
Florinus, and his Fellow Blastus, and condemns them of such Heresies as threw
them and their Followers into great Impiety, etc. Those at Rome corrupting the
sound Doctrine of the Church. Therefore most manifest it is, that some Heresy
had its rise and beginning at Rome. But to leave this slip of Ruffinus, most
evident it is, that Ruffinus neither did, nor could account the particular
Church of Rome Infallible: for if he had esteemed so of it, he would not have
dissented from it in so main a Point, as is the Canon of the Scripture, as he
plainly does. Ruff. in Exposit. Symb. p. 188. In which reckoning he plainly
agrees with the Church of England. Art. 6
For reckoning up the Canonical Books, he most manifestly dissents from the
Roman Church. Therefore either Ruffinus did not think the Church of Rome was
Infallible, or else the Church of Rome at this day reckons up more Books within
the Canon, then heretofore she did. If she do, then she is changed in a main
Point of Faith, the Canon of Scripture, and is absolutely convinced not to be
Infallible: for if she were right in her reckoning then, she is wrong now; and
if she be right now, she was wrong then: and if she do not reckon more now then
she did when Ruffinus lived, then he reckons fewer then she, and so dissents
from her; which doubtless he durst not have done, had he thought her judgment
Infallible. Yea, and he sets this mark upon his Dissent besides, Novi and
Veteris Testamenti Volumina, etc. sicut ex Patrum Monumentis accepimus. Ruff.
in Symb. p. 188. et haec sunt quae Patres intra Canonem concluserunt. Et ex
quibus Fidei ^ostrae Assertiones constare voluerunt. Ib. p. 189.
That he reckons up the Books of the Canon just so, and no otherwise, then as
he received them out of the Monuments of the Forefathers; and out of which the
Assertions of our Faith are to be taken. Last of all, had this place of
Ruffinus any strength for the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, yet there is
very little reason that the Pope and his Clergy should take any Benefit by it.
For Si Episcopi Romani est, stulte facis ab eo Exemplar Epistolae petere, cui
missa non est, etc. Vade potius Romam, and praesens apud eum expostula, cur
tibi and absenti and innocenti fecerit injuriam. Primum, ut non reciperet
Expositionem Fidei tuae, quam omnis (ut scribis) Italia comprobavit, etc.
Deinde, ut Canterium tibi Haereseos, dum nescis, inureret. S. Hieron. Apol. 3.
advers. Ruffin. sol. 85. K.
S. Hierome tells us, That when Ruffinus was angry, with him for an Epistle
which he writ not, he plainly sent him to the Bishop of Rome, and bid him
exposiulate with him for the Contumely put upon him, in that he received not
his Exposition of the Faith, which, said he, all Italy approved: And in that he
branded him also, dum nesciret ( behind his back) with Heresy. Now if the
Pope, which then was, rejected this Exposition of the Creed made by Ruffinus,
and branded him besides with Heresy; his Sentence against Ruffinus was just,
or unjust: If unjust, then the Pope erred about a matter of Faith; and so
neither he, nor the Church of Rome, Infallible: If just, then the Church of
Rome labors to defend her self by his Pen, which is judged Heretical by her
self. So whether it were just, or unjust, the Church of Rome is driven to a
hard strait, when she must beg help of him whom she branded with Heresy, and
out of that Tract which she her self rejected; and so uphold her Infall ibility
by the judgment of a man, who in her judgment had erred so foully: Nor may she
by any Quum quis se velle personas testium post publicationem repellere fuerit
protestatus, Si quid pro ipso dixerint, iis non creditur. Extra. Tex. and ibi
Gloss. c. Praesentium 31. de Testibus.
Law take benefit of a Testimony, which her self has defamed, and protested
against.

Bellarmine is pleased to name s^x or Lib. 4. c. 3.. De altero ergo.
seven Popes, which, he says, are all of this Opinion. But of Popes Opinions,
he says, That Quae et si ab Haereticis contemnentur. L. 4. c. 4.. Addo etiam.
these Testimonies will be contemned by the Heretics. Good words, I pray. I
know whom the Cardinal means by Heretics very well: But the best is, his Call
cannot make them so. Nor shall I easily contemn seven Ancient Bishops of Rome
concurring in Opinion, if apparent Verity in the thing it self do not force me
to dissent; and in that case I shall do it without contempt too. This only I
will say, Nemini in sua causa credendum, nisi conformiter ad Legem Divinam,
Naturalem and Canonicam ^oquatur. So Jo. Gerson, and the Doctors of Paris,
cited in Lib. Anon. de Ecclesiastica and Politica Potestate. c. 16. Ed. Paris.
1612. Now these Popes do not speak here conformably to these Laws.
That seven Popes concurring in Opinion, shall have less weight with me in
their own Cause, then any other seven of the more Ancient Fathers. Indeed could
I swallow Lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3. in initio.
Bellarmine's Opinion, That the Pope's Judgment is Infallible, I would then
submit without any more a^o. But that will never down with me, unless I live
till I dote, which I hope in God I shall not.

Bellarmine brings not to prove, that the particular Church of Rome cannot err
in, or from the Faith. And of what force these are to sway any judgment, I
submit to all indifferent Readers. And having thus examined Bellarmines Proofs,
That the particular Church of Rome cannot err in Faith; I now return to A. C.
and the Jesuit, and A. C. p. 42.
tell them, that no Jesuit, or any other, is ever able to prove any particular
Church Infallible.

particular Church of Rome, and the Pope with it, erred it has; and therefore
may err. Erred I say it has in the Worship of Images, and in altering
Christ's Institution in the Blessed Sacrament, by taking away the Cup from the
People; and diverse other particulars, as shall appear at. 33. Consid. 7. Number.
5. and 12.
after. And as for the Ground which is presumed to secure this Church from
Error, it is very remarkable how the Romana Ecclesia Particularis non potest
errare, persistente Romae Apostolica sede. Propositio haec est verissima, and
fortasse tam vera quam illa prima de Pontifi^e. ^. 4 de Romans Pont. c. 4.. 2.
Edit. ^ugdun. 1596. And that first Proposition is this: Summus Pontifex ^^m
totam Ecclesiam docet, in ^is quae ad sidem pertinent ^ullo casu errare potest.
Ibid. c. 3.. 1.
Learned Cardinal speaks in this Case. For he tells us, that this Proposition [
So long as S. Peter's Chair is at Rome, that particular Church cannot err in
the Faith] is verissima, most true; and yet in the very next words, it is
Fortasse tam vera, peradventure as true as the former (that is) That the Pope
when he teaches the whole Church in those things which belong to the Faith,
cannot err in any case. What? is that Proposition most true? And yet is it but
at a peradventure it is as true as this? Is it possible any thing should be
absolutely most true; and yet under a peradventure that it is but as true as
another Truth? But here without all Peradventure neither Proposition is true.
And then indeed Bellarmine may say without a Fortasse, That this Proposition,
The particular Church of Rome cannot err, so long as the Sea Apostolic is
there, is as true as this: The Pope cannot err while he teaches the whole
Church in those things which belong to the Faith. For neither of them is true.
But he cannot say that either of them is verissima, most true, when neither of
them has Truth.

Secondly, if the particular Church of Rome be Infallible, and can neither err
in the Faith, nor fall from it, then it is because the Sea Apostolic cannot be
transferred from Rome, but must ever, to the Consummation of the World, remain
there, and keep that particular Church from erring. Now to this what says
Bellarmine? What? Why he tells us, Pia and probabilissima Sententia est,
Cathedram Petri non posse separari, a Roma, and proiude Romanam Ecclesiam
absolute non posse errare, vel deficere. ^. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 4.. Quod
nihilominus.
That it is a pious, and most probable Opinion to think so. And he reckons four
Probabilities, that it shall never be removed from Rome. And I will not deny,
but some of them are fair Probabilities; but yet they are but Probabilities,
and so unable to convince any man. Why but then, what if a man cannot think as
Bellarmine does, but that enforced by the light of his Understanding, he must
think the quite contrary to this, which Bellarmine thinks pious, and so
probable? What then? Why then Contraria sententia nec est Haeretica, nec
manifest erronea. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 4.. At secundum.
Bellarmine himself tells you, that the quite contrary Proposition to this,
namely, That S. Peter's Chair may be severed from Rome, and that then that
particular Church may err, is neither Heretical, nor manifestly Erroneous. So
then, by Bellarmine's own Confession, I am no Heretic, nor in any manifest
error, if I say (as indeed I do, and think it too) that it is possible for S.
Peter's Chair to be carried from Rome, and that then at least, by his own
Argument, that Church may err.

A. C. A. C. p. 42.
If that Lady desired to rely upon a particular Infallible Church, it is not to
be found on earth. Rome has not that gift, nor her Bishop neither. And
Bellarmine (who I think was as able as any Champion that Church has) dares not
say, it is either Heresy, or a manifest error, to say, That the Apostolic Sea
may be removed thence, and that Church not only err in Faith, but also fall
quite away from it. Now I, for my part, have not ignorance enough in me to
believe, that that Church which may Apostatize at some one time, may not err
at another; especially since both her erring and failing may arise from other
Causes besides that which is mentioned by the Cardinal. And if it may err,
it is not Infallible.


F. The Question was, Which was that Church? A Friend of the Ladies would needs
defend, That not only the Roman, but also the Greek Church was right.


B. Honorable Personage answered, I was not by to hear. But I presume, he was
so far from granting, that only the Roman Church was right, as that he did not
grant it right: and that he took on him no other defense of the poor Greek
Church, then was according to truth.


F. I told him, That the Greek Church had plainly changed, and taught false in
a Point of Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost, and that I had heard say, that
even his Majesty should say, That the Greek Church having erred against the
Holy Ghost, had lost the Holy Ghost.


B. His Majesty, to relate him upon Hearsay. My intelligence serves me not to
tell you what His Majesty said: But if he said it not, you have been too
credulous to believe, and too sudden to report it. Princes deserve, and were
wont to have more respect then so. If His Majesty did say it, there is Truth in
the speech; the Error is yours only, by mistaking what is meant by losing the
Holy Ghost. For a particular Church may be said to lose the Holy Ghost two
ways, or in two degrees. 1 The one, when it loses such special assistance of
that Blessed Spirit, as preserves it from all dangerous Errors and sins, and
the temporal punishment which is due unto them: And in this sense the Greek
Church did perhaps lose the Holy Ghost: for they erred against him, they sinned
against God. And for this, or other sins, they were delivered into another
Babylonish Captivity under the Turk, in which they yet are; and from which, God
in his mercy deliver them. But this is rather to be called an Error circa
Spiritum Sanctum, about the Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost, then an Error
against the Holy Ghost. 2 The other is, when it loses not only this assistance,
but all assistance ad hoc, to this, that they may remain any longer a true
Church; and so, Corinth and Ephesus, and diverse other Churches have lost the
Holy Ghost; but in this sense the whole Greek Church lost not the Holy Ghost.
For they continue a true Church in the main substance, to and at this day,
though Erroneous in this Point which you mention, and perhaps in some other too.


F. The Ladies Friend not knowing what to answer, called in the Bishop, who
sitting down first, excused himself as one unprovided, and not much studied in
Controversies; and desiring that in case he should fail, yet the Protestant
Cause might not be thought ill of.


B. Modesty, for the most part, there I leave it. Yet this it may be fit others
should know, that I had no information where the other Conferences brake off;
no instruction at all what should be the ground of this third Conference, nor
the full time of four and twenty hours to bethink my self. And this I take upon
my Credit is most true: whereas you make the sifting of these, and the like
Questions, to the very Bran, your daily work, and came thoroughly furnished to
the business, and might so lead on the Controversy to what your self pleased,
and I was to follow as I could. De util. Credendi. c. 2.
S. Augustine said once, Scio me invalidum esse, I know I am weak; and yet he
made good his Cause. And so perhaps may I against you. And in that I preferred
the Cause before my particular Credit; that which I did was with modesty, and
according to Reason. For there is no reason the weight of this whole Cause
should rest upon any one particular man: And great reason, that the personal
defects of any man should press himself, but not the Cause. Neither did I enter
upon this service, out of any forwardness of my own, but commanded to it by
Supreme Authority.


F. It having an hundred better Scholars to maintain it then he. To which I
said, there were a thousand better Scholars then I to maintain the Catholic
Cause.


B. Protestants Cause, as to think, that they had but an hundred better then my
self to maintain it. That which has an hundred, may have as many more, as it
pleases God to give, and more then you. And I shall ever be glad, that the
Church of England (which, at this time, if my memory reflect not amiss, I
named) may have far more able Defendants then my self. I shall never envy them,
but rejoice for her. And I make no question, but that if I had named a
thousand, you would have multiplied yours into ten thousand, for the Catholic
Cause (as you call it.) And this confidence of yours has ever been fuller of
noise then proof. But you proceed.


F. Then the Question about the Greek Church being proposed, I said as before,
that it had erred.


B. Question about the Greek Church was proposed. But after you had with
confidence enough not spared to say, That what I would not acknowledge in this
Cause, you would wring and extort from me; then indeed you said as before, that
it had erred: And this no man denied. But every Error denies not Christ, the
Foundation; or makes Christ deny it, or thrust it from the Foundation.


F. The Bishop said, That the Error was not in Point Fundamental.


B. as the Greeks expressed themselves) it was a Question not simply
Fundamental. I know, and acknowledge that Error of denying the Procession of
the Holy Ghost from the Son, to be a grievous Error in Divinity. And sure it
would have grated the Foundation, if they had so denied the Procession of the
Holy Ghost from the Son, as that they had made an inequality between the
Persons. But since their form of speech is, Non ex Filio, sed Spiritum Filii
esse dicimus. Damascen* L. 1. Fid. Orth. c. 11. Et Patris per Filium. Ibid.
That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the Son, and is the Spirit of
the Son, without making any difference in the Consubstantiality of the Persons;
I dare not deny them to be a true Church for this; though I confess them an
erroneous Church in this particular.

a Filio, and per Filium, in the sense of the Greek Church, was but a Question
in modo loquendi, in manner of speech; Pluralitas in Voce, salvat a unitate in
re, non repugnat unitati Fidei. Durand. ^^b. 3. d. 25. ^. 2.
and therefore not Fundamental, is evident. Magist. 1. Sent. d. 11. D. Sa^e
sciend^m est, q o ^ lic t in praesenti Articulo a nobis Graeci verbo
discordent, tamen sensu non differ^nt, etc. Bandinus L. 1. de Tri^. d. 11. and
Bonavent. in 1 Sent. d. 11. A. 1. q. 1.. 12. Licet Graecis in^e^sissimus, qu^m
dixit Graecos ob^icere curiositatem Romany, addendo ( Filioque) Quia sine
hujus Articuli prosessione salus er at; non Respondet ^^gando salutem esse, sed
dicit tan^um opportunam fuisse Determinationem propter periculum. Et postea,.
1^. Sunt qui volunt susti^ere opinionem Graecorum, and Latinorum, distinguendo
duplicem modum Procedendi. Se^ forte si duo sapie^tes, unus Graecus, alter
Latinus, uterque verus amato^ Veritatis, and non propriae dictionis, etc. de
hac vis^ contrarietate disquirerent, pateret utique tandem ipsam Contrarietatem
non esse veraciter realem, sl^^t est Vocalis. Scotus in 1. Sent. d. 11. q. 1.
Antiquorum Graecorum a Latinis discrepa^tia in voce poti^s est, and* modo
explicandi Emanationem Sp. S. quam in ipsa re, etc. Jodocus Clictoveus in
Damasc. ^. 1. Fid. Orth. c. 11. Et quidam ex Graecis co^cedunt, quod sit a
Filio, vel ab ^o profluat. Thom. p. 1. q. 36. A. 2. C. Et Thomas ipse dicit,
Sp. S. procedere mediate a Filio. Ib. A. 3. ad 1. saltem ratione Personarum
Spirantium. Respond^^ cum Bestarione, and Gennadio, Damascenum non negasse Sp.
S. procedere ex Filio, quod ^d rem attinet, qu^^ dixerit Spiritum esse Imaginem
Filii, and per Filium, sed existimasse tutius dici per Filium, qud^n ex Filio,
quantum ad modum loquen^i, etc. Bellarm. L. 2. de Christo, c. 27.. Respondeo
igitur. Et Tollet. in S. John 15. Ar. 25. and Lutheran. Resp. ad Resp. 2.
Jeremiae Patriarchae.
The Master and his Scholars agree upon it. The Greeks (says he) confess the
Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the Son, with the Apostle, Galat. 4. and the
Spirit of Truth, S. John 16. And since Non est aliud, it is not another thing
to say; The Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Father, and the Son, then that he
is, or proceeds from the Father, and the Son; in this they seem to agree with
us in eandem Fidei sententiam, upon the same Sentence of Faith, though they
differ in words. Now in this cause, where the words differ, but the Sentence of
Faith is the same, Eadem penitus Sententia, ubi supra, Clictov.
penitus eadem, even altogether the same, Can the Point be Fundamental? You may
make them no Church (as Bellarm. 4. de Notis Eccl. cap. 8.. Quod autem apud
Graecos.
Bellarmine does) and so deny them Salvation, which cannot be had out of the
true Church; but I for my part dare not so do. And Rome in this particular
should be more moderate, if it be but because this Article ( Filioque) was
added to the Creed by her self. And it is hard to add, and Anathematize too.

Heresy, in foundation of faith; much less a Church; least of all so ample and
large a Church as the Greek, especially so, as to make them no Church. Heaven
Gates were not so easily shut against multitudes, when S. Peter wore the Keys
at his own Girdle. And it is good counsel which Lib. 3. cont. Haeres. fol. 93.
A. ut videant ^i, qui sacile de Haeresi pronuntiant, quam facile etiam ipsi
errent: Et intelligant, non esse tam leviter de Haeresi censendum, etc. In
verbo [ Beatitudo.]
Alphonsus a Castro, one of your own, gives: Let them consider that pronounce
easily of Heresy, how easy it is for themselves to err. Or if you will
pronounce, consider what it is that separates from the Church simply, and not
in part only. I must needs profess, that I wish heartily, (as well as Junius
Animad in Bellar. cont. 2. L. 3. c. 23.
others) that those distressed men, whose Cross is heavy already, had been more
plainly and moderately dealt withal, though they think a diverse thing from us,
then they have been by the Church of Rome. But hereupon you say you were forced:


F. Whereupon I was forced to repeat what I had formerly brought against D.
White, concerning Points Fundamental.


B. White, they are by him formerly answered. The first thing you did, was the
F. First righting the Sentence of S. Austine: Fere^dus est Disputator errans,
etc. Here A. C. p. 44. tells us very learnedly, that my corrupt Copy has
righting instead of reading the Sentence of S. Austine. Whereas I here use the
word righting, not as it is opposed to reading (as any man may discern A. C.
palpably mistakes) but for doing right to S. Austine. And if I had meant it for
writing, I should not have spelled it so.
righting of S. Augustine; which Sentence I do not at all remember was so much
as named in the Conference, much less was it stood upon, and then righted by
you. Another place of S. Augustine indeed was (which you omit;) but it comes
after, about Tradition, to which I remit it. But now you tell us of a great
Proof made out of this By which is proved, That all Points defined by the
Church are Fundamental.
place: For these words of yours contain two Propositions: One, That all Points
defined by the Church are Fundamental: The other, That this is proved out of
this place of S. Augustine.

That all Points defined by the Church are fundamental: It was not the least
means, by which Rome grew to her Greatness, to blast every Opposer she had with
the Name of Heretic, or Schismatic; for this served to shrivel the Credit of
the persons. And the persons once brought into contempt and ignominy, all the
good they desired in the Church, fell to dust, for want of Creditable Persons
to back and support it. To make this proceeding good in these later years, this
course (it seems) was taken. The School, that must maintain (and so they do)
That all Points defined by the Church, are thereby Your own word.
Fundamental, Inconcussa side ab omnibus. Thom. 2. 2ae q. 1. Art. 10. C.
necessary to be believed, Scotus 1. Sent. a. 11. q. 1.
of the substance of the Faith; and that, though it be determined quite
Eccles^^ voces etiam extra Scripturam. Stap. ^elect. Con. 4. q. 1. Ar. 3. Quae
maturo judicio definivit, etc. Solidum est, and etiamsi null^ Scripturarum, aut
evidenti, aut probabili testimony confirmaretur. Ibid.
Extra Scripturam. And then Et penes Cercopes Victoria sit, Greg. Naz. de
Disseren. vitae. Cercopes 1. Astutos, and veteratori^ improbitatis Episcopos,
qui artibus suis ac dolis omnia Concilia perturbabant. Schol. ib.
leave the wise and active Heads to take order, that there be strength enough
ready to determine what is fittest for them.

Church in general, and a General Council, which is but her Representation for
determinations of the Faith; though I be very slow in sifting or opposing what
is concluded by Lawful, General, and consenting Authority; though I give as
much as can justly be given to the Definitions of Councels truly General: Nay,
suppose I should grant (which I do not) That General Councels cannot err; yet
this cannot down with me, That all Points even so defined are Fundamental. For
Deductions are not prime and native Principles; nor are Superstructures
Foundations. That which is a Foundation for all, cannot be one, and another, to
different Christians in regard of it self; for then it could be no common Rule
for any, nor could the Souls of men rest upon a shaking foundation. No: If it
be a true foundation, it must be common to all, and firm under all; in which
sense the Articles of Christian Faith are fundamental. And Quum enim una and
eadem fides sit, neque is qui multum de ipsa dicere potest, plusqu^m oportet,
dicit; neque qui parum, ipsam imminuit. Iren. L. 1. advers. Haeres. c. 3.
Irenaeus lays this for a ground, That the whole Church (howsoever dispersed in
place) speaks this with one mouth. He, which among the Guides of the Church is
best able to speak, utters no more then this; and less then this, the most
simple does not utter. Therefore the Creed (of which he speaks) is a common, is
a constant Foundation. And an Explicit Faith must be of this, in them which
have the use of Reason; for both Guides, and simple people, all the Church
utter this.

Church, which are but Deductions out of this: which (suppose them deduced
right) move far from the foundation; without which Deductions explicitly
believed, many millions of Christians go to Heaven; and cannot therefore be
fundamental in the Faith. True Deductions from the Article may require
necessary belief, in them which are able, and do go along with them from the
Principle to the Conclusion. But I do not see, either that the Learned do make
them necessary to all, or any reason why they should. Therefore they cannot be
fundamental; and yet to some men's Salvation they are necessary.

fundamental in the Faith of Christ, is a Rock immovable, and can never be
varied. Never Resolutio Occhami est, quod nec tota Ecclesia, nec Concilium
Generale, nec summus Ponti^ex potest facere Articulum, quod non ^uit Articulus.
Sed in dubiis Propositionibus potest Ecclesia determinare, an sint Catholicae,
etc. Tamen sic determinando non facit quod sint Catholicae, quum prius essent
ante Ecclesie Determinationem, etc. Almain. in 3. D 25. Q. 1.
. Therefore, if it be fundamental after the Church has defined it, it was
fundamental before the Definition, else it is moveable; and then no Christian
has where to rest. And if it be immovable, as Regul^ Fidei una omnino est,
sola illa immobilis, and irreformabilis. Tertul. de Virg. v^l. cap. 1. In ^ac
^ide, etc. Nihil transmutar^, etc. Athan. Epist. ad Jovin. de Fide.
indeed it is, no Decree of a Council, be it never so General, can alter
immovable Verities, no more then it can change immovable Natures. Therefore
if the Church in a Council define any thing, the thing defined is not
fundamental, because the Church has defined it; nor can be made so by the
Definition of the Church, if it be not so in it self. For if the Church had
this power, she might make a new Article of the Faith, Oceham. Almain. in 3.
Sent. D. 25. q. 1
which the Learned among your selves deny: For the Articles of the Faith cannot
increase in substance, but only in Explication Thom. 2. 2. q. 1. Ar. 7. C.
. And for this, I Will be judged by Bellarmine, Fides Divina non ideo habet
certitadinem, quia toti Ecclesiae communis est: sed quia nititur Authoritate
Dei, qui nec falli, nec fallere potest, quum sit ipsa Veritas. L. 3. de Justif.
c. 3.. Quod vero Concilium. Probatio Ecclesiae facit ut omnibus innotes^at
Objectum (Fidei Divinae) esse revelatum a Deo, and propter hoc certum and
indubitatum; non autem tribuit firmitatem verbo Dei aliquid revelantis. Ibid..
At inquit.
who disputing against Amb. Catharinus about the certainty of Faith, tells us,
That Divine Faith has not its certainty, because it is Catholic, i. common to
the whole Church; but because it builds on the Authority of God, who is Truth
it self, and can neither deceive, nor be deceived. And he adds, That the
Probation of the Church can make it known to all, that the Object of Divine
Faith is revealed from God, and therefore certain, and not to be doubted; but
the Church can add no certainty, no firmness to the Word of God revealing it.

School; for Scotus in 1. Sent. D. 11. q. 1.
Scotus professes it in this very particular of the Greek Church: If there be
(says he) a true real difference between the Greeks and the Latins, about the
Point of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, then either they or we be vere
Haeretici, truly and indeed Heretics. And he speaks this of the old Greeks,
long before any Decision of the Church in this Controversy: For his instance
is in S. Basil, and Greg. Nazianz. on the one side, and S. Hierome, Augustine,
and Ambrose, on the other. And who dares call any of these Heretics? is his
challenge. I deny not, but that Scotus adds there, That howsoever this was
before, yet ex quo, from the time that the Catholic Church declared it, it is
to be held as of the substance of Faith. But this cannot stand with his former
Principle, if he intend by it, That whatsoever the Church defines, shall be
ipso facto, and for that Determinations sake Fundamental. For if before the
Determination (supposing the Difference real) some of those Worthies were truly
Heretics, (as he confesses) then somewhat made them so. And that could not be
the Decree of the Church, which then was not: Therefore it must be somewhat
really false, that made them so; and fundamentally false, if it made them
Heretics against the Foundation. But Scotus was wiser then to intend this. It
may be, he saw the stream too strong for him to swim against, therefore he went
on with the Doctrine of the Time, That the Churches Sentence is of the
substance of Faith; but meant not to betray the truth: For he goes no farther
then Ecclesia declaravit, since the Church has declared it, which is the word
that is used by diverse Bellarm. L. 2. d^ Conc. Auth c. 12. Concilia cun
definiunt, non faciunt aliquid esse infallibilis veritatis, sed declarant.
Explicare, Bonavent. in 1. d. 11. A. 1. q. 1. ad finem. Explanare, declarare.
Tho. 1. q. 36. A. 2. ad. 2. and 2. 2. q. 1. A. 10. ad. 1.

Quid unquam aliud (Ecclesia) Conciliorum decr^tis enisa est, nisi ut quod
antea simplicite^ Credebatur, hoc idem posted diligentius crederetur. Vin. Lyr.
cont. ^^r. c. 32.


.

Sent. 1. D. 11
Master teaches, and the Alb. Mag. in 1. Sent. D. 11. Art. 7.
Scholars too, That every thing which belongs to the Exposition or Declaration
of another, intus est, is not another contrary thing, but is contained within
the Bowels and nature of that which is interpreted: from which, if the
Declaration depart, it is faulty and erroneous; because instead of declaring,
it gives another, and contrary Hoc semper, nec quicquam praeterea. Vin. Lyr. c.
32.
sense. Therefore, when the Church declares any thing in a Council, either that
which she declares, was intus, or extra; in the nature and verity of the thing,
or out of it. If it were extra, without the nature of the thing declared, then
the Declaration of the thing is false, and so, far from being fundamental in
the Faith In nova Haeresi Veritas prius erat de Fide, et si non ita declarata.
Scotus in 1. D. 11. q. 1. in fine. Haeretici multa quae erant implicita fidei
nostrae, compulerunt explicare. Bonavent. in 1. D. 11. A. 1. ^. 1. ad finem.
Tho. 1. q. 36. A. 2. ad. 2. Quamvis Apostolica Seeds, aut Generale Concilium de
Haeresi censere possit, no^ tamen ide^ Assertio aliqua erit Haeresis, quia
Ecclesia definivit, sed quia Fidei Catholic^ repug^at. Ecclesia siquidem sua
definitione non facit talem Assertionem esse Haeresin, quam etiamsi ipsa non
definivisset, esset Haeresis; sed id efficit ut pateat, etc. Alphon. a Castro*
L. 1. Advers. Haeres. c. 8. ^ol. ^1. D.
. If it were intus, within the compass and nature of the thing, though not open
and apparent to every eye; then the Declaration is true, but not otherwise
fundamental, then the thing is which is declared: for that which is intus,
cannot be larger or deeper then that in which it is; if it were, it could not
be intus. Therefore nothing is simply fundamental, because the Church declares
it, but because it is so in the nature of the thing, which the Church declares.

Declaration of the Church makes it Fundamental, quoad nos, in respect of us;
for it does not that neither: For no respect to us can vary the Foundation. The
Churches Declaration can bind us to Peace, and External Obedience, where there
is not express Letter of Scripture, and sense agreed on; but it cannot make any
thing fundamental to us, that is not so in its own Nature. For if the Church
can so add, that it can by a Declaration make a thing to be fundamental in the
Faith, that was not; then it can take a thing away from the foundation, and
make it by declaring, not to be Fundamental; which all men grant, no power of
the Church can do. Ecclesia non amputat necessaria, non apponit supers^^a. Vin.
Lyr. c. 32.
For the power of adding any thing contrary, and of detracting any thing
necessary, are alike forbidden Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
, and alike denied. Now nothing is more apparent, then this, to the eye of all
men, That the Church of Rome has determined, or declared, or defined (call it
what you will) very many * Thom. Supp. q. 6. A. 6. C.
things, that are not in their own nature fundamental; and therefore neither
are, nor can be made so by her adjudging them. Now to all this discourse, that
the Church has not power to make any thing fundamental in the Faith, that
intrinsecally, and in its own nature is not such, A. C. is content to say
nothing.

That it is proved by this place of S. Augustine, That all points defined by
the Church are fundamental. You might have given me that place cited in the
Margin, and cased my pains to seek it; but it may be there was somewhat in
concealing it. For you do so extraordinarily right this place, that you were
loath (I think) any body should see how you wrong it. The place of S. Augustine
is this, against the Pelagians, about Remission of Original Sin in Infants:
August. Sermon. 14. de verb. Apost. c. 12. Fundata res* est. In aliis.
Quaestionibu^ non diligen^er digestis, nondum plena Ecclesiae Authoritate
firmatis serendus est Disputator errans: ibi serendus est error; non tantum
progredi debet, ut etiam Fundamentum ipsum Ecclesiae quate^e mo^iatur.
This is a thing founded: an erring Disputer is to be born with in other
Questions not diligently digested, not yet made firm by full Authority of the
Church, their error is to be born with: but it ought not to go so far, that it
should labor to shake the foundation it self of the Church. This is the place:
but it can never follow out of this place (I think) That every thing defined by
the Church is fundamental.

first, he speaks of a foundation of Doctrine in Scripture, not a
Church-definition. This appears: for, few lines before, he tells us, Ibid. c.
20.
There was a Question moved to S. Cyprian, Whether Baptism was concluded to the
eighth day, as well as Circumcision? And no doubt was made then of the Origin
Peccati.
beginning of sin; and that Ex ea re, unde nu^^a erat Quaestio, soluta est
exorta Quaestio.
out of this thing, about which no Question was moved, that Question that was
made, was Answered. And Hoc de Fundamento Ecclesi^ sumpsit ad confirmandum
Lapidem nutantem.
again, That S. Cyprian took that which he gave in Answer from the foundation
of the Church, to confirm a stone that was shaking. Now S. Cyprian in all the
Answer that he gives, has not one word of any Definition of the Church:
therefore ea res, that thing by which he answered, was a Foundation of prime
and settled Scripture-Doctrine, not any Definition of the Church: Therefore,
that which he took out of the Foundation of the Church, to fasten the stone
that shook, was not a Definition of the Church, but the Foundation of the
Church it self, the Scripture, upon which it is builded: as appears in the
Council. Mi^^vit c. 2.
Milevitane Council; where the Rule, by which Pelagius was condemned, is the
Rule of Romans 5. 15.
Scripture: Therefore S. Augustine goes on in the same sense, That the Disputer
is not to be born any longer, that shall Ut Fundamentum ipsum Ecclesiae quat^re
moliatur.
endeavor to shake the foundation it self, upon which the whole Church is
grounded.

Secondly, If S. Augustine did mean by Founded, and Foundation, the definition
of the Church, because of these words, This thing is founded, this is made firm
by full Authority of the Church; and the words following these, to shake the
foundation of the Church; yet it can never follow out of any, or all these
Circumstances (and these are all) That all points defined by the Church, are
fundamental in the Faith. For first, no man denies, but the Church is a 1 Timothy
3. 15
Foundation; That things defined by it, are founded upon it: And yet hence it
cannot follow, That the thing that is so founded, is Fundamental in the Faith:
For things may be Mos fundatissimus S. Aug E^. 28.
founded upon Humane Authority, and be very certain, yet not Fundamental in the
Faith. Nor yet can it follow, This thing is founded, therefore every thing
determined by the Church, is founded. Again that which follows, That those
things are not to be opposed, which are made firm by full Authority of the
Church, cannot conclude, they are therefore Fundamental in the Faith. For full
Church Authority (always the time that included the Holy Apostles being past
by, and not comprehended in it) is but Church Authority; and Church Authority,
when it is at Full Sea, is not simply Staple. Relect. cont. 4. q 3. A. 1.
Divine, therefore the Sentence of it not fundamental in the Faith. And yet no
erring Disputer may be endured to shake the foundation, which the Church in
Council lays. But plain Scripture with evident sense, or a full demonstrative
Argument must have room, where a wrangling and erring Disputer may not be
allowed it. And there is Q^^ quidem, si tam manifesta monstratur, ut in dubium
venire non possit, pr^ponenda est omnibus illis rebu^, quibus in Catholica
ten^or. Ita si aliquid apertissimum in Evangelio. S. August. contra Fund. c. 4.
neither of these, but may convince the Definition of the Council, if it be ill
founded. And the Articles of the Faith may easily prove it is not Fundamental,
if indeed and verily it be not so.

That things are fundamental in the Faith two ways: One, in their Matter, such
as are all things which be so in themselves; The other, in the Manner, such as
are all things that the Church has defined, and determined to be of Faith: And
that so, some things that are de modo, of the manner of being, are of Faith.
But in plain truth, this is no more, then if you should say, Some things are
fundamental in the Faith, and some are not. For wrangle while you will, you
shall never be able to prove, that any thing which is but de modo, a
consideration of the manner of being only, can possibly be fundamental in the
Faith.

Foundation of this place, I will a little view the Mortar with which it is
laid by you. It is a venture, but I shall find it Ezekiel. 13. 11
untempered. Your Assertion is: All Points defined by the Church are
fundamental. Your proof, this place: Because that is not to be shaken, which is
settled by Plena Ecclesiae Authoritate.
full Authority of the Church. Then (it seems) your meaning is, that this point
there spoken of, The remission of Original Sin in Baptism of Infants, was
defined, when S. Augustine wrote this, by a full Sentence of a General Council.
First, if you say it was: L. 2. de Author. Council. c. ^. A solis particularibus.
Bellarmine will tell you, it is false; and that the Pelagian Heresy was never
condemned in an Ecumenical Council, but only in Nationals. But Bellarmine is
deceived: For while the Pelagians stood out impudently against National
Councels, some of them defended Nestorius; which gave occasion to the first
Can. 1. and 4.
Ephesine Council to Excommunicate, and depose them. And yet this will not
serve your turn for this place. For S. Augustine was then dead, and therefore
could not mean the Sentence of that Council in this place. Secondly, if you
say, it was not then defined in an Ecumenical Synod; Plena Authoritas
Ecclesiae, the full Authority of the Church there mentioned, does not stand
properly for the Decree of an Ecumenical Council, but for some National; as
this was condemned in a Council. Milevit. Can. 2.
National Council: And then the full Authority of the Church here, is no more
then the full Authority of the Church of Nay if your own Capellus be true, De
Appell. Eccl. A^ric. c. 2. n. 5. it was but a Provincial of Numidia, not a
Plenary of Africa.
Africa. And I hope that Authority does not make all Points defined by it to be
fundamental. You will say, Yes: if that Council be confirmed by the Pope. And
then I must ever wonder, why S. Augustine should say, The full Authority of the
Church, and not bestow one word upon the Pope, by whose Authority only that
Council, as all other, have their fullness of Authority in your Judgment. An
inexpiable Omission; if this Doctrine concerning the Pope were true.

A. C. steps in again to help the Jesuit; and he tells us, over and over
again, That all points made firm by full Authority A. C. p. 45.
of the Church are fundamental; so, firm he will have them, and therefore
fundamental. But I must tell him: That first, it is one thing in Nature, and
Religion too, to be firm; and another thing to be fundamental. These two are
not Convertible. It Is true, that every thing that is fundamental, is firm: But
it does not follow, that every thing that is firm, is fundamental. For many a
Superstructure is exceeding firm, being fast, and close joined to a sure
foundation, which, yet no man will grant, is fundamental. Besides, whatsoever
is fundamental in the Faith, is fundamental to the Church, which is one by the
unity Almain. in 3. Sent. Di^. 25. q. 1. A Fide enim (...) Ecclesia dicitur un^.
of Faith. Therefore if every thing defined by the Church be fundamental in the
Faith; then the Churches Desinition is the Churches foundation. And so upon the
matter, the Church can lay her own foundation; and then, the Church must be in
absolute and perfect Being, before so much as her foundation is laid. Now this
is so absurd for any man of Learning to say, that by and by after A. C. is
content to affirm, not only, that the prima Credibilia, the Articles of Faith,
but all which so pertains to Supernatural, Divine, and Infallible Christian
Faith, as that thereby Christ does dwell in our hearts, etc. is the foundation
of the Church under Christ the Prime Foundation. And here he is out again. For
first, all which pertains to Supernatural, Divine and Infallible Christian
Faith, is not by and by Aliquid pertinet ad Fidem dupliciter. u^^ modo direct,
sicut t^ que nobis sunt principali^^^ divirit^s tradita, ut Deum esse Trinum,
etc. Et circa haec opinari fallum hoc ^p^^ inducit Haeresin, etc. Alio modo
indirecte. Ex quibus consequitur aliquid contrarium Fidei, etc. Et in his
aliquis potest falsum opinari absque periculo Haeresis, donec Sequela illa ti
innotescat, etc. Tho. p. 1. q. 32. A. 4. C. There are things necessary to the
Faith; and things which are but accessory, etc. Hooker L. 3. Eccl. Pol.. 3.
fundamental in the Faith to all men. And secondly, the whole Discourse here is
concerning Faith, as it is taken Objective for the Object of Faith, and thing
to be believed; but that Faith by which Christ is said to dwell in our hearts,
is taken Subjective, for the Habit and Act of Faith. Now to confound both these
in one period of speech, can have no other aim, then to confound the Reader.
But to come closer both to the Jesuit, and his Defender A. C. If all Points
made firm by full Authority of the Church be fundamental, then they must grant,
that every thing determined by the Council of Trent is fundamental in the
Faith. For with them it is firm and Catholic, which that Council Decrees. Now
that Council Decrees, Si quis Dixerit Ordines ab Episcopis collatos sine populi
vel potestatis saecularis conse^su aut vocatione irritos esse; Anathema sit.
Con. Trid. Sess. 23. Can. 7.
That Orders collated by the Bishop are not void, though they be given without
the consent or calling of the People, or of any Secular Power. And yet they can
produce no Author that ever acknowledged this Definition of the Council
fundamental in the Faith. It Is true, I do not grant, that the Decrees of this
Council are made by full Authority of the Church; but they do both grant and
maintain it: And therefore it is Argumentum ad hominem, a good argument against
them, that a thing so defined may be firm, for so this is; and yet not
fundamental, for so this is not.

A. C. tells us further, That if one may deny, or doubtfully dispute against
any one Determination of the Church, then A. C. p. 45.
he may against another, and another, and so against all; since all are made
firm to us by one and the same Divine Revelation, sufficiently applied by one
and the same full Authority of the Church; which being weakened in any one,
cannot be firm in any other. First, A. C. might have acknowledged that he
borrowed the former part of this out of Co^t. Haeres. c. 31. Abdicatri enim
qualibet part Catholici Dogmatis, alia quoque atque item alia, etc. Quid aliud
ad extremum sequtur; nisi ut totum pariter repu^ietur?
Vincentius Lirinensis. And as that Learned Father uses it, I subscribe to it,
but not as A. C. applies it. For Vincentius speaks there de Catholico Dogmate,
of Catholic Maxims: and A. C. will force it to every Determination of the
Church. Now Catholic Maxims, which are properly fundamental, are. 38. N. 21.
certain prime truths deposited with the Church, and not so much determined by
the Church, as published and manifested, and so made firm by her to us. For so
Ecclesia Depositorum apud se Dogmatum Custos, etc. Denique quid unquam
Conciliorum Decretis enisa est, nisi, ut quod a^tea simpliciter credebatur, hoc
idem postea diligentius crederetur, etc. Vin. Lir. cont. Haeres. c. 32.
Vincentius expressly. Where, all that the Church does, is but, ut hoc idem quod
antea, that the same thing may be believed, which was before believed, but with
more light, and clearness, and (in that sense) with more firmness, then before.
Now in this sense, give way to a Disputator errans, every Cavilling Disputer to
deny, or quarrel at the Maxims of Christian Religion, any one, or any part of
any one of them; and why may he not then take liberty to do the like of any
other, till he have shaken all? But this hinders not the Church her self, nor
any appointed by the Church to examine her own Decrees, and to see that she
keep Dogmata deposita, the Principles of Faith unblemished, and uncorrupted.
For if she do not so, but that Vin. Lir. cont. Haeres. c. 31. Impiorum and
turpium Errorum Lupanar: ubi erat ante cast and incorruptae Sacrarium
Veritatis.
Novitia veteribus, new Doctrines be added to the old; the Church, which is
Sacrarium veritatis, the Repository of Verity, may be changed in lupanar
errorum, I am loath to English it. By the Church then this may, nay it ought to
be done, however, every wrangling Disputer may neither deny, nor doubtfully
dispute, much less obstinately oppose the Determinations of the Church, no not
where they are not Dogmata Deposita, these deposited Principles. But if he will
be so bold to deny or dispute the Determinations of the Church; yet that may be
done without shaking the foundation, where the Determinations themselves belong
but to the fabric, and not to the foundation. For a whole frame of Building
may be shaken, and yet the foundation where it is well laid, remain firm. And
therefore after all, A. C. dares not say, the foundation is shaken, but A. C.
p. 46.
only in a sort. And then it is as true, that in a sort it is not shaken.

A. C. must pardon me, if I dissent from him. For first, All Determinations of
the Church are not made firm to us by one and the same Divine Revelation. For
some Determinations of the Church are made firm to us, per chirographum Vin.
Lir. cont. Haer. c. 32.
Scripturae, by the handwriting of the Scripture; and that is Authentical
indeed. Some other Decisions, yea and of the Church too, are made, or may be
(if Relect. cont. 4. q. 1. Art. 3. Etiamsi nullo Scripturarum, aut evidenti,
aut pro^abili Testimonio, etc.
Stapleton inform us right) without an evident, nay without so much as a
probable Testimony of Holy Writ. But Non potest aliquid certum esse certitudint
fidei, nisi aut immediate contineatur in Verbo Dei, aut ex Verb Dei per
evidentem consequentiam deducatur. Bellar. L. 3. de Justificat. c. 8.. Prima
Ratio.
Bellarmine falls quite off in this, and confesses in express terms, That
nothing can be certain by certainty of Faith, unless it be contained
immediately in the Word of God; or be deduced out of the Word of God by evident
consequence. And if nothing can be certain but so, then certainly no
Determination of the Church it self, if that Determination be not grounded upon
one of these: either express Word of God, or evident consequence out of it. So
here is little agreement in this great Point between Stapleton and Bellarmine.
Nor can this be shifted off, as if Stapleton spoke of the Word of God Written,
and Bellarmine of the Word of God Unwritten (as he calls Tradition.) For
Bollarmine treats there of the knowledge which a man has of the certainty of
his own Salvation. And I hope A. C. will not tell us, there is any Tradition
extant unwritten, by which particular men may have assurance of their several
Salvations. Therefore Bellarmine's whole Disputation there is quite beside the
matter: or else he must speak of the written Word, and so lie cross to
Stapleton, as is mentioned. But to return. If A. C. will, he may, but I cannot
believe, that a Definition of the Church, which is made by the express Word of
God, and another which is made without so much as a probable Testimony of it,
or a clear Deduction from it, are made firm to us by one and the same Divine
Revelation. Nay, I must say in this case, that the one Determination is firm by
Divine Revelation, but the other has no Divine Revelation at all, but the
Churches Authority only.

^ Secondly, I cannot believe neither, That all Determinations of the Church
are sufficiently applied by one and the same full Authority of the Church. For
the Authority of the Church, though it be of the same fullness in regard of it
self, and of the Power which it commits to General Councels lawfully called:
yet it is not always of the same fullness of knowledge and sufficiency; nor of
the same fullness of Conscience, and integrity to apply Dogmata Fidei, that
which is Dogmatical in the Faith. For instance, I think you dare not deny but
the Council of Trent was lawfully called; and yet I am of Opinion, that few,
even of your selves, believe that the Council of Trent has the same fullness
with the Council of Nice, in all the forenamed kinds, or degrees of fullness.
Thirdly, suppose that all Determinations of the Church are made firm to us by
one and the same Divine Revelation, and sufficiently applied by one and the
sante full Authority; yet it will not follow, that they are all alike
fundamental in the Faith. For I hope A. C. himself will not say, that the
Definitions of the Church are in better condition, then the Propositions of
Canonical Scripture. Now all Propositions of Canonical Scripture are alike
firm, because they all alike proceed from Divine Revelation: but they are not
all alike fundamental in the Faith. For this Proposition of Christ to S. Peter
and S. Andrew, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men S. Mat. 4. 19.
, is as firm a truth, as that which he delivered to his Disciples, That he must
die, and rise again the third day S. Mat. 16. 21.
: For both proceed from the same Divine Revelation, out of the mouth of our
Savior; and both are sufficiently applied by one and the same full Authority
of the Church, which receives the whole Gospel of S. Matthew to be Canonical
and Infallible Scripture. And yet both these Propositions of Christ are not
alike fundamental in the Faith. For I dare say, No man shall be saved (in the
ordinary way of Salvation) that believes not the Death and the Resurrection of
Christ. And I believe A. C. dares not say, that no man shall be saved, into
whose capacity it never came, that Christ made S. Peter and Andrew fishers of
men. And yet should he say it, nay should he show it sub annulo Piscatoris, no
man will believe it, that has not made shipwreck of his common Notions. Now if
it be thus between Proposition and Proposition issuing out of Christ's own
Mouth* I hope it may well be so also between even Just and True Determinations
of the Church, that supposing them alike true and firm, yet they shall not be
alike fundamental to all men's belief.


F. Secondly, I required to know, what Points the Bishop would account
Fundamental. He said, all the Points of the Creed were such.


B. Tertull. Apol. contra Gentes, c. 47. de v^land. virg. c. 1. S. August.
Sermon. 15. de Temp. cap. 2. Ruffin. in Symb. apud Cyprian. p. 357.
Fathers make the Creed the Rule of Faith; Alb. Mag. in 1. Sent. D. 11. A. 7.
since the agreeing sense of Scripture with those Articles are the two Regular
Precepts by which a Divine is governed about the Faith; since your own Council
of Council. Trident. Sess. 3.
Trent Decrees, That it is that Principle of Faith, in which all that profess
Christ, do necessarily agree, and fundamentum firmum and unicum, not the firm
alone, but the only foundation; since it is Excommunication Bonavent. ibid.
Dub. 2. and 3. in lite^am.
ipso jure, for any man to contradict the Articles contained in that Creed;
since the whole Body of the Faith is so contained in the Creed, as that the
Thom. 2. 2^^ q. 1. Art. 7. c.
substance of it was believed even before the coming of Christ, though not so
expressly as since in the number of the Articles; since Bellar. L. 4. de Verb.
Dei non Script. c. 11.. Primum est.
Bellarmine confesses, That all things simply necessary for all men's Salvation
are in the Creed, and the Decalogue; what reason can you have to except? And
yet for all this, every thing fundamental is not of a like nearness to the
foundation, nor of equal primeness in the Faith. And my granting the Creed to
be fundamental, does not deny, but that there are Tho. 2. 2. e. q. 1. A. 7. C.
quaedam prima Credibilia, certain prime Principles of Faith, in the bosom
whereof* all other Articles lay wrapped and folded up. One of which since
Christ, is that of 1 S. Joh* 4. 2 (...)
S. John: Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is of
God. And one, both before the coming of Christ, and since, is that of S. Paul:
Heb. 11. 6.
He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that be is a rewarder of
them that seek him.

A. C. tells you, That either I must mean that those points are only
fundamental, which are expressed in the Creed; A. C. p. 40.
or those also which are infolded. If I say, those only which are expressed,
then (says he) to believe the Scriptures is not fundamental, because it is not
expressed. If I say, those which are infolded in the Articles, then some
unwritten Church-Traditions may be accounted fundamental. The truth is, I said,
and say still, that all the Points of the Apostles Creed, as they are there
expressed, are fundamental. And therein I say no more, then some of your best
Learned have said before me. But I never either said, or meant, that they only
are fundamental; that they are Conc. Trident. Sess. 3.
Fundamentum unicum, the only Foundation, is the Council of Trent's; it is not
mine. Mine is, That the belief of Scripture to be the Word of God, and
Infallible, is an equal, or rather a preceding Prime Principle of Faith, with,
or to the whole Body of the Creed. And this agrees (as before I told the
Jesuit) with one of your own great Masters, Albertus Magnus I^ 1. Sent. D. 11.
A. 7. Regula Fidei est concors Scripturarum sensus cum Articulis Fide^: Quia
illis duobus regularibus Praeceptis regitur The^logus.
, who is not far from that Proposition in terminis. So here the very foundation
of A. C'. Dilemma falls off. For I say not, That only the Points of the Creed
are fundamental, whether expressed, or not expressed. That all of them are,
that I say. And yet though the foundation of his Dilemma be fallen away, I will
take the boldness to tell A. C. That if I had said, that those Articles only
which are expressed in the Creed, are fundamental, it would have been hard to
have excluded the Scripture, upon which the Creed it self in every Point is
grounded. For nothing is supposed to shut out its own foundation. And if I
should now say, that some Articles are fundamental which are infolded in the
Creed, it would not follow, that therefore some unwritten Traditions were
fundamental. Some Traditions I deny not true and firm, and of great, both
Authority, and Use in the Church, as being Apostolical, but yet not fundamental
in the Faith. And it would be a mighty large fold, which should lap up
Traditions within the Creed. As for that Tradition, That the Books of holy
Scriptures are Divine, and Infallible in every part, I will handle that when I
come to the proper place. 16. N. 1.
for it.


F. I asked how then it happened (as M. Rogers says) that the English Church
is not yet resolved, what is the right sense of the Article of Christ's
descending into Hell.


B. English Church never made doubt (that I know) what was the sense of that
Article. The words are so plain, they bear th^^^ meaning before them. She was
content to put that Art. 3.
Arti^^^ among those, to which she requires Subscription, not as doubting of
the sense, but to prevent the Cavils of some, who had been too busy in
crucifying that Article, and in making it all one with the Article of the
Cross, or but an Exposition of it.

Church of England is better resolved of the right sense of this Article, then
the Church of Rome, especially if she must be tried by her Writers, as you try
the Church of England by M. Rogers. For, you cannot agree, whether this Article
be a mere Tradition, or whether it has any place of Scripture to warrant it.
Scotus in 1. D. 11. q. 1.
Scotus, and Stapleton Kelect. Con. 5. q. 5. Art. 1.
Stapleton allow it no footing in Scripture, but Bellar. 4. de Christo. c. 6.
and 12. Scripturae passin hoc docent.
Bellarmine is resolute, that this Article is every where in Scripture; and
Thom. 2. 2ae. q. 1. A. 9. ad 1.
Thomas grants as much for the whole Creed. The Church of England never doubted
it, and S. Aug. Ep. '99.
S. Augustine proves it.

in triduo mortis, in the time of his Death, did go down into Hell really, and
was present there; or vertually, and by effects only. For Tho. p. 3. q. 52. A.
2. c. per suam essentiam.
Thomas holds the first, and Durand* in 3. d. 22. q. q. 3.
Durand the later. Then you agree not, Whether the Soul of Christ did descend
really and in essence into the lowest Pit of Hell, and place of the Damned, as
Bellar. L. 4. de Christo. c. 16*
Bellarmine once held probable, and proved it; or really only into that place,
or Region of Hell, which you call Limbum Patrum; and then, but vertually from
thence into the Lower Hell: to which Bellar. Recog. p. 11.
Bellarmine reduces himself, and gives his reason, because it is the Sequuntur
enim. Tho. p. 3. Q. 52. A. 2.
common Opinion of the School. Now the Church of England takes the words as
they are in the Creed, and believes them without farther Dispute, and in that
sense which the ancient Primitive Fathers of the Church agreed in. And yet if
any in the Church of England should not be thoroughly resolved in the sense of
this Article; Is it not as lawful for them to say [ I conceive thus, or thus of
it; yet if any other way of his Descent be found truer than this, I deny it
not, but as yet I know no other] as it was for Non est pertinaciter asserendum,
quin Ani^a Christi per alium modum nobis ignotum potuerit descendere ad
Insernum: Nec nos negamus alium modum esse forsitan veriorem; sed fatemur nos
illum ignorare. Durand. in 3. Sent. Did. 22. q. 3. Nu. 9.
Durand to say it, and yet not impeach the Foundation of the Faith.


F. The Bishop said, That M. Rogers was but a private man. But (said I) if M.
Rogers (writing as he did by public Authority) be accounted only a private
man, etc.


B. Rogers was a private man. And I take it, you will not allow every speech of
every (...), though allowed by Authority to have his Books Printed, to be the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome. And this was an Ancient fault too, for S.
Augustine Checks at it in his time. Noli colligere calumnias ex Episcoporum
scriptis, sive Hillarii, sive Cypriani and Agrippini. Primo, quia hoc genus
literarum ab Authoritate Ca^o^^s distinguendum est. Non enim sic leguntur
tanquam ita ex iis testimonium proferatur, ut contra sentire non liceat, sicubi
forte aliter sentirent, qua^ veritas postulat. S. Aug. Ep. 48. etc. And yet
these were far greater men in their generations, than M. Rogers was.
This has been often complained of on both sides: The imposing particular men's
assertions upon the Church: yet I see you mean not to leave it. And surely as
Controversies are now handled (by some of your party) at this day, I may not
say, it is the sense of the Article in hand, But I have long thought it a kind
of descent into Hell, to be conversant in them. I would the Authors would take
heed in time, and not seek to blind the People, or cast a mist before evident
Truth lest it cause a final descent to that place of Torment. But since you
will hold this course, Stapleton was of greater note with you, than M. Rogers
his Exposition, or Notes upon the Articles of the Church of England is with us.
And as he, so his Relection. And is it the Doctrine of the Church of Rome which
Stapleton affirms, Stapl. Cont. 5. q. 5. A. 1.
The Scripture is silent, that Christ descended into Hell, and that there is a
Catholic and an Apostolic Church? If it be, then what will become of the
Pope's Supremacy over the whole Church? Shall he have his power over the
Catholic Church given him expressly in Scripture, in the Mat. 16. 9.
Keys, to enter; and in S. Joh. 21. 16.
Pasce, to feed when he is in; and when he had fed, to ^. Luke 22. 32.
Confirm; and in all these, not to err and fail in his Ministration: And is
the Catholic Church, in and over which he is to do all these great things,
quite left out of the Scripture? Belike the Holy Ghost was careful to give him
his power; Yes in any case; but left the assigning of his great Cure, the
Catholic Church, to Tradition. And it were well for him, if he could so
prescribe for what he now Claims.

Rogers there says no such thing? As in truth, he does not. His words are:
Rogers in Art. Eccles. Angl. Art. 3.
All Christians acknowledge, He descended; but in the interpretation of the
Article, there is not that consent, that were to be wished. What is this to the
Church of England, more than others? And again, Ibid.
Till we know the native and undoubted sense of this Article, is M. Rogers [
We] the Church of England? or rather his, and some others Judgment, in the
Church of England?

A. C. will have somewhat again to say, though, A. C. p. 47.
God knows, it is to little purpose. It Is, that the Jesuit urged M. Roger's
Book, because it was set out by Public Authority: And because the Book bears
the Title of the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England. A. C. may
undoubtedly urge M. Rogers, if he please; But he ought not to say, that his
Opinion is the Doctrine of the Church of England, for neither of the Reasons by
him expressed. First, not because his Book was publicly allowed. For many
Books among them, as well as among us, have been Printed by public Authority,
as containing nothing in them contrary to Faith and good manners, and yet
containing many things in them of Opinion only, or private Judgment, which yet
is far from the avowed Positive Doctrine of the Church, the Church having as
yet determined neither way by open Declaration upon the words, or things
controverted. And this is more frequent among their Schoolmen, than among any
of our Controversers, as is well known. Nor secondly, because his Book bears
the Title of the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England. For suppose the
worst, and say, M. Rogers thought a little too well of his own pains, and gave
his Book too high a Title; is his private Judgment therefore to be accounted
the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England? Surely no: No more than I
should say, every thing said by Angelici D. S. Tho. Summa.
Thomas, or Celebratissimi Patris Dom. Bonaventurae Doctoris Seraphici in 3. L.
Sent. Disputata.
Bonaventure, is Angelical, or Seraphical Doctrine, because one of these is
styled in the Church of Rome, Seraphical, and the other, Angetical Doctor. And
yet their works are Printed by Public Authority, and that Title given them.

Yea, but our private Authors (says A. C.) are not allowed A. C. p. 47.
(for ought I know) in such a like sort to express our Catholic Doctrine in
any matter subject to Question. Here are two Limitations, which will go far to
bring A. C. off, whatsoever I shall say against him: For first, let me instance
in any* private man, that takes as much upon him as M. Rogers does, he will
say, he know it not, his Assertion here being no other, then for ought he
knows. Secondly If he be unwilling to acknowledge so much, yet he will answer,
it is not just in such a like sort as M. Rogers does it, that is, perhaps, it is
not the very Title of his Book. But well then: Is there never a Private man
allowed in the Church of Rome to express your Catholic Doctrine in any matter
subject to Question? What? Not in any matter? Were not Vega and Soto two
private men? Is it not a matter subject to Question, to great Question in these
Days, Whether a man may be certain of his being in the state of Salvation,
certitudine fidei, by the certainty of Faith? Does not Bellar. Lib. 3. de
Justific. c. 1. and 14.
Bellarmine make it a Controversy? And is it not a part of your Catholic
Faith, if it be determined in the Huic Concilio Catho^ici omnes ingenia sua,
and judicia sponte subjiciunt. Bellar. L. 3. de Justif. c. 3. S. Sed Concilii
Tridentini.
Council of Trent? And yet these two great Friars of their time, Dominicus
Soto, and Andreas Vega Hist Council. Trident. Lib. 2. p. 245. Edit. Lat. Leidae,
1622.
were of contrary Opinions; and both of them challenged the Decree of the
Council; and so consequently your Catholic Faith to be as each of them
concluded: and both of them wrote Books to maintain their Opinions; and both of
their Books were published by Authority. And therefore I think it is allowed in
the Church of Rome to private men to express your Catholic Doctrine, and in a
matter subject to Question. And therefore also* if another man in the Church of
England, should be of a contrary Opinion to M. Rogers, and declare it under the
Title of the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England, this were no more
than Soto and Vega did in the Church of Rome. And I, for my part, cannot but
wonder A. C. should not know it. For A. C. p. 47.
he says, that for ought he knows, private men are not allowed so to express
their Catholic Doctrine. And in the same Question both Catharinus and
Bellarmine Bellar L. 3. de Justif. c. 3.
take on them, to express your Catholic Faith, the one differing from the
other, almost as much as Soto and Vega, and perhaps in some respect more.


F. But if M. Rogers be only a private man; in what Book may we find the
Protestants public Doctrine? The Bishop answered, That to the Book of Articles
they were all sworn.


B. The Articles of the Church of England were the Public Doctrine of all the
Protestants? Or, that all the Protestants were sworn to the Articles of
England, as this speech seems to imply? Sure I was not. Was not the immediate
speech before of the Church of England? And how comes the Subject of the Speech
to be varied in the next lines? Nor yet speak I this, as if other Protestants
did not agree with the Church of England in the chiefest Doctrines, and in the
main Exceptions, which they jointly take against the Roman Church, as appears
by their several Confessions. But if A. C. will A. C. p. 47.
say (as he does) that because there was speech before of the Church of
England, the Jesuit understood me in a limited sense, and meant only the
Protestants of the English Church; Be it so; there is no great harm done And
therefore A. C. needs not make such a Noise about it, as he does, page 48.
but this, that the Jesuit offers to enclose me too much. For I did not say,
that the Book of Articles only was the Continent of the Church of Englands
public Doctrine: She is not so narrow, nor has she purpose to exclude any
thing which she acknowledges hers, nor does she wittingly permit any Crossing
of her public Declarations; yet she is not such a shrew to her Children, as to
deny her Blessing; or Denounce an Anathema against them, if some peaceably
dissent in some Particulars remoter from the Foundation, as your own Schoolmen
differ. And if the Church of Rome, since she grew to her greatness, had not
been so fierce in this Course, and too particular in Determining too many
things, and making them matters of Necessary Belief, which had gone for many
hundreds of years before, only for things of Pious Opinion; Christendom (I
persuade my self) had been in happier peace at this Day, than (I doubt) we
shall ever live to see it.

A. C. will prove the Church of England a Shrew, A. C. p. 48.
and such a Shrew. For in her Book Can. 5.
of Canons She excommunicates every man, who shall hold any thing contrary to
any part of the said Articles. So A. C. But surely these are not the very words
of the Canon, nor perhaps the sense. Not the Words; for they are: Whosoever
shall affirm that the Articles are in any part superstitious, or erroneous,
etc. And perhaps not the sense. For it is one thing for a man to hold an
Opinion privately within himself; and another thing boldly and publicly to
affirm it. And again, it is one thing to hold contrary to some part of an
Article, which perhaps may be but in the manner of Expression; and another
thing positively to affirm, that the Articles in any part of them are
superstitious, and erroneous. But this is not the Main of the Business: For
though the Church of England Denounce Excommunication, as is Can. 5.
before expressed; Yet she comes far short of the Church of Rome's severity,
whose Anathema's are not only for 39 Articles, but for very many more, Council.
Trident.
above one hundred in matters of Doctrine; and that in many Points as far
remote from the Foundation, though to the far greater Rack of men's Consciences,
they must be all made Fundamental, if that Church have once Determined A. C. p.
45.
them: whereas the Church of England never declared, That every one of her
Articles are Fundamental in the Faith. For it is one thing to say, No one of
them is superstitious or erroneous: And quite another to say, Every one of them
is fundamental, and that in every part of it, to all men's Belief. Besides, the
Church of England prescribes only to her own Children, and by those Articles
provides but for her own peaceable Consent in those Doctrines of Truth. But the
Church of Rome severely imposes her Doctrine upon the whole World under pain of
Damnation.


F. And that the Scriptures only, not any unwritten Tradition, was the
Foundation of their Faith.


B. Church of England grounded her Positive Articles upon Scripture; and her
Negative do refute there, where, the thing affirmed by you, is not affirmed by
Scripture, nor directly to be concluded out of it. And here not the Church of
England only, but all Protestants, agree most truly, and most strongly in this,
That the Scripture is sufficient to salvation, and contains in it all things
necessary to it. The Fathers S. Basil. de ver. ^ and pi^ fide. Manifesta
defectio. Fidei est importare quicquam eorum que scripta non sunt. S. Hilar. L.
2. ad Constable. Aug. Fidem ta^^^n secuad^^ ea que scripta sunt deside^ antem, and
hoc qui repudiat, Antichristus est, and qui simulat, Anathema est. S. Aug. L.
2. de Doctr. Christian. c. 9. In iis quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt,
inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem, moresque vivendi. And to this
place Bellarm. L 4. de verbo Dei non script^, cap. 11. says, that S. Augustine
speaks de illis Dogmatibus quae necessaria sunt omnibus simplicit^r, of those
Points of Faith, which are necessary simply for all men. So far then he grants
the Question. And that you may know, it fell not from him on the sudden, he had
said as much before, in the beginning of the same Chapter, and here he confirma
it again.
are plain, the Scotus Prolog. in sent. q. 2. Scriptura sufficient^r conti^^t
Doctrinam necessariam Viatori. Thom. 2. 2^ q. 1. A. 10. ad 1. In Doctrine
Christi and Apostolorum, veritas fidei est sufficienter explicata. And he
speaks there of the written Word.
Schoolmen not strangers in it. And have not we reason then to account it, as
it is, The Foundation of our Faith? And Scripturam Fundamentum esse, and
Columnam Fidei fatemur in suo genere, i. e. in genere Testimoniorum, and in
mater^^ Credendorum. Relect. Con. 4. q. 1. Ar. 3. in fine.
Stapleton himself, though an angry Opposite, confesses, That the Scripture is
in some sort the Foundation of Faith, that is, in the nature of Testimony, and
in the matter, or thing to be believed. And if the Scripture be the Foundation,
to which we are to go for witness, if there be Doubt about the Faith, and in
which we are to find the thing that is to be believed, as necessary in the
Faith; we never did, nor never will refuse any Tradition that is Universal, and
Apostolic, for the better Exposition of the Scripture; nor any Definition of
the Church, in which she goes to the Scripture, for what she teaches; and
thrusts nothing as Fundamental in the Faith upon the world, but what the
Scripture fundamentally makes materiam Credendorum, the substance of that which
is so to be believed, whether immediately and expressly in words, or more
remotely, where a clear and full Deduction draws it out.

A. C. excepts. And first A. C. p. 48.
he says, It Is true, that the Church of England grounded her Positive Articles
upon Scripture: That is, it is true, if themselves may be competent Judges in
their own Cause. But this by the leave of A. C. is true, without making our
selves Judges in our own Cause. For, that all the Positive Articles of the
present Church of England are grounded upon Scripture, we are content to be
judged by the joint and constant Belief of the Fathers, which lived within the
first four or five hundred years after Christ, when the Church was at the best;
and by the Councels held within those times; and to submit to them in all those
Points of Doctrine. Therefore we desire not to be Judges in our own Cause. And
if any whom A. C. calls a Novellist, can truly say, and maintain this, he will
quickly prove himself no Novellist. And for the Negative Articles, they refute,
where the thing affirmed by you, is either not affirmed in Scripture, or not
directly to be concluded out of it. Upon this Negative ground A. C. infers
again, That the Baptism of Infants is not expressly A. C. p. 4.
(at least not evidently) affirmed in Scripture, nor directly (at least not
demonstratively) concluded out of it. In which case he professes he would
gladly know, what can be answered to defend this doctrine to be a Point of
Faith necessary for the salvation of Infants. And in Conclusion, professes, he
cannot easily guess what answer can be made, unless we will acknowledge
Authority of Church-Tradition necessary in this Case.

A. C. is so desirous of an Answer, I will give it freely. And first in the
General. I am no way satisfied with A. C. his Addition (not expressly, at least
not evidently) what means he? If he speak of the Letter of the Scripture, then,
whatsoever is expressly, is evidently in the Scripture, and so his Addition is
vain. If he speak of the Meaning of the Scripture, then his Addition is
cunning. For many things are Expressly in Scripture, which yet in their Meaning
are not evidently there. And what e're he mean, my words are, That our Negative
Articles refute that which is not affirmed in Scripture, without any Addition
of Expressly, or Evidently. And he should have taken my words, as I used them. I
lke nor Change, nor Addition, nor am I bound to either of A. C's making. And I
am as little satisfied with his next Addition (nor directly, at least not
demonstratively concluded out of it.) For are there not many things in Good
Logic concluded, directly, which yet are not concluded Demonstratively? Surely
there are. For to be directly or indirectly concluded, flows from the Mood or
Form of the Syllogism: To be demonstratively concluded, flows from the Matter
or Nature of the Propositions. If the Propositions be Prime and necessary
Truths, the Syllogism is demonstrative and scientifical, because the
Propositions are such. If the Propositions be probable only, though the
Syllogism be made in the clearest Mood, yet is the Conclusion no more. The
Inference, or Consequence indeed is clear and necessary, but the Consequent is
but probable, or topical, as the Propositions were. Now my words were only for
a Direct Conclusion, and no more: though in this case I might give A. C. his
Caution. For Scripture here is the thing spoken of. And Scripture being a
Principle, and every Text of Scripture confessedly a Principle among all
Christians, whereof no man Habitus enim Fidei it^ se habet in in or^ine ad
Theologiam, sicut se habet Habitus intellectus ad Scientias humanas. M. Canus.
L. 2. de Loc. c. 8.
desires any farther proof: I would fain know, why that which is plainly and
apparently, that is, by direct Consequence, proved out of Scripture, is not
Demonstratively or Scientifically proved? If at least he think there can be any
Demonstration in Divinity: and if there can be none, why did he add
Demonstratively?

A. C. A. C. p. 49.
makes, concerning the Baptism of Infants, That it may be concluded directly
(and let A. C. judge, whether not demonstratively) out of Scripture, both that
Infants ought to be baptized, and that Baptism is necessary to their Salvation.
And first, that Baptism is necessary to the Salvation of Infants (in the
ordinary way of the Church, without binding God to the use and means of that
Sacrament, to which he has bound us) S. Aug. expressly of the Baptism of
Infants. L. 1. de Peccato. Mer. and Remiss. c. 30 Et L. 2. c. 27. Et L. 3. de
Anima and ejus Origin. c. 13. Nay they of the Roman Party which: urge the
Baptism of Infants, as a matter of Faith, and yet not to be concluded out of
Scripture; when they are not in eager pursuit of this Controversy, but look
upon truth with a more indifferent eye, consess as much (even the Leaundist of
them) as we ask. Advertendum autem Salvatorem dum dicit [Nisi quis renatus,
etc.] necessitatem imponere omnibus, ac proinde Parvulos debire renasci ex aqua
and Spiritu. Jansen. Harm. in Evang. c. 20. So hereis Baptism Necessary for
Infants, and that Necessity imposed by our Savior, and not by the Church only.
Haeretici nulld alio quam hoc Scripturae testimonio probare pollunt, Infantes
esse baptizandos. Mald. in S.] oh. 3. 5. So Maldonat confesses that the
Heretics (we know whom he means) can prove the Baptism of Infants by no
Testimony of Scripture but this: which speech implies. That by this Testimony
of Scripture it is, and can be proved, and therefore not by Church-Tradition
only. And I would fain know, why Bellarmine, L. 1. de Baptism. cap. 8.. 5.
should bring three Arguments out of Scripture to prove the Baptism of Infants [
Habemus in Scripturie tria Argumenta, etc.] if Baptism cannot be proved at all
out of Scripture, but only by the Tradition of the Church And yet, this is not
Bellarmine's way alone, but Suarez's in Tho. p. 3. q. 68. Disput. 25. Sect. 1..
2. Ex Scriptura possant varia Argumenta sumi ad confirmandum Paedobaptismum. Et
similiter, etc. And Greg. de Valentia, L. de Baptis. Far^ulorum, c. 2.. 1. And
the Pope himself, Innocent. 3. L. 3. Decretal. Tit. 42. Cap. Majores. And they
all jump with S. Am^^ L. 10. Epist. 84. (...) Demetriadem Virginem, who
expressly affirms it, Paedobaptismum esse Constitutionem Salvatoris. And proves
it out of S. Joh. 3. 5.
is express in S. John 3. Except a man be born again of water, and the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. So, no Baptism, no Entrance. Nor can
Infants creep in any other ordinary way. And this is the received Opinion of
all the Ancient Church of Infantes reos esse Originalis peccati, and ideo
baptizandos esse, Antiquam Fidei Regula^ vocat. S. Aug. Ser 8. de verb. Apost.
c. 8. Et nemo vobis susurret doctrinas alienas, hoc Ecclesia semper babuit,
semper tenuit, hoc a majorum sid^ recepit, etc. S. Aug. Sermon. 10. de verb*
Apost. c. 2. and. S. Ambros. E. 10. Ep* 84. circa medium. Et S. Chrysostom. Hom.
de Adam and Eva. Hoc praedicat Ecclesia Catholica ubique diffusa.
Christ. And secondly, That Infants ought to be baptized, is first plain by
Evident and Direct Consequence out of Scripture. For if there be no Salvation
for Infants in the ordinary way of the Church, but by Baptism, and this appear
in Scripture, as it does; then out of all Doubt, the Consequence is most
evident out of that Scripture, That Infants are to be baptized, that their
Salvation may be certain. For they which cannot Egi causam eorum qui pro se
loqui non possunt, etc. S. Aug. Sermon. 8. de verb. Apost. c. 8.
help themselves, must not be left only to Extraordinary Helps, of which we
have no assurance, and for which we have no warrant at all in Scripture, while
we in the mean time neglect the ordinary way and means commanded by Christ,
Secondly, it is very near an Expression in Scripture it self. For when Act* 2.
38, 39.
S. Peter had ended that great Sermon of his, Act. 2. he applies two comforts
unto them, Verse 38. Amend your lives, and be baptized, and you shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost. And then, Verse 39. he infers, For the promise is
made to you, and to your children. The Promise; What Promise? What? Why the
Promise of Sanctification by the Holy Ghost. By what means? Why, by Baptism.
For it is expressly, Be baptized, and ye shall receive. And as expressly, This
promise is made to you, and to your Children. And therefore A. C. may find it,
if he will, That the Baptism of Infants may be directly concluded out of
Scripture. For some of his own Party, Nullum excipit, non Judeum, non Gentilem,
non Adultum, non Puerum, etc. Ferus in Act. 2. 39.
Ferus and Et ad Filios vestros: quare debent consentire, quum ad usum rationis
perveniunt, ad implenda promissa in Baptismo, etc. Salm. Tract. 14. upon the
place.
Salmeron, could both find it there. And so (if it will do him any pleasure) he
has my Answer, which he says, he would be glad to know.

Bellar. L. 4. de Verbo Dei. c. 9.. 5.
Bellarmine presses a main place out of S. Augustine, and he urges it hard. S.
S. Aug. Genesis ad Lit. c. 23. Consuetudo Matris Ecclesiae in Baptizandis parvulis
nequaquam spernenda est, nec omnind credenda, nisi Apostolica esset Traditio.
Augustine's words are, The Custom of our Mother the Church in Baptizing
Infants, is by no means to be contemned, or thought superfluous, nor yet at all
to be believed, unless it were an Apostol^cal Tradition. The place is truly
cited, but seems a great deal stronger, than indeed it is. For first, it is not
denied, That this is an Apostolical Tradition, and therefore to be believed.
But secondly, not therefore only. Nor does S. Augustine say so, nor does
Bellarmine press it that way. The truth is, it would have been somewhat
difficult to find the Collection out of Scripture only for the Baptism of
Infants, since they do not actually believe. And therefore S. Augustine is at
nec credenda nisi, that this Custom of the Church had not been to be believed,
had it not been an Apostolical Tradition. But the Tradition being Apostolical,
led on the Church easily to see the necessary Deduction out of Scripture. And
this is not the least use of Tradition, to lead the Church into the true
meaning of those things which are found in Scripture, though not obvious to
every eye there. And that this is S. Augustine's meaning, is manifest by
himself, who best knew it. For when he had said, Cur Antiquam fidei Regulam
frangere conaris? S. Aug. Ser. 8. de ver. Apost. c. 8. Hoc Ecclesia semper
tenuit. Ib. Ser. 10. c. 2.
as he does, That to baptize children, is Antiqua fidei Regula, the Ancient
Rule of Faith, and the constant Tenet of the Church, yet he doubts not to
collect and deduce it out of Scripture also. For when Pelagius urged, That
Infants needed not to be baptized, because they had no Original Sin: S.
Augustine relies not upon the Tenet of the Church only, but argues from the
Text thus. Quid necessarium babuit Infans Christum, si non aegrotat? S. Matthew.
9. 12. Quid est quod dicis, nist ut non accedant ad Jesum? Sed tibi clamat
Jesus, Sine Parvulos venire ad me. S. Aug. in the fore cited places.
What need have Infants of Christ, if they be not sick? For the sound need not
the Physician, S. Mat. 9. And again, is not this said by Pelagins, ut non
accedaent ad Jesum? That Infants may not come to their Savior? Sed clamat
Jesus, but Jesus cries out, Suffer Little ones to come unto me, S. Marc. 10. 14.
S. Mar. 10. And all this is fully acknowledged by Nullus est Scriptor tam
vetustus, qui non ejus Originem ad Apostolorum seculum pro certe referat. Calv.
4. Just. c. 16.. 8.
Calvine, Namely, That all men acknowledge the Baptism of Infants to descend
from Apostolical Tradition. Miserrimum asylum soret, si pro Defensione
Paedobaptismi ad nudam Ecclisia authoritatem fugere cogeremur. Call. 4. Inst. c.
8.. 16.
And yet that it does not depend upon the bare and naked Authority of the
Church. Which he speaks not in regard of Tradition, but in relation to such
proof, as is to be made by necessary Consequence out of Scripture over and
above Tradition.

As for Tradition,. 15. Number. 1. A. C. p. 49.
I have said enough for that, and as much NUMBER. 6. ^
as A. C. where it is truly Apostolical. And yet if any thing will please him, I
will add this concerning this particular, The Baptizing of Infants; That the
Church received this by Orig. i^ Romans 6. 8. (...). 2. p. 543. Pro hoc Ecclesia
ab Apostolis Traditionem s^scepit, etiam parvulis Baptis* mum dare. Et S. Aug.
Ser. 10. de verb. Apost. c. 2. Hoc Ecclesia a Majorum fide percepit. And it is
to be observed, that neither of these Fathers ( nor I believe any other) say
that the Church received it a Traditione sola, or a Majorum fide sola: as if
Tradition did exclude collection of it out of Scripture.
Tradition from the Apostles. By Tradition. And what then? May it not directly
be concluded out of Scripture, because it was delivered to the Church by way of
Tradition? I hope A. C. will never say so. For certainly in Doctrinal things,
nothing so likely to be a Tradition Apostolical, as that which has a Yea, and
B. slarmine himself avers, Onnes Traditiones, etc. contineri in Scripturis in
universal. Lib. 4. de verb. Dei non scripto. c. 10.. Sic etiam. And S. Basil.
Sermon. de fide approves only those Agrapha, quae non sunt aliena a pia secundum
Scripturam Sententia.
root and a Foundation in Scripture. For Apostles cannot write, or deliver
contrary, but subordinate, and subservient things.


F. I asked how he knew Scripture to be Scripture, and in particular, Genesis,
Exodus, etc. These are balieved to be Scripture, yet not proved out of any
Place of Scripture. The Bishop said, That the Books of Scripture are Principles
to be supposed, and needed not to be proved.


B. Scripture by Tradition, and Tradition by Scripture, till the Devil find a
means to dispute him into Infidelity, and make him believe neither. I hope this
is no part of your meaning. Yet I doubt this Qui conantur fidem destruere sub
specie Quaestionis difficible, aut sort indissolubilis, etc. Orig. Q. 35. in.
S. Matthew.
Question, How do you know Scripture to be Scripture? has done more harm, than
you will be ever able to help by Tradition. But I must follow that way which
you draw me. And because it is so much insisted upon by you, and is in it self
a To know that Scriptures are Divine, and insallible in every part, is a
Foundation so necessary, as if it be doubtfully questioned, all the Faith built
upon Scripture falls to the ground. A. C. p. 47. Necesse est nosse ext are
libros aliquos vere Divinos. Bellatm. L. 4. de verb. Dei non scripto. c. 4..
Quarto necesse. Et etiam libros qui sunt in manibus esse illos. ibid.. Sexto
oportet.
matter of such Consequence, I will sift it a little farther.

this great Principle in Divinity, have used diverse means to prove it. All have
not gone the same way, nor all the right way. You cannot be right, that resolve
Faith of the Scriptures being the Word of God, into only Tradition. For only,
and no other proof, are equal. To prove the Scripture therefore (so called by
way of Excellence) to be the Word of God, there are several Offers at diverse
proofs. For first, some fly to the Testimony and witness of the Church, and (1.)
her Tradition, which constantly believes, and unanimously delivers it.
Secondly, some to the Light and the Testimony which (2.)
the Scripture gives to it self; with other internal proofs which are observed
in it, and to be found in no other Writing whatsoever. Thirdly, some to the
Testimony of the Holy Ghost, (3.)
which clears up the light that is in Scripture, and seals this Faith to the
Souls of men, that it is Gods Word. Fourthly, all that (4.)
have not imbrutished themselves, and sunk below their species, and order of
Nature, give even Natural Reason leave to come in, and make some proof, and
give some approbation upon the weighing, and the consideration of other
Arguments. And this must be admitted, if it be but for Pagans and Insidels, who
either consider not, or value not any one of the other three: yet must some way
or other be converted, or left without excuse, Romans 1. 20.
Romans 1. and that is done by this very evidence.

Tradition of the Church, which is your way: That taken and considered alone,
it is so far from being the only, that it cannot be a sufficient Proof to
believe by Divine Faith, that Scripture is the Word of God. For that which is a
full and sufficient proof, is able of it self to settle the Soul of man
concerning it. Now the Tradition of the Church is not able to do this For it
may be further asked, Why we should believe the Churches Tradition? And if it
be answered, We may believe, Because the Church is infallibly governed by the
Holy Ghost; it may yet be demanded of you, How that may appear? And if this be
demanded, either you must say, you have it by special Revelation, which is the
private Spirit you object to other men, or else you must attempt to prove it by
Scripture Esse aliquas veras Traditiones demonstratur ex Scripturis. Bellar. L.
4. de verb Dei non scripto. c. 5. and A. C. p. 50. proves Tradition out of 2
These. 2.
, as all of you do. And that very offer, to prove it out of Scripture, is a
sufcient acknowledgment, that the Scripture is a higher Proof, than the
Churches Tradition, which (in your Grounds) is, or may be Questionable, till
you come thither. Besides, this is an Inviolable ground of Reason: Arist. 1.
Post. ^. 2. T. 16. Per Pacium. Quocirca si (...), propter prima scimus and
credimus, illa quoque scimus and credimus (...) magis, quia per illa scimus,
and credimus etiam posteriora.
That the Principles of any Conclusion must be of more credit, than the
Conclusion it self. Therefore if the Articles of Faith, The Trinity, the
Resurrection, and the rest, be the Conclusions, and the Principles by which
they are proved, be only Ecclesiastical Tradition, it must needs follow, That
the Tradition of the Church is more infallible than the Articles of the Faith,
if the Faith which we have of the Articles should be finally Resolved into the
Veracity of the Churches Testimony. But this Eorum errorem dissimulare non
possum, qui asserunt fidem Nostram, (...) tanquam in ultimam credendi causam
reducendam esse. Ut Credamus Ecclesiam esse Veracem, etc. M. Canus. L. 2. de
Locis. c. 8.. Cui, and tertium.
your Learned and wary men deny. And therefore I hope your self dare not affirm.

Voice of the Church (saying the Books of Scripture commonly received, are the
Word of God) be the formal Object of Faith, upon which alone absolutely I may
resolve my self; then every man not only may, but ought to resolve his Faith
into the Voice or Tradition of the Church: for every man is bound to rest upon
the proper and formal Object of the Faith. But nothing can be more evident than
this, That a man ought not to resolve his Faith of this Principle into the sole
Testimony of the Church. Therefore neither is that Testimony, or Tradition
alone, the formal Object of Faith. Vox Ecclesiae non est Formale Objectum
Fidei. Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. q. 3. A. 2. Licet in Articulo Fid^^ [ Credo
Ecclesiam] forte contineatur hoc totum, Credo ea, quae docet Ecclesia: tamen
non intelligitur necessario, quod Credo docenti Ecclesiae tanquam Test
infallabili. ibid. tibi etiam rejicit Opinionem. Durandl and Gabr. Et Waldens.
L. 2. Doctr. Fidei Art. 2. c. 21. Number. 4. Testimonium Ecclesiae Catholicae est
Objectum Fidei Christianae, and Legistatio Scripturae Canonicae, subjicitur
tamen ipsi, sicut Testis Judici, and Testimonium Veritati, etc. Canus Loc. Lib.
2. cap. 8. Nec si Ecclesia aditum nobis praebet ad hujusmodi Libros Sacros
cognoscendos, protinus ibi acquiescendum est, sed ultr^ oportet progredi, and
Solida Dei veritate niti, etc.
The Learned of your own part grant this: Although in that Article of the Creed
(I believe the Catholic Church) peradventure all this be contained [I believe
those things which the Church teacheth] yet this is not necessarily understood,
That I believe the Church teaching, as an Infallible Witness. And if they did
not confess this, it were no hard thing to prove.

Authorities of Fathers, Councels, nay of Scripture too, Omnis ergo
Ecclesiastica Authoritas, ^^m sit ad Testificandum de Christo, and Legibus
ejus: vilior est Christi legibus, and Scripturis Sanctis necessario
postponenda. Wald. ^.* 2. Doct. Fidei Art. 2. cap. 21. Numb. 1.
(though this be contrary to their own Doctrine) must be finally Resolved into
the Authority of the present Roman Church. And though they would seem to have
us believe the Fathers, and the Church of old, yet they will not have us take
their Doctrine from their own Writings, or the Decrees of Councels: because (as
they say) we cannot know by reading them, what their meaning was, but from the
Infallible Testimony of the present Roman Church reaching by Tradition. Now by
this, two things are evident. First, That they ascribe as great Authority (if
not greater) to a part of the Catholic Church, as they do to the whole, which
we believe in our Creed; and which is the Society of all Christians. And this
is full of Absurdity in Nature, in Reason, in All things, that any Totum est
majus sua part. Etiamsi Axioma sit apud Euclydem, non tamen id^o Geometricum
putandum est, quia Geometres eo utitur. Utitur enim and tota Logica. Ram. in
Schol. Matthew. And Aristotle vindicates such Propositions (...), From being
usurped by Particular Sciences: (...), etc. Quia convenient omni ^ati, and non
alicui Generi separatim. 4. Metaph. c. 3. T. 7.
Part should be of equal worth, power, credit, or authority with the Whole.
Secondly, that in their Doctrine concerning the Infallibility of their Church,
their proceeding is most unreasonable. For if you ask them, Why they believe
their whole Doctrine to be the sole true Catholic Faith? Their Answer is,
Because it is agreeable to the Word of God, and the Doctrine and Tradition of
the Ancient Church. If you ask them, How they know that to be so? They will
then produce Testimonies of Scripture, Councels, and Fathers. But if you ask a
third time, By what means they are assured, that these Testimonies do indeed
make for them, and their Cause? They will not then have recourse to Text of
Scripture, or Exposition of Fathers, or Phrase and propriety of Languag^, in
which either of them were first written, or to the scope of the Author, or the
Intelligentia dictorum ex causis est assumenda dicendi, quia non Sermoni res,
sed Rei Sermo est subjectus. S. Hilar. 1. 4. de Trin. Ex materia dicti* di
rigendus est sensus. Tert. l. de Resur. carnis, c. 37.
Causes of the thing uttered, or the Conference with like Videndo differentias
Similium ad Similia. Orig. Tract. 19. in S. Matthew.
Places, or the Antecedents Recolendum est unde venerit ista Sententia, and
quae illam superiora pe^ererint, quibusque connexa dependeat. S. Aug. Ep. 29.
Soiet circumstantia Scripturae illuminare Sententiam. S. Aug. L. 83. Quaest. q.
69.
and Consequents of the same Places: Quae ambigue and obscure in nonnullis
Scripturae Sacrae locis dicta videntur, per ea quae alibi certa, and indubitata
habentur declarantur. S. Basil. in Regulis contractis, Reg. 267. Manifestiora
quaeque praevaleant, and de incertis certiora praescribant. Tert. L de Resur.
c. 19 and 21. S. Aug. L. 3. De Doct. Christ. c. 26. Moris est Scripturarum
obscuris Manifesta subnectere, and quod prius sub aeuigmatibus dixerint,
apert^^ voce proferre. S Hieron. in Esa. 19. princ. Vid.. 26. Nu. 4.
or the Exposition of the dark and doubtful Places of Scripture by the
undoubted and manifest. With diverse other Rules given for the true knowledge
and understanding of Scripture, which do frequently occur in S. Aug. L. 3. de
Doctr. Christiana.
S. Augustine. No, none of these, or the like helps: That, with them, were to
admit a Private Spirit, or to make way for it. But their final Answer is, They
know it to be so, because the present Roman Church witnesses it, according to
Tradition. So arguing, ^ primo ad ultimum, from first to last; the Present
Church of Rome and her Followers believe her own Doctrine and Tradition to be
true and Catholic, because she professes it to be such. And if this be not to
prove idem per idem, the same by the same, I know not what is: which, though it
be most absurd in all kind of Learning, yet out of this I see not how it is
possible to wind themselves, so long as the last resolution of their Faith
must rest (as they teach) upon the Tradition of the present Church only.
necessary, And this is so necessary, that Bellarmine confes^es, that if
Tradition (which he rel^es upon) be not Divine: He and his can have no Faith.
Non habemus fidem. Fides (...) verbo Dei nititur. L. 4. de verbo Dei. c 4.. At
si ita est. And A. C. tells us, p. 47. To know that Scripture is Divine and
Infallible in every part, is a Foundation so necessary, as if it be doubtfully
questioned, all the Faith built upon Scripture falls to the ground. And he
gives the same reason for it, p. 50. which Bellarmine does.
that we be able to prove the Books of Scripture to be the Word of God, by some
Authority that is absolutely Divine. For if they be warranted unto us by any
Authority less than Divine, then all things contained in them (which have no
greater assurance than the Scripture, in which they are read) are not Objects
of Divine belief. And that once granted, will enforce us to yield, That all the
Articles of Christian Belief have no greater assurance than Humane, or Moral
Faith, or Credulity can afford. An Authority then simply Divine must make good
the Scriptures Infallibility, at least in the last Resolution of our Faith in
that Point. This Authority cannot be any Testimony, or Voice of the Ecclesiaem
spiritu a^flatam esse, certe credo. Non ut veritatem, authoritatemve Libris
Canonicis tribuat, sed ut doceat illos, (...) alios esse Canonicos. Nec si
aditum nobis praebet ad hujusmodi sacros Libros cognoscendos, protinus ibi
acquiescendum est, sed ultra oportet progredi, and solid^ Dei veritate ^iti.
Qu^ ex re intelligitur quid sibi voluerit Augustinus, quum ait, Evangelio non
creder^m, nisi, etc M. Canus L. 2. de Lacis, c. 8. fol. 3a. b. Non docet
fun^^tam esse Evangilii fidem in Ecclesiae Authoritate, sed, etc. Ibid.
Church alone. For the Church consists of men subject to Error; And no one of
them, since the Apostles times, has been assisted with so plentiful a measure
of the Blessed Spirit, as to secure him from being deceived; And all the Parts,
being all liable to mistaking, and fallible, the Whole cannot possibly be
Infallible, in, and of it self, and privileged from being deceived in some
Things, or other. And even in those Fundamental Things, in which the Whole
Universal Church neither does, nor can Err; yet even there her Authority is
not Divine, because She delivers those supernatural Truths by Promise of
Assistance, yet tied to Means: And not by any special immediate Revelation,
which is necessarily required to the very least Degree of Divine Authority. And
therefore our Hook. l. 3.. 9.
Worthies do not only say, but prove* That all the Churches Constitutions are
of the nature of Humane Law. Stapl. Relect. Co^. 4. q. 3. A. 1 and 2.
And some among you, not unworthy for their Learning, prove it at large, That
all the Churches Testimony, or Voice, or Sentence (call it what you will) is
but suo modo, or aliquo modo, not simply, but in a manner Divine. Yea, and A.
C. A. C. p. 51.
himself, after all his debate comes to that, and no further, That the
Tradition of the Church is, at least in some sort, Divine and Infallible. Now
that which is Divine but in a sort or manner, be it the Churches manner, is
aliquo modo non Divina, in a sort not Divine. But this Great Principle of Faith
(the Ground and Proof of whatsoever else is of Faith) cannot stand firm upon a
Proof that is, and is not; in a manner, and not in a manner Divine; As it must,
if we have no other Anchor than the External Tradition of the Church to lodge
it upon, and hold it steady in the midst of those waves, which daily beat upon
it.

A. C. confesses expressly, That to prove the Books of Scripture to be Divine,
we must be warranted by that which A. C. p. 49.
is Infallible. He confesses farther, that there can be no sufficient A. C. p.
50.
Infallible Proof of this, but Gods Word, written, or unwritten. And he gives
his Reason for it: Because if the Proof be merely A. C. p. 51.
Humane, and Fallible, the Science or Faith which is built upon it, can be no
better. So then this is agreed on by me, (yet leaving other men to travel by
their own way, so be they can come to make Scripture thereby Infallible) That
Scripture must be known to be Scripture by a sufficient, Infallible, Divine
Proof. And that such Proof can be nothing but the Word of God, is agreed on
also by me. Yea, and agreed on for me it shall be likewise, that Gods Word may
be written and unwritten. For Cardinal Verbum Dei non est tale, nec habet ullam
Authoritatem, quia scriptum est in membr^ni^, sed quia a Deo profectum est.
Bellar. l. 4. de Verb. Dei. c. 2.. Ecclesiasticae Traditiones.
Bellarmine tells us truly, that it is not the writing, or printing, that make
Scripture the Word of God; but it is the Prime Unerring Essential Truth, God
himself, uttering, and revealing it to his Church, that makes it Verbum Dei,
the Word of God. And this Word of God is uttered to men, either immediately by
God himself, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and so 'twas to the Prophets and
Apostles: Or mediately, either by Angels, to whom God had spoken first, and so
the Law was given, Lex ordinata per Angelos in man^ Mediatoris, Gal. 3. 19.
Gal. 3. and so also the Message was delivered to the Blessed Virgin, S. Luke
1. 30.
S. Luke 1. or by the Prophets The Holy Ghost, etc. which spoke by the
Prophets, in Symb. Nicen.
and Apostles, and so the Scriptures were delivered to the Church. But their
being written, gave them no Authority at all, in regard of themselves. Written
or Unwritten, the Word was the same. But it was written, that it might be the
better Nam Pseudoprophetae etiam viventibus adhuc Apostolis, multas fingebant
corruptelas sub hoc praetextu and titulo, quasi ab Apostolis viva voce essent
traditae: and propter hanc ipsam causam Apostoli Doctrinam suam coeperunt
Literis comprehendere, and Ecclesiit commendare. Chem. Exam. Council. Third. de
Traditionibus sub octavo genere Tradit. And so also Jausen. Comment. in S. Joh.
5. 47. Sicut enim firmius est quod mandatur Literis, ita est culpabilius and
majus non credere Scriptis, quam non credere Verbis.
preserved, and continued with the more integrity to the use of the Church, and
the more faithfully in our Labilis est memoria, and ideo indigemus Scriptura:
Dicendum quod verum est, sed hoc non habet, nisi ex inundantia peccatorum.
Henr. a Gand. Sum. p. 1. Ar. 8. q. 4. fine. Christus ipse de pectore morit^ro
Testamentum transfert in tabulas di^ duraturas. Optat. L. 5. Christus ipse non
transtulis, sed ex Optati sententia, Ejus Inspiratione, si non Jussu, Apostoli
transtulerunt.
Memories. And you have been often enough told (were truth, and not the
maintaining of a party, the thing you seek for) that if you will show us any
such unwritten word of God delivered by his Prophets and Apostles, we will
acknowledge it to be Divine and Infallible. So, written, or unwritten, that
shall not stumble us. But then A. C. must not tell us, at least not think we
shall swallow it into our Belief, That every thing which he says is the
unwritten Word of God, is so indeed.

Bellarmine has written a whole Book Bellar. L. 4. de Verbo Dei non sc^ipt.
De verbo Dei non scripto, of the Word of God not written; in which he handles
the Controversy concerning Traditions. And the Cunning is, to make his weaker
Readers believe, that all that, which He, and his are pleased to call
Traditions, are by and by no less to be received, and honored, than the
unwritten Word of God ought to be. Whereas it is a thing of easy knowledge,
That the unwritten Word of God and Tradition, are not Convertible Terms, that
is, are not all one. For there are many Unwritten Words of God, which were
never delivered over to the Church, for ought appears: And there are many
Traditions (affirmed, at least to be such by the Church of Rome) which were
never warranted by any Unwritten Word of God.

Unwritten Words of God which were never delivered over to the Church, is
manifest. For when, or where were the words, which Christ spoke to his
Apostles, during the Act. 1. 3.
forty days of his Conversing with them after his Resurrection, first delivered
over to the Church? or what were the Unwritten Words he then spoke? If neither
He, nor His Apostles, or Evangelists have delivered them to the Church, the
Church ought not to deliver them to her Children. Or if she do Annunciare
aliquid Christianis Catholici^* pra^er id quod acceperunt, nunquam licuit,
nusquam licet, nunquam lic^bit. Vincent. Lit. c. 14. Et pr^cipit nihil aliud
in^^vari, nisi quod traditum est, S, Cypri. ad Pompelum c^nt. Epist. Stephan.
princ.
tradere non traditions, make a Tradition of that, which was not delivered to
her, and by some of Them; then She is unfaithful to God, and does not servare
depositum, faithfully keep that which is committed to her Trust. 1 Timothy 6. 20
and 2 Timothy 1. 14.
1 Timothy 6. And her Sons, which come to know it, are not bound to obey her
Tradition against the Si ipsa (Ecclesia) contraria Scripturae diceret (Fidelis)
ipsi non crederet, etc. He^* ^ Gand. S^^. p. 1. A. 10. q. 1. And Bellarmine
himself* that he might the more safely defend himself in the Cause of
Traditions, says, (but how truly let other men judge) Nullam Traditionem
admittimu^ contr^ Scripturam. L. 4. de Verb^ Dei. cap. 3. ^. Deinde commune.
Word of their Father. For wheresoever Christ holds his peace, or that his
words are not Registered, I am of S. S. Aug. Tom. 96. in S. Joh. in illa Verba,
Multa ^abeo dicere, sed non potestis portare modd.
Augustines Opinion, No man may dare without rashness say they were these, or
these. So, there were many Unwritten Words of God, which were never delivered
over to the Church; and therefore never made Tradition. And there are many
Traditions, which cannot be said to be the Unwritten Word of God. For I
believe, a Learned Romanist, that will weigh before he speaks, will not easily
say, That to Anoint, or use Spittle in Baptism: or to use three Dippings in the
use of that Sacrament: or diverse other like Traditions, had their Rise from any
Word of God unwritten: Or if he be so hardy as to say so, it is gratis dictum,
and he will have enough to do to prove it. So, there may be an Unwritten Word
of God, which is no Tradition. And there are many Traditions, which are no
Unwritten Word of God. Therefore Tradition must be taken two ways. Either, as
it is the Churches Act delivering, or the Thing thereby delivered; and then
it is Humane Authority, or from it, and unable infallibly to warrant Divine
Faith, or to be the Object of it. Or else as it is the Unwritten Word of God:
and then where ever it can be made to appear so, it is of divine and infallible
Authority, no Question. But then I would have A. C. consider where he is in
this Particular. He tells us, We must know infallibly, that the Books of A. C.
p. 49.
Holy Scripture are Divine, and that this must be done by Unwritten Tradition,
but so, as that this Tradition is the Word of God unwritten. Now let him but
prove that this, or any Tradition, which the Church of Rome stands upon, is the
Word of God, though unwritten, and the business is ended. But A. C. A. C. p. 50.
must not think, that because the Tradition of the Church tells me these Books
are Verbum Dei, Gods Word; and that I do both honor and believe this
Tradition; That therefore this Tradition it self is Gods Word too; and so
absolutely sufficient and infallible to work this Belief in me. Therefore for
ought A. C. has yet added, we must on with our Inquiry after this great
Business, and most necessary Truth.

Divine and Infallible Testimony, Lumine proprio, by the resplendencie of that
Light, which it has in it self only, and by the witness that it can so give to
it self, I could never yet see cause to allow. Hook. l. 2.. 4.
For as there is no place in Scripture that tells us, Such Books containing
such and such Particulars are the Canon, and Infallible Will and Word of God:
So if there were any such place, that were no sufficient proof; For a man may
justly ask another Book to bear witness of that; and again of that another; and
where ever it were written in Scripture, that must be a part of the Whole. And
no created thing can alone give witness to it self, and make it evident, nor
one part testify for another, and satisfy where Reason will but offer to
contest. Except those Principles only of Natural knowledge, which appear
manifest by intuitive light of understanding, without any Discourse. And yet
they also to the weaker sort require Induction preceding. Now this Inbred light
of Scripture is a thing coincident with Scripture it self: and so, the
Principles, and the Conclusion in this kind of proof should be entirely the
same, which cannot be. Besides, if this inward Light were so clear, how could
there have been any variety among the Ancient Believers touching the Authority
of S. Eusebius. L. 2. c. 27. fi^e. Edit. Basil. 1549.
James, and S. Jude's Epistles, and the Eusebius L. 3 c. 25.
Apocalypse, with other Books which were not received for diverse years after the
rest of the New Testament? For certainly, the Light which is in the Scripture,
was the same then, which now it is. And how could the Gospel of S. Bartholomew,
of S. Thomas, and other counterfeit pieces, obtain so much credit with some, as
to be received into the Canon, if the evidence of this Light were either
Universal, or Infallible, of, and by it self? And this, though I cannot
approve, yet methinks, you may, and upon probable grounds at least. For I hope
no Except A. C. whose boldness herein I cannot but pity. For he denies this
light to the Scripture, and gives it to Tradition* His words are, p. 52.
Tradition of the Church is of a company, which by its own light shows it self
to be infallibly assisted, etc.
Romanist will deny, but that there is as much light in Scripture to manifest,
and make ostension of it self to be infallibly the written Word of God, as
there is in any Tradition of the Church, that it is Divine, and infallibly the
Unwritten Word of God. And the Scriptures saying from the mouths of the
Prophets, Isa. 44. and passim.
Thus says the Lord, and from the mouths of the Apostles, that the Holy Ghost
spoke by them, are at least as able, * Act. 28. 25.
and as fit to bear witness to their own Verity; as the Church is to bear
witness to her own Traditions, by bare saying they come from the Apostles. And
your selves would never go to the Scripture, to prove that there are
Traditions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Jude, verse. ^.
as you do, if you did not think the Scripture as easy to be discovered by
inbred light in it self, as Traditions by their light. And if this be so, then
it is as probable at the least (which some of ours affirm) That Scripture may
be known to be the Word of God, by the Light and Luster which it has in it
self, as it is (which you In your Articles delivered to D. W. to be answered.
And A. C. p. 52.
affirm) That a Tradition may be known to be such, by the light which it has
in it self: which is an excellent Proposition to make sport withal, were this
an Argument to be handled merrily.

Testimony of the Holy Ghost, and so look in vain after special Revelations,
and make themselves by this very Conceit, obnoxious, and easy to be led by all
the whisperings of a seducing private spirit; or else you would fain have them
think so. For your side, both upon this, and other Occasions, do often
challenge, That we resolve all our Faith into the Dictates of a A Jesuit,
under the name of T. S. set out a Book, An. 1630. which he called, The Trial of
the Protestant private Spirit.
private Spirit; from which we shall ever prove our selves as free, if not
freer than you. To the Question in hand then: Suppose it agreed upon, that
there must be a Ut Testimonia Scripturae certam and indubitatam fidem pr^stent,
necessarium videtur ostendere, quod ips^ Divine Scripturae sint Dei Spiritu
inspirata. Orig. 4. (...).
Divine Faith, cui subesse non potest falsum, under which can rest no possible
error, That the Books of Scripture are the written Word of God: If they which
go to the testimony of the Holy Ghost for proof of this, do mean by Faith,
Objectum Fidei, the Object of Faith that is to be believed, then, no question,
they are out of the ordinary way. For God never sent us by any word or warrant
of his, to look for any such special, and private Testimony to prove which that
Book is, that we must believe. But if by Faith they mean, the Habit; or Act of
Divine infused Faith, by which virtue they do believe the Credible Object, and
thing to be believed; then their speech is true, and confessed by all Divines
of all sorts. For Faith is the gift 1 Cor. 1. 2. 3 4. Datur nobis a Deo, etc.
S. Aug. in Psalm. 87.
of God, of God alone, and an infused Quia homo assentiendo eis quae sunt
fidei, elevatur supra Naturam suam, oportet quod hoc insit ei ex supernaturali
principio interius movente, quod est Deus. Tho. 2. 2^. ^. 6. A. 1. c. And your
own Divines agree in this, That Fides acquisit^ is not sufficient for any
Article, but there must be Fides i^^^sa, before there can be Divine Certainty.
Fides acquisita in^ititur (...) humanis. Ad quem modum and Saraceni suis
Pr^ceptoribus; and Jud^^ suis Rabinis, and Gentes suis Philosophis, and omnes
suis Majoribus inherent: non sic Christiani, sed per interi^s lumen infusum a
Spirit^ San^to, qu^ firmissime and certissime moventur ad credendum, etc.
Canus. L. 2. Locor. c. 8.. Jam si haec.
Habit, in respect whereof the Soul is merely recipient; And therefore the sole
Infuser, the Holy Ghost must not be excluded from that work, which none can do,
but He. For the Holy Ghost, as Symb. Nicen. The Holy Ghost spoke by the
Prophets, etc. Et 1 S. Pet. 2. 21. Quis modus est, quo doces animas ea quae
f^tura sunt? Docuist^ enim Prophetas t^os. S. Aug. L. 11. Co^^ess. c. 19.
He first dictated the Scripture to the Apostles: Nec enim Ecclesiae
Testimonium, aut Judicium predi^amus, Dei Spiritum, vel ab Ecclesia docente,
vel a nobis a^aientibus, excludimus, sed utrobique dis^rte includimus, etc.
Stapl. trip. contr. Whitak. c. 3.
So did he not leave the Church in general, nor the true members of it in
particular, without Grace to believe, what himself had revealed, and made
Credible. So that Faith, as it is taken for the virtue of Faith, whether it be
of this, or any other Article, Fides que c^pit ab Ecclesiae Testimoni^,
quatenus proponit and inducit ad Fidem, desinit in Deo intus revelante, and
intus docente quod s^r^s Ecclesia pr^dicavit. Sapl. Relect. Cont. ^. q. 3. a.
2. When grave and learned men do sometimes hold, that of this Principle there
is no proof, but by the Testimony of the Spirit, etc. I think it is not their
meaning, to exclude all outward Proofs, etc. but rather this, That all other
means are uneffectual of themselves to work Faith, without the special Grace of
God. Hook. etc. Lib. 3.. 8.
though it receive a kind of preparation, or Occasion of Beginning from the
Testimony of the Church, as it proposes, and induces to the Faith; yet it
ends in God, revealing within, and teaching within, that which the Church
preached without. For till the Spirit of God move the Heart of man, he cannot
believe, be the Object never so Credible. The speech is true then, but quite De
habita Fidei quoad fieri ej^s, and generationem, quum a Deo immediate solo Do^o
gratuito (...) est, Nihil ad Qu^stionem, nisi quoad hoc quod per Scripturae
inspectionem, etc. Henr. a Gand. Sum. ^. 10. q. 1. lit. D.
out of the State of this Question: which inquires only after a sufficient
means to make this Object Credible, and fit to be believed, against all
impeachment of folly and temerity in Belief, whether men do actually believe it
or not. For which no man may expect inward private Revelation, without the
external means of the Church, unless perhaps the Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. Q. 3.
A. 2. Does not only affirm it, but proves it too, a paritate ratio^^s, in case
of necessity, where there is no Contempt of the external means.
case of Necessity be excepted, when a man lives in such a time and place as
excludes him from all ordinary means; in which I dare not offer to shut up God
from the Souls of men, nor to tie him to those ordinary ways and means, to
which yet in great wisdom and providence He has tied and bound all mankind.

Private Revelation then has nothing ordinarily to do, to make the Object
Credible in this, That Scripture is the Word of God, or in any other Article.
For the Question is of such outward, and evident means, as other men may take
notice of, as well as our selves. By which if there arise any Doubting, or
Infirmity in the Faith, others may strengthen us, or we afford means to support
them: Whereas the Quid cum singulis agitur, Deus scit qui agit, and ipsi cum
quibus agitur, sciunt. Quid autem agatur cum genere Humano, per Historiam
commendari voluit, and per Prop^^tiam. S. Aug. de vera R^lig. c. 25.
, Testimony of the Spirit, and all private Revelation is within, nor felt, nor
seen of any, but him that has it. So that hence can be drawn no proof to
others. And Miracles are not sufficient alone to prove it, unless both They*
and the Revelation too, agree with the Rule of Scripture* which is now an
unalterable Rule by Gal. 1. 8. A. C. p. 52.
man, or Angel. To all this A. C. says nothing, save that I seem not to admit
of an Infallible Impulsion of a private Spirit, ex part subjecti, without any
infallible Reason, and that sufficiently applied ex part objecti, which if I
did admit, would open a gap to all Enthusiasms, and dreams of fanatical men.
Now for this yet I thank him. For I do not only seem not to admit, but I do
most clearly reject this frenzy in the words going before.

Utitur tamen sacra Doctrina Ratione Humana, Non quidem ad proba^dum Fidem
ipsam, sed ad manifestandum aliqua alia, qu^ traduntut (...) hac Doctrind. Tho.
p. 1. q. ^. A. 8. ad 2. Passibus rationis novus bo^^ tendit in Deum. S. Aug. de
vera Relig. c. 26. ( Passibus, verum est, sed nec aequis, nec solis.) Nam
Invisibilia Dei altiori modo quantum ad plura percipit Fides, quam Ratio
natur^lis ^x Creaturis in Deum procede^s. Tho. 2. 2. q. 2. A. 3. ad 3.
Reason leave to come in, and prove what it can, may not justly be denied by
any reasonable man. For though Reason without Grace cannot see the way to
Heaven, nor believe this Book, in which God has written the way; yet Grace is
never placed but in a reasonable Creature, and proves by the very seat, which
it has taken up, that the end it has, is to be spiritual eye-water, to make
Reason see what by Animalis homo non percipit. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
Nature only it cannot, but never to blemish Reason in that, which it can
comprehend. Now the use of Reason is very general; and man (do what he can) is
still apt to search and seek for a Reason why he will believe, though after he
once believes, his Faith grows Quia sci^ati^ certitudinem habent ex naturali
lu^ine Rationis human^, qu^ potest er^are: Theologi^ autem (quae docet and
Objectum and Notitiam Fidet, sicut and Fidem ipsam) certitudinem habit ex
lumine Divine scientie, quae decipi non potest. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 5. c. ut
ipsa fide valentiores ^acti, quod credimus intelligere mereamur. S. Aug. cont.
Ep. Ma^ichaej, dictam, Fundamentum. c. 14. Hoc autem ita intelligendum est, ut
scientia certior sit Certitudine Evidentiae; Fides vero certior Firmitate
Adh^sionis. Majus lumen in Scientia, majus R^b^r in Fide. Et hoc, quia in Fide,
and ad Fidem Actus imperatus Voluntatis conc^rrit. Credere enim est Actus
Intellectus Vero assentientis productus ex Voluntatis Imperio. Biel. in 3.
Se^^. d. 23. q. 2. A. 1. Unde Tho. Intellectus Credentis determinatur ad Unum,
non per Rationem, sed per Voluntatem; and ideo Assensus hic accipitur pro Actu
Intellectus, secundum quod a Voluntate determinatur ad Unum* 2. 2. q. 2. A. 1.
ad 3.
stronger, than either his Reason, or his Knowledge: and great reason for this,
because it goes higher, and so upon a safer Principle, than either of the other
can in this life.

Books called the Scripture, are commonly and constantly reputed to be the Word
of God, and so infallible Verity, to the least point of them. Does any man
doubt this? The world cannot keep him from going to weigh it at the Balance of
Reason, whether it be the Word of God, or not. To the same Weights he brings
the Tradition of the Church, the inward motives in Scripture it self, all
Testimonies within, which seem to bear witness to it; and in all this, there is
no harm: the danger is, when a man will use no other Scale, but Reason, or
prefer Reason before any other Scale. For the Word of God, and the Book
containing it, refuse not to be weighed by Si vobis, rationi, and veritati
consentanea videntur, in pretio habete, etc. de mysteriis Religionis, Justin.
Mart. Apol. 2. Igitur, si fuit dispositio Rationis, etc. Tertull. L. de Carne
Christi, c. 18. Rationabile est credere Deum esse Autorem Scripturae. Henr. a
Gand. Sum. To. 1. Ar. 9. q. 3.
Reason. But the Scale is not large enough to contain, nor the Weights to
measure out the true virtue, and full force of either. Reason then can give no
supernatural ground, into which a man may resolve his Faith, That Scripture is
the Word of God infallibly; yet Reason can go so high, as it can prove that
Christian Religion, which rests upon the Authority of this Book, stands upon
surer grounds of Nature, Reason, common Equity, and Justice, than any thing in
the World, which any Infidel, or mere Naturalist, has done, does, or can
adhere unto, against it, in that which he makes, accounts, or assumes as
Religion to himself.

Ancient Fathers relied upon the Scriptures, no Christians more; and having to
do with Philosophers (men very well seen in all the subtilties, which Natural
Reason could teach, or learn) They were often put to it, and did as often make
it good, That they had sufficient warrant to rely, so much as They did, upon
Scripture. In all which Disputes, because they were to deal with Infidels, they
did labor to make good the Authority of the Book of God by such Arguments, as
Unbelievers themselves could not but think reasonable, if they weighed them
with indifferency. For though I set the Mysteries of Faith above Reason, which
is their proper place; yet I would have no man think They contradict Reason, or
the Principles thereof. No sure. For Reason by her own light can discover how
firmly the Principles of Religion are true: But all the Light she has will
never be able to find them false. Nor may any man think that the Principles of
Religion, even this, That Scriptures are the Word of God, are so indifferent to
a Natural eye, that it may with as just cause lean to one part of the
Contradiction, as to the other. For though this Truth, That Scripture is the
Word of God, is not so demonstratively evident, a priori, as to enforce Assent:
yet it is strengthened so abundantly with probable Arguments, both from the
Light of Nature it self, and Humane Testimony, that he must be very wilful, and
self-conceited, that shall dare to suspect it.

Hook. L. 3. ^. 8. Si Plato ipse viv^veret, and me interro^a^tem non
aspernaretur, etc. S. Aug. de vera Kelig. c. 3. Videamus quatenus Ratio potest
progredi a visibilibus ad invisibilia, etc. Ibid. c. 29.
It is not altogether impossible to prove it even by Reason, a Truth
infallible, or else to make them deny some apparent Principle of their own. For
Example: It is an apparent Principle, and with them, That God, or the Absolute
prime Agent, cannot be forced out of any Possession. For if He could be forced
by another Greater, He were neither Prince, nor Absolute, nor Si vim spe^^es,
Deus Valentissimus est, Arist. de Mundo, c. ^. Domini and Moderatores omnium.
Cic. 2. d^ L^g.
God, in their own Theology. Now they must grant, That that God, and Christ,
which the Scripture teaches, and we believe, is the only true God, and no other
with him, and so deny the Deity, which they worshipped, or else deny their own
Principle about the Deity, That God cannot be commanded, and forced out of
possession: For Ipse S^turnus, and Serapis, and Jupiter, and q^^^quid Daemonum
colitis, victi dolor q^od sunt, eloquuntur. Nec utique in turpit^dinem sui
nonnullis praesertim vestrorum assistentibus, mentiuntur. It sis testibus esse
eos Daemones de se verum con^^te^^^bus credit. Adjurati enim per Deum verum,
and so^^n invi^i, etc. Arnob. 8. contra Gent. Or (...) Foelix, as is now
thought.
their Gods, Saturn, and Serapis, and Jupiter himself, have been adjured by the
Name of the true, and only God, and have been forced out of the bodies they
possessed, and confessed themselves to be foul and seducing Devils. And their
Confession was to be supposed true, in point of Reason: For they that were
adored as Gods, would never belie themselves into Devils, to their own
reproach, especially in the presence of them that worshipped them, were they
not forced. This, many of the Unbelievers saw; therefore they could not (in
very force of Reason) but they must either deny their God, or deny their
Principle in Nature. Their long Custom would not forsake their God, and their
Reason could not forget their Principle. If Reason therefore might judge among
them, they could not worship any thing that was under Command. And if it be
reasonable to do, and believe this, then why not reasonable also to believe,
That Scripture is his Word, given to teach himself, and Christ, since there
they find Christ S. Mat. 12. 22.
doing that, and S. Mat. 16. 17.
giving power to do it after, which themselves saw executed upon their
Devil-Gods?

Laws have scarce had the honor to be duly observed, or constantly allowed
worthy approbation in the Particular places, where they have been established
for Laws; this Law of Christ, and this Canon of Scripture the container of it,
is, or has been received in almost Si Libri quoquo modo se habent sancti tamen
Divinarum rerum pleni prope totius generis humani confessione di^^ama^tur, etc.
S. Aug. de util. Cred. c. 7. Scriptura summ^ dispositione Providenti^ super
omnes omnium Gentium Literas, omnia ^ibi genera inguni^rum humanorum Divine
Excellens Authoritate subjecit. S. Aug. 11. de Civit. Dei, c. 1. At in omni
orb terr^rum, in omni Gr^cid, and universis Nationibus, innumeri s^nt, and
immensi, qui relictis Patriis Legibus, etc. ad observantiam Mosis, and Christi,
etc. Origin. 4. (...). cap. 1.
all Nations under Heaven. And wheresoever it has been received, it has been
both approved for Unchangeable good; and believed for Infallible verity. This
persuasion could not have been wrought in men of all sorts, but by working upon
their Reason, unless we shall think all the World unreasonable, that received
it. And certainly God did not give this admirable faculty of Reasoning to the
Soul of man, for any cause more prime than this, to discover, or to Judge and
allow (within the Sphere of its own Activity, and not presuming farther) of the
way to Himself, when and howsoever it should be discovered.

Rational men, was that which stumbled the Manichee (an Heresy it was, but
more than half Pagan) namely, That somewhat must be believed, before much could
be known. Wise men use not to believe, but what they know: And the Manichee
Irridere in Catholicae Fidei disciplina, quod juberentur homines credere, non
autem, etc. S. Aug. 1. Retract. c. 14.
scorned the Orthodox Christian, as light of Belief; promising to lead no
Disciple after him, but upon evident knowledge. This stumbles many; but yet the
Principle, That somewhat must be believed, before much can be known, stands
firm in Reason still. For if in all Sciences there be some Principles, which
cannot be proved; if Reason be able to see this, and confess it; if almost all
Artists have granted it; if in the Mathematics, where are the Exactest
Demonstrations, there be Quaedam postulata, some things to be first Demanded,
and granted, before the Demonstration can proceed: Who can justly deny that to
Divinity, A Science of the Highest Object, God Himself, which he easily and
reasonably grants to inferior Sciences, which are more within his reach? And
as all Sciences suppose some Principles without proving; so have they almost
all, some Text, some Authority, upon which they rely in some measure; and it is
Reason they should. For though these Sciences make not their Texts Infallible,
as Divinity does; yet full consent, and prudent Examination, and long
continuance, have won reputation to them, and settled reputation upon them, very
deservedly. And were these Texts more void of Truth than they are, yet it were
fit, and reasonable to uphold their credit, that Novices, and young Beginners
in a Science, which are not able to work strongly upon Reason, nor Reason upon
them, may have Authority to believe, till they can learn to Conclude from
Principles, and so to know. Is this also reasonable in other Sciences, and
shall it not be so in Theology, to have a Text, a Scripture, a Rule, which
Novices may be taught first to believe, that so they may after come to the
knowledge of those things, which out of this rich Principle, and And therefore
S. Aug. 2. de Doctr. Christ. c. 8. would have men make themselves perfect in
reading the Letter of the Scripture, even before they understood it. Eas notas
habeat, etsi nondum intellectu, tamen lectione duntaxat; No question but to
make them ready against they understood it. And as Schoolmasters make their
Scholars conne their Grammar-Rules by heart, that they may be ready for their
use, when they better understand them.
Treasure are Deduceable? I yet see not how right Reason can deny these
Grounds; and if it cannot, then a mere Natural man may be thus far convinced,
That the Text of God is a very Credible Text.

Scripture to be the Word of God, as by a Divine and Infallible Warrant. And,
it seems, no one of these does it alone. The Tradition of the present Church is
too weak, because that is not absolutely Divine. The Light which is in
Scripture it self, is not bright enough, it cannot bear sufficient witness to
it self. The Testimony of the Holy Ghost, that is most infallible, but
ordinarily it is not so much as considerable in this Question, which is not,
how, or by what means we believe, but how the Scripture may be proposed as a
Credible Object, fit for Belief. And for Reason, no man expects, that that
should prove it; it does service enough, if it enable us to disprove that which
misguided men conceive against it. If none of these then be an Absolute and
sufficient means to prove it, either we must find out another, or see what can
be more wrought out of these. And to all this again A. C. says nothing.

For the Tradition of the Church then, certain it is, we must NUMBER. ^0.
distinguish the Church, before we can judge right of the Validity of the
Tradition. For if the speech be of the Prime Christian Church, the Apostles,
Disciples, and such as had immediate Revelation from Heaven; no question, but
the Voice and Tradition of this Church is Divine, not aliquo modo, in a sort,
but simply; and the Word of God from them, is of like Validity, written, or
delivered. And against this Tradition (of which kind this* That the Books of
Scripture are the Word of God, is the most general and uniform) the Church of
England never excepted. And when S. L. 1. cont. Epis. (...). c. ^. (...) non
cred^r^m E(...), ^isi me catholi^^ Ecclesi^ comm^veret Authorit^^.
Augustine said, I would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the
Catholic Church moved me, (which Place you urged at the Conference, though you
are now content to slide by i^) some of your own will not endure should be
understood, save Occham. Dia^. p. 1 L. ^. c. 4. Intelligitur solum d^ Ecclesi^
(...) ^uit ^^^pore Apostolorum.
of the Church in the time of the Apostles only: and B^el. lect. 22. in C.
Miss^. A tempore Christi and Apostolorum, etc. And so does S. Aug. take ^ccles.
(...) a F^^d.
some of the Church in General, not excluding after-ages. But sure to include
Christ, and his Apostles. And the certainty is there, abundance of certainty in
it self: but how far that is evident to us, shall after appear.

Tradition of the present Church must be as Infallible, as that of the
Primitive. But the contrary to this is proved ^. 16. N^. 6.
before, because this Voice of the present Church, is not simply Divine. To
what end then serves any Tradition of the present Church? To what? Why to a
very good end. For first, it serves by a full consent to work upon the minds of
unbelievers, to move them to read, and to consider the Scripture, which (they
hear by so many Wise, Learned, and Devou^ men) is of no meaner esteem than the
Word of God. And secondly, It serves among Novices, Weakings, and Doubters in
the Faith, to instruct, and confirm them, till they may acquaint themselves
with, and understand the Scripture, which the Church delivers as the Word of
God. And thus again some of your own understand the forecited Place of St.
Augustine, I would not believe the Gospel, etc. S^ve In^ideles, ^ive in Fide
Novitii. Can. Loc. L. 2. c. 8. Neganti, aut omnino ne^sci^^ti Scripturam.
Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. q. 1. A. 3.
For he speaks it either of Novices, or Doubters in the Faith, or else of such
as were in part Infidels. You at the Conference (though you omit it here) would
needs have it, that S. Augustine spoke even of the Quid si fateamur Fideles
etiam, Ecclesiae Authoritate comm^ueri, ut Scriptur as recipiant: Non tamen
inde sequitur ^o^ hoc modo penitus persuaderi: aut null^ ali^ fortiore^ue
ratione induci? Quis antem Christianus est, quem Ecclesia Christi* commendans
Scripturam Coristi, non comm^^^at? Whitaker. D^sp. de sacra Scriptura. Contr^.
1. ^. 3. ^, 8. ubi citat locum ^anc, S. Aug.
faithful, which I cannot yet think: For he speaks to the Manichees, and they
had a great part of the Infidel in them. And the words immediately before
these, are, If thou should ^ind one, Qui Evangelio nondum credit, which did
not yet believe the Gospel, what would thou do to make him believe? Et (...)
Quibus ^^^empera^^ dicentibus Credit Evang^^io. Therefore he speaks of
himself, when he did not believe.
Ego vero non, Truly I would not, etc. So to these two ends it serves, and
there need be no Question between us. But then every thing, that is the first
Inducer to believe, is not by and by either the Principal Motive, or the chief,
and last Object of Belief, upon which a man may rest his Faith. Unless we shall
be of ^^^tum est quod tene^^^ credere omnibus (...) in Sacro Canon^, quia
Ecclesia credit ^x ea ratione solum* Ergo per prius and magis t^^^^u^ Credere
Ecclesiae, quam Evang^^^^. A^tt(...)n. in 3* Did. 24. Conclus. 6. ^^^. 6. And
to make a show of proof for this, he ^alsifies S. August. most notoriously, and
reads that known place, not Ni^^ (...) commo^^r^^ ( at all read it) ^^^
r^m^elleret. Pate^. quiae dicit Augustinus, Evangelio non Credere^, nisi ad ^o^
me compell^ret Ecclesi^ Authoritas. Ibid. And so also Gerson reads it, in
Declarat. veritatum, qu^ cr^dend^ sunt, etc. part. 1. p. 414.. 3. But in a most
ancient Manuscript in Corp. Chr. College Library in Cambridge, the words are,
Nisi me commov^r^t, etc.
Jacobu^ Almain's Opinion* That we are per pri^^ and magis, first and more
bound to believe the Church, than the Gospel. Which your own Learned men, as
you may see by ^ Mel. Canus, reject as Extreme ^oul, C^^^n L. ^. de L^c^^ c. 8.
fol. 34. ^.. 16. Number. 6.
and so indeed it is. The first knowledge then (after the Quid Nomin^^ is known
by Grammar) that helps to open a man's understanding, and prepares him to be
able to Demonstrate a Truth, and make it evident, is his Logic: But when he
has made a Demonstration, he resolves the knowledge of his Conclusion, not
into his Grammatical, or Logical Principles, but into the Immediate Principles
out of which it is deduced. So in thi^ Particular, a man is probably led by the
Authority of the present Church, as by the first informing, inducing,
persuading Means, to believe the Scripture to be the Word of God: but when he
has studied, considered, and compared this Word with it self, and with other
Writings, with the help of Ordinary Grace, and a mind morally induced, and
reasonably persuaded by the Voice of the Church; the Scripture then gives
greater and higher reasons of Credibility to it self, then Tradition alone
could give. And then he that Believes, resolves his last and full Assent, That
Scripture is of Divine Authority, into internal Arguments found in the Letter
it self, though found by the Help and Direction of Tradition without, and Grace
within. And the resolution that is rightly grounded, may not endure to pitch,
and rest it self upon the Helps, but upon that Divine Light, which the
Scripture, no Question, has in it self, but is not kindled, till these Helps
come* Thy Word is a Light Psalm. 119 10^. S^^ctarum Scripturarum Lumen, S. Aug.
L. de vera Relig. c. ^. Quid (...) Scripturum vanis umbris? etc. S. August. ^.
d^ M^r. Eccl. Cathol. ^35.
: so David. A Light? Therefore it is as much manifestati^um sui, as al^eri^s, a
manifestation to it self, as to other things which it shows: but still, not
till the Candle be Lighted; not till there has been a Preparing Instruction,
What Light it is* Children call the Sun and Moon, Candles; Gods Candles: They
see the light as well as men, but cannot distinguish between them, till some
Tradition, and Education has informed their Reason. And 1 Cor. 2. 14.
animalis homo, the natural man, sees some Light of Moral counsel, and
instruction in Scripture, as well as Believers; But he takes all that glorious
Luster for Candlelight, and cannot distinguish between the Sun, and twelve to
the Pound, till Tradition of the Church, and Gods Grace put to it, have cleared
his understanding. So Tradition of the present Church, is the first Moral
Motive to Belief. But the Belief it self, That the Scripture is the Word of
God, rests Orig. 4. (...). c. 1. went this way; yet was he a great deal nearer
the prime Tradition, than we are. For being to prove that the Scriptures were
inspired from God, he says, D^ ^oc ^ssig^abimus ^x ipsis Divi^is Scripturis,
qu^ nos comp^^^^t^r mo^^ri^t, etc.
upon the Scripture, when a man finds it to answer, and exceed all that, which
the Church gave in Testimony, as will after appear. And as in the Voice of the
Primitive and Apostolical Church, there was Princip(...) (^^^^m and hic)
credimus propter D^^m, non Apostol^s, etc. H^nr a ^and. Sum. A. 9. q. 3. Now,
if where the Apostoles themselves spoke, ultimate resolutio Fidei, was in Deum,
not in ipsos per se, much more shall it be in Deum, than in pr^sentem
Ecclesi^^: and into the writings of the Apostles, than into the words of their
Successors, made up into a Tradition.
simply Divine Authority, delivering the Scripture, as Gods Word; so, after
Tradition of the present Church has taught, and informed the Soul, the Voice
of God i^ plainly heard in Scripture it self. And then here is double Authority,
and both Divine, that confirms Scripture to be the Word of God, Tradition of
the Apostles delivering it; And the internal worth and argument in the
Scripture, obvious to a Soul prepared by the present Churches Tradition, and
Gods Grace.

go to Private Revelations for Light to know Scripture. No, we do not, you see
it is excluded out of the very state of the Question: and we go to the
Tradition of the present Church, and by it, as well as you. Here we differ; we
use the Tradition of the present Church, as the first Motive, not as the Last
Resolution of our Faith. We Resolve only into Calv. Instit. 1. c. 5.. 2.
Christiana Ecclesia Prophetarum scriptis, and Apostolorum praedicatione initio
fundata ^uit, ^^icunque reperietur e^ Doctrina, etc.
Prime Tradition Apostolical, and Scripture it self.

prime Apostolical Tradition, but by the Tradition of the present Church; and
that therefore, if the Tradition of the present Church be not Gods unwritten
Word, and Divine, we cannot yet know Scripture to be Scripture, by a Divine
Authority. Well I Suppose I could not know the prime Tradition to be Divine,
but by the present Church, yet it does not follow, that therefore I cannot know
Scripture to be the Word of God by a Divine Authority; because Divine Tradition
is not the sole, and only means to prove it. For suppose, I had not, nor could
have full assurance of Apostolical Tradition Divine; yet the moral persuasion,
reason, and force of the present Church, is ground enough to move any
reasonable man, that it is fit he should read the Scripture, and esteem very
reverently and highly of it. And this once done, the Scripture has then, In,
and Home-Arguments enough to put a Soul, that has but ordinary Grace, out of
Doubt, That Scripture is the Word of God, Infallible and Divine.

Lumine suo, by the Light and Testimony which it has in, and gives to it self.
Against this, you give reason for your selves, and proof from us. Your Reason
is, If there be sufficient Light in Scripture to show it self, then every man
that can, and does but read it, may know it presently to be the Divine Word of
God; which we see by daily experience, men neither do, nor can. First, it is
not absolutely, nor universally true, There is And where Hooker uses this very
Argument, as he does, L. 3.. 8. his words are not, If there be sufficient
Light; But, if that Light be Evident.
sufficient Light; therefore every man may see it. Blind men are men, and
cannot see it; and 1 Cor. 2. 14.
sensual men, in the Apostles judgment, are such: Nor may we deny, and put out
this Light, as insufficient, because blind eyes cannot, and perverse eyes will
not see it; no more than we may deny meat to be sufficient for nourishment,
though men that are heart-sick, cannot eat it. Next, we do not say, That there
is such a full light in Scripture, as that every man upon the first sight must
yield to it; such Light as is found in Prime Principles; Every whole is greater
than a Part of the same; and this, The same thing cannot be, and not be, at the
same time, and in the same respect. These carry a natural Light with them, and
evident: for the Terms are no sooner understood, then the Principles themselves
are fully known, to the convincing of man's understanding, and so they are the
beginning of knowledge; which, where it is perfect, dwells in full Light: but
such a full Light we do neither say is, nor require to be in Scripture; and if
any particular man do, let him answer for himself. The Question is, only of
such a Light in Scripture, as is of force to breed faith, that it is the Word
of God; not to make a perfect knowledge. Now Faith, of whatsoever it is, this
or other Principle, is an Evidence (...). Heb. 11. 1.
, as well as Knowledge; and the Belief is firmer than any Knowledge can be,
because it rests upon Divine Authority, which cannot deceive; whereas Knowledge
(or at least he that thinks he knows) is not ever certain in Deductions from
Principles.. 16. N^. 13.
But the Evidence is not so clear: For it is Heb. 11. 1.
of things not seen, in regard of the Object; and in regard of the Subject that
sees, it is in 1 Cor. 13. 12. And A. C. confesies, p. 52. That this very thing
in Question may be known infallible, when it is known but obscurely. Et Scotus
in 3. Did. 23. q. 1 fol. 41. B. Hoc modo facile est videre quomoco Fides est
cum aenigmate, and obscuritate. Quis Habitus Fidei non credit Articulum esse
verum ex Evidenti^ Objecti, sed propter boc, quod assentit veratitati
infundentis Habitum, and in hoc revelantis Credibilia.
aenigmate, in a Glass, or dark speaking. Now God does not require a full
Demonstrative Knowledge in us, that the Scripture is his Word, and therefore in
his Providence has kindled in it no Light for that, but he requires our Faith
of it, and such a certain Demonstration, as may fit that. And for that, he has
left sufficient Light in Scripture to Reason and Grace meeting, where the Soul
is morally prepared by the Tradition of the Church; unless you be of
Bellarmine's Bellar. l. 3. de Eccles. c. 14. Credere ullas esse divinas
Scripturas, non est omnino necessarium ad salutem. I will not break my
Discourse, to ^i^^e this speech of Bellarmine; it is bad enough in the best
sense, that favor it self can give it. For if he mean by omnino, that it is
not altogether, or simply necessary to believe there is Divine Scripture, and a
written Word of God; that is false, that being granted, which is among all
Christians, That there is a Scripture: And God would never have given a
Supernatural unnecessary thing. And if he means by omnino, that it is not in
any wise necessary, then it is sensibly false. For the greatest upholders of
Tradition that ever were, made the Scripture very ncessary in all the Ages of
the Church. So it was necessary, because it was given; and given, because God
thought it necessary. Besides, upon Roman Grounds, this I think will follow:
That which the Tradition of the present Church delivers, as necessary to
believe, is omnino necessary to salvation: But that there are Divine
Scriptures, the Tradition of the present Church delivers, as necessary to
believe: Therefore to believe there are Divine Scriptures, is omnino (be the
sense of the word what it can) necessary to Salvation. So Bellarmine is herein
^oul, and unable to stand upon his own ground. And he is the more, partly,
because he avouches this Proposition for truth after the New Testament written.
And partly, because he might have seen the state of this Proposition carefully
examined by Gandavo, and distinguished by times. Sum. p. 1. A. 8. q. 4. sine.
Opinion, That to believe there are any Divine Scriptures, is not omnino
necessary to Salvation.

Lib. 1.. 14.
Hooker: Of things necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what Books we are
bound to esteem Holy; which Point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it
self to teach. Of this Protest. Apol. Tract. 1.. 10. N. 3.
Brierly (the Storehouse for all Priests that will be idle, and yet seem well
read) tell us, That L. 2.. 4.
Hooker gives a very sensible Demonstration: It is not the Word of God, which
does, or possibly can assure us, that we do well to think it is his Word: for
if any one Book of Scripture did give Testimony to all; yet still that
Scripture, which gives credit to the rest, would require another to give
credit unto it. Nor could we ever come to any pause, to rest our assurance this
way: so that unless, beside Scripture, there were something that might assure,
etc. And L. 2.. 7. and L. 3.. 8.
this he acknowledges (says Brierly) is the Authority of Gods Church.
Certainly, Hooker gives a true, and a sensible Demonstration; but Brierly wants
fidelity, and integrity, in citing him: For in the first place, Hooker's speech
is, Scripture it self cannot teach this; nor can the Truth say, that Scripture
it self can. It must needs ordinarily have Tradition, to prepare the mind of a
man to receive it. And in the next place, where he speaks so sensibly, That
Scripture cannot bear witness to it self, nor one part of it to another; that
is grounded upon Nature, which admits no created thing to be witness to it
self; and is acknowledged by our Savior, S. Joh. 5. 31. He speaks of himself
as man. S. Joh. 8. 13.
If I bear witness to my self, my witness is not true, that is, is not of force
to be reasonably accepted for Truth. But then it is more than manifest, that
Hooker delivers his Demonstration of Scripture alone. For if Scripture has
another proof, nay many other proofs to usher it, and lead it in, then no
Question, it can both prove, and approve it self. His words are, So that
unless, besides Scripture, there be, etc. Besides Scripture; therefore he
excludes not Scripture, though he call for another Proof to lead it in, and
help in assurance, namely, Tradition, which no man, that has his brains about
him, denies. In the two other Places, Brierly falsifies shamefully; for folding
up all that Hooker says, in these words; This (other means to assure us besides
Scripture) is the Authority of Gods Church; he wrinkles that Worthy Author
desperately, and shrinks up his meaning. For in the former place abused by
Brierly, no man can set a better state of the Question between Scripture, and
Tradition, than Hooker does: L. 2.. 7.
His words are these: The Scripture is the ground of our Belief; The Authority
of man (that is the Name he gives to Tradition) is the Koy which opens the door
of entrance into the knowledge of the Scripture. I ask now; When a man is
entered, and has viewed a house, and upon viewing likes it, and upon liking
resolves unchangeably to dwell there; does he set up his Resolution upon the
Key, that let him in? No sure; but upon the Goodness and Commodiousness, which
he sees in the House. And this is all the difference (that I know) between us
in this Point; In which, do you grant (as you ought to do) that we resolve our
Faith into Scripture as the Ground; and we will never deny, that Tradition is
the Key that lets us in. In the latter place, Hooker is as plain, as constant
to himself, and Truth: L. 3.. 8.
His words are: The first outward Motive, leading men so to esteem of the
Scripture, is the Authority of Gods Church, etc. But afterward, the more we
bestow our Labor in reading, or learning the Mysteries thereof, the more we
find that the thing it self does answer our received opinion concerning it: so
that the former inducement prevailing somewhat with us before, does now much
more prevail, when the very thing has ministered farther Reason. Here then
again, in his Judgment, Tradition is the first Inducement; but the farther
Reason, and Ground, is the Scripture. And Resolution of Faith ever settles upon
the Farthest Reason it can, not upon the First Inducement. So that the State of
this Question is firm, and yet plain enough, to him that will not shut his eyes.

A. C. thrusts himself in again, A. C. p. 52.
and tells me, That if I would consider the Tradition of the Church, not only
as it is the Tradition of a Company of Fallible men, in which sense the
Authority of it (as himself confesses) is but Humane, and Fallible, etc. But as
the Tradition of a Company of men assisted by Christ, and his Holy Spirit; in
that sense I might easily sinde it more than an Introduction, indeed as much as
would amount to an Infallible Motive. Well, I have considered The Tradition of
the present Church both these ways. And I find that A. C. confesses, That in
the first sense, the Tradition of the Church is mere humane Authority, and no
more. And therefore in this sense, it may serve for an Introduction to this
Belief, but no more. And in the second sense, as it is not the Tradition of a
Company of men only, but of men assisted by Christ, and His Spirit: In this
second sense I cannot find, that the Tradition of the present Church is of
Divine and Infallible Authority, till A. C. can prove, That this Company of men
(the Roman Prelates, and their Clergy he means) are so fully, so clearly, so
permanently assisted by Christ, and his Spirit, as may reach to Infallibility,
to a Divine Infallibility, in this, or any other Principle, which they teach.
For every Assistance of Christ, and the Blessed Spirit, is not enough to make
the Authority of any Company of men Divine, and infallible; but such and so
great an Assistance only, as is purposely given to that effect. Such an
Assistance the Prophets under the Old Testament, and the Apostles under the New
had; but neither the High Priest with his Clergy in the Old, nor any Company of
Prelates, or Priests in the New, since the Apostles, ever had it. And
therefore, though at the entreaty of A. C. I have considered A. C. p. 52.
this very well; yet I cannot, no not in this Assisted sense, think the
Tradition of the present Church, Divine and Infallible, or such Company of men
to be worthy of Divine and infallible Credit, and sufficient to breed in us
Divine, and Infallible Faith* Which I am sorry A. C. should affirm so boldly as
he does. A. C. p. 52.
What? That Company of men (the Roman Bishop, and his Clergy) of Divine and
Infallible Credit, and sufficient to breed in us Divine and Infallible Faith?
Good God! Whither will these men go? Surely, they are wise in their generation,
but that makes them never a whit the more the Children of Light S. Luke 16. 8.
: S. Luke 16. And could they put this home upon the world) as they are gone far
in it) what might they not effect? How might they, and would they then Lord it
over the Faith of Christendom, contrary to 1 S. Pet. 5. 3.
S. Peter's Rule (whose Successors certainly in this they are not.) But I pray,
if this Company of men be infallibly assisted, whence is it, that this very
Company have erred so dangerously, as they have, not only in some other things,
but even in this Particular, by equaling the Tradition of the present Church to
the written Word of God? Which is a Doctrine unknown to the S. Basil goes as
far for Traditions as any. For he says: Parem vim habent ad pietatem L. de Sp.
Sanct. c. 27. But first, he speaks of Apostolical Tradition, not of the
Tradition of the present Church. Secondly, the Learned take exceptions to this
Book of S. Basil, as corrupted. Bp. A^dr. Opuse. cont. Peron. p. 9. Thirdly, S.
Basil himself, Ser. de Fido, prosesses that he uses sometimes Agrapha, sed ea
solum quae non sunt aliena a pia secundum Scripturam sententia. So he makes the
Scripture their Touchstone, or trial. And therefore must of Necessity make
Scripture superior, in as much as that which is able to try another, is of
greater force, and superior Dignity in that use, than the thing tried by it.
And Stapleton himself confesses, Traditionem recentiorem and posteriorem, sicut
and particularem, nullo modo cum Scriptura, vel cum Traditionibus prius a se
explicatis comparand^m esse. Stapleton. Relect. Controv. 5. q. 5. A. 2.
Primitive Church, and which frets upon the very Foundation it self, by
justling with it. So belike, he that has but half an indifferent eye, may see
this Assisted Company have erred, and yet we must wink in obedience, and think
them Infallible.

A. C. would have me consider again, That it is as easy A. C. p. 52.
to take the Tradition of the present Church in the two forenamed senses, as
the present Scriptures printed, and approved by men of this Age. For in the
first sense, The very Scriptures (says he) considered as printed, and approved
by men of this Age, can be no more than of Humane Credit. But in the second
sense, as printed and approved by men assisted by God's Spirit for true Copies
of that which was first written, then we may give Infallible Credit to them.
Well. I have considered this too. And I can take the Printing, and Approving
the Copies of Holy-Writ in these two senses. And I can, and do make a
difference between Copies printed and approved by mere moral men, and men
assisted by Gods Spirit. And yet for the Printing only, a skilful, and an able
moral man may do better service to the Church, than an illiterate man, though
assisted in other things by God's Spirit. But when I have considered all this,
what then? The Scripture being put in writing, is a thing visibly existent; and
if any error be in the Print, it is easily corrigible by Ut 18. Nu. 4. Ex S.
Aug. L. 32. cont. Fanstum. c. 16.
former Copies. Tradition is not so easily observed, nor so safely kept. And
howsoever, to come home to that which A. C. infers upon it, namely, That the
Tradition of A. C. p. 53.
the present Church may be accepted in these two senses: And if this be all
that he will infer (for his pen here is troubled, and forsakes him, whether by
any check of Conscience, or no, I know not) I will, and you see, have granted
it already without more ado, with this Caution, That every Company of men
assisted by Gods Spirit, are not assisted to this height, to be Infallible by
Divine Authority.

A. C. will needs give a needless Proof of the Business: Namely, That there is
the Promise of Christ's, and his Holy A. C. p. 53.
Spirits continual presence and assistance, S. Luke 10. 16. Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Joh. 14. 16. not only to the Apostles, but to their Successors also, the
lawfully sent Pastors, and Doctors of the Church in all Ages. And that this
Promise is no less, but rather more expressly to them in their Preaching by word
of mouth, than in writing, or reading, or printing, or approving of Copies of
what was formerly written by the Apostles. And to all this I shall briefly say,
That there is a Promise of Christ's and the Holy Spirits continual presence,
and assistance. I do likewise grant most freely, that this Promise is on the
part of Christ, and the Holy Ghost, most really and fully performed. But then
this Promise must not be extended further than 'twas made. It was made of
Continual presence and assistance; That I grant: and it was made to the
Apostles and their Successors; That I grant too. But in a different Degree. For
it was of Continual, and Infallible Assistance to the Apostles; But to their
Successors, of Continual and fitting assistance, but not Infallible. And
therefore the lawfully sent Pastors and Doctors of the Church in all Ages, have
had, and shall have Continual Assistance; but by A. C's leave, not Infallible,
at least, not Divine and Infallible, either in writing, reading, printing, or
approving Copies. And I believe A. C. is the first, that durst affirm this: I
thought he would have kept the Popes Prerogative entire, that He only might
have been Infallible; and not He neither, but in Cathedra, sat down and well
advised. And well advised: Yes, that is right. Nam multe sunt Decretales
h^r^ticae, sicut dicit Ocham. Et firmiter hoc Credo, sed non licet dogmatis are
Oppositum, quo^iam sunt determinatae, nisi manifest^ constet, etc. Ja. Almain.
in 3. St^t. D. 24. q. unic. i. Conclus. 6. Dub. 6. ^^^^. And Alphons a Castro
also both says and proves, Caelestinum Papam errasse, non ut privatam Personam,
sed ut Papam. L. 1. advers. Har. c. 4. and the Gloss Confesses. Eum errare
posse ^^ ^. 24. q. 1. C. A. Recta ergo.
But he may be sat, and not well Advised, even in Cathedra. And Now, shall we
have all the Lawfully sent Pasters and Doctors of that Church in all ages
Infallible too? Here Is a deal of Infallibility indeed, and yet error store. The
truth is, the Jesuits have a Months mind to this Infallibility. And though A.
C. out of his bounty is content to extend it to all the lawfully sent Pastors
of the Church: yet to his own Society questionless he means it chiefly. As did
the Apologist to whom Casaubon replies, to Fronto Ducaeus. The words of the Nam
in side quidem Jesuitam errare non posse, atque adeo esse hoc unicum (...),
caeteris, quae solent a Poetis plurim^ commemorari, post^d^ annumerandum, si
nescis, mi Fronto, and puto nescire, doceb^ te, ab Apologista doctus, hoc ipsum
disertis verbis affirma^te. Sic ille, cap. 3. Ejus exemplaris quod ad Sereniss.
Regem fuit miss^m, pagina 119. Jungantur in unum, ait, dies cum nocte, tenebrae
cum luce, calidum cum frigido, sanitas cum morbo, vita cum morte: and erit tum
spes aliqua posse in caput Jesuitae haeresin cadere. Isa. Casaubon. Ep. ad
Front. Ducaeum. Land. 1611.
Apologist are: Let day and night -- life and death be joined together, and
then there will be some hope, that Heresle may fall upon the person of a
Jesuit. Yea marry, this is something indeed. Now we know where Infallibility
is to be found. But for my present Occasion, touching the Lawfully sent Pastors
of the Church, etc. I will give no other Confutation of it, then that M. Fisher
and A. C. (if they be two men) are lawfully sent Pastors and Doctors of the
Church; at least I am sure, they will assume they are, and yet they are not
Infallible; which I think, appears plain enough in some of their errors
manifested by this Discourse, and elsewhere. Or if they do hold themselves
infallible, let them speak it out, as the Apologist did.

Three Places of Scripture, which A. C. cites, they are of old alleged, and
well known in this Controversy. The A. C. p. 53.
First is in S. Luke 10. where Christ says, He that hears you, S. Luke 10.
16.
hears me. This was absolutely true in the Per quod docet quicquid per
Sanctos Apostolos dicitur, acciptandum esse, quia qui illos audit, Christum
audit, etc. S. Cyrillus apud Thom. in Catena. Et Dominus dedit Apostolis suis,
potestatem Evangelii, per quos and Veritatem, id est, Dei Filium cogno^imus,
etc. Quibus and disit Dominus, Qui vos audit, etc. Iraeneus praesat. in L. 3.
edvers. Haer. fine.
Apostles, who kept themselves to that, which was reavealed by Christ. But it
was to be but Conditionally true in their Dicit ad Apostolos, ac per hoc ad
Omnes Praepositos, qui Apostolis Vicari a Ordinatione succedunt. S. Cyprian. L.
4. Epist. 9. But S. Cyprian does not say, that this speech of our Saviors was
aequaliter dictum, alike and equally spoken and promised to the Apostles, and
the succeeding Bishops. And I believe A. C. will not dare to say in plain and
express Terms, That this speech, He that hears you, ^earath me, does as amply
belong to every Roman Priest, as to Peter, and the Apostles. No, a great deal
of Difference will become them well.
Successors, He that hears you, hears me. That is, so long, and so Be ye
followers of me, even as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. and 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
far, as you And so V^^^r. Beda expressly, both for hearing the word, and for
contemning it* For neither of these ( says he) belong only to them which saw
our Savior in the flesh; but to all hodie quoque: but with this limitation; if
they hear, or despise Evangelii verba: not the Preachers own. Beda in S. Luke
10. 15, 16.
speak my words, and not your own. For S. Mat. 28. 20.
where the Command is for Preaching, the Restraint is added. Go (says Christ)
and teach all Nations. But you may not preach all things what you please; but,
all things which I have commanded you. The Publication is yours, the Doctrine
is mine: And where the Doctrine is not mine, there your Publication is beyond
or short of your Commission. The Second Place is in S. Mat. 28. There Christ
says again, S Mat. 2^. 19, 20.
I am with you always unto the end of the world. Yes; most certain it is,
present by his Spirit; For else in bodily presence He continued not with his
Apostles, but during his abode on Earth. And this Promise of his Spiritual
Presence was to their Successors; else, why to the end of the World? The
Apostles, did not, could not live so long. But then to the R^banus Maur. goes
no farther, then that to the End some will always be in the world fit for
Christ by his Spirit and Grace to inhabit: Divina mansione and inhabitatione
digni. Rab. in S. Matthew. 28. 19, ^0. Pergatis habentes Dominum Protectorem, and
Ducem, says S. Cypr. L. 4. Epistl. 1. But he does not say, How far forth. And,
Loquitur Fidelibus sicut uni Corperi. S. Chrysostom. Homil. in S. Matthew. And if
S. Chrysostom enlarge it so far, I hope A. C. will not extend the Assistance
given or promised here to the whole Body of the Faithful, to an Infallible, and
Divine Assistance in every of them, as well as in the Pastors and Doctors.
Successors, the Promise goes no farther, then I am with you always; which
reaches to continual assistance, but not to Divine, and Infallible. Or if he
think me mistaken, let him show me any One Father of the Church, that extends
the sense of this Place to Divine and Infallible Assistance, granted hereby to
all the Apostles Successors. Sure I am, Saint In illis donis quibus salus
aliorum queritur (quali a sunt Prophetiae, and interpretationes Sermonum, etc.)
Spiritus Sanctus nequaquam semper in Praedicatoribus permanet. S. Greg. L. 2.
Moral. c. 29. prin. Edit. Basil. 1551.
Gregory thought otherwise. For he says plainly, That in those Gifts of God
which concern other men's salvation (of which Preaching of the Gospel is One)
the Spirit of Christ, the Holy Ghost does not always abide in the Preachers, be
they never so lawfully sent Pastors, or Doctors of the Church. And if the Holy
Ghost does not always abide in the Preachers, then most certainly he does not
abide in them to a Divine Infallibility always. The Third Place is in S. John
14, where S. John 14. 16.
Christ says, The Comforter the Holy Ghost shall abide with you for ever. Most
true again. For the Holy Ghost did abide with the Apostles according to Christ's
Promise there made, and shall abide with their Successors for ever, to Iste
Consolator non a^feretur a Vobis, sicut subtra^itur Humanitas mea per mortem,
sed aeternaliter erit Vobiscum, ^ic per Gratiam, in futuro per Gloriam. Lyra,
in S. John 14. 16. You see there the Holy Ghost shall be present by Consolation
and Grace, not by Infallible Assistance.
comfort and preserve them. But here is no Promise of Divine Infallibility made
unto them. And for that Promise which is made, and expressly of Infallibility,
Saint S. Joh. 16. 13.
John 16. (though not cited by A. C.) That Is confined to the Apostles only, for
the settling of them in all Truth. And yet not simply all: For, there are some
Truths (says Omnem veritatem: Non arbitror in hac vita in cujusquam mente
compleri, etc. S. August. in S. Joh. Tract. 96. versus ^in.
Saint Augustine) which no man's Soul can comprehend in this life. Not simply
all: But Spiritus Sanctius, etc. qui eos doceret Omnem Veritatem, quam tunc,
cum iis loquebatur, portare non poterant. S. Joh. 16. 12, 13. and S. August.
Tract. 97. in S. Joh. prin.
all those Truths, quae non poterant portare, which they were not able to bear,
when He Conversed with them. Not simply all; but all that was necessary for the
Founding, propagating, establishing, and Confirming the Christian Church. But
if any man take the boldness to enlarge this Promise in the fullness of it,
beyond the persons of the Apostles themselves, that will fall out which Saint
Omnes vel ins^pientissimi Haeretici, qui se Christianos vocari volunt, ^^daci
as sigmentorum suorum, quas maxim exhorret sensus humanus, hac Occasion
Evan^^licae sententiae color are conentur, etc. S. August. T. 97. in S. Joh.
circa med.
Augustine has in a manner prophesied: Every Heretic will shelter himself,
and his Vanities under this Color of Infallible Verity.

Nam. 26. A. C. p. 52.
little before, that A. C. his Pen was troubled, and failed him: Therefore I
will help to make out his Inference for him, that his Cause may have all the
strength it can. And (as I conceive) this is that he would have. The Tradition
of the present Church is as able to work in us Divine and Infallible Faith,
That the Scripture is the Word of God: As that the Bible (or Books of
Scripture) now printed, and in use, is a true Copy of that, which was first
written, by the Penmen of the Holy Ghost, and delivered to the Church. It Is
most true, the Tradition of the present Church is alike operative, and powerful
in, and over both these works: but neither Divine, nor Infallible in either.
But as it is the first moral Inducement to persuade, that Scripture is the Word
of God, so is it also the first, but moral still, that the Bible we now have,
is a true Copy of that which was first written. But then as in the former, so
in this latter for the true Copy, The last Resolution of our Faith cannot
possibly rest upon the naked Tradition of the present Church, but must by, and
with it go higher to other Helps and Assurances. Where I hope A. C. will
confess, we have greater helps to discover the truth, or falsehood of a Copy,
than we have means to look into a Tradition. Or especially to sift out this
Truth, That it was a Divine and Infallible Revelation, by which the Originals
of Scripture were first written: That being far more the Subject of this
Inquiry, than the Copy, which according to Art and Science may be examined by
former preceding Copies close up to the very Apostles times.

A. C. has not done yet; For in the last place he tells us, That Tradition and
Scripture, without any vicious Circle, A. C. p. 53.
do mutually confirm the Authority either of other. And truly for my part, I
shall easily grant him this, so he will grant me this other: Namely, That
though they do mutually, yet they do not equally confirm the Authority either
of other. For Scripture does infallibly confirm the Authority of
Church-Traditions truly so called: But Tradition does but morally and probably
confirm the Authority of the Scripture. And this is manifest by A. C.'s own
Similitude: For (says he) it is as a Kings Ambassadors word of mouth, and His
Kings Letters bear mutual witness to each other. Just so indeed. For His Kings
Letters of Credence under hand and seal, confirm the Ambassadors Authority
Infallibly to all that know Seal, and hand: But the Ambassadors word of mouth
confirms His Kings Letters but only probably. For else, Why are they called
Letters of Credence, if they give not him more Credit, than he can give them?
But that which follows I cannot approve, to wit, That the Lawfully sent
Preachers of the Gospel are Gods Legates, and the Scriptures Gods Letters, which
he has appointed his Legates to deliver, and expound. So far it is well, but
here is the sting: That these Letters do warrant, that the People may hear, and
give Credit to these Legates of Christ, as to Christ the King himself. Soft,
this is too high a great deal. No Will A. C. maintain, that any Legate ^ Latere
is of as great Credit, as the Pope himself?
Legate was ever of so great Credit as the King himself. Nor was any Priest,
never so lawfully sent, ever of that Authority, that Christ himself; No sure,
For ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye do well; for so I am, says our
Savior, S. John 13. And certainly, this did not suddenly S. Joh. 13. 13.
drop out of A. C's Pen. For he told us once before, A. C. p. 52.
That this Company of men which deliver the present Churches Tradition, (that
is, the lawfully sent Preachers of the Church) are assisted by Gods Spirit to
have in them Divine and Infallible Authority, and to be worthy of Divine and
Infallible Credit, sufficient to breed in us Divine, and Infallible Faith. Why,
but is it possible these men should go thus far to defend an Error, be it never
so dear unto them? They as Christ? Divine, and Infallible Authority in them?
Sufficient to breed in us Divine, and Infallible Faith? I have often heard some
wise men say, That the Jesuit in the Church of Rome, and the Precise party in
the Reformed Churches agree in many things, though they would seem most to
differ. And surely this is one: For both of them differ extremely about
Tradition. The one in magnifying it, and exalting it into Divine Authority; the
other vilifying, and depressing it almost beneath Humane. And yet even in these
different ways, both agree in this Consequent: That the Sermons and Preachings
by word of mouth, of the lawfully sent Pastors and Doctors of the Church, are
able to breed in us Divine and Infallible Faith, Nay, are the For this A. C.
says expressly of Tradition, p. 52. And then he adds, That the Promise for this
was no less, but rather more Expressly made to the lawfully sent Pastors and
Doctors of the Church in all ages in their teaching by word of mouth, than in
writing, etc. p. 53.
very word of God. So A. C. expressly. And no less then so, have some accounted
of their own factious words (to say no more) than as the For the freeing of
factious and silenced Ministers, is ^^^^ed, the Restoring of Gods Word to its
Liberty. In the Godly Author of the late News from Ipswich, P. 5.
Word of God. I ever took Sermons (and so do still) to be most necessary
Expositions, and Applications of Holy Scripture, and a great ordinary means of
saving knowledge. But I cannot think them, or the Preachers of them Divinely
Infallible. The Ancient Fathers of the Church preached far beyond any of these
of either faction; And yet no one of them durst think himself Infallible, much
less, that whatsoever he preached was the Word of God. And it may be Observed
too, That no men are more apt to say, That all the Fathers were but Men, and
might Err, than they that think their own preachings are Infallible.

A. C.) which I shall trouble you with, is, That this method, and manner of
proving Scripture to be the Word of God, which I here use, is the same, which
the Ancient Church ever held, namely, Tradition, or Ecclesiastical Authority
first; and then all other Arguments, but especially internal, from the
Scripture it self. This way the Church went in S. Augustine's And S. Aug.
himself. L. 13. contra Faustum, c. 5. proves by an Internal Argument the
fulfilling of the Prophets. Scriptura (says he) quae fidem suam rebus ipsis
probat quae per temporum successiones haec impleri, etc. And Hen. a Gand. Par.
1. Sum. A. 9. q. 3. cites S. August. Book de vera Religione. In which Book,
though these four Arguments are not found in Terms together, yet they fill up
the scope of the whole Book.
Time. He was no enemy to Church-Tradition; yet when he would prove, that the
Author of the Scripture (and so of the whole knowledge of Divinity, as it is
supernatural) is Deus in Christo, God in Christ; he takes this as the
All-sufficient way, and gives four proofs, all internal to the Scripture:
First, The Miracles. Secondly, That there is nothing carnal in the Doctrine,
Thirdly, That there has been such performance of it. Fourthly, That by such a
Doctrine of Humility, the whole world almost has been converted. And whereas
ad muniendam Fidem, for the Defending of the Faith, and keeping it entire,
there are two things requisite, Scripture, and Church-Tradition; Duplici modo
muniri fidem, etc. Primo Divinae Legis Authoritate, tum deinde Ecclesiae
Catholicae Traditione. cont. Haer. c. 1.
Vincent. Lirinens. places Authority of Scriptures first, and then Tradition.
And since it is apparent, that Tradition is first in order of time, it must
necessarily follow, that Scripture is first in order of Nature, that is, the
chief, upon which Faith rests, and resolves it self. And your own School
confesses this was the way ever. The Woman of S. Joh. 4.
Samaria is a known Resemblance, but allowed by your selves: For Hen. a. Gand.
Sum. Par. 1. A. 10. q. 1. Sic quotidie apud illos qui foris sunt, intrat
Christus per mulierem, i. Ecclesiam, and credunt per istam fa^am, etc. Gloss.
in S. Joh. cap. 4.
quotidie, daily with them that are without, Christ enters by the woman, that
is the Church, and they believe by that fame which she gives, etc. But when
they come to hear Christ himself, they believe his word, before the words of
the Woman. For when they have once found Christ, Ibid. Plus verbis Christi in
Scriptur a credit, quam Ecclesiae testificanti. Quia propter illam jam credit
Ecclesiae. Et si ipsa quidem contraria Scripture diceret, ipsi non crederet,
etc. Prima^ fidem tribuamus Scripturis Canonicis, secundam, sub ista,
Definitionibus and Consuetudinibus Ecclesiae Catholicae, post istas studiosis
viris non sub poe^ a perfidiae, sed proterviae, etc. Walden. D^ct. Fid. To. 1.
L. 2. Art. 2. c. 23. Nu. 9.
they do more believe his words in Scripture, than they do the Church, which
testifies of him; because then propter illam, for the Scripture they believe
the Church: And if the Church should speak contrary to the Scripture, they
would not believe it. Thus the School taught then; and thus the Gloss commented
then; And when men have tired themselves, hither they must come. The Key, that
lets men in to the Scriptures, even to this knowledge of them, That they are
the Word of God, is the Tradition of the Church: but when they are in, In sacr
a Scriptur a Ipse immediate loquitur fidelibus. Ibid.
They hear Christ himself immediately speaking in Scripture to the Faithful: S.
John 10. 4.
And his sheep do not only hear, but know his voice. And then here is no vicious
Circle indeed of proving the Scripture by the Church, and then round about, the
Church by the Scripture. Only distinguish the Times, and the Conditions of men,
and all is safe. For a Beginner in the Faith, or a Weakling, or a Doubter about
it, begins at Tradition, and proves Scripture by the Church: But a man strong
and grown up in the Faith, and understandingly conversant in the Word of God,
proves the Church by the Scripture; And then upon the matter, we have a double
Divine Testimony, altogether Infallible, to confirm unto us, That Scripture is
the Word of God. The first is the Tradition of the Church of the Apostles
themselves, who delivered immediately to the world, the Word of Christ. The
other, the Scripture it self, but after it has received this Testimony. And
into these we do, and may safely Resolve our Faith. Quod autem credimus
posterioribus, circa quos non apparent virtutes Divinae, hoc est, Quia non
praedicant al^a, quam quae illi in Scriptis certissimis reliquerunt. Que
constat per medios in nullo fuisse vitiata ex consenstone concordi in eis
omnium succedentium usque ad tempora nostra. Hen. a Gand. Sum. P. 1. A. 9. q. 3.
As for the Tradition of after-Ages, in, and about which Miracles and Divine
Power were not so evident, we believe them (by Gandavo's full Confession)
because they do not preach other things than those former (the Apostles) left
in scriptis certissimis, in most certain Scripture. And it appears by men in
the middle Ages, that these writings were vitiated in nothing, by the
concordant consent in them of all succeeders, to our own time.

Fathers, which seem to speak differently in no few places, both one from
another, and the same from themselves, touching Scripture and Tradition; And
that as well in this Point, to prove Scripture to be the Word of God, as for
concordant Exposition of Scripture in all things else. When therefore the
Fathers say, Scriptur. as babemus ex Traditione. S. Cyril. Hier. Catech. 4.
Multa que non inveniuntur in Literis Apostolorum, etc. nonnisi ab illis tradita
and commendata creduntur. S. Aug. 2. de Baptism. contra D^^at. c. 7.
We have the Scriptures by Tradition, or the like; either They mean the
Tradition of the Apostles themselves delivering it; and there, when it is known
to be such, we may resolve our Faith. Or if they speak of the Present Church,
then they mean, that the Tradition of it, is that by which we first receive the
Scripture, as by an according Means to the Prime Tradition. But because it is
not simply Divine, we cannot resolve our Faith into it, nor settle our Faith
upon it, till it resolve it self into the Prime Tradition of the Apostles, or
the Scripture, or both; and there we rest with it. And you cannot show an
ordinary consent of Fathers: Nay can you, or any of your Quarter, show any one
Father of the Church, Greek, or Latin, that ever said, We are to resolve our
Faith, that Scripture is the Word God, into the Tradition of the present
Church? And again, when the Fathers say, we are to rely upon Scripture Non
aliunde scientia Coelestium. S. Hilar* l. 4. de Trinit. Si Angelus de Coelo
annanciaverit praeterquam quod in Scripturis, etc. S. Aug. L. 3. cont. Petil.
c. 6.
only, they are never to be understood with Exclusion of Tradition, in what
causes soever it may be had, Quum sit perfectus Scripturarum Canon, sibique ad
omnia satis superque sufficiat, etc. Vin. Lir. contra Haeres. c. 2. And if it
be sibi ad omnia, then to this, to prove it self, at least after Tradition has
prepared us to receive it.
Not but that the Scripture is abundantly sufficient, in, and to it self for
all things, but because it is deep, and may be drawn into different senses, and
so mistaken, if any man will presume upon his own strength, and go single
without the Church.

That Scripture is the Word of God, I shall now in the Last place put all
together, that so the whole state of the Question may the better appear.

First then, I shall desire the Reader to consider, that every Pun. 1.
Rational Science requires some Principles quite without its own Limits, which
are not proved in that Science, but presupposed. Thus Rhetoric presupposes
Grammar, and Music Arithmetic. Therefore it is most reasonable that Omnis
Scientia praesupponit fidem aliquam. S. Prosper. in Psalm. 123. And S. Cyril.
Hierosol. Ca^ches. 5. shows how all things in the world do fide consistere.
Therefore most unreasonable to deny that to Divinity, which all Sciences, nay
all things challenge: Namely, some things to be presupposed, and believed.
Theology should be allowed to have some Principles also, which she proves not,
but presupposes. And the chiefest of these, is, That the Scriptures are of
Divine Authority.

Secondly, that there is a great deal of difference in the Manner Pun. 2.
of confirming the Principles of Divinity, and those of any other Art or
Science whatsoever. For the Principles of all other Sciences do finally
resolve, either into the Conclusions of some Higher Science; or into those
Principles which are per se nota, known by their own light, and are the Grounds
and Principles of all Science. And this is it, which properly makes them
Sciences, because they proceed with such strength of Demonstration, as forces
Reason to yield unto them. But the Principles of Divinity resolve not into the
Grounds of Natural Reason (For then there would be no room for Faith, but all
would be either Knowledge or Vision) but into the Maxims of Divine Knowledge
supernatural. And of this we have just so much light, and no more, than God
has revealed unto us in the Scripture.

Thirdly, That though the Evidence of these Supernatural Pun. 3.
Truths, which Divinity teaches, appears not so manifest as that of the
Natural; Si vis credere manifestis, invisibilibus, magis quam visibilibius
oportet credere. Litet dictum sit admirabile, verum est, etc. S. Chrysostom.
Hom. 46. ad Pop. And there he proves it. Aliae Scientiae certitudinem baben^ ex
Naturali Lumint Rationis Humane, que decipi potest: Hec autem ex Lumine Divine
Scientiae, quae decipi non potest. Thom. p. 1. q. 1. ^. 5. c.
yet they are in themselves much more sure and infallible than they. For they
proceed immediately from God, that Heavenly Wisdom, which being the fountain of
ours, must needs infinitely precede ours, both in Nature and excellence. He
that teaches man knowledge, shall not be know? Psalm. 94. 10. Our old English
Translation reads it, Shall not be punish? That is, shall not he know when, and
why, and how to punish?
Psalm. 94. And therefore, though we reach not the Order of their Deductions,
nor can in this life come to the vision of them, yet we yield as full and firm
Assent, not only to the Articles, but to all the Things rightly deduced from
them, as we do to the most evident Principles of Natural Reason. This Assent is
called Faith. And Faith being of things Heb. 11. 1.
not seen, Heb. 11. Si sit Ratio convincens, and propter eam quis credat, ali^s
non crediturus, tollitur meritum fidei. Biel. 3. D. 25. q. unic. fi^e. Non est
dicendus credere, cujus judicium subigitur, aut cogitur, etc. Scapl. Triplicet.
c^ntr^ Whitaker, cap. 6. p. 64.
would quite lose its honor, nay it self, if it met with sufficient Grounds in
Natural Reason, whereon to stay it self. For Faith is a mixed Act of the Will
and the Understanding, and the Fides non fit in nobis nisi volentibus. Tolet
in. S. Joh. 16. Annot. 33. Et qui voluerunt, crediderunt. S. Aug. Se^^. 60. de
verb. Dom. c 5. Fides Actus est, non solius Intellectus, sed etiam Voluntatis,
quae cogi non potest. I^ ^ magis Voluntatis quam Intellectus, quatenus illa
Operationis principium est, and Assensum (qui proprie Actus fidei est) sola
elicit. Nec ab Intellectu Volu^ (...), ^^d a Voluntate Intellectus in Actu
fidei determinatur. Stap. Triolic. cont. Whitak. c. 6. p. 64. Crodere enim est
Actus Intellectus determinati ad unum ex Imperio Voluntatis. Tho. 2. 2. q. 4
A^^. c. Non potest dart aliquis Assensus Fidei, quicunque ille ^it, qui non
dependet in suis Causis mediate vel immediate ab ^^tu Voluntatis. A^^. in 3.
Sent. D. 24. Conclus. 6. Dub. 4. And S. Aug. says: Fidei locum esse Cor. Tract.
52. in S. Job. Where the Heart is put for the whole Soul, which equally
comprehends both the Will and the Understanding. And so does Bi^^* also, in 3.
Sent. D. 25. q. unic. Art. 1. F.
Will inclines the Understanding to yield full approbation to that whereof it
sees not full proof. Not but that there is most full proof of them, but because
the main Grounds which prove them, are concealed from our view, and folded up
in the unrevealed Counsel of God, God in Christ resolving to bring mankind to
their last happiness by Faith, and not by knowledge, that so the weakest among
men may have their way to blessedness open. And certain it is, that many weak
men believe themselves into Heaven, and many over-knowing Christians lose their
way thither, while they will believe no more than they can clearly know. In
which pride and vanity of theirs they are left, and have these things hid from
them, Mat. 11. 25.
S. Matthew. 11.

Fourthly, That the Credit of the Scripture, the Book in Pun. 4.
which the Principles of Faith are written, (as of other writings also) depends
not upon the subservient Inducing Cause, that leads us to the first knowledge
of the Author, which leader here is the Church; but upon the Author himself,
and the Opinion we have of his sufficiency, which here is the Holy Spirit of
God, whose Penmen the Prophets and Apostles were. And therefore the Mysteries
of Divinity contained in this Book; As the Incarnation of our Savior; The
Resurrection of the dead, and the like, cannot finally be resolved into the
sole Testimony of the Church, who is but a subservient Cause, to lead to the
knowledge of the Author, but into the Wisdom and Sufficiency of the Author,
who being Omnipotent, and Omniscient, must needs be Infallible.

Fifthly, That the Assurance we have of the Penmen of the Pun. 5.
Scriptures, the Holy Prophets and Apostles, is as great, as any can be had of
any Humane Authors of like Antiquity. For it is morally as evident to any
Pagan, that S. Matthew and S. Paul writ the Gospel and Epistles which bear
their Names, as that Cicero or Seneca wrote theirs. But that the Apostles were
divinely inspired, whilst they writ them, and that they are the very Word of
God expressed by them, this has ever been a matter of Faith in the Church, and
was so, even while the Apostles themselves The Apostles indeed they knew, for
they had clear Revelation: They to whom they preached, might believe, but they
could not know without the like Revelation. So S. Job. 19. 35. He that saw,
knows that he says true, that you, which saw not, might believe. D^^s is
Prophe^^ ^ and sic in Apostolis) quos immediate illuminabat, causabat
evidentiam. Jac. Almain. in 3. Sent. Dis. 24. q. unic ^. Conclus. 6. But for
the refu^^e of men, it is no more, but as Thomas has it: Oportet quod credatur
Authoritati eorum, quibus Revelatio facta est. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 8. ad 8.
lived, and was never a matter of Evidence and Knowledge, at least as Knowledge
is opposed to Faith. Nor could it at any time then be more Demonstratively
proved than now. I say, not scientifice, not Demonstratively. For, were the
Apostles living, and should they tell us, that they spoke, and writ the very
Oracles of God: yet this were but their own Testimony of themselves, and so not
alone able to enforce Belief on others. And for their Miracles, though they
were very Great Inducements of Belief, yet were neither they Evident and
Convincing Proofs, Non est ^^idens vel ista esse vera miracula: vel ista fieri
ad illam Veritatem comprobandam. Ja. Almain. i^ ^. (...). D. 24. q. un^c^
Concl. 6. Therefore the Miracles which Christ and his Apostles did, were fully
sufficient to beget Faith to Assent, but not Evidence to Convince.
alone and of themselves. Both because, There may be counterfeit Miracles: And
because true ones are neither Cautos nos fecit Sponsus, quia and Miraculis
decipi non debe^us. S. Aug. T. 13. in S. Joh. And he that says ^^e ought not to
be deceived, acknowledges that we may be deceived even by Miracles. And
Arguments which can deceive, are not sufficient to Convince. Though they be
sometimes too full of efficacy to pervert. And so plainly Almain, out of
Ocham. Nunquam acquiritur ^videntia per Medium quod (...) ^^ general falsum
assensum, sicut ver^^. Ja. Alma. in 3. Sent. Di. 24. q. unic. Concl. ^. And
therefore that Learned Roman Catholics, who tells us, the Apost^^^ Miracles
made it evident, that their Doctrine was true and Divine, went too far.
Credible they made it, but not Evident. And therefore he is after forced to
confess, That the Soul sometimes assents not to the Miracles, but in great
timidity, which cannot stand with clear Evidence. And after again, That the
Soul may renounce the Doctrine formerly confirmed by Miracles, unless some
inward and supernatural Light be given, etc. And neither can this possibly
stand with Evidence. And therefore Bellarmine goes no farther than this:
Miracula esse (...), and efficacia ad (...) (...) (...). L. 4. de Nobis (...).
c. 14. ^. 1. To induce and persuade, but not to Convince. And Thomas will not
grant so much, for he says express: (...) (...) est sufficient caus^ inducens
Fidem. Quia videntium unum and idem Miraculum, quidam credunt, and quidam non.
Tho. ^. 2. q. 6. A. 1. c. And (...) (...) (...) Romans 10. 15. is downright at
Nulla fides, est habenda signo. ^xaminand^ sunt, etc. Anastasius (...) (...),
apud (...) ad A^. 36^^ (...) ^1. Non sunt necessaria signa vera fidei, etc.
Suarez, (...). Fidei Cathol. L. 1. cap. 7. Number. 3.
Infallible nor Inseparable Marks of Truth in Doctrine. Not Infallible: For
they may be Marks of false Doctrine in the highest degree. Deuteronomy. (...). 1, 2,
3. 2 These. 2. 9. S. Marc. 13. 22.
Deuteronomy. 13. Not proper and Inseparable: For (...) Virtutum alteri datur, 1* Cor.
1^. 10. (to one and another, he says, not to all.) Daemonia fu^^r^, Mortuos
(...), etc. dedit quibusdam Discip^^i^ (...), quibusdam (...) (...)* (That is,
to do Miracles.) (...) Aug. Sermon. 22. ^t Verbis Apost. c. ^.
all which wrote by Inspiration, did not confirm their Doctrine by Miracles.
For we do not find that David or Solomon, with some other of the Prophets did
any, neither were any wrought by S. John the Baptist, S. Joh. 10. 41.
S. Joh. 10. So, as Credible Signs they were, and are still of as much force to
us, as it is possible for things on the credit of Relation to be: For the
Witnesses are many, and such as spent their lives in making good the Truth,
which they saw. But that the Workers of them were Divinely and Infallibly
inspired in that which they Preached and Writ, was still to the Here it may be
observed how warily A. C. carries himself. For when he has said, That a clear
Revelation was made to the Apostles, which is most true; And so the Apostles
knew that which they taught simpliciter a priori, most Demonstratively from the
Prime Cause, God himself: Then he adds, p. 51. I say, clear in attestante. That
is, the Revelation of this Truth was clear in the Apostles that witnessed it.
But to make it knowledge in the Auditors, the same, or like Revelation, and as
clear must be made to them. For they could have no other knowing Assurance;
Credible they might, and had. So A. C. is wary there, but comes not home to the
Business, and so might have held his peace. For the Question is not, what clear
Evidence the Apostles had? but what Evidence they had, which heard them?
Hearers a matter of Faith, and no more evident by the light of Humane Reason
to men that lived in those Days, than to us now. For had that been
Demonstrated, or been clear (as Prime Principles are) in its own light, both
they and we had apprehended all the Mysteries of Divinity by Knowledge, not by
Faith. But this is most apparent was not. For had the Prophets or Apostles been
ordered by God to make this Demonstratively, or Intuitively by Discourse or
Vision appear as clear to their Auditors, as to themselves it did, that
whatsoever they taught was Divine and Infallible Truth, all men which had the
true use of Reason, must have been forced to yield to their Doctrine. Esaias 53.
1.
Esaias could never have been at Domine quis? Lord who has believed our Report?
Esaias 53. Nor Jer. 20. 7.
Jeremy at Domine factus sum, Lord I am in derision daily, Jer. 20. Nor could
any of S. Paul's Auditors have mocked at him (as some of them did) Acts 17. 32.
And had Zedechiah and the people seen it as clearly as Jeremy himself did, that
the word he spoke was Gods word, and Infallible, Jerusalem, for ought we know,
had not been laid desolate by the Chaldean. But because they could not see this
by the way of knowledge, and would not believe it by way of Faith, they, and
that City perished together. Jer. 38. 17.
Act. 17. for Preaching the Resurrection, if they had had as full a view as S.
Paul himself had in the Assurance, which God gave of it in, and by the
Resurrection of Christ, verse. 31. But the way of Knowledge was not that which
God thought fittest for man's Salvation. For Man having sinned by Pride, God
thought fittest to humble him at the very root of the Tree of Knowledge, and
make him deny his understanding, and submit to Faith, or hazard his happiness.
The Credible Object all the while, that is, the Mysteries of Religion, and the
Scripture which contains them is Divine and Infallible, and so are the Penmen
of them by Revelation. But we, and all our Forefathers, the Hearers and Readers
of them, have neither Nemo pius, nisi qui Scripturae credit. S. Aug. L. 26.
cont. Fanstum, c. 6. Now no Man believes the Scripture, that does not believe
that it is the Word of God. I say, which does not believe, I do not say, which
does not know. Oportet quod Credatur Authoritati eorum quibus Revelatio facta
est. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 8. ad secundum. (...) etc. Quod vero Animam habemus,
unde manifestum? Si enim Visibilibus credere velis, and de Deo, and de Angelis,
and de meute, and de Anima dubitabis: and sic tibi omnia veritatis dogmata
deperibunt. Et certe si manifestis credere velis, Invisibilious magis quam
Visibilibus credere oportet. Licet enim admirabile sit dictum, verum tamen, and
apud mentem habentes valde certum, vel in confesso. Ex homil. 13. S. Chrysostom.
in S. Mat. To. 1. Edit. Fronto: Paris. 1636.
knowledge, nor vision of the Prime Principles in, or about them, but Nemo
pius, nisi qui Scripturae credit. S. Aug. L. 26. cont. Fanstum, c. 6. Now no
Man believes the Scripture, that does not believe that it is the Word of God. I
say, which does not believe, I do not say, which does not know. Oportet quod
Credatur Authoritati eorum quibus Revelatio facta est. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 8.
ad secundum. (...) etc. Quod vero Animam habemus, unde manifestum? Si enim
Visibilibus credere velis, and de Deo, and de Angelis, and de me^te, and de
Anima dubitabis: and sic tibi omnia veritatis dogmata deperibunt. Et certe si
manifestis credere velis, Invisibilious magis quam Visibilibus credere oportet.
Licet enim admirabile sit dictum, verum tamen, and apud mentem habentes valde
certum, vel in confesso. Ex homil. 13. S. Chrysostom. in S. Mat. To. 1. Edit.
Fronto: Paris. 1636.
Faith only. And the Revelation, which was clear to them, is not so to us, nor
therefore the Prime Tradition it self delivered by them.

Sixthly, That hence it may be gathered, that the Assent, which Pun. 6.
we yield to this main Principle of Divinity, That the Scripture is the Word of
God, is grounded upon no Compelling, or Demonstrative Ratiocination, but relies
upon the strength of Faith, more than any other Principle whatsoever. And this
is the Ground of that which I said before,. 15. Nu. 1. That the Scripture only,
and not any unwritten Tradition, was the Foundation of our Faith. Namely, when
the Authority of Scripture is first yielded unto.
For all other necessary Points of Divinity, may by undeniable Discourse be
inferred out of Scripture it self once admitted: but this, concerning the
Authority of Scripture not possibly: But must either be proved by Revelation,
which is not now to be expected: Or presupposed and granted as manifest in it
self, like the Principles of natural knowledge, which Reason alone will never
Grant: Or by Tradition of the Church, both Prime and Present, with all other
Rational Helps, preceding, or accompanying the internal Light in Scripture it
self; which though it give Light enough for Faith to believe, yet Light enough
it gives not to be a convincing Reason, and proof for knowledge. And this is
it, which makes the very entrance into Divinity, inaccessible to those men, who
standing high in the Opinion of their own wisdom, will believe nothing, but
that which is irrefragably proved from Rational Principles. For as Christ
requires a Denial of a man's self, that he may be able to follow him, S. Luke 9.
So as great a part as any of this Denial of his Wholeself S. Luke 9. 23.
(for so it must be) is the denial of his Understanding, and the composing of
the unquiet search of this Grand Inquisitor into the Secrets of Him that made
it, and the overruling the doubtfulness of it by the fervency of the
Intellectus Credentis determinatur per Voluntatem, non per Rationem. Tho. 2. 2.
q. 2. A. 1. ad tertium. And what power the Will has in Case of men's Believing,
or not Believing, is manifest, Jer. 44. But this is spoken of the Will compared
with the Understanding only, leaving the Operations of Grace free over both.
Will.

Seventhly, That the knowledge of the Supreme Cause of Pun. 7.
all (which is God) is most remote, and the most difficult thing Reason can
have to do with. The Quod sit, That there is a God, Co^^n ^ijis enim sententia
est Patrum and Theologorum aliorum, demonstrari posse naturali ratione Deum
esse; Sed a posteriori and per effectus. Sic Tho. p. 1. q. 2. A. 2. Et Damasc.
I. 1 Ortho. Fid. c. 3. and Almain. in 3. sent. D. 24. q. 1. But what may be
demonstrated by natural reason, by natural light may the same be known. And so
the Apostle himself, Romans 1. 20. Invisibilia Dei a Creatura mundi per ea quae
facta sunt, intellecta conspiciuntut. And so Calvin most clearly, I. 1. Instit.
c. ^.. 1. Aperire oculos nequeunt, quin aspicere eum coguntur, though
Bellarmine would needs be girding at him, L. 4. de Great. and Lib. Arbit. cap.
2. Videtur autem and Ratio iis quae apparent attestari: Omnes enim homines de
Diis (ut ille loquitur) habent existimationem, Arist. I. 1. de Coelo, T. 22.
blear-eyed Reason can see. But the Damasc. L. 1. Ortho. Fid. c. 4.
Quid sit, what that God is, is infinitely beyond all the fathoms of Reason. He
is a Light indeed, but such as no man's Reason can come at for the Brightness. 1 Timothy 6. 16. Et u^ Vestiglum sic accedendi relinquit. S. Aug. nisi dugeas
imaginatione cogitationis lucem solis innumerabiliter vel quid aliud, etc. ^.
8. de Trin. c. 2. Solus modus accedendi, Preces sunt. Boet. de Consolat.
Philos. L. 5. prosa. 3.
1 Timothy 6. If any thing therefore be attainable in this kind, it must be by
Prates Scientias Philosophicas; necesse est ut ponatur alia Scientia divinit^s
revelata de iis quae hominis captum excedunt. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 1.
Revelation; And that must be from Himself: for none can Reveal, but And
therefore Biel is express, That God could not reveal any thing that is to come,
nisi illud esset ^ Deo praescitum seu praevisum (i. e. unless God did fully
comprehend that which he does reveal) Bi^l in 3. sent. D. 23. q. 2. A. 1.
he that Comprehends. And Nullus Intellectus Creatus videndo Deum, potest
cognoscere Omnia que Deus facit, vel potest facere. Hoc enim esset
Comprehendere ejus virtutem, etc. Tho. p. 1. q. 12. A. 8. C.

Ad Argumentum: Quod Deus ut Speculum est: Et quod omnia quae fieri possunt, in
eo resplendent. Respondet Thom. Quod non est necessarium, quod videns speculum,
omnia in speculo videat, nisi speculum vtsu suo comprehendat. Tho. p. 1. q. 12.
A. 8. ad 2. ( Now no man can comprehend this Glass which is God Himself.)


none does, or can comprehend God, but Himself. And when he does Reveal, yet he
is no farther discernable, than Deus enim est Speculum voluntarium revelans
quae and quot vult alicui beato: non est Speculum naturaliter repraesentans
omnia. Biel. Suppl. in 4. Sent. D. 49. q. 3. propos. 3.
Himself pleases. Now since For if Reason well put to its search did not find
this out, how came Arist. to affirm this by rational disquisition? (...), etc.
Restat, ut men's sola extrinsecus acc^dat, eaque sola divina sit, nihil enim cum
ejus Action communicate Actio corporalis. Arist. l. 2. de genesis Anim. c. 3. This
cannot be spoken of the Soul, were it mortal. And therefore I must needs be of
Paulus Benius his opinion, who says plainly, and proves it too, Turpiter
affixam a quibusdam Aristottli Mortalitatis Animae Opinionem. Benius in Timaeum
Platonis, Decad. 2 ^. L. 3.
Reason teaches, that the Soul of man is immortal, and For if Reason did not
dictate this also, whence is it that Aristotle disputes of the way and means of
attaining it? L. 1. Moral. c. 9. And takes on him to prove, That Felicity is
rather an Honorable than a Commendable thing, c. 12. And after all this, he
adds, Deo beata tota vita est, hominibus autem catenus, quatenus similitudo
quaedam ejusmodi Operationis ipsis inest, Arist. L. 10. Moral. c. 8.
capable of Felicity. And since that Felicity consists in the Contemplation of
the highest Cause, which again is God himself. And since Christ therein
Confirms that Dictate, that man's eternal Happiness is to know God, and Him whom
he has sent, S. S. John 17. 3. Ultima Beatitudo hominis Consistit in quadam:
supernaturali visione Dei. Ad hanc autem visionem Homo. ^^r^^^gere non potest,
nisi per modum Addiscentis a Deo Doctore, Omnis qui audit a Patre and didicit.
S. John 6. 45. Thom. 2. 2. q. 2. A. 3. in c.
Joh. 17. And since nothing can put us into the way of attaining to that
Contemplation, but some Revelation of Himself, and of the way to Himself: I
say, since all this is so, It cannot reasonably be thought by any prudent man,
that the All-wise God should create man with a desire of Felicity; and then
leave him utterly destitute of all Instrumental Helps to make the Attainment
possible: since Deus and Natura nihil frustra faciunt, Arist. ^. 1. de Coelo.
T. 32. Frustra autem est quod non potest habere suum usunt, Thom. ibid.
God and Nature do nothing but for an end. And Help there can be none
sufficient, but by Revelation. And once grant me that Revelation is necessary,
and then I will appeal to Reason it self, and that shall prove abundantly one
of these two: That either, there was never any such Revelation of this kind
from the worlds beginning to this day; And that will put the frustra upon God
in point of man's Felicity: Or, that the Scriptures which we now embrace, as
the Word of God, is that Revelation; And that is it we Christians labor to make
good against all Atheism, Profaneness, and Infidelity.

Last of all, To prove that the Book of God which we honor Pun. 8.
as His Word, is this necessary Revelation of God and his Truth, which must,
and is alone able, to lead us in the way to our eternal Blessedness (or else
the world has none) comes in a Cloud of witnesses. Some for the Infidel, and
some for the Believer. Some for the Weak in Faith, and some for the Strong. And
some for all. For then first comes in the Tradition of the Church, the present
Church; so it is no Heretical, or Schismatical Belief. Then the Testimony of
former Ages; so it is no New Belief. Then the consent of Times; so it is no
Divided or partial Belief. Then the Harmony of the Prophets, and them
fulfilled; so it is not a 2 Pet. 1. 1^
Devised, but a forespoken Belief. Then the success of the Doctrine contained
in this Book; so it is not a Belief stifled in the Cradle; but it has spread
through the world in despite of what the world could do against it; And
increased from weak, and unlikely Beginnings, to incredible Greatness. Then the
Constancy of this Truth; so it is no Moon-Belief: For in the midst of the
worlds* Changes, it has preserved its Creed entire through many generations.
Then, that there is nothing Carnal in the Doctrine; so it is a Chaste Belief. And
all along it has gained, kept, and exercised more power upon the minds of men,
both learned and unlearned, in the increase of virtue, and repression of vice,
than any Moral Philosophy, or Legal Policy that ever was. Then comes the
inward Light and Excellency of the Text it self; and so it is no dark, or
dazzling Belief. And it is an Excellent Text: For see the riches of Natural
knowledge, which are stored up there, as well as Supernatural. Consider how
things quite above Reason consent with things Reasonable. Weigh it well what
Majesty lies there hid under Humility: Quasi quidam fluvius est, planus, and
Altus, in quo and Agnus ambulet, and Elephas natet, S. Greg. Praesat. in Lib.
Moralium, c. 4.
What Depth there is with a Perspicuity unimitable: What In Lege Domini
voluntas ejus, Psalm. 1. 2. Dulcior super mel and fa^nm, Psalm. 18. 11. and
passim.
Delight it works in the Soul, that is devoutly exercised in it, how the Multa
dicuntur submissis and bumi repentibus animis, ut aecommodati^s pir humana in
Divina consurgant. Multa etiam figurate, ut studiosa men's, and quaesitis
exerceatur utili^s and uberius laetetur inven^^ S. Aug. de Mor. Ec. Cat. c. 17.
Sed nihil sub spirituali sensu continetur. Fidei necessarium, quod Scriptura
per Literalem sensum alicubi manifest non tradat. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 10. ad 1.
Sublimist wits find in it enough to amaze them; while the simplest want not
enough to direct them. And then we shall not wonder, if (with the assistance of
Credimus, etc. sicut ob alia multa certiora Argument^ quam est Testimonium
Ecclesiae) tum propter hoc potiffsmum, q^od Spiritus Sanctus nobis intus has
esse Dei voces persuadeat. Whitaker. Disput. de Sac. Scrip. Controvers. 1. q.
3. c. 8.
Gods Spirit, who alone works Faith and Belief of the Scriptures, and their
Divine Authority, as well as other Articles) we grow up into a most Infallible
Assurance, such an Assurance, as has made many lay down their lives for this
Truth: such, as that, Gal. 1. 8.
Though an Angel from Heaven should Preach unto us another Gospel, we would not
believe Him, or it. No; though we should see as great, and as many Miracles
done over again to dissuade us from it, as were at first to win the world to
it. To which firmness of Assent by the Operation of Gods Spirit, the Will
confers as much, or more strength, than the Understanding, Clearness, the whole
Assent being an Act of Faith, and not of Knowledge. And therefore the Question
should not have been asked of me by F. How I knew? But, upon what Motives I did
believe Scripture to be the word of God? And I would have him take heed, lest
hunting too close after a way of Knowledge, he lose the way of Faith, and teach
other men to lose it too.

So then the Way lies thus (as far as it appears to me) The Pun. 9.
Credit of Scripture to be Divine Resolves finally into that Faith, which we
have touching God Himself, and in the same order. For as that, so this has
Three main Grounds, to which all other are Reducible. The first is, the
Tradition of the Church: And this leads us to a Reverend persuasion of it. The
Second is, The Light of Nature: and this shows us how necessary such a Revealed
Learning is, and that no other way it can be had: Cum Fides insallibili
veritati innitatur: Et ideo cum impossible sit de vero demonstrari Contrarium
1 sequitur omnes Probationes qua contra fidem inducuntur, non posse esse
Demonstrationes, sed solubilia Argumenta. Tho. p. 1. q. A. 1. 8. c.
Nay more, that all Proofs brought against any Point of Faith, neither are, nor
can be Demonstrations, but soluble Arguments. The Third is, The light of the
Text it self; in Conversing wherewith we meet with the Fidei ultima Resolutio
est in Deum illuminantem. S. Aug. cont. Fund. c. 14.
Spirit of God inwardly inclining our hearts, and sealing the full Assurance of
the sufficiency of all Three unto us. And then, and not before, we are
certain, That the Scripture is the Word of God boty by Divine, and by
Infallible Proof. But our Certainty is by Faith, and so voluntary, not by
Knowledge of such Principles, as in the light of Nature can enforce Assent
whether we will or no.

I have said thus much upon this great Occasion, because this Argument is so
much pressed, without due respect to Scripture. And I have proceeded in a
Synthetical way, to build up the Truth for the benefit of the Church, and the
satisfaction of all men Christianly disposed. Whereas had I desired only to rid
my hands of these Captious Jesuits (for certainly this Question was Captiously
asked;) it had been sufficient to have restored the Question, thus: How do you
know the Testimony of the Church (by which, you say, you know Scripture to be
the Word of God) to be Divine and Infallible? If they prove it by Scripture (as
all of them do, and as A. C. does) how do A. C. p. 53. Et vid.. 16. N. 28.
they know that Scripture to be Scripture? It is but a Circular Assurance of
theirs, by which they found the Churches Infallibility upon the Testimony of
the Scripture; And the Scriptures Infallibility upon the Testimony of the
Church: That is upon the Matter, the Churches Infallibility upon the Churches
Infallibility. But I labor for edification, not for destruction. And now, by
what I have here said, I will weigh my Answer, and his Exception taken against
it.


F. The Bishop said, That the Books of Scripture are Principles to be Supposed,
and needed not to be Proved.


B. The Books of Scripture are the Word of God) is to be supposed, as needing
no Proof at all to a Natural man? Or to a man newly entering upon the Faith?
yea, or perhaps to a Doubter, or Weakling in the Faith? Can you think me so
weak? It seems you do. But sure I know, there is a great deal of difference
between Ethnicks that deny, and deride the Scripture, and men that are Born in
the Church. The first have a farther way about to this Principle; The other in
their very Christian Education suck it in, and are taught so soon as they are
apt to learn it, That the Books, commonly called The Bible, or Scripture, are
the Word of God. And I dealt with you Dixi sicut (...) congruebat, ad quem
scribebam, S. Aug. l. 1. Retract. c. 13.
as with a Christian, though in Error, while you call Catholic. The Words
before spoken by me were, That the Scripture only, not any unwritten Tradition,
was the Foundation of Faith. The Question between us, and you is, Whether the
Scripture do contain all necessary things of Faith? Now in this Question, as in
all Nature, and Art, the Subject, the Scripture is and must be Nor is it such a
strange thing to hear that Scripture is such a supposed Principle among
Christians. Quod a Scriptura evidenter deducitur, est evidenter verum,
suppositis Scripturis. Bellarm. L. 4. de Eccl. Milit. c. 3. ^. 3.
supposed. The Quaere between the Roman Catholics and the Church of England,
being only of the Praedicate, the thing uttered of it, Namely, Whether it
contain all Fundamentals of Faith, all Necessaries for Salvation within it? Now
since the Question proposed in very form of Art, proves not, but De Subjecto
enim queritur semper, non Subjectum ipsum.
supposes the Subject, I think I gave a satisfying Answer, That to you, and me,
and in this Question, Scripture was a Supposed Principle, and needed no Proof.
And I must tell you, that in this Question of the Scriptures perfect Continent,
it is against all Art, yea and Equity too, in Reasoning to call for a proof of
That here, which must go unavoydably supposed in this Question. And if any man
will be so familiar with Impiety, to Question it, it must be tried in a
preceding Question, and Dispute by it self. Yet here not you only, but L. 4. de
verb. Dei, c. 4.. Quarto necesse est. And the ^esuite here, op^d A, C. p. 49.
Bellarmine, and others run quite out of the way to snatch at Advantage.


F. Against this I read what I had formerly written in my Reply against M. John
White: Wherein I plainly showed, that this Answer was not good, and that no
other Answer could be made, but by admitting some Word of God unwritten, to
assure us of this Point.


^. Discourse upon this Argument. But surely I so untied the knot of the
Argument, that I set you to your Book again. For your self confess, that
against this you read what you had formerly written. Well! what ere you read
there, certain it is you do a great deal of wrong to M. Hooker L. ^. ^. 8.
, and my self, that because we call it a Supposed or Presumed Principle among
Christians, you should fall by and by into such a Whereas Bellarm. says
expressly, that in the Controversies between you and us, Non agitur de
Metaphysicis subtilit atibus, qu^ sine periculo ignorari, and interdum c^^^
Laud opp^^nari poss^^^, etc. Bellarm. Praesat. Ope^^^us pr^^^x. ^. 3.
Metaphysical Discourse to prove, That that which is a His omnibus (...) est
Controversia de Verbo Dei. Neque enim disputari potest, nisi prius in aliquo
Communi Principio cum Adversariis (...) nos and omnes omni^^ H^reticos, Verbum
Dei esse Regulum fidei, ex qua de Dogmatibus judicandum sit, esse commune
Pri(...) ab omnibus concessum, (...), etc. Bellarm. Praesat. Operib. prafix..
ult. And if it be Com(...) Pri(...) ab omnibus (...), then I hope it must be
taken as a thing supposed, or as a Praecognitum in this Dispute between us.
Praecognitum, fore-known in Science, must be of such light, that it must be
known of, and by it self alone; and that the Scripture cannot be so known to be
the Word of God.

Beam, which is very glorious (especially in some parts of Scripture) gives
light to prove it self. You see neither Hooker, nor I, nor the Church of
England (for ought I know) leave the Scripture alone to manifest it self, by
the light, which it has in it self. No; but when the present Church has
prepared, and led the way, like a preparing Morning-Light to Sunshine; then
indeed we settle for our Direction, yet not upon the first opening of the
morning-light, but upon the Sun it self. Nor will I make needless enquiry, how
far, and in what manner a Praecognitum, or Supposed Principle in any Science,
may be proved in a Higher, to which that is subordinate; or accepted for a
Prime. Nor how it may in Divinity, where Prae, as well as Post-cognita, things
fore, as well as after-known, are matters, and under the manner of Faith, and
not of Science strictly. Nor whether a Praecognitum, a presupposed Principle in
Faith, which rests upon Divine Authority, must needs have as much, and equal
Light to Natural Reason, as Prime Principles have in Nature, while they rest
upon Reason. Nor whether it may justly be denied to have sufficient Light,
because not equal. Your own School Colligitur apert^ ex Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A^g:
ad 1. Et Articulotum Fidei veritas non potest nobis esse evidens absolute.
Bellar. L. 4. de Eccles. Mit. c. 3.. 3.
grants, That in us, which are the Subjects both of Faith and Knowledge, and in
regard of the Evidence given in unto us, there is less Light, less Evidence in
the Principles of Faith, than in the Principles of Knowledge, upon which there
can be no doubt. But I think the School will never grant, That the Principles
of Faith (even this in Question) have not sufficient Evidence. And you ought
not to do, as you did, without any Distinction, or any Limitation, deny a
Praecognitum, or Prime Principle in the Faith; because it answers not in all
things to the Prime Principles in Science, in their Light and Evidence; a thing
in it self directly against Reason.

A. C. here steps in again, and tells me, That though a Praecognitum in Faith
need not be so clearly known, as a Praecognitum in Science, yet there must be
this proportion between them, that, whether it be in Science, or in Faith, the
Praecognitum, or thing supposed as known, must be prius cognitum, first known,
and not need another thing pertaining to that Faith, or Knowledge, to be known
before it. But the Scripture (says he) needs Tradition to go before it, and
introduce the knowledge of it. Therefore the Scripture is not to be supposed,
as a Praecognitum, and a thing fore-known. Truly I am sorry to see in a man
very learned such wilful mistakes. For A. C. cannot but perceive, by that which
I have clearly laid down. 17 and 18. N^. 2.
before, That I intended not to speak precisely of a Praecognitum in this
Argument. But when I said, Scriptures were Principles to be supposed; I did
not, I could not intend, they were prius cognitae, known before Tradition;
since I confess every where, That Tradition introduces the knowledge of them.
But my meaning is plain; That the Scriptures are and must be Principles
supposed, before you can dispute this Question; And my immediate Words in the
Conference, upon which the ^esuite a^^ed, How I knew Scripture to be Scripture?
were (as the ^esuite himself relates it, apud ^. c. p^^* 8.) That the Scripture
only, not any unwritten Tradition* was the Foundation of our Faith. Now the
Scripture cannot be the only F^^^dation of F^^^h, if it contain not all things
necessary to Salvation; Which the Church of Rome denying against all Antiquity,
makes it now become a Question. And in regard of this* my Answer was, That the
Scriptures are and must be Principles supposed, and praecognit^^, before the
handling of this Question.
Whether the Scriptures contain in them all things necessary to salvation.
Before which Question it must necessarily be supposed and granted on both
sides, That the Scriptures are the Word of God. For if they be not, it is
instantly out of all Question, that They cannot include all Necessaries to
Salvation. So it is a Praecognitum, not to Tradition (as A. C. would cunningly
put upon the Cause) but to the whole Question of the Scriptures sufficiency.
And yet if he could tie me to a Praecognitum in this very Question, and
proveable in a Superior Science; I think I shall go very near to prove it in
the next Paragraph, and entreat A. C. to confess it too.

A. C. this, I must secondly follow him a little farther. For I would fain make
it appear as plainly, as in such a difficulty it can be made, what wrong he
does Truth and himself in this Case. And it is the common fault of them all.
For when the Protestants answer to this Argument (which, as I have showed, can
properly have no place in the Question between us about Tradition) Hook. L. 3..
8.
they which grant this as a Praecognitum, a thing fore-known (as also I do)
were neither ignorant, nor forgetful, That things presupposed, as already known
in a Science, are of two sorts. For either they are plain and fully manifest in
their own Light: or they are proved and granted already, some former knowledge
having made them Evident. This Principle then, The Scriptures are the Oracles
of God, we cannot say is clear, and fully manifest to all men simply, and in
self-Light, for the Reasons before given. Yet we say, after Tradition has been
our Introduction, the Soul that has but ordinary Grace added to Reason, may
discern Light sufficient to resolve our Faith, that the Sun is there. This
Principle then being not absolutely, and simply evident in it self, is presumed
to be taught us otherwise. And if otherwise, then it must be taught in and by
some superior Science, to which Theology is subordinate. Now men may be apt to
think out of Reverence, That Divinity can have no Science above it. But your
own School teaches me that it has. Hoc modo sacra Doctrina est Scientia; quia
procedit ex Principiis notis Lumine superioris Scientiae, qu^ scilic^^ est
Scientia Dei and Beatorum. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. a. 2. And what says A. C. now to
this of Aquinas? Is it not clear in him, that this Principle, The Scripturis
are the word of God, of Divine and most infallible Credit, is a Praecognitum in
the knowledge of Divinity, and proveable in a superior Science, namely, the
Knowledge of God, and (...) ^lessed in Heaven? Yes; so clear, that (as I told
you he would) A. C. cons^ll^^ it, p. 51. But he adds? That because no man
ordinarily sees this Proof, therefore we must go either to Christ, who saw it
cle(...) Of to the Apostles, to whom it was clearly revealed; or to them, who
by Succession received it from the prime Seers. So now, because Christ is
ascended, and the Apostles gone into the number of the (...), and made in a
higher Degree partakers of their knowledge; therefore we must now only go unto
their Successors, and borrow light from the Tradition of the present Church.
For that we must do; And (...) so far well. ^^t that we must rely upon this
Tradition, as Divine, and Infallible, and able to breed in us (...), and
inf^^^^ble Pa^th, as A. C. adds, p. 51, 52. is a Proposition, which in the
times of the Pri(...) Church would have been accounted very dangerous, as
indeed it is. For I would fain know, why ^e^^^ing too (...) upon Tradition may
not mislead Christians, as well as it did the Jews. But (...), with (...),
Traditionis favore Legis praec^pta transgressi sunt. Can. 14. in ^. Mat. Yet to
this (...) are They of (...) now grown, Th^^ the Traditions of the present
Church are infallible: And by out(...) the Truth, told many after them. And as
it is Jer. 5. 31. The Prophets prophesit untruths, and the Priests recei^^
gifts, and my people delight therein, what will become of this in the end?
The sacred Doctrine of Divinity in this sort is a Science, because it proceeds
out of Principles that are known by the light of a Superior Knowledge, which is
the Knowledge of God, and the Blessed in Heaven. In this Superior Science, This
Principle, The Scriptures are the Oracles of God, is more than evident in full
light. This Superior Science delivered this Principle in full revealed Light to
the Prophets and Apostles. Non ^teditur Deus esse Author hujus Scienti^, qui^
Homines hoc testati sunt in quantum Homines nudo Testimonio Humano; sed in
quantum circa eos effulsit virtus Divina. Et ita Deus iis, and sibi ipsi in eis
Testimonium perhibuit. Hen. ^ Gand. Sum. P. 1. A. 9. q. 3.
This Inf^llible Light of this Principle made their Authority derivatively
Divine. By the same Divine Authority they wrote, and delivered the Scripture to
the Church. Therefore from them immediately the Church received the Scripture,
and that incorrupt, though not in the same clearness of Light, which they had.
And yet since no sufficient Reason has, or can be given, that in any
Substantial thing it has been Corrumpi non possunt, quia in manibus sunt
omnium Christianorum; Et quisquts hoc primitus ausus esset, multorum Codicum
vetustiorum collation^ confut^r^tur. Maxim, quia non una lingua, sed multis
continetur Scriptura. Nonnullae autem Codicum mendositates, vel de
Antiquioribus, vel de Lingua praecedente emendantur. S. Aug. L. 32. cont.
Faustum, c. 16.
Corrupted, it remains firm at this day, and that proved in the most Supreme
Science; and therefore now to be supposed (at least by all Christians) That the
Scripture is the Word of God. So; my Answer is good, even in strictness, That
this Principle is to be supposed in this Dispute.

Jews never had, nor can have any other Proof, That the Old Testament is the
Word of God, than we have of the New. For theirs was delivered by Moses, and
the Prophets; and ours was delivered by the Apostles, which were Prophets too.
The Jews did believe their Scripture by a Divine Authority: For so the Jews
argue themselves: S. John 9. 29.
S. Joh. 9. We know that God spoke with Moses. Maldonat. in S. Joh. 9. Itaque
non magis errare posse eum sequentes, quam si Deam ipsam sequerentur.
And that therefore they could no more err in following Moses, than they could
in following God himself. And our Savior seems to infer as much, S. Joh. 5. 47.
S. Joh. 5. where he expostulates with the Jews thus: If you believe not Moses
his Writings, how should you believe Me? Now how did the Jews know that God
spoke to Moses? How? Why apparently, the same way that is before set down.
First, by Tradition. So S. Hom. 57. in S. Joh. 9. (...).
Chrysostom: We know why: By whose witness do you know? By the Testimony of
our Ancestors. But he speaks not of their immediate Ancestors, but their Prime,
which were Prophets, and whose Testimony was Divine; into which (namely their
Writings) the Jews did resolve their Faith. And even that Scripture of the Old
Testament was a a S. Pet. 1. 19.
Light, and a shining Light too: And therefore could not but be sufficient,
when Tradition had gone before. And yet though the Jews entered this way to
their Belief of the Scripture, they do not say, S. Chrysostom. ubi suprd. (...).
Audivimus, We have heard that God spoke to Moses, but We know it. So they
Resolved their Faith higher, and into a more inward Principle, than an Ear to
their immediate Ancestors, and their Tradition. And I would willingly learn of
you, if you can show it me, where ever any one Jew disputing with another about
their Law, did put the other to prove, that the Old Testament was the Word of
God. But they still supposed it. And when others put them to their Proof, this
way they went. And yet you say:


F. That no other Answer could be made, but by admitting some Word of God
unwritten, to assure us of this Point.


B. Answer is good, and that no other Answer need be made. If there were need,
I make no Question, but another Answer might be made to assure us of this
Point, though we did not admit of any Word of God unwritten. I say, to assure
us; and you express no more. If you had said, to assure us by Divine Faith,
your Argument had been the stronger. But if you speak of Assurance only in the
general, I must then tell you (and it is the great advantage which the Church
of Christ has against Insidels) a man may be assured, nay infallibly assured
by Ecclesiastical and Humane Proof. Men that never saw Rome, may be sure, and
infallibly believe, That such a City there is, by Historical, and acquired
Faith. And if Consent of Humane Story can assure me this, why should not
Consent of Church-story assure me the other, That Christ and his Apostles
delivered this Body of Scripture as the Oracles of God? For Jews, Enemies to
Christ, they bear witness to the Old Testament; and Christians through almost
all Nations Tanta hominum, and temporam consensione firmatum. S. Aug. L. de
Mor. Eccles. Cath. c. 29. Ii Libri quoquo modo se habent, sancti tamen
Divinarum Rerum pleni prope totius generis humani Confessione diffamantur, etc.
S. Aug. de util. Cred. c. 7. and L. 13. cont. Faust. c. 15.
give in evidence to both Old and New. And no Pagan, or other Enemies of
Christianity, can give such a Worthy and Consenting Testimony for any Authority
upon which they rely, or almost for any Principle which they have, as the
Scripture has gained to it self. And as is the Testimony which it receives,
above all Super omnes omnium Gentium Liter as. S. Aug. 11. de Civit. Dei, c. 1.
Writings of all Nations; so here is assurance in a great measure, without any
Divine Authority, in a Word written or Unwritten. A great assurance, and it is
Infallible too; Only then we must distinguish Infallibility. For first, a thing
may be presented as an infallible Object of Belief, when it is true* and
remains so. For Truth qua talis, as it is Truth, cannot deceive. Secondly, a
thing is said to be Infallible, when it is not only true, and remains so,
actually, but when it is of such invariable constancy, and upon such ground,
as that no Degree of falsehood at any time, in any respect can fall upon it.
Certain it is, that by Humane Authority, Consent, and Proof, a man may be
assured infallibly, that the Scripture is the Word of God, by an acquired Habit
of Faith, cui non subest falsum, under which nor Error, nor falsehood is: But he
cannot be assured insallibly, by Divine Faith, Incertum esse non potest hos
esse Libros Canonicos. Wall. Doct. sid. l. 2. a. 2. c. 20.
cui subesse non potest falsum, into which no falsehood can come, but by a
Divine Testimony: This Testimony is absolute in Scripture it self, delivered by
the Apostles for the Word of God, and so sealed to our Souls by the operation
of the Holy Ghost. That which makes way for this as an Canus Loc. l. 2. c. 8.
facit Ecclesiam Causam sine qua non.
Introduction and outward motive, is the Tradition of the present Church; but
that neither simply Divine, nor sufficient alone, into which we may resolve our
Faith, but only as is. 16.
before expressed.

miserable Rent in the Church of Christ (which I think no true Christian can
look upon, but with a bleeding heart) that you and We were all of One Belief:
That belief was tainted, in tract and corruption of times, very deeply. A
Division was made; yet so, that both Parts held the Creed, and other Common
Principles of Belief. Of these, this was one of the greatest, Inter omnes pene
constat aut certe id quod satis est, inter me and illos, cum quibus nunc
agitur, convenit hoc, etc. Sic in alia Causa cont. Manichaeos, S. Aug. L. de
Mor. Eccl: Cath. c. 4.
That the Scripture is the Word of God; For our belief of all things contained
in it, depends upon it. Since this Division, there has been nothing done by us
to discredit this Principle. Nay, We have given it all honor, and ascribed
unto it more sufficiency, even to the containing of all things necessary to
salvation, with Vin. Lir. cont. Haeres. c. 2.
Satis superque, enough and more than enough; which your selves have not done,
do not. And for begetting and settling a Belief of this Principle, we go the
same way with you, and a better besides. The same way with you: Because we
allow the Tradition of the present Church to be the first inducing Motive to
embrace this Principle; only we cannot go so far in this way as you, to make
the present Tradition always an Infallible Word of God unwritten: For this is
to go so far in, till you be out of the way. For Tradition is but a Lane in the
Church; it has an end, not only to receive us in, but another after, to let us
out, into more open, and richer ground. And we go a better way than you:
Because after we are moved, and prepared, and induced by Tradition, we resolve
our Faith into that Written Word, and God delivering it; in which we find
materially, though not in Terms, the very Tradition, that led us thither. And
so we are sure by Divine Authority that we are in the way, because at the end
we find the way proved. And do what can be done, you can never settle the Faith
of man about this great Principle, till you rise to greater assurance, than the
Present Church alone can give. And therefore once again to that known place of
S. Augustine: Contra Epist. Fund. c. 5.
The words of the Father are, Nisi commoveret, Unless the Authority of the
Church moved me: but not alone, but with other Motives; else it were not
commovere, to move together. And the other Motives are Resolvers, though this
be Leader. Now since we go the same way with you, so far as you go right; and a
better way than you, where you go wrong; we need not admit any other Word of
God, than we do. And this ought to remain, as a Presupposed Principle among all
Christians, and not so much as come into this Question, about the sufficiency
of Scripture between you, and us. But you say, that


F. From this the Lady called us, and desiring to hear, Whether the Bishop
would grant the Roman Church to be the Right Church? The B. granted, That it
was.


B. Tertullian to write his Book d^ Praescript. adversus Haereticos, was, That
he Pamel. in Summar. Lib... Videns Disputationibus nihil aut par^m profici.
saw little or no Profit come by Disputations. Sure the Ground was the same
then, and now. It was not to deny, that Disputation is an Opening of the
Understanding, a sifting out of Truth; it was not to affirm, that any such
Disquisition is in, and of it self unprofitable. If it had, S. Stephen Acts 6.
9.
would not have disputed with the Cyrenians, nor S. Paul with the Acts 9. 29.
Grecians first, and then with the Jews Acts 19. 17.
, and all Comers. No sure: it was some Abuse in the Disputants, that frustrated
the good of the Disputation. And one Abuse in the Disputants, is a Resolution
to hold their own, though it be by unworthy means, and disparagement
Debilitatur generosa indoles conject a in argutias. Sen. Ep. 48.
of truth. And so I find it here. For as it is true, that this Question was
asked; so it is altogether false, that it was asked in this Here A. C. has
nothing to say, but that the Jesuit did not affirm, That the Lady asked this
Question in this or any other precise form. No? why, the words preceding are
the Jesuits own. Therefore if these were not the Ladies words, he wrongs her,
not I him.
form, or so answered. There is a great deal of Difference (especially as
Romanists handle the Question of the Church) between The Church, and A Church;
and there is some between a True Church and a Right Church: which is the word
you use, but no man else that I know; I am sure not I.

The Church may import in our Language, The only true Church; and perhaps (as
some of you seem to make it) the Root and the Ground of the Catholic. And this
I never did grant of the Roman Church, nor ever mean to do. But A Church can
imply no more, than that it is a member of the Whole. And this I never did, nor
ever will deny, if it fall not absolutely away from Christ. That it is a True
Church I granted also; but not a Right (as you impose upon me.) For Ens and
Verum, Being and True, are convertible one with another; and every thing that
has a Being, is truly that Being, which it is, in truth of Substance. But this
word Right is not so used, but is referred more properly to perfection in
Conditions: And in this sense, every thing that has a true, and real Being, is
not by and by Right in the Conditions of it. A man that is most dishonest, and
unworthy the name, a very Thief (if you will) is a True man, in the verity of
his Essence, as he is a Creature endued with Reason; for this none can steal
from him, nor he from himself, but Death: But he is not therefore a Right, or
an upright man. And a Church that is exceeding corrupt, both in Manners and
Doctrine, and so a dishonor to the Name, is yet a True Church in the verity of
Essence, as a Church is a Company of men, which profess the Faith of Christ,
and are Baptized into his Name: But yet it is not therefore a Right Church,
either in Doctrine, or Manners. It may be you meant cunningly to slip in this
word Right, that I might at unawares grant it Orthodox. But I was not so to be
caught; For I know well, that Orthodox Christians are keepers of integrity, and
followers of right things (so Integritat^ custodes, and rect a sectantes. De
vera Relig. c. 5.
St. Augustine) of which, the Church of Rome at this day is neither. In this
sense then no Right, that is, no Orthodox Church at Rome.

Roman Church to be a True Church. For so much very learned Protestants Hooker
l. 3.. 1. Junius l. de Ec. c. 17. Falluntur qui Ecclesiam negant, quia Papatus
in ea est. Reynold. These. 5. Negat tantum esse Catholicam, vel sanum ejus
membrum. Nay the very Separatists grant it. Fr. Johnson in his Treatise,
called, A Christian Plea, Printed 1617. p. 123, etc.
have acknowledged before me; and the Truth cannot deny it. For that Church,
which receives the Scripture as a Rule of Faith, though but as a partial and
imperfect Rule; and both the Sacraments as Instrumental Causes, and Seals of
Grace, though they add more, and misuse these; yet cannot but be a True Church
in essence. How it is in Manners and Doctrine, I would you would look to it
with a single eye, Si tamen bono ingenio Pietas and Pa^ quaedam mentis accedat,
fine qua de sanctis rebus nihil prorsus intelligi potest. S. Aug. de Util.
Cred. c. 18.
For if Piety and a Peaceable mind be not joined to a good understanding,
nothing can be known in these great things.

A. C. tells us, That the Jesuit does not say that the Lady asked this
Question in this, or any other precise form of words; A. C. p. 53.
But says, the Jesuit is sure, her desire was to know of me, whether I would
grant the Roman Church to be the right Church? And how was the Jesuit sure the
Lady desired to hear this from me? Why, A. C. tells us that too. For he adds,
That the A. C. p. 54.
Jesuit had particularly spoken with her before, and wished her to insist upon
that Point. Where you may see, and it is fit the Clergy of England should
consider with what cunning Adversaries they have to deal, who can find a way to
And after A. C. says again, p. 54. That the Lady did not ask the Question, as
if she meant to be satisfied with bearing what I said. So belike they take
Caution beforehand for that too* That whatever we say (unless we grant what
they would have) their Proselytes shall not be satisfied with it.
prepare their Disciples, and instruct them beforehand upon what Points to
insist, that so they may with more ease slide that into their hearts and
consciences, which should never come there. And this once known, I hope they
will the better provide against it. But A. C. goes on, and tells us, That
certainly by my Answer, the A. C. p. 54.
Ladies desire must needs be, to hear from me, not whether the Church of Rome
were a right Church, etc. but whether I would grant, that there is but one holy
Catholic Church, and whether the Roman Church (that is, not only that which is
in the City, or Diocese of Rome, but all that agreed with it) be not it. About
A Church, and The Church, I have said enough. 20. N. 1.
before, and shall not repeat. Nor is there any need I should. For A. C. would
have it The Church, The One, Holy, Catholic Church. But this cannot be
granted, take the Roman Church, in what sense they please, in City, or Diocese,
or all that agree with it. Yet howsoever before I leave this, I must acquaint
the Reader with a perfect Jesuitism. In all the Primitive Times of the Church,
a Man, or a Family, or a National Church were accounted Right and Orthodox, as
they agreed with the Catholic Church; But the Catholic was never then
measured, or judged by Man, Family, or Nation. But now in the Jesuits new
School, The One, Holy, And though Stapleton to magnify the Church of Rome, is
pleased to say: Apud vet^r^s pro eod^m habita fuit Ecclesia Romana and Ecclesia
Catholica: yet he is so modest as to give this Reason of it: Quia ejus Communio
^rat evidenter and certi^^^^^ cum to^d Catholied. Relect. Con. 1. q. 5. A. 3*
(Lo, The Communion of the Roman was then with the Catholic Church, not of the
Catholic with it.) And S. Cyprian employed his Legates Caldonius and
Fortunatus, not to bring the Catholic Church to the Communion of Rome, but
Rome to the Catholic Church: El^borar^nt, ^t ad Catholica Ecclessae unitatem
s^iss^ Corporis membr^ c^^p^^erent, etc. Now the Members of this Rent and torn
Body were they of Rome, then in an open Schism between Corneliu^ and N^vatian.
S. Cypr. L. 2. Epist. 10.
Catholic Church must be measured by that which is in the City or Diocese of
Rome, or of them which agreed with it, and not Rome by the Catholic. For so A.
C. says expressly, The Lady would know of me, not whether that were the
Catholic Church to which Rome agreed; but whether that were not the Holy
Cathotholike Church, which agreed with Rome. So upon the matter, belike the
Christian Faith was committed to the Custody of the Roman, not of the Catholic
Church; and a man cannot agree with the Catholic Church of Christ (in this new
Doctrine of A. C.) unless he agree with the Church of Rome; but if he agree
with that, all is safe, and he is as Orthodox, as he need be.

A. C. is yet troubled about the form of the Ladies Question. And he will not
have it, That she desired to know, whether I would grant the Roman Church to be
the Right Church? Though these be her words, according to the Jesuits own
setting down, but he thinks the Question was, Whether the Church of Rome was
not the Right Church? Not Be not, but was not. A. C. p. 54.
Was not? That is, was not once or in time past the Right Church before Luther
and others made a breach from it? Why, truly A. C. needed not have troubled
himself half so much about this. For let him take his Choice. It shall be all
one to me whether the Question were asked by Be* o^ by Was? For the Church of
Rome neither is, nor wa^ the Right Church, as the Lady desired to hear. A
Particular Church, it is, and was, and in some times right, and in some times
wrong; and then in some things right and in some things wrong* But The Right
Church, or The Holy Catholic Church it never was, nor ever can be. And
therefore was not such before Luther, and Others either left it, or were thrust
from it. A particular Church it was* But then A. C. is not distinct enough here
neither. For the Church of Rome both was, and was not a Right, or Orthodox
Church before Luther made a Breach from it. For the word An^e, Before, may look
upon Rome, and that Church a great way off, or long before; and then in the
Prime times of it, it was a most Right and Orthodox Church. But it may look
also nearer home, and upon the immediate times before Luther, or some Ages
before that; And then in those times C^m infiniti Abusus, Schismata quoque and
Haereses per totum nunc Christianum Orbem invalescant, Ecclesiam Dei legitima
indigere Reformatione nemi^^ (...) ^ertum ^rit. Pe^. de Ali^co Card. Camer^*
ce^^i^ L. de Refor. Ecclesiae. And if Schisms and Heresies did then invade the
whole Christian world, let A. C. consider how Rome s^aped free* And I think
Ca^erac^^sis was in this Prophetical. For sixty years and more before Luther
was born, and so before the great troubles which have since fallen upon all
Christendom, he used these words in the Book which himself delivered up in the
Council of Constance: Nisi celerite^ fiat Reformatio, audeo dicere quod licet
magna si^t, quae videmus, tamen in brevi incomparabiliter majora vid^bimus. Et
post istae ^on^^rua tam ^^rre^^a, majora alia audi^mus, etc. Camet. l. de
Refor. Eccles. And it will hardly sink into any man's judgment, that so great a
man, as Pet. ^s, Aliac^ was in that Church* should speak thus, if he did not
see some Errors in the Doctrine of that Church, as well as in Manners. Nay
Cassander, though he lived and dyed in the Communion of the Church of Rome, yet
found fault with some of her Doctrines. Consult. Arti^. 21 and 22. And Pope
^uli^^^ the third Professed ^e Bononi^, (...) Sacramentorum Ecclesiae
ministerium i^^umerabiles Abusus irrep^isse. Espencaeus in Tit. 1. and yet he
was on^ of the Bishops, nay the chief Legate in the Council of Trent.
Rome was a Corrupt and a tainted Church, far from being Right. And yet both
these times Before Luther made his Breach. So here A. C. should have been more
distinct. For the word Before includes the whole time before Luther, in part of
which time that Church of Rome was Right, and in other part whereof it was
wrong. But A. C. p. ^4.
A. C. adds yet, That I suspected the Lady would i^ser, if once that Church
were Right, what hindered it now to be? Since that did not depart from the
Protestant Church, but the Protestant Church from it. Truly, I neither
suspected the Inference would be made, nor fear it, when it is made. For it is
no News that any Particular Church, Roman, as well as another, may once have
been Right, and afterward wrong, and in far worse case. And so it was in Rome
after the enemy had sowed tares among the wheat. S. Mat. 13. 25.
S. Mat. 13. But whether these Tares were sown, while their Bishops slept; or
whether For A. C. knows well, what strange Doctrines are charged upon some
Popes. And all Bellarmines labor, though great and full of Art, is not able to
wish them clean. (...) ^. 4. de R^m. Pont. c. 8, etc. Et Papas quosdam graves
errores semin^ss^ in Ecclesid Christi lu^e cla^^^s est. Et pro^^tu^^d ^aco.
Almain. Opus^. de Author. Ecclesiae, c. 10. And Cassander speaks it out more
plainly: Uti^am (...) (He speaks of the Bishops and Rectors in the Roman
Church) ^ (...) haec Informa^^^ (...) ess^^, non Ipsi ^arum Superstitionum
Auctores essent: vel certe (...) i^ Animi^ (...) (...) ^l^quand^ (...) ca^sa
nutrir^^^. Cassand. Consult^. Art. 21. versus finem.
They themselves did not help to sow them, is too large a Disquisition for this
Place. So though it were once Right, yet the Tares which grow thick in it, are
the Cause why it is not so now. And then though that Church did not depart from
the Protestants Church; yet if it gave great, and just Cause for the Protestant
Church to depart from the Errors of it, while it in some Particulars departed
from the Truth of Christ, it comes all to one for this Particular, That the
Roman Church which was once right, is now become wrong, by embracing
Superstition and Error.


F. Farther he confessed, That Protestants had made a Rent and Division from it.


B. Grave omni^^ crimen, s^^ desensionem longinquam non requirit, satis est
enim negare; sicut pro Ecclesia olim. S. Aug. de ^til. Cred. c. ^. ^
angry, but that I have resolved in handling matters of Religion to leave all
gall out of my Ink; for I never granted that the Roman Church either is, or was
the right Church. It Is too true indeed, that there is a miserable Rent in the
Church, and I make no Question but the best men do most bemoan it Hanc quae
respect^ hominum Ecclesia dicitur, observare, ejusque Communionem co^ere
debemus. Calv. Inst. 4. c. 1.
; nor is he a Christian, that would not have Unity, might he have it with
Truth. But I never ^. 7.
said, nor thought that the Protestants made this Rent. The Cause of the Schism
is yours; for you thrust us from you; because we called for Truth, and Redress
of Abuses. For a Rect^ ^cia^ not ^e^iss^ re^^d^udo ^ vobis, etc. Lucif. L. d^
non co^^^nitud^ cum ^aereticis. He speaks of the Arrians, and I shall not
compare you with them, nor give any Offense that way. I shall only draw the
general Argument from it, thus: If the Orthodox did well in departing from the
Arrians, then the Schism was to be imputed to the Arrians, although the
Orthodox did depart from them. Otherwise if the Orthodox had been guilty of the
Schism, he could not have said, Recte scias nos fecisse recede^do. For it
cannot be that a man should do well in making a Schism. There may be therefore
a necessary separation, which yet incurs not the blame of Schism; and that is,
when Doctrines are taught contrary to the Catholic Faith.
Schism must needs be theirs, whose the Cause of it is. The Woe runs full out
of the mouth of * Christ, ever against him, that gives the Offense; not against
him that takes it, ever. But you have, by this carriage, given me just cause,
never to treat with you, or your like, but before a Judge, or a Jury. S. Matthew.
18. 7.


A. C. tells me, I had no cause to be angry, either with the Jesuit, or my
self. Not with the Jesuit, for he writ down A. C. ^. 55, 56.
my words in fresh memory, and upon special notice taken of the Passage, and
that I did say either iisdem, or aequipollentibus verbis, either in these, or
equivalent words, That the Protestants did make the Rent, or Division from the
Roman Church. What, did the Jesuit set down my words in fresh memory, and upon
special notice taken, and were they so few as these, The Protestants did make
the Schism; and yet was his memory so short, that he cannot tell, whether I
uttered this iisdem, or aequipollentibus verbis? Well, I would A. C. and his
Fellows would leave this Art of theirs, and in Conferences (which A. C. p. 57.
they are so ready to call for) impose no more upon other men, than they utter.
And you may observe too, that after all this full Assertion, that I spoke this
iisdem, or aequipollentibus verbis, A. C. concludes thus: The Jesuit took
special notice in fresh memory, A. C. p. 55.
and is sure he related, at least in sense, just as it was uttered. What Is
this, At least in sense just as it was uttered? Do not these two Enterfeire,
and show the Jesuit to be upon his shuffling pace? For if it were just as it
was uttered, then it was in the very form of words too, not in sense only. And
if it were but At least in sense, then when A. C. has made the most of it, it
was not just as 'twas uttered. Besides, at least in sense, does not tell us in
whose sense it was. For if A. C. mean the Jesuite's sense of it, he may make
what sense he pleases of his own words; but he must impose no sense of his upon
my words. But as he must leave my words to my self, so when my words are
uttered, or written, he must leave their sense either to me, or to that genuine
Construction, which an Ingenuous Reader can make of them. And what my words of
Grant were, I have before expressed, and their sense too.

Not with my self: That Is the next. For A. C. says, It Is truth, and that the
world knows it, that the Protestants did depart from A. C. p. 56.
the Church of Rome, and got the name of Protestants, by protesting against it.
No, A. C. by your leave, this is not truth neither; and therefore I had reason
to be angry with my self, had I granted it. For, first, the Protestants did not
depart: For departure is voluntary, so was not theirs. I say, not theirs,
taking their whole Body and Cause together. For that some among them were
peevish, and some ignorantly zealous, is neither to be doubted, nor is there
danger in confessing it. Your Body is not so perfect (I wot well) but that many
amongst you are as pettish, and as ignorantly zealous, as any of Ours. You must
not suffer for these, nor We for those; nor should the Church of Christ for
either. Next, the Protestants did not get that Name by Protesting against the
Church of Rome, but by Protesting (and that when nothing else would serve)
Conventus fuit Ordinum Imperii Spirae* ^bi Decretum factum est, ut Edictum
Wormatiense observaretur contra Novatores, ( sic appellare placuit) and ut
omnia in integrum restituantur (and sic nulla omnind Reformatio.) Contra hoc
Edictum solennis fuit protes^atio, Aprilis 16. An. Chr. 1529. Et hinc ortum
pervulgatum illud Protestantium nomen. Sc. Calvis. Chro. ad Anne 1529. This
Protestation therefore was not simply against the Roman Church, but against the
Edict which was for the restoring of all things to their former estate, without
any Reformation.
against her Errors and Superstitions. Do you but remove them from the Church
of Rome, and our Protestation is ended, and the Separation too. Nor is
Protestation it self such an unheard of thing in the very heart of Religion.
For the Sacraments both of the Old and New Testament are called by your own
School, Visible Signs protesting the Faith. Now if the Sacraments be
Protestantia, Signs Protesting, why may not men also, and without all offense,
be called Protestants, since by receiving the true Sacraments, and by refusing
them which are corrupted, they do but Protest the sincerity of their Faith
against that Doctrinal Corruption, which has invaded the great Sacrament of
the Eucharist, and other Parts of Religion? Especially, since they are men
Quibus homo fidem suam protestaretur, Tho p. 3. q. 61. A. 3. 4. C.
which must protest their Faith by these visible Signs and Sacraments.

A. C. goes on, and will needs have it, that the Protestants were the Cause of
the Schism. For (says he) though A. C. p. 56.
the Church of Rome did thrust them from her by Excommunication, yet they had
first divided themselves by obstinate holding, and teaching Opinions contrary
to the Roman Faith, and Practice of the Church; which to do, S. Bernard thinks
is Pride, and S. Augustine Madness. So then, in his Opinion; First,
Excommunication on their Part was not the Prime Cause of this Division; but the
holding and teaching of contrary Opinions. Why but then in my Opinion, That
holding and teaching was not the Prime Cause neither, but the Corruptions and
Superstitions of Rome, which forced many men to hold, and teach the contrary.
So, the Prime Cause was theirs still. Secondly, A. C's words are very
considerable. For he charges the Protestants to be the Authors of the Schism,
for obstinate holding and teaching contrary Opinions. To what I pray? Why to
the I know Bellarm. quotes S. Jerome: Scito Romanam Fidem, etc. supra. 3. Nu.
9. But there S. Jerome does not call it Fidem Romanam, as if Fides Romana and
Fides Catholica were convertible: but he speaks of it in the Concrete. Romana
Fides, i. Romanorum Fides, quae laudata fuit ab Apostolo, etc. Romans 1. 8. S.
Hieron. Apol. 3. cont. Ruffin. That is, that Faith which was then at Rome when
S. Paul commended it. But the Apostles commending of it in the Romans at one
time, passes no deed of Assurance, that it shall continue worthy of
Commendations among the Romans through all times.
Roman Faith. To the Roman Faith? It was wont to be the Christian Faith, to
which contrary Opinions were so dangerous to the Maintainers. But all is Roman
now with A. C. and the Jesuit. And then to countenance the Business, S.
Bernard and S. Augustine are brought in, whereas neither of them speak of the
Roman, and S. Bernard perhaps neither of the Catholic, nor the Roman, but of a
Particular Church, or Congregation. Or if he speak of the Catholic, of the
Roman certainly he does not. His words are, Quae major superbia, etc. What
greater pride, than that one man should prefer his judgment before the whole
Congregation of all the Christian Churches in the world? So A. C. out of Saint
Bernard. Que major superbia, quam ut unus homo toti Congregationi judicium su^m
praeferat, tanquam ipse solus Spiritum Dei habeat? S. Bern. Sermon. 3. de Resur.
But Saint Bernard not so. For these last words (of all the Christian Churches
in the world) are not in Saint Bernard. And whether Toti Congregationi imply
more in that Place than a Particular Church, is not very manifest. Nay I think
it is plain, that he speaks both of, and to that particular Congregation to
which he was then preaching. And I believe A. C. will not easily find where
tota Congregatio, the whole Congregation, is used in Saint Bernard, or any
other of the Fathers, for the whole Catholic Church of Christ. And howsoever
the meaning of S. Bernard be, it is one thing for a private man, Judicium suum
praeferre, to prefer, and so follow his private Judgment, before the Whole
Congregation; which is indeed, Lepra proprii Consilii (as S. Bernard there
calls it) the proud Leprosy of the Private Spirit. And quite another thing for
an Intelligent man, and in some things unsatisfied, modestly to propose his
doubts even to the Catholic Church. And much more may* a whole National
Church, nay the whole Body of the Protestants do it. And for S. Augustine, the
Place alleged out of him is a known Place. And he speaks indeed of the Whole
Catholic Church. And he Similiter etiam siquid horum tota per Orbem frequentat
Ecclesia? Nam and hinc quin ita faciendum fit disputare, Insolentissimae
Insaniae est. S. Aug. Epist. 118. c. 5.
says (and he says it truly) It Is a part of most insolent madness for any Man
to dispute, whether that be to be done, which is usually done in* and through
the whole Catholic Church of Christ* Where first here is not a word of the
Roman Church, but of that, which is tota per Orbem, all over the World,
Catholic, which Rome never yet was* Secondly, A. C. applies this to the Roman
Faith, whereas A. C. p. 56.
S. Augustine speaks there expressly of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
and Quaris quid per quintam Feriam ultimae hebadomadis Quadragesimae fieri
debet, An offerendum sit mane? etc. S. Aug. Ibid.
particularly about the Manner of Offering upon Maundy* Thursday, whether it be
in the Morning, or after Supper, or both. Thirdly, it is manifest, by the words
themselves, that S. Augustine speaks of no Matter of Faith there, Roman, nor
Catholic. For Frequentat, and And so Bellarmine most expressly. But then he
adds, Universam Ecclesiam non posse errare, non solum in Credendo, sed nec in
Operando: and praesertim in Ritu and Cultu Divino, L. 4. de Verb. Dei, c. 9. 4.
And if this be true, what is it to Rome?
Faciendum are for Things done, and to be done, not for Things believed, or to
be believed. So here is not One Word for the Roman Faith in either of these
Places, And after this, I hope you will the less wonder at A. C's Boldness.
Lastly, a right sober man may without the least Touch of Insolency or Madness,
dispute a Business of Religion with the Roman either Church or Prelate* (as all
men know Eusebius. 1* 5. Hist. Eccl. c. 26. Et Socrat. L. 5. Hist. c. 22.
Irenaeus did with Victor.) so it be with Modesty, and for the finding out, or
Confirming of Truth, free from Vanity, and purposed Opposition against even a
Particular Church. But in any other way to dispute the Whole Catholic Church,
is just that which S. Augustine calls it, Insolent Madness.

Church of Rome were Orthodox in all things, yet the Faith, by the Jesuite's
leave, is not simply to be called the Roman, but the Christian, and the
Catholic Faith* And yet A. C. will not understand this, but A. C. p. 56.
Roman and Catholic, whether Church or Faith, must be one and the same with
him; and therefore infers, That there can be no just Cause to make a Schism or
Division from the whole Church. For the whole Church cannot universally err in
Doctrine of Faith. That the whole Church cannot universally err in the
Doctrine of Faith, is most true, and it is granted by drivers Question est, An
Ecclesia totalis totaliter considerat^, ^. pr^ omnibus simul Electis, dum sunt
Membra Militantis Ecclesia, possint errare, v^l i^ tot^ ^ide, v^l in grav^
atiquo fidei p^n^to? Et respondemus simplicit^^* id ^sse impossible, Keckerm.
Sy^^. Theol* p. 387. Edit. Ha^novia* An. 1602* Calvinus and (...) Har^ti^i
concedunt Ecclesiam absolute ^o^ posse deficere; Sed dicunt intelligi debere de
Ecclesia invisib(...) Bellar. L. 3. de Eccl^s^ Milit. c. 13.. 1. But this
Exception of Bellarmine's, that the Protestants, whom, out of his Liberality,
he calls Heretics, speak of the Invisible Church, is ^^^^^ly frivolous. For
the Church of the Elect is in the Church of them that are Called, and the
Invisible Church in the Visible. Therefore if the whole Church of the Elect
cannot err in Fundamentals, the whole Visible Church, in which the same Elect
are, cannot (...). Now that the Invisible Church of the Elect is in the
Visible, i^ manifest out of S. August. Ipsa est Ecclesta, quae intra sagenam
Dominicam cum malis piscibus na^a^. S. Aug. Epist. 48. Grana sunt inter illam
paleant, quando Area cum videretur tota, palea putabatur. S. Aug. in Psalm. 121.
And this is proved at large by Hooker, L. 3. Eccles. Pol.. 1. For else the
Elect or Invisible Church is tied to no duty of Christianity. For all such
Duties are required of the Church, as it is Visible* and performed in the
Church, as it is Visible. As we hold it impossible, that the Church should ever
by Apostasy and Misbelief, wholly depart from God, etc. So we hold, that it
never falls into Heresy. So that Bellarmine is as much to be blamed for idle
and needless busying himself to prove, That the Visible Church never falls into
Heresy, which we most willingly grant. Field. L. 4. de Eccles. c. 2. Taking
the Church for all the Believers now living, and in things necessary to be
known expressly. Ibid. Calvinus dicit hanc Propositionem [ Ecclesia no^ potest
errare] ^^r^^ esse si intelligatur dum duplici restriction^. Prima est, si non
pr^^onat Dogmata extra Scripturam, ^o^. ( And indeed Calvin does say so, L. 4.
Instit. c. 8.. 13.) Secunde est, si intelligatur de sola Ecclesia Universali,
non autem de Representa^iva. Bellar. L. 3. de Eccl. Milit. c. 14.. 2. And I
hope it is as good and a better Restriction in Calvin, To say the Catholic
Church cannot err, if it keep to the Scripture: than for Bellarmine to say,
The particular Church of Rome cannot err, because of the Pope's residing
there; or the Pope cannot err, if he keep his Chair: which yet he affirms, L.
4. de Romans Pont. c. 4.. 2.
Protestants (so you will but understand its not erring, in Absolute
Fundamental Doctrines.) And therefore it is true also, that there can be no just
Cause to make a Schism from the whole Church. But here is the Jesuite's Cunning.
The whole Church, with him, is the Roman, and those parts of Christendom, which
subject themselves to the Roman Bishop. All other parts of Christendom, are in
Heresy and Schism, and what A. C. pleases. Nay soft. For another Church may
separate from Rome, if Rome will separate from Christ. And so far as it
separates from Him and the Faith, so far may another Church fever from it. And
this is all that the Learned Protestants do or can say: And I am sure all that
ever the Church of England has either said, or done. And that the whole Church
cannot err in Doctrines absolutely Fundamental, and Necessary to all men's
Salvation (besides the Authority of thoso Protestants, most of them being of
prime Rank) seems to me to be clear by the Promise of Christ, S. Matthew. 16.
That the Gates of Hell shall S. Mat. 16. 18.
not prevail against it. Whereas most certain it is, that the Gates of Hell
prevail very far against it, if the Whole Militant Church universally taken,
can Err, from, or in the Foundation: But then this Power of not E^ring is not
to be conceived, as if it were in the Church primo and per se, Originally, or
by any power it has of it self: For the Church is constituted of Men, and
Humanum est errare, all men can err. But this Power is in it, partly by the
virtue of this Promise of Christ: and partly by the Matter which it teaches,
which is the unerring Word of God, so plainly and manifestly delivered to her,
as that it is not possible she should universally fall from it, or teach
against it in things absolutely necessary to Salvation. Besides, it would be
well weighed, whether to believe or teach otherwise, will not impeach the
Article of the Creed concerning the Holy Catholic Church, which we profess we
believe. For the Holy Catholic Church there spoken of, contains not only the
whole Militant Church on earth, but the whole Triumphant also in Heaven. For so
Ecclesia hic tota accipienda est, non solum ex part^ qua peregrinatur in
terris, etc. verumetiam ex illa part quae in coelis, etc. S. Aug. Enchir. c.
56.
S. Augustine has long since taught me. Now if the whole Catholic Church in
this large extent be Holy, then certainly the whole Militant Church is Holy, as
well as the Triumphant, though in a far lower degree, in as much as all Nemo ex
toto Sanctus, Optat. L. 7. contr^ Parme^.
Sanctification, all Holiness is imperfect in this life, as well in Churches,
as in Men* Holy then the whole Militant Church is. For that which the Apostle
speaks of Abraham, is true of the Church, which is a Body Collective made up of
the spiritual seed of Abraham, Romans 11. If the root be holy, so are the
branches. Well then, Romans 11. 16.
the whole Militant Church is Holy, and so we believe. Why but, will it not
follow then, That the whole Militant Church cannot possibly err in the
Foundations of the Faith? That she may err in Superstructures and Deductions,
and other by, and unnecessary Truths, if her Curiosity, or other weakness carry
her beyond, or cause her to fall short of her Rule, no doubt need be made. But
if She can err either from the Foundation, or in it, She can be no longer
Holy, and that Article of the Creed is gone. For if she can err quite from the
Foundation, then She is nor Holy, nor Church, but becomes an Infidel. Now this
cannot be. For Dum Christus orat in Exc^lso, Navicula (id est, Ecclesia)
turbatur fluctibus in profundo, etc. sed quia Christus orat, non potest mergi.
S. August. Sermon. 14. de Verb. Dom. c. 2. Et. Bellar. L. 3. de Eccles. Milit. c.
13. Praesidi^ Christi fulcitur Ecclesi^ perpetuitas, ut inter turbulentas
agitationes, and formidabiles motus, etc. salva tamen man^at. Calvin. L. 2.
Instit. c. 15.. 3. Ipsa Symboli disposition^ admonemu^ perpetuam residere in
Ecclesia Christi remissionem Peccatorum. Calv. L. 4. Instit. c. 1.. 17. Now
remission of sins cannot be perpetual in the Church, if the Church it self be
not perpetual. But the Church it self cannot be perpetual, if it fall away.
all Divines, Ancient and Modern, Romanists and Reformers, agree in this, That
the whole Militant Church of Christ cannot fall away into general Apostacy.
And if She Err in the Foundation, that is, in some one or more Fundamental
Points of Faith, then She may be a Church of Christ still, but not Holy, but
becomes Heretical: And most Certain it is, that no Spiritus Sanctificationis
non potest inven^^^ in Haereticorum mentibus, S. Hierom. in Jerem. 10.
Assembly (be it never so general) of such Heretics, is, or can be Holy. Other
Errors that are of a meaner alay take not Holiness from the Church; but these
that are dyed in grain cannot consist with Holiness, of which Faith in Christ
is the very Foundation. And therefore if we will keep up our Creed, the whole
Militant Church must be still Holy. For if it be not so still; then there may
be a time, that Falsum may subesse Fidei Catholicae. That falsehood, and that in
a high degree, in the very Article, may be the Subject of the Catholic Faith,
which were no less than Blasphemy to affirm. For we must still believe the Holy
Catholic Church. And if She be not still Holy, then at that time when she is
not so, we believe a Falsehood under the Article of the Catholic Faith.
Therefore a very dangerous thing it is to cry out in general terms, That the
whole Catholic Militant Church can Err, and not limit nor distinguish in
time, that it can err indeed: for Ignorance it has, and Ignorance can Err.
But Err it cannot, either by falling totally from the Foundation, or by
Heretical Error in it. For the Holiness of the Church consists as much, if not
more, in the Verity of the Faith, as in the Integrity of Manners taught and
Commanded in the Doctrine of Faith.

A. C. thinks he has met with me. For he tells me, That I may not only safely
grant, that protestants ^. C. p. 56.
made the Division that is now in the Church; but further also, and that with a
safe Confidence, as one did, was it not you? says he, That it was ill done of
those, who first made the Separation. Truly I do not now remember, whether I
said it or no. But because A. C. shall have full satisfaction from me, and
without any Tergiversation, if I did not say it then, I do say it now; and most
true it is, That it was ill done of those, who ere they were, that first made
the separation. But then A. C. must not understand me of Actual only, but of
Causal separation. For (as I said. 21. Nu. 1.
before) the Schism is theirs, whose the Cause of it is: And he makes the
Separation, that gives the first just Cause of it; not he that makes an Actual
Separation upon a just Cause preceding. And this is so evident a Truth, that A.
C. cannot deny it; for he says, it is most true. Neither can he deny it in this
sense, in A. C. p. 56.
which I have expressed it; for his very Assertion against us (though false) is
in these Terms, That we gave the first Cause; Therefore he must mean it of
Causal, not of Actual Separation only.

A. C. goes on and tells us, That after this Breach was made, yet the Church of
Rome was so kind and careful to seek A. C. p. 57.
the Protestants; that She invited them publicly with Safe Conduct to Rome, to
a General Council, freely to speak what they could for themselves. Indeed I
think the Church of Rome did carefully seek the Protestants; But I doubt it was
to bring them within their Net. And she invited them to Rome; A very safe
place, if you mark it, for them to come to; just as the Lion (in the Olim quod
vulpes agroto cauta Leoni Respondit, referam, Qui a me vestigia terrent Omnia
te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum. Hor. L. 1. ^p. ^1. ex Aesop.
Apologue) invited the Fox to his own Den. Yea, but there was Safe Conduct
offered too? Yes, Conduct perhaps, but not safe; or safe perhaps for going
thither, but none for coming thence. Vestigia nulla retrorsum. Yea, but it
should have been to a General Council? Perhaps so. But was the Conduct safe,
that was given for coming to a Council, which they call General, to some others
before them? No sure, Though I cannot justify all which these two men said,
yet safe Conduct being given, that Public Faith ought not to have been
violated.
John Hus, and Jerome of Prage burnt for all their Safe Conduct. And so long as
Affirmant uno censensu omnes Catholici, debere Haereticis servar^ fidem, sive
salvus conductus concedatur Jure communi sive speciali. Bec. Dis. Theol. de
Fide Haereticis servanda^, c. 1^.. 5. But for all this Brag of (Affirmant un^
consensu omnes Catholiti) Becanus shuffies pitifully, to desend the Council of
Constance. For thus he argues: Fides non est violata Hussio. Non a Patribus:
Illi enim fidem non dederunt. Non ab Imperatore Sigismundo: Ille enim dedit
fidem, sed non violavit. Ibid.. 7. But all men know that the Emperor was used
by the Fathers at Constance to bring Husse thither. Sigismundus Hussum
Constantiam vocat, and missis Litaris publica fide cavet, mense October. Anno
1414. etc. Edit. in 16. Et etiamsi Primo graviter tulit Hussi in carcerationem,
tamen cum dicerent Fidem Haereticis non esse servandam, non modo ^^mi sit
Offensionem, sed and primus ^^^rbe in eum pronunci avit. Ibid. This is a
mockery. And Beca^us his Argument is easily turned upon himself. For if the
Fathers did it in cunning, that the Emperor should give Safe Conduct which
themselves meant not to keep, then they broke Faith. And if the Emperor knew,
they would not keep it, then he himself broke faith, in giving a Safe Conduct,
which he knew to be invalid. And as easy it is to answer what Becanus adds to
save that Councels Act, could I stay upon it.

Fides Haereticis data servanda non est, sicut nec Tyrannis, Piratis and
caeteris publicis praedonibus, etc. Simanca, Iustit. Tit. 46.. 51. And although
Becanus in the place above cited,. 13. confidently denies, that the Fathers at
Constance decreod, No says to be kept with Heretics, and cites the words of
the Council, Sess. 19. yet there the very words themselves ^ave it thus: Posse
Concitium eos punire, etc. etiamsi de salvo conductu confisi ad locum vinerint
Judicii, etc. And much more plainly Simanca, Instit. 46.. 52. Jure igitur
Haeretici quidam gravissimo Concilii Constantiensis Judicio legitima flamma
concremati sunt, quamvis promissa illis securit as fuisset. So they are not
only Protestants which charge the Council of Constance with this. Nor can
Becanus say as he does, Affer^ant uno consensu omnes Catholici, fidem
Hae^eticis servandam esse: For Simanca denies it; And he quotes others for it,
which* A. C. would be ^oath should not be accounted Catholics. But how
faithfully Simanca says the one, or Becanus the other, let them take it between
them, and the Reader be judge. In the mean time the very Title of the Canon of
the Council of Constance, Sess. 19. is this: Quod non abstantibus salvis
conductibus Imperatoris Regum, etc. possit per Judicem competentem de Haeretica
pravitate inquiri.


Jesuits write and maintain, That Faith given is not to be kept with
Heretics: And the Church of Rome leaves this lewd Doctrine uncensured (as it
has hitherto done, and no exception put in of force and violence:) A. C. shall
pardon us, that we come not to Rome, nor within the reach of Roman Power, what
freedom of Speech soever be promised us. For to what end Freedom of Speech on
their part, For so much A. C. confesses, p. 4^. For if they should give way to
the altering of one, then why not of another, and another, and so of all? And
^he Trent-Fathers in a great point of Doctrine being amazed, and not knowing
what to answer to a Bishop of their own, yet were resolved not to part with
their common error. Certum tamen erat Doctrinam eam non probare, sed quam antea
didicissent firmiter te^ere* etc. Hist. Con. Trid. L. 2 p. 277* Edit. Leyd.
^6^2.
since they are resolved to alter nothing? And to what end Freedom of speech on
our part, if after speech has been free, life shall not?

A. C. makes no doubt, but that the Roman A. C. p. 57.
Church is so far from being Cause of the continuance of the Schism, or
hinderance of the Reunion, that it would yet give a free hearing with most
ample Safe Conduct, if any hope might be given, that the Protestants would
sincerely seek nothing but Truth and Peace. Truly A. C. is very Resolute for
the Roman Church; yet how far he may undertake for it, I cannot tell. But for
my part, I am of the same Opinion for the continuing of the Schism, that I was
for the making of it. That is, that it is ill, very ill done of those, whoever
they be, Papists, or Protestants, that give just Cause to continue a
Separation. But for free-hearings, or Safe-Conducts, I have said enough, till
that Church do not only say, but do otherwise. And as for Truth and Peace, they
are in every man's mouth with you, and with us; But lay they but half so close
to the hearts of men, as they are common on their tongues, it would soon be
better with Christendom, than at this day it is, or is like to be. And for the
Protestants in general, I hope they seek both Truth and Peace, sincerely. The
Church of England, I am sure does, and has taught me to Biseeching God to
inspire continually the Universal Church with the Spirit of Truth, Unity, and
Concord, etc. In the Prayer for the Militant Church. And in the third Collect
on Good Friday.
pray for both, as I most heartily do. But what Rome does in this, if the world
will not see, I will not Censure.

A. C. adds, That such a free hearing is A. C. p. 57.
more than ever the English Catholics could obtain, though they have often
offered, and desired it, and that but under the Princes word: And that no
Answer has, nor no good Answer can be given. And he cites Campian for it. How
far, or how often this has been asked by the English Romanists, I cannot tell,
nor what Answer has been given them. But surely Campian was too bold, and so
is A. C. too, to say Campian, Praesat. Rationibus praefixa.
Honestum responsum nullum, no good Answer can be given. For this, I think is a
very good Answer; That the Kings and the Church of England had no Reason to
admit of a Public Dispute with the English Romish Clergy, till they shall be
able to show it under the Seal, or Powers of Rome, That that Church will submit
to a Third, who may be an Indifferent Judge between us and them; or to such a
General Council as is after. 26. Nu. 1.
mentioned. And this is an Honest, and I think a full Answer. And without this
all Disputation must end in Clamor; And therefore the more public, the worse.
Because as the Clamor is the greater, so perhaps will be the Schism too.


F. Moreover he said, he would ingenuously acknowledge, That the Corruption of
Manners in the Romish Church, was not a sufficient Cause to justify their
Departing from it.


B. sufficient Cause to justify their Departure. How could I say this, since I
did not grant that they did Depart, otherwise than is. 21. N. 6.
before expressed?) There is difference between Departure, and causless
Thrusting from you; For out of the Church is not in your Power (God be thanked)
to thrust us: Think on that. And so much I said expressly then, That which I did
ingenuously confess, was this, That Corruption in Manners only, is no
sufficient Cause to make a Separation in the Church; Modo ea quae ad Cathedram
pertinent, recta praecipiant, S. Hier. Ep. 236.
Nor is it. It is a Truth agreed on by the Fathers, and received by Divines of
all sorts, save by the Cathari, to whom the Donatist, and the Anabaptist after
accorded. And against whom L. 4. Instit. c. 1. 13, etc.
Calvin disputes it strongly. And S. Augustine Ep. 48. A malis piscibus cord
semper and moribus se^arant^^* etc. corporalem separationem in littore marie,
hoc est, in fine saetuli expectant.
is plain: There are bad fish in the Net of the Lord, from which there must be
ever a Separation in heart, and in manners; but a corporal separation must be
expected at the Seashore, that is, the end of the world. And the best fish
that are, must not tear and break the Net, because the bad are with them. And
this is as ingenuously Confessed for you, as by me. For if Corruption in
Manners were a just Cause of Actual Separation of one Church from another, in
that Catholic Body of Christ, the Church of Rome has given as great cause as
any, since (as Vix ullum peccatum (sola Haerest excepta) cogitati potest* quo
illa Seeds turpiter maculata non fuerit, maxim ab Anno 800. Relect. Cont. 1. q
5. Art. 3.
Stapleton grants) there is scaree any sin that can be thought by man (Heresy
only excepted) with which that Sea has not been foully stained, especially
from eight hundred years after Christ. And he need not except Heresy, into
which Biel. in Can. Miss. Lect. 23.
Biel grants it possible the Bishops of that Sea may fall. And Stel* in S. Luc.
c. 22. Almain. in 3. Sent. d. 24. q. 1. fine. Multae sunt Decretales ber^ticae,
etc. And so they erred as Popes.
Stella and Almain grant it freely, that some of them did fall, and so ceased
to be Heads of the Church, and left Christ (God be thanked) at that time of his
Vicars defection, to look to his Cure himself.


F. But (says he) beside Corruption of Manners, there were also Errors in
Doctrine.


B. That some of the Errors of the Roman Church were dangerous to Salvation.
For it is not every light Error in Disputable Doctrine, and Points of curious
Speculation, that can be a just Cause of Separation in that Admirable Body of
Christ, which is his Ephesians. 1. 23.
Church, or of one Member of it from another. For he gave his Natural Body to
be rent and torn upon the Cross, that his Mystical Body might be One. And St.
S. Aug. Epist. 50. Et it^rum Columbae non sunt qui Ecclesiam dissipant.
Accipitres sunt, Milvi sunt: N^^ ^ani^^ Columba, etc. S. Aug. tract* 5. i^ S.
John.
Augustine infers upon it; That he is no way partaker of Divine Charity, that
is an enemy to this Unity. Now what Errors in Doctrine may give just Cause of
Separation in this Body, or the Parts of it one from another, were it never so
easy to determine (as I think it is most difficult) I would not venture to set
it down in particular, lest in these times of Discord, I might be thought to
open a Door for Schism; which surely I will never do, unless it be to let it
out. But that there are Errors in Doctrine, and some of them such, as most
manifestly endanger Salvation, in the Church of Rome, is evident to them that
will not shut their Eyes. The proof whereof runs through the Particular Points,
that are between us; and so is too long for this Discourse. Now A. C. p. 55.
here A. C. would fain have a Reason given him, Why I did endeavor to show
what Cause the Protestants had to make that Rent or Division, if I did not
grant that they made it. Why truly in this reasonable demand I will satisfy
him. I did it partly because I had granted in the general, that Corruption in
Manners was no sufficient cause of Separation of one Particular Church from
another; and therefore it lay upon me, at least to Name in general what was:
and partly because he, and his Party will needs have it so, that we did make
the Separation: And therefore though I did not grant it, yet amiss I thought it
could not be, to Declare by way of Supposition, that if the Protestants did at
first Separate from the Church of Rome, they had reason so to do: For A. C.
himself confesses, That Error in Doctrine A. C. p. 56.
of the Faith is a just Cause of Separation; so just, as that no Cause is just,
but that. Now had I leisure to descend into Particulars, or will to make the
Rent in the Church wider, it is no hard matter to prove, that the Church of Rome
has erred in the Doctrine of Faith, and dangerously too: And I doubt I shall
afterward descend to Particulars, A. C. his Importunity forcing me to it.


F. Which when the General Church would not Reform, it was lawful for
Particular Churches to Reform themselves.


B. Particular Church may reform it self, if the General will not? I had
thought, and do so still, That in Point of Reformation of* either Manners, or
Doctrine, it is lawful for the Church since Christ, to do as the Church before
Christ did, and might do. The Church before Christ consisted of Jews and
Proselytes: This Church came to have a Separation, upon a most ungodly Policy
of 3 Reg. 12. 27.
Jeroboam's, so that it never pieced together again. To a Common Council, to
reform all, they would not come. Was it not lawful for Judah to reform her
self, when Israel would not join? Sure it was, or else the Prophet deceives me,
that says expressly, Hos. 4. 15.
Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah sin. And S. Hierome Super
Haereticis prona intelligentia est. S. Hier. Ibid.
expounds it of this very particular sin of Heresy, and Error in Religion. Nor
can you say, that Non tam^^ cessavit Deus and populum hunc argu^r^* per
Prophetas. Nam ibi* extiterunt Magni ill^ and insignes Prophetae Elias and
Elizaeus, etc. S* Aug. L. 17. de Civit. Dei, ^. 22. Multi religiose intra se
D^i* cultum* babebant, etc. De quo numero ^^^^mve Posteris septem illa ^illi^
fuiss^ ^tatuo, q^^ i^* Persecutione sub A^hab^ Deum si^i a^ Id^lolatr^^*
immunes* reservarunt, nec genua ante Baal flexerunt. Fran. Monceius, L. 1. de
Vit. Aureo, c. 12.
Israel from the time of the Separation was not a a Church; for there were true
Prophets in it* 3 Reg. 17. sub Acha^o.
Elias and 4 Reg. 3. sub Jehoram ^ilio Achabi.
Elizaeus, and others, and 3 Reg. 19* 18.
thousands that had not bowed knees to (...) And there was Salvation for these;
which cannot be in the Ordinary way, where there is no Church. And God
threatens Hos. 9. 17.
to cast them away, to wander among* the Nations, and be no Congregation, no*
Church: therefore he had not yet cast them away in Non Ecclesiam, into
No-Church. And they are expressly called the People of the Lord in 4 Reg. 9. 6.
(...) time, and so continued long after. Nor can you plead* that Judan is your
part, and the Ten Tribes ours (as some of you do) for if that be true, you must
grant that the Multitude and greater number is ours: and where then is
Multitude, your ^^merous Note of the Church? For the Ten Tribes were more than
the two. But you cannot plead it. For certainly if any Calves be set up, they
are in Dan and in Bethel: They are not ours.

reform what is amiss in Doctrine, or Manners, is as lawful for a Particular
Church, as it is to publish and promulgate any thing that is Catholic in
either. And your Question, Quo Judice? lies alike against both. And yet I think
it may be proved, that the Church of Rome, and that as a Particular Church, did
promulgate an Orthodox Truth, which was not then Catholikely admitted in the
Church; namely, The Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son. If she erred in
this Fact, confess her Error; if she erred not, why may not another Particular
Church do as she did? A learned School-man of yours says she may: Non ^portuit
ad hoc e^s vocare, q^um Authoritas fu^rit publica^di apud Ecclesiam Romanam,
pr^^ip^e cum unicuique etiam particulari Ecclesiae li^^at, id quod Catholicum
est, prom^lgare. Alb. Magn. in 1. Dest. 11. A. 9.
The Church of Rome needed not to call the Grecians to agree upon this Truth,
since the Authority of publishing it was in the Church of Rome, especially
since it is lawful for every particular Church to promulgate that which is
Catholic. Nor can you say, he means Catholic, as fore-determined by the
Church in general; for so this Point, when Rome added Filioque to the Creed of
a General Council, was not. And how the Grecians were used in the after-Councel
(such as it was) of Florence, is not to trouble this Dispute; But Catholic
stands there, for that which is so in the nature of it, and Fundamentally. Nor
can you justly say* That the Church of Rome did, or might do this, by the
Pope's Authority over the Church* For suppose he have that, and that his
Sentence be Infallible, (I say, suppose both, but I give neither) yet neither
his Authority, nor his Infallibility can belong unto him, as the particular
Bishop of that S^a* but as the Non ^^rare, conv^^it Popae, ^t est Caput.
^^^^a^. L. ^. de Romans Po^t. c. 3.
Ministerial Head of the whole Church. And you are all so lodged in this, that
L. 2. de C^ri^t^, c. (...). ^. Quande au^^m. So you cannot find Records of your
own Truth, which are far more likely to be kept: but when Errors are e^ept
(...), w^ must be bound to tell the place, and the time, and I know not what,
of their Beginnings, or else they are* ^ot Errors. As if some Errors might* not
want a Record, as well as some Truth.
Bellarmine professes he can neither tell the year when, nor the Pope under
whom this Addition was made. A Particular Church then, if you judge it by the
School of Rome, or the Practice of Rome, may publish any thing that is
Catholic, where the whole Church is silent; and may therefore Reform any thing
that is not Catholic, where the whole Church is negligent, or will not.

Rome, as Omnino recte, nisi excepisset, etc. Net consideravit quanti referat
concederi Ecclesiis particularibus jus condendorum Canonum de Fide, inconsulta
Romana Sede, quod nunquam licuit, nunquant factum est, etc. Capel. de Appellat.
Eccl. Africanae, c. 2. Nu. 12.
Capellus is, who is angry with Baronius about certain Canons in the second
Milevitane Council, and says, That he considered not of what consequence it
was, to grant to Particular Churches the Power of making Canons of Faith,
without consulting the Roman Sea, which (as he says, and you with him) was
never lawful, nor ever done. But suppose this were so, my Speech was not, Not
consulting, but in Case of Neglecting, or Refusing: Or when the difficulty of
Time and Place, or other Circumstances are such, that a Rex co^^itetur se
voensse Concilium tertium Tolet anum; Quia d^^^rs^s retro temporibus Haeresis
immine^s in tota Eclesia Catholica agere Synodica Negotia denegabat, etc.
Conc^l. Tole^an. tertium. Can. 1.
General Council cannot be called, or not convene. For that the Roman Sea must
be consulted with, before any Reformation be made, First, most certain it is,
Capellus can never prove. And secondly as certain, that were it proved and
practiced, we should have no Reformation: For it would be long enough, before
the Church should be cured, if that Sea alone should be her Physician, which in
truth is her Disease.

Provincial Council will not suffice, but we should have born with Things, till
the time of a General Council. First, it is true, a General Council, free and
entire, would have been the best Remedy, and most able for a Gangrene that had
spread so far, and eaten so deep into Christianity. But what? Should we have
suffered this Gangrene to endanger life and all, rather than be cured in time
by a Physician of a weaker knowledge, and a less able Hand? Secondly, We live
to see since, if we had stayed and expected a General Council, what manner of
one we should have had, if any. For that at Trent was neither general, nor
free. And for the Errors which Rome had contracted, it confirmed them, it cured
them not. And yet I much doubt, whether ever that Council (such as it was)
would have been called, if some Provincial and National Synods under Supreme
and Regal Power, had not first set upon this great work of Reformation; Which I
heartily wish had in all places been as Orderly and Happily pursued, as the
Work was right Christian and good in it self. But humane frailty, and the Heats
and Distempers of men, as well as the Cunning of the Devil, would not suffer
that. For even in this sense also, The wrath of man does not accomplish the
will of God, S. James 1. But I have learned not to S. James 1. 20.
reject the Good, which God has wrought, for any evil which men may fasten to
it.

Grave and Learned Men, and of your own Party, have taught me, That when the
Universal Church will not, or for the Iniquities of the Times, cannot obtain
and settle a free general Council, it is lawful, nay sometimes necessary to
Reform gross Abuses by a National, or a Provincial. For, besides Alb. Magnus,
whom I quoted. 24. Nu. 2.
before, Gerson, the Learned and devout Chancellor of Paris tells us plainly:
Nole tamen dicere, quin in multis partibus possit Ecclesia per suas parts
reformari. Imo hoc necesse esset, sed ad hoc agendum sufficerent Concilia
Provincialia, etc. Gerson. Tract de Genesis Council. unius obedientiae, part 1. p.
222. F.
That he will not deny, but that the Church may be reformed by parts. And that
this is necessary, and that to effect it, Provincial Councels may suffice; and
in some things Diocesan. And again, Omnes Ecclesiae status aut in Generali
Concilio reformetis, aut in Concilus Provincialibus reformari mandet^s. Gerson.
Declarat. Defectuum Virorum Ecclesiasticorum, par. 1. page 209. B.
Either you should reform all estates of the Church in a General Council, or
command them to be reformed in Provincial Councels. Now Gerson lived about two
hundred years since. But this Right of Provincial Synods, that they might
decree in Causes of Faith, and in Cases of Reformation, where Corruptions had
crept into the Sacraments of Christ, was practiced much above a thousand years
ago by many, both National and Provincial Synods. For the Council. Romans 2. sub
Sylvestro.
Council at Rome under Pope Sylvester, An. 324. condemned Photinus and
Sabellius. (And their Heresies were of high Nature against the Faith.) The
Council. Gang. Can. 1.
Council at Gangra about the same time condemned Eustathius for his condemning
of Marriage as unlawful. The Con. Carth. 1. Can. 1.
first Council at Carthage, being a Provincial, condemned Rebaptization, much
about the year 348. The Con. Aquiliens.
Provincial Council at Aquileia in the year 381. in which S. Ambrose was
present, condemned Palladius and Secundinus for embracing the Arrian Heresy.
The Con. Carth. 2. Can. 1.
second Council of Carthage, handled and Decreed the Belief and Preaching of
the Trinity; And this a litte after the year 424. The Quaedam de causis fidei,
unde nunc Quaestio Pelagianorum imminet, in hoc Coetu sanctissimo primisus
tractentur, etc. Aurel. Carthaginensis in Praefat. Conc. Milivit. apud Caranzam.
Council of Milevis in Africa, in which S. Augustine was present, condemned the
whole Course of the Heresy of Pelagius, that great and bewitching Heresy, in
the year 416. The Conc. Aurausican 2. Can. 1, 2, etc.
second Council at Orange, a Provincial too, handled the great Controversies
about Grace and Free Will, and set the Church right in them, in the year 444.
The Conc. Tolet. 3.
third Council at Toledo (a National one) in the year 589. determined many
things against the Arrian Heresy about the very Prime Articles of Faith, under
fourteen several Anathema's. The fourth Council at Toledo did not only handle
Matters of Faith for the Reformation of that People, Quae omnia in aliis
Symbolis explicit tradit a non sunt, Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 1.
but even added also some things to the Creed, which were not expressly
delivered in former Creeds. Nay the Bishops did not only practice this, to
Condemn Heresies in National and Provincial Synods, and so Reform those several
Places, and the Church it self by parts: But They did openly challenge this as
their Right and Due, and that without any leave asked of the Sea of Rome. For
in this Fourth Council of Toledo Statuimus, ut saltem semel in Anno a Nobis
Concilium celebretur, it a tamen, ut si Fidei Causa est, aut quaelibet alia
Ecclesiae communis, Generalis Hispaniae and Galleciae Synodus celebretur, etc.
Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 3.
They Decree, That if there happen a Cause of Faith to be settled, a General,
that is, a National Synod of all Spain and Galicia shall be held thereon. And
this in the year 643. Where you see, it was then Catholic Doctrine in all
Spain, that a National Synod might be a Competent Judge in a Cause of Faith.
And I would fain know, what Article of the Faith does more concern all
Christians in general, than that of Filioque? And yet the Church of Rome her
self made that Addition to the Creed without a General Council, as I have
showed ^. 24. Nu. 2.
already. And if this were practiced so often, and in so many places, why may
not a National Council of the Church of England do the like? as She did. For,
She cast off the Pope's Usurpation, and as much as in her lay, restored the
King to his right. That appears by a The Institution of a Christian man:
Printed An. 1534.
Book subscribed by the Bishops in Henry the eighth's time; And by the In
Synodo Londinensi, Sess. 8. Die Veneris. 29 Januarii A^. 1562.
Records in the Archbishops Office, orderly kept, and to be seen. In the
Reformation which came after, our And so in the Reformation under Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29. and under Josia, 4 Reg. 23. And in the time of Reccaredus King of
Spain, the Reformation there proceeded thus: Quum gloriosissimus Princeps omnes
Regiminis sui Pontifices in unum convenire mandasset, etc. Council. Tolet. 3.
Can. 1. Can convenissemus Sacerdotes Domini apud urbem Toletanum, ut Regiis
imperi is atque jussis commoniti, etc. Council. Tolet. 4. in princ. apud
^ara^zam. And both these Synods did treat of Matters of Faith.
Princes had their parts, and the Clergy theirs. And to these Two principally
the power and direction for Reformation belongs. That our Princes had their
parts, is manifest by their Calling together of the Bishops, and others of the
Clergy, to consider of that which might seem worthy Reformation. And the Clergy
did their part: For being thus called together by Regal Power, they met in the
National Synod of sixty two. And the Articles there agreed on, were afterward
confirmed by Acts of State, and the Royal Assent. In this Synod the Positive
Truths which are delivered, are more than the Polemicks. So that a mere Calumny
it is, That we profess only a Negative Religion. True it is, and we must thank
Rome for it, our Confession must needs contain some Negatives. For we cannot
but deny that Images are to be adored. Nor can we admit Maimed Sacraments. Nor
grant Prayers in an unknown tongue. And in a corrupt time, or place, it is as
necessary in Religion to deny falsehood, as to assert, and vindicate Truth.
Indeed this later can hardly be well and sufficiently done, but by the former;
an Affirmative Verity being ever included in the Negative to a Falsehood. As for
any Error which might fall into this (as any other Reformation) if any such can
be found, then I say, and it is most true: Reformation, especially in Cases of
Religion, is so difficult a work, and subject to so many Pretensions, that it is
almost impossible but the Reformers should step too far, or fall too short, in
some smaller things or other, which in regard of the far greater benefit coming
by the Reformation it self, may well be passed over, and born withal. But if
there have been any wilful, and gross errors, not so much in Opinion, as in
Fact, ( Quisquis occasion hujus Legis, quam Reges terrae Christo servientes ad
emendandam vestram impietatem promulgaverunt, res proprias vestras cupide
appetit, displicet nobis. Quisquis donique ipsas res pauperum, vel Basilicas
Congregationum, etc. non per Justietam, sed per Avaritiam tenet, displicet
nobis. S. Aug. Epist. 48. versus finem.
Sacrilege too often pretending to reform Superstition) that is the Crime of
the Reformers, not of the Reformation; and they are long since gone to God to
answer it, to whom I leave them.

the General Church as it was for the most part forced under the Government of
the Roman Sea. And this you understand well enough. For in your very next words
you call it the Roman Church. Now I make no doubt, but that as the Universal
Catholic Church would have reformed her self, had she been in all parts freed
of the Roman Yoke: so while she was for the most in these Western parts under
that yoke, the Church of Rome was, if not the Only, yet the Chief Hinderance of
Reformation. And then in this sense, it is more than clear, That if the Roman
Church will neither Reform, nor suffer Reformation, it is lawful for any other
Particular Church to Reform it self, so long as it does it peaceably and
orderly, and keeps it self to the Foundation, and free from And this a
Particular Church may do, but not a Schism. For a Schism can never be
peaceable, nor orderly, and seldom free from Sacrilege. Out of which respects,
(it may be) as well as for the grievousness of the Crime, S. Aug. calls it
Sacrilegium Schismatis, L. 1. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 8. For usually they go
together.
Sacrilege.


F. I asked Quo Judice, did this appear to be so? Which Question I asked, as
not thinking it equity that Protestants in their own Cause should be Accusers,
Witnesses, and Judges of the Roman Church.


B. Question; For you did not discover it at the Conference: if you had, you
might then have received your Answer. It is most true: No man in common equity
ought to be suffered to be Accuser, Witness, and Judge in his own Cause. But is
there not as little reason, and equity too, that any man that is to be accused,
should be the Accused, and yet Witness, and Judge in his own Cause? If the
first may hold, no man shall be Innocent; and if the last, none will be Nocent.
And what do we here with [ in their own Cause against the Roman Church?] Why?
Is it not your own too, against the Protestant Church? And if it be a Cause
common to both, as certain it is, then neither Part alone may be Judge: If
neither alone may judge, then either they must be judged by a ^. 21. Nu. 9.
Third which stands indifferent to both, and that is the Scripture; or if there
be a jealousy or Doubt of the sense of the Scripture, they must either both
repair to the Exposition of the Primitive Church, and submit to that; or both
call, and submit to a General Council, which shall be lawfully called, and
fairly, and freely held with indifferency to all parties; And that must judge
the Difference according to Scripture, which must be their Rule as well as
Private Men's.

Pride and Insolent madness of the Protestants, A. C. adds, That the Church of
Rome A. C. p. 58.
is the Principal, and Mother Church: And that therefore, though it be against
common equity, that Subjects and Children should be Accusers, Witnesses,
Judges, and Executioners against their Prince and Mother in any case: yet it is
not absurd, that in some cases, the Prince or Mother may Accuse, Witness,
Judge, and if need be, execute Justice, against unjust and rebellious Subjects,
or evil Children. How far forth Rome is a Prince over the whole Church, or a
Mother of it, will come to be showed at after. In the mean time, though I
cannot grant her to be either, yet let us suppose her to be both, that A. C's
Argument may have all the strength it can have. Nor shall it force me (as
plausible as it seems) to weaken the just power of Princes over their Subjects,
or of Mothers over their Children, to avoid the shock of this Argument. For
though A. C. may tell us it is not absurd in some Cases; yet I would fain have
him name any one Moderate Prince that ever thought it just, or took it upon him
to be Accuser, and Witness, and Judge in any Cause of moment against his
Subjects, but that the Law had Liberty to Judge between them. For the great
Philosopher tells us, (...) Arist. Eth. c. 6.
That the Chief Magistrate is Custos juris, the Guardian and keeper of the Law;
and if of the Law, then both of that equity and equality which is due unto them
that are under him. And even Tiberius himself, in the Cause of Silanus, when
Dolabella would have flattered him into more power than in wisdom he thought
fit then to take to himself, he put him off thus: No, Minni Jur^ quoties
gliscat Potestas, nec utendum Imperio, ^^i* Legibus agi possit. Tacit. L. 3.
Annal.
the Laws grow less where such Power enlarges. Nor is absolute Power to be
used, where there may be an orderly proceeding by Law. And for Heb. 12. 9.
Parents, it is true, when Children are young, they may chastise them without
other Accuser, or Witness, than themselves; and yet the children are to give
them reverence. And it is presumed that natural affection will prevail so far
with them, that they will not punish them too much. For all experience tells us
(almost to the loss of Education) they God used Samuel as a Messenger against
^li for his overmuch indulgence to his sons, 1 Samuel 3. 13. And yet Samuel
himself committed the very same fault concerning his own sons, 1 Samuel 8. 3. 5.
And this Indulgence occasioned the Change of the Civil Government, as the
former was the loss of the Priesthood.
punish them too little, even when there is cause. Yet when Children are grown
up, and come to some full use of their own Reason; the Apostles Rule is Colos.
3. 21.
Colos. 3. Parents, provoke not your Children. And if the Apostle prevail not
with froward Parents, there is a Magistrate, and a Law to relieve even a son
against Crimini ei tribunus inter caetera dabat, quod (...) (...) mallius
probri compertum, extorrem urbe, domo, penatibus, soro, lu^e, congressu
aequalium prohibitum, in opus servile, prope in carcerem, atque in ergastulum
dederit. Live. dec. 1. l. 7.
unnatural Parents: as it was in the Case of T. Manlius against his
over-Imperious Father. And an express Law there was among the Jews, Deuteronomy. 21.
19.
Deuteronomy. 21. when Children were grown up and fell into great extremities, that
the Parents should then bring them to the Magistrate, and not be too busy in
such cases with their own Power. So suppose Rome be a Prince, yet her Subjects
must be tried by Gods Law, the Scripture: and suppose her a Mother; yet there
is, or ought to be Remedy against her for her Children that are grown up, if
she forget all good Nature, and turn Stepdame to them.

Jesuit asked the Question, Quo Judice? Who should be Judge? He says was this;
Because there is no equity in it, that the Protestants should be Judges in their
own Cause. But now upon more Deliberation A. C. A. C. p. 57.
tells us (as if he knew the Jesuits mind as well as himself; as sure I think
he does) That the Jesuit directed this Question chiefly against that speech of
mine, That there were Errors in Doctrine of Faith, and that in the General
Church, as the Jesuit understood my meaning. The Jesuit here took my meaning
right. For I confess I said there were Errors in Doctrine, and dangerous ones
too, in the Church of Rome. I said likewise, that when the General Church could
not, or would not Reform such, it was lawful for Particular Churches to Reform
themselves. But then I added, That the General Church (not universally taken,
but in these Western parts) fell into those Errors, being swayed in these later
Ages by the predominant Power of the Church of Rome, under whose Government it
was for the most part forced. And all men of understanding know how often, and
how easily an Over-potent. Member carries the whole with it, in any Body,
Natural, Politic, or Ecclesiastical.

A. C. tells us, That never any Competent Judge did so censure the Church; And
indeed, that no Power on Earth, or A. C. p. 57.
in Hell it self, can so far prevail against the General Church as to make it
Err generally in any one Point of Divine Truth, and much less to teach any
thing by its full Authority to be a Matter of Faith, which is contrary to
Divine Truth expressed, or involved in Scriptures rightly understood. And that
therefore no Reformation of Faith can be needful in the General Church, but
only in Particular Churches. And for proof of this he cites S. Mat. 16. and 28.
S. Luke 22. S. John 14. and 16. In this troublesome and quarrelling Age, I am
most unwilling to meddle with the Erring of the Church in general. The Church
of England is content to pass that over. And though Art. 19.
She tells us, That the Church of Rome has Erred even in matters of Faith; yet
of the Erring of the Church in general She is modestly silent. But since A. C.
will needs have it, That the whole Church did never generally Err in any one
Point of Faith, he should do well to Distinguish, before he be so peremptory.
For if he mean no more than that the whole Universal Church of Christ cannot
universally Err in any one Point of Faith simply necessary to all men's
salvation, he fights against no Adversary, that I know, but his own fiction.
For the most Si demus errare non posse Ecclesiam in rebus ad salutem
necessariis, hic sensus noster est: Ideo hoc. esse, quia abdicara omni sua
sapientia, a Spiritu Sancto doceri se per Verbum Dei patitur. Calv. L. 4. Inst.
c. 8. S. 13. And this also is our sense. Vide sup. S. 21. Nu. 5.
Lear ned Protestants grant it. But if he mean, that the whole Church cannot
Err in any one Point of Divine Truth in general, which though by sundry
Consequences deduced from the Principles, is yet made a Point of Faith, and may
prove dangerous to the Salvation of some, which believe it, and practice after
it, (as his words seem to import) especially, if in these the Church shall
presume to determine without her proper Guide, the Scripture, as Nostra
sententia est, Ecclesiam absolute non posse errart, nec in rebus absolute
necessariie, nec in aliis quae credenda vel facienda nobis proponit, sive
babeantur express in Scripturis, sive non, Bellar. L. 3. de Eccl. Mil. c. 14.
5. A. C. p. 58.
Bellarm. says, She may, and yet not Err. Then perhaps it may be said, and
without any wrong to the Catholic Church, that the Whole Militant Church has
erred in such a Point of Divine Truth and of Faith. Nay A. C. confesses
expressly in his very next words, That the Whole Church may at some time not
know all Divine Truths, which afterward it may learn by study of Scripture,
and otherwise. So then in A. C's. judgment, the Whole Militant Church may at
some time not know all Divine Truths. Now that which knows not all, must be
ignorant of some; and that which is ignorant of some, may possibly err in one
Point or other; The rather, because he confesses the knowledge of it must be
got by Learning; and Learners may mistake and err; especially where the Lesson
is Divine Truth out of Scripture, out of Difficult Scripture. For were it of
plain and easy Scripture that he speaks, the Whole Church could not at any
time be without the knowledge of it. And for ought I yet see, the Whole Church
Militant has no greater warrant against Not erring in, than against Not
knowing of the Points of Divine Truth. For in 8. John 16. There is as S. Joh.
16. 13.
large a Promise to the Church of knowing all Points of Divine Truth, as A. C.
or any Jesuit can produce for Her Not erring in any. And if She may be
ignorant, or mistaken in learning of any Point of Divine Truth, Doubtless in
that state of Ignorance she may both Err, and teach her Error, yea and teach
that to be Divine Truth, which is not: Nay perhaps teach that as a Matter of
Divine Truth, which is contrary to Divine Truth; Always provided it be not in
any Point simply Fundamental, of which the Whole Catholic Church cannot be
Ignorant, and in which it cannot Err, as has. 21. N. 5.
before been proved.

Scripture which A. C. cites to prove that the Whole Church cannot Err
Generally in any one Point of Divine A. C. p. 57.
Truth, be it Fundamental or not, they are known Places all of them, and are
alleged by A. C. three several times in this A. C. p. 57.
short Tract, and to three several purposes. Here, to prove, That the Universal
Church cannot Err. Before this, to prove, A. C. p. 53.
that the Tradition of the present Church cannot Err. After this, to prove,
that the Pope cannot Err. He should have done A. C. p. 58 and 73.
well to have added these Places a fourth time, to prove that General Councels
cannot Err. For so does both Stapl Relect. praef. ad Lectorem.
Stapleton and Bellar. ^. 2. de Council. c. 2.
Bellarmine. Sure A. C. and his fellows are hard driven, when they must fly to
the same Places for such different purposes. For A Pope may Err, where a
Council, does not; And a General Council may Err, where the Catholic Church
cannot. And therefore it is not likely that these places should serve alike for
all. The first Place is Saint Matthew 16. There Christ told S. Mat. 16. 18.
Saint Peter, and we believe it most assuredly, That Hell-Gates shall never be
able to prevail against his church. But that is, That they shall not prevail to
make the Church Catholic Apostatize, and fall quite away from Christ, or Err
in absolute Fundamentals, which amounts to as much. But the Promise reaches not
to this, that the Church shall never Err, no not in the lightest matters of
Farth, For it will not follow: Hell-Gates shall not prevail against the Church;
Therefore Hellish Devils shall not tempt, or assault, and batter it. And thus
Saint Puguare potest, Expugnari non potest, S. Aug. L. de Symb. ad Catecum, c.
6.
Augustine understood the place. It may fight (yea and be wounded too) but it
cannot be wholly overcome. And Bellarmine himself applies it to prove, Bellar.
L. 3. de Eccl. Milit. c. 13.. 1. etc.
That the Visible Church of Christ cannot deficere, Err so, as quite to fall
away. Therefore in his judgment, this is a true, and a safe sense of this Text
of Scripture. But as for not Erring at all, in any Point of Divine Truth, and
so making the Church absolutely Infallible, that is neither a true, nor a safe
sense of this Scripture. And it is very remarkable, that whereas this Text has
been so much beaten upon by Writers of all sorts, there is no one Father of the
Church for twelve hundred years after Christ (the Counterfeit or Partial
Decretals of some Popes excepted) that ever concluded the Infallibility of the
Church out of this Place: but her Non deficiencie, that has been, and is
justly deduced hence. And here I challenge A. C. and all that party to show the
contrary, if they can. The next Place of Scripture is Saint Matthew 28. S Mat.
28. 21.
The Promise of Christ that he will be with them to the end of the World. But
this in the general voice of the S. Hill. in Psalm. 124. Prosp. L. 2. de vocat.
Gent. c. 2. Leo Ser. 2. de Resur, Dom. c. 3. and Ep. 31. Isidor. in Jos. 1^.
Fathers of the Church is a promise of Assistance and Protection, not of an
Infallibility of the Church. And In omnibus que Ministris suis commisit
exequenda, S. Leo, Epist. 91. c. 2.
Pope Leo himself enlarges this presence and providence of Christ to all those
things which he committed to the execution of his Ministers. But no word of
Infallibility is to be found there. And indeed since Christ according to his
Prowise is present with his Ministers in all these things, and that one and a
Chief of these All is the preaching of his Word to the People; It must follow,
That Christ should be present with all his Ministers that Preach his Word, to
make them Infallible; which daily Experience tells us, is not so. The third
Place urged by A. C. is S. Luke S. Luke 22. 32.
22. Where the Prayer of Christ will effect no more than his Promise has
performed; neither of them implying an Infallibility for, or in the Church
against all Errors whatsoever. And this almost all his own side confess is
spoken either of S. Peter's person only, or of him and his Successors Bellar.
L. 4. de Romans P^nt. c. 3. S. Est igitur tertia. He understood the place of both
S. Peter and his Successors.
both. Of the Church it is not spoken, and therefore cannot prove an unerring
Power in it. For how can that place prove the Church cannot Err, which speaks
not at all of the Church? And it is observable too, that when the Divines of
Paris expounded this Place, that Christ here prayed for S. Peter, as he
represented the Whole Catholic Church, and obtained for it that the Faith of
the Catholic Church nunquam desiceret, should never so err, as quite to fall
away; Que Expositio falsa est, Primo quia, etc. Bell. ibid.. 2. And he says
it is false because the Parisians expounded it of the Church only. Volunt enim
pro sold Ecclesi^ esse eratum, Ibid.. 1.
Bellarmine is so stiff for the Pope, that he says expressly, This Exposition of
the Parisians is false, and that this Text cannot be meant of the Catholic
Church. Not be meant of it? Then certainly it ought not to be alleged as Proof
of it, as here it is by A. C. The fourth Place named by A. C. is S. John 14.
And the consequent Place to it S. John A. C. p. 57. S. John 14. 16, 17. S. Joh.
16. 13.
16. These Places contain another Promise of Christ concerning the coming of
the Holy Ghost. Thus: That the Comforter shall abide with them for ever. That
this Comforter is the Spirit of Truth. And, That this Spirit of Truth will lead
them into all Truth. Now this Promise as it is applied to the Church consisting
of all Believers which are and have been since Christ appeared in the Flesh,
including the Apostles, is Field, L 4. de Eccles. c. 2. free from all error and
ignorance of Divine things.
absolute, and without any Restriction. For, the Holy Ghost did lead them into
all Truth, so that no Error was to be found in that Church. But as it is
appliable to the whole Church Militant in all succeeding times, so the Promise
was made with a Limitation, And Theodoret proceeds father, and says, Neque
divini Prophetae, neque mirabiles Apostoli omnia praesciverunt. Quaecunque enim
expediebant, ea illis significavit gratid Spiritus. Theod. in 1 Timothy 3. v. 14,
15.
namely, that the Blessed Spirit should abide with the Church for ever, and
lead it into all Truth; but not simply into all Curious Truth, no not in or
about the Faith, but into all Truth necessary to Salvation. And against this
Truth the Whole Catholic Church cannot err, keeping her self to the direction
of the Scripture, as Christ has appointed her. For in this very Place where
the Promise is made, That the Holy Ghost shall teach you all things, it is
added, that He shall bring all things to their remembrance. What? simply all
things? No: But all things which Christ had told them, S. John 14. So there is
a Limitation S. Joh. 14. 26.
put upon the words by Christ himself. And if the Church will not err, it must
not ravel Curiously into unnecessary Truths, which are out of the Promise, nor
follow any other Guide than the Doctrine which Christ has lest behind him to
govern it. For if it will come to the End, it must keep in the Way. And Christ
who promised the Spirit should lead, has no where promised that it shall
follow its Leader into all Truth, and at least not Infallibly, unless you will
Limit, as before. So, no one of these Places can make good A.C.'s Assertion,
That the whole Church cannot err Generally in any (...) Point of (...) (...).
In Absolute Foundations. 21. Nu. 5.
she cannot: in Deductions and superstructures she may.

Right which Particular Churches have to Reform themselves* when the General
Church cannot for Impediments* or will not for Negligence, which I have proved
at large. 24. Nu. 1, 2, etc.
before* All the Answer that A. C. gives, is, First, Quo Judice? Who shall be
Judge? And that shall be the Scripture, and the Si de (...) set, nonne
oporteret in (...) recur^ere Ecclesias, ^ Traditionis? etc. (...) L. ^. advers.
Haeres. c. 4.
Primitive Church* And by the A. C. p. ^7. ^
Rules of the one, and to the Integrity of the other* both in Faith and
Manners, any Particular Church may safely Reform it self.

That no Reformation in Faith can be needful in the General Church, but only in
Particular Churches. In which Case also (he says) Particular Churches may not
take upon A. C. p. 58.
them to Judge and Condemn others of Errors in Faith. Well, how far forth
Reformation even of Faith may be necessary in the General Church, I have
expressed. 25. Nu. 4.
already. And for Particular Churches, I do not say, that they must take upon
them to Judge or Condemn others of Error in Faith. That which I say, is, They
may Reform themselves. Now I hope, to Reform themselves, and to Condemn others,
are two different Words, unless it fall out so, that by Reforming themselves*
they do by consequence Condemn any other, that is guilty in that Point, in
which they Reform themselves; and so far to Judge and Condemn others, is not
only lawful, but necessary. A man that lives religiously, does not by and by
sit in Judgment, and Condemn with his mouth all Profane Livers: But yet while
he is silent, his very Life* condemns them. And I hope in this way of
Judicature, A. C. dares not say it is unlawful for a particular Church or man to
Condemn another. And (...) whatsoever A. C. can say to the contrary, there are
diverse Cases, where Heresies are known* and notorious, in which it will be hard
to say (as he does) That one Particular Church must A. C. p. 58.
not Judge or Condemn another so far forth at (...), as to (...) and protest
against the Heresy of it.

A. C. tells us, That Particular A. C. p. 58.
Churches must in that Case (as Irenaeus intimates) have recourse to the
Church of Rome, which has more powerful sub Principality, ^

^

^ the Principality of an Apostolic Chair: Or, if you will, the Apostolic
Chair, in relation to the West and South parts of the Church, all the other
four Apostolic Chairs being in the East. Now this no man denies, that
understands the state and story of the Church. And Quia Opinio inval^it
^undatam esse hanc Ecclesiam ^ S. Petro ^taque in Occidente Seeds Apostolica
Hon^ris caus^ vo^abatur. Calv. L. 4. c. 6.. 16.
Calvin confesses it expressly. Nor is the Word Principatus so great, nor were
the Bishops of those times so little, as that Principes and Principatus are not
commonly given them both by the Princeps Ecclesiae, S. Hilar. l. 8. de Trin.
Prin. And he speaks of a Bishop in gener^^. Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 17.
Ascribuntur Episcopo (...). Imperium, Thronus, and Principatus ad regimen
(...)* Et* (...), hujus^odi Imp^rium. And he also speaks of a Bishop, Greg.
Nazianz. Great. 20. Nor were these any Titles of pride in Bishops then. For S.
Greg. Nazianz. who challenges these Titles to himself, Orat. 17. was so devout,
so mild, and so humble, that rather than the Peace of the Church should be
broken, he freely resigned the Great Patriarchate of Constantinople, and
retired; and this in the First Council of Constantinople, and the Second
General.
Greek and the Latin Fathers of this great and Learned Age of the Church
made up of the fourth and fifth hundred years, always understanding Principatus
of their Spiritual Power, and within the Limits of their several*
Jurisdictions, which perhaps now and then they did occasionally exceed. And
there is not one word in S. Augustine, That this Principality of the Apostolic
Chair in the Church of Rome was then, or ought to be now exercised over the
whole Church of Christ, as Bellarmine insinuates there, and as A. C. would have
it here. And to prove that S. Augustine did not intend by Principatus here to
give the Roman Bishop any Power out of his own Limits (which God knows were far
short of the whole Church) I shall make it most manifest out of the very same
Epistle. For afterward (says S. Augustine) when the pertinacie of the
Donatists could not be restrained by the African Bishops only, (...) ad ^ratres
and Colleg^s (...) (...) Ecclesiarum Episcopos, etc. S. Aug. Ep. 16^.
they gave them leave to be beard by foreign Bishops. And after that he has
these words: An fort^ non deb^it Roman^ Ecclesiae (...) Episcopus cum Collegis
transmarinis Episcopis illud sibi usurpar^ judicium quod ab Afris (...), ubi
Pri^as Tigisitanus pr^sedit, fuerit terminatum? Quid quod nec ipse usurpavit*
Rogatus quipp^ Imperator, Judices ^is^t (...), qui cum (...) (...), and d^ tot^
ill^ (...), quod jus^^^ vider^tur, (...), etc. S. Aug. Ibid.
And yet peradventure Melciades the Bishop of the Roman Church, with his
Colleagues, the Transmarine Bishops, non debuit, ought not usurp to himself
this Judgment which was determined by seventy African Bishops, Tigisitanus
sitting Primate. And what will you say, if he did not usurp this Power? For the
Emperor being desired, sent Bishops Judges, which should sit with him, and
determine what was just upon the whole Cause. In which Passage there are very
many things Observeable. As first, that the Roman Prelate came not in, till
there was leave for them to go to Transmarine Bishops. Secondly, that if the
Pope had come in without this Leave, it had been an Usurpation. Thirdly, that
when he did thus come in, not by his own Proper Authority, but by Leave, there
were other Bishops made Judges with him. Fourthly, that these other Bishops
were appointed, and sent by the Emperor and his Power; that which the Pope will
least of all endure. Lastly, lest the Pope and his Adherents should say this
was an Usurpation in the Emperor, Ad cujus Curam, de qua rationem Deo
r^ddit^rus est, res illa maxim pertinebat. S. Aug. Epist. 162.
S. Aug. tells us a little before, in the same Epistle still, that this does
chiefly belong ad Curam ejus, to the Emperors Care and charge, and that He is
to give an Account to God for it. And Melciades did sit and Judge the Business
with all Christian Prudence and Moderation. So at this time the Roman Prelate
was not received as Pastor of the whole Church, say A. C. what he please. Nor
had he any Supremacy over the other Patriarchs: And for this, were all other
Records of Antiquity silent, the Civil Law is proof enough, (And that is a
Monument of the Primitive Church.) The Text there is, Nam contra horum
Antistitum ( de Patriarchis loquitur) Sententias, non esse locum Appellation^ ^
Majoribus nostris constitutum est. Co^. L. 1. Tit. 4. L. 29. ex editione
Gothofredi. Si non rata habuerit utraque Pars, que Judicata sunt, tun^
Beatissimus Patriarcha Diocese^s illius, inter eos audiat, etc. Nulla part
ejus Sententiae contradi^ere valente. Authen. Collat. 9. Tit. 1^. C. 22.
A Patriarcha non datur Appellatio. From a Patriarch there lies no Appeal. No
Appeal. Therefore every Patriarch was alike Supreme in his own Patriarchate.
Therefore the Pope then had no Supremacy over the whole Church. Therefore
certainly not then received as Universal Pastor. And S. Gregory himself
speaking of Appeals, and expressly citing the Laws themselves, says plainly, Et
ille (scilicet Patriarcha) secundum Canones, and Leges praebeat finem. And
there he cites the Novel its self. S. Greg L. 11. Indict. ^. Epist. 54.
That the Patriarch is to put a final end to those Causes, which come before
him by Appeal from Bishops and Archbishops: but then he adds, Si dictum fuerit,
quod nec Metropolita^um habeat, nec Patriarcham: dicendum est, quod a Sede
Apostolica, quae omnium Ecclesiarum Caput est, causa a^dienda est, etc. S.
Greg. Ibid.
That where there is nor Metropolitan, nor Patriarch of that Diocese, there
they are to have recourse to the Sea Apostolic, as being the Head of all
Churches. Where first this implies plainly, That if there be a Metropolitan, or
a Patriarch in those Churches, his Judgment is final; and there ought to be no
Appeal to Rome. Secondly, It Is as plain, That in those Ancient times of the
Church Government, Britain was never subject to the Sea of Rome. For it was one
of the Notitia Provinciarum Occidentalium, per Guidum Pancirolum, l. 2. c. 48.
Six Diocesses of the West Empire, and had a Primate of its own: Nay, Hunc
cunctis Liberalium Artium disciplinis eraditum pro Magistro t^^eamus, and quasi
Comparem, velut alterius Orbis Apostolic^m and Patriarcham, etc. Jo. Capgravius
de Vitis Sanctorum, in vita S. Anselm^. Et Guil. Malmesburiens. de Gestis
Po^^ificum Anglorum, p. 223. Edit. Franco^. 1601.
John Capgrave, one of your own, and Learned for those times, and long before
him William of Malmesbury tell us, that Pope Urban the second, at the Council
held at Bar^ in Apulia, accounted my Worthy Predecessor S. Anselm, as his own
Compeer, and said he was as the Apostolic, and Patriarch of the other world.
(So he then termed this Island.) Now the Britains having a Primate of their own
(which is greater than a Metropolitan) yea a Ibi (Cantuaria id est) prima Seeds
Arcniepiscopi habetur, qui est totius Angliae Prima^ and Patriarcha. Guil.
Malmesburiensis in Prolog. Lib. 1. de Gestis Ponti^icum Anglorum, p. 195.
Patriarch, if you will, He could not be Appealed from, to Rome, by S.
Gregorie's own Doctrine. Thirdly, it will be hard for any man to prove, there
were any Churches then in the World, which were not under some either
Patriarch, or Metropolitan. Fourthly, if any such were, it is gratis dictum,
and impossible to be proved, that all such Churches, where ever seated in the
world, were obliged to depend on Rome. For manifest it is, that the Bishops
which were Ordained in places without the Limits of the Roman Empire (which
places they commonly called Praeterea and qui sunt (...), in Barbarico,
Episcopi a Sanctissim^ Thro^o Sanctissi^^ Constantinopolit^^^ Ecclesiae
Ordinintur. Codex Canonum Ecclesiae universae, Can. 206. And Justellus proves
it there at large, that by in Barbarico, in that Canon, is meant in Solo
Barbarorum. Annot. Ibid.
Barbarous) were all to be Ordained, and therefore most probable to be governed
by the Patriarch of Constantinople. And for Rome's being the Head of all
Churches, I have said enough to that in diverse parts of this Discourse.

Church of Africa, I shall borrow another reason from the Practice of that
Church, why by Principatus, S. Augustine neither did, nor could mean any
Principality of the Church, or Bishop of Rome over the Whole Church of Christ.
For as the Acts of Councels and Stories go, the African Prelates finding that
all succeeding Popes were not of Melciades his temper, set themselves to assert
their own Liberties, and held it out stoutly against Zozimus, Boniface the
first, and Coelestine the first, who were successively Popes of Rome. At last
it was concluded in the sixth Council of Carthage (wherein were assembled two
hundred and seventeen Bishops, of which S. Augustine himself was one) that they
would not give way to such a manifest incroachment upon their Rights and
Liberties; and thereupon gave present notice to Pope Coelestine to forbear
sending his Officers amongst them, N^ ^umosum typhum seculi in Ecclesiam
Christi videatur inducere, etc. Epist. Council. Asric. ad Papam Coelestinum
Primum. Apud Nicolin. Tom. 1. Council. p. 844.
lest he should seem to induce the swelling pride of the world into the Church
of Christ. And this is said to have amounted into a formal Separation from the
Church of Rome, and to have continued for the space of somewhat more than one
hundred years. Now that such a Separation there was of the African Church from
Rome, and a Reconciliation after, stands upon the Credit and Authority of two
public Instruments extant both among the Ancient Councels. The one is an
Epist. Bonifacii 2. apud ^col. Tom. 2. Council. p. 544.
Epistle from Boniface the Second, in whose time the Reconciliation to Rome is
said to be made by Eulalius then Bishop of Carthage, but the Separation,
instigan^e Diabolo, by the Temptation of the Devil. The other is an Exemp.
Precum apud Nicolin. Ibid. p. 525.
Exemplar Precum, or Copy of the Petition of the same Eulalius, in which he
damns and curses all those his Predecessors which went against the Church of
Rome. Amongst which Eulalius must needs Curse S. Augustine; And Pope Boniface
accepting this Submission* must acknowledge that S. Augustine and the rest of
that Council deserved this Curse, and dyed under it, as violating Rectae Fidei
Regulam, the Rule of the Right Faith (so the Exemplar Precum begins) by
refusing the Popes Authority. I will not deny, but that there are diverse
Reasons given by the Learned Romanists and Reformed Writers for and against the
Truth and Authority of both these Instruments. But because this is too long to
be examined here, I will say but this, and then make my use of it to my present
purpose, giving the Church of Rome free leave to acknowledge these Instruments
to be true or false, as they please. That which I shall say, is this: These
Instruments are let stand in all Editions of the Councels and Epistles
Decretal. As for Example, in the Old Edition by Isidor, Anno 1524. And in
another Old Edition of them Printed, Anno 1530. And in that which was published
by P. Crabbe, Anno 1538. And in the Edition of Valentinus Joverius, Anno 1555.
And in that by Surius, Anno 1567. And in the Edition at Venice by Nicolinus,
Anno 1585. And in all of these without any Note, or Censure upon them. And they
are in the Edition of Binius too, Anno 1618. but there is a Censure upon them,
to keep a quarter it may be with Baron. Annal. An. ad 49. Nu. 93, 94.
Baronius, who was the first (I think) that ever quarrelled them, and he does
it tartly. And since Valde mihi illae Epistolae suspect^ sunt* Bellar. L. 2. de
Romans Pont. c. 2^.. Respondeo primum. Sed si forte illae Epistolae ver^ sunt,
nihil enim affirmo, etc. Ibid.. ult.
Bellarmine follows the same way, but more doubtfully. This is that which I had
to say. And the Use which I shall make of these Instruments, whether they be
true or false, is this. They are either true or false, that is of necessity. If
they be false, then Boniface the Second, and his Accomplices at Rome, or some
for them, are notorious Forgers, and that of Records of great Consequence
concerning the Government and Peace of the whole Church of Christ, and to the
perpetual Infamy of that Sea; and all this foolishly, and to no purpose. For if
there were no such Separation, as these Records mention of the African Churches
from the Roman, to what end should Boniface, or any other, counterfeit an
Epistle of his own, and a Submission of Eulalius? On the other side, if these
Instruments be true (as the sixth Council of Carthage against all other
Arguments makes me incline to believe they are, in Substance at least, though
perhaps not in all Circumstances) then it is manifest, that the Church of Africa
separated from the Church of Rome; That this Separation continued above one
hundred years; That the Church of Africa made this Separation in a National
Council of their own, which had in it two hundred and seventeen Bishops: That
this Separation was made (for ought appears) only because they at Rome were too
ready to entertain Appeals from the Church of Africa, as appears in the Case of
And so the Council of Carthage sent word to Pope Coelestint plainly, that in
admitting such Appeals, he brake the Decrees of the Council of Ni^t. Epist.
Council. Africa. ad Caelestinum, c. 105. Apud Nicolin. Tom. 1. Council. p. 844.
Apiarius, who then appealed thither: That S. Augustine, Eugenius, Fulgentius,
and all those Bishops, and other Martyrs which suffered in the Vandalike
Persecution, dyed in the time of this Separation: That if this Separation were
not just, but a Schism, then these Famous Fathers of the Church dyed (for ought
appears) in Actual and unrepented Schism, Plane ex Ecclesia Catholicae albo
Expung^nda fuissent Sanctorum Africanorum Martyrum Agm^na, qui in persecutione
Vandalica pro Fide Catholica* etc. Baron. An. 419. Number. 93. Et Binius, In Notis
ad Epist. Bonifacii 2. ad Eulalium.
and out of the Church. And if so, then how comes S. Augustine to be, and be
accounted a Saint all over the Christian world, and at Rome it self? But if the
Separation were just, then is it far more lawful for the Church of England by
a National Council to cast off the Popes Usurpation (as. 24. Nu. 5.
She did) then it was for the African Church to separate; Because then the
African Church excepted only against the Pride of Rome Bell. l. 2. de Romans Po^^.
c. 25.. 2.
in Case of Appeals, and two other Canons less material; But the Church of
England excepts (besides this Grievance) against many Corruptions in Doctrine
belonging to the Faith, with which Rome at that time of the African Separation
was not tainted. And I am out of all doubt, that S. Augustine and those other
Famous men in their generations, durst not thus have separated from Rome, had
the Pope had that powerful Principality over the whole Church of Christ; And
that by Christ's own Ordinance and Institution, as A. C. pretends he had. A. C.
p. 58.


. 25. Nu. 10.
before, that the Popes grew under the Emperors, till they had overgrown them.
And now lest A. C. should say, I speak it without proof, I will give you a
brief touch of the Church-story in that behalf: And that from the beginning of
the Emperors becoming Christians, to the time of Charles the Great, which
contains about five hundred years. For so soon as the Emperors became
Christian, the Church (which before was kept under by Persecutions) began to be
put in better Order. For the calling and Authority of Bishops over the Inferior
Clergy, that was a thing of known use, and benefit for Preservation of Unity
and Peace in the Church. And so much Quod autem postea Unus electus est qui
caeteris praepon^retur, in Schismatis remedium, factum est, ^e unus quisque ad
se tra^^^s Christi Ecclesiam ru^peret. Nam and Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista
Presbyteri semper unum ex^se* electum in excellentiori gradu collocatum.
Episcopum nominabant, etc. S. Hieron. in Epist. ad Evagrium. So even according
to S. Hierom, Bishops had a very ancient and honorable descent in the Church
from S. Mark the Evangelist. And about the end of the same Epistle, he
acknowledges it. Traditionem esse Apostolicam. Nay, more then so, He affirms
plainly* That Ubi non est Sacerdos, non est Ecclesia. S. Hieron. advers.
Luciferian. And in that place most manifest it is that S. Jerome by Sacerdos
means a Bishop. For he speaks de Sacerdote qui potestatem habet Ordinandi,
which in S. Jeroms own Judgment no mere Priest had, but a Bishop only. S. Hier.
Epist. ad Evagrium So even with him, no Bishop, and no Church.
S. Jerome tells us. Though being none himself, he was no great friend to
Bishops. And this was so settled in the minds of men from the very Infancy of
the Christian Church, as that it had not been to that time contradicted by any.
So that then there was no Controversy about the Calling; all agreed upon that.
The only Difficulty was to accommodate the Places and Precedencies of Bishops,
among themselves, for the very Necessity of Order and Government. To do this,
the most equal and impartial way was, That as the Church is in the
Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in it (as Non enim Resp. est in Ecclesia:
sed Ecclesia in Repub. Optat. ^. 3.
Optatus tells us:) So the Honors of the Church should Conc. Calced. Can. 9.
and Actio 16.
follow the Honors of the State. And so it was insinuated, if not Ordered (as
appears) by the Canons of the Councels of Chalcedon and Antioch. And this was
the very fountain of Papal Greatness, the Pope having his Residence in the
great Imperial City. But Precedencie is one thing, and Authority is another. It
was thought fit therefore, though (as S. Cyprian. L. de Simp. Praelat.
S. Cyprian speaks) Episcopatus unus est; the Calling of a Bishop be one and
the same, that yet among Bishops there should be a certain Subordination and
Subjection. The Empire therefore being cast into several Divisions (which they
then called Diocesses) every Diocese contained several Provinces, every
Province several Bishoprics. The Chief of a Diocese (in that larger sense) was
called (...), and sometimes a Patriarch. The Chief of a Province, a
Metropolitan. Next the Bishops in their several Diocesses (as we now use that
word.) Among These there was effectual subjection respectively grounded upon
Canon, and Positive Law, in their several Quarters. But over them none at all.
All the Difference there, was but Honorary, not Authoritative. If the Ambition
of some particular persons did attempt now and then to break these Bounds, it
is no marvel. For no Calling can sanctify all that have it. And Socrates tells
us, That in this way the Bishops of Alexandria and Rome advanced themselves to
a great height (...), even beyond the quality of Bishops. Now upon view of
Story it will appear, that what advantage accrewed to Alexandria, was gotten by
the violence of Theophilus, Patriarch there. A man of exceeding great Learning,
and of no less violence; and he made no little advantage, out of this, that the
Empress E^doxia used his help for the casting of S. Chrysostom out of
Constantinople. But the Roman Prelates grew by a steady and constant
watchfulness upon all Occasions to increase the Honor of that Sea. Interposing
and (...) ^ (...) sive se (...) esse. Greg. Naz. Car^. de vita sua, p. 26.
assuming to themselves to be Vindices Canonum (as S. Gregory Nazian. speaks)
Defenders and Restorers of the Canons of the Church; which was a fair pretense,
and took extremely well. But yet the World took notice of this their aim. For
in all Contestations between the East and the West, which were nor small nor
few, the Western Bishops objected Levity to the Eastern; And they again
Arrogancy to the Bishops of the West, as Orientalibus levitas, Occidentalibus
arrogantia invicem objecta est. Bilius Ann^t. in S. Gregor. Naz. Vitam. Number.
153. Quid opus est Occidentali supercitio? ex (...) Basil, etc.
Bilius observes, and upon very warrantable Testimonies. For all this, the
Bishop of Rome continued in good Obedience to the Emperor, enduring his
Censures and Judgments. And being chosen by the Clergy and People of Rome, he
accepted from the Emperor the Ratification of that choice. Insomuch that about
the year 579. when all Italy was on fire with the Lombards, and Hec una suit
causa quare Pelagius inju^^^ Principis Pontifex creatus sit, q(...) obsessam ab
host urbem mitti quispiam non posset, etc. Postea itaque ad placandum
Imperatorem Gregorius Diaconus, etc. Platina in vita Pelagi^ 2. and Onuph. ibid.
Pelagius the Second constrained through the necessity of the times, contrary
to the Example of his Predecessors, to enter upon the Popedom without the
Emperors leave; S. Gregory then a Deacon was shortly after sent on Embassy to
excuse it. About this time brake out the Ambition of Onuph. In Plat. in vita
Boni^. 3.
John Patriarch of Constantinople affecting to be Universal Bishop. He was
countenanced in this by Mauricius the Emperor, but sowerly opposed by Pelagius
and S. Gregory. Insomuch that S. In hac ejus (...) quid aliud nisi propinqua
jam Antichristi esse tempora designatur. S. Greg. L. 4. Epist. ^8.
Gregory says plainly, That this Pride of his shows that the times of
Antichrist were near. So as yet (and this was now upon the point of six hundred
years after Christ) there was no Universal Bishop, No one Monarch over the
whole Militant Church. But Mauricius being deposed and murdered by Phocas;
Phocas conferred upon It may be they will say S. Gregory did not inveigh
against the Thing, but the Person. That John of Constantinople should take that
upon him, which belonged to the Pope. But it is manifest by S. Grego^^s own
Text, that he speaks against the Thing it self, that neither the Bishop of
Rome, nor any other, ought to take on him that (...). Cura totius Ecclesiae and
Principatus S. Petro (...), and tamen Universalis Apostolus non vocatur. S.
Greg. L. 4. Epist. 76. (Therefore neither is his Successor, Universal Bishop.)
Nu^quid ego hac in re propriam causam defendo? ^^^quid spec^alem injuriam
Vindi^o? and non magis causam Omni(...) Dei and Universalis Ecclesiae? where ^e
plainly denies, that he speaks in his own Cause, or in the Cause of his Sea,
Per Ven^randam Chalcedonensem Synodum hoc Nomen Romans Pontifici oblatum est, sed
nullus eorum unquam hoc (...) Vocabulum assumpsit, nec ^ti consens^^, ne dum
privatum aliquid daretur Uni, ^onore debito Sacerdotes privarentur Universi,
etc. Where he plainly says, the Roman Bishops rejected this Title. Ibid. And
yet for all this Pope Gregory the Seventh delivers it as one of his Dictates in
a Council held at Rome about the year 1^76. Quod (...) Romanus Pontifex jure
dicatur Universalis. Baron. a^ An. ^076. Number. 31 and 32.
Boniface the Third that very honor, which two of his Predecessors had
declaimed against as Absit a Cordibus Christianorum Nomen istud Blasphemi^. S.
Greg. L. 4. Epist. 76. In isto scelesto vocabulo consentire, nihil est aliud
quam fidem p^rdere. S. Greg. L. 4. Epist. 83.
Monstrous and Blasphemous, if not Antichristian. Where, by the way either
those two Popes, Pelagius and S. Gregory erred in this weighty business about
an Universal Bishop over the whole Church; Or if they did not Err, Boniface,
and the rest which after him took it upon them, were in their very Predecessors
judgment, Antichristian. But to proceed. Vana tunc ^abebatur Cleri and Populi
Electio, nisi aut Imperatores, aut eorum Exarchi confirmassent. Plat. in vita
Severini 1.
As yet the right of Election or Ratification of the Pope continued in the
Emperor. But then the Lombards grew so great in Italy, and the Empire was so
infested with Saracens; and such changes happened in all parts of the world, as
that neither for the present, the Homage of the Pope was useful to the Emperor;
nor the Protection of the Emperor available for the Pope. By this means the
Bishop of Rome was left to play his own game by himself. A thing which as it
pleased him well enough; So both he, and his Successors made great Advantage by
it. For being grown to that Eminence by the Emperor, and the greatness of that
City and Place of his abode, He found himself the more free, the greater the
tempest was, that beat upon the other: And then first, Quum Theophylactus
Exarchus Imperatoris Itali am peteret, Milites Itali, veriti ne quid mali ejus
Adventus portenderet, quod superioribus temporibus fer^ magis cum Pontificibus
quam cum Imperatoribus sensissent, ingressurum Romam interficere constituerant.
( And the Emperors own Governor was fain to be defended from the Emperors own
Soldiers by the Popes power, who had gotten Interest in them against their own
Master.) Platina in vita Johan. 6. Absimarus was then Emperor.
He set himself to alion^te the hearts of the Italians from the Emperor. Next
he Opposed himself against him. And about the year seven hundred and ten, Pope
Constantine the first did also first of all openly confront Philippicus the
Emperor in defense of Images. As Primus omnium Romans Pontificum Imperatori Gr^^o
Philippico in os resistere palam ausus est. Onuph. in Plat. in vit^ Constantini
1.
On^phrius tells us. After him Platina in vita Gregor. 2 and 3.
Gregory the Second, and the third took up his example, and did the like by Leo
Isaurus. By this time the Lombards began to pinch very close, and to vex on all
sides not Italy only, but Rome too. This drives the Pope to seek a new Patron.
And very fitly he meets with Charles Martel in France, that famous warrior
against the Saracens. Ut laboranti Romae and Ecclesiae primo quoque tempore
auxilium ^erret, etc. Platin. in vita Greg. 3.
Him he implores in defense of the Church against the Lombards. This address
seems very advisedly taken, at least it proves very fortunate to them both.
Quaeres semel incoepta cum ^ongobardici Regni excidio fi^ita est. Onuph. in
Plat. in vita Constantini Primi.
For in short time it dissolved the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy, which had
then stood two hundred and four years, which was the Popes security; And it
brought the Crown of France into the House of Charles, and shortly after the
Western Empire. And now began the Pope to be great indeed. For by the Bounty of
Reddi^us ita^ue Roma^^^ Exarc^atus est, quicquid Pa^um and Apenninum
interjacet, etc. Plat. in vita Stephan. Secundi.
P^pin Son of Charles, that which was taken from the Lombards was given to the
Pope. So that now of a Bishop, he became a Temporal Prince. But when Charles
the Great had set up the Western Empire, then he resumed the Ancient and
Original Power of the Emperor, to govern the Church, to call Councels, to order
Papal Elections. And this Power continued in his Posterity. For this Right of
the Emperor was in force and use in Gregory the Seventh's time, Imperator in
gratiam cum Gregorio rediit, eundemque in Pontificatu confirmavit, ut tum
Imperatorum mos erat. Plat. in vita Gregor. septim.
Who was confirmed in the Popedom by Henry the fourth, whom he afterward
deposed. And it might have continued longer, if the succeeding Emperors had had
abilities enough to secure, or vindicate their own Right. But the Pope keeping
a strong Council about him, and meeting with some Weak Princes, and they
oft-times distracted with great and dangerous Wars, grew stronger, till he got
the better. So this is enough to show how the Popes climed up by the Emperors,
till they over-topped them; which is all I said before, and have now proved.
And this was about the year 1073. (For the whole Popedom of Gregory the Seventh
was begun and ended within the Reign of William the Conqueror.) Yet was it
carried in succeeding times with great changes of fortune, and different
success. The Emperor sometimes plucking from the Pope, and the Multi deinde
fuerunt Imperatores Hen. similiores, quam Jul. Caesari, quos subigere non fuit
difficile, dum domi rerum omnium securi, etc. Calv. L. 4. Iustit. c. 11.. 13.
Pope from the Emperor, winning and losing ground, as their Spirits, Abilities,
Aids and Opportunities were, till at the last the Pope settled himself upon the
Grounds laid by For in a Synod at Rome about the year 1076. Pope Gregory the
Seventh established certain brief Conclusions, twenty seven in number, upon
which stands almost all the Greatness of the Papacy. These Conclusions are
called Dictatus Papae. And they are reckoned up by Baronius in the year 1076.
Nu. 31, 32, etc. But whether this Dictatorship did now first invade the Church,
I cannot certainly say. The chief of these Propositions follow here. Quod solus
Romans Pontifex jure dicatur Universalis. Quod solius Papae pedes omnes Principes
deosculentur. Quod liceat illi Imperatores Deponere. Quod nulla Synodus absque
praecepto ejus deb^t Generalis vocari. Quod nullum Capitulum, null^sque Liber
Ca^onicus habeatur absque illius Authoritate. Quod sententia illius a nullo
debet retractari, and ipse omnium solus retractare potest. Quod Romans Ecclesia
nunquam erravit, nec in perpetuum, Scripture testante, errabit. Quod Romans
Pontifex, si Ca^onice fuerit ordinatus, meritis B. Petri indubitanter efficitur
sanctus. Quod a fidelitate Iniquorum subdit^s potest abso^^^re.

Gregory the Seventh, in the great power which he now uses in and over these
parts of the Christian world.

A. C. knowing it is not enough to say this, That the Pope is Pastor of the
whole Church, labors to prove it. And first he tells us, that Irenaeus
intimates so much; but he does not tell us where. And he is much scanted of
Ancient Proof, if Irenaeus stand alone. Besides, Irenaeus was a Bishop of the
Gallicane Church, and a very unlikely man to Captivate the Liberty of that
Church under the more powerful Principality of Rome. And how can we have better
evidence of his Judgment touching that Principality, than the Actions of his
Life? When Pope Victor Excommunicated the Asian Churches (...) Eusebius. L. 5. c.
25.
all at a blow, was not Irenaeus the Chief man that reprehended him for it? A
very unmeet and undutiful thing, sure, it had been in Irenaeus, in deeds to tax
him of rashness and inconsiderateness, whom in words A. C. would have to be
acknowledged by him, The Supreme and Infallible Pastor of the Universal Church.
But the Place of Irenaeus, which A. C. means, (I think) is this, where he uses
these words indeed, but short of A. C's sense of it. Ad hanc Ecclesiam, propter
potentiorem Principalitatem, necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam; i. e. eos
qui sunt undique fideles: In qua semper ab his qui sunt undique, conservata est
ea quae est ab Apostolis Traditio. Iren. L. 3. c. 3.
To this Church (he speaks of Rome) propter potentiorem principalitatem, for
the more powerful Principality of it, it is necessary that every Church, that
is, the faithful, undique, round about, should have recourse. Should have
recourse, so A. C. translates it. And what does this avail him? Very A. C. p.
58.
great reason was there in Irenaeus his time, That upon any Disference arising
in the Faith, Omnes undique Fideles, all the Faithful, or, if you will, all the
Churches round about, should have recourse, that is, resort to Rome, being the
Imperial City, and so a Church of more powerful Principality, than any other at
that time in those parts of the world. Well: Will this exalt Rome to be the
Head of the Church Universal? What if the States and Policies of the world be
much changed since, and this Conveniencie of resorting to Rome be quite ceased?
Then is not Rome divested of her more powerful Principality? But the meaning of
A. C. is, We must so have recourse to Rome, as to submit our Faith to hers: And
then not only in Irenaeus his time, but through all times reform Our selves by
her Rule: That is, all the Faithful, not undique, round about, but ubique,
every where, must agree with Rome in point of Faith. This he means, and Rome
may thank him for it. But this Irenaeus says not, nor will his words bear it;
nor durst A. C. therefore construe him so, but was content to smooth it over
with this ambiguous phrase of having recourse to Rome. Yet this is a place as
much stood upon by them, as any other in all Antiquity. And should I grant them
their own sense, That all the faithful every where must agree with Rome (which
I may give, but can never grant) yet were not this saying any whit prejudicial
to us now. For first, here is a powerful Principality ascribed to the Church of
Rome. And that no man of Learning doubts but the Church of Rome had within its
own Patriarchate and Jurisdiction; and that was very large, containing Ed.
Brierwood, of the Jurisdiction and Limits of the Patriarchs, in the time of the
Nicen Council, Ad. Qu. 1. M. S.
all the Provinces in the Diocese of Italy (in the old sense of the word
Diocese) which Provinces the Lawyers and others term Suburbicarias. There were
ten of them. The three Islands, Sicily, Corsica, and Sardinia; and the other
seven upon the firm land of Italy. And this (I take it) is plain in Ruffinus.
For he living shortly after the Ni^^ne Connec^^, as he did, and being of Italy,
as he was, he might very well know the Bounds of that Patriarchs Jurisdiction,
as it was then practiced: Apud Alexandriam, ut in urbe Roma vetusta consuetudo
servetur, ut ille Aegypti, ut hic Suburbicariarum Ecclesiarum solicitudinem
gerat. Ruffin. L. 1. Eccles. Hist. c. 6.
And he says expressly, That according to the old Custom, the Roman Patriarchs
Charge was confined within the Limits of the Suburbicarian Churches. To avoid
the force of this Testimony, Peron L. 2. of his Reply, c. 6.
Cardinal Peron lays load upon Ruffinus. For he charges him with Passion,
Ignorance, and Rashness. And one piece of his Ignorance is, That he has ill
translated the Canon of the Council of Nice. Now be that as it may, I neither
do, nor can approve his Translation of that Canon; nor can it be easily proved,
that he purposely intended a Translation. All that I urge is, that Ruffinus
living in that time and Place, was very like well to know and understand the
Limits and Bounds of that Patriarchate of Rome, in which he lived. Secondly
here is, That it had potentiorem, a more powerful Principality than other
Churches had. And that the Protestants grant too; and that not only because the
Roman Prelate was Ordine primus, first in Order, and Degree, which some One
must be, to avoid Confusion; Quia cum Orientales and Graecae Ecclesiae, and
Africanae etiam, multis inter se Opinionum dissentionibus tumultuare^tur, haec
sedatior aliis, and minus turbulenta fuerit. Calv. L. 4. Iustit c. 6.. 16.
But also because the Roman Sea had won a great deal of Credit, and gained a
great deal of Power to it self in Church Affairs: Because while the Greek yea,
and the African Churches too, were turbulent, and distracted with many and
dangerous Opinions, the Church of Rome all that while, and a good while after
Irenaeus too, was more calm and constant to the Truth. Thirdly, here is a
Necessity (say they) required, That every Church, that is, the faithful, which
are every where, agree with that Church. But what? simply with that Church,
what ever it do or believe? No, nothing less. For Irenaeus adds, with that
Church, in qua, in which is conserved that Tradition which was delivered by the
Apostles. And God forbid but it should be necessary for all Churches; and all
the faithful to agree with that Ancient Apostolic Church in all those Things,
in which it keeps to the Doctrine and Discipline delivered by the Apostles. In
Iraeneus his time it kept these better than any other Church, and by this in
part obtained potentiorem Principalitatem, a Greater power than other Churches,
but not over all other Churches. And (as they understand Irenaeus) a Necessity
lay upon all other Churches to agree with this: but this Necessity was laid
upon them by the Then Integrity of the Christian Faith there professed, not by
the Universality of the Roman Jurisdiction now challenged. And let Rome reduce
it self to the Observation of Tradition Apostolic, to which it then held, and
I will say as Irenaeus did; That it will be then necessary for every Church,
and for the Faithful every where, to agree with it. Lastly, let me Observe too,
That Irenaeus made no doubt, but that Rome might fall away from Apostolical
Tradition, as well as other Particular Churches of great Name have done. For he
does not say, in qua servanda semper erit, sed in qua servata est: Not, in
which Church the Doctrine delivered from the Apostles shall ever be entirely
kept: That had been home indeed: But in which, by God's Grace and Mercy, it was
to that time of Irenaeus so kept and preserved. So we have here in Irenaeus his
Judgment, the Church of Rome then Entire, but not Infallible. And endowed with
a more powerful Principality than other Churches, but not with an Universal
Dominion over all other Churches; which is the Thing in Question.

Irenaeus A. C. joins a Reason of his own. A. C. p. 58.
For he tells us the Bishop of Rome is S. Peter's Successor, and therefore to
Him we must have recourse. The Fathers, I deny not, ascribe very much to S.
Peter: But it is to S. Peter in his own person. And among them, Epiphanius is as
free, and as frequent in extolling S. Peter, as any of them: And yet did he
never intend to give an Absolute Principality to Rome in S. Peter's right.
There is a Noted Place in that Father, where his words are these: Ipse autem
Dominus constituit eum Primum Apostolorum, Petram firmam super quam Ecclesia
Dei aedificata est; and portae inferorum non valebunt adversus illam, etc.
Juxta omnem enim modum in Ipso firmata est fides, qui accepit Clavem Coelorum,
etc. In hoc enim omnes Quaestiones ac Subtilitates fidei inveniuntur. Epiphan.
in Ancorato. Edit. Paris. Lat. 1564. fol. 497. A. Edit. vero Graec^. Latin.
Tom. 2. p. 14.
For the Lord himself made S. Peter the first of the Apostles, a firm Rock,
upon which the Church of God is built, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it, etc. For in him the Faith is made firm every way, who received the
Key of Heaven, etc. For in him all the Questions and Subtilties of the Faith
are sound. This is a great Place at first sight too, and deserves a Marginal
Note to call young Readers eyes to view it. And it has this Note in the Old
Latin Edition at Paris, 1564. Petri Principatus, and Praestantia; Peter's
Principality, and Excellency. This Place, as much show as it makes for the
Roman Principality, I shall easily clear, and yet do no wrong, either to S.
Peter, or the Roman Church. For most manifest it is, That the Authority of S.
Peter is (...). For there begins the Argument of Epiphanius.
urged here to prove the Godhead of the Holy Ghost. And then follow the Elogies
given to S. Peter, the better to set off and make good that Authority; As that
he was (...).
Princeps Apostolorum, the Prince of the Apostles, and pronounced blessed by
Christ; because as God the Father revealed to him the Godhead of the Son, so
did he again the Godhead of the Holy Ghost. After this Epiphanius calls Him
(...).
solidam Petram, a solid Rock, upon which the Church of God was founded,
against which the Gates of Hell should not prevail. And adds, That the Faith
was rooted, and made firm in him (...), etc.
every way, in him who received the Key of Heaven. And after this, he gives the
Reason of all: (...), etc.
Because in Him: (mark I pray, it is still in Him, as he was blessed by that
Revelation from God the Father, S. Matthew 16.) were found all the (...), the
very Nice-Cities S. Mat: 16. 17.
and exactness of the Christian Faith. For he professed the Godhead of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; And so Omni modo every Point of Faith was rooted in Him.
And this is the full meaning of that Learned Father in this passage. Now
therefore Building the Church upon Saint Peter in Epiphanius his sense, is not,
as if He and his Successors were to be Monarchs over it for ever: But it is the
edifying and establishing the Church in the true Faith of Christ by the
Confession which S. Peter made. And so (...), etc. Qui factus est nobis revera
solida Petra firmans fidem Domini. In qua (Petra) aedificata est Ecclesia juxta
omnem modum. Primo, quod confessus est Christum esse Filium Dei vivi, and
statim audivit, Super hanc Petram solidae fidei aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. --
Etiam de Spiritu Sancto idem, etc. Epiphan. L. 2. Haeres. 59. contra Catharos.
Tom. 1. p. 500. Edit. Graeco-Lat.
He expresses himself elsewhere most plainly: Saint Peter (says he) who was
made to us indeed a solid Rock firming the Faith of our Lord. On which ( Rock)
the Church is built juxta omnem modum, every way. First, that he Confessed
Christ to be the Son of the Living God, and by and by he heard: Upon this Rock
of solid Faith I will build my Church. And the same Confession he made of the
Holy Ghost. Thus was S. Peter a solid Rock upon which the Church was founded
omni modo, every way. That is, the Faith of the Church was confirmed by him in
every Point. But that S. Peter (...). Ibid.
was any Rock, or Foundation of the Church, so as that he and his Successors
must be relied on in all matters of Faith, and govern the Church like Princes,
or Monarchs, that Epiphanius never thought of. And that he did never think so,
I prove it thus. For beside this apparent meaning of his Context (as is here
expressed) how could he possibly think of a Supremacy due to S. Peter's
Successor, that in most express terms, and that Ille primus ( speaking of S.
James the Lords Brother) Episcopalem Cathedram coepit, quum ei ante caeteros
omnes suum in terris Thronum Dominus tradidisset. Epipham L. 3. Haeres. 78.
Tom. 2. p. 1039. Et sere similiter, Tom. 1. L. 1. Haeres. 29.
twice repeated, makes S. James the Brother of our Lord, and not S. Peter,
succeed our Lord in the Principality of the Church. And Epiphanius was too full
both of Learning and Industry, to speak contrary to himself in a Point of this
moment.

A. C. speeds no better with Irenaeus, he will have A. C. p. 58.
it out of Scripture. And he still tells us, the Bishop of Rome is S. Peter's
Successor. Well. Suppose that. What then? What? Why then he succeeded in all S.
Peter's Bellar. L. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 9.. Respondeo Pontifica^um.
Prerogatives which are Ordinary, and belonged to him as a Bishop, though not
in the Extraordinary, which belonged to him as an Apostle. For that is it which
you all say, ^. 25. N. 10.
but no man proves. If this be so, yet then I must tell A. C. S. Peter in his
Ordinary Power was never made Pastor of the whole Church: Nay, in his
Extraordinary, he had no Bellar. Ibid.
more powerful Principality than the other Apostles had. A The Fathers gave
three Prerogatives to S. Peter. Of Authority. Of Primacie. And of Principality.
But not of Supremacit of Power. Raynold contra Heart. cap. 5. Divis. 3. And he
proves it at large.
Primacie of Order was never denied Him by the Protestants: And an Universal
Supremacy of Power was never granted him by the Primitive Christians. Yea, but
Christ promised the Keys to Saint Peter, S. Mat. 16. 18.
S. Mat. 16. True, but so did he to all the rest of the Apostles, S. Mat. 18.
18. S. Joh. 20. 22.
S. Mat. 18. and S. Joh. 20. And to their Successors, as much as to His. So
it is Tibi, and Illis, not Tibi, non Illis. I give the Keys to thee and them,
not to thee to exclude them. Unless any man will think Heaven-Gates so easy,
that they might open and shut them without the Keys. And Si hoc Petro tantum
dictum est, non facit hoc Ecclesia, etc. S. Aug. Tract. 50. in S. Joh.
S. Augustine is plain: If this were said only to S. Peter, then the Church
has no power to do it; which God forbid! The Keys therefore were given to S.
Peter, and the rest, in a Figure of the Church, to whose power, and for whose
use They were given. But there is not one Key in all that Bunch, that can let in
S. Peter's Successor, to a more powerful Principality universal than the
Successors of the other Apostles had.

Christ prayed, That S. Peter's Faith might not fail, A. C. p. 58.
S. Luke 22. 32.
S. Luke 22. That Is true. And in that sense, that Christ prayed, S. Peter's
Faith failed not; That is, in Application to his person for his Perseverance in
the Faith, as Deum dare, ut in side perseveretur. S. Prosper. L. 1. de Vocat.
Gent. c. 24.
S. Prosper applies it. Which Perseverance yet he must owe and acknowledge to
the Grace of Christ's Prayer for him, not to the power and ability of his own
Free Will, as Rogavi ut non deficeret, etc. Et certe juxta vos in Apostoli erat
positum potestate si voluisset, ut non deficeret fides ejus; etc. S. Hieron. l.
2. adversus Pelagianos.
S. Jerome tells us. Aliquid speciale. Bellarm. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3..
Secundo, quia sine.
Bellarmine likes not this: Because (says he) Christ here obtained some
special Privilege for S. Peter, whereas Perseverance in Grace is a Gift common
to all the Elect. And he is so far right. And the Special Grace which this
Prayer of Christ obtained for S. Peter was, That he should not fall into a
final Apostacy; no not when Satan had sifted him to the bran, that he fell
most horribly even into a threefold Denial of his Master, and that with a
Curse. And to recover this, and Persevere, was aliquid speciale I trow, if any
thing ever were. But this will not down with Bellarmine. No, The Ut nec ipse ut
Pontisex doceret unquam aliquid contra fidem, sive ut in Side ejus inveniretur
qui doceret. Bellar. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3.. Alterum Privilegium est.
Aliquid speciale, the special Thing here obtained was (says he) That neither
S. Peter himself, nor any other that should sit in his Seat should teach any
thing contrary to the true Faith. That S. Peter after his recovery should
preach nothing either as Apostle or Bishop contrary to the Faith, will easily
be granted him; But that none of his Successors should do it, but be all
Infallible, that certainly never came within the Compass of Rogavi pro te
Petre, I have prayed for thee Peter. And Bellarmines Proof of this, is his just
Confutation. For he proves this Exposition of that Text only by the Testimony
of seven Popes in their own Cause. And then takes a leap to Theophylact, who
says nothing to the purpose. So that upon the matter Bellarmine confesses there
is not one Father of the Church disinteressed in the Cause, that understands
this Text as Bellarmine does, till you come down to Theophylact. So the Popes
Infallibility appeared to no body but the Popes themselves, for above a
thousand years after Christ. For so long it was before Theophylactus floruit
circa An. Dom. 1072.
Theophylact lived. And the spite of it is, Theophylact could not see it
neither. For the most that Bellarmine makes him say, is but this* Qui^ (...)
habeo Princip^m Discipulorum, confirma caeteros. Hoc enim decet's^ qui post me
Ecclesia Petra es and Fundamentum. Bellarm. L. 4. de Romans Pontif. cap. 3..
Praeter hos. Ex Theophyl. in 21. S. Luc.
Because I account thee as chief of my Disciples, confirm the rest, for this
becomes Thee, which art to be a Rock and Foundation of the Church after me. For
this is Personal too, and of S. Peter, and that as he was an Apostle. For
otherwise then as an Apostle* he was not a Rock or Foundation of the Church, no
not in a Secondary sense. The special privilege therefore which Christ prayed
for, was personal to S. Peter, and is that which before I mentioned. And
Bellarmine himself says, That Christ (...), and ibid. Est igitur tertia.
obtained by this Prayer two Privileges, especial ones for Saint Peter. The
one, That he should never quite fall from the true Faith, how strongly soever
he were tempted. The other, That there should never be found any sitting in his
Seat, that should teach against it. Now for the first of these, Ex quibus
privilegiis primum fortasse non ^^^^vit ad p^st^res, at secundum sine d^bi^
^^^^vit ad Poster^s sive Successores. (...). ibid. ^. Alterum Privilegium.
Bellarmine doubts it did not flow over to his Successors. Why then it is true,
which I here say, that this was Personal to S. Peter. But the second he says,
Out of all doubt passed over to his Successors. Nay, that is not out of all
doubt neither. First, because many Learned men have challenged many Popes for
teaching Heresy; and that is against the true Faith. And that which so many
Learned Men have affirmed, is not out of all doubt. Or if it be, why does
Bellarmine take so much pain^ to confute and disprove them, as Bellar. ^. ^. de
Romans (...) c. ^.
he does? Secondly, because Christ obtained of his Father every thing that he
prayed for, if he prayed for it absolutely, and not under a Condition* Father,
I know thou hear me always, S. John 11. S. Joh. 11. (...).
Now Christ here prayed absolutely for S. Peter; Therefore whatsoever he asked
for him was granted. Therefore if Christ (...) his Successors as well as
himself, his Prayer was granted for his Successors as well as for himself. But
then, if Bellarmine will tell us absolutely, as he does, Donum hoc loco Petro
impetratum, etiam ad Successores pertinet, Bell. L. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 3. ^.
Quarto, donum hoc.
That the whole Gift obtained by this Prayer for S. Peter did belong to his
Successors; and then by and by after break this Gift into two parts, and call
the first part into doubt, whether it belongs to his Successors or no, he
cannot say the second part is out of all doubt. For if there be reason of
doubting the one, there is as much reason of doubting the other, since they
stand both on the same foot, The Validity of Christ's Prayer for Saint Peter.

Christ charged S. Peter to govern, and feed his whole stock, S. John 21. Nay
soft. *It Is but his Sheep and his S. Joh. 29. 151
Lambs; and that every Apostle, and every Apostles Successor has charge to do.
Mat. 28. 21. and S. Mat. 10. 17. The same power and charge is given to them all.
S. Matthew. 28. But over the whole Flock I find no one Apostle or Successor set.
And it is a poor shift to say, as A. C. does, That the Bishop of Rome is A. C.
p. 58.
set over the whole Flock, because both over Lambs and Sheep. For in every
Flock that is not of barren Weathers, there are Lambs and Sheep, that is, And
this seems to me to allude to that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 2. and Heb. 5. 12.
Some are fed with milk, and some with stronger meat. The Lambs with milk, and
the Sheep with stronger meat. But here A. C. follows Pope Hildebran^ close, who
in the Case of the Emperor then, asked this Question: Quando Christus Ecclesiam
suam Petro commisit, and dixit* P^s^^ ^ves (...), excep^t^^ Reges? Platin. in
vita Greg. 7. And certainly Kings are not exempted from being ^ed by the
Church* But from being spoiled of their Kingdoms by any Churchmen, that they
are.
weaker and stronger Christians; not People and Pastors, Subjects and
Governors, as A. C. expounds it, to bring the Necks of Princes under Roman
Pride. And if Kings be meant, yet then the command is Pasce, feed them; But
Deponere, or Occidere, to depose, or kill them, is not Pascere in any sense;
Lanii id est, non Pastoris, that is the Butchers, not the Shepherds part. If a a
Sheep go astray never so far, it is not the Shepherds part, to kill him; at
least if he do, non pascit, dum o^cidit, he does not certainly feed, while he
kills.

That the Bishop of Rome shall never refuse A. C. p. 58.
to feed and govern the whole stock in such sort, as that neither particular
Man, nor Church shall have just cause under pretense of Reformation in Manners
or Faith to make a Separation from the whole Church. By A. C's favor, this is
mere begging of the Question. He says the Pope shall ever govern the whole
Whole Church, so as that there shall be no just Cause given of a Separation.
And that is the very Thing, which the Protestants charge upon him; Namely, that
he has governed, if not the Whole, yet so much of the Church as he has been
able to bring under his Power, so as that he has given too just Cause of the
present continued separation. And as the Corruptions in the Doctrine of Faith,
in the Church of Rome were the Cause of the first Separation; so are they at
this present day the Cause why the separation continues. And farther, I for my
part, am clear of Opinion, that the Errors in the Doctrine of Faith, which are
charged upon the whole Church, at least so much of the whole, as in these parts
of Europe has been kept under the Roman Jurisdiction, have had their Original
and Continuance from this, that so much of the Universal Church (which indeed
they account All) has forgotten her own Liberty, and submitted to the Roman
Church and Bishop; and so is in a manner forced to embrace all the Corruptions;
which the Particular Church of Rome has contracted upon it self. And being now
not able to free her self from the Roman Jurisdiction, is made to continue also
in all her Corruptions. And for the Protestants, they have made no separation
from the General Church properly so called (for therein A. C. said well, A. C.
p. 58.
the Popes Administration can give no Cause to separate from that) but their
Separation is only from the Church of Rome; and such other Churches, as by
adhering to her, have hazarded themselves, and do now miscal themselves, the
Whole Catholic Church. Nay, even here the Protestants have not left the Church
of Rome in her Essence, but in her Errors; not in the Things which Constitute a
Church, but only in such Abuses and Corruptions, as work toward the Dissolution
of a Church.


F. I also asked, who ought to judge in this Case? The B. said, a General
Council.


B. General Council, I do not see: Nor do you doubt. And A. C. grants A. C. p.
59.
it to be a most Competent Judge of all Controversies of Faith, so that all
Pastors be gathered together, and in the Name of Christ, and pray unanimously
for the promised assistance of the Holy Ghost, and make great and diligent
search and examination of the Scriptures, and other Grounds of Faith; And then
Decree what is to be held for Divine Truth. For then (says he) it is Firm, and
Infallible, or else there is nothing firm upon earth. As fair as this Passage
seems, and as freely as I have granted, that a General Council is the best
Judge on Earth, where the sense of Scripture is doubted; yet even in this
passage there are some things Considerable. As first, when shall the Church
hope for such a General Council, in which all Pastors shall be gathered
together? there was never any such General Council yet, nor do I believe such
can be had. So that is supposed in vain; and you might have learned this of Si
omnes, nullum fuit hactenus Concilium Generale, neque etiam videtur deinceps
futurum. Bellarm. 1. de Conc. cap. 17.. 1.
Bellarmine: if you will not believe me. Next (says he) If all these Pastors
pray unanimously for the promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost. Why, but if all
Pastors cannot meet together, all cannot pray together, nor all search the
Scriptures together, nor all upon that Search Decree together. So that is
supposed in vain too. Yea, but Thirdly, If all that meet do pray unanimously.
What then? All that meet are not simply All. Nor does the Holy Ghost come, and
give his Assistance upon every Prayer, that is made unanimously, though by very
many Prelates or other Faithful People met together, unless all other
Requisites as well as Unanimity, to make their prayer to be heard and granted,
be observed by them; So that an Unanimous Prayer is not adequately supposed,
and therefore Concludes not. But lastly, how far a General Council, if all A.
C's Conditions be observed, is firm, and Infallible, that shall be more fully
discussed at after.. 33. Consi^. 1.
In the mean time, these two words Firm and Infallible are ill put together as
Synonima's. For there are some things most Infallible in themselves, which yet
could never get to be made firm among men. And there are many things made firm
by Law, both in Churches and Kingdoms, which yet are not Infallible in
themselves. So to draw all together; to settle Controversies in the Church,
here is a Visible Judge and Infallible, but not living. And that is the And
this was thought a sufficient Judge too, when Christians were as humble as
Learned. I am sure Optatus thought so. Querendi sunt Judices. Si Christiani de
utraque part dari non possunt, q^ia ^^^liis veritas impeditur, De foris
qu^rendus est Judex. Si Paganus, non potest nosse Christiana Secreta. Si
Judaeus, inimicus est Christiani Baptismatis. Ergo in terris de hac re nullum
poterit reperiri Judicium. De Coelo quaerendus est Judex. Sed ut quid pulsamus
ad Coelum qu^m habemus hic in Evangelio? Testamentum (inquam quia hoc loco
recte possunt terrena coelestibus comparari) tale est, quod quivis hominum
habens numerosos filios, his quamdiu pater praesens est, ipse imperat singulis;
non est adhuc necessarium Testamentum. Sic and Christus, quamdiu praesens in
terris fuit, (quamvis nec modo desit) pro tempore quicquid necessarium erat,
Apostolis Imperavit. Sed quomodo terrenus Pater dum se in consinio senserit
mortis, timens ne post mortem suam, rupta pace litigent fratres, adhibitis
Testibus Voluntatem suam de Pectore morituro transfert in Tabulas diu
duraturas. Et si fuerit inter fratres contentio nata, non itur ad Tumulum, sed
q^^ritur. Testamentum; and qui Tumulo quiescit, tacitus de Tabulis loquitur.
Vivus, cujus est Testamentum, in Coelo est. Ergo voluntas ejus, velut in
Testamento, sic in Evangelio inquiratur. Opt. l. 5. adv. Parm. This pregnant
Place of Optatus, (That the Scripture is the Judge of Divine Truth, when ever
it is questioned) though Baldwin dare not deny both, yet he would fain slide by
it, and by a parallel place as full in S. Augin Psalm. 21. Exposition^ 2. with
this shift, that S. Augustine in another place had rather use the Testimony of
Tradition, that is, the Testimony Nuncupativi potius quam Scripti Testamenti,
of the Nuncupative, tather than the Written Will of Christ. Baldwin. in Optat.
L. 5. But this is a mere shift. First, because it is Petitio principii, the
mere begging of the Question. For we deny any Testament of Christ, but that
which is written. And A. C. cannot show it in any one Father of the Church,
that Christ ever left behim a Nuncupative obligatory Will. Secondly, because
nothing is more plain in these two Fathers, Optatus and S. Augustine, than that
both of them appeal to the Written Will, and make that the Judge without any
Exception, when a matter of Faith comes in Question. In Optat. the words are:
Habemus in E^^ngelio, we have it in the Gospel. And in Evangelio inquiratur,
Let it be inquired in the Gospel: And Christ put it in tabulas diu duraturas,
into Written and lasting Instruments. In S. Augustine the words are: Our Father
did not dye intestate, etc. And Tabul^ aperiantur, Let his Will, his written
Instruments be opened. And Legantur Verba mortui, Let the words of him that
dyed, be read. And again, Aperi, Legamus, Open the Will, and let us read. And
Legamus, quid litigamus? Why do we strive? Let Us read the Will. And again,
Aperi Testamentum, lege, Open the Will, read. All which Passages are most
express and full for his Written Will, and not for any Nuncupative Will, as
Baldwin would put upon us. And Heart who takes the same way with Baldwin, is not
able to make it out, as appears by Dr. Reynolds in his Conference with Heart, c.
8. divis. 1. p. 396, etc.
Scripture pronouncing by the Church. And there is a visible and a Living
Judge, but not Infallible; and that is a General Council, lawfully called, and
so proceeding. But I know no formal Confirmation of it needful (though A. C.
require it,. 28. Number. 1. And so plainly S. Augustine speaking of S. Cyprians
Error about Rebaptization, etc. says, Illis temporibus antequam Plenarii
Concilii sententia quid in hac ^e sequendum esset, totius Ecclesiae Consensio
confirmasset, Visum est ei cum, etc. L. 1. de Bapt. cont. Donatist. ^. 18. So,
here is first Sententia Conci^i: And then the Confirmation of it is totius
Ecclesiae Consensio, the Consent of the whole Church yielding unto it. And so
Gerson. Concurrente universali totius Ecclesiae consensu, etc. In Declaratione
Veritatum quae credendae sunt, etc.. 4. For this, that the Pope must confirm
it, or else the General Council is invalid, is one of the Roman Novelties. For
this cannot be showed in any Antiquity void of just Exception. The truth is,
the Pope as other Patriarchs and great Bishops used to do, did give his assent
to such Councels as he approved. But that is no Corroboration of the Council,
as if it were invalid without it: but a Declaration of his consenting with the
rest.. 33. Consid. 4 Number. 6.
) but only that after it is ended, the Whole Church admit it, be it never so
tacitly.

A. C. interposes new matter quite out of A. C. p. 59, 60.
the Conference. And first in case of Distractions and Disunion in the Church,
he would know, what is to be done to Reunite, when a General Council (which is
acknowledged a fit Judge) cannot be had by reason of manifold impediments: Or
if being called, will not be of one mind? Has Christ our Lord (says he) in
this Case provided no Rule, no Judge Infallibly to determine Controversies, and
to procure Unity and Certainty of Belief? Indeed the Protestants admit no
Infallible Means, Rule, or Judge, but only Scripture, which every man may
interpret, as he pleases, and so all shall be uncertain. Truly, I must
confess, there are many Impediments to hinder the Calling of a General Council.
You know in the Ancient Church there was Christian^tas in diversas Haereses
sc^ssa est, quia non erat licentia Episcopis in unum convenire, persecutione
saeviente usque ad tempora Constantini, etc. Isidor. praefat. in Council. Edit.
Venet. 1585.
hinderance enough, and what hurt it wrought. And afterward though it were long
first, there was provision made for Prequens Generalium Conciliorum celebratio
est praecipua cultura Agri Dominici, etc. Et illorum neglectus Errores,
Haereses, and Schismata disseminat. Hec praeteritorum temporum recordatio and
praesentium consideratio ante oculos nostros ponunt. Itaque sancimus, ut a modo
Concilia Generalia celebrentur; ita quod Primum a fine hujus Concilii in
quinquennium immediate sequens, Secundum vero a fine illius in septen^ium, and
dei^ceps de decennio in decennium perpetuo celebrantur, etc. Council. Constant.
Sess. 39. Et apud Gerson, Tom. 1. p. 230. Et Pet. de Aliaco Card. Cameracensis
lib^llum obtulit in Council. Constant. de Reformatione Ecclesi^ contra ^^inionem
eorum qui putarunt Concilia Generalia minus necessaria esse, quia Omnia been a
Patribus nostris ordinata s^^t, etc. In fascic. Rerum expetendarum. sol. 28. Et
Schismatibus debet Ecclesia cito per Concilia Generalia provideri, ut in
Primitiva Ecclesia docuerunt Apostoli, ut Act. 6. and Act. 15. Ibid. fol. 204.
A.
frequent calling of Councels, and yet no Age since saw them called according
to that Provision in every Circumstance; therefore Impediments there were
enough, or else some declined them wilfully, though there were no Impediments.
Nor will I deny, but that when they were called, there were as many In Council.
Ariminensi multis pa^corum fraud deceptis, etc. S. Aug L. 3. contra Maximinum,
^. (...).
Practices to disturb or pervert the Councels. And these Practices were able to
keep many Councels from being all of one mind. But if being called, they will
not be of one mind, I cannot help that; Though that very not agreeing is a
shrewd sign, that the other Spirit has a party there against the Holy Ghost.

Now A. C. would know, what is to be done for Re-uniting NUMBER. 3
of a Church divided in Doctrine of the Faith; when this Remedy by a General
Council cannot be had; Sure Christ our Lord (says he) has provided some Rule,
some Judge in such and such like Cases to procure unity and certainty of
Belief. I believe so too; for he has left an Infallible Rule, the Scripture.
And that by the manifest Places in it (which need no Dispute, no External
Judge) is Non per difficiles nos Deus ad Beatam vitam Quaestiones vocat, etc.
In absoluto nobis and facili est aeter^itas; Jesum suscitatum a mortuis per
Deum Credere, and Ipsum esse Dominum confiteri, etc. S. Hilar. L. 10. de Trin.
ad finem.
able to settle Unity and Certainty of Belief in Necessaries to Salvation; And
in Non necessariis, in and about things not necessary, there ought not to be a
Contention to a Cyprianus and Collegae ipsi^^ credentes Haereticos and
Schismaticos Baptismum non habere, sint Baptismo re^^^tis, etc. iis tamen
communicare quam separari ab ^nitate maluerunt. S. Aug. ^. 2 de Baptis. contra
Donatist. c. 6. Et by non contaminabant Cyprianum. Ibid. sine.
Separation.

A. C. does not well, to make that a Crime, that the Protestants admit no
Infallible Rule, but the Scripture only: Or as he (I doubt not without some
scorn) terms it, beside only Scripture. For what need is there of another,
since this is most Infallible; and the same which the Recensuit cuncta sanctis
Scripturis consona. Eusebius. L. 5. Hist. c. 20. De Irenaeo. Regula Principalis de
qu^ Paracletus agnitus. Tert. de Monogam, c. 2. And this is true, though the
Author spoke it, when he was Lapsed. Ipsas Scripturas apprime tenens. S.
Hieron. ad Marcellum adversus Montanum. Tom. 2. Hoc quia de Scripturis non
habet authoritatem, eadem sacilitate non contemnitur, qua probatur. S. Hieron.
in S. Matthew. 23.

Manifestus est fidei lapsus, and liquidum superbiae vitium, vel respu^re
aliquid little quae Scriptura habet, vel inducere quicquam quod scriptum non
est. S. Basil. Sermon. de Fide. Tom. 2. p. 154. Edit. Basileae, 1565.

Contra insurgentes Hereses s^pe pugnavi Agraphis, verum non alienis a pia
secun^^^ Scripturam sententia. Ibid. p. 153.

And before Basil, Tertul. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, etc. si non est
scriptum, timeat Hermogenes. (...) illud adjicientibus vel detrabeatibus
destinatum. Tertul advers. Hermog. c. 22.

And Paulinus plainly calls it Regulam Directionis, Epist. 23.

De ^^c Regul^ tria observanda sunt. 1. Regula est, sed a tempore quo scripta.
2. Regula est, sed per Ecclesiam applicanda, non per privatum Spiritum. 3.
Regula est, and mensurat omnia quae continet: continet autem, omnia necessaria
ad salutem vel mediate vel immediate. Et hoc tertium habet. Biel. ^^ 3. D. 25.
q. ^^ic^. ^onclus. 4. M. And this is all we say. Hook. L. 5. Eccles. Pol.. 22.


Ancient Church of Christ admitted? And if it were sufficient for the Ancient
Church to guide them, and direct their Councels, why should it be now held
insufficient for us, at least, till a free General Council may be had? And it
has both the Conditions which Regula Catholicae fidei debet esse certa and
nota. Si certa non sit, non erit Regula. Si nota non sit, non erit Regula
nobis. Bellar. L. 1. de Verbo Dei, c. 2.. 5. Sed nihil est vel certius vel
no^^^s Sacra Scripture. Bellarm. ibid.. 6. Therefore the Holy Scripture is the
Rule of Catholic Faith, both in it self, and to us also; For in things simply
necessary to Salvation, it is abundantly known and manifest, as. 16. Nu. 5.
Bellarmine requires to a Rule. Namely, that it be Certain, and that it be
Known; For if it be not certain, it is no Rule; and if it be not known, it is no
Rule to us. Now the Convenit inter nos and omnes omnino Haereticos, Verbum Dei
esse Regulam sidei, ex qua de D^g^natibus judicandum sit. Bellarm. Praefat.
Tom. 1. fine. And although there perhaps he includes Traditions, yet that was
never proved yet. Neither indeed can he include Traditions. For he speaks of
that Word of God, upon which all Heretics consent: But concerning Traditions,
they all consent not, That they are a Rule of Faith. Therefore he speaks not of
them.
Romanists dare not deny, but this Rule is Certain; and that it is sufficiently
Known in the manifest Places of it, and such as are necessary to Salvation,
none of the Ancients did ever deny; so there is an Infallible Rule.

Private Spirit in these manifest things, which being but read, or heard, teach
themselves. Indeed you Romanists had need of some other Judge, and he a
propitious one, to crush the Pope's more powerful Principality out of Pasce
oves, feed my sheep. And yet this must be the meaning (if you will have it)
whether Gideon's fleece be wet, or dry, Judge. 6. that is, whether there be dew
enough in the Judge. 6.
Text, to water that sense or no. But I pray, when God has left his Church
this Infallible Rule, what warrant have you to seek another? You have showed us
none yet, what e're you think you have. And I hope A. C. cannot think, it
follows, that Christ our Lord has provided no Rule to determine necessary
Controversies, because he has not provided the Rule, which he would have.

A. C. would have, and let the For so he affirms, p. 58.
Pope be he; yet that is not sufficient against the malice of the Devil, and
impious men, to keep the Church at all Times from Renting, even in the Doctrine
of Faith; or to soder the Rents which are made. For Oportet esse Haereses, 1
Cor. 11. Heresies there will be, and Heresies properly there 1 Cor. 11. 19.
cannot be, but in Doctrine of the Faith. And what will A. C. in this Case do?
Will he send Christ our Lord to provide another Rule than the Decision of the
Bishop of Rome, because he can neither make Unity, nor Certainty of Belief? And
(as it is most apparent) he cannot do it de facto; so neither has he power from
Christ over the Whole Church to do it: nay out of all doubt, it is not the least
reason, why de facto he has so little success, because de Jure he has no
power given. But since A. C. requires another Judge besides the Scripture, and
in Cases, when either the time is so difficult, that a General Council cannot
be called; or the Council so set, that they will not agree; Let Us see, how he
proves it.

every earthly Kingdom (says he) when matters A. C. p. 60.
cannot be composed by a Parliament (which cannot be called upon all Occasions;
why does he not add here, And which being called, will not always be of one
mind, as he did add it in Case of the Council?) has, besides the Law Books,
some living Magistrates and Judges, and above all, one visible King, the
Highest Judge, who has Authority sufficient to end all Controversies, and
settle Unity in all Temporal Affairs. And shall we think that Christ the wisest
King has provided in his Kingdom, the Church, only the Law Books of the
Holy-Scripture, and no living visible Judges, and above all, one Chief, so
assisted by his Spirit as, may suffice to end all Controversies for Unity and
Certainty of Faith; which can never be, if every man may interpret Holy
Scripture, the Law Books, as he list? This is a very plausible Argument with
the Many. But the foundation of it is but a Qu^ subtilissi^^ de hoc disputari
possunt, ita ut non similitudinibus quae plerunque fallunt, sed rebus ipsis
satisfiat, etc. S. August. L. de Quant. Animae, cap. 32. Whereupon the
Logicians tell us rightly, that this is a Fallacy, unless it be taken
reduplicative, i. e. de similibus qua similia sunt: And hence Aristotle himself
2 sop. Loc. 32. says, (...). Rursum in Similibus, si similiter se habent.
Similitude; and if the Similitude hold not in the main, the Argument's
nothing. And so I doubt, it will prove here. I Will observe Particulars, as they
lie in order.

Militant Church (for of that we speak) a Kingdom. But this is not certain: For
they are no mean ones, which think our Savior Christ left the Church Militant
in the Hands of the Apostles, and their Successors, in an Aristocratical, or
rather a Mixed Government; and that the Church is not When Gerson writ his Tract
De Auseribilitate Papae, sure he thought the Church might continue in a very
good Being, without a Monarchical Head; Therefore, in his Judgment, the Church
is not by any Command or Institution of Christ, Monarchical. Gerson. par. 1.
page 154.

When S. Hierome wrote thus: [ Ubicunque fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive
Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis;
ejusdem meriti, ejusdem est and Sacerdotil. S. Hieron. Epist. ad Evagrium,]
doubtless he thought not of the Roman Bishops Monarchy. For what Bishop is of
the same Merir, or of the same Degree in the Priesthood with the Pope, as
things are now carried at Rome? Affirma^^ls etiam, Patribus and Graecis and
Latinis, ignotas esse voces de Petro aut Papa Monarcha and Monarchia. Nam quod
in superioribus observabamus reperiri eas dictiones positas pro Episcopo, and
Episcopatu, nihil hoc ad rem sacit. Isa Casaub. Exercitatione 15. ad Annals
Eccles. Baron.. 12. p. 378. and. 11. p. 360. diserte asserit and probat
Ecclesie Regimen Aristocraticum fuisse.


Monarchical otherwise than the Triumphant and Militant make one Body under
Christ the Head. And in this sense indeed, and in this only, the Church is a
most absolute Kingdom. And the very Expressing of this sense is a full Answer
to all the Places of Scripture, and other Arguments brought by Bellar. L. 2. de
Council. c. 16.. 1, 2, 3.
Bellarm. to prove that the Church is a Monarchy. But the Church being as large
as the world, Christ thought it fitter to govern it Aristocratically, by
Diverse, rather than by One Viceroy. And I believe this is true. For all the
time of the first three hundred years, and somewhat better, it was governed
Aristocratically, if we will impartially consider, how the Bishops of those
times carried the whole Business of admitting any new consecrated Bishops or
others to, or rejecting them from their Communion. For I have carefully
Examined this for the first six hundred years, even to, and within the time of
S. Gregory the great. S. Greg. L. 9. Epist. 58. and L. 12. Epist. 15.
Who in the beginning of the seventh hundred year sent such Letters to
Augustine then Archbishop of Canterbury, and to S. Greg. L. 9. Epist. 61.
Quirinus, and other Bishops in Ireland; And I find, That the Literae
Communicatoriae which certified from one Great Patriarch to another, who were
fit or unfit to be admitted to their Communion, if they upon any Occasion
repaired to their Seas, were sent mutually. And as freely, and in the same
manner from Rome to the other Patriarchs, as from them to it. Out of which, I
think, this will follow most directly, That the Church Government then was
Aristocratical. For had the Bishop of Rome been then accounted Sole Monarch of
the Church, and been put into the Definition of the Church (as he is now by
^^^lar. L. ^. de Eccles. ^. ^. Nostr^ a^^^^^.
Bellarmine) all these Communicatory Letters should have been directed from him
to the rest, as whose admittance ought to be a Rule for all to Communicate; but
not from others to him, or at least not in that even, equal, and Brotherly way,
as now they appear to be written. For it is no way probable, that the Bishops
of Rome, which even then sought their own Greatness too much, would have
submitted to the other Patriarchs voluntarily, had not the very Course of the
Church put it upon them.

Non enim Respublica est in Ecclesia: sed Ecclesia in Republic^: ^. ci^^
Imperis R(...). Optat. L. ^.
Optatus, That wheresoever there is a Church, there the Church is in the
Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in the Church. And so also the Church was
in the Roman Empire. Now from this Ground I argue thus: If the Church be within
the Empire or other Kingdom, it is impossible the Government of the Church
should be Monarchical. For no Emperor or King will endure another King within
his Dominion that shall be greater than himself, since the very enduring it,
makes him that indures it, upon the matter, no Monarch. Nor will it disturb
this Argument: That two Great Kings in France and Spain permit this. For he
that is not blind, may see, if he will, of what little value the Pope's power
is in those Kingdoms, farther than to serve their own turns of Him, which They
do to their great advantage. Nay farther, the Ancient Canons and Fathers of the
Church seem to me plain for this: For the Council. Antioch. ^. 9. p. 507.
Council of Antioch submits Ecclesiastical Causes to the Bishops. And what was
done amiss by a Bishop, was corrigible by a Council. (...). 1. ^. ^. and
Antioch. ^* 12.
Synod of Bishops, but this with the Council. Nic. 1. ^. 4. and Antioch. Can. 9.
Metropolitan. And in Case these did not agree, the Council. Antioch. ^. 14.
Metropolitan might call in other Bishops out of the neighboring Provinces.
And if Things settled not this way, a General Council ( Sed* praep^^itur
Scriptura. S. Aug. L. ^. de Bapti^^^^. Donat. c. 3.
under the Scripture, and directed by it) was the Highest Remedy. And Nam cum
Statutum si^ omnibus nobis. etc. and singulis Pastoribus portio gregis, etc. S.
Cypr. L. 1. Ep. 3.
S. Cyprian even to Pope Cornelius himself says plainly: That to every Bishop
is ascribed a portion of the flock for him to govern. And so not all committed
to One. In all this the Government of the Church seems plainly Aristocratical.
And if all other Arguments fail, we have one left from Bellarmine, who opposes
it as much as any, Bellar. L. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 8. and L. 2. de Council. c. 16.
twice for failing. And yet, where he goes to Exclude Secular Princes from
Church Government, Bellar. L. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 7.
all his Quotations, and all his Proofs run upon this Head, to show, That the
Government of the Church was ever in the Bishops. What says A. C. p. 64, 65.
A. C. now to the Confession of this great Adversary, and in this great Point,
extorted from him by force of Truth? Now if this be true, then the whole
foundation of this Argument is gone. The Church Militant is no Kingdom; and
therefore not to be Compared, or Judged by One. The Resemblance will not hold.

Kingdom: yet the Church Militant remaining one, is spread in many Earthly
Kingdoms; and cannot well be ordered like any one particular Licet sit
Expediens quod uni Populo partiali fideli praesit unus Episcopus; non expedit
tamen quod toti populo fideli praesit unus solus. Tum quia omnia Negotia unius
populi partialis potest sustineve unus solus: Nullus autem unus potest
^^sti^ere omnia Negotia etiam majora omnium Christianorum. Tum* quia minus
malum est, ut populus partialis and parvus inficiatur ab uno Episcopo, quam ut
totus, vel fere totus populus Christianus inficiatur ab uno Capite, quod
omnibus praefit. Ockam, L. 2. Dial. Tract. 1. p. 3. c. 30. ad 8. And besides
this of Ockam: To that Common Argument, That Monarchieal Government is the
best, and therefore undoubtedly that which Christ instituted for his Church*
it is sufficient to Answer, That a Monarchy is the best form of Government in
one City or Country. Arist. L. 8. Moral. c. 10. But it follows not, That it is
the best in respect of the whole world; where the Parts are to remote, and the
dispositions of men so various. And therefore Bellarm. himself confesses:
Monarchiam Aristocratiae and Democratiae admi^^tam utiliorem esse in hac vita,
quam simplex Monarchia ^. ^. L. 1. de Romans Pout. c. 3.. 1.
Kingdom. And therefore, though in one particular Kingdom there be many Visible
Judges, and one Supreme: yet it follows not, That in the Universal Militant
Church there must be one Supreme. For how will he enter to Execute his Office,
if the Kings of those Kingdoms will not give leave?

Now here, though A. C. expresses himself no farther, yet I NUMBER. 11. well know,
what he and his Fellows would be at. They would not be troubled to ask leave of
any several Kings in their several Dominions. No: they would have one Emperor
over all the Kings, as well as One Pope over all the Bishops. And then you know
In the first Gloss ascribed to Isidore, in Genesis 1. 16. it is Per Solemn
intelligitur Regnum; per Lunam, Sacerdotium. But Innoceu^ the Third, almost six
hundred years after Isidore's death, perverts both Text and Gloss. Thus: Ad
firmamentum Coeli, ^. ^. Universalis Ecclesiae, fecit Deus duo magna I^mi^aria,
hoc est, duas instituit Potestates, Pontificalem, and Regalem, etc. Ut quanta
inter Sole^ and Lunam, tanta inter Pountifices and Reges differentia
cognoscatur. Epist. ad Imperat. Constantinopolitanum. Decret. L. 1. de
Majoritate and Obedientia. Tit. 33, cap. Solitae.
who told us of two great Lights to govern the World, the Sun and the Moon,
that is, the Pope and the Emperor. At the first it began with more modesty, The
Emperor and the Pope. And that was somewhat Tolerable. For Ecclesia Militans
s^pt in Scripturis dicitur Luna, propter Mutabilitatem, etc. S. Aug. Epist.
119. c. 6.
S. Augustine tells us, That the Militant Church is often in Scripture called
the Moon, both for the many Changes it has, and for its obscurity in many
times of its peregrination. And he tells us too, That if we will understand
this place of Scripture in a Spiritual Sense: Intelligimus spiritualiter
Ecclesiam, etc. Et hic quis est S^^, ^is^ Sol Justitiae ^ etc. S. Aug. in Psalm.
103.
Our Savior Christ is the Sun, and the Militant Church, as being full of
changes in her estate, the Moon. But now it must be a Triumphant Church here;
Militant no longer. The Pope must be the Sun, and the Emperor but the Moon. And
lest Innocents own power should not be able to make good his Decretal; Gasp.
Schiop. L. dicto Ecclesiasticus, c. 145.
Gasper Schioppi^^ does not only avow the Allusion or Interpretation, but is
pleased to express many Circumstances, in which he would f^in make the world
believe the Resemblance holds. And lest any man should not know how much the
Pope is made greater than the Emperor by this Comparison; the Igitur cum terra
sit septies major Lun^, Sol autem octies major terra, restat ergo ut
Pontificalis dignitas quadragesles septies sit major Regali diguitate. Gloss.
in Decret. praedict, Where first the Gloss is out in his Latin. He might have
said Quadragies: for Quadragesies is no word. Next, he is out in his
Arithmetic. For eight times seven makes not forty seven, but fifty six. And
then he is much to blame for drawing down the Pope's power from fifty six to
forty seven. And lastly, this Allusion has no ground of Truth at all. For the
Emperor, being Solo Deo minor, Tertul. ad Scap. cannot be a Moon to any other
Sun.
Gloss furnishes us with that too: and tells us, that by this it appears, that
since the Earth is seven times greater than the Moon, and the Sun eight times
greater than the Earth; it must needs follow, that the Pope's power is forty
seven times greater than the Emperor's. I like him well, he will make odds
enough. But what, does Innocent the Third give no Reason of this his Decretal?
Yes. And it is (says he) Sed illa Potestas, quae praeest diebus, i. c. in
Spiritualibus, major est; quae vero Carnalibus, minor. Innocent. 3. ubi supra.
because the Sun, which rules in the day, that is, in Spiritual things, is
greater than the Moon, which rules but in the night, and in carnal things. But
is it possible that Innocentius the Third, being so wise, and so able, as Ut
post ejus mortem, nihil eorum quae in hac vita egerit, la^daverit, aut
improbaverit, immutatum sit. Platina in vita ejus.
that nothing which he did, or commended, or disproved in all his life, should
after his death be thought fit to be changed, could think that such an Allusion
of Spiritual things to the Day, which the Sun governs, and Worldly Business to
the Night, which the Moon governs, should carry weight enough with it to
depress Imperial power lower than God has made it? Out of doubt he could not.
For he Romans 13. 1.
well knew that Omnis Anima, every Soul was to be subject to the Higher Power,
Romans 13. And the Patres veteres, and praecipue August. Epist. 54. Apostolum
interpretantur de Potestate seculari tantum loqui, quod and ipse Textus
subindicat, etc. Salmeron, Disput. 4. in Romans 13.. Porr^ per Potestatem.
Higher Power there mentioned, is the Temporal. And the (...) etc. Omnibus ista
imperantur, and Sacerdotibus and Monachis, etc. Et postea. Etiamsi Apostolus
s^s, si Evangelesta, si Propheta, sive quisquis tandem fueris. S. Chrysostom.
Hom. 23. in Romans Sive est Sacerdos, sive Antistes, etc. Theodoret. in Romans 13.
Si omnis Anima, and vestra. Quis vos ex^ipit ab Universitate? etc. Ipsi sunt
qu^ vobis dicere solent, servate vestrae Sedis bonorem, etc. Sed Christus
aliter and Jussit, and Gessit, etc. S. Bern. Epist. 42. ad Henricum Senonensem
Archiepiscopum. Et Theophylact. in Romans 13. Where it is very observable, that
Theophylact lived in the time of Pope Gregory the Seventh; And S. Bernard after
it, and yet this Truth obtained then. And this was about the year 1130.
Ancient Fathers come in with a full consent, That Omnis Anima, every Soul,
comprehends there all without any Exception: All Spiritual men, even to the
Highest Bishop; and in Spiritual Causes too, so the Foundations of Faith and
Good Manners be not shaken. And where they are shaken, there ought to be Prayer
and Patience, there ought not to be Opposition by force. Nay he knew well that
An forte de Religione fas non est ut dicat Imperator, vel quos miserit
Imperator? Cur ergo ad Imperatorem vistri venere Legati? Cur enim secerunt
causae suae Judicem, noa secutari quod ille judicaret? etc. S. Aug. L. 1. cont.
Epist. Parmen. c. 9. Et Quaestio fuit, an pertineret ad Imperatorem adversus
eos aliquid statuere qui prava in Religione sectantur. Ibid Nor can this be
said to be usurpation in the Emperor. Nam S. August. alibi sic. Ad Imperatoris
curam, de* qua rationem Deo redditurus est, Res illa maxim pertinebat. S. Aug.
Epist. 162. and Epist. 50. Quis mente sobrius Regibus dicat: Nolite cu^are in
Regno vestro ^ quo tentatur, vel opp^g^etur Ecclesia Domini vestri? etc.
Antiquitas recte dixit, Magistratus est custos Legis, scilicet Primae and
Secundae Tabulae, quod ad disciplinam (...). Confessio Saxonica,. 23. and
Gerardus, Tom. 6. Locorum, c. 6.. 5. Membro 1. probat ex Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
Emperors and Kings are Custodes utriusque Tabulae: They, to whom the custody
and preservation of both Tables of the Law for worship to God, and duty to man,
are committed. That a Book of the Law was by Gods own Command in Moses his
time, to be given the King, Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
Deuteronomy. 17. That the Kings under that Law, but still according to it, did
proceed to Necessary Reformations in Church-Businesses; and therein Commanded
the very Priests themselves, as appears in the Acts of 2 Chronicles. 29. 4.
Hezekiah and 4 Reg. 23. 2.
Josiah, who yet were never Censured to this day for usurping the Highpriests
Office. Nay, he knew full well, That the greatest Emperors for the Churches
Honor, Theodosius the Elder, and Justinian, and Charles the Great, and diverse
other, did not only meddle now and then, but did inact Laws to the great
Settlement and Increase of Religion in their several times. But then if this
could not be the Reason, why Innocentius made this strange Allusion, what was?
Why truly, I Will tell you. The Pope was now grown to a great, and a firm height.
Hic Maximus Pontifex totius Ecclesiasticae Libertatis ^^nicus Assertor. Onuph.
in Plat. in Greg 7. For taking Occasion by the War which Henry the Fourth had
with the Saxons and their neighbors, and the complaint of the Saxons made to
the Pope (of which Platina in the life of Gregory the Seventh) the Pope wise
enough for his own advantages, sought not only to free himself from the
Emperor, but to make the Emperor subject to him; and for this the History is
plain enough.
Gregory the Seventh had set the Popedom upon a broad bottom before this
Innocents time. So that now it is the less wonder, if he make so bold with the
Emperor, as to depress him as low as the Moon, upon no better ground, than a
groundless Resemblance. But beside this prime Reason, there are diverse other,
which may easily be drawn out of the same Resemblance. For since Innocentius
his main aim was to publish the Popes greatness over Kings and Emperors: Why
does he not tell us, That the Pope is as the Sun, and the Emperor as the Moon?
Because as the Moon borrows all her light from the Sun: So the Emperor borrows
all his true light from the Pope. Or because as the Moon still increases in
light so long as she follows the Sun, but so soon as ever she steps before the
Sun she waines presently, and her light decreases: So the Emperor, so long as
he is content to follow the Pope, and do all that he would have him, his light,
and his power, increase; but if he do but offer to step before (though that be
his proper place) then his light, and honor, and power, and all decrease. And
this Pope Gregory the Seventh made too good upon the Emperor Henry the Third.
And Pope Adrian the Fourth, and Alexander the Fourth, and Lucius the Third,
with some others, upon Frederick Barbarossa. And some other Emperors were
alike served, where they did not submit. And I hope no man will blame the Popes
Holiness for this. For, if the Emperors kept the Popes under for diverse years
together, whereas Papa utpote Regis Regum Vicarius nunquam erat de jure
subditus Imperatoribus terrenis. sed quia tum Potestas ejus non erat nota: --
and quia viribus temporalibus destitutus erat, vellet, nollet, subjectus esse
cogebatur. Bellar. in Apologia, c. 15. Respous. ad Me^dacium. 10. And
Bellarmine is at the same Argument for Deposing of Kings too: Quia deerant
vires temporales Christiants. Bellar. L. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 7.. Quod si
Christiani. Now this is a most loud untruth, as appears in Tertullian, who
lived about the year 200 under Severus. And the Christians then had strength
enough against the Emperor, had they had right enough with it.
Bellarmine tells us it was against all right they should so do, the Pope being
never rightfully subject unto them, I hope the Pope having now got power
enough, may keep the Emperors under, and not suffer them any more to step
before the Sun, lest like Moons as they are, they lose all their Light. Or
because as the Moon is but Vicaria Solis, the Vicar or Substitute of the Sun,
as L. de Monar.
Philo tells us: So the Emperor, at least in all Spiritual Causes, is but the
Popes Substitute, and that for the Night, that his Holiness may sleep the
quieter on the other side of the Sphere. Or lastly (if you will abuse the
Scripture, as you too often do, and as Innocentius did in the Decretal very
grossly) you may say it is, because the Woman, which all grant represented the
Church, Revel. 12. 1.
Revel. 12. is clothed with the Sun, that is, with the glorious rays of the
Pope, and had the Moon, that is, the Sic enim Alexander Tertius collum
Frederici Primi pede comprimebat, and dixit, Scriptum est, Super aspidem and
basiliscum, etc. Jo. Nauclerus, Chron. Generatione 40. circa An. 1170. Genesis 1.
16.
Emperor, under her feet. For this is as good, as literal, as proper an
interpretation of these words, as that of Innocentius is of the words Genesis 1.
God made two great Lights, the greater light to Rule the day, and the less to
rule the night. Thus he or you may give your wits leave to play, if you will,
for the Popes Decretal is a mere fancy. But the true reason indeed, why
Innocentius made it, was that above mentioned. He was now in that greatness,
that he thought he might pass any thing upon the Christian world, that pleased
him: And was therefore resolved to bring it into the Body of the Canon, that
aftertimes might have a Law to legitimate and make good their Predecessors
usurpation over Emperors and Kings. And rather then fail of this, he would not
spare the abusing of Scripture it self. Where by the way, dares A. C. say this
Pope did not err in Cathedra, when he was so dazzled between the Sun and the
Moon, that he wanted light in the midst of it, to expound Scripture? Well, I
would have the Jesuits leave their practicing, and remember, First, that one
Emperor will not always be able to establish and preserve one only Uniform
practice and Exercise of Religion. Secondly, that supposing he both can and
will so do, yet the Jesuits cannot be certain, that that one Uniform Exercise
of Religion shall be the Roman Catholic. And Thirdly, That as there is a Body
of Earth, a world of Confusion to Eclipse their Moon the Emperor: so in the
same way, and by like interposition, the Moon when it is grown too near in
Conjunction, may Eclipse their Sun the Pope. And there is no great doubt but he
will, considering what some great Kings make of the Popes Power at this day,
when it pleases them.

Sun and the Moon, give me leave a little farther to examine, who A. C. and his
fellow-Jesuites with some others would have to be this one Emperor. I am not
willing to meddle with any the secret Designs of Foreign States: but if they
will express their Designs in print, or publish them by Great and Full
Authority, I hope then it shall be neither unlawful, nor unfit for me, either
to take notice, or to make use of them. Why then you may be pleased to know,
They would have another Translation of the Empire from Germany to Spain. They
think belike this Emperors line, though in the same House, is not Catholic
enough. And if you ask me, how I know this secret, I will not take it up upon
any common report, though, I well know what that says. But I Will tell you how I
know it. Somewhat above four hundred years after Innocentius made his Comment
upon the two great Lights, the Sun, and the Moon, the Pope and the Emperor:
John de Puente, La Convenientia de las des Monarquias Catolicas la de la
Iglesia Romana, y la del Imperio Espaniol, y defensa de la precedentia de los
Reyes Catolicos de Espania a ^odos los Reyes del mundo.
a Spanish Friar follows the same resemblance between the Monarchies of Rome
and Spain, in a Tract of his, entitled: The Agreement of the two Catholic
Monarchies, and Printed in Spanish in Madrid, Anno 1612. In the Frontispiece or
Title Page of this Book there are set out two Scutchions: The one bearing the
Cross-Keys of Rome: The other the Arms of Castile and Leon, both joined
together with this Motto; In vinculo pacis, in the bond of peace. On the one
side of this there is a Portraiture resembling Rome, with the Sun shining over
it, and darting his beams on S. Peter's Keys, with this Inscription: Luminare
Majus, ut praesit ^rbi and Orbi.
Luminare Majus, the greater Light, that it may govern the City (that is Rome)
and the whole world. And on the other side there is another Image designing
Spain, with the Moon shining over that, and spreading forth its Rays upon the
Spanish Scutchion, with this Impress: Luminare Minus, ut subdatur Urbi, and
dominetur Orbi.
Luminare minus, the less Light, that it may be subject to the City (of Rome he
means) and so be Lord to govern the whole world besides. And over all this in
the top of the Title Page, there is Printed in Capital Letters, Fecit-Dens duo
Luminaria magna, God made two great Lights. There follows after in this Author
a Discovery at large of this Blazoning of these Arms; but this is the Substance
of it, and abundantly enough to show what is aimed at, by whom, and for whom.
And this Book was not stolen out without the will and consent of the State.
For it has Printed before it all manner of License, that a Book can well have.
For it has the approbation of Father Pedro de Buyza, of the Company of the
Jesuits. Of John de Arcediano, Provincial of the Dominicans. Of Diego Granero,
the Licencer appointed for the Supreme Council of the Inquisition. And some of
these revised this Book by Por Orden de los Seniores del Cons^io Supremo.
Order from the Lords of that Council. And last of all the Por Mandado del Rey
nuestro Senior.
Kings Privilege is to it, with high Commendation of the Work. But the
Spaniards had need look to it for all this, lest the French deceive them. For
now lately Friar Campanella has set out an Eclogue upon the Birth of the
Dolphin, and that Permissu Superiorum, by License from his Superiors. In which
he says expressly, Quum Gallia al at 20000000 bominum. Ex singulis centenis
sumendo unum colligit 200000 strenuorum militum ^^ipend^atorum, commode, (...).
Propterea omnes terrae Principes met^^^^t n^^e magis d Galli^, quam (...) ab
aliis; Paratur enim illi Regnum Universale. ^. The. Campanellae Ecloga in
Principis Galliarum Delphini Nativitatem, cum Annot. Discip. Parisiis. 1639.
Cum Permissu Superiorum.
That all Princes are now more afraid of France than ever, for that there is
provided for it Regnum Universale, The Universal Kingdom, or Monarchy.

A. C. in this passage has been A. C. p. 60.
very Careful to tell us of a Parliament, and of Living Magistrates and Judges
besides the Law Books. Thirdly, therefore the Church of England (God be
thanked) thrives happily under a Gracious Prince, and well understands that a
Parliament cannot be called at all times: And that there are Visible Judges,
besides the Law Books, and One Supreme (long may he be, and be happy) to settle
all Temporal differences (which certainly, he might much better perform, if his
Kingdoms were well rid of A. C. and his fellows.) And she believes too, That
our Savior Christ has left in his Church, besides his Law-book the Scripture,
Visible Magistrates, and Judges, that is, Archbishops and Bishops, under a
gracious King, to govern both for Truth and Peace according to the Scripture,
and her own Canons and Constitutions, as also those of the Catholic Church,
which cross not the Scripture, and the Just Laws of the Realm. Non est necesse,
ut sub Christo fit u^us Rector totius Ecclesiae, sed sufficit quod sint plures
regentes diverse as Provincias, sicut sunt plures Reges gubernantes plura regna.
Ocham. Di^l. L. 2. Tract. 1. p. 1. c. 30. ad 1.
But she does not believe there is any Necessity to have one Pope, or Bishop
over the Whole Christian world, more than to have one Emperor over the whole
world. Which were it possible, She cannot think fit. Nor are any of these
intermediate Judges, or that One, which you would have Supreme, Infallible.

But since a Kingdom, and a Parliament please A. C. so well NUMBER. 14:
A. C. p. 60.
to pattern the Church by, I Will follow him in the way he goes, and be bold to
put him in mind, that in some Kingdoms there are diverse Businesses of greatest
Consequence, which cannot be finally and bindingly ordered, but in and by
Parliament. And particularly the Statute-Laws which must bind all the Subjects,
cannot be made, and ratified, but there. Therefore according to A. C.'s own
Argument, there will be some Businesses also found, (Is not the settling of the
Divisions of Christendom one of them?) which can never be well settled* but in a
Propter difectam Conciliorum Generalium totius Ecclesiae, que sola audet
intrepice corrigere omnes, ea mala quae Universalem tangunt Ecclesiam, manentia
diu incorrecta crescunt, etc. Gerson. Declarat. Defectuum V^^orum
Ecclesiasticorum, Tom. 1. p. 209.
General Council: And particularly the making of Canons, which must bind all
Particular Christians, and Churches, cannot be concluded, and established, but
there. And again, as the Supreme Magistrate in the State Civil, may not
abrogate the Laws made in Parliament; though he may Dispense with the Sanction,
or penalty of the Law quoad hic and nunc, as the Lawyers speak: So in the
Ecclesiastical Body, no Bishop, no not the Pope (where his Supremacy is
admitted) has power to Sunt enim Indissolubilia Decreta, quibus reverentia
debita est. Prosper cont. Collatorem, c. 1. And Turrecremata, who says every
thing that may be said for the Popes Supremacy, yet dares not say, Papam posse
revocare and tollere omnia Statuta Generalium Conciliorum, sed Aliqua tantum.
Jo. de Turr^^r. Summae de Ecclesia, L. 3. c. 55. Et postea. Papa non potest
revocare Decreta primorum quatuor Conciliorum, quia non sunt nisi Declarativa
Articulorum Fidei. Ibid. c. 57. ad 2.
disanul, or violate the true and Fundamental Decrees of a General Council,
though he may perhaps dispense in some Cases with some Decrees. By all which it
appears, though somewhat may be done by the Bishops and Governors of the
Church, to preserve the unity and certainty of Faith, and to keep the Church
from renting, or for uniting it, when it is rent; yet that in the ordinary way
which the Church has hitherto kept, some things there are, and upon great
emergent Occasions may be, which can have no other help, than a lawful, free,
and well composed General Council. And when that cannot be had, the Church must
pray that it may, and expect till it may, or else reform its self per parts,
by National or Provincial Synods, (as has been, said. 24. Nu. 1.
before.) And in the mean time, it little beseems A. C. or any Christian to
check at the wisdom of And shall we think that Christ the wisest King has not
provided, and c. A. C. p. 60. Where I cannot but commend either A. C. his
Modesty, that he does not, or his Cunning, that he will not go so far as some
have done before him; though in these words [Shall we think, etc.] he goes too
far. Non videretur Dominus discretus fuisse (ut cum reverentia ejus ^oquar)
nisi unicum post se talem Vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia potest. Fuit
autem ejus Vicarius Petrus. Et idem dicendum est de Successoribus Petri, cum
eadem absurdit as sequeretur, si post mortem Petri, Humanam Naturam a se
creatam sine regimine Unius Personae reliquisset. Extravagant. Com. Tit. de
Majoritate and Obedientia c. Unam Sanctam. In addition. D. P. Bertrandi Edit.
Paris. 1585.
Christ, if he have not taken the way they think fitting to settle
Church-Differences. Or if for the Churches Sin, or Trial, the way of Composing
them be left more uncertain than they would have it, that they which are
approved may be known, 1 Cor. 11. 19. But the Jesuit had told me before, that
a General Council had adjudged these things already. For so he says.


F. I told him* that a General Counee^* to wit of Trent, had already Judged,
not the Roman Church, but the Protestants to ^^l^ Errors. That (says the B.)
was not a Lawful Council.


B. Trent. And my Answer was, not only, That the Council was not Legal, in the
necessary Conditions to be observed in a General Council, but also, That it was
no General Council: which again you are content to omit. Consider it well.
First, is that Council Legal, the Abettors whereof maintain publicly* That it
is lawful for them to conclude any Controversy, and shake it be deside, and so
in your Judgment Fundamental, though it have not, I do not say now, the
Written Word of God for Warrant* either in express Letter, or necessary Sense
and deduction (as all unerring Councels have had, and as all must have that
will not e^^e) but not so much as ^ Test^^^nio (...) Stapl. ^otest. Cont. 4. ^.
^. A^^. 3.
Probable Testimony from it, nay quite extra, without the Scripture? Nay
secondly, Is that Council ^^^^ ^. ^. (...) (...)* that doubtless the Arri^^^
also (...) (...), that at Nice the Pope had (...) to carry his Messages, and
that (...) of them in his place sa^e as President. Why but first* it is
manifest, that Hosius was President at the Council of Nice, and not the Bishop
of Rome, either by himself or his Legates. And so much Athanasius himself, (who
was present, and surely understood* the Council of Nice, and who presided
there, as well as A. C.) tells us ^ H^sius b^e est Princeps Synodor^^* (So
belike He presided in other Councels as well as at Nice.) Hic formulam Fidei in
Nicaena Synodo concepit. And this the Arrians themselves confess to Constantius
the Emperor, then seduced to be theirs. Ap^^ S. Athanas. Epist. ad solitar*
^ita^agentes. But then secondly, I do not except against the Popes sitting as
President, either at Nice, or Trent. For that no might do, when called, or
chosen to it, as well as any other Patriarch, if you consider no more but his
(...) as President. But at Nice the Cause was not his own, but Christ's, against
the Arrian: wher^^s a^ (...), it was ^^erly his (...), his own Supremacy, and
his Churches Corruptions, against the Protestants. And therefore (...) not to
sit President at the Trial of his own Cause, though in other Causes he might
sit as will as (...) (...)* And for that of Bellarmine, (...). de (...) c. ^^^.
T^^tia c^^di^^^, namely* That it is ^^just (...) ^^^^ the Roman^ Pr^lat^is Right
(jus suum) in calling General Countels, and Presiding in them, in possession of
which ^ight be has (...) for 1500 years; That Is but a bold A^^ertion of the
Cardina^^, by his ^^^ve. For he gives us no proof of ie, but his bare word.
Whereas the very A^thentick Copies of the Counc^ls, published and princed by
the Romanists themselves affirm clearly, they were called by Emperors* not by
the Pope* And that the Pope did not preside in all of them. And I hope
Bellar^^^^ will not expect we should take his ^^^e word against the Councels.
And most certain it is, that even as Hosius Presided the Council (...) Nice,
and no way that, as the Popes Legate* so also in the second General Council*
which was the first of (...), N^ctarius Bishop of Constanti^^ple Presided.
Council, Chal^ed* Act. 6* p. 136. a^ud (...)* (...) the (...), which was the
first at Ephesus, S. C^^^^ of Alexandria Presided. And though Pope C^l^sti^^
was joined with him, yet he sent none out of the West to that Council, ^till
many things were therein finished, as appears a^^^ Act. Council. Tom. 2. ^. 16*
17. In the fourth, at Chal^^^, the Legates of the Bishop of Rome* had the Pr^^^
place. In the fifth, (...) Bishop of Constanti^^^^ was President. In the sixth,
and seventh, the Legates of the Pope were president; yet so, as that almost all
the duty of a Moderator or President was performed in the seventh by Tharas^us
Bishop of Constantinople; as appears manifestly in the Acts of that Council.
And since these seven are all the General Councels, which the Greeks and
Latins jointly acknowledge; And that in these other Patriarchs and Bishops
Presided, as o^t at lea^^ as the Bishops of Rome; What Is become of Bellarmine's
Brag, That the Pope has been possessed of this Right of Presiding in General
Councels for the space of 1500 years?
Legal, where the Pope, the Chief Person to be Reformed, shall sit President in
it, and be Chief Judge in his own Cause* against all Law, Divine, Natural, and
Humanein a place not free, but in, or too near his own Dominion? To which all
were not called, that had Deliberative, or Consultative Voice? In which none
had Suffrage, but such as were sworn to the Pope and the Church of Rome, and
professed Enemies to all that called for ^eformation, or a free Council? And
the Leo 10. ^^ll. Jun. 8. 1520.
Pope himself, to show his Charity, had declared and pronounced the Appellants,
Heretics, before they were Condemned by the Council. I hope an Assembly of
Enemies are no Lawful Council: and I think the Decrees of such a one, are omni
jure nulla, and carry their Nullity with them through all Law.

General, that has none of the Eastern Churches Consent, nor presence there?
Are all the Greeks so become Non Ecclesia, no Church, that they have no
interest in General Councels? It numbers indeed among the Subscribers, six
Greeks: They might be so by Nation, or by Title, purposely given them; but dare
you say they were actually Bishops of, and sent from the Greek Church to the
Council? Or is it to be accounted a General Council, that in many Sessions had
scarce Ten Archbishops, or Forty, or Fifty Bishops present? And for the West of
Christendom, nearer home, it reckons one English, S. Assaph. But Cardinal Poole
was there too: And English indeed he was by Birth, but not sent to that Council
by the King* and Church of England, but as one of the Popes Legates; And so we
find him in the five first Sessions of that Council: And at the beginning of
the Council, he was not Bishop in the Church of England; and after he was
Archbishop of Canterbury, he never went over to the Council. And can you prove,
that S. Assaph went thither by Authority? There were but few of other Nations,
and, it may be, some of them reckoned with no more truth, than the Greeks. In
all the Sessions under Paul the Third, but two Frenchmen, and sometimes none;
as in the six under Julius the third; when Henry II of France protested against
that Council. And in the end, it is well known, how all the French (which were
then a good part) held off, till the Cardinal of Loraigne was got to Rome. As
for the Spaniards, they labored for many things upon good grounds, and were
most unworthily overborn.

A. C. has nothing to say, but That it is not necessary A. C. p. 61.
to the Lawfulness, and Generalness of a Council, that all Bishops of the World
should be actually present, subscribe, or consent, but that such Promulgation
be made, as i^ morally sufficient to give notice, that such a Council is
called, and that all may come, if they will; and that a major part, at least,
of those that are present, give assent to the Decrees. I will forget, that it
was but p. 59. in which A. C. speaks of all Pastors, and those not only A. C.
p. 59.
summoned, but gathered together. And I will easily grant him, that it is not
necessary that all Bishops in the Christian world be present, and subscribe:
But sure it is necessary to the Generalness of a Council, that some be Ut aliqui
^ittantur, and adveniant, and conveniant, etc Bell. ^. 1. de Council. c. 17. ^
Quarta, ^^ saltem.
there, and authorized for all Particular Churches. And to the freedom of a
Council, that all that come, may come safe. And to the Lawfulness of a Council,
that all may come uningaged, and not fastened to a side, before they sit down
to argue, or deliberate. Nor is such a Promulgation as A. C. mentions,
sufficient, but only in case of Contumacy, and that where they which are
called, and refuse to come, have no just Cause for their not coming, as too
many had in the Case of Trent. And were such a Promulgation sufficient for the
Generalness of a Council; yet for the Freedom and the Lawfulness of it, it were
not.


F. So (said I) would Arrians say of the Council of Nice. The Bishop would not
admit the Case to be like.


B. Council of Nice, famous through all the Christian world. In the mean time,
nor you nor they consider, that the Case is not alike, as I then told you. If
the Case be alike in all, why do not you admit that which was held at Ariminum,
and the second of Ephesus, as well as Nice? If you say, (as yours do) It was
because the Pope approved them not; That Is a true Cause, but not adequate, or
full. For it was, because the Whole Church refused them;. 26. Nu. 1.
with whom the Roman Prelate (standing then entire in the Faith) agreed, and
so (for his Patriarchate) refused those Councels. But suppose it true, that
these Synods were not admitted, because the Pope refused them; yet this ground
is gained, That the Case is not alike for men's Assent to all Councels. And if
you look to have this granted, That the Pope must confirm, or the Councel's not
lawful; we have far more reason to look, that this be not denied, That
Scripture must not be departed from, in Here A. C. tells us, that the Arrians
thought so of the Council of Nice, p. 61. Namely, that they departed from
Letter, and Sense of Scripture. They said so indeed. But the Testimony of the
whole Church, both then, and since, went with the Council against the Arrian.
So is it not here against the Protestant for Trent. For they offer to be tried
by that very Council of Nice, and all the Ancient Councels and Fathers of the
Church, within the first four hundred years, and somewhat farther.
Letter, or necessary sense, or the Council is not lawful. For the Consent and
Confirmation of Scripture is of far greater Authority to make the Council
Authentical, and the Decisions of it de side, than any Confirmation of the Pope
can be. Now of these two, the Council of Nice, we are sure, had the first, the
Rule of Scripture; and you say it had the second, the Pope's Confirmation. The
Council of Trent, we are able to prove, had not the first; and so we have no
reason to respect the second. And to what end do your Learned men maintain that
a Council may make a Conclusion de fide, though it be simply So Stapleton
often, but the Fathers quite otherwise. Que ^xtra Evangelium sunt, non
desendam. ^Hilar. L. 2. ad Cohst.
ab extra, out of all bound of Scripture; but out of a Jealousy at least, that
this of Trent, and some others, have in their Determinations left both Letter,
and Sense of Scripture? Show this against the Council of Nice, and I will grant
so much of the Case to be like. But what will you say, if Literarum divinitus
inspiratarum testimoniis. L. 2. in Syn. Nic. Tom. 1. per Nicolinum.
Constantine required, That things thus brought into Question, should be
answered, and solved by Testimony out of Scripture? And the Bishops of the
Nicene Council never refused that Rule. And what will you say, if they profess
they depart not from it, Ib in Osi^ sententia. p. 517. Parati ex S. Spiritus
arbitrio per plurima Divinarum Scripturarum testimonia demonstrare hac it a se
babere.
but are ready by many Testimontes of divine Scripture to demonstrate their
Faith? Is the Case then alike betwixt it, and Trent? Surely no. But you say
that I pretended something else, for my not admitting the Case to be alike.


F. Pretending that the Pope made Bishops of purpose, for his side. But this
the Bishop proved not.


B. Pope's Heart. For if it be proved that he made Bishops at that time; that
some of them were Titular only, and had no Livelihood to subsist, but out of
his Purse (and so must hang their Judgment at the strings of it;) that some of
these thus made were sent to the Council; and sure not without their Errand:
yet if the Pope will say, he neither made, nor sent them to overruled the Holy
Ghost at that Meeting, or of purpose for his side, (as no question but it will
be said) who can prove it, that is not a Surveyor of the heart? But though the
Pope's heart cannot be seen, yet if these, and the like Presumptions be true,
it is a great sign that Trent was too corrupt, and factious a Meeting for the
Holy Ghost to be at. And sure the Case in this, not alike at Nice.

Trent could be no Indifferent Council to the Church, the Pope having made
himself a strong Party in it. And this I proved, though you be here not only
content to omit, but plainly to deny the Proof. For I proved it thus, (and you
Here A. C. is angry, and says: This was no Proof, nor worthy of any Answer, or
looking into the Book for it. First, because it is only a Surmise of
Adversaries, who are apt to interpret to the worst. Secondly, because there
might be more Italian Bishops there, as bring ^earer, yet without any factious
Combination with the Pope: As in the Greek Councels more Grecians were present.
A. C. p. 62. No proof, or a weak one. Let the Reader Judge that. But why (...)
Proof? Because a Surmise of Adversaries. Is that a Surmise of Adversaries, that
is taken out of the Council it self? Is that Council then become Regaum
divisum, and apt to interpret the worst of it self? Yea but there were more
Italian Bishops, as being nearer. Most true. Nearer a great deal than the
Gre^ian Bishops. But the Bishops of France and of some parts of Germany were
almost as near as the Italians themselves. And why then came no more of These,
that were near enough? Well: A. C. may say what he will. But the Pope remembered
well the Councels of Constance, and Bas^l, and thought it wisdom to make sure
work at Trent. For in later times, (for their own fears, no doubt) the Bishops
of Rome have been no great friends to General Councels, especially Free o^es:
Multi suspicantur, quod haec dissim^laverit Romana Curia, and Concilia ^^^i
neglexerit, ut possit ad sue voluntatis libitum before dominari, and Jura
aliaru^ Ecclesiarum liberius usurpare. Quod non asser^ esse verum, sed quia
bujusmodi laborat infamia, id^^, etc. Pet. de Aliaco, Car^ Cam^ra^^nsis L. de
Reformat. ^^^les. in ^asci^. rerum expe^end. sol. 204. A.
answered not) That there were more Italian Bishops there, then of all
Christendom besides. More? Yea more than double. And this I proved out of the
Council it self, which you had in your hand in Decimo sexto; but had no great
heart to look it. For, where the number of Prelates is expressed, that had
Suffrage and Vote in that Council, the Italians are set down to be 187. and all
the rest make but 83. So that there were more Italian Bishops by 104, than of
all the rest of Christendom. Sure the Pope did not mean to be overreached in
this Council. And whatsoever became of his Infallibility otherwise, he might
this way be sure to be Infallible in whatsoever he would have Determined: And
this, without all doubt, is all the Infallibility he has. So I proved this
sufficiently, I think. For if it were not to be sure of a side, give any
satisfying Reason; why such a potent Party of Italians, more than double to the
whole Christian world, should be there? Show me the like for Nice, and I will
give it, that the Case is alike between these two Councels.

Bellarmine comes in to help: But sure it will not help you, that he has
offered at as much against the Council of Nice, as I have urged against that at
Trent. For he tells us, In Concilio Nicaeno prim^ ex Occidente solum fu^unt duo
Presbyteri missi ex Italia, unus Episcopus ex Gallia, unus ex Hispania, and
unus ex Africa. Bellarm. L. 1. de Council. c. 17. Antepenult.
That in the Council at Nice, there were as few Bishops of the West present, as
were of the East at Trent, but five in all. Be it so: Yet this will not make
the Case alike between the two Councels. First, because I press not the
disparity in number only; but with it the Pope's carriage, to be sure of a
Major part. For it lay upon the Pope to make sure work at Trent, both for
himself, and his Church. But neither the Greek Church in general, nor any
Patriarch of the East, had any private Interest to look to, in the Council at
Nice. Secondly, because I press not so much against the Council of Trent, That
there were so exceeding many Bishops of the West, compared with those of the
East, (for that must must needs be, when a Council is held in the West) but
that there were so many more Italians, and Bishops obnoxious to the Popes
power, than of all Germany, France, Spain, and all other Parts of the West
besides. Thirdly, because both Bellarmine and A. C. seek to avoid the Dint of
this Argument, by comparing the Western with the Eastern Bishops, and are
content to say nothing about the Excessive number of Italians, to others of the
West: That will receive a fuller Answer than any of the rest. For though very
few Western Bishops were at the Council of Nice, being so remote: yet at the
same time Pope Sylvester held a Council at Rome, in which He with 275 Bishops
of the West confirmed the Nicene Creed; Omnes qui ausi fuerint dissolvere
^esinitionem Sancti and Mag^i Concilii quod apud Ni^^am congregatum est,
Anathematizamus. Council. Romans 3 sub Sylvestro. Apud Binium, p. 449.
and Anathematized all those which should dare to dissolve the Definition of
that Holy, and Great Council. Now let Bellarmine, or A. C. or any else show,
That when the Council of Trent sat, there was another Council (though never so
privately in regard of their miserable Oppression) which sat in Greece, or any
where in the East, under any Patriarch or Christian Bishop, which did confirm
the Canons of the Council of Trent, and Anathematize them which admitted them
not, and I will confess they speak home to the Comparison between the Councels,
else a blind man may see the difference, and it is a vast one.

A. C. makes account he has found a better Reply to this; and now tells us,
that neither French, nor Spanish, nor Schismatical A. C. p. 62.
Greeks did agree with Protestants in those Points which were defined in that
Council, especially after it was confirmed by the Pope; as appears by the
Censure of Jeremias the Greek Patriarch. Who agreed with the Protestants in the
Points defined by that Council, (as he speaks) or rather (to speak properly)
against the Points there defined; I know not. And for ought A. C. knows, many
might agree with them in heart, that in such a Council durst not open
themselves. And what knows A. C. how many might have been of their Opinion, in
the main before the Council ended, had they been admitted to a fair, and a free
Dispute? And it may be too, some Decrees would have been more favorable to
them, had not the care of the Popes Interest made them sowrer. For else what
mean these words, Especially after it was confirmed by the Pope? As for
Jeremias, it is true, his Censure is in many things against the Protestants: But
I find not that that Censure of his is warranted by any Authority of the Greek
Church; Or that he gave the Protestants any hearing, before he passed his
Censure. And at the most, it is but the Censure of a Schismatic, in A. C's own
Judgment. And for his flourish which follows, That East and West would condemn
Protestants for Heretics; I would he would forbear Prophesying, till both
parts might meet in a free General Council, that sought Christ more than
themselves. But I find the Jesuit has not done with me yet, but adds:


F. In sine, the B. wished, That a Lawful General Council were called to end
Controversies. The persons present said, That the King was inclined thereunto,
and that therefore we Catholics might do well to concur.


B. Wish? You pretend great love to the Truth, would you not have it found? Can
you, or any Christian be offended, that there should be a good end of
Controversies? Can you think of a better end, than by a General Council? And if
you have a most Gracious King inclined unto it, (as you say it was offered) how
can you acquit your selves, if you do not consent? Now here A. C. marvels what
A. C. p. 62^
kind of General Council I would have, and what Rules I would have observed in
it, which are morally like to be observed, and make an end of Controversies
better then their Catholic General Councels. Truly I am not willing to leave
A. C. unsatisfied in any thing. Nor have I any meaning to trouble the Church
with any New Devisings of mine. Any General Council shall satisfy me, (and, I
presume, all good Christians) that is lawfully called, continued, and ended
according to the same course, and under the same Ex iis Conciliis quae omnium
consensu Generalia fuerunt, qualia sunt quatuor prima: Et ex consuetudine
Ecclesiae colligimus quatuor Conditiones requiri, and sufficere. Bellar. 1. de
Council. c. 17. 2.
Conditions, which General Councels observed in the Primitive Church; which I
am sure were Councels General, and Catholic, what ever yours be. But I doubt
that after all noise made about these Requisite Conditions, A. C. and his
Fellows will be found as much, if not more defective in performance of the
Conditions, than in the Conditions themselves. Well: the Jesuit goes on, for
all this.


F. I asked the B. whether he thought a General Council might err? He said it
might.


B. Whether a General Council may err in Determination, or not? Your self
brought no Proof that it cannot; and till that be brought, my speech is good
that it can: and yet I hope to be found no Infringer of any Power given by
Christ to his Church. But it seems by that which follows, you did by this
Question ( Can a General Council err?) but seek to win ground for your other,
which follows.


F. If a General Council may err, what nearer are we then (said I) to unity,
after a Council has determined? Yes (said he) although it may err; yet we
should be bound to hold with it, till another come to reverse it.


B. General Council may err, or not, is a Question of great Consequence in the
Church of Christ. To say it cannot err, leaves the Church not only without
Remedy against an Error once determined; but also without sense that it may
need a Remedy, and so without care to seek it; which is the misery of the
Church of Rome at this day. To say it can err, seems to expose the members of
the Church to an uncertainty and wavering in the Faith, to make unquiet
Spirits, not only to disrespect former Councels of the Church, but also to
slight and contemn whatsoever it may now Determine; into which Error some
Opposers of the Church of Rome have fallen. And upon this is grounded your
Question, Wherein are we nearer to unity, if a Council may err? But in
relating my Answer to this, you are not so candid: for my words did not sound
as yours seem to do, That we should hold with the Council, err, or not err,
till another came to reverse it. As if Grounds of Faith might vary at the
Racket, and be cast of each side, as a cunning hand might lay them.

Caution which I added. For I said, The Determination of a General Council
erring was to stand in force, and to have External Obedience at the least
yielded to it, till 33. Consid. 5. Number. 1, 2. And the Reason of this is,
Because to have a General Council deceived, is not impossible; But altogether
impossible it is, that Demonstrative Reason, or Testimony Divine, should
deceive. Hook. L. 2. Eccl. Pol. 7.
Evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration to the Contrary made the Error
appear; and until thereupon In which Case Maldonat puts in the shrewdest
Argument: Namely, that this way we should never have a certain end of
Controversies. For to try whether any thing were Decreed according to the Word
of God by one General Council, we should need another Council; and then another
to try that; and so in infinitum. So our faith should never have where to
settle and rest it self. Maldon. in S. Matthew. 18 20. But to this I answer, That
the Ancient Church took this way, as will afterward appear in S. Augustine.
Next, there is no uncertainty at all: For no General Council lawfully called,
and so proceeding, can be questioned in another, unless it so fall out, that
Evident Scripture, or a Demonstration appear against it. But either of these
are so clear and manifest, that there need be no fear of proceeding in
infinitum, and leaving the Faith in uncertainty, in necessaries to salvation.
And in curious Speculations, it is no matter, whether there be certainty or no,
with or without a Council. 33. Consid. 5. Number. 1. and 2.
another Council of equal Authority did reverse it. And indeed I might have
returned upon you again: If a General Council not Confirmed by the Pope may
err (which you affirm) to what end then a General Council? And you may answer,
Yes: For although a General Council may err, yet the Pope, as Head of the
Church, cannot. An excellent means of Unity, to have all in the Church as the
Pope will have it, what ever Scripture say, or the Church think. And then I
pray, to what end a General Council? Will his Holiness be so holy, as to
confirm a General Council, if it determine against him? And as for Bellar. L.
4. de Romans Pont. c. 7. 3. etc.
Bellarmines Reasons why a General Council should be useful, if not necessary,
though the Pope be Infallible; they are so weak in part, and in part so
unworthy, that I am sorry any necessity of a bad Cause should force so Learned
a man to make use of them.

A. C. tells me, The Caution mentioned, as omitted, makes my Answer worse then
the Jesuit related it. And that in two A. C. p. 63, 64.
things. First, in that the Jesuit relates it thus: Although it may err: but
the Caution makes it, as if it did actually err. Secondly, in that the Jesuit
relates, That we are bound to hold it, till another come to reverse it; that
is, we not knowing whether it do err or not, but only that it may err. But
the Caution puts the Case so, as if the Determination of a General Council
actually erring were not ipso jure invalid, but must stand in force, and have
external Obedience yielded to it, till not only moral Certainty, but Evidence
of Scripture, or a Demonstration to the Contrary, make the error appear; And
when it appears, we must yield our Obedience, till a Council of equal Authority
reverse it, which perhaps will not be found in an whole Age. So either the
Jesuit relates this speech truly, or less disgracefully. And A. C. thinks,
that upon better Judgment, I will not allow this Caution. Truly I shall not
thank the Jesuit for any his kindness here. And for the Caution, I must and do
acknowledge it mine, even upon advisement, and that whether it make my Answer
worse, or better. And I think farther, that the Jesuit has no great Cause to
thank A. C. for this Defense of his Relation.

First then the Jesuit (so says A. C.) does in his Relation make it but a
supposition, That a General Council may err. But A. C. p. 63.
the Caution expresses it as actually erring. True, But yet I hope this
Expression makes no General Council actually err. And then it comes all to
one, whether I suppose that such a Council may err, or that it do err. And
it is fitter for clearing the Difficulties into which the Church falls in such a
Case, to suppose (and more then a supposition it is not) a General Council
Synodum Generalem aliquoties errasse perce^i^^s. Wald. L. 2. de Doctri^. Fidei,
Art. 2. c. 19. 1.
actually erring, then as only under a Possibility of Erring. For the Church
has much more to do to vindicate it self from such an Error actually being,
than from any the like Error that might be.

A. C. thinks, he has got great advantage by the words of the Caution; in that
I say, A General Council erring is A. C. p. 63.
to stand in force, and have external Obedience, at least so far as it consists
in silence, Patience, and forbearance yielded to it, till Evidence of
Scripture, or a Demonstration to the Contrary make the Error appear, and until
thereupon another Council of equal Authority did reverse it. Well! I say it
again. But is there any one word of mine in the Caution, that speaks of our
knowing of this Error? Surely not one (that is A. C's Addition.) Now suppose a
General Council actually Erring in some Point of Divine Truth, I hope it will
not follow that this Error must be so gross, as that forthwith it must needs
be known to private men. And doubtless till they know it, Obedience must be
yielded; Nay when they know it (if the Error be not manifestly against
Fundamental verity, in which case a General Council cannot easily err) I would
have A. C. and all wise men Consider, Whether External Obedience be not even
then to be yielded. For if Controversies arise in the Church, some end they
must have, or they will tear all in sunder. And I am sure no wisdom can think
that fit. Why then say a General Council Err, and an Erring Decree be ipso
jure, by the very Law it self invalid; I would have it wisely considered again,
whether it be not fit to allow a General Council that Honor and Privilege,
which all other Great Courts have. Namely, That there be a Declaration of the
Invalidity of it is Decrees, as well as of the Laws of other Courts, before
private men can take liberty to refuse Obedience. For till such a declaration,
if the Council stand not in force, A. C. sets up Private Spirits to control
General Councels; which is the thing he so often, and so much cries out against
in the Protestants. Therefore it may seem very fi^ and necessary for the Peace
of Christondome, that a General Council thus erring should stand in force, till
Evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration make the Error to appear, It is not
long since A. C. compared Councels to Parliaments; it was but p. 60. And I hope
a Parliament and the Acts of it must stand in force, though something be
mistaken in them, or found bur^sul, till another Parliament of equal Authority
reverse it and them. For I presume you will not have any inferior Authority to
abrogate Acts of Parliament.
as that another Council of equal Authority reverse it. For as for Moral
Certainty, that is not strong enough in Points of Faith. (which alone are spoken
of here.) And if another Council of equal Authority cannot be gotten together
in an Age, that is such an Inconvenience, as the Church must bear, when it
happens. And far better is that inconvenience, than this other, 33. Consid. 4.
Number. 1.
that any Authority less than a General Council, should rescind the Decrees of
it, unless it err manifestly, and intolerably: Or that the whole Church upon
peaceable, and just complaint of this Error, neglect or refuse to call a
Council, and examine it. And there come in National or Provincial Councels to
24. Number. ^.
reform for themselves. But no way must lie open to private men to 38. Nu. 15.
Refuse obedience, till the Council be heard, and weighed, as well as that
which they say against it; yet with Non est inferio^um judicare an Superiores
legitime procedant nec^e, nisi manifestiss^^ e cons^ct intolerabilem Errorem
committi. Bell. L. 2. de Council. c. 8. Alii dicunt Concilium. Nisi manifest
constet. Jacob. Almain in 3 sent. D. 24. q. unic^, fine.
Bellarmines Exception still: so the error be not manifestly intolerable. Nor
is it fit for Private men, in such great Cases as this, upon which the whole
peace of Christendom depends, to argue thus: The Error appears, Therefore the
Determination of the Council is ipso ^ure invalid. But this is far the safer
way (I say still, when the Error is neither Fundamental, nor in it self
manifest) to argue thus: The Determination is by equal Authority, and that
secundum jus, according to Law declared to be invalid; Therefore the Error
apears. And it is a more humble and conscientious way* for any private man to
suffer a Council to go before him, then for him to outrun the Council. But
weak and Ignorant men's out-running both God, and his Church, is as bold a fault
now on all sides, as the daring of the Times has made it Common. As for that
which I have added concerning the Possibility of a General Councels erring, I
shall go on with it, without asking any farther leave of A. C.

Consider the Point of General Councels, How they may, or may not err; And a
little to look into the Roman and Protestant Opinion concerning them, which is
more agreeable to the Power and Rule which Christ has left in his Church; and
which is most preservative of Peace established, or ablest to reduce perfect
unity into the Church of Christ, when that poor Ship has her ribs dashed in
sunder by the waves of Contention. And this I will adventure to the World, but
only in the Nature of a Consideration, and with submission to my Mother the
Church of England, and the Mother of us all, the Universal Catholic Church of
Christ; As I do most humbly All whatsoever else is herein contained.

First then, I Consider, whether all the Power, that an Occumenical Consid. 1.
Council has to Determine, and all the Assistance it has, not to err in that
Determination, it has it not all from the Si Ecclesia Universitati non est
data ulla Authoritas, Ergo nequt Concilio Generali, quatenus Ecclesiam
Universalem repraesentat. Bellarm. Lib. 2. de Council. c. 16. Quod si Ecclesia.
Catholic Universal Body of the Church, and Clergy in the Church, whose
Concilium Generale Ecclesiam repraesentans. Ja. Almain. in 3 Sent. D. 24. Q.
unied. Episcopi sunt Ecclesia repraesentative, ut nostri loquuntur. Bellarm.
Lib. 3. de Eccles. Milit. c. 14. 3.
Representative it is? And it seems it has. For the Government of the Church
being not 26. Number. 8.
Monarchical, but as Christ is Head, this Principle is inviolable in Nature:
Every Body Collective that represents, receives power and privileges from the
Body which is represented; else a Representation might have force without the
thing it represents; which cannot be. So there is no Power in the Council, no
Assistance to it, but what is in, and to the Church. But yet then it may be
Questioned, whether the Representing Body has Omnis repraesentatio virtute
minor est Re ipsa, vel Veritate, cujus Repraesentatio est. Colligitur aperte ex
Thom. 1. 2. q. 101. A. 2. ad 2.
all the Power, Strength, and Privilege, which the Represented has? And
suppose it has all the Legal power, yet it has not all the Natural, either of
strength, or wisdom, that the whole has. Now because the Representative has
power from the Whole, and the Main Body can meet no other way; therefore the
Acts, Laws, and Decrees of the Representative, be it Ecclesiastical, or Civil,
are Binding in their Strength. But they are not so certain, and free from
Error, as is that Wisdom which resides in the Whole. For in Assemblies merely
Civil, or Ecclesiastical, all the able and sufficient men cannot be in the Body
that Represents; And it is as possible, so many able Posset enim contingere
quod Congregati in Concilio Generali essent pauci and viles, tam in re, quam in
hominum reputatione, respectu illorum qui ad illud Concilium Generale mini^e
convenissent, etc. Ockam. Dial. par. 3. lib. 3. c. 13.
and sufficient men (for some particular business) may be left out, as that
they which are in, may miss, or mis-apply that Reason, and Ground, upon which
the Determination is principally to rest. Here, for want of a clear view of
this ground, the Representative Body erres; whereas the Represented, by virtue
of those Members which saw and knew the ground, may hold the Principle
inviolated.

Secondly, I Consider, That since it is thus in Nature, and in Consid. 2.
Civil Bodies, if it be not so in Ecclesiastical too, some reason must be given
why; Ecclesia est unum Corpus mysticum per Similitudinem ad Natural. Durand.
3. D. 14. Q. 2. N. 5. Biel. Lect. 23. in Can. Miss.
For that Body also consists of men: Those men neither all equal in their
perfections of Knowledge and Judgment, whether acquired by Industry, or rooted
in Nature, or infused by God. Not all equal, nor any one of them perfect, and
absolute, or freed from passion and humane infirmities. Nor does their meeting
together make them Infallible in all things, though the Act which is hammered
out by many together, must in reason be perfecter, than that which is but the
Child of one man's sufficiency. If then a General Council have no ground of Not
erring from the Men, or the Meeting, either it must not be at all, or it must
be by some assistance and power upon them, when they are so met together: And
this, if it be less than the Assistance of the holy Ghost, it cannot make them
secure against Error.

Thirdly, I Consider, That the Assistance of the Holy Ghost Consid. 3.
is without Error; That Is no Question; and as little there is, That a Council
has it. But the Doubt that troubles, is, Whether all the assistance of the
Holy Ghost be afforded in such a High manner, as to cause all the Definitions
of a Council in matters Fundamental in the Faith, and in remote Deductions from
it, to be alike Infallible? Now the Romanists, to prove there is Omnem
veritatem infallibiliter docendi, etc. Stapl. Relect. Praes. ad Lectorem.
infallible assistance, produce some places of Scripture; but no one of them
infers, much less inforces an Infallibility. The places which Stapleton there
rests upon, are these: S. Joh. 16. 1^
I will send you the Spirit of Truth, which will lead you into all Truth. And,
S. Joh. 14. 16
This Spirit shall abide with you for ever. And, S. Mat. 28. 20
Behold I am with you to the end of the world. To these, others add: S. Mat.
16. 18
The founding of the Church upon the Rock, against which the gates of Hell
shall not prevail. And, Christ's Prayer for S. Peter, S. Luke 22. 32
That his Faith fail not. And Christ's Promise, That S. Mat. 18. 20.
where two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the midst
of them. And that in the Acts 15. 28.
Acts: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us.

first, which is, Leading into all truth, and that for ever. Prosp. de vocat.
Gent. L. 1. c. 10.
All, is not always universally taken in Scripture. Nor is it here simply for
All Truth: For then a General Council could no more err in matter of Fact,
than in matter of Faith; in which yet Bellarm. 2. de Council. c. 8. Respondeo
quidam* Where he says, ^bi Question est de Facto, non de Jure etc. In ejusmodi
Judicius Concilium errave posie non est dubium.
your selves grant it may err. But into All Dubium est a^ illud docebit omnia,
S. Joh. 14. 26. referendum sit ad illud, Quaecunque dixi vobis: quasi non aliud
doctu^um Spiritum Sanctum dicat, quam quod ipse ante^ docuisset, non repug^abo,
si quis it^ velit interpretari, etc. Maldonat. in S. Joh. 14.
Truth, is a limited all: Into all Truth absolutely necessary to Salvation: And
this, when they suffer themselves to be led by the Blessed Spirit, by the Word
of God. And all Truth which Christ had before (at least fundamentally)
delivered unto them: S. Joh. 16. 14
He shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. And again, S. Joh. 14. 26
He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, which
I have told you. And for this necessary Truth too, the Apostles received this
Promise, not for themselves, and a Council, but for themselves, and the
Bellarm. 2. de Conc. c. 9. Alteram. Assistentia Sp. Sancti non est propter
Council. sed ^nivers^m Ecclesiam.
whole Catholic Church; of which a Council, be it never so General, is a very
little part. Yea, and this very Assistance is not so absolute, not in that
manner to the whole Church, as it was to the Apostles; neither does Christ in
that place speak directly of a Council, but of his Apostles Preaching, and
Doctrine.

Christ's being with them unto the end of the world, the Fathers are so
various, that in the sense of the Ancient Church, we may understand him present
in S. Aug. Tr. 50. in S. Joh. Isidor. 1. Sent. cap. 14.
Majesty, in S. Hilar. in Psalm. 124. Justin, Martyr. Dial. cum Tryphone.
Prosp. Epist. ad Demetriadem.
Power, in Aid and S. Hilar. in Psalm. 124. Prosp. Lib. 2. de vocat. Gent. cap.
2. Leo Sermon. 2. de Resurrect. Dom. cap. 3. Isidor. in Jos. c. 21.
Assistance, against the Difficulties they should find for Preaching Christ;
which is the native sense, as I take it. And this Promise was made to support
their weakness. As for his Presence, in teaching by the Holy Ghost, S. Cyril.
lib. 7. Dial. de Trin. Prosp. Epist. ad Demetriadem.
few mention it; and no one of them which does, speaks of any Infallible
Assistance, farther than the succeeding Church keeps to the Word of the
Apostles, as the Apostles kept to the Guidance of the Spirit. Besides, the S.
Hilar. in Psalm. 124. S. Cyril L. 7. Dial. de T^in. S. Aug. 6. de Genesis ad ^it.
c. 8. S. Leo Sermon. 10. de Not. Dom. c. 5. Isid. in Jos. c. 12. In all which
places, Vobiscum is either interpreted cum suis, or Fidelibus, or Universa
Ecclesia.
Fathers refer their Speech to the Church Universal, not to any Council, or
Representative Body. And Hoc colligitur, sed quaeritur non quid colligitur, sed
quid dicere voluit. Maldonat. in S. Mat. 28.
Maldonate adds, That this His presence by teaching, is, or may be a
Collection from the place, but is not the Intention of Christ.

the Rock upon which the Church is founded, which is the next Place, we dare
not lay any other Foundation, than 1 Cor. 3. 11.
Christ: Christ laid his Ephesians. 2. 20.
Apostles, no question, but upon Himself. With these S. Peter was laid, no man
questions, and in prime place of Order, (would his claiming Successors be
content with that) as appears, and diverse Fathers witness, by his particular
designment, Tu es Petrus; But yet the Rock even there spoken of, is not S.
Peter's person, either only, or properly, but the Faith which he professed.
And to this, besides the Evidence, which is in Text, and Truth, the S. Ignat.
Epist. ad Philadelph. Qui suam firmavit Ecclesiam super Petram, aedificatione
spirituali. S. Hilar. l. 6. de Tria. Super hanc igitur Confessionis Petram
Ecclesiae aedificatio est. Et paulo ^ost: Haec Fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est.
S. Greg. Nyss. a^ Trin. adversus Judaeos: Super hanc Petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam* super Confessionem videlice^ Christi. S. Isid. Pelus. Epist. l.
1. Epist. 235. Ut hac ratione certam omnibus Confessionem traderet, quam ab ^o
inspiratus Pernis tanquam Basin, ac Fundamentum jecit, super quod Dominus
Ecclesiam suam extru^it. S. Cyril. Alexand. de Trin. l. 4 Petram opinor per
agnominationem, aliud nihil quam inconcussam and firmissimam Discipuli fidem
vocavit, in qua Ecclesia Christi it a fundata, and firmata esset, ut non
laberetur, etc. P.* Theodor. in Cant. Petram appellat fidei pietatem, veritatis
professionem, etc. Et super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. S. Greg.
Epist. l. 3. Ep. 33. In vera fide persistite, and vitam vestram in Petram
Ecclesiae, hoc est, in Confessione B Petri Apostolorum Principis solidate.
Theophylact. in Matthew. 16. Super cum aedificavit Ecclesiam, quia enim confessus
erat, etc. quod haec Confessio fundamentum erit, etc. S. Aug. in 1 Epist. S.
Johan. tract. 10. Quid est, Super hanc Petram? Super hanc Fidem, super id quod
dictum est, Tu es, etc. S. Bas. Seleuc. Orat. 25. Hanc Confessionem ^um
nominasset Christus Petram, Petrum nuncupat eum qui primum illam est confessus,
do^a^s illi hanc appellationem tanquam infign^, and monumentum hujus
confessionis. Haec enim est revera Pietatis Petra, haec salutis basis, etc. S.
Jacob. Liturg. (...), p. 26. etc. And some which join the person of S. Peter,
profess it is propter robur Confessionis. Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. S.
Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Psalm. 50. S. Ambros. L. 10. in S. Luc. c. 24. And S. Greg.
gives it for a Rule, when Petra is read in the singular number, (and so it is
here) Christus est, Christ is signified.
Fathers come with very full consent. And this, That the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it, is not spoken of the Not erring of the Church
principally, but of the Non deficit. S. Bern. Sermon. 79. in Cant. And Bellarmine
himself going to prove Ecclesiam non posse deficere, begins with this very
place of Scripture, L. 3. de Eccles. c. 13.
Not falling away of it from the Foundation. Now a Church may err, and
dangerously too, and yet not fall from the Foundation; especially if that of L.
3. de Eccl. c. 14. Quinto, si esset. Multa sunt de Fide, quae* non sunt
absolute necessaria ad salutem.
Bellarmine be true, That there are many things, even de fide, of the Faith,
which yet are not necessary to Salvation. Besides, even here again, the Promise
of this stable edification, is to the whole Church, not to a Council, at least
no further than a Council builds, as a Church is built, that is, upon Christ.

The next Place is Christ's Prayer for S. Peter's Faith. The native NUMBER. ^.
sense of which Place is, That Christ prayed, and obtained for S. Peter
perseverance in the grace of God, against the strong temptation, which was to
winnow him above the rest. But to conclude an Infallibility hence in the Pope,
or in his Chair, or in the Roman Sea, or in a General Council, though the Pope
be President, I find no one Ancient Father that dare adventure it. And Lib. 4.
de Romans Pont. cap. 3.
Bellarmine himself, beside some Popes, in their own Cause (and that in
Epistles counterfeit, or falsely alleged) has not a Father to name for this
sense of the Place, till he come down to Chrysologus, Theophylact, and S.
Bernard: of which Chrysologus his speech is but a flash of Rhetoric; and the
other two are men of yesterday, compared with Antiquity, and lived when (it was
God's great grace, and Learned men's wonder) the corruption of the time, had not
made them corrupter than they are. And 2. 2ae, q. 2. A. 3. Probat enim ex his
verbis, Fidem Ecclesiae Universalis non posse deficere.
Thomas is resolute, That what is meant here beyond S. Peter's Person, is
referred to the whole Church. And the Gloss upon the Canon Law is more
peremptory than he, even to the Denial, that it is Causa. 24. q. 1 c. A Recta.
Non d^ Papa, quia Papa potest errare.
meant of the Pope. And if this Place warrant not the Popes Faith, where is the
Infallibility of the Council that in your Doctrine depends upon it?

next Place is Bellarmine's choice one, and his first; and he says it is a
Testimonia propria sunt tria. Primum est Mat. 18. etc. Bellarm. L. 2. de
Council. c. 2. 4. Sed contra, Firmitas Conciliorum proprie non innititur his
verbis. Stapl. Relect. Controvers. 6. q. 4. A. 4. ad 4. Locus hic non debet huc
proprie accommodari. Valentia in Tho. Tom. 3. Disput. 1. R. 1. Puncto 7. 45.
proper place for Proof of the Infallibility of General Councels. This Place is
Christ's Promise: Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am
I in the midst of them, S. Matthew. 18. 19, 20.
S. Matthew. 18. And he tells us, The strength of the Argument is not taken from
these words alone, but as they are continued with the former; and Addita
Argumentatione a Minori ad Majus, etc. Bellarm. L. 2. de Council. c. 2. 4. Et
Stapl. Relect. Cont. 6. q. 3. A. 4.
that the Argument is drawn a Minori ad Majus, from the less to the greater.
Thus Si duo vel tres congregati in nomine meo obtinent semper quod petunt a
Deo, etc. Bellarm. ibid. 5.
If two or three gathered together in my Name, do always obtain that which they
ask at Gods hands, to wit, wisdom and knowledge of those things which are
necessary for them: How much more shall all the Bishops gathered together (in a
Council) always obtain wisdom and knowledge to Judge those things, which belong
to the direction of the whole Church? I answer; First, it is most true, that
here is little strength, in these words alone. For, though the Fathers make
different interpretations of this place of Scripture, yet S. Chrysostom. Hom 61. in
S. Mat. 18. Ubi duo vel tres pari spiritu and voluntate collecti sunt, etc.
Theoph. in S. Mat. 18. S. Cyprian. L. 4. Epist. 4. S. Hilar. ^^ S. Matthew. 18.
most of them agree in this, That this Place is to be understood of Consent in
Prayer. And this is manifest enough in the Text it self. Secondly, I think
there is as little strength in them by the Argument drawn a Minori ad Majus.
And that I prove two ways. First, Because though that Argument hold in Natural,
and Necessary things; yet I doubt it holds not either in Voluntary, or Promised
things, or things which depend upon their Institution. For he that promises the
less, does not hereby promise the greater; and he which will do the less, will
not always do the greater. Secondly, Because this Argument from the less to the
greater, can never follow, but where, and so far as the thing upon which the
Argument is founded, agrees to the less. For if it do not always agree to the
less, it cannot Necessarily pass from thence to the greater. Now that upon
which this Argument is grounded here, is Infallible hearing, and granting the
Prayers of two or three met together in the Name of Christ. But this
Infallibility is not always found in this Less Congregation, where two or three
are gathered together. For they often meet, and pray, yet obtain not, because
there are diverse other Conditions necessarily required (as S. Chrysostom
Quomodo igitur a Patre cuncta non consequentur? Quia multae sunt Causae non
impetrandi, etc. S Chrysostom. Hom. in S. Matthew. 18. Et Bellarm. ipse. Si
congregari in Nomine Christi sit Nota Ecclesi^, non erit quomodocunque
congregari. Sic enim omnes Haereses, and Schismata congregantur in nomine
Christi. Sed, etc. L. 4. de Notis Ecclesiae, c. 2. Tertius non.
observes) to make the Prayers of a Congregation heard, beside their gathering
together in the Name of Christ. And therefore it is not extended to a greater
Congregation, or Council, unless the same Conditions be still observed. Neither
does Christ's Promise, Ero in Medio, I will be in the midst of them, infer, That
they, the greater or the less, three or three hundred, have all, even Etsi
Christus adsit in medio talium, non adest tamen ad omnem effectum, aut ad hunc
qui est Judicare de fide. Stapl. Relect. Controv. 6. q. 3. A. 4. Sed nec illi
semper ad Deum recipient qui in medio eorum est. Nec Deus sic adest ^is qui
recipient ad Ipsum, ut omnem veritatem doceat in Instanti and omni tempore
simul, etc. Junius in Bellar. L. 2. de Council. c. 2.
necessary things infallibly granted unto them, as often as they ask, if. they
ask not as well as they ought, as what they ought. And yet most true it is,
that where more or fewer are gathered together in the Name of Christ, there is
he in the midst of them; but to assist, and to grant whatsoever he shall find
fit for them, not Infallibly whatsoever they shall think fit to ask for
themselves. And therefore S. Cyprian, though he use this very Argument a Minori
ad Majus, from the less to the greater, yet he presumes not to extend it as
Bellarmine does, to the obtaining of Infallibility; but only uses it in the
General way, in which there neither is, nor can be doubt of the truth of it.
Thus: Si duo Unanimes tantum possunt; Quid, si Unanimitas apud omnes esset? S.
Cypr. ^. 4. Epist. 4.
If two that are of one mind to Godward, can do so much; what might be done,
if there were Unanimity among all Christians? Undoubtedly more, but not All
what soever they should ask, unless all other Requisites were present. Thirdly,
in this their own Non ad Infallibilem certitudinem a^^cujus Senten^i^, in quam
plures in Nomine Christi consentiunt, locus hic* Evangelii proprie accommodari
debet, sed ad efficaciam consensionis plurium ad id impet^andum, quod
unanimiter in Christi Nomine petunt, si id, quidem ad eorum salutem expediat.
Sec^s enim non mod^ ex illo loco probabitur, etc. Greg. de Valen. Tom. 2. in
Thom. Disput. 1. Q. 1. Punct. 7. 45. And although Stapleton approves this
Argument a Minori ad Majus, yet withal he says, Firmitas Conciliorum illis
Christi verbis proprie non innititur; Quia nec Christus ibi de Conciliis
Episcoporum loquitur, sed de quavis Fidelium unanimi Congregation^. Nec etsi,
etc. Stapl. Relect. Controv. 6. q. 6. A. 4.
Great Champions disagree from Bellarmine, or he from them. For Gregory de
Valentia and Stapleton tell us, That this place does not belong properly to
prove an Infallible Certainty of any sentence in which more agree in the Name
of Christ: but to the efficacy of Consent for obtaining that which more shall
pray for in the Name of Christ, if at least that be for their souls health. For
else you may prove out of this Place, That not only the Definition of a
General Council; but even of a Provincial, nay of two or three Bishops gathered
together is valid, and that without the Popes Assent.

last Place mentioned for the Infallibility of General Act. 15. 28.
Councels is that, Acts 15. where the Apostles say of themselves, and the
Council held by them: It seems good to the Holy Ghost, and to us. And They
might well say it: For They had Infallibly the Assistance of the Holy Ghost,
and They kept close to his Direction. But I do not find, that any General
Council since, though they did implore (as they ought) the Assistance of that
Blessed Spirit, did ever take upon them to say, in terminis, in express terms,
of their Definitions: Visum est Spiritui Sancto, and Nobis; It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost, and to Us. Acknowledging even thereby (as I conceive) a great
deal of Difference in the Certainty of those things, which a General Council at
after Determined in the Church; and those which were settled by the Apostles,
when They sat in Council. But though I do not find, That They used this
speech punctually, and in terms; yet the Fathers, when They met in Council,
were Confident, and spoke it out, That They had Assistance from the Holy Ghost;
yet so, as that They neither took Themselves, nor the Councels They sat in, as
Infallibly Guided by the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles were. And Valentia is very
right: Quintum Argumentum, etc. Aut sunt ergo Arrogantes, quod putandum non
est, Aut infallibilit^r definiunt. Respondet Valentia concedendo neutrum, Tom.
3. in Tho. Disp. 1. Q. 1. Punct. 7. 45.
That though the Council say they are gathered together in the Holy Ghost, yet
the Fathers are neither Arrogant, in using the speech, nor yet infallible for
all that. And this is true, whether the Pope approve, or disapprove their
Definitions; Though Valentia will not admit that. The Pope must be (with him)
infallible, what ever come of it. Now though this be but an Example, and
include no Precept, yet both Firmitas eo^um nititur Exemplo primi Concilii.
Stap. Rel. Cont. 6. q. 3. A. 4. ad 3.
Stapleton and Et Bellarm. dicit locum hunc esse tertium ^ Propri^. L. 2. de
Council. c. 2. Tertius Locus.
Bellarmine make this Place a proper Proof of the Infallibility of General
Councels. And Conciliorum Decreta sunt Spiritus Sancti Oracula. Stapl. ibid.
Sententia Orthodoxa prima.
Stapleton says the Decrees of Councels are the very Oracles of the Holy Ghost;
which is little short of Blasphemy. And Si illud Concilium ex quo formam
acceper^^^ (...) (...) Concilia asserit Decreta su^ esse Decreta (...). Sa^cti,
certe idem a^^ere poss^nt caet^ra ligitima Concilia, etc. Bellar ibid.
Bellarmine adds, that, Because all other Councels borrowed their form from
this, therefore other lawful Councels may affirm also, That their Decrees are
the Decrees of the Holy Ghost. Little considering therewhile, That it is one
thing to borrow the Form, and another thing to borrow the Certainty, and the
Infallibility of a Council. For suppose that After-Councels did follow the Form
of that first Council exactly in all Circumstances, yet, I hope, no advised man
will say, There is the like Infallibility in other Councels, where no man sat
that was Inspired, as was in this, where all, that sat as Judges, were
Inspired. Or if any Jesuit will be so bold as to say it, he had need bring
very Good Proof for it* and far better than any is brought yet. Now that all
Councels are not so Infallible as was this of the Apostles, nor the Causes
handled in them, as there they were, is manifest by Vide qudm prudenter agunt,
non praecipiat Sententiam, sed singula expendunt. Ia rebus (...)* Fid^i and
quae conscientiam tangunt, non satis est, dicere, Volumus Mandamus. Vides
igitur quomodo Convenient Apostoli, simpliciter Convenient, nihil nisi Deum
quaerunt, and aliorum salutem expetunt, etc. Quid igitur mirum si in hoc
Concilio fu^rit Spiritus Sanctus? etc. Nos aliter Convenimus, N^m^e cum mag^d
pompa, nosque ipsos q^aerimus* atq^e nobis pollicemur nihil nobis non licere de
Plenitudine Potestatis. Et quomodo Sp. Sanctus ejusmodi Concilia probare
possit? Ferus in Act. 15. 7.
One of their own, who tells us plainly, That the Apostles in their Council
dealt very prudently, did not precipitate their Judgment, but weighed all
things. For in Matters of Faith, and which touch the Conscience, it is not
enough to say, Volumus and Mandamus, We Will and Command. And thus the Apostles
met together in simplicity and singleness, seeking nothing but God, and the
salvation of men. And what wonder if the Holy Ghost were present in such a
Council? Nos aliter. But we meet otherwise, in great pomp, and seek our selves,
and promise our selves that we may do any thing out of the Plenitude of our
Power. And how can the Holy Ghost allow of such Meetings? And if not allow, or
approve the Meetings, then certainly not concur to make every thing Infallible,
that shall be concluded in them.

Church (including the Apostles) as all of them do; And then All grant the
Uoyce of the Church is Gods Voice, Divine and Infallible. Or else they are
General unlimited, and applyable to private Assemblies as well as General
Councels; which none grant to be Infallible, but some mad Enthusiasts. Or else
they are limited, not simply into All truth, but All necessary to salvation; in
which I shall easily grant a General Council cannot err, suffering it self to
be led by this Spirit of Truth in the Scripture, and not taking upon it to lead
both the Scripture and the Spirit. For Suppose these Places or any other, did
promise Assistance even to Infallibility, yet they granted it not to every
General Council, but to the Catholic Body of the Church it self; and if it be
in the whole Church principally, then is it in a General Council, but by
Consequent; as the Council represents the Whole. And that which belongs to a
thing by consequent, does not otherwise, nor longer, belong unto it, then it
consents and cleaves to that, upon which it is a consequent. And therefore a
General Council has not this Assistance, but as it keeps to the whole Church,
and Spouse of Christ, whose it is to hear His word, and determine by it. And
therefore if a General Council will go out of the Churches way, it may easily
go without the Churches Truth.

Fourthly, I Consider, That All agree, That the Church in General Consid. 4.
can never err from the Faith necessary to Salvation: No Persecution, no
Temptation, no S. Mat. 16. 28
Gates of Hell (whatsoever is meant by them) can ever so prevail against it.
For all the Members of the Militant Church cannot err, either in the whole
Faith, or in any Article of it; it is impossible. For if all might so err,
there could be no union between them, as Members, and Christ the Head: And no
Union between Head and Members, no Body, and so no Church; which cannot be. But
there is not the like consent, That Ecclesia Universalis fidem hab^t
indefectibilem, etc. Non quidem in Generali Synodo congregata, quam aliquoties
errasse percepimus, etc. Wald. Lib. 2. Doct. Fid. Ar. 2. ^. 19. 1. 38. Number. 4.
General Councels cannot err. And it seems strange to me, the Fathers having
to do with so many Heretics, and so many of them opposing Church Authority,
that in the Condemnation of those Heretics, this Proposition, even in terms (
A General Council cannot err) should not be found in any one of them, that I
can yet see. Now suppose it were true, that no General Council had erred in any
matter of moment to this day; which will not be found true: yet this would not
have followed, that it is therefore infallible, and cannot err. I have no time
to descend into Particulars, therefore to the General still. S. Augustine Aug.
^. ^. de Bapt. Contra Donat. cap. 3.
puts a Difference between the Rules of Scripture, and the Definitions of men.
This Difference is: Praeponitur Scriptura, That the Scripture has the
Prerogative. That Prerogative is, That whatsoever is found written in
Scripture, may neither be doubted, nor disputed, whether it be true, or right.
But the Letters of Bishops may not only be disputed, but corrected by Bishops
that are more learned and wise than they, or by National Councels; and National
Councels by Plenary or General: And even Ipsaque plenaria saepe priora a
posterioribus emendart.
Plenary Councels themselves may be amended, the former by the later. It seems
it was no News with S. Augustine, that a General Council might err, and
therefore inferior to the Scripture, which may neither be doubted, nor
disputed, where it affirms. And if it be so with the Desinition of a Council
too (as Vox Ecclesiae talis est, ut non de eajudicemus recte^e ansecus
docuerit. So. Stapl. Relect. c. 4. q. 1. A. 1.
Stapleton would have it) That that may neither be doubted, nor disputed; Where
is then the Scriptures Prerogative?

Place; but it cannot be wrastled off. De Regulis Morum and Disciplina. ^^lect.
Cont. 6. q. 3. A. ^.
Stapleton says first, That S. Augustine speaks of the Rules of Manners, and
Discipline: And this is Bellarmine's last Shift. Both are out, and Bellarmine
in a Contradiction. Bellarmine in a Contradiction: For first he tells us,
General Councels cannot err in L 2. de Conc. c. 2. Princip.
Precepts of Manners; and then, to turn off S. Augustine in this Place, he
tells us, That if S. Augustine does not speak of matter of Fact, but of Right,
and of universal Questions of Right, then is he to be understood of Ibid. cap.
7. Potest etiam.
Precepts of Manners, not of Points of Faith: Where he has first run himself
upon a Contradiction; and then we have gained this ground upon him, That either
his Answer is nothing; or else against his own state of the Question, A General
Council can err in Precepts of Manners. So belike when Bellarmine is at a
Shift, A General Council can, and cannot err in Precepts of Manners. And both
are out: For the whole Dispute of S. Augustine, is against the Error of S.
Cyprian, followed by the Donatists, which was an Error in Faith; Namely, That
true Baptism could not be given by Heretics, and such as were out of the
Church. And the Proof which Stapleton and Bellarmine draw out of the subsequent
words ( Quando aliquo rerum experimento, quod clausum erat, ^peritur.
When by any experiment of things, that which was shut, is opened) is too weak:
For experiment there is not of Fact; nor are the words, Conclusum est, as if it
were of a Rule of Discipline concluded, as Stapleton cites them; but a farther
experiment or proof of the Question in hand; and pertaining to Faith which was
then shut up, and as S. Augustine after speaks, Ibid. c. 4. Nebulis involuta.
wrapped up in cloudy darkness.

Stapleton Sensus est, quod Concilia posteriora emendant, id est, perfectius
explicant fidem in semine antiqua Doctrinae latentem, etc. Stapl. Relect.
Contr. 6. q. 3. A. 4.
will have it, That if S. Augustine do speak of a Cause of Faith, then his
meaning is, that later General Councels can mend, that is, explicate more
perfectly that Faith which lay hid in the seed of Ancient Doctrine. He makes
instance, That about the Divinity of Christ, the Council of Ephesus explicated
the first of Nice; Chalcedon, both of them; Constantinople, Chalcedon. And then
concludes: Qua in re nihil erroneum ul^um Concilium docuit, etc.
In all which things, none of (these) Councels taught that which was erroneous.
An excellent Conclusion: These Councels, and These, in this thing, taught no
Error, and were only explained: Therefore no Council can err in any matter
of Faith; or, Therefore S. Augustine speaks not of an Emendation of Error, but
of an Explanation of Sense: whereas every eye sees, neither of these can follow.

Augustine meant plainly, That even a Plenary Council might err, and that
Saep^.
often (for that is his word) and that in matter of Faith, and might and ought
so to be amended in a later Council, I think will thus appear. First, his word
is, Emendari, to be amended; which properly supposes for error, and
faultiness, not Explanation. And S. Augustine needed not to go to a word of
such a Not used but either for Corrigere, or A^serre; And so S. Augustine uses
the word, ^. 20. contr. Faust. c. 21. And Bellarmine, though he interpret it in
matter of Fact, yet equals the word with Correxit. 2 de Conc. c. 8. Respond.
Quaest.
forced sense, nor sure would, especially in a Disputation against Adversaries.
Next, S. Augustine's Dispute is against S. Cyprian and the Council held at
Carthage about Baptism by Heretics; in which Point, that National Council
erred (as now all agree.) And S. Augustine's Deduction goes on: Scripture
cannot be other than right; that is the Praerogative of it: but Bishops may,
and be Reprehendi.
Reprehended for it, if peradventure they Si quid in iis forte a veritate
deviatum est.
err from the Truth; and that either by more Learned Bishops, or by Provincial
Councels. Here Reprehension, and that for deviation from the Truth, is (I hope)
Emendation properly, and not Explanation only. Then Provincial Councels, they
must Cedere.
yield to General: And to yield, is not in case of Explanation only. Then it
follows, That even Plenary Councels themselves may be amended, the former by
the later; still retaining that which went before, If peradventure they erred,
or made deviation from the Truth. And if this be not so, I would fain know, why
in one and the same tenor of words, in one and the same continuing Argument
and Deduction of S. Augustine, Reprehendi should be in proper sense, and a
veritate deviatum in proper sense, and Cedere in proper sense; and only
Emendari should not be proper, but stand for an Explanation? If you say the
Reason is, because the former words are applied to men, and National Councels,
both which may err; but this last to General Councels, which cannot err: This
is most miserable Begging of the Principle, and thing in Question.

Augustine concludes there, That the General Council preceding may be amended
by General Councels that follow, Quum cognoscitur quod latebat.
When that is known which lay hid before. Not as Stapleton would have it, Lay
hid as in the seed of Ancient Doctrine only, and so needed nothing but
explanation; but hid in some darkness or ambiguity, which led the former into
error, and mistaking, as appears: For S. Augustine would have this amendment
made without Sacrilegious Pride, doubtless, of insulting upon the former
Council, that was to be amended; and without swelling Arrogance, sure, against
the weakness in the former Council; and without contention of envy, which uses
to accompany man's frailty, where his, or his friends Error is to be amended by
the later Council; and in holy Humility, in Catholic Peace, in Christian
Charity, no question, that a Schism be not made to tear the Church (as here the
Donatists did) while one Council goes to reform the lapse of another, if any
be. Now to what end should this Learned Father be so zealous in this work, this
highest work, that I know in the Church, Reviewing and Surveying General
Councels, to keep off Pride, and Arrogance, and Envy, and to keep all in
Humility, Peace, and Charity; if after all this noise, he thought later
Councels might do nothing, but amend, that is, explain the former?

Bellar. L. 2. de Council. c. 7. Respondeo primo sort.
Bellarmine adds to these two of Stapleton, is poorest of all, namely, That S.
Augustine speaks of unlawful Councels; and it is no question, but they may be
amended, as the second Ephesine was at Chalcedon. For this Answer has no
Foundation but a peradventure: Nor durst Bellarmine rest upon it. And most
manifest it is, that S. Augustine speaks of Councels in general, that they may
err, and be amended in Doctrine of Faith; and in case they be not amended,
that then they be condemned and rejected by the Church, as this of Ephesus, and
diverse others were. And as for that mere Trick, of the. 26. Nu. 1.
Popes Instruction, Approbation, or Confirmation, to preserve it from Error,
or ratify it that it has not erred, the most ancient Church knew it not. He
had his Suffrage, as other great Patriarchs had, and his Vote was highly
esteemed, not only for his Place, but for worth too, as Popes were then. But
that the Whole Council depended upon him, and his Confirmation, was then
unknown, and I verily think at this day not Believed, by the Wise and Learned
of his Adherents.

Fifthly, it must be considered, If a General Council may err, Consid. 5.
who shall judge it? S. Augustine is at Ibid.
priora a posterioribus, Nothing sure, that is less then a 32. Number. 5
General Council. Why, but this yet lays all open to uncertainties, and makes
way for a Whirlwind of a Private Spirit, to ruffie the Church. No, neither of
these. First, all is not open to uncertainties. For General Councels lawfully
called, and ordered, and lawfully proceeding, are a Great and an Awful
Representation, and cannot err in matters of Faith, keeping themselves to
God's Rule, and not attempting to make a New of their own; and are with all
submission to be observed by every Christian, where Scripture, or evident
Demonstration come not against them. Nor does it make way for the Whirlwind of
a private Spirit: For private Spirits are too giddy to rest upon Scripture, and
to heady and shallow to be acquainted with Demonstrative Arguments. And it were
happy for the Church, if she might never be troubled with Private Spirits, till
they brought such Arguments. I know this is hotly objected against Praefat. p.
29.
Hooker, the Dial. dictus, Deus and Rex.
Author calls him a Cordatus Protestans.
Wise Protestant, yet turns thus upon him. If a Council must yield to a
Demonstrative Proof, Who shall judge, whether the Argument that is brought, be
a Demonstration, or not? For every man, that will kick* against the Church,
will say, the Scripture he urges, is evident, and his Reason a Demonstration.
And what is this, but to leave all to the wildness of a Private Spirit? Can any
ingenuous man read this Passage in Hooker, and dream of a Private Spirit? For
to the Question, Who shall judge? Hooker answers, as if it had been then made;
Praefat. p. 29. And therefore A. C. is much to blame after all this, to talk of
a pretext of seeming evident Scripture, or Demonstration; as he does, p. 59.
An Argument necessary and Demonstrative, is such (says he) as being proposed
to any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly assent unto it.
So, it is not enough to think or say it is Demonstrative. The Light then of a
Demonstrative Argument, is the Evidence which it self has in it self to all
that understand it. Well; but because all understand it not, If a Quarrel be
made, Who shall decide it? No Question, 32. Number. 2
but a General Council, not a Private Spirit: first, in the intent of the
Author; for Hooker in all that Discourse makes the Sentence of the Council
Praefat. p. 28.
binding: and therefore that is made Judge, not a Private Spirit. And then for
the Judge of the Argument, it is as plain: For if it be evident to any man,
then to so many Learned men as are in a Council, doubtless: And if they cannot
but assent, it is hard to think them so impious, that they will define against
it. And if that which is thought evident to any man, be not evident to such a
grave Assembly, it is probable it is no Demonstration, and the producers of it,
ought to rest, and not to trouble the Church.

Hooker's alone, nor is it newly thought on by us. It is a Ground in Nature,
which Grace does ever set right, never undermine. And 2 de Bapt. cont. Don.
cap. 4.
S. Augustine has it twice in one Chapter, That S. Cyprian, and that Council
at Carthage, would have presently yielded to any one that would ^^ni verum
dicenti, and demonstra^ti.
demonstrate Truth. Nay, it is a Rule with Cont. Fund. cap. 4.
him, Consent of Nations, Authority confirmed by Miracles, and Antiquity, S.
Peter's Chair, and Succession from it, Motives to keep him in the Catholic
Church, must not hold him against Demonstration of Truth; Quae quidem si tam
manifesta monstratur, utin dubium venire non possit, praeponenda est omnibus
illis reous, quibus in Catholica teneor: Ita si aliquid apertissi^ u^ in
Evangelio. Ib. c. 4.
which if it be so clearly demonstrated, that it cannot come into doubt, it is
to be preferred before all those things, by which a man is held in the
Catholic Church. Therefore an evident Scripture, or Demonstration of Truth
must take place every where; but where these cannot be had, there must be
Submission to Authority.

Bellarmine himself grant this? For speaking of Councels, he delivers this
Proposition, That Inferiors may not judge, whether their Superiors (and that
in a Council) do proceed lawfully, or not. But then having bethought himself,
that Inferiors at all times, and in all Causes, are not to be cast off; he
adds this Exception, L. 2. de Council. c. 8. Alii dicunt Concilium. Nisi
manifestissime conste^ intolerabilem Errorem committi.
Unless it manifestly appear that an intolerable Error be committed. So then,
if such an Error be, and be manifest, Inferiors may do their duty, and a
Council must yield; unless you will accuse Bellarmine too of leaning to a
Private Spirit: for neither does he express who shall judge, whether the Error
be intolerable.

General Council is, and must be infallible. Your Fellows tell us, (and you can
affirm no more) That the Voice of the Church determining in Council, is not
Stapl. Relect. Cont. 4. Q. 3. Art. 1.
Humane, but Divine. That is well; Divine, then sure Infallible: yea; but the
Proposition sticks in the throat of them that would utter it. It is not Divine
simply* but in a Divina suo modo. Ibid. And so A. C. too, who has opened his
mouth very wide to prove the Succession of Pastors in the Church, to be of
Divine and Infallible Authority; yet in the close is forced to add, Atleast in
some sort, p. ^1.
manner Divine. Why but then sure not infallible, because it may speak loudest
in that manner, in which it is not Divine. Nay more: The Church (forsooth) is
an infallible Foundation of Faith Iu altiori genere, viz. in genere causae
efficientis, atque (...) aliqud ex par^e formalis. Ibid. Q. A. Ar. 3.
in an higher kind than the Scripture: For the Scripture is but a Foundation
in Testimony, and Matter to be believed; but the Church as the efficient Cause
of Faith, and in some sort the very formal. Is not this Blasphemy? Does not
this knock against all evidence of Truth, and his own Grounds, that says it?
Against all evidence of Truth: For in all Ages, all men that once admitted the
Scripture to be the Word of God (as all Christians do) do with the same breath
grant it most undoubted and infallible. But all men have not so judged of the
Churches Definitions, though they have in greatest Obedience submitted to them.
And against his own Grounds, that says it: For the Scripture is absolutely, and
every way Divine; the Churches Definition is but s^o modo, in a sort, or manner
Divine. But that which is but in a sort, can never be a Foundation in an Higher
Degree, than that which is absolute, and every way such: Therefore neither can
the Definition of the Church be so Infallible as the Scripture; much less, in
altiori genere, in a higher kind than the Scripture. But because, when all
other things fail, you fly to this, That the Churches Definition in a General
Council, is by Inspiration, and so Divine and Infallible: my haste shall not
carry me from a little Consideration of that too.

Sixthly then, If the Definition of a General Council be infallible, Consid. 6.
then the Infallibility of it is either in the Conclusion, and in the Means
that prove it; or in the Conclusion, not the Means; or in the Means, not the
Conclusion. But it is infallible in none of these. Not in the first, The
Conclusion and the Means: For there are diverse Deliberations in General
Councels, where the Conclusion is Catholic; but the Means by which they prove
it, not infallible. Not in the second, The Conclusion, and not the Means: For
the Conclusion must follow the nature of the Premises or Principles out of
which it is deduced; therefore if those which the Council uses be sometimes
uncertain, as is proved before, the Conclusion cannot be Infallible. Not in the
third, The Means, and not the Conclusion: For that cannot be true and
necessary, if the Means be so. And this I am sure you will never grant; because
if you should, you must deny the Infallibility which you seek to establish.

worn out, nor shifted off) your great Master Re^ect. Cont. ^ q. 2. a^ Arg. 11
Stapleton (who is miserably hampered in it, and indeed so are you all)
answers, That the Infallibility of a Council is in the second Course, that is,
And herein* I must needs commend your Wisdom. For you have had many Popes so
ignorant, grossly ignorant, as that they have been no way able to ^i^t, and
examine the Means. And therefore you do most advisedly make them infallible in
the Conclusion without the Means. 39. Number 8.
It is infallible in the Conclusion, though it be uncertain and fallible in the
Means, and Proof of it. How comes this to pass? It is a thing altogether
unknown in Nature, and Art too, That fallible Principles can, either father, or
mother, beget, or bring forth an infallible Conclusion.

Nature, and in all Argumentation, that causes Knowledge. But we shall have
Reasons for it: Ibid. Not. 4.
First, because the Church is discursive, and uses the Weights, and Moments of
Reason in the Means; but is Prophetical, and depends upon immediate Revelation
from the Spirit of God, in delivering the Conclusion. It is but the making of
this appear, and all Controversy is at an end. Well, I will not discourse
here, To what end there is any use of Means, if the Conclusion be Prophetical;
which yet is justly urged: for no good cause can be assigned of it. If it be
Prophetical in the Conclusion, (I speak still of the present Church ^ for that
which included the Apostles, which had the Spirit of Prophecy, and immediate
Revelation, was ever Prophetic in the Definition, but then that was Infallible
in the Means too) That since it delivers the Conclusion not according to Nature
and Art, that is, out of Principles which can bear it, there must be some
Supernatural Authority which must deliver this Truth: That (say I) must be the
Scripture. For if you fly to immediate Revelation now, the Enthusiaesm must be
yours. But the Scriptures, which are brought in the very Exposition of all the
Primitive Church, neither say it, nor enforce it. Therefore Scripture warrants
not your Prophecy in the Conclusion. And I know no other thing, that can
warrant it. If you think the Tradition of the Church can, make the world
beholding to you. Produce any Father of the Church that says: This is an
Universal Tradition of the Church, That her Definitions in a General Council
are Prophetical, and by immediate Revelation. Produce any one Father that says
it of his own Authority, that he thinks so: Nay, make it appear, that ever any
Prophet, in that which he delivered from God, as infallible Truth, was ever
discursive at all in the Means. Nay, make it but probable in the ordinary
course of Prophecy, (and I hope, you go no higher, nor will I offer at God's
absolute Power) That that which is discursive in the Means, can be Prophetic
in the Conclusion, and you shall be my great Apollo for ever. In the mean time,
I have learnt this from Prophet audi^ba^t a Des interius inspirante. Tho. 2.
2^. q. 5. A. 1. ad. 3.
yours, That all Prophecy is by Vision, Inspiration, etc. and that no Vision
admits discourse: That all Prophecy is an Illumination, not always present,
but when the Word of the The Word of the Lord came unto me, is common in the
Prophets.
Lord came to them; and that was not by discourse. And yet you Stapl. Relect.
Cont. 4. q. 2. ^. 473.
say again, That this Prophetic Infallibility of the Church is not gotten
without study and Industry. You should do well to tell us too, why God would
put his Church to study for the Spirit of Prophecy, which never any Particular
Prophet was put unto. Propheticam Revelationem ^^^^o pacto ha^^^^ posse, vel
(...) Naturae, vel ^^udio, contra Avi^e^nam, Alg^^ a^em, Averr^em, etc. Fran.
Picus, 2. Praenot. c. 4.
And whosoever shall study for it, shall not do it in vain, since Prophecy is
a 1 Cor. 12. 10.
Gift, and can never be an acquired Habit. And there is somewhat in it, that
Bellarmine, in all his Dispute for the Authority of General Councels, dares not
come at this Rock. L. 2. de Conc. c. 12.
He prefers the Conclusion, and the Canon, before the Acts and the
Deliberations of Councels; and so do we: but I do not remember, that ever he
speaks out, That the Conclusion is delivered by Prophecy, or Revelation. Sure
he sounded the shore, and found danger here. He did sound it: For a little
before he speak, plainly (would his bad Cause let him be constant) Concilia non
habent, neque scribunt immediatas Revelationes, etc. sed ex verbo Dei per
ratiocinationem deducunt Conclusiones. Bellar. Lib. 2. de Council. cap. 12. S
Dicuntur.
Councels do deduce their Conclusions. What? from Inspiration? No: But out of
the Word of God, and that per ratiocinationem, by Argumentation: Neither have
they, nor do they write any immediate Revelations.

Stapl. Ibid. 374.
Stapleton will have it Prophetic in the Conclusion, is, Because that which is
determined by the Church, is matter of Faith, not of Knowledge: And that
therefore the Church proposing it to be believed, though it use Means, yet it
stands not upon Art, or Means, or Argument, but the Revelation of the Holy
Ghost: Else when we embrace the Conclusion proposed, it should not be an Assent
of Faith, but an Habit of Knowledge. This for the first Part (That the Church
uses the Means, but follows them not) is all one in substance with the former
Reason. And for the later Part, That then our admitting the Decree of a
Council, would be no Assent of Faith, but an Habit of Knowledge; what great
inconvenience is there, if it be granted? For I think it is undoubted Truth,
That one, and the same Conclusion may be Faith to the Believer, that cannot
prove, and Knowledge to the Learned, that can. And Cont. Fund. c. 4.
S. Augustine, I am sure, in regard of one, and the same thing, even this, the
very wisdom of the Church in her Doctrines, ascribes Understanding to one sort
of men, and Belief to another weaker sort. And Tho. p. 1. q. 2. A. 2. ad 1.
Nihil prohibet illud, quod secundum se demonstrabile est, and scibile, ab
aliquo accipi ut Credibilt, qui Demonstrationem non capit.
Thomas goes with him.

Nature, and cannot have Light enough to see the way to Heaven, but by Grace.
This Grace was first merited, after given by Christ: this Grace is first
kindled by Faith; by which, if we agree not to some Supernatural Principles,
which no Reason can demonstrate simply, we can never see our way. But this
Light, when it has made Reason submit it self, clears the eye of Reason, it
never puts it out. In which sense, it may be, is that of L. 3. Rationabi^is and
ubique diffusa.
Optatus, That the very Catholic Church it self is reasonable, as well as
diffused every where. By which ut ipsa fide valentiores facti, quod cre(...)
intelligere ^^ereamur, non jam hominibus, sed Deo intriasecus mentem nostr^m
(...) and illuminante. S. Aug. cont. epist. Fundament. c. 14.
Reason enlightened, (which is stronger than Reason) the Church in all Ages has
been able, either to convert, or convince, or at least Omnia genera Ingeniorum
subdita Scripturae. S. Aug. L 22. cont. Faust. c^^. 96.
stop the mouths of Philosophers, and the great men of Reason, in the very
Point of Faith, where it is at highest. To the present occasion then. The
first, immediate, Fundamental Points of Faith, without which there is no
Salvation, as they cannot be proved by Reason; so neither need they be
determined by any Council, nor ever were they attempted, they are so plain set
down in the Scripture. If about the sense, and true meaning of these, or
necessary deduction out of these Prime Articles of Faith, General Councels
determine any thing, as they have done in Nice, and the rest; there is no
inconvenience, that one and the same Canon of the Council should be believed,
as it reflects upon the Articles and Grounds indemonstrable; and Almain. 3. D.
24. q. 1. and Tho. 2. 2. e. q 1. A. 5. C. Id quod est scitum ab uno homine
etiam in flatu vi. c, est ab alio Creditum, qui hoc Demonstrare non novit.
yet known to the Learned, by the Means and Proof, by which that Deduction is
vouched, and made good. And again, the Conclusion of a Council, suppose that in
Nice, about the Consubstantiality of Christ with the Father, in it self
considered, is indemonstrable by Reason; There I believe, and assent in Faith:
But the same Conclusion, Concilium Nicaenum deduxit Conclusionem ex Scripturis.
Bellar. L. 2. de Council. c. 12. Sic etiam.
if you give me ground of Scripture, and the Creed (and somewhat must be
supposed in all, whether Faith, or Knowledge) is demonstrable by natural
Reason, against any Arrian in the world. And if it be demonstrable, I may know
it, and have an Habit of it. And what inconvenience in this? For he weaker sort
of Christians, which cannot deduce, when they have the Principle granted, they
are to rest upon the Definition only, and their Assent is mere Faith: yea, and
the Learned too, where there is not a Demonstration evident to them, assent by
Faith only, and not by Knowledge. And what inconvenience in this? Nay, the
necessity of Nature is such, that these Principles once given, the
understanding of man cannot rest, but it must be thus. And the S. Pet. 3. 15
Apostle would never have required a man to be able to give a Reason, and an
account of the hope that is in him, if he might not be able to know his
account, or have lawful interest to give it, when he knew it, without
prejudicing his Faith by his Knowledge. And suppose exact Knowledge and mere
Belief cannot stand together in the same Person, in regard of the same thing,
by the same means; yet that does not make void this Truth. For where is that
exact knowledge, or in whom, that must not merely, in points of Faith, believe
the Article, or ground upon which they rest? But when that is once believed, it
can demonstrate many things from it. And Definitions of Councels are not
Principia Fidei, Principles of Faith, but Deductions from them.

Wherein are we nearer to Unity Consid. 7.
by a Council, if a Council may err? Besides the Answer given, I promised to
consider which Opinion was most agreeable with the Church, which most able to
preserve, or reduce Christian Peace: The Roman, That a Council cannot err; or
the Protestants, That it can. And this I propose not as a Rule, but leave the
Christian world to consider of it, as I do.

First then I consider, Whether in those places of Scripture before mentioned,
or any other, there be promised to the present Church an absolute
Infallibility? Or whether such an Infallibility will not serve the turn, as
Relect. cont. 4. q. 2. Notab. 3. Exact^ and Omni moda Infallibilitate non
indiget, sed satis est semel acceptis, etc.
Stapleton, after much wrigling, is forced to acknowledge? One not every way
exact: because it is enough, if the Church do diligently insist upon that which
was once received: and there is not need of so great certainty to open and
explicate that which lies hid in the seed of Faith sown, and deduce from it; as
to seek out, and teach that which was altogether unknown. And if this be so,
then sure the Church of the Apostles required guidance by a greater degree of
Infallibility, than the present Church; which yet, if it follow the Scripture,
is Infallible enough, though it has not the same degree of Certainty which the
Apostles had, and the Scripture has. Nor can I tell, what to make of
Bellarmine, that in a whole Chapter disputes five Prerogatives, in Certainty of
Truth, L. 2. de Conc. c 12. ult. Cum utraque sint infallibilis veritatis, ^que
certa dici possunt.
that the Scripture has above a Council; and at last Concludes, That They may
be said to be equally certain in Infallible Truth.

Consider, is: Suppose this not Exact, but congruous Infallibility in the
Church; Is it not residing according to Power, and Right of Authority in the
whole Church (always understanding the Church in this place pro Communitate
Praelatorum, for Church Governors, which have Votes in Councels) and in a
General Council, only by Power Quod si Ecclesiae Universitati non est data
ulla Authoritas; ergo nec Concilio Generali, quatenus Ecclisiam Universalem
repraesentat. Bellar. L 2. de Council. c. 16. Ex his habemus.
deputed with Mandate to determine? The Places of Scripture, with Expositions
of the Fathers upon them, make me apt to believe this. S. Peter (says Petrus
Personam Ecclesiae Catholicae sustinet, and huic datae sunt Claves, quum Petro
datae. De Ag^n. Chr. c. 30.
S. Augustine) did not receive the Keys of the Church, but as sustaining the
person of the Church. Now for this Particular, suppose the Key of Doctrine be
to let in Truth, and shut out Error; and suppose the Key rightly used,
Infallible in this: yet this Infallibility is primely in the Church Docent, in
whose person (not strictly in his own) S. Peter received the Keys. But here
Stapleton lays cross my way again, and would thrust me out of this
Consideration. He R^l. Cont. 6. q. 3. A. 5. Sed propter Primatum quem gerebat
Ecclesiae, id^bque etsi finaliter Ecclesia accepit, tamen formaliter Petrus
accepit.
grants, that S. Peter received these Keys indeed, and in the Person of the
Church; but (says he) that was, because he was Primate of the Church; And
therefore the Church received the Keys finally, but S. Peter formally: that is
(if I mistake him not) S. Peter for himself, and his Successors received the
Keys in his own Right; but to this end, to benefit the Church, of which he was
made Pastor. But I keep on in my Consideration still. For the Church here is
taken pro Communitate Praelatorum, for all the Prelates, that is, for the
Church as it is Docent, and Regent, as it Teaches, and Governs. For so only it
relates to a General Council. And so Ad omnes dicitur, Pasce oves, etc. S. Aug.
de Ag one Christian. c. 30. which cannot be spoken or meant of the Laity. Et
Bilson. Perpet. Gover. c. 8. fine.
S. Augustine, and Stapleton himself, understand it in the places before
alleged. Now in this sense S. Peter received the Keys formally for himself
and his Successors at Rome, but not for them only; but as he received them in
the person of the whole Church Docent, so he received them also in their Right,
as well as his own, and for them all. And in this sense S. Peter received the
Keys in the person of the Church (by Stapleton's good leave) both Finally and
Formally. For I would have it considered also, whether it be ever read in any
Classick Author, That to receive a thing in the person of another, or
sustaining the person of another, is only meant Finally to receive it, that
is, to his good, and not in his right. I should think, he that receives any
thing in the person of another, receives it indeed to his good, and to his use,
but in his right too: And that the formal right is not in the receiver only,
but in him or them also, whose person he sustains while he receives it. I Will
take one of Stapleton's Stapl. Relect. Cont. 3. q. 1. A. 1. ad 2.
own Instances. A Consul or prime Senator in an Aristocratical Government (such
as the Churches is Ministerially under Christ) receives a Privilege from the
Senate, and he receives it as Primarily, and as Formally for them, as for
himself, and in the Senates right as well as his own, he being but a chief
part, and they the whole. And this is S. Peter's Case in Relation to the whole
Church Docent and Regent, saving that his Place and Power was Perpetual, and
not Annual, as the Consul's was. This Stumbling Block then is nothing, and in
my Consideration it stands still, That the Church in this Notion by the hands
of S. Peter received the Keys, and all Power signified by them; and transmitted
them to their Successors, who by the assistance of Gods Spirit may be able to
use them, but still in and by the same hands, and perhaps to open and shut in
some things Iufallibly, when the Pope, and a General Council too (forgetting
both her, and her Rule, the Scripture) are to seek how to turn these Keys in
their Wards.

third Particular, I Consider, is: Suppose in the whole Catholic Church
Militant, an absolute Infallibility in the Prime Foundations of Faith,
absolutely necessary to Salvation; and that this Power of not erring so, is not
Non omnia illa quae tradit Ecclesia sub Definitione Judiciali (i. in Concilio)
sunt de Necessitate Salutis credenda, sed illa duntaxat quae sic tradit
concurrente Universali totius Ecclesiae consensu, implicit, vel explicit,
vere, vel interpretative. Gerson. Tract. de Declaratione veritatum quae
credendae sunt, etc. 4. par. 1. p. 414.
communicable to a General Council, which represents it, but that the Council
is subject to error: This supposition does not only preserve that which you
desire in the Church, an Infallibility, but it Possit tamen contingere quod
quamvis Generale Concilium definiret aliquid contra Fidem, Ecclesia Dei non
exponeretur periculo. Quia possit contingere quod congregati in Concilio
Generali essent pauci and viles tam in r^, quam in hominum reputatione,
respectu illorum qui ad illud Concilium Generale minime convenissent. Et tunc
illorum leviter Error extirparet^^ per multitudinem meliorum and sapientiorum
and ^amosiorum illis. Quious etiam multitudo simplicium adhaereret magis, etc.
Och. Dial. p. 3. l. 3. c. 13.
meets with all inconveniences, which usually have done, and daily do perplex
the Church. And here is still a Remedy for all things. For if Private Respects,
if Many of these were potent at Ariminum, and S^l^ucia.
Bandies in a Faction, if power, and favor of some parties, if weakness of
them which have the managing, if any unfit mixture of State-Councels, if any
departure from the Rule of the Word of God, if any thing else sway and wrench
the Council; the Whole Determinationibus quae a Concilio, vel Pontifice Summo
fiunt super iis dubitationibus, quae substantiam fidei concernunt, necessario
credendum est, dum Universalis Ecclesia non reclamet. Fr. P. Mirand. Theor. 8.
Church, upon evidence found in express Scripture, or demonstration of this
miscarriage, has power to represent her self in another Body, or Council, and
to take order for what was amiss, either practiced, or concluded. So here is a
means without any infringing any lawful Authority of the Church, to preserve,
or reduce Unity, and yet grant, as I did, and as the Artic. 21.
Church of England does, That a General Council may err. And this course the
Church heretofore took; for she did call, and represent her self in a new
Council, and define against the Heretical Conclusions of the former: as in the
case at Ariminum, and the second of Ephesus, is evident: And in other Councels
named by Bellar. L. 2. de Council c. 16. Tertio, Concilium sine Papa
Bellarmine. Now the Church is never more cunningly abused, than when men out
of this Truth, that she may err, infer this Falsehood, that she is not to be
Obeyed. For it will never follow, She may Err, Therefore She may not Govern.
For he that says, Obey them which have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, Heb. 13. 17.
Heb. 13. commands Obedience, and expressly ascribes Rule to the Church. And
that is not only a Pastoral Power, to teach and direct, but a Praetorian also,
to Control and Censure too, where Errors or Crimes are against Points
Fundamental, or of great Consequence. Else S. Paul would not have given the
Rule for Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. Nor Christ himself have put the 1 Cor. 5. 5.
man that will not hear and obey the Church into the place and condition of an
Ethnic and a Publican, as he does, S. Mat. 18. S. Mat 18. 17.
And Solomon's Rule is general, and he has it twice: My son, forsake not the
teaching, or instruction of thy Mother. Now this Prove. 1. ^8.
is either spoken and meant of a natural Mother; And her Authority Vid. S. Aug.
2. Conf. c. 3. and Prove. 6. 20. Ecclus 3. 3. Prove. 15. 20.
over her Children is confirmed, Ecclus 3. And the fool will be upon him, that
despises her, Prove. 15. Or it is extended also to our Mystical and Spiritual
Mother, the Church. And so the Geneva Forsake not thy Mothers instruction, that
is, the Teaching of the Church, wherein the faithful are begotten by the
incorruptible seed of Gods Word. Annot. in Prove. 1. 8.
Note upon the Place expresses it. And I cannot but incline to this Opinion;
Because the Blessings which accompany this Obedience are so many and great, as
that they are not like to be the fruits of Obedience to a Natural Mother only,
as Solomon expresses them all, Prove. 6. And in all this, here is no Exception of
Prove. 6. 22.
of the Mothers erring. For Matter errans, an erring Mother loses neither the
right nor the power of a Mother by her error. And I marvel what Son should
show reverence or obedience, if no Mother, that has erred, might exact it.
It Is true, the Son is not to follow his Mothers error, or his Mother into
error. But it is true too, it is a grievous crime in a Son to cast off all
obedience to his Mother, because at some time, or in some things, she has
fallen into error. And howsoever, this Consideration meets with this
Inconvenience, as well as the rest. For suppose (as I said) in the whole
Catholic Militant Church, an absolute Infallibility in the Prime Foundations
of Faith absolutely necessary to Salvation: And then, though the Mother Church,
Provincial, or National, may err; yet if the Grandmother, the whole Universal
Church cannot in these necessary things, all remains safe, and all occasions of
Disobedience taken from the possibility of the Churches erring, are quite taken
away. Nor is this Mother less to be valued by her Children, because in some
smaller things Age had filled her face fuller of wrinkles. For where it is said,
that Christ makes to himself a Church without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. that is
not understood Ephesians. 5. 27.
of the Church Militant, but of the Church Triumphant. In id progrediuntur (
Pelagiani) ut dicant vitam Justorum in hoc seculo nullum omnino habere
peccatum, and ex his Ecclesiam Christi in hac mortalitate perfici, ut sit
omnino sine macula and ruga. Quasi nou sit Christi Ecclesia, quae in toto
terrarum orb clamat ad Deum: Dimitte nobis debita nostra, etc. S. Aug. lde
Haeresibus, Haer. 88.
And to maintain the contrary, is a Branch of the spreading Heresy of
Pelagianism. Nor is the Church on earth any freer from wrinkles in Doctrine,
and Discipline, than she is from Spots in Life and Conversation.

Consider, is: Suppose a General Council take it self to be infallible in all
things which are of Faith: If it prove not so, but that an Error in the Faith
be concluded; the same Erring Opinion that makes it think it self Infallible,
makes the Error of it seem irrevocable. And when Truth, which lay hid, shall
be brought to light, the Church (who was lulled asleep by the opinion of
Infallibility) is left open to all mauner of Distractions, as it appears at
this day. And that a Council may err, (besides all other Instances, which are
not few) appears by that Error of the Council of Sess. 13.
Constance. And one Instance is enough to overthrow a General, be it a Council.
S. Matthew. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
Christ instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood in both kinds. To break
Christ's Institution, is a Damnable Error, and so confessed by Return of
Untruths upon Mr. Jewel. Ar. a. Untruth 49.
Stapleton. The Council is bold, and defines peremptorily, That to Communicate
in both kinds, is not necessary, with a Non obstante to the Institution of
Christ. Consider now with me, Is this an Error, or not? 4. De Eucharist. c. 26.
Bellarmine, and Stapleton, and you too, say it is not; because to receive under
both kinds, is not by Divine Right. No? No sure. For it was not Christ's
Bellar. Ibid. Vicesimo proferunt.
Precept, but his Example. Why, but I had thought, Christ's Institution of a
Sacrament had been more than his Example only, and as binding for the
Necessaries of a Sacrament, the Matter and Form, And now lately in a Catechism
Printed at Paris, 1637. without the Authors name, it is twice affirmed thus: The
Institution of a Sacrament is of it self a Command. Conference 14. p. 244. And
again, p. 260. Institution is a Precept.
as a Precept: Therefore speak out, and deny it to be Christ's Institution, or
else grant with Stapleton, It is a damnable Error to go against it. If you can
prove, that Christ's Institution is not as binding to us as a Precept, (which
you shall never be able) take the Precept with it, S. Matthew. 26 1 Cor. 11.
(...), in Liturg. S. Chrysostom.
Drink ye All of this; which though you shift as you can, yet you can never
make it other than it is, A binding Precept. But Bellarmine has yet one better
Device than this, to save the Council. He says, It is a mere Calumny, and that
the Council has no such thing: That the Non obstante has no reference to
Receiving under both kinds, but to the time of receiving it, after Supper; in
which the Council says, the Custom of the Church is to be observed, Non
obstante, notwithstanding Christ's Example. How foul Bellarmine is in this, must
appear by the words of the Council, which are these: Licet Christus post Caenam
institucrit, and suis Discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie Panis and
Vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum, tamen hoc Non obstante, non d^bet confi^i post
Coenam, nec recipt nisi a (...). [ Here Bellarmine stays, and goes no farther;
but the Council goes on.] R^ similiter quod licet in Primitiva Ecclesta
Sacramenta reciperentur sub utraque Speci^ a fidelibus, tamen haec Consuetudo,
ut a Laicis sub speci^ Panis tantum susciptatur, habenda est pro Lege, quam non
licet reprobare. Et asserere hanc esse illicitam, est Erroneum, Et per^in^cit^r
asseren^es sunt arcen^i tanquam Haeretici. Sess. 13.
Though Christ instituted this venerable Sacrament, and gave it his Disciples
after Supper under both kinds of Bread and Wine; yet, Non obstante,
notwithstanding this, it ought not to be Consecrated after Supper, nor received
but fasting. And likewise, that though in the Primitive Church this Sacrament
was received by the faithful under both kinds; yet this Custom, that it should
be received by Laymen only under the kind of Bread, is to be held for a Law,
which may not be refused. And to say, this is an unlawful Custom of Receiving
under one kind, is erroneous; and they which persist in saying so, are to be
punished, and driven out as Heretics. Now, where is here any slander of the
Council? The words are plain, and the Non obstante must necessarily (for ought
I can yet see) be referred to both Clauses in the words following, because both
Clauses went before it, and has as much force against Receiving under both
kinds, as against Receiving after Supper. Yea, and the after-words of the
Council couple both together, in this Reference: for it follows, Et similiter,
And so likewise, that though in the Primitive Church, etc. And a man by the
Definition of this Council, may be an Heretic, for standing to Christ's
Institution, in the very matter of the Sacrament: And the Churches Law for One
kind may not be refused, but Christ's Institution under Both kinds may. And
yet this Council did not err; No; take heed of it.

Unreasonable than this: for consider any Body Collective, be it more, or less
Universal, whenever it assembles it self, did it ever give more power to the
Representing Body, of it, than binding power upon all particulars, and it self?
And did it ever give this power otherwise, than with this Reservation in
Nature, That it would call again and reform, yea, and if need were, abrogate
any Law, or Ordinance, upon just cause made evident, that this Representing
Body, had failed in Trust, or Truth? And this Power no Body Collective,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, can put out of it self, or give away to a Parliament,
or Council, or call it what you will, that represents it. Nay, in my
Consideration it holds strongest in the Church. For a Council has power to
order, settle, and Define differences arisen concerning Faith. This Power the
Council has not by any immediate Institution from Christ, but it was prudently
taken up in the Church, from the Acts 15. In Novo Testamento Exemplum
celebrationis Conciliorum, ab Apostolis babemus, etc. Joh. de Turrecremata Sum.
de Eccles. Lib. 3. c. 2. Et firmitas Conciliorum nititur Exemplo primi
Concilii. Stapl. Relect. Cont. 6. q. 3. A. 4. ad 3.
Apostles Example. So that to hold Councels to this end, is apparent
Apostolical Tradition written: but the Power, which Councels so held have, is
from the whole Catholic Church, whose members they are, and the Churches power
front God. And This is more reasonable a great deal than that of Bellarmine, 2.
de Council. c. 18. Pontificem non posse se subjicere sententiae coactivae
Concilior^m.
this Power the Church cannot farther give away to a General Council, than that
the Decrees of it shall bind all Particulars, and it self, but not bind the
whole Church from calling again; and in the After-calls, upon just Cause, to
order, yea, and if need be, to abrogate former Acts. I say, upon just Cause.
For if the Council be lawfully called, and proceed orderly, and conclude
according to the Rule, the Scripture, the whole Church cannot but approve the
Council, and then the Definitions of it, are Binding. And the Power of the
Church has no wrong in this, so long as no Power, but her own, may meddle, or
offer to infringe any Definition of hers made in her Representative Body, a
Lawful General Council. And certain it is, no Power, but her own may do it. Nor
does this open any gap to private Spirits. For all Decisions in such a Council,
are Binding: And because the whole Church can meet no other way, the Council
shall remain the Supreme, External, Living, Temporary, Ecclesiastical Judge of
all Controversies. Only the Whole Church, and she alone has power, when
Scripture or Demonstration is found, and peaceably tendered to her, to represent
her self again in a new Council, and in it to order what was amiss.

unreasonable: For you do not only make the Definition of a General Council,
but the Sentence of the Pope infallible, nay more Infallible than it. Bellar.
^. 2. de Council. c. 16 and 17.
For any General Council may err with you, if the Pope confirm it not. So
belike this Infallibility rests not in the Representative Body, the Council,
nor in the Whole Body, the Church, but in your Head of the Church, the Pope of
Rome. Now I may ask you, to what end such a trouble for a General Council? Or
wherein are we nearer to Unity, if the Pope confirm it not? You answer, (though
not in the Conference, yet elsewhere) That the Pope erres not, especially
giving Sentence in a General Council. And why especially? Does the Deliberation
of a Council help any thing to the Conclusion? Surely not in your Opinion: For
you hold the Conclusion Prophetical, the means fallible: and fallible
Deliberations cannot advance to a Prophetic Conclusion. And just as the
Council is in Stapleton's Judgment, for the Definition and the Proofs; so is
the Pope, in the Judgment of Canus lib. 6. de Locis, cap. 8. Et quidem in.
Pontifices Summi in Conclusione errar^ nequeunt, Rations autem, etc.
Melch. Canus, and them which followed him, Prophetical in the Conclusion. The
Council then is called but only in effect to hear the Pope give his Sentence
in more state. Else what means this of Relect. Co^t. 6. q. 3. Art. 5. and ibid.
Quia ad co^p^^cendos importunos Haer^ticos Concilii Generalis Definitio
illustrior est, etc. Et vulgo hominum magis satisfacit, etc.
Stapleton: The Pope by a Council joined unto him, acquires no new Power, or
Authority, or Certainty in Judging, no more than a Head is the wiser by joining
the Offices of the rest of the members to it, than it is without them? Or this
of 4. d^ Romans Pont. c. 3. At contra, Nam. Ex quo apparet tota^ firmitatem*
Conciliorum Legitimorum esse ^ Pontific^, non partim a Pontifice, partim a
Concilio.
Bellarmine, That the firmness and infallibility of a General Council is only
from the Pope, not partly from the Pope, and partly from the Council? So belike
the Presence is necessary, not the Assistance: Which opinion is the most
groundless, and worthless, that ever offered to take possession of the
Christian Church. And I am persuaded, many Learned men among your selves scorn
it at the very heart. And I avow it, I have heard some Learned and Judicious
Roman Catholics utterly condemn it. And well they may. For no man can affirm
it, but he shall make himself a scorn to all the Learned men of Christendom,
whose Judgments are not Captivated by Roman power. And for my own part, I am
clear of Et ^^^rum est quod Adversarii non asserant cum Impeccabilem: Et credo
assererent, nisi quotidiana summorum Pontificum Opera ad ^^^dendum Oppositum
compell^rent. Almain. de Author. Eccles. c. 10. fi^^.
Jacobus Almain's Opinion: And a great wonder it is to me, That they which
affirm the Pope cannot err, do not affirm likewise, that he cannot sin. And I
verily believe they would be bold enough to affirm it, did not the daily Works
of the Popes compel them to believe the Contrary. For very many of them have
led lives quite Contrary to the Gospel of Christ. Nay, such lives, as no
Epicurean Monster storied out to the world has out-gone them in sensuality, or
other gross Impiety, if their own Historians be true. Take your choice of
Platina and Onuphrius is Vitis little.
John the thirteenth, about the year 966. Or of Sylvester the second, about the
year 999. Or John the eighteenth, about the year 1003. Or Benedict the ninth,
about the year 1033. Or Boniface the eighth, about the year 1294. Or Alexander
the sixth, about the year 1492. And yet these, and their like, must be
Infallible in their Dictates and Conclusions of Faith. Do your own believe it?
Surely no. For Non enim credo aliquem esse adeo impudentem P^p^ Assentatorem,
ut ei tribuere hoc velit, ut nec errare, nec in Interpretatione S. S. Literarum
ha^^^ci^ari possit. Alphons. a Castro, Lib. 1. advers. Haeres. c. 4. And the
Gloss confesses it plainly, in c. 24. q. ^. c. A recta ergo.
Alphonsus a Castro tells us plainly, That he does not believe; that any man
can be so gross and impudent a flatterer of the Pope, as to attribute this unto
him, that he can neither err, nor mistake in expounding the holy Scripture.
This comes home; And therefore it may well be thought it has taken a shrewd
Purge. For these words are Express in the Edition at Paris, 1534. But they are
not to be found in that at Colen, 1539. Nor in that at Antwerp, 1556. Nor in
that at Paris, 1571. Harding his Detection of Errors against Jewel, p. 64.
Harding says indeed, Alphonsus left it out, of himself, in the following
Editions. Well: First, Harding says this, but proves it not; so I may choose
whether I will believe him, or no. Secondly, be it so, that he did; that cannot
help their Cause a whit. For say he did mislike the sharpness of the Phrase, or
ought else in this speech, yet he altered not his Judgment of the thing. For
in all these later Editions he speaks as home, if not more than in the first;
and says Expressly, Coelestinus erravit non solum ut privata persona, sed ut
Papa, etc. Alph. a Castro, L. 1. adv. Haeres. c. 4. ibid.
That the Pope may err, not only as a private person, but as Pope. And in
difficult Cases he adds, That the Pope ought to Consult Viros doctos, men of
Learning. And this also was the Opinion of the Ancient Church of Christ
concerning the Pope and his Infallibility. For thus Liberius, and he ^ Pope
himself, writes to Athanasius: Brother Athanasius, if you think in the presence
of God, and Christ, as I do, I pray subscribe this Confession, which is thought
to be the true Faith of the Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, that we may
be the more certain, that you think concerning the Faith, as We do. (...).
Liberius in Epist. ad (...)than^f. (...) than (...). p. (...). ^^it. Parisiens.
1608. Et E^it. Paris. Latine-Gr. 1627.
Ut ego etiam persuasus sim inhaesitanter, That I also may be persuaded without
all doubting of those things which you shall be pleased to Command me. Now I
would fain know, if the Pope at that time were, or did think himself Infallble,
how he should possibly be more certainly persuaded of any Truth belonging to
the Faith by Athanasius his concurring in Judgment with him. For nothing can
make Infallibility more certain than it is: At least, not the concurring
judgment of that is Fallible, as S. Athanasius was. Beside, the Pope
Complemented exceeding low, that would submit his unerring Judgment to be
commanded by Athanasius, who, he well knew, could Err. Again, in the Case of
Easter, (which made too great a noise in the Church of old) Post Aegypti^^^^
^pputationes and Alexandrin^ Ecclesie definitionem, Epoisco^i quoque Romanae
Ecclesiae per Literas plerique meam adhuc expectant sententiam, quid existimem
de die Paschae. S* Ambr. L. 10. Epist. 83.
Very many men called for S. Ambrose his Judgment in that Point, even after
the Definition of the Church of Alexandria, and the Bishop of Rome. And this I
presume they would not have done, had they then conceived either the Pope, or
his Church infallible. And thus it continued down to Lyra's time: For he says
expressly, Ex hoc patet quod Ecclesi^ non consistit in hominibus ratione
Potestatis vel Dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, vel Saecularis, quia multi Principes
and Summi Pontifices, and alii inferiores inventi sunt Apostatasse a Fide, etc.
Lyra in S. Matthew. 16. 18.
That many Popes as well as other Inferiors, have not only erred, but even
quite Apostatized from the Faith. And yet now nothing* but Infallibility will
serve their turns. And sometimes they have not only taken upon them to be
Infallible in Cathedra, in their Chair of Decision, but also to Prophecy
Infallibly out of the Scripture. But Prophetical Scripture (such as the
Revelation is) was too dangerous for men to meddle with, which would be careful
of their Credit in not Erring. For it fell out in the time of Innocent the
third, and Honorius the the third, (as Romans Pontifices ex Historid, etc. Quae
mendacissima esse exitus probavit. Aventin. Annal. Bo^orum, L. 7. p. 529. Edit.
Basil. 1580.
Aventine tells us) That the then Popes assured the world, that Destruction was
at hand to Saracens, Turks, and Mahumetans; which, the Event showed, were
notorious untruths. And it is remarkable which happened anno 1179. For then in a
Council held at Baron. An.
Rome, Pope Alexander the third Condemned Peter Lombard of 1179. N. 13.
Hereste: And he lay under that Damnation for thirty and six years* till
Innocent the third restored him, and condemned his Accusers. Now Peter Lombard
was then condemned for something which he had written about the humane Nature
of our Savior Christ. S^ here was a great Mystery of the Faith in hand;
something about the Incarnation. And the Pope was in Cathedra, and that in a
Council of three hundred Archbishops and Bishops. And in this Council he
condemned Peter Lombard, and, in him, his Opinion about the Incarnation: And
therefore of necessity either Pope Alexander erred, and that in Cathedra, as
Pope, in Condemning him; or Pope Innocentius, in restoring him. The truth is,
Pope Alexander had more of Alexander the Great, than of S. Peter in him. And
being accustomed to Warlike Employments, he understood not that which Peter
Lombard had written about this Mystery. And so He, and his Learned Assistants
condemned him unjustly.

Apud A. C. p. 68.
after, That you hold nothing against your Conscience; I must ever wonder much,
how that can be true, since you hold this of the Pope's Infallibility,
especially as being Prophetical in the Conclusion. If this be true, why do you
not lay all your strength together, all of your whole Society, and make this
one Proposition evident? For all Controversies about matters of Faith are
ended, and without any great trouble to the Christian World, if you can but
make this one Proposition good, That the Pope is an Infallible Judge. Till
then, this shame will follow you infallibly, and eternally, That you should
make the Pope, a mere man, Principium Fidei, a Principle, or Author of Faith;
and make the mouth of him, whom you call Christ's Vicar, sole Judge, both of
Christ's Word, be it never so manifest, and of his Church, be she never so
Learned, and careful of his Truth. And for Conclusion of this Point, I would
fain know (since this had been so plain, so easy a way, either to prevent all
Divisions about the Faith, or to end all Controversies, did they arise) why
this brief, but most necessary Proposition, The Bishop of Rome cannot err in
his Judicial Determinations concerning the Faith, is not to be found either in
letter or sense, in any Scripture, in any Council, or in any Father of the
Church, for the full space of a thousand years and more after Christ? For had
this Proposition been true, and then received in the Church, how weak were all
the Primitive Fathers, to prescribe so many Rules and Cautions for avoidance of
Heresy, as Tertullian, and Vincentius Lirinensis, and others do, and to endure
such hard Conflicts, as they did, and with so many various Haereticks; To see
Christendom so rent, and torn by some distempered Councels, as that of
Ariminum, the second of Ephesus, and others; Nay, to see the whole world almost
become Arrian, to the amazement of it self; And yet all this time not so much
as call in this Necessary Assistance of the Pope, and let the world know, That
the Bishop of Rome was infallible; that so in his Decision all Differences
might cease? For either the Fathers of the Church, Greek as well as Latin,
knew this Proposition to be true, That the Pope cannot Err Judicially in
matters belonging to the Faith, or they knew it not. If you say they knew it
not; you charge them with a base, and unworthy Ignorance, no ways like to
over-cloud such, and so many Learned men, in a Matter so Necessary, and of such
infinite use to Christendom. If you say they knew it, and durst not deliver
this Truth; how can you charge them, which durst die for Christ, with such
Cowardice toward his Church? And if you say they knew it, and withheld it
from the Church; you lay a most unjust Load upon those Charitable souls, which
loved Christ too well to imprison any Truth, but likely to make or keep peace
in his Church Catholic over the world. But certainly, as no Divine of Worth
did then dream of any such Infallibility in Him; so is it a mere Dream, or
worse, of those Modern Divines, who affirm it now The wild Extent of the Popes
Infallibility and Jurisdiction is a Mistake. These are the words of a Great
Roman Catholic uttered to my self. But I will spare his Name, because he is
living; and I will not draw your Envy upon him.
. And as ^uto quod ipsi etiam rideant, quum hoc audiunt, and tamen nisi hoc
dicant, quod erubescant si dicant, non habent omni^o quod dicant. Sed quid ad
nos? No^^^^ invidemus. ^egant nobis ^^o de Scripturis Sanctis, and ^^edimus. S.
August. de ^nit. Eccles. cap. 17.
S. Augustine sometimes spoke of the Donatists, and their absurd limiting the
whole Christian Church to Africa only; so may I truly say of the Romanists
confining all Christianity to the Roman Doctrine, governed by the Pope's
Infallibility: I verily persuade my self, That even the Jesuits themselves
laugh at this. And yet unless they say this, which they cannot but blush while
they say, they have nothing at all to say. But what is this to us? we envy no
man. If the Pope's Decision be infallible, Legant, Let them read it to us out
of the Holy Scripture, and we'll believe it.

Pope has no Infallibility to attend his Cathedral Judgment in things
belonging to the Faith. For first, besides the silence of Impartial Antiquity,
diverse Papa non solum Errore Personali, sed and Errore Judiciali potest errare
in Materia Fidei. Almain. L. de Author. Eccles. c. 10.
of your Own confess it, yea and prove it too, by sundry Instances.

Secondly, There is a great Question among the Learned, both Schoolmen and
Controversers, Whether the Pope coming to be an Heretic, may be Deposed? And
it is Learnedly disputed by L. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 30.
Bellarmine. The Opinions are different. For the Si sit a Fide devius. Did. 40
Can. Si Papa.
Canon Law says expressly, He may be judged and deposed by the Church in case of
Heresy. Jure Divino Papatu privatus est, etc. Jo. de Turrecr. l. 4 Par. 2. c.
20. Et Bellar. L. 2. de To. Pont. c. 30.
Joh. de Turrecremata is of Opinion, That the Pope is to be deposed by the
Church so soon as he becomes an Heretic, though as yet not a manifest one;
Because he is already deprived by Divine Right. And recites another opinion,
That the Pope cannot be deposed, though he fall into secret or manifest
Heresy. Papa factus Haereticus non est ipso facto, vel jure Divino, vel humano
depositus, sed deponendus. Cajet. Tract. de Author. Papae and Concilii, c. 20.
Cajetan thinks that the Pope cannot be deposed, but for a manifest Heresy;
and that then he is not deposed ipso facto, but must be deposed by the Church.
Papa Haereticus manifestus per se desinit esse Papa and Capat, etc. Et tum
potest ab Ecclesia Judicari, and puniri. Bellar. L. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 30. Est
ergo quinta.
Bellarmine's own Opinion is, That if the Pope become a manifest Heretic, he
presently ceases to be Pope and Head of the Church, and may then be Judged and
punished by the Church. Bellarmine has disputed this very Learnedly, and at
large; and I will not fill this Discourse with another man's Labors. The use I
shall make of it, runs through all these Opinions, and through all alike. And
truly the very Question it self supposes, that A Pope may be an Heretic. For
if he cannot be an Heretic, why do they question, whether he can be Deposed
for being One? And if he can be one, then whether he can be Deposed by the
Church, Before he be manifest, or not till after, or neither before nor after,
or which way they will, it comes all to one for my purpose. For I question not
here his Deposition for his Heresy, but his Heresy. And I hope none of these
Learned men, nor any other, dare deny, but that if the Pope can be an Heretic,
he can err. For every Heresy is an Error, and more. For it is an Error
oft-times against the Errants knowledge, but ever with the pertinacie of his
Will. Therefore out of all, even your own Grounds; If the Pope can be an
Heretic, he can err grossly, he can err wilfully. And he that can so Err,
cannot be Infallible in his Judgment private or public. For if he can be an
Heretic, he can, and doubtless will Judge for his Heresy, if the Church let
him alone. And you your selves maintain his Deposition lawful, to prevent this.
I verily believe Pighius L. 4. Ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae, c. 8
Alb. Pighius foresaw this Blow: And therefore he is of Opinion, That the Pope
cannot become an Heretic at all. And though Communis Opinio est in contrarium.
Ecll. L. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 30. 2.
Bellarmine favor him so far, as to say his Opinion is probable; yet he is so
honest as to add, that the Common opinion of Divines is against him. Nay,
though Lib 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 11.
he Labor hard to excuse Pope Honorius the first from the Heresy of the
Monothelites, and says, that Pope Adrian was deceived, who thought him one, yet
Tamen non possumus negare, quin Adrianus cum Romano Concilio, imo and tota
Sy^odus octava Generalis senserit, in causd Haeresis posse Romans Pontificem
judicari. Add quod esset miserrima conditio Ecclesiae, si Lupum manifest
grassantem pro Pastore agnoscere cogevetur. Bell. L. 2. de. To. Pont. c. 30.. 5.
He confesses, That Pope Adrian the second, with the Council then held at Rome,
and the eighth General Synod, did think that the Pope might be Judged in the
Cause of Heresy: And that the condition of the Church were most miserable, if
it should be constrained to acknowledge a Wolf manifestly raging for her
Shepherd. And here again I have a Question to ask, Whether you believe the
eighth General Council, or not? If you believe it, then you see the Pope can
err, and so He not Infallible. If you believe it not, then in your Judgment
that General Council erres, and so that not Infallible.

Thirdly, It is altogether in vain, and to no use, that the Pope should be
Infallible, and that according to your own Principles. Now God and Nature make
nothing in vain. Therefore either the Pope is not Infallible, or at least God
never made him so. That the Infallibility of the Pope (had he any in him) is
altogether vain, and useless, is manifest. For if it be of any use, it is for
the settling of Truth and Peace in the Church, in all times of her Distraction.
But neither the Church, nor any member of it, can make any use of the Popes
Infallibility that way; Therefore it is of no use or benefit at all. And this
also is as manifest, as the rest. For before the Church, or any particular man,
can make any use of this Infallibility, to settle him and his Conscience, he
must either Know or Believe that the Pope is Infallible: But a man can neither
Know nor Believe it. And first for Belief: For if the Church, or any Christian
man can believe it, he must believe it either by Divine, or by Humane Faith.
Divine Faith cannot be had of it: For (as is before proved) it has no Ground
in the written Word of God. Nay (to follow you closer) it was never delivered
by any Tradition of the Catholic Church. And for Humane Faith, no Rational man
can possibly believe (having no Word of God to overruled his Understanding)
that he which is Fallible in the Means, as Stapl. Relect. cont. 4. q. 2. N^tab.
4.
your selves confess the Pope is, can possibly be Infallible in the Conclusion.
And were it so, that a Rational man could have Humane Faith of this
Infallibility; yet that neither is, nor never can be sufficient to make the
Pope, Infallible. No more than my strong Belief of another man's Honesty can
make him an Honest man, if he be not so. Now secondly, for Knowledge; and that
is altogether impossible too, that either the Church, or any Member of the
Church, should ever know that the Pope is Infallible. And this I shall make
evident also out of your own Principles. For your Om^ia Sacramenta tribus
perficiantur, etc. Decret. Eugenli 4. in Council. Florent.
Council of Florence had told us, That three things are necessary to every
Sacrament; the Matter, the Form of the Sacrament, and the Intention of the
Priest, which administers it, that he intends to do as the Church does. Your
Conc. Trid. Ses. 7. Can. 1.
Council of Trent confirms it for the Intention of the Priest. Upon this Ground
(be it Rock or Sand, it is all one; for you make it Rock, and build upon it) I
shall raise this Battery against the Popes Infallibility. First, the Pope if he
have any Infallibility at all, he has it as he is Bishop of Rome, and S.
Peter's Successor. Bellar. L. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 3. Alterum Privilegium est.
This is granted. Secondly, the Pope cannot be Bishop of Rome, but he must be
in holy Orders first. And if any man be chosen that is not so, the Election is
void ipso facto, propter errorem Personae, for the error of the Person.
Constantinut ex Laico Papa circa An. 767. ejectus Papatu. Et Steph. 3. qui
successit, habito Concilio statuit, ne quis nisi per Gradus Ecclesiasticos
ascendens Pontificatum occupare a^deret sub poena Anathematis. Decret. Did.
79. c. Nullus.
This also is granted. Thirdly, He that is to be made Pope, can never be in
Holy Orders, but by receiving them from One that has Power to Ordain. This is
notoriously known; So is it also, that with you Order is a Sacrament properly
so called. And if so, then the Pope, when he did receive the Order of Deacon,
or Priesthood at the hands of the Bishop, did also receive a Sacrament. Upon
these Grounds I raise my Argument, thus. Neither the Church, nor any Member of
the Church, can know that this Pope which now sits, or any other that has
been, or shall be, is Infallible. For he is not Infallible, unless he be Pope;
and he is not Pope, unless he be in Holy Orders; And he cannot be so, unless he
have received those Holy Orders, and that from one that had Power to Ordain;
And those Holy Orders in your Doctrine are a Sacrament; And a Sacrament is not
perfectly given, if he that Administers it have not intentionem faciendi quod
facit Ecclesia, an intention to do that which the Church does by Sacraments.
Now who can possibly tell, that the Bishop which gave the Pope Orders, was
first, a man qualified to give them; and secondly, so devoutly set upon his
Work, that he had, at the instant of giving them, an Intention and purpose to
do therein as the Church does? Surely none but that Bishop himself. And his
testimony of himself, and his own Act, such especially as, if faulty, he would
be loath to Confess, can neither give Knowledge nor Belief sufficient, that the
Pope, according to this Canon, is in Holy Orders. So upon the Whole matter, let
the Romanists take which they will (I will give them free Choice) either this
Canon of the Council of Trent is false Divinity, and there is no such Intention
necessary to the Essence and Being of a Sacrament: Or if it be true, it is
impossible for any man to know, and for any advised man to Believe, That the
Pope is Infallible in his Judicial Sentences in things belonging to the Faith.
And so here again a General Council, at least such a one, as that of Trent is,
can Err, or the Pope is not Infallible.

ad Hominem, good against your Party only, which maintain this Council. But
the plain Truth is, Both are Errors. For neither is the Bishop of Rome
Infallible in his Judicials about the Faith: Nor is this Intention of either
Bishop or Priest of Absolute Necessity to the Essence of a Sacrament; so, as to
make void the gracious Institution of Christ, in case by any Tentation the
Priests Thoughts should wander from his Work, at the instant of using the
Essentials of a Sacrament, or have in him an Actual Intention to scorn the
Church. And you may remember, if you please, that a Neapolitan Minovensis
Episcopus fuit.
Bishop then present at Trent, disputed this Case very Learnedly, and made it
most evident that this Opinion cannot be defended, but that it must open a way
for any unworthy Priest to make infinite Nullities in Administration of the
Sacraments. And his Arguments were of such strength, L. 2. Hist. Trident. p.
276, 277. Leidae, An. 1622.
ut caeteros Theologos dederint in stuporem; as amazed the other Divines which
were present. And concluded, That no Internal Intention was required in the
Minister of a Sacrament, but that Intention which did appear Opere externo; in
the Work it self performed by him: And that if he had unworthily any wandering
thoughts, nay more, any contrary Intention within him, yet it neither did, nor
could hinder the blessed effect of any Sacrament. And most certain it is, if
this be not true, besides all other Inconveniences, which are many, no man can
secure himself upon any Doubt or trouble in his Conscience, that he has truly
and really been made partaker of any Sacrament whatsoever, No, not of Baptism;
and so by Consequence be left in doubt whether he be a Christian or no, even
after he is Baptized. Whereas it is most impossible, That Christ should so order
his Sacraments, and so leave them to his Church, as that poor Believers in his
Name, by any unworthiness of any of his Priests, should not be able to know
whether they have received His Sacraments or not, even while they have received
them. And yet for all this, such great lovers of Truth, and such careful
Pastors over the Flock of Christ, were these Trent-Fathers, that they regarded
none of this, but went on in the usual track, and made their Decree for the
Internal Intention and purpose of the Priest, and that the Sacrament was
invalid without it.

That the Pope can err, not Personally only, but Judicially also; and so
teach false Doctrine to the Church; which Summus Pontifex quum totam Ecclesiam
docet, in his quae ad Fidem pertinent, null ocasu errare potest. Bellar. L. 4.
de Romans Pont. c. 3. 1.
Bellarmine tells us No Pope has done, or can do. And a Maxim it is with you,
That a General Council can err, if it be confirmed by the Pope; Concilia
Generalia a Pontifice Confirmata errare non possunt Bellar. L. 2 de Council. c.
2. 1.
But if it be confirmed, then it cannot err. Where first, this is very
improper Language. For I hope no Council is confirmed, till it be finished. And
when it is finished, even before the Popes confirmation be put to it, either it
has Erred, or not Erred. If it have Erred, the Pope ought not to confirm it;
and if he do, it is a void act. For no power can make Falsehood Truth. If it have
not Erred, then it was True before the Pope confirmed it. So his Confirmation
adds nothing but his own Assent: Therefore his confirmation of a General
Council (as you will needs call it) is at the most Signum, non Causa; a Sign,
and that such as may fail, but no Cause of the Councels not Erring. But then
secondly, if a General Council Confirmed (as you would have it) by the Pope
have Erred, and so can Err; then certainly the Pope can Err Judicially. For
he never gives a more solemn Sentence for Truth, than when he decrees any thing
in a General Council. Therefore if he have Erred, and can Err there, then
certainly he can Err in his Definitive Sentence about the Faith, and is not
Infallible. Now that he has Erred, and therefore can Err in a General Council
confirmed, in which he takes upon him to teach all Christendom, is most clear
and evident. For the Pope teaches in and by the Council. Later. Can. 1.
Council of Lateran Confirmed by Innocent the third; Christ is present in the
Sacrament by way of Transubstantiation. And in and by the Council. Constable. Sess*
13.
Council of Constance, the Administration of the Blessed Sacrament to the Laity
in one kind, notwithstanding Christ's Institution of it in both kinds for all.
And in and by the Council. Trid. Sess. 25 Decret. de Invocation^.
Council of Trent, Invocation of Saints, and Adoration of Images, to the great
Scandal of Christianity, and as great hazard of the Weak. Now that these
Particulars, among Many, are Errors in Divinity, and about the Faith, is
manifest both by Scripture, and the Judgment of the Primitive Church. For
Transubstantiation first; That never was heard of in the Primitive Church, nor
till the Council of Lateran; nor can it be proved out of Scripture; and taken
properly, cannot stand with the Grounds of Christian Religion. As for Communion
in one kind; Christ's Institution is clear against that. And not only the
Primitive Church, but the Whole Church of Christ kept it so, till within less
than four hundred years. For Provide in quib^^d^m Ecclesiis observatur, ut
Popul^ Sanguis non deti^. Thom. p. 3. q. 80. A. 12. c. So it was but in some
Churches in his time. Negare non possumu^ etiam in Ecclesia L^tina fuisse usum
utriusque speciei, and usque ad Tempora S. T^om^ durasse. Vasq. in ^ Disput.
216. c. 3. ^. 38.
Aquinas confesses it was so in use even to his times; And he was both born and
dead during the Reign of Henry the third of England. Nay, it stands yet as a
Monument in the very Refecti cibo pot^^* c^lesti, Deus ^oster, Te^supplices
ex^ramu^, etc. In proprio Missarum de Sa(...), Jan. 15. Orat. post Communionem.
(...) Jan. ^1.
Missal, against the present Practice of the Church of Rome, That then it was
usually Given and received in both kinds. And for Invocation of Saints, though
some of the Ancient Fathers have some Rhetorical flourishes about it, for the
stirring up of Devotion (as they thought) yet the Church then admitted not of
the Innovation of them, but only of the Commemoration of the Martyrs, as
appears clearly in Ad quod Sac^^ficium suo loco and ordine Homines Dei
nomind^tur, non tamen a Sa^^rdo^^, qu^ Sa^r^^^ca^, Invocantur. S. Aug. L. 22.
Civ. Dei, c. 10.
S. Augustine. And when the Church prayed to God for any thing, she desired to
be heard for the Mercies and the Merits of Christ, nor for the Merits of any
Saints whatsoever. For I much doubt this were to make the Saints more than
Mediators of Intercession* which is all that Bellarm. L. 1 de Sanctor.
Bedtitud. c. 20. Ad primum ergo locu^, etc.
you acknowledge you allow the Saints. For I pray, is not by the Merits, more
than by the Intercession? Did not Christ redeem us by his Merits? And if God
must hear our Prayers for the Merits of the Saints, how much fall they short of
sharers in the Sunt Redemptores nostri aliquo modo and secun(...) aliquid.
Bellar. L. 1. de Indulgen^. c. 4. Et Sanctos appellat Numina, L. 2. de Imagine.
Sanctorum, c. 20. 3. Now if this word (Numen) signify any thing else besides
God himself, or the power of God, or the Oraole of God, let Bellarmine show it;
or A. C for him.
Mediation of Redemption? You may think of this. For such Prayers as these the
Church of Rome makes at this day, and they stand (not without great scandal to
Christ, and Christianity) used, and authorized to be used in the Missal. For
instance: Ut eju^ Meritis and Precibus ^ Gehe^ne ^^cendiis liberemur. In
proprio Missarum de Sanctis, December. 6.
Upon the Feast of S. Nicolas you pray, That God by the Merits and Prayers of
S. Nicolas, would deliver you from the fire of Hell. And upon the Octaves of S.
Peter and S. Paul, Ut A^borum Meritis aeternitatis Glor^am consequam^^. Ibid.
Julii 6.
you desire God that you may Obtain the Glory of Eternity by their Merits. And
on the Ejus intercedentibus Meritis ab Omnibus nos absolve peccatis. Ibid.
Julli 14.
Feast of S. Bonaventure you pray, that God would absolve you from all your
sins by the Interceding Merits of Bonaventure. And for Adoration of Images, the
In Optatus his time, the Christians were much troubled upon but a false report,
That an Image was to be placed upon the Altar. What would they have done, if
Adoration had been Commanded? etc. Et recte dictum erat, si tasem famam similis
veritas sequeretur. Optat. L. 3. ad finem.
Ancient Church knew it not. And the Modern Church of Rome is too like to
Paganism in the Practice of it; and driven to scarce Intelligible Subtilties in
her Servants Writings that defend it; And this without any Care had of Millions
of Souls unable to understand her Subtilties, or shun her Practice. Did I say,
the Modern Church of Rome is grown too like Paganism in this Point? And may
this speech seem too hard? Well, if it do, I Will give a Double Account of it.
The One is: It Is no harsher Expression than They of Rome use of the
Protestants, and in Cases in which there is no show or resemblance. For Sicut
non licet cum Ethnicis Idola colere. Becan. L. de side Haeret. servunda, c. 8.
Becanus tells us, It Is no more lawful to receive the Sacrament as the
Calvinisis receive it, than to worship Idols with the Ethnicks. And Gregory de
Valentia enlarges it to more Points than one, but with no more truth. The
Sectaries of our times Co^^i^git aliq^a^do H^retic^s ^ir^a plura errare quam
Gentiles, ut Manich^os, inquit Thomas. Quod nos possumus vere dicere ^e nostri
temporis Sectariis, qui culpabil^^er in pluribus videntur errare. Valentia in
2. 2 ^. Disp. 1. ^. 1^. Punct. 3.
(says he) seem to Err culpably in more things than the Gentiles. This is
easily said, but here is no Proof. Nor shall I hold it a sufficient warrant for
me to sour my Language, because these men have dipped their Pens in Gall. The
Other Account therefore which I shall give of this speech, shall come vouched
both by Authority and Reason. And first for Authority; I could set Ludovicus
Vives against Becanus, if I would, who says expressly, That the making of Feasts
at the Oratories of the Martyrs (which Quod quidem a Christianis m^lioribus non
^it. S* Aug. L. 8. de Civ. Dei, c. 27.
S. Augustine tells us, The best Christians practiced not) are a kind of Illa
quasi Par^u^alia superstitioni Gentilium simillima. Lud. Vives Ibid.
Parentalia, Funeral-feasts too much resembling the superstition of the
Gentiles. Nay, Vives need not say, resembling that superstition, since Quod
ergo mortuis litabatur, utique Parentationi deputabatur, qu^ species proinde
Idololatriae est, quoniam and Idololatri^ Parentationis ^^t species. Tert. L.
de Spe^^acu^is, c. 12.
Tertullian tells us plainly, that Idolatry it self is but a kind of
Parentation. And Vives dying in the Communion of the Church of Rome, is a
better testimony against you, than Becanus, or Valentia, being bitter enemies
to our Communion, can be against us. But I Will come nearer home to you, and
prove it by more of your own. For Manifestus est, quam ut multis verbis
explicari de^eat* Imaginum and simulachrorum Cultum nimium invaluisse, and
affectioni, se^ potius superstitioni populi plus sa^^^ indultum esse, it a ut
ad summam adorationem, quae vel a Paganis suis simulachris ^xbibert consutvit,
etc. Cassand Consult. Art. 21. C. de Imagibibu^. Where he names diverse of your
own, ^s namely, ^urant^s Minatensis Episco^us, John Billet, Gerson, Durand,
Holkot, and Biel, rejecting the Opinion of Thomas, and other superstitions
concerning Images. Ibid.
Cassander, who lived and died in your Communion, says it expressly, That in
this present Case of the Adoration of Images, you came full home to the
Superstition of the Heathen. And secondly, for Reason, I have (I think, too
much to give, that the Modern Church of Rome is grown too like to Paganism in
this Point. For the Non quod Credatur ^nesse aliqua in iis Divinitas, and
velut^ olim fiebat a Gentibus. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. Decret. de Invocat.
Council of Trent it self confesses, That to believe there is any Divinity in
Images, is to do as the Gentiles did by their Idols. And though in some words
after, the Fathers of that Council seem very religiously careful, that all Et
^^dibus periculosi Erroris Occasiouem, etc. Ibid.
Occasion of dangerous Error be prevented; yet the Doctrine it self is so full
of danger, that it works strongly, both upon the Learned and Unlearned, to the
scandal of Religion, and the perverting of Truth. For the Unlearned first, how
it works upon them by whole Countries together, you may see by what happened in
Asturiis, Cantabria, Galetia, no small parts of Spain. For there the People (so
Et ad^o Gens affecta est trancis corrosis and deformibus Imaginibus, ut me
test, quo^^es Episcopi, decentiores ponere jubent, veteres suas petant
plorantes, etc. Hieron. Lamas S^mma* p. 3. c. 3
He tells me that was an Eyewitness, and that since the Council of Trent) are
so addicted to their worm-eaten and deformed Images; that when the Bishops
commanded new, and handsomer Images to be set up in their rooms, the poor
people cried for their old, would not look up to their new, as if they did not
represent the same thing. And though he say, this is by little and little
amended, yet I believe there is very little Amendment. And it works upon the
Learned too, more than it should. For it wrought so far upon Lamas himself, who
bemoaned the former Passage, as that he delivers this Doctrine: Imagines
Christi and S. Matris ^j^^s, and Sanctorum non sunt v^nerand^, acsi in ipsis
Imaginibus esset Divinit a^, seeundum quod sunt Materia Art ^ffigiata, and non
secundum quod repraesentant Christum, and Sanctos, etc. Sic enim adorare, vel
petere aliquid ab iis, esset Idololatria. Lam. ibid.
That the Images of Christ, the blessed Virgin, and the Saints, are not to be
worshipped, as if there were any Divinity in the Images, as they are material
things made by Art, but only as they represent Christ and the Saints: for else
it were Idolatry. So then belike* according to the Divinity of this Casuist, a
man may worship Images, and ask of them* and put his trust in them, as they
represent Christ, and the Sam^s. For so there is Divinity in them, though not
as Things, yet as Representers. An^ what I pray did, or could any Pagan Priest
say more than this? For the Proposition resolved is this: The Images of Christ
and the Saints, as they represent their Exemplars, have Deity or Divinity in
them. And now I pray A. C. do you be judge, whether this Proposition do not
teach Idolatry? And whether the Modern Church of Rome be not grown too like to
Paganism in this Point? For my own part, I heartily wish it were not. And that
men of Learning would not strain their wits to spoil the Truth, and rent the
Peace of the Church of Christ, by such dangerous, such superstitious vanities.
For better they are not; but they may be worse. Nay, these and their like have
given so great a Scandal among us, to some ignorant, though, I presume,
well-meaning men, that they are afraid to testify their duty to God, even in
his own Quis ferat populum in Templum irruentem, (...) haram sues? Certe non
obs^^t populo C^^^moni^, sed prosunt, si modus in ^is servet^r, and caveamus^e
(...) loco habeaatur, hoc est, ne precipuam pietatem in illis collocemus. Rhen.
Annot. in T^rtul. de Cor. ^^il.
House, by any outward Gesture at all. Insomuch that those very Ceremonies,
which, by the Judgment of Godly and Learned men, have now long continued in
the Practice of this Church, suffer hard measure for the Romish Superstitions
sake. But I will conclude this Point with the saying of B. Rhenanus: Who could
endure the people (says he) rushing into the Church like Sivine into a Stye?
Doubtless, Ceremonies do not hurt the people, but profit them, so there be a
Mean kept, and the By be not put for the Main, that is, so we place not the
principal part of our Piety in them.

The Conference grows to an end, and I must meet it again ere we part. For you
say,


F. After this (we all rising) the Lady asked the B. whether she might be saved
in the Roman Faith? He answered, She might.


B. Cave ne dum v^s alium notare Culpae, ipse uoteris Calum(...). S. Hier. ^.
3. advers. Pelagianos.
Answer perfectly related? My Answer to to this was General, for the ignorant,
that could not discern the Errors of that Church* so they held the Foundation,
and conformed themselves to a religious life. But why do you not speak out what
I added in this Particular? That it must needs go harder with the Lady, even in
point of Salvation, because she had been brought to understand very much, for
one of her Condition, in these Controverted causes of Religion, And ^ person
that comes to know much, had need carefully bethink himself, that he oppose not
known Truth against the Church that made him a Christian. For Salvation may be
in the Church of Rome, and yet they not find it, that make surest of it. Here
A. C. is as confident as the Jesuit himself, That I said expressly, A. C. p. 64.
That the Lady might be saved in the Roman Faith. Truly, it is too long since
now for me to speak any more than I have already, upon my Memory: But this I am
sure of, That whatsoever I said of her, were it never so particular, yet was it
under the Conditions before expressed.


F. I bad her mark that.


B. mark that. Well, you bad her Mark that. For what? For some great matter? or
for some new? Not for some New sure. For the Protestants have ever been ready
for Truth and in Charity to grant as much as might be. And therefore from the
beginning many Nos fatemur sub Papatu plu^imum esse boni, imo omne bonum
Christianum, atque etiam illinc ad nos devenisse, etc. Luther. contra
Anabaptist. citante Bellarmino, L. 4. de Notis Eccles. c. 16.. penult. Et
^^^eld. Appendic^, par. 3. c. 2. Et Jos. Hall Bishop of Exeter, L. Of the Old
Religion, c. 1. Many holding Christ the Foundation aright, and groaning under
the burden of Popish trash, etc. by a general repentance, and assured Faith in
their Savior, did find favor with the Lord. D. Gro. Abbot late Archbishop of
Cant. Answer to Hill. ad Ration. 1.. 30.

For my part I dare not deny the possibility of their Salvation, who have been
the chiefest Instruments of ours, etc. Hooker in his Discourse of Justificat..
17. In former times a man might hold the general Doctrine of those Churches,
wherein our Fathers lived, and be saved. And yet since the Council of Trent
some are found in it in such degree of Orthodoxy, as we may well hope of their
Salvation. Field. l. 3. Eccl. c 47.

The Latin, or Western Church subject to the Romish Tyranny, was a true
Church, in which a saving profession of the Truth of Christ was found. Jos.
Hall Bishop of Exeter. L. Of the Old Religion, fine. in his Advertisement to
the Reader, p. 202.

Non pauci retinuerunt Christum Fundamentum, etc. Mornaeus Tract. de Ecclesia
c. 9. fine.

Inter sordes istas, ista quae summo cum periculo expectetur salus, non ipsorum
Additamentis, sed iis, quae nobiscum habent communia, Fundamentis est
attribuenda. Jo. Prideaux Lectione 9. fine.

Papa aliquam adhuc Religionis formam relinquit, spem vitae aeternae non
tollit, etc. Calv. Instruct. advers. Libertinos, c. 4.


Learned men granted this. So that you needed not have put such a serious Mark
that upon my speech, as if none before had, or none but I would speak it. And
if your Mark that were not for some New matter, was it for some Great? Yes
sure, it was. For what greater then Salvation? But then I pray, mark this too,
That might be saved, grants but a Here A. C. gets another snatch, and tells us,
That to grant a Possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church, is the free
Confession of an Adversary, and therefore is of force against us, and extorted
by Truth: But to say that salvation is more securely, and easily to be bad in
the Protestant Faith, that is but their partial Opinion in their own behalf, and
of no force, especially with Roman Catholics. I easily believe this latter
part, That this, as A. C. and the rest use the matter with their Proselytes,
shall be of little, or no force with Roman Catholics. But it will behove
them, that it be of Force. For let any indifferent man weigh the Necessary
Requisites to Salvation, and he shall find this no partial Opinion, but very
plain and real Verity, That the Protestant living according to his belief, is
upon the safer way to Heaven. And as for my Confession, let them enforce it as
far as they can against me, so they observe my Limitations; which if they do,
A. C. and his fellows will (of all the rest) have but little comfort in such a
limited Possibility.
Possibility, no sure, or safe way to Salvation. The Possibility I think cannot
be denied, the Ignorants especially, because they hold the Foundation, and
cannot survey the Building. And the Foundation can deceive no man that rests
upon it. But a secure way they cannot go, that hold with such corruptions, when
they know them. Now whether it be wisdom, in such a Point as Salvation is, to
forsake a Church, in the which the Ground of Salvation is firm, to follow a
Church, in which it is but possible one may be saved, but very probable he may
do worse, if he look not well to the Foundation, judge ye. I am sure L. 1. De
Bapt. cont. D^n. c. 3. Graviter peccarent in rebus ad salutem animae
pertinentibus, etc. eo solo, quod certis incerta praeponerent.
S. Augustine thought it was not, and judged it a great sin, in Point of
Salvation, for a man to prefer incerta certis, uncertainties and naked
possibilities before an evident and certain Course. And Propter incertitudinem
propriae Justitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totam
in sola Dei misericordia and be^ignitate reponere. Bellar. L. 5. de Justif. c.
7.. Sit tertia Propositio.
Bellarmine is of opinion, and that in the Point of Justification: That in
regard of the uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and of the danger of vain
glory, tutissimum est, it is safest to repose our whole trust in the Mercy and
goodness of God. And surely, if there be One safer way than another, as he
confesses there is, he is no wise man, that in a matter of so great moment will
not betake himself to the safest way. And therefore even you your solves in the
Point of Condignity of Merit, though you write it, and preach it boysterously
to the People; yet you are content to die, renouncing the condignity of all
your own Merits, and trust to Christ's. Now surely, if you will not venture to
die as you live, live and believe in time, as you mean to die.

one thing more, because you bid Mark this, let me remember to tell you for the
benefit of others. Upon this very Point (That we acknowledge an honest ignorant
Papist may be saved) you and your like work upon the advantage of our Charity,
and your own want of it, to abuse the weak. For thus I am told you work upon
them. You see the Protestants (at least many of them) confess there may be
salvation in our Church; We absolutely deny there is salvation in theirs:
Therefore it is safer to come to Ours, than to stay in theirs; to be where,
almost all grant Salvation, than where the greater part of the world deny it.
This Argument is very prevailing with men, that cannot weigh it, and with women
especially, that are put in fear by And this piece of Cunning to affright the
weak was in use in Justin Martyrs time. Quosdam scimus, etc. ad Iracundiam suam
Evangelium pertrabentes, etc. quibus si potestas ea obtigisset ut nonnullos
Gehennae traderent, Orbem quoque Universum consumpsissent: Just. Martyr. Epist.
ad Zenam and Sere^^m. ( And here it is) ad Iracundiam suam Ecclesiam
pertrabentes, etc.
violent (though causless) denying Heaven unto them. And some of your party
since this, have set out a Book, called Charity mistaken. But beside the Answer
fully given to it, this alone is sufficient to Confute it. First, that in this
our Charity (what ever yours be) is not mistaken, unless the Charity of the
Church her self were mistaken in the Case of the Donatists, as shall 35. Nu. 3.
after appear. Secondly, even Mistaken Charity (if such it were) is far better
than none at all. And if the Mistaken be ours, the None is yours. Yea, but A.
C. tells us, That this denial A. C. p. 56.
of Salvation is grounded upon Charity, as were the like threats of Christ, and
the Holy Fathers. For there is but one true Faith, and one true Church, and out
of that there is no Salvation. And he that will not hear the Church, S. Matthew.
18. S. Mat. 18. 17.
let him be as a Heathen, and a Publican, Therefore he says, it is more Charity
to forewarn us of the danger, by these threats, than to let us run into it,
through a false security. It Is true, that there is but one true Faith, and but
one true Church. But that one, both Faith, and Church, is the And this is
proved by the Creed. In which we profess our Belief of the Catholic, not of
the Roman Church.
Catholic Christian, not the Particular Roman. And this Catholic Christian
Church, he that will not both hear, and obey; yea, and the Particular Church,
in which he lives too, so far as it in necessaries agrees with the Universal,
is in as bad condition as a Heathen and a Publican, and perhaps in some
respects worse. And were we in this Case, we should thank A. C. for giving us
warning of our danger. But it is not so. For he thunders out all these threats,
and denial of salvation, because we join not with the Roman Church, in all
things; as if her Corruptions were part of the Catholic Faith of Christ. So
the whole passage is a mere begging of the Question, and then threatening upon
it, without all ground of Reason or Charity. In the mean time let A. C. look to
himself, that in his false security, he run not into the danger, and loss of
his own salvation, while he would seem to take such care of ours. But though
this Argument prevails with the weak, yet it is much stronger in the cunning,
than the true force of it. For all Arguments are very moving, that lay their
ground upon This is a free Confession of the Adversaries Argument against
themselves, and therefore is of force. A. C. p. 64. But every Confession of
Adversaries, or others, is to be taken with its Qualities and Conditions: If
you leave out, or change these, you wrong the Confession, and then it is of no
force. And so does A. C. here. And though Bellarm. makes the Confession of the
Adversary a note of the true Church. L. 4. de (...) Eccl. 16. yet in the very
beginning, where he lays his Ground,. 1. he lays it in a plain fallacy a
secundum quid ad simpliciter.
the Adversaries Confession; especially if it be confessed, and avouched to be
true. But if you would speak truly, and say, Many Protestants indeed confess,
there is salvation possible to be attained in the Roman Church; but yet they
say withal, that the Errors of that Church are so many For they are no mean
Differences that are between us, by Bellarmines own Confession. Agendum est non
de rebus levibus, sed de gravissimis Questionibus qua ad ipsa Fidei fundamenta
pertinent, etc. Bellarm. in praefat. Operibus praefix^,. 3. And therefore the
Errors in them, and the Corruptions of them cannot be of small Consequence, by
your own Confession. Yes, by your own indeed. For you A. C. say full as much,
if not more than Bellarmine. Thus We Catholics hold all points. In which
Protestants differ from us in Doctrine of Faith, to be Fundamental, and
necessary to be Believed, or at least not denied. A. C. Relation of the first
Conference, p. 2^.
(and some so great, as weaken the Foundation) that it is very hard to go that
way to Heaven, especially to them that have had the Truth manifested; the heart
of this Argument were utterly broken. Besides, the force of this Argument lies
upon two things, one directly Expressed, the other but as upon the By.

expressed, is, We and our Adversaries consent, that there is salvation to some
in the Roman Church. What? would you have us as malicious, (at least as rash)
as your selves are to us, and deny you so much, as possibility of Salvation? If
we should, we might make you in some things strain for a Proof. But we have not
so learned Christ, as either to return evil for evil in this heady course, or
to deny salvation to some ignorant silly souls, whose humble peaceable
obedience makes them safe among any part of men, that profess the Foundation,
Christ; And therefore seek not to help our Cause by denying this comfort to
silly Christians, as you most fiercely do, where you can come to work upon
them. And this was an old trick of the Donatists. For in the Point of Baptism
(whether that Sacrament was true in the Catholic Church, or in the part of
Donatus) they exhorted all to be baptized among them. Why? Because both parts
granted, that Baptism was true among the Donatists; which that peevish Sect
most unjustly denied the sound part, as Esse v^^^ apud Donatistas Baptismum,
and illi aesserunt, and nos concedimus, etc. L. 1. de Bap. cont. Donat. c. 3.
S. Augustine delivers it. I would ask now, Had not the Orthodox true Baptism
among them, because the Donatists denied it injuriously? Or should the Orthodox
against Truth have denied Baptism, among the Donatists, either to cry quittance
with them, or that their Argument might not be the stronger, because both parts
granted? But Mark this, how far you run from all common Principles of Christian
Peace, as well as Christian Truth, while you deny salvation most unjustly to
us, from which you are farther off your selves. Besides, if this were, or could
be made a concluding Argument, I pray, why do not you believe with us in the
Point of the Eucharist? For all sides agree in the Faith of the Church of
England, That in the most Blessed Sacrament, the Worthy receiver is by his
Corpus Christi manducatur in Coena, etc. tantum Coelesti and spirituali
ratione: Medium autem quo Corpus Christi accipitur and manducatur in Coena,
Fides est. Eccl. Angl. Art. 28.

After a spiritual manner by Faith on our behalf, and by the working of the
Holy Ghost on the behalf of Christ. Fulk in 1 Cor. 11. p. 528.

Christus se cum ommibus bonis suis in Coena offert, and nos cum recipimus
fide, etc. Calv. 4. Instit. c. 17.. 5. Et Hooker. L. 5.. 67. p. 176.

And say not you the same with us? Spiritualis manducatio, quae per Animam fit,
ad Christi Carnem in Sacramento pertingit. Cajet. Tom. 2. Opusc. de Euchar.
Tract. 2. Cap. 5.

Sed spiritualiter, id est, invisibiliter, and per virtutem Spiritus Sancti.
Thom. p. 3. q. 75. A. 1 ad ^.

Spiritualiter manducandus est per Fidem and Charitatem. T^na. in Heb. 13.
Difficultate 8.


Faith made spiritually partaker of the true and real Body and Blood of Christ
I would have no man troubled at the words Truly and Really. For that blessed
Sacrament received as it ought to be, does Truly and Really exhibit and apply
the Body and the Blood of Christ to the Receiver. So Bishop White in his
Defense against T. W. P. Edit. London. 1617. p. 138. And Calvia. in 1 Cor. 10.
3. Vere datur, etc. And again in 1 Cor. 11. 24. Neque enim Mortis tantum and
Resurrectionis suae beneficium nobis offert Christus, sed Corpus ipsum in quo
passus est, and resurrexit. Concludo Realit^r (u^ vulgo loquuntur) hoc est.
Vere nobis in Coen^ datur Christi Corpus, ut sit An^mis nostris in Cibum
Salutarem, etc.
truly, and really, and of all the Benefits of his Passion. Your Roman
Catholics add a manner of this his Prefence, Transubstantiation, which many
deny; and the Lutherans a manner of this Presence, Consubstantiation, which
more deny. If this Argument be good, then even for this Consent, it is safer
Communicating with the Church of England, than with the Roman, or Lutheran;
Because all agree in this Truth, not in any other Opinion. Nay, Hoc totum
pend^t ex Principiis Metaphysicis and Philosophicis, and ad Fidei Doctrinam non
est necessarium. Suarez i^ 3. Thom. Disput. 50.. 2.
Suarez himself, and he a very Learned Adversary (what say you to this A. C?
does Truth force this A. C. p. 64, 65.
from him?) Confesses plainly, That to Believe Transubstantiation is not simply
necessary to Salvation. And yet he knew well the Church had determined it. And
Bellar. L. 3. de Eucha. c. 18.. Ex his colligimus.
Bellarmine, after an intricate, tedious, and almost inexplicable Discourse
about an Aductive Conversion (A thing which neither Divinity, nor Philosophy
ever heard of till then) is at last forced to come to this: Sed quidquid sit de
Modis loquendi, illud teuendum est, Conversionem Panis and Vini in Corpus and
Sanguinem Christi esse substantialem, sed arcanam and ine^^abilem, and nullis
nature olibus Conversionibus per omnia similem, etc. Bellar. in Recognit. hujus
loci. Et Vid. 38. Number. 3.
Whatsoever is concerning the manner and forms of speech, illud tenendum e^t,
this is to be held, that the Conversion of the Bread and Wine into the Body and
the Blood of Christ, is substantial, but after a secret and ineffable manner,
and not like in all things to any natural Conversion whatsoever. Now if he had
left out Conversion, and affirmed only Christ's real Presence there, after a
mysterious, and indeed an ineffable manner, no man could have spoke better. And
therefore, if you will force the Argument always to make that the safest way of
Salvation, which differing Parties agree on; why do you not yield to the force
of the same Argument, in the Belief of the Sacrament, one of the most immediate
means of Salvation, where not only the most, but all agree; And your own
greatest Clarks cannot tell what to say to the Contrary?

Argument, which certainly in it self is nothing, though by A. C. made of great
account; A. C. p. 64.
For he says, It Is a Confession of Adversaries extorted by Truth. Just as Sed
quia ita magnum firmamentum vanitatis vestrae in hac sententia esse
arbitramini, ut ad hoc tibi terminandam putares Epistolam quo quasi recentius
in Animis I^gentem remaneret, breviter respondeo, etc. S. August. L. 2. cont.
Lit. Petil. c. 108. And here A. C. ad hoc sibi putavit terminandam Collationem:
sed frustra, ut apparebit. Number. 6.
Petilian the Donatist bragged in the case of Baptism. But in truth, it is
nothing. For the Syllogism, which it frames, is this. In Point of Faith and
Salvation it is safest for a man to take that way, which the differing Parties
agree on. But Papists and Protestants (which are the differing Parties) agree
in this, that there is salvation possible to be found in the Roman Church.
Therefore it is safest for a man to be, and continue in the Roman Church. To the
Minor Proposition then; I observe this only, that though many Learned
Protestants grant this, all do not. And then that Proposition is not
Universally true, nor able to sustain the Conclusion. For they do not in this
all agree; nay, I doubt not, but there are some Protestants, which can, and do
as stiffly, and as churlishly deny them Salvation, as they do us. And A. C.
should do well to consider, whether they do it not upon as good reason at
least. But for the Major Proposition; Namely, That in Point of Faith and
Salvation, it is safest for a man to take that way, which the Adversary
confesses, or the Differing Parties agree on. I say, that is no Metaphysical
Principle, but a bare Contingent Proposition, and being indefinitely taken, may
be true or false, as the matter is to which it is applied; but being taken
universally, is false, and not able to lead in the Conclusion. Now that this
Proposition (In point of Faith and Salvation, it is safest for a man to take
that way, which the differing Parties agree on, or which the Adversary
confesses) has no strength in it self, but is sometimes true, and sometimes
false, as the Matter is, about which it is conversant, is most evident. First,
by Reason: Because Consent of disagreeing Parties is neither Rule, nor Proof of
Truth. For Herod and Pilate, disagreeing Parties enough, yet agreed against
Truth it self. But Truth rather is, or should be the Rule to frame, if not to
force Agreement. And secondly, by the two Instances. 35. N. 3.
before given. For in the Instance between the Orthodox Church then, and the
Donatists, this Proposition is most false; For it was a Point of Faith, and so
of Salvation, that they were upon, Namely, the right use and administration of
the Sacrament of Baptism. And yet had it been safest to take up that way, which
the differing Parts agreed on, or which the adverse Part Confessed, men must
needs have gone with the Donatists against the Church. And this must fall out
as often as any Heretic will cunningly take that way against the Church, which
the Donatists did, if this Principle shall go for current. But in the second
Instance, concerning the Eucharist, a matter of Faith, and so of Salvation too,
the same Proposition is most true. And the Reason is, because here the matter
is true; Namely, The true, and real participation of the Body and Blood of
Christ in that Blessed Sacrament. But in the former the matter was false,
Namely, That Rebaptization was necessary after Baptism formally given by the
Church. So this Proposition (In Point of Faith and Salvation it is safest for a
man to take that way, which the differing Parties agree in; or which the
Adversary confesses,) is, you see, both true and false, as men have cunning to
apply it, and as the matter is, about which it is Conversant. And is therefore
no Proposition able, or fit to settle a Conclusion in any sober man's mind,
till the Matter contained under it, be well scanned, and examined. And yet as
much use as you would make of this Proposition to amaze the weak, your selves
dare not stand to it, no not where the matter is undeniably true, as shall
appear in diverse Particulars beside this of the Eucharist.

A. C. says to the two former. For he tells us, These A. C. p. 65.
two are nothing like the present case. Nothing? That is strange indeed. Why in
the first of those Cases concerning the Donatists, your Proposition is false;
And so far from being safest, that it was no way safe for a man to take that
way of Belief, and so of Salvation, which both parts agreed on. And is this
nothing; Nay, is not this full, and home to the present case? For the present
case is this, and no more. That it is safest taking that way of Belief which
the differing Parties agree on: or which the Adversary Confesses. And in the
second of those Cases concerning the Eucharist, your Proposition indeed is
true, not by the Truth which it has seen in it self, Metaphysically, and in
Abstract, but only in regard of the matter, to which it is applied; yet there
you desert your own Proposition, where it is true. And is this nothing? Nay, is
not this also full, and home to the present case, since it appears your
Proposition is such as your selves dare not bide by, either when it is true, or
when it is false? For in the Case of Baptism administered by the Donatist, the
Proposition is false, and you dare not bide by it, for Truths sake. And in the
case of the Eucharist, the Proposition is true, and yet you dare not bide by
it, for the Church of Romes sake. So that Church (with you) cannot err, and
yet will not suffer you to maintain Truth; which not to do, is some degree of
Error, and that no small one.

A. C. goes on, and gives his Reasons why these two Instances are nothing like
the present Case. For in these Cases A. C. p. 65.
(says he) there are annexed other Reasons of certainly known peril of
damnable Schism and Heresy, which we should in^ur by consenting to the
Donatists denial of true Baptism among Catholics: and to the Protestants
denial, or doubting of the true substantial Presence of Christ in the
Eucharist. But in this Case of Resolving to live and die in the Catholic
Roman Church, there is confessedly no such peril of any damnable Heresy, or
Schism, or any other sin. Here I have many Particulars to observe upon A. C.
and you shall have them, as briefly as I can set them down.

And first, I take A. C. at his word, that in the case of the Donatist, Punct.
1.
should it be followed, there would be known peril of damnable Schism, and
Heresy, by denying true Baptism to be in the Orthodox Church. For by this you
may see, what a sound Proposition this is (That where two Parties are
dissenting, it is safest believing that in which both Parties agree, or which
the Adversary confesses) for here you may see by the case of the Donatist, is
confessed, it may lead a man, that will universally lean to it, into known and
damnable Schism and Heresy. An excellent Guide, I promise you, this, is it not?

Nor secondly, are these, though A. C. calls them so, annexed Punct. 2.
Reasons; For he calls them so, but to blaunch the matter, as if A. C. p. 65.
they fell upon the Proposition ab extra, accidentally, and from without;
Whereas they are not annexed, or pinned on, but flow naturally out of the
Proposition it self. For the Proposition would seem to be Metaphysical, and is
appliable indifferently to any Common Belief of dissenting Parties, be the
point in difference what it will. Therefore if there be any thing Heretical,
Schismatical, or any way evil in the Point, this Proposition being neither
Universally, nor necessarily true, must needs cast him, that relies upon it,
upon all these Rocks of Heresy, Schism, or what ever else follows the matter
of the Proposition.

Thirdly, A. C. does extremely ill to join these Cases of the Donatists Punct.
3.
for Baptism, and the Protestant for the Eucharist together, A. C. p* 66.
as he does. For this Proposition in the first concerning the Donatists, leads
a man (as is confessed by himself) into known and damnable Schism and Heresy:
but by A. C's good leave, the later concerning the Protestants, and the
Eucharist, nothing so. For I hope A. C. dare not say, That to believe the true
Caterum his absurditatibus sublatis, quicquid ad Exprimen(...) (...) (...)
Sanguinis Domini Communicationem, que sub (...) (...) symbolis, fidelibus
exhibetur, facere potest, libenter recipio. Calv. L. 4. Inst. c. 17. 19* (...),
per symbola (...) and vi^i Christus vere nobis (...), etc. (...) ^^s (...)
substanti^ ejus facti sumus. Ibid. 11.
substantial Presence of Christ, is either known, or damnable Schism, or
Heresy. Now as many, and as Learned 35. Number. 3.
Protestants believe and maintain this, as do believe possibility of Salvation
(as before is limited) in the Roman Church: Therefore they in that not guilty
of either known, or damnable Schism, or Heresy, though the Don^tists were of
both.

Fourthly, whereas he imposes upon the Protestants, The denial Punct. 4.
A. C. p. 66.
or doubting of the true and Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist; he is a
great deal more bold, than true, in that also: For understand them right, and
they certainly, neither deny, nor doubt it. For as for the Lutheranes, as they
are commonly called, their very Opinion of Consubstantiation makes it known to
the world, that they neither deny, nor doubt of his true, and Real presence
there. And they are Protestants. And for the Calvinists, if they might be
rightly understood, they also maintain a most true and Real presence, though
they cannot permit their Judgment to be Transubstantiated. And they are
Protestants too. And this is so known a Truth, that Bellarmine * Bellarm. L. 1.
de Euchar. c. 2. ^ Quint^ d^cit. Sacramentarii saepe dicunt reale Corpus
Christi in Coena adesse, sed realiter (...) dicunt, quod legerim, nis^ (...)
loquuntur de Coena quae fit in Coel^, etc.

And that he means to brand Protestants under the name of Sacramentarii, is
plain. For he says the Council of Trent opposed this word realiter, Figmento
Calvinistico, to the Calvinistical Figment. Ibid.


confesses it. For he says, Protestants do often grant, that the true and real
Body of Christ is in the Eucharist. But he adds, That they never say (so far
as he has read) That it is there Truly and Really, unless they speak of the
Supper which shall be in Heaven. Well: first, if they grant that the true and
Real Body of Christ is in that Blessed Sacrament (as Bellarmine confesses they
do, and it is most true) then A. C. is false, A. C. p. 65.
who charges all the Protestants with denial, or doubtfulness in this Point.
And secondly, Bellarmine himself also shows here his Ignorance, or his Malice:
Ignorance, if he knew it not; Malice, if he would not know it. For the
Calvinists, at least they which follow Calvin himself, do not only believe
that the true and real Body of Christ is received in the Eucharist, but that it
is there, and that we partake of it vere and realiter, which are Calv. in 1
Con. 10. 3. vere, etc. (...) (...) 1 Cor. (...). 24. realiter. (...) (...),
(...). 3.
Calvin's own words; and yet Bellarmine boldly affirms, that to his reading, no
one Protestant did ever affirm it. And I, for my part, cannot believe but
Bellarmine had read Calvin, and very carefully, he does so frequently and so
mainly Oppose him. Nor can that Place by any Art be shifted, or by any Violence
wrested from Calvin's true meaning of the Presence of Christ in and at the
blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, to any Supper in Heaven whatsoever. But
most manifest it is, that Quod legerim, for ought I have read, will not serve
Bellarmine to excuse him. For he himself, but in the very Bellar. L. 1. (...)
Eucharisti^, c. ^ ^ 5 (...), docet.
Chapter going before, quotes four Places out of Calvin, in which he says
expressly, That we receive in the Sacrament the Body and the Blood of Christ
Vere, truly. So Calvin says it four times, and Bellarmine quotes the places;
and yet he says in the very next Chapter, That never any Protestant said so, to
his Reading. And for the Church of England, nothing is more plain, than that it
believes and teaches the true and Real presence of Christ in the The Body of
Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper (of the Lord) only after an
Heavenly and Spiritual manner. And the means whereby the Body of Christ is
received and eaten, is Faith. Eccl. Angl. Art. 28. So here is the manner of
Transubstantiation denied, but the Body of Christ twice affirmed. And in the
Prayer before Consecration, thus: Grant us graci^^^ Lord so to eat the flesh of
thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his Blood, etc. And again, in the
second Prayer or Thanksgiving after Consecration, thus: We give thee thanks,
for that thou do vouchsafe to feed us which have duly received these holy
Mysteries with the spiritual food of the most precious Body and Blood of thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christ, etc.
Eucharist, unless A. C. can make a Body no Body, and Blood no Blood, (as
perhaps he can by Transubstantiation) as well as Bread no Bread, and Wine no
Wine. And the Church of England is Protestant too. So Protestants of all sorts
maintain a true and Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist; and then, where is
any known, or damnable Heresy here? As for the Learned of those zealous men
that died in this Cause in Q. Mary's days, they denied not the Real presence
simply taken, but as their Opposites forced Transubstantiation upon them, as if
that, and the Real presence had been all one. Whereas all the Ancient
Christians ever believed the one, and none but Modern and Superstitious
Christians believe the other; if they do believe it: for I, for my part, doubt
they do not. And as for the Unlearned in those times, and all times, their zeal
(they holding the Foundation) may eat out their Ignorances, and leave them
safe. Now that the Learned Protestants in Queen Mary's days, did not deny, nay
did maintain the Real presence, will manifestly appear. For when the
Commissioners obtruded to Jo. Frith the Presence of Christ's natural Body in
the Sacrament, and that without all figure, or similitude: Jo. Frith
acknowledges, Jo. Fox Martyrolog. Tom. 2. London 1597. p. 943.
That the inward man does as verily receive Christ's Body, as the outward man
receives the Sacrament with his Mouth: And he adds, Fox Ibid.
That neither side ought to make it a necessary Article of Faith, but leave it
indifferent. Nay, Archbishop Cranmer comes more plainly, and more home to it
than Frith. For if you understand (says Cranmer apud Fox ibid. p. 1301.
he) by this word really, Reipsa, that is, in very deed and effectually; so
Christ by the grace and efficacy of his Passion, is indeed, and truly present,
etc. But if by this word Really, you understand I say Corporaliter, corporally;
for so Bellarmine has it expressly: Quod autem Corporaliter and proprie
s^^^atur Sanguis and Caro, etc. prob^^i potest omnibus Argumentis, etc. Bell.
L. 1. de Eucharistic* 12. Sed tota. And I must be bold to tell you more than,
That this is the Doctrine of the Chapter of Rome. For I must tell you too, that
Bellarm. here contradicts himself. For he that tells us here, that it can be
proved by many Arguments, that we receive the Flesh and the Blood of Christ in
the Eucharist corporaliter, said as expressly before (had he remembered it) that
though Christ be in this Blessed Sacrament vere and realiter, yet (faith he)
non dicemus corporaliter, i. e. co modo quo s^d natura existunt Corpora, etc.
Bell. L. 1. de Euchar. c. 2. Tertia Regula. So Bell. here is in a notorious
contradiction. Or else it will follow plainly out of him, that Christ in the
Sacrament is existent one way and received another; which is a gross absurdity.
And that corporaliter was the Doctrine of the Chapter of Rome, and meant by
Transubstantiation, is farther plain in the book called The Institution of a
Christian man, set forth by the Bishops in

Convocation in H. 8's time, an. 1534. c. Of the Sacrament of the Altar. The
words are: Under the form and figure of Bread and Wine, the very body and blood
of Christ is corporally, really, etc. exhibited and received, etc. And Aqui^as
expresse^^^ thus: Quia tamen substantia Corporis Christi realiter non dividitur
a sua quantitate dimensiva, and ab aliis accidentibus, ind^ est, quod ex vi
realis Concomitantiae est in Sacramento tot^ quantitas dimensiva Corpori^
Christi, and omnia accidentia ejus. Tho. p. 3. q. 76. Ar. 4. c.


Corporaliter, Corporally, in his natural and Organical Body, under the Forms
of Bread and Wine, it is contrary to the Holy Word of God. And so likewise
Bishop Ridley. Nay, Bishop Ridley adds yet farther, and speaks so fully to
this Point, as I think no man can add to his Expression: And it is well if some
Protestants except not against it. Both you and I (faith Apud Fox ibid. p. 1598.
he) agree in this: That in the Sacrament is the very true and natural Body and
Blood of Christ, even that which was born of the Virgin Mary; which ascended
into heaven, which sits on the right hand of God the Father, which shall come
from thence to judge the quick and the dead. Only we differ in modo, in the
way and manner of being. We confess all one thing to be in the Sacrament, and
dissent in the Manner of Being there. I confess Christ's natural Body to be in
the Sacrament by Spirit and Grace, etc. You make a grosser kind of Being,
enclosing a natural Body under the shape and form of Bread and Wine. So far,
and more, Bishop Ridley. And Apud Fox ibid. 1703.
Archbishop Cranmer confesses, That he was indeed of another Opinion, and
inclining to that of Zuinglius, till Bishop Ridley convinced his Judgment, and
settled him in this Point. And for Tantum de modo quaestio est, etc. Et ^acessat
calum^ia auferri Christum a Coena sua, etc. Calv. L. 4. Inst. c. 17. 31.
Veritatem Dei in qua acquiescere tuto licet, sine controversia amplectar.
Pronunciat ille Carnem suam esse Animae meae cibum, Sanguinem esse potum.
Talibus alimentis animam Illi meam pascendam o^^^^o. In S. Coena jubet me sub
Symbolis Panis and Vini Corpus and Sanguinem suum sumere, manducare and bi^ere.
Nihil dubito, quin and Ipse Vere porrigat, and ego recipiam. Calv. ibid. 32.
Calvin, he comes no whit short of these, against the Calumny of the Romanists
on that behalf. Now after all this, with what face can A. C. say (as he does)
That Protestants deny, or doubt of the true, and Real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament? I cannot well tell, or am unwilling to utter.

Fifthly, whereas it is added by A. C. That in this present case, Punct. 5.
there is no peril of any damnable Heresy, Schism, or any other A. C. p. 66.
Sin, in resolving to live and die in the Roman Church. That Is not so neither.
For he that lives in the Roman Church, with such a Resolution, is presumed to
believe as that Church believes. And he that does so, I will not say is as
guilty, but guilty (...) is, more, or less, of the Schism which that Church
first caused by her Corruptions, and now continues by them, and her power
together; And of all her Damnable Opinions too, in point of Misbelief, though
perhaps A. C. will not have them called Heresies, unless they have been
condemned in some General Council; And of all other sins also, which the
Doctrine and Misbelief of that Church leads him into. And mark it I pray. For
it is one thing to live in a Schismatical Church, and not Communicate with it in
the Schism, or in any false Worship that attends it. For so Elias lived among
the Ten Tribes, and was not Schismatical, 3 Reg. 3 Reg. 17.
17. And after him Elizaeus, 4 Reg. 3. But then neither 4 Reg. 3.
of them either countenanced the Schism, or worshipped the Calves in Dan, or in
Bethel. And so also beside these Prophets, did those Thousands live in a
Schismatical Church; yet never bowed their knee to Baal, 3. Reg. 19. But it is
quite another 3 Reg. 19. 18.
thing to live in a Schismatical Church, and Communicate with it in the Schism,
and all the Superstitions and Corruptions, which that Church teaches, nay to
live and die in them. For certainly here no man can so live in a Schismatical
Church, but if he be of capacity enough, and understand it, he must needs be a
Formal Schismatic, or an Involved One, if he understand it not. And in this
case the Church of Rome is either far worse, or more cruel than the Church of
Israel, even under Ahab and Jezabel, was. The Synagogue indeed was corrupted a
long time, and in a great degree. But I do not find, that this Doctrine, You
must sacrifice in the high places: Or this, You may not go and worship at the
one Altar in Jerusalem, was either taught by the Priests, or maintained by the
Prophets, or enjoined the people by the Sanedrim: Nay, can you show me when any
Jew living there devoutly according to the Law, was ever punished for omitting
the One of these, or doing the Other? But the Church of Rome has solemnly
decreed her Errors: And erring, has yet decreed withal, That she cannot err.
And imposed upon Learned men, disputed and improbable Opinions,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and Forbearance of the Cup in the blessed
Eucharist, even against the express Command of our Savior, and that for
Articles of Faith. And to keep off Disobedience, what ever the Corruption be,
she has bound up her Decrees upon pain of Excommunication, and all that
follows upon it. Nay, this is not enough, unless the Faggot be kindled to light
them the way. This then may be enough for us to leave Rome, though the old
Prophet 3 Reg. 13. 11.
forsook not Israel, 3. Reg. 13. And therefore in this present case there is
peril, great peril of damnable both Schism and Heresy, and other sin, by
living and dying in the Roman Faith, tainted with so many superstitions, as at
this day it is, and their Tyranny to boot. So that here I may answer A. C. just
as Petilianus dixit, Venite ad Ecclesiam populi, and aufugite Traditores ( ita
Orthodoxos tum appellavit) si cum iisdem perire non vultis. Number ut facile
cogno^catis quod ipsi sunt rei, de fide nostra optime judicant. Ego illorum
infectos baptizo. Illi meos (quod absit) recipient baptizatos, quae om^ino non
^acerent, si in Baptismo nostro culpas aliquas agnovissent. Videte ergo quod
damus, quam sanctum sit, quod destruere metuit Sacrilegus Inimicus. S. August.
respondet. Sic approbamus in Haereticis Baptismum, nox Haereticorum, sed
Christi, sicut in Fornicasoribus, Idololatris, Veneficis, etc. approbamus
Baptismum non eorm, sed Christi. Omnes enim isti, inter quos and Haeretici
sunt, sicut dicit Apostolus: Regnum Dei non possidebunt, etc. ^. August. ^. 2.
cont. Lit. Petiliani. c. 108.
S. Augustine answered Petilian the Donatist, in the forenamed case of
Baptism. For when Petilian pleaded the Concession of his Adversaries, That
Baptism, as the Donatists administered it, was good and lawful, and thence
inferred (just as the Jesuit does against me) that it was better for men to
join with his Congregation, than with the Church S. Augustine answers; We do
indeed approve among Heretics Baptism, but so, not as it is the Baptism of
Heretics, but as it is the Baptism of Christ. Just as we approve the Baptism
of Adulterers, Idolaters, Witches, and yet not as it is theirs; but as it is
Christ's Baptism. For none of these, for all their Baptism, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. And the Apostle reckons Heretics among them, Galat. 5. 19, 20,
21.
Galat. 5. And again afterward: It is not therefore yours (says Non ergo
vestrum est quod destruert metuimus, sed Christi; quod and in sacrilegis per se
sanctum est. S. August. Ibid.
Saint Augustine) which we fear to destroy, but Christ's, which even among the
Sacrilegious, is of, and in it self, holy. Now you shall see how full this
comes to our Petilianist A. C. (for he is one of the Contractors of the Church
of Christ to Rome, as the Donatists confined it to Asrick.) And he cries out,
That a Possibility A. C. p. 64, 65.
of Salvation, is a free Confession of the Adversaries, and is of force against
them, and to be thought extorted from them by force of Truth it self. I answer.
I do indeed for my part (leaving other men free to their own judgment)
acknowledge a Possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church. But so, as that
which I grant to Romanists, is not as they are Romanists, but as they are
Christians, that is, as they believe the Creed, and hold the Foundation Christ
himself, not as they associate themselves wittingly and knowingly to the gross
Superstitions of the Romish Church. Nor do I fear to destroy quod ipsorum est,
that which is theirs; but yet I dare not proceed so roughly, as with theirs, or
for theirs to deny, or weaken the Foundation, which is Christ's, even among
them; and which is, and remains holy even in the midst of their Superstitions;
And I am willing to hope there are many among them, which keep within that
Church, and yet wish the Superstitions abolished which they know, and which
pray to God to forgive their errors in what they know not, and which hold the
Foundation firm, and live accordingly, and which would have all things amended
that are amiss, were it in their power. And to such I dare not deny a
Possibility of Salvation, for that which is Christ's in them, though they
hazard themselves extremely by keeping so close to that, which is
Superstition, and in the Case of Images, comes too near Idolatry. Nor can A. C.
shift this off A. C. p. 66.
by adding, living and dying in the Roman Church. For this living and dying in
the Roman Church, (as is before expressed) cannot take away the Possibility of
Salvation from them which believe, and repent of whatsoever is error, or sin
in them, be it sin known to them, or be it not. But then perhaps A. C. will
reply, that if this be so, I must then maintain, that a Donatist also, living
and dying in Schism, might be saved. To which I answer two ways. First, that a
plain honest Donatist, having (as is confessed) true Baptism, and holding the
Foundation (as for ought I know, the For though Prateolus will make Donatus,
and from him the Donatists, to be gullty of an impious Heresy (I doubt he
means Arrianism, though he name it not) in making the Son of God less than the
Father, and the Holy Ghost less than the Son. L 4. de Haeres. Haer. 14. yet
these things are most manifest out of S. Aug. concerning them, who lived with
them both in time and place, and understood them, and their Tenets far better
than Prateolus could.

And first, S. Aug. tells us concerning them: Aryiani* Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, diversas substantias esse dicunt. Donatistae autem unam
Trinitatis substantiam confitentur. So they are no Arrians.

Secondly, Si aliqui eorum minorem Filium esse dixerunt quam Pater est, ejusd^m
tamen substantiae non ^^garunt. But this is but si aliq^^, if any: so 'twas
doubtful, this too, though Patreolus delivers it positively.

Thirdly, Plurimi ver^ in iis ^oe se dicunt, omnino credere de Patre, and
Fili^, and Spirit^ Sancto, quod Catholica credit Ecclesia. Nec ^^sa cum illis
vertitur Question, sed de sola Communione i^^oeliciter litigant, etc. De sola.
Only about the Union with the Church. Therefore they erred not in Fundamental
Points of Faith. And

Lastly, All that can farther be said against them, is, That some of them, to
win the Goths to them, when they were powerful, said, Hoc se Credere quod and
illi Credunt. Now the Goths (for the most) were Arrians. But then, faith S.
Aug. they were but n^^nulli, some of them. And of this some it was no more
Certain, than sicut andivimus, as we have heard, S. Aug. knew it not. And then
if it were true of some, yet Majorum s^orum Authoritate convincuntur; Quia nec
Donatus ipse sic credidisse asseritur, de cujus part se esse gloriantur. S.
Aug. Epist. 50. Where Prateolus is again deceived; for he says expressly, that
Donatus affirmed the Son to be less then the Father. Impius ille asserebat,
etc. But then indeed, (and which perchance deceived Patreolus) beside Donatus
the founder of this Heresy, there was another Donatus, who succeeded Majorinus
at Carth^ge, and he was guilty of the Heresy, which Prateolus mentions, Et
extant scripta ejus ubi appare^, a^ S. Aug. confesses, L 1. de Haeres. Haer.
69. But then S. Aug. adds there also, nec facile in iis quisquam, that scarce
any of the Donatists did so much as know, that this Donatus held that Opinion,
much less did they believe it themselves. S. Aug. Ibid.


Donatists did) and repenting of what ever was sin in him, and would have
repented of the Schism, had it been known to him, might be saved* Secondly,
that in this Particular, the Romanist and the Donatist differ much; And that
therefore it is not of necessary consequence, that if a Romanist now (upon the
Conditions before expressed) may be saved; Therefore a Donatist heretofore
might. For in regard of the Schism the Donatist was in one respect worse, and
in greater danger of damnation than the Romanist now is: And in another respect
better, and in less danger. The Donatist was in greater danger of damnation, if
you consider the Schism it self then; for they brake from the Orthodox Church
without any cause given them. And here it does follow, if the Romanist have a
Possibility of Salvation, therefore a Donatist has. But if you consider the
Cause of the Schism now, then the Donatist was in less danger of Damnation than
the Romanist is; Because the Church of Rome gave the first and the greatest
cause of the Schism (as is proved. 21. N. 1, etc.
before.) And therefore here it does not follow, That if a Donatist have
possibility of Salvation, Therefore a Romanist has; For a lesser Offender may
have that possibility of safety, which a greater has not.

And last of all, whereas A. C. adds, that confessedly there is Punct. 6.
no such Peril. That Is a most loud untruth, and an Ingenuous A. C. p. 66.
man would never have said it. For in the same. 35. N. 1, 2.
place, where I grant a possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church, I
presently add, that it is no secure way, in regard of Roman Corruptions. And A.
C. cannot plead for himself that he either knew not this, or that he overlooked
it; for himself disputes against it as strongly as he can. What modesty, or
Truth call you this? For he that confesses a possibility of Salvation, does not
thereby confess no peril of Damnation in the same way. Yea, but if some
Protestants should say there is peril of Damnation to live and die in the Roman
Faith, their saying is nothing in comparison of the number or worth of those
that say, there is none. So A. C. again. And beside, they which say it, are
contradicted by their own more Learned Brethren. Here A. C. speaks A. C. p. 66.
very confusedly. But whether he speak of Protestants, or Romanists, or mixes
both, the matter is not great. For as for the Number and Worth of men, they are
no necessary Concluders for Truth. Not Number; for who would be judged by the
Many? The time was when the I^gemuit totus Orbis, and Arrianum se esse miratus
est. S. H^er. advers. Luciferian. post medium. To. 2. Arrianorum Venenum non
^am portiunculam quandam, sed p^^e Orbem totum contaminaverat, adeo ^t prope
cunctis Latini Sermonis Episcop^^, partim vi, partim fraud deceptis, caligo
quaedam mentibus offunderetur, etc. Vin. Lir. cont. Haeres. c. 6. Ecclesia non
Parietibus consistit, sed in Dogmatum veritate. Ecclesia ibi est, ubi fides
vera est. Caeterum ante annos quindecim, aut viginti, Parietes omnes hic
Ecclesiarum Haeretici ( de Arrianis and aliis Haereticis loquitur) possidebant,
etc. Ecclesia autem illic erat, ubi fides vera erat. S. Hier. in Psalm. 133.
Constantius Tantane Orbis terrae pars, Liberi, in te residet, ut tu solus
homini Impio (de Athanasio loquitur) subsidio veni^^, and pace^ Orbis ac Mundi
totius dirimere au^^as. Liberius. Esto quod ego solus sim, non tamen propterea
Causa fidei fit inferior; nam olim tres solum erant reperti, qui Regis mandato
resisterent, etc. Theod. L 2. Hist. Eccles. c. 16. Dialogo inter Constant. Imp.
and Liberium Pa^am. So that Pope did not think Maltitade any great note of the
true Church ubi sunt, etc. qui Ecclesiam multitudi^e definiunt, and parvum
gr^gem aspernantur, etc. Greg. Naz. Orat. 25. prin. Nay, the Arrians were grown
to that boldness, that they Objected to the Catholics of that time Paucitatem,
the thinness of their number, Greg. Naz. Carm. de vita sua, p. 24. Edit. Paris.
1611. Quum ejecti tam^^ essent de Civitatibu^, ja^^aba^t in desertis suis
Synagogis illud: Multi vocati, pauci electi, Socr. L. 1. Hist. Eccl. c. 10.
Arrians were too many for the Orthodox. Not Worth simply, for that once Error
Origenis and Tertullian^ magna fuit in Ecclesia D^^ Populi tentatio, Vin. Lir.
cont. Haer. c. 23, and 24.
misled, is of all other the greatest misleader. And yet God forbid, that to
Worth weaker men should not yield in difficult and Perplexed Questions, yet so,
as that when Matters Fundamental in the Faith come in Question they finally
rest upon an higher, and clearer certainty than can be found in either Number
or Weight of men. Besides, if you mean your own Party, you have not yet proved
your Party more worthy for Life of Learning than the Protestants. Prove that
first, and then it will be time to tell you, how worthy many of your Popes have
been for either Life or Learning. As for the rest, you may blush to say it. For
all Protestants unanimously agree in this, That there is great peril of
Damnation for any man to live and die in the Roman persuasion. And you are not
able to produce any one Protestant, that ever said the contrary. And therefore
that is a most notorious slander, where you say, that they which affirm this
peril of Damnation, are contradicted A. C. p. 66.
by their own more Learned Brethren.

A. C. to the two former Instances, I will now proceed (as I. 35. N. 4.
promised) to make this farther appear, that A. C. and his Fellows dare not
stand to that ground, which is here laid down. Namely, That in Point of Faith
and Salvation, it is safest for a man to take that way which the Adversary
Confesses to be true, or whereon the differing Parties agree. And that if they
do stand to it, they must be forced to maintain the Church of England in many
things against the Church of Rome.

And first, I Instance in the Article of our Savior Christ's Descent Punct. 1.
into Hell. I hope the Church of Rome believes this Article, and withal that
Hell is the place of the Damned; so does the Church of England. In this then
these dissenting Churches agree; Therefore according to the former Rule (yea
and here in Truth too) it is safest for a man to believe this Article of the
Creed, as both agree: That is, that Christ descended in Soul into the Place of
the Damned; but this the Romanists will not endure at any hand. For the
Sequuntur en^m Thom. p. 3. q. 52. Ar. 2. c. Verba ejus sunt. Anim^ Christi per
suam essentiam descendit solum ad locum Inferni, in quo justi detinebantur,
etc. Ezec. 13. 10.
School agree in it, That the Soul of Christ in the time of his death went
really no farther than in Limbum Patrum, which is not the place of the Damned;
but a Region or Quarter in the upper part of Hell, (as they call it) built up
there by the Romanist, without License of either Scripture, or the Primitive
Church. And a man would wonder how those Builders with untempered Mortar found
light enough in that dark Place to build as they have done.

Secondly, I Will instance in the Institution of the Sacrament in Punct. 2.
both kinds. That Christ Instituted it so, is confessed by both Churches; and
the Ancient Churches received it so, is agreed by both Churches. Therefore
according to the former Rule (and here in Truth too) it is safest for a man to
receive this Sacrament in both kinds. And yet here this Ground of A. C. must
not stand for good, no not at Rome, but to receive in one kind is enough for
the Laity. And the poor Basiliens^ Conc^lium concessit Bohemis utriusque
spec^^i usum: mod^ faterentur id sibi concedi ab Ecclesia, non autem ad hoc
teneri Divino j^r^. Bell. L. 1. de Sacrament. in genere, c. 2.. 2.
Bohemians must have a Dispensation, that it may be lawful for them to receive
the Sacrament as Christ commanded them. And this must not be granted to them
neither, unless they will ackdowledge (most opposite to Truth) that they are
not bound by Divine Law to receive it in both kinds. And here their Building
with untempered Mortar appears most manifestly. For they have no show to
maintain this, but the fiction of Thomas of Aquin, That he which receives the
Body of Christ, receives also his Blood per concomitantiam, by concomitancy;
because the Blood goes always with the Body; of which Term Tho. p. 3. q. 76. A.
2. c. and alibi passim.
Thomas was the first Author I can yet find. First then, if this be true, I
hope Christ knew it: And then why did he so unusefully institute it in both
kinds? Next, if this be true, Concomitancy accompanies the Priest, as well as
the People; and then why may not he receive it in one kind also? Thirdly, this
is apparently not true: For the Eucharist is a Sacrament Sanguinis effusi, of
Blood shed, and poured out; And Blood poured out, and so severed from the Body,
goes not along with the Body per concomitantiam. And yet Christ must rather
err, or proceed I know not how in the Institution of the Sacrament in both
kinds, rather than the Holy unerring Church of Rome may do amiss in the
Determination for it, and the Administration of it in one kind. Nor will the
Distinction, That Christ instituted this as a Sacrifice, to which both kinds
were necessary, serve the turn: For suppose that true, yet he instituted it, as
a Sacrament also, or else that Sacrament had no Institution from Christ; which
I presume A. C. dares not affirm. And that Institution which the Sacrament had
from Christ, was in both kinds.

And since here is mention happened of Sacrifice, my Third Instance Punct. 3.
shall be in the Sacrifice which is offered up to God in that Great and High
Mystery of our Redemption by the death of Christ. For as Christ offered up
Christ by his own Blood entered once into the Holy place, and obtained eternal
Redemption for us. Heb. 9. 12. And this was done by way of Sacrifice; by the
offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once made, Heb. 10. 10. Christ gave
himself for us, to be an Offering, and a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
unto God, Ephesians. 5. 2. Out of which place the School infers, Passionem Christi
verum Sacrificium fuisse. Tho. p. 3. q. 48. Art. 3. c. Christ did suffer death
upon the Cross for our Redemption, and made there, by his one Oblation of
himself once offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation, and
Satisfaction for the sins of the whole World. Eccles. Angl. in Canone
Consecrationis E^cbar.
himself once for all, a full and all-sufficient Sacrifice for the sin of the
whole world: So did He Institute, and Command a And Christ did Institute, and
in his holy Gospel Command us to continue a Perpetual Memory of that his
precious Death, until his Coming again. Eccles. Angl. ibid.
Memory of this Sacrifice in a Sacrament, even till his coming again. For at,
and in the Eucharist, we offer up to God three Sacrifices. One by the Priest
only, that is the Sacramentum b^c est Commemorati^um Dominice Passionis, quae
fuit verum Sacrificium; and sic Nominatur Sacrificium. Tho. p. 3. q. 73. A. 4.
C. Christ being Offered up once for all in his own proper Person, is yet said
to be Offered up, etc. in the Celebration of the Sacrament; Because his
Oblation once for ever made, is thereby Represented. Lambert in Fox his
Martyrolog. Vol. 2. ^dit. ^ond. 1579. p. 1033. Et postea* It Is a Memorial, or
Representation thereof. Ibid. The Master of the Sentences judged truly in this
Point, saying: That which is Offered and Consecrated of the Priest, is called a
Sacrifice and Oblation, because it is a Memory, and Representation of the true
Sacrifice, and holy Oblation made on the Altar of the Cross. Archb. Cranm^r in
his Answer to Bishop Gardner concerning the most holy Sacrament, L. 5. p. 377.
And again, this shortly is the mind of Lombardus, That the thing which is done
at Gods Board is a Sacrifice, and so is that also which was made upon the
Cross, but not after one manner of understanding* For this was the Thing
indeed, and that is the Commemoration of the thing. Ibid. So likewi^e Bishop
Jewel acknowledges incruentum and ^atio^abil^ Sacrificium, spoken of by Eusebius.
de Demonstrat. Evang* ^. 1. Jewels Reply against Harding. Art. 7. Divis. 9.
Again, the ministration of the holy Communion is sometimes of the Ancient
Fathers called an Unblo^dy Sacrifice, not in respect of any Corporal or Fleshly
presence, that is imagined to be there without bloudshedding, but for that it
represents, and reports to our minds that one, and everlasting Sacrifice
that Christ made in his Body upon the Cross. This Bishop Jewel disliketh not in
his Answer to Harding, Art. 17. Divis. 14. Patres C^nam Dominicam duplici de
causa vocaru^t Sacrificium incruentum. Tum quo^ ^^t Imago and sole^^is
repraesentatio illius Sacrificii (...) quod Christus cum sanguinis effusione
obtulit in Cruce: Tum quod sit etiam Eucharisticum Sacrificium, id est,
Sacrificium Laudis and grati^rum actionis, cum pro benefic^is omnibus, tum pro
redemptione imprimis per Christi mort^m peracta. Zanch. in 2 Praecept. Decal.
T. 4. p. 459. And D. Fulk also acknowledges a Sacrifice in the Eucharist. In S.
Matthew. 26. 26. Non dissimulaverint Christiani i^ Coena Domini, sive ^t ips^
loqu^bantur, in Sacrificio Altaris peculiari q^odam modo praesentem se venerari
Deum Christia^or^m* sed que esset forma ejus Sacrificii quod per Symbol^ Panis
and Vini peragitur, ^^c V^teres prae se non ^erebant. Isa. Casaub. Exe^cit. 16.
ad Annal. Baron.. 43* p. 560.
Commemorative Sacrifice of Christ's Death represented in Bread broken, and Wine
poured out. Another by the In the Liturgy of the Church of England we pray to
God immediately after the reception of the Sacrament, That he would be pleased
to accept this our Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, etc. And Heb. 13. 15.
The Sacrifice Propitiatory was made by Christ himself only, but the Sacrifice
Commemorative and Gratulatory is made by the Priest and the People. Archbishop
Cranmer in his Answer to Bishop Gardner, L. 5. p. 377.
Priest and the People, jointly; and that is the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving, for all the Benefits and Graces we receive by the precious death
of Christ. The Third, I beseech you Brethren by the mercies of God, that you
give up your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, Romans 12.
1. We of^er, and present unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our souls and bodies,
to be a reasonable, holy, and living Sacrifice unto thee. So the Church of
England* in the Prayer after the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
by every particular man for himself only; and that is the Sacrifice of every
man's Body, and Soul, to serve him in both, all the rest of his life, for this
blessing thus bestowed on him. Now thus far these dissenting Churches agree,
that in the Eucharist, there is a Sacrifice of Duty, and a Sacrifice of Praise,
and a Sacrifice of Commemoration of Christ. Therefore according to the former
Rule, (and here in truth too) it is safest for a man to believe the
Commemorative, the the Praising, and the Performing Sacrifice, and to offer
them duly to God, and leave the Church of Rome in this Particular to her
Superstitions, that I may say no more. And would the Church of Rome stand to A.
C's Rule, and believe dissenting Parties where they agree, were it but in this,
and that before, of the Real presence, it would work far toward the Peace of
Christendom. But the Truth is, They pretend the Peace of Christendom, but care
no more for it, than as it may uphold at least, if not increase their own
Greatness.

My fourth Instance shall be in the Sacrament of Baptism, and Punct. 4.
the things required as necessary to make it effectual to the Receiver. They in
the common received Doctrine of the Church of Rome are three. The Matter, the
Form; and the Intention of the Priest, to do that which the Church does, and
intends he should do. Now all other Divines, as well ancient as modern, and
both the dissenting Churches also, agree in the two former; but many deny that
the Intention of the Priest is necessary. Will A. C. hold his Rule, That it is
safest to believe in a controverted Point of Faith that which the dissenting
Parties agree on, or which the Adverse Part Confesses? If he will not, then why
should he press that, as a Rule to direct others, which he will not be guided
by himself? And if he will, then he must go professedly against the Council.
Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 11.
Council of Trent, which has determined it as deside, as a Point of Faith,
that the Intention of the Priest is necessary to make the Baptism true and
valid. Though in the Hist. Council. Trid. L. 2. p. 277 Edit. Lat. Leyda, 1622.
History of that Council, it is most apparent the Bishops and other Divines
there could not tell what to answer to the Bishop of Minors, a Neapolitane, who
declared his Judgment openly against it, in the face of that Council.

My fifth Instance is: We say, and can easily prove there Punct. 5.
are diverse Errors, and some gross ones, in the Roman Missal. But I my self
have heard some Jesuits confess, that in the Liturgy of the Church of England
there is no positive Error. And being pressed, why then they refused to come to
our Churches, and serve God with us? They answered, they could not do it,
Because though our Liturgy had in it nothing ill, yet it wanted a great deal
of that which was good, and was in their Service. Now here let A. C. consider
again, Here is a plain Concession of the adverse Part: And both agree, there is
nothing in our Service, but that which is holy and good. What will the Jesuit
or A. C. say to this? If he forsake his ground, then it is not safest in point
of Divine Worship to join in Faith as the dissenting Parties agree, or to stand
to the Adversaries own Confession. If he be so hardy as to maintain it, then
the English Liturgy is better, and safer to worship God by, than the Roman
Mass. Which yet, I presume A. C. will not confess.

Instances (the Matter so falling out of it self, for the Argument enforces it
not) the thing is true; but not therefore true, because the dissenting Parties
agree in it, or because the adverse Part Confesses it. Yet lest the Jesuit, or
A. C. for him, farther to deceive the weak, should infer that this Rule in so
many Instances is true, and false in none, but that one concerning Baptism
among the Donatists, and therefore the Argument is true ut plerumque, as for
the most, and that therefore it is the safest way to believe that which
dissenting Parties agree on; I will lay down some other Particulars of as great
Consequence, as any can be in, or about Christian Religion. And if in them A.
C. or any Jesuit dare say, that it is safest to believe as the dissenting
Parties agree, or as the adverse Party confesses, I dare say he shall be an
Heretic in the highest degree, if not an Insidel.

And First, where the Question was betwixt the Orthodox, Punct. 1.
and the Arrian, whether the Son of God were consubstantial with the Father.
The Orthodox said he was (...) of the same substance. The Arrian came within in
a Letter of the Truth, and said he was (...) of like substance. Now he that
says, he is of the same substance, confesses he is of like substance, and more,
that is, Identity of Substance; for Identity contains in it all Degrees of
likeness, and more. But he that acknowledges, and believes that He is of like
nature, and no more, denies the Identity: Therefore if this Rule be true, That
it is safest to believe that, in which the dissenting Parties agree, or which
the Adverse Part Confesses, (which A. C. makes such great A. C. p. 64, 65.
vaunt of) then it is safest for a Christian to believe that Christ is of like
nature with God the Father, and be free from Belief, that He is Consubstantial
with him; which yet is Concluded by the Council. Nicen. Fides vel Symbolum in
fine Council.
Council of Nice as necessary to Salvation, and the Contrary Condemned for
Damnable Heresy.

Secondly, in the Question about the Resurrection, between Punct. 2.
the Orthodox, and diverse ^ross Saturninus, Basilides, Carpocrates, Cerinthus,
Valentinus, Cerdon, Appelles, etc. Tertull. de praescript. advers. Haer^t. c.
46, 48, 49, 51, etc.
Heretics of old, and the Anabaptists and Libertines of late. For all, or most
of these dissenting Parties agree, that there ought to be a Resurrection from
sin to a state of Grace, and that this Resurrection only is meant in diverse
Passages of holy Scripture, together with the Life of the Soul, which they are
content to say is Immortal. But Libertini rident ^^em omnem quam de
Resurrectione habemus, idque jam nobis even^sse dicunt, quod adhuc expectamus,
etc. ut Homo sciat Animam suam Spiritum (...) esse perpetu^ viventem in Coelis,
etc. Calv. instructione advers. Libertinos, c. 22. prin^. Sunt etiam hodie
Libertini qui eam irrident, and Resurrectionem quae tractatur in Scripturis,
tantum ad Animas referunt. Pet. Mart. Loc. Com. Class. 3. Ca. 15. Nu. 4.
they utterly deny any Resurrection of the Body after Death: So with them that
Article of the Creed is gone. Now then if any man will guide his Faith by this
Rule of A. C. The Consent of dissenting Parties, or the Confession of the
Adverse Part, he must deny the Resurrection of the Body from the Grave to
Glory, and believe none but that of the Soul, from sin to Grace, which the
Adversaries Confess, and in which the Dissenting Parties agree.

Thirdly, in the great Dispute of all others, about the Unity Punct. 3.
of the Godhead. All dissenting Parties, Jew, Turk, and Christian: Among
Christians Orthodox, and Anti-Trinitarian of old: And in these later times,
Orthodox and Socinian (that Horrid and mighty Monster of all Heresies) agree in
this, That there is but one God. And I hope it is as necessary to believe one
God our Father, as one Church our Mother. Now will A. C. say here, it is safest
believing as the dissenting Parties agree, or as the Adverse Parties Confess,
namely, That there is but one God, and so deny the Trinity, and therewith the
Son of God the Savior of the world?

Fourthly, in a Point as Fundamental in the Faith, as this, Punct. 4.
Namely, whether Christ be true and very God. For which very Point, most of the
Hebr. 11. 37. Cyrillus Alexandrinus male audivit, quod Ammonium Martyrem
appellavit, quem constitit te^eritatis poenas dedisse, and non Necessitate
negandi Christi in tormentis esse mortuum. Socr. Hist. Eccl. L. 7. c. 14.
Martyrs in the Primitive Church laid down their lives. The dissenting Parties
here were the Orthodox Believers, who affirm He is both God and Man; for so our
Creed teaches us: And all those Heretics, which affirm Christ to be Man, but
deny him to be God, as the Optatus L. 4. Cont. Parmen.
Arrians, and Tertul. L. de Praescrip. c. 48.
Carpocratians, and Tertul. Ibid.
Cerinthus, and Tertul. L. de Carne Christi, c. 14.
Hebion, with others: and at this day the Si ad Jesu Christi respicias
Essentiam atque Naturam, non nisi Hominem eum fuisse constanter affirmamus.
Volkelius, Lib. 3. de Religione Christiana, cap. 1.
Socinians. These dissenting Parties agree fully and clearly, That Christ is
Man. Well then. Dare A. C. stick to his Rule here, and say, it is safest for a
Christian in this great Point of Faith to govern his Belief by the Consent of
these dissenting Parties, or the Confession and acknowledgment of the Adverse
Party, and so settle his Belief, that Christ is a mere Man, and not God? I hope
he dares not. So then, this Rule, To Resolve a man's Faith into that, in which
the Dissenting Parties agree, or which the Adverse Part confesses, is as often
false, as true. And false in as Great, if not Greater Matters, than those, in
which it is true. And where it is true, A. C. and his fellows dare not govern
themselves by it, the Church of Rome condemning those things which that Rule
proves. And yet while they talk of Certainty, nay of Infallibility, (less will
not serve their turns) they are driven to make use of such poor shifts as
these, which have no certainty at all of Truth in them, but infer falsehood and
Truth alike. And yet for this also men will be so weak, or so wilful, as to be
seduced by them.

. 35. Nu. 2. fine.
before, That the force of the preceding Argument lies upon two things. The one
expressed, and that is past; the other upon the Bye, which comes now to be
handled. And that is your continual poor Outcry against us, That we cannot be
saved, because we are out of the Church. Sure if I thought I were out, I would
get in as fast as I could. For we confess as well as you, That Extra Ecclesiam
neminem Vivificat Spiritus Sanctus. S. Aug. Epist. 50. ad finem. Field. L. 1.
de Eccles. c. 13. una est Fidelium Universalis Ecclesia, extra quam nullus
salvatur. Conc. Lateran. Can. 1. And yet even there, there is no mention of the
Roman Church.
Out of the Catholic Church of Christ there is no Salvation. But what do you
mean by Out of the Church? Sure out of the And so does A. C. too: Out of the
Catholic Roman Church there is no Possibility of Salvation. A. C. p. 65.
Roman Church. Why but the Roman Church and the Church of England are but two
distinct Members of that Catholic Church which is spread over the face of the
Earth. Therefore Rome is not the House where the Church dwells, but Rome it
self, as well as other particular Churches, dwells in this great Universal
House; unless you will shut up the Church in Rome, as the Donatists did in
Africa. I come a little lower. Rome and other National Churches are in this
Universal Catholic House as so many And Daughter Sion was Gods own phrase of
old of the Church, Isa. 1. 8. (...) Hyppol. Orat. de Consum. mundi. Et omnis
Ecclesia Virgo appellata est. S. Aug. Tr. 13. in S. Joh.
Daughters, to whom (under Christ) the care of the Household is committed by God
the Father, and the Catholic Church the Mother of all Christians. Rome, as an
Elder Sister, For Christ was to be preached to all Nations, but that Preaching
was to begin at Jerusalem, S. Luc. 24. 47. according to the Prophecy, Mic. 4.
2. And the Disciples were first called Christians at Antioch, Acts 11. 26. And
therefore there was a Church there, before ever S. Peter came thence to settle
One at Rome. Nor is it an Opinion destitute either of Authority, or
Probability, That the Faith of Christ was preached, and the Sacraments
administered here in England, before any settlement of a Church in Rome. For S.
Gildas the Ancientest monument we have, and whom the Romanists themselves
reverence, says expressly, That the Religion of Christ was received in Brittany,
Tempore (ut scimus) summo Tiberii Caesaris, etc. In the latter time of Tiberius
Caesar. Gildas de excid. Brit. whereas S. Peter kept in Jewry long after
Tiberius his death. Therefore the first Conversion of this Island to the Faith,
was not by S. Peter. Nor from Rome, which was then a Church. Against this Rich.
Broughton in his Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain, Centur. 1. C. 8.. 4.
says expressly: That the Protestants do freely acknowledge, that this Clause of
the time of Tiberius (tempore summo Tiberii Caesaris) is wanting in other
Copies of that holy Writer, and namely in that which was set forth by Pol.
Virgil, and others. Whereas first these words are express in a most fair, and
ancient Manuscript of Gildas to be seen in Sir Rob. Cotton's Study, if any
doubt it. Secondly, these words are as express in the printed Edition of Gildas
by Polyd. Virg. which Edition was printed at London, An. 1525. and was never
reprinted since. Thridly, these words are as express in the Edition of Gildas,
by Jo. Joselin. printed at London also, An. 1568. And this falsehood of
Broughton is so much the more foul, because he boasts (Praefat. to his Reader,
fine.) That he has seen, and diligently perused the most, and best Monuments
and Antiquities extant, etc. For if he did not see and peruse these, he is
vainly false to say it: if he did see them, he is most maliciously false to
belie them. And Lastly, whereas he says: The Protestants themselves confess so
much, I must believe he is as false in this as in the former, till he name the
Protestants to me, which do confess it. And when he does, he shall gain but
this from me, That those Protestants which confessed it, were mistaken. For the
thing is mistaken.
but not the Eldest neither, had a great Care committed unto her, in, and from
the prime times of the Church, and to her Bishop in her: but at this time (to
let pass many brawls that have formerly been in the House) England, and some
other Sisters of hers are fallen out in the Family. What then? Will the Father,
and the Mother, God, and the Church, cast one Child out, because another is
angry with it? Or when did Christ give that power to an Elder Sister, that She,
and her Steward, the Bishop there, should thrust out what Child she pleased?
Especially when she her self is justly accused to have given the Offense that
is taken in the House? Or will not both Father, and Mother be sharper to Her
for this unjust and unnatural usage of her younger Sisters, but their dear
Children? Nay, is it not the next way to make them turn her out of doors, that
is so unnatural to the rest? It is well for all Christian Men and Churches,
that the Father and Mother of them are not so cursed as some would have them.
And Salvation need not be feared of any dutiful Child, nor Outing from the
Church, because this Elder Sisters faults are discovered in the House, and she
grown froward for it against them that complained. But as Children cry when
they are waked out of sleep, so do you, and wrangle with all that come near
you. And Return of Untruths upon M. Jewel. Art. 4. Untruth 105.
Stapleton confesses, That ye were in a dead sleep, and overmuch rest, when
the Protestants stole upon you. Now if you can prove that Rome is properly The
For I am sure there is a Roman Church, that is but a Particular. B^llarm. L. 4.
de Romans Pont. c. 4. And then you must either show me another Roman Church,
which is The Catholic: Or you must show how One and the same Roman Church is
in different Respects or Relations A Particular, and yet The Catholic. Which
is not yet done. And I do not say, A Particular, and yet A Catholic; But A
Particular, and yet The Catholic Church: For so you speak. For that which
Card. Peron has, That the Roman Church is the Catholic Causally, because it
insuses Universality into all the whole Body of the Catholic Church, can, I
think, satisfy no man that reads it. That a Particular should insuse
Universality into an Universal. Peron. L. 4. of his Reply. c. 9.
Catholic Church it self (as you commonly call it) speak out and prove it. In
the mean time, you may Mark this too, if you will, and it seems you do; for
here you forget not what the Bishop said to you.


F. The Lady which doubted (said the Bishop to me) may be better saved in it,
than you.


B. Mark that too. Where yet by the way, these words ( Than you) do not suppose
Person only. For I will Judge Romans 14. 4.
no man, that has another Master to stand or fall to. But they suppose Calling
and Sufficiency in the Person. Than you, that is, Than any man of your Calling
and Knowledge, of whom more is required. And then no question of the truth of
this speech, That that person may better be saved (that is, easier) than you,
than any man that knows so much of Truth, and opposes against it, as you, and
others of your Calling do. How far you know Truth, other men may judge by your
Proofs, and Causes of Knowledge; but how far you oppose Truth known to you,
that is within, and no man can know, but God and your selves. Howsoever, where
the Foundation is but held, there for Caeteram turbam non intelligendi
vivacitas, sed Credendi simplicitas tutissini^^ f^ti^. S. Aug. Cont. Fund. c.
4. (...). Naz. Orat. 21.

Omission of Inquiry many times saves the people.


ordinary men, it is not the vivacity of Understanding, but the simplicity of
Believing, that makes them safe. For S. Augustine speaks there, of men in the
Church; and no Heretics in respect of the Profession of sundry Divine Verities
which they still retain in common with right Believers, etc. do still pertain
to the Church. Field, L. 1. de Eccles. c. 14. Potest aliquis Ecclesia membrum
esse secundum quid, qui tamen simpliciter non est. Haereticus recedens a Fide,
non dimittitur ut Pagani^^, sed propter Baptismi Characterem, punitur ut
transfuga, and Excommunicationis gladio spiritualiter occiditur. Stapl.
Controv. 1. q. 2. A. 3. Notabil. 3.

The Apostle pronounces some gone out, S. Joh. 2. 19. from the fellowship of
sound Believers, when as yet the Christian Religion they had not utterly cast
off. In like sense and meaning, throughout all Ages, Heretics have justly been
hated, as branches cut off from the true Vine, yet only so far forth cut off,
as the Heresies have extended. For both Heresy, and many other Crimes which
wholly sever from God, do sever from the Church of God, but in part only.
Hooker, L. 5. Eccles. Pol. 68.


man can be said simply to be Out of the Visible Church, that is Baptized, and
holds the Foundation. And as it is the simplicity of Believing, that makes them
safe, yea safest: so is it sometimes, A quickness of Understanding, that loving
it self, and some by-respects too well, makes men take up an unsafe way about
the Faith. So that there is no Question, but many were saved in corrupted times
of the Church, when their Ipsis Magistris pereuatibus: nisi forte ante mortem
resipuerint. Luth. de Serve. Arbit.

H^resiarche pl^s peccant, quam alii qui Heresin aliquam secuti. Supplem. Tho.
q. 99. A. 4. c.


Leaders, unless they repented before death, were lost. And Si mihi videretur
u^^s and idem Haereticus, and Haereticis credens homo, etc. S. Aug. L. 1. de
util. Cred. c. 1. Et Epist. 162. ad Donatist. Episc.
S. Augustine's Rule will be true, That in all Corruptions of the Church, there
will ever be a difference between an Heretic, and a plain well-meaning man
that is misled, and believes an Heretic. Yet here let me add this for fuller
Expression: This must be understood of such Leaders and Heretics as S. Mat.
18. 17. Qui oppugnaut Regulam Veritatis. S. Aug L. de Haeresibus: versus sinem.
refuse to hear the Churches Instruction, or to use all the means they can, to
come to the knowledge of the Truth. For else, if they do this, Err they may,
but Heretics they are not, as is most manifest in Cypria^us Reatus, and
Martyr. S. Aug. L. 1. de Bapt. cont. Do^at. c. 18.
S. Cyprian's Case of Rebaptization. For here, though he were a main Leader in
that Error, yet all the whole Church grant him safe; and his Donatistae vere
(qui de Cypriani Authoritate sibi carnaliter blandiuntur, S. Aug. L. 1. de
Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 18.) nimium miseri, and, nisi se corrigant, a semetipsis
omnino damnati, qui hoc in tanto viro eligunt imitari. Ibid. c. 19.
Followers in danger of damnation. But if any man be a Leader, and a Teaching
Heretic, and will add Rei falsitatis (circa accusatum Caeci^ia^um) deprchensi
Donatistae, pertinaci dissentione firmata, Schisma in Haeresi^ verterunt. S.
Aug. L. de Haeres. Haer. 69. Et Tales, sub Vocabulo Christiano doctrinae
resistunt Christian^. S. Aug. L. 18. de Civ. Dei. c. (...). prin.
Schism to Heresy, and be obstinate in both, he without Repentance must needs
be lost, while many that succeed him in the Error only, without the
Obstinacy, may be saved. For, they which are misled, and swayed with the
Current of Time, hold the same Errors with their Misleaders, yet not supinely,
but with all sober diligence to find out the Truth: Not pertinaciously, but
with all readiness to submit to Truth, so soon as it shall be found: Not
uncharitably, but retaining an internal Communion with the Whole Visible Church
of Christ in the Fundamental Points of Faith, and performance of acts of
Charity, not facticusly, but with an earnest desire, and a sincere endeavor
(as their Place and Calling gives them means) for a perfect Union, and
Communion of all Christians in Truth, as well as Peace. I say these, however
misled, are neither Heretics, nor Schismatics in the sight of God, and are
therefore in a state of Salvation. And were not this true Divinity, it would go
very hard with many poor Christian souls, that have been, and are misled on all
sides in these and other Distracted times of the Church of Christ; Whereas thus
habituated in themselves, they are, by God's mercy, safe in the midst of those
waves, in which their Misleaders perish. I pray you Mark this, and so, by God's
Grace, will I. For our Qui et^i ips^ postmodum ad Ecclesiam red^unt, restituere
tamen eos, and secum rev^care non possunt, qui ab iis sedu^^i sunt, and foris
morte praeventi extra Ecclesiam sine Communicatione and Pace per^erunt, quorum
Anima in die Indicii de ipsorum manibus expetentur, qui perditionis Authors,
and duces extiterunt. S. Cypr. ^* 2. Epist. 1.
Reckoning will be heavier, if we thus mislead on either side, than theirs that
follow us. But I see I must look to my self; for you are secure: For,


F. D. White (said I) has secured me, that none of our Errors be damnable, so
long as we hold them not against our Conscience. And I hold none against my
Conscience.


B. White's Assertion, and your Conscience. What Assurance D. White gave you, I
cannot tell of my self; nor, as things stand, may I rest upon your Relation. It
may be you use him no better than you do me. And sure it is so. For I have
since spoken with D. White the late Reverend Bishop of Ely, and he avows this,
and no other Answer. He was asked in the Conference between you, Whether Popish
Errors were Fundamental? To this he gave an Answer, by distinction of the
Persons which held and professed the Errors: Namely, that the Errors were
Fundamental reductive, by a Reducement, if they which embraced them did
pertinaciously adhere to them, having sufficient means to be better informed:
Nay farther, that they were materially, and in the very Kind and Nature of
them, Leaven, Dross, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
Hay, and Stubble. Yet he thought withal, that such as were misled by
Education, or long Custom, or over-valuing the Sovereignty of the Roman
Church, and did in simplicity of heart embrace them, might by their general
Repentance, and Faith in the Merit of Christ, attended with Charity, and other
Virtues, find mercy at God's hands. But that he should say signanter, and
expressly, That none either of yours, or your Fellows Errors were damnable, so
long as you hold them not against Conscience, that he utterly disavows. You
delivered nothing to extort such a Confession from him. And for your self, he
could observe but small love of Truth, few signs of Grace in you (as he told
me:) Yet he will not presume to judge you, or your Salvation; It is the S. Joh.
12. 48
Word of Christ that must judge you at the later day. For your Conscience, you
are the happier in your Error, that you hold nothing against it, especially if
you speak not against it, while you say so. But this no man can know, but your
self: 1 Cor. 2. 11.
For no man knows the thoughts of a man, but the spirit of a man that is within
him; to which I leave you.

A. C. replies. And first he grants, that D. White did A. C. p. 67.
not signanter and expressly say these precise words. So then here is his plain
Confession: Not these precise words. Secondly he says, that neither did D.
White signanter and expressly make the Answer above mentioned. But to this I can
make no Answer, since I was not present at the first or second Conference.
Thirdly, he says, that the Reason which moved the Jesuit to say D. White had
secured him, was because the said Doctor had granted in his first Conference
with the Jesuit these things following. First, That there must be one or other
Church continually visible. Though D. White, late Bishop of Ely, was more able
to Answer for himself; yet since he is now dead, and is thus drawn into this
Discourse, I shall, as well as I can, do him the right, which his Learning, and
Pains for the Church deserved. And to this first, I grant as well as he, That
there must be some one Church or other continually visible: Or that the
Militant Church of Christ must always be visible in some Particulars, or
Particular at least (express it as you please.) For if this be not so, then
there may be a time in which there shall not any where be a Visible Profession
of the Name of Christ; which is contrary to the whole scope and promise of the
Gospel.

A. C. adds, That D. White A. C. p. 67.
confessed that this Visible Church had in all Ages taught that unchanged Faith
of Christ in all Points Fundamental. D. White had reason to say that the
Visible Church taught so; but that this or that particular Visible Church did
so teach, sure D. White affirmed not; unless in case the whole Visible Church
of Christ were reduced to one Particular only.

A. C. tells us, that A. C. p. 67.
D. White being urged to assign such a Church, expressly granted he could
assign one different from the Roman, which held in all Ages all points
Fundamental. Now here I would fain know what A. C. means by a Church different
from the Roman. For if he mean different in place; It Is easy to affirm the
Greek Church (which as has. 9.
before been proved) has ever held, and taught the Foundation in the midst of
all her Pressures. And if he mean different in Doctrinal things, and those
about the Faith, he cannot assign the Church of Rome for holding them in all
Ages. But if he mean different in the Foundation it self, the Creed; then his
urging to assign a Church, is void, be it Rome, or any other. For if any other
Church shall thus differ from Rome, or Rome from it self, as to deny this
Foundation, it does not, it cannot remain a Differing Church, sed transit in
Non Ecclesiam, but passes away into No Church, upon the Denial of the Creed.

A. C. means, he expresses not, nor can I tell; but I may peradventure guess
near it, by that which out of these Premises he would infer. For hence he tells
us, He gathered that D. A. C. p. 67.
White's Opinion was, That the Roman Church held and taught in all Ages
unchanged Faith in all Fundamental points, and did not in any Age err in any
Point Fundamental. This is very well. For A. C. confesses, he did but gather,
that this was Doctor White's Opinion. And what if he gathered that, which grew
not there, nor thence? For suppose all the Premises true, yet no Cartrope can
draw this Conclusion out of them. And then all A. C's labor's lost. For grant
some one Church or other must still be Visible: And grant that this Visible
Church held all Fundamentals of the Faith in all Ages. And grant again, that D.
White could not assign any Church differing from the Roman, that did this;
Yet this will not follow, that therefore the Roman did it. And that because
there is more in the Conclusion, than in the Premises. For A. C's Conclusion is,
That in D. White's Opinion A. C. p. 67.
the Roman Church held and taught in all Ages unchanged Faith in all
Fundamental points. And so far perhaps the Conclusion may stand, taking
Fundamental points in their literal sense, as they are expressed in Creeds, and
approved Councels. But then he adds: And did not in any Age err in any Point
Fundamental. Now this can never follow out of the Premises before laid down.
For say some one Church or other may still be Visible; And that Visible Church
hold all Fundamental Points in all Ages; And no man be able to name another
Church different from the Church of Rome, that has done this; yet it follows
not therefore, That the Church of Rome did not err in any Age in any Point
Fundamental. For a Church may hold the Fundamental Point literally, and as long
as it stays there, be without control; and yet err grossly, dangerously, nay
damnably in the Exposition of it. And this is the Church of Rome's Case. For
most true it is, it has in all Ages maintained the Faith unchanged in the
Expression of the Articles themselves; but it has in the Exposition both of
Creeds, and Councels, quite changed, and lost the sense, and the meaning of
some of them. So the Faith is in many things Changed both for Life and Belief,
and yet seems the same. Now that which deceives the World, is, That because the
Bark is the same, men think this Old Decayed Tree, is as Sound as it was at
first, and not Weather-beaten in any Age. But when they can make me believe
that Painting is true Beauty, I Will believe too, that Rome is not only sound,
but beautiful.

A. C. goes on and tells us, That hereupon the Jesuit asked, A. C. p. 67.
whether Errors in Points not Fundamental were damnable? And that D. White
answered, they were not, unless they were held against Conscience. It Is true,
that Error in Points not Fundamental is the more damnable, the more it is held
against Conscience: But it is true too, that Error in Points not Fundamental
may be damnable to some men, though they hold it not against their Conscience.
As namely, when they hold an Error in some Dangerous Points, which grate upon
the Foundation, and yet will neither seek the means to know the Truth, nor
accept and believe Truth when it is known, especially being men able to Judge;
which I fear, is the case of too many at this day in the Roman Church. Out of
all which A. C. tells us, The A. C. p. 68.
Jesuit collected, that D. White's Opinion was, That the Roman Church held all
Points Fundamental, and only erred in Points not Fundamental, which he
accounted not damnable so long as he did not hold them against his Conscience;
And that thereupon he said D. White had secured him, since he held no Faith
different from the Roman, nor contrary to his Conscience. Here again, we have
but A. C's and the Jesuits Collection: But if the Jesuit, or A. C. will
collect amiss, who can help it?

Paragraph to all the Passages of A. C. as supposing them true: and set down
what is to be answered to them, in case they prove so. But now it is most
apparent by Dr. White's Answer, set down before. 37. N. 1.
at large, that he never said, that the Church of Rome erred only in Points not
Fundamental, as A. C. would have it. But that he said the contrary, Namely,
that some errors of thy Church were Fundamental reductive, by a reducement, if
they which embraced them, did pertinaciously adhere to them, having sufficient
means of information. And again expressly, That he did not say, that none were
damnable, so long as they were not held against Conscience. Now where is A. C's
Collection? For if a Jesuit, or any other may collect Propositions, which are
not granted him; nay, contrary to those which are granted him, he may infer
what he please. And he is much to blame, that will not infer a strong
Conclusion for himself, that may frame his own Premises, say his Adversary what
he will. And just so does A. C. bring in his Conclusion, to secure himself of
salvation, because he holds no Faith but the Roman, nor that Contrary to his
Conscience: Presupposing it granted, that the Church of Rome errs only in not
Fundamentals, and such Errors not Damnable, which is absolutely and clearly
denied by D. White. To this A. C. says A. C. p. 67.
nothing, but that D. White did not give this Answer at the Conference. I was
not present at the Conference between them, so, to that I can say nothing as a
witness. But I think all that knew D. White, will believe his affirmation as
soon as the Jesuits; To say no more. And whereas A. C. refers to the Relation
A. C. p. 67.
of the Conference between D. White and M. Fisher, most true it is, there A. C.
in his relation of that Conference, p. 26.
D. White is charged to have made that Answer twice. But all this rests upon
the credit of A. C. only (For For so it is said in the Title Page, by A. C.
he is said to have made that Relation too, as well as this*) And against his
Credit I must engage D. Whites, who has avowed another Answer, as. 37. N. 1.
before is set down.

A. C. relates to that Conference, which it seems he makes some good account
of, I shall here once for all take occasion to assure the Reader, That most of
the Points of Moment in that Conference with D. White, are repeated again and
again, and urged in this Conference, or the Relation of A. C. and are here
answered by me. For Instance: In the Relation of the first Conference, the
Jesuit takes on him to prove the Unwritten (1)
Word of God out of 2 These. 2. page 15. And so he does in the Relation of this
Conference with me, page 50. In the first he (2)
stands upon it, That the Protestants upon their Principles cannot hold, That
all Fundamental points of Faith are contained in the Creed, page 19. And so he
does in this, page 46. In the first, he would fain through Master (3)
Roger's sides wound the Church of England, as if she were unsettled in the
Article of Christ's Descent into Hell, page 21. And he endeavors the same in
this, page 46. In the first he is very earnest to prove, That the Schism was
made by the Protestants, (4)
page 23. And he is as earnest for it in this, page 55. In the first he lays
it* for a Ground, That Corruption of Manners (5)
is no just Cause of separation from Faith, or Church, page 24. And the same
Ground he lays in this, page 55. In the first he will (6)
have it, That the Holy Ghost gives continual, and Infallible Assistance to the
Church, page 24. And just so will he have it in this, page 53. In the first he
makes much ado about the Erring of (7)
the Greek Church, page 28. And as much makes he in this, page (8)
44. In the first, he makes a great noise about the place in St. Augustine,
Ferendus est disputator errans, etc. page 18. and 24. And so does he here also,
page 45. In the first, he would make his Proselytes believe, That he and his
Cause have mighty advantage (9)
by that Sentence of S. Bernard, It Is intolerable Pride: And that of S.
Augustine, It Is insolent madness to oppose the Doctrine, or Practice of the
Catholic Church, page 25. And twice (10)
he is at the same Art in this, page 56. and 73. In the first, he tells us,
That Postquam discessionem a toto mundo facere coact^ sumus. Calv. Epist. 141.
Calvin confesses, That in the Reformation, there was a Departure from the
whole world, page 25. And though I conceive Calvine spoke this but of the Roman
world, and of no Voluntary, but a forced Departure, and wrote this to
Melancthon, to work Unity among the Reformers, not any way to blast the
Reformation: Yet we must hear of it again in this, page 56. But over and above
the rest, one Place with his own (11)
gloss upon it pleases him extremely, It Is out of S. Athanasius his Creed. That
whosoever does not hold it entire, that is, (says he) in all Points: and
Inviolate, that is, (says he) in the true unchanged, and uncorrupted sense
proposed unto us by the Pastors of his Catholic Church, without doubt he shall
perish everlastingly. This he has almost verbatim in the first, page 20. And
in the Epistle of the Publisher of that Relation to the Reader, under the Name
of W. I. and then agian the very same in this, if not with some more
disadvantage to himself, page 70. And perhaps (had I leisure to search after
them) more Points than these. Now the Reasons which moved me to set down these
Particulars thus distinctly, are two. The One, that whereas the In the
beginning of the Conference set out by A. C.
Jesuit affirms, that in a second Conference all the speech was about
Particular matters, and little or nothing about the main, and great general
Point of a Continual, Infallible, Visible Church, in which that Lady required
satisfaction, and that therefore this third Conference was held; It may hereby
appear that the most material, both Points, and Proofs are upon the matter the
very same in all the three Conferences, though little be related of the second
Conference by A. C. as appears in the Preface of the Publisher W. I. to the
Reader. So this tends to nothing but Ostentation, and show. The Other is, that
Whereas these men boast so much of their Cause and their Ability to defend it;
It cannot but appear by this, and their handling of other Points in Divinity,
that they labor indeed, but no otherwise, then like an Horse in a Mill; round
about in the same Circle; no farther at night then at noon; The same thing over
and over again; from Tu es Petrus, to Pasce oves; from thou art Peter, to Do
thou feed my Sheep; And back again the same way.


F. The Lady asked, Whether she might be saved in the Protestant Faith? Upon my
soul (said the Bishop) you may. Upon my soul (said I,) there is but one saving
Faith, and that is the Roman.


B. England, else I would not have taken the salvation of another upon my soul.
And sure I had reason of this my Confidence. For to believe the Scripture, and
the Creeds; to believe these in the sense of the Ancient Primitive Church; To
receive the four great General Councels, so much magnified by Antiquity; To
believe all Points of Doctrine, generally received as Fundamental in the Church
of Christ, is a Faith, in which to live and die, cannot but give salvation. And
therefore I went upon a sure ground in the adventure of my soul upon that
Faith. Besides, in all the Points of Doctrine that are controverted between us,
I would fain see any one Point maintained by the Church of England, that can be
proved to depart from the Foundation. You have many dangerous Errors about the
very Foundation, in that which you call the Roman Faith: But there I leave you
to look to your own soul, and theirs whom you seduce. Yet this is true too,
That there is but one saving Faith. But then every thing which you call De
Fide, of the Faith, because some Council or other has defined it, is not such
a Breach from that One saving Faith, as that he which expressly believes it not;
nay, as that he which believes the Contrary, is excluded from Salvation, so
his. 32. Nu. 5.
Disobedience therewhile offer no violence to the Peace of the Church, nor the
Charity, which ought to be among Christians. And Multa sunt de fide, quae non
sunt absolute necessaria ad Salutem. Bellarm. L. 3. de Eccles. Milit. c. 14..
Quinto, si esset.
Bellarmine is forced to grant this, There are many things de Fide, which are
not absolutely necessary to salvation. Wald. Doct. Fid. l. 2. A^. 2.. 23.
Therefore there is a Latitude in the Faith, especially in reference to
different men's salvation. To set. 38. Nu. 8.
Bounds to this, and strictly to define it for particular men, Just thus far
you must believe in every Particular, or incur Damnation, is no work for my
Pen. These two things I am sure of. One, That your peremptory establishing of
so many things, that are remote Deductions from the Foundation, to be believed
as Matters of Faith necessary to Salvation, has, with other Errors, lost the
Peace and Unity of the Church, for which you will one day Answer. And the
other, That you of Rome are gone farther from the Foundation of this One saving
Faith, than can ever be proved, we of the Church of England have done.

A. C. bestirs himself, finding that he is come upon the Point, which is indeed
most considerable. And first he A. C. p. 68.
answers, That it is Pope Pelagius the second thought it was sufficient. For
when the Bishop of Is^ria deserted his Communion in Causa trium Capitulorum: He
first gives them an Account of his Faith, that he embraced that Faith, which
the Apostles had delivered, and the four Synods explicated. And then he adds:
Ubi c^go de Fidei firmitate nulla vobis poterit question, vel suspicio generari,
etc. Council. ^o. 4 p. 473. Edit. Paris. So then, that Pop^ thought there could
be no question made, or suspicion had of any man's faith, that prosessed that
Faith, which the Apostles delivered, as it is explicated by those Great
Councels. And yet now with A. C. it is not sufficient. Or else he holds the
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in such respect of persons (contrary to the
Apos^es Rule, S. James 2. 12.) as that profession of it, which was sufficient
for Pope Pelagius, shall not be sufficinet for the poor Protestants.
not sufficient to beget a Confidence in this Case, to say we believe the
Scriptures and the Creeds, in the same sense which the Ancient Primitive Church
believed them, etc. Most true, if we only say, and do not believe. And let
them which believe not, while they say they do, look to it on all sides; for on
all sides I doubt not, but such there are. But if we do say it, you are bound
in Charity to believe us, (unless you can prove the Contrary) For I know no
other proof to men of any Point of Faith, but Confession of it, and
Subscription to it. And for these particulars, we have made the one, and done
the other. So it is no bare saying, but you have all the proof that can be had,
or that ever any Church required: For how far that Belief, or any other, sinks
into a man's heart, is for none to judge but God.

Next, A. C. Answers, That if to say this be a sufficient A. C. p. 68.
Cause of Considence, he marvels why I make such difficulty to be Confident of
the Salvation of Roman Catholics, who believe all this in a far better manner
than Protestants do. Truly, to say this, is not a sufficient cause, but to say
and believe it, is. And to take off A. C's wonder why I make difficulty, great
difficulty of the salvation of Roman Catholics, who, he says, believe all
this, and in a far better manner than Protestants do; I must be bold to tell
him, That Romanists are so far from believing this in a better manner than we
do, that, under favor, they believe not part of this at all. And this is most
manifest: For the Romanists dare not believe, but as the Roman Church
believes: And the Roman Church at this day does not believe the Scripture and
the Creeds in the sense, in the which the Ancient Primitive Church received
them. For the Primitive Church never interpreted Christ's descent into Hell to
be no lower than Limbus Patrum. Nor did it acknowledge a Purgatory in a
sidepart of Hell. Nor did it ever interpret away half the Sacrament from
Christ's own Institution, which to break, St. apl. Return of Untruths upon B.
Jewel Art. 2. Untruth 49. fol. 44.
Stapleton confesses expressly, is a Damnable Error; Nor make the Intention of
the Priest of the Essence of Baptism; Nor believe Worship due to Images; Nor
dream of a Transubstantiation, which the Learned of the Roman party dare not
understand properly, for a change of one substance into another, for then they
must grant that Christ's real and true Body is made of the Bread, and the Bread
changed into it; which is properly Transubstantion. Nor yet can they express it
in a credible way, as appears by Est totalis Conver sio substanti^ Panis and
Vini in Corpus and Sanguinem Domini. Bellar. L. 3. de Enchar. c. 18. 1.
Substantialis conversio, seu Transubstantio, sicut Ecclesia appellat. Greg. de
Valen. Tom. 4. Disp. 6. q. 3. pu^ct. 3. Now you shall see what stuff Bellarmine
makes of this. Con^ersio Panis in Corpus Domini, nec est Productiva, nec
Conservativa, sed Adductiva. Nam Corpus Domini prae^xistit ante Conversionem,
sed non sub speciebus Panis. Conversio igitur non facit, ^t Corpus Christi
simpliciter esse incipiat, sed ut incipiat esse sub speciebus Panis, etc.
Bellarm. L. 3. de Euchar. c. 18. Ex his colligimus. So upon the whole matter,
there shall be a total Conversion of the Bread into the Body of Christ: And yet
there shall be no conversion at all, but a bringing of the Body of Christ
before pre-existent, to be now under the species of Bread, where before it was
not. Now this is merely Translocation, it is not Transubstantiation. And I would
have Bellarmine, or any Jesuit for him, show where Conversio Adductiva is read
in any good Author. But when Bellarmine comes to the Recognition of his Works,
upon this place he tells us, That some excepted against him, as if this were
Translocation, rather than Transubstantiation. So in this charge upon him I am
not alone. And fain would he shift off this, but it will not be. But while he
is at it, he runs into two petty Errors, beside the main one. The first is,
That the Body of Christ in the Sacrament begins to be, non ut in loco, sed ut
substantia sub Accidentibus. Now let Bellarmine, or A. C. for him, give me any
one Instance, That a Bodily substance under Accidents, is, or can be any where,
and not ^^ in loco, as in some place, and he says somewhat. The second is, That
some Fathers and others seem (he says, but I see it not) to approve of his
manner of speech of Conversion by Addu^tum. And he tells us for this, that
Bonaventure says expressly, In Transubstantiatione sit, ut quod erat alicubi,
sine sui mu^at^one ^it alibi. Now first, here is nothing that can be drawn with
Cart-ropes to prove Conversion by Adduction. For if there be Conversion, there
must be Change: And this is ^ine mutatione sui. And secondly, I would fain
know, how a Body that is alicubi, shall be alibi, without change of it self,
and yet that this shall be rather Transubstantiation than Translocation.
Besides, it is a Phrase of very ^owre Consequence (should ^ man squ^^^^ it)
which Bellarmine uses there even in his Recognition* Panis transit in Corpus
Christi.
Bellarmine's Struggle about it, which yet in the end cannot be, or be called
Transubstantiation, and is that, which at this day is a A Scandal, and a
grievous (...). For this gross Opinion was but Confirmed in the Council of
Lateran: It had got some footing in the Church, the two blind Ages before. For
Berengarius was made recant in such terms, as the Romanists are put to their
shists to excuse. Bellar. L. 3. de Euchar. c. 24. Quartum Argumentum. For
hesays expressly: Corpus Christi posse in Sacramento sensuali^er manibus
Sacerdotum tract^ri, and frangi, and fidelium dentibus a^^^^i. Decr. par. 3. de
Consecratione. Did. 2. C. Ego Berengarius. Now this Recantation was made about
the year 1050. And the Council of Lateran was in the year 1215. Between this
gross Recantation of Berengarius, and that Council, the great Learned Physician
and Philosopher Averroes lived, and took scandal at the whole Body of Christian
Religion for this. And thus he says: Mundum peragravi, etc. and non v^di
Sectam deteriorem, aut magis fatuam Christiana, quia Deum, quem colunt,
dentibus devorant. Espencaus 1. 4. de Euchar. adoratione, c. 3.
scandal to both Jew and Gentile, and the Church of God.

A. C. goes on, and tells us, That they (of Rome) A. C. p. 69.
cannot be proved to depart from the Foundation so much as Protestants do. So
then, We have at last a Confession here, that they may be proved to depart from
the Foundation, though not so much, or so far as the Protestants do. I do not
mean to Answer this, and prove that the Romanists do depart as far, or farther
from the Foundation, than the Protestants; for then A. C. would take me at the
same lift, and say I granted a departure too. Briefly therefore, I have named
here more Instances than one; In some of which they have erred in the
Foundation, or very near it. But for the Church of England, let A. C. instance,
if he can, in any one Point, in which She has departed from the Foundation.
Well, that A. C. will do: For he says, The Protestants err against A. C. p. 69.
the Foundation, by denying infallible Authority to a General Council, for that
is in effect to deny Infallibility to the whole Catholic Church. 33. Consid.
4. Number. 1.
No, there is a great deal of difference between a General Council, and the
whole Body of the Church. And when a General Council erres, as the second of
Ephesus did, ont of that great Catholic Body another may be gathered, as was
then that of Chalcedon, to do the Truth of Christ that right which belongs unto
it. Now if it were all one in effect to say, a General Council can err, and
that the Whole Church can err, there were no Remedy left against a General
Council erring; 33 Consid. 7. Number. 4.
which is your Case now at Rome, and which has thrust the Church of Christ
into more straits than any one thing besides. But I know where you would be. A
General Council is Infallible, if it be confirmed by the Pope; and the Pope he
is Infallible, else he could not make the Council so. And they which deny the
Councels Infallibility, deny the Pope's which confirms it. And then indeed the
Protestants depart a mighty way from this great Foundation of Faith, the Popes
Infallibility. But God be thanked, this is only from the Foundation of the
present Roman Faith (as A. C. and the Jesuit call it) not from any Foundation
of the A. C. p. 68.
Christian Faith, to which this Infallibility was ever a stranger.

A. C. falls to asking Questions. I think he means to try whether he can win
any thing upon me, by the cunning way A multis Interrogationibus simul, by
asking many things at once, to see if any one may make me slip into a
Confession inconvenient. And first, he asks, How Protestants, admitting A. C.
p. 69.
no Infallible Rule of Faith, but Scripture only, can be infallibly sure that
they believe the same entire Scripture, and Creed, and the Four first General
Councels, and in the same incorrupted sense in which the Primitive Church
believed? It Is just as I said. Here are many Questions in one, and I might
easily be caught, would I answer in gross to them all together; but I shall go
more distinctly to work. Well then; I admit no ordinary Rule left in the
Church, of Divine and Infallible Verity, and so of Faith, but the Scripture.
And I believe the entire Scripture, first by the Tradition of the Church* Then
by all other credible Motives, as is before expressed: And last of all, by the
light which shines in the Scripture it self, kindled in Believers by the Spirit
of God. Then I believe the entire Scripture Infallibly, and by a Divine
Infallibility am sure of my Object: Then am I as sure of my Believing, which is
the Act of my Faith, conversant about this Object: For no man believes, but he
must needs know in himself whether he believes or no, and wherein, and how far
he doubts. Then I am Infallibly assured of my Creed, the Tradition of the
Church inducing, and the Scripture confirming it. And I believe both Scripture
and Creed in the same uncorrupted sense which the Primitive Church believed
them; and am sure that I do so Believe them, because I cross not in my Belief
any thing delivered by the Primitive Church. And this again I am sure of,
because I take the Belief of the Primitive Church, as it is expressed, and
delivered by the Councels, and Ancient Fathers of those times. As for the Four
Councels, if A. C. ask how I have them, that is, their true and entire Copies?
I answer, I have them from the Church-Tradition only: And that is Assurance
enough for this. And so I am fully as sure as A. C. is, or can make me. But if
he ask how I know infallibly I believe them in their true and uncorrupted
sense? Then I answer, There Is no man of knowledge, but he can understand the
plain and simple Decision expressed in the Canon of the Council, where it is
necessary to Salvation. And for all other debates in the Councels, or Decisions
of it in things of less moment, it is not necessary that I, or any man else,
have Infallible Assurance of them; though I think it is possible to attain, even
in these things, as much Infallible Assurance of the uncorrupted sense of them,
as A. C. or any other Jesuits have.

A. C. asks again, What Text of Scripture tells, That Protestants now living do
believe all this, or that all this is expressed A. C. p. 69.
in those particular Bibles, or in the Writings of the Fathers and Councels,
which now are in the Protestants hands? Good God! Whither will not a strong
Bias carry even a learned Judgment! Why, what Consequence is there in this? The
Scripture now is the only Ordinary Infallible Rule of Divine Faith, Therefore
the Protestants cannot believe all this before mentioned, unless a particular
Text of Scripture can be showed for it. Is it not made plain before, how we
believe Scripture to be Scripture, and by Divine and Infallible Faith too, and
yet we can show no particular Text for it? Beside, were a Text of Scripture
necessary, yet that is for the Object and the thing which we are to believe,
not for the Act of our believing, which is merely from God, and in our selves,
and for which we cannot have any Warrant from, or by Scripture, more than that
we ought to believe; but not that we in our particular do believe. The rest of
the Question is far more inconsequent, Whether all this be expressed in the
Bibles which are in Protestants hands? For first, we have the same Bibles in
our hands, which the Romanists have in theirs; Therefore either we are
Infallibly sure of ours, or they are not Infallibly sure of theirs; For we have
the same Book, and delivered unto us by the same hands; and all is expressed in
ours, that is in theirs. Nor is it of moment in this Argument, that we account
more Apocryphal than they do; For I will acknowledge every Fundamental point of
Faith as proveable out of the Canon, as we account it, as if the Apocryphal
were added unto it. Secondly, A. C. is here extremely out of himself, and his
way; For his Question is, Whether all this be expressed in the Bibles which we
have? All this? All what? Why, before there is mention of the four General
Councels; and in this Question here is mention of the Writings of the Fathers
and the Councels. And what, will A. C. look that we must show a Text of
Scripture for all this, and an express one too? I thought, and do so still,
it is enough to ground Belief upon Non potest aliquid certum esse certitudine
Fidei, nisi aut immediate contineatur in Verbo Dei: aut ex Verbo Dei per
evidentem Consequentiam deducatur. Bellar. L. 3. de Justif. c. 8.. 2.
Necessary Consequence out of Scripture, as well as upon express Text. And this
I am sure of, that neither I, nor any man else is bound to believe any thing as
Necessary to Salvation, be it found in Councels, or Fathers, or where you will,
Nec ego Nicaenum, nec tu debes Ariminense tanqu^m pr^judicaturus proferre
Concilium. Nec ego hujus Authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturarum
Authoritatibus, etc. Res cum re, Causa cum causa, Ratio cum ratione concertet.
S. Aug. L. 3. cont. Maximinum. c. 14. Testimonia Divina in fundamento ponenda
sunt. S. Aug. L. 20. de Civ. Dei. c. 1. Quia principia hujus Doctrinae per
Revelationem habentur, etc. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. A. 8. ad 2. Solis Scripturarum
Libris Canonicis didici hunc honorem deferr^, ut nullum Authorem eorum in
scribendo errasse aliquid firmissime credam. Alios autem ita le^o, ut
quantalibet sanctitate, doctrin^que praepolleant, non ideo verum putem, quod
ips^ ita senserunt, vel scripserunt. S. Aug. Epist. 19.
if it be Contrary to express Scripture, or necessary Consequence from it. And
for the Copies of the Councels and Fathers which are in our hands, they are the
same that are in the hands of the Romanists, and delivered to Posterity by
Tradition of the Church, which is abundantly sufficient to warrant that* So we
are as Infallibly sure of this, as it is possible for any of you to be. Nay, are
we not more sure? For we have used no Index Expurgatorius upon the Writings of
the Fathers Sixtus Senens. i^ Epist. ad Pi^m quintum.
as you have done: So that Posterity hereafter must thank us for true Copies
both of Councels and Fathers, and not you.

A. C. goes on, and asks still, Whether Protestants be Infallibly A. C. p. 69.
sure that they rightly understand the sense of all which is expressed in their
Books, according to that which was understood by the Primitive Church, and the
Fathers which were present at the four first General Councels? A. C. may ask
everlastingly, if he will ask the same over and over again. For I pray wherein
does this differ from his. 38. N. 5:
Question, save only that here Scripture is not named? For there the Question
was of our Assurance of the Incorrupted sense: And therefore thither I refer
you for Answer, with this, That it is not required either of us, or of them,
that there should be had an Infallible assurance that we rightly understand the
sense of all that is expressed in our Books. And I think I may believe without
sin* that there are many things expressed in these Books (for they are theirs
as well as ours) which A. C. and his Fellows have not Infallible assurance that
they rightly understand in the sense of the Primitive Church, or the Fathers
present in those Councels. And if they say, Yes, they can, because when a
difficulty crosses them, they believe them in the Churches sense: Yet that dry
shift will not serve. For belief of them in the Churches sense is an Implicit
Faith; but it works nothing distinctly upon the understanding. For by an
Implioite Faith no man can be infallibly assured that he does rightly
understand the sense (which is A. C's Question) whatever perhaps he may rightly
believe. And an Implicit Faith, and an Infallible understanding of the same
thing, under the same Considerations, cannot possibly stand together in the
same man at the same time.

A. C. has not done asking yet: But he would farther A. C. p. 69.
know, Whether Protestants can be Infallibly sure that all and only those
points which Protestants account Fundamental and necessary to be expressly known
by all* were so accounted by the Primitive Church? Truly, Unity in the Faith is
very Considerable in the Church. And in this the Protestants agree, and as
Uniformly as you, and have as Infallible Assurance as you can have, of all
points which they account Fundamental; yea, and of all, which were so accounted
by the Primitive Church. And these are but the Creed, and some few, and those
Immediate deductions from it. And Tertullian and Tert. praescrip. adversus
Haeres. c. 13. etc.
Ruffinus upon the very Clause of the Catholic Church, to decipher it, make a
recital only of the Fundamental Points of Faith. And for the first of these, *
Ruffin. in Symb.
the Creed, you see what the sense of the Primitive Church was by that Famous
and known place of Et neque qui valde potens est in dicendo ex Ecclesi^
Praesectis alia ab his ^di^et, etc. Neque debilis in dicendo hanc Traditionem
i^^minuet. Quum enim una and eadem fides sit, neque is, qu^ mult^^ de ea dicere
potest, plusquam opportet, dicit, neque qui parum, ipsam imminuit. Irenae. ^.
1. Adv. Her. c. 2. and 3. E. S. Basil. Sermon. de Fide, To. 2. p. 195. E^it
Basil. 1509. una and Immobilis Regula, etc. Tert. de V^land. Virg. c. 1.
Irenaeus: where after he had recited the Creed, as the Epitome or Brief of the
Faith, he adds, That none* of the Governors of the Church, be they never so
potent to Express them selves, can say alia ab his, other things from these:
Nor none so weak in Expression as to diminish this Tradition. For since the
Faith is One, and the same, He that can say much of it, says no more than he
ought; Nor does he diminish it, that can say but little. And in this the
Protestants all agree. And for the second, the immediate Deductions, they are
not formally Fundamental for all men, but for such Quantum ad prima Credibilia,
quae sunt Articuli Fidei, tenetur homo Axplic^^e crede^^, sicut and tenetur
habere fidem. Quantum (...) ad alia Credibilia, etc. non tenetur explicit
credere, nisi quando hoc ci constiterit in Doctrina Fidei contineri. Tho. 2. 2.
q. 2. ^. 5. 6. Potest quis Errare Creae^d^ oppositum Alicui Articulo subtili,
ad cuius fidem explicitam ^on omnes tenentur. Holkot. in 1. sent. q. 1. ad
quartum.
as are able to make or understand them. And for others, it is enough if they do
not obstinately or Schismatically refuse them, after they are once revealed.
Indeed you account many things Fundamental, which were never so accounted in
any sense by the Primitive Church; such as are all the Decrees of General
Councels, which may be all true, but can never be all Fundamental in the Faith.
For it is not in the power of ^esotutio Ocham est, ^uod nec tota Ecclesia, nec
Concilium Generale, nec summus Pontifex potest facere Articulum q^od (...) fuit
Articulus. Articulus enim est ex ^o solo, quia a Deo R^v^la^us est, Almain. e^
3. sent. D. 15. q. unica. Conclus. 4. Dub. 3.
the whole Church, much less of a General Council, to make any thing
Fundamental in the Faith, that is not contained in the Letter or sense, of that
common Faith, which was once given (and but once for all) to the Saints, S.
Jude 3. S. Jude verse. 3.
But if it be A. C's meaning to call for an Infallible Assurance of all such
Points of Faith as are Decreed by General Councels: Then I must be bold to tell
him: All those Decrees are not necessary to all men's salyation. Neither do the
Romanisis themselves agree in all such determined Points of Faith; Be they
determined by Councels, or by Popes. For Instance. After those Books) which we
account Apocryphal were Council. Trid. Sess. 4.
defined to be Canonical, and an Anathema pronounced in the Case, Six. Senens.
Biblioth. Sanct. L. 1.
Sixtus Senensis makes scruple of some of them. And after Non est necessari^
credendum Determinntis* per Sum. Pontificem, etc. Almaln. in 3. sent. D. 24. q.
unica Conclus. 6. Dubio. 6. fine.
Pope Leo the tenth had defined the Pope to be above a General Council, yet
many Roman Cathalikes defend the Contrary; And so do all the Sorb^nists at this
very day. Therefore if these be Fundamental in the Faith, the Romanists differ
one from another in the Faith, nay, in the Fundamentals of the Faith; And
therefore cannot have Infallible Assurance of them. Nor is there that Unity in
the Faith amongst them, which they so much, and so often boast of. For what
Scripture is Canonical is a great point of Faith. And I believe they will not
now Confess, That the Popes power over a General Council is a small one. And so
let A. C. look to his own Infallible Assurance of Fundamentals in the Faith:
for ours, God be thanked, is well. And since he is pleased to call for a
particular Text of Scripture to prove all and every thing of this nature, which
is ridiculous in it self, and unreasonable to demand (as has been. 38. Nu. 6.
showed) yet when he shall be pleased to bring forth but a particular known
Tradition, to prove all and every thing of this on their side, it will then be
perhaps time for him to call for, and for us to give farther Answer about
particular Texts of Scripture.

A. C. infers, That I had need seek A. C. p. 69.
out some other Infallible Rule, and means, by which I may know these things
infallibly, or else that I have no reason to be so confident, as to adventure
my soul, that one may be saved living and dying in the Protestant faith. How
weak this Inference is, will easily appear, by that which I have already said
to the premises; And yet I have somewhat left to say to this Inference also.
And first, I have lived, and shall (God willing) die in the Faith of Christ, as
it was professed in the Ancient Primitive Church, as it was professed in the
present Church of England. And for the Rule which governs me herein, if I
cannot be confident for my soul upon the Scripture, and the Primitive Church
expounding and declaring it, I will be confident upon no other. And secondly, I
have all the reason in the world to be confident upon this Rule; for this can
never deceive me; Another (that very other which A. C. proposes) namely, the
Faith of the Roman A. C. p. 72.
Church) may. Therefore with A. C's leave, I will venture my salvation upon the
Rule aforesaid, and not trouble my self to seek another of man's making, to the
forsaking and weakening of this which God has given me. For I know they
Committed two Evils, which forsook the Fountain of Living Waters, to hew out to
themselves Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water, Jer. 2. For
here is the Evil of Desertion of that Jer. 2. 13.
which was Right: and the Evil of a bad Choice, of that which is hewed out with
much pains and care, and is after Useless and Unprofitable. But then Thirdly, I
find that a Romanist may make use of an Implicit Faith (at his pleasure) but
a Protestant must know all these things Infallibly; that is A. C's word, Know
these things; Why, but is it not enough to believe them? Now God forbid it
should. Else what shall become of Millions of poor Christians in the world,
which cannot know all these things, much less know them Infallibly? Well, I
would not have A. C. weaken the Belief of poor Christians in this fashion. But
for things that may be known as well as believed, nor I, nor any other shall
need forsake the Scripture, to seek another Rule to direct either our
Conscience, or our Confidence.

A. C. observes, That the Jesuit was as confident for his part, with this
difference, that he had sufficient A. C. p. 69.
reason of his Confidence, but I had not for mine. This is said with the
Confidence of a Jesuit, but as yet, but said. Therefore he goes on and tells
us, That the Jesuit had reason of his A. C. p. 70.
Confidence, out of express Scriptures, and Fathers, and the Infallible
Authority of the Church. Now truly, Express Scriptures, with A. C's patience,
he has not named one that is express, nor can he. And the few Scriptures which
he has alleged, I have. 25. N. 5.. 33. Co^sid. 3 N. 1.
Answered, and so have others. As for Fathers, he has named very few, and with
what success, I leave to the Readers judgment. And for the Authority of the
Catholic Church, I hold it. 21. N. ^.
as Infallible as he, and, upon better Grounds, but not so of a General
Council, which he here means, as appears A. C. p. 71.
after. And for my part I must yet think (and I doubt A. C. will not be able to
disprove it) that express Scripture, and Fathers, and the Authority of the
Church will rather be found proofs to warrant my Confidence, than his. Yea, but
A. C. says, That I did A. C. p. 70.
not then tax the Jesuit with any rashness. It may be so; Nor did he me. So
there we parted even. Yea, but he says again, that I acknowledge there is but
one saving Faith, and that the Lady might be saved in the Roman Faith, which
was all the Jesuit took upon his soul. Why, but if this be all, I will confess
it again. The first, That there is but one faith, I confess with S. Paul,
Ephesians. 4. And the other, that the Lady might be saved Ephesians. 4. 5.
in the Roman Faith, or Church. 35. N. 1.
, I confess with that charity which S. Paul teaches me, Namely, to leave all
men, especially the weaker both sex and sort, which hold the Foundation, to
stand or fall to their own Master, Romans 14. And this is no mistaken Romans 14. 4.
charity. As for the Inference which you would draw out of it, that is answered
at large. 35. N. 2. A. C. p. 70.
already. But than A. C. adds, That I say, but without any proof, that the
Romanists have many dangerous errors, but that I neither tell them which they
be, nor why I think them dangerous, but that I leave them to look to their own
souls; which (he says) they do, and have no cause to doubt. How much the
Jesuit and A. C. have said in this Conference, without any solid Proof, I
again submit to judgment, as also what Proofs I have made. If in this very
place I have added none, it is because I had made proof enough of the self-same
thing. 33. N. 12.. 35. N. 7.
before. Where, lest he should want and call for Proof again, I have plainly
laid together some of the many Dangerous errors which are charged upon them.
So I tell you which, at least, some of which they be: and their very naming
will show their danger. And if I did remit you to look to your own souls* I
hope there was no offense in that, if you do it, and do it so, that you have no
cause to doubt. And the reason why you doubt not, A. C. tells us, is, Because
you had no new device A. C. p. 70.
of your own, or any other men's, nor any thing contrary to Scripture, but all
most conformable to Scriptures interpreted by Union, Consont of Fathers, and
Definitions of Councels. Indeed if this were true, you had little cause to
doubt in point of your Belief. But the truth is, you do hold new Devices of
your own, which the Primitive Church was never acquainted with. And some of
those so far from being conformable, as that they are little less than
contradictory to Scripture. In which particulars, and diverse others, the
Scriptures are not interpreted by Union, or Consent of Fathers, or Definitions
of Councels, unless perhaps by some late Councels, packed of purpose to do that
ill service. I have given Instances enough 33. N. 12. 35. N. 7.
before; yet some you shall have here, lest you should say again, that I affirm
without proof or Instance. Conc. Lateran Can. 1.
I pray then whose Device was Transubstantiation? Conc. Constan. Sess. 13.
And whose Communion under one kind? Propter Haeresin Rex non solum Regno
privatur, sed and filii ejus a Regni successione pelluntur. Simanca Cathol.
I^stit. tit. 9. 259. Absoluti sunt Subditi a debito Fidelitatis: Et custodes
Artium, etc. Ibid. tit. 46. 37. It was sti^ly avowed long since by -- That no
man could show any one Roman Catholic of note and Learning, that affirmed it
lawful to kill Kings upon any pretext whatsoever. Now, surely he that says (as
Romanists do) that it is lawful to Depose a King, says upon the matter, it is
lawful to kill him. For Kings do not use to be long-lived after their
Deposition: And they seldom stay till grief break their hearts: They have
Assassinates ready to make shorter work. But since he is so confident, I Will
give him an Author of note, and very Learned, that speaks it out. Rex debet
occidi, si solicitet populum colere Idola, vel desere Lege^ Dei. Tostat. in 2 Samuel c. 11. q. 17. And he makes bold with Scripture to prove it, Deuteronomy. 13. And
Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms, Verbo T^^annus; yet he is so moderate, that he
would not have this done, till he be S^^s^^c'd; but then, Quisquis potest fieri
Executor. Mariana is far worse: for he says it is lawful to kill him, postquam
a pancis Seditiosis, sed doctis c^perit Tyrannus appellari. L. 1. de Rege. and
Reg. Institutione, c. 6. Yea but Mariana was disclaimed for this by the
Jesuits. Yea but for all that, there was an Apology Printed in Italy, An.
1610. Permissu Superiorum. And there it is said, They were all Enemies of the
holy Name of Jesus, that condemned Mariana for any such Doctrine. As for
Tostatus, no Sentence has touched upon him at all for it.
And whose Deposition and Unthroning, nay Killing of Princes, and the like, if
they were not yours? For I dare say, and am able to prove, there is none of
these but are rather contrary than conformable to Scripture. Neither is A. C.
or any Jesuit able to show any Corpus Christi verd^iter esse in Encharistist
ex Evangelio habemus: Conversionem vero P^nis in Corpus Christi Evangelium non
explicavit, sed express ab Ecclesia accepimus. Cajetan. in Thom. 3. q. 75.
Art. 1.
Scripture interpreted by Union or D^ Transubstantiatione Panis in Corpus
Christi rara est in antiquis Scriptoribus m^^tio. Alpha Castro, L. 8. advers.
Har. Verbo Indulgentia.
Consent of Fathers of the Primitive Church, to prove any one of these: Nor any
Definition of Ancient Councels, but only Council. Lateran. C^^. 1.
Lateran for Transubstantiation, and that of Council. Constan. Sess. 13.
Constance for the Eucharist in one kind; which two are Modern at least, far
downward from the Primitive Church; and have done more mischief to the Church,
by those their Determinations, than will be cured I fear in many Generations.
So whatever A. C. thinks, yet I had reason enough to leave the Jesuit to look
to his own soul.

A. C. having as it seems little new matter, is at the same again, and over and
over it must go, That there is but one A. C. p. 70.
saving Faith: That this one Faith was once the Roman: And that I granted, one
might be saved in the Roman Faith. To all which I have abundantly answered 35.
N. 1. and 38. N. 10.
before. Marry then he infers, That he sees not how we can have our souls
saved, without we entirely hold this Faith, being the Catholic Faith; which S.
Athanasius says, unless a man hold entirely, he cannot be saved. Now here
again is more in the Conclusion than in the Premises; and so the Inference
fails. For say there was a time in which the Catholic and the Roman Faith
were one, and such a time there was, when the Roman Faith was Catholic and
famous through the world, Romans 1. Yet Romans 1. 8.
it does not follow, since the Council. Trident. Bulla Pii 4. super forma
Juramenti professionis Fidei ad finem. Council. Trident.
Council of Trent has added a new Creed, that this Roman Faith is now the
Catholic. For it has added extranea, things without the Foundation,
disputable, if not false Conclusions to the Faith. So that now a man may
Believe the whole and entire Catholic Faith, even as S. Athanasius requires,
and yet justly refuse for dross a great part of that which is now And this is
so much the more Remarkable, if it be true which Thomas has. S. Athanasium non
composuisse hanc Manifestationem Fidei, per modum Symboli, sed per modum
Doctrinae, etc. Et deinde Authoritate summi Pontificis receptam esse, ut quasi
Regula fidei habeatur. Tho. 2. 2 ae. q. 1. A. 10. ad 3. Symbolo Apostolorum
addita sunt duo alia, scilicet Symbolum Nicaenum, and S. Athanasii, ad majorem
Fidei Explanationem. Bie). in 3 Sent. D. 25. q. unica. A. 1 D.
the Roman Faith. And Athanasius himself, as if he meant to arm the Catholic
Faith against all corrupting Additions, has in the beginning of his S.
Athanas. in Symb.
Creed, these words, This is the Catholic Faith, This, and no other: This and
no Other, then here follows. And again at the end of his Creed, And yet the
Council of Trent having added twelve new Articles, says thus of them also: Haec
est vera Catholica Fides, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, etc. Bulla Pii 4.
super forma Juramenti professionis Fidei. In fine Council. Trident.
This is the Catholic Faith, Integram Fidei Veritatem, ejus Doctrinam breviter
continet. Tho. 2. 2* ae. q. 1. A. 10. ad 3.
This and no more than is here delivered, (always presupposing the Apostles
Creed, as Athanasius did) and this is the largest of all Creeds. So that if A.
C. would wipe his eyes from the mist which rises about Tyber, he might see how
our souls may be saved, believing the Catholic Faith, and that entire, without
the Addition of Roman Leaven. But if he cannot, or, I doubt, will not see it;
it is enough that by Gods grace we see it. And therefore once more I leave him
and his, to look to their own souls.

A. C. is busy in unfolding the meaning of this great Father of the Church, S.
Athanasius. And he tells us, That he A. C. p. 70.
says in his Creed, That without doubt every man shall perish, that holds not
the Catholic Faith entire, (that is, says A. C. in every Point of it) and
inviolate (that is, in the right sense) and for the true formal reason of
divine Revelation, sufficiently applied to our understanding by the Infallible
Authority of the Catholic Church proposing to us by her Pastors this
Revelation. Well, we shall not differ much from A. C. in expounding the meaning
of S. Athanasius; yet some few things I shall here observe. And first, I agree
that he which hopes for Salvation, must believe the Catholic Faith whole and
entire in every Point. Next, I agree, that he must likewise hold it inviolate,
if to believe it in the right sense, be to hold it inviolate. But by A. C's
leave* the Believing of the Creed in the right sense, is comprehended in the
first branch, The keeping of it whole and entire. For no man can properly be
said to believe the Whole Creed, that believes not the Whole Sense, as well as
the Letter of it, and as entirely. But thirdly, for the word inviolate, it is
indeed used by him that translated Athanasius. But the Father's own words,
following the Common Edition, are, That he that will be saved must keep the
Faith (...) Now (...), is the sound and entire Faith. And it cannot be a sound
Faith, unless the Sense be as whole and entire as the Letter of the Creed. And
(...) is compounded of the Privative particle ((...)) and (...), which is
reproach or infamy. So that (...) signifies, the holding of the entire Faith in
such holiness of life and conversation, as is without all infamy and reproach.
That is, as our English renders that Creed exceeding well: Which Faith unless a
man do keep whole and Sic Ecclesia dicitur (...), Ephesians. 5. 27 and in veteri
Glossario, Immaculatus, (...).
undefiled, even with such a life as Monius himself shall not be able to carp
at. So Athanasius (who certainly was passing able to express himself in his own
Language) in the beginning of that his Creed requires, That we keep it entire,
without diminution; and undesiled, without blame: And at the end, that we
believe it faithfully, without wavering. But [ inviolate] is the mistaken word
of the old Interpreter, and with no great knowledge made use of by A. C. And
then fourthly, though this be true Divinity, That he which hopes for Salvation,
must believe the Whole Creed, and in the right sense too (if he be able to
comprehend it) yet I take the true and first meaning of inviolate (could
Athanasius his word (...) have signified so) not to be the holding of the true
sense, but not to offer violence, o^ a forced sense or meaning upon the Creed;
which every man does not, that yet believes it not in a true sense. For not to
believe the true sense of the Creed, is one thing: But it is quite another, to
force a wrong sense upon it. Fifthly, a Reason would be given also, why A. C.
is so earnest for the whole Faith, and bauks the word which goes with it, which
is holy or undesiled. For Athanasius does alike exclude from Salvation those
which keep not the Catholic Faith holy, as well as these which keep it not
whole. I doubt this was to spare many of his. 35. N. 6.
holy Fathers, the Popes, who were as far as any (the very ^ewd^st among men
without exception) from keeping the Catholic Faith holy. Sixthly, I agree to
the next part of his Exposition, That a man that will be saved must believe the
whole Creed for the true formal reason of divine Revelation. For upon the Truth
of God thus revealed by Himself* (...) the infallible certainty of the
Christian Faith. But I do not grant, that this is within the compass of S.
Athanasius his word (...), nor of the word Inviolate. But in that respect it is
a mere strain of A. C. And then lastly, though the whole Catholic Church be
sufficient in applying this to us and our Belief, not our Understanding, which
A. C. is at again; yet Infallible She is not, in the A. C. p. 70.
proposal of this Revelation to us by every of her Pastors, some whereof
amongst you, as well as others, neglect, or forget at least to feed Christ's
sheep, as Christ and his Church has fed them.

A. C. has taught us (as you see) the meaning of S. Athanasius; in the next
place he tells us, That if we did believe A. C. p. 70.
any one Article, we (finding the same formal Reason in all, and applied
sufficiently by the same means to all) would easily believe all. Why surely we
do not believe any one Article only, but all the Articles of the Christian
Faith; And we believe them for the same formal Reason in all, namely, Because
they are revealed from and by God, and sufficiently applied in his Word, and by
his Churches Ministration. But so long as they do not believe all in this sort
(says A. C.) Look you; He tells us we do not believe all, when we profess we
do. Is this man A. C. p. 70.
become as God, that he can better tell what we believe, than we our selves?
Surely we do believe all, and in that sort too: Though, I believe, were S.
Athanasius himself alive again, and a plain man should come to him, and tell
him he believed his Creed in all and every particular; he would admit him for a
good Catholic Christian, though he were not able to express to him the formal
reason of that his belief. Yea but (says A. C.) while they will, as all
Heretics do, make choice of what they A. C. p. 70.
will, and what they will not believe, without relying upon the Infallible
Authority of the Catholic Church, they cannot have that one saving Faith in
any one Article. Why, but whatsoever Heretics do, we are not such, nor do we
so. For they which believe all the Articles (as once again I tell you we do)
make no choice; And we do rely upon the Infallible Authority of the Word of
God, and the whole Catholic Church; And therefore we both can have, and have
that one saving Faith which believes all the Articles entirely, though we
cannot believe that any particular Church is infallible.

A. C. will not thus be satisfied, but on he goes, and adds, That although we
believe the same truth which other A. C. p. 71.
good Catholics do in some Articles, yet not believing them for the same
formal reason of Divine Revelation sufficiently applied by Infallible
Church Authority, etc. we cannot be said to have one and the same Infallible
and Divine Faith which other good Catholic Christians have, who believe the
Articles for this formal Reason, sufficiently made known to them, not by their
own fancy, nor the fallible Authority of humane deductions, but by the
Infallible Authority of the Church of God. If A. C. will still say the same
thing, I must still give the same answer. First, he confesses we believe the
same Truth in some Articles (I pray mark his phrase) the same Truth in some
Articles with other good Catholic Christians: so far his Pen has told Truth
against his will: for he does not (I wot well) intend to call us Catholics,
and yet his Pen being truer than himself, has let it fall. For the word (
other) cannot be so used as here it is, but that we, as well as they, must be
good Catholics: For he that shall say, the old Romans were valiant, as well as
other men, supposes the Romans to be valiant men; And he that shall say, The
Protestants believe some Articles* as well as other good Catholics, must in
propriety of speech suppose them to be good Catholics. Secondly, as we do
believe those some Articles, so do we believe them, and all other Articles of
Faith, for the same formal reason, and so applied, as but just. 38. N^. 1^.
before I have expressed. Nor do we believe any one Article of Faith by our own
fancy, or by fallible Authority of humane deductions; but next to the
Infallible Authority of God's Word, we are guided by his Church. But then A. C.
steps into a Conclusion, A. C. p. 71.
whither we cannot follow him: For he says, that the Article to be believed
must be sufficiently made known unto us by the Infallible Authority of the
Church of God, that is, of men Infallibly assisted by the Spirit of God, as all
lawfully called, continued, and confirmed General Councels are assisted. That
the. 21. N^. ^.
whole Church of God is infallibly assisted by the Spirit of God, so that it
cannot by any error fall away totally from Christ the Foundation, I make no
doubt. For if it could, the gates of Hell had prevailed against it, which, our
Savior assures me, S. Matthew. Matthew. 16. 18.
16. they shall never be able to do. But that all General Councels, be they
never so lawfully called, continued, and confirmed, have Infallible Assistance,
I utterly deny. It Is true, that a General Council de post facto, after it is
ended, and admitted by the whole Church, is then Infallible* for it cannot err
in that which it has already clearly and truly determined without Error. But
that a General Council a part ante, when it first sits down and continues to
deliberate, may truly be said to be Infallible in all its after-determinations,
whatsoever they shall be, I utterly deny. And it may be it was not without
cunning that A. C. shuffled these words together, Called, Continued, and
Confirmed; for be it never so lawfully called, and continued, it may err. But
after it is confirmed, that is, admitted by the whole Church, then being found
true, it is also Infallible; that is, it deceives no man. For so all Truth is,
and is to us, when it is once known to be Truth. But then many times that Truth,
which being known is necessary and Infallible, was before both contingent and
fallible in the way of proving it, and to us. And so here, a General Council is
a most probable, but yet a fallible way of inducing Truth, though the Truth
once induced may be (after it is found) necessary and Infallible. And so
likewise the very Council it self for that particular in which it has
concluded Truth. But A. C. must both speak and mean of a Council set down to
deliberate, or else he says nothing.

A. C. gathers* That though every thing defined to A. C. p. 71.
be a Divine Truth in General Councels is not absolutely necessary to be
expressly known and actually believed (as some other Truths are) by all sorts:
yet no man may (after knowledge that they are thus defined) doubt deliberately,
much less obstiuately deny the Truth of any thing so defined. Well, in this
Collection of A. C. First, we have this granted, That every thing defined in
General Councels is not absolutely necessary to be expressly known, and actually
believed by all sorts of men* And this no Protestant, that I know, denies.
Secondly, it is affirmed, that after knowledge, that these Truths are thus
defined, no man may doubt deliberately, much less obstinately deny any of them*
Truly* Obstinately (as the word is now in common use) carries a fault along
with it: And it ought to be far from the temper of a Christian, to be obstinate
against the Definitions of a General Council. But that he may not upon very
probable grounds, in an humble and peaceable manner deliberately doubt; yea,
and upon Demonstrative grounds constantly deny even such Definitions, yet
submitting himself and his grounds to the Church in that or another Council, is
that which was never till now imposed upon Believers. For It Is one thing for a
man deliberately to doubt, and modestly to propose his Doubt for satisfaction,
which was ever lawful, and is many times necessary. And quite another thing for
a man upon the pride of his own Judgment,. 32. Nu. 5.
to refuse external Obedience to the Council, which to do, was never Lawful,
nor can ever stand with any Government. For there is all the reason in the
world, the Council should be heard for it self, as well as any such Recusant
whatsoever, and that before a Judge as good as it self at least. And to what
end did S. Aug. 1. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 3. Ipsaque plenaria, saepe
pri^ra a posterioribus em^ndar^.
S. Augustine say, That one General Council might be amended by another, the
former by the Later, if men might neither deny, nor so much as deliberately
doubt of any of these Truths defined in a General Council? And A. C. should
have done well to have named but one ancient Father of the Primitive Church,
that ever affirmed this.. 21. N. 5.
For the Assistance which God gives to the whole Church in general, is but in
things simply necessary to eternal Salvation; therefore more than this cannot
be given to a General Council, no nor so much* But then if a General Council
shall forget it self, and take upon it to define things not absolutely
necessary to be expressly known, or actually believed (which are the things
which A. C. here speaks of) In these as neither General Council, no^ the whole
Church have infallible Assistance: so have Christians liberty modestly and
peaceably, and upon just grounds, both deliberately to doubt, and constantly to
deny such the Councels Definitions. For instance, the Council of Florence first
defined Purgatory to be believed as a Divine Truth, and matter of Faith ( I
know the Greeks subscribed that Council. Sed in i^^o Concilio Graeca Ecclesia
di^ restitit. Pet. Mart. Loc. com. class tertia, c. 9. Nu. 13. Et in ultima
Sessione istius Concilii Graeci dixerunt se si^e Authoritate totius Ecclesiae
Orientalis Questionem aliam tractare non posse, praeter illam de processione
Spiritus Sancti. Postea vero, consenti^nte Imperatore, tractarunt de aliis,
etc. Florent. Con. Sess. ult. apud Nicolinum, To. 4. p. 894, etc. This favors
of some art to bring in the Greeks. Howsoever this shows enough against
Bellarmint, That all the Greeks did not constantly teach Purgatory, as he
affirms, L. 1. de Purgat. c. 11.. De tertio modo.
if that Council had Consent enough so to define it.) This was afterward
deliberately doubted of by the Protestants; after this as constantly denied,
then confirmed by the Council. Trid. Sess. 25. and in Bulla Pii 4. super forma
Jurame^ti professionis Fidei.
Council of Trent, and an Anathema set upon the head of every man that denies
it. And yet scarce any Father within the first three hundred years ever thought
of it.

Omnes veteres Graeci and Latini ab ipso tempore Apostolorum constanter
docuerunt Purgatorium esse, Bell. L. 1. de Pur. c 11.. De tertio modo.
Bellarmine affirms it boldly, That all the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, did
constantly teach Purgatory from the very Apostles times. And where he brings
his Proofs out of the Fathers for this Point, he divides them into two Ranks.
Bell. Lib. 1. de Purg. c. 6.. 1.
In the first, he reckons them which affirm Prayer for the dead, as if that
must necessarily infer Purgatory. Whereas most certain it is, that the Ancients
had, and gave other Reasons of Prayer for the dead, then freeing them out of
any Purgatory. And this is very Learnedly, and at large set down, by the now
Learned Jaco. Usher Armachan. In his answer to the Jesuits Challenge, c. 7. p.
194.
Primate of Armagh. But then in the second, he says, there are Sunt apertissima
Loca in Patribus, ubi asserunt Purgarium, Bell. L. 1. de Purg. c. 6.. Deindesunt
most manifest places in the Fathers* in which they affirm Purgatory. And he
names there no fewer then two and twenty of the Fathers. A great Jury
certainly, did they give their Verdict with him. But first, within the three
hundred years after Christ, he names none but Tertullian, Cyprian, and Origin.
And Tert. L. de An^. c. 17. Infer.
Tertullian speaks expressly of Hell, not of Purgatory. Cypr. L. 4. Ep. 2.
Em^^dayi igne.
S. Cyprian of a Purging to Amendment, which cannot be after this Life. As for
Origin. L. 1. (...). c. 6. S. Hieron. in Jonae 3. Bellar. L. 1. de Purg. c. 2..
Porro non. S Aug. L. 21. Civ. Dei, c. 17.
Origin, he, I think, indeed was the first Founder of Purgatory; But of such an
One, as I believe Bellarmine dares not affirm. For he thought there was no
Punishment after this life, but Purgatory; and that not only the most impious
men, but even the Devils themselves should be saved, after they had suffered
and been Purged enough. Which is directly contrary to the Word of God expounded
by his Aug. L. 2^. Civ. Dei, c. 17.
Church. In the fourth and fifth (the great and Learned Ages of the Church) he
names more, as S. Amb. in Psalm. 36. 14.
S. Ambrose. But S. Ambr. says, That some shall be saved, quasi per ignem, as
it were by fire, leaving it as doubtful, what was meant by that Fire, as the
Place it self does, whence it is taken. 1 Cor. 3. 15.
1 Cor. 3. S. Hieron. in 66 Isai. fine*
S. Hierome indeed names Purging by fire; But it is not very plain, that he
means it after this life. And howsoever, this is most plain, That S. Hierome is
at Credimus, we believe eternal Punishment; but he goes no farther than
Arbitramur, we think there is a Purging. So with him it was Arbitrary; And
therefore sure no Matter of Faith then. And again S Hiero. L. 4. cont. Pelag.
ultra medium.
he says, That some Christians may be saved, post poenas, after some
punishments endured, but he neither tells us Where, nor When. S. Basil. in
Isai. 9.
S. Basil names indeed Purgatory fire; but he relates as uncertainly, to that
in 1 Cor. 3. as S. Ambrose does. As for Paulin. Ep. 1.
Paulinus, he speaks for Prayer for the dead, but not a word of Purgatory. And
the Place in Greg. Naz. Orat. 39. fine
S. Gregory Nazianzen is far from a manifest Place. For he speaks there of
Baptism by fire; which is no I think the first that ever used that phrase,
Baptism by fire, was Origin. And he used it for Martyrdom, as clearly appears
by a passage of his in Eusebius. L. 6. Hist. c. 4. Edit. Graec. Lat. Coll^niae
Allob. 1612.
usual phrase to signify Purgatory. But yet say that here he does, there is a
(...), a fortassis, a peradventure in the words, which Bellarmine cunningly
leaves out. And if it be a Peradventure ye shall then be Baptized with fire;
why then it is at a Peradventure too, that ye shall not. Now such Casual stuff
as this; peradventure you shall, and peradventure you shall not, is no
Expression for things, which are valued to be de side, and to be believed as
Matters of Faith. Bellarmine goes on with Lact. L. 7. c. 21.
Lactantius, but with no better success. For he says indeed, That some men
perstringentur igne, shall be sharply touched by fire. But he speaks of such,
quorum peccata praevaluerunt, whose sins have prevailed. And they in
Bellarmine's Doctrine are for Hell, not Purgatory. As for S. Hilar. in Ps. 118.
v. 20.
S. Hilary, he will not come home neither. It Is true, he speaks of a Fine too,
and one that must be endured; but he tells us, it is a punishment expiandae a
peccatis animae, to purge the soul from sins. Now this will not serve
Bellarmine's turn. For they of Rome teach, That the sins are forgiven here, and
that the Temporal Punishment only remains to be satisfied in Purgatory. And
what need is there then of purging of sins? Lest there should not be Fathers
enough, he reckons in Boethius. L. 4. Pros. 4.
Boethius too. But he, though not long before a Convert, yet was so well seen in
this Point, that he goes no farther than Puto, I think that after death some
souls are exercised purgatoria clementia, with a Purgative Clemency. But Puto,
I think it is so, is no expression for Matter of Faith. The two pregnant
Authorities which seem to come home, are those of Gregory Nyssen, and
Theodoret. But for Theo. in 1 Cor. 3.
Theodoret in Scholiis Graecis (which is the Place Bellarmine quotes) I can
find no such Thing: And manifest it is, Bellarmine Bellarm. L. 1. de Purgato.
c. 5.. Ex Graecis habemus.
himself took it but upon trust. And for S. Greg. Nyss. Orat. de Mortuis. p.
1066. Edit. Paris. 1615. Tom. 2. (...). ibid. p. 1067. (...), etc. ibid. p.
1068.
S. Gregory Nyssen, it is true, some places in him seem plain. But then they are
made so doubtful by other Places in him, that I dare not say simply and
roundly, what his Judgment was. For he says, Men must be purged from
Perturbations, and either by Prayers, and Philosophy, or the study of Wisdom,
or by the furnace of Purgatory-fire after this life. And again, That a man
cannot be partaker (...) of the Divine nature, unless the Purging-fire does
take away the stains that are in his Soul. And again, That after this life a
Purgatory-fire takes away the blots and propensity to evil. And I deny not,
diverse other like places are in him. But first, this is quite another thing
from the Roman Purgatory. For S. Gregory tells us here, that the Purgatory he
means, purges Perturbations, and stains, and blots, and propensity to evil.
Whereas the Purgatory which Rome now teaches, purges not sin, Item definimus,
si vere poenitentes in Dei charitate decesserint, antequam dignis poenitentiae
fructibus de Commissis and Omissis satisfecerint, poenis Purgatoriis post
mortem purgari, Council. Floren. circa prin. per Bin. Edit. Colon. 1618.
but is only satisfactory by way of punishment for sins already forgiven, but
for which satisfaction was not made before their Death. Secondly, S. Gregory
Nyssen himself seems not obscurely to relate to some other Fire. S. Greg. Nyss.
da Anima and Resur. Tom. 2. p. 658.
For he says expressly, That the soul is to be punished, till the Vitiosity of
it be consumed, Purgatorio igne; So the Translation renders it; but in the
Original it is (...), that is, in a fire that sleeps not, which, for ought
appears, may be understood of a Fire that is eternal; whereas the fire assigned
to Purgatory shall cease. Besides, S. Gregory says plainly: The Soul cannot
suffer by sire but in the Body; and the Body cannot be with it, till the
Resurrection. Therefore S. Greg. Orat. 3. de Resurrect. Christi.
he must needs speak of a fire after the Resurrection, which must be either the
Fire of the General Conflagration, or Hell; Purgatory he cannot mean; Where,
according to the Romish Tenet, the Soul suffers without the Body. The truth is:
Diverse of the Ancient, especially Greeks, which were a little too much
acquainted with Plato's School, Non expedit philosophari alt^us, etc. Orig. L.
6. cont. Celsum.
philosophized, and disputed upon this, and some other Points with much
Obscurity, and as little Certainty. So upon the whole matter, in the fourth and
fifth hundred year, you see here is none that constantly and perspicuously
affirm it. And as for S. Augustine he Constat Animas purgari post hanc vitam,
S. August. Lib. 21. Civ. Dei, c. 24. vide.
said, and Justorum flagella non incipiunt post mortem, sed desinunt. Et Anima
mox in Paradisum, etc. S. Aug. contr. Foelicianum, c. 15. Et duo tantum loca
esse, etc. S. Aug. Ser. 19. de verb. Apost. c. 15. Et L. 21 de Civ. Dei, c. 16
fine, Negat, nisi sit Ignis ille in Consummatione saecult.
unsaid it, and Quaeri potest, etc. S. Aug. in Enchirid. c. 69. Forsitan verum
est, etc. S Aug. L. 21. de Civ. Dei, c. 26. Quid S Paulus senserit, 1 Cor. 3.
de Igne illo, male intelligentiores, and doctiores andire, S. Aug. L. de Fide
and Oper. c. 16.
at the last left it doubtful; which had it then been received as a Point of
Faith, he durst not have done. Indeed then in S. Gregory the Great's time, in
the beginning of the sixth Age, Purgatory was grown to some perfection. For S.
S. Greg. in Psalm. 3. Poenitentialem princ.
Gregory himself is at Scio ('it was but at Puto a little before) I know that
some shall be Expiated in Purgatory flames. And therefore I will easily give
Bellarmine all that follow. For after this time Purgatory was found too warm a
business to be suffered to Cool again. And in the after Ages, more were
frighted, than led by proof into the Belief of it.

Tradition; For then we might have traced it by the smoke to the Apostles
times. Indeed Bellarmine would have it such a Tradition. For he tells us out of
S. Quod Universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi Authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur, S. Aug. L.
4* de Bapt. Cont. Donatist, c. 24. Nec ad Summ^s Pontifices referri potest.
Addit Melch. Canus, L. 3. de Locis, c. 4. prin.
Augustine, That that is rightly believed to be delivered by Apostolical
Authority, which the whole Church holds, and has ever held, and yet is not
Instituted by any Council. And he adds, That Purgatory is such a Tradition, so
Constantly held in the whole Church, Greek, and Latin. And Non invenimus
initium hujus dogmatis, sed omnes veteres Graeci and Latini, etc. Bellar. L. ^.
de Purg. c. 11.. De tertio modo.
that we do not find any beginning of this Belief. Where I shall take the
boldness to Observe these three things. First, that the Doctrine of Purgatory
was not held ever in the whole Catholic Church of Christ. And this appears by
the proofs of L. 1. de Purg. c. 6.
Bellarmine himself produced, and I have. 38. N. 16.
before examined. For there it is manifest, that scarce two Fathers directly
affirm the belief of Purgatory for full six hundred years after Christ.
Therefore Purgatory is no Matter of Faith, nor to be believed as descending
from Apostolical Authority, by S. Augustine's Rule. Secondly, that we can find
a beginning of this Doctrine, and a Beginner too, namely Origin. And neither
Bellarmine, nor any other is able to show any one Father of the Church that
said it before him. Therefore Purgatory is not to be believed as a Doctrine
delivered by Apostolical Authority, by Bellarmine's own rule; For it has a
Beginning. Thirdly, I observe too, that Bellarmine cannot well tell where to
lay the foundation of Purgatory, that it may be safe. For first, he labors to
found it upon Scripture. To that end Bellar. L. 1. de Purgat. c. 3. and 4.
he brings no fewer then ten places out of the Old Testament, and nine out of
the New, to prove it. And yet fearing lest these places be strained (as indeed
they are) and so too weak to be laid under such a vast pile of Building, as
Purgatory is De tertio modo perspicuum est, etc. Bellar. L. 1. de Purgat. c.
11.. Tertio ex Verbo, etc. and. De tertio modo, and c.
, he flies to unwritten Tradition. And by this Word of God unwritten, he says
it is manifest, that the Doctrine of Purgatory was delivered by the Apostles.
Sure if Nineteen places of Scripture cannot prove it, I would be loath to fly
to Tradition. And if Recourse to Tradition be necessary, then certainly those
places of Scripture made not the proof they were brought for. And once more,
how can Bellarmine say here, That we find not the Beginning, hujus dogmatis,
of this Article; when he had said before, that he had found it in the Nineteen
places of Scripture? For if in these places he could not find the beginning of
the Doctrine of Purgatory, he is false while he says he did: And if he did
find it there, then he is false here in saying, we find no beginning of it,
And for all his Brags of Omnes veteres Graci and Latini, etc. Bellarm. L. 1. de
Parga. c. 11.. Detertio modo.
Omnes Veteres, all the Ancient Greek and Latin do constantly teach Purgatory.
Yet De Purgatorio in Antiquis Scriptoribus potissinum Graecis fere nulla mentio
est. Qua de causa usque in hodiernum diem Purgatorium non est ^d Graecis
creditum, Alphon. a Castro. L. 8. advers. Haeres. Verbo Indulgentia.
Alphons. a Castro deals honestly and plainly, and tells us, That the mention
of Purgatory in Ancient Writers is fere nulla, almost none at all, especially
in the Greoks.

And he adds, That hereupon Purg^tory (...) not believed by the Graecians to
this very day* And what no^, I pray, after all this, may I not so much as
del^berately doubt of this* because it is now Defined* and but now in a manner
and thus* No sure. So A. C. tells you. Doubt* No* For when you had fooled the
Archbishop of Spalat^* back to Rome* there you either made him say, or said it
for him* Purgatorium nullum esse* est manifest (...)* etc* M. Anton. de
Do(...) (...). P^^^s. 10^^. p. 17. Me^^^a, (...), and ^^^^qua, qu^ su^^^^us
(...) in Ecclesia (...) Artic^ls Fundamentales, (...) Revelation, qu^m (...)*
Ibid p. 32. And so much A. C. himself says of all Points in which in the
Doctrine of the Faith (...) differ from them. In his Relation of the first
Conference, p. 28.
(for in Print it is, and under his Name) That since it is now defined by the
Church, a man is as much bound to believe there is a Purgatory, as that there
is a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead* How far comes this short of Blasphemy*
to make the Trinity, and Purgatory, things alike and equally Credible?

A. C. will give you a Reason, why no man may deliberately doubt, much less
deny any thing that is defined by a A. C. p. 71*
General Council. And his Reason is, Because every such doubt and denial is a
breach from the one saving faith. This is a very good reason, if it be true.
But how appears it to be true? How? why it takes away (says A. C.) Infallible
credit from the A. C. p. 71.
Church, and so the Divine Revelation not being sufficiently applied, it cannot
according to the ordinary course of Gods providence breed Infallible Belief in
us. Why but deliberately to doubt, and constantly to deny, upon the grounds and
in the manner ^ 38. Na. ^.
aforesaid, does not take away Infallible credit from the whole Church, but
only from the Definition of a General Council some way or other misled, And
that in things not absolutely Necessary to all men's Salvation; for of such
things Though every Thing defined to be a Divine Truth in General Councels is
not absolutely necessary to be expressly known, and actually believed by all
sorts, etc. A. C. p. 71.
A. C. here speaks expressly. Now to take away Infallible credit from some
Definitions of General Councels, in things not absolutely necessary to
Salvation, is no breach upon the one saving Faith which is necessary, nor upon
the Credit of the Catholic Church of Christ in things absolutely necessary*
for which only it had Infallible assistance promised. So that no breach being
made upon the Faith, nor no Credit which ever it had being taken from the
Church, the Divine Revelation may be* and is as sufficiently applied as ever it
was; and in the ordinary course of Gods providence may breed as Infallible
belief in things necessary to Salvation, as ever it did.

A. C. will prove his Reason before given, and therefore A. C. p. 71.
he asks out of S. Paul, Romans 10* Now shall men believe unless Romans 10. 14, 15.
they hear? How shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach
(to wit* Infallibly) ^^less they be sen^, that is, from God, and infallibly
assisted by his Spirit? Here Is that which I have twice at least spoken to
already, namely, That A. C. by this will make every Priest in the Church of
Rome that has Learning enough to preach, and dissents not from that Church, an
Infallible Preacher; which no Father of the Primitive Church did ever assume to
himself, nor the Church give him. And yet the Fathers of the Primitive Church
were sent, and from God, were assisted, and by God, and did sufficiently
propose to men the Divine Revelation, and did by it beget and breed up Faith,
saving Faith, in the Souls of men: Though Alios (ab (...) Ca^^^itae Scripture)
ita (...) quantalibet sanctitate doctr(...), non ideo vtrum ^^tem, q^^d ^^si
ita (...), vel scripserunt. (...) 1. q. 1. A. 8. ad* 2. Ex S. Aug. Ep. (...)
non cre^^^, nisi Demonstr Demonstr(...) accipias ex sacris Literi^. S. Cyril
Hierosol. Cat.
no one among them since the Apostles, was an Infallible Preacher. And A. C.
should have done very well here to have made it manifest, That this Scripture,
How shall they preach (to wit, infallibly) is so interpreted by Union, Consent
of Fathers, and Definitions of Councels, as he A. C. p. (...)
bragged before, that they use to interpret Scripture: For I do not find How
shall they preach (to wit, Verba hac Apostole (...) possunt intelligi de Fide
insusa, illa enim immediate a Deo creata est, and non est ex auditu ut haec.
Apertissime colligitar ex Biel in 3 Sent. D. 23. q. 2. A. 2. Co^^l. 1. Ergo
Fides acquisita necessari^ est. Ibid. sed praeter Acquisitam, Insusa etiam
requiritur, and non solum propter Intentionem Actus, sed etiam propter Assensum
and Certitudinem. Quia non potest esse firmus Assensus a Fide acquisita. Quia
per cum nu^us credi, alicui, nisi quem scit posse falli and fallere, licet
credat cum non Velle fallere. Scotus in 3 Sent. D. 23. q. unica. Therefore in
the Judgment of your own School, your Preachers can both deceive and be
deceived. And therefore certainly are not Infallible. And M. Canus very
expressly makes this but an Introduction to Infallible Faith. Primum ergo id
status juxta Cor^munem Leg^m aliqua exteriora and humana incitamenta necessaria
esse, quibus ad Evangelli fidem inducamur. Quomodo enim credent ei, quem non
audierunt, etc. Canus ^. 2. de ^ocis, c. 8. S. Primum ergo. Et iterum. Si Fides
infusa ita Fidei acquisitae uiteretur, tanquam suo Fundamento; ipsum
Fundamentum Fidei nostrae non esset Divina, sed Humana Veritas. Ibid. S Cui and
tertium. Therefore surely A. C. abuses this place of the Apostle very boldly.
Infallibly) to be the Comment of any one of the Fathers; or any other approved
Author; And let him show it, if he can.

A. C. p. 71.
and backward he goes) he falls immediately upon this Question: If a whole
General Council defining what is Divine Truth, be not believed to be sent and
assisted by Gods Spirit, and consequently of Infallible Credit; what man in the
world can be said to be of Infallible Credit? Well, first, A. C. has very ill
luck in fitting his Conclusion to his Premises, and his Consequent to his
Antecedent; And so it is here with him. For a General Council may be assisted by
God's Spirit, and in a great measure too, and in a greater than any private man
not inspired, and yet not consequently be of Infallible credit: for all
assistance of God's Spirit reaches not up to Infallibility. I hope the Ancient
Bishops, and Fathers of the Primitive Church were assisted by God's Spirit, and
in a plentiful measure too, and yet A. C. himself will not say they were
Infallible. And secondly, for the Question it self, If a General Council be
not, what man in the world can be said to be of Infallible Credit? Truly I Will
make you a ready Answer, No man. Not the Pope himself? No: Let God and his Word
be true, and every man a Liar, Romans 3. for so, more or less, every man will be
found to be. And this is Romans 3. 4.
neither damage to the Church, nor wrong to the person of any.

A. C. asks a shrewder Question than this. If such A. C. p. 71.
a Council lawfully called, continued and confirmed, may err in defining any
one Divine Truth, how can we be Infallibly certain of any other Truth defined
by it? For if it may err in one,. 10. N. 15.
why not in another, and another, and so in all? It Is most true, if such a
Council may err in one, it may in another, and another, and so in all of like
nature: I say in all of like nature. And A. C. may remember he expressed
himself a little A. C. p. 71.
before, to speak of the Defining of such Divine Truths as are not absolutely
necessary to be expressly known and actually believed of all sorts of men. Now
there is, there can be no necessity of an Infallible certainty in the whole
Catholic Church, and much less in a General Council, of thing not. 21. N. 5.
absolutely necessary in themselves. For Christ did not intend to leave an
Infallibe certainty in his Church to satisfy either Contentious, or Curious,
or Presumptuous Spirits. And therefore in things not Fundamental, not
Necessary, it is no matter if Councels err in one, and another, and a third,
the whole Church having power and means enough to see that no Council err in
Necessary things, and this is certainty enough for the Church to have* or for
Christians to expect; especially since the Foundation is so strongly and so
plainly laid down in Scripture and the Creed, that a modest man might justly
wonder why any man should run to any later Council, at least for any Infallible
certainty.

A. C. has more Questions to ask; and his next is, How A. C. p. 72.
we can (according to the ordinary Course) be Infallibly assured that it erres
in one, and not in another, when it equally by one and the same Authority
defines both to be Divine Truth? A. C. taking here upon him to defend M. Fisher
the Jesuit, could not but see what I had formerly written concerning this
difficult Question about General Councels. And to all that (being large) he
replied little or nothing. Now when he thinks that may be forgotten, or as if
he did not at all lie in his way, he here turns Questionist, to disturb that
business, and indeed the Church, as much as he can. But to this Question also I
answer again, If any General Council do now err, either it erres in things
absolutely necessary to Salvation, or in things not necessary. If it err in
things Necessary, we can be infallibly assured by the Scripture, the Creeds,
the four first Councels, and the whole Church, where it erres in one, and not
in another. If it be in non necessariis, in things not necessary, it is not
requisite that we should have for them an infallible assurance. As for that
which follows, it is notoriously both cunning, and false. It Is false to suppose
that a General Council defining two things for Divine Truths, and erring in
one, but not erring in another, does define both equally by one, and the same
Authority. And it is cunning, because these words (by the same Authority) are
equivocal, and must be distinguished, that the Truth, which A. C. would hide,
may appear. Thus then, suppose a General Council erring in one point, and not
in another, it does define both, and equally by the same delegated Authority
which that Council has received from the Catholic Church, But it does not
define both, and much less equally, by the same Authority of the Scripture,
(which must be the Councels Rule, as well as private men's) no nor by the same
Authority of the whole Catholic Church (who did not intentionally give them
equal power to define Truth, and error for Truth.) And I hope A. C. dares not
say the Scripture (according to which all Councels, that will uphold Divine
Truth, must Determine) does equally give either ground or power to define
Error and Truth.

A. C. adds, That if we leave this to A. C. p. 72.
be examined by any private man, this examination not being Infallible, had
need to be examined by another, and this by another without end, or ever coming
to Infallible certainty necessarily required in that one faith which is
necessary to salvation, and to that peace and unity which ought to be in the
Church. Will this inculcating the same thing never be left? I told the Jesuit.
32. N. 5.. 33. Consid. 7. Number. 4.
before, that I give no way to any private man to be Judge of a General
Council: And there also I showed the way how an erring Council might be
rectified, and the peace of the Church either preserved or restored, without
lifting any private spirit above a Council, and without this process in
Infinitum (which A. C. so much urges; and which is so much declined in all
Arist. 1. Post. Tex. 6. and 4. Metaph. T. 14.
Sciences.) For as the understanding of a man must always have somewhat to rest
upon, so must his Faith. But a. 38. Nu. 15.
private man, first for his own satisfaction, and after for the Churches, if he
have just cause, may consider of, and examine by the Hic non loqui^ur ^e
De^is^^^^, (...) Determinatione Doctrinali, qu^ ad ^^^^quemque virum peritum
spectare dignoscitur; sed de Authoritativ^ and Judiciali, etc. la. Almain. L.
de Author* Eccles. c. 10. Pri^.
Judgment of discretion, though not of power, even the Definitions of a General
Council. But A. C. concludes well, That an Infallible certainty is necessary
for that one Faith which is necessary to salvation. And of that (as I
expressed. 38. Nu. 1.
before) a most infallible certainty we have already in the Scripture, the
Creeds, and the four first General Councels, to which for things Necessary and
Fundamental in the Faith, we need no assistance from other General Councels.
And some of your Sunt qui nescio qua ductiratione sentiunt non esse opus
Generali Concillo (^e Constant^en^ loquitur) dicentes, omnia been a Patribus
nostris Ordinata ac Constituta, modo ab omnibus ^egiti^^ and fid^liter
ser^^rentur. Fatemur equid^m i^ ipsum esse verissimum. Tamen cum nihil fere
servetur, etc. Pet. de Aliaco. ^. de reformat. Eccles. ^ine. So that
after-Councels are rather to D^^r^^ for Observance, than to make any new
Determinations of the Faith.
own, very honest and very Learned, were of the same Opinion with me. And for
the peace and unity of the Church in things absolutely necessary, we have the
same infallible direction that we have for Faith. But in Things not necessary,
(though they be Divine Truths also) if about them Christian men do differ, it is
no more than they have done, more or less in all Ages of the Church; and they
may differ* and yet preserve the Non omnis Error in his que fidei sunt, est aut
Infidelitas, aut Haeresis. Holkot. in 1 Sent. q. 1. ad 4. ^.
One necessary Faith, and Scimus quosdam quod semel imbiberint nolle deponere,
nec propositum suum facile mutare, sed salvo inter Collegaa pacis and concordia
vinculo, quaedam propria quae apud se semel si^t usurpata, retiuere. Qu^ in re
nec nos vim cuiquam facimus, aut legem damus, etc. S. Cypr. ^. 2. Epist. 1.
Concordia quae est Charitatis effectus, est unio Voluntatum, non Opinionum,
Tho. 2. 2. q. 37. Ar. 1. c. Dissensio de Minimis, and de Opinionibus repugnat
quidem paci perfectae, in qua plene verita^ cognoscetur, and omnis appetitus
complebitur. Non tamen repugnat paci imperfectae, qua^^s habetur in via. Tho.
2. 2^. q. 29. A 3. ad 2.
Charity too, entire, if they be so well minded. I confess it were heartily to
be wished, that in these things also men might be all of one mind, and one
judgment, to which the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 1. 10 Phil. 2. 2.
1 Cor. 1. But this cannot be hoped for till the Church be Triumphant over all
humane frailties which here hang thick and close about her. The want both of
Unity and Peace proceeding too often, even where Religion is pretended, from
Men and their Humors, rather than from Things and Errors to be found in them.

A. C. tells me, That it is not therefore (as I would persuade) A. C. p. 72.
the fault of Councels Definitions, but the pride of such as will prefer, and
not submit their private Judgments, that lost, and continues the loss of peace
and unity of the Church, and the want of certainty in that one aforesaid
soul-saving Faith. Once again I am bold to tell A. C. there is no want of
certainty, most infallible certainty of That one soul-saving Faith. And if for
other opinions which flutter about it, there be a difference, a dangerous
difference, as at this day there is, yet necessary it is not, that therefore,
or for prevention thereof, there should be such a Certainty, an Infallible
Certainty in these things. For he understood himself well that said, Oportet
esse Haereses, 1 Cor. 11. There must, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
there will be Heresies. And wheresoever that Necessity lies, it is out of doubt
enough to prove, that Christ never left such an Infallible Assurance as is able
to prevent them: Or such a Mastering Power in his Church, as is able to
overawe them; but they come with their Oportet about them; and they rise and
spring in all Ages very strangely. But in particular for that which first
caused, and now continues the loss of Unity in the Church of Christ, as I make
no doubt but that the Pride of men is one Cause, so yet can I not think that
Pride is the adaequate and sole Cause thereof. But in part Pride caused it, and
Pride on all sides; Pride in some that would not at first, nor will not since
submit their private judgments, where, with good Conscience, they may, and
ought. And Pride in others that would not first, nor will not yet mend
manifest, great, and dangerous errors, which with all good Conscience they
ought to do. But it is not Pride, not to submit to known and gross Errors: And
the Definitions of some Councels (perhaps the Lateran, Constance, and Trent)
have been greater and more urgent Causes of breach of Unity, than the Pride of
men has been; which yet I shall never excuse, where-ere it is.

How far this one soul-saving Faith extends, A. C. tells me I have confessed it
not a work for my Pen: But, he says, it is to be A. C. p. 72.
learned from that One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, always Visible, and
Infallible Roman Church; of which the Lady, once doubting, is now fully
satisfied, etc. Indeed (though A. C. sets this down with some scorn, which I
can easily pass over) it is true that thus. 38. Nu. 1.
I said. There is a Latitude in Faith, especially in reference to different
men's Salvation: But to set a Bound to this, and strictly to define it; Just
thus far you must Believe in every particular, or incur domnation, is no work
for my Pen. Thus I said, and thus I say still. For though the Foundation be one
and the same in all, yet a 38. Number. 8.
Latitude there is, and a large one too, when you come to Consider not the
Foundation common to all, but things necessary to many particular men's
Salvation. For to whomsoever God has given more, of him shall more be
required, S. Luc. 12. 48. Unicuique secuo^^m proportionem suam, secunau^
disserentiam Scien^iae vel Ignorantiae, etc. Et post^a. Extenditur doctrina
haec, non solu^ ad Donum Scientiae, etc. Caietan. in S. Luc. 12. Ecce quomodo
Scientia aggravat Culpam. Unde Gregorius, etc. Gorran. in S. Luc. 12. Therefore
many things may be necessary for a knowing man's Salvasion, which are not so for
a poor Ignorant soul. Si qui^ de Antecessoribus nostris vel ignorenter, vel
simpliciter non hoc observavit, and tenuit, quod nos Domnius facere exemplo and
magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitati ejus de Indulgentid Domini Venia
concedi. Nobis vere non poterit ignosci, qui nunc a Domino adm^niti and
instructi sumus. S. Cyprlan. L. 2. Epist. 3.
S. Luc. 12. as well in Belief, as in Obedience* and Performance. And the gifts
of God, both ordinary and extraordinary, to particular men, are so various, as
that for my part I hold it impossible for the ablest Pen that is to express it.
And in this respect I 38. Number. 1.
said it with Humility and Reason; That to set these Bounds, was no work for my
Pen. Nor will I ever take upon me to express that Tenet, or Opinion (the denial
of the Foundation only excepted) which may shut any Christian out of heaven.
And A. C. I believe you know very well, to what a narrow S^antling, some
Articuli Fidei sunt sicut Principia per se nota. Et sicut quaedam eorum in
aljis implicit continentur, it a omnes Articuli implicit continentur in
aliquibus primis Credibilibus, etc. secundum illudad Heb. 11. Tho. 2. ^ a, q.
1. A. 10. c. Iu absoluto nobis and facili est aeternitas: Je^um suscitatum a
mortuis per Deum ^redere, and ipsum esse Dominum confiter^, etc. S. Hilar. L.
10. de Trin. ad finem. S. Matthew. 22. 37.
Learned of your own side bring the very Foundation it self, rather than they
will lose any that lay hold on Christ, the Son of God, and Redeemer of the
World. And as Christ Epitomizes the whole Law of Obedrence into these two great
Commandments; The love of God, and our Neighbor, S. Mat. 22. So the Apostle
Epitomizes the whole Law of Belief into these two great Assents: That God is;
and That he is a rewarder of them that seek him: Heb. 11. that seek him in
Christ. And S. Heb. 11. 6.
Peter was full of the Holy Ghost, when he expressed it, That there is no
salvation to them that seek it in, or by another Name, Act. 4. Acts 4. 12.


A. C. will not say it is a work And yet before in this Conference, and apud A.
C. p. 42. the Jesuire whom he defends has said it expressly, that all those are
Pundamental which are necessary to Salvation.
for his. But he tells us, A. C. p. 72.
It Is to be learned of the One, Holy, Catholic, Apostolic, always Visible,
and Infallible Roman Church. 'Titles enough given to the Roman Church; and I
wish she deserved them all, for then we should have peace. But it is far
otherwise. One she is, as a particular Church, but not The One. Holy she would
be counted; but the world may see, if it will not blind it self, of what value
Holiness is in that Court and Country. Catholic she is not, in any sense of
the word; for she is not the Romana Ecclesia particularis. Bellar. L. 4. de
Romans Pont. c. 4. 1. Catholica autem est illa quae diffusa^est p^r universum
Orb^m. S. Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 18.
Universal, and so not Catholic in extent. Nor is she sound in Doctrine, and
in things which come near upon the Foundation too; so not Catholica enim dicitur
Ecclesia illa quae universaliter docet sine ullo defectu, vel differentia
dogmatum. S. Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 18. Unde Augustinus subscripsit se
Episcopum Catholica Ecclesiae Hipponiregensis, L. 1. de Actis cum Foelice
Manich. c. 20. Et l. 2. c. 1. Et Catholica Alexandrinorum. Soz. L. 1. Hist. 9.
Et L. 2. c. 3. And so every particular Church is or may be called Catholic,
and that truly, so long as it teaches Catholic Doctrine. In which sense the
Particular Roman Church was called Catholic, so long as it taught all and only
those things to be de Fide, which the Catholic Church it self maintained. But
now Rome does not so.
Catholic in Belief. Nor is she the Prime Mother Church of Christianity;
Supra. 35. Number. 9. Other Churches beside the Roman are called Matres, and
Originales Ecclesiae, as in Tertul. de prisceipt. advers. Here Is. c. 21. Et
Ecclesia Hierosolymitana quae aliarum omnium^ Matter. (...), etc. Theodoret. L.
5. Hist. Eccl. c. 9. ex ^ibello Synodico a Council. Constantinopol. 2.
transmiss^ ad Concilium sub Damaso tum Roma coactum. Et Constantinopolitana,
Ecclesia dicitur omnium aliarum Caput. Cod. L. 1. Tit. 2. L^g. 24. That is, not
simply of all Churches, but of all in that Patriarchate. And ^so Rome is the
Head of all in the Roman Patriarchate.
Jerusalem was that; and so not Catholic as a Fountain, or Original, or as the
Head, or Root of the Catholic.

Romanists object here (though A. C. does it not) that S. Cyprian called the Et
Ecclesiae Catholicae radicem and Matricem agnoscereat and tenerent. S. Cyp. L.
4. Epist. 8.
Roman Church, The Root and Matrix of the Catholic Church of Christ; I hope I
shall have leave to explain that difficult place also. First then, S. Cyprian
names not Rome. That stands only in the Margin, and was placed there as his
particular judgment led Edit. Basili^ns. 1530. And Sima^ca also applies this
speech of S. Cyprian to Rome Tit. 24. 17. And so also Pamellus upon S. Cyprian.
But they wrong him.
him that set out S. Cyprian. Secondly, the true Story of that Epistle, and
that which led S. Cyprian into this Expression, was this. Cornelius then chosen
Pope, expostulates with S. Cyprian, That his Letters to Rome were directed
only to the Clergy there, and not to Him; and takes it ill, as if S. Cyprian
had thereby seemed to disapprove his Election. S. Cyprian replies, That by
reason of the Schism moved then by Novation, it was uncertain in Africa which
of the Two had the more Canonical Right to the Sea of Rome; and that therefore
he named him not: But yet that during this uncertainty, he exhorted all that
sailed thither, ut Ecclesiae Catholicae Radicem and Matricem agnoscerent and
tenerent; That in all their carriage they should acknowledge, and so hold
themselves unto the Unity of the Catholic Church, which is the Root and Matrix
of it, and the only way to avoid participation in the Schism. And that this
must be S. Cyprian's meaning, I shall thus prove. First, because, This could
not be his meaning or Intention, That the Sea of Rome was the Root or Matrix of
the Catholic Church. For if he had told them so, he had left them in as great,
or greater difficulty, than he found them. For there was then an Open and an
Apparent Schism in the Church of Rome. Two Bishops, Cornelius and Novation; Two
Congregations, which respectively attended and observed them. So that a
perplexed Question must needs have divided their thoughts, which of these Two
had been that Root and Matrix of the Catholic Church. Therefore had S. Cyprian
meant to pronounce Rome the Root and Matrix of the Catholic Church, he would
never have done it at such a time, when Rome it self was in Schism. Whereas in
the other sense, the Counsel is good and plain, Namely, that they should hold
themselves to the Unity and Communion of the Catholic Church, which is the
Root of it. And then necessarily they were to suspend their Communion there,
till they saw how the Catholic Church did incline, to approve, or disaprove
the Election of the One, or the Other. And thus S. Cyprian frees himself to
Cornelius from the very least Touch of Schism. Secondly, Because this sense
comes home to Baron. Annal. 254. Number. 64. where he cites this Epistle.
Baronius. For he affirms that S. Cyprian and his Colleagues the African
Bishops did Communionem suspendere, suspend their Communion until they heard by
Caldonius and Fortunatus, whose the undoubted right was. So it seems S. Cyprian
gave that Counsel to these Travelers, which himself followed. For if Rome,
during the Schism, and in so great uncertainty, had yet been Radix Ecclesiae
Catholicae, Root of the Catholic Church of Christ, I would fain know, how S.
Cyprian, so great and famous an Assertor of the Churches Unity, durst once so
much as think of suspending Communion with her. Thirdly, Because this sense
will be plain also by other Passages out of other Epistles of S. Cyprian. For
writing to Jubaianus an Africane Bishop against the Novatians, who then
infested those parts, and durst Rebaptize Catholic Christians, he says thus.
Nos autemqui Ecclesiae unius Caput and Radicem tenemus, pro certo sci^^^, and
credimus, ^ihil extra Ecclesiam lic^^^, and Baptismatis quod est unum; Caput
nos esse, ubi and ipse Baptizatus p^ths fuerat, quando Divinae ^ivitatis, and
Rationem and veritatem tenebat. S. Cypr. ad Jubain. Epist. 73. Edit. Pam^l.
But we who hold the Head and Root of One Church, do know for certain, and
believe, that nothing of this is lawful out of the Catholic Church; And that
of Baptism, which is but One, we are the Head, where he himself was at first
Baptized, when he held the Ground and Verity of Divine Unity. Now I conceive
it is all one, or at least as Argumentative to all purposes, to be Caput or
Radix Baptismatis, Head or Root of Baptism, as Head or Root of the Church. For
there is but One Baptism, as well as but One Church, and that is the entrance
into this. And S. Cyprian affirms and includes himself, Nos esse Caput, that we
are the Head of Baptism. Where yet (I pray observe it) he cannot by Nos, We,
mean his own Person (though if he did, he were the more Opposite to Rome) much
less can he mean the Roman Church, as it is a Particular, and stands separate
from others. For then how could he say, Nos esse Cap^t, that we are the Head?
Therefore he must needs mean the Unity and Society of the Church Catholic,
which the Novatians had then left, and whereof he and his Church were still
Members. Besides most manifest it is, that he calls that Church Caput
Baptismatis the Head of Baptism, where Novatian was Baptized (they are his own
words) and probable it is that was Rome, Because that Schismatic was a Roman
Priest. And yet for all this S. Cyprian says, No^ esse Caput Baptismatis, that
we are the Head of Baptism, though he were at Carthage. By which it is plain,
That as Caput is parallel to Radix, and Matrix: So also that by Caput, the head
of Baptism, he includes together with Rome all the other members of the Church
Universal. Again, S. Elaborarent ut ad Catholicae Ecclesie unitatem sci^^i
corporis membra compontrent and Christianae Charitatis vinculum c^pularent.
Se^^ quontam diversae partis obstinata and inflexibilis pertinacia non tantum
Radicis and Matris sinum atqut complexum recusavit, sed etiam gliscence and in
pejus recrudescente discordia, Episcopum sibi constituit, etc. S. Cypr. ^. 2.
Epist. 10.
Cyprian writes to Cornelius and censures the Schismatical Carriage of the
Novatians at Rome. And tells him farther, that he had sent Caldonius and
Fortunatus to labor Peace in that Church, that so they might be reduced to,
and composed in the Unity of the Catholic Church. But because the Obstinate,
and inflexible pertinacy of the other Party had not only refused Radicis and
Matris sinum, the bosom of their Mother and embracings of their Root, but the
Schism increasing and growing raw to the worse, has set up a Bishop to it
self, etc. Where it is observable, and I think plain, That S. Cyprian employed
his Legates not to bring the Catholic Church to the communion of Rome, but
Rome to the Catholic Church. Or to bring the Novatians not only to
Communicate with Cornelius, but with the Church Universal, which was therefore
Head and Root in S. Cyprian's judgment, even to Rome it self, as well as to all
other, Great, Ancient, or even Apostolical Churches. And this is yet more plain
by the sequel. For when those his Legates had labored to bring those
Schismatics to the Unity of the Catholic Church; yet he complains their
Labor was lost. And why? Why? because recusabant Radicis and Matris sinum,
they refused the Bosom of the Root, and the Mother. Therefore it must needs
be* that in S. Cyprian's sense, these two Unit as Catholicae Ecclesiae, the
unity of the Catholic Church. And Radicis, or Matricis Sinus; or Complex^^,
the Bosom, or Embracing of the Root, or the Mother, are all one. And then
Radix and Matrix are not words by which he expresses the Roman Sea, in
particular, but he denotes by them the Unity of the Church Catholic. Fourthly,
Because T^t at tantae Reclesiae. Una est illa a^ Apostolis prima, ex qua Omnes.
Sic omnes primae, and ^mnes Apostolicae, dum unam omnes probant Unitatem, Terr.
de praes. advers. Haer. ^. 20. Porro unam esse primam Apostolicam, ex qua
reliquae. Hanc nulli loco affigit B Rhenanus Annot. in Argumento, Tert. de
praescript. etc. Null^ loco. Therefore not at Rome. But these words [Hanc nulli
loco affi^it] deleant^r, says the Spanish Inquisition upon R^en^^^s, printed at
Madrid An. 1^84
Tertullian seems to me to agree in the same sense. For says he, these so many
and great Churches founded by the Apostles, taken all of them together, are
that One Church from the Apostles out of which are All. So all are First, and
all Apostolic, while they all allow and prove Unam Unitatem, One Unity. Nor
can any possibly understand this of any Particular Church, but subordinately.
As S. Gregory Nazianzen says the Church of Caesarea was G^^g. Nazia^. says the
Church of C^saria was Matter prope omnium Ecclesiarum. Epist. 18.
Matter, the Mother of almost all Churches; which must needs be understood of
some Neighboring Churches, not of the whole Catholic Church. And where Pamel.
^^ Tertul. d^ praescript. adv^s. Haeres. c. 21. Nu. 129.
Pamelius speaks of Original and Mother-Churches, he names six, and others* and
Rome in the last place. Therefore certainly no Particular Church can be the
Root or Matrix of the Catholic; But she is rooted in her own Unity, down from
the Apostles, and no where else extra Deum* And this is farther manifest by the
Irreligious act of the Emperor Adrian. For he intending to root out the Faith
of Christ, took this course. He Consecrated Simulacrum Jovis; the Image of
Jupiter in the very place where Christ suffered, and profaned Bethlehem with
the Temple of Adonis. Ut quasi* Radix and Fundamentum Ecclesia tolleretur, si
in (...) loc^ Idola (...) in quibus Christus ^atu^ est, etc. S. Paul ^us Epist,
11* ad Sev^rum.
To this end, that the Root, as it were, and the Foundation of the Church might
be taken away, if in those places Idols might be worshipped, in which Christ
himself was born, and suffered, etc. By which it is most evident, That either
Jerusalem was the Root of the Catholic Church, if any Particular Church were
so; Or rather, that Adrian was deceived, (as being an Heathen he well might) in
that he thought the Universal Church had any particular or Local Root of its
Being: Or that he could destroy it all by laying it waste in any one place
whatsoever. And S. Augustine I think is full for this, That the Catholic
Church must have a Catholic Root or Matrix too. For Hareses omnis de illa
exi^runt tanquam sar^^^ta* ^nutilia de Vite pr^cisa. Ipsa autem ma^^t in Radic^
sud* etc. S. Aug. de Symb. ad (...). L. 1. ^. 6.
he tells us, That all Herestes whatsoever went out de illa, out of the
Catholic Church. For de illa there can be out of no other. For all Heresies
did not go out of any one Particular Church. He goes on. They were cut off de
Vite, from this Catholic Vine still, as unprofitable Branches. Ipsa autem, but
this Catholic Church remains in Radice sua, in in its own Root, in its own
Vine, in its own Charity, which must needs be as ample, and as Catholic as it
self. Or else, were it any Particular, All Heretical Branches could not be cut
off from one Root. And S. Augustine says again, Pars Donati non considerat se
praecisam esse a Radice Orientalium Ecclesiarum, etc.. Aug. Ep. 170. p^in.
That the Donatists did not consider that they were cut off from the Root of
the Eastern Churches. Where you see again, it is still but One Root of many
Churches: And that if any man will have a Particular Root of the Catholic
Church, he must have it in the East, not in the West at Rome. And now lastly,
besides this out of S. Cyprian to prove his own meaning, (and sure he is the
best interpreter of himself) and other assisting Proofs, it is most evident,
that in the prime and principal sense, the Catholic Church, and her Unity, is
the Head, Root, or Matrix of Rome, and all other Particular Churches; and not
Rome, or any other Particular, the Head, Root, or Matrix of it. For there is a
double Root of the Church, as there is of all things else: That is, Radix
Essentiae; the Root, Head, or Matrix of its Essence. And this is the prime
sense. For Essence and Being is first in all things. And then there is Radix
Existentiae, the Root of its Existence, and formal Being, which always
presupposes Being; And is therefore a sense less Principal. Now to apply this.
The Catholic or Universal Church is, and must needs be the Root of Essence and
Being to Rome, and all other Particulars. And this is the Principal Root, Head,
or Matrix that gives Being. And Rome, but with all other Particular Churches,
and no more then other Patriarchal Churches, was and is Radix Existentiae, the
Root of The Churches Existence. And this agrees with that known and received
Rule in Art: That Universals give Essence to their Particulars, and Particulars
supply their Universals with Existence. For as Socrates and every Particular
man borrow their Essence from the Species and Definition of a man, which is
Universal, but this Universal Nature and Being of Man has no actual Existence
but in Socrates and all other particular men: so, the Church of Rome, and every
other particular Church in the world, receive their very Essence and Being of a
Church from the Definition of the Catholic Universal Church of Christ; But
this Universal Nature and Being of the Church has no actual Existence but in
Rome and all other Particular Churches, and equal Existence in all her
particulars. And should all the Particular Churches in the world fall away from
Christ, save only One (which God forbid) yet the Nature, Essence, and Being of
the Universal Church would both Exist and Subsist in that one Particular. Out
of all which to me most clear it is, That for the Churches Being, the Catholic
Church, and that in Unity (for Ens and Unum, Being, and Being one, are
Convertible) is Radix, the Root, Head, Matrix, Fountain, or Original (call it
what you will) of Rome, and all other Particular Churches. But Rome is no more
than other Churches, the Root, or Matrix of the Catholic Churches Existence,
or Place of her actual Residence. And this I say for her Existence only, not
the purity or form of her Existence, which is here not considered. But if the
Catholic she be not, nor the root of the Catholic Church, yet Apostolic I
hope She is. Indeed Apostolic She is, as being the Sea Not as Bellarmine would
have it, with a Hinc dicitur Apostolica, quia in ea Successio Episcoporum ab
Apostolis deducta est usque ad nos, Bellar. ^. 4. de notis Eccl. c. 8.. 1. For
by this Reason neither Jerusalem, nor Antioch were in their times Apostolic
Churches; Because Succession of Bishops has not succeeded in them to this day.
De Collegis agebatur qui possent, etc. Judicio Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum causam
suam integram reservare, S. Aug. Epist. 162. Jo. de Turrecrem. enumerat sex
Verbi hujus significationes. Quarum prima est. Apostolica dicitur quia in
Apostolis, etc. initiata est. Hos enim instituit qua^i fundamentum Ecclesiae,
etc. Jo. de Turrecr. ^. 1* Summae, c. 18. Et quia Originem sumpsit ab
Apostolis, etc. Ibid. ubi dicit etiam S. Patres appossuisse hanc Vocem
[Apostolicam] in Symbolo suo, supra symbolum Apostolorum, ibid.
of One, and he a Prime Apostle. But then not Apostolic, as the Church is
called in the Creed from all the Apostles, no nor the Ecclesiae Apostolicae, ut
Smyrnaeorum, and reliquae ab Apostolis fundatae, Tertul. de praescrip. advers.
Haeret. c 32. Percurrae Ecclesias Apostolicas, etc. Habes Corinthum, Philippos,
Thessalonicenses, Ephesum, Roman, ibid. c. 32* Et Pamelius inumerat
Hierosolymitanam, Anti^ebenam, Corinthiam, Philippensem, Ephesinam, Romanam.
Pamel. ib. c. 21. Number. 129. And it may be observed, that so long ago
Tertullian, and so lately Pamelius should should reckon Rome last. Quin and
aliae Ecclesiae quae ab his Apostolicae etiam deputantur, at soboles
Ecclesiarum Apostolicarum, etc. Tertul. ib. c. 20.
Only Apostolic, Visible I may not deny God has hitherto preserved Her, but
for a better end doubtless than they turn it to. But Infallible She was never:
Yet if that Lady did as the Jesuit in his close avows, or others will rest
satisfied with it, who can help it? Sure none but God. And by A. C's leave,
this (which I said, is no work for my Pen) cannot be learned, no not of the
One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, much less of the Roman. For though
the Foundation be one and the same, and sufficiently known by Scripture and the
Creeds; Yet for the building upon the Foundation, the adding to it; the
Detracting from it; the Joining other things with it; The grating upon it: Each
of these may be damnable to some, and not to others, according to the
Knowledge, Wisdom, means of Information which some have, and others want: And
according to the ignorance, simplicity, and want of Information, which some
others have* and cannot help: And according to the Negligence, Contempt,
Wilfulness, and Malice, with Obstinacy, which some have against the Known
Truth; and all or some of these in different degrees in every particular man.
And that in the whole Latitude of mankind, from the most wise and learned in
the School of Christ, to the simplest Idiot that has been so happy as to be
initiated into the Faith by Baptism. Now the Church has not this knowledge of
all particulars, Men, and Conditions, nor can she apply the Conditions to the
Men. And therefore cannot teach just how far every man must believe, as it
relates to the possibility, or impossibility of his salvation in every
particular. And that which the Church cannot teach, men cannot learn of her.
She can teach the Foundation, and men were happy if they would learn it, and
the Church more happy would she teach nothing but that as necessary to
Salvation; for certainly nothing but that is Necessary. Now then whereas after
all this, the Jesuit tells us, that


F. Upon this and the precedent Conferences, the Lady rested in judgment fully
satisfied (as she told a confident Friend) of the Truth of the Roman Churches
faith. Yet upon frailty and fear to offend the King, she yielded to go to
Church; for which she was after very sorry, as some of her friends can testify.


B. Honorable Lady was then settled in Conscience, how in Judgment, I know
nor. This, I think, is made clear enough, That that which you said in this and
the precedent Conferences could settle neither, unless in some that were settled
or settling before. As little do I know what she told any confident friend of
her approving the Roman cause* No more whether it were frailty, or fear, or
other Motive that made her yield to go to Church, nor how sorry she was for it,
nor who can testify that sorrow. This I am sure of, if she repent, and God
forgive her other sins* she will more easily be able to Answer for her coming
to Church, than for her leaving of the Church of England, and following the
superstitions and errors which the Roman Church has added in Point of Faith,
and the Worship of God. For the Lady was then living, when I answered thus.

Lady would far more easily be able to answer for her coming to Church, than
for her leaving the A. C. p. 73.
Church of England; To this A. C. excepts, and says, That I neither prove, nor
can prove, that it is lawful for one (persuaded especially as the Lady was) to
go to the Protestant Church. There Is a great deal of Cunning, and as much
Malice in this passage: but I shall easily pluck the Sting out of the Tail of
this Wisp. And first, I have proved it already through this whole Discourse,
and therefore can prove it, That the Church of England is an Orthodox Church.
And therefore with the same labor it is proved, that men may lawfully go unto
it, and communicate with it; for so a man not only may, but ought to do with
an Orthodox Church. And a Romanist may communicate with the Church of England,
without any Offense in the Nature of the Thing thereby incurred. But if his
Conscience, through misinformation, check at it, he should do well in that
Case, rather to inform his Conscience, than forsake any Orthodox Church
whatsoever. Secondly, A. C. tells me plainly* That I cannot prove that a man so
persuaded as the Lady was, may go to the Protestant Church; that is, That a
Roman Catholic may not go to the Protestant Church. Why, I never went about
to prove that a Roman Catholic being and continuing such, might against his
Conscience, go to the Protestant Church. For these words ( A man persuaded as
the Lady is) are A. C's words; they are not mine. Mine are not simply that the
Lady might, or that she might not: but Comparative they are, That she might
more easily answer to God for coming to, than for going from the Church of
England. And that is every way most true. For in this doubtful time of hers,
when* upon my Reasons given, she went again to Church; when yet soon after (as
you say at least) she was sorry for it. I say, at this time she was in heart
and resolution a Romano Catholic, or she was not: If she were not, (as it
seems by her doubting she was not then fully resolved) then my speech is most
true, that she might more easily answer God for coming to Service in the Church
of England, than for leaving it. For a Protestant she had been, and, for ought
I knew, at the end of this Conference, so she was; and then 'twas no sin in it
self to come to an Orthodox Church; nor no sin against her Conscience, she
continuing a Protestant, for ought which then appeared to me. But if she then
were a Roman Catholic, (as the Jesuit and A. C. seem confident she was) yet
my speech is true too. For then she might more easily answer God for coming to
the Church of England, which is Orthodox, and leaving the Church of Rome, which
is Superstitious, than, by leaving the Church of England, communicate with all
the Superstitions of Rome. Now the cunning and the malignity of A. C. lies in
this: He would fain have the world think that I am so Indifferent in Religion,
as that I did maintain, the Lady, being conscientiously persuaded of the Truth
of the Romish Doctrine, might yet, against both her conscience, and against
open and avowed profession, come to the Protestant Church.

first, it is not lawful for one affected as that Lady was; that is, for one
that is resolved of the Truth of the Roman Church, to go to the Church of
England, there, and in that manner to serve and worship God; Because (says A.
C.) that were to halt on both sides, to serve two Masters; ^. C. p. ^3.
and to dissemble with God and the world. Truly, I say the same thing with him;
And that therefore neither may a Protestant, that is resolved in Conscience,
that the profession of the true Faith is in the Church of England, go to the
Romish Church, there, and in that manner to serve and worship God. Neither need
I give other Answer, because A. C. urges this against his own fiction, not my
assertion. Yet since he will so do, I shall give a particular Answer to each of
them. And to this first Reason of his, I say thus, That to Believe Religion
after one sort, and to practice it after another, and that in the main points
of worship, the Sacrament and Invocation, is to halt on both sides, to serve
two Masters, and to dissemble with God and the world. And other then this I
never taught, nor ever said that which might infer the Contrary. But A. C. give
me leave to tell you, your fellow Jesuit Quinto quaeritur* A^ ubi Catholici
un^ cum Haereticis versantur, liti^um sit Catholico adire Templa ad qu^
Heretici (...) eorum interess^ Conventibus, etc. Respondeo: Si r^i Naturam
spectemus, non est per se malum, sed sua nature a indifferens, etc. Et postea.
Si Princeps b^res^ labor^t, and ^ubeat subditos Catholicos sub p^n^ Mortis, vel
Con^^scationis bo^^rum frequentare Templa Haeretic^rum, quid tum faciendum P
Responde^: ^^^^be^t tantum, ut omnes Mandato suo obedient, li^^tum est
Catholicis facere: Qui^ pr^stant solum Obedientiae officium. Sin jub^at, ut ^o
Symbolo simul Religion^m H^reticam profiteantur, par^r^ non debent. Qu^res
it^rum, An li^tat Catholico ob^dire, ^^d^ public ^sseveret s^ id ^^^^cere,
sol^^ ut Principi suo obediat, non ut sectam ^^^^ticam pro^^^^atur? Respondeo:
Quidam id li^^r^ arbitrantur, (...) bon^ ejus public^^tur, vel Vita ^ripiatur.
Quod san^ pro^abiliter dici videtur. Azorius Instit. Moral. p. 1. L. 8. c. 27.
p. 1299. ^^it. Paris. 1616.
Azorius affirms this in express terms; And what do you think, can he prove it?
Nay, not Azorius only, but other Priests and Jesuits here in England, either
teach some of their Proselytes, or else some of them learn it without teaching,
That though they be persuaded as this Lady was, that is, though they be Roman
Catholics, yet either to gain honor, or save their purse, they may go to the
Protestant Church, just as the Jesuit here says, The Lady did out of frailty
and fear to offend the King. Therefore I pray A. C. if this be gross
dissimulation both with God and the world, speak to your fellows to leave
persuading or practicing of it, and leave men in the profession of Religion to
be as they seem, or to seem and appear as they are; Let Us have no Mask worn
here. A. C's second Reason why one so persuaded as that Lady was, might not go
to the Protestant Church, is, Because that were outwardly to profess A. C. p.
73.
a Religion in Conscience known to be false. To this I answer, first, that if
this Reason be true, it concerns all men, as well as those that be persuaded as
the Lady was. For no man may outwardly profess a Religion in conscience known
to be false; For with the heart man believes to righteousness, and with the
mouth he confesses to salvation, Romans 10. Now to his own Romans 10. 10.
salvation no man can confess a known false Religion. Secondly, if the Religion
of the Protestants be in conscience a known false Religion, then the Romanists
Religion is so too; for their Religion is the same; Nor do the Church of Rome
and the Protestants set up a different Religion (for the Christian Religion is
the same to both) but they differ in the same Religion: And the difference is
in certain gross corruptions, to the very endangering of salvation, which each
side says the other is guilty of. Thirdly, the Reason given is most untrue; for
it may appear by all the former Discourse to any Indifferent Reader, that
Religion, as it is professed in the Church of England, is nearest of any Church
now in being to the Primitive Church: And therefore not a Religion known to be
false. And this I both do and can prove, were not the deafness of the Asp upon
the ears of seduced Christians Psalm. 58. 4.
in all humane and divided parties whatsoever.

A. C. tells me, That I A. C. p. 73.
neither do nor can prove any superstition or error to be in the Roman I
would A. C. would call it the Roman Perswasi^on, as some understanding
Romanists do.
Religion. What none at all? Now truly I would to God from my heart this were
true, and that the Church of Rome wore so happy, and the whole Catholic Church
thereby blessed with Truth and Peace. For I am confident such Truth as that
would soon either Command Peace, or For though I spare their Names, yet can I
not agree in judgment with him that says in Print: God be praised for
th(...)isagreement in Religion. Nor in Devotion with him that prayed in the
Pulpit: That God would tear the Rent of Religion wider. But of S. Greg. N^^.
opinion I am. (...) etc. Non st^d^mu^ paci in detrimentum vir^ Doctrine -- ut
facilit^^^s, and Mansuetudinis famam colligamus. -- Et rursum, Pa^^m colimus
legiti^^ pugnantes, etc. Orat. 32.
confound Peace-Breakers. But is there no Superstition in Adoration of Images?
None in Invocation of Saints? None in Adoration of the Sacrament? Is there no
error in breaking Christ's own Institution of the Sacrament, by giving it but
in one kind? None about Purgatory? About Common Prayer in an unknown tongue
none? These and many more are in the Roman Religion, (if you will needs call
it so.) And it is no hard work to prove every of these to be Error, or
Superstition, or both. But if A. C. think so meanly of me, that though this be
no hard work in it self, yet that I (such is my weakness) cannot prove it, I
shall leave him to enjoy that opinion of me, or what ever else he shall be
pleased to entertain, and am far better content with this his opinion of my
weakness, than with that which follows of my pride; for he adds, That I cannot
prove any Error or Superstition to be in A. C. p. 73.
the Roman Religion, but by presuming, with intolerable pride, to make my self
or some of my fellows to be Judge of Controversies; and by taking Authority to
censure all to be Superstition and Error too, which suits not with my fancy,
although it be generally held, or practiced by the Universal Church. Which
(says he) in S. Augustine's judgment is most insolent madness. What, not prove
any Superstition, any Error at Rome, but by Pride, and that Intolerable? Truly
I would to God A. C. saw my heart, and all the Pride that lodges therein. But
wherein does this Pride appear, that he censures me so deeply? Why first in
this, That I cannot prove any Error or Superstition to be in the Roman
Religion, unless I make my self or some of my fellows Judge of Controversies.
Indeed if I took this upon me, I were guilty of great Pride. But A. C. knows
well, that before in this Conference, which he undertakes to Answer, I am so
far from making my self or any of my fellows Judge of Controversies, that 33..
26. Nu. 1. and 11.
I absolutely make a lawful and free General Council Judge of Controversies,
by, and according to the Scriptures. And this I learned from Praep^nitur
Scripturae, etc. S. Aug. L. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 3.
S. Augustine, with this, That ever the Scripture is to have the prerogative
above the Council. Nay, A. C. should remember here, that. 32. Nu. ^. A. C. p.
63.
he himself taxes me for giving too much power to a General Council, and
binding men to a strict Obedience to it, even in Case of Error. And therefore
sure most innocent I am of the most intolerable pride, which he is pleased to
charge upon me; and he, of all men, most unfit to charge it. Secondly, A. C.
will have my pride A. C. p. ^3.
appear in this, that I take Authority to censure all for Error and
Superstition, which suits not with my own fancy. But how can this possible be,
since I submit my judgment in all humility to the Scripture interpreted by the
Primitive Church; and upon new and necessary doubts, to the judgment of a
lawful and free General Council? And this I do from my very heart, and do
abhor, in matters of Religion, that my own, or any private man's fancy should
take any place, and least of all against things generally held or practiced by
the Universal Church, which, to oppose in such things, is certainly (as S. Aug.
Ep^^^. 118. c. 5.
S. Augustine calls it, Insolentissimae insaniae, an Attempt of most insolent
madness. But those things which the Church of England charges upon the Roman
Party to be superstitious and erroneous, are not held or practiced, in, or by
the Universal Church generally, either for time or place. And now I would have
A. C. consider how justly all this may be turned upon himself. For he has
nothing to pretend, that there are not gross Superstitions and Errors in the
Roman Persuasion, unless by intolerable pride he will make himself and his
Party Judge of Controversies, (as in effect he does; for he will be judged by
none but the Pope, and a Council of his ordering) or unless he will take
Authority to free from Superstition and Error whatsoever suits with his fancy,
though it be even Superstition it self, and run cross to what has been
generally held in the Catholic Church of Christ; Yea, though to do so, be, in
S. Augustine's judgment, most insolent madness. And A. C. spoke in this most
properly, when he called it taking of Authority; For the Bishop and Church of
Rome have in this particular of judging Controversies, indeed taken that
Authority to themselves, which neither Christ, nor his Church Catholic did
ever give them. Here the Conference ended with this Conclusion.

Lady mercy: so I heartily pray that he will be pleased to give all of you a
Light of his Truth, and a Love to it, that you may no longer be made
Instruments of the Pope's boundless Ambition, and this most unchristian. 33.
Nu. 6.
brainsick device, That in all Controversies of the Faith he is Infallible,
and that by way of Inspiration and Prophecy in the Conclusion which he gives.
To the due Consideration of which, and God's mercy in Christ, I leave you.

Conclusion of the Conference between me and the Jesuit, A. C. says not much:
But that which he does say, is either the self same which he has said already,
or else is quite mistaken in the business. That which he has said already, is
this; That in matters of Faith we are to submit our judgments A. C. p. 73.
to such Doctors and Pastors, as by Visible Continual Succession, without
change, brought the Faith down from Christ and his Apostles, to these our days,
and shall so carry it to the end of the world. And that this Succession is not
found in any other Church differing in Doctrine from the Roman Church. Now to
this I have given a full Answer. 37. N. 3. 4.
already* and therefore will not trouble the Reader with needless and
troublesome repetition. Then he brings certain places of Scripture to prove the
Pope's Infallibility. But to all these places I have likewise answered. 2^. Nu.
^.
before. And therefore A. C. needed not to repeat them again, as if they had
been unanswerable.

A. C. had not urged before, either for proof of this Continued Visible
Succession, or for the Pope's Infallibility. Nor does A. C. distinctly set down
by which A. C. p. 73.
of the two he will prove it. The Place is Ephesians 4 (...).
Ephesians. 4. Christ ascending gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, etc. for the edification of the Church.
Now if he do mean to prove the Pope's Infallibility by this place, in his
Pastoral Judgment; Truly I do not see how this can possibly be collected
thence. Pontificatus Summus disert^ positus est ab Apostolo in illis verbis,
Ephesians. 4. 11. and in illis clarioribus, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ipse posuit in Ecclesia
primum Apostolos, etc. Bellar. L. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 1. Respondeo
Pontificatum. And he gives an excellent reason for it. Siquidem Jumma potestas
Ecclesiastica non solum data est Petro, sed etiam aliis Apostolis. Ibid. So
belike, by this reason, the Apostle does clearly express the Popt^^^^ because
all the rest of the Apostles had as much Ecclesiastio^l Power, as S. Peter had.
But then Bellarmine would salve it up with this, That ^^^s Power is given Petro
(...) Ordinario Pastori cui succederetur, aliis vero tanquam Delegatis, quibus
non succederetur. Ibid. But this si mere Begging of the Question, and will
never be granted unto him. And in the mean time, we have his absolute
Confession for the other, That the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power was not in S.
Peter al^ae, but in all the Apostles.
Christ gave some to be Apostles for the Edification of his Church: Therefore
S. Peter, and all his Successors, are Infallible in their Pastoral Judgment.
And if he mean to prove the Continued Visible Succession, which, he says, is
to be found in no Church but the Roman, there is a little more show; but to no
more purpose. A little more show: Because it is added Ephesians. 4. 13.
Verse. 13. That the Apostles, and Prophets, etc. shall continue at their work
(and that must needs be by Succession) till we all meet in unity and perfection
of Christ. But, to no more purpose. For it is not said that they, or their
Successors should continue at this work in a personal, uninterrupted Succession
in any one Particular Church, Roman, or other. Nor ever will A. C. be able to
prove that such a Succession is necessary in any one particular place. And if
he could, yet his own words tell us, the Personal Succession is nothing, if the
Faith be not brought down without change from Christ and his A. C. p. 73.
Apostles to this day, and so to the end of the world. Now here is a piece of
Cunning too, The Faith brought down unchanged. For if A. C. mean by the Faith,
the Creed, and that in Letter; it is true, the Church of Rome has received and
brought down the Faith unchanged from Christ and his Apostles to these our
days. But then it is apparently false, That no Church differing from the Roman
in Doctrine has kept that Faith unchanged, and that by a visible and continued
Succession. For the Greek Church differs from the Roman in Doctrine, and yet
has so kept that Faith unchanged. But if he mean by the Faith unchanged, and
yet brought down in a continual visible Succession, not only the Creed in
Letter, but in Sense too; And not that only, but all the Doctrinal Points
about the Faith, which have been Determined in all such Councels as the present
Church of Rome allows: ( And so also Bellarm. Sexta nota est Conspiratio in
Doctrina cum Ecclesia Antiqua. L. 4. de Noti(...) Eccles. c. 9.. 1
as most certainly he does so mean, and it is the Controversy between us:) then
it is most certain, and most apparent to any understanding man that reads
Antiquity with an impartial eye, that a Visible Continual Succession of Doctors
and Pastors have not brought down the Faith in this sense from Christ and his
Apostles to these days of ours in the Roman Church. And that I might not be
thought to say, and not to prove, I give instance. And with this, that if A. C.
or any Jesuit can prove, That by a Visible Continued Succession from Christ
and his Apostles to this day, either Transubstantiation in the Eucharist; Or
the Eucharist in one kind; Or Purgatory; Or worship of Images; Or the
Intention of the Priest of necessity in Baptism; Or the Power of the Pope over
a General Council; Or his Infallibility with, or without it; Or his Power to
depose Princes; Or the public Prayers of the Church in an unknown tongue; with
diverse other Points have been so taught, I, for my part, will give the Cause.
Beside, for Succession in the general I shall say this. It Is a great happiness
where it may be had Visible and Continued, and a great Conquest over the
Mutability of this present world. But I do not find any one of the Ancient
Fathers that makes Local, Personal, Visible, and Continued Succession, a
Necessary Sign or Mark of the true Church in any one place. And where Vin.
Lir. cont. Haer. c. 4.
Vincentius Lirinensts calls for Antiquity, Universality, and Consent, as great
Notes of Truth, he has not one word of Succession. And for that great place in
Hac Ordinatione and Successione ea quae est ab Apostolis in Ecclesia Traditio,
and veritatis praeconiatio pervenit usque ad nos. Et est plenissima haec
Ostensio, Unam and tandem Vivificatricem fidem esse, quae in Ecclesia ab
Apostolis usque nuac fit conservata, and tradita in veritate. Iren L. 3.
Advers. Haer. c. 3.
Irenaeus, where that Ancient Father reckons the Succession of the Bishops of
Rome to Eleutherius, (who sat in his time) and says, That this is a most full
and ample proof or Ostension, Vivificatricem Fidem, that the Living, and
Life-giving Faith is from the Apostles to this day Conserved and delivered in
Truth; And of which place Per hanc Successionem confundi omnes Haereticos.
Bellar L. ^. de Notis Eccles. c. 8. 1. There Is no such word found in Irenaeus,
as per hanc Successionem, or Hac Successione, in the Church of Rome only,
which is Bellarmine's sense: But by Succession in general in other Churches, as
well as in Rome.
Bellarmine boasts so much. Most manifest it is in the very same place, that
Testimonium his perhibent quae sunt in Asia Ecclesia Omnes, and qui usque adhuc
Successerunt Polycarpo. Iren. L. 3. advers. Haeres. c. 3. Constat omnem
Doctrinam quae cum illis Ecclesiis Apostolicis, Matricibus, Originalibus Fidei
conspiret, Veritati deputandam. Tertul. de praescript. advers. Haeretic. c. 21.
Ecclesia posteriores non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro consangiunitate
Doctrinae. Ibid. c. 32. Ecclesia non in Parietibus consistit, etc. Ecclesia
autem illic erat, ubi fides vera erat. S. Hieron. in Psalm. 133.
Irenaeus stood as much upon the Succession of the Churches then in Asia, and
of Smyrna ( though that no prime Apostolical Church) where Polycarpus sat
Bishop, as of the Succession at Rome. By which it is most manifest, that it is
not Personal Succession only, and that tied to one Place, that the Fathers
meant, but they taught, that the Faith was delivered over by Succession in some
places or other still to their present time; And so doubtless shall be, till
Time be no more. I say, The Faith; But not every Opinion, true or false, that
in tract of time shall cleave to the Faith. And to the Faith it self, and all
it is Fundamentals, we can show as good, and full a Succession as you; And we
pretend no otherwise to it than you do, save that We take in the Greeks, which
you do not. Only we reject your gross Superstitions, to which you can show no
Succession from the Apostles, either at Rome or elsewhere, much less any one
uninterrupted. And therefore he might have held his peace that says, It is
evident that the Roman Catholic Church only has had a Constant and
uninterrupted Succession of Pastors, and Doctors, and Tradition of Doctrine
from Age to Age. For most evident it is, That the Tradition of Doctrine has
received both Addition and Alteration, since the first five hundred years in
which Antiqua Ecclesia primis quin^^ntis A(...) vera Ecclesia suit, and proinde
Apostolicam Doctrinam ^etinu^^, Ecl L. 4. de Notis Eccles. c. 9.. 1.
Bellarmine confesses, and B. Jewel maintains the Churches Doctrine was
Apostolical.

Succession which the Fathers meant, is not tied to Place or Person, but it is
tied to the Verity of Doctrine. For so Ad hanc formam provocabuntur ab illis
Ecclesiis, quae licet nullum e^ Apostolis, vel Apostolicis Authorem suum
proferant, ut multo posteriares quae denique quotidie institu^utur, t^mem in
eadem side couspirantes, non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro consanguinitati
Doctrinae, Tertul. de praescript. c. 32.
Tertullian expressly. Beside the order of Bishops running down (in Succession)
from the beginning, there is required Consanguinitas Doctrinae, that the
Doctrine be allied in blood to that of Christ and his Apostles. So that if the
Doctrine be no kinn^ to Christ, all the Succession become strangers, what
nearness soever they pretend. And Illis Presbyteris obediendum est, qui cum
Episcopatus Successione Charisma acceperu^t Veritatis, Iren. Lib. 4. cap. (...).
Irenaeus speaks plainer than he. We are to obey those Presbyters, which
together with the Succession of their Bishoprics have received Charisma
Veritatis, the gift of truth. Now Stapleton being pressed hard with these two
Authorities: first, Successio nec Locorum tantum est, nec personarum, sed etiam
verae and sanae Doctrinae, Stapl. Relect. Controver. 1. q. 4. A. 2. Notab. 1.
Confesses expressly, That Succession, as it is a Note of the true Church, is
neither a Succession in place only, nor of Person only, but it must be of
true and sound Doctrine also. And had he stayed here, no man could have said
better, But then he saw well he must quit his great Note of the
Church-Succession; That he durst not do. Therefore he begins to cast about,
how he may answer these Fathers, and yet maintain Succession. Secondly,
therefore he tells us, That that which these Fathers say, do nothing weaken
Succession, but that it shall still be a main Note of the true Church? and in
that sense which he would have it. And Quia Doctrina Sana est ab ipsaver^ and
legitima Successione indiv^^sa, Stapl. Ibid.
his Reason is. * Because sound Doctrine is indivisible from true and lawful
Succession, Where you shall see this great Clerk (for so he was) not able to
stand to himself, when he has forsaken Truth. For it is not long after, that he
tells us, That the People are led along, and judge the Doctrine by the Pastors;
But when the Church comes to examine, she judges the Pastors by their Doctrine.
And this Nam e Pastore ^^^pus fieri potest. Stap. ibid. Notab. 4.
he says is necessary, Because a man may become of a Pastor, a Wolf. Now then
let Stapleton take his choice. For either a Pastor in this Succession cannot
become a Wolf, and then this Proposition's false; Or else if he can, then sound
Doctrine is not inseparable from true and Legitimate Succession: And then the
former Proposition's false, as indeed it is. For that a good Pastor may become
a Wolf, is no news in the Ancient Story of the Church, in which are registered
the Change of many Vincent. Lir. ^ont. Haer. c. 23. 24.
Great men into Heretics, I spare their Names; And since Judas changed from an
Apostle to a Devil, S. John 6. it is no wonder to see others change from
Shepherds S. John 6. 70.
into Wolves. I doubt the Church is not empty of such Changelings at this day.
Yea but Stapleton will help all this. For he adds, That suppose the Pastors do
forsake true Doctrine, yet Succession shall still be a true Note of the Church;
Yet not every Succession, but that which is legitimate and true. Well: And what
is that? Why, Legitima autem est illorum Pastorum, qui Unitatem tenent and
Fidem, Stap* ibid. Notab. 5.
That Succession is lawful which is of those Pastors, which hold entire the
Unity and the Faith. Where you may see this Sampson's hair cut off again. For
at his word I Will take him. And if that only be a Legitimate Succession which
holds the Unity and the Faith entire, then the Succession of Pastors in the
Roman Church is illegitimate; For they have had In their own Chronologer,
Onuphrius, there are Thirty acknowledged.
more Schisms among them than any other Church: Therefore they have not kept
the Unity of the Church. And they have brought in gross Superstition: Therefore
they have not kept the Faith entire. Now if A. C. have any mind to it, he may
do well to help Stapleton out of these briars, upon which he has torn his
Credit, and I doubt his Conscience too, to uphold the Corruptions of the Sea of
Rome.

quite mistaken, it is, his Inference, which is this. That I should therefore
consider carefully, Whether it be not more Christian, and less brainsick, to
think that the Pope, being S. Peter's Successor, with a General Council should
be Judge of Controversies, etc. And that the Pastoral Judgment of him should be
accounted Infallible, rather than to make every man that can read the
Scripture, Interpreter of Scripture, Decider of Controversies, Controller of
General Counsels, and Judge of his Judges: Or to have no Judge at all of
Controversies of Faith, but permit every man to believe as he list. As if there
were no Infallible certainty of Faith to be expected on earth; which were,
instead of one saving Faith, to induce a Babylonical Confusion of so many
faiths, as fancies; Or no true Christian Faith at all. From which Evils, Sweet
Jesus deliver us! I have considered of this very carefully; But this Inference
supposes that which I never granted, nor any Protestant that I yet know;
Namely, That if I deny the Pope to be Judge of Controversies, I must by and by
either leave this supreme Judicature in the hands and power of every private
man that can but read the Scripture; or else allow no Judge at all, and so let
in all manner of Confusion. No, God forbid that I should grant either: For I
have expressly. 26. Nu. 1.
declared, That the Scripture interpreted by the Primitive Church, and a lawful
and free General Council determining according to these, is Judge of
Controversies: And that no private man whatsoever, is, or can be Judge of
these. Therefore A. C. is quite mistaken (and I pray God it be not wilfully, to
beguile poor Ladies, and other their weak adherents, with seeming to say
somewhat) I say, quite mistaken, to infer, that I am either for a private
Judge, or for no Judge; for I utterly disclaim both* and that as much, if not
more than he, or any Romanist, whoever he be. But these things in this passage
I cannot swallow. First, That the Pope with a General Council should be Judge;
for the Pope in Ancient Councels never had more power than any the other
Pat^^^r^hs: Precedence, perhaps for Orders sake, and other respects, he had.
Nor had the Pope any Negative voice against the rest in point of difference.
Patrum and Avorum nostrorum tempore, p(...), Papam esse supra (...). (...),
(...) notum, quia Roma(...). rerum* Ex^^^^^d. f^^. 5. Nunc autem, Papam esse
non (...) supra Concilium Generale, sed and (...) Ecclesiam, est propositio
^ere de Fide. Bellar. 1. 2. ^^ Council. c. 1^.. ^.
No nor was he held superior to the Council. Therefore the ancient Church
never accounted or admitted him a Judge; no, not with a Council, much less
without it. Secondly, it will not down with me, that his Pastoral Judgment
should be Infallible; especially since some of them have been as (...) hoc
tempore (...) Romae (ut fa^^ est) qui ^acr as (...) as didic^rit, ^u^ front^
(...) eorum docert audebit, quod nos di^^cerit? A^^i^ph. (...) Council. (...).
Nam (...)et (...) adeo illiteratos esse ut Grammaticam penitus ignorarent, qui
(...) u^ sacr^s Lit^ras interpretari possint? Alphons. a Castro, L. 1. advers.
Haeres. c. 4. versus medium. Edit. Pa^^s. 1534. ( For both that at Antwer^, An.
1556. and that at Paris, An. 1571. have been in Purgatory.) And such an
Ignorant as these was Pope John the four and twentieth, Platino in Vita ejus.
E.. 33. N 6
Ignorant, as many that can but read the Scripture. Thirdly, I cannot admit
this ^e^ther (though he do most cunningly thereby abuse his Readers:) That any
thing has been said by me, out of which it can justly be inferred, That
there is no Infallible certainty of Faith to be expected on earth. For there is
most Infallible certainty of it, that is, of the Foundations of it in Scripture
and the Creeds. And it is so clearly delivered there, as that it needs no Judge
at all to sit upon it, for the Articles themselves. And so entire a Body is
this one Faith in it self, as that the Resolutio Occham est, Quod nec tota
Ecclesia, nec Concilium Generale, n^c Summus Pontifex potest facere Articulum,
quod non fuit Articulus. Sed Ecclesia been ^^terminat de Propos^tionibus
Catholic^, de quibus erat dubium, etc. Ja. Almain. in 3. Sent. D. 25. q. unic^.
Dub. 3. Sicut ad ea quae spectant ad. Fidem nostram, and nequaquam ex voluntate
humana dependent, non potest Summus Pontifex, nec Ecclesia de (...) non ve^^,
veram: nec de non fal^^ falsam facere, ita non potest de non Catholic^
Catholicam facere, nec de non (...) Haerititam. Et ideo non potest ^^^^m
Articulum facere, nec Articulum Fidei tollere. Quo^iam sicut Veritates
Catholicae absque omni approbatio^^ Ecclesia e^ natura rei sunt immutabiles,
and immutabiliter vera, ita sunt immatabiliter Catholicae reputandae. (...)
H^reses absque omni reprobatione, and damnatione sunt falsae, ita absque omni
reprobatione sunt Haereses r^putanda, etc. Ex postea. Patet ergo quod nulla
Veritas est Catholica ex approbatione Ecclesiae vel Papae. Gab. (...) 3. S^^t.
Did. (...). q. unica. Art. 3. (...), 3. versus (...).
Whole Church (much less the Pope) has not power to add one Article to it, nor
leave to detract any one the least from it. But when Controversies arise about
the meaning of the Articles, or Superstructures upon them, which are Doctrines
about the Faith, not the Faith it self (unless where they be immediate
Consequences) then both in and of these a. 26. Number. 1.
Lawful and free General Council, determining according to Scripture, is the
best Judge on earth. But then suppose uncertainty in some of these
superstructures, it can never be thence concluded, That there is no Infallible
certainty of the Faith it self. But it is time to end, especially for me, that
have so Many Things of Weight lying upon me, and disabling me from these
Polemick Discourses, beside the Burden of sixty five years complete, which
draws on apace to the period set by the Prophet David, Psalm. 90. Psalm. 90. 10.
and to the Time, that I must go, and give God, and Christ an Account of the
Talent committed to my Charge; In which God, for Christ Jesus sake, be merciful
to me, who knows, that however in many Weaknesses, yet I have with a faithful
and single heart (bound to his free Grace for it) labored the Meeting, the
Blessed Meeting of Truth and Peace in his Psalm. 85. 10.
Church, and which God, in his own good time, will (I hope) effect. To Him be
all Honor, and Praise for ever. AMEN.


FINIS.
A Table of the principal Contents.
A
AFricanes: their opposing the Roman Church, and separating from it, 112. etc.
they are cursed and damned for it by Eulalius, and this accepted by the Pope,
Ibid. S. Augustine involved in that curse, 113 Ja. Almain against the Popes
Infallibility, 172. his absurd Tenet touching the belief of Scripture, and the
Church* 53 Alphonsus a Castro his confession touching the Popes fallibility,
173 his moderation touching heresy, 17. his late Editions shrewdly purged, 173
S. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury how esteemed of by Pope Urban the second,
111 Apocrypha: some Books received by the Trent-Fathers, which are not by
Sextus Senensis, 218 Of Appeals to foreign Churches, 110, 111, 112. no Appeal
from Patriarchs or Metropolitans, ib. Aristotle falsely charged to hold the
mortality of the Soul, 72 Arrians: the large spreading of them, 179. wherein
they dissented from the Orthodox Christians, 201 Assistance: what promised by
Christ to his Church, what not, 60 106, etc. 151, etc. what given to his Church
and Pastors thereof, 62, 64, 156, 157, 166, 233 Assurance infallible even by
humane proof 80, 81 S. Augustine cleared, 22, 37, 38, 53, 54, 82, 110, 123,
etc. righted, 89, 158, 159, 229, his proofs of Scripture, 65 The Author bis
small time to prepare for this conference, 15. his submission to the Church of
England and the Church Catholic, 150, 151. the Rule of his faith, 246. pride
imputed to him, and retorted upon the imputors, 246, 247
B
BAptism: of anointing, use of spittle, and three dippings in it, 44. that of
Infants how proved out of Scripture, 36, 37. acknowledged by some Romanists
that it may be proved thence, 37. the necessity of it, 36. how proved by
tradition, and S. Augustine's mind therein, 37, 38. that by Heretics,
Schismatics, and Sinners, not theirs but Christ's, 195 S. Basil explained, 59
Beatitude supreme, how to be attained, 73 Belief of some things necessary,
before they be known, 51. Vid. Faith. Bellarmine: his cunning discovered and
confuted, 7, 8, 9, 136, his dissent from Stapleton, 26. and from Catharinus,
32, his absurd and impious tenet touching belief of Scripture confuted, 56
Berengarius: his gross recantation, 214 S. Bernard righted, 88, 89 Biel: his
true assertion touching things that be de Fide, 252 Bishops: their calling and
authority over the Inferious Clergy, 114, 115. their places and precedencies
ordered, Ibid. the titles given them of old, 110. all of the same merit and
degree, 131 Bodies representing and represented: their power, privileges, etc.
compared together, 150, etc. 171 Britanny, of old not subject to the Sea of
Rome, 111, 112. S. Gildas his testimony concerning the Antiquity of the
conversion of it, 203. and that testimony vindicated, ibid.
C
CAlvin and Calvinists for the Real presence, 191, etc. 193 Campanella his late
Eclogue, 138 Campian his boldness, 94 Canterbury: the ancient place and power
of the Archbishops thereof, 111, 112 Capellus: his censure of Batonius, 98
Certainty: vid. Faith. Certainty of Salvation: vid. Salvation. Christ's descent
into Hell: vid. Descent. Church: whereon founded, 8, 9. wherein it differs
from a General Council, 18, no particular one infallible, 3, 4, 58, 59, etc.
not that of Rome, 3, 4, 6, 7, etc. 11, 12. Catholic Church: which is it, 203.
etc. her declarations, what fundamental, what not, 20. how far they bind, 20,
21. her authority not divine, 22. not in those things wherein she cannot err,
42. wherein she cannot universally err, 90, 91, 104, 157. what can take
holiness from her, 91, 92. in what points of faith she may err, 104, 105. her
errors and corruptions, how and by whom caused, 126. what required of her that
she may not err, 127. she in the Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in her,
132, etc. how she must be always visible, 207. the invisible in the visible,
90. of her double Root, 240, 241. what the opinion of the Ancients concerning
it, 237, 238, etc. 240. A Church, and the Church, how they differ, 82, 83, 84,
etc. by what assistance of the Spirit the Church can be made infallible, 58.
the authority of the Primitive compared with that of the present Church, 52
Church of Caesarea her title given by Gregory Naz. 110 Greek Church, vid. G.
Church of England a part of the Catholic, 104, etc. where her Doctrine is set
down, 32, 33. her Motherly dealing with her Children, ibid. her Articles and
Canons maintained, 33. of her positive and negative Articles, 34, 35. her
purity, 245. how safe to communicate with her, 243. what Judges and Rules in
things spiritual she has and acknowledges, 138. how she is wronged by the
Roman, 204. Salvation more certain in her than in the Roman, 212, etc. How
one particular Church may judge another, 108, etc. mutual criminations of the
Eastern and Western, 116 A Church in Israel after her separation from Judah, 97
Church of Rome wherein she has erred, 12, 58. sometimes right, not so now, 85.
though she be a true Church, yet not Right or Orthodox, 82, 83. her want of
charity, 16, 17. her determining of too many things, the cause of many evils,
30, 33. her severity in cursing all other Christians, 33, 34. how f^^ she
extends the authority of her testimony, 41. her rash condemning of others,
90, 92. how she and how other Churches Apostolic, 242. how corrupted in
Doctrine and Manners, 95, 96. she not the Catholic Church, 120, 240, 241.
false titles given her, 237. her belief how different from that of the ancient
Church, 213. other Churches as well as she called Matres and Originales
Ecclesiae, 237. A Church at Jerusalem, Antioch, and (probably) in England
before one at Rome, 103. Cardinal Peron his absurd tent that the Roman Church
is the Catholic causally, 104. vid. Errors. Pope. Rome.
Concomitancy in the Eucharist, vid. Eucharist. Conference: the occasion of
this, 1, 2* the Jesuits manner of dealing in this and in two former, 311
Confessions Negative, made by Churches in what case needful, 101 Controversies:
that in them consent of parties is no proof of truth, 188 190, 198, etc.
Counsels their fallibility, 150, 158, 162, 163, etc. 225. the infallibility
they have is not exact but congruous infallibility, 166. whence, and where it
is principally resident, 166, 172. none of the present Church absolutely
infallible, 59. confirmation of them by the Pope, a Roman novelty, 128. who
may dispute against them, who not, 22, 25. how, inferiors may judge of their
decrees, 161. a general Council the only fit judge of the present
Controversies, 136, 139. and how that to be qualified, 99, 101, 127, 145, 146,
etc. the Bishop of Rome not always President in general Councels, 140, 141.
what impediments have been and now are of calling and continuing them, 129.
what confirmation they need, 127, 128, 147. what of them lawful, what not, 141,
etc. what obedience to be yielded to them erring, 146, 147, 168, 169, etc.
what is the utmost they can do, 20. the words Visum est Spiritui sancto and
Nobis, not used by any posteriour Council, 155. the first and later Councels
differently assisted, 156, 166. whence they have their power and assistance,
150, etc. the prior may be amended by the posterior, 158, etc. what decrees of
them are necessary to be believed, 161. how they are held by the Romanists to
be infallible, 163. their decrees by Stapleton held to be the Oracles of the
Holy Ghost, 156. that they are not Prophetical in their conclusions, 163, 164.
Of their necessity and frequency, 128. that they may err, the whole Church not
erring, 168. their errors how to be amended, 101. how made of no worth at all
by the Romanists without the Pope, 17^. Councels and Fathers: how we are sure
we have their true copies, ^^6, 217. Conclusions of Councels how to be
believed, 226 their determinations not all of equal authority, 234. by whom
they were and ought to be called, 140, 141. against the Popes being above a
general Council, 218, 252. Conditions required to make a Council lawful, 142,
143. Protestants invited to one upon doubtful and dangerous terms, 92 Of the
Council of Florence, and the Greeks their subscribing to it, ^27. Council of
Constance: her injurious proceeding against Husse, etc. 92, 93. Becanus his
defense of it confuted, ibid. its great error touching Communion in one kind,
170 Council of Nice: the absence of the Western Bishops from it how
recompensed, 144 Council of Africa in S. Cypri^ns time erred about Baptism by
Heretics, 158 Council of Trent: how occasioned, and what an one it was, 99.
not general nor legal, and so null. 140, 143. compared with ancient Councels,
26, 27, 142, 143, etc. the blind p^rtinacy of the Fathers there, 93. her
dangerous and wilful error concerning the intention of those that administer
the Sacraments, 179, 180. claimed by So^o and Vega for their contrary Tenets,
32, of things there determined, 24. there the Pope ought not to have sat as
President, 140, 141. Bishops made of purpose to make a major part there, 143.
more Italian Bishops in it than of all Christendom beside, ibid. its addition
of twelve new Articles to the Creed, 222 Creed: that it is a Rule of faith, 27.
that it is wholly grounded on Scripture, 29. some words added to it, why, and
by whom, 9. Irem^us his famous testimony of it, 218 Athanasian Creed expounded
and vindicated, 210, 223 S. Cyprian cleared, 3, etc. and 6 and righted, 237 S.
Cyril of Alexandria vindicated, 8, 9
D
DEmonstrative reasons of greater force than any other humane proof, 161.
direct proof and demonstrative how they differ, 35 Descent of Christ into Hall,
how h^ld by the Church of England, and how by those of Rome, 29, 30, 198
Dissent and difference in opinion, what may stand with the peace of the Church,
234, 235 Disputations: their use, 82. when and how lawful for a private man to
dispute with the whole Church, ^4. public disputations how safe or available,
94, 95. in what case to be admitted between the English and the Romish Clergy,
94 Divinity: that it has a science above it, and what, 79. the Principles of
it otherwise confirmed than those of any other Art, 67, 68, 78, 79 Donatus: two
of that name, 196 Donatists compared with the Romanists, 194, 195, 196, whether
any of them living and dying so had possibility of salvation, and which, 195,
196. whether they were guilty of H^resie, ibid.
E
Emperor: whom the Jesuits would have to be, 233, 137 vid. Pope. Epiphanius
cleared and vindicated, 121, 122 Errors not fundamental to whom and in what
case damnable, 208, 209, 242. Errors of Councels: vid. Councels. Errors of
the Roman Church wanting all proof from ancient Councels and Fathers, 221,
etc. 250. what be the most dangerous of them, 245. Errors of Papists, to whom
fundamental, 217. vid. Church of Rome. Eucharist: a threefold Sacrifice in it,
199, 200. mutilated by the Roman Church, 12, 170, 171. upon what hard terms
the Bohemians were dispensed with to have it in both kinds, 198. the Papists
tied by their own grounds to believe of it as the Church of England does, 187,
etc. the Church of England and other Protestants believe Christ's real presence
in it, 188, 289, etc. 191, 192, 193. Conco^itancy in it. Thomas of Aquin's
fiction confuted, 198. Bellarmines notorious contradiction of Christ's being in
it corporally present, 192 193. his new and intricate Doctrine touching Tran
substantiation, 213, 214. of the unbloody Sacrifice and the bloody how they
differ, 199, 200. the propitiatory and gratulatory Sacrifice how they differ,
199, 200 Expositions: such only right, as the thing expounded contains, 20
The Extravagants censured, 139
F
FAith: how it is unchangable, and yet has been changed, 7. what is certain by
the certainty of it, 25, 26. not to be terme^ the Roman, but the Christian or
Catholic Faith, 88, etc. the two Regular precepts of it, 27. of its prime
Principles, and how they differ from the Articles of it, 28. the last
Resolution of it, into what it should be, 41, 42, etc. 57, 65, 66, 215, 223,
224, etc. Faith acquired and faith in sus'd, wherein either or both required,
233. how few things are essential to the Faith, 234, 235. how its Principles
differ from those of sciences, 67. its foundation the Scripture, 34. by it man
brought to his last happiness, 68, 70, 71. how by it the understanding is
captivated, 72. that it is an act produced by the will, 48, 68. the Principles
of it have sufficient evidence of proof, 77. It and Reason compared in their
objects, etc. 164, etc. a latitude in it in reference to different men's
salvation, 212, 236. things of two sorts belonging to it, 24. what by it to be
believed explicitly, what not, 217, 218. of the perfection and certainty of it,
252. of things not necessary to salvation no infallible Faith can be among men,
233. foundation of Faith how shaken 25. how fretted by those of Rome, 59. the
Catholic and now Roman Faith, ^ot both one, 220. Faith of Scripture to be
Gods Word, infused by the Holy Ghost, 47, 48. the true grounds of it, 71, 72,
73, 74. our Faith of it, how it differs from that of those who wrote Scripture,
70, 71. Faith of Scripture that it has all perfections necessary 73, 74. how
firm and invincible it is, 74, 75 Felicity: what it is, and that the soul of
man is capable of it, 72 Ferus his acknowledgment of the difference 'twixt the
first Councels and the late ones, 156 Fundamental: what makes a point to be
such, 19, 20, 22. that decrees of Councels are not such, 87. what points be so,
and what not, 17, 18. 21, 22, 27, etc. 217, 218. not all of a like primeness,
28. all Fundamentals held by the whole Church, 18. Points not Fundamental, how
and to whom necessary to salvation, 18, 19. Firm and Fundamental how they
differ, 23
G
GErson his ingenuity, 99 Holy Ghost how said to be lost, 14. his procession
from the Son added to the Creed by the Roman Church, 16, 97. the Greek Church
her error touching this, 14. what and how dangerous, 16 God: proof of the true
one by testimony of the false ones, 50 Government of the Church in what sense
Monarchical, in what Aristocratical, 130, 131, etc. how a Monarchical not
needful, 138 S. Gregory Naz. vindicated, 8 his humility and mildness, 110 Pope
Gregory VII. the raiser of the Papacy to the height, 135, 136. his XXVII.
Con^lusions the Basis of the Papal greatness, 118 Creek Church notwithstanding
her error, still a true Church, 16. and justified by some Romanists* ibid. her
hard usage by the Church of Rome, 17. of her Bishops their subscription to the
Council of Florence, 227
H
HEresies: what makes them, 20. the occasion of their first springing up, 128.
how, and by whom began at Rome, 10, 11 Heretics who, and who not, 105. none to
be rashly condemned for such, 17. that some may pertain to the Church, 105. who
they be that teach that faith given to Heretics is not to be kept, 92, 93 S.
Hierome explained, 6, 88. in what esteem he had Bishops, 115 Hooker righted,
56, 57, 158
I
St. James believed to have been Successor of our Lord in the Principality of
the Church, 122 Idolaters: their gods how put down by Christian Religion, 50,
51. Idolatry how maintained in the Church of Rome, and with what evil
consequents, 181, etc. Of Jeremias the Greek Patriarch (...) Cens^^e, 145
Jesuites^ (...) (...) of dealing in this Conference, 211. their cunning in
expounding the Fathers to their own purpose, 7. their confidence, 15. their
arrogance, 111. their subtle malignity, 244. (...) (...) to themselves
infallibility, 61. their desire of having one King (...) one Pope, 65, 66.
their late cunning argument to draw Protestants to them answered, etc. 194.
their falsification of the Authors words, 86, 87. A perfect Jesuitism, 84 Jews
the ground of their belief of the old Testament, 79 Images: how worshipped by
the Church of Rome, 12. against adoration of them, 181. Cassander his complaint
of it, 182. The flying from Image Worship should not make (...) to run into
profaneness and irreverence against God, 183 Infallible: two acceptions of it,
80 Infallible and Firm how they differ, 127. the evils ensuing the opinion of
the Churches and the Popes Infallibility, 143, etc. 170, 175. what an
Infallibilty of the Church Stapleton is forced to acknowledge, 166, 167 Vid.
Councels: and Pope: and Church. Innocent the third: ^^^ extolling the Pope
above the Emperor, 134, etc. Against Invocation of Sain^t, 181 Iren^^^
vindicated, 118, etc. 249, 250, 251 Israel a Church after her separation from
Judah, 97 Judge: who to be in controversies touching faith and manners, 101,
102, etc. 108, 253. what Judges of this kind the Church has, 127, 253. who to
judge when a general Council cannot be had, 129. that no visible Judge can
prevent or remedy all Heresy and Schism, 130. A visible living Judge of all
Controversies whether always necessary, 130. etc. wherein private men may
judge, and wherein not, 2, 149, 160
K
THe Keys to whom given, and how, 123, 167 Kings: Custodes utriusque tabulae,
134. not to be tyrannized over by the Pope, 125. their supremacy in things
spiritual, 134. some Romanists for the deposing and killing of them, 221
Knowledge of God, how difficult, 71, 72. what Knowledge needful to breed faith,
55, 56. what degree of it is necessary to salvation, hard to determine, 212,
236. the Apostles Knowledge how different from that of their hearers, 69
L
AGainst Limbus Patrum, 198 213 Literae Communicatoriae what they were, and of
what use, 132 Peter Lombard condemned of Heresy by the Pope, 174
M
MAldonate answered, 147 Manichees: their soul Heresy, and what stumbled them,
151 Manners: Corruption in them no sufficient cause of separation, 94, 95
Martyrs: of the Feasts made of old at their Oratories, 182 Mass: the English
Liturgy better and safer than it, 201. what manner of sacrifice it is made by
them of Rome, 200 Matrix and Radix in S. Cyprian not the Roman Church, 238, 240
Merits: against their condignity, 185 Miracles: what proofs of Divine truth,
48, 69. not wrought by all the Writers of Scripture, 69. what kind of assent is
commonly given to them, ibid. Multitude: no sure mark of the truth, 198
N
NOvatians, their original, 3, 10. Novatian: how dealt with by Saint Cyprian,
23, 239, etc.
O
OBedience: of that which is due to the Church and her Pastors, 155 Occham: his
true Resolution touching that which makes an Article of faith, 254 Origin: his
Errors obtruded by Ruffinus, 6. he the first Founder of Purgatory, 227, 231
P
PApists: their denying possibility of salvation to Protestants confuted, and
their reasons answered, 185, 186, 187. of their going to Protestant Churches,
and joining themselves to their Assemblies, 244 Parents: their power over their
children, 103 Parliaments: what matters they treat of and decree, 138, 139
Pastors lawfully sent, what assistance promised to them, 61, 62. their Embassy
of what authority* 64 Patriarchs all alike supreme, 111, 112, 116. no appeal
from them, 117, 111, 1^2 People, the unlearned of them saved by the simplicity
of faith 105 Perfidia, the different significations of it, 4, 5, 6 S. Peter: of
Christ's prayer for him, 106, 107, 124, 125. of his Primacy, Preeminency and
Power, 121, etc. 123, 152. in what sense the Church is said to be built upon
him, 122. that he fell, but not from the faith, 123, 124. whether he were
universal Pastor, 125. the highest power Ecclesiastical how given to him, and
how to the rest of the Apostles, 109, 110, 247, 248 Pope not infallible, 2, 3*
4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 58, 59, 124* 147* 253. how improbable and absurd it is to say
he is so, 174, 175, etc. he made more infallible by the Romanists than a
general Council, 172. his infallibility held by some against Conscience, 174,
175. if he had any, it were useless, 177. how opposed by Alphonsus a Castro,
172, 173. the belief and knowledge of it both of them impossible, 177. that he
may err, and has erred, 136. that he may err as Pope, 174, 175. preferred by
some before a general Council, 172. not Monarch of the Church, 132. he has not
a negative voice in Councels, 253. made by some as infallible without, as with
a general Council, 172, 173. his confirmation of general Councels, of what
avail, 180. of his power in France and Spain, 132, 133, 136. how much greater
he is made by some than the Emperor, 132, 133, etc. 137. his power slighted by
some great Princes, 132, 133, 136. whether he may be an Heretic, and being one
how to be dealt with, 176. all his power, prerogatives, etc. indirectly denied
by Stapleton, 30 Popes: the fall of some of them, and the consequents thereof,
95 Of their Power and Principality, 109, 110, etc. 253. their subjection to the
Emperor, 115, 116. and how lost by the Emperor, 117. and how recovered, 118.
primacy of order granted them by Ecclesiastical Constitutions, but no
Principality of power from Christ, 109, 110. some of them opposed by the
African Church, 112. some of them Heretics, 124. some Apostates, 173. some
false Prophets, 174. how unfit Judges of Controversies, 162, 163, 254. the l^wd
lives of many of them, 172. Pope Liberius his clear testimony against the Popes
Infallibility, 173 Prayer: what requisite that it may be heard, 127, 154, 155.
Prayer for the dead, that it presupposes not Purgatory, 162 Preachers: how
their Preaching to be esteemed of, 64. none since the Apostles infallible, 232
Precisians: their opposition to lawful Ceremonies occasioned by the Romanists,
183. that there be of them in the Roman Church no less then in the Protestant,
87. their agreement in many things, 64
Princes: the moderation and equiquity of all that are good, 103 the power of
Sovereign Princes in matters Ecclesiastical, 111. all of the Clergy subject to
them, 134 Prophecy: the spirit of it not to be attained by study, 163, 164
Protestants: why so called, 87 of their departing from the errors of the Roman
Church, 86, 87. On what terms invited by Rome to a general Council, 92, 93
their charitable grant of possibility of salvation in the Roman Church, met
with uncharitableness by the Roman party, 184, 185. they that deny possibility
of salvation to them confuted, 186, 187. their Faith sufficient to salvation,
212 Purgatory: not thought on by any Father within the three first hundred
years, 227. not presupposed by Prayer for the dead, ibid. Origin the first
Founder of it, 226, 230. proofs of it examined ibid. the Purgatories mentioned
by the Fathers different from that believed by Rome, 228, 229. the Fathers
alleged for it, cleared, 227, etc. the Papists their Blasphemous assertion
touching the necessity of believing it, 231. Bellarmines contradiction touching
the beginning of it, ibid.
R
REason, not excluded or blemished by grace, 48, 49. the chief use of it, 51.
what place it has in the proof of divine supernatural truths, 39, 48. how high
it can go in proving the truth of Christian Religion, 49, 165 Reformation: in
what case it is lawful for a particular Church to Reform her self, 96, etc. and
to publish any thing that is Catholic in faith or manners, 97, 108. Examples of
it* 99, 100. Reformation by Protestants how to be judged of, 99, faults
incident to Reformation and Reformers of Religion, 101. who the chief hinderers
of a general Reformation, 101. Reformation of the Church of England justified,
114. the manner of it, 100, 101. what places Princes have in the Reformation of
the Church, ibid. Christian Religion: how the truth of it proved by the
Ancients, 49. the propagation of it, and the firmness where it is once received,
50, 51. the evil of believing it in one sort, and practicing it in another,
243, 244. yet this taught by some Jesuits and Romish Priests, ibid. one
Christian Religion of Protestants and Romanists, though they differ in it, 245.
private men's opinions in Religion not to be esteemed the Churches, 20. Religion
as it is professed in the Church of England, nearest, of any Church now being,
to the Primitive Church, 245. Resurrection: what believed by all Christians,
what by some Heretics denied, 201, 202 Private Revelation, in what case to be
admitted, 49 Divine Revelation the necessity of it, 73 B. Rhenanus purged on
behalf of Rome, 239 B. Ridley, his full confession of the Real Presence, 193.
his conviction of Archbishop Cranmers judgment touching it, 192 Romans: who
truly such, and their true privilege* 4. Rome: her praeter* and
super-structures in the ^aith, 7. 8. She and Spain compared in their two
Monarchies, 137. Heresies both begun and maintained in her, 9. 10. wherein she
has erred, 12. whether impossible for the Apostolic Sea to be removed thence,
12, 13. that she may Apostatize, 13. her definitions of things not necessary,
21. She the chief hinderance of a general Reformation, 110. of her pretended
Sovereignty, and the bad effects of it, 102, 103, etc. what Principality and
Power She has, and whence, 109, 110, 114, etc. 120. She not the head of the
Church, nor did all Churches depend on her, 111, 112, 119. that she has kept,
nor faith nor unity inviolated, 253. whether all Christians be bound to agree
with her in faith, 119. and in what case they are so, 120. the ancient bounds
of her jurisdiction, 120. possibility of Salvation in her, and to whom, 118,
105, etc. the danger of living and dying in her Communion, 193, 195, 196, 197.
her rigor and cruelty beyond that of Schismatical Israel, 194. her fundamental
errors of what nature, 208. the Catholic Church her Head and Root, not she of
it, 240, etc. Roman Sea: in what case a particular Church may make Canons with
out consulting it, 98, 99, etc. 109. Romanists their cunning dealing with their
Converts in fieri, 83. of their calling for a free hearing, 94, 95. their
agreement with the Donatists in contracting the Church to their side, 188, 189.
their danger in different respects lesser or greater than that of the
Donatists, 196 Ruffinus, his pernicious cunning, 6 his dissent from the Roman
Church, 10. branded by the Pope with Heresy, 11. his words explained, 8, 9, 10
S
SAcraments: against the necessity of his intention who administers them, 178,
179, etc. 200, 213 Sacrilege and Schism usually go together, 101 Saints:
against the Invocation of them, 181. they are made by Bellarmine to be Numina,
and in some sort our Redeemers, ibid. Salvation: controversies amongst the
Romanists about the certainty of it, 32 Schism: the heinousness of it, 95 who
the cause of it at this day, 86 88, 126. the continuance of it whence, 94
Schismatical Church: to live in one and to communicate in the Schism how
different, 194. the Protestants their leaving Rome, no Schism, 126. of the
Schism of Israel, and those that lived there in the time of it, 97, 194 Science
supreme, what, 78 Scotus righted, 20 Scripture: that it was received and has
continued incorrupt, 79 what books make up the Canon of it, 11. all parts of it
alike firm, not alike fundamental, 27. that it is the Word of God, is a prime
principle of faith, 28, etc. 75, 76, 80, the sufficiency of it, 34, 75, 76,
etc. 81. how known to be Gods Word, 38, etc. Of the Circular probation of
Scripture by Tradition, and Tradition by Scripture, 38, 75 the different ways
of proving it, 39. it is a higher proof than the Churches Tradition, 40. the
testimony proving it must be Divine and Infallible, 43, 45, 47 whether it can
be known to be Gods Word by its own light, 45, 46. and that the Roman Church by
her own Tenet ought so to hold, 46. what the chief and what the first
inducement to the credibility of it, 53, 54, 57, 65, 66, 68. the Divine light
thereof, and what light the natural man sees in it, 53, 54. Confirmation by
double divine authority, 54, 65, 66. what measure of light is or can be
required in it, 55, 56 as now set forth and printed, of what authority it is,
59, 63 Scripture and Tradition confirm either other mutually, not equally, 63
The way of the Ancient Church of proving Scripture to be Gods Word, 65. four
proofs brought for it, ibid. the seeming contradiction of Fathers touching
Scripture and Tradition, reconciled, 66. belief of Scripture the true grounds
of it, 71, 72, 73. rules of finding the true sense of it, 41. how rich a
storehouse it is, 73, 74. the writers of it, what certainty we have who they
were, 69. proof of its Divine Authority to whom necessary, 75 infallible
assurance of that Authority by humane proof, 8. that it is a Rule sufficient
and infallible, 129, 130. three things observable in that Rule, 129. its
prerogative above general Councels, 157. compared with Churchdefinitions, 162.
what assurance that we have the true sense of Scriptures, Councels, Fathers,
etc. 215, 216, etc. some Books of Scripture anciently doubted of, and some not
Canonical received by some into the Canon, 46 Separation Actual and Causal, 92,
93 for what one Church may lawfully Separate from another, 90, 94, 95.
Corruption in manners no sufficient cause of Separation, 94, 95. what
Separation necessary. 86 Sermons exalted to too great a height both by Jesuits
and Precistans, 64. their true worth and use, ibid. Simanca: his soul tenet
concerning ^aith given to Heretics, 93 Sixtus Senensis: his doubting of some
of the Apocryphal Books received by the Council of Trent, 218 Socinianism: the
monster of Heresies, 202 Archbishop of Spalato made to speak for Rome, 231 Of
the Private Spirit, 46, 47, 161 Succession: what a one a note of the Church,
249, 250, not to be found in Rome, 251. Stapleton his inconstancy concerning
it, 250
T
TEstimony of the Church, whether Divine or Humane, 39 The Testimony of it
alone cannot make good the Infallibility of the Scripture, 42, 43 Theophilus of
Alexandria, his worth and his violent Spirit, 115 Traditions: what to be
approved, 29, 30* 34, 43, 44. Tradition and Scripture-proofs of the same
things, 38. is not a sufficient proof of Scripture, 39, 40. it and Gods
unwritten Word, not terms convertible, 43, 44. Tradition of the present Church
what uses it has, 52, 53, 55, 81. how it differs from the Tradition of the
Primitive Church, 52, 63. Tradition of the Church mere humane Authority, 58.
what Tradition the Fathers meant, by saying we have the Scriptures by
Tradition, 66, 67. Tradition Apostolical, the necessity and use of it, 66, 67.
Tradition how known before Scripture, 77. what most likely to be a Tradition
Apostolical, 38, 39. the danger of leaning too much upon Tradition, 78. Against
Transubstantiation, 180, 188, 189, 192, 212. Suarez his plain confession, that
it is not of necessary belief, 188. Cajetane and Alphonsus a Castro their
opinion concerning it, 221. Scandal taken by Averroes at the Doctrine of it,
213. vid. Eucharist. True, and Right, their difference, 82, 83
V
VIctor Pope taxed by Irenaeus, 118. Vincentius Lirinensis cleared, 25 Union of
Christendom, how little regarded, and how hindered by Rome, 200, 212 Unity:
the causes of the breaches thereof, 235, etc. Not that Unity in the Faith
amongst the Romanists, which they so much boast of, 218 Universal Bishop: a
title condemned by S. Gregory, yet usurped by his Successors, 116
W
WOrd of God: that it may be written and unwritten, 43. why written, 44.
uttered mediately or immediately, 43. many of Gods unwritten Words, not
delivered to the Church, 44, 45 Vid. Scripture and Tradition. Worth of men, of
what weight in proving truth, 197
A Table of the places of Scripture which are explained or vindicated.
Genesis. Cap. 1. verse. 16. page 136. Deuteronomy. Cap. 4. v. 2. p. 21. c. 13.
v. 1, 2, 3. p. 69. c. 21. v. 19. 103. p. c. 17. v. 18. p. 135. 1 Samuel. Chap.
3. v. 13. p. 103. c. 8. v. 3, 5, ibid. 3 Kings. Cap. 12. v. 27. p. 96. c. 13.
v. 11. p. 194. c. 17. p. 193. c. 19. v. 18. p. 194. 4 Kings. Cap. 3. p. 97,
193. c. 23. p. 100. 135. 2 Chronicles. Cap. 29. v. 4. p. 100, 135. Psalms. Psalm. 1.
v. 2. p. 73. Proverbs. Cap. 1. v. 8. c. 15. v. 20. c. 6. v. 20, 22. p. 169,
170. Isaiah. Cap. 44. and passim. p. 71. c. 53. v. 1. p. 70. Jeremiah. Cap. 2.
v. 13. p. 219. c. 5. v. 31. p. 78. c. 20. v. 7. etc. 38. v. 17. p. 70. S.
Matthew. Cap. 9. v. 12. p. 37. c. 12. v. 22, etc. 16. v. 17. p. 50. c. 16. v.
18. p. 9 106. 123. 240. c. 16. v. 19. p. 47. c. 18. v. 18. p. 123. c. 18. v.
20. p. 152, 154 c. 18. v. 17. p. 168, 185. c. 22. v. 37, p. 236. c. 28. v. 19,
20. p. 61, 106. c. 28, v. 21. p. 106. c. 28. v. 29. p. 125. c. 28. v. 20. p.
151. c. 26. v. 27. p. 169. S. Mark. Cap. 10. v. 14. p. 38. c. 13. v. 22. p. 69.
S. Luke. Cap. 10. v. 16. p. 61. c. 12. v. 48. p. 236. c. 22. v. 35. p. 30. c.
9. v. 23. p. 71. c. 22. v. 37. p. 100. c. 12. v. 32. p. 123, 151. c. 24. v. 47.
p. 104. S. John. Cap. 5. v. 47. p. 79. c. 6. v. 70. p. 251. c. 9. v. 29. p. 79.
c. 10. v. 4. p. 65. c. 10. v. 41. p. 70. c. 11. v. 42. p. 124. c. 14. v. 16. p.
62. 151. c. 14. v. 26. p. 107, 151. c. 16* v. 13. p. 62, 151. c. 16. v. 14. p.
151. c. 17. v. 3. p. 72. c. 19. v. 35. p. 69. c. 20. v. 22. p. 123. c. 21. v.
15. p. 30, 125. c. 5. v. 31. p. 57. c. 2. v. 19. p. 105. Acts. Cap. 4. v. 12.
p. 136. c. 6. v. 9. p. 82. c. 9. v. 29. etc. 19. v. 17. p. 82. c. 11. v. 26. p.
103. c. 15. v. 28. p. 46, 151, 155, 171. Romans. Cap. 5. v. 15. p. 22. c. 1. v.
20. p. 29, 72. c. 1. v. 8. p. 88. c. 1. v. 18. p. 222. c. 10. v. 10. p. 245. c.
10. v. 14, 15. p. 231. c. 3. v. 4. p. 232. c. 11. v. 16. p. 91. c. 13. v. 1. p.
134* 1 Corinthians. Cap. 1. v. 10. p. 235. c. 2. v. 11. p. 207. c. 3. v. 2. p. 125.
c. 3. v. 11. p. 152. c. 2. v. 14. p. 48. c. 5. v. 5. p. 166. c. 11. v. 1. p.
61. c. 11. v. 23. p. 169. c. 11. v. 19. p. 235, 236. c. 12. v. 3, 4. p. 47. and
12, 10. p. 70. and 12, 28. p. 247. c. 13. v. 1. p. 134. Galath. Cap. 3. v. 19.
p. 43. Ephesians. Cap. 2. v. 20. p. 152. c. 4. v. 11. p. 247. c. 4. v. 13. p.
248. c. 5. v. 2. p. 199. c. 5. v. 27. p. 169. 2 These. Cap. 2. p. 39. c. 2. v.
9. p. 70. c. 2. v. 15. p. 46. 1 Timothy Cap. 3. v. 15. p. 22. c. 6. v. 20. p. 44.
2 Timothy Cap. 1. v. 14. p. 44. c. 6. v. 16. p. 72. Hebr. Cap. 5. v. 12. p. 125.
c. 9. v. 12. p. 199. c. 11. v. 6. p. 28, 236. c. 11. v. 1. p. 56, 68. c. 12. v.
9. p. 103. c. 13. v. 17. p. 168. S. James. Cap. 1. v. 20. p. 99. 1 S. Peter.
Cap. 5. v. 3. p. 59. 2 S. Peter. Cap. 1. v. 16. p. 73. 1 S. John. Cap. 4. v. 2.
p. 28. c. 2. v. 19. p. 105. S. Jude. V. 3. p. 46. p. 218. Apocal. Cap. 12. v.
1. p. 136.
FINIS.

