Law Unknown, OR, Judgment Unjust.

Wherein is showed, That some Persons were Indicted, Judged, and Condemned at
the Sessions in the Old Bailey, London, by an Unknown Law, neither Printed nor
Published; nor any ways knowable by the common People: Whereby the Inhabitants
of this Nation may perceive what unavoidable Bondage and Slavery they are going
into.

With a brief Relation of the Killing of John Townesend, by Major Crosby at St.
Albones, and the proceedings of Court thereupon, in quitting the said Crosby,
and punishing the peaceable standers by: And some remarkable Passages of Sir
Harbottle Grimston in the said Trial.

Together also with certain Queries, grounded upon the Act of Indemnity,
especially recommended to the serious Consideration of the said Sir Harbottle,
and all the Members of that Parliament whereof he was SPEAKER.

How long will ye Judge unjustly: and accept the persons of the Wicked?

Defend the poor and fatherless: do Justice to the afflicted and needy.

Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked,

Psalm. 82.2, 3, 4. Printed in the Year, 1662.

Reader,
I Know not whether this Paper will ever see the light of the sun, or not; We
being fallen into times of such defection, and degeneracy, even from the common
principles of the light of Nature, that Justice and Righteousness seem banished
out of our Territories, and prohibited our Courts of Judicature: nothing more
frequent than to call Light Darkness, and Darkness Light; Good Evil, and Evil
Good; and accordingly to Justify the Wicked, and Condemn the Innocent; Whereof
this Paper contains one small and petty Instance, which (compared with the
great numbers of its fellows, and many of them much deeper in demerit) may be
accounted a smaller proportion, than One, of a Thousand: To make a particular
calculation of all which, as it would be next to an impossibillity, (for they
may well be called, Legion, or rather, many Legions; and would make a swelling
Volumn, too big for this age well to bear.) So were it also like to be an
undertaking of no great advantage; they appear so visible in their own Light,
that he who should go about to demonstrate them, should do little better, than
light up a Candle for men to see the Light of the Sun: Scarce any man's eyes so
dim, but he now beholds them in their own Colors; and if there be yet a Blind
man amongst us, let him take an exact survey of the proceedings of the Court at
the Sessions, held at the Old Baily in London, the 11th and 12th of this
instant August, and there may he meet with Eye Salve, for the opening of his
Eyes to see, the Door opened that leads Englishmen into the Paradise of
unavoidable Bondage and Slavery. It was then, and there asserted once, and
again, by him who sat as Judge at the trial of some men, who were then Indicted
and Condemned by them, That they were not judged by any Act of Parliament, nor
Statute Law; but by the Common Law, not Printed but Written; and such which the
Judge himself professed in open Court, He had been Studying these forty years,
and yet did not fully understand it; and therefore the Common People must be
content to be ignorant of it. Oh England, England! Where is thy Magna Charta?
Or what is become of thy Liberty, when thy freeborn Subjects shall be
Indicted, Judged, and Condemned by such a Law, which was never Printed nor
Published; and of the knowledge whereof they are no ways capable?

A brief RELATION of the killing of John Townesend by Major Edward Crosby, the
4th. of May 1662, at St. Albones in the County of Hartford, and the Proceedings
of Court thereupon.
Upon the day aforesaid, being Sabbath day, many People being met together in a
peaceable manner at the Funeral of one Mrs. Terril, and one Mr. Heaward
preaching unto them in a place called, either the Cloister, or, the
Schoolwhite; the said Crosby come swearing in a furious manner, calling them
Rogues, and Rebels, (without any occasion given him by the People, save only
their being met as aforesaid) and directing his speech to the said Heaward, he
cried out, Come down; Why prate you there? Come down, or I will pull you down.
To which Heaward replied, If you have any Authority to command me to come down,
I will obey it; but otherwise not. Then Crosby swore, He would fetch that which
should fetch him down, and so went away; but about half an hour after, he
returned again, with a Pistol cocked in his hand; accompanied by one Tymothy
Ratcliffe, a Constable of the Town, with a Fowling-piece in his hand. At which
the People being much affrighted to see two men come against them with
Fire-armes, some of them cried out, Murder, Murder. But Crosby, with his
assistant Ratcliffe, pressed in amongst them; Whereupon the said John Townsend
uttered these words, Noble Major, Pray make no disturbance, consider it is the
Sabbath day. Upon which Crosby replied, You Rogue, do you tell me of the
Sabbath day? and turned himself about toward Townesend, (who stood almost
behind him) and bending down the muzle of his Pistol, (which before he carried
upwards) presented it against Townesend, and gave fire upon him, and shot him,
that he immediately died upon the place. And afterward both Crosby and
Ratcliffe made up toward the said Heaward. Hereupon there was a great Cry
among the People, some crying, Keep the peace, keep the peace. Others, Here is
a man killed, Constable do your office; apprehend him that killed him, etc.

The Substance of this Relation was proved by substantial Evidence to the
Court, and the Jury, and might have been farther testified (with other
agravating Circumstances) by a cloud of Witnesses more, had not the Justices
terrified them through fear, and with threatenings.

Upon all which, several of those men who were peaceably met together as
aforesaid, were bound to their good behavior, and Indicted for a Riot;
especially those who cried, Constable keep the peace, do your office, etc. But
the said Ratcliffe, who was assistant to Crosby and came with him armed as
aforesaid, contrary to the Law; and refused to do his Office, etc. and
therefore in the eye of the Law was deeply accessory to the Fact, and ought to
have been dealt with accordingly; was notwithstanding (not only unmolested,
but) made Foreman of the Jury to try Crosby, who stood Indicted for Willful
Murder. Yet nevertheless (though Ratcliff was Foreman) the Jury brought in the
Bill, a true Bill: At which Sir Harbottle Grimston demanded of them, Will you
hang a Man upon supposition? Can you prove that he came with a full intent to
kill him? or words to that effect. And bid them go again; which they did, some
of them saying, They meant not to hang him, but thought they had done right;
for they intended to do as they were bid, or words to that purpose. But (it
seems not well understanding their Lesson) the second time they brought the
Bill in Ignoramus; whereupon the said Crosby was quit by Proclamation.

Now because this story has filled the ears, and exercised the tongues of
many, Your Speech to the King, Aug. 29 1660.
far and near; Let us reason a little with Sir Harbottle Grimston upon some
Maxims of his own. Sir, it was your own observation very lately, that, To
settle men's estates was the way to quiet their minds. But how (think you) can
we look upon our Estates as settled, or, what quietness can the minds of
Englishmen have, when their lives shall be in jeopardy every hour, and their
persons obnoxious to be assaulted, killed and murdered at the malicious rage
of such wicked and ungodly wretches as Crosby, if justice cannot be had against
the Murderers? If Jehu had reason to demand, What peace so long as the
Whordoms of Jezabel, and her Witchcrafts are so many? How much more cause have
Englishmen to say, What peaceable security have we, when the Justices upon the
Bench, [and no less than a quondam Speaker of Parliament] shall countenance the
Murderer? Or, what Justice are we like to expect, when such shall be made
Foremen of the Jury to try Capital Offenders, who were themselves accessory to
the Crimes committed? especially if accompanied with such fellow Jurats, who
shall say in open Court, They intended to do as they were bid? What is the Law?
or, what is our security by it when thus perverted, and employed to punish the
Innocent, and discharge the Guilty? Peaceable men bound to their good
behavior, and Indicted as Rioters; and the Constable that assisted the
Murderer with Fire-armes, made Foreman of the Jury; and the Murderer quit by
Proclamation upon an ignoramus Verdit. Was there ever the like president
before, that a Jury should be turned back when they had found a Bill, under the
like proofs as in this case; and an ignoramuus Verdit received? The King has
lost a Subject: This man killed him in the face of many Witnesses; in the
manner aforesaid: and can the Bill be found ignoramus, and he that killed him
quit thereupon? Where is the Justice of the Judge? Eccles. 10.16. Psalm. 82.2, 3
-- Woe to thee oh Land (says the Wise Man) when thy King is a Child, and thy
Princes eat in the morning. How much more may we say, Woe to thee oh Land, when
thy Judges are thine Oppressors, and those that should defend the cause of the
Fatherless, and the Widow, shall defend the Murderer, and the Peace-breaker?
Surely such wisdom as this, Genesis 3.4, 5.
was not conveyed by Divine intelligence into the Soul of the Jugde, but rather
inspired from him, who first taught men shifts to evade the dint of a righteous
Law. I appeal to you Sir, who so lately was as the Mouth of the Commons of
England, Speech to the King, Aug. 29 1660. 2 King. 4.40.
Whether such Justice as this will Deliver us from our Sufferings? Or, Knock
off our Shakels? Or, Set us at Liberty? Will such Judges and Judiciary
proceedings turn our Prison into a Paradise of Pleasure, and fill the whole
Nation with Joy, Love, and Peace? If this be the after-crop, which the fair
weather of our Patience has brought forth for us, what food can we expect
therefrom, but such as has Death in it? Or, what contentment can any of the
Loyal and Faithful Subjects of the Land receive thereby? Will such Triacle as
this, expel the poison of John Townsend's Blood, and make a Sacrifice to
appease God's wrath, and satisfy Divine Justice? Will God be mocked? Can you
demand of him, whether Crosby intended to kill? Or, would you know his
Judgment? Read Numb. 35.16. And if he smite him with an instrument of iron (so
that he die) he is a murderer; the murderer shall surely be put to death. And
verse. 31. Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the Life of a murderer,
which is guilty of Death, but he shall be surely put to Death. But Crosby did
more then this, his Act had Contrivance, and Deliberation in it; He first
Threatened, then fetched his Pistol, cock't it, and presented it against
Townesend, gave fire and killed him; and afterward pursued another man.
Certainly this is no more like unto Murder, than one Egg is like another; and
to say that Crosbey had an intent to kill a man, is (without all doubt) as bad
us to call a Spade, a Spade; or, a Bottle, a Bottle. What greater demonstration
can you have of the inward Intention of any Murderer? And yet would you reject
a Verdict that found him guilty, and quit him upon an ignoramus? HEAR oh
Heavens! and GIVE EAR oh Earth! and Consider ye Justices of the Bench! Think
not that God will be mocked; Or, that Considerate Men will always shut their
Eyes: No, you do not dance in such a Net, but many in City, and in Country do
look upon you: This Story rings far and near; and is come very nigh unto the
Ears of the King's Court. And let all such folly be made manifest that it may
proceed no further. 2 Timothy 3.9. Matthew. 26.13.
-- Our Lord Christ says, concerning the Woman that poured the box of Ointment
on his Head, Wheresoever this Gospel is preached, there shall this be told for
a memorial of her. In like manner, wheresoever the name of Sir H. G. from
henceforth shall be mentioned, let this story be told, for the future shame,
and reproof of all Contrivers of Injustice and Unrighteousness in the seat of
Judicature.

He that Justifies the Wicked, and he that Condemns the Just, even they both
are abomination to the Lord,

Prove. 17.15.
Mr. Grimston's Speech in Parliament upon the Accusation and Impeachment of
William Laud, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, of High Treason. Printed in the Year
1641. and now Reprinted for public use.
Mr. Speaker,
THere has been presented to the House, a most faithful and exact report of
the conference we had with the Lords yesterday, together with the opinion of
the Committees that were employed in that service: That they conceived it sit
the Arch Bishop of Canterbury should be sequestered. I must second the motion,
and with the favor of this House, I shall be bold to offer my Reasons, why I
conceive it more necessary we should proceed a little further than the desire
of a bare Sequestration only.

Mr. Speaker, Long Introductions are not suitable to weighty business; We are
fallen upon the great man, the Arch Bishop of Canterbury; Look upon him as he
is in his Highness, and he is the Stye of all pestilential filth, that has
infected the State, and government of the Church, and Commonwealth: Look upon
him in his Dependancies, and he is the man, the only man, that has raised and
advanced all those, that (together with himself) have been the Authors and
Causers of all the Ruins, Miseries, and Calamities we now groan under. Who is
it, but he only that brought the Earl of Strafford to all his great places,
and employments, a fit Instrument, and Spirit to act, and execute all his
wicked and bloody designs in these Kingdoms? Who is it, but he only that
brought in Secretary Windebanke into the place of Secretary and Trust; the very
Broker and Pander to the Whore of Babylon? Who is it (Mr. Speaker) but he only,
that has advanced all Popish Bishops? I shall name some of them, Bishop
Manwaring, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, the Bishop of Oxford, and Bishop Wren
(the least of all) but the most unclean one. These are men that should feed
Christ's Flock, but they are the Wolves that devoured them: The Sheep should
have fed upon the Mountains; but the Mountains have eat up the Sheep. It was
the happiness of our Church, when the zeal of God's House did eat up the
Bishops; Glorious and brave Martyrs that went to the Stake in defense of the
Protestant Religion: But the zeal of these Bishops has been to eat up, and
persecute the Church. Who is it (Mr. Speaker) but the great Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, that has sat the Helm to guide and steer them all to the managing
of their Projects, that have been set on foot in this Kingdom these ten years
last past? And rather than he would stand out, he has most unworthily truck'd
and chaffer'd in the meanest of them; as for instance, that of Tobacco, wherein
thousands of poor people have been stripped, and turned out of their Trades, for
which they have served as Aprentices: We all know he was the Compounder, and
Contractor with them for the Licenses, putting them to pay Fines, and Fee, and
Farm Rents to use their Trades. Certainly (Mr. Speaker) he might have spent his
time better (and more for his grace) in the Pulpit, than thus sharking and
raking in the Tobacco shop.

Mr. Speaker, We all know what he has been charged withal here in this House;
Crimes of a dangerous consequence, and of transcendent nature; No less than the
subversion of the Government of this Kingdom, and the alteration of the
Protestant Religion; and this not upon bare information only, but much of it
comes before us already upon clear and manifest proofs: And there is scarce any
business, grievances, or complaints, come before us in this place, wherein we
do not find him intermingled, and as it were twisted into it; like a busy and
angry Wasp* his sting in the tail of (...) thing. We have this day heard the
report of the conference yesterday; and in it the accusations which the Scotch
Nation have charged him withal; and we do all know he is guilty of the same,
(if not more) in this Kingdom. -- Mr. Speaker, He has been and is, the common
enemy of all goodness, and good men; and it is not safe that such a Viper
should be near his Majesty's person, to distill his poison into his sacred Ears;
nor is it safe for the Commonwealth, that he should sit in so eminent a place
of Government, being thus accused. We know what we did in the Earl of
Strafford's Case.

This man is the corrupt Fountain, that has infected all the Streams; and till
the Fountain be purged, we cannot expect to have any clear Channels. I shall be
bold therefore to offer my opinion, and if I err, it is the error of my
Judgment, and not my want of zeal and affection to the public good. I
conceive it most necessary and fit, that we should now take up a resolution, to
do somewhat, to strike whilst the Iron is hot, and go up to the Lords, in the
Name of the Commons of this House, and in the Name of the Commons of England,
and to accuse him of High Treason; and to desire their Lordships his person may
be sequestered, and that in convenient time they may bring up the charge.

Six Queries, seriously propounded to all, but especially recommended to Sir
Harbottle Grimston, with the rest of the Members of that Parliament, whereof he
was SPEAKER; grounded upon the Act of Indemnity; whereby are pardoned all
Treasons, etc. as therein is mentioned; until the 24th. of June 1660, and no
longer. Hereupon I Querie,
Querie 1.
1. Whether such men who after the said 24th of June 1660. sat and made Laws
as a Parliament, being not called by the Kings Writ according to Law, did not
usurp the Legislative power of the Nation, contrary to the Laws thereof? And
whether this be not implied (at least) in the Preamble to an Act, Entitled, An
Act for confirmation of public Acts; Made by the Parliament begun and held at
Westminster, the 8th day of May 1661?

Querie 2.
2. Whether such as shall usurp the Legislative Power as aforesaid, be not
guilty of High Treason?

Querie 3.
3. Whether (unless an Act of Pardon shall be made for them) the King may not
at any time, when he finds cause, give forth Orders to apprehend, imprison,
and try any of them accordingly?

Querie 4.
4. Whether the King has any reason to be gracious to, or confide in such men?
Or, Whether by the same Principles they may not act as much against the King,
if occasion serve, as they then seemed to do for him? For he whose Principle
will serve to break the Law one way, why may it not serve him to break it the
contrary way another time?

Querie 5.
5. Whether if the King should always connive thereat, it would not seem (at
least) to a great degree, to justify the usual plea of his Adversaries, to
make good their former proceedings against himself, who were wont frequently to
plead Necessity, and not Law, for the ground, and justification of their
actions?

Querie 6.
6. Whether it be safe for the King and Kingdom to let them all escape without
some examples of Justice; inasmuch as their proceedings in this kind seems so
much to justify the Plea of Necessity practiced by others heretofore; and
likewise tends very much to encourage other men in future time to dangerous
practices upon the same principle?

FINIS.

