AN ANSWER To a Book published by Richard Smith OF WESTCHESTER, Wherein The
People of God called QUAKERS (more particularly in this County of Cheshire) are
cleared from the Wrong, Injustice and False Accusations by him charged upon
them.

Written for the Information and Satisfaction of the Sober-minded, by Alexander
Lawrence.

Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy Neighbor, Exodus 20.16. Against
an Elder receive not an Accusation, but before two or three Witnesses, 1 Timothy
5.10. Printed in the Year 1677.

Reader,
Whosoever thou art to whom this may come, and especially to all such who have
seen Richard Smith's Book, to which this following is an Answer; and because
the said Richard Smith gives thee an Account in his Book, how long he has
walked with those People called Quakers, etc. and now has thus publicly
appeared against them, therefore lest thou should say (as some have done)
That the Quakers are divided amongst themselves, and therefore are like to come
to naught.

To all such (on the behalf of the People aforesaid) I Answer, That the People
called Quakers are not divided, but are in Unity, Peace and Concord amongst
themselves, praised be the Lord for it, who is the God of all our Mercies, who
has raised us up to be a People, who were not a People, by his own Arm of
Power, and thereby has gathered us to himself, who were once afar off; and by
this Power have we been preserved unto this day, notwithstanding many who have
risen up against us; and blessed be the Lord, this holy Arm of Power we do yet
feel to uphold us and carry us on through whatsoever Sufferings or Reproaches
do or may yet attend us for his Name sake.

And although some, who have walked with us, may turn from us, it is so
manifest, that they were not truly of us; and such there were in the days of
the Apostles, of whom John speaks, 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, but they
were not of us (but as he says, even so say we) if they had been of us, no
doubt they would have continued with us; but they went out, that they might be
made manifest, etc. And Judas walked, and was numbered amongst the Apostles, yet
afterward turned from them, and proved a Traitor. And the Wise in Heart may
easily see R. S's Design in publishing his Book, and thereby gratifying such
who are evilly affectied toward us. The Apostle Paul, when he speaks of his
many Perils, 2 Cor. 11.26. mentions as not one of the least of his Sufferings
(to wit) his Perils amongst false Brethren; and so, if we meet with such in our
day, it is no new thing, but even the same that our Brethren that are gone
before us have met with in their Age and Day.

T. J.
Given forth the 29th day of the 7th Month, 1677.
AN ANSWER To a BOOK published by Richard Smith OF WESTCHESTER.
Richard Smith,
THy Book thou gave me the 26th of the 4th Month, I have perused, and did
wholely conclude to have been silent as to any Answer to it, knowing it would
pass away like an untimely Birth, as many of that nature and tendency have
done; but upon further consideration finding, that though thou pretendest to a
great deal of fair and Christian-like dealing with us in Words, yet in Deed
have done otherwise, as though we were guilty of gross Errors, and in our
managing of the Difference between thee and Daniel Maddock. that thou had
received such Wrong from us as is beyond all bounds of Civility; page the 7th
at large, reporting those for my words in the behalf of the Meeting which were
not mine, taking part of that which thou to me calledst the Preamble to my
Answers to thy Queries, and therein seek to fasten a Lie upon me; also
adding or diminishing to all or most of my Answers to thy Queries, which in
their time and place I shall prove, and therefore cannot well pass it by with
Silence, as thou in thine to the Reader say, it was the way of the holy men
of old not to favor gross Errors therewith; but shall endeavor to manifest to
thee, and all the sober-minded that may come to read this thy unchristian like
dealing with Friends in this County in general, and my self in particular. In
the first place, thou tell the Reader, That thou signifiedst to thy Friends
thy intent in publishing thine; and that thou gave them ten days time, that
they might have come and seen it. I leave it to the sober Reader to judge,
whether it had not been as fit for thee to have come to some of us, to have
showed it (as I did this to thee) before thou had published it; and I my
self, upon the receiving notice thereof from thee, wrote to thee again,
signifying my desire unto thee to the contrary, by reason it would open the
mouths of many to speak evil, and say, as they now do, We are at Difference
among our selves: but my Letter, by reason of some neglect in the messenger,
came not to thee within thy prefixed time (though it came before thy Papers
went from thy hand) and therefore thou would not so much as open it to read,
but sent it from thee sealed again; which I also leave to the sober minded to
judge, whether this were christian or friendly dealing yea or nay, being it
came before thine went from thy hands: and though such things as these may and
do give some occasion to say, We are at Difference among our selves, yet
blessed be the Lord, who by the Arm of his holy Power at first gathered us, and
brought us nigh unto himself (which were once afar off) and one unto another in
that holy Power; by the same he has and does preserve the faithful and upright
in heart nigh unto himself, and in Unity one with another, and in love and good
will to all people: and though some have, and do, and may go from us, yet it is
but that it may be manifest, that they were not all of us.

In Page 8. thou say, Thou have walked with these People since the
beginning, meaning them called Quakers: that is not so; for they were a People
a good season before thou came among them so as to join with them, and longer
before thou walkedst with them in all humility and lowliness, as thou
pretendst: Bearing part with them in all Trials and Sufferings that have
befallen them upon a Religious account, as thou there writest: These are very
large sayings, and very much included in them; but less in words, and more in
deeds, would make thee never the worse, but better thought of by them that have
and do know thy manner of humility and lowliness, and what part thou have born
with us in all our Trials and Sufferings; but it may be thou beganst to be
weary of that part thou did or might bear with us, and therefore took this
occasion to turn the Meeting forth of thy House, and to dissent from us; Truth
and Time will manifest all things.

The first part of thy Book is, to give an account of our dealing or
mannagement of the difference between thee and Daniel Maddock; and this we
know, that Daniel did not in many things carry hinself as became one professing
what he does, but many times gave occasion for thee to complain of him; and
this thou as well know we never stood by him, or in the least owned him
therein; but on the contrary, reproved him for the same, and admonished him to
condemn it, which according to thine page 11. he did; and yet new occasion did
rise, so that the Difference continued, and rather increased between you, by
reason of which we were much troubled, and our spirits often grieved, and tired
with the matter, much of the Meeting being many times taken up with that
business; and our desires were, that the man might see his own Weakness, and
shun it; and therefore did we bare with him long, not willing to cast him
wholely off, knowing there was a Principle of God in him, for the sake of which
many of us had a secret respect for him, though we dealt plainly with him: and
thou thy self at a Meeting, when we were determined to proceed against him,
desired Forbearance, for thou had Hopes of the Man.

Witness Thomas Janney, Henry Morrey.

And our long Forbearance (which thou blamest us so much for, calling it
Neglect, Injustice, and false to our own Orders, etc.) produced this at the
last, viz. that he, upon the sending Thomas Win and his Brother Nathan to
him, they laying something before him, came to see his Error, and to condemn
it, and gave forth a Paper against himself, the Copy of which is as follows.

To all my dear Friends, both Brethren and Sisters at their Quarterly Meeting
in Cheshire.
Chester, the 9th of the 10th Month, 1675.
WHereas you out of love and tenderness toward me, have ordered my Brother
Nathan Maddock and Thomas Win to come unto me, to reason with me concerning
those things charged in your Paper, which things they clearly opened to my
Understanding to be Evil, viz. My Burdening the Meeting sometimes with Words,
which they could not bear; in speaking Evil against James Park and Richard
Smith; and having Separate Meetings, which Friends do disown: Moreover being at
this time sensible of God's living Truth, I do in the sense of the same,
condemn not only all those things aforesaid, but all other that the Spirit of
Truth condemns by you, in that blessed and good Order wherein you are gathered;
yea, dear Friends, I do condemn the very spirit and ground of it, and desire to
live with you in that good and heavenly Order for evermore.

The Mark of Daniel VVV Maddock.
Witness Nathan Maddock, Richard Hemlock, Thomas Win.

This may also further satisfy, that the abovesaid was the true Desire of my
own Heart.

D. M.




And though thou say, Thou know not upon what account we received it; yet
it was in order to give thee, or any other that he had offended satisfaction:
Yet were we not satisfied with this only, but also enjoined his Brother Nathan
to go to him, and advise him, as from us, To go to thee, and Condemn the thing
before the Woman which was by when the words were spoke; which accordingly he
did: and though thou art minded to say it was by reason of thy threatening to
have him before the Mayor of the City; but that is but thy Supposition; but
however, we enjoined him to do it, and accordingly he did, and therein our
expectation was answered; and thou at that time seemed satisfied, and desired
the Lord to forgive him, and thou did.

Witness Nathan Maddock, Richard Hemlock.

Yet after all this, to seek in all things to justify thy self, and render us
and our proceedings as bad as thou can, is not Christian nor Friend-like; but
I do believe thou will miss of thy End in the minds of sober people, unto whom
I leave the consideration of these things to judge, whether we deserve to be
reflected upon after such a manner as thou do in thy Book, and whether thou
deservest to be justified in so doing; for my end chiefly in writing is, to
give satisfaction to such as may read both thine and this.

And as to the thing thou chargest us with, relating to Thomas Davanport, I
shall give a short Relation of the truth of the matter, and leave it to the
consideration of the sober Reader, whether thou have not wronged us in saying,
We received an Accusation from him against thee when thou wast absent. Thomas
Davanport had been long from amongst us, and at that time Thomas Win and
Nathan Maddock went to D.M. they also went to Thomas Davanport, and after some
discourse together, he saw he had not done well, and ingenuously confessessed
it, and gave forth a Paper to condemn it, the Copy is as follows.

This is to all Friends in the Living and Eternal Truth.
THat whereas I have been judged to deny the Meetings and Assemblies of
Friends, and upon that account have abstained from Meetings, and joined my self
to those that have denied Meetings. I do here testify in the Presence of the
Lord, and bear my Testimony against that spirit that has led from Meetings,
and does lead from meetings, and particularly against that spirit that judged
Friends for putting off their Hats and kneeling in the time of public Prayer:
and not only so, but also bear my Testimony against that spirit of Imposition
that keeps it on; and as touching my marrying contrary to the good and heavenly
Order that is now established among Friends, I do condemn with the former, and
the Root and Ground that led me to it: and whatsoever the blessed Spirit of God
in the good Order of the same condemns, I do from my Heart condemn: and hereby
desire, that this may remove whatsoever Scruple may be in the hearts of any
Friends in reference to these things aforesaid; and I heartily desire in the
sense of God's blessed Truth to be at Unity with Friends in the same holy and
good Order forever and for evermore.

With my whole heart I do freely consent to what is above written. Thomas
Davanport.
Iron-Bridge-house, the 10th of the 10th Month, 1675. Witnesses Nathan
Maddock, Thomas Win.



Which when we heard, many of us were very glad of it, having had long good
will for him, and really desired his good, The next Quarterly Meeting he came
among us, and having some discourse with him, we advised him, to go again to
Meetings amongst us; he answered, Richard Smith had forbid him his house, and
he did not know whether he would be willing he should come thither or nay, or
words to this effect; we told him, We could not receive any thing against
Richard Smith, he not being there, and therefore desired him to forbear; and
further, William Gandy and others said unto him, They would engage Richard
Smith would be willing he should come into his house: this was the occasion of
those words from T. D. and our ^nswer, and whether this were receiving a False
Accusation against thee, as thou chargest us with, let any reasonable man judge.

Witness William Gandy, John Simcock, Thomas Welsh, John Badely, Henry Maddock,
with many more.


Afterward thou came into the Meeting, and I told thee what Tho. Davanport
had accused thee with, but not willing to have any old matters debated upon (we
having had too much of them, as before) I did ask thee this Question, Richard,
Art thou willing Thomas shall come into thy House to the Meeting? thou said,
Thy Doors were open, etc. I asked thee again; thou replyedst off the Matter; so
I said, Richard, Can not thou say, thou art willing, or thou art not? what
needs so much ado? And when thou could not satisfy us with those Answers,
thou said, Thou would say no more, or words to that purpose: and indeed, it
did trouble many in the Meeting to see thee so stiff, and so little of a
condescending spirit, that though Friends had engaged thou would be willing,
yet thou would not so much as say thou were; which manner of carriage in thee
has given too much occasion of the then Difference in Chester: and when thou
had refused to answer, Thomas seeing we were troubled thereat, he said to
thee, If he had done thee any VVrong, he would do what thou would have him to
do, or words to that purpose; and further said, he would do what we would have
him to do; and thereupon we advised and desired him to come to Meetings, which
accordingly he did; and this thing was it that did (as thou calledst it p. 7.)
pinch thee the most of any thing that was done by us; and after this thy spirit
turned against us; and then thou be an'st to speak and write against Women's
Meetings, and not before since that at London (which thou chiefly objectest
against) though that was done above nine month before this I mention; yet
nothing that I know of said against it by thee till after this time; so it may
easily be understood the Ground or Reason of thy differing with and separating
from us, even because thy Mind was not answered in all things according to thy
desire by us (which is not the Symtom of a man's walking in all Humility and
Lowliness with us, as thou boastest of thy self) though thou now pretendest
something else, and make a great noise of the Wrong we have done thee, etc.
which is left to the Reader to consider of, and without partiality to judge.

So I come to show wherein thou have wronged me, in reporting those for my
words in the behalf of the Meeting which were not mine: The 19th of the 8th
month, 1676. after a long Debate with thee, indeed to small purpose, as is
proved; thou may well know the Cause of it, if thou will but let Truth take
place in thy mind; the greatest matter thou at that time could allege
against us was, our Forbearance, or as thou call it; neglect, etc. that we
had not given Sentence of Excommunication against Daniel Maddock, and wholely
rejected him; which indeed (as by thy Book does appear) was the main thing thou
had driven at for a season; thereupon I said in the behalf of the Meeting,
That the Church had Power to pass Sentence of Excommunication, or to forbear
for a time, as they saw meet and convenient in the Wisdom of God; these were my
words, witness Tho. Brigs, Richard Milner, and others, and these we will stand
by. And we do say, The time and season of our declaring on disunion with those
who break out of the order of truth stands not in the will of any prejudiced
man, but in the will of God, who is Long-suffering and full of tender Mercy,
who waits to restore the Back-slider.

Thou say in thine, page 19. I said, We had power to suspend our Judgment; in
which thou show either a great deal of Ignorance or Wilfulness; for we had
given our Judgment long before this against D. M. otherwise, why did we require
him to make thee satisfaction? This manner of dealing is not Friendly nor
Christianly, but looks too like Forgery.

For thy saying, that Tho. Brigs and Tho. Win told thee plainly, thy house
was not thy own: It is well known to the moderate people of this Nation (though
thou make such use of it) that we do not deny any man that which is his own,
nor desire it from him: but let me tell thee, thou having given Friends leave
to meet in part of thy House, and they having provided some convenience for
that purpose, as things to sit upon, etc. it was not agreeable to the Truth for
thee, for the Offense of one or two (if such a thing were) to turn all the rest
forth of thy Doors without their Consent, and thereby expose them to such
Sufferings as did thereupon follow, which might have been much worse had not
the then Mayor and Recorder of that City used much Moderation and Justice in
the Mannagement of the Matter; and how slight soever thou may make of this,
yet it is that which by all thy Papers and Book thou can not clear thy self
from until thou repent of it, and condemn it.

The next thing is to clear my self from the Lie thou would make people
believe I am guilty of, in saying, It is thy Principle and Practice to deny
Water Baptism, and Breaking of Bread, and Drinking of Wine. I do say, and am
able to prove it both by Witness and thy Practice, that it is thy Principle and
Practice (except thou be changed in that as well as in other things) to deny
both, as being now in force, or to be practiced in the Church of Christ; and
therefore demand of thee, what Scripture thou have to prove the discontinuing
of them, seeing thou ownest they were once? or what Scripture had Paul to prove
the discontinuance of Circumcision, seeing God said, It should be for an
Everlasting Covenant in their flesh, Genesis 17.13. For, no rational man can in
reason judge, that I should charge thee to deny that they never were, seeing
the Scriptures are so full that they were, in their time and season; therefore
needless is it for thee to say, they were of Service in the Church, etc. but to
prove by plain Text of Scripture, that they are not (not that I say they are)
seeing thou will be so exact for Scripture Proof for what we do; for that was
the occasion of my so writing; not that we in the least deny the Scriptures, as
thou well know, but own and esteem them in their place, yet prefer the holy
Spirit before them, by which the holy Scriptures were given forth, and the
Leadings of that Spirit which leads into all Truth, so into the Truth in them.

In the next place I come to speak of my Answer to thy Queries, and therein to
prove unto thee and others what I said before, viz. that thou have in all or
most of them either added or diminished; in my first Answer, page 26, 27. thou
in thy Book endest with these words, Though they pretend Scripture for their
Rule in what they do; in mine to thee there is this further, We have an evident
Testimony that we can give for Women's Meetings, from many faithful Witnesses,
that God owneth them by accompanying them with his living Presence in their
Assemblies; yet we go not about to impose them upon Believers, but as the Lord
persuades them: This word Imposition has often been used upon other occasions,
as thou well know, by such as have gone forth of the blessed Unity of Truth,
when there has been no occasion for it; now, if this be fair or right, to say
as thou do in the Margin, p. 26. it is my Answer, and yet leave this forth
which answers to the latter part of thy Query, page 22, 23. I leave it to any
rational man to judge: in answer to thy Reply I shall only say thus, We go not
about to speak, write or act any thing contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, nor
to dis-esteem of them, as thou well know, therefore it is not friendly so to
write as though we did, page 27. and for thee to go about to make void my
assertion in answer to thy Query, p. 26. to wit, that the power and authority
of that unlimited Spirit is the same in the Female as in the Male, by saying,
page 27. was ever the same in any Female as in the heavenly Male Christ Jesus,
shows much wilfulness in thee; for thou can not be so ignorant as so to
understand the intent of my words, that I should compare either Female or any
other Male with him in whom dwell the fullness of the Godhead ^odily, and of
whose fullness we receive Grace for Grace: but though he was anointed with the
Oil of Gladness above his fellows, and did not receive the Spirit by measure,
yet it has pleased the Father in his infinite to Goodness, that His should be
anointed with the same Anointing, and receive a measure of the same Spirit, as
to nature and quality (and therein is one with that in those Males he breathed
upon) I am not speaking of quantity; so my assertion is not contrary to the
Apostles Doctrine, as thou page 27. say it is, but agreeable thereunto, who
said, There are diversities of Gifts by the same Spirit [mark that] dividing to
every man severally as he will; and we say, women too; for God said, who cannot
lie, He would pour forth his Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your
Daughters shall prophecy, Joel 2.28. So my assertion stands good, and will do
against all that thou can say against it, That the Power and Authority of
that unlimited Spirit is the same in the Female as in the Male, and in that
they are laborers together for God: Consider what thou art about to do, and
take heed left through thy own wilfulness darkness cover thy understanding.

Thou need not tell us, That the Church has no Power but what it has from
him who is the Beginning; for I say in my answer, page 27. of thy Book, That
the Church of Christ had and has Power given them (not that they take it
wrongfully) as thou in thy Query, p. 22. would charge us with; neither are we
five that Church, but through Gods Grace Members of it.

Those words of thine in the Margin, page 27. But may not I justly question,
whether you five he that Church which has Power given to add this, etc.
favors more of a cavilling spirit, that will be critical, then the Spirit of
Truth.

Thou say in thy Reply to my second Answer, page 29. And now of late for you
to set up such things as these (meaning Women's Meetings) as are no way in
themselves necessary to the accomplishing of the other aforesaid, to wit, a
holy and upright Life; and yet there say, thou art not against them or any
other to meet to pray, exhort, strengthen and build up one another in their
most holy Faith: This is strange that they may meet together to pray, exhort,
strengthen and build up one another in their most holy Faith, and yet be no way
in themselves necessary to the accomplishment of an holy and upright Life; this
indeed is such a Paradox to me, that I have not heard of the like by one that
pretends so much as thou do; and if they may do this, which is the greater,
why may they not do that which is the lesser, to wit, take care of some widows,
fatherless and such as want relief, and that the younger women and elder also
walk orderly, etc. we do believe they may do both, according to the ability
that God gives them; and we do not despise them because they are the weaker
Vessels (though it may be some of us have been of that mind with thee.) And for
thee to say, That we saying, if any professing the Truth shall either by word
or deed, directly discountenance or weaken the hands of either men or women in
that work or service, let such be admonished, according to the Order of the
Gospel, and if they receive it not, but resist counsel, and persist in the work
of Division, we cannot but look upon them, as therein, not in the unity with
the Church of Christ and order of the Gospel, is to excommunicate such, or call
that Excommunication, as thou do: I would have thee read thy self, as thou
say to us; for I thought Excommunication had been a further thing then to
say, we cannot but look upon them therein not in the unity with the Church of
Christ and order of the Gospel; for if this be Excommunication, as thou have
often said it is, then was Daniel Maddock excommunicated by us; for we did not
in those things which thou chargedst against him, look upon him to be in unity
with the Church of Christ, and order of the Gospel; and therefore we exhorted
him to condemn them, and so we have done and do thee, thy writing and speaking
so much against Women's Meeting, as thou do, to say, they are contrary to the
Scripture of Truth, and that they are in themselves no way necessary to the
accomplishing of an holy and upright life, etc. yet we say, Excommunication is
a further thing, viz. in the Power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ to
deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
So thou may read thy self either ignorant or wilful in thy saying and
writing, that our so saying, as before, is Excommunication; for doubtless Paul
had not unity with Peter in that thou mentionest in thine to the Reader page 4.
neither did he look upon him therein in unity with the Church of Christ and
order of the Gospel, yet this was not to excommunicate that good man, who did
not persist therein; and though the Government be upon Christ's Shoulders; yet
he has given his Power to govern under him; and what they do in his Power he
owns; and though the Apostle had not dominion over other* Faith, or at least
did bear with such as were weak in the faith, yet he and they had Power to
judge and reject Gainsayers and Opposers, and so have his true Church now: we
do say, such as keep to the Doctrine and Practice which was first amongst us,
and continue in the unity of the Spirit, which first united us (but that thou
leavest forth) such ought not, nor are not by us accounted Makers of Division,
etc. but a man or men and people may hold both the doctrine and practice, and
yet be forth of the unity of the Spirit, as thou art; and diverse more before
thee (in our day and time) have been and are: so thou may mourn for thy self;
for time will come thou must mourn for this and other of thy doings, as well as
several have done, who are gone to their place, and once bigned themselves, and
stiffned their Necks against us as much as thou now do; but when they came to
lie upon their Dying Bed, it was otherwise with them, and then they could take
the shame to themselves, and clear the Lords Truth, and them that abode
faithful thereunto; and this was God's Love unto them; and this thou must come
to sooner or later, or it will be worse for thee, whether thou will hear or
forbear.

In my Answer to thy 3d Query thou endest page 31. And against such the Spirit
and Power of the Lord is, etc. (in mine there is thus much further) God is and
does judge, as I with many more through God's Goodness am a living Witness, and
had such a living Testimony in my heart from God against that dividing
separating spirit upon occasion, that it left such a seal therein, which I hope
through Gods Grace I shall never forget. In thy assertion in thy latter-end of
thy Query thou art too confident, as upon occasion may appear. Now why thou
should do thus in my first, and this also, except to cover that separating
spirit from the Testimony that many can give against it, I know not

In thy Reply, p. 31. thou say, If you had continued in that where true unity
was, you would not have innovated such things as would have broke it, or
infested the Church, and disturbed her Peace. Here thou set thy self a
Judge over us all, to censure us to be gone forth of that in which the true
Unity was, so make thy self guilty of that which thou would charge upon us,
viz. to be Lords over others faith, as thou did in thine of the 21th of the
5th month, 1676. to me, in which thou wrotest, It had been better those words
had not been writ (meaning those of the 27th of the 3d month, 1675.) or being
writ, that we would recall them: so, as I wrote in answer to thee, we must not
write or speak that which is upon our spirits upon good ground, as I to thee
there signified, but by thee be censured, it were better they had not been
writ, or being writ to recall them; and now further by thee be censured to be
gone forth of that in which the true unity wa^; so, as W. Penn wrote to thee,
instead of querying thou judge us: but that is known and felt in our Men and
Women's Meetings in which our Unity was and does continue, blessed be the Name
of the Lord: and it is not some going from us now, as others have done before,
that can break our Unity, as in the Power we keep; though it may be and is
cause of godly Sorrow to us, to see such things: Neither do honest godly Women,
Meetings infest or disturb the Peace of the true Church (it is a bad saying
from thee, and thou must repent of it) it is that dividing spirit which would
be Lord (though it pretends a great deal of Humility) that seek, to infest and
disturb her Peace; but the Lord has hitherto preserved it (and will do to the
end, as his keep faithful to him) against all that has or may rise to break
it, either from amongst our selves or others. And for thee to say, Setting up
of Women's Meetings runs parallel with the Bringers in of Circumcision amongst
Believers: Not at all; for the Apostle preached Circumcion down (though he had
no Scripture for it) and said, Gal. 5.2. That if ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing; but he never spoke against Women's Meetings (when he
went where they used to pray) but rather encouraged them, exhorting the Elder
Wowen to teach the Younger; neither did Moses, that Man of God, speak against
or forbid Miriam, and all the Women went out after her, Exodus 15.2. (here were
women apart from the men, and questionless a great assembly or meeting this
was) for doing what they did; he might have said, have not I sung with the
Children of Israel unto the Lord? and what need you women go apart to sing? but
he was not of such a spirit, as to stop or gainsay any thing that was good, in
which there could be no hurt, or tendency of evil, nor in our Women's Meetings;
But thou will be ready to say, This was upon another account then to take care
of the Churches business; it is true; but this part of our women's business in
their Meetings, to praise the Lord for his goodness: and Deborah was a Judge in
Israel, and the Children of Israel came unto her for Judgment, Judge. 4.4, 5.
and Israel was the then Church of God: This may serve for answer to that in thy
Reply to my Answer to thy 4th Query, p. 33. where thou say, it lies upon our
part to prove that ever Females were entrusted to look after the Government of
the Church, which I have here done, to wit, that a Female was entrusted with
the Government of the Church.

In my answer to thy 4th Query thou endest, and there was the first breach of
unity; in mine there was this further, As many can witness, whose Testimony I
hope thou will not deny. So have I showed wherein thou have either added to or
diminished from all or most of my answers, for what end is known unto thy self,
and as a Conclusion there was written, before I subscribed my Name, Thus have I
in plainness, according to what was in my mind, given thee an Answer, and if
herein thou be not satisfied, I leave thee to more abler Brethren for further
satisfaction; but this I know, Richard, were the Truth and the simplicity
thereof kept unto, there would not be so much a do about honest Women's meeting
together for the end beforementioned: and I am really sorry upon serious
consideration, that thou, which have been a strength unto others, should now
become a weakner of the weak, not only in this, but also and more particularly
in other things of weighty concern, which I desire may (in the measure of that
blessed Spirit of Light and Life) be seriously by thee considered and amended,
that so the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, may be truly known.

From thy real Friend and Welwisher Alexander Lawrence.
And for thee in thy Reply to my fourth Answer, so to make use of my words, as
that I should say, That the Scriptures should so far differ (page 34.) from
that Spirit that gave them forth, as to be compared to Babel 's Builders,
because I compare the^ thereunto, who wilt one while have an instance from
Scripture for what we do; and another while, have not others a measure of Gods
Spirit to direct them what to do, and what to leave undone; this I said looked
like Babel's Builders: and for thee to make such use of my sayings as
aforesaid, is little less then wilful Wickedness: But what Scripture had John
for his Baptism, or Paul for his preaching down Circumcision, Priesthood,
Tithes, Temple, Offerings, etc. and setting up new Institutions: so that which
was once done and set up by and according to the Command of God, was afterward
by the Revelation of the divine Power preached down, and another thing set up,
by which it is plain, that the holy Spirit in all Ages was the Rule of God's
People, which was before Scripture was; and was Abel's Rule, Enoch's Rule,
Noah's Rule, Abraham's Rule, etc. and this is the Rule of his at this day; for
it is the everlasting unchangeable Rule; and unto this have our hearts bended,
and by it been broken, blessed be his holy Name: and unto this must thou bend,
and by it be broken more then yet thou art, or it will be worse for thee; and
this holy Spirit leads none to preach any other God, Christ, Spirit, Gospel,
Truth, etc. then what the holy men of God, that gave forth the holy Scriptures,
preached and testified of, as thou reflectingly upon us writest, page 26. yet
the Scriptures speak of another God and Spirit, viz. the God of this World, the
spirit that rules in the hearts of the Children of disobedience; and this is
the ground of Division.

Thus having for the Information and Satisfaction of the sober impartial
Reader, given a short account of the truth of things, and also hinted at some
of thy Wrestings and Perverting of our Words and Doings, knowing it would be
tedious both to the Reader and my self, to trace thee through them all; I leave
the issue of all unto the Searcher of hearts, knowing it is not he that
commends himself, but such as God approves that finds acceptance.



In the Title Page line 9. for Cheshire read Chester: page 7. lin. 2. for no
read to.

THE END.

