A Complete Body OF Chirurgical Operations, Containing The Whole Practice OF
SURGERY. WITH OBSERVATIONS and REMARKS on each Case.

Amongst which are Inserted, the several Ways of Delivering Women in Natural
and Unnatural Labors.

The whole Illustrated with Copper Plates, Explaining the several Bandages,
Sutures, and diverse useful Instruments.

By M. de La Vauguion. M. D. and Intendant of the Royal Hospitals about Paris.

Faithfully Done into English.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwick in St. Paul's Church Yard, T. Goodwin, M.
Wotton, B. Took in Fleetstreet, and S. Manship in Cornhil, 1699.

THE PREFACE.
Surgery or Surgery (as we shall write it in compliance with the present
usage) is an Art which instructs us how to cure a Multitude of Diseases
incident to the Bodies of Men, by the help of Manual Operation. This is one of
the three principal Members of the Art of Physic, without which it would be
lame and imperfect; and however Custom has made it a separate Art, and a sort
of Inferior Employment; yet it is evident it does not require less Study,
Application, and Knowledge, than the other Parts of Medicine, and in many
Respects, for the Certainty and Expedition of the cure, deserves to be
preferred before them. Many Distempers indeed are conquered by a Regular Diet,
and the assiduous Use of proper internal Remedies; but on the contrary, there
are others which are invincible by any milder way, and require the use of
Instruments and external Applications, which alone are capable of giving
certain and effectual Relief to the languishing Patient.

The Invention of Surgery is ascribed to Aesculapius, whose two Sons Podalirius
and Machaon, are celebrated by Homer for their rare Skill and Dexterity, and
the great Services they did in curing the wounded Men in that famous Expedition
against Troy. Chiron and his Pupil Achilles are extolled for their
extraordinary Knowledge of Simples, insomuch that Ulcers which require the
Skill of a finished Surgeon to cure them, are still called Chironia, and that
Plant with which Achilles is reported to have cured Telephus after he had
wounded and defeated him, still bears the Name of Sideritis Achillaea. But the
first who has committed any thing of this kind to writing, was the Great
Hippocrates the seventeenth in Descent from Aesculapius, whose Chirurgical
Pieces of Fractures, Of the Articulations, Of reducing Bones by Machines, Of
Wounds in the Head, etc. are not esteemed by the learned World, inferior to
any of his Writings in the other Parts of Medicine. After this great Man
several of his Country men made Improvements, and this Art for a Series of many
Ages, seemed as it were confined to the Natives of Greece. The next who applied
themselves to improve the Instruments and Operations of Surgery, were the
Arabians, of which the Writings of Albucasis, and some portions of Avicenn are
the only Remains. In the last place, about two or three Centuries, or since it
was introduced into Europe by Guido de Cauliaco, Joannes de Vigo, etc. who
ought justly to be accounted the Fathers of the Modern Surgery; but as yet it
was rude and imperfect till Ambrose Parry, Fab. Hildanus, Fab. ab Aquapendente,
etc. by their successful Labors advanced it to a higher pitch than their
Predecessors; however it was impossible but it must be deficient for want of
the later Discoveries in Anatomy, and since that Science has been cultivated,
and the Structure of Humane Bodies in many particulars better known, Surgery
has necessarily received great Advantages. Since this new Light has been
introduced (which has made the productions of a few Years exceed those of many
preceding Ages) no Nation has been more Industrious to bring Surgery to
perfection than the French; and this is owing almost entirely to the Master
Surgeons of the School of St. Cosmus, who have applied themselves with the last
Diligence, to instruct every Member of their Body in all parts of an Art which
is of so great Use and Importance to Mankind.

But our present Design is not to set forth the Nature or Excellence of this
Art, or give a History of the Degrees by which it has been perfected; and
therefore we shall content our selves with giving the Reader an Account of the
Volume we here present him with, and informing him what he may expect to find
in it. Antiquity has produced many excellent Pieces; but the great Discoveries
in the Humane Microcosm, have opened a large Field for Improvements, and the
New Philosophy has furnished us with more sensible Accounts, than the Obscure
and Uncertain Principles of the Ancients could possibly assist us to find out.
This is so evident and clear, that it is a surprising Thing, that Surgery
should not be earlier advanced by it, and all along till very lately, the old
beaten Path trodden without any regard to the Modern Inventions. Our Author has
reformed this in a great Measure in the following Work, in which he has
presented the Reader with such Instructions for performing the Operations, and
such Reasons for the Accidents which attend them, as are agreeable to the
Structure of the Parts, and the New Doctrines in Philosophy. The whole Volume
is an entire System, which contains all the Operations in the Practice of
Surgery, and the Different manners of Performing them now in Use, and they are
all delivered in a most exact order. For Instance, in the first place he
premises the Definition, for the giving his Reader a Succinct Account of the
Subject under his consideration; Then he explicates the Nature and Cause of the
Disease which he grounds on the Structure of the Part, and this enables the
Artist to give a Rational and Satisfactory Account of what he proposes to
perform, by this means to distinguish himself from Empirick or Ignorant
Mechanic, who can give no other Reason, than the Practice of his Master. In
the next place he delivers the Signs, as well those which serve to detect the
Nature of the Disease, as those which assist the Surgeon to make a Just
Prognostic of the Event. After these necessary Premises, he proceeds to the
Operation it self, in which he gives Instructions extending even to the most
minute Circumstances which can happen, to this he subjoyns the Dressings,
several sorts of Bandages, and so proceeds through the whole Method of treating
the Patient, prescribings in every Case a proper Regimen, and Medicaments to
Complete and perfect the Cure. In the last place, which is not the least
curious of the whole, he adds a great Number of extraordinary and instructive
Observations, extracted out of the Writings of Kerkringius, Bartholine, the
German Transactions, and other Authors, but principally from Fabricius
Hildanus, whose Merit is acknowledged by all knowing Judges. In short; to avoid
any farther expatiating on particulars, whoever shall peruse this Piece with
Care from beginning to end, will find an ample Collection of useful and solid
Knowledge. But I shall not undertake to preingage the Readers Favor, but
rather choose to abandon this Work to his impartial Censure, and leave him to
the Liberty to embrace what he finds in it agreeable to Reason and Experience,
and to Reject the Rest.

THE CONTENTS.
Chapter I. OF Operations in general, p. 1. Their Definition, ib. Cause, The Signs
when necessary, of things previous, p. 2. The Dressing, Cure, Remarks, p. 3. A
Specimen of these, containing an Account of several Accidents on a Gunshot
Wound, ib. Chapter II. Of Sutures, p. 3. Their Definitions, ib. Cause, Signs when
necessary, p. 4. Diagnostick Signs in Wounds, ib. p. sequ. Prognostic, p. 7.
etc. The Operation, and what Instruments necessary, ib. The interrupted or
separate Stich, ib. The Stitching of Wounds which have Angles, ib. Of those
which have none, p. 8. Of Needles, ib. Of the Dry Stitch, ib. Of the Glovers
Stitch, ib. Of Wounds which do not admit of being stitched, and whereof, p. 9.
The Dressing and Cure after Sutures, ib. Of internal and external Remedies, p.
10. When Wounds are to be kept open, and of Tents, p. 11. Of drying up
Serosities, ib. Of Cicatrizing, p. 12. Of Contus'd Wounds, p. 12. Of Gunshot
Wounds, ib. Ambrose Parry's Balsam, p. 13. An Excellent Mundificative after
Digestion, ib. Wounds from the Bite or Sting of Venomous Animals, ib. Of Wounds
of the Veins and Arteries, and Styptick Medicines, p. 14. How to consume
Luxuriant Flesh, ib. Wounds of Nerves, p. 15. And Nervous parts, ib. An
excellent Nervine Medicine. How to take off the Synovia, ib. Of Convulsions on
Wounds in the Tendons, ib. Wounds in the Breast, Head, ib. Of Wounds of the
Cranium, p. 16. Of contus'd Wounds, ib. Remarks, ib. Chapter III. Of the Suture or
Stitching of a Tendon, p. 17. The Dressing and Cure, p. 18. An excellent
Liniment, a good way of preparing Oil of St. John's wort, p. 10. Remarks, ib.
Chapter IV. Of the Hare-Lip, p. 29. Its Definition, ib. Not to be undertaken when
there is a great loss of Substance, ib, etc. The Signs, ib. The Operation, p.
21. Dressing, etc. ib. and sequ. Chapter V. Of the Gastroraphia, or stitching of
the lower Belly, p. 23. The Definition, Cause, The Signs when this is to be
done, and how to judge what Parts are concerned, p. 23. The Operation, ib. Of
the Mortification of the Omentum, p. 24. Of the Guts, ib. Dilating the Wound
for the reducing the Guts. The Operation, p. 25. Dressing, ib. Cure, p. 26. A
good Digestive when the Lips of the Wound are Callous, ib. Remarks, 27. Chapter VI.
Of the Paracenthesis or Aperture of the Belly only in Dropsies, p. 27. The
Definition, ib. The Causes which require it, p. 28. Why the Muscles appear
sound in Hydropick Bedies after their Decease, ib. Of the principal Causes of a
Dropsy, ib. The signs of a Dropsy, p. 29. The cause of the Fever, low Pulse,
pale Complexion, ib. What is previous to to the Operation, ib. The Operation,
ib. When the Lancet or Tap are to be made use of, p. 30. Of Scarification, the
Dressing, and Cure, p. 31. Remarks, p. 32. History of an Hydropick Tumor,
shining like a Looking-glass, ib. Of an Hydropick swelling spotted all over,
ib. Twenty nine pound of Water contained between the Muscles and the
Peritonaeum, ib. Chapter VII. Of the Hydrocele or Hernia Aquosa, p. 33. Its
Definition, Cause, ib. An Ascites, the Operation is needless when this proceeds
from a Dropsy, ib. The signs, p. 33. The Operation, ib. Dressing, p. 34. Cure,
p. 35. Remarks, ib. The Scrotum entirely separated in an Hydrocele, ib.
Regurgitation of the Waters to the Throat, ib. Chapter VIII. Of Hernias or
Ruptures, p. 36. The Definition, Cause, ib. Signs, p. 37. The Operation of the
Bubonocele, or Hernia Inguinalis, p. 40. Of a Complete Hernia, p. 41. The
Dressing, p. 43. Cure, ib. Remarks, p. 44. History of a R^d Urine caused by an
Enterocele. Chapter IX. Of the Exomphalos or Rupture of the Navil, p. 44. The
Definition, Cause, with Remarks on the Structure of that part, p. 44. The
signs, p. 45. Operation, ib. Dressing, p. 46. A convenient Machine to check the
Motion of the Belly, p. 47. Another for the Exomphalos, ib. Trusses of
different kinds, an invention very convenient in these cases. The Cure, p. 48.
Remarks, ib. History of a Rupture of the Navil, with a great crack, ib. A
swelling of the Navil in a Newborn Child, ib. The Guts forcing themselves out
of the Belly in a newborn Child, ib. Chapter X. Of Castration, p. 49. The
Definition, Cause, ib. Signs that the Intestine adheres to the Testicle, p. 50.
Why swellings of the Stones are of ill consequence, ib. The Operation, ib. What
to be done when the productions of the Peritonaeum are Carcinomatous, the
Dressing and Cure, p. 51. Remarks, ib. History of the parts of the Testicle, as
hard as Flints, ib. Of a Fever which brought down the Stones of a young Man,
who had none before that time. ib. Chapter XI. Of the Phymosis, p. 52. The
Definition and Cause of the Distemper, ib. When the Operation is required, ib.
The Operation, ib. Dressing, p. 53. Cure, p. 54. Remarks, ib. An History of a
Child who had a prepuce of a Monstrous size from his Birth, ib. Chapter XII. Of the
Paraphymosis, p. 54. The Definition and Cause, ib. Signs, p. 55. The Operation,
Dressing and Cure, ib. Remarks, p. 56. The History of a Cancer as large as a
Man's Head, proceeding from a Wart on the Prepuce ib. Chapter XIII. Of Lithotomy or
Cutting for the Stone, p. 57. The Definition, Cause of the Operation, ib. The
Opinions of Hippocrates, Fernelius and the Chemists concerning the generation
of the Stone, ib. Signs of the existence of the Stone, and in what parts it is
found, p. 59. Causes of the Symptoms, ib. Some farther signs of a Stone in the
Bladder, p. 60. Why the Urine is emitted at certain intervals, and whence the
Pain after making water proceeds, and the involuntary erection of the Yard, ib.
Signs that there are several stones in the Bladder, ib. How it comes to pass
that a Patient may carry a stone about him all his Lifetime, and not be
incommoded by it, ib. The manner of Extraction, p. 61. Two ways of searching,
ib. The way of searching Women, p. 62 How to know if the stone be large, ib.
What to be done when it adheres to the Bladder, when it is broke, ib. The
lesser Apparatus in Men, p. 64. The same in Women. The way of cutting Women by
the greater Apparatus, p. 65. How to judge of the success, ib. How to proceed
when the stone is in the Urethra, Glans, Neck of the Bladder, ib. Of Sunction,
of Incision, ib. The Dressing, p. 66. After Incision of Yard, ib. The Cure, ib.
How Persons cut for the stone, must regulate themselves. Remarks, p. 64. The
History of a stone found in the Bladder, which weighed 52 ounces, Another of
25. ib. Three stones as big as Wallnuts, voided by the Yard, ib. A stone made
up of two other pieces, weighing together 22 ounces, ib. A stone taken out of
the Scrotum, weighing 8 drams, ib. Seventy two dark, brown stones found in the
Lungs of a certain person, ib. The Gallbladder filled with greenish Flints,
bigger than Beans, ib. Five stones found in the Gallbladder of Pope Urban
VIII. ib. Seventy soft stones which melted in Water found in the Gallbladder
of a Woman, ib. Stones found in the Gallbladder of several other Animals, ib.
Sweating of Gravel, ib. The Brain of an Ox petrefied, ib. Vrines with long
Filaments, p. 70. An History of a Woman who could not feel the heat of an Oven,
though she burnt her side, ib. Four small stones which came out in bleeding in
the Arm, ib. A stone as large as a Pullets Egg, found lodged in an Abscess in
the Liver, ib. A stone carried off by a Decoction of Speedwell, ib. Chapter XIV. Of
the Punction of the Perinaeum, p. 71. The Definition, Cause, ib. Signs when
required. The Operation, Dressing, Cure, ib, Remarks, p. 72. History of a Woman
who having the small Pox, had her Fundament rotted, ib. Of a suppression of
Urine on Riding, which proved Mortal, ib. Chapter XV. Of the Fistula in Ano, p. 73.
The Definition, the Cause, ib. Why Fistula's happen more frequently in the
Anus, than any other parts, ib. The signs, ib. When Fistula's are curable, p.
74. The different sorts of Fistula's, ib. The Operation of the Fistula in Ano,
The Dressing, p. 76. The Cure, ib. Fabricius Hildanus method of curing
Fistula's, ib. Remarks, ib. History of a Fistula of the Yard, with four Sinus.
Chapter XVI. Of the Empyema, p. 77. The Cause, ib. The signs of a Pleurisy, p. 78.
Why the Patient cannot lie on one side, ib. Signs of an Abscess in the Lungs,
p. 79. Signs which show that a Wound penetrates the Lungs, ib. The manner of
searching a recent Wound in the Breast, p. 80. Signs which show that the Lungs
are hurt superficially, ib. A sign of Blood extravasated in the Lungs, ib. Of
the Cause of the usual Symptoms, the Florid color of the Cheek, the vivacity
of the Eyes, etc. ib. The Operation, p. 81. Dressing, p. 82. Cure, p. 83. Of
Vulnerary Injections, etc. Method of curing an Empyema without operation.
Riverius his manner of curing Pleurisies, p. 85. A Pleurisy with an acute
Fever, cured by the same, ib. Fab. Hildanus method for curing of Pleurisies,
ib. Remarks, p. 86. An History of Obstructions and Schirrosities in the Liver,
Spleen, and a stone in the Lungs, covered with a carnous coat in an Asthmatick
Person, p. 86. Of stones and concreted blood found in the Lungs of a Phthisical
Patient, ib. Of a Person suffocated by a great piece of the Lungs falling into
the Aspera Arteria, ib. Chapter XVII. Of the Extirpation of a Cancer, p. 87. The
Definition, Cause, ib. Signs which demonstrate a swelling to be Cancerous, p.
88. The several steps by which a Cancer grows, ib. Signs when it is upon the
point of Vlcerating, what parts are most subject to them. Of things previous to
the operation, p. 88. The Operation, ib. The old way of taking off a Cancer, p.
89. The Dressing after the Operation, p. 90. Heliodorus his Bandage, ib. The
Cure, ib. Of the virtues of red Snails, etc. ib. Another case-related by
Riverius, ib. Fab. Hildanus's method, p. 91. Remarks, p. 92. History of a
Cancerous Ulcer, which corroded the Breast quite down to the Ribs, ib. A Cancer
beginning at the extremity of the Tongue, ib. Chapter XVIII. Of Bronchotomy, p. 93.
The Definition, Cause, ib. The different sorts of Quinsies, etc. ib. Why
Children are subject to Quinsies, p. 94. Signs and Prognostics, ib. The
Operation, and what precautions are necessary, p. 95. The Dressing, Cure, p.
96. Method of curing Quinsies without the Operation, p. 97. Remarks, 99.
History of a Quinsie, proceeding from a Dysentery, ib. Another from Pepper
applied to the Uvula, ib. Chapter XIX. Of Bleeding, p. 99. The Definition, Causes,
Signs, ib. The Operation, p. 100. The Precautions necessary, ib. What Persons
and Times, etc. are improper for this Operation, How to know if the stone be
large, ib. What to done when it adheres to the Bladder, when it is broke, ib.
The lesser Apparatus in Men, p. 64. The same in Women. The way of cutting Women
by the greater Apparatus, p. 65. How to judge of the success, ib. How to
proceed when the stone is in the Urethra, Glans, Neck of the Bladder, ib. Of
Sunction, of Incision, ib. The Dressing, p. 66. After Incision of Yard, ib. The
Cure, ib. How Persons cut for the stone, must regulate themselves. Remarks, p.
64. The History of a stone found in the Bladder, which weighed 52 ounces,
Another of 25. ib. Three stones as big as Wallnuts, voided by the Yard, ib. A
stone made up of two other pieces, weighing together 22 ounces, ib. A stone
taken out of the Scrotum, weighing 8 drams, ib. Seventy two dark, brown stones
found in the Lungs of a certain person, ib. The Gallbladder filled with
greenish Flints, bigger than Beans, ib. Five stones found in the Gallbladder
of Pope Urban VIII. ib. Seventy soft stones which melted in Water found in the
Gallbladder of a Woman, ib. Stones found in the Gallbladder of several other
Animals, ib. Sweating of Gravel, ib. The Brain of an Ox petresied, ib. Vrines
with long Filaments, p. 70. An History of a Woman who could not feel the heat
of an Oven, though she burnt her side, ib. Four small stones which came out in
bleeding in the Arm, ib. A stone as large as a Pullets Egg, found lodged in an
Abscess in the Liver, ib. A stone carried off by a Decoction of Speedwell, ib.
Chapter XIV. Of the Punction of the Perinaeum, p. 71. The Definition, Cause, ib.
Signs when required. The Operation, Dressing, Cure, ib. Remarks, p. 72. History
of a Woman who having the small Pox, had her Fundament rotted, ib. Of a
suppression of Urine on Riding, which proved Mortal, ib. Chapter XV. Of the Fistula
in Ano, p. 73. The Definition, the Cause, ib. Why Fistula's happen more
frequently in the Anus, than any other parts, ib. The signs, ib. When Fistula's
are curable, p. 74. The different sorts of Fistula's, ib. The Operation of the
Fistula in Ano, The Dressing, p. 76. The Cure, ib. Fabricius Hildanus method of
curing Fistula's, ib. Remarks, ib. History of a Fistula of the Yard, with four
Sinus. Chapter XVI. Of the Empyema, p. 77. The Cause, ib. The signs of a Pleurisy,
p. 78. Why the Patient cannot lie on one side, ib. Signs of an Abscess in the
Lungs, p. 79. Signs which show that a Wound penetrates the Lungs, ib. The
manner of searching a recent Wound in the Breast, p. 80. Signs which show that
the Lungs are hurt superficially, ib. A sign of Blood extravasated in the
Lungs, ib. Of the Cause of the usual Symptoms, the Florid color of the Cheek,
the vivacity of the Eyes, etc. ib. The Operation, p. 81. Dressing, p. 82. Cure,
p. 83. Of Vulnerary Injections, etc. Method of curing an Empyema without
operation. Riverius his manner of curing Pleurisies, p. 85. A Pleurisy with an
acute Fever, cured by the same, ib. Fab. Hildanus method for curing of
Pleurisies, ib. Remarks, p. 86. An History of Obstructions and Schirrosities in
the Liver, Spleen, and a stone in the Lungs, covered with a carnous coat in an
Asthmatick Person, p. 86. Of stones and concreted blood found in the Lungs of a
Phthisical Patient, ib. Of a Person suffocated by a great piece of the Lungs
falling into the Aspera Arteria, ib. Chapter XVII. Of the Extirpation of a Cancer,
p. 87. The Definition, Cause, ib. Signs which demonstrate a swelling to be
Cancerous, p. 88. The several steps by which a Cancer grows, ib. Signs when it
is upon the point of Vlcerating, what parts are most subject to them. Of things
previous to the operation, p. 88. The Operation, ib. The old way of taking off
a Cancer, p. 89. The Dressing after the Operation, p. 90. Heliodorus his
Bandage, ib. The Cure, ib. Of the virtues of red Snails, etc. ib. Another case
related by Riverius, ib. Fab. Hildanus's method, p. 91. Remarks, p. 92. History
of a Cancerous Ulcer, which corroded the Breast quite down to the Ribs, ib. A
Cancer beginning at the extremity of the Tongue, ib. Chapter XVIII. Of Bronchotomy,
p. 93. The Definition, Cause, ib. The different sorts of Quinsies, etc. ib. Why
Children are subject to Quinsies, p. 94. Signs and Prognostics, ib. The
Operation, and what precautions are necessary, p. 95. The Dressing, Cure, p.
96. Method of curing Quinsies without the Operation, p. 97. Remarks, 99.
History of a Quinsie, proceeding from a Dysentery, ib. Another from Pepper
applied to the Uvula, ib. Chapter XIX. Of Bleeding, p. 99. The Definition, Causes,
Signs, ib. The Operation, p. 100. The Precautions necessary, ib. What Persons
and Times, etc. are improper for this Operation, ib. and seq. Of the Veins
which are most frequently opened, p. 103. Of the manner of opening them, p.
105. Why the Ligature is put about the Neck in bleeding in the Head, p. 106.
Way of opening a Vessel, p. 107. Posture of the Patient, ib. Way of holding the
Lancet, etc. p. 109. and seq. Trying the part, p. 110. How to proceed when the
Vessel is deep, p. 111. Of the way of pricking, etc. ib. Of bleeding in the
Foot, p. 115. Of bleeding in the Jugular, ib. Of bleeding under the Tongue, p.
116. Of opening the Arteries, p. 116. How to order the bleeding, and close the
Orifice, p. 117. The Dressing after bleeding in the Arm, etc. p. 117. Bandages
for bleeding in the Foot, p. 118. Forehead, ib. End of the Nose, p. 119.
Temporal Arteny, p. 120. Bleeding in the Jugulars, ib. The Cure after bleeding,
p. 121. Circumstances to be observed, p. 121. Swooning, and whether the Patient
may sleep after bleeding, ib. What Judgment is to be made of the Color, Scent,
etc. of the blood, p. 124. and sequ. Of the several Accidents which may happen
after bleeding, as discoloration of the Part, Erisypelas, etc. Pricking of a
Tendon, etc. and the way of remedying them, p. 127. and sequ. Remarks, p. 136.
The History of a Child born dead, caused by the Mothers being twice bled at the
same time, ib. Another of the pricking of the Nerve in bleeding Charles the IX.
ib. Chapter XX. Of an Aneurism, 137. The Definition, Cause, ib. Signs of a genuine
one, of a Bastard one, ib. The Operation, ib. Dressing, p. 139. Cure, p. 140.
Of curing an Aneurism without Operation, ib. Fab. Hildanus's way, p. 141.
Remarks, p. 142. An Aneurism on the right Clavicle, ib. History of an Aneurism,
which translated it self to a Man's Breast, p. 143. Chapter XXI. Of the Trepan, p.
143. The Definition, ib. The Cause of a Fracture of the Skull, ib. The
different sorts of Fractures according to Hippocrates, and their Causes, ib.
and sequ. The signs of a Fracture, p. 146. Of the Accidents, as Fever,
Inflammation, Coma, Bleeding at the Nose, etc. and their Causes and
Prognostics, ib. and sequ. Of the Structure of the Cranium, p. 154. Of the
Bones in particular, as the Frontal, Parietal, Temporal, Occipital,
Sphaenoidal, etc. in Adults, and in the Foetus, etc. p. 156. and sequ. An exact
History of the Holes in the Basis of the Skull, and the Vessels which pass
through them, p. 167. The Operation, p. 171. Of several parts on which the
Instrument must not be applied, as the Sutures, Eyebrows, etc. ib. The manner
of making the Incision, p. 173. The Dressing, p. 175. Cure, p. 176. Fabr.
Hildanus's Method of proceeding in Fractures of the Skull, p. 177. Remarks, p.
178. The History of the Cure of a Woman who had lost a portion of her Brain, p.
179. Of a Child who became stupid by a blow on the Head, ib. Of a Depression of
the Skull, without any remarkable Accidents, ib. Of an Epilepsy cured by a
Fracture of the Skull, p. 180. Of a great quantity of Pus voided by the Nose,
and yet none found in the Brain, ib. Chapter XXII. Of the Fistula Lachrymalis, p.
181. The Definition, Cause, and Signs, ib. The Operation, p. 182. Dressing,
Cure, p. 183. Remarks, p. 186. An History of a large Hemorrhage of the Eye, ib.
Chapter XXIII. Of Cataracts, p. 187. The Definition, Cause, Signs, ib. How to know
if a Cataract be ripe, p. 188. The Operation, ib. The Dressing, Cure, Remarks,
p. 189. The History of a Person who could see in the Dark, ib. Riverius's way
of curing an Ophthalmy, p. 190. Chapter XXIV. Of Delivering Women, p. 190. The
Definition, The Cause, ib. Signs of Conception, ib. Signs which precede and
accompany a Natural delivery, p. 191. The Operation or manner of Delivering
Women, p. 193. Of fetching away the Afterbirth, p. 195. Of Hard and Unnatural
Labors, p. 197. How to deliver a Woman when the Feet present first, ib. When
the Head is stopped in the passage, p. 198. How to bring away the Head when it is
torn from the Body, and remains behind in the Womb, p. 199. How to deliver a
Woman when the Child's Head thrusts out the Neck of the Womb, p. 200. When the
Child's Head comes first, but is too big, or the Passage cannot be sufficiently
dilated, ib. When the Child presents one side of his Head, or Face first, p.
201. When its Head is entirely out, and the Body stopped by the Shoulders, ib.
When the Child presents one or both Hands together, with its Head, p. 202. When
it presents one or both Hands alone, ib. When it comes with the Knees first, p.
203. The Shoulder, Back or Breech, ib. The Belly, Breast, or Sides, p. 204.
When two or more Children present together in the Passage, ib. When the Navil
comes first, p. 205. When the Burden presents first, or entirely comes away
before the Child, p. 2^5. When there is a Flooding and Convulsions, p. 206.
When the Child is Hydropical or Monstrous, ib. When the Child is dead in the
Womb, p. 207. Of a Mole or false Conception, p. 208. Signs to distinguish a
true conception, from a false one, ib. How to procure the expulsion of a Mole,
ib. How to fetch away a Mole when it is exceedingly large, or strongly adheres
to the Womb, ib. How to extract a False Conception, ib. The way of ordering a
Woman after her Delivery, p. 209. The Dressing of the Child, p. 210. What Rules
a Woman with Child must observe, p. 211. Of the Accidents which happen to them,
and how to remedy them, Vomiting, p. 215. Pains in the Loins, Reins, Groins,
etc. p. 216. Of Pains in the Breast, p. 217. Of a Stoppage of Urine, ib. Of a
Cough, and Difficulty of Breathing, p. 218. Of Pains and Varicose, and
oedematous Swellings in the Thighs and Legs, p. 219. Of the Hemorrhoides, p.
220. Of a Looseness, Dysentery, etc. p. 221. Menstrual Flux, p. 223. Of
Flooding, p. 224. Weight or Bearing down of the Womb, p. 226. Dropsy of the
Womb, ib. Swelling of the Loins, p. 227. Of the Venereal Distemper, p. 228. Of
Abortions, p. 229. How a Woman with Child must be ordered, when her reckoning
is up, p. 230. After her Delivery, p. 231. Of Applications to the Privities,
Belly, and Breasts of a Woman newly laid, p. 232. How she is to be managed
during her Labor, p. 233. How to dry up the Milk, p. 234. Of Flooding after
Labor. What is to be done when this proceeds from a False Conception. Of the
Falling out of the Neck of the Womb, p. 236. Of the falling out of the Rectum,
p. 238. Of the Haemorrhoides which happen to Women in their Labor; Of
Contusions and Rents of the Exterior Parts, p. 238. Of Pains after delivery,
p. 240. Of the Cleansings, and the signs when they are good or bad, 241. Of
Accidents arising from their suppression, p. 242. Of an Inflammation of the
Womb after Delivery, p. 243. Of Schirrosities of the Womb, p. 244. Of a Cancer,
p. 245. Of a Looseness soon after Labor, p. 247. Of Ruptures in the Belly, p.
247. Of an Inflammation of the Breasts, p. 248. Coagulated Milk, p. 249. Of
Apostems in the Breasts, p. 250. Of excoriation and loss of the Nipples, p.
251. Of the swelling of the Legs and Thighs, p. 253. Of Fits of the Mother,
etc. p. 253. Of the Whites, p. 255. Of Dieting and ordering the Newborn Child,
p. 256. Of their Weakness. Of the swelling, and of the too great openness of
the Mould, p. 260. Of Gripes and Pains in their Bowels, p. 261. Of the
Inflammation and Vlceration of the Navil, etc. p. 262. Of the Smartings,
Redness, Inflammation of the Groins, Thighs, and Buttocks, p. 263. Of the
Thrush or small Ulcers in the Mouth, p. 264. Of a Looseness, p. 266. Of
Vomiting. ib. Of Ruptures, p. 267. Of a Hydrocele, ib. Of Scabs in the Head or
Face, p. 268. Of the Meezles and small Pox, with their Symptoms and Cure, ib.
and sequ. Of the Venereal Distemper in Children, p. 269. Directions for the
choice of a good Nurse, p. 272. Ways to prevent a Child from growing
Squint-eyed or awry, and to rectify any part that is distorted, p. 274.
Remarks on Deliveries, p. 275. History of a Child which had been two Months
dead in its Mothers Belly, without the least Cadaverous Stench. ib. Of a Woman
who was delivered of a sound Child, notwithstanding she had a Virulent
Gonorrhea for a twelvemonth before, ib. Of a Child which dyed of a Defluxion on
the Brain, proceeding from the coldness of the Water with which it was
Baptized, ib. Of a Woman which Miscarried in her Mouth of a Foetus, exceedingly
emaciated nine days after, being frighted with a Clap of Thunder, ib* Of a
Woman who was delivered alone at her due term of a Daughter, who was sound and
well, though the Mother voided above a pint of Water in one day, above two
Months before, p. 276. Of a Woman with Child who had the Hymen entire, ib. Of a
Woman with Child, which never had her Courses, ib. Of a Woman who had been
blooded four or five times in the Arm, twice in the Foot, once in the Throat,
who notwithstanding at her due time, was delivered of a sound Child which
lived, and did well, ib. Of a Woman who was safely delivered, notwithstanding
she had undergone a copious Salivation, during the time of her Pregnancy, ib.
Of a Woman who was with Child, notwithstanding she constantly had a Pessary,
ib. Of a Woman who was delivered of a sound Child, notwithstanding she had been
Hydropical for above nine Years, p. 277. Of an Hydropical Woman two Else about,
who notwithstanding was several times delivered of a Child at her due time, ib.
Of a Woman emitting wind from the Womb, with as great a Noise as from the Anus,
ib. Of a False Conception proceeding from a fright, ib. Of a Child killed in
the Mothers Belly by a sudden fright, ib. Of a Foetus no larger than a Man's
Nail, which had all its parts well distinguished, p. 278. Of a Laceration of
the Womb, ib. Of a Child who lived two Hours after it was taken out of its
Mothers Belly, she being dead, ib. Of a Woman who lost the use of her Reason
and after recovered it in a Labor, ib. Of the Testicle of a Woman bigger than
a Man's Head, ib. Of a Child born with the Scars of the small Pox, ib. Of
Children born yellow, by reason of the Mothers taking of Saffron, p. 279. Of a
Child which retired into the Womb after it was half out, ib. Of a Child which
was heard to cry in its Mothers Womb, ib. Of a Child groaning in its Mothers
Belly, and the Calamities which this did presage. ib. Chapter XXV. Of the Caesarean
Birth, p. 280. The Definition, Cause, Signs, ib. The Operation, Dressing, ib.
Cure, p. 281. Remarks, ib. An History which proves this Operation to have been
made, ib. The History of a Big-bellied Woman whose Womb insinuated it self into
the Groin, so as to require an Incision for the extracting of the Foetus, ib.
Chapter XXVI. Of a Polypus, p. 282. The Definition, Cause, Signs, ib. Operation, p.
283. Dressing, ib. Cure, p. 284. Of Ozenas, ib. Remarks, p. 285. Riverius
Method of curing a Polypus, ib. Worms sometimes come from Ulcers of the Nose,
ib. Chapter XXVII. Of Amputation, p. 285. The Definition, Cause, ib. Of Gangrenes
and Mortifications, their Causes and Signs, The Operation, p. 291. Dressing, p.
292. Cure of the Stump, p. 293. Fab. Hildanus way, p. 294. Remarks, p. 295. Chapter
XXVIII. Of a Paronychia or Whitlow, p. 296. The Definition, Cause, Signs, ib.
The Operation, Dressing, Cure, p. 297. Remarks, p. 298. An History of one cured
by putting the Finger into a Cats Ear, ib. Fab. Hildanus Method of curing
Whitlows, ib. XXIX. Of Applying Causticks, and making Issues, p. 299. The
Definition, Cause, Signs, ib. The Operation, Dressing, p. 300. Cure, p. 301.
Remarks, ib. Chapter XXX. Of making of Setons, p. 301. The Definition, Cause,
Signs, ib. The Operation, ib. Dressing, Cure, p. 302. Remarks, ib. History of a
Child perfectly cured of an inveterate Fluxion, by a Seton. ib. Chapter XXXI. Of
Cupping and Scarifying, p. 303. The Definition, Cause, ib. Signs, p. 304. The
Operation, ib. Several manners of Scarifying, ib. The Dressing, Cure, p. 305.
Fa. Hildanus way of applying Cupping-glasses, ib. Great loss of blood by
Cupping, ib. Chapter XXXII. Of Applying Leeches, p. 306. The Cause, Signs when
required, ib. Of the choice of Leeches, and the way of managing them, ib. The
Dressing, Cure, Remarks, p. 307. Chapter XXXIII. Of applying Blisters, p. 308. The
Definition, Cause, Signs, Operation, ib. Manner of making Blisters, ib. Some
Cautions in their Use, ib. The Dressing, ib. Cure, p. 309. Remarks, ib. History
of a young Man cured after the taking of 12 Cantharides, ib. Chapter XXXIV. Of the
Extirpation of the Uvula, p. 310. The Definition, Cause, Signs of a
Mortification of that part, The Operation, Dressing, Cure, ib. Remarks, History
of the Uvula, so much Swollen, as to fill the whole Capacity of the Mouth, ib.
Chapter XXXV. Of the Varices in the Veins, The Definition, Cause, Signs, ib. Why
most pregnant Women have Varicose swellings in their Legs, ib. The Operation,
and how to cure Varices without proceeding to it, ib. The Dressing, Cure,
Remarks. ib. Chapter XXXVI. Of Reducing the Fundament, p. 313. The Definition,
Cause, Signs, ib. The Operation, Dressing, ib. The Cure, p. 314. Remarks, Fab.
Hildanus's way of curing a Procidentia Any, ib Chapter XXXVII. Of Reducing the
Womb, p. 315. The Definition, Cause of its falling out, Signs of the Relaxation
of the Vagina, ib. The Operation, ib. Dressing, Cure, 316. Remarks, History of
a Carnous Excrescence in the Vagina mistaken for a falling out of the Womb, ib.
Of a Wench mistaken for a Boy, by reason of the Relaxation of the Vagina, p.
317. Chapter XXXVIII. Of Opening Abscesses, p. 317. The Definition, Cause, ib.
Signs of an Abscess, ib. The Operation, ib. The Dressing, Cure, p. 318.
Remarks, p. 319. Chapter XXXIX. Of the Hydrocephalus, p. 319. The Definition,
Cause, Signs, ib. Operation, p. 320. Dressing, Cure^ ib. Remarks, p. 321. An
History of a Child who had its Head two Foot three Inches in Circumference ib.
History of a Hydropical Head, filled with a Saline Water, ib. Of a Brain which
had lost its consistence, ib. Of Thirty ounces of a clear Saline Water, drawn
out of the Head of a Child, ib. Chapter XL. Of opening Parts imperforate, p. 322.
The Definition, Cause, Signs, Operation, ib. Of a Membrane covering the
Tympanum. Of a Carnous Excrescence in the Audicory Passage, ib. Of the closure
of the Nostrils in Children; p. 323. Of the opening the Urethra, ib. Of the
imperforation of the Anus, and the Vagina, ib. The Dressing, ib. The Cure, ib.
Remarks, p. 324. History of a Yard perforated near the Scrotum, ib. Of a Yard
without any Urethra, ib. Chapter XLI. Of cutting Tongue-tied Children, p. 324. The
Cause, Signs, ib. The Operation, p. 325. Dressing, Cure, Remarks, ib. Chapter XLII.
Of the Coalition of the Fingers, p. 326. The Definition, Cause, Signs, ib. The
Operation, The Dressing, ib. The Cure, Remarks, p. 327. Chapter XLIII. Of
Extracting all Extraneous Bodies, p. 327. The Definition, Cause, Signs, ib. The
Operation, ib. Extracting of Bodies fallen into the Ear, Eye, Nose, Throat, p.
328. The Dressing, Cure, Remarks, p. 329. Chapter XLIV. Of Extirpating Scrophulous
Tumors, p. 329. The Definition, Cause of Scrophulous Tumors, ib. Of the
Bronchocele, p 330. The Signs, Operation, Dressing, ib. The Cure, p. 331.
Remarks, p. 332. Chapter XLV. Of Warts, Wenns, Horny and Fungous Excrescences, p.
332. D^finition, Cause, ib. The Signs, the Operation, Dressing, Cure, Remarks,
Hildanus's Method of cu^ing Warts. Chapter XLVI. Of taking out Cystis's or Bags, p.
335. The Definition, etc. ib. Dressing, Cure, Remarks, p. 336. Chapter XLVII. Of
^utt^ng out the The Nails when they enter the Flesh. p. 337. The Definition,
Cause, etc. ib. Chapter XLVIII. Of Perforating the Cornea, p. 338. The Definition,
Cause, etc. ib. Remarks, History of Sight recovered by Fab. Hildanus, p. 339.
Ducts which bring in the Aqueous Humor, first observed by M* Nuck, ib. Chapter
XLIX. Of Ungula's in the greater Angle of the Eyes, The Definition, Cause,
Signs, etc. p. 340. Chapter L. Of Extirpating a Cancer of the Eye, The Definition,
etc. p. 341. Chapter LI. Of a Coalition of the Eyelids, p. 343. The Definition,
Cause, etc. History of the Eyelid adhering to the Globe of the Eye, cured from
Fab. Hildanus, ib. Chapter LII. Of drawing out Hairs when they stick in the Eyes,
The Definition, Cause, ib. etc. History of Blindness proceeding, frequent
Sneezing, p. 345. Chapter LIII. Of Drawing Teeth, p. 346. The Definition, ib. Cause
of the Toothache, ib. Of the Teeth in general, and the manner of their
Formation, ib. The Operation, etc. 347. Remarks, An Extract of a Letter
concerning the Teeth of diverse Animals, p. 349, etc. History of a Cancer in a
Tooth, p. 352. Of Sinuous Fistula's proceeding from Pain in the Teeth, p. 353.
Chapter LIVE. Of Prothesis, or supplying parts Deficient, p. 354. The Definition,
Cause, etc. ib. Chapter LV. Of Transfusion and Injections into the Veins, p. 356.
The Definition, ib. Remarks. History of the Injecting fair Water into the Veins
of an Animal, 360. Of Sack, ib the Golden Purging Wine, ib. Of an Infusion of
Cro^^ Metallorum, ib. Of Opium, p. 361. Of Aqua Reg^a. ib. Of Spirit of Nitre
into the Subclavian Vein of a D^^, ib. Of Rosin of Scammony dissolved in
Essence of Gua^^cum, to a Soldier who had the Pox, ib. Of an Epil^p^^, ^^red by
an Infusion of Jalap, ib. Injection of Spirit of ^^nish Wine, ib. Chapter LVI. Of
the Bones in general, and the manner of t^^^^ Nutrition, p. 362. Of the Ma^^^,
p. 364. A Com^^^ion of the Marrow in the Bones of Men, with the Pith in Trees,
ib. Of the Production of the Callus, p. 365. A Popular Mistake of the Influence
of the Moon noted, ib. Concerning the Articulations, p. 366. Chapter LVII. Of
fractures in general, The Definition, etc, ib. The Cure, p. 372. A good
Emplaster for Fractures, p. 372. Forestus Cerate for the Nervous parts, 373.
The Dressing, p. 374. Remarks, ib. Chapter LVIII. Of the Fracture of the Nose, p.
375. The Definition, etc. ib. Chapter LXVI. Of the Fracture of the lower Jaw, p.
378. etc. Remarks, Fab. Hildanus Method to lessen the Callus, p. 381. Chapter
LXVIII. Of the Fracture of the Clavicle, p. 382, etc. Chapter LIX. Of the Fracture
of the Shoulder Blade, p. 385, etc. Chapter LX. Of the Fracture of the Ribs. p.
388, etc. Chapter LXI. Of the Fracture of the Sternum or Breast Bone, p. 392. Chapter
LXII. Of the Fracture of the Vertebrae, p. 394. Chapter LXIII. Of the Fracture of
the Rump-bone, p. 401. Chapter LXIV. Of a Fracture of the Os Ilium, Question
whether the Os Pubis be separated in Women's Labors, p. 403. Chapter LXV. Of the
Fracture of the Humerus or Shoulderbone, etc. p. 403. The History of the
breaking an Arm by a very slight Motion, p. 406. Chapter LXVI. Of the Fracture of
the Bones of the Hand, p. 407. Chapter LXVII. Of the Fracture of the Thigh, p. 409.
Chapter LXVIII. Of the Fracture of the Rotula, p. 413. History of a Lameness
arising from a Fracture of the Rotula p 41^. Chapter LXIX. Of a Complicate Fracture
of the Leg, p. 415. History of a Wound which opened again, twenty years after
it had been healed, p. 417. Chapter LXIX. Of the Fracture of the Bones of the Feet,
p. 418. History of a strange Wound happening from a small leap, p. 419. Chapter LXX.
Of Luxations in general, p. 420. Chapter LXXI. Of the Luxation of the Bones of the
Cranium, p. 424. History of the separation of the Sutures, p. 425. Chapter LXXII.
Of the Luxation of the Bones of the Nose, p. 426. Chapter LXXIII. Of the Luxation
of the lower Jaw, p. 427. Chapter LXXIV. Of the Luxation of the Clavicle, p. 428.
Chapter LXXV. Of the Luxation of the Vertebrae, p. 429. Chapter LXXVI. Of the Luxation
of the Ribs, and the Cartilago Mucronata, etc. p. 432. History of a Luxation,
attended with a great Diarrhaea. Chapter LXXVIII. Of the Luxation of the Humerus,
p. 434. etc. History of an extreme Emaciation, proceeding from a Luxation of
the Shoulder Bone, p. 438. Chapter LXXIX. Of the Luxation of the Elbow, p. 438. Chapter
LXXX. Of the Luxation of the Bones of the Wrist, p. 440. Chapter LXXXI. Of the
Luxation of the Thigh, p. 441. Chapter LXXXII. Of the Luxation of the Knee, p. 444.
Chapter LXXXIII. Of the Luxation of the Bones of the Foot. p. 446.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. l. 36. after Apoplexy, r. ensue, p. 10. l. 23. for drawn r. distilled,
p. 22. l. 20. r. to be clapped, p. 38. l. 12. for Circocele r. Cirsocele, p. 89.
l. 15, 16. 26. and sequ. for Pincers r. Forceps, p. 135. l. ult. after to be,
r. mortified, p. 280. l. 22. for and on one side, r. the Body of the Womb, and
put, p. 332. l. 5. ounce, r. once. p. 403. l.ult. in the Notes, Bauhinus's
Observations, p. 446. l. 9. be slipped, in the r. be slipped in, the.

A COMPLETE BODY, OF Chirurgical Operations.
CHAP. I. Of Operations in General.
AN Operation is the Industrious and Methodical Application of the Surgeons
Hand, to the Parts of a Humane Body, to restore them to their Natural State.

There are Five Species of Operations, Synthesis, Diaeresis, Exaeresis, Taxis
and Prothesis, [or Uniting, Dividing, Extracting, Reducing, Supplying.]

Synthesis is the dexterous reuniting parts divided, as Wounds by the help of
Sutures.

Diaeresis is dividing with judgment parts which require division, as the
opening Abscesses.

Exaeresis is the Artful extracting extraneous Bodies, or any noxious
Substance, as Bullets, Matter, etc.

Taxis is Restoring to their Natural Site parts displaced, as the Guts fallen
into the Scrotum.

Prothesis is the adding by Art and Industry useful parts deficient, as
Artificial Legs and Arms. This last is not properly termed an Operation.

Sometimes several of these concur, viz. in an Abscess where an aperture is
made, the Pus let out, the parts reunited, and the whole incarned.

The CAUSE of Operations are Diseases incurable, except by an industrious
Application of the Hand. Thus Parts mortified, Bones very much shattered
require Amputation, Extravasated Blood on the Brain the Trepan, the
Strangulation of the Gut in the Scrotum, the Bubonocele, with an infinity of
the like nature amply treated of in this Course of Operations.

The SIGNS which instruct the Surgeon in what cases an Operation is necessary,
are taken from the various Diseases to which Humane Bodies are subject, and
shall be distinctly delivered in treating of each particular.

In each OPERATION it is necessary to know what is to be done Before, At the
time of performing it, and After it is over. Before the Operation, all
necessaries must be provided for the well performing it. During the making it,
all the Rules prescribed must be carefully observed, and After it, Care must be
had for the Perfecting the Cure.

Farther there are four Things to be regarded, Of what Nature the Operation is,
For what Reason it is attempted, If Necessary and Possible, and The Manner of
performing it. The First may be learnt in the Definition. The Second from
considering the Nature of the Disease incurable by other means. The Third must
be determined by comparing the Disease, the Strength and Constitution of the
Patient, and the Part affected. The Last is fully delivered in the Rules of
Art, prescribed in their proper places.

If the Operation can be deferred, it is best to wait for the most favorable
Season, Spring, Autumn, Winter and Summer having all different Advantages
conducing to a happy Cure.

The Spring puts new life into the Blood and Spirits concentered by the Winters
Cold, raises a kind Fermentation, and exalts them to the Surface of the Body.

The Autumn sweetens and calms the Blood, grown sharp and sour by the loss of
its Spirituous and Balsamic parts, dissipated by the immoderate Heats of the
Summer.

The Winter closes the Pores, obstructs Transpiration, abates the Circulation,
which has scarce vigor enough to animate the Parts.

PROPER DRESSING must be applied on the part after the Operation is finished,
the Neatness of which is a great comfort to the Patient, by persuading him He
is in the Hands of an able Surgeon. This sets his mind at ease, and Nature
advances the Cure more equally. At the end of each Operation, the Reader may
find an exact Method of Dressing.

The CVRE varies according to the different Operations, to which we shall remit
the Reader.

THE REMARKS annexed to each Operation, we hope will be useful to those who
peruse them; They are extracted out of the Best and most Famous Practitioners
of Europe, especially Fabricius Hildanus, a Person of well known Merit, and
highly valued by all Physicians and Surgeons. Among other of whose Observations
this is one, Cent. 4. Obs. 59. A certain Big-bellyed Woman in her eighth Month,
received a Gunshot wound on the Right Thigh, not with any Bullet, but a Pellet
of chewed Paper only, which entered the Muscles a Fingers length. The Child in
the Womb was so much affected with the Blow, that it dyed instantly; some time
after the waters in which the Foetus ordinarily swims, made their way. The
Succeeding Day the Woman was delivered of a Child, Dead, Black, Flabby and
Stinking: After some Time she began to recover, and the Wound was completely
healed in 24 Days.

CHAP. II. Of the Sutures.
SVture is a stitching of Wounds, to help their Reunion. There are three Kinds
of Sutures, Incarning, Restringent and Conservative.

The Incarning have their Stitches separate.

The Restringent have their Stitches continuous.

The Conservative are such as are made in Great Wounds, to prevent deformity.

The Incarning Sutures are the Interrupted, the Quilled, the Twisted, the
Clasping and the Dry Suture.

The Restringent made to stop a flux of Blood, are the Glovers, the Shoomakers,
the Tailors, that from without inwards, that from within outward, that of
Celsus made in form of a Cross.

See all the several Kinds of Sutures or Stitches, from Fig. 97. to 83.
There are but four kinds of Sutures necessary, the Interrupted, the Twisted,
the Dry, and the Glovers Suture, The others are useless and prejudicial, the
Figure of which nevertheless I have annexed, in the Plates at the end of this
Work, to gratify the Curious.

The CAUSE of Sutures are Wounds Recent, or Divisions of the soft Parts from
some external Cause.

Wounds are Simple or Complicate. Simple Wounds are a bare division of the
Flesh, not accompanied with any ill Accident. On the contrary,

Complicate Wounds are such as are attended with diverse Accidents, as Pain,
Inflammation, Contusion, loss of Substance, etc.

THE DIAGNOSTICK SIGNS. In External Wounds the Division of the Flesh is
visible, but Internal are not so easily discovered.

If a Wound penetrate the Breast, and the Patient bring up Blood in Coughing,
you can hear the Air come out of the Wound in expiration, it is a sign the
Lungs are wounded, and the Vessels hurt.

If there be a plentiful effusion of blood from the Breast, and the push is
directed toward the Heart, there is ground to fear that important Organ is
hurt.

If the Blood which comes from it be Hot, Black and Boiling, it is probable the
Right Ventricle is hurt, but if it be of a Florid Scarlet color and Frothy, it
is the Left Ventricle which has received the Thrust.

When the Heart is wounded, the Arteries beat feebly; The Face turns Pale, the
Extreme parts grow chill, and the whole Body is covered with a cold Sweat.

If the Diaphragm be wounded, the Patient can scarce breath, feels a great pain
in the Back, Shoulders and Arms.

If the Spinal Marrow be hurt, the Nerves are relaxed, all Sense lost,
sometimes the Seed and Urine come away involuntarily.

If the Aspera Arteria be hurt, the Patient spits Blood, has a great pain
toward his Back, the Voice becomes Hoarse, and the Tongue Dry.

If the Guts are hurt and the wound be small, there happen Syncopes,
Inquietude, Convulsions and Fever. If the Patient vomit or void blood by Stool,
or the Faeces come forth, it is certain the wound is large.

If the thrust be in the Belly, and there happen a plentiful effusion of Blood,
it is a sign the Great Artery or Vena Cava is cut.

When the Stomach is wounded, the Patient has cutting Pains, Bilious Vomiting,
Cold Sweats, the Hiccough; loses all Appetite, and the Aliment comes forth of
the wound, if it be very large.

If the wound be on the right Side a little above the Navil, and penetrates far
in, and something obliquely toward the Bastard Ribs, and black Blood come
plentifully from the wound, the Party wounded feels great pain in these parts,
vomits Bile, and lies on his Belly more commodiously, than in any other
posture, you may pronounce, the Liver is wounded.

If the wound be on the left Side deep, and near the Seat of the Spleen, and a
black Blood issue from it, it is a sign the Spleen is hurt.

In wounds of the Kidneys, the Patient pisses with great Difficulty; The Urine
is Bloody, and a pain is felt in the Groin.

When the Sphincter of the Bladder is hurt, the Urine flows out involuntarily,
and if its Bottom it comes out in the Belly, and through the Orifice.

There is reason to fear, the Brain and its Meninges are Hurt, when the
Fracture of the Skull is of a large extent, the Eyes are Swollen and full of
pain, the Face is red and inflamed, the Patient is Comatose, a Fever is
kindled, with a hard Pulse, shaking Fits frequently recurring, and Vomitings:
He voids Blood by the Nose, Mouth or Ears. The Excrements and Urine come away
involuntarily, and a a Syncope, Vomitings, Convulsion, Delirium, Lethargy and
Apoplexy. The Lungs and the Liver Apostemate, which is discovered by a fixed
Pain on the sides of the Breast, or the Region of the Liver, or by frequent
Rigours. All or several of these signs concurring, are sufficient to show the
Brain is hurt.

When the Nerves art hurt, Inflammation, Pain and Convulsion ordinarily succeed.

These Prognostics are mostly taken from that memorable Aphorism of
Hippocrates, Sect. 6.18. If the Urinary Bladder, Brain, Heart, Diaphragm, Small
Guts, Stomach or Liver happen to be hurt, the Wound is Mortal. But these Wounds
which are pronounced Mortal, are not always so, and many Instances to the
contrary, (as in the Brain, Liver, Stomach, Guts, etc.) occurr in Authors,
particulars of which would be too numerous to recite here.
THE PROGNOSTIC SIGNS. Wounds of the Head are most commonly Dangerous, by
reason of the nicety of the Brain and its Membranes, which seldom escape
alteration, when the Head is wounded.

Great Wounds of the Dura-Mater are Mortal, because of the division of its
Blood Vessels, but if the Wound be small and remote from the Sinus's or
principal Vessels, the Patient may well enough escape.

There is no reason to pronounce Wounds of the Aspera Arteria Mortal, though the
Cartilages of the Larynx happen to be divided. In desperate Quinsies when the
Respiration is hindered by the Tumor of the Throat; Physicians sometimes advise
an Incision to be made in the Aspera Arteria, by which the Lives of many have
been saved, ^^he^^^se desperate. This Operation is called Bronchotomia, and the
manner of performing it d^s^ribed by our Author, Chap xviii.
Wounds in the Spine of the Neck, Aspera Arteria and Oesophagus, are Mortal:
Those in the Blood Vessels and Nerves are dangerous, it being difficult to stop
the Blood, if the wound be large.

Wounds of the Breast are not very dangerous when they are external, but if
they penetrate, there is much to be feared upon the score of the Lungs and
Heart.

Wounds which penetrate the Ventricles of the Heart are Mortal, and the great
Flux of Blood instantly kills the Patient, but if the wound be near its Cone,
the Patient may live several Days. Wounds of the Pericardium are Mortal, as
well as those of the Lungs And so are

Wounds of the Thoracick Duct and Receptacle of the Chyle, by reason no New
Blood can be prepared for defect of this Juice.

Great Wounds of the Diaphragan are Mortal, because respiration is interrupted.

Wounds of the Stomach and Guts are Mortal, it being difficult to reunite them
by reason of their peristaltick Motion. The Chyle and Excrements flow through
the wound, and cause great Putrefaction in the lower Belly.

Wounds of the Mesentery are not Mortal, except the Blood Vessels, Lacteals and
Lymphaticks are cut, in which Case the Blood and Lympha flowing into the Belly,
make great Putrefactions.

Wounds of the Lungs are not always Mortal, and those of the Omentum are only
so upon the account of the Division of the Vessels.

Wounds of the Liver are Mortal, by reason of the numerous Vessels in that
Viscus, which admit of no Application, besides that the Heart and Lungs suffer
by communication of their Nerves, from whence proceed Syncopes, Vomiting of
Bile, and Difficulty of Breathing.

Wounds of the Gall Bladder are Mortal, because this is the Receptacle of the
Bile, by whose Irritation the Expulsion of the Excrements is made.

Deep wounds of the Kidneys are Mortal, because these are the Receptacles and
Strainers, through which the Urine is percolated.

Wounds of the Vreters are Mortal, because the Urine falling into the lower
Belly, corrupts its Contents.

Wounds of the Vterus are very Dangerous, or to speak more plainly Mortal.

To conclude; all Wounds of the Great Vessels in the lower Belly are Mortal, it
being impossible to stop the Flux of Blood.

THE OPERATION.
The Instruments here to be used, are the Fingers, Needles and Thread. You must
have Needles of different Figures and Sizes, Straight, Crooked, Flat, all sharp
and of well tempered Metal. The Thread must be single or double, as the Nature
of the wound shall require.

The Interrupted Suture.
To make this Suture, you must begin to clear the Wound from all extraneous
Bodies and Coagulated Blood. A Servant must hold together the Lips. These
Cautions are common to all Sutures. You must pass the Needle with the Waxed
Thread in it, into the middle of the wound from without inwards, leaving a
moderate Distance between each Stitch. You must pierce deep enough, and go to
the Bottom of the wound, least an effusion of Blood there obstruct the Reunion.

If a Wound have Angles, you must begin the Suture there. Before you tie the
Knot, you must bring the Edges of the wound together, which if they are not
Level, will leave an inequality in Cicatrizing. If Wounds have no Angles, you
must begin to tie that Thread which is in the midst, and make a simple knot on
the side opposite to the discharging of the Matter; on this knot you must lay a
small Compress of Linen Cloth Waxed, on which you must make a slip-knot, which
may with ease be undone if any Accident happen.

If you intend to cover the wound after the Suture with an Emplaster, you must
lay a small Compress on the knots to hinder its sticking to them, which creates
a great deal of trouble to the Patient in taking off the Dressings.

If any Inflammation happen, you must dexterously loose the knots in such
manner, that you may close all again when the Accidents are abated. But if the
Accidents are so pressing as to oblige you to cut the Threads, you must pass a
Cannulated Probe under them, and slide the point of the Scissars on the
Cannula. After the Reunion is completed, you must cut the Threads on the
Probe, observing to put your finger on the knots to stay the Flesh; and draw
out the Thread gently, to prevent tearing open the wound.

In Superficial wounds you must use straight Needles, in Deep ones crooked.

The twisted Suture is used in the Hare-lip, of which in its proper place.

The Dry Suture.
This is only made in Superficial wounds, in places where we must be careful to
avoid Deformity, as in the Face or Hands of the Fair Sex. This Suture is not
very much to be depended on, because most commonly it loosens. The Manner of
making it is thus. Take two pieces of new Linen Cloth with their Hemms on,
proportioned to the largeness of the Wound. The Hemms must be laid on the edges
of the wound, then cut the Cloth into Digitations, at a convenient distance
from each other. The number of Digitations must be equal to the number of
Stitches you intend to make; to the end of each Digitation, sow a small Ribbon;
then dip the Cloth in strong glue, and apply it a Fingers breadth from the
edges of the wound; these Ribbons must be tied to each other in such manner,
that the edges of the wound may touch.

The Glovers Stitch.
This is made in great wounds of the Guts and Scrotum. To make it, Take a
straight Needle with waxed Thread: then take the two Lips of the Wound between
the Thumb and Forefinger, whilst an Assistant holds the Gut at one end: Then
stitch it length-ways, passing the Thread beneath and over the Lips of the
wound, in the same manner Glovers use to stitch their Leather.

Wounds altered by the Air do not admit of Sutures, these are not to be cured
without Suppuration, because the Nitre of the Air wasting the Unctuous parts of
the Blood, which is the Balsam used by Nature for the uniting of Wounds, and
keeping the Parts supple, the Fibers grow dry, the Pores are contracted, and
dangerous obstructions ensue. Besides the Salts of the Air lodging in wounds,
are changed into a Vitriolick Arsenical Matter, which corrodes and frets the
Vessels, hinders the Cure, and causes a Gangrene.

Sutures are not convenient in contused Wounds, which must suppurate to con^^rt
the Blood extravasated between the Fibers and Vesiculae into Pus. Nor in wounds
with great loss of Substance, whose Lips cannot be brought together to reunite.
Nor in the Bites of Venomous Animals, as well upon the account of their
Contusion, as the continual irritation of the Venom, which molests the Part,
infects the Mass of Blood, hinders the Reunion. In this case the external
Remedies must be most potent Resolvents, and the Internal Cordials and
Corroborants. Nor in Divisions of the larger Vessels, where the great Flux of
Blood and Pledgits with Stypticks thrust into the wound; Nor in wounds of the
Breast, where the perpetual Motion obstructs the Union. It is a question among
Practitioners, if Sutures may be made on Bones laid bare. I shall declare in
short my Opinion. If there be a Contusion or Fracture in the Bone, an
exfoliation must be procured, and since there is no better way to obtain this,
than to expose the Part to be altered by the Air, you must not make any Suture
in this Case. But if the Bone be sound and entire, and you desire to preserve
it from Exfoliation, a Suture must be made without delay, in which there is no
danger; because the Threads may easily be cut, if any Accident shall press. In
the last place Longitudinal Wounds do not require Suture, the Uniting Bandage
being sufficient.

THE MANNER OF DRESSING is directed in each Operation, where Sutures are
necessary.

THE CURE IN SIMPLE WOUNDS, consists in reuniting the divided parts, in
removing all external Obstacles, such as Coagulated Blood, and Extraneous
Bodies, in bringing together the Lips, and applying Vulnerary, Agglutinating
and Balsamic Remedies.

Since the Blood is the true Balsam which Nature makes use of for the Reunion
of Wounds, the Surgeon must be careful to prevent all corruptions of this Noble
Liquor, by extirpating the Seeds of Distempers, Rectifying its Fermentations
and Digestions, and Restoring it to its Natural State.

To this purpose conduce Clysters to cleanse the lower Belly, Mild Purgatives,
and lastly Diaphoreticks which purify the Blood, and sweeten the Nutritive
Juice, v.g. Diaphoretick Antimony, ss. Crabs Eyes, ij. Sperma Ceti, i. Chalk,
ss. Salt of Lead, gr. iv. Give the Mixture in some proper Vehicle, as a Glass
of Carduus, or any other Sudorifick Water. Or, Waters of Mint and Chervil,
ijss. Crabs Eyes, i. Diaphoretick Antimony, i. Salt of Wormwood, ss. Treacle of
Andromachus, Sperma Ceti, Elixir Vitae, Syrup of Speedwell, a^ i. Of this
Mixture give some Spoonfuls from time to time till the Patient Sweat, and then
cover him close.

The ill impressions of the Air, must be corrected by Balsamic Applications,
which must be Volatile, Saline and Oleous, Resembling the Blood which is the
Natural Balsam, such are Balsam of Peru, Oil of St. John's wort, the Juice from
Peel of Elms drawn in Balneo Mariae, Oil of Turpentine allayed with Balsam of
Peru, Balsam of Sulphur, and preferrably to all others of the like kind, the
Bals. Samech of Paracelsus prepared with Salt of Tartar, volatilized with
Spirit of Wine. But Oils by expression without other preparation are dangerous,
as well upon the Account of their Viscosity, which makes them hurtful to the
Nervous parts, rotting them, stopping the Pores, and hindering Transpiration as
by a certain latent Acid, able to corrode Iron and Silver.

Sharp Medicines must not be applied to wounds, Experience showing us they keep
wounds open too long, waste the Flesh and Blood, and by their Acrimony bring
Pain and Fluxion. Only Temperate Balsams are proper to parts Replete with
Blood, and Temperate inclining to Acrid and Bitter for the Nervous parts, which
last require more deterging Medicines, since they commonly produce more Filth
than other parts. Add to these Vulnerary Potions made of Decoction of proper
Plants, as Great Sanicle or Ladies Mantle, Ground Ivy, Speedwell, St. John's
wort, Chervil, Crab's-eyes boiled in White Wind, and drunk every part of which
is Vulnerary. We must not use these Balsams if it be necessary to keep the
wound open, as in those which enter the Cavity of the Breast, for fear of any
Matter which may happen to be lodged there, or any Inflammation or Contusion;
for here if the wound be closed too soon, we have no means left to prevent
accidents. Suppuratives must be used, which are ordinarily made of Turpentine,
the Yelks of Eggs, with the Addition of a little Honey, Myrrh, Balsam of Peru,
and Gum Elemi, and after a laudable Pus obtained, treat the wound like a simple
Ulcer with Mundificants, Sarcoticks, and Agglutinating Medicines.

Wounds then are cured by applying Balsamicks, removing extraneous Bodies,
approaching their Lips, and retaining them by Bandage and Suture. Hares-grease
is esteemed excellent to draw extraneous Bodies out of the wound, whether the
Part be rubbed with it alone, or mixed with Unguent of Betony, or made into an
Emplaster with Gum-Arabick. It is pretended Radishes, Dictamnus of Crete mixed
with this Grease, have the same Virtue. Or Crab's-eyes, Hares-grease, a^ ss.
White Amber, iij. Mix and apply them. To these add, Savin, Periwinkle,
Crab's-eyes, which are proper Ingredients in vulnerary Potions, to expel all
extraneous Substances.

Tents dipped in some good Balsam, must be kept in deep wounds till their bottom
be cleansed, that their Flesh may grow up to their sides, without which it
would increase too fast, the Orifice close, and the Pus and Filth lodge within,
from whence Pains, Inflammations, Return of the Abscess, Fistula's, and deep
Cystis's. But before any Tent be put in, it is necessary to consider well, if
no Nervous part lie on the side of the wound; in this Case Tents too long or
big, will inevitably create acute pain, which irritates the Nervous parts,
corrupts their Juice, and causes a dryness and extenuation of the Part. The
Tent must not be very big, except it be in the middle; not filling the wound
that it may have room to swell; its point must be soft for fear of Hurting the
Flesh, which begins to renew and grow again. Tents must not be too long
continued, because they are apt to generate a Callus on the edges of the wound,
which obstructs Reunion; but must be diminisht by degrees, to give the Flesh
liberty to grow.

A Serous Humor gleeting from the wound in the time of Cicatrizing, makes the
Flesh Flabby and Soft, occasions excrescences, hinders the Unition, and to
Skinning Here Desiccatives must be used to absorb excessive Humidity, and
moderate Astringents to correct the Laxity of the Flesh, and give them a firm
consistence.

There happens at some times, an Inequal Roughness and Hardness in the Cicatrix
after the Part is Healed, which proceeds from the Fibers of the Skin, not
exactly meeting those which they are separated from, and the Pores and Channels
which before the Division were straight and answering to each other, are
confounded and displaced; and from hence the Nutritious Juice being detained
and stopped in the Part, produces a Callus in the Bones, and a Cicatrix in the
fleshy parts, especially if Restringents and Desiccatives have been employed,
which contract the Pores, make the Fibers firm, and harden the Part.

WOUNDS CONTUSED easily putrefie, and this obstructs the Cure; for this Reason,
if the Contusion be slight, you must have Recourse to Suppuratives to separate
that which is mortified and bruised. But if the Contusion and Wound be very
great, and you have reason to fear Gangrene before you can obtain a
Suppuration, you must make Incisions into, and Scarify the Part, to give issue
to the Blood, and suppurate the rest with good Digestives, adding Aegyptiacum
by way of precaution. From the first you must apply Topics on the part, proper
to prevent Corruption, such as Oil of Wax, with which rub the part, laying on
the Emplaster of Cummin, Oil of the Philosophers, Emplaster of Laurel Berries,
Or Roots of the greater or lesser Consound, Flowers of Chamomil and Melilot, a^
i. Saffron, i. Flour of Beans, Fenugreek, a^ iss. Boil these in water first,
putting in the Roots, then add Wormwood, Powder of Cummin a^ ss, mix these, and
apply them outwardly. When the greatest part of the Contusion is overcome, rub
in Spirit of Sal Armoniack destilled with quicklime, which is an excellent
Medicine.

WOUNDS CONTUSED easily putrefie, and this obstructs the Cure; for this Reason,
if the Contusion be slight, you must have Recourse to Suppuratives to separate
that which is mortified and bruised. But if the Contusion and Wound be very
great, and you have reason to fear Gangrene before you can obtain a
Suppuration, you must make Incisions into, and Scarify the Part, to give issue
to the Blood, and suppurate the rest with good Digestives, adding Aegyptiacum
by way of precaution. From the first you must apply Topics on the part, proper
to prevent Corruption, such as Oil of Wax, with which rub the part, laying on
the Emplaster of Cummin, Oil of the Philosophers, Emplaster of Laurel Berries,
Or Roots of the greater or lesser Consound, Flowers of Chamomil and Melilot, a^
i. Saffron, i. Flour of Beans, Fenugreek, a^ iss. Boil these in water first,
putting in the Roots, then add Wormwood, Powder of Cummin a^ ss, mix these, and
apply them outwardly. When the greatest part of the Contusion is overcome, rub
in Spirit of Sal Armoniack destilled with quicklime, which is an excellent
Medicine.

GUNSHOT WOUNDS are always attended with Contusion, Laceration and Superficial
Heat; for this Reason you must suppurate the Contusion, which commonly begins
to appear on the third or fourth Day, during which time, it is enough to take
off the dressings once in twenty four Hours. After Suppuration made, and the
Abscess formed, and the contused Matter resolved, you must dress the wound with
Mundisicants, and clear it from all extraneous Bodies. Spirit of Wine and
Balsam of Peru, must be added to the Digestives and Maturating Applications, to
prevent the bruised parts from mortifying. Spirit of Wine is excellent in
Burns, and you ought to dip your Tent in it, before you lay Digestives and
Suppuratives on them, because Digestives are not always agreeable to the
Nervous parts, and Spirit of Wine corrects their ill qualities. The Application
must be laid on, so as to give vent to the Matter on all sides, Ambrose Parry's
Balsam is proper for Gunshot Wounds, which is made in the following manner. Oil
of White Lilies or Violets, lb iv. Boil in this Liquor some young Puppies, till
the bones are dissolved, add a pound of Earthworms boiled in Wine; Boil all
again, adding to the strained Liquor Venice Turpentine, iij. Spirit of Wine,
iss. Mix these and make a Liniment, which is excellent to appease pain, and
ripen these Wounds. After Suppuration use the following Mundificant, Venice
Turpentine, v. Honey of Roses strained, Myrrh, Aloes, Mistick, Round Birthwort
a^ iss. Barley flower, iij. Mix these for a Liniment, which imbibe and wet with
Spirit of Wine. You must continue to mundifie till new Flesh grow up. If in the
mean time any great putrefaction or corruption happen, you must add to the
beforementioned Remedies Precepitate well edulcorated, especially if the
Nervous parts happen not to be hurt. If Pains happen below in the Bones, Oil of
Turpentine is an excellent Remedy, especially in the Caries of a Fissure.

WOUNDS FROM THE BITE OR STING OF VENOMOUS ANIMALS, require deep Scarifications
of the part, applying to the wound Oil of Nutmeggs, Vigo 's Emplaster with
Mercury. Juice of pounded Onions is excellent for the Puncture of Spiders.
Scarification is not necessary if the wound be not deep, as the Sting of a
Wasp, or some such like Insect. In the Bites of Vipers or Serpents, you must
scarifie the part, and crush a living Toad on it; or a dry one, if you cannot
get one alive; if you macerate it in Wine or Vinegar, it will be more
efficacious: A red hot Iron applied as near the wound as may be, is a Remedy
experienced by Mr. Boil. The Serpentine Stone found in Snakes of the
East Indies, or that compounded of it, is a very good preservative against the
Bites of all Mad or Venomous Animals. Or in defect of this, the Magnetic
Emplaster of Angelus Sala, with the addition of an Ounce or two of Crab's-eyes
calcined. The contiguous parts must be rubbed with Oil of Scorpions, with a
little Sugar of Lead to prevent inflammation. The following Cataplasm against
the Biting of Venomous Animals, is generally reputed good.. One sharp Onion,
one Clove of Garlic, Balm, Venice Treacle, Common Leaven, a^ ss. Beat all
together into the form of a Cataplasm. After the Venom is drawn out of the
Wound, apply a good Balsam or a Digestive, with the addition of Aegyptiacum.
Inwardly you must give Spirit and Volatile Salt of Vipers, Spirit and Decoction
of Crabs to stop the progress of the Venom.

Add to these in^stion of the Part with the actual Cautery, applying of
Cupping-glasses and dipping in the Salt Water, which last practice now commonly
used after (...) Bites of Mad Animals is recommended by Celsus.
WOUNDS OF THE VEINS AND ARTERIES, are always attended with great Flux of Blood,
to stop which, apply Crepitus Lupi, which is a sort of dried Fungus, with a
close Bandage. This may be soaked in a Solution of Vitriol of Steel, with a
moiety of Salt dissolved in some decoction of Mild, Vegetable, Restringents,
and applied Cold with Stupes. If the wound be large, you must throw in
Bole-Armoniack, or the Caput mort. of Vitriol well edulcorated. You must
observe that all Stypticks whatever are useless, except they be kept firm on
the part with a straight Bandage. Oak Moss, or the Pith of Elder pulverized and
strewed on the Wound, stop an Haemorrhage, Moss of a Humane Skull is a certain
Remedy. The following Restringent is good,. Sharpest Vinegar, i. Crocus of
Steel, i. Colcothar or dulcified Earth of Vitriol, ss. Beat all together very
well, and dip Rags with powder of the Crepitus Lupi, and apply it to the wound.
If these means are not sufficient, make a ligature on the Vessels, according to
the manner prescribed in the Operation of the Aneurism. For the internal
Medicines which stop Blood, those wherein Swines or Asses Dung are Ingredients
are to be preferred, and to those which have Nitre prepared with Antimony,
Tinctures of Sulphur and Vitriol, and the Astringent Tincture of Mars. If
superfluous Flesh spring up, you must strew on Burnt Alome, Crocus Metallorum,
or rub the part with Aegyptiacum. But the best way is to touch it with the
Lapis infernalis.

The Lapis infernal^^ is not the Lixivial Caustic commonly so called in
England, but the Lunar Caustic described by Lemery with that Title.
WOUNDS OF THE NERVES AND NERVOUS PARTS. These parts are easily altered and
corrupted, and contract a Gangrene by means of the external Air, and the Flux
of that Synovia, [or thin Gleet] which obstructs their Unition. In Hurts of the
Nervous parts, it is necessary to rub the Limb from the first Rise of the
Nerves with Oil of Earthworms, heightened with Distilled Oil of Lavender.
Distilled Oil of Lavender taken inwardly, removes Convulsions, and so does Oil
of Sage, Amber. All Unctuous and Mucilaginous things, all Greases and expressed
Oils are hurtful in Nervous wounds, which require penetrating Medicines, such
as Balsam of Peru, Distilled Oil of Turpentine, Oil of Wax, Distilled Oil of
Lavender, Oil of the Philosophers, Distilled Oil or Balsam of St. John's wort,
Spirit of Wine and Gum Elemi. The following Composition is excellent, Dialtheae
iv. Distilled Oil of Bays, iss. Mix and apply this. The Following Oil is
admirable to apply to the Fist, the Tops of St. John's wort in flower, two
Handfulls; Common Oil, l. vi. Digest these together, adding Turpentine lb.
Powder of Earthworms, iij. a little Saffron, Mix these and apply them to wounds
of the Nerves. Tents must not be put into Nervous parts if it can be avoided,
because they aggravate the Pain. To abate the Synovia or Gleet from the
Joints,. Oyster shells calcined, i. Powder of Skulls burnt, dried Bones, Jaws
of a Pike calcined, a^ ij. Burnt Ivory, Terra Sigillata, a^ iss. strew the
Powder on the Part. Hogs-dung incorporated with the Blood of the Wound, Boiled
and applied in F^rm of a Cataplasm, is a Specific to stop the Synovia,
Distilled Water of Pounded Crabs applied with Rags, does not only stop the
Synovia, but takes off all other Inflammations, Erysipelas, and Pain in wounded
Parts. If Convulsions proceed from a partial division of the Tendons, cut them
quite asunder, and stitch them as directed in the Operation of the Suture of
the Tendon.

WOUNDS OF THE BREAST, if they hurt the Lungs, require internal Medicines to
prevent and cure a Pleurisy or Peripneumony, which ordinarily happen in these
wounds. You must put in Tents Capped, or with a Head, to give a free exit to
the Blood and Sanies, which otherwise would create an Empyema. Internally you
must give Diuretics and Vulnerary potions; We may observe Pus, Sanies, and
Blood sometimes voided by Urine in these wounds.

WOUNDS OF THE HEAD, require the Body to be kept open, if they are superficial
it suffices to use Oil of St. John's wort, Balsam of Peru, Emplaster of Betony.
Or this following, Emplaster of Betony, Tacamahac a^ incorporate these with
Balsam of Peru. If the wound hurt the Cranium, and do not pass through it,
strew on it powder or Orrice Root, Aloes and Myrrh, impregnated with Spirit of
Wine, or distilled Oil of Turpentine, and lay dry Lint on it. Nothing which is
oily or greasy, is to be used in Fractures of the Cranium. If wounds pierce the
Cranium, stop instantly the Flux of Blood with Powder of Frankincense and
Whites of Eggs, with a little Bole Armoniack. Put into the Cranium Pledgits
dipped in a little Oil of Turpentine, with Balsam of Peru: You must never suffer
Oily or Greasy Medicines to touch the Brain; If the Brain or its Membranes
begin to corrupt, use Honey with some few drops of Oil of Turpentine, but never
Honey alone. In contus'd wounds which are Superficial, use to the part affected
Oil of St. John's wort, with a small proportion of Chemical Oil of Aniseseeds;
But if they are Deep, there will be a great swelling, and you must attempt to
dissipate it by insensible Transpiration, or open it without farther delay,
least the Pus corrode the Periosteum and the Bone by its Acrimony, and then
heal the wound with Digestives and Suppuratives, of which kind is this
Composition.. Turpentine distilled, Gumm Elemi, a^ iss. Beavers Grease, and
Stale Hogs lard, i. Mix these and apply them.

REMARKS.
It is Useless as well as Dangerous, to make Sutures on Parts tumefied, as some
Practitioners have done after the Amputation of Limbs, passing the Thread
crossways to draw together the Flesh; this Practice is to be condemned, because
the parts after the Operation tumefying with abundance of Pain burst the
Threads which kept them in, and hinder the Application of Pledgits.

CHAP. III. Of the Suture of the Tendon.
THIS Operation is a Stitching of the Tendon to reunite its parts.

THE CAUSE of the Suture of a Tendon, is its division.

THE SIGNS are evident from the apparent Separation, and loss of Motion in the
part.

The OPERATION.
When a Tendon is cut asunder, it suffers no Tension, Inflation or Fluxion, the
contracted parts only retiring and increasing something in Bulk. But if the
Tendon be divided in Part only, you must instantly cut it asunder, without
which there will infallibly follow Vehement and Sharp Pain, Convulsion,
Syncope's, Vomiting, Fluxes, Fevers, Coma's, and frequently a Gangrene. The
Fibers remaining entire, wanting the Assistance of those which are cut, are
burst and torn by the contraction of the Muscle, or suffer violent Tension, and
the Blood spilt in the Wound beginning to ferment, its Saline parts, prick and
molest them, which determines the Spirits toward the Muscles in a great Hurry
and Confusion, and causes the Convulsion. The Spirits flying to various parts
of the Body in this disorderly manner, the Heart is deprived of their influx,
disabled in its motion, and hence Syncope's necessarily ensue. The Spirits
beginning to regain their Natural Course, redouble their Strength, and Dart
themselves with great Swiftness into the Fibers of the Stomach, by the great
communication between the Nerves of the Heart and this part; and this creates
violent Heavings and Vomitings. The Stomach by its contraction very much
compresses the Gallbladder, and the Biliary and Pancreatick Duct, forcing them
to discharge their contents into the Guts, and from hence Fluxes arise. These
Liquors wanting due preparation, corrupt and communicate an ill Ferment to the
Chyle, with which they are mixed in the Intestines, and from hence Fevers
proceed. The Fermenting Blood rises to the Brain with great impetuosity, and
the Vessels by the flow Circulation through the Sinus's, not being sufficient
to discharge it into the J^gulars, with the same Expedition it is brought
thither, and compresses the Nerves arising from the Basis of the Brain, which
are dispensed to the Organs of Sense, and this causes the Coma.

If the Tendons are so far contracted within the Flesh, that you cannot draw
them out with your Forceps, mollify them with Oil of Wax, or Oil of sweet
Almonds drawn without Fire; because these being Viscous, are for that reason
proper to Sheath the Acidity of the Blood, and abate the Pain. If the
opportunity of rejoyning the Tendon while the Wound is recent be neglected, you
must open the Cicatrix as little as may be, because the Flesh preserves it from
the Alteration which might otherwise happen.

In making the Operation, cut as little as may be, the extremity of the
Tendons, if they happen to be callous by remaining long divided. The part must
be kept a little bended, for the better approaching of the two ends, which must
be brought about one sixth part of an Inch one over another. It is not
sufficient for their Unition to have the Edges brought together, because by the
Contraction of the Muscle, they would be soon drawn asunder; but by applying
the one extremity a little over the other, they are reunited by the Nutritious
Juice issuing from their two Extremities and forming a so^t of Ganglion.

The Surgeon must take a Straight, Thin, Flat Needle, Threaded with a double
Thread well waxed, with a Knot at the end, into which he must put a small
Compress. Then He must pass his Needle from without inwards into the Tendons,
laid over each other, and after from within outward, then make a simple knot
on the small Compress, and after that a slip-knot.

The DRESSING. When the Operation is finished, you must keep the part bended by
the Help of Past-board and Bandage, for fear least the ends of the Tendons
should be drawn asunder, which would make their Reunion after impossible. You
must lay on the Wound a small pledgit dipped in some Spirituous Liquor, and a
small Compress over it, and keep all on by Rolling the Part.

The CURE. When the Wound is Cicatrized, chafe it with Spirituous and Balsamic
Medicines, to make the Tendon supple, and by degrees extend it self, lest the
Part remain stiff and contracted. The Suture must be humected with Oil well
mixed with Spirit of Wine. The following days you must use a Balsam made with
Turpentine, Tincture of Aloes in Spirit of Wine, infusion of the Flowers of St.
John's Wort. All Oily and Greasy Medicines corrupt the Tendons, and must be
forborne. Cataplasms made of Wine, with the four meals, the Yelk of an Egg and
Honey, are very good in the beginning of the Distemper. During the whole Cure,
you ought to chafe well the Limb with some good Liniments, to the Origin of the
Nerves; for example, the Neck, if it be the Arm; and the Spine of the Back, if
it be the Thigh and Leg, with Oil of Earthworms, heightened with the Chemical
Oil of Lavender. The following Unguent is good. Oil of Earthworms, Foxes, Man's
Fat a^ iss. Juice of Earthworms, ss. Mix all well, and rub the Part with them,
Balsam of Peru, Distilled Oil of Turpentine, Oil of Wax, Distilled Oil of
Lavender, Oil of the Philosophers, Distilled Oil of Bays, Balsam of St. John's
wort, Spirit of Wine, Gum Elemi are good Medicines to apply to the Tendons, and
all other Nervous parts. The Composition of Felix Wortz is excellent, which is
thus made; Of the. Unguent. Dialthaeae, iiij. Chemical Oil of Bays, iss. Mix
and apply them. This Oil of St. John's Wort is admirable.. Of the Tops of St.
John's Wort in Flower, one Handful. Common Oil, vi. Digest these together,
adding Turpentine, lbi. Oil of Earthworms, iij. with a small quantity of
Saffron; mix the Ingredients. The Exuviae of Snakes powdered, and Crab's-eyes
mixed, is admirable to unite Nervous parts divided. Or. Distilled Oil of
Turpentine i. Camphor ss. Spirit of Wine i. mix and apply them; This is Parry's
Medicine. Last of all Frictions with Balsamic and Spirituous Medicines supple
the part, dispose it to a gradual Extension, which otherwise would remain stiff
and bended.

REMARKS.
We must not esteem this Operation imaginary or impracticable. Veslingius in
his Epistles, Bartholine in his Observations, and Etmuller in his Surgery
assure us, that it was made at Paris, on a certain Person who had all the
Tendons of the Wrist cut. This Practice of which there are several Hints in
Authors, as Guido de Cauliaco, Felix W^^^zius, Severinus, and others, was of
late years revived and practiced with Success by Monsieur Bienaise, and some
other eminent Surgeons at Paris.
This Operation has this observable consequence, that upon all change of
Weather the Patient finds a pain resembling the Gout, in the place where the
Suture was made.

CHAP. IV. Of the Hare Lip.
THIS Operation is The Reuniting a Lip cleft, by the help of the Twisted
Suture. This Deformity derives its name from the Resemblance to the Lips of
Hares which are cleft after the same manner.

THE CAUSE. This Defect is either Natural, when the Child comes into the World
with it, or is caused after from some Cut, Fall, or other like Accident.

If there happen to be a considerable loss of Substance, you must not adventure
on the Operation. The Cure in this case would be worse than the Distemper it
self, and the Skin being so tense and close to the Gum, it would be difficult
to Articulate several Words, or move the Lips without a great deal of Trouble.
When this happens in the lower Lip, it proves more obstinate than in the upper,
by reason of the constant flowing of the Spittle into the Mouth. It is
dangerous to undertake this Operation in young Infants, because their continual
Crying, the softness of the part, and the necessity of Sucking, would hinder
the Unition; and therefore it must be deferred till they arrive at an Age to
submit to the trouble upon Rational Motives. But if you resolve to do it, be
sure to keep the Child from Sleeping for some time before, that he may sleep
soundly after the Operation is over.

This is not to be done in Old Bodies, whose wounds are difficult to be cured,
nor in Scorbutic or Pocky People, whose Blood is Sharp and Corrosive, which
like an Aqua fortis eats and hinders all Unition. The Blood of Women who want
their Courses, is little better than a serous Mass, without its due Consistence
or Unctuosity, who therefore are not proper Subjects for this Operation. But it
may be successfully undertaken in Sound, Healthy Bodies of a complete Age to
undergo it.

THE SIGNS are evident of themselves, the Deformity being sufficiently visible.

THE OPERATION.
To perform this Methodically, first free the Lip from the Gum with a sharp
Knife; that is, cut the small Filament which ties it down; and here you must
have great care in disengaging the Lip not to hurt the Gums. It is better in
this Case to touch something on the side of the Lip, because if we should go
too far on the other, the Bone of the Jaw would be bared, and ever after remain
so. When the Lip is separated, seize it with your Forceps, and with your
Scissars take off the Callosity on the sides, cutting off as little as
possible. The Assistant who stands behind and holds the Patients Head, must
press his Cheeks forward with both Hands, that the Lips of the Wound may be
applied level to each other, for the least inequality would be very deform and
disagreeable to the Sight; after this pass a Needle with a waxed Thread through
the Lips from without inwards, at a very little distance from the edges, lest
if you do it too close, the Thread may cut through the Lip with the least
striving, turn the Thread round the Needle, and after several Turns, cross it
above and below the needles. These turnings stay the Lip, and keep its sides
Level. You may pass as many Needles, as you shall think convenient. If the Lip
be great, and the cleft extend quite to the Nose, you may pass three, breaking
off the points, and putting a Compress under each end to prevent their
pricking, and causing an Inflammation.

THE DRESSING. When the Operation is over, wipe the Lips with a Sponge dipped in
Wine a little warmed, and lay on the Wound a Pledgit dipped in some good Balsam,
and between the Lips and Gums a Rag dipped in some Desiccative Liquor, to hinder
the Lip from growing to the Gums, and over all apply the Roller with four
Tails, or the Uniting Bandage. To make the Bandage, take a piece of Linen
Cloth about an Inch broad, and an Ell and an half in length, more or less
according to the largeness of the Subject, make a Hole in the Roller in the
midst, an inch and an half long, Roll it with two Heads one at each end. You
must begin to apply it behind the Patients Head, and bring the ends of the
Roller forwards, and pass one of them through the Hole you made, then apply the
cleft on the part affected, and next bring back the two ends behind the Head
over the other pretty close, and fasten them with Pins at their ends.

If you rather choose to make use of the Roller with four Tails, this is the
manner of making it. Take a Roller about an Inch Broad, and about an Ell long,
more or less according to the bigness of your Subject. Double this, and cut it
lengthways with your Scissars, so that there may remain three fingers breadth
plain in the midst. This Roller is thus cut into four parts, each of which is
called a Tail. You must begin with applying the middle, broad, undivided part
of the Roller on the Wound, and the two upper Heads you must pass behind the
Patients Head downward, and fasten them at their ends, next take two lower, and
pass them to the hinder part of the Head ascending, and having made them cross
with the two upper Tails fasten them with Pins at their ending.

It is a general Rule in the applying these divided Rollers to make the upper
Tails pass downwards, and the lower pass upwards, and so cross with the former.

See this Roller in the Plates. Fig. 3. and the Emplaster Fig. 20.
The Emplaster must have a Traverse and a Branch at each extremity of the
Traverse. The Traverse is to be applied on the Lip, and each Branch be clapped
upwards on the side of the Nose.

THE CURE. The Dressings must be removed twice or thrice after the Operation;
for which purpose a Servant must stand behind the Patient and press his Cheeks
forward, for sear the Wound should open it self, while the Surgeon is taking
them of. If there be three Needles, he must untwist about half the Thread of
that in the midst, and one or two rounds of the other, and then dress it as
before: Seven or Eight Days after, the Dressing must be taken a second time of,
and if the Unition be completed, the Needles must be gently drawn out, least
if they should remain longer, their Holes might be difficult to fill.

REMARKS.
Guillaume Relates, that having made this Operation on a Child of five Months
old, it was attended with so many ill Accidents, that he expected it would die,
and therefore advises never to Attempt it in so young an Age.

CHAP. V. Of Gastroraphia or Stitching the Belly.
THIS is a Suture of the lower Belly, to prevent the Guts and other parts
contained in it from falling out.

THE CAUSE which obliges us to make this Operation, is a Wound received in it.

THE SIGNS. Wounds of the Belly are Great or Small, if they are great enough to
let the intestines fall through them, you must make use of the interrupted
Suture; but if they are small, you must only put in a Tent for discharging of
the Pus. Wounds of the lower Belly are with Laesion of the Internal Parts, or
without. We conclude that the Internal Parts have received Hurt from the
Instrument, with which the Wound was made, which if it had a sharp Edge or
Point in all Appearance the Parts are Hurt. We may Judge of the Hurt by the
Acute Pain, Inflammation, Fever, or Evacuated Matter, which may be
distinguished by its Color, Smell, Consistence from the Pus, proceeding from
the Wound.

You may make a Judgment of the parts Wounded by the Situation, and the Posture
the Person was in at the Time he received it. If the Guts or Omentum come
forth, we must examine whether they are mortifyed, or any ways hurt.

The OPERATION.
If, there happen to be a great Wound in the Guts, make the Glovers Suture with
a Straight flat Needle, and waxed Thread. A Servant must hold the Gut on one
side, and your self on the other, make the first stitch at a very small
distance beyond the Wound, and continue it lengthways holding it between the
Forefinger and Thumb. You must not tie the Thread, but let one end hang out of
the Wound. If the Omentum be fallen out, it is almost ever mortified, it being
very spungy, loaded with Fat, and its Texture lax, abounding with Humors, and
an infinity of Vessels in it, upon which Account the Air easily penetrating its
Substance, Coagulates the Blood, and the part being deprived of its Vital
Warmth and Motion, soon Mortifies.

The Mortification of the Omentum is soon discovered by its livid Color, and
the corrupted part must be cut off before the rest be replaced in the Belly. To
do this pass a Needle with a waxed Thread into the sound part cross the
Omentum, taking care not to prick the Vessels. The Ligature must be indifferent
close, and you must take off part of the Omentum, cutting it to the quick an
inch and half above the Ligature. One end of the Thread must be left to hang
out of the Wound, the better to bring the Omentum to its edges, and Cicatrize
it with more ease, as well as to draw out the Threads after the Suppuration has
rotted them. The Inflation of the Guts, proceeds from the Air which insinuates
it self, shuts the Pores, obstructs the Circulation, and by consequence causes
an Inflammation. Besides all this the Gut suffering Strangulation, the Motion
of the Blood is interrupted, and flowing in by the Arteries, and not returning
by the Veins, must needs Tumefie the part. You must attempt to dissipate this,
by applying live Animals cut open to them, or by Fomenting with a Decoction of
Line-seed. The following Medicine is good.. Flowers of Chamomil, Melilot a^,
one Handful; Aniseed, Sweet Fennel-seed, Cummin-seed, a^ i. Cloves and Nutmegs
a^ ss. Boil all in Milk. To this add Decoction of Spirit of Wine camphorated,
i. Sugar of Lead, ij. Oil of Aniseeds, ij. and Foment with this Decoction hot.

Before this Suture be made, the Guts must be fomented with Spirit of Wine,
with a little Camphire dissolved in it.

If the Guts are mortified or gangrened, use no unguent, but foment them with
Spirituous and penetrating Liquors. In this case, Oil of Flints with a little
Spirit of Wine comphorated, is an approved Medicine. If all these Mediums
happen to be useless for the Reduction of the Gut, dilate the Wound; which if
it be in the upper part, the Dilatation must be made downwards, if Transverse
and near the Linea alba, recede from thence. To make this Dilatation, you must
bring the Intestines dexterously on the side of the Wound to find its
direction, then lay on a Compress dipped in Wine a little warmed, and introduce a
Director into the Belly, turning it on one side and another, to prevent
engaging the Gut between it and the Peritonaeum, and to be sure that it is not
engaged, draw it a little back. The Director must be held in your left Hand,
and you must slide in an Incision-knife to dilate the Wound, and cut the
Teguments equally within and without. You must search for that part of the Gut
which is nearest to the Orifice of the Wound, which thrust back into the Cavity
of the Belly with your forefinger, not taking it out till with the forefinger
of your other Hand, you have by degrees thrust in the remaining part, and
wholly reduced the Gut. There is no necessity of shaking the Body, as the
Ancients did to restore the Guts to their place, Nature taking sufficient care
in this Affair.

All parts being reduced, make the interrupted Suture, which is called
Gastroraphia, when it is practiced on the Belly.

The OPERATION.
For performing this, take two crooked Needles threadded with one Thread, put
the forefinger of the left Hand into the Belly, to bring the Peritonaeum,
Muscles and Skin all together to the edges of the Wound; then hold your Needle
together with your Wound, and pass it from within outward, carrying the point
over your forefinger, to prevent hurting the Gut. Take Scope enough, least the
continual Motion of the lower Belly force the Suture. When this is done without
drawing your finger out of the Wound, take hold of the other side, and pass the
Needle from within outward, with the same precaution as before. If there be
several stitches to be made, make them in the same manner as the first, without
taking your finger out of the Belly. The Threads being all passed, a Servant
must hold together the edges of the Wound, and you must tie them, beginning
with that in the middle, and observing all the Directions we have before given
in describing the Interrupted Suture. Some pretend that a Tent ought not to be
put into the Wound, which is open enough by the continual Motion of the Belly.

THE DRESSING. When the Suture is made, Apply on it a Pledgit dipped in some
Balsam or Spirituous Liquor, and Embrocate the Region of the Belly with Oil of
Roses, with a little Spirit of Wine, then lay on an Emplaster, over all a
Compress dipped in Oxycrate, or some other Defensative, and keep all on with the
Napkin, Scapular, or other convenient Bandage.

To make this Bandage, take a great Napkin, fold it three or four times
lengthways, and roll it at both ends to apply it more commodiously. This must
be laid over the part affected, you must bring it behind, and then forwards
again, and then fasten it with pins. This Napkin must be supported by the
Scapular, to make which, Take a piece of Linen Cloth 7 or 8 Inches broad, half
or three quarters of an Ell in length, make a Hole in the midst to pass its
Head through, one of its two ends must fall before, and the other behind; and
both must be fastened to the Napkin with Pins; it is best to fix them to the
Napkin the first Turn. You may cut the Scapular so that it shall have four
Tails, and it will support the Napkin better if these are fastened so, that each
Tail were cross the other.

THE CURE. If the Guts or Omentum are Hurt, the Patient must lie on his Belly
the first Days to give them opportunity, gluing of themselves to the edges of
the Wound, nothing conducing more to their Cure. You must place a small, flat,
soft, Boulster under his Belly. This Situation is proper, because the Viscera
bearing their weight on the Peritonaeum, this Compression abates their Motion,
besides we may observe the Internal parts never cured, except by uniting with
Neighboring parts.

During the Cure, the Patient must observe an exact Diet to abate the
peristaltick Motion of the Guts. You must foment every day the Parts with
Mollifying and Resolvent Medicines, to prevent Tension, which mightily
obstructs Reunion, for the Lips making an effort to separate themselves cause
great Pain, and often burst the Stitches. You must take care to give frequent
Clysters, because they Relax the Fibers, and dilute the contents of the Guts,
as well as cool and allay the Motion of the Blood and Spirits, and prevent
Accidents. Bleeding is a great means to prevent Inflammation, and so are all
general Medicines seasonably used.

If the edges of the Wound are Callous, you must have recourse to Digestives
which relax the Fibers, remove Obstructions, promote the production of Flesh,
and by consequence advance the Cure.

A good Digestive may be made with Turpentine and the Yelks of Eggs, adding a
little Honey of Myrrh, and Gum Elemi. This Digestive is Unctuous and Temperate,
equalling in its Virtues the best Vulneraries and Balsamicks, corrects the Acid
in Wounds, puts a stop to their Progress, and disposes the vicious Ferment,
which is the cause of all Corruption, to be expelled. When the callous edges of
the Wound are softened by Digestives, and you have obtained a laudable Pus, you
must use Mundificants as in ordinary Ulcers, without Malignity.

REMARKS.
If the Gut happen to be quite cut asunder, the two ends must be stitched to
the edges of the Wound to which they will reunite; and you must Cicatrize the
edges, keeping them from uniting together, which may be easily done by great
Tents. This Orifice will serve in the Nature of an Anus, as we have seen in a
Soldier who had one of the great Guts cut, which was joined by a Cicatrix to
the Wound of the Belly, through which the Faeces past, the Anus being closed
up. The most observable thing in this case, was the Excrements which he voided
had no discernible smell. Fabricius Hildanus relates, Centur. 6. Obs. 72. That
a Surgeon having the Misfortune to cut one of the great Guts in the Operation
of the Bubonocele, the Gut Cicatrized to the Wound, and the Party voided his
Excrements, and sometimes Worms by this Orifice.

CHAP. VI. Of the Paracentesis or Aperture of the Belly in Dropsies.
PAracentesis is The Punction made in the Bellies of Hydropical Patients, to
let out the Waters.

THE CAUSE is some Dropsy. These are General or Particular.

General Dropsies are the Ascites, Anasarca, Leucophlegmatia.

The Ascites is Genuine or Spurious. The Genuine arises from a quantity of
Water which fills the Cavity of the Belly, and distends it to an extraordinary
Magnitude. In the Spurious or Bastard Ascites, the Waters are contained in the
Teguments of the Belly, and not in its cavity, and these only are affected.
Though the Waters float on the Muscles, yet in opening the Bodies of Hydropical
Persons, we find the Fibers of the Muscles whitish, as well as the Neighboring
parts, by their long soaking in the Water; but in all other respects, as sound,
solid and firm, as if there had been no such Inundation; and because the Waters
which form this Anasarca are sweet, insipid, and void of all Acrimony, and by
consequence incapable of infecting the Parts in which they are lodged, the
Patient has no Fever or Thirst* and the Urine is sweet and crude. But in the
Genuine Ascites the Urine is Red, Lixivious, with a violent Thirst, and a
constant Hectic Fever, and very small in quantity.

There are two principal Causes which concur in the forming a Dropsy, the
Dissolution of the Blood, and the slowness of its Circulation. The Blood
becomes serous and incapable of preserving the Union of its parts, when the
Balsamic parts are dissipated by violent Exercises, long Meditation, Excessive
Grief by the Abundance or Exaltation of its Salts, and by this Colliquation, it
finds ways to get out of its Vessels, and produce Dropsies. When the
Circulation of the Blood is slow, from whatever cause it proceeds the
Serosities begin to separate, as in Milk from the Caseous part, or in the same
manner as in the Porringer after bleeding; because the Motion which it had in
the Vessels ceasing, the parts fall together and press out the Serum, not
unlike Water expressed out of a Sponge by clinching the Hand. And these
Serosities not being longer detained by the Oleous part of the Blood, find a
way to transpire through the intervals of the Fibers. This Opinion is confirmed
by the experiment of making a Ligature on the Veins, which obstructing the
Reflux of the Blood, the part becomes Hydropick.

We see Women for the most part have their Legs Tumefied, during the time of
their going with Child, because the Foetus compressing the Vessels which return
the Blood to the Heart, the Circulation is very much impeded. Add to this, that
all People dwelling in Marshy places, and those who are of a cold Constitution,
are oftener attacked with these Distempers, because the Motion of their Blood is
slower.

When the Waters are included in a Cystis, the Dropsy is for the most part
incurable. This Cyst is is a Case which by degrees is separated from some
Neighboring Membrane, by the discharge of abundance of muddy, saline Water,
which corrodes those Filaments by which it was connected to them. It abounds
with an infinity of Glands and Vessels, which it receives from the Neighboring
parts, all which afford matter for Dropsies.

The Anasarca or Leucophlegmatia is a soft watery Tumor, which extends over the
whole Body, especially the Muscles, and yields to the impression of the Finger.

Particular Dropsies only occupy some one part, and receive different Names
from the Parts affected, as Hydrocephale in the Head, Hydrocele in the Serotum,
and Hydromphalus in the Navil, etc.

THE SIGNS of a Dropsy are swelling of the Belly, Transparence and Fluctation
of the Waters, difficulty of Breathing, a Fever, a low, quick Pulse, a
Heaviness of Body, Insatiable Thirst, and Difficulty of making Water.

The Fever arises from the impure Chyle and Saline Water, which mixing with
the Blood pass to the Heart, and fermenting there create a disorder in its
Motion. The Heart by its Communication disorders the Pulse of the Arteries,
kindles a Fever which is not very perceptible, by reason of a Deficiency of
the Spirits, unable to give the Blood any great Degree of Motion, and hence
comes the lowness of the Pulse. The Pale Complexion and the Heaviness of the
Body, proceeds from the slow Motion of the Blood, the Mass of Water with which
it is loaded, and the Dissipation of the Spirits which are in a manner drowned
in such a quantity. The Difficulty of Breathing arises from the great Tension
of the lower Belly, which presses the Diaphragm toward the Lungs, so that
wanting liberty to extend it self, Respiration becomes frequent and forced. The
Excessive Thirst proceeds from the Salt Waters, which are the Causes of this
Distemper. The Patient has a difficulty of Urine, because the Urine which in a
Natural State passes through the Kidneys, discharges it self into the capacity
of the Belly. Besides that the Salts of these Waters molesting the Urinary
Ducts and Sphincter of the Bladder, force them to a more than ordinary
contraction.

The OPERATION.
Before the Operation, you must have Recourse to Diuretics, Sudorisicks and
Aperitives.

The strongest Diuretics are Roots of Dwarf-Elders, Iris, Gratiola, Wild
Coweambers, Leaves of Soldanella infused in Spirit of Wine Tartarised, the Pith
of Elder, Saffron, Crystal Mineral, R^ots of Butchers Broom, Polypody, and
Garden Flaggs which infused in White Wind, have a very good effect. The
following Sudorificks are good, Diaphoretick Antimony taken from 6 gr. to 30.
in any proper Vehicle, as Carduus Water, Sal Ammoniac and Tartar given
separately, and one after another, from 4 to 10 gr. each. Volatile Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, from 6 to 20 gr. Carduus and Balm-water, from ij. to vi. Volatile
Salts of Tartar, Vipers Urine, Hartshorn and Ivory, from 6 to 16 gr. Powder of
Vipers to Thirty, covering well the Patient after the taking these Medicines.
Proper Aperitives are Saltpeter refined, from 10 gr. to i. Sal Armoniack, from
6 to 24 gr. Jalap, from 10 gr. to i. Rosin of Jalap, from 4 gr. to 12. Rosin of
Scammony, from 4 to 10 gr. Chrystals of Tartar, from i. to 3. Tartar Soluble,
from 15 gr. to i. Spirit of Turpentine and Spirit of Cresses, from 15 drops to
i. Extract of Aloes, from i. to i. Besides infinite more, of which Authors are
full, not to be made use of without good Advice.

If these Remedies are ineffectual, you must proceed to Operation, which must
be performed in the following manner. The Patient must be kept sitting on his
Bed or on a Pillow, to give the Waters leave to fall down. And a Servant must
hold his Belly with both his Hands, to harden and stay the place in which you
design to make the Operation. This Instrument was first Described by Barhette
in his Surgery, which he says was then lately brought out of Italy by Mr.
James Block a Surgeon at Amsterdam. This he published in his Book, but with
this difference, that he makes his of Steel edged at the point like a Lancet,
whereas the other was made of Silver with a round Point.
You must pierce the Belly with the Tap or Pipe with a Needle in it, three or
four fingers breadth below the Navel, and about the same distance on the side,
to avoid hurting the Linea Alba. You must stretch the Skin a little, that it
may fill up the Orifice, when you have drawn your Instrument out. You must make
the punction at one thrust, so that your Needle and the Cannula which contains
it, may enter the Belly. Then draw the Needle out of the Cannula, to give way
for the exit of a sufficient quantity of Water, which must be proportionable to
the Patients strength. This Instrument is preferable to the Lancet; because
when you have drawn it out, the Orifice is so small the Waters cannot get out
after, and the Aperture made by a Lancet is so great, it is very difficult to
stop them. If the Waters are thick and muddy, and cannot pass through so small
a puncture, you must make the aperture with a Lancet, and leave a Cannula in
it; till you have drawn out all the Waters, which you must do at several Times,
least you weaken the Patient too much, and throw him into a Syncope. When you
make a second puncture with this Instrument, it must be below the former. If
the Waters make a great swelling about the Navil, make your puncture in this
manner described. But if they fall into the Legs and Thighs, make
Scarifications, about the depth of a Bleeding, four fingers Breadth below the
internal Ancles, whence you will have a great deal of Blood and Water; and
after lay a little Lint on, and keep it on with a Bandage. When you would have
the Waters come out, you must undo the Bandage and cause the Patient to walk,
some Body holding him up. If these are not sufficient, you may Scarifie the
Scrotum, Prepuce, and Thighs, all which Rivulets joining will make a
considerable Evacuation.

THE DRESSING. Lay on Pledgits and a Compress on the Scarification, with a
Bandage four fingers Broad, and of a length proportioned to the Part. This must
be rolled at one end only, and applied on the Compress to keep that on the
Scarifications, over which you must make several Turns or Rounds: After this,
ascending and descending again spirally, still leaving one third part of the
Roller below bare, and in the last place six it with Pins at its ends. If the
Operation be made with the Lancet, put a Tent into the Cannula which remains in
the Belly, and a great Compress made of Rags three or four Times double, or
more if you think fit, and sustain all with the Napkin and Scapular; the manner
of making and applying which, we have shown in the Gastroraphia.

If you have made the Operation with the Tap, there is no need of Dressing. The
Perforation is so small, the Waters cannot make their way through. But if for
more security you have a mind to make one, you need only apply a simple
Compress on the Puncture, with a Bandage to keep it on.

THE CURE. The Patient must use a drying Diet, such as Roasted Meats. If you
fear a Relapse, purge from time to time with Hydragogues, such as Jalap in
Powder, from 10 gr. to 30, Rosin of Jalap, from 6 to 12, Scammony, from 8 to 15
and Prisans made with the Diuretics such as Roots of Dwarf-Elder, Iris,
Gratiola, Wild Cowcumbers, Leaves of Chervil, Roots of Butchers Broom, with a
Thousand of the like nature to be found in Authors.

Bartholine Cent. 3. Hist. 23. relates that a young Fellow of 20 Years of Age,
happened to have a Hydrops Ascites. The Swelling was so extraordinary large and
shining, the Water forced its way through the Pores of the Skin to that degree,
that all the Clothes and Linen round was wetted with it, the Tumor abated, and
after returned, which Relapse so weakened the Patient that it killed him. In
Cent. 3. Hist. 81. he tells us a Child not a year old dying Hydropick, had the
Skin spotted with a purplish brown color, about the Stomach, Navel and Groin.
Fifteen pints of Water were drawn out of its Belly, which was very Serous,
Bilious and Stinking The Omentum was all putrefied, the Stomach and Guts
inflated. It did not appear there ever had been any Pancreas. The Mesaraick
Veins were filled with a shining glutinous matter. The Spleen was Monstrous,
had three Appendages, adhered to the left Kidney, and the Kidneys were very
large, the Liver had lost its Red, and was become Ash-colored discharging
abundance of Serosities upon cutring it; The Cavities of the Liver and Spleen
were filled with Water. The Bile in the Gallbladder looked bright like Gold,
the Pericardium was of the same Color, and very much distended by a quantity
of stinking Water contained in it. Not one drop of Blood was to be found in the
Heart, or any of the other Viscera, no Blood in the Vena Cava, nor the great
Artery, but a Water like the washing of Flesh. The Lungs were flaggy and
putrid. Blasius relates, that having opened a young Girl of two years of Age,
who dyed of a Hydrops Ascites, he drew out Twenty nine pound of Water, all
contained between the Muscles and Peritonaeum, the Viscera being entire.

We must not imagine that all swellings of the Belly arise from Dropsies, since
the last named Author assures us, He had opened a Woman whose Belly was as hard
as a Stone; and when she was dead, was dry all over. The Skin, Muscles and
Peritonaeum, made only one deformed Lump, not to be distinguished from the
Muscles. The parts all together, were more than half an Ell in thickness, from
the Navel to the Bottom of the Belly. The External parts were all
Cartilaginous, and the Internal all full of Cancrous Ulcers.

CHAP. VII. Of the Operation of the Hydrocele.
THIS Operation is an opening the Scrotum, to let the Water out of it.

THE CAUSE. Is a praeternatural quantity of Water contained in it. The Reason
of its collection there, is the same we have asigned as the Cause of a Hydrops
Ascites, whither we shall remit the Reader. The Hydrocele sometimes follows
upon an Ascites, in which case we must not think it always proceeds from the
Water running through the Productions of the Peritonaeum; for then it would
ever be lodged within the Tunica Vaginalis, whereas it frequently finds a
Passage between the Peritonaeum and the Muscles, and so gets into the Scrotum.
Sometimes the Water is contained between the proper Membranes of the Testicle,
or included in a Cystis, sometimes part is in the Scrotum, or a Membrane
adhering to it, which makes a Double Hydrocele.

If the Hydrocele be the effect of a Hydrops Ascites, the Operation will be
useless; because the constant Defluxion of Waters will still produce it a new.

Hydrocele's not ensuing on Dropsies, ordinarily proceed from the slow Motion
of the Blood or its Dissolution, as we have above proved. Falls and Contusions
may sometimes causethem, because the Blood stagnating in the part, gives the
Serosities time to separate. We may assign the various Circumvolutions of the
Spermatick Veins, as another Cause, which numerous windings, hinder the prompt
circulation of the Blood, and give the Redundant Serum liberty to sink into,
and distend the Scrotum.

THE SIGNS of an Hydrocele are the Swelling of the Cods, and the Transparence
of the Tumor. Hydrocele's are often mistaken for true Hernia's; but we shall
assign a sufficient number of Marks to distinguish the one from the other, in
the Operation of the Hernia.

The OPERATION.
This is performed with the Tap, Lancet, Seton, or Potential Cautery.

For making it with the Tap, let the Patient be standing or sitting, and let a
Servant compress the Scrotum, keeping back the Testicle, to prevent its being
hurt with the point of the Instrument. When the Water is let out, draw out the
Cannula, and the skin of the Testicles which contracts, will exactly close the
Aperture.

When the Hydrocele is only on one side of the Scrotum, it is most commonly
within the Tunicks of the Testicle; and is very painful, by reason of the great
Tension of the Membranes. To make the Operation in this Species of Hydrocele,
make the Aperture with the Lancer, and let it be deep and large enough to let
the Water out, and apply proper Remedies to discuss the Membranes swollen by the
Humors soaking into them.

The Aperture must be on the side of the Cods, and instead of the Lancet, may
be made with the Potential Cautery; which on this occasion is preferrable;
because there is less danger of hurting the Testicle in this way, and it
insensibly wastes the Membranes, which in time will be wholly consumed by the
Suppuration. Lay a Caustic on the place you design for your Orifice, and
afterward open the Escar with a Lancet. The Waters being apt to blunt the
point of the Caustic, if the first do not make an Escar sufficient, apply
more. When the Slough is separated, fill the wound with Dossils, and leave
those which cover its Bottom, four or five days without taking them out. The
end of letting them lie in so long, is that the matter may grow sharp, and
sooner wast the Tunicks which contain the Waters. Your first Care must be to
procure a good Digestion, and next to look well to the Healing of the Wound. In
very young Children, the Aperture is best made with the Lancet to discharge the
Water all at once.

To make the Operation with the Seton, pass a Skain of Thread through Needles
are make for the purpose much after this Form, and to be had at every
Instrument-Markers.
a Packers Needle, and pass this through the Scrotum, drawing the Thread now
and then to discharge the Water. This way can only be practiced in the Scrotum;
for if you should Attempt it in the Tunica Vagin^lis, the rubbing of the Thread
against the Testicles, would cause a violent Inflammation. I think the Lancet
or the Tap preferable to this.

In all Cases where the Cods require Suspension, you must make use of a Bag
Truss. This is nothing else but a Bag with four Tails or Straps, the upper of
which go round the Patients Body, the lower between his Legs, and are fastened
behind to the Wastband. This Bag must have an Aperture before for the Yard to
pass through.

You may make a Suspensory Bandage which shall be more commondious, and keep
the Cods up better after this manner. Take a piece of Linne Cloth three Inches
broad, and about four or five Inches long, divide it below to the middle, then
sow above on each side two little strings, near an Inch broad, and long enough
to go round the Patients Body, and two more below to pass between the Thighs,
and be tied behind to those which go round the Wast; These must cross each
other in passing between the Legs.

THE CURE. Apertion being no more than a palliative Cure, you must have
Recourse to a good Drying Diet, such as are all Roasted Meats. Give Diuretic
Prisans made with the Roots of Dwarf-Elder, Iris Gratiola, Wild Cowcumber,
Leaves of Soldanella and Chervil, Roots of Butchers Broom, Polypody,
Garden-Flags, Crystal Mineral, Saffron, etc. These Ingradients infused in
White Wine make an excellent Medicine, as we have noted in the Chap. of the
Dropsy. Purgatives which colliquate the Blood, have a good effect, as Jalap,
ss. in any Decoction, Resin of Jalap gr. 12. in Conserve of Roses, or in a
Decoction or Resin of Scammony, from 10 to 18 gr. after the same manner.
Sudorificks are useful, as Powder of Vipers 15 gr. with as much Diaphoretick
Antimony in Carduus Water, iij or iv. or Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack, from
6 to 20 drops. Volatile Salt of Tartar and Vipers, from 6 to 16 gr. with an
Infinity more to be found in the best Modern Authors, such as L' Emery, Charas,
Etmuller, etc. Lastly, Aperitives are very serviceable, such as Spirit of Salt,
from 4 to 10 Drops, Salt Peter refined, from 10 gr. to i. Sal Armoniack, from 6
to 24 gr. the Mercurial Panacaea, from 6 gr. to 20, etc.

REMARKS.
Fabricius Heldanus, Centur. 1. Obs. 48. Relates a History of a Man of 40 years
of Age, attackt with a Hydrops Ascites, which discharged it self so largely on
the Scrotum, that it mortified, and the Slough coming away let the Testicles
bare. The great efflux of Waters cured the Person of his Dropsy, and Nature
reinvested the Testicles with a Callous cover, which served instead of the
Scrotum to them, and the Patient after his Recovery had several Children.
Bartholin Cent. 2. Hist. 64. relates that a certain Abbot being Hydropick, the
Waters fell into the Scrotum, which grew exceeding large. The Surgeon made an
Aperture greater and deeper than was necessary; which caused a Gangrene of the
Part. The Patient found the Waters ascend toward his. Throat, which took away
his Speech, and the Scrotum mortifying, he soon after dyed.

CHAP. VIII. Of Hernia's.
HErnias are Praeternatural Tumors caused by the falling down of some Viscera
of the lower Belly, or a Flux of Humors. Hernias differ according to the parts
affected. If this swelling is in the Navel, it is called Exomphalos, if in the
Groin Bubonocele; if in the Scrotum it is a perfect Hernia; if it happen in
other parts of the Belly, it is called Hernia Ventralis; if caused by the
falling of a part of the Guts Enterocele; if by the Omentum Epipocele, if by
the Gut and Omentum both Eutoroepiplocele.

Hernias are again divided into Genuine and Spurious. They are Genuine or true,
when the swelling is made by a Part; and Spurious or Bastard, when they proceed
from Waters, Wind, etc. The first are called Hydrocele, the latter
Pneumatocele, which shall all be explained hereafter. Some again are Complete,
when the parts fall into the Scrotum in Men, and the Lips of the Pudendum in
Women; others Incomplete, when they do not fall lower than the Groin.

The Causes are External or Internal.
The External Causes are Violent Blows, Rude Shaking, Long Races, Dancing,
Leaping, continual Bawling, Frequent Debauches with Women, and generally all
violent Exercises. The Internal Causes are first the copious Defluxion of
Serosities separated from the Glands of the Guts, Groin and Peritonaeum, which
plentifully watering these parts, dispose them to yield to all Impulsions. The
second cause is the great quantity of Fat and Oleous parts in the Omentum and
Mesentery, which smear and grease the Fibers of the Peritonaeum, and by this
means soften, relax, and dispose them to dilate and yield to the Motion, and
pushing forwards of those parts which form Hernias. For this reason all Persons
who eat much Oil in their Diet, are more subject to inconveniences of this kind
than others. Windy Dyer contributes very much to the Rise of Hernias; for the
included Air by its Rarefaction distends the Guts, which push forward on the
Peritonaeum, and enter its Productions.

Hydropical Bodies, and Bigg-bellyed Women are subject to Hernias; because the
Distention of the Womb in one, bears up the Guts against the Diaphragm, and
forms an Exomphalos, and the Water in the other soaks and relaxes the
Peritonaeum, and makes it incapable after that is exhausted of resisting the
Guts; which force its inner Membaane through the Rings of the Muscles, and form a
Bag which is more or less elongated, as the impulse is more strong or feeble.
Whence it appears this Bag is not formed by the Productions which cover the
Spermatick Vessels. The Hernia Ventralis happens in the Aponeurosis, [or
Tendinous interstices] of the straight Muscles, the Belly rising in such a
manner, that it cannot avoid dilating those weak parts, and sometimes bursting
them.

This Species of Hernias, does not happen so often as the Bubonocele; because
the Parts and Humors by their own weight, have a natural tendence toward the
Groin, and the Rings of the Muscles being open, the Parts easily slip in where
they find little Resistance.

THE SIGNS. In the first Species of Hydrocele, the Water lodged between the
Membrances of the Scrotum make a slight Tension a considerable Tumor, and a
moderate Weight. You may perceive an Undulation by striking on the Swelling
with your Hand, and the Transparence of the Water by setting a light behind it,
the skin becomes tender, soft and shining, without pain. In the second kind the
Waters are within the Membrane of the Testicles, there is great Pain and
Tension, the Weight is greater than in the First, the Skin is not so much
Distended, but has several of its folds remaining; it is for the most part on
one side, the Fluctuation is deeper, and the Transparence of the Waters more
obscure. These two Species may happen together.

The Signs of a Sarcocele are a great Hardness, an intolerable Weight, an
insensible Increase of the Swelling. If there be no Rising in the Groin, it is
a sign the Productions of the Peritonaeum are free from Cancrous Ulcers.

You may distinguish the Sarcocele from the Hernia intestinalis, the former
being soft, and the latter hard. This Tumor is sometimes Schirrous, sometimes
Malignant; when it is Schirrous, there is no sense of Heat or Pain; when it is
Malignant there is both.

The signs of a Varicocele are a great Inequality, Weight, Pain, Inslammation,
especially if you use many Medicines to molest it. This makes a Man impotent,
when it siezes both Testicles.

The signs of Circocele, (which is a Dilatation of the external Vessels in
opposition to the Varicocele, in which the internal only are distended) are the
same with the former, except that the Pain, Weight, Inflammation, are less; the
Membranes of the Serotum more distended, and the Swelling more apparent.

In the Pneumatocele the Swelling vanishes at some times, and upon striking
sounds like a Drum, has no Weight, Pain, or Inflammation, is Transparent
without changing the Color of the Skin, and the Wind is sometime perceived
higher, and sometimes lower.

Recent Hernias made by the parts are most commonly soft, without Inflammation
or Change of Color, and disappear upon the least thrusting them back, xcept
they proceed from some external Cause, as Blows, Falls, or some indurated
Excrements stopped in the Gut, or the free passage of the Blood and Spirits into
the Part be interrupted, which creates an Inflammation, often followed by a
Mortification. For this Reason the Surgeon must be careful not to handle these
Tumors rudely, least such ill consequences may ensue. If there be a Descent of
the Gut without Inflammation, Strangulation or Adhaerence, the Swelling is Soft
and Uniform, the Color of the Skin is not changed, and it disappears when the
Patient lies on his Back; and when the Gut is reduced into the Belly, there is
a discernible Noise. If the Omentum is the Cause of the Tumor, it is softer
than if it be the Gut, and is not so easily thrust in, it is very uneven by
reason of the Fat, and if it be pressed with the Finger the the Impression
remains, the Resistance is the same as in a Steatomatous Humor; and there is
great danger of Mortification, because the Omentum is spungy, and loaded with
Fat. The Gut is inflamed, and the Omentum turns livid upon the least Alteration.

The most dangerous Accidents which happen in these sort of Swellings, are the
Inflammation which is always attended with Pain, Fever, Strangulation of the
Gut, and sometimes the Miserere, in which all the Excrements of the Body are
forced up, and voided through the Mouth. This Symptom proceeds from the Faeces
being too long retained in the Gut and hardened there, hindering the free supply
of Blood and Spirits to the part, which increasing in Bulk suffers a
Strangulation; hence follows the inverted Motion of the Intestinal Contents,
the Lividity and Mortification of the Parts. This Discoloration happens when
the Swelling has been too much handled and compressed, and the cessation of
Pain discovers the parts to be Mortified.

In the Bubonocele and perfect Hernia the Tumor sometimes disappears, and
sometimes is permanent. If it disappears, it is a sign there is no adherence,
and the Gut suffers no Compression. In this Case Bandage and proper Remedies
are sufficient for the Cure. If the Tumor be permanent, this proceeds from
Inflammation, Adhesion or Excrements hardened in the Gut. Here nothing can be
effected without manual Operation.

The Gut cannot contract an Adherence to any thing besides the Bag, which makes
the Hernia, except it be corroded by some sharp Humor. This Bagg adheres
sometimes to the Sheath, which invests the Spermatick Vessels, at other times
to the Omentam, the Rings of the Muscles, the Dartos, or the Membranes of the
Testicle.

It is very dangerous when the Gut adheres to the Testicle, and if it be of any
standing, it is scarce possible to cure it, without Amputation of the Testicle.

You may conclude the Gut adheres if the Tumor has not for a long time
subsided, and the Patient feels great Pain and Weight in the Testicle.

If there be a Descent of the Gut into the Scrotum, and it be retained there
for a long Time without returning, it is probable that the Bag which contains
it, is fixed to the Testicles by the glutinous Humors distilling from the
Peritonaeum, and the Membranes of the Testicles which being thickened by the
Heat of the part, and drying unite them very strictly, and make the Operation
necessary to disingage them.

The OPERATION.
The Operations of the Bubonocele and the complete Hernia, are in a manner the
same, and for that Reason, I shall comprehend them both in one Chapter.

To perform this Operation, oblige the Patient to lie on his Back, with his
Hips a little raised, then pinch up the Skin which lies over the Swelling. A
Servant must hold this at one end, and your self at the other. Then with a
sharp Knife in your Right Hand, make the Incision on the Tumor following the
Fold of the Groyn, when the Skin is cut, the Fat appears, which you must tear
of with your Nails or an Instrument, as well as the Peritonaeum, for fear of
cutting the Guts; and when you have discovered the Bag which makes the Hernia,
tear it with it with your Nails or Instrument as before.

Sometimes this Bag is found full of Water, which accident must not surprise
the Operatour, who may be apt to fear, that Water issues from the wounded Gut.
To remove this Apprehension, he must consider well the Signs which distinguish
the Gut from this Bag.

The Color of the Gut is Brownish, by reason of its numerous Blood Vessels, it
forms a sort of Arch, which is perceptible when it lies bare, and the Swelling
is abated. The Gut is thicker than the Peritonaeum, because it is composed of
four Tunicks; but this last sign is Ambiguous, the Bag formed by the
Peritonaeum sometimes happening to be of a considerable Thickness. A Thick Foetid
Matter ever distills from the Gut when it is wounded, but that which comes from
the Peritonaeum is clear and limpid. If you draw the Gut to you it obeys,
except it happen to adhere to the Neighboring parts, but the Peritonaeum
yields little. The Patient feels a dull Pain till the Gut be discovered. These
are the signs which distinguish the Peritonaeum from the Gut.

Sometimes the Gut does not adhere to the Peritonaeum, and here it is you must
show your Dexterity to avoid engaging the Gut, which you must draw a little
forth, when it happens to be exposed, to see whether it adheres to the
Peritonaeum and Rings, or not. When you are sure it is free in every place,
manage it gently with your finger, to make it enter more easily; this is done
to diminish its Builk, and break the Excrements, which cause its Tension; after
this put it into the Belly with the two forefingers, thrusting them alternately
into the Ring. But if the Strangulation be very considerable, dilate it with an
Incision Knife on the Furrow of the Director. It is the Ring of the External
oblique, which being lower than the others, causes the Strangulation, because
the Tendinous Fibers of the Aponeurosis of that Muscle, cannot recede to give
place to the Carnous, and are more succeptible of Inflammation, for this Reason
only Scarifie that in this Operation. If you cannot introduce your Probe for
the great Strangulation; draw the Gut to you, and put the forefinger of the
left Hand above near the Ring, slip a small Incision-knife on the Nail, and
make a Scarification there, to make way for the entry of the Director, just to
cut the edge of the Ring.

For if you should proceed farther, you run a Risk of cutting a small branch of
an Artery, which passes through the Aponeurosis of the Muscle, which you must
carefully avoid. You must cut inwardly without hurting the Teguments, because
it is the Aponeurosis of the Muscle only, which causes the Strangulation. When
all is over, replace the Parts in the Belly, and to make a firm Cicatrix,
Scarifie the Ring which is Callous, if the Hernia be of any long standing.

The Operation of the Perfect Hernia.
To perform this, Let the Patient lie on his Back, and make an Incision with a
Knife through the Skin on the side of the Thigh the whole length of the
Swelling, raising the Skin as before, you holding one end, and a Servant the
other, separate the Lips of the wound, and break with your Fingers or Fleam,
the Coats which cover the Gut and Testicle. The Gut being discovered, introduce
a Director between the Membranes of the Scrotum and it, and widen the Aperture
with your Scissors, which you must slide on the Furrow, and when you have laid
bare, disingage it from the Testicle, to which it adheres. Next let a Servant
hold up the Gut, and draw it gently with his Hands toward the Os pubis, whilst
you lightly draw the Testicle with your Hand, to get the liberty of breaking
with a Fleam, or the point of your Knife, the Membranous Ties which unite the
Testicle to the Gut.

But here observe if the Adhesion be very strict, it is more advisable to hurt
the Testicle than the Gut, because that is not necessary to Life, whereas if
the Intestine be cut, the Patient can hardly escape. You must have a great care
likewise to avoid cutting the Spermatick Vessels, because the Flux of Blood
will obstruct the Operation.

After you have separated the Gut from the Testicle, introduce the Director
between the Skin and the Gut, and cut the Ring of the Muscle, which you must
scarifie to deliver the Gut from its Strangulation, in case it should happen.
In the last place reduce the Gut into the Belly in the same manner as in the
Bubonocele, and when it is replaced, command a Servant to press the Belly with
his Hand, to prevent its falling out again.

It is a ridiculous Assertion, that the Testicle must always be extirpated
after the Operation; for this does not conduce to the Cure of the Hernia; on
the contrary it prolongs it, puts the Patient to unnecessary Trouble, and
deprives him of the means of satisfying the Duties of his Sex; nay, if the
Testicle happen to be affected, it is most advisable to defer the Operation
till the Fluxion be abated, in which space perhaps that may be cured.

Sometimes the Omentum alone adheres and covers part of the Testicle, and
sometimes the Gut with the Omentum lying over it. In this case you must
dexterously free the Gut from the Testicle, and leave a small portion of the
Omentum, adhering to either of them, rather than endanger the hurting them.

The Omentum is almost ever corrupted, and for this Reason a Ligature must be
made, and the tainted part taken of. Sometimes indeed in Recent Hernia's, there
is not time enough to admit of any alteration, and then you may replace it in
the Belly without farther trouble. If the Omentum cleave to the Gut, and there
be no change discernable in it, reduce both together without taking off any
part of the former. If both together adhere to the Bag of the Peritonaeum, take
off part of the Peritonaeum, rather than touch the Gut, and if it cannot be
otherwise disengaged, as when the Omentum adheres to the Bag, it is better to
take off part of the last, than the first. But the Omentum being unable to
remain long in that State without being altered, it seldom happens but that
some part is requisite to be cut off.

In making a Ligature on the Omentum, you must be careful not to make it too
straight, because it easily cuts through it, by reason of itssoftness. You must
turn the Threadseveral times round, first passing the Needle through its
Substance.

THE DRESSING. Thrust into the Wound a long Tent of Linen capped at one end,
and flat at the other; for if you use Lint only, the Guts which are always
driving down, will not fail to dilate the Ring, and hinder a good Cicatrix, and
the Intestines will fall down again after the Wound is healed. Here observe to
pass a Thread through your Tent to draw it out at pleasure, and hinder it from
sinking into the Belly. Next fill the Wound with Dossils armed with good
Digestives made with Turpentine and Yelks of Eggs, over them lay a Triangular
Emplaster, and a large Compress of the same Figure, Embrocate well the
Neighboring Parts with Oil of Roses, apply good defensatives to the Scrotum,
and Hypogastrick Region made of Compresses dipped in Oxycrate very Hot. Lastly,
keep up the Scrotum with a Bag-Truss, and make the Bandage called Spica.

This is made with a Roller rolled at one end, which must be six Else long, and
three Inches broad. You must begin to apply the end of the Roller on the Wound,
then pass on to the Back, returning to the Belly, thence over the wound, thence
between the Thighs, thence over the Wound, thence behind the Back, thence over
the Wound, then over the Belly, then over the Thigh, then between the Thighs,
then over the Wound, then behind the Back, continuing to make these rounds till
the Roller is spent; and lastly fasten it with Pins at the extremities; every
time the Roller passes over the Wound, you must leave small Interstices, in
which a third part of the Roller beneath is seen. The whole figure something
resembling an Ear of Corn, from whence this Bandage derives it Name: We have
described Trusses for the Scrotum, in the Operation of the Hydrocele, where the
Reader may take the pains to turn to them.

THE CURE. The Wound must be treated with good Digestives to procure
Suppuration, and a firm Cicatrix. When the Pus becomes laudable, that is white,
of a good consistence, and without any illscent, you must deterge and cleanse
it like all ordinary wounds. The Patient must be nourished with good Broths,
and from time to time Clysters given, with other general Remedies, as the
nature of the Symptoms shall require.

REMARKS.
Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 81. Relates that a certain Gentleman named
Daniel de Chalou, who for several Years had been afflicted with an Enterocele,
chanced to use some violent Exercise, upon which the Gut fell into the Scrotum,
whence came great pain in his Belly, continual Vomiting, great Restlesness, and
a Retention of the Urine and Excrements. Having neglected to take any care for
remedying this, all the Symptoms increased, by reason of the violent pain in
the Belly. After two or three days he fell into a Coma; Upon the fourth day the
Urine was perfectly red, and the Patient made it without Difficulty. When the
Patient was ready to expire the Urine, resumed its natural Color and
Consistence.

CHAP. IX. Of the Operation of the Exomphalos.
THE Exomphalos is a praeternatural Tumor of the Navil, made by the extrusion
of some of the Viscera.

The Operation is an Incision made on the Tumor to restore the Parts to their
Natural place.

THE CAUSES. To have a right Knowledge of the Cause of this Distemper, it is
requisite to consider the Structure of the Navil. This is formed by the uniting
of the Umbilical Vessels, which obliquely sliding into the Peritonaeum, are
accompanied with that, and both together striking through the Linea alba,
terminate in the Surface of the Skin. The Ways through which these pass, are no
less visible in the Foetus, than the Rings in the Muscles of the Lower Belly in
Adults; but after the Birth the Vessels dry, shrink degenerate into Ligaments,
and are no longer pervious, and the contiguous parts increasing, while these
remain unaltered, the Navil is necessarily pulled in by them. The difference
between Umbilical and the Spermatick Channels in the latter are permeable
distinct, and easily separable from each other. The former impervious,
contracted, and the Tendinous Fibers of each Aponeurosis so enterlaced with
each other, they seem to compose one Continuous Body. Besides we may observe,
the Navil is encompassed with a Circle destitute of Carnous Fibers, for half a
Fingers breadth round, all which circumstances concur in forming an Exomphalos,
and differ very little from those described in the Bubonocole.

THE SIGNS. If the Gut is the Cause of this Swelling, it is called
Enteromphalos; if the Omentum Epiplompalos; if Water Hydromphalos; if Wind
Pneumatomphalos; if Flesh Sarcomphalos; and Vaicomphalos if it be the Vessels.
If it be a Hydromphalos, the Swelling is pliant, and yields to the impression
of the Fingers; you may discover it to be Transparent, by setting a Candle
behind the Water, it makes a small noise if you strike on the part, and you may
perceive its Motion. The Pneumatomphalos yields to the Fingers instantly,
returning to the same Magnitude; resounds if you strike on it, and it is always
equal, and of the same Figure in whatever Posture the Patient be put. The
Sarcomphalos is hard, the Swelling is large, and does not yield to compression.
The Enteromphalos is a Tumor a little Hard, with Tension, narrow at the Basis,
and Swelling out if the Patient holds his Breath, it abates if you press it
with your Hand, making a little noise in the Subsiding, which is more sensible
if the Patient be laid on his Back when the Compression is made. In the
Epiplomphalos, the Tumor is softer and larger on one side than the other. Its
Basis is larger, and in Compressing it subsides without the least noise.

This is more dangerous if an Inflammation arise and create an Abscess, which
coming to break the Viscera force out of the Belly. Infants are more easily
cured of these Diseases than Persons advanced in years, and Ancient People
seldom recover. Children have their Flesh more soft and spungy than Adults, and
these still more than old Bodies, which very much assists the Cure.

The OPERATION.
Before you begin, you must remove all impediments of the Reunion of the Parts,
such as Inflammation and Repletion of the Guts with Excrements or Wind.

The Inflammation must be discussed by Bleeding, and Unction with Oil of Roses,
Lilies; the Guts cleared from Wind or Excrement by Clysters, with Decoctions of
the Emollient Herbs, as Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, with a
Thousand others of the like nature, amongst the rest; you must not forget to
put in Aniseseeds bruised, and give the Clyster pretty Hot. After these
Preparatives, proceed to the Operation.

To perform this, the Patient lying on his Back, pinch up the Flesh which
covers the Tumor, one end of which a Servant must hold, and your self the
other, then with a sharp Knife make an Incision the length of the Swelling,
taking care not to hurt the Umbilical Vessels, especially the Vein which
suspends the Liver, because that Viscus not being suspended, would compress the
Vena Cava, and totally intercept the Circulation of the Blood. If the Skin be
so Tense that it cannot be pinched up, make an Incision with a sharp Knife to
the Fat, which you must tear with your Nails or Fleam; for you must not make
your Incision deeper, for fear of wounding the Intestines. When the Peritonaeum
is laid bare, draw it up with your Nails, to make a small aperture with your
Scissors, then put the forefinger of your left Hand into this aperture, to
guide the point of the Scissors or Knife, and so enlarge your Incision.

If the Omentum adheres to the Peritonaeum, disengage it, directing your Knife
more toward the former than the latter. If the Guts adhere to the Omentum, you
must be careful in freeing them not to hurt them, leaving some part of the
Omentum cleaving to them. Sometimes there is a Carnous Mass appended to the
Gut, which must be removed as well as all that part of the Omentum which is
corrupted; in order to this make a Ligature in the Sound part, and all the rest
with your Scissors or Knife. Next reduce all the parts into the Belly, and to
procure a firm close Cicatrix, Scarifie all round the Lips of the Wound. Then
make the interrupted Suture, observing all circumstances directed in the
Gastroraphia, or stitching of the Belly.

THE DRESSING. Apply to the Wound a Pledgit dipped in some Balsam or Spirituous
Liquor, Embrocate the Belly round the Navil with Oil of Roses, with a little
Spirit of Wine; Then lay on a Good Emplaster, and over this Compresses well
wetted in some good Desensative, and keep all on with the Napkin. This is
doubled lengthways into three Folds, and then Rolled at both Ends, its middle
applied on the Part affected, and so brought round the Body pinned at the end,
and kept up by the Scapular. The manner of making and applying it, is described
in the Dressings of the Gastroraphia.

A Machine to check the Motion of the Belly described.
Fabricius ab Aquapendente makes a Truss of double Dimetty or Linen Cloth with
a Hellow Plate with a Round Cake, on the Part which lies on the Navil, in the
Center of which is a round Knob of Lint which goes into the Breach or Dilation
of the Navil, to hinder the Extrusion of the Guts, and on this a proper Cerate
or Glutmating Emplaster is laid, and so bound straight round the Abdomen from
the Truss, so binds over the shoulders to hinder it from falling down, and
Straps on the lower part between the Legs, to hinder it from rising up. Our
Country Man Wiseman in Ruptures of the Navil, makes a Bracer to lace in the
whole Belly from the Cartilago Ensiformis to the Os Pubis, under this on the
Navil. He puts Empl. ad Herniam with a quilted Boulster over it wrought in Sole
Leather, and tacked to the Bracer. V. Wisemans Surgery, Lib. 1. c. 8. from
Sect. 85 to Sect. 39.


Since nothing more impedes the Coalition of Wounds of the lower Belly than its
continual Motion, nothing can be more serviceable here, than some Machine
adapted to check this, and such an one may be made after this manner. Double a
pretty thick Iron Wire, in such a Figure it may embrace the Wast. This Machine
must have two Cavous Plates at each end, in short it must be like that Women
use to stiffen their Commodes with. This is to be applied in such a Manner
behind on the Loins, that both Plates may extend forwards, and press by their
elasticity the sides of Belly, which Compression prevents the Dilatation of the
Wound. This Instrument must be covered with Dimetty or some such soft Matter,
and stuffed with Cotton like Trusses to prevent galling.

In an Exomphalos's arising from Inflation, or when the Parts sometimes retire
into the Cavity of the Belly, few Persons will be persuaded so submit to the
Hazard and Trouble of the Operation.

A Machine for the Exomphalos.
The Machine I am now about to describe, is contrived to prevent the Parts from
intruding into the Tumor, and differs very little from a Truss with three
Branches. The Form of it is thus. Take a Thick Steel Wire, bend it and make a
Truss like those commonly used in double Hernias. Then make another Branch
which is to be sixed to the knob on each side, to which fit a round knob to be
applied to compress the Tumor on the Navil. This Instrument is proper for
those Persons who have a Hernia on both sides, and an Exomphalos with it, and
is more commodious than any Bandage, which in compressing the Belly obstructs
Respiration, whereas these by their Spring complying with the alternate rising
and falling of the Part in that Action, are not liable to the same
inconvenience.

THE CURE. Digest the Wound with good Balsamicks to procure a firm Cicatrix,
and continue to treat it after the usual manner; Prescribe the Patient a good
Diet, nourishing him with proper liquids, frequently interposing Clysters.

If the Tumor arise from a Mass of Water collected there, attempt to disperse
it, chafing the part well with Oil of Turpentine, applying Hot Bags filled with
Camomil and Elder Flowers boiled in Wine, or other proper Discutients.

REMARKS.
Antionette Fautras, a certain Woman of the Village of d' Ambigne, in the
Maine, being big with Child, attempting to lift a Bushel of Corn, with the
vehement straining burst the Peritonaeum, and the Guts instantly rushed into
the Navel with as great a Noise, as the going off of a Pistol, notwithstanding
which Accident, she was delivered of a Boy at her due Term, and that with less
Pain and Difficulty than of her former Children, and after lived and enjoyed
her Health very well.

Blancard relates the History of a Child born with a Tumor on the Navel as
large as both Fists. The Navil-string as big as the little Finger, and above an
Ell and an Half in length, and so Transparent, the Guts were visible through it.
The same Author mentions a Child born with his Guts hanging out, which
lamentable Accident he tells you was occasioned by the Mothers having seen the
like Spectacle in a Cat run over by a Coach, a little Time before her Delivery.

CHAP. X. Of Castration.
THis Operation is an Amputation of the Testicle. THE CAUSE. Diverse Cases may
happen where all other Methods will be ineffectual: as for instance, When the
Testicle adheres firmly to the Gut, and cannot be separated without loss of
Substance: When in great Contusions the Vessels and Vesiculae are crushed, and
the influx of the Blood is intercepted: When there is a Varicose swelling which
cannot be discussed by the usual Applications, or lastly when the Part is
infested with some Excrescences of long standing.

These Excrescences are sometimes in the Substance of the Testicle, and
sometimes on its Membranes only; and seem to be formed out of the more Oily and
Viscid part of the Blood, imported by the Spermatick Arteries, which escaping
through the Porosities of the Vessels, is hardened and condensed by the Heat of
the Part: This Extravasated Matter being lodged in the small Tubes, grows
Acrimonious, corrodes, huffs up and distends them, and so produces Fungous and
Cancrous Swellings.

When the external Membranes are affected, they communicate the Cancrosity to
the Productions of the Peritonaeum, and sometimes it extends to the parts
contained within the Cavity of the Belly: But in this case the Operation is
useless, since not being confined to the Tunica Vaginalis, you must destroy the
Vessels, Rings, and other Parts contained in the Hypogastrium, to extirpate it.

Whatever is apt to cause obstructions, may create an Inflammation in this
Part: Thus Seed infected with the Pocky Malignity, sometimes ferments and
tumefies the Testicles.

If a Complete Hernia made by Descent of the Gut, happen when there is any
Ulcer or Carnosity in the Testicle, the Sanious Matter issuing from them,
excoriates the Gut, and glews it so firmly to the Testicle, that it is
impossible to separate them without taking off the latter. Contusions proceed
from some external Cause, such as Blows, Falls or Crushes, which Accidents
break the Vessels, and the Blood and Humors stagnating in the Parts create
Tumors, Abscesses and Ulcers.

THE SIGNS of an Adhaesion of the Testicle to the Gut, is manifest to the Naked
Eye, when Part of its Substance is destroyed, and taken off to free the Gut,
and make the Operation in a perfect Hernia. The Sign which without opening the
Scrotum, demonstrates the adhaesion of the Testicle to the Gut, is that the Gut
has remained for some time in the Scrotum without re-entring the Belly, which
yet is not very certain. You may conclude the Testicle is bruised, if the
Patient feel a violent Pain, and after some blow or crush it swells.
Excrescences are discerned by their Bigness, Weight and Hardness.

Swellings of the Testicles are to be feared, because Abscesses and
Schirrosities frequently follow, if Resolvents have been omitted in the
beginning. Inflammations of the Testicles are dangerous, because they usually
terminate in Abscesses, and sometimes gangrene.

There remain frequently Schirrous Swellings after Contusions, which incommode
the Patient all his Life, and sometimes the Testicle mortifies. If the Swelling
be Hard, Schirrous, Painful, and Inflamed, or be of long standing, and both
Testicles are affected, the Operation will be dangerous.

The OPERATION.
Place the Patient on his Back, with his Buttocks raised higher than his Head,
and his Legs stradling, which must be held by two Servants.

Pinch up the Skin of the Scrotum, and let a Servant hold it at one end, and
your self at the other, make an Incision lengthways, (or without pinching the
Skin, let the Incision be made on the Body of the Testicle) Then free free the
Carnosity from the Dartos, which invests the Testicle without hurting the Cover
of the Spermatick Vessels, and make a Ligature betwixt the Rings and the
Swelling. Cut about a fingers breadth below the Ligature, and take off the
Testicle with the Sarcoma, leaving the End of the Thread hanging out of the
Wound, without drawing down or compressing the Spermatick Vessels, least you
throw the Patient into a Convulsion.

If the Cancrosity spread it self on the Productions of the Peritonaeum,
consume the Superfluous Flesh by Causticks, or wast it with strong Suppuratives
before you proceed to the Operation. When the proud Flesh is removed, and the
Escar separated, make a Ligature on the Spermatick Vessels near the Rings of
the Muscles, and so take off the Testicle. If the Ligature be made before the
separation of the Escar, the Patient will be convulsed. If the Carnous
Excrescence be moveable, and does not adhaere to the Testicle, free it and
choose rather to leave some little part of this Excrescence remaining on the
Body of the Testicle than endanger hurting it. If any Vessels appear, make the
Ligature before you cut the Excrescence off.

THE DRESSING. Fill the Wound with Dosils armed with a good Digestive,
Embrocate with Anodynes, Apply Compresses dipped in Defensative Liquors, as
Oxycrat or Red-wine very Hot, and lastly keep the Applications on with the
Bag-Truss described in the Hydrocele.

THE CURE. Digest the Wound for some time with Turpentine, and the Yelk of
Eggs, to procure a good Cicatrix, and consume the remains of the superfluous
Flesh. If you perceive any Inflammation, have recourse to Bleeding and
Clysters. Be sure to keep the Wound clean, and when you obtain a laudable Pus
begin to cicatrize; The Patient must abstain from all things Salt, Acid, or
Sharp.

REMARKS.
Riverius relates an Observation of a Man, who upon a Fall from a Horse crushed
his Testicles, which tumefied to that degree, the Scrotum was as big as a Man's
Head. The Swelling suppurated plentifully, and there came forth Stones as hard
as Flints. The Patient had a Fever and Thirst which encreast continually,
Pustules broke out over all his Body, and his Strength decayed by degrees till
he dyed.

Kerkringius assures us, He had seen a young Man who had no Testicles in the
Scrotum, his Voice was very Musical, and charmed even the most insensible of
the Pleasures of Music. He happened to have a Fever about 18 Years of Age,
felt a violent Pain in the Scrotum, and found two great Testicles fall into
them, upon which he lost his Fine Voice, which became like that of other Men.

CHAP. XI. Of the Phymosis.
THIS Operation is an Incision of the Prepuce, to give way for denuding the
Glans.

THE CAUSE which makes this Incision necessary, is a contraction of the
Prepuce, which strongly compresses the Glans of the Yard, which except it be
disengaged, becomes inflamed and mortifies.

This Imprisonment of the Glans is sometimes Natural, and proceeds from its
being wrapped in the Prepuce, and not freed from it by any Venereal Exercise or
Handling. When this Disease is Natural, the Prepuce forms several Wrinkles,
between which a Tenacious Slimy Matter is lodged, which arises from the Glans,
and glews the Prepuce very strictly to it, scarce leaving a Passage for the
Urine. Sometimes this Disease is Accidental, and proceeds from some
Inflammation, Chancre, Wart, Schirrosity, or Unskilful Use of Corrosive
Medicines; but whatever the Cause be, the free Circulation of the Blood is
interrupted, the Part exceedingly inflamed, and the Fibers of the Prepuce very
stiff and stubborn.

The vehement Pain proceeds from the Thinness and exquisite Sense of the
Membrane of the Glans, which is composed of, and interwoven with a multitude of
Nerves; which Structure renders it very sensible, when it is molested by any
Pungent or Corrosive Matter.

THE SIGNS. This Disease is evident, The Patient finds great Difficulty in
making Urine, has violent Pains, cannot uncover the Glans, and most commonly a
Matter like Plaster is lodged between it and the Prepuce.

The OPERATION.
This must not be undertaken, till all other Remedies have been tried, such as
Bleeding, Warm Baths, Digestives mixed lightly with some preparation of Mercury
(and introduced between the Prepuce and the Glans with the end of the Probe)
Galens Cerate, Emollient Injections, a small Ball of Lint insinuated in between
the Glans and the Skin, Compresses dipped in Oxycrat, etc.

Observe here in all Diseases of the Yard, (and so in the use of these
Medicines) it is very Commodious to lay it on the Belly, and keep it Suspended
in this Posture by a small Bandage, the Description of which the Reader may
find in its proper place.

If the Prepuce be firmly united to the Glans, which is known by the Skin not
being brought over, and no Probe passing between it and the Glans, the
Operation will be dangerous, and cannot be done without first disengaging the
Prepuce from the Glans, and creating a great deal of Pain, and endangering a
Mortification of the Yard.

When you judge the Case will admit of Operation, Let the Patient stand or sit
as you like best. Draw the Extremity of the Prepuce as far back as you can, and
command an Assistant to keep the Skin down at the Root of the Yard, (that the
Incision may reach exactly to the bottom of the Glans) then introduce a small
Incision-knife, with a button of Wax on its point (to prevent wounding the
part) under the Prepuce, and cut through it. If one Incision be not sufficient,
make another on the opposite side.

THE DRESSING. Lay on the Wound a small Pledgit armed with some good Balsam,
and over this a Compress in form of a Cross, perforated in the midst for the
passage of the Urine; and keep these on with a narrow Fillet near three
quarters of an inch broad. This Fillet must be of a sufficient length to cover
the whole Yard by its Circumvolutions, have a Hole made at one end, and the
other end slit lengthways above an inch and a half. In applying this, pass the
two Tails or Slit end through the Hole at the other end, then draw it as strait
as is convenient; make several Circumvolutions spirally, till the whole Yard be
covered, and the Fillet spent, and then fasten it by the two Tails.

If you judge it necessary to cover the Pledgit with an Emplaster, make this of
the same Figure, and let it be perforated in the midst like the Compress.

For the Patients ease, and to prevent the Inflammation of the Part, make a
Linen Case of an equal length with the Yard, and large enough to contain it
with all its Dressings: Let this Case have a Perforation at the end for the
passage of the Urine, stitch two small straps at the lower end on each side,
and one to the upper, which may be long enough to be fastened to the Band which
goes round the Wast to suspend the Yard, and prevent Pain and Inflammation.

This Case is of singular use to prevent painful Erection in Priapisms,
Virulent Gonorrhaeas, Heats of Urine, and other Diseases incident to this Part.

THE CURE does not differ from the usual Method, in all simple Wounds. For
instance, If any Inflammation arise, have Recourse to Bleeding, Cooling
Clysters, and a Regular Diet, and when the Wound is incarned, Cicatrize it.

REMARKS.
Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 4. Obs. 8. Relates the History of a Young Man of 22
Years of Age, who from his Infancy bad a Prepuce of a monstrous Size, contorted
before in such a manner, that in the emission of his Urine the stream was
diverted on one side, and wetted his Clothes. The Prepuce was not Membranous,
as it ordinarily is, but a Carnous Substance, and when he made Water, a great
part of the Urine was detained by it; to prevent which, he was obliged to draw
the Glans out with his Fingers. This constant Handling made the Yard swell
prodigiously, and the inferior part commonly called the Suture, was exceeding
Tense and Horney. The Author cut off this Prepuce close to the Glans, and the
Patient was happily cured of this inconvenience. Before the Operation he had
used all kinds of General Remedies, and now after it he applied Restringent
Powders to stop the Blood, and in order to keep the Yard straight, put a Pipe
into the Vrethra.

CHAP. IV. Of the Paraphymosis.
THIS Operation is the Reducing the Prepuce over the Glans, when it is so far
retracted, that it cannot cover it without the help of Manual Operation

THE CAUSES. The Strangulation of the Glans is caused sometimes by a simple
Retraction of the Skin, which forms a Roll round the Yard, and at other times
by an Inflammation of the Prepuce, from some preceding Cancre or Tumor. The
Yard is often exceedingly swollen, and there are two or three Rolls one over
another, which mightily intercept the Refluent Blood. When this happens, it is
almost ever attended with a swelling in the lower part of the Prepuce, filled
with a reddish Water, rarefied and converted into a windy Matter by the Heat of
the Part.

THE SIGNS of a Paraphymosis are a Tumor of the Yard and Rolls on the Prepuce.
There is sometime an observable swelling under the Prepuce, filled with a
reddish Water, which rises to such a Height, that except you Scarifie deeply
the tumified place, to give a discharge to the Part, the Yard necessarily
Mortifies.

The OPERATION.
To reduce the Prepuce, you must use both forefingers and both Middle fingers.
Place these beneath the Rolls, formed by the tumefied Prepuce, and with the two
Thumbs compress the sides of the Glans, to lessen its Bulk, and so draw on the
Prepuce. You must not thrust back the end of the Glans, to make the Prepuce
come over it; because it enlarges it self, which hinders Reduction. If the
Inflammation be very great, and renders this Method impracticable, apply
Compresses dipped in M. Lemeries, or some other Styptick Water, and when that is
abated, proceed as before.

THE DRESSING is the same with that used in the Phymosis.

THE CURE. While the Disease remains, the Method of Cure does not differ from
that of the Phymosis.

Fabricius Hildanus informs us, He cured a Paraphymosis in very Plethorick
Gentlemen by the following Method. In the first place to keep the Patients Body
cool, he enjoined him to shun all manner of strong Drink, purged him with
Cholagogues, and bled him copiously in the Arm; then he applied a cooling
Liniment twice a Day to the Region of the Kidneys, and the following Cataplasm
as often to the suffering Part.. Barley Flower iv. Powder of Roses, ij.
Pomgranat Flowers and Cypress Nuts, i. Boil the Ingredients in Rose and
Plantain Water. Make a Cataplasm with these, with the Addition of Yelks of
Eggs, which is to be repeated twice a Day.

These Application being continued for several Days, the Pain abated very much.
But a great erection happening one Night, obstructed the Cure, and the Prepuce
violently compressing the Glans, all the Symptoms increased. Upon this he
ordered him to forbear all Commerce with his Wife, not permitting him so much
as see with her, purged him with Cholagogues, using outwardly the following
Liniment.. Oil of Violets, Nenufar and Roses, a^ i. Oil of Henbane by
expression, ij. Camphire dissolved in Vinegar of Roses, i. Mix these in a
Mortar. Besides this he gave him a Dose of Laudanum after Supper, after which
he had better Repose than ordinarily, and the Erection was less troublesome. He
persisted to give him Laudanum, which seldom exceeded two Grains, and outwardly
to use the Liniment above described, and continue Cataplasms to the Part. The
Swelling of the Yard abated soon, the Patient was cured, and had several
Children after. But we must not omit here his caution to young Practitioners
not to use the Cataplasm above mentioned, if the Paraphymosis proceed from
impure Embraces, least the Malignity of the Distemper be repelled, and ill
conditioned Ulcers ensue.

REMARKS.
Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 3. Obs. 88. Tells us, a certain Smith of 40 years of
Age of a Melancholic Habit, had a small Wart on the extremity of his Prepuce
of the bigness of a Vetch. This Man being Married, found a great and continual
Pain in this Excrescence upon the embraces of his Wife, which obliged him to
forbear knowing her for thirteen Years. The Pain increased by little and
little, and at last degenerated into a Horrible Cancer, as big as an Infants
Head. The whole Yard became a Huge deformed Mass of Flesh, with several Ulcers
on its Surface, through which the Patient discharged his Urine: The noisome scent
of this Cancer was so great, that no one could endure to come near it. The
Author made an Amputation of the Yard, and cured him perfectly.

CHAP. XIII. Of Lithotomy or Cutting for the Stone.
THIS Operation is Incision made in the Perinaeum, to extract the Stone through
the Aperture.

There is no Animal, except Man alone, infested with this Disease.

THE CAUSE. The Ancients did believe the Stone to be formed by the more Viscid
and Faeculent parts of the Blood passing off with the Urine, and settling in the
Bladder. Hippocrates is persuaded, it proceeds from the more Terrestrial and
Heavy parts of the Urine it self, which in too long a Retention of it, subside
and sink to the bottom of the Bladder, like Sand in a Vessel of Water, and are
there bound together by a thick slimy Matter, which compacted Mass, in process
of Time increases by the supply of new Materials. Fernelius conceives, all
Stones are first formed in the Kidneys, and fall from thence by the Ureters
into the Bladder. This Opinion he founds upon an Observation, That he had seen
no Person afflicted with the Stone, who had not before felt Nephritick Pains:
This he farther confirms, by assuring us, that in most great Stones when
broken, there is found a small Kernel in the center, of the same Color and
Consistence with the Stone, and of a Figure agreeing to the Basin of the
Kidneys, and enclosed in a Case of a different Color from it.

Our Author seems to be mistaken in representing Helmonts Opinion of the
Generation of the Stone: Spirit of Nitre and Spirit of Wine stir indeed, and
that with great Heat and Tumult, but after combine and compose a Temperate
Liquor, or Spiritus Nitri dulcis. The true Helmontian Hypothesis, is that the
Duelech or Animal Stone is formed by a Volatile Salt coagulated by a Vinous
Sulphur; which conjecture he forms on the Famous Experiment of mixing Spirit of
Wine and Spirit of Vurine both perfectly dephlegm'd (for the least Aquosity
remaining, defeats the Trial) both which Liquids instantly coagulate into a
Hard, Dry Substance, which he calls Offa Alba. See Helmont de Lithiasi.
But the Modern Chemists seem to me to frame the most plausible Theory of the
Formation of the Stone in Animal Bodies. These Gentlemen in Analysiing the
Urine by Fire, find in it two constituent Principles, viz. a Urinous Salt of a
Volatile and Nitrous Nature, and pure Sulphur not unlike a Vinous Spirit. Now
Experience shows us, That upon mixing Spirit of Wine and Spirit of Nitre, a
Coagulum will result in an instant; it is very easy and natural to suppose,
that the like Principles existent in the Urine, leaving their Superfluous
Phlegm, may unite, precipitate, and produce the like effect.

Van Helmout does not think the Principles of the Urine alone sufficient, for
the Production of the Stone; but adds a Petrifick Ferment, which he places in
the Kidneys and Urinary Vessels, and reckons up as a Third Agent, required to
fix and coagulate the former. There is no Transmutative principle in Nature,
says that Author, without a Ferment; The Intestine Motion of the Particles of
the Urine, is not the immediate Cause of its Corruption; Its Putrefaction does
not arise from any vicious Disposition of the Urine, but from a peculiar
corruptive Ferment residing in the Kidneys, and other Vessels. This he
illustrates by the Similitude of a Vessel, in which any Acid Liquour has stood
for some Time, which Coagulates and sours Milk; by Leaven which ferments Dough,
and by the Taint of a Musty Vessel, which alters and corrupts Wine, or any
Liquor put into it. This Ferment which for its fineness and subtilty, bears
some Analogy to the Odoriferous Steams issuing from Scented Bodies, he calls it
Odor or Scent; and of such a Nature he pretends the Ferment is, to whose
Petrifying influence, he ascribes the Origin of the Stone; and to confirm the
existence of such a Ferment, he alleges this Experiment, That Urine will
sooner putrify in a Vessel tainted with it before, than in another which is
clean and new.

Having laid down the necessity of a peculiar Ferment to perfect this Work, he
proceeds to Explicate the manner how it is performed. He assures us, he has
found in a Spagyrical Examen of the Urine a Nitrous Spirit, which he terms the
Coagulator, and another Spirit not unlike Spirit of Wine. Besides these, says
he, There is in Urine a Terrestrial Styptick Spirit, which by the Assistance of
the corruptive Ferment, is volatilized and imbibed by the Urinous Spirit, and
these two uniting, excite and put into Motion the Vinous Spirit, which before
lay dormant in the Pores of the Urine. At last after some conflict and mutual
Action they combine together, Praecipitate and Form a Stone in the midst of the
Liquor. From hence he infers, Stones are formed in an Instant, and grow
gradually; though sometimes too he supposes they receive a considerable Addition
in a Moment of Time.

Ill Diet conduces much to the generation of the Stone; for instance, all
Spirituous Drinks, Sharp Sauces, Milk-Meats, Fruits, Rye-bread, and the like;
The latter upon the Account of their Foulness, and the former upon the Account
of their Spirituous parts. The one furnish Materials for the Stone, and the
otherr the Petrifick Ferment. Nature too oftentimes as well as Diet, has a
share in this matter, and the Stone proceeds from some Petrfying seeds we
inherit from our Parents, and keep all our life after.

THE SIGNS. The Stones found in Humane Bodies differ very much, as Small,
Great, Smooth, Unequal, Flat, Round, Oval, Square, Hollow, Light, Heavy, Hard
or Soft; some have Kernels, others not; some are White, Gray, Red, Black,
Brown, or of other Colors; some adhere to the Parts, as the Sides, Bottom or
Neck of the Bladder, others are loose; some are in the Kidneys, Vreters,
Bladder or Vrethra; some are included in Cystis's, others not. In short, they
are found in all Parts of the Body.

If a Stone be lodged in the Kidneys, there is an Inflammation, a Violent and
fixed Pain, (which increases if you press the Part with your Hand.) There is a
Fever and Suppression of Urine, which destills drop by drop, and sometimes is
Bloody, which proceeds from the fretting of the Vessels by the growing Stone.
Muddy and Purulent Urines, discover the Blood to be Extravasated, and an
Abscess in the Kidneys. In this case Vomiting, a Stupor of the Thigh and
Legensue, and the Patient cannot endure to keep his Body straight, the Testicle
of the same side is retracted into the Groin, and sometimes Pus is evacuated
with the excrement; for the purulent Matter corroding the Gut, runs through it,
and passes off with the Faeces.

The Communication between the Nerves of the Kidneys and Stomach, and the
agitation of the Spirits in the Carnous Fibers of the Stomach by the
Inflammation of the Kidneys, are the causes of the Vomiting.

The Kidney lying on the Head of the Muscle Psoas, compresses and inflames it,
and this inflamed Muscle presses the great Trunk of the Nerves, (which passes
through its substance, and is distributed to the fore part of the Thigh and
Hip,) and from hence proceeds the Stupor, because the free influx of the
Spirits is interrupted. The Psoas and Iliac Muscle contiguous to it being
inflamed, (which two Muscles are the Benders of the Thigh) they cannot obey or
follow the motion of the Extensors; and this is the reason the Patient cannot
keep himself erect, without enduring vehement pain. The Iliac Muscle being
united to the Cremaster, communicates its Inflammation to it, which causing a
contraction of the Fibers of the latter, the Testicle must of necessity ascend
to the Groin.

But after all, these Symptoms concurring are not sufficient to give us an
absolute assurance there is a Stone in the Kidneys, since they all may attend
an ordinary Inflammation of that part, as in the case of Nephritick Colicks.

We discover that there is a Stone in the Bladder, by a lively burning pain in
Pissing, and the Urine coming forth by drops, and after diverse intervals, as in
the Strangury.

The Stone sometimes stops the Neck of the Bladder, and sometimes wholly blocks
it up, according to the several Motions it receives from the Urine; and this is
the cause of these Intermissions. When the Bladder is evacuated its sides rub
on the Stone, which grates them by its hardness and inequality; and from hence
proceed great Pains after Urining, and sometimes drops of Blood. The Patient
feels an itching in the Perinaeum, which is continued to the extremity of the
Glans, and obliges him to rub it: This sometimes happens from sharpness of
Urine. The weight of the Stone is often felt, and the irritation of the Fibers
sometimes causes an involuntary Erection of the Yard. The Urine is sometimes
White, sometimes Bloody, Thick, Turbid, Muddy, and full of Sand.

When the Urine is very clear, and there is Sand at the Bottom of the Urinal,
this is a sign of a Stone in the Bladder. If the Stone extracted be polite and
smooth, it is a sign there are more, by rubbing against which this smoothness
is caused.

If the Stone be very large, and rests in the Neck of the Bladder, it becomes
equally large with its bottom. When it fixes to the bottom of the Bladder, and
is contained in a Cystis, the Patient may carry it all his Lifetime without
any notable inconvenience, or the appearance of any of the signs above recited.

Among the Diagnostick signs, there is none more certain than the Resistance of
the Catheter, and the discernable noise from gently striking on the Stone.

The OPERATION.
This must not be undertaken, till you have a very good assurance of the
existence of the Stone in the Bladder.

To obtain a certainty of this, introduce your finger into the Anus, and turn
it toward the Pubis, then bend it, at the same time pressing the Bottom of the
Belly with your other Hand, and if there be a Stone, you will feel it with your
Finger. In Women or Grown Maids, you must put the finger up the Vagina, but in
young Girls into the Anus.

But since Hard Swellings and Schirrosities may impose on you in this way of
Examen, the Catheter is to be relied on as the most certain evidence.

The first way of Searching.
Let the Patient sit in a Chair with a Back, on which he may rest or lie on his
Back. Take the Yard by the Glans between the Thumb and forefinger, drawing it
up straight, compress the Glans a little to open the Vrethra, into which
introduce the Catheter with its Concave side downwards; when this is past in
far enough for you to judge it is in the Neck of the Bladder, turn it quick and
dexterously, and bring your Hand over the Patients Belly, and at the same time
that you turn it, draw the Yard a little forward to keep the Vrethra straight
and without wrinkles, which may hinder the entering of your Instrument.

If after turning the Catheter you find it did not enter, leave the Yard, and
introduce your finger into the Anus, to guide the end of it into the Bladder.
After this draw your finger out of the Anus, and quit the Yard to strike with
the Instrument, turning it every way to hear what noise it makes on the Stone.
If it happens that the Stone swims in Urine, (for the Bladder must be full when
you pass the Instrument,) and you have reason to think this may hinder you from
perceiving it, evacuate the Bladder by drawing out the Silver Wire in the
Catheter, and after try as before.

Second way of Searching.
The following way seems more convenient, because there is no need of turning
the Catheter. Let the Patient lie on his Back, and holding the Glans between
your forefinger and Thumb, raise the Yard up, inclining it a little on his
Belly, hold the Rings of the Instrument on the side of the Belly, and compress
a little the Glans between your fingers to open the Vrethra; then introduce the
end of the Catheter, continuing to push it on gently, till it enters the
Bladder. By proceeding this way, you save the Trouble of passing your Hand over
the Patients Belly, and turning the Instrument.

The way of Searching Women.
To Search a Woman oblige her to lie on her Back, with her Buttocks a little
raised, and her Thighs divaricated; then separate the Nymphae with the left
Hand and with the right; introduce the Instrument into the Neck of the Bladder,
as in Men. When you are well assured there is a Stone, prepare the Patient for
the Operation by General Remedies, Bleeding, Clysters, and other proper
Medicines, to prevent any ill Habit of Body, having a bad influence on the
Wound after the Operation.

The OPERATION.
Place the Patient on a Table of a midling height, with his Back supported on
the Back of a lined Chair, his Thighs open, his Knees drawn up to his Belly,
his Heels applied to his Buttocks, and his Hands resting on each side his
Ancles. To keep him in this Posture, Take a great Swathe three inches Broad,
the middle of which is to be put about his Neck, and with each end of it the
Arms are to be fastened to the Thigh and Leg of the same side, each hand resting
on the out side of the Ancle of the Foot. This Posture is exceeding convenient
to hinder his stirring, to keep the Bladder steady, and give liberty to the
Muscles of the lower Belly to perform their Actions. After this place a Servant
on the Table behind the Patient, to keep him down by pressing on his Shoulders,
in case he should attempt to rise. All things thus prepared introduce a
Catheter (not like the former, but with a Hollowness or Furrow along the unequal
side) into the Bladder, after the manner before described. The Catheter thus
introduced, must be held by a Servant placed for that purpose on one side of
the Patient, who must hold it with both his Hands, drawing up the Scrotum in
such a manner, that the back of the Catheter which thrusts out the Perinaeum,
may be between his two forefingers, and leave space enough for you to make your
Incision. The Incision must be made with a sharp two edged Knife on one side
the Suture of the Perinaeum; which must be greater or less, as you judge the
Stone to be. To perform this dexterously, hold your Knife like a Lancet, and
entering in the most prominent part, plunge it quite to the Catheter, continuing
to pass and repass it in the furrow of that Instrument, till you have laid as
much bare as you desire. This caution is necessary, least if the Incision were
made at several Times, there might be more than one Orifice.

In Men the Incision must be near two inches and an half long, in Children
less. It is better to have it too great, than to be obliged to enlarge the
wound with the Dilator, in case the Stone should prove too great to be
extracted through the aperture, because such violent distention tears and bruises
the Fibers of the Bladder. The Incision if it be well made must enter the
Vrethra, and you must not draw the Catheter out of the Bladder, till you have
slipped into its Furrow a Gorget or two Conductors, on which the Forceps is after
introduced; for without the direction of these, you may easily mistake and pass
them aside, which too often happens; and whilst the Operator thinks he is in
it, and seeking the Stone feels it with his Forceps, instead of that pulls the
Bladder and often tears it. When the Forceps is in the Bladder open it, and
gently search for the Stone, which when found hold fast. You must never close
your Forceps in the Bladder, except when you have hold of the Stone, for fear
of tearing its Membranes. When you would take hold of the Stone, open the
Forceps with both Hands, and you may be assured you have hold of it, if its two
Bows stand wide open.

If the Stone be Oval, and you have hold of it lengthways, loose the Stone, and
introduce your Forceps a second time, and take hold of it another way. But
observe here the wideness of the Bows alone is not a sufficient evidence to
assure you that you hold the Stone lengthways, since the same appearance will
be, if the Stone be large; wherefore to obtain a more full information of this
matter, enquire of the Patient how long he has been afflicted with this
Distemper, (for the older the Stone is, the thicker it grows) or if he feels a
great weight in his Bladder. You may farther judge of the thickness of the
Stone, and perhaps of its Figure too, by introducing the Finger into the Anus,
and feeling it through the Gut. When you have hold of the Stone with your
Forceps, do not draw it directly out, but turn your Fist to the Right and to
the Left.

If the Stone happen to adhere to the Bladder, you must not obstinately resolve
to extract it, least you tear the Membranes, but if it be fixed to the Neck of
the Bladder, it will be freed without Suppuration. You may conclude that it is
fixed to the Bladder; if not, being very big, it comes forth with Difficulty,
and then you must proceed gently in extracting it.

If Stones are excessively large, as some noted in our Remarks, forbear
extracting them, lest the Patient expire in your Hands. If you perceive the
Stone is broken in extracting it, put in the Forceps again, and draw out the
fragments in the same manner as the whole, and bring out the clotted blood with
the Spoon. If the Patient be very weak, remove him to his Bed, and put a Tent
into the Wound to prevent it from closing, and draw out the Remaining fragments
after he has recruited his Strength.

If the Stone be so big that it cannot pass through the Orifice, dilate the
Wound.

This Operation is called the Greater Apparatus, or Cutting on the Staff.

The Lesser Apparatus in Men, or Cutting on the Gripe.
This manner of Operation is called lesser, because it does not require so many
Instruments as the former. To perform this, put your forefinger into the Anus,
to bring the Stone to the Perinaeum; make your Incision on the Stone it self on
one side of the Suture, and extract it through the aperture with a Hook. This
Operation takes place when the Stone is not too big, and you can bring it to
the Perinaeum with your finger.

The Way of cutting Women.
Put your forefinger and middle finger up the Vagina, or into the Anus in young
Girls; with these two fingers bring the Stone to you, compressing the Bottom of
the Belly with the other to make it descend: Put a Hollowed Probe or Director
up the Vrethra, which is to be held by some Assistant; then slide a Dilator on
its Furrow, and taking out the Director, Dilate the Vrethra without cutting at
all, and so extract the Stone with the Hook or Forceps. You must not put the
Dilator too far up the Vrethra, because the Neck of the Bladder is short in
Women, and by this means you may happen to lacerate the Sphincter, and so cause
an involuntary efflux of Urine. This is called the lesser Apparatus in Women.

The Greater Apparatus in Women.
The Patient being put into, and kept in the same posture with (Men described
before) Introduce the Conductors into the Vrethra, and between them slide a
Dilator, then withdraw the Conductors and so dilate, next introduce the
Forceps, and drawing forth the Dilator, take hold of the Stone with it. If the
Stone be too big to come forth, make a small Incision to the Right and to the
Left, to make way for it. Instead of the Conductors, you may use the Gorget, if
you like it better.

The Vrethra in Women dilates exceedingly, and it seldom happens that we are
obliged to have recourse to Incision. Besides, Women are more rarely attacked
with this Distemper than Men; because their Vrethra is Wider, Streighter and
Shorter, and the Urine more easily drives away that Sand which is lodged in the
Bladder.

The Success of the Operation may be guessed at from the quiet repose which the
Patient enjoys, the Freedom or Breathing, the Moisture of the Tongue, no
Immoderate Drowth, Pain scarce sensible, little or no Fever, no Swelling in
the Hypogastrick Region, and a Cessation of Inflammation on the fifth or sixth
Day.

Sometimes a Stone is voided out of the Bladder, and passes into the Vrethra,
where it lodges and obstructs the Emission of the Urine. In this case if the
Stone be near the Glans, press that with your Finger, and if it do not easily
come forth, bring it out with the Extractor, if both fail, make an Incision on
the side of the Vrethra to so take it out.

When the Stone is in the Neck of the Bladder, push it with the Catheter, or
endeavor to bring it back by slipping the finger into the Anus.

When the Stone is in the Vrethra, if it be small stop the passage with your
fingers (compressing the Yard beyond the Stone) then blow into the Vrethra to
dilate it, and push the Stone forwards with your fingers, till you have brought
it forth. This way succeeds better in young Children, than in Adults, their
Vrethra being more easily distended.

The Stone may sometimes be drawn out by Suction, this succeeded well with Dr.
Muys, who advised the Mother to suck the Yard of her Infant.

If a Stone be lodged in the Vrethra, and cannot be got out by any of the ways
above mentioned, draw the Skin of the Prepuce upwards, and take the Yard
between your fingers to hold the Stone firm, compressing it a little, and
making the Incision on the Stone lengthways on the side of the Yard. When the
Stone lies bare, press it out with your forefingers, or pick it out with the
Extractor.

THE DRESSING. When the Patient is Cut, Apply a great Compress on the Wound,
and let some Robust Fellow carry him to his Bed. If there be any fragments of
the Stone remaining in the Bladder, or you have ground to think there are more
Stones; put a Tent dipped in some Digestives into the Wound to prevent it from
closing, and if there be a Flux of Blood, stop it with Restringents. If there
be no Stone or Gravel remaining in the Bladder, put no Tent into the Wound, but
a Pledget with some good Balsam, with an Emplaster over that, and a Compress
both in the form of a Horse-shooe. The Dressing must be kept on with a Roller
with four Tails or the double T suspended with a Collar, and the Legs below
the Knee, bound together with a narrow Roller, to keep the Wound from gaping.

The Roller with four Tails is made with a piece of Linen Cloth three inches
broad, and an Ell long; slit this lengthways at both ends to the middle,
leaving between four and five inches in the middle undivided. Apply the plain
or entire part on the Wound, and then cross the two foremost Tails, and fasten
them to the Collar about the Ribs. (This Collar is a Band stitched at both
ends, which is put about the Patients Neck, and hangs down to his Belly.) Then
pass the two other Tails through the Collar, and bringing them back fasten them
behind.

The TT or double T, is a Girth which goes round the Wast, with two Straps in
the midst sown at some small distance from each other; apply the middle of the
Girth behind, and tie its ends before, then bring the two Straps between the
Legs, crossing them on the Wound, and tie them before to the Girth or Wastband.

The Dressing for the Incision made on the Yard.
Apply a Pledgit dipped in some good Balsam, and over it an Emplaster. The
Bandage and all the rest, is the same as in the Phymosis.

THE CURE. We have observed before, that in case there be Reason to suspect
there is Gravel remaining in the Bladder, you must not instantly heal the
Wound, but put a large Tent into it with some good Digestive, to give leave to
the Gravel to purge it self through the Orifice. If the Wound be contus'd, you
must Suppurate till a laudable Digestion appear, every day lessening the Tent.
But if after the Operation there be no Contusion, it suffices to put in a
Pledgit armed with some good Balsam, and Dress it twice every day, till it be
perfectly cured. The Patient must be fed with good Broths and Gellies, and must
not eat any thing Solid for fear of a Fever, which would obstruct the
Coalition of the Wound.

To prevent the Stone from being reproduced in the Bladder, the following
Precautions must be used. The Person who is cut must lead a Regular Life; that
is, He must not eat to Excess, for fear of creating ill Juyces, the Stomach not
being capable of good Digestion, when it is overcharged with Meat. He must eat
Wheaten Bread well baked, for Rye Bread containing an Acidity, is apt to
Coagulate the Humors, and produce the Stone. He must avoid all salt Meats, all
sorts of Ragousts which ordinarily are high Seasoned: All these Aliments heat,
and are apt to petrefie that Glairy Matter, which is lodged in the Kidneys and
Bladder. Milk Meats, Old Cheese, Hard Eggs, Sallets, Unripe Fruits, create ill
Humors, which being mixed with Acids, acquire a coagulating property. The Use
of Heady Wines and Beer, is dangerous. G^sner has observed, that if you put
Sand into Stale Beer, it forms a Stone. Muddy Waters, and Waters of melted Snow
and Ice are very impure, and full of Bodies, which have a Coagulating property.
Excessive Application of Mind, Debauches of Wine and Women, all violent
Passions are very hurtful to Persons who have any Disposition to Gravel; all
Excesses in any of these kinds sharpen the Blood, and wast its Unctuous and
Balsamic part. Too long Repose is hurtful, because the gross Feculent Matter
subsiding, and not being dispersed by Motion is collected together, and soon
coagulated by an Acid.

For these Reasons the Patients Diet must consist of such Things as are sweet
and easy of Digestion, as Veal, Lamb, Fowl, etc. or Broths, in which the
Cooling Plants are boiled, as Succory, Sorrel, Parsley, Spinach, or others of
the like Nature.

White Wind boiled with a Moiety of Water, etc. Sleeping and Waking must be
moderate. The Patient must not sleep on his Back, for this posture is Heating.
The Body must be kept open with Clysters, if Nature does not act her part, and
gentle Purges given at proper times, of Whey, Manna and Cassia.

Those who are subject to Nephritick Colicks, may be cured by Emollient and
Lenitive Clysters made with Mallows, Marshmallows, Milk, Sugar, and Oil of
sweet Almonds. These are Preparative to Diuretics, such as Ptisans made with
Saltpeter refined, ss. Dissolved in a Decoction of Rest Harrow, and Dogs
Grass. There is not a more excellent Diuretic than Turpentine, ss. made into a
Pill. To harden it, it must be boiled in some Diuretic Liquor, as Turnep
Water, and so made up. To the part affected, apply Fomentations.. Roots of
Marshmallows, ss. Mallows, Melilot, Chervil and Camomil together three
Handfulls, Linseed, Parsley Seed, a^ i. Boil the Ingredients together, and
apply the Cataplasm to the Part.

Baths made with Emollient Herbs, are very useful in Nephritick Pains, and
Broth with Oil of sweet Almonds, i. given to the Patient in the Bath. You may
likewise give Turpentine Pills, or a Dram of the Powder of Millepedes, both
which are proper to expel Gravel by Urine.

If in Nephritick cases the Patient Vomit, give him the following Powder..
Sperma Ceti, Crabs Eyes, ss. Cinnabar of Antimony, i. Volatile Salt of Amber iv.
gr. Laudanum gr. iss. Torchisc. Alkekengi with Opium ss. Mix these for four
Doses.

Mr. Boil in Nephritick Pains, commends Castile Soap dissolved in old Oil of
Wallnuts, adding Oil of Ginger three or four drops. This is a good Diuretic.

REMARKS.
There is in the Hospital of the Charity at Paris, a Stone weighing 51 Ounces,
taken out of the Bladder of a Priest after he was dead, who had been Cut to no
purpose, the Stone being too large to be extracted.

There was found in the Bladder of a Certain English Knight, who dyed at 82
years of Age, a Stone which weighed 25 Ounces and a half, the Urine had formed
a Channel in it, through which it passed into the Vrethra. This Channel had one
Hole in the place where the Vreters enter the Bladder, and another at the
Bottom of the Stone.

Hildanus Centur. 1. Obs. 69. relates the History of a Young Fellow who had
emitted by the Yard 300 Stones of different Colors, some as big as Nuts,
others as large as Chestnuts. He voided all these in two years time with great
Pain, accompanied with Blood; This young Man dyed of the Plague.

The same Author relates, Cent. 4. Obs. 50. He had found the Bladder of a Man
divided into two Bags, each Bag containing six Stones about the bigness of
Galls.

In Centur. 4. Obs. 5. He mentions a Stone which he had taken out of the
Bladder of a young Man of 20 years of Age, which weighed 22 Ounces. It seemed
to consist of several small Stones cohering, and had the Figure of a
Cupping-glass. The Patient dyed in the Hands of the Operator.

In Centur. 6. Obs. 57. He tells us he had a Stone by him, which he had
extracted out of the Scrotum, which weighed 8 Drams when it was first taken
out, but at present weighs no more than five.

In the Miscellanea Cariosa, Obs. 44. There is a History of a Man of 64 years
of Age, tormented with a violent Pain in the Ischium; He had an Asthma to that
degree, he could not breath except he kept his Head erect, had the Jaundice
besides, and in fine dyed of these Distempers. Upon opening the Body, two
Tubercles were found in the Lungs, and 72 Stones about the bigness of Peace, of
a blackish, yellow Color in the Gallbladder and Porus Choledochus. In the
Gallbladder of a certain Count of 70 years of Age were found several Stones,
the greatest of which weighed 14 Drams, and the least 4. In a Woman of 63 years
of Age, the Gallbladder was filled with several greenish Flints, larger than
Beans.

Five Stones, the least of which was as big as a Nut, were taken out of the
Gallbladder of Pope Urban the VIII. Borrichius tells us, he had found in the
Bladder of a Woman, above seventy Stones of an irregular Figure, soft to the
touch, which melted in warm Water. Helmont relates, that he had found Stones in
the Gallbladder of several Animals. Bartholin. Cent. 1. Hist. 34. tells us
that a certain Person very much subject to Gravel, falling into a prodigious
Sweat, evacuated a great quantity of small Sand that way.

In the Miscellanea Cariosa, Obs. 46. is an account published, of a certain Ox
seeming to be more stupid than any of the Rest, inclining his Head to the
Ground, often lying down, and nodding in a Paralytick Manner, who being
observed to wast away, was killed by his owner. The Brain was found petrified,
and as hard as Marble, all the remaining Part of his Body being sound. The
Leanness and Decay in this Animal, did doubtless proceed from a Defect in the
Distribution of the Spirits from the Brain, to the several parts of the Body.

Obs. 27. contains the History of a Woman, who for several years being
tormented with cruel Nephritick pains, made Urine so thick it that Roped, and
sometimes felt such an extreme chillness, that standing before a Violent Fire
naked, she could not perceive the least Heat, though her Skin were scorched.
This Woman dyed with excessive Pain, and her Kidneys were found petrefied, and
as solid as Alabaster.

Obs. 65. A certain Person of 72 Years of Age, of a Phlegmatic Habit of Body,
was attacked with a suffocative Catarrh, and a great Suppression of Urine: A
large Aperture was made in the Vein of the Arm, out of which six Ounces of
Blood were drawn, together with which came out 4 small Stones, which made so
great a noise in falling into the Porringer, as to be heard by the standers by,
these were of a yellow Color, a little inclining to Red, and of the same
bigness with the Gravel usually voided in Urine. The Patient was soon cured of
his Catarrh; but the Difficulty of Urine remained, and soon after he dyed of an
Apoplexy.

Observe. 66. Relates the History of a Woman of 33 years of Age, of a Sanguine
Complexion, who being near the time of her Delivery was suffocated with a
Catarrh. In the inferior part of the Liver was found a great Abscess or Mass of
Matter contained in a Cystis, so hard and strong, that it could not without
great Difficulty be cut with a good Pair of Scissars. This was filled with a
Black reddish Substance, very Glutinous, not unlike Birdlime. This Glue was so
Tenacious, it was difficult to get it off from the Fingers. In the midst of
this was lodged a Stone, about the bigness of a Pullets Egg, which being
divided in the midst, sparkled as if it had been filled with Nitre. This Stone
was much harder on the Surface than within, and void of all perceptible Scent.

Observat. 107. Relates that a Widow of a certain Shoemaker, had for the space
of 16 years, a Stone in the left Kidney, who by the Torment which she suffered,
was wasted to that degree, she seemed a living Skeleton. She had a great Stupor
on her left Thigh. This Woman took every day for some time, a Decoction of
Speedwell in great quantity. This innocent Remedy brought the Stone from the
Kidneys into the Ureters; whilst it was detained there, ^he ^ound the Pain
intolerable, and expected nothing less than to be killed by it. She continued
the Use of her Medical Drink in greater quantity, and so brought it down into
the Bladder, and thence by the help of the same Drink and Fomentations, at
length brought it quite forth.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Punction of the Perinaeum.
THIS Operation is an Aperture made in the Perinaeum, to let out the suppressed
Urine.

THE CAUSE. The Suppression proceeds from some great Inflammation, or some
Carnosity, Fungus, Schirrus, or Ulcer, which blocks up the Vrethra.

THE SIGNS. There is great Pain and Inflammation in the Perinaeum, the Urine is
retained, and the Catheter will not pass the Duct to let it out.

The Operation must only be undertaken when milder ways fail, such as
Injections, the Catheter, or Cataplasms. In this case put the Patient into the
same posture as in Cutting for the Stone, and without using the Catheter, (for
we suppose that will not enter into the Bladder.) Make an Aperture with a
Lancet or an Incision Knife, large enough to put in a Cannula, whose extremity
may pass into the Bladder. This must be left in the Wound for the Urine to pass
through, till the Inflammation be over. After the Cannula is drawn out, dress
the Wound.

THE DRESSING. This is exactly the same with that described in Cutting for the
Stone.

THE CURE of the Inflammation of the Perinaeum, consists like others of the
like kind in applying Discutie^ts to the Part, taking Internally Volatile
Medicines, v. g.. Carduus Water, i. Water of Elder Flowers, ij. Crabs Eyes, i.
Diaphoretick Antimony, ss. Sperma Ceti, i. Laudanum gr. 11. Sugar Candy, ij. of
which Mixture the Patient at several times must take some Spoonfulls.

Cataplasms are made of Roots of Asparagus, Bryony, Hemlock, Flowers of
Chamomil and Elder, with Camphire and Sulphur. Compresses dipped in Spirit of
Wine Camphorated, may be applied. If these prove ineffectual, suppurate the
Wound with emollient Cataplasms made with Lily Roots, Bryony, Marshmallows.
Brank-ursin, Pellitory, Chervil, Mullin, Chamomil, Melilot, Figgs, etc. After
the Ingredients are boiled, pound them in a Mortar, adding Oil of Lilies or
Roses, and apply the Cataplasm hot to the Part.

When the Suppuration is over, cleanse the Ulcer with some deterging Balsam.
Sweeten the Blood with Volatile Medicines given internally, such as Diaphoretick
Antimony, Crabs Eyes, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn and Vipers, and an infinity of
others to be found in M. L' Emery, or other good Chemists. These Volatils may
be given together or separately in some proper Vehicle, as Carduus Water, v. g.
of the powder ss. in a Glass of the aforesaid Water.

If the Ulcer be in the Vrethra, which may be discovered by the Suppuration,
make your injections of Mundifying Ingredients infused in Hot Wine.

REMARKS.
In the Chamber of the Blessed Queen in the Hotel Dieu, there was a Big-bellyed
Woman ill of the Small Pox, her Fundament was rotted from the Os Pubis, to the
Os Sacrum, notwithstanding which, she was Delivered of a living Child, who dyed
some Hours after, as did the Mother not long after her Delivery.

Bartholin Cent. 2. Hist. 52. tells us that a Man of 49 years of Age, had a
Suppression of Urine caused by Straining in Mounting his Horse, a Fever ensued
with a continual Hiccough, a Pain and Swelling in the Groin. Upon insinuating a
Pipe into the Bladder he Urined, the Swelling of the Belly sunk, and the Pain
was allayed; but the Pain sometime after returning, the Patient dyed. Upon
opening the Body, there appeared two Tubercles of the bigness and figure of the
Testicles, which perfectly stopped the Duct of the Vrethra. These in all points
performed the Office of a Valve, opening from without inwards, if the Cannula
were thrust against them, but stopped the passage from within outward. These
Tubercles consisted of a firm white Flesh, without any Purulent Matter; The
Right was larger and something more brown than the Left. The lower part of the
Bladder was a little Mortified, the Patient made a Purulent Water, and the
Colon adhered strictly to the Peritonaeum on the right side.

CHAP. XV. Of the Fistula in Ano.
THIS Operation is an Incision made into the Anus, to lay open an Ulcer in that
part.

THE CAUSE. A Fistula is a Callous, Sinuous, Deep Ulcer with a straight Mouth
or Entry, opening into a more Spacious Bottom. These Cavernous Ulcers full of
Partitions, are formed by the sharp and saline parts of the Blood.

The immediate Causes of Fistulas in this part, are External and Internal. The
External are Contusions, Impure Embraces, Falls, Leeches ill applied, etc. all
which obstruct the Circulation, detain the Humors, and create an Abscess, apt
to degenerate and become Fistulous. The Internal Causes are Abscesses
proceeding from Obstructions, Inflammations, Ulcers, Piles, etc. The Anus is
more subject to Fistula's, than any other part in the whole Body. This proceeds
from the great quantity of Fat, with which the Intestinum Rectum is loaded,
from the Evacuation of the Faeces here (this being the common Sink, where all
the Filth of the Body is brought down to be carried off) from its continual
Humidity, and numerous Vessels, (as Branches of the Hypogastrick Arteries and
Veins, a Branch of the Aorta, another of the inferior Mesenterick Artery, the
Haemorrhoidal Veins, the vast number of Lymphaticks;) and Lastly, from its
Glands which separate a white, glairy, viscous Liquor. Some or more of the
Causes above mentioned, happening to meet with a part thus disposed, it is no
wonder to find a Fistula soon formed.

Fistula's differ much, and are to be distinguished by the following Marks.

THE SIGNS. If the Fistula be in the Fleshy parts, the Pus is White, Turbid and
Viscous. If in the Nervous parts, the Patient has Acute and very Sensible
Pains, and the Humor is Serous and Sharp. If it attack the Veins and Arteries,
it works through them by its Acrimony, and the Matter which comes away,
resembles the Washings of Flesh. If the Fistula emit a thin, clear, sharp,
Humor, it is a mark it has invaded the Bones, and they are corrupted. In this
last Case the Callosity is greater, which proceeds from the Excessive Acrimony
and Saline parts, able to Corrode and Cariate so solid a substance. How the
Saline parts form a Callosity, may be conceived by the like effect which Salt
has, when strewed upon Pork which it hardens, whilst the Humidity of the Flesh
dissolving it, its parts like so many stakes enter and hinder the Motion. This
explication is plausible enough, and may be admitted by those who place the
Hardness of Bodies in the Repose of their Parts.

Recent Fistula's in Persons of a good Habit of Body, are curable if the part
concerned will admit the Application of proper Remedies. But when Inveterate or
in ill Bodies, or invading parts necessary to support Life, as the Bladder,
Guts, etc. where no Application can be made, are desperate.

Fistula's are of different sorts; some pierce the Gut without any outward
Orifice. Others open outwardly, without entering the Intestinum Rectum. These
two Species are termed Incomplete. Some open within and without the Body, and
these are called Complete. There are some which have diverse Cancers, all
opening into one Cavity.

If the Fistula pierces the Gut only, there is a small Tumor and Inflammation
Visible, without the Pus flows out of the Gut, there is Pain, Excoriation,
Itching, and a Tenesmus caused by the Acrimony of the Matter, which irritates
the Part, and sollicites the Patient to go to Stool without any necessity. If
it open outwardly, the Orifice is discerned by the Eye, and the Probe. No Pus
comes from the Gut, and none of the preceding Signs appear. The Sinuosities and
Caverns are found by the Probe, by the Pain and Matter of various Color and
Condition. From considering the Signs, we proceed to

The OPERATION.
The Operation is the same, of whatever Nature the Fistula be. Place the
Patient on the brink of his Bed with his. Thighs stradling; If the Fistula open
outwardly, enlarge the Orifice to introduce the Incision-Knife with its Probe.
This Knife must be crooked and slender, and the Probe Long, Pointed at the end,
and made of well tempered Metal, to prevent the Danger of its breaking in the
Operation. Put the forefinger of the Left Hand up the Anus, introduce the Knife
into the External Orifice of the Fistula, and when you feel the Point of the
Probe on your Finger, perforate the Gut with it, and then draw one end of the
Probe with your Finger, and the other with your Hand, so make the Incision
quite through at one Slash. Observe before you use this Instrument, to have its
Edge covered with a fine thin Silver Chape or Sheath, which keeps it from
hurting the Patient when it is thrust in, and is to be taken off when the Knife
is in the Wound, before the Incision be made.

If the Fistula pierce the Gut only, and the Swelling, Pain, Inflammation, or
other External Marks of the Bottom of the Fistula, are very remote from the
Anus, forbear the Use of the Knife, which would make the Wound too large and
painful, and make the Aperture with potential Cauteries only.

For this purpose lay an Emplaster over the Bottom of the Fistula of the same
length with the Orifice designed, apply the Caustic bruised on the part, first
wetting a little the Place, then cover it with another Emplaster to keep it on
the part. The lower perforated Emplaster, prevents the Caustic from acting on
the adjacent parts, or spreading farther than you design. The time of its lying
on, must be proportioned to its Strength. After which the Escar is to be
separated with the Lancet, and the Operation performed after the manner above
described. When the Operation is over, search with your forefinger whether
there be any Sinus's, which if you find, open with the Scissors, and cut the
Communications; without which caution the Wound apparently cured, will
infallibly Relapse. Here you must be careful of cutting Arteries which may lie
in the way; in case of such accident, stop the Blood with Lemeries, Styptick
Water, or some good Restringent Powders, of which you may find an infinity in
Authors.

If any Surgeon in the Country shall be called to perform this Operation,
unprovided with the Instrument described, he may use his Scissors in this
manner. Let him take an Iron Wire sharpened at the end, and pass its point
through the enlarged Orifice, and thrust it into the Gut, having introduced his
Forefinger into the Anus. Then let him draw the point outward through the
Anus, and when it is come far enough out, bring the Ends of the Wire together,
and with the left Hand drawing the Flesh to him, enter one Blade of the
Scissors or the crooked Knife, and at once cut through all the Flesh. This
method is useful in defect of other Conveniences, or in case the Fistula lie so
deep in the Rectum, you cannot without Difficulty introduce the Knife together
with its Probe. In this Operation, you must be careful to avoid cutting the
Sphincter quite through, least the Patient ever after suffer an involuntary
emission of the Excrement.

THE DRESSING. Fill the Wound with Dossils armed with good Digestives, and so
disposed, that the Medicines may have their effects equally on all its Parts,
over these lay Pledgits with more Digestives, and after the Cavity is filled,
cover all with an Emplaster, and over this lay a Triangular Compress, which
must be of this Figure, that one side may pass between the two Buttocks. The
Dressings must be kept on by the Roller with four Tails fastened to the Collar,
or with the single or double T. These are the very same with those used in the
Operation of Cutting for the Stone, where the Reader will find them described,
which we shall omit here to avoid unnecessary Repetition.

THE CURE. Good Digestives must be applied twice a day, to remove all
Callosities. If these fail of effecting, lay a Caustic on the Indurations, and
when the Digestives is laudable, mundifie the Ulcer after the usual manner.

Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 5. Obs. 80. Relates a Cure of a Fistula arising from
the ill managing a Tumor of the Parotid Gland. A certain Person had an Abscess
under the right Ear, which by degrees degenerated into a Fistula, which had
been three Years unsuccessfully in the Hands of some Barbers, till He was
called to it. He found it Cavernous with two Sinus's at the least under the
skin; the first of these extended upwards toward the Cranium, dividing again
into two other; the second went downwards in its descent, following the Course
of the Jugular Vein, all these Cavities were lined with a Callus. In the first
place he prescribed the Patient an Exact order of Living, purged him twice,
consumed the skin which covered the Fistula with a Caustic, hastening the
Separation of the Escar with Basilicon. The Callosisities in the Bottom he
likewise consumed with another Caustic, with the Addition of his Angelick
Powder. After these removed, he proceeded to Mundifie the Wound with the same
Powder, which he Extolls for its wonderful Efficacy in consuming superfluous
Flesh, advancing the growth of the sound, and procuring the Coalition of Wounds.

REMARKS.
M. A. Severinus in his Book de Chirurgia Efficaci, p. 2. c. 49. Relates the
History of a Fistula in the Perinaeum of five Years standing. And mention
another in the Penis with four tortuous Sinus's, in which every Year a New
Abscess was formed, creating great Pain and Difficulty of Urine.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Operation of the Empyema.
THis Operation is an Aperture made between the Ribs, to let out the Blood or
Matter lodged in the Cavity of the Breast. The word Empyema is sometimes taken
for a Collection of Matter it self, and sometime for the Operation made to emit
it.

THE CAUSE. This Collection whatever the Matter be, sometimes Stagnates between
the Pleura and the Lungs, and sometimes in the substance of the Lungs
themselves.

The Causes are Internal or External. The Internal sometimes is an Abscess
formed in the Duplicature of the Pleura or the Lungs, which coming to break,
makes an Effusion of Matter on the Diaphragm. The External Cause is frequently
some Fall or the like Accident, which breaking the Vessels spills a great
quantity of Blood, and forms an Abscess. Sometimes the Lungs adhere so firmly
to the Pleura, that the Pus does not load the Diaphragm, in this Case there is
no necessity to disengage them, which can scarce be done without Laceration,
since Life is not immediately concerned. These generally proceed from some
preceding Pleurisy or Abscess in the Lungs.

The sense of Authors about the Causes of a Pleurisy differ very much; some
pretend it is caused by an Ebullition of the Blood in the Pleura, Some think it
is a Bilious Blood lodged in the Duplicature of that Membrane, which being
stopped in its Course, putrefies and causes this Distemper. Others derive it from
an Effusion of Blood out of the Intercostal Vessels, which being lodged in the
Interstices of the Pleura, Suppurates and is converted into Pus.

The most common occasion of Pleurisies, is the inconsiderate practice of some
Persons, who after violent Heats or Exercise, expose themselves to a sudden
Change, by drinking Liquors cooled with Ice, going into some Cellar or Vault,
or other Subterraneous place, or perhaps opening their Bosom.

While the Body is heated the Pores are open, the Blood is in a great
Agitation, which coming to dissolve, and the sorous Part to separate from the
Globular consequently there follows a profuse Sweating, and every Pore is
filled with Moisture, till the Chillness of the Ambient Air, a Draught of Cold
Drink, or some other External Accident in a Moment stops the Evacuation, and
the Matter ready to Transpire, is arrested between the Duplicature of the
Pleura, where it Stagnates, Corrupts, and by its Acidity, coagulates the Blood.
Those who indiscretely keep their Breasts open, before the Weather is very
warm, are in danger of being attacked with Pleurisies, for the sharp Air soon
piercing the Breast, which is a Thin part and not very Fleshy, creates
Obstructions, and the Blood meeting with these impediments, which hinder the
free Circulation and passage from the Arteries to the Veins, its Serosity
Transudes through the Arterial Coats, and the Blood and Lympha together
Stagnating in the Pleura, putrefie and form a Suppuration.

Though Cold be the most frequent and general Cause of these Distempers; yet it
is not always so, and we often find Men without overheating their Bodies, or
using the least violent Exercise, surprised with Pleurisies. In this Case I
conceive, they arise from some Nitrous or Acid Particles conveyed into the Body
with the Aliment, or the Air in Respiration, which coagulate the Blood, and
intercept its Motion. This Opinion is confirmed by an Observation, That
Pleurisies are very common after Earthquakes, Tremblings or other Agitations of
the Ground, which throw up the Nitre, and infect the Air, and this doubtless is
the Cause, why Epidemical Pleurisies rage so much in Hot Countries, which more
abound with Nitrous Salts, than colder Climates.

The same Causes which produce Pus in the Pleura, are likewise capable of
producing an Abscess in the Lungs.

THE SIGNS which discover Blood or Pus lodged within the Pleura, are
Inflammation, Acute Pain, or Weight, a small continual Fever, a Hard, Close,
Deep Pulse, frequent Rigors, a great Difficulty of Breathing, a Dry Cough, and
an universal Disorder of the Body: The Patient cannot lie on the sound side,
(because the Matter contained in the Pleura draws it down,) grows suddenly
Lean, and Wastes very much in a little time.

If the Abscess in the Pleura break, and the Matter be discharged on the
Diaphragm, all these Symptoms vanish, and the Patient enjoys some ease for the
present; but soon after He finds a difficulty of Breathing, a Weight on the
Diaphragm, a Fluctuation, and Great Disturbance: The Fever increases and
becomes burning, the Pulse rises, and the Pain (which is not so acute as
before) is felt under the short Ribs: He cannot lie on the sound side, because
the Mediastinum in that posture is loaded with the Pus, which oppresses it, and
causes great Pain: Sometimes the Spittle becomes Purulent, and Abscesses in the
Liver ensue, in the same manner as after great Wounds of the Head. If the Pus
be lodged on both sides, the Patient cannot lie on either, but is forced to lie
on his Back.

If there be Pus in the Substance of the Lungs, the Patient breaths with great
Difficulty, finds a great Weight from the Compression of the Matter, and a fixed
Pain, (which last is usual in Pleurisies, as well as in this Case; but with
this difference, that Pleuritick pains are sharp and sudden, and these not so
vehement, and come gradually) the Fever is continual without any Remission, and
the Thirst immoderate, the Spittle purulent, the Patients Mouth and Throat are
dry, his Cheeks of a Florid Red color, his Eyes sunk in their Orbit, their
lively Sparkling quite Extinguished, his Nails reflected back, and his whole
Body dry and emaciated.

If the Fever increase, and the Patient grows delirous, If his Spittle is
black, livid, or of the color of dried Leaves, the Symptoms are Mortal.

If the Abscess originally proceed from an Internal Cause, the Difficulty of
Breathing is not so great. The Fever is continual accompanied with frequent
Rigors and Cold Sweats, from time to time: At first the Patient spits Blood,
but afterward a spumous Purulent Matter sometimes Yellow, (which last is a
presage of Death) He is forced to lie on his Back, by reason of the Pressure of
the Matter, if he should lie on the sound side, and when he turns to lie on it,
the Lungs press on the Pleura, which unavoidably causes Pain: The Eyes sparkle
at the first, but after some time lose their Vivacity, and the Face is bloated.

There is no more certain sign that any Wound pierces the Breast, than the
noise which the Air makes in rushing out, and the Motion it gives the Flame of
a Candle, applied to it.

To search the Wound, the Patient must be put in the same posture he was in at
the Time he received it; for the better introducing the Probe, and giving exit
to the Matter. If the Wound penetrate the Lungs, the Blood is Frothy, and the
noise of the Air is not so discernible, as in simple Wounds. The Probe piercing
into the Breast, and the exit of the Air are undoubted Signs, there is a
penetration of the Breast, but not that the Lungs are wounded, since the Air
may rush out though these are entire; and therefore you must enquire for
something farther, on which you may safely rely. If a Wound of the Lungs be
Superficial, the Patient feels less Pain lying on his Back, than on his Side;
but if it be deep, and any of the Great Vessels divided, it is the same in
whatever Posture he be. If you introduce your finger into the Wound some days
after it is made, and find the Lungs adhere to the Pleura round the Wound, it
is a sign there is extravasated Blood.

The Florid Red Color of the Cheeks in an Abscess of the Lungs, arises from
some parts of the Purulent Matter, which being absorbed and mixed with the
Blood, accelerate its motion in the numerous Blood Vessels of the Cheeks, which
abound with minute Veins and Arteries, more than most other parts. The Vivacity
and Sparkling of the Eyes, is destroyed by the Sharp, Tartarous Salts, which
which vitiate the Oleous and Balsamic part of the Blood; for the Crimson
Tincture of the Mass, depends on the due Mixture of its Sulphurous parts;
Besides the Air entering the Apostemated Lungs is corrupted, and cannot
impregnate it, as in a State of Health. The sinking of the Eyes in their Orbit,
proceeds from the general Emaciation of the Body. The turning back of the Nails
happens, because these being Productions of the Skin, and this only supplied
with a Serous Liquor destitute of Spirits, it decays, dries, shrinks, and by
consequence draws them back with it.

If these Signs proceed from a Wound not penetrating the Breast, they cease in
few Days upon Bleeding, and a good Digestion; but if the Lungs are corrupted,
they continue and increase, and the same happens if the Diaphragm be loaded by
any Extravasated Matter.

The Flatus is no certain sign that the Wound penetrates the Breast, and
happens sometimes in Wounds of other Parts.

Be not too hasty to proceed to the Operation, if the Oppression be not very
troublesome.

The OPERATION.
When it is evident there is Pus lodged in the Cavity of the Breast, an
Incision must be made for evacuating it; but it would be a very great Rashness
to attempt this, without first considering there are several Cases in which it
may be useless. If the Abscess be in the substance of the Lungs, no Aperture of
the Breast can avail any thing toward the discharging of the Matter; on the
contrary, if the Abscess be on the Surface of the Lungs, and precisely in the
place of their Adhaesion to the Pleura (which may be discovered by a constant
and fixed Pain) there the Operation is absolutely necessary.

If a Wound be made by a Thrust, and happen to be low enough, or otherwise
convenient for the discharging the Matter any farther, the Incision will be
needless; since the extravasated Blood may be evacuated through this Orifice,
by placing the Patient in a proper Posture, and dilating the Wound if necessary.

The place of perforating the Breast, is sometimes in the Artists Choice, and
sometimes directed by Necessity. The Place of Necessity is where the Matter
presents it self; as in Abscesses of the Pleura, or an Adhesion of the Lungs to
it. The Place of Choice, is that which the Operator likes best, when no
Circumstances determine him more to one part, than another: Here the most
proper Place is, between the third and fourth of the Bastard Ribs, beginning to
count from below upwards, about four fingers breadth below the point of the
Scapula, and about the same distance from the Spine of the Back.

Before the Operation, enquire if the Patient do not feel Pain in some part of
the Breast; if he has not been for some time past subject to Distempers of that
Part, has not had a Pleurisy, or the like; for in these Cases the Diaphragm
often adheres as high as the third or fourth Ribs, and to make a Perforation
lower, would be to no effect.

For making the Operation; let the Patient sit on his Bed, and Assistants be
planted by to keep his Body firm; begin to count the Ribs from below upward,
and when you are between the second and third of the Bastard Ribs, pinch up the
Skin transversely, and let one of the Assistants hold one end of the Folded
Skin, and your self the other with your left Hand; Then make your Incision
about two Inches large on the Fold from above downwards, that is lengthways of
the Body. Then cut the Latissimus Dorsi transversely, for by any other way of
Section, the Fibers of this Muscle closing, would stop the Orifice of the
Pleura, and hinder the evacuation of the Matter. Then continue to cut through
the Intercostal Muscles. When you are come to the Pleura, cut through it with
your Knife, guiding the Point with your Finger, lest it enter too far, and
wound the Lungs or Diaphragm, which sometimes adhere to that Membrane. After
the Aperture made, introduce your Finger to enlarge the Incision of the Pleura,
and free the adhering Lungs, if no Pus appear; for if Pus come out freely, it
is a sign, as I noted before, that this adhesion is Natural.

For the forcing out the Pus, oblige the Patient to lie down, and close his
Mouth and Nostrils. If the Lungs fill up the Orifice, and endeavor to get out;
you must thrust them back with a Blunt Hollow Probe with a Hole at each end,
for the Matter to pass through, or a Pipe adapted to the largeness of the
Wound. If Flatuosities happen, long Pipes are very proper, because the Orifice
of the Wound is so small and deep, it would be difficult without these, to give
vent to the imprisoned Air. If you should make use of the Probe to discover
whether you have past through the Pleura, you may happen to separate it from
the Ribs, and make another Vacuity, in which the Blood being collected will
create a new Abscess, wherefore it is better to forbear this Trial. If it be
blood which comes from the Wound, you may let out a greater quantity, than if
it be Pus, the latter containing, according to common Opinion, more Spirits,
and the Patient sooner falling into a Syncope. Observe in dividing the
Intercostal Muscles, to make your Incision in the midst between the Ribs, to
prevent laying the Bones bare, which would leave behind it a Fistulous Ulcer.

THE DRESSING. You must begin here with putting in a Tent of Lint flat at the
end, which enters the Wound, and Cupped or Headed at the other; This must be as
little as possible, least it offend the Lungs, and must be very soft least it
hurt the Ribs, and lay the Bone bare, which may cause an incurable Fistula. You
must not forget to pass a double Thread through the Tent, which may be fastened
round the Body, if you please to hinder it from getting into the Caviry of the
Breast. Next fill the Wound with Dossils armed with some good Digestives, lay
on a Pledgit, then an Emplaster, and over all a Compress dipped in some good
Defensative to prevent any Fluxion on the Part. The best Defensatives are the
Styptick Waters, or in defect of these Oxycrate well heated. These must be kept
on with the Napkin. For this purpose fold your Napkin lengthways into three
Plaits, Roll it at both ends, then apply its Middle upon the Wound, and
beginning here, bring it round the Body pinning it at its Ends. The Napkin must
be suspended by the Scapular. The Way of making it is thus: Take a piece of
Linen near six Inches broad, and long enough to reach from the Napkin before,
to the same behind; then cut a Hole in the midst lengthways, large enough for
the Patient to thrust his Head through, then draw it down on the Shoulders, and
Pin one End to the Napkin before, and the other behind. Some choose to fasten
the two ends of the Scapular between the Pleats of the Napkin; Some likewise
cut the ends of the Napkin six Inches or more lengthwise, and cross the cut
Ends or Tails over one another.

THE CURE. The Patient must be kept lying on his Back, with his Head raised,
and his Body half erect; he must be left undisturbed till he finds a new
Matter, which requires the taking off the Dressings to give it vent. If the
Lungs present themselves and fill the Orifice, put them gently back with the
long Pipe, so let the Pus discharge it self through its Cavity, and after the
Evacuation, proceed to the Use of good Detergents.

Blood comes away ordinarily the first three or four Days, next a Water for
some Days more, and after this Pus which by degrees thickens. If this be thick
to excess, evacuated with Difficulty, and the Patient sensible there is some
still remaining, Syringe the Wound with Vulnerary Injections made of the
Decoctions of the Birthworts, etc. with Aloes, Myrrh, Frankincense, or any
other proper Ingredients; correct the Intemperature of the Air with Fire
brought to the Patients Bedside, during the time of Dressing him, and keep the
Wound no longer open than is necessary, because the Air by its Acidity is apt
to condense and coagulate the extravasated Matter, and hinder its Evacuation.
If the Pus be thick, or there happen to be a Mixture of Water, a Decoction of
Barley strained with a little Honey of Roses is very good. If the Injections do
not come away freely, make way for them with your Finger or the Pipe, or if the
Lungs adhere* free them by introducing your Finger and turning it round. If the
Blood be too Watery, and the Patient loaded with too great a quantity of Matter,
take off the Dressings three or four times a Day. There is a Flux of Matter
very often, which lasts for three or four Months; when you observe nothing but
Pus come from the Wound, you may Heal and Cicatrize it. When the Air acts on
the Blood extravasated in the Breast, it is very often Coagulated without being
converted into Pus, and comes away in Clots. If the Lungs are wounded forbear
Injections at first, at least leave out Aloes, because the Patient will be apt
to bring them up through the Mouth. But after this is consolidated, inject with
Tincture of Aloes, Wine or Vulnerary Decoctions, with Honey of Roses if the Pus
be small in Quantity. After a Thrust with a Sword, if Blood come plentifully
out, and in a day or two after none appear, you must endeavor to close the
Wound, the small Vessels only in all appearance being Hurt, which by degrees
are Healed by the Glutinous Parts of the Mass. If the Wounds penetrate on both
sides, or other occasions require an Aperture, you must not leave both Orifices
open at once, least the Air entering on both sides compress the Lungs, and
Suffocate the Patient. In short, all Wounds of the Breast are dangerous, Death
is commonly the end, or if they happen to be cured, some Phthisis or some
lingering Distemper follows. Wounds of the Breast have sometimes been fortunate
to Persons laboring under Asthma's, or other Chronical Infirmities by opening
a Way for applying Medicines to the Diseased Parts.

Empyema's being usually Consequent on Distempers of the Breast, Pectoral
Medicines conduce very much to their Cure; such are these extracted from the
Famous Mr. Lemery: Sulphur drawn from Cinnabar of Antimony, from 2 gr. to 8.
Oil of Brick used externally, Flower of Sulphur from 10 gr. to 30, Magistery of
Sulphur, from 6 gr. to 16, Balsam of Sulphur from 1 drop to 6, Sugar Candy,
Laudanum, from to 2 gr. Oil of Nuts. Bugle in some Ptisan, Rose Water from i.
to vi. Flowers of Benzoin, from gr. 2 to 5, Mead.

Riverius relates, Cent. 1. Obs. 56. A young Fellow, a Shoemaker by Trade, of a
Bilious Habit, was attacked with a Pleurisy; he had been Bled, and diverse
Remedies used without Success; the Fever continuing upon the fourth Day, to
grow more violent than before, and the Pain of his Side increasing. After this
he eat a whole Apple with a Dram of Frankincense in it, drinking after it, four
Ounces of Carduus Water, covering himself well, and Sweating, which did not
abate the Fever at that time, but Sweating again twice or thrice the next day,
he recovered.

In Cent. 2. Obs. 78. He relates, That a Maid of 25 years of Age very Bilious,
had labored for some Months under a Fluxion on the Lungs, attended with an
incessant Cough, could not Sleep, had a great Pain in her Breast, a small
Fever, never went to Stool, was exceedingly Emaciated, and her Life despaired
of. Riverius observing a great Heat in her Bowels, and a great Restriction of
Body, prescribed an Emollient Clyster, and the losing six Ounces of Blood.
After this two Issues between the Shoulders, and the following Laxative Ptisan
to be continued for five Days.. Tamarinds ss. Boil these in Spring Water lb
iij. to ij. Infuse in this Liquor first strained and cooled, Senna cleansed,
Coriander Seeds, Liquorice bruised, a^ i. Red Reses, i. Let the Patient take
off this, ss. each Morning about an Hour before eating. By the Use of these
slight things she got up the fifth day, and followed her ordinary Affairs. But
still continuing bound and not sleeping, he prescribed her farther a Bolus of
Conserve of Roses, i. Laudanum gr. i. after which she rested four or five
Hours, and continued to sleep several whole Nights after, without any other
Remedy whatever.

In Cent. 2. Obs. 79. He tells us a Boy of 12 Years of Age was Pleuritick on
the Right side, he bled him five times, prescribed all Things usually given in
the like cases, notwithstanding which the Fever grew higher with great
Restlessness and Vehement Pain. The next day he ordered Chimney Soot well
pulverized ss. in Carduus Water, two Hours after the taking which all Symptoms
ceased, and the Patient began to recover.

In Cent. 3. Obs. 39. He tells us, that a Child of five years Old was attacked
with a Pleurisy, attended with an Acute Fever. He gave him the usual Remedies
for the space of five Days, bleeding him several times, after this applying two
Cupping-Glasses on the side affected, and Scarifying deep, from these Incisions
issued out a Sanies continually, after which the Fever and Pain ceased: he
applied Beat Leaves on the Scarifications, and the Flux of Sanies continued two
Days longer; after this came forth a True Pus, and the Patient perfectly
recovered.

In Cent. 4. Obs. 39. He observes that all Pleuritick Patients who Vomit at
first, are Cured.

Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 4. Obs. 26. relates the History of a Pleurisy in a
Person of 30 years of Age. In the first place, he prescribed him a good
Regimen, then a Clyster, and Bled him in the Arm. To the side affected, he used
Anodyne Fomentations, and Internally Pectoral Medicines, with all other things
usual on the like occasions. Upon the Fourth Day the Pain in his side ceased,
and his expectoration was easy. The Seventh Day a great sweat arose, and the
Patient Recovered; But on the Tenth he was seized with a violent Fever, and
Shaking, and dyed the thirteenth. Hildanus conjectures, the case of this Fatal
Turn might be his excessive using the Privileges of Matrimony, being lately
Married to a very Beautiful Woman. Upon this Occasion he observes, How
pernicious all Commerce with Women is in Acute Pains.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 26. relates, that a certain Person who had for
many years been Asthmatick, and had a Cough, dyed Emaciated to the highest
Degree. Upon opening the Body, he found Obstructions and Schirrosities in the
Liver, Spleen, and other Viscera, and in the Lungs a Hard, Rough Stone about
the bigness of a Nut, enclosed in a Carnous Case. There were diverse Tubercles
along the branches of the Aspera Arteria all Schirrous, without any Ulcer in
the Lungs. He found two pound of Water in the Pericardium, and a great quantity
in the Cavity of the Breast. He relates farther in the same Observation, That
in opening of a Woman who dyed of a Phthisis, he found a great quantity of
Clotted Blood in the Lungs, besides several small Stones, and in opening the
Body of a Man, he found diverse Stones part black, and part white.

In Cent. 2. Obs. 30. He says, he found some Fragments of the Lungs in the
Urine of a Peasant.

In the Miscellanea curiosa Obs. 41. There is a Relation of a certain Person of
36 Years of Age, naturally Hot, Dry, and Phthisical, who was found dead by his
Wife's side. The preceding Day he had dispatched all his ordinary Affairs. His
Wife rising in the Morning made the least noise she could, for fear of
disturbing him, imagining he was a sleep; but wondering he did not come down
after some time, went up and found him Dead. This Accident made a great Noise,
and Physicians were sent for to discover the Cause of his sudden Death; in
opening the Body, a large Swelling was found near the Cartilago Arytenoides,
resembling a Scrophulous Tumor; the Lungs were Ulcerated, silled with Purulent
Matter, and great Part of their Substance wasted. Upon opening the Trachea, and
examining the Swellings, it appeared to be a Portion of the Lungs, which being
stopped there, had Suffocated the Patient.

Bartholin Cent. 2. Hist. 56. relates that a certain Person dying of a Dropsy
of the Breast, he found the two Lobes of the Lungs wasted, especially the
lower, nothing remaining besides the Membrane which invests them, which was
thrice as thick as the Pericardium, and extremely distended with the Water
contained in it. The Heart was larger than was natural, flabby and filled with
a black Blood.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Extirpation of the Cancer.
THis Operation is a Total Extirpation of that Raging Tumor, to free the
Patient from all its mischievous consequences.

THE CAUSE of this cruel Disease is a sharp corrosive Blood or Lympha, which
discharging it self on some part, corrodes and tumefies it. If it invades the
glandulous parts, it probably arises from a virulent Lympha becoming Corrosive,
not unlike Aqua Fortis. If the Muscular or Fleshy Parts, it may be derived from
the same ill qualities in the Blood.

The Cancer then is a Round, Unequal, Livid, Painful Tumor, formed by some
Sharp and Corrosive Humors. In a Cancer the Tumefied Veins creep along the
Surface of the Skin, resembling the Claws of a Crab, from which appearance it
derives its Name. The roundness proceeds from the Figure of the Glands, in
which this Distemper is Seated, for the Flux of Humors distending them
equally, they preserve their Natural Figure. The Pain is more vehement in
Cancers of the Glandulous Parts than others, because these are furnished with
an infinity of Nervous Fibrillae, which are allowed by all Men to be the
immediate Organ of Sensation. The Lympha contributes much to their increase,
the Glands being the Receptacles of that Liquor. When the most corrosive parts
of the Blood escape out of the Vessels, an Ulceration ensues, and the slow
progress of this, proceeds from the difficulty which the parts of the Blood
find in making their way by the slowness of the Circulation.

Some Cancers are Internal, others External, some Vlcerated, others not.

THE SIGNS. A Cancer often in its beginning, is not larger than a Pea, and
grows at some times faster, at others slower. At first it appears like a
Little, Hard, Blackish Swelling, Troublesome by its excessive itching. This
Tumor after some time increasing, appears Hard, of a Leaden Color and Livid.
The Pain at first is Tolerable, but after becomes Violent, and when the
Ulceration is completed strikes to the quick, and emits an intolerable stench.
In its Progress when it is upon the point of Ulcerating, there is an Excessive
Heat, with Pulsation and Pricking: The Neighboring Veins are Swollen, filled
with a black Blood, and creep along the Skin, resembling the Claws of a Crab.
Cancers seldom come of themselves, but most commonly proceed from Schirrous or
Scrophuious Tumors ill Cured. The Principal Seat of Cancers is in the
Glandulous parts, especially the Breasts of Women, and sometimes the Mouth,
Nose, Lips, etc. and the strange aptness to degenerate, makes all Ulcers of
these parts justly to be feared.

A Cancer not Ulcerated is called Occult, and Apparent if it be Ulcerated. The
Signs which discover a Cancer is Ulcerating, are Accession of Pain, Pulsation,
and unusual pricking, and an increase of the Heat and Swelling.

Occult Cancers are best left untoucht, for fear of irritating them, and
hastening the Patients End. Cancers in the Breasts and Glandulous Parts are very
dangerous; because these parts are very sensible, and more susceptible of ill
impressions than others. This arises from the abundance of Lympha in them,
which growing sour, does more mischief than in parts where it is less
plentiful. External Cancers are very difficultly meddled with, Medicines being
more apt to exasperate, than heal them.

Before Operation, try if they are curable by General Methods, as observing a
Good D^et, Mild, Repeated Purging and Bleeding. The Haemorrhoidal Flux in Men,
or the Menstrua in Women, afford great Relief in this Disease: Sharp Medicines
preposterously used, make the Disease incurable. The Cure of a Cancer not
Ulcerated, must be attempted by Mild and Gentle Remedies; which cool, allay,
dissolve, and repel the Matter kindly, without raising any Fermentation; such
are Mulberry, Plantane and Strawberry Waters. If these prove ineffectual, then
proceed to Operation.

The OPERATION.
When you first perceive in the Breast a Small, Hard, Permanent Tumor in the
Glandulous Parts, with other Symptoms of a growing Cancer, extirpate it. Place
the Patient in a convenient Posture, to lay open the Tumefied Gland, then free
and take it off. If any Vessels appear, which may give occasion to fear a
Haemorrhage, tie these before you cut out the Tumor.

Though the Cancer extend over the whole Breast, yet if it be moveable without
adhesion to the Ribs or Sternum, there is room to hope the Operation may be
successful, especially if the Patient be young, and have as good Habit of Body.

To perform the Operation in this Case: The Patient being placed on his Back in
his Bed, lift up the Arm on the same side the Cancer, and draw it back; then
embrace the whole Breast with Pincers made of two half Crescents, which may
pass over each other when the Pincers are shut. The Breast being in this manner
held fast, cut all off with a crooked Knife very sharp and flat, beginning
beneath, that the Mammary Vessels may be divided last of all, for fear of a
Flux of Blood. Take the whole Tumor off as quick as may be, close to the Ribs.
This is the manner of performing the Operation, when the Cancer is Ulcerated.

If the Cancer be not Ulcerated, make a Crucial Incision through the Skin,
without entering the Glandulous Body; then separate the four Flaps, and embrace
the Carnous Tumor with the Pincers above described, and take it off with a
sharp Knife. If you are not provided with Pincers of this kind, Gripe the
Tumor as well as you can in your Hand, or if you cannot conveniently do this,
use a sort of a Steel Fork to hold it, and so cut it off.

The Operation but a little while since, was commonly performed in the
following manner, but it is too cruel. The Patient was laid on his Back on his
Bed, The Surgeon raised the Arm on the same side with the Cancer, drawing it
back to lay the Breast fairly open; then he passed a Needle with a very strong
Thread through the Basis of the Breast, and another after the same manner to
cross with the former. Next he tied the four Ends of the Thread together, and
made a Knot, with which he drew the whole Breast up, and then cut all off as
near the Ribs as possible, with a very sharp Knife. He began to cut in the
lower part of the Breast, ending at the Vessels next the Axillae, and leaving a
small Portion of Skin to cover the Vessels, for the more easy stopping the
Flux of Blood. This way of Operating would still be good, if we had not a more
convenient way of apprehending the Breast, after the manner above described.

THE DRESSING. Gently compress the sides of the extirpated Breast, to squeeze
out the Blood and Humors, and lightly pass over the Wound an Actual Cautery to
disperse the Humors; and lastly apply the Vitriol Button to stop the Flux of
Blood: Take Vitriol grossly powdered, wrap this in Tow, make it up round like a
Button, and apply it to the Vessels; lay over this Pledgits with a Restringent
Powder, and cover them with a large Emplaster with a Compress over, and keep
all on with the Napkin and Scapular, described in the Gastroraphia and
Paracentesis of the Breast.

The following Bandage which retains the Name of Heliodorus, a Greek Physician
who first invented it, is very convenient. Take a Linen Girth three inches
broad, and of a competent length to go round the Body; sow two Straps in the
middle of this, about two inches or more distant from each other, and long
enough to reach so as to be fastened behind, apply the middle of the Girth on
the Breast, and passing it round the Body; bring its ends as far back on the
first Round as they will extend, and pin them there; then take up the two
Straps, cross them, pass one over the Right, the other over the Left Shoulder,
and fasten them behind to the Girth.

THE CURE. Apply Suppuratives to procure a good Digestion, to draw out the
Corrosive Matter remaining in the Part, and hinder the Cancer from making
farther Devastation; then Deterge well, and Cicatrize the Wound.

Before I leave this Subject; It is necessary to let the Reader know, some
Authors have pretended to Cure Ulcerated Cancers by the use of Medicines only,
without Manual Operation. Some assure us, this has been effected by the
Application of red Snails, taken out of their Shells: These, they tell us,
leave a slime on the Part, their Bellies are corroded, they swell to a vast
size, and at length burst. If this Method fail of the intended Success, it has
this advantage, that it may be tried with little Difficulty.

Riverius Obs. 20. tells us, a young Surgeon, a Stranger, cured a Cancer
beginning to Ulcerate in a Woman of 50 years of Age, with this Medicine:. Crude
Sublimate, i. ij. Sal Armoniack, ij. Arsenick, i. Aqua Fortis, i. Put all these
into an equal Weight of Distilled Vinegar; then Distill all over, till the
remaining Matter obtain the consistence of a Past. He bathed well the suffering
Part with Rags soaked in Wine well warmed, rubbing it a little roughly to
enrage it. Then he spread a little of his Composition on a Pledgit, six times
less than the Tumor, applying this on the Part, and leaving it on for the
space of 24 Hours, in which time it made an Escar about six times as large as
the Pledgit, and equal to the Tumor; after the Separation of which, he
incarned and cicatrized the Wound. If any part of the Tumor remained, he
consumed it with Burnt Alum and Praecipitate, using only dry Lint for the
Incarning it. The most observable Accidents in this Process of Curing, were
upon the Application of the Medicine; the Fever immediately grew higher, a
Vomiting, Flux and Copious Urining ensued, which Symptoms lasted for two or
three Days.

The same Author assures us, He had cured a Cancer of 13 years standing, with
very painful Carnosities in an Ancient Woman, with so innocent a Medicine as
Nightshade, Plantain and Rose Water, with the addition of Honey of Roses,
exposed for some time to the Sun, and then Applied. The same he tells us, he
had successfully applied in another Cancerous Ulcer in the Breast.

Fabricius Hildanus uses the following Method; A certain Woman he tells us, had
an Occult Cancer in her Breast, proceeding from Coagulated Milk. She having
abundance of Milk, and happening to fall into a Suppression of Urine, an
Inflammation ensued, which curdled it. After the Inflammation was gone, there
remained a Tubercle or small Lump, about the bigness of a Bean; which being
neglected, continued for the space of 40 Years without any Pain, but the Woman
growing Old and Decrepit, the Tumor began to increase, grow Painful, and
extend quite to and under the Arm-pit. Having procured her self to be bled in
the Arm, on the same side with this Cancerous Tumor, she was deprived of the
use of it. Our Author at the entreaty of this miserable Woman, undertook a
Palliative Cure. This he began with prescribing her an exact Order of Living,
then purging her with the following Potion. Leaves of Sena, iss. Dodder,
Fumitory, Scabious, Hart's-tongue, of each Handful, sharp pointed Dock, Figwort,
Polypody of the Oak, the inner Bark of Birch-root, a^ ss. Aniseseeds, sweet
Fenil-seeds, a^ ij. Liquorice, ss. Boil these Ingredients in Water, so that
after straining, there may remain viij. Take a Moiety of this Liqueur, to which
add Syrup of Roses wi^^ Rhubarb, Agaric and Sena. Mix and make a Potion. This
purged the Patient very gently. The next day he bled her about four Ounces in
the Right Foot, and two days after purged her with the same Potion, with the
addition of Confection of Hameck, ij. Compound Syrup of Roses, i. Externally he
used the following Liniment twice a Day to the Diseased Part.. Oil of
Earthworms and Foxes, a^ ij. Yelks of Eggs, and Oil of Sweet Almonds, iss. Oil
of Scorpions, i. Oil of Spike, i. Mix these for use. These Inunctions removed
the Pain and Swelling in the Arm; the Breast continued in the same State, and
she felt no Pain. Notwithstanding which, he applied this Emplaster.. Empl.
Diapompholygos, ij. Diapalma, i. Calx of Lead washed, Calamy Stone, a^ ss. With
a sufficient quantity of Juice of Cranes Bill, make up an Emplaster according
to Art.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 3. Obs. 88. Relates the Case of a Woman of 50 years of
Age, who had a small Turbercle on the right Nipple: Though this Tumor at first
was hard, and something troublesome; yet being small, and not very painful, she
would not suffer it to be meddled with; But the Pain after some time increasing,
she called in a Surgeon, who applied Emollient Medicines for the space of a
Month; the Pain increasing, the Tumor broke, and a sanious Bloody Matter
issued out, resembling Water after the washing of Flesh. This Tumor at length
became Painful, Stinking and Ulcerated, in so malignant a manner, that it
corroded the Breast to the Ribs, and up to the Arm-pit. The Patient selt great
Pain, Restlessness, a constant Nausea, and an Aversion to all sores of
Aliments, and dyed in this Condition. This is an eminent Instance, how
dangerous it is to meddle with Occult Cancers.

The same Author, Cent. 3. Obs. 86. relates, that he had seen a young Man whose
Tongue was so thick, and had so copious a Flux of Water in his Mouth, that he
could not Articulately pronounce several Words. After some time a small
Tubercle appeared at the end of the Tongue, which grew to the bigness of a
Vetch, and after of a Bean, then of a Chestnut, without the least Pain; In
fine, it increased to the bigness of an Egg, remaining still hard and indolent,
till in the issue it killed the Patient.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Operation of the Bronchotomia.
THIS Operation is an opening of the Aspera Arteria, to give the Air liberty of
entering the Lungs in Tumors of the Throat.

THE CAUSES. These Tumors sometimes are occasioned by external Hurts,
straining of the Voice, and long or much talking; sometimes the Humors are
soured by vehement Passion, and create an Inflammation of the Larynx. This
Inflammation opposes the free Circulation of the Blood, and the Blood
endeavoring to force a passage, increases the Tension; and the part increasing
in its Dimensions, press the Aspera Arteria, and hinders the passage of the
Air, and hence suffocation ensues.

The immediate Cause of Quinsies is Sharp, Vitiated, Lympha, which Corrodes,
Inflames and Obstructs the Membranes, Glands or Muscles of the Throat. The
Remote or Occasional causes, are those before mentioned, or some excessive
sharp or sour Aliment, some Preternatural Substance swallowed by neglect, which
being lodged in the Throat, by its Compression, may cause Pain and Fluxion: Or
lastly, Mercurial Inunctions; which raising a Salivation by the Sharpness and
Caustic quality of the Serum, is very apt to inflame their Parts. There are
two sorts of Quinsies, the Genuine and the Spurious; The Genuine is attended
with a Fever, and Difficulty of Breathing, the Spurious or Bastard is a simple
Inflammation of the Throat, without any other ill Accident.

THE SIGNS which discover a Quinsie, is Breeding, are Difficulty of Swallowing,
and Breathing, a Pain in the Gula, a great Heat and Burning in the Throat, a
pain in stirring the Neck, a thick and glutinous Spit, and a vehement Headache.
When the Quinsie is come to Perfection, the Patient finds a great difficulty in
Breathing and Swallowing, Drinks, and all Liquid Aliments revert by the Nose,
the Tongue is flabby and soft, the Fauces are full of Saliva, Respiration is
intercepted, and the Patient cannot lie down without danger of Suffocation.
When the Quinsie is very great, the Tongue livid and loaded with a thick,
saline, bitterish Matter, the Face is swollen and inflamed, its Veins are Tumid,
the Fever very acute, with an intolerable Thirst, and a bitter Taste in the
Mouth; the Eyes stick out, and the Pulse is wavering and small.

Children are more subject to Distempers of this kind, than grown Persons,
their Throat being more clogged with Pituitous stuff. When they are attacked
with this Distemper, their Countenance is pale, they complain of an external
pain in the Neck, Hawk very much, and what they bring up, is thick and
glutinous.

A Quinsie after a Fever, without any preceding Tumor in the Throat, is very
dangerous; and the same Prognostic holds in all pain and difficulty of
Breathing, without any apparent swelling in the Neck. If the Lungs are Inflamed
in a Quinsie, the Patient most commonly dies upon the seventh Day, or if they
exceed that, Hippocrates assures us an Empyema will certainly follow. The
Distemper by its sharp Nature causing a Peripneumony, which terminates in a
Suppuration. Some Authors however deny any Quinsie ever to have had such a
Crisis. If the Fever does not abate, it is an ill sign, and if the Patient
foams at Mouth, Death is very near. If the internal Inflammation be
communicated to the external Parts, and a swelling arises with a redness on the
Breast, it is a very good sign.

In a Quinsie, the Patient sometimes can swallow Solids only, and not Liquids,
and sometimes Liquids, and not Solids. When the Inflammation is seated on the
Palate, Uvula, and Neighboring parts, he cannot swallow Solids, by reason of
the pain they cause, and these parts are disabled from thrusting them down the
Gula; but Liquids make their way by their own weight. If the Inflammation be
only on the Muscles of the Pharynx, he swallows Solids more easily than
Liquids; because the Inflammation contracting the Oesephagus. The Liquid
Aliment being protruded by the Tongue, and finding no passage by their
Fluidity, fly up on every side, and revert by the Nose.

Tumors in the Throat must not be neglected, because the Lympha stagnating
there in the Vessels and Glands, is very apt to breed a Quinsie by its
sharpness. This Distemper is not so dangerous in growing Children, as in Adult
Persons, it ordinarily proceeding in these from the Redundance of a Nutritious
Juice, void of all Acrimony, but in Adults it is caused by an Acid, Vicious
Lympha. If the Remedies prescribed in this Distemper prove ineffectual, and the
Patient be in danger of Suffocation, you must proceed to the Operation.

The OPERATION.
This is not to be undertaken rashly, and therefore first enquire whence the
difficulty of Breathing proceeds, which if caused by an Inflammation of the
Lungs, will frustrate your Hopes. It may happen the whole length of the Aspera
Arteria may be inflamed, and filled with a thick Lympha, in which case it is
best to forbear making any Incision.

When you intend to perform the Operation, place the Patient in a Chair, or on
his Bed, and plant a Servant behind to hold his Head, resting on his Breast,
being careful not to draw it too much back, least he intercept the little
Respiration remaining, and suffocate him before you can finish your Work. The
most commodious and secure place to make the Aperture in, is about an inch
below the Top of the Larynx, between the third and fourth Ring of the Aspera
Arteria. But in great Inflammations where the Muscles are very much Tumefied,
and it is difficult to count the Rings, you may make your Operation in the
middle of the Windpipe. To make the Aperture, pinch the Skin up transversly if
possible, and make a Longitudinal Incision; then separate with the point of
your Incision Knife, as finely as possible the Bronchial Muscles, and the
Sternohyoidaei, in doing which the Line which separates them, will serve to
guide you. When you have laid the Aspera Arteria bare with a Lancet, divide the
carnous Membrane which unites the Cartilaginous Rings, having an especial care
not to cut the Recurrent Nerves, which inevitably destroys the Voice, these
Nerves furnishing Spirits to the Muscles of the Tongue. Avoid hurting the
Glandulae Thyroidaeae, which are Receptacles of the Lympha, the effusion of
which; would make an inundation in the Wound, the Air being apt to corrupt the
Cartilages.

The Lancet must be kept in a straight Line with the Scales, by a Tape wrapped
round to its Point; before you take out the Lancet, introduce a Probe into the
Orifice, and on this side a short, flat Cannula or Pipe, a little crooked at
the end. This must not be thrust too far, for fear of hurting the hinder part
of the Aspera Arteria, and causing a Cough. The Pipe must have two Rings to
pass Ribbons through, which are to be tied about the Neck, but not too strait,
for fear of choking the Patient; leave the Pipe in the Wound till the
Inflammation be over. You must not apply any Tow to the end of the Pipe,
because the Incision is made for the free passage of the Air; besides there is
danger some part of it may be sucked through the Pipe, and suffocate the
Patient. To take off the chillness of the Air, before it enters the Lungs, keep
a good Fire constantly in the Chamber, or if the Party be not in a condition to
bear this Expense, bring a Chasingdish of Coals to his Bed, and draw the
Curtains. When you perceive the Air recovers its Natural passage by the Mouth,
then take out the Pipe and dress the Wound.

THE DRESSING. Bring the Lips of the Wound even together, which is easily done
with a small Fillet, lay on the Wound a Pledgit armed with some good Balsam.
The best Application to simple Wounds not contus'd which admit of a prompt
Reunion, is a Pledgit dipped in some Styptick Water. This is the celebrated
Balsam which Mountebanks make so great a stir about, that with which they cure
so speedily the Cuts they sometimes make upon the Stage, to give the gazing
Multitude a proof of their rare Skill.

After the Lips of the Wound are brought together, keep them close with the
uniting Bandage. To make this, take a Fillet about two inches and a half broad,
and an Ell long, slit a Hole in the midst of it lengthways, more than two
inches long, rub it at both ends, and pass one end or head through the Hole in
the midst, put the Fillet about the Neck, apply the slit on the Wound, and draw
the two ends or heads to keep the Lips of the Wound together, being careful not
to straiten it too much; for fear of inflaming the suffering part; Then bring
the ends of the Fillet behind, and continue to make as many rounds about the
part, as the length of the Fillet will admit of, pinning it where it ends.

THE CURE. The Patient must be fed with good Nourishing Liquids; for all solids
in Deglution, are apt to compress the Aspera Arteria, and put it into some
Motion, which obstructs the Reunion. If you perceive the Wound is inclined to
Suppurate, rake off the Dressings, and put a little Balsam under the ordinary
Bandage; but if no signs of Suppuration appear, let the Dressing remain
untoucht, till the Coalition be perfected. For simple Wounds, often when no
Styptick Water is applied, are cured without Suppuration.

When Quinsies are curable without Manual Operation, the Method of Treating
them is as follows. The Patient must be confined to a Regular Diet; for
Abstemiousness and spare feeding, are useful in all Inflammations whatever. We
may account these in effect a perpetual Bleeding, since the Blood not being
supplied in proportion to its expense in Transpiration, must needs wast. His
Chamber must be kept moderately warm; both extremes of Heat and Cold being
equally mischievous: An Excess in the first putting the Blood into a violent
Agitation, necessarily heightens the Inflammation; on the other hand an Excess
in the latter, produces the same effect by obstructing the Circulation, and
hindering the Reflux of the Blood in the Veins. I Assign the Arteries as the
Channels which convey the Matter of obstructions, because these discharge into
the parts the Blood forced through them with great impetuosity, by the
contraction of the Heart, the Veins being wholly calm, and without Pulsation.
The most commodious Posture of Body is erect; because when it is bended, the
Vessels are pressed together, the Circulation is less free, and the Air does not
so easily enter the Branches of the Trachea.

If the Patient cannot swallow Liquids, let him remain for some time without
Aliment, rather than do any Violence to the suffering part. The less he eats,
the more speedy his Cure will be; Men may subsist for several Days without
Food, especially in Acute Distempers. The Want of sleep, which is a Symptom
frequently attending Quinsies, is mischievous, continual Waking, being apt to
inflame the Blood. To remedy this, endeavor to procure sleep by Somniferous
Emulsions made with the four cold Seeds, and white Poppy Seed in Elder Water:
Let a Glass of this be taken going to Rest, keeping the Mind Serene, and free
from all disturbing Passions. In danger of a Suffocation, bleed the Patient
instantly in the Jugular Veins; nothing can discharge the Superior parts more
immediately or effectually, than an Aperture of these Vessels; but here observe
not to hazard strangling him with a Ligature about the Neck, which some
indiscreetly make. To prevent this, compress the Neck on the side and behind
with a Fillet, without passing over the Aspera Arteria, this Ligature is
sufficient to tumifie the Vessels. If for any Reason the Patient cannot endure
Bleeding, apply Cupping Glasses to the Thighs, to determine the Blood to the
inferior parts.

Clysters are to be frequently given; These may be made with the Decoction of
Mallows, Marshmallows, Brank-Vrsine, Chamomil, with the addition of Honey of
Mercury, i. the Yelk of an Egg, Oil of Lillies, i. Nitre refined, i. To all his
Liquid Aliments, add Oil of sweet Almonds, i. Cream of Tartar, i.

This Gargarism is good in Quinsies.. Water of Elder Flowers, ij. Water of
Plantain, i. Spirit of Wine, vi. Spirit of Sal Armoniack 20 drops, Mix these,
and Gargle the Patients Mouth. Or,. Decoction of Elder Flowers, viij. Spirit of
Wine, ij. Honey of Roses, ss. let the Patient gargle his Throat with this
Mixture, or if the Inflammation of the Muscles make him incapable of doing
this, let him retain the Liquor in his Mouth, frequently spitting it out and
renewing it.

Externally apply Discutient Remedies to the Throat, the choicest of which are
Volatile and Spirituous Liquids, such as Spirit of Wine Camphorated, Volatile
Salt of Urine, dissolved in a little Elder Water. Emollient Cataplasms have a
very good effect, to make these:. Flowers of Scabious, Mallows, Chamomil and
Melilot, a^ one handful, Hemlock half a Handful, Liquorice, i. Album Graecum i.
Boil all in Milk and then apply the Cataplasm. Or,. Crumbs of White Bread a
Handful, Roots of Althaea, Bulbous Roots of Lillies a^. i. Linseed, vi.
Fenugril, ss. Boil all the Ingredients in Milk and so pass them through a
Strainer: Add in the Straining, Oil of Sweet Almonds, Oil of Lillies, a^ vi.
Fresh Butter, ss. Saffron, i. the Yelk of two Eggs. Cataplasms made of Swallows
Nests are excellent, because these as well as all Animals Dungs, abound with
Nitrous Salts. All these enumerated Remedies, together with all proper
Emplasters promote Suppuration; and therefore assist in removing the Obstruent
Matter. After Suppuration, deterge the Wound with a Decoction of Barley, and
Honey of Roses, adding if necessity require, a little Spirit of Salt.

Bastard Quinsies caused by a thick, glutinous Lympha clogging the Throat, may
be cured with a Gargarism made of the Decoction of Sage and Mallows, a^ one
Handful in a Quart of White Wind, till it be reduced to a Pint, straining the
Liquor, and dissolving a little Sal Armoniack in it.

Sudorisicks are very good in this Distemper; for Instance, Powder of Vipers,
Diaphoretick Antimony, a^ gr. xv. taken in a Glass of Carduus Water, the
Patient being well covered and Sweating after it. Outwardly Diachylon and
Vigo's Emplaster are good; Liniments may be made of Oil of sweet Almonds,
Marjoran, Mint, applied warm to the part affected.

If these Glandulous Tumors are not curable by Discutients, you must have
Recourse to Maturating Medicines, to procure Suppuration, and break the Abscess.

REMARKS.
Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 3. Obs. 27. relates the Case of a very Ancient Man,
who had a Quinsie after a Dysentery of three Months continuance, which he
conjectures was caused by the Matter of those Pustles, which ordinarily appear
on the Lips, being detained in the Throat, and creating a great Inflammation
there. The same Author relates, Cent. 6. Obs. 15. He had seen a great Quinsie
proceeding from the Application of Pepper, in a Relaxation of the Uvula.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Bleeding.
BLeeding is the dextrous opening a Vein or Artery, to extract a certain
quantity of Blood, in order to preserve Health, cure some Distemper, or at
least give Relief to the Patient.

THE CAUSE. Bleeding is commonly required in Intermitting, Continual, Malignant
and Spotted Fevers. In violent Pains, Apoplexies, Quinsies, Inflammation of the
Lungs, Pleurisies, Asthma's, and all Diseases arising from Obstructions, or
attended with Sanguineous Eruptions on the Skin, as the Meazles, Small Pox, all
Ebullitions of the Blood, Boils, Carbuncles and Erysipelas's. It is very
serviceable in Women with Child, to prevent Flooding and Abortion, and in their
Labor to facilitate and advance the Birth. It conduces very much to the speedy
Cure of Abscesses, Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures and Dislocations, to divert all
Defluxions on the Wounded Part, and prevent all ill Accidents, which ordinarily
attend these cases. Bleeding is likewise very much used in difficulty of
Breathing, and all Repletion, etc.

THE SIGNS which indicate Bleeding, are the same with the Causes above recited.

The OPERATION.
Before this Operation be prescribed or performed, all Circumstances ought to
be considered, viz. the Nature of the Distemper, the Patients Strength, Age,
Complexion and Sex, the Season, Climate, etc.

Great Diseases require large Evacuations, milder yield to less. As for Age,
bleeding is convenient at all times, if the Disease be pressing. M. Patin bled
a Child within three days after it was born, who lived after to a very great
Age. If necessity require, fer not to bleed Ancient People, they not being
exempted from a Multitude of Diseases, whose progress cannot be checked by any
other way: But in Persons between fifteen and sixty years of Age, you may bleed
boldly, having nothing to fear. Much greater heed is to be taken to the
Patients Strength, than his Age; for if his Strength be quite spent, though his
Distemper seem to plead very much for bleeding, you must forbear, because in
this Case, it would throw him into extreme danger of his Life. Drunken Men must
not be bled, because the Stomach being overcharged, stands in need of all its
Heats to perform Digestion. Persons who have undergone a long Abstinence, are
not proper Subjects to bleed, the Refraining from eating being a gradual and
constant expense of blood. Guido de Cauliaco pretends, that in such Bodies as
are soft, lax, thin and weak, ought seldom to bleed; but such as are fleshy,
firm and sound, who have large and ample Veins, may bear a more frequent
Repetition of it. Heavy Bodies which abound with gross Humors, more easily
sustain frequent bleeding, than Bilious Persons whose Humors are more subtle
and fine, the blood being a sort of check to the Bile. I do not think these
Rules are infallible, and always to be observed, since Bilious Persons are very
subject to Erysipelas's, Effervescences of blood, Inflammations, and other
Indispositions, which oblige them to have Recourse to Bleeding. Those who feed
on Meats which breed Copious blood; such as Bread, and Flesh Meats, may bear
more frequent bleeding, than Persons who use a less nourishing Diet. Married
Men who have craving Wives, must not bleed often; the great Consumption of
Spirits in these Men, assisted by the Exhaustion of their blood, would
infallibly throw them into an exereme Weakness. Persons naturally Lean, bear
bleeding better than those whose Leanness proceeds from Labor, Abstinence,
Wane of Sleep, or long Distempers. Celsus is of Opinion, that Fat and full
Bodies best of all bear bleeding, and that it is healthy for them. Women ought
not to bleed so often as Men: their Bodies being more tender, lax, delicate and
soft than Men, and by consequence more porons and perspirable, not to mention
those Monthly Evacuations of blood, which excuse them from this Operation.

Bleeding may be practiced at all Times, if necessity urge it. Regard is had to
the properness of the Season only in bleeding by way of Prevention. In this
Case the Spring is preferable to all the other parts of the Year; because the
Weather growing Warm stirs and ferments the Blood. The Autumn is not improper,
its beginning usually proving temperate. This bleeding for prevention, is by no
means to be allowed of in very hot or very cold Weather. Both these extremes
are equally bad, in the first all farther Evacuations increase the expense of
Spirits, and in the last lessen the Natural Warmth, and leave Men unable to
bear the Rigor of the Season. If it shall be requisite to bleed in excessive
hot Weather, choose some Day Overcast or Rainy, because the Dissipation of the
Spirits is not so great at such times. Bleeding in the Morning, is better than
any other part of the Day, especially in Mechanics and Laboring Men; because
the Reparation of the Spirits by the Preceding Nights Sleep, put the Patient in
a condition to bear the Operation. If any Business or Accident hinders bleeding
at that time, defer it till Night going to Bed, the Repose of the Night, soon
giving the blood opportunity of resuming its ordinary Course. Persons usually
bleeding at certain times, must continue this Custom, the Omission of which,
will certainly endanger a loss of Health.

Hippocrates forbids bleeding in Big-bellyed Women; for fear of Abortions. He
tells us, Sect. 5. Aphor. 31. A Bigbellyed Woman if she be bled Miscarries, if
the Foetus be very far advanced. The Veneration paid to this great Man, must
not oblige Physicians to follow his Sentiments to the Letter. Experience shows,
several Women with Child have been saved by Bleeding, and that very Copious
too; for more ample Account of this, I shall refer the Reader to the Remarks on
Deliveries, where is related the History of a Woman, who was bled eight and
forty times during her going with Child, to free her from a Cruel Oppression,
which threatened her with Suffocation, notwithstanding which, she was delivered
of a living Child. However this Famous instance must not be abused, to
encourage the too bold use of the Lancet in these Cases. Bleeding in Women
first with Child is dangerous; because the Placenta not adhering firmly to the
Vterus in the beginning separates, the Blood is the Life of the Animal, decays
the Constitution, and causes an Abortion: But if a Woman have a great
Repletion, and her Vessels be overcharged with Blood, an Evacuation is
necessary to prevent ill Accidents.

The inconveniences which usually require bleeding in Big-bellied Women are
Lassitude, Heaviness of Body, Colic Pains, Difficulty of Breathing, Vomiting,
Flux of Blood from the Nose or Womb, Varicose swellings of the Legs, obstinate
pain in the Teeth, Falls, violent Commotions or Disturbances of Mind, all which
put the Blood and Spiris into Disorder. But here it is ever to be observed,
that in bleeding Big-bellyed Women, the Evacuation must not be exceeding large,
upon any pretense whatever, for fear of a Syncope and Abortion.

Women with Child are commonly bled in the seventh and ninth Month, and
sometimes there is a necessity of bleeding them in their Labor, to facilitate
their Delivery. Maids must never be bled, without first enquiring, if they have
their Courses on them. Young Girls who never had, and are now of an Age proper
to expect their Courses, must not be bled. Bleeding in this critical Juncture,
especially in the Arm, unavoidably defers the Evacuation, and perhaps may
endanger the Patient's Life. Young unmarryed Women, ought not to be
clandestinely bled in the House where they live, without the Knowledge of the
Family: If such Person come to a Surgeons House, and desire to be bled, upon
pretense of preventing some Distemper; it I confess is something a Nice case,
for if you bleed her never so little, if she apprehends her self to be with
Child, she may unbind her Arm, and make as great an Evacuation as she pleases.

The most General Rule in respect of bleeding is, never to have recourse to it
without necessity; for the blood is the Life of the Animal; In short, if it
were possible to refrain, all together, it would be best for, as Fernciius sets
it forth; it wastes the Blood and Spirits, decays the Constitution, precipitates
those who use it into an untimely old Age, and leaves the Body subject to
numerous Infirmities, as Dropsies, Gout, Tremors and Palsies. There is a
pernicious Opinion prevailing amongst some People, that the first bleeding
certainly saves the Patient's Life, upon which foolish Confidence, many People
deferring this Remedy to Extremity, have perished.

Bleeding is to be avoided after remarkable Crises, whether by Vomiting, Fluxes
of the Belly or Urine, Voiding of Blood, Defluxions or Abscesses, because these
Evacuations weaken the Patient. Bleeding must be forborne, or at least very
rarely used in Dropsical Patients, and those who have Tromors, or Persons
Emaciated and worn out with long Illness. It is not a proper time to bleed
immediately after Meals (because this obstructs Digestion, and the Patient
vomits up his Meat) nor immediately after any violent Exercise, when the
Spirits are spent; nor in decayed Stomachs, where the loss of Blood must
infallibly increase the Deficiency of the Spirits; nor in the first attacks or
increase of a Fever, the Patient being at that time unable to sustain it.

Bleeding is a proper Remedy in the beginning of hot Abscesses, to lessen the
Matter which feeds them. It is of wonderful use at first in great Wounds, to
Anticipate Inflammations, Fevers, Fluxion, and the ill Accidents usually
attending them, and for the same Reasons, it is exceeding serviceable in all
Fractures and Dislocations of the Bones; But in all these cases it ought to be
moderate.

Of the Veins usually opened.
The Arteries are distinguished from the Veins by their Beating, whereas the
Veins have no sensible Motion. The Blood in the Arteries, is of a more lively
Florid Searlet color, more Subtle and Spirituous than that of the Veins; it
springs by repeated Jets, which the Venal Blood does not. The Arteries lie more
deeply concealed in the Part, and the Veins more shallow and superficial.

The Veins may be opened without any danger, if nothing be hurt besides the
Vessels; but the Punction of the Arteries is ever attended with troublesome
Accidents, as Aneurisms, Difficulty of stopping the Blood, and Death after, if
these Swellings by neglect, or ill management degenerate and gangrene. The
pricking of an Artery which lies deep, is still more dangerous, because no
Ligature or Restringent Remedies can be applied.

The Vein running through the middle of the Forehead, is called the Frontal
Vein, or Vena praeparans. Hippocrates directs the opening this Vein in pains of
the hinder part of the Head, and at present it is practiced in inveterate Pains
of that Part, wherever they reside. In the same case the Temporal Arteries are
sometimes opened: These Arteries alone can be opened, because they are small,
and may be compressed with a Boulster and Bandage; This advantage they receive
from running over the Bone, which with the External Applications, compose a
double Compress.

The Veins in the greater Angle of the Eye, are opened to prevent their
Inflammation; and the Veins between the Cartilages of the Nose, to take off the
Copper Color, and other Deformities in the Skin of the Face. The opening of
the Veins on each side the Fraenum of the Tongue, commonly called Venae
Ranulares, is practiced in Inflammations of the Throat, and Pains of the Teeth,
when the usual Remedies fail. Bleeding in the Jugulars, is very effectual to
prevent all Quinsies, Apoplexies, and all stubborn Distempers of the Head,
especially Inflammations of the Eyes.

There are four Veins in the Arm, in which it is common to let Blood, the
Cephalic, Median, Basilick and Cubital. The First is in the upper and external
part of the foreside of the Arm, near the bending of the Elbow. The Basilick is
a little lower, and the Cubital at the bottom of the Arm on the Bone of the
Cubit, or near it. When the Vessels lied^ep, and cannot be opened, there appear
on the inner part of the foreside of the Arm, from the Elbow to the Wrist,
several communicating Branches, which convey the Blood from one to the other,
and these may be opened in stead of the principal Veins. On the Hand are two
Veins, one between the Thumb and forefinger, and another between the last
Finger, and the last but one called Salvatella, and sometimes opened in Quartan
Agues.

There are several Veins on the Leg and Foot opened, to give Relief to the
Patient. In the upper part of the Musculi Gemelli, there is one called
Poplitea, the opening of which is useful in the Gout, and prevents Varicose
Swellings of the Legs. The Saphaena is opened above and below the Internal
Ancle. This Vein continues its course on the Foot, quite to the Juncture of the
great Toe, and may be opened there: In opening it above the Ancle, great care
must be taken not to prick a Nerve, which terminates in that place, and on the
Foot not to hurt the Tendons. There is another Vein which winds round the
extremity of the same Articulation, called the Sciatica; from the opinion that,
abundance of Blood drawn out thence, appeases pains of the Hip-Gout. The
Saphaena and Sciatica, spread numerous Branches on the Foot, which may be
opened when the great Trunks do not appear.

The opening of a Vein is done after two several ways, either by Pricking or
Cutting. The larger are cut, but the lesser and those which lie deep, admit
only of simple Punction; as the Veins of the Nose, where the adjacent parts
would be hurt, if the Point of the Lancet were raised. Incisions are made after
three several manners, Lengthways, Transverse, or Oblique, and greater or
lesser, according to the largeness and depth of the Vessels.

To open the Veins more conveniently; First stop the Refluent Blood with a
Ligature, except there be a Varicose Swelling, where the Circulation of the
Blood being interrupted, the Vessels are tumid enough without any Artificial
Help.

In Bleeding Delirious Persons, the Vessels are so exceeding large, and
Distended by the furious agitation of the Blood, that for the most part there
is no occasion for Ligature, the Reason of which is plain from the Laws of
Circulation.

The Frontal Vein may be opened lengthways when it is rolling, and Transversly
when it is steady. But in whatever manner it be opened, the Lancet must be held
inclining, for fear if it were plunged Perpendicularly in, it might hurt the
Pericranium, and the subjacent Bone.

The Veins and Arteries of the Temples, may be opened in two places, viz. on
the Temporal Muscles, or under the Lobe of the External Ear, at the entry of
the Meatus Auditorius. On the Temporal Muscles, these Atteries must be opened
lengthways, to prevent dividing their Fibers, which may happen to be followed
by a huge Swelling of the Head, Delirium and Convulsions. The Fear of such bad
Consequences, ought to make a Surgeon who values his Reputation, cautious of
hurting these Muscles.

The Vein in the Greater Angle of the Eye, must be opened lengthways, least a
Transverse Section hurt the Tendon of the Oblique Muscle, and cause a Deformity
in the Part; But it is much better to forbear meddling with this, for fear of
hurting the Lachrymal Gland.

To open the Vein in the Nose, plunge a Lancer directly down, and pretty deep
in the extremity of the Nose, between the two Cartilages. This Lancet must be
kept in its Scales, by a Tape wrapped round it, and only plunged in without
raising its Point: For the Vessel lies so low, that if the Elevation of the
point were answerable to the depth of the Punction, the Orifice would be very
large, and leave a very unseemly Scar. The Veins on each side the Fraenum of
the Tongue, are opened with a Lancet wrapped round with a little Tape to its
point. The Tongue is to be raised with the left Hand, and with the right a
small Transverse incision made, which must not be too deep, for fear of opening
the Arteries, which lie very near the Veins. If these happen to be cut, the
Flux of Blood will prove difficult to stop, since no Dressing can be applied to
the Part. When the Patient has bled enough, let him wash his Mouth with cold
Oxycrate; If this be not sufficient, apply to the Wound some Restringent
Powders of Terra Sigillata, Dragons Blood, Vitriol, or keep a small Compress
dipped in Mons. Lemery's Styptick Water on it.

To bleed all the Veins of the Head, it is necessary to make a Ligature round
the Neck, because the Blood sent to the Head by the Arteries, is conveyed back
to the Heart by the Jugulars, and the Ligature causes them to swell. Sharp,
strong Lancets are required to open the Veins of the Neck, because the Skin is
very lax here, and more difficultly opened, than in other parts where it is
more Tense, and the Veins must be opened lengthways, because they are large and
unsteady.

In making a Ligature on the Jugulars, the middle of the Fillet is to be
applied behind on the Neck, the two Ends brought before, turned over each
other, and put into the Patients Hand, to straiten them as he finds he can
bear; or if he by any Accident be disabled, an Assistant must hold them for him
till the Work be finished. In Apoplexies and Quinsies, no Ligature can be made
without danger of Suffocating the Patient. In stead of this, the Artist must
order one of the standers by to keep his Thumb on the bottom of the Vein of the
opposite side, in the Cavity of the Clavicle, and press the same side in which
he Designs to bleed with one of his own Thumbs, thrusting in the Lancet with
his other Hand. The two Veins thus Comprest Tumefie, and may be well enough
opened, without straitning the Windpipe. To stop the Blood, apply to the Wound
Mastich spread on Rags or Leather. The Reader will find a proper Bandage for
bleeding in the Neck, described in the Dressings; because a simple Emplaster
often is not sufficient to stop the Blood, when it is in a violent Commotion.

In opening the Veins of the Hands and Feet, the Parts are to be plunged in
Water, as hot as the Patient can well endure it. This is done as well to make
the Skin tender, as to raise the Veins.

The Veins of the Hands are to be opened lengthways, for fear of hurting the
Tendons which abound there by a Transverse Section, and the Ligature is to be
made above the Part intended for Bleeding. In opening the Veins of the Ham, or
Vena Poplitea, a Ligature must be made above the Knee; The Orifice must be made
Transverse, and proportioned to the largeness of the Vessel.

The Surgeon ought to have an especial care, least the Patient faint: This
happens sometimes in the Operation, and sometimes after. To avoid this Accident
at the time of Bleeding, the Surgeon must enquire, If he be commonly subject to
faint upon the like occasion; If he has been long fasting; If he does not find
himself inclined to go to Stool. If he usually faint in Bleeding, he must be
bled lying along in his Bed, take cold Water in his Mouth, be diverted from
looking on his Blood, entertained with some agreeable Relation, have Vinegar
put to his Nose to smell too, or some Spiritous Liquor, as Spirit of Wine,
Orange-Flower Water, Queen of Hungary's Water, or Lastly, take a Spoonful of
Wine, or some other Restorative.

It is by no means convenient to bleed any Person immediately after his Stomach
is filled with Meat; for the Weakness which the loss of blood causes, is
followed by Vomiting, for fear of which Mischief, it is best to stay till
Digestion is finished.

The Surgeon must bleed Persons subject to faint, lying down: The same Posture
is proper for Persons weakened, and worn out with long Illness. But this is only
to be understood of Bleeding in the Hand or Foot; for bleeding in the Head or
Neck, necessarily requires the Patient to be a little raised. A Stout Robust
Man, who is not daunted with bleeding, may be bled sitting in a Chair, or in
his Bed, whatever the part be. Bleeding in the Veins of the Hams, and Varicose
Swellings, must be done, the Patient standing erect, because then the Vessels
rise best.

The Surgeon may Operate in three several Postures, Standing, Sitting, or
Kneeling. He must be standing to bleed in the Head, Neck and Arm, sitting to
bleed in the Foot, or kneeling if he cannot find a convenient Seat. Lastly, He
is often constrained to kneel on the Bed to bleed such Patients as are
exhausted by long Sickness, and unable to bear the least stirring.

Sometimes when a Surgeon is called to miserably poor People, all Conveniences
are wanting, even so much as a Fillet to bind the part; in this case he must
make the best shift he can, and accommodate himself to the necessity of the
place.

A good Light is of wonderful Service to a Surgeon in all Operations, but
especially in Bleeding, and the Success of this nice Operation, depends very
much on the well managing that. He must never if possible, do it by the light
of the Sun; because his own Hand, or the Patients Arm causes a shadow. If the
Operation be done by the Light of a Candle, though a great Wax Taper give a
better Light than an ordinary Candle, yet it is never to be made use of; least
if a drop of Wax by any Accident should fall, it might scald the Arm, and the
Patient draw it back, whereas a drop of Tallow would be scarce sensible, at
least create no very troublesome Pain.

If the Person be very Hairy shave the part, especially if it be the Foot or
Hand. When hot Water is necessary to bath the part before bleeding, all above
the place intended for the Operation must be bathed, especially if the Vessels
be large, and lie deep. And to make the Patient able to bear the hot Water, the
part must be first plunged in warm Water only, and hotter still gradually
poured in, till the Patient is no longer able to endure it. If the Veins of the
Arms are difficult to find, the whole Limb must be bathed in hot Water. The
most convenient Vessel for which purpose, is a long Kettle, such as is used to
boil Fish.

The Surgeon ought to have an exquisite Sense at the extremities of his
Fingers, and to preserve this, must not use any Laborious or Mechanical
Occupation, must not touch any rough Objects, must have a great care of Burns,
(all which leave the Skin Thick and Callous,) and Wine and Women, which create
Tremors.

The Surgeon must be provided with Ligatures, Lancets, and proper Vessels to
receive and measure the Blood. He must have diverse sorts of Fillers, some
longer for Persons of better Fashion, and some lesser for ordinary and mean
People. He must never use the same to sound Bodies, and those who have any
Cutaneous Disease, as the Itch, Small Pox, Meazles, Carbuncles, Malignant or
spotted Fevers, for fear of communicating the Infection.

If the Vessels to be opened lie deep, a long, straight Lance^ is the most
proper to be used; for if it should be broad, the Orifice would be too large.
Superficial and rolling Vessels, must be opened with larger Lancets, whose
points are firm and stable. Infants require lesser Lancets than Adult Persons.

Surgeons who daily practice bleeding, may receive blood in any sort of
Vessels, and guess pretty well at the quantity, at least without being much
deceived, but in great Diseases, and Feeble, Weak, Exhausted Subjects, they
ought if possible to have Vessels to measure exactly the Blood, as small
Porringers of three or four Ounces. It is proper for an Artist to practice the
trying, how much two or three of these Porringers hold in any Household Vessel,
that in defect of these, he may at any time guess the quantity of Blood emitted.

When the Blood is not received in Porringers, as in bleeding in the Hand or
Foot in warm Water, the quantity of blood is guessed, computed by the largeness
of the Orifice, the time of its running, and the Tincture it gives to Linen,
found either by dipping Rags in it, taking up a little in the Hand, and
dropping it on a clean Napkin.

If the Blood be received in any other Vessels besides Porringers, to judge
aright of the quantity they must not be too wide, but of a reasonable depth,
because these are less apt to impose on the Senses, than more shallow and wide
ones, in which the Blood appears of a more Florid Scarlet color.

Before the Artist proceed to open a Vessel, it is necessary to make a Ligature
sufficient to stop the Refluent Blood. In performing his Work, he must alike
shun the two Extremes of Boldness and Fear: For on the one Hand, some Timorous
Men apprehending they may hurt the Contiguous parts, do not make a sufficient
Orifice, while on the other, some rash Surgeons without Fear or Wit, commit
very dangerous Errors.

There are four Particulars in this Operation, the Right placing the Ligature,
the well Holding the Lancet, the Searching for the most proper place for the
Aperture; and lastly, the Artful opening the Vessel.

The Ligature is ever to be made above the intended aperture, except in the
Head and Neck, where it is below.

When the Vein lies deep, and difficult to come at, some Surgeons make two
opposite Ligatures, or make three turns of the Fillet round the Limb, or sow a
small Boulster of Linen Cloth, three or four times double, on the middle of the
Fillet, or place where it is applied, to make a more exact compression on the
Part, and these sort of Ligatures they call Pontons. But all these are mistaken
Methods, proceeding from ignorance of the Causes. The Ligature with the
Boulster, fails of the intended effect; because some Vessels being less
comprest than others, the Blood ascends by some, whilst it is intercepted in
others; and for this Reason, one which equally compresses all, is to be
preferred. The third turn is unnecessary, since the first two are sufficient to
make any Constriction desired, by binding them streighter, and inconvenient,
because when the bleeding is over and this undone, there remain two more to be
loosed. The two opposite Ligatures tend more to hinder, than promote the Rising
of the Vein. The upper has no other effect in stopping the current of the
Blood, after the lower is made, except it be to retain a small proportion of
it, in the intervening space between it and the lower; but on the contrary, it
puts some stop to the Blood passing through the Channels of the Arteries into
the Part, and so lessens the Rising of the Veins below the Ligature. So that
doubtless the best way of making a Ligature on any part in letting Blood, is by
two simple turns of the Fillet, exactly over one another; which may be
constringed or relaxed at pleasure, by streightning or loosing the Ends near
the Knot, which stays them.

The Ligature must be made at some reasonable distance above the place intended
for bleeding; for instance, about the breadth of two Fingers. Thus in bleeding
in the Arm, it ought to be placed about two Fingers breadth above the Juncture
of the Elbow, at the same distance from the Fist and Ancles, in bleeding in the
Hand or Foot. At the same Distance above the Rotula of the Knee, in opening the
Veins of the Hamms, and in all bleeding of the Head and Jugulars, in the lowest
part of the Neck.

The Gormans and other Foreign Nations, make use of the Fleam in bleeding; But
our Lancets being more convenient, and this now grown obsolete, I shall omit
describing it. But here the Invention of the Americans must not be forgot, who
to supply the defect of Iron, unknown to them before their Commerce with
Europe, made Lancets of sharpened Flints and Bones.

The Surgeon in bleeding must open his Lancet in such a manner, that it may
make a Right Angle with its Scales, except in opening the Veins of the Tongue
or Nostrils, where the Lancet is wrapped round with a Tape in such manner, that
both it and its Scales stand in one right Line. The way of holding the Lancet
is very different, some hold it very long, others short, for my part I prefer
the middle way. If it be held too long, it is difficult to direct aright,
especially if the Skin be dry and unsteady. On the other hand in holding it too
near its Point, there is not room enough for a sufficient Punction in Fat
Bodies, or such as have their Vessels lying deep. The Lancet is best held
between the Thumb and Forefinger, not the Thumb and two Middle-fingers, or
Thumb Fore and Middle-finger, as some direct. The three last Fingers serve for
a stay to the Hand, to keep it firm and stable, and are to rest a little on the
part below, and on one side the Orifice, which is a more commendable way than
Bully like, to run the Lancet into the Vessel, without regard to Security. The
Aperture is to be made in the place which represents it self fairest, except
some Neighboring Artery, Tendon or Membrane forbid.

The Operation in opening a Vessel, consists of three parts; Punction,
Incision, and Raising the Point of the Lancet. All these are to be so promptly
done, that to the Spectator they may appear but one Action. The Surgeon ought
to be provided with all Necessaries, and to have at least two Assistants by him
if possible, one to hold the Candle, (when necessary) and Porringer, and the
other to do him any Service occasion shall require.

In Bleeding in the Arm, after the Patient is put in a good Posture, and the
Bed covered with Linen to receive the Blood which springs out at first
something impetuously, and (without this Care to prevent it) would be apt to
stain the Bed-cloths. The next thing is to tuck up and fasten the Patients
Sleeve, and cover it with a Napkin, for fear any Blood may happen to be spilt
upon it. These little Precautions, though not very Material to the thing it
self, yet are apt to beget a Favorable Opinion of the Artist in the Mind of
the Patient, who from observing these minute Circumstances of his proceeding,
is apt to conclude him careful and dextrous.

When this previous Business is done, the Surgeon must feel the inside of the
Arm in all places where the Veins appear, to discover where the Artery lies.
This is discerned by the Pulse or Beating, which is not sensible after the
Ligature is made; and therefore it is to be found before. The Ligature as I
noted before, is to be placed two Fingers breadth or something more, above the
Flexure of the Elbow, to pass twice round the Arm, and be tied with a Bow knot
on its out side. The first round must not be altogether so strait as the
second, and the Skin not forcibly extended, by drawing it up or down, least
upon relaxing a little, the Ligature to give way to the Blood issuing out, the
Orifice close and obstruct the Passage.

After the Ligature is made, some little time must be allowed for the Veins to
swell, during which the Surgeon may open his Lancer, put it in his Mouth, take
again the Patients Arm in his Hand, and (making several Frictions, drive up the
Blood toward the place intended for the Incision;) feel the Vessels with his
Fingers, and choose out some place for the Aperture, which answers best. This
Answering is a gentle Resistance, which yields to a moderate Compression, and
Resists the Finger, if the Compression be very slight. But observe here, this
answering of the Vein may be very deceitful, especially in the middle of the
Flexure of the Arm, when numerous Scars have made a sort of small Sinus, which
may impose on the sense, and appear like a Vein on the Surface, when the Real
Vein lies much deeper.

After a long while feeling too and fro, if no Vein appear which can be opened
with any tolerable Security, Frictions with hot Cloths are to be used, and
continued for a considerable time. Or the Ligature taken off, and the Arm
plunged in hot Water bound up again, and Frictions used as before. If after all
these ways tried, no Vessel appear capable of being opened, it is more
advisable to desist, than bleed at all Adventures, as some Rashly do on the
Scars of old Orifices. This Practice is occasioned by the hopes of finding the
same Vessels, which is a mistake, since the Veins change their Situation under
the Skin, according to the Age or good Case of the Body; nay, some Vessels are
so lessened by frequent Bleeding, they at length become scarce sensible.

If after a Careful Trial, the Surgeon comes to discover a Vessel which lies
deep, he must assure himself well of the Place by several feelings, and rub the
part with a little Oil to supple it, and facilitate the entering of the Lancer,
especially if the Skin be dry, rough and scurfy: Lastly, to secure the place of
the Vein, he must make an impression with his Nail, which may serve to guide
him.

After the Artist has observed these Circumstances, grasping the Patient Arm in
one Hand, he must take the Lancet in the other, and holding its Blade firmly in
the middle, between his Forefinger and Thumb (staying his three remaining
Fingers on the Patients Arm) thrust it in precisely in the lowest part of the
Impression made with his Nail, and curcing a little Transversely, raise up its
Point to cut through the Vessel and Teguments, and widen the Orifice. If he
suspect the Lancer to be plunged in too deep, he may draw it a little back,
before he brings up its point. Cutting Transversly is the surest way not to
miss the Vessel, and large Orifices are to be preserred to small ones, for the
free emission of the Blood. The largeness of the Orifice is more necessary in
Vessels which lie deep, because the Flesh and Fat is apt to choke the passage,
and hinder the Evacuation. Add to this in the last place, that small Orifices
are apt to leave Thrombu's behind them.

In Bleeding in the Arm, the Surgeon must feel all over it with his Forefinger
for the Artery, which commonly lies under the Basilick Vein. I observed before,
that this Search is necessary before the Ligature be made, because after it the
Veins are Tumefied, and the Pulsation is not sensible. The next Search is after
the Tendons, which are discovered in bending the Arm by their Rigidity. When
the place of the Artery and Tendon is certainly known, the Ligature is made two
Fingers breadth above the Bending of the Elbow, and place of the intended
Orifice. The middle of the Fillet is to be applied on the Arm, and passing
twice round it, to be tied behind: The knot is best placed above the Joint,
least if it be below it incommode that Hand which holds the Patients Arm; The
Ligature must not be so strait, as to compress the Arteries which import Blood
into the part; it is enough if it be sufficient to stop the Reflux of the Blood
in the Veins.

In Bleeding in the Right Hand, the Surgeon must take the Patients Arm in his
Left Hand, and prick him with his Right; and on the contrary, in the Left he
must take it in the Right, and bleed him with his Left. Before the Operation,
it is necessary to consider well which Vessel is fairest, that is largest, and
which has least danger in it; for in case the Artery adhere to it, it is better
to prick the lesser, than run any hazard in the greater. The Cephalic is the
most secure of all the Veins of the Arm, having no Artery or Tendon
accompanying it, and yet Surgeons are not very willing to bleed in it; because
the Skin on the upper side of the Arm is pretty thick, and the Blood does only
flow down the Arm without springing, which does not so well please the Patient,
who when the Blood springs out, thinks the Operation better performed, and is
fond to have it thought he has a great deal of Vigor. If the Vessel lies deep,
and is not Visible, which often happens in the thick Arms of some Women, in
order to find it, he must grasp the Arm in one Hand, compressing the place
where the Vessels ought to appear with his Thumb, and with the other Hand make
several Frictions upwards, pressing the Vessels all along to see if he can
discover any Blood strike against his Thumb. When he finds any Vessel under his
Thumb, he must take it instantly off, marking the place with his Nail, and then
prick a little below the impression.

The Punction is made with the Lancet, either with or without raising the
Point. In the first way the Surgeon takes the Lancet between the Thumb and
Forefinger, meeting even (not too long, because it would not be steady, nor
too short, because it would be Troublesome;) and then resting his three other
Fingers on the Patient's Arm, plunges his Lancet into the Vessel, a little on
one side, and when he is in raises its Point, and so cuts through it. This is
the best Method of Operating, when there are no Reasons against it, but it is
the most Painful.

In bleeding without raising the Point, the Lancet is held in the same manner
as before, plunged directly into the Vessel a little beneath, and so brought
forward without turning up its Point; This way is less painful that the former,
but in some Cases is not without Danger. If the Tendon or Artery lie directly
under the Vein, this last Method is never to be used, because it requires
deeper Punction, and there is great Danger of hurting one of them; On the
contrary, if either lie on the side, there is ground to fear they may be cut by
raising the point. But observe which soever of these ways be practiced, the
Lancet must be held something inclining, and not too Perpendicularly over the
Vein, least entering in this Manner, it prick the Membrane of the Muscles, from
whence great Pain and Inflammation would ensue.

In Veins running over great Muscles, the Puncture is made obliquely upwards;
for in pricking directly down, it is scarce possible to avoid hurting the
Membranes, which invest the Subjacent Muscle, which will be attended with Pain
and Inflammation.

If one Vessel only appear fair, and that be accompanied with a Tendon or
Artery, the best way is to trace it through its whole Progress, till it leaves
them, and where it appears alone, there make the Puncture. This is the way of
Bleeding in the Arm. The Dressing I shall describe below, in its proper place.

For Bleeding in the Leg, the Part is to be kept in warm Water to the mid Leg.
This is done to bring the Blood more copiously into it, and soften the Skin
which is very thick in that place. When the Part is well heated. the Artist
searches for the Vessel above or below the Ancle, makes a Ligature about two or
three Fingers breadth above it, ties it straight enough to compress the Vein
without pressing the Artery, puts the Foot again into hot Water to give the
Vein time to Swell. Then (the Patient sitting on the side of his Bed, and he in
a Chair before him) he lays the Foot on his Knee, grasping it in one Hand* and
Bleeding with the other. In Bleeding in the Right Fo^^, the Lancet is to be
held in the Left Hand, and on the contrary in the Right in Bleeding in the
Left, according to the Rules before prescribed.

The most convenient place for pricking is below the Ancle. There is no Attery,
Nerve, or Tendon to fear ther^^ The Part is carnous, and there is room enough
to (...) the Lancet without pricking the Periosteum; But abov^ (...) Ancle
there is little Flesh, and there is great dange^^^^ pricking that Membrane, or
some Nerve dispensed to the Part; the ill Consequence of which, would be
violent Inflammation and Pain. On the side of the Ancle there are diverse
Tendons, which ought to make the Surgeon cautious: When the Vessels on the
Internal Ancle are not fair, they appear for the most part fair on the Foot*
but I would not advise bleeding here, upon account of the numerous Tendons
which are in great Danger of being pricked, but if it be necessary, he must
enter very obliquely.

For Bleeding in the Jugulars, a Constriction must be made with a Handkerchief,
sufficient to make the Vessels rise, and the Orifice be made lengthways of the
Vessel, in its middle.

In all Bleeding this may be accounted a General Rule. If the Vessel be very
large the Aperture is to be made in its middle lengthways; If of a middle size,
as in the Arm, a little on one side, and something obliquely from above
downwards; If very small, as in Infants, then it is to be cut Transversly.

It is a general Rule likewise, That in what ever Veins of the Head the
Evacuation be made, the Ligature must ever be about the Neck. In Distempers of
the Head, the great Vein in the midst of the Forehead, and the Veins under the
Tongue are often opened, but doubtless the Jugulars are best in most of these
Cases, to make the most prompt and copious Evacuation.

In Bleeding under the Tongue after the Ligature made, it is raised, held
against the Palate, and then the Vein opened, and the Blood stopped with a good
Restringent Gargarism, if it do not cease of it self.

Arteries are opened in the same manner as Veins, but these are never to be
pricked, unless where they immediately pass over some Bone, which no other
Arteries in the Body do, except those of the Head; the Principal of which for
this Operation, is the Temporal. Dr. Willis pretends, Arteries are opened more
Successfully than Veins, in Obstructions and Inflammations, as for instance of
the Eyes, because they contract and retire within the Flesh, are Cicatrized
there, and cease from their Office of conveying blood to the Part.

After Incision made, when the Impetuosity of the Blood begins to abate, the
Ligature must be a little relaxed; that as much Blood may pass into the Part by
the Arteries, as will suffice for the intended Evacuation. Farther for
promoting the Discharge, some little round thing as a Lancet-case, or the like,
is to be put into the Patients Hand, to turn about with the extremity of his
Fingers only; This Action causes a Contraction of the Muscles of the Arm, viz.
the Sublimis and Profundus, which are Flexors of the Fingers, and by this means
they express the Blood in the Vessels running on their inside, and accelerate
its Motion toward the Orifice. In Bleeding in the Throat, the same thing is
effected by gently moving the lower Jaw, and in the Foot, by stirring the Great
Toe. All the time the Blood is running, the Surgeon must hold the Patients Arm
with one Hand, in which there is a double Convenience; First, the easing and
supporting the Part, which is heavy by the great quantity of Blood and Spirits
stopped in it: And Secondly, the advantage of bending and extending it as
occasion shall require. With his other Hand he may distend the Skin, drawing it
upwards, downwards, or on one side, to make the outward Orifice answer to that
Vein.

When the intended quantity of Blood is drawn out, the Arm must be unbound, and
the Surgeon with his Finger must press around the Orifice, least any Blood
happen to Stagnate under the Skin. The Wound must be exactly stopped by closing
it on both sides with the Forefinger and Middle finger; but if the Fat come
out, this must first be put back by a Compress in one Hand, with the other Hand
pinching together the Lips of the Wound, between the Thumb and Forefinger.

While the Surgeon is busied in stopping the Orifice, the Servant who held the
Porringer which received the Blood, must set it down on the Table gently, and
strike it over with a Feather, or some other light thing to take off the Froth.
This Trifling Circumstance has its use, to discover the true Color of the
Blood, and amuse the People who most commonly are admirers of such Mysterious
Matters.

THE DRESSING. This consists only in applying a little, thick, square Compress
on the Orifice, and keeping it on by binding up the Arm. Before this be laid
on, the Surgeon must clear the Wound from Coagulated Blood, which if neglected,
will hinder Coalition: Then keeping the Lips of the Orifice together with his
Fingers, he must speedily apply the Compress, Staying it on with his fore and
middle Finger. If any little Flatulent Tumor appear on the Orifice, which is
not uncommon when it is too small, the Compress dipped in cold Water disperses
it. For binding up the Arm, he must take a Fillet of about an Ell long, and an
Inch and a half broad, and gathering into his Hand three or four Inches of one
end of it, and (laying the Thumb, fore and middle Finger of his left Hand, in
bleeding in the Right Arm, or the Thumb and the same Fingers of his Right in
bleeding in the left Arm, on it) apply that part which he holds between his
Fingers, on the Orifice, and so make several Crosses over the bending of the
Elbow; and Lastly, when the Fillet is spent, bringing back that end which he
held in his Hand, he must tie both ends behind the Arm. Some place the Knot
behind the Arm, above the bending of the Elbow, and others below. If the Fillet
be of a firm and strong Cloth, and there be no reason to fear the Patient will
make use of his Arm, the Knot is best placed above, on the contrary, if the
Cloth be weak and much worn below, for fear when the Patient shall come to open
his Arm, the Fillet break. In the last place, observe the Fillet must never be
rolled.

For Bleeding in the Foot.
The Artist must bring together the sides of the Orifice, cleanse the Wound of
Blood, lay a small, thick, square Compress on it, and keep this on with a
Fillet of an Ell and half long, and an Inch and half broad, rolled at one end.
To apply, he must lay a good length of the Fillet on his Knee, and place the
Patients Heel on it, then with the other end he must make a Circular Turn on
the Compress, and an X on the Foot; After diverse Circumvolutions, he must bring
the Fillet obliquely over that end which is under the Heel, and then bringing
this back, form a sort of Stirrup from the resemblance to which, this Bandage
takes its Name.

For Bleeding in the Forehead.
The small Compress applied on the Orifice, is kept on by the Handkerchief
folded cross, or Diagonalwise, in the form of a Triangle: The Artist takes the
Handkerchief thus folded in both Hands, with his Thumbs above, and Fingers
below, and in this manner applies its Middle directly over the Wound, then
slides his Hands on the Handkerchief thus placed behind the Head, and brings
both ends as far forward as they reach, and pins them at the end; In placing
the Handkerchief, care must be taken to avoid Wrinkles as much as possible.

There is another Bandage used in Bleeding in the Forehead, called the
Discrimen. In this the Compress is kept on by a Roller or Fillet of an Inch and
an half broad, and three Else in length, rolled at one end. The Method of
making which is thus. The Artist applies one end of the Roller to the Top of
the Nose, and measures a length from thence to the Nape of the Neck. This he
lets hang down over the Face, then he passes the Fillet along the Sagittal
Suture, brings it to the Nape of the Neck, and back over the Parietal Bone on
one side, over the Parietal Bone on the other; then lifts up the end of the
Fillet over the Face, lays it over the Sagittal Suture, leaving it to hang
behind, then returning to the other end, brings it over this depending part,
engages it under it, so continuing his Circular Turns round the Parietal Bones
till the Fillet is spent, and then pins it at its ends.

There is a third Bandage for bleeding in the Forehead, called the Scapha, from
its resembling a little Boat, and is thus made; The Artist takes a Fillet or
Roller of an Inch and half broad, and three Else in length, rolled up at one
end. After a small Compress laid on, he applies the Fillet obliquely on it,
lets fall about a Foot in length, and with the other end passes over the
Parietal Bone, behind on the Nape of the Neck, over the other Parietal Bone,
and so over the Wound; then he takes up the end hanging before, lays it over
the Head, leaving it depending behind, then returns to the end of the Fillet
which he left, continues his Circular rounds (over the Parietal Bone, the
Wound, the Parietal Bone on the other side, behind the Nape of the Neck) and
pins it at the End.

There remains still a fourth Bandage for the Forehead, which is called the
Royal Bandage. To make this, the Artist takes a Roller of an Inch and half
broad, and three Else in length, rolled at one end, as in the two former, there
he Measures twice the length or distance from the top of the Nose, to the Nape
of the Neck, this he leaves hanging down before on the Face from the Compress,
and with the other or Rolled end, he proceeds over the Sagittal Suture,
descends behind the Head, returns before, passes under the Chin, then
reascending on the Cheek, passes near the lesser Angle of the Eye, then over
the Head, descends behind, returns before, passes under the Chin, reascends on
the opposite side on the Cheek, passes as in the former very near the lesser
Angle of the Eye, and so continu^ng upwards passes over the first turn on the
top of the Head, and makes a cross with it Salterwise. Then he delivers the
Roller to an Assistant to hold, whilst himself makes three Pleats, each
gradually longer than other, in that end of the Roller which hung over the
Patients Face, and lays the remaining part over the Sagittal Suture, leaving it
to hang behind his Head. When this is done, he returns to the Rolled end of the
Fillet, and makes several Circular Turns round the Head passing over the
Forehead and Parietal Bones) and in the last place pins the end of the Roller.

A Bandage for the end of the Nose.
The Ancients bled at the extremity of the Nose, between the bifurcation of the
Cartilage, being extremely careful not to cut it. This Bleeding is very
ridiculous, since there are so many places more commodious for this purpose;
but those who practice it, use the Bandage called the Discrimen, with this
difference, that here they begin to apply the Bandage on the Nose, whereas in
the former case they began on the Forehead.

A Bandage for the Temporal Artery.
In bleeding in the Temporal Artery, a Compress dipped in some Styptick Water is
applied on the Orifice, and the Bandage called the Discrimen made, which is the
same used in opening the Frontal Vein; but with this difference, it is first
applied in this last Case on the Temples, as in the former on the Forehead.

A General Bandage.
The following Bandage is adapted to bleeding in the Forehead, Neck, or
Temporal Artery. The Artist takes a Fillet of three inches in breadth, and an
Ell long, this he doubles in the midst, and slits it lengthways with a pair of
Scissars, leaving about three Inches square in the midst plain and undivided.
When it is thus divided, it is called the Fillet or Roller, with four Tails. He
applies the plain undivided part on the Orifice, brings the two upper Tails
downwards, and the two lower Tails upwards, continuing them each respectively,
circularly over the other, and pinning them at their Ends The Reader may
observe here as a general Rule, in applying these divided Rollers; That the two
lower Tails must ever ascend, pass over the upper, and be fastened above, and
the two upper must descend cross with the lower, and be fastened below.

These slit Rollers are exceedingly useful, and adapted to keep Applications on
all parts of the Head, except in the Operation of the Trepan, where the Great
Cap is in use, which shall be described in its proper place.

A Bandage for the Jugulars.
The Artist takes a Fillet of half an Ell long, applies the middle of it on the
top of the Head, and leaves the two ends hanging on each side of the Neck; then
he takes another Fillet of a competent length, and near three Inches broad
rolled at one end, with this he makes several circular Turns over the Compress,
as far as the Fillet reaches, and then pinns it where it ends; Next he takes up
the two ends hanging on the sides of the Neck, and fastens them on the Head,
these are very serviceable to suspend the Fillet rolled about the Neck. This is
called the Contentive Bandage of the Neck. There are some Cases which will not
admit of any Bandage on the Jugulars, and here it is necessary to lay some
Glutinating Emplaster on the Orifice.

THE CURE. After the Bleeding is over, the Patient may lie down and drink off a
glass of Water, which mixing with the Blood dilutes and cools it. The Patient
is suffered to rest for the space of an Hour, and after takes some Restorative
Draught. It is customary to forbid the Patient sleeping, till he has taken
this; but I profess I am a stranger to the Reason of this Practice, for in
sleeping immediately after Bleeding, Transpiration is free; and there arises a
certain Dew on the Surface of the Body, which is very refreshing. Besides this
is the most gentle, easy, and agreeable Slumber that can be imagined, Nature
requires it, and seems to have Violence done her, when this Satisfaction is
denied her. However since Custom prevails to the contrary, and perhaps some
Accidents may have attended sleeping at this time, I would not advise any
Person to recede from the common and received Practice.

If the Physician has directed the Patient to be twice bled on the same day,
the Surgeon may put some Oil or Grease on the Orifice, to prevent its closing,
and by this means save the trouble of making a second Puncture. The lesser
Dressing is not commonly taken off under twenty four hours, or a longer time,
if the Orifice be not disposed to heal. For when the Limb is too soon unbound,
the Wound is but half closed, the Air insinuates into it, creates a little
running Ulcer, which is difficultly healed, and molests the Patient
exceedingly. The Dressing is left on much longer after opening an Artery, than
a Vein; because the Blood being projected with great Impetus, would forcibly
open the Orifice, before the Coalition be perfected. When the Compress is to be
taken off, if it adhere to the Orifice, it is better to leave it on, or Humect
it with a little warm Wine, and so gently separate it, than remove it by
Violence.

If the Patient fall into a Swoon during the Operation, the Surgeon must cause
him to be carried to his Bed, if he be not already in it, fling a little cold
Water in his Face, or give him some to drink, must open the Chamber Windows,
and draw the Curtains, if the Disease and Season of the Year permit. He must
apply to his Nose some Odoriferous things, as good Vinegar, Queen of Hungary's
Water, Spirit of Wine, must call him frequently by his Name in his Ear, with as
loud a Noise as possible, and unloose whatever is tied about any part of his
Body. When the Patient is come to himself, the Artist must place the Limb in a
convenient Posture, which is as various as the parts concerned. For instance,
after Bleeding in the Head, the Patient must remain quiet, and have his Head
supported with some soft Pillow, and lie a little inclining rather than erect:
After bleeding in the Arm, the Patient must avoid all stirring, reposing on his
Bed, or some convenient Couch, with his Arm suspended in a middle Posture,
between Bent and Extended: After Bleeding in the lower Parts, he must keep his
Bed for the space of twenty four Hours, to prevent any Fluxion or Suppuration
on the place.

Most Persons after Bleeding, are in some Disorder, in which I would recommend
boldly drinking a large Draught of Water, as a proper means to recall the Blood
and Spirits determined, by opening the Vein toward the extreme parts, besides
Water mixing with the Blood, allays its Heat. The grand Objection against
sleeping after Bleeding, is that Nature is always offended by two praecipitate
a Change from one Extreme to another; That it must unavoidably be injurious, to
put the Blood into two such contrary Motions at once, as in Bleeding and
Sleeping; in the First of which it is brought from the Center to the
Circumference, and in the latter, from the Circumference to the Center of the
Body. The Second Objection is, That this concentration of the Blood in the time
of Sleeping, frustrates the effect of the Evacuation, which is the Principal
Intention of Bleeding. Others without assigning so many ridiculous Reasons,
only pretend if the Patient be permitted to sleep, there is danger by some
Motion of it, the Bandage of the Arm may be loosned, and others are so
positive, as to affirm they have found Persons sleeping after Bleeding,
actually dead. For my part, none of these Reasons prevail with me, or hinder my
believing, sleep after bleeding very wholesome, nothing cooling the Body more
effectually, (which is one of the principal ends of Bleeding) or calming the
Blood more, after the disorder it is put into by the Evacuation. Bleeding is a
proper Remedy in want of sleep; and after bleeding, most Men find a greater
desire of sleeping, than at any other time, without any inconvenience attending
it. As for the danger of losing Blood in such Persons as have unquiet and
disturbed Sleeps, they may be well enough secured by a close, well-made,
double, Bandage, or by placing some Servant by the Patient, to observe all his
Motions.

It is commendable, to refrain from eating immediately after Bleeding, or till
such time as the Blood and Spirits have resumed their ordinary Course, which is
a little irregular at that time; because all the Fermentations conducing to
Digestion, operate better in their Natural State; than when they are put in any
commotion. The ordinary time of earing after bleeding, is the space of an Hour,
except the Patient be very weak, in which case he may take some Restoratives
immediately, as a little Wine, or some other Spirituous Liquors. The
Nourishment after Bleeding ought to be light, and easy of Digestion, as some
good Strengthening Broth.

The Porringers must be set in some place where there is no Smoke, Wind, or
Dust, or where the Rays of the Sun do not beat, because all these Accidents
change the Surface of the Blood, and hinder the right judging of it. Vessels of
Silver, Pewter or Glass, are more proper to keep the Blood in, than Brass or
Copper. The Vessels must be washed, and wiped clean, because a little Moisture
remaining, imparts to the Blood a more florid Vermilion Color.

Observations on the Blood in Porringers.
Since most Patients are Sollicitous about the State of their Health, they are
generally inquisitive concerning their Blood, and frequently asking the
Surgeons Opinion of its Color, Consistence and Taste.

The Blood is a Heterogeneous Liquor, composed of a Multitude of Particles,
supplying proper Materials for the Reparation of the Body, which is in a
constant Consumption. The differing Particles, have each a different
Configuration, and Disposition of Surface, which make a various Reflection of
the Light. Now that visible appearance called Color, being nothing else but
the Impression which the Rays of Light returned after a various manner make on
the bottom of the Eye, it is consequently true, the least alteration in the
Disposition of the parts of a Body, must produce an Alteration in its Color.
This being admitted, no reasonable Man will deny the Color of the Blood in a
State of Health, to be the undoubted Standard, and all others to be judged
better or worse, as they approach to, or recede from it; and those Colors
allowed to show the most Vicious Disposition of the Blood, which are most
distant from the Natural.

Blood then is pronounced good, and of a Natural Color, when it is Florid and
Vermilion, which Color it acquires in passing through the Lungs, as Dr. Lower
by several Experiments has Demonstrated. Whoever observes, that the Blood drawn
out of the Vena Cava, before it enters the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and
that drawn out of the Pulmonary Artery, is of a dark, brown, Red; and on the
contrary, that drawn out of the Pulmonary Vein is of a Bright Red, and that
drawn out of the Artery of no better a Color, after having past through the
left Ventricle, must necessarily conclude this effect proceeds from the Nitre,
diffused through the Mass of Air, which is incessantly drawn into the Lungs in
Respiration, and so communicates its bright and lively Tincture. This Operation
is still farther confirmed by the following Experiment. If Blood stands for
some time in a Porringer, the Surface will be of a Florid Color, but the
bottom of a Dark red; but if the Coagulum be inverted, and the lower side for
some time exposed to the Air, it becomes of as bright a Red, as its Surface
before was. Which effect, undoubtedly proceeds from the Saline parts of the
Air, which insinuate themselves, change the Disposition of the Parts of the
Blood, and so cause them to reflect the Rays of Light, after a different manner.

There is ground to pronounce the Blood bad, if it appear Blue, Whitish,
Yellowish, or of very different Colors at once. The Ancient Physicians
pretended from the Color of the Blood, to determine which of the four Humors,
Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, or Blood taken in a strict Sense (which they
thought to be the Ingredients of the Mass) were predominant. Chemical
Physicians derive the various colors of the Mass of Blood, from the several
Exaltations of the Active or Passive Principles, which they believe to exist in
the Blood. They ascribe the Sound and Healthy State of the Blood, and its
laudable Color, to the equal Mixture of its Spirits, Salt, Sulphur, Water and
Earth, and its Depravation to the effort in these Principles, to disingage and
separate themselves from each other.

It is a Problem among the Learned, why the Blood in Malignant Fevers, should
appear of so fine a Color. This noble Color is reputed an ill Sign; Because
(say some Authors) the corrupted Blood is destitute of Spirits, moves with
difficulty through the Arteries next the Heart, and scarcely arrives at the
Extreme Parts of the Body.

If it be asked whether a Florid Vermillion Blood be always good, the Answer
ought to be, this depends very much on the Color. Orifice of the Vein, the
Manner of its issuing out, and the Vessel which receives it. An Orifice too
great or too small, are both faults in Bleeding, and make the Blood appear
different from what it would be, if the Orifice were proportioned to the
Vessel. If it be too little, the Blood spins out in a thin Thread, and is a
long time in discharging it self, and its Particles are much more changed by
the Air, than when it comes forth in a larger Stream, and less Time: On the
contrary, if the Aperture of the Vessel be large, instead of springing out, it
runs down the Arm, and the Surface is larger, which likewise gives room for the
Air to act on it, and create a lively red Color. Again, if the Aperture of the
Vessel be too great or too small, and by this means the Blood must cake and
coagulate too soon, and the different parts have no time to separate, and rise
to the Surface which appears Red, from the impression of the Nitre of the Air,
which gives it a disposition proper to excite such a lively Sensation in our
Eye.

The Vessel which receives it, contributes very much to the Color, for if it
be wide and shallow, it appears of a brighter Red, than if the Vessel be deep
and narrow; in the first it soon coagulates and cools, and leaves a greater
Surface exposed to be impregnated with the Aerial Nitre, the contrary happens,
when it is received in narrow and deep Vessels, in which it preserves its
Motion and Heat for a longer time, which gives its Parts liberty to separate,
and rise toward the Surface, where they show their proper Color. If the Blood
be much stirred, the Air acts on more of its Parts, and it cools soon, which
makes it appear more red. Lastly, if the Porringer or Vessel which receives the
Blood, have any Water left in it, with which it was washed, it cools soon, and
its Motion ceasing, there is not time for the diversity of its parts to
separate, and rise to the Top, for which reason its Color is finer. From these
considerations it appears evidently enough, the Florid Red is not a certain
sign of good Blood, since this Beautiful Color may be the effect of the
different manner of letting out, or receiving this Noble Liquor. On the other
Hand, the same Color is not a sufficient Reason to condemn the Operation, as
ill performed; since the Blood ought to appear good in a State of Health, or
Slight Indisposition, where there is no Distemper sufficient to communicate an
ill Color to the Mass. In Persons reduced to extreme Weakness, or after long
Abstinence, or when the fear of Bleeding, and the Terror upon sight of the
Blood creates a depression of the Spirits, in these Cases the Blood is of a
Beautiful Color, because the Spirits wanting force to project it to a
distance, the Air has more power over it to impregnate it with its Salts; And
for the same Reason, it ever has a Beautiful Color in Malignant Fevers. On the
other Hand, the bad Color of the Blood is not always an Argument, the
Operation is well performed; because in some Bodies the Blood is so corrupt,
that it will appear bad, notwithstanding it be ill let out, or ill received; In
fine, a Right Judgment can only be performed from the duly comparing all
Circumstances beforementioned.

Great Regard is to be had to the Consistence of the Blood when it is cold, and
has stood for some time in the Vessel, and Observations of this kind will
inform us, of its good or ill Condition. If the Blood preserves its Liquidity
after it is perfectly cold, it does plainly discover its corruption, and the
entire separation of its Principles; on the contrary, if the Blood Coagulates
soon, it is a Mark of its Thickness, and a Deficiency of Spirits: for which
reason it is deprived of its necessary Motion in the Vessels. The due
consistence of cold Blood, is such as may preserve a Moderate Union of its
parts.

The Blood has rarely any Scent, unless it be entirely corrupted, its parts
separated, or it Stagnates in the Veins, and wants Agitation, as in Leprous
Persons, or is vitiated by the Remains of an Old Pox, in which cases it
sometimes has an ill smell. Where the Blood is thus Tainted, the Patient cannot
expect long Life. But in this place I think it pertinent, to give the Surgeon
this necessary notice, That however the Blood may be free from any ill smell,
it is very dangerous to draw in its Steams in Respiration, and constant
Experience shows us, that Surgeons in Hospitals who bleed often, are more
frequently attacked with Malignant Fevers, than those who dress Ulcers which
exhale the most foetid smell. From which Observation it evidently follows, that
in Breathing through the Mouth or Nose the Poison is received, which after
circulates with the Blood, and infects the whole Mass. To taste the Blood is
both dangerous and disgustful, and therefore very little information can be
gained from this Head of its good or ill qualities; However the sweet Taste is
reputed best, and any other as Salt, Bitter, or Acid, condemned as a Mark of
its Depravation.

To conclude this Subject, those who pretend to know the Patients Distemper by
his Blood, are Impostors; there is indeed sufficient ground to pronounce a Man
to be indisposed when the Blood has a bad appearance, but to assign the Disease
and its Nature, is an impossible Matter.

Of Accidents happening after Bleeding.
Bleeding is the most Trivial, the least Gainful, and yet most dangerous
Operation, which an Artist is ever employed in. If well performed, no
Reputation is gained by it, if any Accident happen after it, it is sufficient
to ruin his Honor by the Slanders of the ignorant Multitude, who never regard
what they talk, and the Envy of his Fellow-Surgeons who are ever busy in
defaming one another. A young Surgeon therefore in point of Prudence ought to
be well instructed in the Accidents which happen after Bleeding, and as well
versed in the Method of curing them, to prevent having recourse to his
Treacherous Friends.

The Principal Accidents in Bleeding are these which follow. In the first place
it sometimes happens the Vein is not pricked at all, or at least very ill
opened, and the Blood comes out with difficulty. The missing of a Vein proceeds
either from its unsteadiness when it is not fixed enough under the Skin, to
abide the Lancet, or from some extraordinary Concern and Apprehension in the
Artist, who when it lies deep is afraid of having some Membrane, Nerve, Tendon,
Artery, or other dangerous part, or lastly, some Deception of the sense, when
he believes he feels a Vein in a place where there is none. A Vein is said to
be ill opened, when the Incision is either too High, or too Low, or when the
Surgeon does not keep a rolling Vein steady, for in this case the Vein slipping
under the Skin, the outward Orifice does not answer to the inward, and the
Blood is stopped. A Vein is likewise reputed to be ill opened, if the Orifice be
too small; but whether this be a fault or not, is not yet decided, and it
remains a controversy amongst the Learned, whether a small or a large Orifice
be best. I shall not pretend to determine this point, only here it concerns the
young Artist to observe, that if the Orifice be too large the Blood will not
spring out and make an Arch, and the Patient by consequence will never be well
contented.

If the Surgeon fail in his first attempt to open the Vein, because it flies
from his Lancet; He must subject it again directly on the Incision first made,
and endeavor to prick it in the same Orifice, or if he like not that, in some
other place above or below, or in any other Vein which presents it self fairer;
but whatever he does, he must be sure to have a presence of Mind, without
discovering the least Fear or Surprise, and not like some timorous Men appear
out of Countenance upon missing Bleeding, which alarms the Patient and Standers
by, and makes them think this, which is a very slight or no fault at all, a
very great one. If the Surgeon misses the Vein, and does not make his Incision
deep enough, he may plunge his Lancet deeper in the same Vein, or make attempt
to open it in another place, with better Success. I think it better to do this
in a new place, than to prick again in the same, and this is less apt to
disgust the Patient, who feels a Pain still remaining in the first Puncture. If
the Surgeon be deceived in feeling, he ought to examine the Patients Arm with
greater exactness, to discover the place where the Vein lies, and if after
feeling and searching for a considerable time, he cannot find any greater
certainty than at first, it is better to defer Bleeding till the Evening or the
next Morning; because the position of the Veins may shift in that time, and all
who have any Experience in this matter, know very well they are sometimes
obliged to quit their work, and yet sometime after Bleed in the same place,
with the greatest ease imaginable. If a Vein be ill opened, and the Blood comes
so badly from it that the Patient cannot hope to be relieved by it, the Surgeon
must Bleed in the other Arm, or defer the Operation, if the Nature of the
Distemper require it to be done in the same, especially if the Vein lies deep,
because these once beginning to evacuate, never rise after, not to mention the
Blood running down which blinds the Operatour. If the Incision be too small,
the Operation ought to be deferred till next day, or at least the Patient ought
to bleed on the other side. If the Orifice be too large, and the Patients
indisposition be slight, the Surgeon may permit the Blood to run down the Arm,
but if the Disease be violent, and the Physician pretend to judge of that by
inspecting the Blood, he must streighten it a little, the better to give the
Blood its Natural Color.

Sometimes there happens to be a small Collection of Blood under the Skin,
which forms a Thrombus, and after a little Inflammation and Pain, ends in a
slight Suppuration. The same consequence sometimes happens upon a Lancet not
being sharp enough, for this makes a sort of Contusion, and the edges of the
Wound do not easily unite to each other. The extention of the Arm or other
Motion of the Patient after Bleeding, sometimes impedes the Coalition, and some
little quantity of Blood getting between the Lips of the Orifice, forms a small
Ulcer which proves troublesome to the Patient for some time. The Method of
preventing these inconveniences, is first applying mild Digestive Medicines,
and after them Desiccatives; for instance, using a warm Liniment with Oil of
Roses and Vinegar, laying a little Basilicon on the Orifice, and over that
Galen's Cerate, or Rags several times doubled dipped in Oxycrate a little heated,
and after the Inflammation is over, and the Suppuration completed, a small
Emplaster of burnt Ceruse, Diapalma, and de Minio to dry the Ulcer, and confirm
the Cicatrix. Sometimes there is an Appearance of a Contusion on the Arm, in
Persons who are nice and difficult to Bleed, which proceeds-from more than
ordinary handling the part in feeling for the Vessel, or a small Suffusion of
Blood under the Skin, but this accident is not attended with Pain, and easily
removed by chafing the Part well with Spirit of Wine.

In Bleeding, the Membrane investing the Muscles sometimes happens to be hurt
with the point of the Lancet, which Accident is ever attended with Mischievous
consequences, such as a Fever, a very great Inflammation, which in a very
little time extends over all the inner side of the Arm, a hard Swelling which
arises on the place of the Puncture, and terminates in a great Abscess, (and
sometimes more than one) between the upper part of the Arm, and the Extremity
of the Hand. This Accident is ever worst, when it happens in Hospitals of Great
Cities, or Camps, where the Air is corrupted, or in foul Bodies, or such as are
overheated by Fatigue, or Disorderly living. Sometimes these Symptoms are not
so violent, and the Patient only feels a considerable Pain from the place quite
down to the Thumb, on the same side, which incommodes him most in turning the
Wrist round. This Symptom proceeds from a Hurt of the Tendinous Fascia,
assisting in this Motion, and this remains for a long time. This Accident is
soon perceived by a vehement pain in the instant of Pricking, extending from
the Place to the Thumb, where the Tendon terminates. The ill Consequences which
attend it are prevented in great measure by Defensatives, as by unction of the
Part with Oil of Roses and Vinegar, or the same beat up with the White of an
Egg, Bole Armoniack, Galen's Cerate, and repeated Bleeding in the other Arm.
When the Pain, Inflammation and Swelling increase, it is proper to use an
Anodyne Cataplasm made of Milk, Crumbs of Bread, Saffron, Populeum, and Oil of
Roses, and attempt to break the Suppuration on the Orifice by some proper
Application to the Part, as Emplast. Divinum, Diachylon with the Gums, or a
Cataplasm made with Sorrel, Lily Roots, and Basilicon, or Rags dipped in warm
Oxycrate. If an Abscess happen in any other part besides the Orifice, it is to
be opened where the included Pus presents it self, and treated in the ordinary
Method.

If none of these Accidents happen after the Puncture, and the Patient only
complains of a Pain extending from the Orifice to the Wrist, without any fear
of Inflammation or Suppuration, it suffices to use a Liniment made of Oil of
Roses and Spirit of Wine mixed, heated and repeated thrice a day, and after if
occasion require, Oil of Earthworms, with Spirit of Wine, or Queen of
Hungaries Water, or rub well the whole Arm with Ointment of Marshmallows, and
Vnguen. Martiatum melted. During the Cure, the Prudent Surgeon ought to visit
him several times a day, and perfect it with all possible speed, to secure his
Friendship, and prevent his being offended at the Accident.

Of an Erisipelas after Bleeding.
The Surgeon is not always blameable, when an Erisipelas arises after Bleeding,
for however the Puncture of the Muscular Membrane, or some Nerve or Tendon, may
cause the effusion of a Hot, Bilious Blood the common Materials of an
Erisipelas; yet it is no less certain, the same effect succeeds sometimes on
the opening Veins which are so very large, that the most unskillful Surgeon
cannot hurt any other Part, or fear the least Accident. In such Cases the Cause
of the Erisipelas is to be ascribed to the ill Disposition of the Patients
Blood, which upon opening the Vessel is conveyed thither by the Arteries with
great impetuosity, and in greater quantity, than can conveniently return by the
Veins. This Conjecture is confirmed, by observing that at the same time this
boiling impetuous Blood causes an extraordinary Inflammation, and very great
Tension of the Arm, it has the like effect on the Lungs, and causes great
Difficulty of breathing, Spitting of Blood, and all Symptoms of a Peripneumony,
which ordinarily proves fatal after the Erisipelas is vanished: Add to this,
the Inflammation is ordinarily less near the Orifice, than in more distant
Parts.

THE SIGNS of an Erisipelas are manifest enough, viz. a large visible Swelling
of the Arm, extending from the Shoulder to the Hand, with a Train continuing
from the Arm-pit to the Elbow, the Skin appears Red and Inflamed, which is
sometimes greater in one place, and sometimes in another. A continual Fever is
kindled, the Patient feels a great pain with Tension and Burning, which will
not suffer him to rest; a Difficulty of Breathing ensues, the Spit turns red,
and there is a sensible heat in every part of the Body.

THE CURE. Bleeding on the opposite Side is very Serviceable in remedying these
Mischievous Accidents, especially if repeated seven or eight times soon after
one another (to make a prompt and effectual Diversion) in conjunction with
external and internal Medicines, to abate the Fervor of the Blood. The Patient
must be confined to a strict regular Diet, to Cool, Purify and supply a
competent stock of Moisture to the Mass; such as Veal or Chicken Broths, with
Leaves of Succory, Lettuces, Chervil, Borage, Bugloss, and a little Gelly, but
not too Nourishing. The Patient may drink Ptisans with Roots of Scorzonera,
Marshmallows, Nenuphar, Dogs grass, Liquorice, and every Night two Doses of an
Apozem, with cold Seeds boiled in it, adding some good Syrup and Diacodium a^.
i.

If the Erisipelas spread much and extend to the Breast, it is very proper to
give powder of Vipers in the first Draught of Broth, or in some Cordial Water,
as Scabious, Scordium, Carduus, Scorzonera or Wood Sorrel to abate its
Violence, and fortify the parts against the ill effects of the Malignant Bile,
which infects all the Humors of the Body. The Diseased Part must be fomented
with a Decoction of Roots of Marshmallows, Leaves of Marshmallows, Violary,
Pellitory of the Wall, Groundsil, Betes, Herb-Mercury, adding after Boiling a
little Vinegar of Roses, and so using it thrice or four times a Day, soaking
Stupes in the Decoction, and applying them hot on the part, which ought to be
rubbed likewise with a Liniment made of the Juices of Nightshade, Plantain and
Housleek, the Mucilage of the Seeds of Psyllium, Linseed and Fenugreek drawn in
Rose Water, Oil of Poppies, Camphire, Saffron and the Cerate of Galen, or
lastly, let an Anodyne Cataplasm made of Crumbs of White-Bread boiled in Milk
be used, adding Yelks of Eggs, Saffron and Oil of Roses, and in extreme pain
the Liquid extract of Opium.

If the Pain and Inflammation are moderate, a Discutient or Resolvent Cataplasm
may be applied, made of Meal of Wild Vetches, Lupins and Linseed boiled in
Oxymel, adding Flowers of Roses, Chamomil, Melilot, together with Oil of Dill,
and St. John's wort. If the Erisipelatous Swelling Ulcerates in any part of the
Arm, a Detergent lotion is proper, of Birthwort, Periwinkle, lesser Centaury,
Gentian, Wormwood, Sanicle, using after this, Unguent. Nutritum, Pompholyx,
Desiccativum rubrum, Unguent of Ceruss, the Santaline Cerate, or other drying
Medicines.

Doubtless the most dangerous Accident which happens in Bleeding, is the
pricking a Nerve or Tendon, whose Symptoms and Method of Cure are very much
alike. The Nerves of the Arm lie so deep, it seldom happens they are pricked,
but it falls out too often in opening the Vena Mediana, that the Tendon of the
Biceps Muscle (which together with the internal Brachial bends the Cubit) is
hurt, because this Vein most commonly runs over, or at least very near it. If
the Nerve or Tendon be hurt, it is soon discovered by the violent pain, which
the Patient feels at the time of the Puncture, as well as by the ensuing
swelling in the Arm, which is very large, attended with strong pulsation, great
Inflammation, a continual Fever, and without speedy care to prevent them,
Convulsions, Delirium, a Gangrene and Mortification of the Part, which cruel
Accidents kill the Patient in a small time.

The Prevention of these Accidents is attempted by bleeding, and the same
Regimen which is prescribed in the Erisipelas of the Arm, together with
Ptisans, Cooling Draughts, Laxative Clysters and Apozems. The Surgeon must have
an especial care in treating the Wounded Part; to apply to the adjacent parts
as well above as below, good Defensatives made of Oil of Roses, Whites of Eggs,
Bole Armoniack, Juices of Solanum, Housleek, Vinegar, Oxycrate made with Waters
of Plantain, Mulberries, Roses, Henbane-seed, and a greater proportion of the
sharpest Vinegar, than is commonly put in the Composition. Ancient Writers
direct the pouring in hot Oils, to absorb the Moisture issuing from the Wounded
Nerve. This Gleet, unless prevented, soon turns sharp and acrimonious, and
acquires an exceeding Malignant quality, Guido de Cauliaco, calls it a Nitrous
and Aeruginous Sanies, and commends Oil of Savin preferably to all others. In
Defect of this Oil of Turpentine, with the addition of a little Spirit of Wine
may serve, or Oil of St. John's wort, Lilies, Foxes, Castor, Euphorbium, or Oil
of Eggs, if the Pain be excessive; Lastly, in want of all these. Oil of Dill or
Rue, made by the Decoct on the Ingredients in common Oil.

The whole Arm is to be rubbed for a long time together with Oil of Roses,
Camomil or Lillies, or pretty sharp Vinegar. These Oils are to be applied very
hot, and the whole Arm covered with the Cataplasms prescribed above in
Erisipelatous Tumors, or Emplastrum Diachalciteos or Oxycroceum dissolved in
Oil of Roses and Vinegar, or Emollient and Discutient Fomentations, with a
little Sal Ammoniac.

If these Remedies fail of the intended effect, the Surgeon must dilate the
Wound to give the included Sanies (which is lodged on the Nerve or Tendon) a
free discharge, and open a way for the more effectual applying Medicines to its
bottom. This Method is used by the best Practitioners, and amongst the rest
Guido de Cauliaco, who in treating of Wounds of the Nerves and Tendons, directs
a Surgeon in these cases principally to aim at, discharging the virulent
Sanies, by making an incision through the Teguments, and laying the bottom
open. Ambrose Parry gives the same advice, and indeed all who understand the
Nature of these Wounds, know it is by no means convenient to defer the laying
them open, and discharging the acrimonious Matter pent up, nor is this ever
done so Successfully after some time, as in the beginning.

When the Wound is sufficiently dilated upwards and downwards, with an Incision
Knife or crooked Scissars, (and made rather too great than too small) good
Digestives must be put in it, as Liniment of Arcaeus melted pretty hot, or a
Digestive Unguent of Turpentine washed in Spirit of Wine, Powder of Myrrh, Oil
of Eggs, and Gum Elemi, and the Wound filled up with Pledgits (without forcing
any in) and the same Ointments, Cataplasms, Emplasters and Fomentations
continued on the Tumefied part as before, till a good Suppuration is procured
and all Accidents cease, and then it must be incarn'd, dried and cicatrized
after the usual manner.

In these cases a Prudent Surgeon will conceal his Fault to preserve his Fame;
but if he finds the Patient is like to run any Risque of his Life, or there be
the least hazard in the Case, he must Sacrifice his Reputation to the Patients
Health, and by this means make him some sort of Reparation, and instantly lay
open the Wound, if there be the least danger in deferring it. If the Apertion
has been too long procrastinated, and the Tension, Fever and Convulsion do
continue, and the Natural Heat of the Part is extinguished, which is discovered
by the Rising of the Vesiculae or little Bladders, the change of the Red into a
Dark color, tending to Livid, by the decaying and withering, and weight of the
Part, and by a certain putrid Cadaverous Stench soon discernible in approaching
the Patient. There is no time to be lost, and the Surgeon must use all his
endeavors to take off the Convulsion, abate the Tension, recall the Natural
Heat, and prevent the entire Mortification of the wounded Part.

To prevent the Convulsion, Authors advise the cutting the Tendon or Nerve
asunder, whose Fibers are apt to be torn by the contraction of the Muscle. But
sometimes even after cutting the Tendon asunder, the Convulsion does not cease.
To abate the Tension, the swelling is to be Scarified to the quick, throughout
its whole Extent, especially in those places where it is Vesicated, or the
Scarf-skin separated, or the Skin discolored. That the Scarification is deep
enough, may be known from the Patients crying out, and Blood issuing from the
Orifice. The Scarification must begin beneath, and be continued up to the
highest part of the Swelling in such a manner, that the lower Angles of the
upper Incision may intersect the upper Angles of the lower, and the Skin by
consequence suffer no constraint.

The Scarifications may be multiplied according as the Disease increases, and
made longer and deeper if the Gangrene does not stop, in order to apply
Medicines to the bottom of the putrefied Slough. All Medicines are to be
applied very hot to restore the Natural Heat, and stir up the remaining Spirits
to a Vigorous Action. Fomentations may be made with Venice Treacle, dissolved
in Spirit of Wine, strengthened with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or the yellow
Water made with Quicklime, and Sublimate corrosive. A Fomentation made with a
good quantity of Common Salt dissolved in very strong Vinegar, with the
addition of Spirit of Wine, Honey of Roses, and Aegyptiacum is a good Medicine
if applied hot to warm the Scarified part. Those who have Experience, may
compose variety of these Applications according to their Opinion of their
Virtue, and dip Pledgits in them to put in the Incision, taking care to lay on
some good Liniment to procure a laudable Suppuration, and a quick Separation of
the gangrened and corrupted part.

This Liniment may be made of Turpentine washed in Spirit of Wine, with Powders
of Myrrh, Aloes, Aegyptiacum, Basilicon, Oil of Wormwood, and St. John's wort.
After the incisions are filled with these and other like Medicines, it is
convenient to apply on the part some Cataplasm, to put a stop to the progress
of the putrefaction, to discuss, dry, and abate Pain. This Cataplasm may
consist of Meal of Beans, Barley, Wild Vetches, Lupins, boiled in Oxymel with
common Salt, Honey of Roses, Juice of Wormwood, and Hore-hound, Powders of
Myrrh, Aloes and Mastich, with a little Spirit of Wine added at last, to give
the whole a soft Consistence.

Cataplasms are very good on these occasions, though some Practitioners condemn
them, upon a pretense they load the Part, stop the Pores, and hinder
Transpiration; for this reason they prefer Compresses dipped in some of the
before mentioned Liquors, with some Aromatic Spirit of Wine, with Bottles of
hot Water, Bricks and Tiles applied to the part to preserve the Warmth. These
Bricks and Tiles are to be wrapped in Linen Cloth several times doubled, to
prevent burning the Patient. This is the more necessary, because the Parts
being in a manner insensible, will endure very considerable burning before the
Patient complain of it.

These Applications must be renewed twice or thrice a day, to work more
effectually. In the mean time the Patient must take several Cordial Potions;
such as are before prescribed in the Cure of the Erisipelas, applying on the
Heart some Epithem of Carduus, Bugloss, Borrage, Rose and Treacle Water, Juice
of Citron and Nightshade, Vinegar of Roses, Powders of the three Sanders,
Diamargariton frigidum, Confection of Alkermes, Hyacinth and Troches of
Camphire.

If all these Methods fail of their intended effect, and the part appears to be
from little shivering Fits, Nauseas, and heaving of the Stomach, and malignant
Vapors arising from the putrid Flesh, infest the Heart. The only remaining
remedy to preserve the Patients Life, is a speedy Amputation of the Part, the
Method of performing which, I shall show in its proper place.

REMARKS.
Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 5. Obs. 18. relates the History of a certain Man of
thirty Years of Age, who had endured violent Pains in the Head, in the Fits of
an Epilepsy for a long time, he bled him in the Frontal Vein, upon which the
Patient lost the use of one of his Eyes, which remained shut. The pain of his
Head sometime after grew more vehement, and the Eye more inflamed to that
degree, that its Membranes being corroded the Humors fell out, and the Patient
for ever lost his Sight. But what is more surprising still is, he was deprived
of his Speech, which he afterward recovered by the Care and Diligence of his
Physicians.

The same Author, Cent. 6. Obs. 92. relates the case of a Big-bellied Woman,
who in the last Month of her going with Child, caused her self to be bled in
both Feet at the same time, in hopes of obtaining an easy Delivery,
Immediately after these bleedings, she found her self in a very great disorder,
the Throes which attended Women in Labor came upon her, and that Night she was
delivered of a dead Child before her time was come, very narrowly escaping with
her own Life. In the same Observation, he relates the History of a certain Man,
who caused himself to be bled twice, one time immediately after the other in
both Arms, to relieve him in a Lassitude, and Heaviness of the Head. About
three Hours after Bleeding, he found a great weight on the Anus, and a vehement
Pain which was greater the following Night, and attempting to walk the next
Day, the Pain, Inflammation and Weight increased, still being attended with a
burning Fever, great Restlessness, a Nausea, besides several other ill
Symptoms. Hildanus searching him found a large Abscess, which after a
Suppuration procured, discharged a quantity of Pus of an intolerable weight.
This Abscess ascended lengthways of the Rectum, quite to the Os Sacrum, of
which he was cured without any Fistula remaining behind.

Though it be very difficult for a Surgeon to prick the Nerve on the Arm, which
lies beneath the Basilick Vein, because it must be a very deep Puncture which
can reach it; yet Ambrose Parry assures us, that Charles IX. had this Nerve
hurt in his presence, and suffered great inconveniences by it, for a long time
after the Accidents were removed, by the Careful and Assiduous use of proper
Remedies.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Operation of the Aneurism.
THIS Operation is an Incision of the Teguments to lay the Artery bare, and
make a Ligature on it.

THE CAUSE. There are two kinds of Aneurism, the Genuine and Spurious. The
Spurious Aneurism is only the casual opening an Artery by the point of the
Lancet, joined with a loss of Blood issuing from the opened Vessel. The Genuine
Aneurism is a Collection of Arterial Blood, which forms a Swelling within the
Artery it self.

The Genuine Aneurism proceeds sometimes from an internal, and sometimes from
an external Cause. The internal Cause of a true Aneurism, is the Action of some
sharp and corrosive Humor, which finding a way to get out of the Glands, fixes
on the external Tunick of the Arteries, and corrodes and consumes it. The
internal Tunick in the mean time is exceedingly dilated, and distended by the
constant repeated impulse of the Blood, and the Fibers of the external wanting
strength to resist their effort of extrusion, they at length break forth, and
form this Aneurismal Tumor. All parts of the Body are subject to Swellings of
this kind, which are more frequent in decayed emaciated Subjects where the
Blood is more Saline, than in corpulent fat People.

The external Cause is some Accidental Punction of the outer Coat of the
Artery, with a Lancet or some such like Instrument, or some Fall or Blow
received, or perhaps some more than ordinary straining the Voice, in crying or
holding the Breath in Labor, any of which recited Causes, are sufficient to
strain or break the Fibers of the external Coat, and the Blood continually
striking on the weakened place, produces an Aneurism.

The Spurious Aneurism is caused by the opening of an Artery which lets out the
Blood, which after Extravasation, lodges in the Porosities of the Flesh and
Skin, and there forms a Livid Tumor, or is quite evacuated if the Teguments
are entirely divided by the Lancet.

THE SIGNS of a Genuine Aneurism, are an external Swelling, with a sensible
Pulsation, the Swelling is soft, and if pressed with the Finger subsides
instantly, returning when the pressure is removed. There is no discoloration of
the Skin, because the Tumor is supported by the Blood circulating through the
Arterial Channel.

This Tumor sometimes equals the bigness of a Chestnut, and sometimes an Egg.
These Swellings sometimes break of themselves, and sometimes the Patient
carries them with him to his Grave without bursting; because the Artery growing
Callous in the place where it was most of all weakened, is by this enabled to
sustain the utmost shock of the Blood. These Callosities like those in
Fistulas, proceed from the most Saline and Pungent Particles of the Blood,
which lodging in the Pores of the Arterial Coats, mix with their Nutritious
Juice, and harden it. Sometimes they proceed from the Blood, which being in a
perpetual Fermentation, and passing through the Swelling, dries and hardens it,
by rarefying and wasting that Humidity which kept its Tunicks wet. The Signs of
a Spurious Aneurism, are the deep beating of the Artery, the almost livid
color of the Skin, the Tumor not rising so high as the true possessing a
greater space, and not so easily yielding to the Finger, as the true Aneurism,
and when the Artery is opened, the Blood coming out with impetuosity and force.

The OPERATION.
The Operation is performed in the same manner both in the True and Spurious
Aneurism, if preceding Methods prove ineffectual. Place the Patient in a Chair,
let a Servant hold the Arm extended, then lay a good Compress round the Arm
above the Swelling, and make a Ligature over this, which you may streighten at
pleasure, by turning round a small stick called the Turniket or Turnstick. The
advantage in laying a compress under the Ligature, is to make it less painful,
more equal, and prevent pinching the Skin. The Artery may be compressed to any
degree required, by turning round the Stick. When the Artery is sufficiently
compressed, take the Patients Arm with your Hand below the Swelling, and make
an Incision with a Lancet in the other Hand. This Incision must be made
lengthways, according to the course of the Vessel, beginning below and ending
above, and ought to be too large, rather than too little, to lay the Artery
bare. The Tumor being opened evacuate the coagulated Blood with the Finger,
and if there be any coherences, cut them with the crooked Scissars, to clear
the Wound from the concreted Blood, and of all other extraneous Bodies, which
sometimes are found in Aneurisms of long standing. You must loosen the Turniket
from time to time, to discover the Orifice of the Artery, and then separate it
from the Membranes, which connect it to the neighboring Parts; the Separation
must be made with a Spatula, for fear of cutting it with an Incision Knife.
Then hold the Artery with a Hook, to free it from its other Ties, and when it
is clear, pass a crooked Needle with a waxed Thread under it, cut the Thread,
and draw out the Needle. The point of the Needle must be blunt, to avoid
pricking the Part. After this make a Ligature on the strongest part of the
Artery; first with a simple knot, and then place a Compress over that
strengthened with two other knots on the Compress may be omitted if it shall be
thought inconvenient. A like Ligature must be made on the inferior part of the
Orifice, to hinder the ramifications of the Arteries from discharging any
Blood. The Artery intervening between the two Ligatures must be left uncut,
because the two ends of the Artery contracting and shrinking within the Skin,
may thrust the Ligature off, which would be more dangerous than the Aneurism it
self, since it would be difficult to find the ends, and tie them.

THE DRESSING. Lay on the Wound Dossils armed with Restringent Powders, an
Emplaster and a Compress. Lay a great square Compress the whole length of the
Arm, following the Course of the Artery quite from the Swelling to the Arm-pit,
and keep all on with a Bandage made after this manner.

Take a Roller or Fillet of more than two inches broad, and an Ell and half or
two Else in length (more or less according to the bigness of the Subject ^apply
one end beneath the Elbow, making two rounds about the Arm, then ascending
Spirally (so as to leave one third part of the nether Roller bare in each
Turn) in passing over the Tumor compress it a little by streightning the
Roller, and continue to ascend in the same manner to the Arm-pit then turn it
round the Breast, and fasten it with Pins. The Emplaster and Compress must be
about three or four inches broad, long enough to go round the Arm, and be slit
a pretty way at each end, leaving a part plain and undivided in the midst. This
Figure is convenient to prevent wrinkles; The Bandage must be kept on three or
four Days without undoing it, and in the first Dressing you must be careful to
take the Pledgits very gently off.

THE CURE. Place the Patients Arm a little bended on a Cushion, extending it
now and then for fear it grow stiff. Dress the Wound constantly at least once a
Day, continuing the use of Restringent Powders, as Terra Sigillata, Bole
Armoniack, Colophonia, Dragons Blood, Frankincense, and Laudanum. After you are
once secure, the Vessels will not re-open, Suppurate the Wound with some
Digestive, made with Turpentine and Yelks of Eggs, and after a laudable
Digestion obtained, deterge it well, and Cicatrize it. The Patient at first
must be allowed only some few Liquids, for fear any Putrefaction arise from
Repletion, and the use of solid Aliments, and their Wound must be treated
according to the usual method of Practice.

The Marks or Signs by which it is known that the Artery is hurt, is the
Resistance against the point of the Lancet, the elevation and violent beating
communicated to the Vein by the Subjacent Artery, the springing out of the
Blood by several distinct Jetts, as happens in a wounded Artery; but with this
difference, that it is not so lively sparkling or florid, and is not projected
to so great a distance. If any of these unfortunate Accidents happen, and you
are desirous to have the Aneurism cured without Operation, bleed the Patient to
abate the rapid Motion of the Blood, and put a stop to the progress of the
Tumor, apply on the Artery a small Compress with half a Bean wrapped up in it,
lay over this another Compress something larger, and then over that more still
gradually increasing, to compress the part more equally; around the Wound apply
Defensatives, and keep all on with the Bandage used in the Aneurism, leaving on
the Dressings as long as possible. When the Patient begins to regain his
Strength, you must bleed again, least the Vessels replete with Blood press on
the weak part of the Artery, and occasion a Tumor.

In a Spurious or Bastard Aneurism, the Blood is extravasated under the
Teguments, and the most expeditious way to anticipate the Lividity and
Gangrening of the part and the usual Accidents attending these Cases, is to
proceed instantly to Operation. But if the Patient will not endure this, apply
Compresses and proper Discutients on the part, and have Recourse to frequent
Bleeding.

The external Aneurism is not near so Dangerous as the internal, and it is
often impossible to treat it, and even so much as to discover it. The following
Medicines are good in external Aneurisms.. Powder of Sumach, Hypocistis,
Acacia, Dragons Blood, Aloes, Frankincense, a^ i. Beat all with the White of an
Egg, to the consistence of an Emplaster, let this be applied to the part to
heal the Wound, which must be well cleansed from all the Grumous Blood lodged
in it. A plate of Lead applied alone, or besmeared with the Juice of Plantain,
and bound on straight, puts a stop to the Growth, or Cures an Aneurism quite,
if applied in the beginning. In these Palliative Cures, the Patient is often
obliged to carry this Plate about him all his Life.

Fabricius Hildanus cured after the following manner, a large Aneurism
equalling an Egg in bigness, hard and pale colored, with an exceeding great
Pulsation, and hindering the Patient in the free extension of his Arm. In the
first place he ordered the Patient to observe an exact Regimen, then applied on
the Swelling Emp. de Cicuta, and gave the following Clyster.. Roots of
Marshmallows, Leaves of the same, Violary, Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Herb
Mercury, a^ one Handful, Flowers of Chamomil and Melilot, a^ half a Handful.
Boyl^all in water to the consumption of a third part. Dissolve in the strained
Liquour Benedict. Laxativa, i. Honey of Mercury, ii. Common Oil, iij. Salt one
pugil. Mix these for a Clyster, and so give them. The next Morning to disperse
the Melancholy Humor, predominant in the Patients Body. He prescribed the
following Julep.. Roots of sharp-pointed Dock, Polypody of the Oak, Petroselin
a^ i. Agrimony, Speedwell, Dodder, Fumitory, Hop-tops, of each of the Cordial
Flower a^. one Handful, Liquorice i. Aniseseeds, sweet Fennel Seeds, a^ ss.
Boil these Ingredients in a competent quantity of Water, till reduced to one
third, strain this, adding to each pound of this Decoction, Syrup of Fumitory,
and de Epithymo, a^ ij. Cinnamon Water, iss. and let the Patient take of this
Julep every Morning warm. Next he prescribed the following purging Potion.. Of
the Decoction above prescribed, viij. Sena well cleansed, i. best Rhubard, ij.
Dissolve in a Moiety of this Infusion, Solutive Syrup of Roses, i. Diaturbith
with Rhubarb, i. Mix this for a purging Potion; the next Morning returning to
the former Julep again each day. He renewed the Application of the Emplastr. de
Cicuta on the Tumor. After this he gave him a Purgative Potion made of the
remaining Moiety of the Infusion of Sena and Rhubard, with the Addition of
Confectio Hamech, ss. extract of the Bark of Esula, ss. Cinnamon Water, ss.
This Potion he gave him upon the third Day after the first Purge. He tells us
this Purge wrought so violently, and with that good Success downwards, that the
next Morning there was no appearance of any Aneurism or Pulsation in the Part.
Then he applied this Emplaster,. Empl. Diachalciteos ij. Powder of Mastich, Red
Roses, Myrtle, Roots of the greater Consound, a^. i. Make these into an
Emplaster, with a sufficient quantity of Rose Water; and last of all he applied
a knob of Linen on the Tumor, binding this straight on to compress the
Swelling, and the Aneurism was cured.

There remains one necessary caution to be given the Operatour in this place,
and that is, to extend the Patients Arm at times and by degrees, least in
keeping it too much bent, a deep strong Cicatrix be formed, which retains it
bent the whole time of his Life.

REMARKS.
Riverius Obs. 34. relates the History of a certain Man of 50 Years of Age, of
a very Melancholy complexion, who had a large Tumor on the right Clavicle,
about half the bigness of an Egg, of the same color with the Skin, with a very
great Pulsation in it, which induced him to think it an Aneurism. The Patient
dying, he found the ascending trunk of the Aorta from the Heart to the Clavicle
dilated, enough to receive a Pullets Egg in its Cavity, with its Tunicks very
thick and Cartilaginous.

To regain the free Motion of the Arm after the preceding method is completed,
it is necessary to oblige the Patient to extend and bend his Arm, and to turn
round his Fist to prevent a Collection of a Glairy substance in the juncture of
the Elbow, and too deep a Cicatrix, which sometimes has happened in Persons who
have remained Lame all their Lives after for want of due precaution.

If the Aneurism has been for a long time neglected, and the Operation
deferred, the Bandage must not be too straight, and must more frequently be
taken off and Compresses applied, which ought to be first well soaked in some
Aromatic Wine, with Venice Treacle, or Spirit of Wine, with Volatile Salt of
Sal Armoniack, or any hot or Spirituous Liquors, proper to revive the
languishing Heat and Spirits of the Part. In short, all Circumstances must be
observed, which may conduce to prevent a Mortification of the Part after the
Ligature is made.

Bartholine Cent. 4. Hist. 41. tells us of an Aneurism on the Breast of a
certain Man in Naples, which the Surgeons refusing to meddle with, Translated
it self behind, and the Patient became hunch-backed.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Trepan.
TRepanning is the opening the Skull, to evacuate Pus, or extravasated Blood
lodged on the Dura Matter.

THE CAUSES. Fractures of the Cranium or Skull, are the most ordinary occasions
of performing this Operation. These are of two kinds, Incision or Cutting, made
by an Instrument with a sharp edge, or Contusion by some blow with a blunt
Instrument or Fall.

Hippocrates enumerates five kinds of Fractures of the Skull, viz. Fissure,
Contusion, Incision, Depression, and Contrafissure; but in my Opinion, these
may be commodiously enough reduced to two Species, of which Incision, Fissure
and Contrafisure, make the first Member, and Contusion and Depression the
second.

There are three sorts of Incision: In the first the Blow is perpendicular, and
the edge of the Instrument enters the Skull, and without taking off any portion
of it, makes an impression only in it. This by the Greeks is called Eccope, by
Hippocrates Hedra, and by the Latin Writers, Vestigium or Seeds, and in English
may be properly enough called an Impression. In the Second, the Blow is more
oblique, and enters deeper into the substance of the Bone; but still without
taking any part off, and this is termed Diacope. In the last kind, a piece of
the Skull is entirely cut off, and this is named Apokeparnismos.

Contusions are divided into two kinds; viz. Those which do not, and those
which do destroy the Continuity of the Part.

The First is called by Hippocrates Thlasis, and is a simple Depression of the
Bone, and not a real Fracture. This happens in Children principally, whose
Bones are pliant and flexible, and easily give way without breaking, like
Pewter Pots, or any other Vessels made of malleable Metals.

The Second only, where there is a division of the Bone, can in a strict sense
be termed a Fracture.

When the Bone is divided, and the Surface notwithstanding remains equal, the
Fracture is named a Fissure. This if it be very visible is called Rogme, if
scarce seen, or wholly imperceptible, Trichismos or a Capillary Fissure.

When the equality of the Bone is destroyed, as well as its continuity, and
some fragment of the Cranium displaced, the Fracture by Hippocrates is called
Esphlasis or Euthlasis, of which he reckons up three kinds: Ecpiesma when the
Cranium is depressed, and some Splinter of the Bone sticks in, or presses on
the Dura Matter. Angisoma, when there is a Depression, and the Fragment broken
off lies under the entire Bone. Camarosis, when either one end of the Fragment
is deprest, and the other raised, or both ends are deprest, and it rises in the
midst, leaving an Arch as it were vaulted over, from which this Species derives
its Name.

In Infants, an Arch sometimes happens to be made by a Depression of the Bone,
without a Fissure, which sometimes by its Elastick virtue, returns to its
pristin State; sometimes the exterior Table of the Skull alone, returns to its
Natural State, and the inner remains deprest. These Cases can only happen in
very young Children, while the Cranium is Membranous before Ossification is
completed, and is not possible in Adults, whose Bones are dry and brittle.

Hippocrates speaking of a Contrafissure, pretends it may happen after three
several ways, viz. In the same Bone when the upper part is struck, and the
lower broken; or the outer Table receives the blow, and the inner subjacent
Table is broken, or in different Bones, as when the Occipital Bone is struck,
and the Fracture is in the Coronal.

It is very improbable that a Contrafissure should happen in most ordinary
Skulls, and any Person who considers that the several parts of this Bone are
not continuous, but a multitude of pieces separated by Sutures, must needs
admit it to be very difficult, to suppose a Fissure propagated from one to the
other, and be convinced those Instances alleged by that Author, are not very
much to be relied on.

But I profess here I would not be understood to arraign the Faith of that
Great Man, or insinuate a suspicion of his design to impose on Posterity. That
strain of Integrity and Candor which runs through every part of his Writings,
is too visible to charge him with a Crime of this Nature. I make no doubt,
those Instances which he mentions, really happened in the same manner as they
are related; but without question, in those Persons the Cranium was one
continuous Bone, as in some Bodies it has been found to be without any
preceptible Sutures in it. Admitting this to be true, it is not difficult to
conceive that the left Parietal receiving a smart Blow, and yielding a little,
may communicate the Motion to the Right, and that be crak't, especially if we
suppose it to be of unequal thickness, and weaker than the other.

If Contrafissures happen in Skulls divided by Sutures, it is rational to
believe they proceed from some Fall, which the Person who received the Blow,
might happen to have had during the time he remained Senseless. Now the Wound
making a visible Division of the Teguments, without any Fracture of the Bone,
and the Fall on the contrary making a Fissure of the Bone without hurting the
Teguments, it is very possible the Surgeon not being informed of the Patients
Fall, may impute this Fissure to the first Blow. And thus it is very probable,
Hippocrates might be led into this Mistake. Nor can it be thought strange, that
a Fracture of the Skull should be made, without a Wound of the Teguments, since
every days Experience shows us, That Arms, Legs, and other Limbs are daily
broken, without any Division of the Skin.

If it ever happen, as some Practitioners pretend, that the lower Table of the
Skull is broken, and the upper notwithstanding remains entire, this odd effect
must be explained after this manner. Between the two Tables of the Skull, there
is a visible interstice filled with Marrow, and intertexed with Bony Fibers,
which middle Substance is very spungy and porous; now if it be true, as most
undoubtedly it is, that there is no Vacuum in Nature, the Porosities of this
Substance must consequently be filled with some Matter or other; which admit to
be the Air; it will then follow, that when a Man receives a smart blow on the
Head, and the upper Table yields without breaking, the included Air is
compressed, and impetuously shocks the inner Table, which if it be so compact
and hard that it cannot obey, must inevitably crack. The same reason may be
alleged, in favor of those who espouse the Doctrine of Contrafissures.

Matter may sometimes be extravasated on the Meninges, though the upper Table
of the Skull remain entire; for instance, when the Marrow contained in the
interstice between the Plates, by some Accident being corrupted and growing
Acrimonious, corrodes and cariates the lower Table, and so discharges it self
on the Dura Matter.

THE SIGNS. Fractures of the Skull are for the most part visible to the naked
Eye, and a sensible Fissure appears in the Bone, when the Teguments are removed.

If no Fissure appear, and there is ground to suspect one, though it be so small
as to escape the sight, the usual practice is to lay Ink on the Part, and after
some little time to wipe it off, for then if such Fissure be, there will appear
a black Line. This Experiment cannot be practiced in a Fissure of the lower
Table, and no assurance can be obtained in this matter till Symptoms appear.

The Symptoms which discover the Dura Matter and Brain, do suffer in Fractures
of the Skull, are various, and shall be recited in their proper places.

If any Splinters of the Bone be broken off, they press on or lacerate the Dura
Matter, and sometimes wound the Brain it self, and cause an extravasation of
Blood in it. When this happens, and Symptoms discover the Brain is affected,
and the Surgeon cannot evacuate the Matter lodged on the Dura Matter, he must
proceed to Operation. But if the Bone alone be concerned, though there be a
Comminution or part of it cut off, yet if no Symptoms appear, it is sufficient
to Dress the Wound after the usual manner.

If the Dura Matter be inflamed, from whatever cause this proceeds, there is a
pain and oppression of the Part, the Eyes are bloated and inflamed, the Face is
Red and Swollen, the Patient is Comatose, there is a Fever kindled, attended with
a hard Pulse and Rigors, the Patient voids Blood out of his Nose, Ears or
Mouth, which last happens in great Commotions of the Brain.

If there be any pointed Splinters, there is ground to fear they may pierce
through the Dura Matter, and Wound it. If there be a depression of the Skull;
and some fragments be broke off, there is reason to apprehend an extravasation
of Blood, and a Compression of that Membrane. If the Fracture be large, and
made with a sharp Instrument, it is most undoubtedly cut.

If there be a Fissure of the Bone, the Patient be Comatose, and Blood voided
by the Mouth, Ears or Nose with a sensible Fever, as was noted above, there is
Matter lodged on the Dura Matter.

The Weight or Oppression proceeds from a great quantity of Matter which
presses on the Brain, and its Arteries which convey Blood into, and dilate it:

The Swelling and Inflammation of the Eyes, proceed from the Inflammation of
the Sinus in the bottom of the Brain, which are productions of the Dura Matter.
For these Sinus receiving all the Refluent Blood from the Veins of the Eye,
when their Mouths are inflamed, must of necessity not receive it so fast as it
is conveyed in by the Arteries, wherefore the Globe of the Eye receiving a
constant supply of Arterial Blood, while the Venal does not pass off, must
needs be distended and inflamed.

The Inflammation of the Eyelids, arises from the Inflammation of the
Pericranium, their internal Membrane being a Continuation of that, and the
Inflammation of the Pericranium it self, proceeds from the Pain caused by the
Blows and Bruises it receives.

It is observable, that the Inflammation of the Eyes does not follow
immediately upon the Hurt received; but at some distance of time after,
sometimes upon the third, fourth or fifth Day. For the Inflammation does not
spread it self to its full extent of a sudden, but gradually; and there is a
great Tract intervening for it to pass through, before it arrive at the Eyes.

The Bloated Swollen Face, proceeds from the Inflammation of the Dura Matter,
which straitning the Mouths of the Internal Carotid Arteries, forces part of
the Blood (which would be conveyed to the Brain by those Channels) to
regurgitate and pass off by the external Branches of the same Arteries, to the
several Parts of the Face.

The Coma or Dosiness, proceeds from an interruption in the Circulation of the
Blood, which Stagnates in the Vessels of the Dura Matter, and compresses the
Brain, and by this means closing the Meatus, intercepts the passage of the
Spirits. Now if waking arises from an open free Communication, when this ceases
by any occasional cause, which compresses the Brain, and closes the Pores, its
contrary Sleep or Dosiness must unavoidably ensue.

The Fever proceeds from the extravasated Matter, first corrupting, and then
being absorbed into the Blood. One drop of Pus mixed with the Mass, is
sufficient to produce this effect, and experience shows us, that in Abscesses
of the Lungs, nay of the external Parts too, the Patient is never without a
Fever.

The hard deep Pulse proceeds from a defect in the free circulation of the
Blood through the Brain, the impediment it meets with here, preventing its
rapid descent to the Heart, and its plentiful discharge into the Aorta.

The Rigor's or Shivering Fits, proceed from the Acrimony of the extravasated
Matter lodged on the Membranes. This Acrimony is contracted by its long
Stagnating and Putrefying there, and when it pricks the Membranes of the Brain,
causes Convulsive Motions, and puts the Animal Spirits into a tumultuous and
disorderly State, and driving them in a confused manner through the Nerves into
the Muscles, causes Shiverings, Twitchings, and other irregular Accidents.

The Falling prostrate on the Ground after a Blow received, proceeds from a
Concussion of the whole Brain, which puts the Spirits into great Confusion and
Disorder. Now the Spirits flying to and fro without the Direction of the Mind,
leave those Nerves which convey them into the Muscles, which serve to keep the
Body erect. Nay if it be admitted that a greater quantity of Spirits are
transmitted, this disproportion alone is sufficient to explain this effect,
since there cannot be an equal contraction of the Muscles to balance the Body.

The loss of Sense, and a due perception of Objects, proceeds from a defect in
the Transmission of the Spirits, which are not at all conveyed by the Nerves to
their proper Organs, or at least in a confused disorderly manner.

The Giddiness or Vertigo arises from a violent and irregular Motion of the
Spirits, which whirling about the Optic Nerve, impress the same motion on the
Rays of Light, proceeding from the Object, and depicting it on the Retina. This
causes the Objects themselves to appear as whirling round, since the Mind
cannot have any Image of a visible Object, except by the impression which its
Rays make on the Animal Spirits, residing in the Optic Nerve.

The involuntary coming away of the Urine and Excrement, proceeds from a defect
in the Spirits, sent to the Sphincter of the Bladder and Anus, which are not
potent enough to constringe them for the exercise of their retentive Faculty.

The Deliquium or Swooning arises from a want of Spirits, which are not sent in
quantity enough to the Heart, to make so vigorous a contraction as is necessary
to drive the Blood into the extreme Parts.

The Vomiting proceeds from the impetuous rushing of the Spirits into the
Stomach, whose influx being for a time suspended, and they collected in the
Brain, at length resuming their ordinary Course, force their way through all
opposition, and violently entering the Part, excite this Symptom. If the
Vomiting follow immediately on the Blow, it is a sign the Concussion was not
very great; On the contrary, if the Vomiting happen after some time, it is a
sign that the Concussion is violent, because the greater the Shock is, the
greater by consequence the Inflammation and Obstruction, which it produces must
be. But when the Shock is slight, and these are not very considerable, the
Spirits do not stand in need of so vehement an Effort to remove those
Obstacles, which impede their return to the Brain. In all great Concussions of
the Brain, the Patient Vomits Bile; but in lesser, the Stomach only throws off
the Aliments in its Cavity; the Reason of the difference is, that in all great
injuries the Shock extends to the Gallbladder, which discharges that Sharp
Liquour into the Stomach, and irritates it to a Convulsive Motion, whereas in
the other, the disorderly Motion of the Spirits terminates in the Stomach.

The Brain it self suffers by extravasated Matter, which either proceeds from
the Rupture of some Vessel in great Concussions, or some Cut or Blow which
pierces through the Membranes; or lastly, Matter which insinuates it self through
them, and translates it self into the Brain. The Symptoms which demonstrate
extravasated Matter in the Brain, are a Fever with Paroxysms, Shivering Fits,
Vomitings, Convulsion, Delirium, Lethargy, Apoplexies. In this case oftentimes
the Liver or Lungs apostemate, which is perceived by a constant Pain on the
Side or Region of the Liver, and frequent Rigors.

We have above ascribed the Fever to the admixtion of the purulent Matter, with
the Mass of Blood and the Fus, to a greater quantity than ordinary discharged
into it. For the purulent Matter which contracts an Acrimony by its detention
in the Brain, becomes a sort of Ferment, which upon its mixture with that Vital
Liquor, augments, its Heat and Motion, and as often as a new supply is poured
in, must consequently cause a new Commotion. This acrimonious Matter mixed with
the Blood in its Tour through the various Parts of the Body, pricks the Nerves,
molests the Stomach and Membranes. Sometimes passes into one Muscle, then into
another and, causes Shiverings, Vomitings, and various disorderly Convulsive
Motion; and when these effects appear, they demonstrate the Blood and Spirits
to be contaminated, and that a Delirium and Lethargy may be soon expected.

The Delirium proceeds from the Hurry, and Disorderly Motion of the Blood in
the Paroxysm of the Fever, and the corruption of the Brain by extravasated
Matter, which penetrates into its substance.

The Lethargy is the effect of a great quantity of Matter extravasated, which
being vehemently agitated and corrupted to the highest degree, its more subtle
and fine parrs are carried off by the rapid Motion of the Blood, and the more
heavy and unactive part left behind, which falling on the Glandulous part of
the Brain, blocks up the Pores, stops the Ostiola of the Glands, and intercepts
the passage of the Spirits; and the Brain being thus oppressed and obstructed, a
prosound Sopor must necessarily ensue. On the contrary, when the extravasated
Matter begins to Dissipate, and the heavy load which oppresses the Glands, is
in part driven away by the impulse of new Blood, the Spirits throw themselves
with great impetuosity and disorder into the Parts. And this is the reason why
Deliriums and Lethargies succeed each other by Turns. In Lethargies of this
kind, the Patients Eyes are commonly open, and very much disturbed.

The Apoplexy proceeds from the impetuous Motion of the Blood to the Brain, and
the excessive quantity of extravasated Matter, which by its weight oppresses
the Brain, obstructs the passage of the Spirits, and forces the Sinus of the
Dura Matter to regurgitate on every side, and drive back the Blood flowing into
them and the Veins, by the Arterial Channels. This oppression and distention of
the Brain, destroys all the Animal Functions, and soon puts a Period to the
Patients Life.

Abscesses of the Liver or Lungs ensuing after Wounds of the Head, are the
effects of a Translation of the Matter, which is first absorbed by the Mass of
Blood, and after deposited in these Viscera.

Wounds of the Brain are ever most dangerous, by how much nearer they approach
the Medulla oblongata; since the Nervous Filaments which enter the white
substance of the Brain, are in danger of being cut.

A Fracture made with a sharp Instrument is not so dangerous, as if made with a
blunt one, or some Fall; for all cutting Instruments do not make any great
concussion of the Brain, the injury is confined to the Part which the edge
enters; but Falls and Blows shake the whole Brain, burst a thousand small
Nervous Filaments, and sometimes Wound the Teguments, break the Skull in diverse
places, and separate the Dura Matter from it by the rudeness of the Shock.

If the Wound be made with Firearms, and hurt the Brain or Dura Matter, it is
desperate; for this rarely happens without taking off part of the Substance of
the Brain, and the greatness of the Contusion is always attended with a speedy
putrefaction. But oftentimes when the Cranium only is hurt, the Wound is not
Mortal.

In Wounds of the Head, we may conclude there is a Fracture of the Skull, if
the Symptoms appear, though no Wound be in the Teguments. For as I remarked
above, these being pliant and extensible, may give way to the Blow without
being divided by it, but the Skull which is hard and brittle, especially in
Adults, must necessarily crack upon a violent Blow. For this reason Great Masts
of Ships are made of diverse Pieces, that each may be more free to yield to the
force of the Wind; whereas if they were made of one piece only, it must be very
thick to make a sufficient resistance, and would be easily broken. Thus Swords
may be broken without hurting the Scabbard which contains them.

In all Prognostics concerning Wounds of the Head, great regard is to be had
to the Patients Habit of Body, and the Violence of the Blow. If there be a
Fissure only, it is not so dangerous as when some Splinters are broke off, and
press on, or prick the Subjacent Membrane, especially if they hang together,
and lie one over another; for thus they make a stronger Compression on the
Brain. Besides when the Skull is broke in this manner, there is ground to
believe the Blow is very violent, and there is a great Concussion of the Brain,
which is never without danger. If the Dura Matter be torn by any Splinters of
the Bone, the extravasated Blood and the Inflammation, render the Wound
dangerous.

Great Commotions of the Brain are very dangerous, because in the Universal
Shock there is a disruption of several Vessels in diverse parts, and it is
impossible to discharge and purge it from that extraneous Matter which lodges
in it, putrefies and corrupts its substance, and in the end proves Fatal to the
Patient.

If Vomiting happen in the time of a Delirium and Lethargy, it plainly shows,
that the Spirits which animate the Brain, have quitted their Post, and
abandoned that Part to throw themselves into the Stomach, and this is a mortal
Symptom.

Grinding of the Teeth demonstrates, that the extravasated Blood putrefies and
corrupts the white Substance of the Brain.

Wounds in the Cortical part of the Brain are not Mortal, especially if the
Aperture of the Skull be large enough to admit of the application of Medicines
to the parts concerned. But if the Wound penetrate the White Substance, it is
ever Mortal; for this is composed of an infinite multitude of Nervous
Filaments, which being once divided, Death must inevitably follow. Besides
great Branches of Arteries lie concealed in the anfractuosities of the Brain,
which must necessarily be cut before any Medicaments can be applied, upon whose
Division an irremediable Flux of Blood will ensue.

It is proper before we proceed farther, to enquire in this place, if it be
necessary to apply the Trepan in a simple Fissure of the Skull. To which I
answer, Fissures of the Skull seldom happen without affecting the Subjacent
parts, which pleads for the use of the Trepan in a simple Cleft: However in
this Case it is most advisable to wait till Symptoms appear, since the upper
Table may be cleft, and the lower remain entire.

In Fissures of the Skull, a Tension of the Dura Matter very often ensures,
because this adheres to the Skull by a multitude of Vessels, which supply the
inner Table with Nourishment, and an infinity of Filaments which pass through the
Sutures, especially in Young Bodies. The Tension of the Dura Matter is often
followed by an Inflammation, because the Vessels cannot remain long in this
State without being broke and discharging Blood, which by its Stagnation grows
Acrimonious, pricks and molests the Membrane, and creates an Inflammation,
which sometimes ends in a Mortification.

If in Fractures, Splinters of the Bone offend the Dura Matter, the Patient
ought to be trepanned without farther delay (to prevent all Accidents which may
arise from extravasated Blood) and the fragments of the Bone removed.

If both Tables of the Skull be broke, the Operation must be made to prevent
Accidents, though none as yet do appear, for it is impossible both these should
be broke, without any extravasation on the Dura Matter.

It may be made an enquiry in this Place, if (after a blow on the Head) the
Skull appear entire, and yet by the Symptoms it be evident there is Matter
extravasated on the Brain, whether in this case it be advisable to apply the
Trepan. There are some Practitioners who are for the Negative; alleging, when
the Cranium is whole the Symptoms may arise from a great Commotion of the
Brain, and it is impossible to determine the Place where the Matter is lodged.
Others pronounce it necessary to Trepan if any of the Symptoms appear, and the
Patient feel a fixed Pain in his Head. For my private Opinion, I must declare
for the latter; for if this extravasated Matter remains undischarged, the
Patient in all probability must be killed by it. Again, if you do not find
Matter precisely at the place of the Aperture, the Head may be placed now on
one side, now on the other, and the Patient obliged to hold his Breath, shut
his Mouth and Nose to compress the Dura Matter, that the Matter may be evacuated.

Wounds of the Head are more or less Dangerous, according to the places in
which they are. Fractures of the Occipital Bone are very dangerous, because the
Cerebellum, Medulla oblongata, and Lateral Sinus, possess that part of the
Head. These parts must inevitably suffer great commotion, and be much
shattered, because the Occipital Bone requires great Violence to break it.
Fractures on the top of the Head, and in the place of the Fontanel are very
dangerous, because the Bones in those parts are very thin, and the blow being
for the most part perpendicular, is very smart. The Danger does not in this
case depend on the Brain, which lies beneath the Bone, because we have diverse
Instances of loss of Substance in these parts, and the Patient notwithstanding
has been successfully cured. Fractures in the Sutures are more dangerous than
in the other parts, by reason of the numerous Filaments and Vessels which are
apt to be broken and spill the Blood contained in them on the Dura Matter.
Fractures on the Sinus over the Eyebrows are very inconvenient, and difficult
to Cure, because these Sinus's being lined with an infinity of small Glands,
furnish matter perpetually for Suppuration.

When after a due and exact consideration of all Symptoms, it does appear there
is Pus extravasated on the Dura Matter, there is a necessity of proceeding to
the Operation; but because it may be both difficult and hazardous to undertake
so nice a matter as this is, without an exact knowledge of the Structure of the
Skull; I shall before I deliver the Method of performing it, premise a
description of its Composition and Parts.

Of the Structure of the Cranium.
The Cranium or Skull, is a Bone composed of diverse Pieces, joined togethert
in a most Artful manner, so as to form a Cavity to contain the Brain, and
defend it from external injuries.

Nature has not made the Skull one entire Bone, but formed it out of several
Pieces, the better to enable it to resist exterior Hurts, to which it is
exposed, and to prevent any Fracture extending too far upon a blow received.
Mechanics seem to imitate this Artifice in works exposed to violent attacks;
for instance, in Masts of Ships which are ever made of several pieces put
together, that so being flexible they may be less apt to break.

Each Bone of the Skull is composed of two Tables, the Inner and the Outer. The
Outer is a little harder than the Inner, and covered with the Pericranium. The
Inner has diverse Inequalities or Furrows, which the Vessels of the Dura Matter
first excavated, and after enlarged, while this Plate was very tender and soft,
by their continual beating.

There is a Medullary Substance called by the Greeks Diploe, and by the Latins
Meditullium, which lies between the two Tables, and interspersed with Veins and
Arteries, for its Nourishment like the Marrow in the other Bones of Human
Bodies.

The two Tables of the Skull are solid, and serve as a Rampart to defend the
Brain, to prevent this being too heavy, as it would be if it were one entire
solid Bone; there is placed by the Providence of Nature a spungy light
Substance, which by its unctuosity humecting the Bone, makes it more tough and
less brittle, and disposes it to yield a little to external Blows without
cracking. Architects imitate this Structure, by laying Mortar between their
Massy Stones, which by their vast weight would break, if some soft substance
did not intervene to bear off the pressure. The Cranium of an Elephant is of a
vast biggness, and seems to be ponderous, and yet is really very light, and so
the Sternum of Ostriches and other Animals; for these Masses of Bones are
composed of two thin plates, which contain a great many spungy Lamellae within.

The Magnitude of the Head, is proportioned to the largeness of the Brain. Its
best and most Natural Figure is Oval, something rising before and behind, and
flat on the sides. The eminence before and behind contains the Brain and
Cerebel, and the flatness of the sides conduces to the more advantageous
placing the Organs of the two Senses, of Sight and Hearing.

The Artist ought to be fully acquainted with the Figure, Asperities,
Depressions and Sutures of the Skull, to prevent being imposed on; when he
searches it to discover whether there be any Depression after a Blow received.

The Ancients pretend, that when any Eminence is wanting either before or
behind the Head, there are but two Sutures in the Cranium, which represent a T,
that when the Head is entirely round, there are two Sutures crossing each
other, and forming an X; and lastly, that when the Eminences before and behind
jet very much out, there are three Sutures which form and H. Volcherus Coiter
relates, that he had seen at the House of that Learned Anatomist Arantius, one
which wanted the anteriour Rising, and both the Temporal and Coronal Sutures.

All the Bones of the Skull are united by Indentures, which are termed Sutures.
These Sutures are True, False or Common; True Sutures are those which join the
principal Bones of the Cranium, and resemble Stitches. Of this kind there are
three, viz. The Coronal which joins the Coronal Bone, or Bones of the Forehead
to the Parietal. The Sagittal which proceeds along the top of the Head, from
the fore to the hinder part, and joins the Parietal Bones; and the Lambdoidal
which joins the Occipital to the Parietal Bones.

There are three Common Sutures which separate the Bones of the upper Jaw, from
the Cranium.

The Sutures which join the Bones of the Temples to the Parietal Bones, are
called Squammose or Scaly, upon a supposition, they barely lie over the
Parietal Bone, as the Scales of Fishes do one over another. But this is a
mistake, proceeding from a transient view; for upon a more accurate inspection
it appears, that all the Bones of the Skull are indented with each other, and
the Temporal Bone as well as the rest, is full of several little Angles, where
it joins to the Parietal. It may be remarked here, that the extreme edge of the
Bone of the Temples, and that of the Parietal slope very much.

We have noted above, that there are three true Sutures, viz. the Coronal,
Sagittal and Lambdoidal. The first receives its name from its resembling a
Circular Coronet, or the Greek Women's wearing a Coronet or Garland of Flowers
on it. The Sagittal is so called from the Latin word Sagitta, or an Arrow,
because it shoots in a straight Line, from the hinder to the fore part of the
Head. The third is denominated from its Figure, which is not unlike the Lambda
or L of the Greeks. The Ancient Physicians made Fontanels on the concourse of
the Sagittal and Coronal, and the Sagittal and Lambdoical Suture to cure
Defluxions on the Eyes.

The common Sutures may be reduced to two, That which joins the Os Ethmoides;
and the other which join the Os Sphaenoides; for the Transversal is no more
than a Continuation of the Coronal.

The Principal use of the Sutures, is to hinder the Fracture of one Bone from
extending to another, to suspend the Dura Matter by giving passage to several
Vessels and Nervous Filaments proceeding from the Pericranium; and lastly, to
give way for insensible Transpiration. The last use assigned to the Sutures, is
evinced by the violent Head-achs, ordinary in such Persons where Transpirations
is obstructed by the extraordinary closeness of the Sutures. In some Persons
subject to perpetual pains in the Head, the Sutures have been found separated.

Of the Bones of the Skull in particular.
The Bones which compose the Cranium, are the Coronal which possesses the whole
Forepart, the Occipital which possesses the whole hinder part, and the
Parietal Bones which form the sides. The Os Sphaenoides or Wedgelike Bone, and
the Os Ethmoides are common to the Skull and the Face. The minute Bones of the
Ear, the Malleus, Incus and Stapes, are contained in the Cavity of the Os
Petrosum, or craggy Bone of the Temples.

The Coronal Bone possesses all the forepart of the Head, and receives its Name
from the Crown of Laurel, placed on the Victors Brows. It is called the Os
Frontis, because these Bones together form the Forehead, and is of a
Semicircular Figure, smooth and polite without, and very unequal within, by the
Impression made by the Vessels of the Dura Matter, whilst the Bone is yet soft
and tender. In some Skulls the Sagittal Suture is continued down to the Root of
the Nose, and the Frontal Bone divided into two, which division some Authors
pretend happens more frequently in Women than Men.

The Coronal Bone is a little thicker before than the Parietal, and by
consequence the Surgeon may turn his Instrument with less fear in this, than
the other which are thinner. This Bone is joined to the Parietal Bones by the
Coronal Suture, and to the Ethmoides, Sphaenoides, and the Bones of the lower
Jaw by the common Suture. In the forepart, it composes a great part of the
Orbit of the Eyes. The Plates of this Bone are separated above the Supercilia
or Eyebrows, and form two Cavities which extend to the middle of the Forehead,
and sometimes are very large, and at others very small. There is great caution
to be used in Trepanning in this place; for when the Brows are large and
prominent, the Sinuosities likewise are large, and extend far. These Cavities
open by a common Foramen into the Nose.

Anatomists have entertained various conjectures of the use of these Cavities,
some are of Opinion they serve to reflect the Voice, and form an Echo;
alleging, that if these be deficient, the Voice is flat. Others believe they
are a Magazin of Air which serves for the production of the Animal Spirits, and
imagine this Air does pass through the greater Angle of the Eye to cool it, and
that it does likewise very much assist the Sense of Smelling. But since these
Cavities are lined with a Glandulous Membrane, interwoven with abundance of
Blood Vessels, it is but reasonable to think, these Glands discharge a great
part of their Serosities and Mucus insensibly into the Nose. For we ever find
the Mucus to be furnished by the Aperture of several Sinus; as for instance,
the Bones of the upper Jaw and Os Sphaenoides, which are lined by a Glandulous
Membrane: The perforations of the Lachrymal Bone, drain a great quantity of
Moisture through the Nose, by the Tears evacuated that way.

The Coronal Bone has several Holes; for instance, two external above the Brows
which pierce the Orbit, and through these passes a Branch of the Nerves of the
Third Pair, which is dispensed to the Skin, Muscles of the Forehead and
Eyelids. Besides the external, there is one within above the Apophysis,
commonly called Crista Galli, to which the Root of the right Sinus of the Dura
Matter adheres. In its inner side are two Sinus, which contain the forepart of
the Brain. It has one eminence with a long edge lengthways, to which the Dura
Matter adheres.

Of the Frontal Bones in the Foetus.
It is diverting to consider the Ossification of this Bone, which begins at the
Circumference, and so proceeds to the Center, contrary to all others, which
proceed from the Center to the Circumference. In a Foetus of two Months old,
the Coronal Bone is a Membrane, which by degrees becomes Cartilaginous. In the
third Month several Points appear, which like so many Centers, begin the
Ossification and above the Orbits, on each side a bony Crescent appears. In the
fourth Month the bone is Ossified, except its middle, which still remains
Membranous. The Orbits and the Hole through which the Motory Nerves of the Eye do
pass, begin then to be formed. The Coronal is divided into two bones by a
Suture, which passes through its midst, which is very close at the end next the
Nose, and very large at the other near the Fontanel: the bony points of the
Orbits which appear as through a Cloud, are very discernable. In the fifth and
sixth Month the Ossification advances, the Fontanel is lessened, and the middle
of the Coronal is bony; and in the seventh Month the Ossification is perfected.
The longitudinal Sinus is seen through the Fontanel, in the eighth Mouth.
Kerkringius in his History of the Foetus pretends, that if the Fontanel does
not close within some time after the Birth, it will remain open all the
Patients Life; and assures us, he has often seen it open in Ancient People. In
the ninth Month the bones of the Head, particularly the Coronal and the
Occipital approach, and pass one over the other, which facilitates the passage
of the Infant into the World.

Of the Parietal Bones.
These are so called from their being placed on each side the Head, like two
Walls to defend it. These Bones are externally very smooth, but their inner
Surface has several Depressions or Furrows formed by the Pulsation of the
Arteries, while the part is soft. These Impressions do not unaptly resemble the
neither side of a Fig-leaf. These are the most thin of all the Bones of the
Cranium, which must be regarded, in applying the Trepan to prevent hurting the
Dura Matter with the Teeth of the Instrument. These Bones are contiguous to the
Frontal, Temporal, Sphaenoidal, and Occipital Bones; The Fontanel is the place
where the Sagittal meets the Coronal Suture. Hippocrates calls this part
Bregma, because it is the most tender of all parts of the Skull. The Ancients
gave it the name of the Fontanel, imagining that the Brain did most abound with
Humidities in that part. Aristotle thinks the Fontanel Ossifies, about the time
Children begin to speak; but there is no certain Rule in this matter. In the
inside of each Parietal Bone, there are two great Sinus's in the middle. On
each side of the Sagittal Suture, there is a small hole for the Transit of the
Veins, which convey the Refluent Blood from the Teguments of the Head, to the
right Sinus of the Brain.

Of the Parietal Bones of the Foetus.
In the three first Months after Conception, there is nothing conspicuous,
besides a few points which appear obscurely, and the Ossification of the
Membrane begins there. At the end of the fourth Month, the Ossification of the
Parietal Bones is completed. At that time there are several Membranous
interstices in the Sagittal Suture, and the Temporal and Sphaenoidal Bone; for
the Ossification of the Parietal Bones begins at the Center, and terminates at
the Circumference, contrary to the process of Nature, in the Coronal Bone. In
the fifth and sixth Month these bones grow considerably, and approach very near
each other, so that in the seventh Month, they unite and form the Sutures. The
Parietal bones are separated from the Sphaenoides, and Temporal bone by an
intervening Membrane. In the eighth Month, the bone begin to touch each other,
and in the ninth they are joined to the Sphaenoides and Temple-bone. The
Fontanel, as I noted above, is formed by the concourse of the two Parietals,
with the Coronal Bone, and is not closed till eight or ten Months after the
Birth of the Child, and if we may believe Kerkringius, sometimes remains open
as long as the Person lives. Midwives usually judge a Child to be dead in the
Mothers Womb, when they find the Membrane of the Fontanel closed and sunk,
because the Motion of the Dura Matter in living Children, keeps up this part.

Of the Bones of the Temples.
The Bones on the side of the Head are called the Temporal Bones, from the
Latin word Tempus; because they discover the Age of any Person, the Hair sooner
becoming gray in that, than in any other part of the Head. These Bones are
placed laterally near the lower part of the Head. The upper part of this bone
is then Semicircular, and is called the scaly bone, or Os Squammosum, and the
lower part very hard and rough, and therefore called the craggy part, or Os
petrosum. The greatest part of these bones is joined to the Parietal, and upper
part of the Sphaenoides, and their lower or craggy part, is joined to the lower
part of the Occipital and Sphaenoides.

The Squamous part of the Temporal bone has its outer surface very polite and
smooth, but has several Sinus's on its inner side, which receive the Brain.
This has likewise several parts, v.g. its external Apophysis or Temporal
Process, which the Greeks call Zygomatick from its being joined to the Zygoma,
or process from the Cheek bone. Its Mastoidal Process which receives its Name
from its resembling the Nipple of a Breast, and is placed behind the Auditory
passage. The Process called Styloides, because it resembles a Probe by its long
and pointed Figure, to the Superior part of which, the upper part of the Os
Hyoides adheres.

Below the Temporal Process on each side is a small Sinus, into which the
lesser Heads of the lower Jaw are articulated, and lastly on the inside, a hard
rough Process from its solidity and cragged Figure, called the craggy bone, or
Os petrosum, which contains the whole Organs of Hearing. The bones of the
Temples have several Holes both within and without, through the first of the
internal, passes a branch of the Carotid Artery. Through the second passes the
Auditory Nerve, which after divides it self into the hard and the soft Branch.
Of the External, the first is the Meatus Auditorius, or Auditory passage. The
second is oblique, and transmits a Vein to the Jugulars. The third lies between
the Mastoides and Styloides Processes, and the fourth penetrates the Auditory
passage, and is called the Communicant Duct, through this passage the smoke of
Tobacco is sometimes emitted by the Ear.

Of the Bones of the Temples in a Foetus.
In the second Month the bones of the Temples are Membranous. In the third
Month the Zygomatick Process, and the Circle to which the Membrane of the
Tympanum or Drum is fixed, are bony. But during the whole stay of the Foetus in
the Womb, the Auditory Channel is Cartilaginous, and Nature to preserve the
Drum, has drawn a thick Membrane over it.

The Styloidal Processes are of a bright red Color like a Ruby, and lie close
to the bony Circle, from whence they derive their Origin, not extending
themselves, and standing out as they afterward do. These Processes do not
Ossifie, till a long time after the Birth, extending themselves gradually, and
standing more and more out and increasing. In the fourth Month, the Scaly part
of the Os Petrosum becomes bony. The Cavities which compose the Organ of
Hearing, are included in the craggy Process, and are formed of a bright red
Cartilage. The craggy Process is as yet wholly Cartilaginous, and there is
nothing bony in it, besides a little rough unequal Line, which extends the
whole length of the bony Circle, and so passes beyond it. At this time the
Temporal bone is composed of three small bones, the Squamous or Scaly bone, the
Ring or bony Circle, and the straight Line of the craggy Process. In the fifth
Month, the Scaly part of the Temporal bone is joined to the Sphaenoides, and
Parietal bone. The Mammillary Process is formed of three small bones, the first
is called Pyriformis, from its resembling a Pear, which is joined by its
slender end, to the Squammous bone. The second is called Scutiformis, from its
resembling a Buckler, and is near as thick as the other. The third bone is
about the thickness of a pin Head, and divided from the other by the same
Cartilage.

Near the hole through which the Auditory Nerve passes, there is another hole,
which in Adults is of a long strait Figure like a small Cleft. The Temporal
bone is of a more irregular Figure in the Foetus, than in Adults.

In a Foetus of six Months old, the Massy part of the Hammer is bony. The
longest branch of the Hammer is entirely Cartilaginous, and adheres to the
Membrane of the Drum. The Incus or Anvil has nothing Cartilaginous, except the
top of its Apophysis. The Basis, and the two Branches of the Stirrup are bony,
the Stirrup it self appears Simicircular above. The fourth or Orbicular bone is
deficient in the Foetus.

In the fifth Month, the Temporal bone is composed of six small bones, distinct
from each other, viz. the scaly part of the bony Circle, (which has a Channel
or Rift, in which the Membrane of the Tympanum is enclosed) the craggy Process
which contains the Organs of Hearing, and the three small bones of the
Mammillary Process.

In the sixth Month, the Scutiformis and Pyriformis unite into one. The third
bone is a little thicker, the Stirrup is not formed; the Hammer and Anvil are a
little thicker, but their hardness continues the same. In the seventh Month,
the smallest bone of the Mammillary Process joins to the Scutiformis and
Pyriformis. The small bones of the Ear do not differ from those in Adults,
except that the longer Branch of the Hammer at first is only Cartilaginous.

Of the Bones of the Ear in Adults.
The Os petrosum or craggy Process, is divided into three Cavities, viz. the
Tympanum or Drum, the Labyrinth and the Cochlea or Screw.

The Tympanum contains in it four small bones, viz. the Stapes, the Incus and
Malleus, or Stirrup, Anvil and Hammer.

The Stirrup is a small bone, which derives its Name from its Figure. It is
composed of two Branches, fixed on a flat Oval Basis. In the joining together
of these two Branches above, a small Sinus is formed, in which the fourth bone
is lodged.

The second bone takes its Name from a Smiths Anvil, which it is not very much
unlike. It consists of three parts; the first is the thickest of all, and forms
the Body of the bone, the two other are small Branches, and are only Apophyses
of the former. The more bulky part has two Cavities, and one Protuberance to
articulate with the Protuberance, and Cavity of the Head of the Hammer. This
Articulation resembles a Hinge.

The Hammer is a little bone, which is something like a Workmans Hammer, the
greater and thicker extremity representing the Head, and the thinner and
slenderer the Handle. The hinder part of the Head of the Hammer has two
Protuberances, and one Cavity adapted to receive the Anvil. The Handle is long
and slender, and is made thicker by two Apophyses.

The fourth Bone has scarce any discernible thickness, and is not very much
unlike the Scales of some Fishes. It is unequal on the side where it joins the
Head of the Stirrup, and a little hollow where it is Articulated with the tip
of the Anvil. None of these bones are covered with the Periosteum, and all are
kept together in the place of their Articulation with Ligaments. They all have
little Holes for the Reception of those Vessels which import Nourishment to
them. The Hammer and Anvil are more solid, than the Stirrup, which is an
exceeding thin and porous bone.

Of the Occipital Bone.
There is no bone of the Head requires more Care and Caution in trying it with
the Probe to discover its Fractures, than this, which Difficulty proceeds from
its irregular and and capricious Figure. The Occipital Bone composes all the
lower and hinder part of the Skull. Its Figure is something Lozenge, and it is
near an inch in Thickness. Its exterior part is unequal. This Bone has two
Condyli or flattish round knobs, which are received in the two Sinus of the
first Vertebra of the Neck, by means of which Articulation, the Flexion and
Extension of the Neck is performed. There are in its inner side two great
Cavities, which receive the Cerebel; Besides these there are two lesser lateral
ones with two remarkable Furrows winding obliquely above the greater Cavities.
Through these Furrows the two lateral Sinus of the Dura Matter pass, which
discharge their Blood into the Jugulars; in the last place there is a
Protuberance, to which the Dura Matter adheres.

The Occipital is joined to the Parietal, Temporal, and Sphaenoidal bones. This
bone has sive Holes, viz. The Great one, through which the Spinal Marrow
passes; two Lateral ones, and two more between its Condyli and Processus
Styloides. The lower part of this bone has several Protuberances, to which
Muscles are inserted. There is sometimes a Triangular bone enchased into the
Occipital, by three Sutures. Sometimes this Triangular bone is cleft through
the midst, and each moiety joined by a Suture.

The Lambdoidal Suture is frequently interrupted by several very small and
longish bones, which are inserted between the Occipital and Parietal ones, and
serve to rivet them together. When the Surgeon searches this bone to discover
if it be broke or not, he must consider well the several pieces of which it
consists, the small Sutures, and the Triangular bone just now mentioned; for
without this necessary caution, he will be apt to be imposed on by its great
inequality, and may be induced to believe it broke when it is entire.

Of the Occipital Bone in the Foetus.
In the third Month after Conception, the Occipital bone consists of four
Triangular ones, viz. one great, and three small ones. The great Triangular
bone is sometimes all of one piece, and at other times it is made up of two,
three or four bones joined together. After the lesser bones which compose the
great Triangular one, are united into one large bone, there is usually formed
another less one of a Triangular figure likewise, one of whose Angles touches
the greater Triangular, and the two other extend to the Condyloidal Processes.

In the ninth Month, this bone is united to the Condyloidal Processes, and the
great Triangular bone. The small bone beneath these Condyloidal Processes is
triangular likewise, and continues distinct; but sometimes after the Birth it
is united to the great Triangular, and the two Condyloidal processes of the
Occipital bone. In a Foetus of nine Months old, the great Triangular is
sometimes divided into four unequal Portions. From the above recited
particulars it is evident, there is no bone in the whole Body, in whose
Formation Nature seems to be less regular than this.

Of the Sphaenoidal Bone.
This bone composes the whole Basis of the Skull, and is contiguous to almost
all the bones of the Head, being crowded like a Wedge between them, and this is
the reason of its Name. It is thicker on that side where it is united to the
Occipital bone, and thinner and smoother in its upper part; but its Figure is
so irregular, that it would be very difficult to give a clear Idea of it by a
Verbal Description, and may be better learnt by once seeing it, than by all the
words in the World. On its upper side it is joined to the Temporal Coronal and
Cheek bone, and on its lower to the two greatest bones of the upper Jaw, the
Occipital and the Vomer. It has five Processes on its external Part, two of
which resemble the Wings of a Bat, and by the Greeks are called the Pterygoidal
or Wing-like Processes, in which are two Sinus termed Fossae. Besides these,
there are two more which are flat and smooth, which form a Part of the Orbits,
and the nether part of the Temples, which is reckoned as one of these Fossae,
and a small Process which is enchased in a Channel of the Vomer. The
Sphaenoidal bone has on its innerside two Processes, which the Greeks term
Clinoidal, because they bear some resemblance to the Posts of a Bed. Between
these Processes, there is a Cavity which contains the Pituitary Gland, and this
is called the Sella, because it is not unlike a Saddle. Between the Tables of
the Os Sphaenoides, there is a double Cavity separated by a partition in the
middle, which forms two Sinus opening by different Holes into the Cavity of the
Nostrils. Sylvius imagines, that the Pituita distills insensibly from the
Pituitary Gland into these Sinus, and by this way is conveyed into the Mouth.
But there is little probability of the truth of this conjecture, because there
are no visible perforations in the Sella, through which this Humor can be
discharged. The Holes of this bone shall be described, when we come to
enumerate those in the Basis of the Skull.

Of the Sphaenoidal Bone in the Foetus.
In the second Month this bone is Cartilaginous, in the third its two Wings are
bony, in the fourth it is composed of eight small bones, viz. the Pterygoidal
Processes, the two small bones which support the fifth pair of the upper Jaw,
and the two small bones which form the Sella, which are at that time as big as
a Pins Head; and lastly, those which transmit the Optic Nerve. The two small
bones which support the fifth Pair of the upper Jaw, are divided by the bony
Partition of the Nostrils. And those which compose the Sella, are separated by
a Cartilage; but in the fifth Month they make but one, which resembles a
Crescent. In the fifth Month, the Os Sphaenoides makes but one piece; yet in
the midst of the Sella, there is a Considerable Cartilage.

From the sixth to the ninth Month, the Os Sphaenoides increases, and by
degrees hardens; and though it appears divided in several places by tendinous
interstices, yet it ought to be accounted but one bone, because these in
process of time, wholly disappear in the same manner as in other bones.

Of the Os Ethmoides or Cribrosum.
The last bone of the Skull is the Ethmoides or Sieve-like bone, which receives
its Name from a multitude of small Holes which open into the Nose. In the midst
of this bone, there is a small Process called Crista Galli, which very much
resembles a Cocks Comb, on the side of this are a multitude of small Holes,
through which several Branches of the Olfactory Nerve pass, which serve to line
the Cavities of the Nose, and are dispensed to the Organ of Smelling. The
Lateral parts of this bone which form part of the Orbit, are called Ossa Plana,
because they are flat and polite. These Plates are each pierced with a small
Hole called the Internal Orbital, through which passes a branch of the fifth
pair. That part of the Os Ethmoides which is continued into the Nose, is a
small Plate thicker on that side, which regards the bones of the Nose, and
thinner where it terminates in the Channel of the Vomer. On the sides of the
Cavity of the Nose are several small bony Plates, called Ossa Spongiosa, or the
spongy bones, and are invested with the same Membrane that lines the Cavity of
the Nose. Where these Laminae are very numerous as in Vulturs, Greyhounds, the
Animals generally have an exquisite smell.

Of the Ethmoidal Bone in the Foetus.
The Partition or Sepiment which divides the great Cavity of the Nose, the
Crista Galli, and the Ethmoidal bone is not bony in the Foetus. The Ethmoides
Ossify's about the fifth Month, beginning with those small spongy bones which
are fixed to the side of the Sepiment of the Nostrils. In the sixth Month the
scaly part of the Ethmoides, which makes up a Portion of the Orbit, becomes
bony. The other parts of this bone remain Cartilaginous, for a great while
after the Birth.

But before I leave the bones of the Skull, I cannot forbear presenting the
Reader with an exact Description of the Holes in its Basis, which accurate and
curious History, I have extracted out of a Book entitled the Complete Surgeon.

An Account of the Holes in the Basis of the Skull, and the Vessels which pass
through them.
There are nine pair of Nerves which spring from the Spinal Marrow, and pass
out of the Skull through as many several Holes. The first pair serves the sense
of Smelling, and is divided below the Os Cribrosion into several Filaments,
which passing through several Holes, are dispensed to the internal Tunick of
the Nose. The second pair are the Optic or Visive Nerves, which pass into the
Orbit through several Holes, excavated in the Sphaenoidal bone, immediately
above the Anteriour Clinoidal Processes. In that Portion of the Sphaenoidal
bone which forms the bottom of the Orbit, there is a Fissure about half an inch
in length, which in the lower part beneath the Hole through which the Optic
Nerve passes, is almost round, and larger above where it terminates in a very
long acute Angle. There are several Nerves which enter the Orbit through this
Cleft; as 1. The third pair called the Motory Nerves of the Eye. 2. The fourth
pair called by Willis the Pathetick. 3. The sixth pair. Besides these three
pair which pass entirely through this Cleft, there passes likewise the
Superior Branch of the anteriour Trunk of the fifth pair, which Dr. Willis
calls the Ophthalmick Branch. Beyond the inferior part of this cleft, toward
the hinder part of the Head, there appears on each side in the Sphaenoidal
bone, a Hole which does not pierce the Basis of the Skull, but makes a sort of
a Channel about an inch long. This Channel opens behind the Orbit at the top of
the space between the Pterigoidal Process, and the third bone of the upper Jaw.
The inferior Branch of the Fore-Trunk of the fifth pair, passes through this
Channel. About the sixth part of an inch beyond the Channels, there are two
more Holes in the Sphaenoidal bone of something an Oval Figure. These lie on
the back side of the Sella, through which the posteriour Trunk of the fifth
pair passes. The Hole through which the Auditory Nerve or seventh pair passes,
is in the midst of the posteriour part of the Os Petrosum, which looks toward
the Cerebel. This Hole which is very large is the Mouth of a Duct or Channel,
which running through the Os Petrosum, and sinking obliquely downwards to the
depth of a sixth part of an Inch, forms the bottom of a Sack, terminating
partly in the Basis of the Cochlea, and partly in the Mouth or Entry of the
Vestibulum. At the bottom of this Channel are several Holes; The most
considerable of these is, that in the upper part through which a portion of the
Auditory Nerve passes, and this is the entry of another Channel made in the Os
Petrosum, which opens between the Mastoidal and Styloidal Processes. The other
Holes transmit the branches of the soft pair of the Auditory Nerves. Below this
Channel, there is a considerable Hole formed by the meeting of two unequal
Ridges, the largest of which proceeds from the Occipital bone, and the other
from the inferior part of the craggy Process. From the middle of the Superior
part of this Hole, there is a small bony point jetts out, to which an Appendix
of the Dura Matter is affixed, which divides the Hole into two parts. Through
the anteriour of these, the Nerves of the eighth pair and the Spinal Nerve
passes out; as for the posteriour Hole, its use shall hereafter be assigned.
Near the great Hole of the Occipital bone through which the Spinal Marrow
passes, there is an Oval Hole through which a Nerve of the ninth pair passes.
This Hole is entirely made in the Occipital bone, and proceeding a little
forward, passes obliquely from behind forwards. In the forepart of the Skull
that Hole is sometimes double, but its two Mouths reunite on the external part
of the Skull, and the two Branches which compose the Origin of that Nerve
passing through them likewise, unite before they leave the bone. Thus I have
enumerated all the passages of the nine pair of Nerves, which proceed from the
Medulla Oblongata; there remains only the Intercostal Nerve, and the tenth
pair: The first of which passes out of the Skull by the same Hole, through
which the internal Carotid passes in, and the latter arises from the Spinal
Marrow between the Occipita^ bone, and the first Vertebra of the Neck, and
passes out through the same Hole of the Dura Matter, by which the Vertebral
Artery enters.

The Vessels of the Dura Matter are the Carotids and Vertebrals with their
Ramifications. In the Sphaenoidal bone behind the Hole through which the
posteriour Trunk of the fifth pair passes, there is another little roundish
Hole, which transmits a Branch of the external Carotid Artery, which entering
the Skull, adheres to the Dura Matter, and sends out diverse Ramifications, which
supply with blood all that portion of the Membrane, which covers the sides and
the top of the Brain. At the bottom, and at the top of the external Lateral
part of the Orbit, above the acute Angle of the cleft of the Sphaenoidal bone,
there is a Hole through which a small Artery passes, which springs from that
Branch of the internal Carotid, which imports Blood to the Eye. This Artery is
dispensed to all that part of the Dura Matter, which covers the Anteriour part
of the Brain. The Vertebral Artery after it enters the Skull, dispenses a
considerable Branch on each side, which is dispensed to all the Portion of the
Dura Matter which covers the Cerebel. As for the Veins which accompany these
Arteries, they pass almost all out of the Skull by the same Holes, through
which the Arteries enter in. There are four great Arteries which supply the
Brain with Blood and Spirits, viz. the two internal Carotids; and the two
Vertebrals. The Internal Carotids enter into the Skull by a particular Channel
in the Temporal Bone. The Mouth of this Channel is of an Oval Figure, and is
seated on the external part of the Basis of the Cranium, before the Sinus of
the Internal Jugular. This Channel proceeds obliquely from behind forwards, and
after running about a quarter of an inch in length, ends near the posteriour
part of the Sella in the Sphaenoidal Bone. The Artery makes a Flexus here,
which forms a Roman S. In the place where the Carotid Arteries strike through
the Dura Matter, they send out a great Branch which passes into the Orbit, by
the Inferior part of that Hole which transmits the Optic Nerve. The Vertebral
Arteries issuing out of the Holes of the Transverse Processes of the first
Vertebra of the Neck, in their Progress are reflected under the Superior
Oblique Processes of 7 other Vertebrae; after this they strike through the Dura
Matter, and running along on the Spinal Marrow, enter the Skull through the
great Occipital Hole, and then inclining to each other, unite and form but one
Trunk. The Veins which export the Refluent Blood from the substance of the
Brain, empty their Contents into the Sinus of the Dura Matter, all which
discharge themselves into the Lateral ones, which issue out of the Skull
immediately below the Nerves of the eighth pair, by the hinder part of the Hole
formed by the juncture of the Occipital bone, and craggy Process. The Lateral
Sinus open into the internal Jugulars, whose Mouths are contained in a
considerable Sinus, wrought on each side of the external part of the Basis of
the Skull, and commonly known by the Name of the Sinus of the internal Jugular
Veins. In the upper and posteriour part of the Hole through which the Lateral
Sinus go out, there is an Aperture which is the extremity of a Channel. This
Channel has its Mouth or Entry behind those Condyls, which stand on each side
the great Occipital Hole, and after a Course of about a sixth part of an inch
through the Substance of the Bone, opens immediately into the Vertebral Sinus,
from whence indeed it seems to take its Origin. From hence it is evident, that
the blood contained in the Lateral Sinus is discharged two several ways, viz.
The greatest Portion into the Jugulars, and the other into the Vertebral Sinus,
which sometimes appear only on one side, at other times are intercepted on both
sides, and then all the Blood contained in the Lateral Sinus, is discharged
into the internal Jugulars. Behind the Mastoidal Process, there is on each side
a considerable Hole, through which passes a large Vein, which conveys back a
great part of the Refluent blood from the Teguments and Muscles, on the hinder
side of the Head. This Vein opens into the Lateral Sinus, in the place where
there Flexuosity begins. In some Subjects, this Hole is only on one side, and
sometimes there is none at all to be found; when this happens, the Blood
contained in these Vessels, is emptied into the External Jugulars, with which
the Branches of this Vessel communicate in three places on each Parietal bone,
on the side of the Sagittal Suture, and at a little distance from the
Lambdoidals. There is a Hole through which passes a Vein which conveys back the
Refluent Blood from the Tegument of the Head, and this empties it self into the
upper Longitudinal Sinus. These Passages are sometimes stopped upon one side, and
sometimes on both, in which case the Blood contained in the Branches of this
Vein, is discharged into the external Jugular. In the midst of the Sella, there
are two or three small Holes, through which some Modern Authors have imagined
the Lympha contained in the Pituitary Gland is discharged into the Sinus of the
Sella; but these Holes are filled with Vessels which carry the Refluent Blood
from the Adjacent Bones and Membranes; nay, these Holes themselves are seldom
to be found in Adult Persons. Between the Ridge of the Coronal Bone, and that
of the Christa Galli, there is a Hole which is the Mouth or Entry of a Channel,
which takes its course downwards for the space of about the sixth part of an
inch, through the thickness of the inner Table of the Coronal Bone: The Root of
the upper Longitudinal Sinus is inserted here, and it likewise transmits
several Blood Vessels which serve for the Nourishment of the inner Table.

There are several other Holes in other parts of the Basis of the Skull, the
Principal of which are on the craggy Process. These transmit diverse Vessels
for the Nourishment of the Temporal bone, which contains the bones of the
Tympanum. The other Holes transmit Vessels which supply with blood, the various
parts of the Basis of the Skull.

The OPERATION.
In applying the Trepan, the Artist must ever observe not to fix his Instrument
on the Sutures, especially the Fontanel; because there are, as I before noted,
an infinity of small Vessels which pass through them, and connect the Dura
Matter to the Skull in those places. If the Operation were made there, there
would be great Danger of tearing those Fibers and Vessels with its Teeth, or
perhaps opening the Longitudinal Sinus in Trepanning on the Sagittal Suture. If
the Blow happen to be on the Sutures, and you judge there is Blood extravasated
on each side of the Head, the surest way is to apply the Instrument on both
sides, because the Dura Matter adheres to the Sutures so strictly, that there
can be no Communication from one to another.

The Trepan must never be placed directly in the middle of the Coronal, nor the
Occipital bone, especially toward their lower parts; because the Dura Matter
adheres very firmly to the productions in these places, and there is great
danger of tearing it in turning round of the Instrument.

You must never Trepan on the Eyebrows, because of the great Cavities beneath,
which are lined with a very thick Membrene, and the bone being double in this
place, instead of coming to the Brain after the Perforation is made, you only
discover a Cavity, and there remains still another bone to go through, which
makes the Operation difficult and troublesome. Besides as we observed before,
the Wound would be a long time in Healing, because the Glandulous Membrane
which lines the Cavity, supplies matter for a plentiful Suppuration.

You must never Trepan on the Temporal bone, unless in case of great necessity,
especially in that part where it is contiguous to the Parietal, because here
its thinnest part joins to the lower part of the Parietal, and one part of the
Temporal bone must necessarily escape, since it only lies on the Parietal, and
this creates great difficulty in the Operation.

You must never Trepan on the Lateral Sinus, which lie on the side of the
Occipital, for fear of opening those Sinus with the Teeth of the Instrument.

When any Fragment of a bone is deprest, or there is a Comminution; you must
not fix the Trepan over them, but on one side. For if you should place it over,
you would run a risk of thrusting those Fragments into the Brain, and Mortally
wounding the Patient; and for this Reason, the Instrument is better applied
laterally, than on the Depression it self.

The Trepan may be applied on any other part of the Skull, except those
mentioned; but if the Bone be much shattered, and the Fragments or Splinters be
so large, that upon the taking them out there is sufficient room for the
Application of Medicines; you may supersede the use of this Instrument, there
being no occasion for any farther Perforation.

The Incision of the Teguments must be made after some of the following ways,
viz. On the Temporal Muscle it must have the Figure of the number 7, or Letter
V, or which is better be made lengthways, following the course of the Fibers,
and be large enough to place the Instrument. In all other places of the Head,
the Incision is ordinarily made in form of a Cross; but I think the long T is
better, provided there be room enough to apply the Instrument. In Wounds of the
Forehead the Incision is best made transversly, following the course of the
Wrinkles, for then the Cicatrix will create less Deformity.

After a blow on the Head it is necessary to search, especially when the Skull
is bare; and if the Orifice be not large enough, it must be Dilated, and the
Bone laid bare, in order to discover the Nature of the Fracture. When the
Incision is made, the Wound must be filled with dry Lint to absorb the Blood,
which otherwise would hinder a due inspection of it. If Blood issue from any
Artery, the Artist must make a Ligature on it, and leave the Wound in this
condition till the next day.

If the Bone be very much shattered, and some Fragments of it depressed, it
must be raised, and you must leave the Dressing till the Haemorrhage be stopped,
that so you may consider of the best place to apply the Trepan.

After the Incision is made (whether it be of the form of a Cross,, V or T) the
Teguments removed, and the Pericranium scraped off (by a Spatula, or with the
Nails) the Flux of Blood stopped, and four and twenty Hours are lapsed, since all
these Preparatives are made (which last Circumstance is not always necessary,
especially when some pressing Symptoms require greater Have) you may proceed to
the Operation it self in the following manner.

Place the Patients Head in a convenient Posture; this is ordinarily done by
laying it on a Pillow, and most Surgeon stop the Ears with Cotton, to prevent
his hearing the Noise of the Standers by, or the grating of the Instrument.
When the Head is conveniently placed, begin the work by making a small hole
with the Perforative or Piercer, in this small Hole put the Pin in, to keep the
Trepan Stable, which otherwise would be apt to roll about, and make several
Incisions with its Teeth. You must be careful to choose a Head suited to the
largeness of the Hole you intend to make; Hold the Handle of the Trepan with
the left Hand, and support the Forehead with the same Hand that holds the
Trepan, that so you may press its Head against the Skull, and make the
Perforation more commodiously; At first turn your Instrument very quick. When
the Trepan has taken sufficient hold take it off, and lay aside the Pin; for if
this continue in much longer, there will be great danger of piercing the Dura
Matter, some Skulls being exceeding thin. Cleanse the Teeth of the Instrument
with a little brush, every time you take it out, and after place the Crown in
again. Every time you take out the Instrument, which is to be done frequently,
you ought to try how deep you have gone, for fear least in turning it too
hastily round, you endanger a Laceration of the Dura Matter by its Teeth.

You must likewise with a quill cut after the manner of a Tooth-picker, try the
depth of the Perforation in each part of it, that in case it be cut more on one
than the other side, you may lay the stress of the Instrument on the opposite.

When you find Blood in the Teeth of the Trepan, you may be assured the
Instrument has past through the first Table of the Skull, and is arrived at the
Diploe. When you perceive this, you must turn slowly and very cautiously, for
fear of taking off the first Table, and leaving the second, which Accident
makes the Operation more tedious and troublesome. When this happens, take out
that piece which is in the Trepan, and continue to cut through the second Table
without being surprised; for the first Table is very apt to be broken off after
blows with a blunt Instrument, because the Shock most commonly separates the
Diploe from the Bone. Try from time to time with the Myrtle Leaf, whether the
piece you are about to take out shake, and be near cut through. This is done to
prevent hurting the Dura Matter, which you must inevitably do, if you continue
to saw the Bone, without searching if it be loose or not. Some Artists use the
Terebellum for this purpose, but in this Case it is necessary to have made a
way into the Bone while it is stable, before the application of the Trepan. In
taking out the piece which shakes, you must not attempt to pull it away
forcibly, but remove it gently, for fear of Lacerating the Dura Matter, which
frequently cleaves to it in young Bodies. If the Dura Matter adhere to the
Skull, it may be separated with the Myrtle Leaf. Some Practitioners wait for a
Suppuration to separate them, but since this happens for the most part only in
young Subjects who have the Dura Matter soft and lax, the Bone may conveniently
enough be free from it by the Spatula or Myrtle Leaf.

When the Piece is removed, there always remain in the bottom of the Aperture
several little Asperities, which are to be pared away with the Scalper
Lenticularis, or Lenticular Instrument Knife (so called from a small knob not
unlike a Lentil) with which you press a little the Dura Matter to facilitate the
issue of the extravasated Blood and Pus.

To evacuate the Blood and Pus, place the Patients Head inclining in such a
commodious posture, that the Matter may make its way to the Aperture, and then
bid the Patient shut his Mouth and Nose, and hold his Breath. These Efforts
force the Dura Matter to approach close to the Aperture, and drive out the
Matter extravasated on it. This Rising of the Dura Matter is effected by the
contraction of the Diaphragm in the Retention of the Breath, which must
necessarily constringe the descending Artery passing between its Tendons, and
by consequence drive a great proportion of Blood into the Ascending Trunk,
which passes by the Carotid and Vertebral Arteries into the Brain.

The Extravasated Matter which presents, must be absorbed by false Tents. If
any Blood or Pus be lodged under the Dura Matter, it must be let out with a
Lancet, having an especial care not to Wound the Brain. The Prudent Surgeon in
this Case, ought to conceal his Lancet in a false Tent, and so convey it in and
perform his Work, under pretense of wiping the Membrane.

THE DRESSING. In the first place, put into the Aperture a Sindon dipped in Honey
of Roses, and Spirit of Wine, and introduce this between the Skull and Dura
Matter, to humect, deterge and attenuate the Matter. This Sindon is a Rag of
very fine Linen, cut exactly round, through the midst of which you must pass a
Thread for the drawing it out, in dressing of the Wound It must be larger than
the Aperture, for the conveying the benefit of the Medicines, with which it is
imbibed to the neighboring parts, and preserving the Dura Matter from being
hurt by the Asperities of the Bone, when the Brain is dilated. Over this Sindon
apply another armed with proper Medicines, and then fill the remaining part of
the Aperture with pledgits dipped in some vulnerary Liquour. Next lay a large
Pledgit of dry Lint to cover the Bone, and between the Lips of the Wound, put
in Dosils armed with some good Digestive made of Turpentine, and the Yelks of
Eggs, in the last place cover all with an Emplaster, and keep it on with the
Bandage, called the Great Cap for the Head.

To make this, Take a large Napkin and fold it lengthways unequally, or in such
manner that it want three inches of being folded in the midst. When you have
thus disposed it, take it in the midst, so that the four Fingers of each Hand
be placed under, and both the Thumbs over it, and bring it behind the Patients
Head, and not before, for fear of striking him over the Face with it. Before
you place the Napkin on the Head, bid a Servant keep the Dressings on with his
Hands, for fear of throwing them off, or disordering the Compresses and
Emplasters. Then apply it on the Forehead; so that that part which is three
inches longer than the other, may fall on the Nose, and bid a Servant hold the
two upper ends under the Chin, or let the Patient do it himself if he be able,
and do you take the two lower ends and draw them straight to the side of the
Head, with both Hands (thus several Pleats will be made on the side of the
Head, resembling a Goose Foot) then bring these two ends behind the Head, and
crossing them there, pin them where they end. In winding the Napkin round the
Head, it forms two great Sacks or Baggs which fall on the sides, wherefore take
the two ends which the Servant held in one Hand, and slide your other Hand open
into the Baggs, and draw them down, so that they may make as few folds as
possible, then bring them to the top of the Head, and apply them to the lesser
Angles of the Eye. Be careful where they cross each other on the top of the
Head and behind, to make every thing fit very well, and Pin them. In the last
place, tie or pin the two ends which you gave the Servant to hold under the
Chin. When the Dressing is thus finished, let the Patient be laid down, and
proceed in a proper Method for his Cure.

THE CURE. The Patient must be dressed twice a day after the manner above
described, and the parts round the Wound embrocated with Oil of Roses, with the
addition of a little Spirit of Wine. But observe here, the Head ought to be
shaved before the use of these Applications. One of the principal cares of the
Artist ought to be, to procure a laudable Digestion in the External Wound,
nothing gives the Patient greater Relief than this; because the Dura Matter has
a great Communication with the Teguments, by means of the intervening
Blood Vessels. The Patients Chamber must be kept in a Temperate warmth, with a
good Fire in it, if the weather be Cold. The Wound must never be opened without
a Chasingdish of Coals, and the Curtains drawn close, to prevent the Air from
corrupting it.

Sometimes the Inflammation of the Dura Matter is so violent, that it forces it
self out through the Perforation of the Skull; to remedy this Accident, you
must stop well the Hole, and have Recourse to Bleeding, Clysters, and a cooling
Diet.

In Wounds of the Brain and Dura Matter, there arises sometimes a Fungus or soft
fleshy Excrescences, which are formed out of the Oily Substance, which abounds
in the Brain. When these Tumors happen apply Desiccatives, as Spirit of Wine,
Tincture of Aloes, etc. and shun all greasy Medicines. If these fail, use the
more mild Cathaereticks, as Turpentine dried and powdered, Powder of Iris
Florentina, Burnt Alum; or lastly, if these are not sufficient, Red
precipitate. Observe here for the more easy consuming the Excrescences, the
Wound must be so filled, as to compress them a little.

Next after these the Decoctions of the Vulnerary Plants boiled in White Wind,
with a little Honey of Roses, are to be commended. In short, Desiccative or
Humecting Medicines are proper, according to the different condition of the
Wound. But of whatever kind the Applications are, they ought to be actually
hot, and that to as high a Degree, as the Patient can well endure them.

If the Flesh be firm and sound, the Surgeon must endeavor to keep it so; but
if it be flabby and soft, he must compress it, and apply good Resolvents.

The Pledgits which are laid on to the Bone, ought to be dipped in such
Spirituous Liquors, as promote exfoliation, for which intent Tincture of
Euphorbium is excellent.

Besides Local Applications, Internal Medicines must be given as occasion
requires, and the Body always kept open.

In all his Dressings, a prudent Surgeon must be careful not to use foul
Cloths, or such as have before been made use off in ill conditioned Sores (as
is done in Hospitals, where they boil all the Rags in a Lee, and after use
them again) because there remain in their Pores some Acid Corrosive Spirits,
which excoriate and gangrene the Dura Matter. All Oleous and Acid Medicines are
injurious to the Membranes, the first, because they stop the Pores, and hinder
Transpiration; and the last, because they coagulate the Humors, and create
Obstructions.

There is no certain time can be assigned for the exfoliation of the Bone,
sometimes it is completed sooner, sometimes later. The Callus which fills the
Aperture, is most commonly formed in 40 or 50 Days. It is sooner perfected in
young, than in old Bodies, but is never so firm as the Natural Bone.

Before I leave this Subject, I shall present the Reader with an instance out
of Fabricius Hildanus, of his Process of Cure in a Fracture of the Skull. This
Author tells us, in a certain Case, he began the Cure, by giving the Patient a
Clyster, and after that was come away shaving his Head, and embrocating it with
Oil of Roses and Myrtils. Next he made a Crucial Incision, raised the
Teguments, cleared the Pericranium, laid the Skull bare, and filled the Wound
with fine Tow wetted with the white of an Egg. The next day he removed several
Fragments which were broke off from the first Table, and applied the Trepan.
And the Patient being in vehement Pain, he laid on the Dura Matter a small
Satin Sindon, humected with Honey and Oil of Roses, and filled up the Hole
with the following Digestive.. Turpentine washed in Sage and Betony Waters, i.
Oil of Roses, iss. Yelks of Eggs, ij. Gum Elemi dissolved with these Oils over
a gentle Fire, and strained, i. Add to these Saffron in powder, i. Yelks of two
Eggs, Mix these together into an Unguent.

After having applied this Mundificative to the Wound, he laid on an Emplaster
of Basilicon, embrocating the whole Head and neck with Oil of Roses and
Myrtles. The same day he gave him a Clyster, prescribed him a Regular Diet,
continuing to treat him in this manner for several Days. In the mean time he
discharged the Pus through the Aperture, and by degrees the Fever and other
Symptoms abated.

After the Pain and Inflammation were abated, he mixed some drops of Spirit of
Wine with Honey of Roses, to lay on the Dura Matter, applying to the Wound it
self this Detergent.. Root of Avens, Angelica, Round Birthwort, Iris
Florentina, a^. in powder, i. Extract of Sage and Betony, ij. of Gum Elemi
dissolved in Oil of Roses, ij. Mix these in a Mortar, and make an Unguent with
a sufficient quantity of Honey of Roses, and a little Spirit of Wine, and then
apply it to the Aperture. Next he laid over all the following Emplaster..
Emplaster of Betony, iiij. Gum Elemi dissolved in Oil of Roses, i. Damask
Roses, Myrtilsin powder, a^. i. Mastich, Calamus Aromatticus, Angelica, Avens,
a^. i. with a sufficient quantity of Oil of Roses and a little Wax, make an
Emplaster.

During the whole Process of the Cure, he gave him constantly Clysters once
every other Day, or sometimes every Day, if he did not go to Stool, purging him
upon occasion with the Solutive Syrup of Rhubarb, Agarick, Senna, Manna and
Cassia, till the Patient was entirely cured.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 13. relates that he had seen a Woman who after
receiving a Contus'd Wound on the right Parietal Bone (which was broken and
depressed by the blow) vomited Bile and crude Aliments. He took off about 4
fragments of the Bone, and a small portion of the Brain about the bigness of a
Bean. The next day he removed more Splinters of the Bone with a Portion of the
Brain about the bigness of a Hazel Nut, he continued to take off several more
small Portions of the Brain, notwithstanding which the Patient was perfectly
cured.

In the same Observation he assures us, he had seen a Maid wounded on the Head,
who had several large Fragments of Bones taken out, and the Meninges being
rotten, one side of the Brain lay bare. For the space of three weeks together,
the Surgeon was obliged to remove some Portion of it, which Nature separated,
so that one part of the Brain was entirely taken out; However it lay thus open,
several Carnous Tubercles sprung up on its Substance, of which each was as big
as a Vetch. These Tubercles sensibly increasing, joined one to another, forming
a pretty solid Carnous Tegument, which filled all the Cavity of the Brain, and
covered it, and the Girl in all appearance recovered her Health, but the Cure
of this Wound being neglected, she dyed six Months after. That which occurred
most worthy of Remark in this Case, was, that in the beginning of this Cure,
the Patient did all her ordinary business about the House, as if she had been
perfectly well, without any Pain or Fever.

Some Years ago, there was in the Hotel Dieu at Paris, a certain Woman who
receiving a blow on the Head, the Teguments were all corrupted, and a Moiety of
the Skull was laid bare. Both Tables exfoliated, so that part of the Frontal
Bone, and a Moiety of the two Parietal Bones came away all at a time; and this
Bony Case being removed, the Brain lay bare, and its Motion was very
discernible. By degrees it was covered again by a Carnous Matter, which
consolidated, but this Cover never arrived to such a degree of hardness, as to
resist the impression made by the Motion of the Brain. Upon the least touch
imaginable with the Finger on this Carnous Membrane, the Woman instantly seemed
to see a thousand Candles. She had a Cap of Lead made to cover the part, and
defend it from external injuries, and carried about the exfoliated Bone, as a
Cup to receive Alms in.

The same Author, Cent. 3. Obs. 12. informs us, he had seen a Child of 10 Years
of Age, who had a great Depression on the Occipital Bone upon a Fall: No
dangerous Accidents appearing at first, the Parents neglected the Cure. The
Child who before was very witty, lost his Memory and Judgment, and was rendered
incapable of Study or Learning a Trade, and at Thirty six years of Age, became
perfectly Stupid.

He farther relates, that a Child of three Years of Age falling upon his
Forehead, made a Depression large enough to turn the little Finger in; no other
Application was used, besides a Compress dipped in Spirit of Wine, and renewed
every day, and the Child was perfectly cured without any inconvenience
remaining behind. These Relations compared make it evident, that the Functions
of the Soul are not performed in all parts of the Brain, since the depression
of the Occipital Bone in one produced a Stupidity, and yet in the Frontal, the
same Accident was attended with no consequence prejudicial to the Patient.

If Wounds of the Head are attended with extraordinary Accidents, they
sometimes prove very serviceable to the Patient. F. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 8.
assures us, that a certain Person having the Cranium fractured at the Concourse
of the Sagittal and Coronal Suture, by this Wound was cured of a Vertigo of
long standing. There remained a slight Ulcer on the place of the Fracture,
which perhaps effected this cure by the discharge of Matter.

Sckenkius tells us, a certain Epileptick Person happening to have a Fracture
on the Skull, was by this means cured of a Distemper, with which he had been
for many years afflicted.

Riverius Cent. 1. Obs. 37. relates the History of a young Girl of 7 years of
Age, who for the space of two Months, had been tormented with so violent a Pain
in her Head, extending to the Eyebrows, that she begged to have her Head cut
open with a Knife. This vehement Pain flung her into two or three violent Fits
of an Epilepsy to that degree, she foamed at the Mouth. At length she died, and
a great quantity of Pus burst out of her Nostrils, which caused the Physicians
to believe, there was an Abscess in the Brain. To discover which they opened
the Head, but nothing appeared there, besides a serous Moisture. But if these
Gentlemen had opened the Frontal Sinus, it is very probable they would have
found an Abscess in those Cavities; for most of those Abscesses which find an
Exit by the Nose, do not proceed from the Brain, (since there is no passage for
thence,) but are discharged from the Cavities of the Eyebrows or Cheeks.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Fistula Lachrymalis.
THIS Operation is an Incision made near the greater Angle of the Eye, to
discharge the Pus in a Fistula of that part.

THE CAUSE. The Tumor proceeds from a sharp Saline Humor, which flowing
through the Lachrymal Ducts, corrodes and tumefies the small Caruncle seated in
the greater Angle of the Eye, from whence it comes to pass, that the Tears
finding no passage into the Cavity of the Nose, through the perforations made
in the Lachrymal Bone, they must of necessity run down the Cheek, while on the
other hand, the Acid and Corrosive parts of the Lachrymal Humor, excoriate the
Caruncle, and form an Ulcer, which soon degenerates into a Fistula. The
Corrosive Serum is not confined to the Gland, but very often extends its malign
effects farther, and Cariates the Bone, which happening, makes the Operation
absolutely necessary. However, we must not imagine that the Lachrymal Humor is
ever the Original of this Malady; for sometimes there happens to be an Abscess
or Inflammation in the Lachrymal Gland it self, without the Lympha's, being in
any manner concerned in it. When this happens, there is Pus always lodged in
it, which is ever discharged through the Nostrils, when the Patient squeezes
the place, as most commonly they do once a day, to avoid the Pain and Trouble
of the Operation. If the Patient be careful to discharge the Pus in this
manner, the Tumor often does not increase, and it may remain his whole
Lifetime, without any notable inconvenience.

THE SIGNS of a Fistula Lachrymalis, are an involuntary flowing of the Tears
down the Cheek, which notwithstanding is no certain proof, since a simple
Obstruction or Inflammation of the greater Angle of the Eye, may suffice to
produce this effect. The infallible Mark of a Fistula, is a Pus flowing out of
the corner of the Eye, or by the Nose. If the Bone be not corrupted, the Cure
may be more easily accomplished.

In Searching to find whether the Fistula terminate in the Bone or not, observe
if there be a hard Substance which resists the Probe, without any Pain at all;
for in this Case it is evident the Bone is bare, since if the Periosteum
covered it, the Sense would be exquisite, and the Probe cause great pain. If
the Bone be smooth and even, and the Pus which comes away be neither thick nor
Oily, it is a Mark that it is sound; on the contrary, if the Bone be rough and
uneven, it is Carious.

The OPERATION.
Place the Patient in a Chair, and let his Head be kept steady by a Servant,
then bind up the Sound Eye to prevent his seeing the Instrument, and make a
Semicircular Incision with a Knife on the Tumor. In doing this, be cautious of
cutting the Eyelids, for this would cause a deformity never after to be
removed. Try with the Probe, whither the Bone be carious in order to dilate the
Wound; for if the Caries extend beyond the Incision, you must open farther with
the Lancet, or a Spunge-Tent to lay the Caries bare.

If after Incision you find the Bone Carious, the Actual Cautery must be
applied. When Inustion is necessary, place a Probe on the Bone, and on this a
Cannula or Pipe, which in its upper part is made after the form of a Tunnel,
take out the Probe, and introduce an actual Cautery into the Cannula, and pass
it lightly over the Cariosity. The use of the Cannula is to direct the Cautery,
and prevent it from burning the adjacent parts.

It is common to pierce the Lachrymal Bone through with the Cautery, but this
seems to be needless; because this Bone being corrupted by the Pus lodged in
the Fistula, and by the Air and Medicines applied to it necessarily exfoliates,
and being very thin comes away entire, and so leaves a hole on the side of the
Nose.

THE DRESSING. After the Operation is over, fill the Wound with small Dossils
of dry Lint, and lay on a dry Pledgit, a small Emplaster and Compress, and keep
on all with the Bandage.

The most plain and simple Bandage, is made with a Handkerchief folded
Diagonalwise, or form of Triangle. Take this in both Hands in the middle with
your Thumbs on, and your fingers under it, pass it behind the Head, and apply
its middle on the Eye, slide your Hands on the Handkerchief behind the Head,
and engage it there with the two other ends, which you must bring before,
pinning them where they end. This Bandage is proper for all parts of the Head.

Another sort of Bandage for the Head, may be made after this manner. Take a
Roller two Else in length, and an inch and a half broad, apply the end of the
Roller obliquely on the Parietal Bone, pass this over the part affected,
descending on the opposite Cheek, and so passing behind the Head, and then
again over the Eye affected, making three rounds in the same manner as the
first; then bring it several times round the Forehead, and lastly fasten it.

If there be occasion to bind up both Eyes, you must proceed in this manner;
take a double-headed Roller an inch and a half broad, and four Else in length,
apply the Roller behind the Head, then bring each end of it over each Eye,
crossing it on the Nose, next descending over the Cheeks, pass behind the Head,
returning on the same Rounds of the Roller made the first going about the Head;
then bring the two ends of the Roller about the Forehead, and continue your
Rounds about the Head, till the Roller is spent, and then fasten it. These last
Turns of the Roller about the Head, stay the first made on the Eyes.

THE CURE. Let the Patient lie on his Back, that by this means the Tears may
pass off by the Orifice that you have made. The Curiosity of the Bone, and the
Callus of the Fistula, must be both entirely destroyed, before the Wound is
capable of being cured; and therefore the Superfluous Flesh must be consumed
with some effectual Caustic.

The Cure of a Fistula, principally consists in consuming the Callus, and after
that is removed healing the Ulcer; for this purpose if necessity require, you
must enlarge the Orifice of the Fistula by Tents made of Elder Pith, Roots of
Birthwort, or Sponge prepared with Wax. Dried Gentian Root alone is good, or
the same smeared with some emollient Unguent. This Root has two good effects,
when it is armed with some emollient Unguent, viz. It softens the Callosity,
and widens the Mouth of the Fistula, and when it is drawn out, is commonly
Swollen to twice the size it was when put in. To make this more effectual, you
may sometimes strew on it Burnt Alum, by which means you may dilate and consume
the Callosities at once.

When the Callosities are removed, and the Exfoliation and Suppuration
completed, cleanse the Ulcer with Detergent Injections made of Spirit of Wine,
Juice of Tobacco, the Exuviae of Serpents powdered, or Hydromel. The following
Medicine is good,. Honey of Roses. iij. Spirit of Wine, ss. Sweet praecipitate,
ss. Mix these and inject them. The Dose of Praecipitate must be increased or
lessened, as Circumstances shall require. Plantain Water with Mercurius Dulcis
mixed, is very good to make warm Injections with. Juice of Crabs pounded with
Leaves of Tobacco, and after pressed out and mixed with Mercurius Dulcis, is an
excellent Mundificative; and Mercury mixed with Vulneraries, is one of the best
Detergents, in the World. The following Medicine successively Deterges
Consolidates, and Cicatrizes all sorts of Fistula's, without having recourse to
actual Fire.. Clarified Honey, ij. Boil it to a Viscid Consistence, and when it
begins to cool, add to it Aloes, Frankincense well Powdered, a^. i. Assa
foetida pulverised, iss. beat these together very well for a consider able time
in a Mortar, to the consistence of an Unguent.

Before I leave this Subject, I shall present the Reader with Hildanus's
process in curing a Fistula Lachrymalis, in the left Eye of a Child of 13 years
of Age, which he had had for four years. This was reputed incurable; for not
only the Bone was Carious, but the Lachrymal Gland was so corroded, that the
Tears ran plentifully through the Fistula, when the Child cried, who was very
Refractary, and would not suffer the Actual Cautery to be applied. In the first
place he prescribed a good Regimen, purging the Patient with Medicines adapted
to his Constitution. Next he applied a Seton to his Neck; after the Seton had
discharged it self for some time, he applied a Potential Cautery on the Seton,
to enlarge the Orifice, which was very straight. After the Escar was separated,
he dilated the Fistula, and laid it open quite to the Bone with an Escarotick
Unguent, and Sponge Tent, and filled the Fistula with powder of Euphorbium,
applying over it an Emplaster made with Gum Elemi, without any other Mixture.
In this manner he continued to treat the Patient for seven Weeks; after which
the Bone exfoliated; and when this was effected, he put some few drops of good
Balsam with Lint into the Wound, which soon after healed and the Fistula was
entirely cured. Sometime after he took off the Seton and cicatrized the Wound.
Fabr. Hildanus, sets a great value on powder of Euphorbium, in the Cure of
Fistula's.

There is another Method of curing these Fistula's, delivered by Hildanus,
Cent. 6. Obs. 3. He begins the Cure by an exact Diet, then purges off the most
predominant Humors; Next he fortifies the Head with Medicines, both Internal
and External. The Internal are Decoctions of Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, Sassafras,
China, Betony, Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram and Primroses. Conserves of Betony,
Rosemary, Sage, Primrose, Piony, Confection of Alkermes, Citron Peel, and other
of the Like Nature.

The External are Powders of Benzoin, Styrax Calamita, Mastich, Olibanum, White
Amber, Grains of Kermes, Roots of Iris Florentina, Flowers of Betony, Rosemary,
Marjoram, Red Roses, which are to be strewed on the Head, or applied with
quilted Caps.

Next he makes revulsion of the Matter, which discharges it self on the Eye;
for which purpose he commends Cupping-Glasses applied to the Shoulders, and
Vesicatories behind the Ears. Setons are of more use still, because they
potently attract the Matter, which otherwise would make its way to the Fistula,
and purge and strengthen the Head. He assures us, Setons are of so great
importance in the Cure of Lachrymal Fistula's, that many times it could not be
effected without their Assistance. Before the Seton be made, the Body ought to
be very well purged, and the Seton ought to run for some time, before you
proceed to the Cure of the Fistula.

After these Preparatives, the Wound must be dilated with a piece of Gentian
Root, prepared Sponge, or some good Caustic. The Patients Eye must be kept
very close, and very well guarded when Causticks are applied, to prevent their
running into it, when they begin to melt; some Authors open Fistula's with one
or two drops of Oil of Vitriol, or Aqua Fortis, and consume their Callosity
with these Causticks, but this Practice is to be condemned, because the sound
Bone is corroded, and damaged by these Acid Liquors.

After the Fistula is laid open, Dossils with Praecipitate prepared, ought to
be put into the Wound, and over them an Emplaster with Gum Elemi. This Powder
must be put into the Wound once or twice a day, according as the Ulcer is more
or less moist, and it is best to dress it but once a day. It is not convenient
at first to search the Wound with a Probe, to discover if the Bone be carious
or not, it suffices to put the preceding Powder into it, for this will easily
wast the redundant Flesh, and if the Bone be sound, it will cleanse and
Cicatrize the Ulcer without effecting that.

If the Bone be Carious, it must be laid bare as far as is possible, and filled
with Euphorbium, in fine Powder; This is the best Remedy in the World against a
Cariosity, and there is no reason to apprehend its excessive Acrimony, But
observe here, Powder of Euphorbium is never to be mixed with common Oil,
according to the abusive practice of Apothecaries; for this obtunds its Virtue
and Strength, besides common Oil is injurious to the Bones, as well as the Acid
Spirits of Vitriol, Sulphur and Aqua Fortis. Some Practitioners in Cariosities
of the Bone in Lachrymal Fistula's, make use of the Actual Cautery, but Powder
of Euphorbium is preferable.

When the Ulcer is sufficiently deterged with Powder of Praecipitate well
prepared, and the Flesh almost grown up, some good Balsam may be applied to
make a fair and smooth Cicatrix: And in the time of Dressing, some Drops of the
following Collyrium must be put, three or four times a day, into the Eye..
Plantane and Rose Water, a^ iss, Water of Eyebright and Valerian, a^. i. Seeds
of Quinces reduced to Powder, i. Mix these, and leave them to infuse 7 or 8
Hours, then strain them, and add to the Liquour Tutty prepared, Lead calcined,
Burnt Hartshorn prepared, a^. i. Camphire, i. Mix these very well in a Mortar,
and make a Collyrium, which is to be applied very Hot. Observing this Method,
the Patient (our Author assures us) by the Blessing of God may be cured.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 14. tells us, that a young Man happening to have
a Vein in the inner Angle of the Eye opened, a great Flux of Blood ensued,
which proved fatal to him.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Cataracts.
THIS Operation is a Punction made in the Globe of the Eye, with a Needle to
depress a certain Opake Membranous Concretion which covers the Pupil, and
hinders the Transmission of the Rays of Light.

THE CAUSE. Authors who pretend to assign the Causes of Cataracts, differ very
much in their Opinions; some conceive, they are no more than an Obstruction of
the pupil, made by the Viscosity of the Aqueous Humor, which is enclosed
between the Cornea and Wea; others believe it is a small Webb, spread before
the Chrystalline Humor. Others again imagine it is a small Film, which
separating it self from the Chrystalline floats in the Aqueous Humor and are
persuaded that all the Parts are existent in the first conformation, that
Cystis's are never formed de novo, but are only Membranes disengaged from the
Neighboring parts, which increasing in thickness, receive nourishment from the
parts, to which they adhere. This Opinion they pretend to confirm, by observing
that Cataracts are a Texture of several pellicles or thin Films, applied over
one another, which may be easily discovered when the Cataract is Ripe. They
farther pretend to evince, that a Cataract is only a Membrane disengaged from
the Body of the Chrystalline, because if it be depressed after it is perfectly
formed, the Chrystalline Humor is depressed together with it. And they
endeavor to persuade us, that by this means the Rays of Light wanting that due
Modification in the Chrystalline Humor, which is required for distinct Vision,
all Objects appear confused after the Cataract is couched, and the Patient is
obliged to wear Spectacles.

THE SIGNS. If the Cataract be black, yellow or leaden, it is for the most part
incurable. Its thickness and adhaesion, is the reason why in making the
Operation, there happens a Laceration of the Pupil, and this being disabled
from constringing and relaxing it self, all the Rays of Light which enter the
Eye, strike on the Retina in a disorderly manner, and make a confused Vision.

Blue and Greenish Cataracts, or such as are of the Color of Pearl or
burnished Iron, are Curable by Couching them with the Needle.

When there is no perceptible Motion in the Pupil, it is a sign the Cataract is
fixed to the Wea This is inseparable from old Cataracts, and such are not to
be meddled with.

The way to find whether the Cataract be firm enough to admit of Operation, is
this. Put a Convex-Glass, or a Viol of Water before the Patients Eye, and
behind this set a lighted Candle. If the Patient can discern any Colors
through these, it is a sign the Cataract is not Ripe, but if he can not, it is
time to depress it.

Cataracts happening after Fevers and violent Headachs, are difficult to Cure.
Cataracts are more easily cured in Children, than in grown Persons.

Cataracts in their beginning, when Objects seems to appear as through a Cloud,
are called Suffusions. Some Cataracts have the consistence of Parchment, and
these have an Elastick quality, and when they, are deprest spring up again,
cover the Pupil of the Eye, and frustrate the Operation.

The OPERATION.
When you are well assured the Cataract is in a condition to admit of it,
proceed to the Operation. The Spring and Autumn being the most temperate, are
for that Reason the most proper Season for this purpose. When you undertake
this, choose some fine Day, bind up the Patients sound Eye, and then place him
in a Chair with his Face turned toward the Light; your self sitting on a Seat
directly before, and something higher than him, and a Servant being placed
behind to keep his Head on his Breast. When all things are disposed in this
manner, bid the Patient turn the Eye affected toward his Nose, that so the
Tunica Conjunctiva may be more apparent. Then take a hafted Needle, some of
which are Flat, some Round, some Three-corner'd, and with this pierce the
Conjunctive Tunick close to the Cornea, on the same side with the lesser Angle
of the Eye. But observe here, carefully to avoid hurting the Vessels of the
Conjunctiva. When the Needle is in, you must boldly thrust it to the mindle of
the Cataract, and keep it deprest below the Pupil. If the Cataract does not
spring up again, the Operation is well performed; but if it does rise, you must
keep it down with the Needle, till it is entirely Subjected.

The Needle must be of well polished Steel, and before you thrust it into the
Eye, you ought to pass it through a piece of Woollen Cloth, or the Brim of a
Hat. This smoothens it, and takes off any roughness or inequality, which might
put the Patient to pain.

When the Needle is drawn out, you must close the Eyelids, and not present
Objects as some do, to try if the Patient can discern them; because the
Cataract as yet not being secured in the place where it is lodged upon the
Motion of the Eye, is apt to rise. Because the too sudden striking of the Light
on the Filaments of the Retina after a long Disuse, must inevitably prove
hurtful to it, and cause Dangerous Consequences.

THE DRESSING. This consists only in applying a Pledgit dipped in a Collyrium
made of Plantane and Rose Water, with the white of an Egg, and over this a
Compress kept on with a Handkerchief folded cross-ways, or any of the Bandages
used in the Fistula Lachrymalis, which have been amply described in their
proper places. Observe that the sound Eye ought to be bound up to restrain it
from Motion.

THE CURE. The Patient must keep his Bed for three or four Days, after which he
may be permitted to rise and repose himself in a Dark Chamber.

REMARKS.
In the Miscellanea Curiosa, There is a Relation of a Studious Gentleman, who
being about to divert himself by playing on some Musical Instrument, one of the
strings breaking, the end struck him over the Eye, which caused a vehement
Pain. Cooling Ophthalmick Remedies were applied to abate the Inflammation. The
Gentleman happening to wake in the Night, found he could see every thing in his
Chamber, even to the most Minute Figures in his Pictures and Hangings. The
Patient being surprised at this wonderful Accident, shut that Eye which had
received the Blow, and found immediately he was in Darkness. He next shut the
sound Eye, and opened the other, upon which he found the Chamber, and all the
objects illuminated. Then he called for a Light, but could not bear the strong
impression which Objects made on his Eye. This Symptom lasted for several Days,
ceasing gradually.

In the same Collections, Obs. 93. We read of a certain Man, who having the Pox
and Venereal Ulcers upon him, and being under Cure for the same, as the
Symptoms abated; his Sight was depraved in such a manner, that all Objects
appeared double, but the Cure of the Distemper being completed, he regained
his perfect Sight.

REMARKS.
Riverius Cent. 3. Obs. 45. tells us, that a very thick Cataract ensuing on an
Ophthalmy of a long standing, in a Girl of 8 years of Age, the spot spread it
self over a Moiety of the Iris, which at last he cured by a Solution of Sal
Armoniack in Rose Water, letting it stand in a Copper Vessel, till the Liquor
had obtained a lovely Blue Color. The proportion of Sal Armoniack ought to be
such, as may make the Liquour moderately sharp, and this must be applied with
Compresses.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Delivering Women.
THIS Operation is an Extraction of the Child, together with the Membranes
which contain it, and Placenta, out of the Mothers Womb.

THE CAUSE of a Bigg belly, is the Child contained in the Womb.

THE SIGNS which demonstrate Conception, are the mutual Conjunction of the Seed
of both Sexes, a more than ordinary pleasure in the Act of Coition; because at
that time the Neck of the Womb compresses the Yard more straightly, an
agreeable Titillation, and leaping in every part of the Woman's Body. However
these must not be reputed certain Signs, that a Woman has conceived, since we
see every day, that some are impregnated without emission of Seed, or receiving
the least Pleasure.

If after Reception of the Male Seed the Womb is close, nothing comes away, and
the Man's Yard is not so wet as commonly; this is a sign that there is a
Conception, and that the Masculine Seed is retained in the Womb.

A Woman after Conception, feels some small pain round about the Navel, and
some working in the lower Belly, which arises from a strong Contraction of the
Womb, when it closes it self, which creating a Motion in the Bladder, draws
down the Vrachus, which terminates in the Navel, and this creates a little pain
in that part. This Commotion of the lower Belly proceeds, from the Irritation
of the Rectum by the Motion of the Womb which lies on, and is appended to it.

It is observable, that the Internal Orifice of the Womb in Women who have had
Children, is not so exactly closed in the time of Conception, as in Women who
never had a Child.

The Nausea, the loss of Appetite without any visible Distemper, a longing
after odd and uncommon things, Sickness and Vomiting continuing for a long time
together, Listlessness, Doziness, Frowardness, and ill Humor without a Reason,
Pains in the Teeth, to which she was not subject before; extraordinary
Spitting, Retention of the Courses, or Evacuation of them at an unusual time,
Rising of the Breasts, a Hardness and Pain in them, the Nipple growing hard,
and increasing in bigness a little (because of the Repletion) the increasing of
the little Circle, its brown Color, the Protuberance of the Navil, the
softness and laxity of the Eyelids, which are difficulty kept open, their
heavy aspect with a Yellow Livid Circle round them, the Eyes sunk, their Whites
Turbid, a Languishing look, the Blood let out bad, Emaciation, a Big belly
which gradually increases, all these after Coition are signs of Conception, all
which sometimes appear at once, and sometimes only part of them.

The Reader ought here to observe, that several of these Signs happen to Maids
in a Retention of their Courses; as for instance Nausea, Vomiting, though not
so frequently, Risings, Hardness and Pain in the Breast and Belly, Appetite to
odd and uncommon Things, livid Eyes, their Womb may be closed. On the contrary,
Women may sometimes have their Courses the whole time of their going with
Child, but not in so great plenty as at other times.

Of the Signs which precede, and accompany a Natural Delivery.
Sometimes the Life of the Mother, as well as that of her Child, is endangered
by hastening her Delivery, before the Term of her going with Child is completed.

Colic Pains arising from Wind imprisoned, and moving to and fro in the lower
Belly, which rufling up and down, are not directed to the lower part of the
Womb, (as all Throes in a true Labor,) are no Signs that a Woman ought to be
Delivered. These Colic Pains are dispersed by warm Cloths applied to the
Belly, or Carminative Glysters, whereas these augment the Pains in Real Labor.
These counterfeit Pains, may sometimes proceed from a Diarrhaea, or the
Paroxysm of a Fever.

The true Signs which precede a Natural Labor, and happen within a few Days
before, are unusual Pains in the Reins, the Rising of the Belly which was above
falls down, which makes the Woman walk with more difficulty than before, and
Stimulates her to Urine, because the Foetus bears down on the Bladder; Lastly,
a Flux of Glairy Humor from the Womb which humects the Parts, and dilates the
passage of the Infant.

The Signs which accompany Labor, are great Pains in the Back and Reins, which
redoubling by Intervals, terminate at the bottom of the Belly with repeated
Throes. The Woman has a fuller, quicker, and higher Pulse than ordinary; Her
Face is Red, and inflamed by the vehement efforts she makes to help the Birth.
The Natural parts are tumefied, because the Infant struggles to get out; and if
Vomiting Supervene, it is a sign that the Child will soon be born. This
Vomiting arises from a certain Sympathy, between the Womb and Stomach, because
of the Communication of Nerves between those parts.

When the Delivery is near, there happens a Universal Trembling, especially in
the Thighs and Hamms, a general Heat, and the Humors which then come away, are
often tincted with Blood. The Internal Orifice of the Womb is open, which may
be felt with the Finger, and the Membranes containing the Foetus present
themselves; These appear harder and tenser, according as the Pain is more or
less Vehement. The Pains continuing the Membranes break, and the Waters come
away, and the Naked Head of the Child presents it self to the Orifice.

When all or most of these Signs appear, it is certain that the Woman is near
her Delivery, whether she have completed her Term or not.

The OPERATION.
When you perceive by the abovementioned Signs, that a Woman is really in
Labor, take care that neither her Clothes, or any thing else be about her
Belly, which may streighten it; and give her some pretty strong Clysters before
the Child be in the passage, to evacuate the Rectum, and provoke the Woman to
go to Stool. After this make a Bed for her, if it be Winter near the Fire. The
Bed ought to be so placed, that you may commodiously go round it.

If the Woman be full of Blood, take away some of it when the Pulse rises. This
practice is useful to free the Breast, to assist Respiration, and prevent a
great loss of Blood or Fever after her Delivery. Then let her take some good
Broth, or a new laid Egg, and let her walk in her Chamber, and from time to
time take a Spoonful or two of Wine not too strong, because all Heady Wines,
and strong Liquours, are apt to kindle a Fever. When her Pains take her, advise
her to help her Throes.

The Artist ought from time to time, to feel the internal Orifice of the Womb,
to discover whether the Waters are not ready to break, which so soon as he
perceives, he must anoint the Parts with some Emollient Oil or Grease, and keep
near the Patient to observe all her Motions, Complaints, and Pains, to make a
Judgment whether her Delivery be near, without being obliged so often to try
the Parts. Let the Patient ever and anon rest on her Bed to recruit her
strength, but she must not be suffered to lie on it too long, especially if it
be a low Pallet-Bed, because by Walking, the Weight of the Infant dilates the
Internal Orifice of the Womb, and the Pains are more vehement and frequent; on
the other Hand, she must not be too much Fatigued in her first Pains, for fear
her strength be exhausted too soon.

When the Waters present, let them break of themselves if the Labor be
Natural, because if you should break them before her Delivery, the passage
would be dry, and more difficult for the Infant to slip through. After the
Waters are broken, introduce the Finger into the internal Orifice of the Womb,
to try if the Head of the Child present it self, which may be known if it be
Hard, Thick, Round, Heavy, and equal, for all other parts would be rough and
unequal, Hard or Soft, according as they differ.

For the delivering the Woman, place her on a Bed covered with a Quilt, and not
a Feather-Bed, with Linen several times doubled, to receive the Blood and
Waters (which come in great abundance from her) and prevent their incommoding
her. The most convenient Posture to place her in, is on her Back, with her Head
and Breast a little raised, so that she be neither lying nor sitting; for in
this manner she will be able to breath more easily, and have more strength to
help her Pains, than if she were otherwise, or sunk in her Bed. Being thus
placed, she must spread her Thighs abroad, folding her Legs a little toward
her Buttocks, which must be raised by a small Pillow underneath, to the end
that the Coccyx or Rump-bone may give back; lastly, she must have her feet
stayed against some firm Thing, and hold some of the Assistants by the Hand,
that she may better stay her self during her Pains. The Woman must be
encouraged to hold her Breath, and bear down her Pains as well and as strongly
as she can. Here I must condemn the Practice of some Midwifes, who press the
Superior parts of the Belly, to thrust the Child gently down: This bruises the
Womb, and hinders the Delivery. The Artist ought to content himself (having,
first Anointed his Hand with some Oils or Greases) to dilate the inner Orifice
of the Womb, putting his Fingers up into its entry, and spreading them in the
time of her Pains, thrusting by little and little the sides of the Orifice,
toward the hinder part of the Child's Head.

When the Head begins to advance, the Artist must seat himself conveniently to
receive the Child, and with his Fingers ends endeavor to put back the inner
Orifice of the Womb over its Head, and as soon as it is advanced as far as the
Ears, or thereabouts, take hold of the two sides with his Hands, slipping his
Fingers under the Jaws, and upon the first great Pain which comes, draw it
forth. Here let him take great care that the Navel-string be not entangled
about the Neck, or any other Part, least thereby the After burden be pulled
with Violence, and with it the Womb to which it is fastened, and so it cause a
Flooding, or break the string. It must also be observed, that the Head be not
drawn forth strait, but moving it too and fro, that the Shoulders may more
easily make their way, and this must be done without losing time, least the
Head being past, the Child be stopped by the bigness and largeness of the
Shoulders, and so be Suffocated in the passage. As soon as the Head is born, he
may slide his Fingers under the Armpits, and draw out the rest of the Body.

When the Child is drawn forth, place it on its side with its Face toward you,
least the Blood and Waters which follow immediately after, should incommode it,
or it may choke it by running into its Mouth or Nose, as they would do if it
were laid on its Back.

If the Woman's Pains continue after the Birth, and her Belly be big, and
putting your Hand into her Body, you find another gathering of the Waters, it
is a sign there is a Child still remaining in the Womb. If this be so, you must
not endeavor to fetch away the Afterbirth, till the Woman be delivered of all
her Children (because Twins never have but one Burden, to which there are
fastened as many distinct Strings and Membranes, as there are Children) and if
it should be drawn forth after the Birth of the first, the rest would run a
Risk of losing their Lives, and besides it would endanger a Flooding.

For this reason let the first string be cut (being first tied with a Thread
three or four times double) and fasten the other end with a Thread to the Woman's
Thigh, to prevent the inconvenience it may cause, by hanging between her Legs;
and when this is done, break the Membranes of the Child which remains in the
Womb to let out the Waters, and draw it out of the Mothers Body, observing the
same Circumstances as in the first, after which fetch away the Afterbirth in
the following manner.

How to fetch away the After-burthen.
When the Child is born the Artist taking the String, must wind it once or
twice about one or two Fingers of his left Hand (for instance, the Fore and
Middle Finger joined together) the better to hold it, or he may take it in his
left Hand, wrapping it in dry Linen, to prevent it from slipping between his
Fingers; having done this, let him draw it moderately, and with the right Hand
take another hold of it above the left near the Privities, drawing likewise
with that very gently, resting the while the forefinger of the same Hand
extended, and stretched forth along the String toward the entry of the Vagina,
always observing to draw it from that side where the Burden cleaves least. In
performing this, he must avoid the Membranes of the Infant, which sometimes
hang out after the Birth, and investing the String hinder him from keeping it
Firm. But above all things, let him be careful to draw the Burden gently, for
fear of breaking the String, or drawing down the Womb with it, or causing a
Flooding, which would be of dangerous consequence. In the mean time the Woman
may blow strongly into her Hands shut, or stop her Nostrils, or she may put her
Finger into her Throat, as if she would excite Vomiting, or else strive as if
she were going to stool, bearing down and holding her Breath, all which Motions
have the same effect, and serve to loosen the Burden, and facilitate its
expulsion. If this do not suffice, after you know on which side the Afterbirth
is situated, bid an experienced Nurse-keeper press the Belly lightly with the
flat of her Hand, bringing it gently downwards by way of Friction: When the
Burden is come away, it must be considered whether it be entire, and if the
least part remain behind, so much as the Skirts or any Clods of Blood, the Hand
must be put up into the Womb to bring them out.

When the String is broke and the Placenta is retained, you must speedily
introduce your Hand into the Woman's Body, and before the Womb can close (having
first anointed it with some Grease or Oil, and pared your Nails close) bring it
away. This is easy to be done, if it does not cleave to the Womb; but if it
does adhere, you may easily distinguish it from the Womb it self, by the
several inequalities in its Surface, and then by trying with your fingers on
which side it cleaves least, begin to disingage it there, thrusting the end of
your Fingers between it and the Womb, continuing so to do till it be entirely
freed, and then gently draw it out. You ought to be careful in separating the
Burden, to avoid scratching the Womb, for fear of a Flooding, Inflammation or
Gangrene, and it is better to leave some part of it behind, than endanger such
Accidents.

If the Womb be not open enough to receive the Hand, anoint the Woman's
Privities, and introduce two or three Fingers, with which apprehend that
Portion of the Burden, which almost always presents it self at the internal
Orifice, and draw it gently, and a little obliquely on one side and the other,
and so proceed forwards, keeping what you first seized in its Membranes.

If all these Methods fail, and you cannot fetch it then away, you must have
recourse to Injections made with Decoctions of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Pellitory, Linseed, with the addition of Oil of sweet Almonds, Lilies, or a bit
of fresh Butter, these injected into the Womb are proper to suppurate, and so
bring it away. Strong Clysters are very Serviceable, because the Patients
striving to go to Stool, very much assists the expulsion of the Burden.

Bleeding in the Foot or Arm is necessary as occasion requires to prevent a
Fever; but if the Woman be free from it, good Restoratives may be given her, as
Broths made of Veal or Poultry, with a little Juice of Orange, or Wine and
Water.

Of Difficult and Unnatural Labors.
You may be assured the Child is living if the Woman has received no Hurt, if
she has labored under no very great inconvenience during the time of her going
with Child, if she has enjoyed a good Health, and finds the Infant stir within
her.

If you doubt whether the Child be alive after the Waters are broke, pass your
Hand gently up into the Womb, and take hold of the String as near the Navil as
may be, to feel the Pulse of the Umbilical Arteries, or put the Tip of your
Finger into its Mouth, to feel the Motion of the Tongue.

You may conclude the Child to be Dead, if he has not stirred for a
considerable time; if there be a Flux of Faetid Matter from the Womb; if the
Woman feels great pain and weight in her Belly; if the Womb be not staid, but
falls like a Ball from one side to another, on which ever side she happen to
lie, if she have frequent Syncopes and Convulsions; if the Navel-string or
Burden, have for some time been out of the Mothers Body; if putting the Hand
into the Womb the Child be cold, the Navel have no Pulsation, and the Tongue
remain unmoved; if the Head feel soft, and the Bones move too and fro, riding
over one another in the Sutures; if the Woman has received any Hurt, or lost a
great quantity of Blood, or she be not arrived at her due Term; if the Waters
have been broke for a considerable time; if her Face be of a Leaden Color, her
Eyes sunk, her looks faint and dejected, her Breath ill scented, her Breasts
decayed, her Belly fallen, without any Waters coming away from the Womb. If
diverse of these Signs happen together, there is good reason to believe the the
Child is Dead.

When the Child presents with the Feet First.
When this happens, the Artist must introduce his Fingers into the Womb to
dilate it by spreading them. When the passage is wide enough, introduce your
Hand into the the Womb, and if only one Foot present, consider well whether it
be the Right or the Left, and so you may better judge on which side the other
Foot lies, which you must search for, and so draw forth both together; but
before you proceed thus far, you must be well assured that this is not the Foot
of another Child, for you would sooner kill both Mother and Children, than
deliver her after this manner; you may easily prevent Mistakes of this kind, by
sliding your Finger along the Leg and Thigh to the Twist, till you find the two
Thighs joined to one Body, and this way has this convenience, that at one and
the same time, you find the other Foot in order to bring it away with the
former. When one Foot is found, tie it with a Ribbon, that so you may not lose
that again, in searching for the other. When both Feet are found, taking them
with both Hands above the Ancles, and holding them close together, draw them
till the Thighs and Hamms of the Child are come forth; as soon as the Knees are
come out, take hold of the Thighs above them, wrapping them in a Napkin to
prevent the Hand from sliding, and then proceed to draw the Child to the upper
part of the Breast. Then bring down the two Arms of the Child on the sides of
the Body, taking hold of his Hands near the Wrist, rather than in any other
place. This is the best way to disengage them in the passage, and here care
must be taken to prevent breaking them, by forcing them too much. You must be
careful the Child's Belly and Face be downwards, to prevent the Chin from
stopping on the Sharebone; wherefore if it be not in this Posture, you must
reduce it, which may easily be done. To effect this, slide the flat of one Hand
to the Pubes of the Child, and with the other hold the two Feet, turning the
Body till the Breast and Face be downwards; having in this Posture brought the
Child to the Shoulders, you must proceed to draw it out in the mean time,
advising the Woman to bear down, that the Head may succeed in the place of the
Shoulders, and not stop in the passage.

When the Head stops in the passage.
In this Case, put the Child's Thighs into the Hands of some one of the
Assistants to draw gently, whilst you by degrees disengage the Head from the
Bones of the Passage. To do this, slip one or two Fingers of your Left Hand
into the Child's Mouth, to disengage the Chin, and with your Right Hand embrace
the hinder part of its Neck above the Shoulders, and so draw it out above. This
must be done as promptly as is possible, for fear the Child be Suffocated.

If the stopping of the Child's Head in the Passage, arise from its ill
Position, turn the Face downward, sliding the flat of the Hand over its Face to
cover its inequalities, for the more easy turning and putting it into a more
commodious Situation; but the Head and Body must be turned together, for fear
in turning one without the other, the Child's neck be twisted round. After these
Circumstances observed, the Afterbirth must be fetched away as before.

How to fetch away the Child's Heal when it is separated from the Body, and
remains behind in the Womb.
If the Head be small and soft as in Abortions, it may be easily drawn out, but
if it be big, the Artist must put his right Hand up into the Womb, and search
for the Mouth, and putting one of his Fingers into it, and his Thumb under the
Chin, take hold of the lower Jaw and draw it out.

But if the lower Jaw come off from the Head, he must draw his right Hand out
of the Womb, and slip in his left, and with this stay the Head; and in his
right, he must take a straight strong Hook or Crotchet with one Branch, and
slide it all along the inside of his Hand, keeping the point toward it, for
fear of hurting the Womb. Having i^ troduced it in this manner, he must turn it
to the Head, and strike it into one of the Eyes, or Holes of the Ears or
Occiput, or between the Sutures, and so bring away the Head, making way for it
with his left Hand, when he has brought it near the Passage, he must withdraw
his other Hand, which would be apt to hinder its coming away, however he must
leave two or three of his Fingers on the side of the Head, to prevent the Wombs
being Wounded by the Instrument, if it happen to lose its hold.

If the Artist decline using the Crotcher, he may take a Fillet of soft Linen,
three quarters of an Ell long, and three Inches in Breadth folded double, let
him hold the two ends with his Left Hand, and the middle with his Right, being
first anointed with fresh Butter, let him introduce the end of this Fillet into
the Womb, and pass the middle over the Child's Head, then drawing the two ends
of the Fillet together, let him bring the Head out.

If these means fail, the Artist must thrust his left Hand into the Womb, and
then slide in a crooked Knife with his Right, with the point turned toward his
Hand, for sear of wounding the Womb. When it is in he must turn it to the Head,
and make an Incision in that to evacuate the Brain, and lessen its bigness. The
Knife must be thrust in with the left Hand to prevent hurting the Hand, and
must be small with a long Handle. If the Burden be loosned from the Womb, it
must be brought away first of all; on the contrary if it adheres firmly, the
Head must first be drawn forth.

When the Child's Head thrusts the Neck of the Womb out before it.
When this Accident happens, the Woman must not be obliged to walk or stand up,
but must be kept in her Bed with her Body lying even, and not so much raised as
in a Natural Labor. You must omit giving sharp Clysters, and all such things
as may moisten and relax the Womb, and when the Child thrusts forward, the
Artist must have one Hand on the side of the Head, to put back the Womb to its
proper place, continuing to do this till the Child be born, without drawing the
Head as in Natural Births. But if the Child be stopped in the Passage, and be in
danger of being Suffocated, he must draw it gently out by the Head, whilst some
other Person thrusts back the Womb with his Hands, and when this is done, he
must fetch away the Placenta.

When the Child's Head comes first, and cannot come forth, because it is too
big, or the Passage not sufficiently dilated.
In this Case the Bearing part must be fomented and relaxed by Oils and
Emollient Greases, and all endeavors used to bring the Child into the World.
If these prove useless, and it be certain that the Child is dead, the Artist
must no longer scruple to fix his Crotchet into the Head, and so bring it out.
Before this be done, let him introduce a Catheter well Oyled into the Bladder
to evacuate it, putting the Child's Head a little aside, for the more easy
slipping it in. After this, let him slide the flat of his Right Hand into the
entry of the Womb to the side of the Child's Head, and with the left let him
introduce a Crotchet, which ought to short and strong, and in entering it must
be turned to the inside of the Right Hand; after it is in, let him turn it and
strike it into the middle of the Parietal Bone, and draw it gently till it has
taken fast hold; then let him take out his Right Hand, and introducing his Left
Hand to guide it, fetch it out with the Instrument. If there be occasion, the
Artist may use another Crotchet to the opposite side of the Head, to draw the
whole more equally. In the last place (drawing out his Instruments,) let him
take hold of the Head with both his Hands, to bring out the rest of the Child's
Body.

When the Child presents the side of the Head or the Face to the Birth.
To prevent the Child's advancing farther in this Vicious Posture; Let the Woman
lie down, and cause her to lean a little on the opposite side, to the Child's
ill position, then let the Artist slide up his Hand to the side of the Child's
Head, to bring it right. If this do not succeed, he must put his Hand up to its
Shoulders, that so thrusting them back a little into the Womb, he may give it a
Natural and Convenient Situation, after which he may proceed to deliver the
Woman in the usual manner.

If this succeed not, let him search for the Feet, and bring them out first.

When the Child's Head is born, and the Body stopped in the passage by the
Shoulders.
Draw the Child's Head gently, sometimes by the sides, sometimes taking it with
one Hand under the Chin, and with the other on the Top of the hinder part of
the Head, alternately drawing one side and the other to facilitate the Birth.
If the Shoulders cannot pass, slide one or two fingers of each Hand under the
Armpits, and so draw out the Child. If it be stopped by a Hydropick Belly,
introduce the Left Hand into the Womb, quite to the right side of the Belly,
and pierce that with a Crotchet (for the introducing which, you may make use of
your Right Hand) and when the Waters are let out, bring away the Child.

When the Child comes with one or both Hands together with the Head.
As soon as this ill Position of the Child is perceived, it must be prevented
from proceeding farther. The Woman must be placed on her Bed, with her Hipps
raised a little higher than her Head, and the Artist must put back the Child's
Hand, guiding it as much as may be, to give way to the Child's Head, which
having done, if the Child's Head be on one side, it must be reduced to its
Natural Posture in the middle of the Passage, and so brought away as in
ordinary Births.

When the Child presents one or both Hands foremost.
The Hand or Arm must be thrust as speedily as may be into the Womb, and the
Artist must introduce his Hand under the Child's Breast and Belly so far, till
he sinds the Feet, which he must gently pull toward him to turn it, and draw
it forth, observing to do this with as little Violence as may be.

In introducing the Hand into the Womb, observe to slide it within the
Membranes, that so it may turn more easily without hurting the Womb.

If the Arm come too far out, and cannot be put in without great difficulty by
reason of its bigness, and it be certain the Child is dead, it is then
advisable to take it off as high as is possible, beginning with an Incision
around it, and cutting through the Bone with sharp Pincers, as is practiced by
Ambrose Parre. But I think it better to twist it once or twice round; for by
this means it will easily separate from the Body in the Articulation, and there
will be no danger of hurting the Womb by the Asperities of the Bone.

When the Child presents Feet and Hands together.
When the Womb is sufficiently dilated, let the Artist slide his Hand into it
far enough to reach the Child's Head, and put back that together with the Hands,
to the bottom of the Womb, leaving the Feet in the same place where he found
them, to draw the Child forth by.

Observe that whenever the Child or any part of it is to be thrust back into
the Womb, the Woman must have her Hipps raised.

When the Child presents with the Knees first.
It must not be suffered to advance far in this Posture, wherefore having
placed the Woman aright, put back the Child's Knees, and to unfold its Legs,
put one or two of your Fingers under the Ham, directing them by little and
little all along behind the Leg, until you reach the Foot, that so having
disengaged one, you may do the same to the other, proceeding in the same manner
as with the first; after which having brought both together, deliver the Woman
in the same manner, as when the Feet present first, observing to bring the Face
of it downward, and such Circumstances as are noted where we treat of that
Labor.

When the Child comes with the Shoulder, Back or Breech.
The Artist must thrust the Shoulder a little back, that so he may have the
more liberty of introducing his Hand into the Womb, then sliding it along the
Child's Body on the Belly or Side, as he finds it easiest, and searching for the
Feet, he must turn it and bring them to the Passage, and so deliver the Woman.

If the Back present, he must slide his Hands along it toward the lower part,
till he finds the Feet, and then draw it forth, as if it presented with the
Feet first.

If the Child come with the Breech first, he must gently thrust it back, and
sliding up his Hand along the Thighs to the Legs and Feet of the Child, he must
bring them gently one after the other forth of the Womb, by folding,
stretching, turning and drawing them gently toward the side on which it comes
easiest, being careful not to wind them too much, or cause a Dislocation, and
then let him draw forth the rest of the Body, as if it came with the Feet
foremost.

If the Child's Buttocks happen to be so far engaged in the passages, that it is
impossible to thrust it back, the Artist must draw it out in this Situation, by
sliding one or two fingers of each Hand on each side of the Buttocks to make
his way to the Groin, with as little Violence as may be, and then having
crooked them inwards, let him draw the Breech just out to the Thighs, and so by
drawing and wagging from side to side, he will disingage them from the Passage,
as also the Legs and Feet one after another (being careful not to Dislocate any
part) and then he may extract the rest as before, when coming with the Feet.

When the Child presents Belly, Breast or Side.
When the Child presents the Breast or Belly, let the Artist slide gently the
flat of his Hand (being first well anointed) toward the middle of the Child's
Breast, and thrust that back to turn it, then let him slip up his Hand under
the Belly till he finds the Feet, and bring them to the passage to draw it
forth, observing always to turn it, so that the Breast and Face may come
downwards.

When the Child presents the Side, the Artist must thrust back the Body of the
Child, and introduce his Hand into the Womb, sliding it along the Thighs till
he has found the Legs and Feet, and then turn it and draw it forth.

If several Children present to the passage together, the Artist must carefully
heed which Members belong to each Child, for fear he draw them both at once; if
two or three Feet come forth, let him take two, viz. one Right and one Left,
and slide his Hand along the Legs and Thighs up to the Twist if forwards, or to
the Buttocks if backwards, to find if they belong to the same Body, and when he
is certain of this, let him thrust back the Foot of the other, to facilitate
the passage, and draw forth the nearest, observing the same Circumstances as
when the Child presents with the Feet first, remembering likewise not to fetch
away the Burden, till the Second Child be born; for sometimes there is but one
common Placenta to both Children, which being separated from the Womb, would
cause a great Flooding, and be apt to incommode the Operator, nor can any
remedy avail to remove this, till the Woman be delivered of both her Children.

When one Child is come away, the Artist must tie the Navel-string and cut it,
and after that is done, bring away the other Child by the Feet, and fetch away
the Burden as in a Natural Delivery.

If the Child present any other part besides the Feet, the same Method must be
used, which is above directed in each different Situation, observing to draw
forth that which is farthest advanced in the passage.

When the first Child is come away, and the Waters of the second are not
broken, the Membranes must be torn with the Fingers to let them out, because
the Passage being dilated by the Birth of the First, the Second will come away
without any difficulty.

When the Navel-string comes first.
Let the Woman be laid very warm in her Bed, and the String replaced in the
Womb as soon as is possible, to prevent its cooling. The Artist must endeavor
to put it back behind the Child's Head, and keep it there with his Fingers till
the Head be fully come forth, which will hinder the coming down of it again.

If it be necessary to draw the Hand out of the Womb before the Head be past,
let him put a very fine Rag between the Head and the side of the Womb, to stop
the place where the Navel-string passed, leaving one end of the Rag without, to
draw it out when he pleases; and let a Compress dipped in Wine well warmed be
applied externally to the Womb, to defend the Navel from the injuries of the
external Air.

But if the String yet come forth upon every pain, then without further delay
let the Artist bring the Child away by the Feet, which he must search for,
though it should come with its Head; and let him gently thrust that back,
provided it be not too far advanced; for in this Case it cannot be done without
great Violence, Pain and Hazard of the VVomans Life.

To search for the Feet, let him slide his Hand on the Child's Breast and Belly,
and when he has found them, turn the Child and draw it out. When the
Navel-string comes first, the Child must be Baptized immediately after the
Birth, if it be not already done whilst it This only regards Persons of our
Authors Religion, viz. Roman Catholics, who hold unbaptized Infants are
excluded Heaven.
remains in the Passage.

When the Burden presents first, or is come away before the Child.
When the Placenta presents first, nothing can be felt but a soft Body; there
is a Flooding and concreted Blood comes away, and the Woman faints.

When this happens, the Woman must be delivered with all Expedition, and if
the Membranes are not broken, the Artist must put a little on one side that
part of the Burden which presents, and break the Membranes with his Fingers,
and let out the Waters, and turn the Child at the same time, if it be in any
other posture than with the Feet foremost, and draw it forth immediately.

But if the Burden be almost come forth, and the Membranes broke, he must
bring away the Placenta before the Child, not amusing himself with tying and
cutting the string before he draws out the Child, to prevent losing one moment
of time in delivering the Woman, because the Infant is in great danger of
losing its Life, and the Mother has a continual Flooding.

When there is great Floodings and Convulsions in Labor.
The best Remedy in this case, is to deliver the Woman immediately, without
the least delay, fetching away the Child by the Feet; if the Flux of Blood be
very moderate, and nothing else require it, you must not forward the Labor,
and the Woman may go out her Natural Term.

If the Membranes are not broke when the Flooding appears, they must be torn as
soon as the Womb is a little dilated, because the Burden is fixed to those
Membranes, and these being extremely agitated and moved by the Pains of the
Mother, the Placenta must consequently be moved, and a Flux of Blood ensue. If
a Convulsion happen, the Woman must be delivered immediately. This is the best
expedient in this case, for the saving the Lives of both Mother and Child, if
the Womb be open; but if it be not, then let the Artist have recourse to the
usual Remedies; for instance, Bleeding in the Arm or Foot (if the Accident
arise from Repletion) giving sneezing Medicines or Clysters to cause Throes and
dilate the Womb, in the mean while humecting it with Emollient Fomentations.

To deliver the Woman let the Waters be broke, and the Child drawn out by the
Feet, unless its Head be engaged in the Passage, and then fetch it by that. If
the Child be certainly dead, let it be drawn out with the Crotchets, as was
before directed.

When the Child is Hydropical or Monstrous.
If the Dropsy be in the Head, let the Artist gently introduce his left Hand,
on the right side of the Child's Head, which he will perceive to be very big,
and the Sutures separate from each other; when he finds this, let him with his
right Hand slide a crooked Knife all along the inside of his Hand, with the
point turned toward his Hand, for fear of hurting the Womb, and having
conveyed it very near the Head to the place of the Sutures, turn it in that
place, and make a sufficient aperture to let out the Waters, and draw forth the
Child. The same Method may be used to let the Water out of other tumefied Parts.

But if the Child be of any Monstrous Figure, or too big, or two grow together,
they must be dismembered, without which it is impossible to fetch them out of
the Womb. To perform this, let the Artist introduce his left Hand into the
Womb, and conveying in the crooked Knife to the parts he intends to separate,
let him cut them off as near the Joint as possible. If two Bodies are joined
together, let him separate them in the place of their cohaesion, and draw out
one after the other by the Feet.

When the Infant is dead in the Womb.
Give strong Clysters to the Woman to excite her Throes, and then deliver her
as soon as is possible. In order to this, evacuate the Bladder of its Urine,
and if the Child present with its Head first thrust it back, and introduce the
Hand into the Womb, sliding it under the Child's Belly, and search for the
Feet, and turning it by them draw it forth, as we have so often directed. But
here the Artist must have an especial care that the Head do not remain behind,
because the Child is most commonly rotten; and when this happens, it must be
drawn out in the manner above directed.

If the Head be too far advanced in the passage, it may not be thrust back for
fear of doing Violence to the Womb, but the Child must be drawn forth fixing
Crotchets in his Head, and proceeding after the manner we have elsewhere
described.

If the Dead Child present an Arm, bring it away from the Body by twisting it
once or twice round, and do the same in other parts of the Body; and after the
Child is thus brought away, collect all the parts of the Body, and compare them
to see if any be missing. Observe here to avoid using Crotchets, though you are
certain the Child is dead, if it can possibly be brought away by any other
means; because the Assistants and Midwives are most commonly very censorious in
this case, and will not fail to impute the Child's Death to the Artist.

Of a Mole and False Conception.
A Mole is a Mass of Flesh without Bones, Joints or Distinction of Members, or
any regular or certain Figure, Moles have no Burden or Navel-string, but
adhere to the Womb, and draw Nourishment from it, and are sometimes contained
in Membranes. If Women cast them before the second or third Month, they are
commonly called false Conceptions, and Moles if they are retained in the Womb
for a longer time and grow larger.

There is little difference in the Signs to enable us to distinguish between a
Mole and false Conception; except that the Belly in Women who have Moles, is
harder and more painful, and appears equally extended on all sides, not rising
to a point before, and tumefies sooner than if she were really with Child.
Moles are void of Life and Motion, are not encompast with Waters, and attended
with more inconveniences, than a Natural Conception, and the Woman has no Milk
in her Breasts, tho she can press some Serosities out of them.

When you are assured the Big belly does only proceed from a Mole, try to
bring it away as soon as is possible, giving the Patient some Purgative
Medicines, in case there be no Fever or Flooding; and when these begin to
operate, give a sharp Clyster to excite her Throes, and when the Womb begins
to dilate, relax it with Grease and Emollient Oils. Bleeding in the Feet, and
half Baths are very serviceable in this case.

If a Mole be not too large, or adhere too firmly to the Womb, it will come
away without the Assistance of any Remedies; but if it cleave strongly, or be
exceeding large, when the Womb is sufficiently dilated, the Artist must slide
in his Hand and fetch it out, or make use of a Crotchet or sometimes a Knife,
to divide it into pieces.

If the Mole cleave to the Womb, he must separate it from the part with his
Fingers, which he must by degrees insinuate between them, beginning in that
place where it adheres least, and proceeding till it be entirely loosned,
having great care to have his Nails pared close, for fear of hurting the Womb.

If it be a False Conception, slide one Finger into the Womb, and bend it on
one side and another, till you can enter a Second and a Third, or a Fourth, and
then taking it between the Fingers, fetch it away together with the concreted
Blood; and if no Portion happen to remain behind, the Flux of Blood will soon
cease. But if the Orifice be so small, that the Artist cannot possibly
introduce more than one Finger, let that be the Forefinger of the Right Hand,
and let him thrust that as far as he can, and turn it about to loosen the False
Conception from the Womb, and bring it away with the Finger; and if he cannot
do this, let him make Injections into the Womb to suppurate it. The Flooding
will undoubtedly cease, if no part of the Conception be left behind: But if the
Internal Orisice cannot be more dilated than is mentioned, and the Flooding be
so violent as to endanger the Woman's Life, the Artist having introduced the
Forefinger of his Left Hand, must take with his Right a Cranes Bill or
Forceps, and sliding this along his Forefinger, extract the Unnatural Body in
the Womb, taking care not to pinch the Womb it self, which he may prevent by
guiding the Instrument with his Finger.

What is fit to be done to a Woman newly laid, and her Child.
THE DRESSING OF THE MOTHER. When a Woman is Delivered, lay to her Privities a
Closure of Linen six or seven times doubled, which must be changed upon account
of her Cleansings, but first those must be removed, which received the Child in
her Labor. As for her Posture, place her in her Bed with her Head and Body a
little raised, to give way for her cleansing and free breathing, and let her
put down her Legs and Thighs close by one another, with a little pillow under
her Hams; and let her lie on her Back, that so the Womb may resume its Natural
Situation. After the Closure is removed, let an Anodyne Cataplasm be applied,
made of two ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds, with the Whites and Yelks of two
New-laid Eggs, beat and stirred together with a Spoon over warm Embers, till it
be of a due consistence. Let this Cataplasm be applied hot, and continued on
for the space of three or four Hours, renewing it if there be occasion; it
appeases pain in the bearing part after Labor.

In the next place make a Decoction of Barley, Linseed, Chervil, Marshmallows,
and Violet Leaves, and with this foment the part three or four times a Day, for
the space of five or six Days together, to cleanse the Privities from Clods of
Blood, and other Filth which proceed from the Cleansings.

Nurse-keepers lay a Compress of a Triangular Figure, four or five times double
on the Belly, to bear up the Womb as they pretend, and two others rolled up on
each side, to keep it directly in the middle; then lay a square Napkin all over
the Belly, and after that Swathe it with another Napkin three or four times
double, and about a quarter of an Ell broad. But the Belly ought by no means to
be comprest for the first fifteen Days, and if it happen to be so, the Bandage
must be removed, to anoint it well with Oil of Sweet Almonds, but after that
time it may be a little straightened, to contract and keep the parts together.

If the New-laid Woman intend to Suckle her Child, lay a soft and fine Cloths
on her Breasts to keep them warm, and prevent the Milk from Curdling. If the
Milk begin to come too plentifully into them, embrocate them with a Mixture of
Oil of Roses and Vinegar, and lay on them a fine Compress dipped in it.

After the Cleansings are finished, strengthen the Womb with a Decoction of
Provence Roses, and Roots and Leaves of Plantain in Smiths Water. After that
use this astringent Lotion to close the Parts.. Pomgranate Peel, Cypress Nuts,
a^. iss. Sealed Earth, ss. Provence Roses, i. Roch Alum, ij. Infuse these
Ingredients for the space of a Night in five half pints of Claret alone, or
diluted with Smiths Water, (least the Wine alone be too sharp) boil all till it
be reduced to a Pint, then strain it, and express it strongly, and with this
foment the Parts well Night and Morning.

THE DRESSING OF THE CHILD. Put the Child into a warm Blanket, and take a brown
Thread four or five times doubled, of a quarter of an Ell long, with a knot at
each end to prevent its entangling. This Thread and a pair of Scissars, must
ever be in readiness against the time of Labor; then tie the Navil-string with
this Thread about a Fingers breadth from the Belly, and make a double knot,
then turning the Thread round the Navil, make two other knots on the opposite
side, and so cut the string about a Fingers breadth more beyond the Ligature
toward the Placenta. The Ligature must be so close that no drop of Blood may
pass it, but not so strait as to cut the Navil.

The end of the Navil must he wrapped round with a small Rag, dry or dipped in Oil
of Roses, and another doubled Rag laid on the Belly on the upper side, to
repose the Navil on with a Compress over this, and these lesser Dressings kept
on with a Swathe of three inches broad, rolled round the Body. The Navilstring
dries and separates near the Belly, within five or six Days or thereabouts.

Let the Child's Body be cleansed with Wine and warm Water, especially the Head,
Groin and Armpits, and wiped with soft Rags, or a Sponge dipped in Wine
lukewarm, or if the Excrements be very tenacious, in Oil of sweet Almonds. Let
the Nostrils and Ears be unstopt with little Tents, and the Eyes wiped with a
soft dry Rag.

When the Child's Body is cleansed from all the adhering (...) view it well to
see if no part be dislocated, and all the Passages be open for the voiding its
Excrements; and if they do not come away, give him by the Mouth some Syrup of
Violets or Roses.

After the Child is cleansed, cover his Head with a little Linen Biggen, with a
Woollen Cap over that, but observe first to place a Compress the openness of
the Sutures, and pin it without. Behind the Ears put Rags to dry the Filth, and
then lay other Rags on the Breast, and in the Folds of the Armpits and Groin,
and so Swath him in his Linen and Blankets well warmed binding him lightly on
its Breast and Stomach. The Arms and Legs must be wrapped in the Blanket, and
kept straight lying by each other, with a little of the Blanker between to
prevent them from Galling, by rubbing against each other, and the Head must be
kept steady with a stay fastened on each side the Blanket.

How a Woman ought to govern her self during her being with Child.
The Air in which she breaths must be Temperate, and if it be not so by Nature,
it must be reduced to due temper by Art, warming if it be too cold, or cooling
it if too hot.

A Pregnant Woman ought to shun too warm an Air, because it weakens and
enfeebles the Body; on the other hand, she must with equal Care avoid an Air
which is Cold and Foggy, which may cause Rheums and Coughs, which putting her
Body into an Agitation, may make a Concussion of the Womb, and cause an
Abortion. She ought not to live in strait narrow Lanes or Allies, or near
common Sewers, or other stinking places; because ill Scents will make her apt
to miscarry. She must avoid the noxious Fumes of Charcoal, especially when not
burnt in a Chimney, and also all Perfumes and other sweet Scents, especially if
she be Hyfterical.

If a Pregnant Woman has a longing after odd things, she must be indulged,
though perhaps the things she desires are improper, provided she eat
moderately. But if she have no extravagant Appetite, let her eat any sort of
wholesome Meats, in such quantity as may suffice for the Nourishing her self and
Child, in which her Appetite is to be a Rule. Fasting or long Abstinence is
hurtful, because it heats the Blood, and conveys ill Nourishment to the Child,
which renders it weak, and decayed, and often makes it struggle to free it self
before its time, and seek for better Food. On the contrary she must not eat too
great quantity of Meat, especially at Night, because the Womb in the last
Months of going with Child possesses a great part of the capacity of the lower
Belly, and hinders the Stomach from retaining much; and hence when it is
overcharged, it causes Belches, Indigestion, and difficulty of Breathing,
proceeding from a compression of the Diaphragm, which wants liberty of Motion.
Let her therefore eat little and often, and let her Bread be of the best Wheat,
white and well baked, and not brown Bread or baked Crust, which swells in the
Stomach. Let her eat good Nourishing Meats, as the most tender pi^ces of Beef,
Veal, Mutton, Lamb, Fowl, as Pullets and fat Capons, or Partridge, Pigeons
boiled or ^oasted as she desires; Newlaid Eggs are very good, and Pregnant
Women seldom having good Blood, ought to put into their Broth such Herbs as
purisie it, as Sorret, Lettuce, Succory and Borrage. A Woman with Child ought
to eat no Highseasoned Pies, especially the Crust which is difficult to digest;
and if the eat Fish, it ought to be fresh and not salted, and such as is bred
in Rivers and Running Waters, because Pondfith usually tastes of Mud, and
breeds ill Juices. She may drink at Meals a little good old Wine diluted with
Water. Red Wine is be^ter than White, and strengthens the Stomach, helping
Digestion, which is always bad in the time of pregnancy. If she was not used to
it before, she must gradually accustom her self to it, but must never have it
coold with Ice, or any otherwise drink it too cold, for cool Liquors are apt to
breed the Colic, and by consequence endanger Abortion. On the contrary, she
must no less carefully avoid what is heating, such as all Salt, Sharp, Bitter,
Aperitive and Diuretic things, which provoking the Courses, are apt to make a
Woman miscarry.

Women with Child are apt to have a sharpness of Stomach, to prevent which
they must refrain eating of Fruits, Salle^s, Sugar, and drinking of Wine,
which extremely sours all their Aliment, and lastly keep their Bodies soluble.

Women with Child must have moderate Sleep, that is eight Hours at least, and
ten at the most in the Nighttime, and little or none at all in the Daytime.
However Women who are used to sleep in time Daytime, must be indulged in this
bad custom, rather than do violence to Nature in breaking an ill habit too
abruptly.

As for Exercise and Rest, these differ according to the times of Pregnancy.
For the first four or five Days after Conception, a Woman ought to keep her
self in Bed, and decline the embraces of her Husband. During all the remaining
time of her going with Child, she must use no violent exercise, must not go in
any Coach, Chariot, or on Horseback, because these Agitations of the Body are
apt to loosen the Foetus, and if she have occasion to go abroad, it must be in
a Chair or Litter. She must not carry any great Burden, or lift her Arm too
high; and for this reason she ought not to dress her own Head. The lifting of
the Hands has caused many Abortions, because the Ligaments of the Womb are
relaxed by these violent extensions. Her shoes ought to be lowheeld, because
the Rising of her Belly hindering her from seeing her Feet, she is apt to fall.

If a Woman happens to stumble, fall or hurt her Belly by any other Accident,
and she find her self to void Blood, or a Bloody Serum, or indeed any Water
from the Womb, let her repose her self some Days without seeing her Husband,
till these evacuations cease, and she find no pain in the Reins or Bladder.

In short, she must govern her self so in all exercises, as to exceed in too
much Rest rather than Motion, because a much greater danger attends the one
than the other; and when ever a Woman is advised to use exercise to facilirate
her Delivery, it must ever be understood to be very moderate. A Woman with
Child ought to abstain from the embraces of her Husband, the two last Months
before her Term, because in these Caresses, there is a great Agitation of the
Body and Compression of the Belly, which often occasions a wrong Posture of the
Child. A Woman with Child ought to have a presence of Mind, and to be prepared
against all Surprises which may happen, as Claps of Thunder, Firing of Canon,
and other sudden Noises, which Resolution is difficult to be obtained.

Women with Child are subject to a Constriction of the Belly, because the
Foetus presses on the Rectum, and hinders a free discharge of the Excrements;
besides there is usually in Women with Child a certain Heat of the Bowels,
which disposes them to Costiveness. Let a Woman who is subject to this
inconvenience eat Boiled Apples, Stewed Prunes, New Figgs, Mulberries, Honey
with Bread, Rye Bread, Veal Broth, etc. and take a Clyster of Warm Water
frequently to humect and relax the Gut. Let her sometimes take clean Cassia ss.
or Veal Broth with the Emollient Herbs, and an ounce of the best Honey. If
these innocent Remedies are not sufficient, give her mild Clysters made of a
Decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory, and Anise-seeds, with two
Ounces of brown Sugar dissolved in it, adding a little Oil, or a Decoction of
Bran, adding Honey of Roses with a piece of fresh Butter, or any other thing as
occasion requires. But here be cautious not to give sharp Clysters, or any
thing which may excite a Diarrh^ea, and cause too great an Evacuation^ because
this will endanger an Abortion.

She must moderate her Passions, especially Anger and Jealousy; and care must
be taken not to Surprise her with Fear, or the Relation of any Accident which
may affect her with extraordinary Grief. These Passions put the Spirits into a
Disorder, and often cause Women to fall in Labor at that very instant.

When a Woman finds or suspects her self to be with Child, she must not as
that Sex usually does w^^^ Bodies with VVhale-bone, for these hurt the Breast,
and compress the Belly, and often causes the Children to come before their
time, and sometimes misshapen. These Nice I adies out of affectation of
showing a good shape, spoil their Belly, which after they are laid is full of
VVrinkles, because the Skin not having liberty to extend it self on all sides,
forces its way toward the Thighs, where being exceedingly stretched, it can
never after regain its pristine State, but hangs down like a Purse, and this
Folly sometimes causes them to have Ruptures. For this reason Big-bellied
Women must have their Clothes loose without Buskins which compress the Belly,
and the Foetus in it. In the last place they must never bath for fear the Womb
open, and an Abortion ensue.

A Woman with Child if occasion require may Bleed, but the Evacuation must be
small, and there is no great regard to be had to the time, provided the
quantity by not too large.

Of Vomiting in Women with Child.
A Woman has most commonly an inclination to Vomit in the beginning of her
Pregnancy, and at such times there is no great apprehensions; but if this
continue it weakens the Stomach exceedingly, and it is more apt to corrupt,
than digest the Food. These Vomitings continue till the third or fourth Month,
which is the time the Child stirs most. After that time Women usually begin to
regain that Appetite which they had lost the first Months, and this seems
necessary, because the Child growing greater, requires a larger supply of
Nourishment. Sometimes the Vomiting persists, and then the Woman is in great
danger of Miscarrying, because these Commotions throw the Foetus lodged in the
Womb downwards. Some Women are more afflicted with this Accident in the latter
Months, than in the first, because the Stomach is compressed by the distention
of the Womb. This Vomiting when it happens to Women whose Children lie high,
does not cease till their Delivery.

You need not be concerned if a Woman Vomits in her first going with Child, if
this be not attended with any extraordinary straining, but if it persist after
the fourth Month, some Remedy must be used; because the Foetus growing large,
requires Nourishment as well as the Mother, and must necessarily be deprived of
it, if she continues to cast it up, besides the commotion of the Body endangers
an Abortion, or a Descent of the Womb.

This Vomiting cannot be stopped of a sudden, but must be abated and checked by
degrees, by taking good Sustenance, and eating but a little at a time, because
the Stomach being repelled by the Womb, the Meat regurgitates. To this end let
the Patient make her Meat palatable with Juice of Oranges, Limons, Pomgranats,
or a little Verjuice or Vinegar, as her Appetite serves. She may take often a
Decoction made of Flower of Barley, first baked a little in an Oven, and then
mixed with Yelks of Eggs, to make it more Nourishing and easy of Digestion.
She may likewise eat after her Meals, a little Marmelade of Quinces, or Jelly
of Goosberries, and drink some old Red Wine mixed with Spring Water, or in want
of that clear River Water with Iron quenched in it. Let her refrain from all fat
Meats, which are apt to relax the Stomach and excite Vomiting, and so do all
things which are sweet and prepared with Sugar. Let her give a grateful
sharpness to whatever she eats, for all sharp things are Astringent, and
preserve the Tone of the Stomach. A Spoonful of Aqua-vitae* or a Glass of Sack
now and then, is very proper to take of Nausea's and Vomiting.

If Vomitings continue after a Woman is gone half her time, have Recourse to
m^ld purges, as Sena, i. Rhubarb, ss., and Syrup of Succory, i. This is a good
Medicine to attenuate and carry off the tenacious Humors lodged in the Stomach
and Guts, or purge her with Manna, Cassia, Tamarinds, and such like Lenitives,
never omitting a little Rhubarb and Compound Syrup of Succory. But a Woman
under these Circumstances, must never use violent Medicines, as Antimony,
Hellebore, or Scammony, for fear of an Abortion.

If notwithstanding the Woman continues to Vomit, it is best to leave the cure
to Nature for fear of an Abortion, which will infallibly follow when she is
seized with the Hiccough.

Note here it is convenient to Bleed in these cases before purging, interposing
some small interval of time between these Evacuations, for fear of putting the
Blood into too great a Commotion.

The cold Air is a great enemy to Women apt to Vomit, and therefore they ought
to go warm clad, and wear a Lambs Skin on their Breast and Stomach.

Of Pains in the Back, Reins and Hipps of Big-bellied Women.
The Pains of these parts proceed from the distention of the Ligaments of the
Womb, which are inserted in these places. The best Remedy to appease these
Pains is Rest, and a Big-bellied Woman who in straining has distended these
Ligaments, ought to lose a little Blood in the Arm, and keep her Bed for some
time. If the Pains arise from a bearing down of the Womb on the lower parts,
the Woman must keep her Bed, or at least her Belly must be suspended with a
large Swathe till the time of her Delivery.

If there be any extraordinary excretions from the Womb mixed with Blood during
these Pains, there is great danger of Abortion, and it shows the Womb begins
to open. But to avoid being deceived in passing a Judgment in this case,
consider well if there be a great Repletion of Blood, or the Woman be subject
to the Gravel, both which are capable of producing this Accident; and if either
of these appear to be the cause, let proper Remedies be used, but with great
Moderation.

Of Pains in the Breast.
When a Woman becomes Pregnant, her usual Monthly evacuations ceasing, and
she breeding still new Blood it dows to the Breasts, and distending the Vessels
there creates great Pain. A Woman at this time must be exceeding careful not to
hurt these parts which are extremely sensible. She must not go with her Bodies
strait laced, for fear of a Contasion, which may end in an Inflammation and
Abscess. If the Pains of her Breasts continue after the third Month, let her
Bleed in the Arm, forbearing all Repellent and Restringent Medicines, let her
use a cooling Diet, moderately Nourishing, and keep her Body open.

Of Difficulty of Urine.
When the Foetus compresses the upper part of the Bladder, it necessitates a
Woman to make Water every Moment; but if it compresses the Neck, as in the
first Months after Conception, it intercepts its Passage. Sometimes the sharp
Salts of the Urine pricking the Bladder, stimulate a Woman to make water
frequently, and inflame the Bladder, from whence a Suppression of Urine ensues.

If a Woman with Child have a Stone in the Bladder, it is exceeding
troublesome, and the Womb pressing the Bladder on it, creates insupportable
Pain, if the Stone be rugged and unequal.

There is a necessity to help this Accident as soon as is possible, because the
Woman's straining to make water, forces down the Foetus, and hastens the Birth.
If it proceeds from a Compression of the Bladder by the bigness and weight of
the Womb, the Woman may in some measure help this by keeping up her Belly with
both Hands when she makes water; or suspending it with a Swathe, or which is
best of all keep her Bed. If it proceeds from the Acrimony of the Urine, which
inflames the Neck of the Bladder, it must be abated by a cool Regimen, and
drinking a Ptisan, refraining from Wine. She may use Emulsions Morning and
Night made with the Cold Seeds in Barley Water, with a Spoonful or two of Syrup
of Violets, or Nymphaea. If this do not abate the Inflammation, let her Bleed
in the Arm, and foment all the External part of the Neck of the Bladder with
warm Milk, or a Decoction of the emollient cooling Herbs, as Mallows,
Marshmallows, Pellitory, Violet Leaves, with a little Linseed; or inject the
same into the Neck of the Bladder, adding to it a little Oil of Violets or warm
Milk; the Woman in the mean time must refrain from Copulation.

If these Remedies prove ineffectual, hold up her Belly and introducing a
Catheter (being first well Oyled) through the Vrethra into the Bladder, by this
means evacuate it, and if the Suppression return, use the Catheter again, as
long as occasion shall require. If this inconvenience continue, let her use the
Half-Bath, having an especial care that she be not moved by it; all hot
Diuretics endanger an Abortion, and therefore she must shun the use of them.

If the Difficulty of Urine proceed from a Stone of the Bladder, thrust it back
with the Catheter if it be large, but if it be small, try to fetch it away with
an Extracter, putting the forefinger into the Vagina to keep it steady, and
hindering it from recoyling into the Bladder.

Of a Cough and Difficulty of Breathing.
Women whose Children lie high are subject to a Cough, because the Womb bears
up the Diaphragm. A violent Cough is one of the most dangerous Accidents which
can be fall a Woman with Child, and must be carefully prevented by a regular
and cooling Diet, avoiding all sharp and high Seasoned Meats. If it arise from
the sharpness of the Lympha, she must refrain from all four things, as Oranges,
Lemmons, Pomgranats, Vinegar, Verjuice, which are to irritate the Part, and
excite a Cough. On the contrary, let her use all such things as temper and
sweeten the Blood, as Milk-meats, Decoction of Liquorice, Sugar Candy, Syrup of
Violets and Mulberry's, some Spoonfuls of which she may mix with her Ptisan
(made of Jujubes, Sebesten, Raisins of the Sun, French Barley, with a little
Liquorice,) adding to all these a few Clysters. In the last place, if all these
means prove ineffectual, and there appear manifest signs of Repletion, let her
Bleed at whatsoever time of her going with Child it be, for moderate Bleeding
can never be so dangerous as a continual Cough.

If her Cough proceed from taking cold, let her keep her self warm in her
Chamber, and take some Spoonfuls of Syrup of burnt Wine. To make this,. the
best Wine half a Pint, Cinnamon grossly powdered, ii. Cloves, n. vi. Sugar
double Refined, iv. Put these together in a Silver Porringer, and boil them
upon a Chasing-dish to the consistence of a Syrup, of which let the Woman take
at Night an hour or two after a light Supper, or let her take a little good
Rosa Solis. It is requisite the Woman have her Body open, to which end she must
sometimes take Clysters, have all her Drink warmed, speak little, and refrain
from Copulation. If she want Sleep* that must be procured by mild Somniferous
Juleps, and not by strong Narcoticks, which are dangerous in pregnant Women,
and never to be used without pressing necessity.

Some Women bear their Children so high, that they have not liberty to breath,
in this case Bleeding is necessary to discharge the Lungs, and make room for
their expansion. If this difficulty of Breathing proceed from a Compression of
the Diaphragm, the Woman must go loose in her Dress; must eat but a little at a
time and often; must refrain from all viscous or windy Meats, as Pease, only
feeding on things easy of Digestion, and Laxative; must shun all Melancholy
apprehensions, and sadness of Mind; for these Passions are apt to divert the
Blood, and determine it to the Heart in so great a quantity, as may endanger a
Suffocation.

Of Varicose Swellings, and Pains in the Thighs and Legs.
In the last Months of a Woman's going with Child, the Womb being very much
distended, compresses by its weight the Iliac Veins; by which the Refluent
Blood is hindered in its Ascent, and the Saphena and Crural Veins, together with
all the Vessels of the Legs and Thighs, are tumefied by its Regurgitation, and
the Blood it self stagnating, causes great Pains and Swellings. These varicose
Swellings only admit of a palliative cure during the time of Pregnancy, viz. by
laying a compress of Rags, and binding it on the tumefied Vessels. Let the
Roller with which the Part is bound, be about two or three inches broad, and
begin to apply it below, ascending to the Varices, which being constringed by
this Bandage, are incapable of farther Dilatation, and the Blood hindered from
staying too long, and corrupting in them, whilst at the same time it finds a
passage through the other Vessels, and by consequence the Circulation is not
intercepted. Let the Woman during this keep her Bed as long as she can, because
the Blood ascends to the Head more easily, whilst she is in this Posture, than
when standing. If the Varices arise from Repletion, let her Bleed in the Arm.
Bleeding in the Varices themselves is condemned by Practitioners; as being an
equivalent to Bleeding in the Foot, a thing never to be Practiced in Women with
Child.

Some Women have only Oedematous Swellings (proceeding from abundance of ill
juices) which retain the impression of the Finger. These are to be cured by
promoting Transpiration, by applying compresses dipped in Aromatic Tinctures,
and repeated twice or thrice a Day; for instance,. Rosemary, Bays, Time,
Marjoram, Sage and Lavender, a^. one Handful, Provence Roses half a Handful,
Balaustians Alum, a^. i. Boil all in three Pints of Red Wine, to the
consumption of one third, and then strain it through a Linen Cloth, and keep it
for use.

Of the Haemorrhoids.
The Haemorrhoids in Women with Child, arise from the stopping of their
Courses, which constrains the Superfluous Blood to seek that way for its
discharge; oftentimes they proceed from great straining in going to Stool,
Big-bellied Women being for the most part bound.

If the Piles are small and indolent, care must be taken (whether they be
within or without the Body) to prevent their increase by the use of Medicines,
proper to hinder and prevent a Fluxion on the Parts, but if they are large and
painful, the Pain must be appeased; for so long as that continues, the Fluxion
necessarily increases. And therefore if there be an apparent Repletion, let the
Woman Bleed to abate and divert the plenitude, let her Diet be Regular, moist
and cooling, let her abstain from all high seasoned Meats; and refrain from the
embraces of her Husband. If the Piles proceed from her being bound, and the
Excrements are hardened in the Rectum, which frequently happens in Persons who
have been a long time without going to Stool, give her a Clyster of Warm Water,
or a Decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory, Violet Leaves, Linseed
with Honey and Nenuphar, mixing with it a little Oil of sweet Almonds, and
Fresh Butter, without any sharp Ingredients which will not fail to exasperate
them, especially when the Piles are inward. To pass in the Pipe with less
trouble in giving the Clyster, put the lesser end of a Pullets Gut on it. Let
her keep to a cooling Diet, and Repose her self on her Bed till the Fluxion
cease, and during this time foment the Piles with Warm Milk from the Cow, or
Decoctions of Marshmallows, Tapsus Barbatus, and Linseed. Oil of Eggs alone,
or Oils of sweet Almonds, Poppies and Nenuphar beat up with the Yelk of an Egg,
for a long time together in a Leaden Mortar, are admirable to allay the Pain,
and if the Inflammation be very great, a little of Galen's Cerate, mixed with
an equal quantity of Populeon, may be put in. If the Piles do not go off, and
the Swelling does not abate after the use of these Remedies, open them with a
Lancet if they are hard, or if they are soft apply Leeches, which will serve
well enough, and create less Pain.

If the Piles discharge Blood in great quantity, the Life of the Mother and
Child are both very much endangered; and therefore to prevent this Mischief,
foment well the part with a Decoction of Balaustians, Pomgranate Peels, and
Provence Roses in Smiths Water, adding a little Alum; or apply a Cataplasm made
of Bole Armoniack, Dragons Blood, Terra Sigillata, and the White of an Egg.
Bleeding in the Arm likewise is very proper, to turn the Course of the Blood.

Of a Looseness in Women with Child.
Women with Child are subject to diverse sorts of Loosnesses, all which are apt
to make them Miscarry, if they be violent and last for any considerable time;
but the worst of this kind is a Dysentery or Bloody Flux, because this is
accompanied with vehement and sharp Pains in the Guts, which cause Throes and
great Straining to go to Stool, which often brings the Birth before the due
term is accomplished.

Timely care must be taken in these Fluxes of the Belly to prevent Abortion;
and for this end their Nature must be considered; for instance, In a Lientery
ensuing on continual Vomiting, which frequently happens, the Woman must abstain
from all sorts of unusual Food; must eat nothing but what is Nourishing, and
easy of Digestion, and that in small quantity too, that the Stomach may more
easily concoct it; she must drink a little Red Wine diluted with Water, in
which Iron is first extinguished, instead of her Prisan which is not proper on
this occasion, unless she have a high Fever (for except it be high, she need
not refrain) and in this case she may take some good Cordial or Restorative
before and after Meals, as a Spoonful or two of Syrup of Burnt Wine, a little
Hippocras or Alicant. She may before Meals eat a little Conserve of Roses, or
Marmelade of Quinces, and wear a Lambs-skin on her Stomach, to preserve and
strengthen its Natural Heat, which is necessary for Digestion. She must not
take any purgative Medicine, for these are apt to destroy the Tone of the
Stomach, and disable it from performing its Office.

When the Flux is no more than a simple gentle Diarrh^ea of no long standing,
and the Woman is not much incommoded or endangered by it, it is sufficient to
moderate it without stopping it all at once; but if this Evacuation continues
above four or five Days, the Tenacious Humors lodged in the Guts, must be
carried off by some mild Purgative, as an Infusion of Rhubarb with Syrup of
Succory, or an Ounce of Double Catholicon with Rhubarb.

But if the Looseness continue notwithstanding, and become a Dysentery, and she
have constantly bloody Stools, great pains in her Bowels, and a Tenesmus, she
is in very great danger of Miscarrying. The way to prevent this mischief, is to
purge with the Medicines before mentioned, and prevent the breeding of ill
Humors in the Bowels by a good Diet. To this end let her eat Veal or Chicken
Broth, with the cooling Herbs boiled in it, with a Quince to allay the
sharpness of the Humors; let her eat Rice boiled in her Broth, or let some
New-laid Eggs be beaten in, because these smoothen the inside of the Guts.

A Woman in this condition may drink Chalybeate Waters, with a little Wine if
she have no Fever, or if she have, she may take a spoonful of Syrup of Quinces
or Pomgranats in a glass of water, and eat a little Marmelade of Quinces, or
Conserve of Roses, or some other Restringent and Corroborating things after
being well purged. To abate the violent and sharp Pains in the Belly and
Rectum, which arise from a discharge of sharp Humors on the Parts, and excite
continual Throes endangering an Abortion, give a Clyster made of the Decoction
of a Calves or Sheeps Head, adding to it two Ounces of Oil of Violets, or of
New Milk, with the Yelks of two New-laid Eggs beat with it, and give the
Patient a little Laudanum in the Yelk of an Egg, to cause her to rest quietly.
When she has retained these Anodyne Clysters as long as she can, next give her
detersive ones made of the Decoction of Barley, Mallows and Marshmallows, with
Honey of Roses, and after these Astringent ones (without Oil or Honey, which
are laxative) beginning with the weakest, as Lettuce or Plantain Water, and
after giving stronger made of a Decoction of the Leaves and Roots of Plantain,
Tapsus Barbatus, Horsetail, Provence Roses, and Pomgranate Peel boiled in
Smith's Water, adding Terra Sigillata, Dragons Blood, a^ ij. and with this
foment the Fundament. Before the use of these Restringents, the Woman must be
purged with the Medicines above mentioned, for fear of endangering the Life of
both the Mother and Child, by a Retention of abundance of vicious Humors.

But since Dysenterick Pains frequently proceed from a sharp Humor lodged in
the Stomach, and the effect of Clysters does not extend so high, it is
convenient for the Patient to drink half a Porringer of New Milk twice or
thrice a Day, and this Remedy has often relieved Pregnant Women in Dysenteries.
But the Cow which gives this Milk must not be Heated, have a gross full Body,
or have lately Calved, but ought to be sound and fed upon a good Pasture well
watered.

Of the Menstrous Flux in Women with Child.
Sometimes Women have their Courses for the first four, nay six Months. When a
Woman voids Blood downwards, it must carefully be considered whence it
proceeds, and in what manner, whether it be the ordinary Courses, or a Real
Flooding. If it be the Courses, the Blood comes away at accustomed times, and
flows by degrees from the Neck of the Womb, and not from its Bottom, as may be
discovered, if trying with a Finger if the Internal Orifice be exactly closed,
which could not be if the Blood come from the bottom of the Womb; to all which
add, if it be the Courses it will be small in quantity. Sometimes this
Evacuation of Blood is not Menstrous, and yet must not be thought a Flooding,
for if the Woman be full of Blood, and the abundance be greater than the Foetus
can consume, this Evacuation is so far from being hurtful to the Mother or
Child, that if the Womb was not discharged of that Superfluous Blood, the
Foetus would be suffocated by it. On this occasion it is better to bleed
moderately, than leave Nature to perform her Work.

If there be no visible Repletion, and ^ne Courses continue after a Woman is
with Child, it proceeds from an extreme fluidity of the Blood, which persisting
during the whole time of her going with Child, makes her subject to miscarry,
or if she escape, her Child will be weak, tender, and unhealthy. To prevent
these Accidents, let her Repose her self in her Bed, refrain from all Meats
which may heat the Blood; shun Anger, using a cooling Diet, and seeding upon
Meats which breed good Blood, and thicken it, such as are good Broths made with
Chickens, Necks of Mutton, or Knuckles of Veal, in which may be boiled cooling
Pot Herbs, as Purslane, Lettuce, etc. New-laid Eggs or Gellies, with Rice and
Barley boiled in them are good. She may drink water in which Iron has been
quenched, with a little Syrup of Quinces, she must refrain from Copulation,
because by heating the Blood, it excites it to flow more. If all these Means
are ineffectual, and the Flux continues, make a Revulsion by Bleeding in the
Arm, if the VVomans strength permit, and apply to the Mothers Belly Compresses
dipped in strong Wine, in which a Pomgranate with its Peel, Provence Roses, and a
little Cinnamon have been boiled, but the best way is to correct the Mothers
Blood.

Of Floodings.
Floodings proceed from the bottom of the Womb with great Pain, and come of a
sudden, the Blood runs away in great quantity without intermission, except when
some clods seem sometimes to lessen the Flux, or stop it for a time, but soon
after it returns with greater violence, and kills both Mother and Child, unless
timely prevented.

When this Flooding happens to a Woman who is young with Child, the cause most
commonly is some Mole or false Conception, which the Womb labors to expel, and
in the effort breaks the Blood Vessels. In Women who are really with Child, it
proceeds from a loosning of the Placenta, whose separation opens the Mouths of
the Vessels. This most commonly is occasioned by some Blow, Slip or Hurt,
though sometimes it is caused by the Child twisting himself in the
Navel-string, and so drawing the Placenta very strongly. This Flooding never
ceases till the Woman be delivered, and is more violent and dangerous in
proportion to the largeness of the Foetus.

Every Evacuation of Blood does not require the Woman to be Delivered
immediately; for sometimes the loss is very small, and may be stopped by keeping
her quiet in her Bed, bleeding her and confining her to a good Diet, and the
Blood perhaps is only her Courses, or proceeds from some Vessel which opens it
self on the outside of the internal Orifice, and keeps the Womb from being
exactly closed. In this case it is necessary to try whether the internal
Orifice is open on the inside, or whether the Child can be felt across the
Membranes, for if so, it is a Demonstrative proof it is a Real Flooding, and
the Woman will soon Miscarry.

If the Blood come away in small quantity, and the Evacuation do not last long,
leave the Delivering the Woman to Nature, provided she have a competent degree
of strength, and no dangerous Accidents happen. But if it come away in great
abundance, or the Woman have Swoonings or Convulsions, it is absolutely
necessary to deliver her at whatever time it be, whether she have the Pains of
Labor or (...) and there is no other way to preserve the Life of the Mother
and Child. To this end let the Artist place the Patient on her Back, and
anointing his Hand with Fresh Butter or Oil, by degrees insinuate his Fingers
close together into the Womb, and spread them one from the other when they are
in the Entry, and dilate it by degrees without violence. When he has his Hand
in the Womb, if he finds the Waters are not broke, let him tear the Membranes,
and slip his Hand in and fetch away the Child by the Feet, and after that bring
away the After-burthen, which does not adhere very firmly, taking care to leave
no clods of Blood behind; for these will cause the Flooding to continue, which
otherwise would soon cease.

Since in all great Losses of Blood, great Weakness must necessarily follow,
let the Patient be strengthened with good Broths, Gellies, or a little Wine; for
Liquid Aliments, have a more prompt effect than Solids. Let her smell to some
Spiritous Liquours, as Aqua Vitae, Queen of Hungaries Water, or lay a Toast
steept in Wine, in which Cinnamon has been infused, or Bleed her in the Arm if
her strength permit, and she be not too much exhausted; observing to close the
Orifice from time, to time, for the more easy diverting the current of the
Blood, without weakening her too much.

You may try to stop the Flux of Blood by Napkins dipped in Oxycrate made with
Plantain Water, applied to the small of the Back, or let the Patient lie on a
Mat, and take two or three Ounces of Juice of Purslane; if all these Remedies
are ineffectual, deliver the Woman forthwith, though she be not above three
Months gone, leaving nothing in the Womb, and this is the only means to save
her Life.

Of the Weight or Bearing down of the Womb.
The Weight and Bearing down of the Womb, hinders a Bigg-bellied Woman in her
walking, and causes a Stupor of the Hips and Thighs, Pains in the Groin, a
Difficulty of making Water, and discharging the Excrements in the Guts,
(because it compresses the Bladder and Rectum, and draws down the Ligaments,)
all which Accidents are capable of making a Woman Miscarry. The best Remedy in
this case, is to keep her lying a-bed, but if she be not in a condition to do
this, let her support her Belly with a large Swathe, to case the Ligaments,
which are very much strained, and when she makes water, let her hold up her
Belly with both Hands to keep it from pressing on the Sphincter.

If the Neck of the Womb be too much relaxed by the Humidities, let her purge
at convenient times, and use a dry Diet, feeding much on Roasted Meats. Let her
not go strait laced, for fear of compressing the Womb which bears down too much
already.

Of a Dropsy of the Womb.
The Womb is sometimes swollen and distended with water, which is apt to impose
on Midwives, who mistake this Distemper for a Woman's being with Child.

Sometimes these Waters are enclosed in a Cover, and sometimes they are in the
cavity of the Womb. When they have no Cover, they are often mistaken for a true
Big-belly, and this error remains till the usual Term is completed. The
longer any Woman retains these waters, the more she runs a risque of her Life,
and sometimes they grow to so vast a bulk, that some have been found with 30
lb. in their Womb.

To distinguish between this Hydropical Swelling, and a true Great Belly,
consider well the Signs of Pregnancy which are delivered above, that having
nothing common with this, except a Distention of the Belly, and a Suppression
of the Courses. In a Dropsy the Woman has her Breasts flaggy, soft and fallen,
has no Milk in them, does not feel the Child stir, perceiving only a
Fluctuation of the Water, has a great pain and weight in the Belly, which is
more extended in its circumference, and does not rise to a Point, and the
color of her Face is worse, than when with Child. Barren Women are more
subject to this Indisposition, than those who have had Children; and these have
the Inner Orifice of the Womb, straiter and thinner than the other.

Dropsies of the Womb sometimes happen in Women who are with Child, and in
these cases the Waters are without the Membranes which contain the Child.
Sometimes too they are enclosed within the Membranes, and the Woman seems to be
big with two or three Children, though she really have but one, and that very
weak too. Sometimes abundance of these Waters come away two or three Months
before Labor, and in this case it is certain they are without the Membranes,
for if the waters were broke, the Child of necessity must needs follow.

When this Dropsy happens to a Pregnant Woman, all the Relief she can have is
the patient expecting her time of Labor, and in the mean time using a drying
Diet. But if there be nothing besides Waters contained in the Womb, let her use
a Half-bath, Diuretic Medicines, and all such things as provoke the Courses,
to evacuate them. Farther, let her Bleed in the Foot, and purge with strong
Hydragogues. The Bourbon Waters are very good, especially if she Bath at the
same time she drinks them.

Of Oedematous Swellings in the Lips of the Privities.
Sometimes the Lips of the Privities are so much Swollen, that Women cannot bring
their Thighs together, or walk without a great deal of Pain. The Lips are
Transparent as in a Hydrocele, which arises from the Waters which distend them.
It is necessary to discuss this Tumor before the time of a Woman's Labor,
because it straitens the Passage, and hinders her Delivery. To this end give
her a Ptisan made of Roots of Dog-grass and wild Succory, in three Pints of
which dissolve a Dram of Crystal Mineral, or a little Spirit of Salt
dulcified; or make some slight Scarifications on the Lips to discharge the
Waters. Apply to these Scarifications a little Ointment of Roses, and
Compresses steeped in some Aromatic Wine to strengthen the parts, confining
the Woman to such a Diet, as may hinder the breeding of more Waters.
Scarification with a Lancet, is much better than the Application of Leeches,
because the Aperture made by these little Animals is so small, that it closes
immediately, and Scarifications may be kept open as long as you think fit, by
laying on unctuous Medicines.

These Oedematous Tumors are not very dangerous, when they are without Fever;
but when they proceed from an Inflammation attended with a Fever, the Womb is
most commonly affected too, and it proves fatal to the Person.

Sometimes there are varicose Swellings on the Lips of the Womb, which causes a
troublesome itching. Women who labor under this inconvenience, are Sanguine for
the most part, and have their Body bound. To remedy this, let them bleed in the
Arm, keep their Body open, refrain from Copulation, and use a cooling Diet.

Of the Veneeral Disease in Women with Child.
If a Woman with Child labor under the Venereal Distemper, and be in her last
Months, she must wait till her Delivery before she attempt a Cure, for fear of
dying if she happen to be in a course of Physic at the time of her Labor. If
the Distemper be not far gone, which is to be known by the Accidents, a
Palliative cure m^st be attempted for the present, using a regular Diet, and
gentle purging. But if a Woman be in the first Months of her going with Child,
and the Pox be very high, and attended with such Accidents as threaten her with
Death, if her cure be deferred for too long a time, let a slight Salivation be
raised by inunction of the upper parts only, as the Hands and Arms; but observe
here, you must never in this case give any Mercurial Preparations by the Mouth,
and use the utmost care least the Frictions throw the Patient i nto a Looseness,
this by disordering the Womb and exciting Throes, cause an Abortion. Bathing
which is sometimes used as a preparative to Mercurial Inunction, must be
omitted in this case, but she may use Ptisans to humect and prepare her for a
Salivation, by which (if it be prudently managed) she may be very well cured,
and notwithstanding retain her Child till its due time.

Of Abortions.
If a Woman be delivered before her seventh Month, it is called an Abortion,
but if at any time after the beginning of that, to the beginning of the tenth
Month it is called a Birth, because at that time the Child can live, and never
before it.

All acute Distempers cause an Abortion, because they kill the Child, and then
it can remain no longer in the Womb. Intermitting Fevers sometimes make a Woman
Miscarry, by causing a great pain in the Belly, and disordering the Child,
which commonly struggles very much in the time of the Fit. There are several
Accidents which endanger an Abortion, such as are great Vomitings, which by the
straining of the parts, compress the Womb, and force it to disburthen it self.
Nephritick Pains, Colic and Griping of the Guts, Stranguries when the Woman
labors much in making water, Great Looseness with a Tenesmus, abundance of the
Courses from the opening of the Womb, excessive Bleeding, Flooding from a
loosning of the Placenta, Dropsy of the Womb; in short, whatever makes a great
Agitation or Concussion of the Woman's Body, as hard Labor, Falls, Leaping,
Dancing, Riding, VValking, Loud crying Excessive Laughing, Blows over the
Belly, sudden and surprising Noise upon firing a Cannon or a clap of Thunder,
especially in the younger sort, long Watching which impairs the Strength, long
Abstinence which weakens both Mother and Child, Stinks and ill Smells, as a
Lamp of Oil extinguished or the fume of Charcoal, the Callosity of the Womb, or
its smallness which being comprest by the Omentum, wants room to dilate it
self, for the Reception of the Child, Compression of the Womb by strait lacing
the Body to appear well shaped or conceal a big Belly, frequent Copulation,
especially in the last Months, which opens the Womb. Phlegmatic Women subject
to the Whites are apt to Miscarry, because the Womb is moist and lax, and the
Placenta easily separates. The great abundance of Blood which is carried to the
Foetus too plentifully sometimes, suffocates it. Vehement Rage which puts the
Spirits into a great Hurry and Disorder, sudden Fear or the Relation of bad
News, often cause a Woman to Miscarry on the Spot. When Children are Monstrous,
they never come at their due time. The ill Posture of the Child in the Womb
sometimes puts him on struggling, which loosens the Placenta, and opens the
Womb. In the last place, Children are sometimes so large, that the Womb is not
capacious enough to contain them, or the Mother able to give them Nourishment.

If after any of these Accidents, a Woman have violent Pains in her Belly and
Reins, clods of Blood come away from the Womb, and the Waters are broke, it is
certain an Abortion is near. If the Woman feel a great Weight in her Belly, and
the Child fall as a Ball on which side soever she lie, and stinking Humors
come from the Womb, she will Miscarry of a dead Child; especially if the
Breasts, which before were hard and full, fall and decay. We have above
directed how to prevent these kinds of Abortions, and therefore shall remit the
Reader thither.

A Woman who is subject to Miscarry ought to keep her Bed, use a good Diet, and
refrain from Copulation, so soon as she perceives her self with Child, avoiding
all Diuretics and Aperitives, and all Passions of Mind, go loose in her Dress,
wear low-heel'd Shoes, and take care not to stumble. When a Woman with Child
happens to receive any hurt, let her keep her Bed, have Compresses steeped in
some astringent Wine, applied to her Belly, and let her be immediately bled in
the Arm, without deferring it as usually.

Observe here, that a Woman must never be Delivered, whilst she has a continual
Fever on her, for in this case she will die immediately after her Delivery. It
is a mistake to think her Cleansings will remove that, on the contrary it
increases them, and the Cleansings are entirely suppressed. And therefore all
endeavors must be used to abate the Fever before the Woman's Delivery.

How to order a Woman when her Reckoning is up.
When a Woman's term is up, she must abstain from all violent exercises, least
they cause a Flooding, occasion the Child to take a wrong Posture, or hasten
the Birth some days before its time, all which is very prejudicial to the
Woman: On the contrary let her walk moderately, repose her self more near the
end of her time, than in the beginning of her pregnancy, and let go loose in
her Dress. Let her observe a Regular Diet, using Meats which yield good Juyces,
and are easy of Digestion, rather roasted than boiled, to humect more, and
keep her Body open, that so she may not be obliged to take Clysters, which are
apt to hasten the Birth. For the eight or ten last days, let her anoint the
bearing parts with Oil of sweet Almonds, and Greases to relax and soften them,
and open the Passage, especially if it be the first Child, because the parts
are straiter. Women who are in years, and never had Children, must have a great
care to relax the parts well with Greases, because they are dry, and do not
yield so easily, besides the Articulation of the Coccyx or Rump-bone is very
firm, and does not easisily give way in Labor.

Women when they are near their time, may not bleed by way of prevention,
unless they are subject to Flooding, nor in the seventh Month; because this
creates a Disorder in the Body, and puts them in danger of Miscarrying.

Women near their time, ought to be provided with some able Midwife or Artist,
whom they must send to as soon as they find any great Pains in their Belly, for
some times the least Colic Pain or Gripe flings them into Labor.

How a Woman is to be ordered after her Delivery.
When a Woman is completely Delivered, and the Burden brought away, a Closure
of fine Linen Rags five or six times doubled, must be applied to her Privities,
to prevent the cold Air from entering her Body, which would shut the Vessels,
and stop the Cleansings, and cause vehement Pain and Griping of the Guts, with
an Inflammation of the Womb, a Fever, Pleurisy, and frequently Death it self.

After the entry of the Womb is closed, let the Woman who is newly Delivered,
be carried to a Bed provided for the purpose, and covered with Cloths to
receive the Cleansings. But if she be Delivered in her own Bed, which is best,
to avoid the trouble of carrying her to another; let the Cloths and other
things be removed, which were laid to receive the Waters and Filth in Labor,
and let her be placed in a convenient Situation, that so she may take herrest,
and recover the Strength she has lost in Labor. Let her Body be raised for her
more easy breathing, and the flowing of her Cleansings, which if they are
retained cause great Pains. Let her put down her Thighs and Legs close to each
other, and have a Pillow under her Hams to support them; Lastly, let her lie on
the middle of her Back without turning either to one side or another, that so
the Womb may resume its natural Situation.

As soon as the Woman is Delivered, give her an Ounce of Oil of sweet Almonds
drawn without Fire, with an equal quantity of Syrup of Maiden Hair to cool her
Throat, which is heated with her cries in Labor, and take off her Gripes.
However if, the Woman nauseate this Remedy, forbear it, and give her some good
Broth as soon as she is a little recovered from the Fatigue of her Labor, and
leave her to Sleep, suffering no noise to be made in the Chamber, drawing the
Curcains, shutting the Windows and Doors, not imitating the Practice of some
who forbid a Woman to sleep after her Labor; good Repose being the most proper
means to recover her Strength, and abate all Accidents which happen.

Of Applications to the Belly and Breasts of a Woman newly Delivered.
As soon as the Woman's Bed is fitted, apply to her Privities an Anodyne
Cataplasm made of two Ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds, and two New-laid Eggs,
both Whites and Yolks stirred together over warm Embers, to the consistence of
a Cataplasm, and spread on a Rag, and laid on moderately warm. This Cataplasm
is very good to abate the Inflammation of the Parts after hard Labor; when it
has lain on three or four Hours, renew it if the Inflammation shall require it;
Lastly, make a Decoction of Barley, Linseed, Chervil, Agrimony, Marshmallows
and Violet Leaves, and wash the Lips of the part two or three times a Day, to
clear it from Blood and other Filth proceeding from the Cleansings, and to
appease the Pain, foment it with Warm Milk Barley and Chervil Waters.

Astringents are not proper till fifteen days after delivery, when the
Purgations are come away, and then such as strengthen the parts may be used; as
a Decoction of the Roots and Leaves of Plantane and Provence Roses, in Smith's
Water. After the Cleansings are entirely over, which is about the space of
three Weeks, to corroborate and close the parts, Water of Myrrh or an
Astringent Lotion may be injected, v. g.. Pomgranate Peels, 4. p. Cypress Nuts,
iss. Acorns, i. Terra Sigillata, ss. Provence Roses, i. Roch Alum, ij. Infuse
all for the space of a Night in half a Pint of strong Red Wine alone, or
diluted with Smith's Water if it be thought too sharp; or boil till it be
reduced to a Pint; strain it through a Linen Cloth and express it, and with
this foment the Part well Morning and Night.

As soon as a Woman is delivered, let the Skins of some Animal be laid on her
Belly to keep it warm. If her Labor has been very hard, let her be very gently
Swathed, because her Belly is very sore; nor must these be straightened till her
Cleansings are all over. Some Midwives and Nursekeepers lay a Compress doubled
on the Belly, and another large square one over that, and keep these on with a
Napkin in three or four Folds, of a quarter of an Ell broad, and so straiten
and compress the Belly, but these do only bruise and hurt it. It is better to
lay a great square Compress on the Belly for the first fifteen days, to keep it
in its right position, undoing this Bandage several times a Day to anoint the
Belly (if it be sore, and she be griped) with Oil of sweet Almonds, which is
better than all the Pomatums in the World. When that time is over, you may
straiten the Belly and bring the parts together, in which you have nothing to
fear, because the Cleansings being finished, the Womb is diminished in its
bulk, and there is no great danger of hurting it, provided it be moderately
strait, for if it be too strait the Womb is thrust down, and the Woman suffers
great inconvenience by that means, and the Flux causes her Belly to remain big
for a long time after.

If the Woman intends to suckle her Child, let her Breasts be covered with fine
soft Cloths, to prevent the Milk from curdling in them. If the Milk flow in
great abundance to the Breast, embrocate them with a mixture of Oil and
Vinegar, and apply Rags dipped in it to them.

What Diet a Woman ought to observe during the time of her lying in.
A Woman newly delivered, must observe the same Diet as Persons in a Fever to
prevent it. She must be very regular and abstemious the three or four first
days, taking only some Veal or Chicken-broth, New-laid Eggs, or some good
Golly, refraining from all solid Meats.

When the abundance of Milk is over, she may be permitted to eat a little Broth
at Dinner, or a little boiled or roasted Chicken, by degrees increasing the
quantity of her Meat, which always must be easy of Digestion; Let her ordinary
Drink be a Ptisan made with Dogs-Grass, Barley and Liquorice, or boiled Water,
which she must not drink cold; she may drink a little White Wind diluted with
Water, after the first five or six Days.

Women used to hard Labor, require more plentiful Nourishment than others; and
it is sufficient for these to lessen the quantity of their ordinary Food.

Let the Woman keep her Bed and rest her self well, not disturbing her Mind
with the concerns of her Family, and avoid all Talking, let her Body be kept
open with Clysters, giving her at least one Ounce in two Days, and let her be
careful to order her self in this manner, till her Cleansings are over. In the
last place to finish all, and purge off the remaining impurities, let her take
Cassia with the purgative Syrups, and bath and cleanse her Body to receive the
Embraces of her Husband.

How to dry up the Milk.
If a Woman does not intend to suckle her Child, apply to her Breasts a Mixture
of Oil and Vinegar, or Ointment of Populeum and Galen's Cerate all spread on
Rags or Brown Paper, or a Rag dipped in Warm Verjuyce, with a little Alum
dissolved in it to make it more astringent, or the Lees of Wine, either by it
self or mixed with Oil. All these are repellents, and hinder the Humors which
breed Milk from flowing too plentifully to the Breast.

To discuss and dissipate the Milk which is already gathered in the Breasts,
apply a Cataplasm made of the four Meals (viz. Barley, Fenugreek, Linseed and
Fitches) Honey and Saffron boiled with a Decoction of Chervil and Sage, or make
a Cataplasm of Honey alone, or rub the Breasts with it, and lay on them Leaves
of red Cabbage, having first cut off the great Ribs, and deadned them before
the Fire. Or make a Decoction of Box-leaves and Sage in Urine, and foment the
Breasts with this, and let Rags dipped in it be applied to them. In the
Application of these Remedies, great care must be taken that the Woman do not
take Cold, as likewise of inflaming the Breast for fear of an Apostem;
wherefore Remedies must be changed as Symptoms alter. One good way to prevent
the breeding of Milk in the Breast, is Purging, and keeping the Body soluble
with Clysters. Much stirring of the Arms is apt to create a Pain in the Breast,
and therefore the Woman must use them as little as possible.

About three Weeks after a Woman's delivery, when the Milk is entirely gone off,
Astringent Medicines may be used to strengthen the Breasts. To this end apply
to the Breasts Cloths dipped in Myrrh Water, or anoint them with Oil of Wallnuts,
being careful not to cause hard and painful Swellings by the use of Astringent
Medicines.

Of Flooding in Women newly Delivered.
When the Burden is great the Vessels most commonly are very large, and if it
be brought away with violence, a great Flooding follows. This Flux of Blood
happens likewise, when any Part of the Burden remains behind in the Womb, or
there is any false Conception in it; for Nature striving with its utmost
efforts to expel any extraneous Body, breaks the Vessels, and pours a Torrent
of blood out of them. Sometimes Serosities only flow from the Womb, and the
Standers by are inclined to believe the Flooding is stopped, when indeed the
Mouths of the Vessels are only blockt up by clods of blood; after the removing
which the Flooding returns, and is often more vehement than before.

Flooding is the most dangerous of all the Accidents which befall Childbearing
Women, and the Blood sometimes comes away in such large quantities, that there
is no time to remedy it, and the Woman dies upon the Spot. If it proceed from
some portion of the Burden retained in the Womb or Clods of blood, or some
false Conception, all endeavors must be used instantly to bring away those
extraneous Bodies, but if after they are removed, the Blood does
notwithstanding continue to flow, bleed the Woman in the Arm if she have
strength to support it, and whilst she bleeds stop the Orifice from time to
time, and let her lie along (that is with her Head not too high) and keep her
self still, that by this means the Blood may flow in less proportion to the
lower parts, and a sufficient diversion be made without too much weakening the
Patient. Her Belly must not be straightened with any Swathe or Compress, for all
Bandages are hurtful, if the Belly be sore. Instead of this, let the Air of her
Chamber be kept cool, and cover her lightly for fear of heating the Blood, and
putting it into a Ferment, (and so increasing the Flux) and give her some
strong Clyster.

If in spite of all these Remedies the Flooding does not cease, lay her upon
fresh Straw with a single Cloth on it, and apply to her Loins Napkins dipped in
cold Oxycrate, or if it be Winter a little warmed. Let her take a little Juice
of Purslain alone, or mixed with her Broths, or make Injections of
Plantane-Water. Some pretend that a Girdle of Knot-grass put about the Wast,
stops all Fluxes of Blood:

Every half Hour to recruit her Strength, she may take a little strong Broth,
or some spoonfuls of Gelly, or Yelks of New-laid Eggs at convenient distances
of time, not eating too much at a time, for fear of overcharging her Stomach.
Let her Drink be Red Wine diluted with a little Water, in which Iron has been
extinguished, and let Cloths dipped in Aromatic Tinctures, or in defect of these
in burnt Wine, be applied to the Region of the Heart.

When the Flux of Blood begins to stop, and the Woman is a little recovered
from her Weakness, let her use a Ptisan made of Burnet and Barley for her
ordinary Drink. If these Remedies have not their due effect, the Patients Life
is in great Hazard, and if she escape, you must expect in a few days a Violent
Pain in the Head, with a continual Fever attended with cold and hot Fits, and
this sometimes is intermitting. Women who recover after violent Floodings, have
their Legs ordinarily Swollen for some Months after, because the new Blood must
of necessity be serous, and cannot recover its due Consistence in a
considerable time. The first Courses which come after Flooding are very
plentiful, and in greater quantity than usual, which makes the Woman fear the
Flooding is returned; but this proceeds only from the Largeness of the
Blood Vessels, is not dangerous, and requires no other Remedy than Rest, and
refraining from Copulation.

Of the falling out of the Womb after Delivery.
When there is a falling out of the Womb, the Woman feels a great weight at the
bottom of her Belly, great difficulty in making Water, a Pain in her Reins and
Back, and a Reddish Water comes away from the Neck of the Womb, which is
relaxed and hangs out.

To remedy this indisposition, let the Neck of the Womb be forthwith reduced to
its Natural place, and if the Woman be young, and the Disease be recent, she
may be cured, but if it be of long standing, the Cure will be difficult to
perform. If the Womb come quite forth upon a Woman's delivery, and be not
immediately reduced, her life is in very great danger. When this happens, the
Artist must have a care not to mistake that large portion of Flesh which hangs
between the Thighs for some extraneous Body, it being the Neck of the Womb it
self, which has lost its Rugosities by its Relaxation. If he draws this, there
is great Danger of causing a Flooding, and killing the Patient.

For the curing of this Disease, it is necessary to reduce the Womb to its
Natural place, and retain it there. To do this let the Woman make Water, having
first to facilitate the Work given her Clysters to evacuate the gross
Excrements in the Rectum, then let her lie on her back with her Hips raised
higher than her Head, and foment with Milk or Wine lukewarm, that which hangs
out between her Thighs, and take the Neck of the Womb with a soft Rag, and
reduce it to its Natural place, thrusting it with the Hand sometimes on one
side, sometimes on the other. If the Neck of the Womb be so large that it
cannot enter, anoint it with Oil of sweet Almond, to put it up the more casily;
and when it is reduced, wipe of the Oil for fear it relax the part, and
occasion its falling out again. If the Womb cannot be reduced, there is great
danger of its gangrening, and killing the Woman.

When the Womb is replaced, let the Woman be laid on her back, with her Hips a
little raised, and her Legs crossed, and her Thighs close to each other, for
fear of its falling out again, and put a Pessary into the Neck of the Womb to
keep it there. These Pessaries are made of a thick piece of Cork covered with
white wax to preserve them from rotting, and keep them from hurting the Neck of
the Womb, and may be drawn out from time to time to cleanse them; The Reader
will find the Figure of them in the Plates annexed at the end.

Whilst the Cleansings continue, there is no other way to strengthen the Womb,
and keep it in its proper place, but by Pessaries, for Astringent Medicines
suppress those purgations, and are of dangerous consequence, and compressing
the Belly by Swathing it, forces the Womb still down. Let the Patient have the
Pan given her in Bed, and in voiding her Excrements, let her lay her Hand
before to keep the Womb from falling out. When the Cleansings are over,
Astringent Injections may be used, and the Pessary covered with Medicines of
the like Nature, and the Woman be purged if occasion require. If she be newly
delivered, she must not rise from her Bed in six or seven Weeks, during which
time she must refrain from the Embraces of her Husband.

Of the falling out of the Fundament.
When the vehement straining of a Woman in her Labor, has occasioned the
falling out of the Fundament, if the Child be advanced in the Passage, advise
her not to help her Throes so much, and defer the Reduction till after the
Birth, because it cannot be done before without bruising the Gut. But so soon
as she is delivered, reduce it in the same manner, and observing the same
Cautions as in the falling out of the Womb. But omit on this occasion giving of
Clysters, because they are apt to excite a straining to go to stool, and
endanger a Relapse.

Of the Hemorrhoids.
Women are commonly troubled with the Piles during their lying in. To prevent
this inconvenience, let them sit with their Fundament in a Basin full of Warm
Water, for a quarter of an Hour at a time, or foment the Piles with Warm Milk,
for the first Days, or Oil of Eggs beat in a Leaden Mortar, either alone or
mixed with Oil of Populeon, being careful to put in no Ingredients which may
irritate them. By procuring a good Evacuation of the Lochia from the Womb, this
Pain abates of consequence.

Leeches applied to the Piles in any of the first days, are apt to divert the
due Evacuation of the Cleansings, and bring a Fluxion on the Piles, and for
this reason if used, must be deferred till eight Days or more after Delivery.

Of Contusions and Rents in the External parts of the Privities.
The great Dilatation of the Privities which is made by the Child in making its
way out, cannot fail of sometimes making Contusions and Lacerations, and if
these Accidents are neglected, they degenerate into malignant Ulcers, by reason
of the continual Heat and Filth of that Part. If there be only simple
Contusions or Excoriations, there is nothing farther necessary than the
applying a Cataplasm made of the Yelks and Whites of New-laid Eggs, with Oil of
sweet Almonds seethed over warm Embers, and stirred till they unite. Let this
Cataplasm be spread on fine Stupes or Rags, and applied warm, leaving it on for
the space of five or six Hours. Next lay Rags dipped in Oil of St. John's wort on
the Excoriated Lips, renewing them twice or thrice a day, bathing the parts
each time with Barley Water, and Honey of Roses, etc. to cleanse them from the
Excrements which come from the Womb. When the Patient makes Water, cover the
Lips of the Privities with fine Rags, to prevent them from being excoriated by
the sharpness of the Urine. If these excoriations are painful, the best Remedy
is Oil of Walnuts drawn without Fire.

Sometimes Midwives do so much violence to the Bearing part, that it is very
much inflamed, and a great Abscess formed in it; when this happens, it is
necessary to give vent to the Matter, and after that is discharged, to inject
some vulnerary Decoction made of Barley Water and Honey into the Cavity, with a
little Honey of Roses, and Spirit of Wine, and so treat it in the same manner,
as all ordinary Ulcers.

Sometimes the Perineum happens to be rent quite down to the Fundament in the
Birth, so that the Anus and Privities make but one common Hole. If this were
left in this State, the Woman would be delivered with more ease of her next
Child; but notwithstanding it is better to reunite the parts as soon as may be,
because the Excrements coming that way disgust the Husband, and the Woman is by
no means fit to receive his Caresses.

Wherefore having cleansed the Part with Red Wine lukewarm, let the Rent be
stitched with three or four separate Stitches, according to the length of the
Laceration, and take at each Stitch good hold of the Flesh, and then dress it
with some Agglutinating Balsam, as Arcaeus Liniment, covering the Wound with
Pledgits or Linen Cloths, to prevent the Excrements from falling on it, which
would cause a great deal of Pain, and hinder its Coalition, and let the Woman
keep her Thighs close till the Cure be perfected.

If she afterward happen to be with Child, let her take care not to anoint
those parts with Greases and Emollient Oils, for some time before her Labor,
that so the Parts giving way in the Birth, may not be torn. A Woman who has
once had an Accident of this kind, ought to employ a skillful and dextrous
Artist, because in all Labors after, there is very great danger of Laceration,
the passage being very much straightened by the Cicatrix.

If the Reunion of the Wound be neglected at first, the Callosity on the edges
must be cut off with a pair of Scissars, and it must then be Stitched, as is
above directed.

If the Child stop too long in the passage, there is a Retention of Urine which
creates an Inflammation and Ulcer in the Bladder, which in time becomes a
Fistula, and emits the Urine involuntarily. This Fistula when there is a loss
of Substance, and great part of the Neck of the Bladder is consumed by the
Suppuration, is incurable, otherwise it may be healed by due Care and Diligence.

Of Pains happening to Women after Delivery.
After a Woman is delivered, she ordinarily is troubled with sharp Pains in the
Reins, Back, Groins, and sometimes in the Womb, and all over the Belly. These
Pains are sometimes Continual, and sometimes Intermitting, and proceed from
wind in the Guts, or some extraneous Body remaining in the Womb after Delivery,
which Nature strives to expel with her utmost efforts. Some false Conception,
some portion of Burden, or some Clods of Blood in the Womb, may be the cause
of these After-pains, which cease not till they are ejected, and are not like
the Wind-Cholick alleviated by giving of Clysters, but rather exasperated.

Sometimes these Pains proceed from a sudden Suppression of the Cleansings, and
then the Womb is distended and inflamed, the Belly is hard and Swollen, and the
Woman is quickly killed by it.

Sometimes these Pains arise from an Excessive Distention of the Ligaments of
the Womb, and then they are fixed in the Back, Reins and Groins, the places
where these Ligaments are inserted, and sometimes they reach to the Womb it
self especially when it has suffered much contusion in Labor.

To prevent these Pains arising from Wind, let the Woman take a mixture of Oil
of sweet Almonds, with Syrup of Maiden Hair. Oil of Wallnuts is better if the
Taste be not too Nauscous These Medicines by their Unctuosity, make way for the
Contents of the Guts to slip more easily through them. If the Woman have an
aversion to any thing of this Nature, give her some very hot Broth, or half a
Glass of Hippocras, provided there be no danger of a Fever. She must keep her
Belly warm, must not drink her Ptisan cold, and must lay warm Cloths on her
Belly, if her pains be very troublesome to her, anointing it with Oil of sweet
Almonds, or applying a Pancake of Eggs fried with Oil of Wallnuts, taking care
not to Swath it too strait. The next morning give her Clysters made of a
Decoction of the Emollient Herbs, with a little Linseed boiled in it, adding
Honey of Roses and Oil of sweet Almonds of each three Ounces, or a little fresh
Butter, repeating these Clysters as often as occasion requires. Some Women as
soon as they are delivered, drink the Broth of an old Partridge boiled with
Leeks, others take a Draught of Milk boiled, to which they put five or six
Walnuts pounded with a little Sugar, and so strain all hot through a Linen
Cloth, but these Remedies are insignificant, if the pains arise from any
extraneous Bodies retained in the Womb; for these must necessarily be expelled,
and when that is effected, the Pains will cease of their own accord, except the
Blood happen to leave any Clods, and if so, these will not fail to produce as
sharp Pains as those after Labor.

If the Cleansings which were copious before, happen to be stopped on a fudden,
vehement and sharp pains will follow, and care must be taken to procure an
Evacuation of them by Clysters, Hot and Aperitive Fomentations applied to the
Privities, and Bleeding in the Foot.

As for the Pains in the Back and Groins, which proceed from the great
extension of the Ligaments, they are to be removed by Rest, and a Regular way
of Living.

Of the Cleansings, and the Signs when they are Good or Bad.
Those Cleansings are good which are Bloody the first days, and after lose that
color, and by degrees become white. Their Consistence ought to be uniform
without any concretions or clods, farther they ought to be void of all Acrimony
and ill Scent, and come away in a moderate quantity.

They must not continue bloody longer than the first days, otherwise instead of
Cleansings, there would be a dangerous Haemorrhage. When they gradually lose
their Red Color, and grow White, it is a sign the Vessels begin to close, and
when their Consistence is equal without any clods or concreted Matter, it is
certain there is no mixture of any Heterogeneous Substance with them; when they
have no ill Scent or Acrimony, it is evident there is no Inflammation or
Corruption of the Womb; In the last place when they flow moderately, the
Superfluities only are discharged, but when they flow in great Quantity, the
Woman is exceedingly weakened, seized with Convulsions, Swooning Fits, is
extremely emaciated, and continues pale for a long time, and her Thighs and
Legs swell, and become Hydropick.

Of the Suppression of the Cleansings, and the Accidents which follow thereupon.
When the Cleansings are suppressed, the Humors corrupt by their long stay in
the Womb, or cause some Inflammation. If the Cleansings happen to be suppressed
in the first Day, there ensues an acute Fever, a vehement Pain in the Head,
Pains in the Breast, Reins and Back, a Suffocation and an Inflammation, which
extends all over the lower Belly, and this becomes distended. Besides this, the
Woman finds a great difficulty of Breathing, stoppage at Stomach, palpitation
of the Heart, Syncopes, Convulsions and Delirium, and these Symptoms frequently
prove Mortal to her. If the Suppression continues, there is great danger of an
Abscess in the Womb, or perhaps of a Cancer or Aposthumes in the lower Belly,
Sciatica's, Lameness, or Inflammations, and Abscesses of the Breasts, according
as the Humors take there courses, and these Suppressions are more dangerous by
much, than those of the Courses.

A Looseness sometimes is the cause of the Suppression of the Cleansings, and
sometimes it proceeds from a disorder of the Spirits caused by violent Fear,
Sadness, or Dejection of Mind, Anxiety, or any dismal Apprehension. Great Cold
constringes the Vessels, and coagulates the Blood in the Womb, Cold Drink, and
Restringent Meats have the same effect, and very much stirring, diffuses the
Humors through the whole Body, and hinders their discharge by the Womb.

To bring the Lochia well down, let the Woman avoid all perturbations of Mind;
let her lie in her Bed with her Head and Breast a little raised, (keeping her
self very quiet, that so the Humors may be more easily carried downwards) let
her observe a good Diet, something hot and moist; let her rather use boiled
Meats than Roasted, and if she be any thing Feverish, drink Broths only with a
little Jelly, avoiding all binding things, and let her Ptisan be made with
Aperitives, such as Roots of Succory, Dogs-grass and Asparagus, with a little
Anise-seed and Hops, and every other time let her take a little Syrup of
Maidenhair in a Glass of the Ptisan, and carefully shun Cold Drink. Let
Clysters be given her, and her lower parts fomented with an Emollient and
Aperitive Decoction made of Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall,
Camomil, Melilot, Roots of Asparagus and Linseed, with which Decoction the Womb
may likewise be injected, and with the remaining Herbs let a Cataplasm be made,
adding a little Oil of Lilies or Hog's Grease, and apply this very hot to the
Belly. Besides this, let her Thighs and Legs be strongly rubbed down, bathing
them with the same Emollient Decoction very hot. But here bleeding must by no
means be forgot, and if the Woman be very Sanguine, first bleed her in the
Arm, and after when the Symptoms are abated in the Foot.

Of the Inflammation of the Womb after Delivery.
Very often the stopping of the Lochia, does cause an Inflammation of the
Womb, and is the Death of most Women to whom it happens. Sometimes this
Inflammation arises from some Hurt or Bruise.

An Inflammation of the Womb may be known, by being much more swelled after
Labor than is requisite, the Woman feels a very great Heaviness in the bottom
of her Belly, and that is sweeled and blown up almost as big as before
Delivery, she has a difficulty in making water, and going to stool, or she
perceives her pain increase in voiding her Excrements (because the Womb
presses the Rectum, and by its Proximity, communicates the Inflammation, as
well as to the Bladder) to which add, that in this case there is a high Fever,
and great difficulty of Breathing, and a Hiccough, Vomitings, Convulsion, and
Death soon follows if not timely prevented.

Contusions of the Womb often cause Abscesses and Schirrous Swellings, which
continue for a long time, and sometimes end in incurable Cancers.

As soon as the Womb appears to be inflamed, extract or procure the expulsion
of all extraneous Bodies, which may happen to be lodged in it, without doing
the least violence to it for fear of exasperating the Malady; correct the
Humors by a cooling Diet, and let the Patient use Food that Nourishes little,
drinking only Broth (but not too strong) made of Veal and Pullets, with the
cooling Herbs, such as Lettuce, Purslane, Succory, Borage, Sorrel, or the like;
let her abstain from Wine, and drink a Ptisan made of the Roots of Succory,
Dogs-grass, Barley and Liquorish; let her keep her self very quiet in her Bed,
and not be Swathed too strait; let her Body be kept open with simple Anodyne
Clysters, without the least sharpness, for fear of causing Throes, which
extremely pain the inflamed part, and of all Passions of the Mind, let her
especially avoid Anger.

The Redundancy of the Humors may be evacuated, and diverted by bleeding;
first in the Arm, and after in the Foot if there be occasion. It is convenient
to cover the Belly with Galen's Emplaster to cool it, or embrocate it with Oil
of sweet Almonds mixed with a little Vinegar. Injections may likewise be made
into the Womb, but these must be cooling only, without the least Astringency,
(such as are made of Barley Water, with Oil of Violets, or warm Milk are very
proper) observing to use nothing which is excessively cold, avoiding all sorts
of Diuretics, and keeping the middle way in the Cure, for fear of Inflaming
the Womb by the use of hot things, which provoke the Flux. Bleeding is good for
the making an Evacuation, without any of these consequences. But observe here,
all Purges how mild soever, are hurtful in this Case, as well as in all
Inflammations and Fluxions on the Womb, even the least that can happen.

Sometimes an Inflammation of the Womb is converted into an Aposthume, which
yields a great quantity of Matter, in this case you must be contented with a
good Regimen and Detergent Injections to carry off the Pus, and for this
purpose you may make use of a Decoction of Agrimony with Honey, or Syrup of
Wormwood, adding (if the Corruption be great) a little Spirit of Wine.

If the Aposthume degenerate into a Cancerous Ulcer, it will only admit of a
Palliative Cure.

Of Schirrosities of the Womb.
Schirrhous Swellings frequently proceed from the application of Cold and
Restringent Medicines to the VVomans Belly, or injecting something of that kind
into the Womb.

If the internal Orifice only is Schirrhous, the Womb is not larger than the
common size; but if the whole Body of it be affected, it is exceedingly
tumefied, and this often happens upon an Inflammation after Labor, or upon
some disorder or suppression of the Courses. For the more certain knowing there
is a Schirrosity in the Womb, lay your Hand on the Woman's Belly, or introduce
your Finger into the Womb, and you will find it big with an extraordinary
hardness. The inner Orifice is larger, harder, shorter, and more unequal, than
it ought if there be no Inflammation, or the Schirrus be not disposed to
Cancerate, it is indolent, but if it be inclined to either of these, the Pain
is very great.

If the Womb be Schirrous, the Woman finds a great Lassitude, a Weight at the
bottom of her Belly, feels Pains in her Reins, Groins and Hips, and has a
frequent Motion to make Water, and these Pains increase when she makes an
effort to void her Excrements, because the Womb compresses the Rectum and the
Bladder by its Weight. The Courses are entirely suppressed, or in very small
quantity, or irregular, which is occasioned by the Obstruction of the Part.

The best way to begin the Cure, is by bleeding in the Arm, and gentle Purging,
for violent Purging in this case is hurtful, and exasperates the Disease,
Emollient Oils, Greases and Cataplasins applied to the Belly, and emollient
Injections into the Womb are serviceable, after which the Patient may use the
Whole or Half-bath. After she has for several days been treated in this manner,
let her bleed in the Foot, refrain from Copulation, and observe a cooling Diet
to allay the Heat of the Blood. Thin Milk, especially that of Asses is good in
this Distemper, but the drinking the Mineral Waters, is yet better.

Of a Cancer of the Womb.
This is commonly the consequence of a Schirrosity, Inflammation or Aposthume,
after Labor. Ill conditioned Whites, and virulent Gonorrhoeas of long
standing, conduce very much to this, by the erosion of the Womb.

It sometimes happens to Women upon a cessation of their Courses, because the
Vessels being stopped by degrees, the blood brought to the Womb, stagnates,
corrupts and ulcerates the substance of the Part, which soon becomes Cancerous.

When a Woman has a Cancer in the Womb, she feels a pricking pain, and a
heaviness which is caused by the sharpness of the Humors, and the bearing down
of the Womb. This Pain extends to the Reins and Groins, and the Patient feels a
great Weight at the bottom of her Belly, and a general Lassitude of the whole
Body; she has a difficulty of Urine, and a Serous, Faetid, Virulent, Blackish
Gleet comes from the Womb. Sometimes the Blood comes away wholly fluid, and
sometimes it is concreted. When the Ulceration is in the inner Orifice of the
Womb, it may be perceived by the Finger, or may be seen by the help of the
Speculum Matricis; but if it be in the bottom, there is no way to know it but
by the condition of the Matter which comes from it, and by the Symptoms above
mentioned. These Ulcers are very unequal, Sordid and Stinking, and the
Corruption is sometimes so great, as to breed Worms.

Cancers of the Womb are incurable, and only admit of Palliating Remedies,
which abate the violence of the Pains. The Patient must not take any thing
sharp, either inwardly or outwardly, for fear of increasing the Disease and
Pain, and hastening her End.

Women who have a Schirrhus or Apostem in their Wombs, or who are subject to
Flooding, or have a Cessation of their Courses, especially when they are
advanced in years, are most of all subject to Cancers. Such Persons as are
threatened with this Disease, upon the account of the ceasing of their Courses,
have no better Expedient than to bleed in the Arm at convenient times, to
supply the defect of that Evacuation, and by this means prevent too great a
Redundancy of Blood and Humors in the Womb; and this they ought to do for
several years together, till those Vessels which conveyed the Blood are very
much diminished. If such a Woman has been very subject to frequent
Haemorrhages, let her refrain from Copulation, because this Action brings Blood
into the part; Let her observe a cool and moist Diet, and shun all Aperitive,
Diuretic or Violent purging Medicines; Let her drink new Milk from the Cow to
sweeten the Blood, and frequently drink Broths made of Pullets, whose Bellies
were first stuffed with the cold Seeds. The Cow whose Milk she drinks must be
sound and not overheated, fed with good Pasture, and one who has not lately
Calved; for all Errors of this kind are dangerous.

Of a Looseness happening to a Woman newly laid.
A Looseness when it happens to a Woman soon after her Delivery is dangerous,
because it diverts the Cleansings from flowing to the Womb, and by this means
often proves fatal to the Patient. That which makes this case dangerous, is,
that Remedies proper to stay the Flux, such as Astringents and Purgatives, are
not to be admitted of, especially at first. In this case therefore give the
Patient strong Broaths to strengthen her, and abate the Flux, give her Anodyne
Clysters made of a simple Decoction of Bran, or the cooling Plants either
alone, or with the addition of Milk, or the Yelks of Eggs to abate the Pain, or
let her take some grains of Laudanum in the Yelk of an Egg. If the Looseness be
accompanied with a Fever, let her bleed. However, if there be a visible Danger
of the Woman's losing her Life by the continuing of the Flux, use all common
Remedies in this case, without the least Scruple, and when that is stopped,
attempt to procure an evacuation of the Cleansings, which for a time were
suppressed.

Of Ruptures of the Belly in Women with Child.
The Womb sometimes is distended to so large a size, that it breaks through the
Peritoneum, and causes Ruptures so large, as to contain the Womb and Child in
it. These Ruptures sometimes happen above and below the Navel, between the
Musculi Recti, in the Navel it self, and in the Groins, which are the weakest
parts of the Belly. They commonly proceed from great Straining of a Woman in
Labor, or vehement Vomitings, or violent and frequent Sneezing, or some
accidental blow on the Belly. This Disease causes want of Digestion, Vomiting
and severe Cholick pains, and often when the Gut which is fallen cannot
re-enter, Death is the Consequence, or at least there is a necessity of making
an Incision into the Belly, as in a Bubonocele.

To avoid Accidents of this Nature, the Woman must be forbid to lace her self,
or straiten her Belly, that it may have room to extend it self every way. But
if she happen to have a Rupture, she must wear a Bandage with Compresses
adjusted to the Part, to prevent the Guts from intruding themselves into the
Swelling. If the Rupture be in a place into which the Womb can insinuate it
self, the Woman must have an especial care to prevent this Fatal Accident, by
the help of good Bandages, and she would do well to keep her Bed during her
being with Child.

Of an Inflammation of the Breasts after Delivery.
If a Woman with Child has received a Blow on her Breasts, or compressed them
by lying on them, or has left too great a quantity of Milk in them, without
drawing them, an Inflammation will infallibly ensue, which sometimes is the
cause of Apostems or Schirrosities, which degenerate into Cancers. The Breasts
being very sensible when they are inflamed, soon produce a continual Fever with
Deliriums.

The best way to prevent an Inflammation of the Breasts, is to procure a good
Evacuation of the Cleansings, and if they are suppressed to provoke them, that so
all the Humors which flowed too plentifully to the Breasts, may take their
course downwards. For this purpose bleed her first in the Arm, and then in the
Foot. In the mean time Embrocate the Breasts well with a Mixture of Oil of
sweet Almonds, and after that apply Galen's, cooling Emplaster, with a third
part of Populeum, or a Cataplasm made of the Setlings found in a Cutlers
Grindstone Trough, and Oil of Roses with a little Vinegar, or if the Pain be
violent, make a Cataplasm with the Crumb of White Bread, Milk, Oil of sweet
Almonds, and the Yelks of Eggs, and apply it to the Breasts, and over that lay
Compresses dipped in Oxycrate or Plantane Water. But great caution is to be used
in Astringent Remedies, least if they be too strong, they occasion a Schirrus,
which in time may become Cancerous.

After the Height of the Inflammation is over, let Discutients be used to
dissipate the Milk, which flows in too great abundance to the Breasts, but the
best way in this case, is to draw them by Sucking; for if any great quantity be
left in the Breasts, it will necessarily Suppurate. However it is necessary to
use discussing Applications first, because Sucking brings Milk into the
Breasts. But if the Milk runs off it self leave it, for this is enough to empty
them. Milk may be resolved by applying a Cataplasm of pure Honey to the part,
or ^ubbing them with a red Cabbage Leaf, having first deadned it by the Fire,
and taking care not to straiten the Breast. The following Discutient is very
good. Take a good Red Cabbage and boil it in River Water till it be soft, and
the Water evaporated. Pound this in a Wooden or Stone Mortar, and after pass
it through a Sieve, adding Honey and Oil of Camomil, and apply this Cataplasm
to the Breasts.

Let the Woman in the mean time use a cool Diet, not very Nourishing, to
prevent breeding too much Chile. Let her keep her Body open, that so the
Humors may discharge themselves downwards, while the Inflammation remains; let
her lie in Bed on her Back, because when she is up, the Weight of her Breasts
increases the Pain. On the fourteenth or fifteenth day after her delivery, when
the Cleansings are pretty well come away, and she is free from a Fever, she may
be purged as often as seems convenient. If notwithstanding the use of these
Remedies the Pain does not abate, there is reason to believe there is Pus in
the Breasts.

Of the Curdling and Clodding of Milk in the Breasts.
About the fourteenth or fifteenth day after Labor, the Milk often is apt to
Curdle, and then the Breasts become hard, unequal, and rugged, without any
Redness, and all the Glands filled with curdled Milk, may easily be discerned;
The Woman finds a great Pain; and cannot Milk them as before, she finds a
Shivering in her Back, which seems to be like Ice. This is followed by a Fever
of four and twenty Hours continuance, and sometimes less, if the clodding of
the Milk do not turn to an Inflammation of the Breast, which will undoubtedly
happen, if it be not emptied or dissipated.

This clodding of the Milk, for the most part proceeds from the Breasts not
being well drawn, either because she has too much Milk, or the Infant is too
weak, or she has no desire to be a Nurse; for the Milk in these cases remaining
in the Breast, sours and clods. This Accident may sometimes happen from taking
Cold, or keeping the Breasts not well covered.

The most certain Remedy in this Case, is to draw the Breasts speedily, till
they are well evacuated, but because the Woman is not soft Milcht, and the
Child cannot draw them strongly enough, let another Woman draw them till the
Milk comes freely, and then she may give the Child Suck; and to the end that
she may not afterward breed more Milk than the Child can draw, let her use a
Diet that yields but little Nourishment, and keep her Body open. But when it
happens the Woman neither can nor will be a Nurse, then her Breasts must not
be drawn, for fear of attracting more Humors, for the Disease will ever recur,
if they be not emptied; wherefore it is necessary to prevent the coming of any
more Milk into them, and to resolve and dissipate that which is there. For this
purpose the Woman must be bled in the Arm, have strong Clysters given her.
Bleeding in the Foot and Purging, are very serviceable in this Case, and to
resolve and dissipate the curdled Milk, apply some Cataplasm above recommended,
as that of pure Honey, or the four Meals boiled in a Decoction of Sage, Mint,
Smallage and Fennel, mixing with it Oil of Chamomil, with which Oil the Breasts
may be well anointed. Cloths laid over pots of Salt Butter are very good, after
having used all things proper to resolve the concreted Milk.

Of Apostems in the Breasts of a Woman new laid.
If a Woman feels a great Pain, and there be a stronger Pulsation in one place
than another, a Hardness, a Livid Color, with a softness in the midst, it is a
sign the Breasts will Apostemate.

To suppurate the Apostem, apply on the Breasts an Emollient and Ripening
Cataplasm made of Mallows, Marshmallows, with their Roots, Lily Roots and
Linseed bruised, and boiled to a Pap, that it may be pulped through a Sieve,
and so no hardness may be left to hurt the Breasts, which at that time are in
great Pain, after mix a good quantity of Hog's Grease or Basilicon with it, or
lay a little Cloth thick spread with the same Basilicon, upon the place where
it is likely to break, and the Poultis all over it, renewing it twelve Hours
after, or at farthest next day, continuing this Remedy till the Apostem be
ripe. Or you may make use of the Emplastrum Divinum, malaxed with Oil of
Lilies; This is preferable to all others of the like Nature, for this purpose.
As soon as the Apostem is Ripe, it must be opened, if it open not of it self.
The time when it is sit, may be known by the ceasing of the beating the Woman
felt before in her Breasts, and that the Pain and Fever is very much abated,
and then besides the middle of the Apostem is raised to a Point, and very soft,
and the contained Matter may by the Finger be perceived to fluctuate. The
Apertion must be made with a Lancet, or with a grain or two of some Caustic,
making it large enough to evacuate the concreted Matter. It is best to use the
Lancet, because there is no loss of Substance, and the Scar is not so
Disfiguring. The Orifice must be made in the most commodious place, for the
Evacuation of the Matter, taking care that none of the large Vessels near the
Armpits be opened, After that, all the Matter and putrified clodded Milk is
discharged, deterge the Apostem after the ordinary manner, observing not to
make the Tents too long, or too hard, but of very soft Dossils of Lint, without
thrusting them too far in, and fasten a Thread to the first to draw it out, if
there be occasion, because these Apostems are most commonly deep. If there be
great Pain, dip the Pledgits in Oil of Eggs, or Basilicon mixed with some
Digestive, if there remain any thing yet to Suppurate; after this deterge the
Ulcer with Honey of Roses, or Vnguentum Apostolorum, laying on the Emplast.
Divinum, to soften and discuss the remaining hardness.

If there be several Apostems in different places of the Breast, in this case
there is no need of laying open every one of these small Holes, but it suffices
to make one or two Apertures in some depending part large enough, because the
Breasts are Spungy, and these Apostems communicate with each other. But the
most prompt Remedy, is to drive the Milk quite back; and for this purpose give
the Woman Clysters, and purge her frequently, confining her to a Diet which is
not very Nourishing.

You must not always stay till the Cataplasms break the Abscesses, and
sometimes there is a necessity of opening them with a Lancet, because if the
Matter Stagnate too long in the Breasts, it will corrode that Glandulous part,
and form Sinuosities very difficult to cure.

Of the Excoriation and Loss of the Nipples.
Very often Women that are Nurses, and especially the first time, are subject
to have their Nipples excoriated, for the small holes of the Nipples not being
sufficiently opened, the Child takes more pains to Suck, than when the Breasts
do almost run of themselves. Sometimes these Chaps and Excoriations, do so
increase by the Child's continual Sucking, that in the end it quite takes the
Nipple off from the Breast, and the Woman is no longer capable of giving Suck,
and there remains an Ulcer very hard to be cured.

This may sometimes happen from Childrens biting and mumping the Nipples, and
sometimes their Mouths are so hot, that they make the Nipples sore, as when
they have those little Ulcers called Apthae or a Thrush, and much sooner if
they have the Pox, with which they infect their Nurses.

These Excoriations if they are neglected, at length become very Malignant
Ulcers. Wherefore as soon as they begin, let the Woman forbear giving her
Child Suck, till they are perfectly cured, and in the mean time drive back the
Milk, for fear of an Inflammation, from too great abundance of it. If only one
Nipple be sore, she may give Suck with the other; to these sore Nipples,
Desiccative Medicines must be applied, as Alom or Limewater, or they may only
be bathed with Plantane Water, laying on them small soft Rags dipped in those
Liquours, or apply an Emplaster of Ceruss or Pompholyx, or Starch; but an
especial care must be taken that nothing be applied which may disgust the
Child, for which reason many only use Honey of Roses.

To prevent Hurts in these Parts, and hinder the Woman's Clothes from cleaving
to them, let a little cap of Lead be put on, as well to defend them, as to give
Issue to the Sanies, which proceeds from those little Ulcers, or that the Milk
which distills from the Breast, may pass that way.

If the Child has sucked off the Nipple, the Milk must then be quite dried
away, because otherwise it would be impossible to cure these Ulcers, which in
time would become callous and malignant.

If the Child be put to another Nurse, and the Ulcers in its Mouth have no
Malignity, it is enough to wash them with Barley Water mixed with a little Juice
of Citron, and let the Nurse use a cooling Diet.

When the Nipples are quite lost, the small Holes are closed up by the Ulcers,
but if notwithstanding she shall desire to give Suck, another Woman may by
degrees make her new Nipples, after the Ulcer shall be perfectly healed, whose
Sucking by degrees will draw them out, and by this means unstop the Root of the
old Nipples, or if she have no Woman to Suck her, let her use a Glass
Instrument, with which she may her self Suck them five or six times a Day, and
to shape them and preserve them when they are drawn out, let her put on them a
small cap of Wood.

Of the Swelling of the Legs and Thighs, in a Woman newly laid.
If the Swelling be very great, there be an Inflammation, and it proceed from
Suppression of the Cleansings; if there be a Fever, difficulty of Breathing, a
great Tension and Pain in the Belly, the case is dangerous. If there be but an
indifferent Swelling only, without any of the above mentioned Accidents, there
is no great difficulty in the Cure.

For this purpose, procure a good Evacuation of the Cleansings, give the Woman
an Aperitive Ptisan, made with the Roots of Fennel, Parsley and Dogs-grass,
with a little Crystal Mineral. Sometimes give her an ounce of Syrup of Maiden
Hair in a Glass of the Ptisan, with five or six drops of the dulcified Spirit
of Salt, and about half a dram of Sal Polychrestum. If she have no Fever, and
it be fifteen days after her Delivery, she may be purged.

Of the Suffocation of the Womb after Delivery.
Some Women in Hysteric Fits have a high Pulse, others a very low one, as it
were sunk in, others have scarce any at all; some became pale and motionless,
others have a good color in their Cheeks, and have several Convulsions, some
have not the least appearance of Breath, and others Breath with great
Difficulty, and great Heavings of the Breast; some are insensible, without
remembering any thing they have done, or said; others never lose their Reason or
Judgment, some are Gay and Merry, Langhing and Singing, others are Sad and
Dejected. Some are attacked with frequent Fits, others very seldom. The Fits
sometimes last for several Hours or Days, and sometimes are suddenly over. The
most ordinary Signs of the Hysteric Passion, are difficulty of breathing,
which causes a Suffocation with a great constriction of the Throat, as if the
Patient had a Morsel which she could not swallow, and the Throat were griped
with a Man's Hand. There is a great Weakness and Palpitation of the Heart,
Nausea's, and sometimes a Flux of Water and Serosities from the Mouth;
frequent yawning, sometimes is a Forerunner of the Fit. The Woman feels a
Pulsation of the Arteries in the bottom of her Belly, a leaping and contraction
of the Womb, a Rusling of wind in the Stomach and Guts which distends them,
and bears up the Diaphragm, sometimes she is delirious in the Fit, and has
Convulsive Motions preceded by a Pain, Weight, and Dizziness of the Head,
Dazzling of the Eyes, Drowsiness and Forgetfulness. Sometimes after these
Convulsive Motions, she is thrown into a Mortal Apoplexy, or a Palsy of one
side, which continues for several years.

To prevent this Distemper, if there be a Suppression of the Cleansings, bring
them down by relaxing all the parts round the Womb, and the Thighs by a
half-Bath, by bleeding in the Foot and purging. If it be a Big-bellied Woman
who labors under this Distemper, let her only bleed, and keep her Body open
with Clysters. The use of the Mineral Waters is admirable, to prevent the
Hysterical Passion, in case the Patient be not with Child. If the Suffocation
proceed from any extraneous Body in the Womb, extract it, or procure its
expulsion by Medicines. Let the Patient avoid all sweet scented things, all
Sweetmeats, or any thing prepared with Sugar, all Melancholy and disturbing
Passions, and keep her Body open. If she be a Married Woman, let her often
embrace the privileges of that State if not, let her keep a cooling Diet, using
Emulsions and Bathing.

In the Fit which is ordinarily attended with difficulty of Breathing
Suffocation, Weakness, Palpitations of the Heart, it is usual to present to
the Patient things which have a very ill Scent, as Partridge Feathers, or Soals
of Shoes burnt. Some fling a Dram of lighted Camphire into a pot of Water,
leaving it till it be extinguished, and give this Water to the Patient to
drink, or give two or three drops of Oil of Amber in a Spoonful of Broth, or
Orange-flower Water. But the best way is to unlace the Patients Cloths, and
give her a Spoonful or two of Cinnamon Water or Aqua-vitae; this is a good
Cordial, and promptly dissipates the VVindiness in the Stomach, which is the
cause of these Suffocations. A Spoonful or two of Wine alone is very good.
Smelling to Spirit of Wine is better than Vinegar. The scent of burnt Paper, or
a Musket Match is very good. If she be with Child, she may not smell too
stinking Scents, for fear she Miscarry. If she be not with Child, let her take
Sneezing Powders, with Powder of Betony, or Tobacco without Perfume. You may
put a grain or two of Salt into the Patients Mouth, to bring away the Water
and Serosities which slow thither in great abundance.

If any large Evacuations precede the Fit as a great Looseness, Flooding, or an
immoderate Flux of the VVhites, or a great abundance of the Cleansings, and the
VVomans Pulse be low and languid, her Face pale, and her Body cold, you must
forbear bleeding; on the contrary, it she have a Florid Color in her Face, her
Pulse be high, and there be a Suppression of the Courses or Cleansings before,
and she have Convulsive Motions, I think bleeding is very proper, first in the
Arm, and after in the Foot.

Of the Whites.
It is very difficult to distinguish VVhites in Women, from virulent
Gonorrhoea's. In the VVhites the Matter is whiter, more serous, especially if
it be copious, and less foetid than in Gonorrhoea's. On the contrary, in
Venereal cases it is more stinking, thick, blackish, yellowish, greenish, and
sometimes is of a redish Color, by the mixture of a bloody Serosity. When a
Woman has the VVhites, the Courses become irregular; sometimes instead of her
Courses, she has a Flux of Blood which becomes serous, and appears like the
Water in which Flesh has been washed; when it is a little abated, after some
time some clods of black corrupted blood come away among the putrid Matter. A
Woman who has the VVhites, can lie with her Husband without pain, but she who
has an Ulcer cannot. The Matter which comes away in the VVhites, most commonly
is White, Serous, not unlike VVhey, without any ill Scent, though sometimes it
is yellow, stinks, and by its Acrimony causes a great Smarting of the Parts. It
is very difficult to distinguish the VVhites from Gonorrhaea's. Women with
Child are more subject to this Distemper, which is occasioned by the
Suppression of their Courses. Few Women are wholly exempt from this
inconvenience, but at some time or other lalour under it; but some are much
more subject to it than others. Women who have not their Courses regularly,
those who are Phlegmatic, have a soft Skin, are pale colored, or lead a
Melancholy Sedentary Life, are most of all subject to the Whites; but young
Girls who are not of an Age to have their Courses, never have them. The Whites
weaken the Woman, humect and relax the Womb to that degree it cannot contract
and close it self, and by consequence cause Barrenness. The Woman's Countenance
becomes pale, her Legs swell, she loses her Appetite, has Pains in her Back,
Weakness, Palpitation of Heart, and Hysteric Fits. If the Whites continue long
the Woman is emaciated, and becomes Hectical; Nay, sometimes such a Relaxation
of the Womb ensues, that it becomes Cancerous if neglected.

For the Cure of this Distemper, Bleed and Purge the Patient well, and
prescribe a good Diet to her; let her go to the Baths, and after drink the
Chalybeate Waters, or others of the like Nature. Phlegmatic Women whose Flesh
is tender and soft, ought to drink the hot Waters, as those of Bourbon and
Vichy in France [or the Bath in England] or a Sudorifick Decoction made of the
Roots of China and Salsa-parilla, taking for a fortnight before, a Glass of a
Laxative and Diuretic Ptisan made of Maiden Hair, Roots of Dog-grass,
Asparagus, Smallage and Fennel, with a Dram of Senna, adding every three days,
four or five drops of the dulcified Spirit of Salt, or half a Dram of Sal
Polycrestum; and during this time, let her observe a good Diet, refraining from
Copulation, and avoiding all Melancholy and Dejection of Mind. The most proper
time to begin the use of Medicines, is immediately after the Courses are over.
After these Medicines, the Patient may use Astringent Injections made of equal
parts of Plantane and Myrrh Water, but she must forbear when the time of the
Courses is near, for fear they cause a Suppression; for my part, I would not
advise any Woman to use Styptick Applications, because this part is the common
Sink, where all the Filth of the Body is discharged.

When the VVhites are very Acrimonious, and cause a smarting of the Parts,
Barley-Water or Whey, or simple Water may be injected three or four times a
Day, (except in the time of the Courses,) to allay the Heat and Pain,
prescribing a good Diet, and between whiles, purging her till the Cure be
completed.

Though the Patient may seem to be cured, and the Whites cease, or at least are
very much abated, the Woman must notwithstanding frequently take Medicines,
and all her Life observe a good Diet, otherwise she will be in very great
danger of a Relapse.

Of Dieting and ordering a Newborn Babe.
It is not usual to give a Child Suck, till ten or twelve Hours after its
Birth, and then the Nurse must Milk a little into its Mouth and on its Lips to
give it a Relish, and when the Child has taken the Breast she must squeeze it
till it be accustomed to Suck of its own accord.

If a Nurse have plenty of Milk, give the Child no other Food for the first two
Months; but for the first two or three Days, give it but a little at a time,
for fear of overcharging its Stomach, and after increase the quantlty. When the
Child is grown a little bigger, you may give it either in the Day or Night, as
much as it desires, a little and often, for if it take too much at a time, it
vomits it up, the Stomach being too weak to digest it. But if you can govern
the Child, it would be better to give it the Breast but once every two Hours,
and never in the Nightime, unless when it wants Sleep.

After the Child has been fed the first two or three Months with Breast-Milk
only, you may give him a Pap made of Flour and Milk, though but little at
first, and not too thick neither lest his Stomach be overcharged. That this may
be easier of Digestion, put the Meal in an Earthen Pan into an Oven, as soon as
the Bread is drawn, stirring it often to dry it equally. Pap made thus, is much
better than the common way; for being made with raw Flour, it is very difficult
to boil it well, without consuming the best part of the Milk, leaving the
thickest part behind, which by its long boiling loses its goodness. When the
Child has taken Pap thus made, which must be but once a day, (especially in the
Morning) or twice at most, the Nurse may give it Suck to wash it down into the
Stomach, and dilute it there.

If Pap be given to a Child newly Born, as some Women indiscreetly do, it
causes Obstructions, Difficulty of Breathing, Gripes, Swelling of the Belly,
and Convulsions, of all which Death is the Result, and therefore it is best to
forbear the three or four first Months, provided the Nurse do not want, Milk.

When the Child has sucked its Fill, let the Nurse lay it to Sleep, not in the
same Bed she lies in her self, for fear of over-laying it, but in a Cradle
close by her Bedside, and let her put a Mantle over the Head of the Cradle, to
prevent Dust falling on its Face, and the Daylight, Sunshine, Candle or Fire
in the Chamber from offending it; let her lay it to sleep on its Back with its
Head a little raised upon a Pillow, and to make it Sleep the sooner, let her
rock gently with an equal Motion, without too great shaking; but that she would
have him go to sleep, it is best not to use him to it at first. He may sleep at
any time in the Day or Night, and ordinarily the better he is the more he
sleeps; however if he exceeds in this respect, let his Nurse carry him in her
Arms to the Light, sing some little Song to him, show him some glittering
thing, or dance him in her Arms.

When he is in the Cradle, let it be so turned that the Light may be directly
in his Face, that he may not be tempted to look aside; for doing so often, his
Sight will be perverted, and he become Squint-eyed. But the best way is to let
him see no Light at all.

The Nurse must open and change the Child, at least twice or thrice a Day, and
sometimes in the Night too, if it be necessary to cleanse him from his
Excrements, and shift the Blankets, which must be put into a Bucking-Tub, and
not slightly washed, as most hired Nurses do; because there comes a certain
Salt from the Excrements, which insinuates it self into them, and causes a
great itching, smarting, and excoriation of the Child's Body.

The Child must always be opened before the Fire, and his Blankets and Clouts
well warmed and dried, before he be put into them, least their cold and
dampness, cause a Cholick and Gripes. The Nurse must put Rags behind his Ears,
and under his Armpits, to dry up the Moisture. During the first four or five
Days, she must be careful not to make the remaining part of the Navil-string
fall off too soon, before the Vessels be closed, and every time she opens the
Child, she must see whether the Navel for want of being tied fast do not bleed;
and after the end is fallen off, let her still for some time Swathe the Navel,
continuing to keep a Compress on it till it be well cicatrized, and something
sunk in. Besides this, let her put upon the Mold of the Head under the Biggin,
another Compress to keep the Brain warm, and prevent the Child's taking cold.
Let her also be very careful not to suffer the Child to cry too much,
especially at first, least the Navel be protruded outward, and cause an
Exomphalos, or a Rupture in the Groin. The best way to quiet him is to give him
the Breast, and to lay him clean and dry and present something to amuse and
please him.

Some foolish Nurses use to suck the Child's Breast, to draw out the Serosities,
and form a Nipple in Girls, but this is a ridiculous Practice; it suffices in
this case to apply Rags dipped in Oil of Roses and Vinegar, and forbear Swathing
the Part too strait.

Of the Weakness of Newborn Children.

Children sometimes suffer so much by a bad Labor, that it is difficult to
know whether they are alive or dead, not any part of their Body having the
least sensible Motion, and being as Blue and Livid, especially in the Face, as
if they were choked. However, you may be assured a Child is alive, if laying
the Hand upon the Breast you feel the Motion of the Heart, or touching the
Navel-string near the Belly, a small Pulsation of the Arteries may be perceived.

The best-help in this case, is to lay him speedily in a warm Bed and Blanket,
and carry him to the Fire, and there let the Midwife sup some Wine and spout it
into his Mouth, repeating it if there be occasion; let her lay Rags dipped in
warm Wine to the Breast and Belly, and let the Face be uncovered, that he may
draw Breath the easier, let her keep his Mouth open a little, and cleanse his
Nostrils with small Linen Tents dipped in White Wind.

Of Contusions or Bruises of a Newborn Child.
Children frequently receive Bruises on the Head in their Birth, and sometimes
have a knob near as big as an Egg, especially if the Mother be in Years, and it
be her first Child, because the inner Orifice of the Womb is Callous, and
cannot be dilated without great difficulty, and the Midwife sometimes does
much mischief by handling it too roughly.

These Tumors are often so large, that they hinder the Artist from discovering
which part presents, and often times make them think it is the Shoulder which
they feel. But this Error is easily discerned, because these Tumors though
feeling fleshy, are notwithstanding harder than any Shoulder or Buttock of a
Child, which parts are always soft and without Hair, as the Head has; besides
the Bones may be easily perceived, if the Finger being anointed with Oil or
fresh Butter, it can be introduced into the inner Orifice, for the Parts within
the Womb are not Swelled. If a Child comes with any part besides the Head, and
they remain a long time pressed in the Passage, they will swell likewise.

The best way to prevent these sort of Tumors, is to procure a speedy
Delivery. To this end grease well the Internal Orifice of the Womb to relax
it, and dispose it to give way for the passage of the Child; and as soon as the
Child is born, foment the Tumors with warm Wine or Spirit of Wine, and lay
Compresses dipped in the same on them; some Midwives only dip a Compress in Oil
and Wine bear together. If a Tumor will not be discussed by this means, but
comes to Suppuration, the Matter must be let out as soon as is possible, for
fear it corrupt the Bones of the Head; In this case it must be opened with a
Lancet, and an Emplaster of Betony applied on the VVound. If it be any other
Part than the Head which is swol^, let it be wrapped in Compresses dipped in a
Decoction of Provence Roses, Camomil Flowers, and Melilot.

Some Male Children have the Scrotum very much swelled, which may proceed from
a Contusion or Waters contained in it. In both these cases, Compresses dipped in
Wine with Roses boiled in it, must be applied.

The greatest Mischief is, when by the badness of the Labor or unskilfullness
of the Midwife, a Leg or Arm is broken or dislocated; if this happen a Surgeon
must be called, and the Part dressed after the same manner as in grown Persons,
having regard to the Weakness and softness of the Bone.

Of the Mould and the Sutures of the Head being too open.
Very often Children who come before their time, have the Mould of their Head,
and the Sutures open. This arises from the distance and separation of the Bones
from one another, which are not steady, but may be moved to and fro, and yield
on every side. When this happens, you must not think to bring the Bones
together by binding the Head strait, for this would press the Brain which is
very tender, and kill the Child. It is sufficient to bind them softly with a
small Cross-cloth, to prevent the inconvenience of their being unsteady, and
commit the rest to Natures Work, which in time will unite the Bones.

There are some Children which have the Mould open till they are three years
old more or less, according to their Strength. In this case, it is convenient to
cover the Part with a Linen Cloth three or four times double to prevent taking
cold, and to defend the Brain from external Injuries.

It happens sometimes, that although the Bones be big enough to unite in all
Parts; yet they are separated from each other in the place of the Sutures, by a
quantity of Waters contained between them and the Dura Matter, and sometimes
between the Skin and the Pericranium, or the Pericranium and the Skull, and
sometimes in the Sinus of the Brain it self. If the Water is contained between
the Teguments and the Bones, and the Swelling be not very large, the Child may
be cured by opening and evacuating the Waters, or discussing them.

Of Gripes and Pains in the Belly of a young Child.
Many Children are so griped, that they cannot forbear crying out Night nor
Day. This is the first Distemper which happens to them, and they often die of
it.

The principal cause of these Gripes, is the Meconium which is contained in
their Guts, which by its long stay there grows sharp, and pricks their
Membranes, or becoming hard, the Infant cannot void it, nor the new Excrements,
which proceed from the Milk which he first Sucks. It sometimes happens because
the Child not being able to Suck with ease, he swallows in sucking the Milk
with Difficulty, much Air and VVind, which being retained in the Stomach, and
sliding into the Guts does distend them, and cause a great deal of Pain.

This VVind is sometimes caused by a Child's taking a greater quantity of Milk
than he can digest, or the Woman giving her Breast-Milk soon after Labor,
before it be purified, or perhaps because the Child has taken Cold. Very often
these Gripes proceed from giving him Pap too soon, or not well boiled; because
this is Gross, Viscous, and apt to engender VVind in the Stomach. Worms
sometimes by their stirring and biting, do very much torment Children. In the
last place, the Midwife may have caused this by forcing back the cold and
clodded Blood out of the Navelstring before it be tied.

To avoid these Pains, the Nurse must avoid giving the Child suck till the next
Day, least the Milk mix with the Excrements, and so corrupt and grow sour,
increasing the quantity by little and little, till the Child be used to this
sort of Food. If it be the Meconium, which by its long stay causes these pains;
give them at the Mouth a little Oil of sweet Almonds or Syrup of Roses, and put
a Suppo^tory made of Beet stalks into the Fundament, or a Sugar Almond dipped in
Honey, or a small Clyster.

If the Child cannot Suck, and this proceed from its being Tongue-tied, the
Fraenum must be cut in the manner shall be taught in its proper place, and if
the Nurse be hard Milcht, change her for another.

Whilst the Child is griped give it no Pap, because this Food does create
Obstructions, breed VVind, and often cause Convulsions.

If the Gripes proceed from Worms, lay a Cloth dipped in Oil of Wormwood mixed
with Ox Gall on the Belly, or a small Cataplasm made with Powders of Rue,
Wormwood, Coloquintida, Alees, and the Seeds of Citrons incorporated with
Ox-gall, and Flouer of Lupines, and if it can take any thing by the Mouth, give
it a small infusion of Rhubarb, or half an Ounce of compound Syrup of Succory,
having before given it a small Clyster of Milk and Sugar.

When these Gripes are caused by VVind, or any sharp Humors in the Guts,
anoint the Child's Belly all over with Oil of sweet Almonds, or Oil of Wallnuts,
Camomil, and Mellot mixed together (having first warmed them) in which also a
Cloth may be dipped to lay upon it, or a small Pancake may be made with an Egg or
two fried in Oil of Wallnuts, and applied to it, or you may give the Child a
little Anodine or Carminative Clyster as occasion requires ever keeping him
very warm.

Of the Inflammation, Vlceration, Shooting forth, or Rupture of the Navel of a
young Infant.
If the Navel-string fall off before it be entirely closed and cicatrized,
there happens an Inflammation and Ulceration at other times; (although it be
outwardly healed, yet not being so within) it is dilated, and protruded out
till the Tumor be as big as an Egg, which is called an Exomphalos. This
proceeds from the continual cries of the Child, or some violent Cough.

In this case ende^^our by all means to appease the Child's Cough, and quiet it
to prevent its continual Crying, without which the ^umour would daily increase.
If the Child's un^^smess pro^^ed from the Gripes, they may be Remedied in the
manner above directed. If the Navel be inflamed, apply Galen 's Cerate mixed
with a Moiety of Populeon, or a small Compress dipped in a Mixture of Oil of
Roses and Vinegar, or Unguent of Roses with Album Rhasis.

When the Ligature is come away, and the Navel is Ulcerated, apply Desiccative
and Restringent Medicines, as Rags dipped in Limewater, which is not too strong,
or Plantane-water with a little Alum dissolved in it. If the Ulcer be very
small, lay on it a little Pledgit of dry Lint, some add a little Powder of a
rotten Post. These Medicines are better than Emplasters which are never so
drying, by reason of the Greases and Oils in their Composition, Ceruss
Emplaster, or Desiccativum Rubrum, or Diapompholygos are the best, in applying
which, you must observe to lay a Compress of Rags, and keep it on by Swathing
the part, till the Navel be entirely formed, for the Child by its crying breaks
the Vessels, or causes an Exomphalos.

As to the Rupture of the Navel in young Children, the cure of it must not be
undertaken otherwise than by Swathes and Compresses sitted for the purpose, at
least till such time as they are grown to a competent bigness, and then if
these do not effect the cure, you may perform the Operation.

If after the Inflammation there ensues an Apostem, the Child most commonly
dies; for if it be opened to discharge the Matter, the Guts protrude themselves
out, as soon as the Child begins to cry. If the Surgeon be solicited to make
the Operation, let him deliver his Prognostic, that so the Child's Death if it
should so fall out, may not be imputed to him.

But if the Apostem be small, and the Child has Courage and Strength enough to
endure it, let him open it a little, which possibly may free the Child from
this inconvenience.

Of the Smartings, Redness and Inflammation of the Groins, Buttocks, and Thighs
of an Infant.
If the Nurse does not keep the Child very clean, the Acrimony of the
Excrements will not fail to cause a Redness and Smarting, and Inflammation of
the Groins, Thighs and Buttocks. She must therefore keep it very cleanly, use a
cooling Diet her self, and refrain from all things which are apt to heat the
Blood, that so the Heat of the Child's Water may be allayed. Let her Bath the
part inflamed with Plantane Water, adding a sourth part of Lime Water, or if
the Pain be very great, foment it with lukewarm Milk. Many Women use Powder
of a rotten Post, or a little Milldust which they strew on it. Album Rhasis, or
Diapompholygos spread on a Rag in form of an Emplaster, is not amiss, but the
best of all is a Lotion of Saccharum Saturni, the effect of which, may be seen
in an Hour after. When the Nurse opens the Child, let her be careful to wrap
the Inflamed parts with fine white Rags, that they may not by rubbing together,
be more galled and pained.

Of Ulcers or a Thrush in the Mouth of a Child.
Very often the Milk of a Nurse that is Red-hair'd, addicted to Drinking, or
very Amorous by its Heat and Acrimony, causes small Ulcers in a Child's Mouth,
which are called Aphthae, and sometimes Cankers. Some of these are simple and
superficial, and are cured with much ease, some again are ill conditioned, and
caused by a Pocky venom, and happen after Malignant Fevers, or are Scorbutic
and putrid; these spread themselves to the Throat, make deep Escars, and often
are Mortal to Children, because they want Strength to undergo the cure.

To cure Ulcers in the Mouth, you must take care to allay the Heat of the
Nurses Milk, prescribing her a cooling Diet, (and Bleeding and Purging her if
she be Plethorick) and wash the Child's Mouth with Barley or Plantane Water, and
Honey of Roses, or Syrup of dry Roses, mixing a little Verjuyce, or Juice of
Citron to deterge the Viscid Humors, and cool the Mouth. For this purpose,
fasten a dry Rag to the end of a hule Stick, and dip this in any of the above
mentioned Medicines, apply it gently to the Ulcerated part, to prevent the
Inflammation from being increased by a violent rubbing. During this, the Child's
Body must be kept open.

If the Ulcers participate of any Malignity, let such Topics be applied as
will have a prompt effect. For this purpose touch them with Plantane Water
sharpened with Spirit of Vitriol taking care to prevent the Child from
swallowing it. The Remedies must be so much sharper and stronger, as the Ulcers
are deeper and more malignant; as soon as they are cauterized with this Water,
let the Child's Mouth be washed with a Decoction of Barley, Agrimony, and Honey
of Roses, or touch them with the same. As often as you shall think convenient,
at least till a slop be put to their spreading. Some rather choose to cauterize
these with small Tents of Rags dipped in boiling Oil, because they apprehend if
the Child should swallow them, that they could not in the least prejudice it.
It will not be amiss to purge off the ill Humors in the Child's Body, by giving
him a little clean Cassia or Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb. If the Ulcers are
Venereal, these Remedies will have little effect.

Of the Pain and other Accidents in breeding the Teeth.
The Breeding of Teeth is the cause of a great many Accidents, and often proves
fatal to Children. In the time of their cutting, they are troubled with
Inflammations of the Gams, Fevers, Convulsions, Loosnesses, especially when
the Dog or Eye-teeth cur, and the Child is large, full of Humors and Costive.

When the Teeth cut, the Gums and Cheeks swell, there is a great Heat and
Itching, which often makes Children put their Fingers into their Mouth to rub
them, from whence some moisture Distills down into the Mouth, because of the
Pain they feel there; the Nurse in giving them suck, finds the Mouth hotter;
they are very much changed and cry every Moment, and cannot sleep, or but very
little; and small points of the Teeth may be seen and selt through the Gums,
which appear thin and pale on the top, and Red and Inflamed on the sides; and
if it happens to be a long time, the Pain is so excessive, that it sometimes
kills the Child.

To prevent these Accidents, the Nurse must keep a good Diet, and use all
things that may allay the Heat of her Milk, for fear of putting the Child in a
Fever, who already is very much in Pain; and let his Body he kept open with
Clysters if he be bound.

To help the cutting of the Teeth, let the Nurse from time to time pass her
Finger over the Child's Gums, gently rubbing them; and give him a stick of
Liquorice to champ, or a little end of a small new VVax-candle, which is very
good to soften the Gum; or a Silver Coral with small Bells to divert him from
thinking on the Pain he feels. Some Women instead of a Coral, put a VVolfs
Tooth in. If the Gums are hard and thick, these things do no good; some Nurses
make an Incision with their Nail; but it is better done with a Lancet, because
that is not so painful, and makes no Contusion.

If the Pain in cutting of the Teeth cause Convulsions, open the Gum with an
Incision Knife, going so deep till you feel the Hardness of the Teeth with the
Instrument; keep the Child's Body open, forbear giving him Pap, anoint his Belly
with some Purgative Syrup, and the hinder part of his Neck with Oil of Lilies,
and let the Nurse observe a good Diet.

Of a Looseness in Children.
Children being wholly fed with Liquids, the Fibers of the Stomach are relaxed,
which is apt to cause a perpetual Looseness. This often happens by reason of the
great Pain which attends the cutting of the Teeth, and sometimes from the
sharpness of the Milk which irritates the Guts.

A Looseness which is of no long standing, and without a Fever, is not to be
accounted dangerous, but if it continue long, it will be convenient to put a
stop to it, for sear the Child be too much weakened by it; for this purpose let
him suck well purified Milk, giving but a little at a time, to the end he may
the better digest it; give him an Infusion of Rhubarb, to purge away the ill
Humors; gentle Anodyne Clysters may be likewise given with Milk, Yelks of
Eggs, and Honey of Roses; but after purging, let them be made with Plantane
Water. You may likewise mix the Yelk of an Egg in the Pap he eats, rub his
Belly with Oil of Quinces, and lay upon his Stomach Compresses dipped in Red
Wine, in which Provence Roses have been boiled.

Of Vomitings.
Vomiting in Infants is frequently the occasion of other Distempers, if it
proceeds too far. It most commonly proceeds from their drawing more Milk than
their small tender Stomachs can retain and digest. Sometimes the badness of the
Milk, the Nurses dancing the Child too much, a violent Cough, or too great a
Compression of the Stomach, are the causes of this Accident; to all which the
sweetness and luke-warmness of the Milk contribute much.

When the Child sucks more than it should, the Nurse must not give it so much,
and but a little at a time. If the Milk be bad, let the Nurse be changed for a
better; if the Vomiting be caused by a Cough, some proper Remedies must be used
to appease it; if by the dancing of the Child, the Nurse must forbear shaking
it so rudely; if from a Compression of the Belly, care must be taken that it be
not Swathed so strait. If there be any ill Humors in the Stomach, it will be
convenient to purge the Child, with a gentle Infusion of Rhubarb, or half an
ounce of compound Syrup of Succory; and after this, if judged necessary, it may
take a little Syrup of Quinces, and Compresses dipped in an Infusion of Provence
Roses, Cinnamon and Cloves in Red Wine, may be laid on the Stomach.

Of Ruptures in Children.
The most frequent causes of this Accident are their vehement Crying, and
violent Coughs; besides the Moisture and Softness of their Bodies does not a
little contribute to this: in the last place too strait Swathing by forcing
down the Guts, often causes Ruptures.

This Mischief must be remedied as soon as discovered, because the continual
descent of the Gut, dilates the place through which it falls every day more and
more. Ruptures in Children are more easily cured, than in grown Persons.

Whilst Children are in Swaddling Clouts, the cure of true Ruptures which
happen to them, must not be undertaken but by a Swathe-band, which is
sufficient. This is effected by a Roller, putting a Compress or Truss just upon
the Rupture, after having first reduced the Gut and Omentum into their Natural
place. To do this, lay the Child with his Head low, then with both Hands reduce
them by degrees, thrusting the Tumor with one Hand, and putting in the Gut
with the other; after the Guts are reduced, lay a thick Compress on the dilated
place, and Swath it in the same manner as was directed in the Rupture of the
Groin or Bubonocele. Because it is very difficult for a Nurse to make this
Bandage, a small Truss may be used in stead of it, which must be waked to
prevent being rotted by the Child's Water, and more than one must be had in
readiness for change. For the better curing the Child, let him be kept in Bed
forty or fifty days, and care be taken to prevent his Coughing and Crying, and
his Belly must not be compressed. Some foment the place with Smith's Water, and
then lay on Emplast. ad Herniam.

The Hydrocele or Hernia-Humoralis, is a Collection of Waters in the Scrotum.
To refolve these Tumors use Spirit of Wine, or a Fomentation made of a
Decoction of Camemil, Melilot, Rue, Marjoram, and Fennel, and apply Compresses
dipped in it to the part, and after this dry the Scrotum with a Solution of Alum
in Limewater, and to strengthen the part, lay Compresses dipped in a Decoction
of Roses and Alum in Red Wine.

If these Remedies are ineffectual, make an Aperture with the Lancet to
evacuate the Waters.

Of Scabs upon the Head and Face of young Children.
These are seldom Malignant, and it is a mark that they are not so, when they
are only superficial, moist and yellow, and when their Crust is removed, the
Skin appears of a Florid red Color, without any notable Ulceration.

The Humors must never be repelled, because the discharge they make is useful
to preserve the Body from ill Distempers, and the Child ever has its Health
best when they come out. However to prevent the breeding of ill Humors, take
care that the Nurse be a Sound and Healthy Woman, keep the Child's Body open,
and purge it now and then with a little Syrup of Roses or Succory. The crust
must be digested and brought off, to give the Matter a better issue; for which
purpose you may make use of fresh Butter or Oil of sweet Almonds, laying on a
Cabbage or Beet Leaf after, which must be renewed twice or thrice a Day, to
avoid the offensive Scent, Continue the use of these Remedies till the Child be
cured, ever endeavoring to procure a plentiful discharge of Matter, after
which Nature will finish the rest of the Cure. In the mean time keep the Child's
Hands tied to prevent his Scratching his Face, which would inflame it more, and
bring down a Flux of Humors.

Of the Smallpox and Meazles in Children.
The Small Pox is a Disease in which abundance of small Pustles do break out
all over the Body, which grow white, and after ripen. The Symptoms of the Small
Pox and Meazles are so very like, that it is difficult to distinguish them on
the first, second or third Day.

The Signs which precede the Eruption of the Pox are a Fever, Stupor, a great
Beating and Pain of the Head, Lassitude, a Pain in the Back, Sickness,
Vomiting, Difficulty of Breathing, Yawning, Sneezing, Itching of the Nose,
Inflammation of the Eyes, a general weariness of the whole Body, and a Urine
very turbid. As for the Eruption upon the third or fourth Day, a great many
small Pustules arise, which increase in bigness and number till the eighth or
ninth Day; at which time they grow white, and gradually ripen; and the Face and
Head Swell, the Eyes are closed by the distention of the Eyelids, the Nose is
stopped, the Voice grows Hoarse, there is a dry Cough, a Pain in the Throat, and
a great Difficulty of Breathing; If there be abundance of Pustules, the whole
Body is Swollen.

There is a sort of Small Pox void of Malignity, this at first is attended with
a Fever, which ceases immediately after the Eruption, the Pustules rise to a
point, suppurate kindly, and are soon well. The Matter is white, uniform, and
well digested: When the Distemper is Malignant, the Pustles are brown, flat,
livid, or ill colored, have little black spots in their middle, break out more
slowly than when they are kind, have no Digestion at all, or at least a very
bad one, are filled with a Sanious Matter, attended with a Malignant Fever,
Delirium, Difficulty of Breathing, Syncope, and Dysenteries; sometimes they
leave behind them Malignant Ulcers, Cariosity of the Bones, loss of Sight,
Deformity of the Face, or Lameness of some Limb.

If the Fever be not very high, and abate in proportion to the Eruption of the
Pustles, if they be not very numerous, and grow white and ripen quickly, the
Distemper is not very dangerous, but if the contrary happen, it is a sign of
Death. The Small Pox in Children, is not so dangerous as in grown Persons,
because their Skin is more soft and Porous, so that they break out more kindly
than in those who have the Skin more compact, and the Pores not so open.

The Meazles are never so dangerous as the Small Pox, because the Peccant
Matter Transpires more easily and quickly. These are most commonly over in
three or four Days, after which the Pox sometimes appears, which occasions the
one Distemper to be mistaken for the other.

For the more successful curing this Distemper, prescribe the Child a good
Diet, let him forbear all solid Meats, and feed only on Liquids; such as Veal
or Chicken Broth, or a little Gelly. Let him drink a Prisan of French Barley,
Roots of Dogs Grass, Liquorice, and Raisins of the Sun. Never give Pap to a
Sucking Child, till it be perfectly recovered, and let the Nurse keep a cooling
Diet. Do not suffer her to carry her Child into the open Air, but let her keep
it close in the Chamber, neither too hot nor too cold; for too hot an Air
dissipates the Spirits, and too cold an one stops the Pores, hinders
Transpiration, and checks the Eruption. The Child's Sleep must be moderate, and
his Belly kept open. If the Small Pox be attended with a High Fever in the
beginning, together with a Difficulty of Breathing, and other like Symptoms
bleeding is necessary. Purging in the beginning of the small Pox is not to be
admitted, for fear of turning the course of Humors which tend toward the Skin,
but after it is proper to evacuate the remaining impurities.

From time to time give the Child all sort of Cordial and Strengthening Things,
such are a pure Air, good wholesome Food, Juice of Oranges, Syrup of Limons, and
Pomgranats in the Ptisan, or a little Wine allayed with Water, but if it be a
sucking Child, Milk must serve in stead of all other Cordials.

As soon as the Pustles begin to appear, anoint them with Oil of sweet Almonds,
rubbing them with a Feather dipped in it. Some use Cream, fresh Butter, or Stale
Lard melted and washed in Rose Water, and beaten up in a Marble Mortar, and
with this they grease them till they are perfectly cured. When the Pustles are
ripe, which may be known by their Whiteness and Itching, which usually is about
the Ninth Day, the biggest of them may then be pierced (by a Gold or Silver
Needle, or by cutting the cops with a pair of Scissors) to discharge the
Matter, least by its too long stay, it ulcerate and corrode the Part too
deeply. Afterward to dry them up, anoint the Face with a Liniment made of
fresh Cream, mixed with white Chalk, continuing this Remedy till the Scabs be
quite fallen off, using it Night and Morning, or make use of Ointment of Roses,
with a little powdered Ceruss mixed with it.

To prevent the Small Pox from causing too great a Defluxion on the Eyes, apply
cooling Remedies, as Rose and Plantane Water from the beginning, Breast Milk is
very good to bath the Eyes with; Let the Nurse from time to time unstop the
Child's Nose, that so he may breath with more ease. Give him sometimes a little
Syrup of Violets to smoothen his Throat, or give him a little Syrup of Limons
or Pomgranats, but Milk alone is sufficient for a Sucking Child.

How to cure the Venereal Pox in Children.
If the Mother have the Pox when the Child is born, it will infallibly be
infected by her, and this may be easily discovered when it is so, by Bustles
and Ulcers in all parts of the Body, especially in the Belly, Fundament, Head,
and between the Legs.

If the Nurse who gives it Suck be Poxed, she will communicate it to the Child
with her Milk. In this case the Distemper first appears in the Child's Mouth,
and the sharpness of the Milk makes several Ulcers in it. But we must not
presently conclude the Nurse has the Pox, because the Child has Pustles in
several parts of its Body, for these sometimes proceed from the Milk being
overheated, and therefore some other Symptoms must be looked for before you can
be assured of it.

There is nothing farther necessary for the cure of simple Pustles, than
changing the first Nurse, and giving the Child to another whose Milk is
sweeter, and who will take care to keep it clean. But Children who come into
the World with the Pox on them, most commonly die of it, and those who receive
it from their Nurses, are very difficultly cured, their tender Age being unable
to support the Fatigue of Medicines.

If the Nurse be Poxed, take the Child from her and give it to one who is
Sound, who must be confined to a cooling Diet. Let the Nurse wash her Nipple
with Wine every time she gives the Child Suck, and let her Purge from time to
time, for fear of being infected. If no Nurse can be found who will venture to
Suckle the Child for fear of being infected her self, take one who has
abundance of Milk, and let her squeeze her Breast and drop it into the Child's
Mouth, or let her Milk her Breast into a Porringer, and give it a Spoonful now
and then, or let her put her Milk into a Funnel, at the end of which there is
fastened a Rag rolled up, and put this into the Child's Mouth for him to suck,
or dip Rags in her Milk and let him suck them. But the best way is to let him
suck a young Goat, fed on purpose with good Hay, and other convenient things.

Let the Child be Bled and Purged, and after if he have Strength enough, anoint
him with a Mercurial Ointment, rubbing only the Pustles and Ulcers, in doing
which and reiterating the Frictions a small Flux will be raised by degrees,
which must be almost insensible, least the Humors being stirred and carried in
too great abundance to the Mouth, cause it to Swell and Ulcerate, and hinder
the Child's Sucking. Wherefore but a small quantity, of Mercury must be mixed
with the Ointment, and after one Friction or two, you must forbear five or six
Days; and see how the Flux will rise, and then if there be occasion, give a few
Grains of the Mercurial Panacea in the Child's Pap. Let the Nurse wash its Mouth
with a Lotion of Barley Water, with the addition of Honey of Roses, or Syrup of
Wormwood with White Wind, to clear it from the froth which is usually gathered
about it, and that he may void the Drivel better, let him lie upon his Side and
not upon his Back, least falling upon the Stomach or upon the Lungs, it should
choke him. Let him be always kept warm without carrying him into the Air, and
watch diligently the effects of the Medicine.

The common Way to make this Mercurial Oynment, is thus; Take half an Ounce of
Quick-silder, pass it through a Leather to clear it from its adhering Filth,
and then mix it in a Mortar with four Ounces of Hogs. Grease, till it be very
well incorporated; then take two Drams of this Ointment for each Friction, more
or less in proportion to the Child's Strength.

How to choose a good Nurse.
The Mother is doubtless the best Nurse that a Child can have, if there be no
reason to the contrary. The best Age for a Nurse, is from 25 Years to 35,
because about that time, a Woman is stronger and more healthy than at any
other. The common Opinion is, that a Woman is most fit to be a Nurse, two or
three Months after her Delivery, because at that time the Milk is purified, and
her Body purged by her Cleansings, but she cannot be so much longer, because in
this case the Milk would not continue so long, as would be necessary to suckle
the Child. She must not have Miscarryed, but had her Child at due time. The
Milk of a Woman who has been Delivered of a Male Child, is commonly thought to
be best, and it is to be preferred if it be her Second Child, because she may
then very well be supposed to have some Experience in the Ordering and Managing
her Infant. Mauricean prefers Milk of a Fortnight old, to that of three or four
Months, and if it be for a Girl, he prefers a Nurse who has a Girl, to one who
has had a Boy.

She must be Sound and Healthy, and born of Parents who were so, and never had
the, Stone, Gout, King's Evil, Falling Sickness, or any other Hereditary
Distemper. She ought to have a clear Skin free from all Scabs, Itch or Scald;
she ought to be strong and able to watch and tend the Child as occasion
requires. It is convenient she be of a middle Stature, neither too large nor
too little, too lean or too fat; but above all, she must not be with Child. Let
her Complexion be Sanguine, and her Flesh plump and firm. She must not have her
Courses, for that is a sign her Blood is too hot, or she is too amorous; she
must not have the Whites, for these are a sign of a bad Habit, she must not be
red Haired, or marked with any Spots, but her Hair must be black or of a Chestnut
brown. She must be well shaped, neat in her Cloths, and handsome in her Face,
having a Sprightly Eye, and Smiling Countenance; she must have good Eyes, Sound
and White Teeth, and ought to have a Sweet Voice, to sing to and please the
Child. She must have no ill Scent come from her, as usually red Haired Women
have, and those who have black Hair and a white Skin, for their Milk is Hot,
Sharp, and of an ill Taste and Scent; She must not have a strong Breath, as they
who have a stinking Nose, and bad Teeth, because she would infect the Child's
Lungs by often drawing in the corrupted Air.

Her Breasts ought to be pretty large to contain a sufficient quantity of Milk;
they ought to be pretty firm and plump, and not flaggy or hanging down; for a
large strutting Breast, is the Mark of a good Habit of Body. As for the Nipples
they must be well shaped, not too big nor hard, nor callous, nor sunk in, but
they must be raised, and have several small Holes that the Child may Suck
without any great pains; she must have Milk sufficient, and not in too great
excess, because the Child not being able to draw it, it grows stale in the
Breast, and by its long stay there, turns sour and curdles; and therefore she
may let another Child suck the remainder. Her Milk must not be too thick nor
too waterish, which may be known by Milking it into the Hand, and the turning
it a little on one side, for if it run off immediately, it is a sign it is too
Fluid, but if it do not run off at all, it is too thick; the good is of a
consistence between both, which runs off gently in proportion to the inclining
of the Hand, and leaves a Trace behind it. The whitest Milk is the best, and
the farther any recedes from that the worse it is, it ought to have a pleasant
smell, and ought to be well tasted, that is, sweet and sugared without any
Acrimony or Heat. But we must not forget one principal condition of a good
Nurse, and that is, that she be an Honest and Conscientious Woman, because
these qualities will make her sober and careful of her charge, and preserve her
from Drinking and Venery.

How to prevent Childrens growing Squint-eyed, Awry, Crooked or Lame.
To prevent a Child's becoming Squint-eyed, choose a Nurse whose Sight is firm
and straight, least by her ill example, he get a bad Habit, Children being
wondrous apt to imitate what they see done. Let his Cradle be ever so placed,
that he may always have the light before him, because when it is on one side,
the Muscles of the Eye are apt to act independently on one another. To redress
this inconvenience, let the Child wear a Mask upon its Face with two small
Holes right against the Eyes to see through, which will cause him perceiving no
light but through them to direct his Eyes that way, and by degrees quit the ill
Habit he has got of looking aside.

To prevent the Child's growing crooked, awry or lame, the Nurse must swaddle
his Body strait, equally extending his Arms and Legs, and Swathing his Body
sometimes one way, sometimes another, lest if she should swaddle it always
alike, the parts should retain an ill Figure. The Nurse must lay him on his
Back straight and not bending, and when she holds him in her Arms, let her
carry him sometimes upon one, and sometimes upon another, for holding his Legs
always in the same Fashion, it would be a great Hazard if they did not grow
crooked, and this compression especially about the Knees, is the cause why so
many Children have crooked Legs.

When any Parts have contracted an ill Figure from whatever cause it proceed,
let this be remedied with Swathes and Compresses conveniently placed, to keep
the Part in a good Posture, whilst the Child is in his Clouts. When he is grown
a little bigger, small Leather Boots may be used to straighten the Legs; if the
Foot only be awry, Shoes underlaid of one side higher than the other, will
serve the turn. When the Breast or Backbone are in fault, it must be helped if
possible, or at least hinder from growing worse, by a little Bodice of strong
Whale-Bone very well lined on that side where it jets out. A Cross made of
Steel is now in use, the Traverse of which passes over both Shoulders, and the
perpendicular lengthways of the Body, this Instrument is very convenient, and
does not appear.

Those who would seriously apply themselves to the Practice of Deliveries ought
to have that excellent Piece of the famous M. Mauriceau on this Subject ever
before them, and read it Day and Night. I dare engage the intelligent Reader
will perpetually find new matter in it. This is a Noble, Useful and Lasting
Monument, from which Posterity will reap great Advantages.

REMARKS.
Mauriceau assures us, He delivered a Woman of a Dead Child, which she had
retained in her Womb for two Months, after being severely exercised with a
Violent Cough. Though the Child was entirely stripped of its Scarf-skin; yet it had
not the least ill Scent, being kept in this manner from all manner of
Cadaverous Putrefaction. The Mother retained it to the end of the ninth Month,
without any notable inconvenience (and continued in perfect good Health till
after her Delivery.

The same Author relates, Obs. 465. that on the 21st of November, 1686. He laid
a Woman nine Months gone with Child of a Girl perfectly Sound, her Burden
appeared to be Sound, though the Mother had in the Neck of the Womb several
Miliary Pustles and Yellow Excrescences, which undoubtedly proceeded from a
Virulent Gonorrhaea, which her Husband probably had given her above a year
before.

Obs. 422. He relates that on the 25th of January, 1686. He happily delivered a
Woman of a Male Child, the Child was seized with a great Defluxion on the Head,
caused by a great quantity of cold Water which the Priest poured on the Mould
in Baptizing him. This cold Water created so great an Obstruction, that it
could not breath through the Nose, and therefore was incapable of Sucking, and
obliged to quit the Breast, as soon as it had taken it into its Mouth, and this
killed the Child in four days after.

Obs. 692. He tells us a Woman Miscatryed of a Foetus wholly emaciated, which
was about the length of a Man's Finger, being about three Months gone, and this
was occasioned by a great Clap of Thunder which surprised her.

Obs. 688. This Author mentions a Woman who was delivered at Nine Months end of
a Girl very sound and well, though the Mother voided near a Quart of Water in
one Day, above two Months before, and after voided a considerable quantity more
at different times. He makes a question whether these Waters were the effect of
a Dropsy, or were really the Child's Waters, and concludes they could not be
any other than a Dropsy, because the Child had been incapable of sustaining
such a loss, and the Woman must of necessity have been delivered when the first
Waters came away.

Obs. 489. He tells us he had laid a Woman of 35 years of Age, whose Hymen was
entire, and only perforated with a small Hole, she was with Child though her
Husband could never break that Membrane, and enter her Body, as she her self
assured him. This Example makes it evident, that a Woman may become big with
Child without introducing the Yard, and that it is sufficient that the Seed be
lodged within the Neck of the Womb.

Obs. 393. He remarks, that a Woman of sixteen years of Age and a half was got
with Child though she never had had her Courses.

Obs. 20. He tells us that a Woman having had a continual Oppression in the
time of her going with Child, was bled four or five times in the Arm, twice in
the Foot, once in the Throat, notwithstanding which she was delivered of a
Healthy Child at her due time.

Obs. 30. He tells us that a Woman of Eighteen years of Age, was happily
delivered at her due time of her first Child who was very well, as the Mother
her self was, though she had been bled Ninety times during her going with
Child, particularly in her eighth Month 22 times in the Arm, and twice in the
Foot.

Obs. 23. He tells us that a Woman of 22 years of Age, and seven Months gone
with Child, underwent a Salivation for the cure of a Pox; The Flux was so
copious, that she filled five or six Basins every Day. This Woman was cured of
her Distemper, and at last happily delivered at her due Term of a Healthy,
Sound, Child, which perhaps would have died of the Pox, if the Woman had not
gone through this Course.

Obs. 40. He relates that a Woman having a Prolapsus of the Womb made use of a
Pessary, who was notwithstanding got with Child, though she did never take that
Pessary out.

Obs. 70. He tells us that a Woman who had been Hydropical for the space of
nine Years, was notwithstanding pregnant, and when her time was up, delivered
of a lusty Child; the Dropsy increased till the time of her Delivery, and she
had four Children whilst her Distemper was on her, amongst which was a Girl who
appeared to be seven years of Age, when she was really not above four and a
half. After her Delivery, her Belly did not sink more than if a Pullets Egg had
been excluded, and she appeared as big as if she had near 30 quarts of Water in
her Belly.

Obs. 249. He relates that a Woman whose Belly was two Else of Paris measure in
Circumference, was notwithstanding got with Child, and delivered several times
when her time was up. This Woman in good Health weighed 110 lb. and when she
had her Dropsy, 220. and yet had her Courses very regularly. This Woman made
Issues in her Legs, whereby all the Water of her Body being evacuated, she dyed
within a few days after.

Obs. 105. He relates that a little Woman who had had several Children, when
she was not with Child, would often emit wind with as great a Noise as from the
Anus, adding, that he had seen several Women who though with Child, have been
subject to the same Accidents.

Obs. 146. He tells us that a Woman at the end of her eighth Month, was
delivered of three Children, each of which had a separate Burden, though the
Woman was Paralitick on one side of her Body.

In Obs. 174. He relates that a Woman having the Nymphae excessively long,
which was unpleasing to her Husband, and incommoded her very much in Riding, by
rubbing against each other, she cut them off and lost twelve Porringers of
Blood in five or six hours.

In Obs. 223. He mentions a Woman who seeing her Husband return from the Army
with his Head bound up, was deprived of her Senses by the sudden Fright, fell
into a Flooding, and was delivered of a false Conception.

Obs. 245. A Woman about six Months gone with Child being overturned in her
Coach, and exceedingly affrighted by the Accident, the Child in her Womb died,
and continued there for the space of a Month, notwithstanding which it was not
much corrupted, being preserved by the Waters; for if these had come away, it
must of necessity have putrefied.

Obs. 246. He tells us he had seen an Abortive Foetus of five weeks old, which
though no longer than his Nail, had all its parts as perfectly formed, as one
of nine Months.

Obs. 251. He relates, that a young Woman dying after she had been two days in
Labor, not being able to be delivered, the Child which was very large
presenting its Head and one side of his Face, was opened after her Death, and
the Child was found dead; and though its Head was in the passage, by its
struggling it had broke through the Womb, and thrust the Burden into the cavity
of the Lower Belly.

Obs. 301. He mentions a Surgeon who cutting the Fraenum in a Child that was
Tongue-tyed, opened a Vein which poured out a great quantity of Blood, and this
coagulating in the Stomach killed the Infant.

Obs. 315. He assures us he had seen a Woman eight Months and a half gone with
Child, who having had a very dangerous Pleurisy about two Months before, was
siezed with a continual Fever and Delirium, of which she dyed after ten days
Illness. As soon as she was Dead, an Incision was made into the Womb, and a
Child taken out which lived about two Hours.

Obs. 342. He mentions a Woman who entirely lost her Senses upon hearing of the
Death of her Child, about five or six Days after her Delivery, who
notwithstanding became pregnant, and after was happily delivered of another
Child, and restored to the use of her Reason.

Obs. 383. He mentions a Woman of twenty years of Age who being supposed by the
bigness of her Belly to be with Child the first time, and about six Months
gone, had violent Vomitings, which after some time were staid by the bringing
up a Worm as long as a Man's Hand; after this she fell into a Hectic Fever and
continual Looseness, with which being very much wasted she died. Upon opening
the Body the left Testicle was bigger than a Man's Head, and filled the whole
capacity of the lower Belly, weighing fifteen pound, and was of a very compact
Substance, the Right Testicle was as big as both a Man's Fists, containing in
the midst of it a Glairy Matter, resembling the White of an Egg. The Womb it
self was no bigger than that of a Child of eight years old.

Bartholine and Forestus assure us, that a Woman with Child having the Small
Pox, was after delivered of a Child who had Scars, from whence it is evident
that the Mother and the Child had the Distemper both at the same time.

Amatus Lusitanus, Centur. 5. tells us that a Woman with Child having taken an
Infusion of Saffron, was after delivered of two Girls, whose whole Bodies were
tinged yellow. This Accident gave occasion to some Virtuosi, to make the
Experiment in a Bitch whose Whelps became all yellow.

In the Miscellanea Curiosa, Obs. 42. there is a Relation of a Woman in Hungary
who being in Labor, and the Foetus having his Head out, drew it back into the
Womb, where it continued a Fortnight longer, and after was born without any ill
Accident.

Mr. Boil in his Experimental Philosophy, relates that a Child was heard to
cry in his Mothers Belly.

In the Scholion to the 62 Obs. of the Miscell. Curiosa, we are told that in
the Year 1624. a Woman nine Months gone with Child, heard her Child sigh in her
Belly whilst she was at Church in the Town of Colberg, several Women besides
heard it. After this Child was born, its Mother and it self both were poisoned
by a certain Person, her Husband died of the Plague, the House in which she
lived was fired, and a great part of the Family burnt, and others lost there
Limbs, and not long after a terrible War broke out in that Country, all which
Mischiefs the People did believe, this Child's crying did Presage.

Pliny in the third Book of his Natural History, Chap. 3. relates that a Child
being half born, retired back into his Mothers Womb. This Prodigy happened the
same year that Hannibal destroyed the City of Saguntum.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Caesarean Birth.
THIS Operation is an Incision into the Belly and Womb, to take out the Foetus.

THE CAUSE of this Operation is the largeness of the Foetus, which cannot pass
by the Natural and Ordinary way, or perhaps its breaking through the Womb, and
so falling into the Belly, or the Womb insinuating it self through the Rings of
the Abdominal Muscles.

THE SIGNS. The largeness of a Child is easily known, by the Mothers Belly
being excessively swelled. This may be farther evinced if putting your Hand up
into the Womb, you find there is an Hydrocephalus. You may conclude the Womb
has thrust it self through the Rings of the Muscles, if it be not in its proper
place, and you may believe the Child has forced its way into the Cavity of the
Belly, if there be nothing in the Womb, and you have certain indications of the
Woman's being with Child.

The OPERATION.
Place the Woman on her Back, and then make a longitudinal Incision below the
Navel, and on one side the Linea Alba, and cut through the Teguments till you
lay the Womb bare; Be sure to make the Incision large enough to extract the
Foetus, and when this is done make an Incision through the Body, and on one
side the Womb put the forefinger of the left Hand into the Incision to widen
it, and guide the Point of the Scissars or Knife on the Finger, to prevent
hurting the Child; then open the Membranes which contain the Foetus, and bring
both it and the Burden away, after having dexterously disingaged it. Wipe the
Blood off the Wound with a Sponge dipped in Wine warmed, and make a Suture of the
Belly, as in its proper place was directed, without stitching the Womb at all.

THE DRESSING is the same as in the Gastroraphia. Put a Pessary into the
Vagina, for the more easy evacuating the Blood and Cleansings, and making
Injections into the Womb.

THE CURE. Dress the Wound once a Day with some good Balsam till it be
cicatrized, and let the Motion of the Belly be checked with such Instruments,
as were described in the Operation of stitching the Belly.

REMARKS.
In the Journal des Scavans, there is a Relation of a Woman of Chateau Thierry,
who some years before being ready to lie in, called in the Surgeon of the
Place, who seeing her case very bad, undertook to make the Caesarean Section.
The Mother was six Months under Cure, and the Child lived 13 Months. The Woman
sometime after her Cure had a Hernia Ventralis, which increased to a great
size, she supported this Rupture with a Bandage hanging from her Shoulders, but
the Pain increasing with the Swelling, and this at last Ulceraring, forced her
to seek for a Cure in the Hotel Dieu, where she remained three Months, in which
time the Rupture rose so high, that it suffocated her. Mr. Saviard who was then
Surgeon in that Hospital opened the Body, found the Peritoneum connected to the
Omentum and small Guts by several Membranous ties, and the Ileum and Jejunum
contained in the Swelling. He found a Cicatrix in the Womb within and without,
with some Membranous Skirts on the Cicatrix within.

Sennertus relates, that a Woman bending a Stick for the Hooping of a Tub, one
end sprung back and hitting her a blow on the Groin, broke the Muscle of the
Peritoneum, by which means the. Womb insinuated it self into the Groin in such
manner, that it could not be reduced into its Natural Place. The Woman became
Pregnant, and the Womb with the Foetus in it hung between her Thighs, and there
was no possible way to deliver her without making an Incision, When the
Operation was over, the Womb could not be reduced into its Natural place, but
the Skin was brought over so as to cover it, and so it was Stitched. The Womb
lessened by degrees till it came to its Natural size, but the Woman after some
time happening to do some work, the Wound gangrened and killed her.

CHAP. XXVI. Of a Polypus.
THIS Operation is the Extraction of a Carnous excrescence in the Nose.

THE CAUSE. A Polypus is a carnous excrescence formed in the cavity of the
Nose. For the better understanding the cause whence this proceeds, we must
consider that the internal Membrane of the Nose is very thick, spungy, and
abounds with a Viscid, Glutinous Humor, and that its Pores are so disposed, as
to admit the gross and terrestrial parts of the Blood to pass, and from the
comparing these causes, it will not be difficult to conceive the manner how
these Excrescences grow. For by the increasing Heat of the Blood, and the
Rapidity of its Motion, the less viscid parts exhale, and the rest is condensed
into a hard Substance, and when this is once formed being detained in the
Membrane, it extends the Vessels, tumefies the Glands, and by the accession of
new Matter, a Fungous Carcinomatous Mass is engendered.

The Polypus sometimes proceeds from an acrid Lympha, which corrodes the Glands
and the Tubuli of the internal Membrane of the Nose, and the Nutricious Juice
emptying it self there, is coagulated round the Orifice, and this concreted
Lump is called a Polypus, though sometimes it is only a Mass of tumefied Glands
which cohere together. The great Agent in this, is the Acidity of the Humors
which is the general cause of all Corrosion and Coagulation in Animal Bodies.

THE SIGNS of a Polypus are manifest, viz. a Carnous Excrescence, which
sometimes comes out of the Nose, and at other times hangs down the Throat,
hindering Respiration, and sometimes occasioning great Fluxes of Blood.

Some Polypus are Schirrous, others Painful, and apt to degenerate into
Cancerous Ulcers; which last are most commonly the effect of some Venereal
Distempers too long neglected; some are soft and of a White or Red Color.
These latter most commonly do not adhere so firmly, and by consequence are
cured with less difficulty.

All Tumors in the Nose must not presently be pronounced to be Polypus's, for
sometimes they are only attendants of an Ozaena, which is an inveterate,
sordid, stinking Ulcer of the Nose, which emits an acrimonious ill colored
Matter, and causes great Pain by its excessive sharpness, corroding the
internal Membrane like an Aquafortis. This Ulcer is covered with a large,
moist Crust, from which a thick foetid Matter distills and makes the Breath
stink, infecting those who come near it.

This Ulcer like all others, proceeds from an Acrimony of the Humors by which
it corrodes the Membrane of the Nose.

If a Polypus be not treated Skilfully, it degenerates very often into a Cancer.

There are some Polypus's which fill the Nostrils, and when this happens, the
Nose becomes hard and Schirrous, and the Patient cannot breath through the
Mouth without blowing.

If both Nostrils be stopped, the Disease is incurable. If the Excrescence be
hard, of a livid color, painful, or adhere to the Bony Lamellae of the Nose,
or be Cancerous, all tampring with it, in stead of appeasing, will exasperate
it. But if it be of a Fleshy Substance, Whitish or Red color, and void of
Pain, it may suffer the Operation.

The OPERATION.
This is done with a Forceps, which is to be introduced into the Nose, that so
taking hold of the Polypus, and turning the Instrument one way and another, you
may pull it out by the Roots.

If the Excrescence be so large as to hang out of the Nose into the Mouth, you
must extract it with the Forceps through the Mouth. This is the way that a
Polypus ought to be extracted, as often as it can be practiced, because by this
means it is most easily eradicated.

The Ancients consumed Polypus's quite to the Roots, with Potential or Actual
Cauteries conveyed into the Nose by a Cannula; but these ways are grown
obsolete, though they may have their use when the Polypus has a large Basis,
and adheres firmly, for in this case it would be impossible to bring it away
with the Forceps.

THE DRESSING. If a Haemorrhage ensue, stop it with a Tent armed with
astringent Powders, or Syringe the Nose with some Styptick Water.

THE CURE. If the least Roots of the Polypus remain, a new one will infallibly
arise, and therefore Suppuration must be encouraged to consume them, and Savin
or some other powders used if that be not sufficient. But observe here not to
apply Causticks without necessity to the Septum of the Nostrils, and to lay
some Tent on to defend those parts, which you would have remain untoucht.

Since Polypus's most commonly arise from the sharpness of the Blood, it is
evident a good Diet must be kept to sweeten it. To this end, let the Patient
abstain from all Acid, Salt, or Peppered Meats; let him drink a Ptisan made of
Barley, and other Vulnerary Ingredients; give him Alkali's and Sudorificks, as
Powder of Vipers, from i. to ss, Diaphoretick Antimony to the same quantity,
Blood of a Stag, from ss. upwards, which may be taken separately, or more of
them together, to the quantity of ss. or ij. in a Glass of Carduus Water.
Millepedes dried in an Oven and powdered, are a very good Alkali, and may be
given in a Ptisan. Apozems of Guajacum, Salsa Parilla and China are good
Sudorisicks, but when the Patient takes any of these Medicines, he must keep
his Bed and Sweat. These Remedies must be frequently repeated for the more
effectual sweetning of the Blood.

Of Ulcers in the Nose.
Though these are not Polypus's, yet it seems very proper to refer them to this
place. These Ulcers are very difficultly cured, all Mercurial Medicines are
good in these cases, which may be taken from 15 to 30 or 40 grains in Conserve
of Roses, and must be continued from a long time, Sudorificks likewise are
good. In short these Ulcers must be treated in the same manner as Venereal ones.

If these Ulcers are Scorbutic, you may make use of the following Liniment..
Crabs Eyes, Sperma Ceti, a^ ss. Cinnabar, gr. 6. Sugar of Lead, gr. i.
Camphire, gr. iij. mix these with a sufficient quantity of Balsam of Peru. Or
you may use the following Injection if you please,. Hydromel, i. Juice of St.
John's wort, Wormwood, Smallage, Spirit of Feverfew, a^. i. Myrrh and Camphire,
a^. i. If the Bone of the Nose be carious, apply the actual Cautery.

Fumigations of Frankincense, Amber and the Gums are useful in these cases.

REMARKS.
Riverius in his communicated Observations, Obs. 24. tells us, he had cured a
Polypus in this manner: In the first place he prescribed an exact Regimen, and
purged the Patient, and after that he made use of the following Liniment;.
Pomgranat peels, Galls, a^ iss. Savin Tops, ij. burnt Chalcitis, iss. Burnt
Alum, iv. mix these with Aegyptiacum, and apply the Mixture to the Tumor.
During the time of Cure, he frequently rubbed the Neighboring parts with an
Unguent made of Bole and Litharge, with the Addition of Amber.

Sometimes large Worms have been voided by Ulcers of the Nose. Kerkringius in
his Observations relates, that a Woman had for a long time been troubled with a
Difficulty of Breathing, a Violent Cough and Pain in her Head, but at last in
blowing her Nose, she voided a long Worm with a multitude of Feet, a forked
Tail, and Horns on its Head, it was very lively, and stirred much about. The
same Woman voided another of a greenish Color, and a like Figure. He adds, he
kept this Worm for a considerable time, and that it generated another little
one it self.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Amputation.
THIS Operation is the Extirpation of a Member, when there is some Gangrene,
Mortification or Fracture, and the Bone is very much shattered.

THE CAUSE. The difference between a Gangrene and Sphacelus, or Mortification,
is that one is incipient only, and the other is complete.

These Accidents arise from a defect in the due distribution of the Blood and
Spirits to the Part. Inflammations of a part ill treated, and the Application
of Emplasters hinder Transpiration, and by consequence the Blood Stagnating
corrupts, and the part Mortifies, which at first is only a Gangrene, but after
becomes a Sphacelus.

When there is an interruption in the Motion of the Heart, the Blood does not
duly circulate, and the Spirits not being distributed to the Extreme parts,
they become chill, the Face grows pale or livid, and the Limbs lose their Sense
and Motion. On the contrary, as soon as the Heart recovers its Motion, the
Blood freely circulates through the Parts, and they are restored to their
Sense, Motion, and Natural Color From all which it is most evident, that the
Life of an Animal consists in the free Circulation of the Blood through every
part, and the Mortification occasioned by excessive Cold, or strict Ligature in
Fractures of the Bones, which stop its Motion are demonstrative proofs which
confirm this Assertion.

Gangrenes sometimes proceed from Obstructions of the Nerves, because for want
of a free supply of Spirits, the Parts lose their Sense and Motion, and by
consequence the Influx of the Blood ceases; This is clear in Paralytick.
Persons, in whom the parts affected ever gangrene first. From which I infer,
that the causes of Gangrenes are a deficience of Blood and Spirits, arising
from some coagulation of this Vital Liquour, or other impediment in its
Circulation.

This is illustrated by comparing the Blood with any Vinous Liquour. For all
Wines whilst they retain their Spirits continue to be potable, and preserve an
easy and gentle Fermentation; but when once the Spirits are exhaled, and the
acid parts prevail over the rest, they lose their sweet and pleasant Taste,
become eager and sour, and sometimes only a dead insipid Phlegm. How much the
Spirituous parts conduce to the good Temper of the Mass, is evident in the
distillation of Wine; for when ^he Spirituous Parts are drawn off, the
remainder is a m^^e nauseous and useless Phlegm. It happens just after the same
manner in the Blood of Animals; for when the Spirituous Parts are lost, the
rest becomes a heavy unactive Mass, bereaved of that principle which should
preserve a gentle Fermentation in it.

When any part suffers by intense Cold, especially the Extremities, the
Circulation is intercepted, by reason of the constriction of the small Vessels,
and when the quantity of the Blood imported is so very small, the parts must
needs suffer a Diminution of their Sense and Motion, and by consequence
Gangrene.

Men who die of excessive Age, are most commonly seized with a Gangrene,
because their Blood loses all its Spirits, which are the true Humidum Radicale;
and for the same reason Mortifications happen after Excessive Labor,
Loosnesses of a long continuance, or long Fasting, in short, whatever wastes the
Spirits.

Gangrenes often seize the Feet and Scrotum of Hydropical Persons, because
their Blood is serous and wants Spirits, and there is less Heat in the extreme
parts, besides the Serosities compressing the Channels which Nature has formed
for the conveying of the Blood to all parts of the Body, must necessarily
intercept its Motion.

The aptness of parts which suffer by extreme cold to gangrene, proceeds as
well from a concentration of the S^^^its, as an obstruction in the Motion of
the Blood, which is plain by the instance of a Bottle of Wine, which if it be
exposed to the Air in a vehement Frost, the Watery and more gross unactive parts
will be frozen all round, and the more Spirituous and Fine ones remain liquid
in the Center, nor can it be imagined but excessive Cold must have a like
effect on Animal Bodies.

The Back and Buttocks of Persons who are forced to keep their Beds for a long
time often gangrene, and this arises from a Compression of the Vessels, which
not conveying Blood enough, and by consequence the Part wanting a due supply to
animate it, must necessarily grow cold and mortify.

Great Inflammations, Contusions and Aneurisms, (especially if there be Blood
spilt in the interstices of the Fibers) very often terminate in a Gangrene, and
this is not difficult to account for, because the Extravasated Blood
putrefying, must necessarily compress the small Channels, and intercept the
Motion of the rest, and it is evident that this is so, because the Pulsation
ceases in proportion as the Gangrene increases, and the part losing its Natural
color, becomes pale or livid.

When Olcons, Greasy, or Astringent Medicines are applied to Inflammations or
Erysipelas's, they most commonly gangrene, because the Oily parts stop the
Pores and hinder Transpiration, and there being a continual congestion of
Matter in the part which cannot be discharged, it must necessarily compress the
Vessels, and hinder the influx of the Blood and Spirits. The Mischief of
Astringent Medicines, proceeds from the same reason, and in the Hot Countries
where the Pores are more open, Gangrenes do not so frequently happen after
Inflammations, as in colder Climates.

Gangrenes after an Inflammation, are more apt to seize on soft and spungy
parts, as the Gums, Lips, Genitals or Brain, than on the solid, which do not
imbibe so great a quantity of Humors.

Gangrenes sometimes ensue on Ulcers, Wounds, Scorbutic Spots, or sharp or
corrosive Medicines, because these being attended with Pain, an Inflammation of
necessity must follow.

Carbuncles most commonly Mortify, because they proceed from excessive sharp
Humors, which like an Aquafort^^ corrode the Vessels and the Parts. In the
last place, when the Humors of the Body grow sharp and corrosive, they
frequently leave a Mortification behind them, as we see happen in Malignant
Fevers, in the Small Pox, and many other Distempers where the Humors are very
much corrupted.

THE SIGNS. In Gangrenes which seize superannuated Persons, arising from a
deficience of Spirits, there is no sensible Heat or Inflammation, the Part
withers, loses its Sense and Motion, and the Person dies gradually.

When a Gangrene follows on a Dropsy, the Pain at first is very slight; but
afterward the Legs are inflamed, and it increases. When a Gangrene proceeds
from external Cold, the Pain is very acute; at first the Part becomes red,
livid, and afterward black, the Spirits abandon it, and a Mortification ensues
with a shivering Fit, not unlike that intermitting Fever. If the Gangrene
proceed from Compression, Ligature, Tumors, or Luxations, or Fractures, or
long lying on the Back, there is a Stupor, and a perfect privation of Sense and
Motion.

If a Gangrene follows an Inflammation, the Pain and Pulsation cease, the Part
becomes of a pale red or violet color; there are a great many Vesicul^e or
small Blebs arise on the Surface of the Skin, which are filled with a Salt
Muddy Water, the Natural Heat is extinguished, and the Part becomes soft and
flabby, and retains the impression of the Finger. If the Mortification be
perfected, the Patient falls into a great Languor, attended with a Burning and
Malignant Fever, Vomiting, and other Symptoms which plainly discover Death is
not far off. These Accidents happen upon the applying, Repelling and Emplastick
Medicines.

When a Gahgrene happens upon the use of an Actual Cautery, or other Caustic
Medicines the Part is benumbed, and loses its Sense and Motion. When it
proceeds from any Malignant Matter, as in the Bites of Venomous Creatures,
there is a Mortification of the part, a Fever, Vomiting, Delirium and Syncope.

The Signs of a Sphacelus or perfect Mortification, are a heaviness in the
Part, Blackness, Stench, the Flesh is flabby, has no Sense, the Skin separates
from it, and it grows dry. Sometimes a part which is perfectly Mortified, does
not presently lose its Motion, which proceeds not so much from it self, as the
Muscles which move it being fixed to a sound part. There are some Pustules
which arise on the Skin, because when the Blood Stagnates in the part, there
comes a sharp corrosive Serum from it, which insinuating it self under the
Skin, separates it, raises it, and forms these small Eruptions. There is no
Pulsation in the Part, and it becomes pale and livid, because the Circulation
of the Blood in the Part ceases, and being extravasated it putrefies. The Pains
proceed from the irritation of the Membranes and Nervous Fibers by the
corrosive Serum, and they cease when the load of extravasated Matter presses on
the Nerves, and intercepts the Motion of the Spirits through their proper
Channels. The great quantity of Serosities which moisten the Fibers, make the
Part soft and flabby; add to this, that upon a Cessation of the Influx of the
Blood and Spirits, the Parts must necessarily be relaxed.

The Acids which corrode and destroy the Neighboring parts, assist the
Mortification in its progress. If an Ulcer mortify (besides the forementioned
Signs) it emits no Matter, or at least what it does is ill colored, and has a
Stench.

A Sphacelus is incurable, except by an excision of the Mortified part. A
Gangrene or Mortification arising from an internal Cause is curable, because
though you should extirpate the part, the Gangrene would be reproduced in
another. Fleshy parts replete with Blood are more easily restored than any
others, on the contrary Nervous parts are more apt to Gangrene, and cured with
more difficulty.

A Gangrene proceeding from an external cause, must be cured with all speed,
and prevented from spreading it self. That which siezes Superannuated Men and
Hydropical Persons is incurable, and the Amputation of the Member would be
altogether useless.

A Gangrene in the soft internal Parts, is very apt to Sphacelate.

Gangrenes are much sooner cured in young than in old Persons, and in Robust,
than in weak Men. Those which proceed from intense Cold, and seize the extreme
parts only are curable, provided the part be not Mortified.

Gangrenes occasioned by great Inflammations, Tumors, Fractures, Luxations,
Contusions, Aneurisms, Erysipelas's, Ulcers, Burns, Scorbutic Spots, Bites of
Venomous Animals, Application of Unctuous Medicines, Causticks, Actual
Cauteries or Compression may be cured in the beginning.

The Operation must not be undertaken on slight occasions, and a Surgeon must
consider well whether there be a probability of Success; for instance, if the
Mortification be on the upper part of the Thigh, it would not be advisable to
meddle with it at all, because it is too near the large Vessels, and Parts
necessary to Life. It would not be proper to perform it when there is a High
Fever, with Vomiting and a Syncope, because these are Mortal Symptoms, but it
may be practiced in Cariosities and Fistula's of long standing in the Joints,
or when the Bone is entirely broke, and the Splinters run into the Flesh and
Tendons, and prick some Nerves or Blood Vessels, and cannot easily be reduced
to their Natural place; but if they can be reduced, and the Inslammation be not
very considerable, forbear Amputation.

Complicate Wounds are difficultly cured, and especially in ill Subjects, and
there is great reason to fear Pain and Inslammation, which are often attended
with bad consequences.

When Cariosities and Fistula's arise from any Hurt, Contusions, or crushing of
the Parts, whilst they are recent, do not affect the Joints, and the Humor
which produces them is void of all Maliguity; you must try to cure them by
Medicines, and not proceed to an Amputation of the Part presently.

But if the Distemper proceed from some Screphulous Humor, or some Abscess or
Ulcer which is the Crists of the Fever or an Universal Corruption of the
Blood, or if they are of long standing in the Joint, or the Cariosity, Pain and
Inflammation are very considerable, and the part disabled from performing its
Natural Functions, it must be extirpated if the Patients has strength enough to
undergo the Operation. But before you proceed to it, let the Blood be prepared
and sweetened by general Remedies, Sudorisicks and Cordials.

The OPERATION.
A Limb must never be cut off in the Joint, without a Visible necessity for it.

The Leg must be cut off as near the Knee as is possible, though the
Mortification spread no farther than the Foot, for the more commodious carrying
a Wooden Leg. The most proper place for this purpose, is about four fingers
breadth below the Joint, precisely beneath the Termination of the Tendons which
cover the Rotula. On the contrary cut as little as may be off the Arm, because
it serves as an Ornament and Counterpoise to the Body, and an Artificial Hand
may be made to be useful in some cases. Cut off as little of the Thigh as is
possible, that the Digestion of the Wound may be made in a shorter time, and
the Patient have strength enough to undergo the Cure.

To cut off the Leg, let the Patient sit in a Chair or on the side of his Bed,
and let one Servant hold him behind, and another stand before to hold his Leg,
then draw the Skin below the Knees up, that so it may the more easily cover the
Bone after the Operation is over. Then make two Ligatures, one above the Knee,
which you must straiten with the Turnstick or Tourniquet, and the other above
it. The first Ligature serves to compress the Vessels, stop the Flux of Blood,
and take off the Sense of the Part. These Ligatures must be made on a thick
Compress laid along the Ham, and before you straiten the Ligature above the
Knee with the Stick, you must lay a small Past-board under it, to hinder it
from pinching the Skin, and being painful to the Patient. This way is very
useful to command the Blood, and let out as little or much of it as you judge
convenient after the Amputation. The Ligature below the Knee serves to keep the
Flesh steady, and ought to be placed at least four fingers breadth below the
Joint.

When the Knee is steady, let the Surgeon place himself between the Patients
Legs, and with a crooked Knife make an Incision around quite to the Bone, and
to do it better, let him make it with his right Hand, resting his Left on the
Back of the Knife, which for this reason must not have an edge there; Let him
scrape off the Periosteum with a slender straight Knife, and cut the Flesh
between the Bones with it, least if he tear them with the Saw, he cause some
farther Accidents.

Before you saw the Bone, take a Fillet and slit it lengthways to the middle,
then put the two ends on the Flesh which is cut, and draw it up to make way for
the Saw, and then saw the Bone as near the Flesh as possibly you can, for this
shrinking and wasting in the Digestion, without this way of prevention would
remain uncovered, and create the Patient abundance of Trouble.

Let the Surgeon take the Leg in his left Hand, and the Saw in his Right, and
fix it at once on both Bones, and then begin with the lesser Focil and end with
the greater, for if he should begin with the Tibia first, the other would not
be able to sustain the Saw, but moving to and fro would tear the Flesh; Let the
Saw at first be a little incliped and saw gently, but after faster. Whilst the
Surgeon Saws the Bones, let a Servant who holds the Leg by the Foot bend it,
and bring it a little against the Saw to facilitate its Passage. When the Bones
are sawed through, take off the Ligature which kept the Flesh steady below the
Knee, and loosen the Stick, and let such a quantity of Blood out as you judge
the Patients Strength can bear, and then stop it by the Dressings.

THE DRESSINGS loosen the Turniket a little, that so you may discover the
Orifices of the Arteries, and then lay a Vitriol Button on them; Let one the
Assistants keep these Buttons on, as well as the dry Pledgits laid on the Bone,
whilst you cover them with a great Pledgit of Tow armed with Astringent
Powders, as Bole Armoniack Terra Sigillata, Dragons Blood, Frankincense, and a
Thousand such like things; lay this in the Palm of your Hand, and at once apply
it on the Stump. Some cover this with a large Hogs bladder armed with Styptick
Medicines, and lay over all a Compress cut in form of a Cross, applying its
middle or plain part on the Stump, and its ends on the Leg. Next there must be
three Compresses applied which must be of a competent breadth, and about the
third part of an Ell in length, or proportioned to the Part, one of these is to
be laid to the Hamm, and so brought over the Stump, and applied to the Knee,
the middle of the Second is to be applied to the Stump, and so disposed as to
cross the other, and the third to be laid on the extremity of the Stump, making
a turn round the Leg.

To keep the Dressings on, take a Roller of three Else in breadth, and more
than two Inches broad, rolled up at one end, apply it first to the edge of the
Stump, and make two turns about it, and then mount to the Knee ascending
spirally, and pin it where it ends without binding the Knee, but whether this
be above or below the Knee, it matters not very much.

When you have done this, take another Roller of more than two Inches broad and
four Else long, rolled up at both ends, and applying the midst of the Roller on
the center of the Stump, bring both Heads up to the Knee, and make a turn round
the part with one Head to stay the other, which you must bring strait down and
so over the Wound, then bring it up and with the other Head make a round to
keep it firm and steady, and thus you must continue to do till the Stump be
covered, still keeping one end above the Knee to make several Rounds, for the
keeping the other steady, but when the stump is covered, make several Rounds
about the Part, with the Heads alternately to keep the ascending and descending
turns steady, and in the last place pin them above the Knee.

Some Practitioners prefer a Ligature of the Arteries to the Vitriol Button,
for stopping the Blood. If you would practice this way, you may proceed in this
manner. Loosen the Turniket to discover the place whence the Blood issues, and
when you have found this take hold of them with a Forceps made with a little
Ring to rise and fall, for the holding them firm at pleasure. This sort of
Forceps is very convenient for apprehending the Artery, and when you have hold
of it, take a crooked Needle with a wax Thread, and having passed it into the
Flesh below the Artery, with the two ends tie the Vessel, and then laying a
small Compress waxed on it, fasten it by two other knots; when you have done
this loosen the Turniket to see if there be any other Arteries, and if there
be, tie them in the same manner as the first. After the Ligatures are all made,
take off the Tuniket, and bring the Flesh as far as you can to cover the Stump,
and proceed to dress it as is above directed, omitting the Vitriol Buttons and
other Stypticks, which are not necessary, except some little Artery, (as most
commonly it does) happen to bleed, and in this case you may apply some slight
Styptick.

THE CURE. When the Operation is over, let the Patient be laid down, and let
the Part be kept supported on a Pillow. If Vitriol Buttons have been applied,
and no Ligature made on the Vessels, the Hand must be kept on the Stump the
first Day for the better applying Medicines, and preventing a Flux of Blood.
But in case Ligatures be made, this is needless, at least it is not necessary
to continue the Hand on for so long a time.

Some use the Actual Cautery to stop the Blood, but in this way when the Escar
separates the Arteries, open and pour out Blood afresh, which often occasions
the loss of the Patients Life.

If the Blood be stopped with Vitriol Buttons, the Dressings must not be taken
off till two Days after the Amputation, that the Stypticks which are applied,
may have time enough to close the Vessels (whereas on the contrary if a
Ligature be made, the Dressings may be taken off the first day, without danger
of a Haemorrhage) and the Second Dressing must be made in the same manner as
the first, omitting the Hogs Bladder and Vitriol Buttons, and only strewing on
Astringent Powders. The Dressings must be removed as gently as may be, for fear
of exciting a Haemorrhage. When you are once secure from any Flux of Blood, it
is then time to remove the Dressings, and endeavor to procure a good Digestion
with Turpentine and Yelks of Eggs, and when you have obtained that, deterge
with Aegyptiacum, or Unguent de Apio, and Cicatrize the Wound, keeping a
Pledgit of dry ^int on the Bone during the whole Cure.

When the Digestion is over, lay Compresses on the stump to press the Part, and
hinder the Growth of Superfluous and Luxuriant Flesh, which usually happens at
that time.

When the Part is convulsed after the Operation, as sometimes it is from the
vehemence of the Pain, and the Hurry and Disorder of the Spirits, let not the
Artist lose time by endeavoring to make a Ligature on the Arteries, but let
him immediately apply the Vitriol Button to the Part, and Pledgits dipped in some
Styptick Water.

This is Fabricius Hildanus's Process in Amputations. In the first place he
does not remove the Dressings till the third Day, unless the Pain be very
urgent, but he embrocates the remaining Stumps of the Limb twice a Day, with a
Mixture of Oil of Roses and Myrtlis, laying Defensatives on the Neighboring
Parts. After the Second Dressing when he is secure from any Haemorrhage, he
lays aside Astringents, and applies the following, or some like Digestive.
Turpentine washed in Plantane Water, iij. Oil of Roses and sweet Almonds, a^.
i. Gum Elemi dissolved and strained, ss. Saffron, i. Mix these Ingredients, and
with the Addition of the Yolk of an Egg make a Liniment. This he continues till
he has obtained a good Digestion, and then he deterges with the following
Liniment, or something of the like Nature.. Turpentine washed in Wine, iij.
Powders of round Birthwort, the Florentine Iris, Flour of Barley, a^. iv. Honey
of Roses, i. Spirit of Wine, ss. the best Venice Treacle, ij. Mix these
Ingredients, and make a Liniment.

When the Wound is deterged, he draws down the Skin and Flesh to cover the
Bone, and applies an Agglutinating Emplaster on the Stump. This he makes after
this or the like manner.. Fine Flour, i. Mastich, Frankincense. Dragons Blood,
Powder of Roses, Gum Tragacanth, a^. ij. Beat up all in a very fine Powder with
the White of an Egg, and as much Oil of Roses as will bring it to the
consistence of Honey; and the next Day if the Medicine be too thick, put some
Rose and Plantane Water into it to bring it to a just Consistence. When he
finds it expedient to dry the Wound, he strews Powder of round Birthworth,
Sowbread, Iris Florentina, Bark of Pine, Guajacum Wood, a^. ss. and when the
Agglutinative Emplaster falls off, he applies another.

During the whole Cure, he is careful not to suffer any Oily thing to touch the
Bone, using the Actual Cautery to it to procure Exfoliation, but withal, being
careful not to touch the Marrow for fear of Inflammation, and defending the
Bone with dry Lint, till Nature has invested it with Flesh. If any Fleshy
Excrescence happens to arise, he consumes it with a Mixture composed of Burnt
Alum, ij. Lapis Calaminaris, Calx of Lead, Cerate, a^. i. Calcined Vitriol, ss.
reduced into a very fine Powder. In the last place, he cicatrizes the Wound
with Emplastr. de Palmite de Cerussa cocta, the red Desiccative Unguent, or
other like Medicines.

REMARKS.
Some time since a young Man in the Hotel Dieu had his Leg cut off, upon the
account of a fierce Gangrene on it, but the Wound it self gangrened again, and
the Surgeons were forced to cut off the Thigh. At first he seemed to do well,
but soon after a large hard Swelling arose on the upper part of the Thigh,
which extended quite to the Groin, this in some small time gangrened, and
killed the Patient. This Observation shows, that internal Gangrenes are
incurable, and that it is not enough to take care of Dressing the Part
outwardly, but great regard must be had to the Blood to sweeten that, which
sometimes is as sharp and corrosive as an Aquafortis.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Paronychia or Whitlow.
THE Operation in Paronychia's, is an Apertion of the extremity of the Finger
to let out the Pus, which sometimes is lodged under the Periosteum.

THE CAUSE. A Paronychia is a Tumor at the extremity of the Finger, and Root
of the Nails on the third Joint, though sometimes it is found on others.

There are two sorts of Paronychia's; in the one the Matter is between the Bone
and Periosteum; and in the other between the Muscles; and both commonly proceed
from a sharp corrosive Humor.

THE SIGNS. When a Paronychia is lodged under the Periosteum, there is a
burning Heat, a sharp Pain, a Pulsation within the Part, a great Tension, and
an Acute Fever. When it is only between the Muscles, there is less Heat and
Pain, the Pulsation is not so deep, nor the Tension so great, and the Fever is
less.

The Heat and Pain proceed from the great Ebullition of the Blood, and the
Acrimony of the Matter which molests the Fibers of the Periosteum. The Tension
arises from the Fermentation and Rarefaction of the Humors, for when any
Matter is in Motion, since the Parts shock and mutually repulse each other,
they must needs leave Vacuities between them, and by consequence the Matter
must occupy a greater space, and compress the Neighboring Vessels. The Pain
and Pulsation proceeds from the Arteries, beating and striking on a sensible
Part, which is pained and inflamed, and it cannot be conceived, but that the
repeated strokes must necessarily increase the Symptoms; The Fever proceeds
from the sharp Humor of the Paronychia being absorbed by the Blood, and
communicating a Vicious Taint to it.

There is reason to believe the Tumor to be ripe, and the Pus fir to be let
out, when the Symptoms cease or abate.

The OPERATION.
This consists in evacuating the Pus, and making an Aperture on the side of the
Finger quite down to the Bone, for the Periosteum must necessarily be opened,
if the Matter be ^odged under it. The Incision as I remarked before, must be
made on the side, to avoid cutting the Tendons with the Lancet.

THE DRESSING. Put a small Tent and a little Pledgit armed with some good
Digestives into the Wound, and cover these with an Emplaster in form of a
Cross, then lay over this a Compress cut in the same Figure, and let the center
be applied on the Extremity of the Finger, laying the Ends along on the sides,
and keep all on with a Fillet three quarters of an Inch broad, and about a
quarter of an Ell in length; there must be a little Hole made at one end of the
Fillet, and the other end must be slit three Inches in length; when it is thus
disposed pass the slit end through the Hole, and so bring the Fillet strait to
the Finger, and then wind it spirally round, ascending and descending
gradually. If the Surgeon pleases, he may make a Case of the Skin of any Animal
to keep the Fingers warm, and fasten this Case to the Wrist with small Ribbons.

It is very convenient to keep the Arm in a Sling, which may be made of black
Taffeta, otherwise a Napkin will serve well enough for this purpose. Put the
middle of the Napkin under the Patients Armpits, and bring the two lower ends
over the opposite Shoulder, then wrap the Arm in the Napkin half folded with
the Elbow down and the Hand a little raised and the Thumb uppermost, then bring
the two upper ends of the Napkin over the other Shoulder, and order it so that
it may sit neatly.

THE CURE. Procure a good Digestion with proper Medicines, as Turpentine or Oil
of Eggs, forbearing all greasy things which are apt to rot the Tendons, and
then deterge the Ulcer.

To cure the Tumor without proceeding to Operation, you must endeavor to
appease the Pain with the Liquor of Worms baked in an Oven, Balsam of Sulphur
is good to discuss this Painful Tumor, or bring it to Suppuration, when it is
disposed. A Liniment made of Ear-wax and Saccharum Saturni, with a little Oil
of Filberds is excellent, and so is a Cataplasm of Human Dung.

REMARKS.
Riverius Cent. 4. Obs. 19. mentions a Woman who was cured of a Paronychia in
less than a quarter of an Hour, by holding her Finger in the Ear of a Cat.
Whilst her Finger was there, she found at certain Intervals of time, a Heat
extending the whole length of her Arm, and a great Pain at the Ends of her
Fingers, the Heat would sometimes cease for a small while, and presently after
return with a like Pain: The Animal was in such extreme Torment, that two Men
could scarce hold it.

Fabricius Hildanus relates, Cent. 1. Obs. 97. how he cured a Paronychia at the
extremity of the Finger. The Patient he tells us was in very great Pain, had a
Fever, Vomited very much, though there was no apparent Swelling or
Inflammation as yet. For some time he Fomented the Part with a Decoction of
Camomil and Melilot, Flowers of Fenugreek and Quinces in Cows Milk. Afterward
he took off the Surface of the Skin, and there appeared under it several Red
Spots which he cut, and there came a red Water from them. When this Water was
let out, he applied to the part rags dipped in a Mixture of Spirit of Wine and
Venice Treacle, upon which the Pain immediately ceased, and the next day the
Patient was entirely well, however he purged her, and then all the Symptoms
vanished.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Applying Causticks, and making Issues.
THIS is an Artificial Division of the Skin, by means of some Causticks laid on
it.

THE CAUSES. The occasions which require Causticks, are usually some Distempers
of long standing, which cannot be removed by other Medicines, as Catarrhs,
Tumors, Arthritick Pains, Callosities in Ulcers, Abscesses not ripe, when some
indications require them to be opened, and in general they are useful for
purifying the Blood, and discharging all Superfluous Moisture.

THE SIGNS which indicate the application of Causticks, are all or any of those
Causes abovenamed.

The OPERATION.
When you intend to apply a Caustic to any Part, first lah on an Emplaster
with a Hole in the midst, of the same size and shape you design the Escar, and
then having wet the skin with a little Spittle bruise the Caustic and lay it
on, covering it with another Emplaster, and leaving it for a longer or a lesser
time, according to the thickness of the Patients Skin, and the Strength of the
Medicine.

The most proper places for the application of Causticks in making of Issues
are in the Neck, between the first and second Vertebra, in the Arm on the
outside, in a little Cavity between the Biceps and Deltoides Muscle, in the
inner part of the Thigh in a small place between the Sartorius and Vastus
internus, in the internal part of the Knee, a little below the Termination of
the Flexors of the Leg, etc. The principal things to be regarded in Issues are,
That as much as possible they be in a Place where the Patient may dress them
himself: That they be near the great Vessels, that so there may be a great
discharge; and in the last place, that they be in the Interstice of two
Muscles, as remote from the Tendons as may be.

To make a good Caustic, take one part of Calx viva, and two parts of Pot
Ashes, put these in an Earthen Pot, pour hot Water on them, leaving them in
Infusion five or six Hours, after that boil them, and filter that which is
clear through a Brown paper, and evaporate it in a Copper Basin, or an Earthen
pan glazed. There will remain a Salt at the Bottom, which you must put in a
good Crucible and melt it, keeping it in a strong heat, till the Moisture be
exhaled. When you find it is reduced to the form of an Oil in the Bottom, cast
it into a Basin and cut it into parts of what size and shape you please whilst
it continues hot, and put these into a strong Glass Bottle, stopping it with
Wax and a Bladder, because the Air soon resolves the Caustic into a Fluor, and
for the same reason it must be kept in a dry place. These are the strongest
Causticks of all, and perform their effect in the space of half an Hour.

The Lapis Infernalis is very useful, for consuming Luxuriant and Superfluous
Flesh by lightly passing it over them. To make this, Dissolve in a Glass Vessel
what quantity of Silver you please, with about thrice the same quantity of good
Spirit of Nitre; set this Vessel in a sand Heat, and evaporate about two thirds
of the Liquour, then pour the rest hot into a good German Crucible, which must
be pretty large by reason of the ebullition which is made, place this on a
small Fire, and leave it there till the Matter, which is very much rarefied,
sinks to the Bottom, then increase the Fire, and it will become like an Oil,
pour this into an Ingot well greased and heated and it will coagulate, and may
be kept in a Glass well stopped. This Stone may be made with a Mixture of Copper
and Silver, but then it will not keep for so long a time. If you put in an
Ounce of Silver, you will have an Ounce and five Drams of this Caustic.

THE DRESSING consists in covering the Caustic with an Emplaster to keep it on
the part, and then laying a Compress over that, binding all on with a Roller
more than two Inches broad. After the Caustic has lain on for a sufficient
time, take off the Dressings and scarifie the Escar with a Lancet, laying on
some good Digestive or a little fresh Butter, continuing this till the Escar
begin to separate, and then if you design to make an Issue put in a small Pea
or a little Orrice Root round, and keep this on with a small Compress and
Bandage, the Bandage must be made of Linen Cloth, long enough to go round the
Arm, and three or four Inches broad, and on the Hem or Edge of this there must
be two or three Holes made to put Ribbons through, and this Bandage is very
convenient, because the Patient can dress these Issues himself, and draw it as
strait as he judges convenient.

THE CURE. The Ulcer must be dressed twice a Day, putting in a new pea of Orrice
every time, and the Cloth changed every time to prevent its stinking. If proud
Flesh grow in the Issue, let it be consumed with burnt Alum.

REMARKS.
Riverius in his communicated Observations, Obs. 2. relates that a certain
Person had been for a long time ill afflicted with a Pain in his Back, of which
at last he died. Sometime before his Death, he had had an Issue made in his
Thigh four fingers breadth above the Knee, upon the Escar falling off, there
came away an ounce and a half of Sanious Matter, and every day after above an
ounce of true Pus. The Man being opened after his Death, there was a great
quantity of Pus found in the Lungs, which occasioned his Death. There was found
a great Apostem in the Back, from whence his Pain did proceed, and a Chanel
extending from the Apostem to the Issue, through which the Pus discharged it
self; This Remark does sufficiently prove how useful Issues are in cases of
this Nature.

CHAP. XXX. Of making a Seton.
A Seton is an Artificial Ulcer made by the passing of a Needle, with a Skain
of Silk through the Skin.

THE CAUSE of this Operation, is the same with that of making Issues.

THE SIGNS which indicate Setons, are the same with those of an Issue.

The OPERATION.
Setons are usually made in the Neck. When the Patient is sat down, turn his
Head and pinch up the Skin; then take a Needle made like that which the Packets
use, with a Skain of Silk soaked in Oil of Roses, and pass the Needle through
the Patients Skin, leaving the Skain in it. Some use a perforated Forceps with
a Hole in it, and with this they pinch up the Skin of the Neck, and pass the
Skain through the Skin.

THE DRESSING consists in laying a Compress on the Seton, and keeping it on
with a Fillet round the Neck.

THE CURE. Take care every Day to take off the Dressings, and draw the Skain a
little to change it, and continue the Seton as long as the Physicians shall
judge necessary.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 4. Obs. 4. relates that a Boy of 11 years of Age was
subject to Fluxions which increased very much, sometimes discharging themselves
on the Eyes, Teeth or Ears, and causing great Pain in those parts, sometimes
again falling on the Throat, Lungs or Stomach, and there causing a Hoursness of
Voice, a Cough, a Nausea, Vomiting, and several other bad Accidents, till in
fine his Body was reduced to a very Weak, Feeble Condition, at last a Seton
being made on the Fontanel or Mould of the Head, the Child grew better from Day
to Day, and in a few Months was so recovered, that his Friends did not know
him, he appearing quite a New Person.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Cupping and Scarifying.
WET Cupping is the Scarifying of the Back, to bring the Blood and Spirits into
the Part by the help of a great Glass Vial filled with lighted Tow, and applied
on the Scarifications.

Dry Cupping is without Scarification.

THE CAUSE. Cupping is useful in Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Hysteric Fits,
Palsies, Contractions of the Ligaments and Tendons which sometimes happen after
Fractures and Dislocations, because when the part is warmed and rarefied, its
Pores open themselves, and receive in the more Subtle parts of the Medicines
applied to it.

The Ancients applied Cupping-glasses to Venereal Bubo's, Pestilential Tumors,
and the Bites of venomous Animals to draw the Venom out of the Part, but later
Authors disapprove of this Practice, because, say they, the Poison insinuating
it self into the Mass of Blood, a Cupping-glass is not capable of putting a
stop to the Mischief; others again reject Cupping-glasses on all occasions
whatever, denying that Scarifications determine the Blood and Spirits toward
the Part which is Cupped, or that by diverting the Humors another way, the
suffering Part is thereby eased, and its Inflammation abated. Those who oppose
this Practice tells us, that if this were true, the part which is cupped would
appear inflamed, because it is not possible that the Blood and Spirits should
flow very plentifully to a Part without a visible Inflammation of it, which
nevertheless in this case is not discernible. Besides if any such Inflammation
should arise, the Motion of the Blood would be interrupted by a Division of the
Vessels, as it happens in all recent Wounds, and not be determined thither by
the Pain or Attraction of the Cupping-glasses. Whence they conclude, that once
letting Blood or taking any Sudorisick or other proper Remedy, will have a
better effect than all the Cupping in the World.

The Ancients very foolishly applied Cupping-glasses on the top of the Head, in
an Inflammation of the Uvula, and on the Hypochondria to stop bleeding of the
Nose, or under the Breasts in Women, to stop the Flux of the Menstrua, or on
the midst of the lower Belly to draw up the Womb, and on the Region of the
Kidneys to allay Nephritick pains.

THE SIGNS which indicate the use of Cupping-glasses, are all those Distempers
above mentioned.

The OPERATION.
There are two sorts of Cupping, the wet and the dry way; the first is designed
to draw the Blood; and the latter only to irritate the Part, and rarefie the
Humors contained in it.

In order to apply Cupping-glasses, place the Patient in a proper Situation
according to the place on which you design to fix them; then rub the Part very
well with a warm Cloth, and setting fire to the Tow in the Glass apply it, and
the fire will be presently extinguished, and the Flesh tumefie in that place.
In stead of Tow, you may put a small wax Candle lighted in a little Tin
Candlestick on the part, and clap one of the Glasses over this, the Candle will
immediately go out, and the Flesh swelling rife up into the Glass, which you
may leave on for as long a time as you please. This is the way of dry Cupping.

But if you would draw Blood, make Scarifications on the Part as deep as you
judge is convenient, beginning beneath and rising upwards, because if you begin
above and descend, the Blood will hinder you from performing the Operation
well. The Scarifications must be made a cross one another, that so the skin may
have no check. When this is done, you may apply Cupping-glasses on the
Scarifications, in the same manner as in the dry way of Cupping, and the Blood
will run into the Glass, which when it is half full must be removed to empty it
and another applied, repeating this as often as there is occasion.

There are three sorts of Scarifications, some Superficial, and these are small
scratches which do not enter the Skin, others are midling and extend to the
Flesh, the last sort are larger and deeper, and are slashes. The first are only
useful in Distempers of the Skin, and the Incisions in Gangrenes and dangerous
Distempers.

THE DRESSING. After dry Cupping lay on the Part a Compress dipped in Spirit of
Wine, simple or Camphorated, and keep it on with a Napkin folded in three
pleats, and fastened round the Breast if the Back be cupt, or with a Fillet if
it be the Leg or Arm.

When the Part is Scarified cleanse the Incision with Spirit of Wine, and make
a Bandage.

THE CURE of Scarifications consists in applying a Desiccative Emplaster to
cicatrize them.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus in his Treatise de tuenda Sanitate observes, that when there is
a Coma, a heaviness in the Head, Defluxions on the Eyes or Throat, that
Cupping-glasses may then be applied on the Shoulder-blades, and that the
Patient must barely stand before the Fire, and not be in too hot a place, for
fear least the Vena cava which runs along the Back be too much heated, and the
Blood be put into a Ferment.

In Cent. 4. Obs. 13. He relates the History of a Man of forty years of Age, of
a good Temper of Body, who was siezed with a violent Flux of Blood at the Nose.
His Physician ordered him to keep himself in a hot place and undergo a
Cupping, which together so increased his Bleeding, that in a few Hours he lost
several Pints. The Flux continued and became so violent, that the Blood
discharged it self outwardly, as well as into the Stomach, and in a few Days
time, the Patient voided 27 l. by the Nose. This Observation shows us, that on
a like occasion the Patient ought never to be kept in a very hot place, or have
Cupping-glasses applied according to the present Practice.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Leeches.
LEeches are a sort of Water-worms, applied to a Part to draw out Blood.

THE CAUSE. Leeches are applied to such parts as cannot endure Scarification;
as the Face, Lips, Nose, Fingers, Joints, and the Fundament in the Piles.

THE SIGNS that Leeches ought to be applied, are those above mentioned, viz. a
necessity of Scarifying, and an unaptness in the Part to admit of it.

The OPERATION.
You must not make use of those which are taken out of standing Waters, as
Marshes and Pits, (which most commonly have a large Head, and shine in the
Night like Glowworms, and have their Back streaked with Blew) for these often
are dangerous and cause Inflammations, Fevers and Syncope's; Those are best
which are found in clear and running. Water, are long and slender, have a small
Head, and a greenish back streaked with Yellow, and their Belly a little
Reddish.

Before Leeches be applied, let them stand for some Days in a Vessel of clear
Water to Vomit. When Leeches are kept in a Glass for use, the Water ought to be
changed once in three Days, and for about ten or twelve hours before they are
applied, let them be kept in a Box, for this makes them more Hungry, and draw
Blood with more eagerness.

Before you apply them, chafe the Part well with a Sponge dipped in warm Water or
Milk, and if the Leech do not stick to the Part, lay on a drop or two of the
Blood of some other Animal. Put them to the Part in the Box it self, for if you
touch them with your Fingers they will be irritated, and will not bite. When
the Patient feels several Pricks take away the Box, and if there be not enough
fastened to the Pa^^ apply it again

If the Leeches fall off before they have sucked Blood enough, take others up
in a Napkin and apply them to the same Punctures which the first have made.
When they do not draw enough cut off the little end of their Tail, for the
Blood coming away as fast as they suck it, they will never be satisfied and
suck perpetually, besides by this means what quantity they draw may be known.
When they have drawn enough you must not pull them away, for then they will
leave their Sting in the Wound, but throw some sharp thing or other on their
Heads, as Ashes or the like, and then they will quit their Hold; after which
you may let a little Blood run, for this carries off any Venom that may happen
to be left in the Wound.

THE DRESSING. Wa^h the Punctures with Salt Water, and apply a Compress with
convenient Bandage. If the Blood does not stop lay on the Punctures some
Astringent Medicines, as a Compress dipped in some Styptick Waters, as Ashes of
Galls, or some other Astringent Powders. However a Compress and Bandage is
necessary, and if there be an Inflammation, the Compress may be dipped in Spirit
of Wine Camphorated; and here note, this is sooner made by repeated extinction
of lighted Camphire, than the common Way by a Solution of it.

THE CURE. Lay small Pledgits of Lint on the Punctures, and if there be any
Inflammation, let them be dipped in some Spirituous Liquour.

REMARKS.
If Leeches are taken out of a Stagnating or Muddy Water, or have not well
disgorged themselves, they sometimes leave Ulcers behind them in the part which
they Wound.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Vesicatories or Blisters.
VEsicatories are certain Applications which raise small Bladders or Blisters
on the Skin.

THE CAUSE. The Occasion of applying Blisters are Vertigo's, Fluxons on the
Eyes or Ears, Pains of the Teeth, Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Soporose Distempers,
the Gout, the Bites of Venomous Animals, and the Stinging of Wasps, Bees, etc.

THE SIGNS which indicate Blistering to be necessary, are some one of those
immediately above recited.

The OPERATION.
Blisters are raised with Cantharides or Spanish Flies dried and powdered, and
mixed with Leaven, and so applied to some one part of the Body. Before you
apply any Visicatory make a light Friction of the part with a course Cloth to
open the Pores, to make way for the more prompt Action of the Caustic Salts.
The Skin of a Child which is thin and of a delicate contexture, does not
require so strong a Vesicatory, as that of a grown Person, and more or fewer
Vesicatories ought to be applied in proportion to the quantity of Serosities
you intend to draw.

The Patient may know when a Blister is drawn, by reason he does then feel the
Pain which the Emplaster causes at first.

Blisters must not be opened till after some Days, when the Flesh begins to
grow a little harder, for otherwise the Air entering too soon, would create
violent pain.

Blisters ordinarily rise in six or seven Hours. If you desire to have a
continual evacuation, leave the Blistring Emplaster on the part, and a Serosity
will continually come away. In Pains of the Teeth Blisters are frequently
applied to the Neck, and kept running for a long time.

THE DRESSING. When a Vesicatory is taken off* and the Blisters opened, apply a
Compress dipped in some Spirituous Liquour, and keep it on with some Bandage
adapted to the Part; for instance, on the Temples with a Handkerchief folded
Triangularwise, on the Trunk of the Body with the Napkin, and on the Limbs with
a Roller.

THE CURE. If you do not desire the evacuation for any long time, take off the
Vesicatory, wash the Part with some Spirituous Liquour, and then lay on some
good Desiccative Emplaster.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 6. Obs. 99. relates that a young Fellow playing the fool
with some of his Comrades in an Apothecaries Shop, seeing a Box of Cantharides,
asked what they would give him to eat twelve of those Spanish Flies, they made
a Bargain, and presently told him out the number, upon which he took and
swallowed very greadily. About Midnight he was tormented with cruel Pains in
his Stomach, and pissed Blood. However he was so fortunate as to escape with
Life, which was partly owing to the Skill and Care of his Physicians, and
partly to their being only in a gross Powder.

Fabr. Hildanus, Centur. 6. Obs. 88. relates, That a certain Person having a
Cold Pituitous Swelling on the Knee, a certain Barber applied to it a
Vesicatory made of Leaven and Spanish Flies, which Ulcerated the whole Knee,
created likewise a vehement Pain, Restlesness and Fever, with a Pain in the
Reins, Back and Belly, and after that he had a great Heat in the Neck of the
Bladder, and could not void any thing besides some drops of Blood, with
intolerable pain; but Hildanus removing this Cataplasm the Pain abated, the
Patient made Water without difficulty, and all other Accidents ceased. The
Barber being incensed at his removing his Emplaster applied another, but the
Accidents returning with more vehemence than before, and the Patient being
sensible of the reason, discharged the Empirick. After this he purged him well
with Hydragogues, and Sweated him with a Decoction of Box, Guajacum, Sassafras,
and Roots of China to purge off that Viscous Humor, from whence the Swelling
did proceed. In the last place, he applied Vigo's Cataplasm hot for a Month
together, renewing it twice a Day, and the Patient was cured.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Extirpation of the Uvula.
THIS needs no Definition.

THE CAUSE. The occasion of this Operation is some Erosion, Gangrene, or
Exorbitant Swelling of the Uvula, which hinders the Patient from Breathing or
Swallowing his Alimen^s.

THE SIGNS of a Gangrene in the Uvula, are the same as in any other part of the
Body. When a Man cannot Swallow or Breath without great difficulty, and there
seems to be a Lump in the Throat, it is a sign the Uvula is inflamed; besides
this may be easily seen by inspecting the Mouth.

The OPERATION.
Depress the Tongue with the Speculum Oris, then take hold of the Uvula with a
Forceps, and cut if off with a pair of Scissars.

THE DRESSING No Pledgit, Compress or Bandage, can be applied to this Part.

THE CURE consists in stopping the Blood with Styptick Gargarisms. If it be
requisite to procure a good Digestion, make a Gargarism for this purpose, with
a Decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows, white Lily Roots, Figs, and other like
ripening Ingredients, and when the Patient uses it, let him retain some of it
for a considerable time in his Mouth. In the last place, make a detergent
Ptisan with the Vulnerary Plants or warm Wine, which often suffices alone.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 19. relates the History of a young Man, whose
Uvula was so large he could not breath without great Difficulty, it filled up
all the Roof of his Mouth quite to the Dentes Incisores. This Swelling was
hard, livid, unequal, painful, and distended with black Veins, and adhered to
the Roof of his Mouth. The Patient putting himself into the Hands of a
Mountebank, soon after died.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Varices in the Veins.
THIS Operation is a Ligature or strait Bandage of a Vein, which is dilated.

THE CAUSE. The internal Cause of Varices is a Thick, Grumous, Blood,
coagulated by some Acid, which hinders the Circulation, and necessarily dilates
the Vessel.

Women with Child frequently have Varicose Swellings in their Legs, because
the Iliac Vessels being comprest by the Foetus, the refluent Blood cannot pass
in a due quantity through them, and consequently must regurgitate and distend
the Vessels in the Feet and Legs.

The SIGNS. These Tumors are great swollen Veins, of a Violet, Livid or Black
color, which frequently are seated on the Legs near the Knees. These Tumors
upon the least compression disappear, but instantly return. Sometimes these
Swellings are very serviceable to the Patient, especially if they are
Hypochondriacal or Melancholy Persons, but if the Blood ferments in them, and
seems disposed to burst the Vein, threatening a Malignant Ulcer by its
sharpness, or the Pain be violent, then you may make the Operation.

The OPERATION

Pinch up the Skin a cross the Tumor, and let a Servant hold one end; do you
take the other end and make an Incision lengthways, till you have laid the
Vessel bare, then take the Vein with a Hook to separate it more conveniently
from its Membranes, and pass a Needle threaded with a double waxed Thread, and
tie the Vein below the Dilatation, and open the Vessel with a Lancet to let out
the Blood. If you have no mind to make this Operation, you may open the Vein
with a Lancet to let out the Blood, as in Bleeding, and when you think you have
drawn enough make a strait Bandage, and forbear undoing it till the Swelling be
down, and the Vein reduced to its Natural Size; or when you have taken away
Blood enough, apply a Plate of Lead on it with Astringent Medicines, and bind
this Plate on very strictly, for by this means the Blood being hindered from
passing through that Vein, it will by degrees be lessened, till it is entirely
gone.

If you have no mind to open the Varix, you may apply a Sponge dipped in a
Decoction of R^ch Alum, Common Salt, and four Pomgranates, applying it twice a
day, and continuing it on for the space of a Month. When the Varix appears to
be dried away, remove the Sponge and keep the part bound strait for a Month or
two, till the Swelling entirely disappear.

The following Medicine is good against all Pains and Swellings of the
Varices.. Unguent of Populeon, Mucilages of Psyllium, Linseed and Foenugreck,
a^. iss. O^. of Camomil, Flower of Beans, a^. ij. and with Wax q. s. make a
Cerate or Emplaster.

THE DRESSING. After the Ligature is made on the Varix, dress it with some good
Digestive or Balsam, that so the extremities of the Vessels may cicatrize, and
then put Dossils into the Wound, and lay on a Pledgit armed with some good
Digestive, and over this a Compress, keeping all on with a Roller above two
Inches broad, and of a length proportioned to the Part, and rolled Spirally on
it.

THE CURE consists in dressing the Wound twice a a Day, Deterging it, and then
Cicatrizing it. The Threads will rot in the Suppuration, and then they may be
drawn out.

It is not enough to treat the Patient in this manner, but you must farther be
careful to sweeten the Blood with Sudorificks, as a Decoction of Guajacum,
China and Sarsaparilla, not forgetting Purging and Bleeding, if the Physicians
approve of it.

REMARKS.
Marcus Aurelius Severinus, in his Book de Chirurgia efficaci, Chapter 37. relates,
That a certain Person had a Varix on the Knee, formed by the conjunction of
several Veins united in such manner, that they made a little Hillock which
after separated, and proceeded in their course up into the Groin.

Bartholin in Hist. 56. relates that a young Fellow continuing 13 Days without
making Water, all the Veins of his Body became Varicose, and several of them
broke, but upon giving the Patient Diuretics he made Water, and the Swelling
of the Vessels went off.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Reducing the Fundament.
THIs Operation is the Reduction of the Gut into its Natural place, when it is
fallen out.

THE CAUSE. The falling out of the Rectum, proceeds from straining in going to
stool, from a Paralysis of the Muscular Fibers of the Sphincter, or a
Relaxation of them by a constant Defluxion of Humidities, or some vehement
Cough, long Looseness, Dysentery, or the Piles, any of which are sufficient to
produce this effect.

THE SIGNS. This Disease is visible enough, part of the Gut hanging out of the
Anus.

If it be of long standing, the Reduction is very difficult and dangerous, and
there being most commonly a large Tumor, the Gut is inflamed and gangrenes.

If it proceeds from a Paralysis of the Sphincter, the Disease is very hard to
cure, and whatever pains you take to replace it, it notwithstanding soon falls
out again. But when it is recent or in young Persons of a good Habit of Body,
it may be remedied without any great difficulty.

The OPERATION.
To reduce the Fundament, place the Patient on his Belly with his Head low and
his Hips raised, and having dipped your Fingers in Oil of Roses, gently thrust in
the Roll formed by the extraversion of the Rugous Membrane of the Rectum, or
take a Compress dipped in Warm Milk, and with this thrust the Fundament up.

THE DRESSING. Foment the Part well and apply Astringents to it, keeping them
on with the double T, or the Roller with four Tails suspended with a Collar.
The Way of making which Bandage, is described at large in the Operation of
cutting for the Stone, and the Fistula in Ano.

THE CURE. Let the Patient lie on his Belly for several Days together, that so
the Gut may have time to recover its Strength, and rub the Part well with Oil
of Beetles. This Oil is made by the infusion of a good quantity of Beetles in
Oil of Turpentine, exposed to the Sun for a considerable time. Oil of
Turpentine alone is sufficient for this purpose.

If the Belly be bound give Clysters frequently, or let the Patient take an
Ounce of Oil of sweet Almonds with a dram of Cream of Tartar. If the Pain be
very troublesome, foment the part with a Decoction of Cowslip and Camomile
Flowers in Milk. Fumigations of Frankincense and Mastick are good; In short, to
prevent the Fundament from falling out again, use all sorts of Astringent
Remedies.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 3. Obs. 76. tells us, that a certain Countryman going
to stool, the Rectum fell out, and it being vehement cold Weather, he was
seized with so sharp a Pain, that he was forced to remain in the place, being
unable to stir. The Gut grew as big as an Egg, and his Excrements which were
very liquid, came away perpetually. Hildanus being called to him, treated him
in this manner. In the first place he applied this Cataplasm to the Anus. R.
Leaves and Flows of Tapsus Barbatus, Flowers of Melilot and Camomile, Roots
and Leaves of Mallows, a^. one Handful, Seeds of Linseed and Fenugreek, a^. ss.
Anise-seeds, i. Boil the Ingredients in Cows Milk, and apply Stuphes wrung out
of it, continuing them on for the space of an hour; then he strewn a little of
the following Powder on the Gut.. Red Roses, Pomgranat Peels, Cypress Nuts,
Mastich, Frankincense, Crocus Martis, Calx of Lead, Mix equal parts of these,
and make a Powder. Then hanging the Patient up by the Heels, and having wrapped
his Finger in a very fine Rag dipped in the Decoction, he put it into the Gut,
and gently thrust it into its Natural Place. Then he anointed the Os Sacrum and
the Rump-Bone with a Liniment made of Oil of Roses and Worms, a^. i. Oil of
Rose-buds, ss. mixed all together. In the last place, he purged the Patient with
the compound Syrup of Roses, made with Rhubarb, Agarick and Senna, having first
bled him in the Arm.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Reducing the Womb when it is fallen out.
THis Operation is the Restoring the Neck of the Womb to its Natural place.

THE CAUSE. The Relaxation of the Neck of the Womb after Delivery, sometimes
proceeds from the unskilfullness of the Midwife in drawing too violently its
Rugae, and tearing it from the Parts to which it adheres, and sometimes it
arises from the Natural Laxity of the Part.

The abundance of Humidities which flow hither, sometimes cause this falling
out of the Womb, as it is commonly, but improperly, called, since it never is
the Body of the Womb which comes forth, but the Vagina only.

THE SIGNS. The falling out or Relaxation of the Vagina, may be perceived
without any great Difficulty; there appears a Thick, Hard, Round Substance not
unlike a Gut, which hangs between a Woman's Legs, and has a Roll at bottom with
a Hole in the midst, which is commonly mistaken for the inner Orifice of the
Womb.

A simple Relaxation of the Neck of the Womb is not dangerous, if there be no
Inflammation, Ulcer, or Gangrene. When the Disease is recent, there is no great
Difficulty in curing it, but if it be of long standing, it is incurable. If it
proceed from an internal Cause, and the Relaxation increase by degrees, the
Distemper is curable; but if the falling out of the Womb proceed from some
external Cause, as the straining of a Woman in Labor, or the Mid-wifes
forcibly drawing out the Rugae, there is but little probability of Success.

The OPERATION.
For the restoring the Vagina to its proper place, let the Patient lie on her
Back with her Hipps raised, and the Artist having first Humected his Fingers
with Oil of Roses, may then gently thrust it into its Natural place. If the
Vagina be very much tumefied and cannot re-enter, he must by no means handle it
roughly, for fear of an Inflammation or Gangrene; but he must humect and foment
it with Emollient Decoctions, and forbear reducing it till the Swelling be
dispersed. If there be a Mortification already on the Vagina, it must be
speedily cut off, which is the only means he can have recourse to save the
Patients Life. For the doing this, let him make a Ligature on the Sound part,
and cut off that which is corrupted; and if there be a Cancer draw the Vagina
to him, and extirpate that by the Roots, stopping the Blood with good Stypticks.

THE DRESSING consists in introducing a Pessary into the Neck of the Womb,
which is to be done in this manner. Take a good thick bit of Cork, and cut it
into the shape of a Cylinder of two Inches or more in Diameter, in proportion
to the largeness of the Vagina. This must not be round, but five or six
cornered, or of any other Multangular Figure for the better retaining it, and
must have a Hole in the midst to give Passage to the Menses: This Pessary must
be dipped in white Wax to prevent it from rotting, and likewise from hurting the
sides by its inequalities; and must be introduced as far as is possible into
the Neck of the Womb to retain it, and be kept in till the Person be cured, or
all her Lifetime if there be a necessity for it.

THE CURE. For restoring the Tone of the Vagina, make a Fumigation with the
Skin of an Eell, or Mastich and Olibanum. Fomentations with Spirit of Feverfew
Camphorated, cure obstructions of the Womb, and dry up the Superfluities, or a
Pessary may be put up into the Vagina, as was above directed. If any Fleshy
Excrescences grow in the Neck of the Womb, cut them off. If there be any
Venereal Ulcers, dry them up with Limewater mixed with Spirit of Wine, or.
Spirit of Wine Camphorated, iv. Olibanum in Powder, i. Saccharum Saturni, ss.
Burnt Alum, i. Dissolve all these together, and apply them hot; Or make a
Nutritum with a sufficient quantity of Oil of St. John's wort, Oil of Elder and
Limewater.

REMARKS.
Kerkringius in Obs. 53. relates that a certain Woman having for a long time
been incommoded with a Fleshy Excrescence hanging out of the Lips of her
Privities, every one thought it to be a falling out of the Womb, but it being
opened after her Death, it appeared to be an Excrescence of the Vagina.

The following History made a mighty noise some time since, both at Paris and
Toulouse. A certain young Woman at Toulouse had a Relaxation of the Vagina,
resembling a Man's Yard, and some pretend she abused it that way, it being six
Inches in Length, and Four in Circumference in the middle, where it was very
hard. This falling out of the Vagina, gradually increased from her Childhood,
she was searched by the Physicians of Toulouse, who gave their Opinion, that
this falling out of the Womb was a Real Yard, and upon this Determination, the
Magistrates of the Town ordered her to go in Man's Habit. In this Equipage she
came to Paris, where she got Money by showing her self, till upon assurance
that she was a Woman, and a promise of being cured, she was brought into the
Hotel Dieu, where the descent was soon put up, and she was forced to resume her
Female Dress to her great Regret.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Opening Abscesses.
THis is an Incision made into an Abscess, to let out the Pus contained in it.

THE CAUSE of Abscesses is some gross Humor, which being brought into a Part
by the Circulation of the Blood, and being not able to pass through the narrow
Channels is congested there. This Feculent Matter is formed of a crude, viscous
Chyle, coagulated by Cold, or some acid or astringent Applications, or a
thousand like Accidents.

THE SIGNS which discover an Abscess, are a great Pain, Inflammation, and
Pulsation of the Part, and a Swelling which gradually increases to its height;
but when the Suppuration is completed, the Pulsation and Pain cease, the
Tumor grows softer than at first, and becomes white in some places.

The OPERATION.
The Tumor must be opened with a Lancet, or some Caustic.

If you would make the Operation with a Lancet, choose the thinnest and most
depending part, to avoid putting the Patient to more pain than need, and giving
the Pus a free discharge. The Orifice must be too large rather than too small,
for the more convenient applying of Medicines and evacuating the Pus, which
sometimes is Grumous and Concreted.

When the Abscess is very large, you must not empty it at once, for fear the
Patient fall into a Syncope, nor squeeze it to express the Matter, for fear of
making a contusion of the tender Flesh.

If the Skin which covers it be thick, as for instance in the Heel, pare it for
making an Incision more conveniently and easily.

In opening an Abscess, hold the Lancet between the Extremities of the
Forefinger and Thumb, in the same manner as in bleeding; but if it be large
and the Skin be thick, as in the Thighs and Buttocks, hold it between the Thumb
and the middle Finger, that so you may employ more force in the using it.

If the Patient be timorous, you may open the Abscess with a Caustic in the
manner above directed, and this is done with less Pain. If you endeavor to
break the Tumor by Topical applications, as the Dung of Animals, or Humane
Excrements, which are best of all, let them be applied as hot as the Patient
can endure them, and be kept on the Part with a Compress and Bandage. But
observe here, it is by no means advisable to wait till some swellings break of
themselves; for instance, such as are in the Breast, Belly, or Fundament, or
near any Bones, Tendons, or other Nervous parts, because the long detention of
the Pus in those parts is apt to rot them, or leave Fistula's behind it. The
same caution is to be used in Venereal Bubo's, because the Pocky Venom if it be
not soon discharged, is apt to infect the Mass of Blood, and so in Paronychias
for fear the Pus rot the Tendons of the Finger if it be kept in too long.

THE DRESSING. This consists in putting Dossils of dry Lint into the Wound
(which like a Sponge absorb the Superfluous Moisture) with a dry Pledgit and a
Compress over them, keeping these on with a Bandage adapted to the part.

THE CURE. Take off the Dressings twice a day, endeavoring to procure a good
Digestion, and when you have obtained this, Deterge and Cicatrize.

Besides local Applications, internal Medicines are of very great use in the
cure of Abscesses, as Purgatives to cleanse the Stomach and Guts, Alteratives
to purify and sweeten the Mass of Blood, of which last kind are all
Sudorificks, v. g. Diaphoretick Antimony, Powder and Salt of Vipers, the Dose
of which is about half a Dram in two or three Spoonfuls of Carduus Water, or
any other convenient Vehicle.

In case there be a Fever, you may make use of some preparations of Nitre, as
Nitre Antimoniated, Sal prunellae, etc.

REMARKS.
Bartholin Cent. 1. Hist. 30. tell us, that a certain Child of four years old
(who had a Dropsy of the Head, and no Member bigger than a Man's Thumb) had an
Abscess upon the Spine in the Region of the Loins; upon opening this Swelling,
there issued out a great quantity of Blood, and the Head became less, but the
Child died within three Days after. The Author conjectures, that this Abscess
had a Communication with the Spinal Marrow, and that the Medulla Oblongata was
corrupted.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Hydrocephalus or Dropsy of the Head.
THis Operation is an Incision made in the Head, to let out the Waters lodged
in that Part.

THE CAUSE. An Hydrocephalus is a Watery Tumor on the Head.

This Distemper most commonly proceeds from an Extravasated Lympha, occasioned
by some Blow, Fall, Wound or Compression of the Vessels. This Water is
contained in different places, as v. g. between the Pericranium and the
Teguments, between the Cranium and Dura Matter, between the Membranes of the
Brain, or in its Ventricles.

THE SIGNS. When the Water is between the Pericranium and the Skull, the
Swelling feels soft; if it be lodged between the Skull and Dura Matter, or in
the Substance of the Brain, there is a great Pain in the Head attended with a
Coma, the Head is large and heavy, and in Children it is Swollen, their Forehead
is prominent, and their Eyes run with Water.

Children most commonly die of this Distemper, and if the largeness of their
Heads increase it is an ill sign; if the Water be lodged in the Ventricles of
the Brain, there is no cure to be hoped for.

If a Hydrocephalus be accompanied with an Apoplexy or Lethargy, Death is not
far off. If the Patient void Blood at the Nose, it is a sign the Lympha is very
Acrimonious and Pungent. This Distemper is Chronical, and frequently Mortal to
the Patient.

If the Water be lodged between the Teguments and the Skull, the Distemper is
curable; but if it be beneath the Skull there is no great Hopes; however if the
cure be attempted, it must be done in the following manner.

The OPERATION.
Make an Incision through the Teguments with a Lancet, and let the Orifice be
large enough, because the Water most commonly is thick and foul, and let it in
the next place be made in the lowest part to discharge the Swelling, which must
be done at diverse times, and not at once, for fear the Patient fall into a
Syncope.

When the Water is beneath the Skull, apply the Trepan, and if it be under the
Dura Matter, pierce that with a Lancet.

THE DRESSING is the same as in the Trepan, and is described in the Chapter
concerning that Operation, where the Reader if he please to take the pains may
find it.

If the Water be only under the Pericranium, the putting a Cannula into the
Incision is sufficient.

THE CURE. Confine the Patient to a regular Diet, let all his Food be drying,
as roasted Fowls, etc. and let him drink good Wine. Let his Exercise and Sleep
be moderate, and let him frequently take Purgative, Diuretic, Diaphoretick,
and Cephalic Medicines.

The best Purgatives in this case are Hydragogues, as Powder of Jalap, ss. in
any little Vehicle, Resin of Jalap, from 8 to 15 gr. in Conserve of Roses,
Scammony from 8 to 15 gr. in the same Conserve, or its Resin, from 8 to 12 gr.

The best Diuretics, are Volatile Salt of Amber, Sal Vegetabile, Nitre
refined, or some drops of Spirit of Salt.

The best Diaphoreticks are the Roots of the Sudorifick Plants, as Sarsa
Parilla, China, or Guajacum boiled in a Ptisan, and Diaphoretick Antimony,
Powder or Salt of Vipers, the Dose of which we have frequently repeated.

REMARKS.
Some years since there was a Girl of ten years of Age shown at St Germains
Fair, whose Head was two foot and three inches in Circumference. This Deformity
began to appear some time after her Birth, and she was so stupefied with it,
that she could neither Speak nor Walk, only some times she would cry like a
little Child; her Skin adhered to her Bones, and her Legs were crooked, she
lived upon Milk and Spoon-Meat, and the Bones of her Head were separated,
especially in the place of the Fontanel.

Kerkringius assures us, that in opening a Child of three Months and a half
old, who died of an Hydrocephalus, he found nothing besides a thick saline
Serum in the Brain.

Tulpius tells us, he had taken five Dutch pints of Water out of the Head of a
Child, and its Brain had lost its round Figure.

Kerkringius assures us, he had found a Brain in a young Lad of fourteen years
of Age, without any Consistence. This Lad in his Lifetime, had been very
stupid and drowsy, there was a distance between the Pia-Mater and the Brain,
and another between the Brain and the Cerebel.

In the Miscellanea Curiosa, there is a Relation of the taking 30 Ounces of
clear Saline Water out of the Head of a Child of one year old. At first those
who dissected him did imagine there was no Brain, because it had lost its
globous Figure, and the Medulla Oblongata adhered to the Arch of the Bone. In
prosecuting the Dissection, there was no Fat beneath the Skin, which always is
found there in Children. There was a great quantity of Water in the Thorax,
like that in the Head. The Kidneys were of a very unequal bigness, the
Pituitary and Pineal Glands in the Brain were wanting, and in its Basis there
were several Nervous Filaments, which were judged to belong to the eighth pair,
and were besmeared with a thick Mucilage.

CHAP. XL. Of Opening parts imperforate.
THis Operation is making an Orifice with an Instrument, in parts where the
Natural ones are deficient.

THE CAUSE. The Occasion is a deficiency in Nature, when Children are born with
their Ears, Nose, Mouth, Privities, Yard or Fundament closed with a Membrane
(which is a continuation of the Skin) or some Fungous or Schirrhous Excrescence.

THE SIGNS. These defects are visible upon inspection, and the Child which is
so imperforate, cannot breath through its Mouth or Nose, or void its Excrements
by its Fundament.

If the Auditory passage be stopped by a Thick Membrane, the Child will remain
deaf all its Lifetime, unless this impediment be early removed. If the Rectum
in Girls open into the Privities, this is incurable, and the Excrements will be
voided that way.

The OPERATION.
The Foetus naturally has a Membrane which covers the Drum of the Ear, and if
this Membrane be very thick, and Nature of its own accord does not resolve it,
you must pierce it with a Lancet, otherwise the party will be deprived of
Hearing.

If the passage be stopped by an Excrescence, cut it off with a pair of Scissars,
or make a Ligature with a Thread, straitning it by degrees; but the Scissars
are best, because the Ligature is some time before it takes it off. Sometimes
this Fungous or Schirrous Substance possesses all the Duct, and then no
Scissars can reach it; in this case you must have recourse to Causticks, to
consume the remaining Carnosity. When you use these, you must be very careful
to prevent them from hurting the Drum of the Ear, for if they should touch
this, they would not fail to corrode it through, and the Party lose his Hearing
for ever; to prevent which Mischief, I think it would be convenient to fasten
them to the end of your Probe, that so you may draw them out at pleasure.

When the Child's Nostrils are closed by a Membrane, it must be cut in the midst
lengthways. Sometimes Childrens Nostrils adhere together after the Small Pox,
in which case they may be separated with a Spatula; but if they adhere too
firmly, or are stopped by some Carnosity, the Lancet must be used.

Sometimes the Vrethra is closed by a Membrane, which hinders the Child from
making Water. In this case an Incision must be made with a strong Lancet
directly down, for fear of Wounding the Glans. If the Glans happen to be closed
at its extremity, and perforated under the Penis in the Vrethra, open its
extremity with a Lancet, and introduce a Leaden pipe to pass through, and
Scarifie the preternatural Aperture, and Cicatrize it, and then bind up the
Yard with a Narrow Fillet, leaving the Child to piss through the Pipe.

If the Vrethra were stopped through its whole length, you might pierce it with a
Bodkin, and then put a Leaden Pipe in till the Duct were closed, for without
this the sides would grow together, and the passage be stopped as before.

If the Anus be closed by a Membrane. you may make an Incision lengthways with
a Lancet, but if it be stopped by a Carnous Excrescence, you must pierce the
Flesh till the Meconium appear, but this is dangerous, and very often the Child
dies in the Operation.

If only the Entry of the Vagina be closed by a Membrane, you may divide it
with a Lancet; but if the sides of the Vagina adhere together, you must place
the Patient on her Back with her Knees raised, and her Thighs spread, and so
make an Incision with a crooked Knife, beginning above and ending below, with
the back of the Instrument turned toward the Nymphae, and in this manner you
may proceed to cut till the Vagina be opened.

THE DRESSING consists in introducing Tents armed with good Digestives into the
Wound, if there be any Fungous or Carnous Excrescences, which may require a
Suppuration to consume them. If there be no necessity of procuring a Digestion,
introduce Cannula's or Pipes of Lead proportioned to the largeness of the
Incision, to hinder the parts from adhering together; and for the making these
Pipes more easy, let them be well smeared with Oil of Roses.

THE CURE. When there is a necessity of making a large Wound, as there is in
cases of Excrescences and Fungus's, let the Patient be prepared by bleeding,
Clysters, and other proper Medicines before the Operation, and after it is
performed let him be confined to a regular Diet.

REMARKS.
Van Horn tells us, he had seen a Child whose Yard was perforated near the
Scrotum, and the Vrethra quite closed up, who had an Artificial Vrethra made in
this manner: The Surgeon first made an Incision the whole length of the Yard,
then he put in a Leaden Pipe and stitched the Flesh on it, and after the Wound
was Cicatrized, there remained callous Channels, through which the Child's Urine
passed.

Some years since in the Hotel Dieu at Paris, there was a Child who had no
Vrethra, and its two Testicles were contained each in a separate Scrotum. The
Yard had a slit between the two Testes, which resembled the Privities of a
Woman, which made most, though untruly, mistake this Child for an
Hermaphrodite, for the Probe when it was put into the slit, past into the
Bladder, and it appeared upon Dissection, that he had not any of the Female
Organs of Generation.

CHAP. XLI. Of cutting Tongue-tied Children.
THIS Operation is the cutting the Ligament of the Tongue, when it extends too
near its Tip.

THE CAUSE of cutting it, is the Inconvenience which arises from its length, as
that the Child can never speak plain, because the Tongue has not liberty to
strike against the Roof of the Mouth, for the forming Articulate Sounds.

THE SIGNS. The length of the Fraenum is visible enough, it appearing continued
to the tip of the Tongue. This Inconvenience is not in any manner dangerous,
but when it is cut with the Nail as Midwifes commonly do, there is a Contusion
made, which often becomes an Ulcer difficult to be cured.

The OPERATION.
Hold down the Child's lower Jaw, and lift up the Tongue with a Fork, which must
be round and blunt at the point, and cut the Ligament (as near the Tongue as
possible) quite to the Roots, taking care not to divide the large Vessels, for
fear of a troublesome Haemorrhage.

The Surgeon if he please may do this more dexterously with his Fingers,
without using the Fork at all. For this purpose, let him depress the lower Jaw
with the Thumb of his left Hand, and press the Tongue with the middle Finger,
and then let him cut the Ligament which is between his Thumb and Finger quite
to the Root, avoiding the Vessels.

THE DRESSING. Lay on a Pledgit dipped in some Styptick Water, to stop the
Haemorrhage if any happen, or if the Child be not old enough to be persuaded to
keep the Pledgit in the Mouth, wash the Part with some Styptick Water.

THE CURE consists in passing several times a Day the Finger under the Child's
Tongue, to prevent the Tongue from adhering to the lower Jaw.

REMARKS.
Some Children have had their Tongue so strictly tied by this Ligament, that
they could not suck, and so have died.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Coalition of the Fingers.
THIS Operation is the Separation of the Fingers, when they grow together by
Incision.

THE CAUSE. The Fingers sometimes are united by an intervening Membrane, and
the Hand resembles a Goose Foot, and sometimes they grow together without any
Medium between.

The Union of the Fingers in the first Case, which is only a continuity of the
Skin proceeds from the Imagination of the Mother. He who would see what
Impressions the Mothers Imagination can have upon the Foetus in the Womb, may
find this Matter explained at large by the Famous Malbranche in his Treatise of
the Search after Truth.

In the first Formation of the Foetus in the Womb, the Fingers are soft and
glutinous, and for this reason happening to be pressed together, they grow in the
same manner as the edges of a Wound.

THE SIGNS. This Male-formation is visible enough.

The OPERATION.
This is made by cutting the Skin between the Fingers, when they are joined by
an intervening Membrane; but if they are gl^wed together without any Medium, by
dissecting gently each Finger.

THE DRESSING. Bind up each Finger with a small Fillet to prevent them from
touching, and adhering to each other after the Operation. Or use the Bandage
called the Gantlet, which is made after this manner.

Take a Roller about two Inches broad, and about 3 or 4 Else in length, and
rolled up at one end. First apply this on the Wrist, and make two Rounds about
it, then pass obliquely on the Metacarpus, and proceeding to the end of the
Thumb, descend spirally, making an X on the first Articulation of the Thumb,
then make another round about the Wrist, and reascend on the back of the Hand,
to the extremity of the Middle Finger, and cover that, then descending
Spirally, make an X on the first Articulation, that is on that next the Wrist,
and make Circumvolatons about the Wrist, making a small edging every time the
Fillet goes round, that the upper part of the Hand may be covered just in the
same manner as the three first Fingers were.

THE CURE consists in laying Pledgits of dry Lint armed with Desiccative
Powders between the Fingers, and so Cicatrizing the Wound.

REMARKS.
Kerkringius tells us, that in the year 1688. there was found in the River Ya a
Child which had seven Fingers on each Hand, eight Toes on the right Foot, and
nine on the left, every one of which was perfectly well formed.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Extracting all Extraneous Bodies.
THIS Operation is the taking out any unnatural Substance, which may happen to
be lodged in some part or other of a Humane Body.

THE CAUSE is that Extraneous Substance which is prejudicial to the Person.

THE SIGNS. Whilst any such Body remains lodged in any part, there is most
commonly a perpetual Pain.

The OPERATION.
If a Bullet be lodged in the Part, you must endeavor to extract it upon the
first Dressing, for fear least when the Inflammation increases it be pent up.

For the better extracting the Bullet, place the Patient in the same posture
that he was in at the time he received the Wound, and then dilate if it be
necessary, and seek for the Ball with the Probe, and when you have found it,
extract it with the Forceps, Extracter, Terebellum, Ducks, Cranes, or Ravens
Bill.

If a Buller or any other extraneous Body whatever enter the Flesh so far, that
it cannot be conveniently brought away, search on the opposite side with the
Finger, and when you perceive where it is lodged by its hardness, make an
Incision on it avoiding the Vessels, and fetch it away through the Orifice.
When it enters the Bone, stir it gently for fear of breaking off some Splinter.
When the extraneous Body cannot be drawn out without Violence, you may wait for
the Digestion which frequently throws it out.

If a Pea, Cherry-Stone, or any the like small Body fall into the Ear, let the
Patient lie on his sound Ear, and bring it away with a small Forceps, but if it
be so large as to fill the Cavity of the Ear, and you cannot apprehend it,
introduce a Probe with some Glutinous Matter at the end, that so it may stick
to it, and come away. If some insect creep into the Ear, kill it by pouring hot
Oil in.

If Sand, Dust, or any such like Body fall into the Eye, lift up the Eyelid
and put under it one of those Stones found in the Head of Crabs, and called
Crabs Eyes, and by some means or other oblige the Patient to sleep, for so this
will not come away till it has cleared the Eye, this way is proposed by Fab.
Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 13.

If any Splinter of Wood hurt the Eye, lift up the Eyelids and take it away
with a small Forceps, or a piece of Rag rolled up and wetted at one end with
the Patients Spittle, or a little Lint, or a bit of a Sponge dipped in Rose or
Plantane Water at the end of a Probe. If it be Dust fetch it away with a
Collyrium, or if it be a Scale of Iron, apply the Loadstone.

If a Body be lodged in the Nose extract it with a Forceps, or cause the
Patient to sneeze with Powder of Tobacco, Hellebore, or any other good
Sternutatory; or if these do not bring it away, you may let it alone, and it
will fall into the Patients Mouth of its own accord.

If any Body be stopped in the Throat, as for instance a Bone, give the Person
seven or eight Grains of Gummi Gotta, or if the Accident be very pressing, the
same quantity of Emetick Tartar in some liquid Vehicle, If these are not
sufficient to bring away this Extraneous Body, open the Patients Mouth, Depress
his Tongue with a Speculum Oris, and bring away the unnatural Body with a
Forceps.

If the Body be so far down in the Throat, that you cannot apprehend it with a
Forceps, take a piece of Sponge as big as a small Nut, and fastening it with a
Thread, let the Patient swallow it, and then draw it back, and by this means
you may often bring up any Extraneous Body lodged in the Throat, or you may
thrust it down with a Wax Candle.

THE DRESSING. Apply Compresses dipped in some Astringent and Resolvent Liquour
to prevent any Inflammation, or use Gargarisms of the same virtue.

THE CURE. If the Extraneous Body has made any Wound, or Inflamed the Throat,
let the Patient abstain from all solid Food, for fear least the Aliments
increase the Inflammation by fretting the Parts in their Descent into the
Stomach, and let him feed on good Broths, and take cooling Clysters, having
Recourse to bleeding, if the Inflammation be very considerable.

REMARKS.
In using Sternutatories to bring Extraneous Bodies out of the Nose, take care
they be not too violent, for some Persons by this means have lost their Sight.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Extirpation of Scrophulous Tumors.
THIS Operation is the Excision or Consuming of Scrophulous Glands.

THE CAUSE. When the Glands of the Neck are large or tumefied, they are said to
be Scrophulous. This Indisposition arises from an acid Lympha which obstructs
the Glands, and coagulates the Matter contained in them. A sedentary unactive
Life, is often the occasion of Scrophulous Tumors; for the Motion of the Blood
being very slow, and not driving the Matter through the Part, it stagnates and
breeds these Strumous Swellings, and for the same Reason, a thick, foggy Air,
External Cold, and all Viscous Meats have the same effect. Waters which flow
down from the Mountains, are apt to breed these Distempers, because their
Chillness very much abates the rapid Motion of the Blood and thickens the
Lympha.

Strumae which are of a Cancerous Nature are very difficultly cured, especially
if they are of long standing, by reason there is a great proportion of an Acid
in them; but such as are soft and pendulous, are not altogether so obstinate at
first.

The Bronchocele must not be confounded with Scrophulous Swellings, for this is
peculiar to the Neck and Throat, and is of a prodigious size sometimes hanging
down like a sack, and if you compress it, you may perceive the Lympha
fluctuate. These swellings are contained in a Cystis, in which the Lympha is
congealed, and becomes of a consistence like Plaster. This Distemper creates a
Difficulty of swallowing; the Senses of Hearing, Tasting, and Smelling are
impaired, which possibly may be caused by Tumors compressing the Nerves, and
hindering the Circulation of the Spirits, or perhaps from abundance of
superfluous Moisture, which makes an inundation on the Tongue, Nose and
Auditory passage, and disables them from duly discerning the qualities of the
Objects presented to them.

THE SIGNS. Strumous Tumors are evident enough of themselves. In feeling the
Neck one may perceive several hard and unequal swellings, which are only
tumefied Glands. These swellings are sometimes very numerous and extend to the
shoulders, and when this is so, they are not inflamed at all.

Strumae in the Neck sometimes appear outwardly and are pendulous, at other
times they are implicated in the Neighboring parts, hinder Respiration, and
compress the Larynx. The true Strumae are Hard, White and Indolent, and those
which are Livid and Painful are Spurious.

The OPERATION.
When the Strumae are pendulous tie them with a Thread with a slip knot that so
you may straiten the Ligature every day by little and little, and so the Tumor
being deprived of its Nourishment, may wither and fall away.

If the Strumae are not Pendulous this way cannot be practiced; and therefore
in cases of this Nature, an Incision must be made through the skin to lay the
Gland bare, and then you must extirpate it together with the Cystis in which it
is contained, and in doing this, you must be careful to dissect the part, and
to separate the Cystis from the contiguous Bodies, without hurting the Nerves
or Blood Vessels.

THE DRESSING. Put Dossils and Pledgits armed with good Digestives into the
Wound to procure a good Suppuration of the Lympha congested there, and then
Deterge and Cicatrize it. The Dressings must be kept on the part with a
Handkerchief folded Triangularwise.

THE CURE. When you do not intend to proceed to the Extirpation of a Strumous
Tumor, you must endeavor to soften and resolve it by the most potent
Discutients; for instance, Ammoniacum, and the rest of the Gumms dissolved in
Vinegar, reduced to the consistence of an Emplaster, and so applied to the
part, or you may foment it with a sponge soakt in Lime Water. Cataplasms of the
Leaves and Roots of Wild Cowcumbers beat up with Goats Dung, is an excellent
Remedy.

Running Mercury applied to the Part affected, is a potent Discutient, but
before it can be applied, it must be made into a Liniment with some Greases,
Turpentine, or some of the Gumms. Or. Unguent. Martiatum, i. Oil of Myrtils and
Bays, a^. ss. crude Quicksilver killed with Flower of Brimstone, ij. Mix these
and make an Unguent. All Mercurial Medicines are apt to raise a Salivation, and
therefore when you use them, you must frequently inspect the Patients Mouth to
see if the Tongue, Tonsils, Gumms, or any other part begin to swell; for if so,
it is a sign that a Salivation is ready to rise, and then it is high time to
remove all the Applications, and purge with Hydragogues. The same Method is to
be taken if it be already begun, and you judge it convenient to prevent it, for
often times a Salivation is of very great service in Scrophulous Distempers.

You must never open Strumous Tumors till the Matter or Lympha whence they
arise is converted into a Pus. And if none of the preceding Remedies soften or
dissipate them, you may try to bring them to suppuration, by an Emplaster of
Melilot malaxed with Oil of sweet Almonds and Serpents Fat, or a Cataplasm of
the Roots of Marshmallows, White Lilies, Hemlock, and Wild Cowcumbers, with
Oil of Lizards.

You must not open the Tumor as soon as the Suppuration is completed, but
leave the Abscess for some time, for the better rotting and wasting the
vitiated Glands. For the consuming what remains after the opening of the
Abscess, put into the Wound a Digestive composed of Turpentine, the Yelks of
Eggs and Honey, which will be better still if a little Praecipitate be mixed
with it. In the last place, deterge and heal the Wound with Balsam of Sulphur.

In the mean time you must not forget internal Medicines. This Powder is very
good,. Sea Sponge burnt, iij. Os Sepiae, Jaws of a Pike, Crabs Eyes, long
Pepper. White Ginger, Galls, Sea Shells burnt, Egg-shells, a^. i. Mix the
Ingredients, and let the Patient take of this Powder ss. ounce every day; let
him likewise use a Ptisan made of the Roots of Figgwort, Filipendula, Leaves of
Butchers Broom, and Broom for his ordinary Drink. Powder of Humane Skulls taken
in any liquid Vehicle, is a specific in Strumous Swellings of the Neck* But
observe that the Skull must neither have been buried nor rotten, because then
it has lost all its volatile Salts.

REMARKS.
Kerkringius Obs. 74. tells us, that a certain Nun was very much incommoded by
a Bronchocele, which took up all the forepart of her Throat, and after three
Months space it grew so large, that it choked her.

CHAP. XLV. Of Warts, Wens, Horny and Fungous Excrescences.
THis Operation is an Amputation, Erosion or Discussing of Excrescences.

THE CAUSE. When the small Nervous Filaments (by the Rete of which the skin is
formed) corroded through, or by any Accident divided the Nutritious Juice which
distills from their extremities is congested, and being coagulated by the
external Cold or some Acids, forms Warts. If these Warts are on the Toes, and
the shoe presses the Part being compacted together they become of a Carnous
Substance, and are rooted in the Tendons, and springing from them like
Ganglions. When these Excrescences thrust very far out and hard, they are
termed Horns, and most commonly proceed from Bones, seeming to be only a
prolongation of them.

Sometimes a soft Tumor rises on the Joints which increases insensibly. When
this has pierced the skin, it grows to a prodigious size in a very small time,
and is called a Wen. This Fle^^y, Soft, Pale and Indolent Substance, is formed
by the Dilaration or Laceration of the same Membrane, Tendon, or other Nervous
part, which happens to be hurt by some Fall, Contusion, Luxation or Strain.
This is almost always on the Joint, and adheres to some Membranes or Tendons.
It proceeds from a Mixture of the Nutritious Juice, and the Mucilage of the
Joints, and by means of the Acids in it acquires a Cancerous Malignity. These
Fungus's sometimes grow on the Membranes of the Brain.

THE SIGNS. These Tumors are visible of themselves, Warts are small uneven
Tumors, rough like Shagreen; these grow deep into the skin, some have a large
Basis and sharpen to a point in a Pyramidal Figure. These little indurated
Bodies which grow on the Feet are harder than Warts, and resemble a Horn being
Transparent. These differ from Corns in no other respect, but that they are
larger. Fungus's are soft, spungy, whitish, and grow suddenly, they are almost
without sense, and most commonly arise about the Joints, and on the Membranes
of the Brain.

Warts are not in any manner dangerous, except when they proceed from some
Venereal Acid. These small Tumors are sometimes cured by slipping them off, if
they do not enter the skin very deep. Warts which are uneven and like Shagreen,
are very apt to return after they are cut off, because most commonly they are
rooted in the Tendon. Pocky Warts are more difficult to cure than any other.
Wenns continue sometimes for several years.

The OPERATION.
Warts must be cut off even with the Skin, and rubbed well with Oil of Tartar
per deliquium. Some burn them with a Needle made red hot in the Flame of a
Candle: But the better way is to make a Ligature to intercept the Nutritious
Juice, for then they soon dry and fall off.

As for Corns, the best way is to cut them to the Root, and when they grow
again, as they will not fail to do, cut them a new. They must likewise be cut
before Causticks are applied to eat out the Roots, except they grow upon a
Tendon, and in this case you must forbear for fear of an Inflammation or
Gangrene of the Part.

Fungus's and Wenns may be taken off together with their Root if it appear, but
if it does not, you may consume them with gentle Causticks; for if they were
too strong, the Fungus would be apt to degenerate into a Cancer. Or if you
would take it off without Excision, you may make a Ligature about it, tying it
every day straiter to intercept the Nourishment which feeds it, and then apply
Desiccative Powders to stop the Orifice.

THE DRESSING is the same used in the applying other Causticks.

THE CURE. These Tumors require both internal and external Medicines, to
prevent the Efflux and Concretion of the Nutricious Juice. The means to obtain
this, is by blunting the Points of the Acids by Alcalies and Sudorificks, as
Diaphoretick Antimony from i. to ss. Powder and Salt of Vipers in like Dose
taken in a Glass of Carduus Water. Ptisans made of the Sudorifick Roots are
excellent. Purging with Hydragogues is very useful to carry off the Acid
Serosities. Of this kind, are Jalap and Scammony, or their Resins taken from
eight to fifteen Grains in Conserve of Roses, or any Liquid Vehicle.

The principal, external Medicines which are good against Warts, are the fresh
Juice of Celandine, which must be applied and continued on for some time,
having first made a Superficial Incision, that so the Juice may penetrate the
better. A Solution of Sal Armoniack, or a Liniment of Honey with a little
Vitriol, or a drop or two of flaming Brimstone from a Pins Head, or Sal
Armoniack dissolved in Vinegar is good to cure Corns if the Corn be first cut,
for otherwise its thickness would be apt to hinder the Medicine from reaching
deep enough.

Aquafortis and Butter of Antimony may be dropped from the point of a Pin, and
repeated frequently, ceasing it any Inflammation arise. If Corns take Root in
the Tendons, you must not corrode them to the Bottom for fear of any
Inflammation or Ulcer which may ensue.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 6. Obs. 81. relates, That a certain young Lady had a
prodigious Wart between the first and second Bones of the Metacarpus of the
Right Hand, which was a great Blemish, but he cured her in this manner; first
he purged the Patient, and after this he made a Ligature on the swelling with a
Thread dipped in Arsenical Water, this he continued to tie straiter and straiter
from time to time, till the Warts fell off, and then deterged the Wound with
Unguent. Apostolorum and healed it, there remaining scarce any Cicatrix at all.
But he advises the young Surgeons not to be too forward to imitate his Practice
in this particular, for fear of bad Accidents happening from the use of
Arsenick, as did in this young Lady, to remedy which he purged her, bled her,
laid on Defensatives, and gave her Cordials.

CHAP. XLVI. Of taking out Cystis's or Baggs.
THIS Operation is the Extirpating Cystis's, together with the Matter contained
in them.

THE CAUSE. Cystis's are formed out of Membranes torn from the adjacent parts
and distended, which like a Bag receive the Nutricious Juice transuding through
the part.

THE SIGNS which demonstrate the existence of a Cystis filled with a Gypseous
or Steatomatous Matter, are principally the situation about the Head and Neck.

These Swellings are without the least Danger, but are very inconvenient.

The OPERATION.
If the swelling be large and have a broad Basis, make a Crucial Incision on
the Skin, and free the Bag from its adherences to the Neighboring parts,
either by the haft of the Knife, or dissect it with the point, and take it out
whole with the Matter contained in it.

Some Practitioners open these Bags with Causticks, and after Digestion consume
the rest with another Caustic; but Extirpation is better if the Patient will
submit to it.

If these Tumors have a slender Basis, you may take them off with a Ligature,
or cut them off when they are dry and withered.

THE DRESSING. For the consuming the remainder of the Bag in Suppuration, put
into the Wound Dossils and Pledgits armed with good Digestives, such as
Turpentine and the Yelks of Eggs, then cover it with an Emplaster, and keep all
on with a convenient Bandage.

If part of the Bag remain in the swelling, consume it with Causticks, and if
there be an Haemorrhage, stop the Flux with Powders or Styptick Waters.

THE CURE consists in continuing to digest the swelling, till the remaining Bag
be consumed, and there be a laudable Suppuration, and then Deterging and
Cicatrizing; during which purge the Patient, and then give him Sudorificks.

Ganglions on Tendons and other Membranous parts, if recent, are cured by
rubbing them strongly with the Thumb, and so making a strait Bandage on them.
But if they are of any long standing, you must apply Discutients on them with a
Plate of Lead, and bind this on with a Filler, leaving the Dressings on the
Part till the swelling be discussed.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 3. Obs. 85. relates the case of a young Fellow of twenty
years of Age, who had the Scrophul^e in his Neck in so monstrous a manner, that
they encompassed it, and filled up the Cavity under the Chin, extending
themselves under the Skin down to the Sternum, and under the Ear to the
Lamdoidal Suture. They were Hard, Livid, Unequal, and the Veins filled with
black Blood. In fine, the Patient was choked by the increase of this swelling.

CHAP. XLVII. Of cutting out the Toe Nails when enter the Flesh.
THIS Operation is an Amputation of part of the Toe Nail which enters the Flesh.

THE CAUSE. This inconvenience proceeds from a want of Care in cutting the
Nail, which being pressed by the shoe, is bent in and thrust into the Flesh.

THE SIGNS. The Flesh growing over the Nail is visible, there is a great Pain
and Inflammation of the Toe, which sometimes is so great that it kindles a
Fever.

The OPERATION.
Let the Foot soak for some time in Warm Water to soften the Nail; then let the
Surgeon place the Patient in a Chair, which is something higher than his own,
and laying the Patients Foot on his Knee pare away the Nail on the side. If
there be a space between the Nail and the Toe, let him pass the point of his
Scissars under the Nail to cut it off; but if the Nail have taken too deep root
in the Flesh, it must be gently separated and taken off with a Knife, and not
torn away by violence.

THE DRESSING. Wrap the Toe in a Desiccative Emplaster, as de Minio, and keep
that on with a narrow Fillet, and if there be a Flux of Blood stop it with some
Styptick Water or Powder.

THE CURE. If an Inflammation or other Accident follow apply Discutients, as
Spirit of Wine Camphorated, or the like.

REMARKS.
There are many instances of continual Fevers, Convulsions and Deliriums, upon
the Nail entering into the Flesh.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of perforating the Cornea.
THIS Operation is a small Incision made in the Cornea, to let out the Pus.

THE CAUSE. The Pus proceeds from Blood extravasated by some Blow,
Inflammation, Obstruction or Rupture of a Capillary Vessel.

THE SIGNS which demonstrate there is Pus under the Cornea are a small Tumor,
Pain, and Discoloration of the Part.

The OPERATION.
Let the Artist place the Patient in a Situation fit for the Operation, let him
depress the Eye with a Speculum Oculi, and make an Incision with a Lancet on
the Tumor at the bottom of the Cornea, and compress the Eye to squeeze out the
Pus. Some would have the Surgeon suck it out through a Pipe, when it is too
thick to come out by any other means. This Pipe must be made large in the
middle, that so the Pus may lodge in the dilated part, and not reach the Mouth;
but this Suction is hazardous because there is a great danger of drawing out
the Aqueous Humor of the Eye, which is one of the Organs of Vision, though this
Humor indeed may be reproduced.

THE DRESSING consists in applying some mild Suppurative, which is not in the
least corrosive, such as is for instance Pigeons Blood. If there be an
Inflammation when the Eye is shut, lay a small round Compress dipped in Rose
Water on it, and keep it on with a Handkerchief folded Triangularwise, as in
the Fistula Lachrymalis.

THE CURE. Let the Dressings be taken off twice a day, and continue to digest
the Wound as long as you judge requisite, and if the Inflammation continues let
the Patient bleed, use Clysters, and let his Food be Broths and the Yolks of
Eggs.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 3. Obs. 23. relates, that a Girl of six years of Age
having long had a Defluxion on the Eye; after having tried a great many
Medicines in vain, at last was cured by a Seton in the Neck of the Defluxion,
and the spot vanished of its own accord.

Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 26. tells us, that a shooemakers Son of about 15
years of Age, received a blow on the Eye near the Iris, upon which the Aqueous
Humor came away instantly, and the young Man lost his Sight. He being called
to him instantly, applied the White of an Egg beaten up with a little Rose
Water and Saffron; and then applied a Defensative Emplaster on the Forehead,
made of Bole Armoniack and Terra Sigillata with Oil of Roses, and a little Wax
and Vinegar, after which he gave the Patient a Clyster. The next Day he gave
him a Purge, and for seven or eight days together dressed the Wound with
Anodines, after which he made a Collyrium with Eyebright Water, Sugar and
Tutty prepared which he laid on the Cicatrix, and the Patient was cured and
recovered the use of his sight.

This Remark demonstrates, that the Aqueous Humor may be reproduced in the Eye
after it is lost. This Experiment is easy to be made in Birds, in which it
succeeds in a very small time. Mr. Nuck late Professor of Anatomy in the
University of Leyden, discovered a Channel creeping over the Sclerotis, and
inserted into the Cornea, which serves to convey the Aqueous Humor into the
Eye. This he first observed in dissecting the Eye of a Dog-Fish or Galea, etc.
and the Channel was large enough to receive his Probe. When he drew out the
Probe the Aqueous Humor did not run out, by reason there was a Valve at the
end of the Duct.

This Accidental Discovery caused that Gentleman to make a more exact scrutiny
in a Sheeps Eye, and there he found five Channels in one, and six in another,
which ran over the Sclerotis, and piercing the Cornea terminated in it. He
thrust a Hogs Bristle into each Channel, which appeared of a black Color. He
found likewise two Channels in each Eye of Dogs, one under the Abducent, and
the other under the Adducent Muscles. If you desire to observe these in the Eye
of a Living Dog, you must lift up the upper Eyelid and then you will see the
place where the common Duct pierces the Cornea. These Channels most commonly
proceed straight forward on the Conjunctiva, but sometimes they turn aside and
piercing the Sclerotis, discharge their contents into the bottom of the Eye.

Fernelius in his Pathology, Chap. 5. l. 5. treating of Suffusions, tells us he
had seen one formed in one days time.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Ungula's in the greater Angles of the Eyes.
THIS Operation is the Extirpation of a small Membrane called Ungula by reason
of its hardness and Figure.

THE CAUSE of this Distemper is a thick Excrescence, which extending it self
over the Conjunctiva, and sometimes over the Pupil hinders Vision.

THE SIGNS. This Distemper is visible of it self, there is a thick Membrane
which takes its Rise from the great Angle, and extends it self over the whole
Globe of the Eye.

The OPERATION.
If this Membrane covers the Globe of the Eye, and is not fixed to the greater
Angle, lift it up and cut it off with the Scissars as near as possible to its
rise. For the raising it up pass a blunt Needle threaded under it, and with the
Thread raise it up and cut it off as near the Insertion as may be.

When the Membrane adheres to the Cornea, some Practitioners pass a Needle
threaded with a Horse-hair under the Cornea, and bring this forward and
backward to separate it; but I disapprove of this Practice, because it must
necessarily cause great Pain and Inflammation, and for this Reason I should
rather choose to make a Ligature on the Membrane near the greater Angle of the
Eye to intercept its Nourishment, and consume the Membrane which covers the
Cornea with Suppuratives, or by passing gently the Lunat Caustic frequently
over it. This Caustic has this Advantage over all others, that it consumes
this Excrescence without leaving any thing in the Eye, which may irritate it,
and there is no danger of hurting the Cornea, because you are constantly Master
of your Caustic.

THE DRESSING consists in putting into the Eye Pledgits dipped in Rose and
Plantane Water, or other Defensatives to prevent the Inflammation, and keeping
them on with the Bandage used in the Fistula Lachrymalis.

THE CURE consists in Bleeding, Clysters, and a regular Diet, if there be any
Inflammation.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 2. relates, that a Man of 40. years of Age had a
Schirrous Tumor about the bigness of a Ches-nut, in the greater Angle of the
Eye. This swelling was Livid and full of several small Veins, adhering on one
side to the Conjunctiva quite to the Iris, and on the other side to the upper
Eyelid, and the Lachrymal Gland in such manner, that it covered the whole
Globe of the Eye when the Patient stirred it.

CHAP. L. Of Extirpating a Cancer of the Eye.
THIS Operation is an Extirpation of a Cancer in the Orbit.

THE CAUSE is the same with that of the Breast, which is amply described in its
proper place.

THE SIGNS are almost the same, there is a clear, sharp, Gleet runs from the
Eye. The Eye it self is red and inflamed, there are small Ulcers in the Cornea
and on the Pupil which create extreme pain, and the Vessels which creep over
the Globe of the Eye are swollen and varicose, the Patient feels an intolerable
pain in his Head, and the Luster of his Countenance is lost, and looks of a
leaden hue. These Cancers sometimes become Fistulous.

While the Tumor of the Eye is only a Ficus, the Eyes are dull and livid, and
the Vessels are neither swollen nor varicose, but sometimes these Tumor
degenerate into Cancers.

The OPERATION.
This is an Extirpating the whole Globe of the Eye, which cannot be done
without separating it round from its adherences, and so taking it out of its
Orbit.

THE DRESSING. Fill the Orbit with Dossils armed with some good Digestives, to
consume the remaining part of the Cancer, and carry it off by Suppuration, then
lay on this a Pledgit armed with some good Digestive, and cover it with a
Compress, keeping all on with a Handkerchief or the Bandage used in the Fistula
Lachrymalis.

THE CURE. Remove the Dressings twice a Day, and renew as often your Digestive
Applications, and continue to suppurate the Wound till the Pus be laudable, and
there be no appearance of a Cancer, then Deterge and Cicatrize it. Let the
Patients Diet be sweet, and let him avoid all Haut gousts, all Pulse, let his
sleep be moderate, banishing all vehement Passions, and let him keep his Body
open.

REMARKS.
Some years since there was a certain Man in the Hotel Dieu at Paris, who had
his Eye struck out by a Blow which he received, the Globe of the Eye being
without the Orbit, adhered and grew to the Cheek, and the Optic Nerve was
elongated, notwithstanding which he could discern any object presented to him.

Bartholin. Cent. 1. Hist. 7. tells us, That an Occult Cancer happening in the
right Breast of a Lady, she applied a plate of Lead rubbed with Quicksilver
once in two Days on it. Notwithstanding which the Cancer increased and
ulcerated, which obliged the Surgeon to remove the Plate of Lead, and then the
Pains ceased, but after some time they increased, and Cancer voided Mercury
every day in dressing it, nay the Mercury transuded through the very Skin it
self on the Shoulder Blade, and our Author laid on a Place of Gold to extract
the Quicksilver.

CHAP. LI. Of the Coalition of the Eyelids.
THIS Operation is the Separation of the Eyelids, when they grow together.

THE CAUSE. This Distemper arises from several small Ulcers on the edge of the
Eyelids, which are united in the same manner as the Lips of Wounds, when they
touch each other.

THE SIGNS. This Defect is visible the Eyes are shut, and the Patient cannot
open the Eyelids.

The OPERATION.
Pass a blunt Needle under the Eyelids and hold them up, and keeping the
thread at both ends, then separate them with a Lancet. If the Eyelids adhere
to the Globe of the Eye, separate them dexterously without engaging the Globe of
the Eye, for it is much better to touch the Lid than that.

If the Eyelids adhere to the Globe of the Eye, it will be difficult to
separate them.

THE DRESSING consists in laying some Pledgits dipped in Defensative Liquors, and
keeping them on with the Handkerchief folded Triangularwise.

THE CURE. You must have recourse to bleeding, Purging and Clysters, putting
Lint dipped in Plantane or Rose Water between the Eyelids, to hinder them from
growing together.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 5. Obs. 10. relates that a certain Man happening to
receive a Wound on the Eye, the upper Eyelid grew to the Globe of the Eye, and
the Physicians tried several ways to free it, till at last he was called in,
who treated him in this manner. In the first place he prescribed him a regular
Diet, purged him and bled him in the Arm. Then he put a small piece of Silk at
the end of a crooked Probe, and passed it under the Eyelid, beginning at the
lesser Angle of the Eye. Next he drew the crooked Probe from the Eyelid, and
left the Thread under it, with one end hanging out of the lesser, and the other
out of the greater Angle of the Eye, and tied both ends of the Silk together,
fastening a piece of Lead to it of a Dram in Weight, which Lead he could slide
all along the Silk from one end to another, upon every different Motion of the
Patient; and this piece of Lead he took away in the Nighttime, binding the
Patients Eye up gently, and dropping the following Collyrium into the greater
Angle of the Patients Eye three or four times in a Day.. Rose, Plantane, and
Eyebright Waters, a^. ss. Tutty prepared, washed Ceruse, Burnt Hartshorn, a^.
i. Mix these in a Mortar, and add to this thick Mucilage Quince-seeds, enough
to give it the consistence of a Liniment.

By means of this Lead the Eyelid was separated from the Ball of the Eye in 8
or 9 days; and because the Cicatrix did a little blemish and impair the Sight,
he made several inunctions of the Eyelids and Forehead with Oil of Worms, and
laid on the Eyes a Bag with Betony, Eyebright, Primr^ses, Camomile Roses and
Rosemary steeped in Water, and applied hot to the Part, with which the Patient
was perfectly cured.

CHAP. LII. Of drawing out Hairs when they stick in the Eyes.
THIS is the p^lling out Hairs which stick in the Eyes. THE CAUSE. The entering
of the Hairs into the Eyes, proceeds from the ill Disposition and Tortuosity of
the Pores which causes them to grow awry; Nay sometimes it proceeds from
several ranges of Hairs which thrust each other out.

THE SIGNS. This is very visible, and the Hairs pricking the Eyes, cause a
great Pain and Inflammation.

The OPERATION.
Turn up the Eyelids and pull out those Hairs with a Forceps, but observe
never to cut them, for being short they will be stiff and prick the Eyes like
so many Needles.

THE DRESSING consists in laying on some small Pledgits dipped in some
Defensative Liquors, to put a stop to the Inflammation, which may be caused by
the Pain of the Operation, and keeping them on with a Handkerchief folded
Triangularwise.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 27. tells us, a certain Man having for a long
time used himself to wash his Eyes every Morning with cold Water, his Sight by
degrees decayed, and he saw all Objects very confusedly, and this at last ended
in an Ophthalmy.

In the same Century, Obs. 24. He tells us that a Boy of fourteen years of Age
of a Phlegmatic Body, laid a Wager that he could sneeze a Hundred times, upon
which he put something up his Nose, and by irritating and tickling the Membrane
of the Nose he did it; but he was presently seized with a violent pain in his
Head, his Sight began to decay, and the next Morning he lost it quite, without
any Inflammation or Fever. This Disease was at last cured by a Seton in the
Neck, and Cupping-glasses applied to the Shoulders.

Bartholin in his 84. History tells us, that the People of Alexandria and
Egypt are very apt to have two or three rows of Hairs on the Eyelids, which
prick the Cornea when they shut them, and from hence Inflammations and Pains of
the Eyes are very frequent in that Country, and he tells us the only way to
free them from this Inconvenience, is to cauterize the Part with a red hot Iron
to make it callous, and prevent the Hairs from returning again.

CHAP. LIII. Of Drawing Teeth.
THIS Operation is the drawing of a Tooth out of its Socket.

THE CAUSE. The Pain of the Teeth proceeds from a sharp Humor which irritates
the Membrane that lines their Alveoli or Sockets. The Teeth are sometimes
rotted, or have their Surface corroded by the sharpness of the Saliva, or the
Meat lodged in their Interstices. Sometimes they are corroded by Sweetmeats.
When any one eats hot Things, and presently eats something very cold after, the
Teeth grow black and carious; because these putting the parts of the Teeth into
various Motions, separate them, and destroy their continuity; and there being
several Intervals between their parts, they must of necessity absorb some parts
of the Light, and from hence it is not difficult to account for their blackness
according to the Cartesian Hypothesis of the cause of Colors.

THE SIGNS. Sometimes there is a small, round, black, hole, which by degtees
increases and grows larger, and the Teeth become black and stinking. Pains in
the Teeth are often accompanied with a great Pain in the Head, loss of
Appetite, want of Sleep, and Convulsions.

The Teeth are small longish Bones, smooth and hard, which are stuck in their
Sockets as a Nail in a piece of Wood. This sort of Articulation as I remarked
before, is called Gomphosis. They begin to appear in young Children, about the
seventh or eighth Month. The Incisores or Fore-teeth of the upper Jaw appear
first, and then those of the lower Jaw; the Dog-teeth come next forth, and the
Grinders last of all. When the Teeth first come out they tear the Gums and the
Periosteum, which lines the Socket, which creates so great Pain, that People
usually do account a Child's Life very dubious, till the Teeth are come forth,
and indeed with very good reason, since there are so many Accidents attend the
breeding of them, as Pains, Convulsions, Fevers, Epilepsies, Vomiting,
Loosnesses, etc.

I conjecture Teeth are formed in this manner. The Membrane which invests the
Teeth being a Texture of an Infinity of small Vessels, spues out glutinous
Matter which forms a sort of Stratum, and by congestion of more of these Strata
on one another, which in time fill up and rise beyond the Cavity of the Alveoli
the Teeth are formed, whose external part being pressed in the Mastication of the
Meat, form a Cortical part harder than the internal. The same Vessels entering
the Basis of the Teeth, supply them with Nourishment.

The Teeth are commonly divided into Incisores or Fore-teeth, Canini or
Dog-teeth, and Molares or Grinders. There are most commonly 32 Teeth in both
Jaws, viz. Sixteen in the upper Jaw, and sixteen in the lower, or Four
Fore-teeth, two Dog-teeth, and ten Grinders in each Jaw. The Incisores or
Fore-teeth are a little flat and sharp, something Unequal without and hollow
within, having never more than one Root. The Grinders are large and unequal,
and have their Basis irregular, for the better grinding and comminution of the
Aliment. These have some one, some two, and others three Roots, and in above
two thousand Teeth which I have viewed, I never found one that had more than
three Roots distinct from each other.

The OPERATION.
When the Teeth are carious and rotten, the best way is to pull them out to be
delivered from the continual Pain and stinking Breath, and prevent them from
corrupting their Neighbors.

There are several Instruments used on this occasion, as the Polican to pull
out large Teeth which are far in the Mouth. The Paces, when they are not so
far, and the Punch, when the Teeth are broken off close to the Gum, and there
is no hold.

But whatsoever the Instrument be with which you perform the Operation, place
the Patient on a Cushion on the Floor, or on a low Seat, and let the Artist
stand behind him, and opening his Mouth as wide as he can, if it be one of the
hinder Teeth let him use the Polican, one end of which must rest on the
fore-teeth, having wrapped it in a Cloth for fear of breaking those Teeth, and
then having hookt the moveable branch of the Instrument, let him pull it
strongly and so bring out the Tooth; but in doing this he must take care of the
sound Teeth, for by resting too much on them, he may chance to break them.

Great care must be taken that the Artist do not mistake a sound Tooth for an
unsound one; and in this case he must not always rely on the Patients account,
for it often happens that the contiguous Teeth being painful, he points to one
of them; and therefore in this case the surest way is to take that which is
black and rotten.

If the Tooth be not too far within the Mouth, the Artist may make use of the
Paces. If the Tooth which is to be drawn be in the upper Jaw, the Handle of the
Instrument must be turned down, and you must take hold of the Tooth as close to
the Gum as may be, having first separated the Gum with a Fleam, for the better
doing this. In drawing the Tooth out, there are three Motions at once, viz.
turning it to the right and left, and pulling it out of the Socket.

When a Tooth is broken off near the Socket, the Punch is to be made use of.
For this purpose separate the Gum from the Tooth as far as is possible, and
apply the two Teeth of the Punch as low as may be, and push it strongly outward.

THE DRESSING. Some times there is so large a Flux of Blood after the pulling
out of a Tooth, that it is difficult to stop it. For this purpose make a huge
Tent of Lint as big as an Egg, and dipping it in the Styptick Water, put it
into the Socket of the Tooth which is drawn out, and let the Patient press it
with his Jaw, and when he cannot compress it himself, its magnitude will be
pressure enough. If there be any great loss of Blood, let the Patient gargle
his Mouth with Oxycrate.

THE CURE. When the Teeth are not carious, they must not be pulled out, though
perhaps they put the Patient to a great deal of Pain. In this case let him take
Spirit of Wine Camphorated into his Mouth, and lie in such a Posture that the
Liquour may touch the Tooth which is affected. Since Pains in the Teeth most
commonly proceed from an Acrimony of the Lympha, whose Fomes is in the Stomach,
let the Patient take 7 or 8 grains of Emetick Tartar in Broth, for it is found
by experience that Vomiting has often cured Pains in the Teeth.

Sometimes the Fluxion is very successfully diverted by bleeding in the
opposite Arm. Detergent and Emollient Clysters are very useful, and so are
Anodyne Cataplasms made with Crumbs of Whitebread, Yelks of Eggs, Saffron and
Camphire applied to the Patients Cheek to abate the Pain. Lauda^um applied to
the Temporal Artery, or a little Lint dipped in a Solution of it, made in Water
or Milk and put into the Ear or Mouth, is an Excellent Remedy. To hinder the
progress of the Cariosity of a Tooth, put Oil of Guajacum into it.

REMARKS.
An Extract of a Letter concerning the Teeth of diverse Animals, Printed at
Paris some years since.

The Structure of the Teeth in most Animals, shows us their Inclinations, and
the Diet on which they feed.

Some Animals have their Incisive Teeth long and sharp, their Dog-teeth long
and crooked, and their Grinders unequal and pointed, as Bears, Boars, Lions,
Wolfs, Tigers, Squirrels, Cats, Dogs, etc. all which are Carnivorous Animals,
and live upon rapine. Their Grinders serve for the Mastication and the
Comminution of their Prey, the incisive Teeth to cut it, and the Dog-teeth to
retain it in the Mouth and tear it. All these Animals have at least three
fourths of their Teeth within the Jaw, which makes them much stronger than if a
greater part of the Teeth were out.

Those Animals which live on Herbage, as Oxen and Sheep have no Incisores, but
have slat round Teeth in their lower Jaw, and do rather pull up than cut the
Grass which they eat, and the most part of these Animals chew the Cud. River
Fowl, as Geese, Ducks, Herns, Swans, have a long Bill which is round and flat
at the end, and have a soft Flexible Membrane in their lower Jaw, which helps
them to swallow their Meat with ease. The sides of their Bill are like so many
small saws, with which they take up little Fish and pluck Weeds.

Birds which have a hard, crooked, strong, Bill, with sharp edges easily tear
and cut Flesh, and for that reason are Carnivorous, and such for the most part
are Birds of Prey, as the Eagle, Hawk, Raven, etc.

Birds which have their Bill strait, slender, with a Channel in it, as the
Linnet, Goldfinch, and Sparrow, most commonly feed on Seeds. The end of their
Bill is cut sharp, and they make use of it to break the Seeds, and cut Blades
of Grass.

Those Birds which have the edges of their Bill indented, as the greatest part
of River Fowl have, feed for the most part upon Weeds, and these Indentations
serve as a saw with which they cut them, and pull them up, as Geese, Ducks,
Swans. River Fowl which only live on Fishing, have most commonly in their Bill
a little set of Teeth, by the help of which they keep the Fish which they catch
in their Mouths. These small points are very large in the Birds called Fiber,
which has Teeth all along his Bill, which are long pointed, and turned in
toward the Throat.

Fish which have little pointed Teeth, only live upon other little Fish which
they catch, and these Teeth which point toward the Throat, serve not so much to
Masticate, as to retain the Fish which they have in their Mouths. Those Fish
which have their Tongue and the Palate of their Mouth paved and scaly, only
live on Shellfish, and break the shell to eat the Meat contained in it.
Tortoises which live in Water, have Teeth quite down to the Throat, and use
them for the Comminution of those Plants which grow at the bottom of the Sea
which they feed on. Land Tortoises have not only Teeth in their Jaws and on
their Tongue, which are not directly opposite, but enter one between the other,
serve only for the retention and not for the Comminution of the Aliments, and
Steno in his Discourse de Cane Carcharia informs us, that Fish has six hundred
Teeth, and has some still come forth as long as he lives. This Fish has several
ranges of Teeth in each Jaw, which are hard, sharp, and pointed, the greatest
part of which are an Inch in length, and serve only for the Retention, and not
for the Comminution of its Food, which is evident since very large Animals are
often found entire in its Stomach.

Animals whose Tongues are set with large pointed Papillae and have these
turned toward the Throat, make use of them in swallowing their Meat, and they
serve to hinder it from falling out of their Mouth; of this kind are Lions,
Tigers, Leopards, Panthers, etc. and then cover the whole Surface of the
Tongue. Some large Fishes have their Tongue covered with Bristies which form a
sort of Brush, and serve to retain the Food.

The Sea-Fox has his Tongue covered with small pieces of Bone, which are not
bigger than the points of Needles, and these are white, square, and very hard.

The Cod-Fish has Teeth at the bottom of his Throat, whose points turn inwards,
and it is probable they only serve to retain the Aliment. These Teeth are hard
pointed, close, and make a sort of File, and there are four of them, viz. two
above and two below, which answer toeach other.

The Raia has three or four ranks of hard, smooth, transparent Bones cut
Lozangewise, and ranged in very good order, and these Bones are the teeth with
which they Masticate their Meat. The Carp has grinders which serve for the
Comminution of his Meat, he has six in the upper Jaw, ranged three and three
together; and in the lower Jaw this Fish has a Cartilaginous Bone in the shape
of a flat Olive, which does the office of Teeth. In the Seas of Canada there is
a Fish which has both the Jaws flat, which serves for the grinding of the Meat.
These have flat Teeth close against each other, and very hard, and with his
Teeth he cracks the shell first, and then feeds on the Fish. The Fish called La
Vielle has flat teeth quite to the farther end of his Throat, which seems to be
paved with them. The Fish called the Requiem has its teeth an Inch, large,
flat, and Triangular, with small Indentations on the side. There are three
ranks in each Jaw, and this Animal is so strong, and his teeth so sharp, that
he can bite off the Thigh of a Man at once.

The Viper has two great moveable teeth in his upper Jaw, as well as the
Sea-Frogg. There is a Serpent in America, which has a great number of teeth in
each Jaw, which serve for the swallowing of his Prey, and whilst the teeth in
one Jaw remain unmoved and serve to retain it, the teeth of the other are
thrust out to hook it, and bring it in again; whilst it draws it in the teeth
in the other Jaw are thrust out, and by this Alternate Motion, the Prey is
conveyed into the Throat.

The Flander bruises shells with his flat Mouth.

The Parrot eats very readily, because its upper Jaw is moveable, and
articulated in such manner with that; though the lower Jaw be much shorter than
the upper, yet he can thrust it to the end.

Those Birds which have the upper Jaw crookt, have the lower Jaw short, but so
notwithstanding that they can thrust it to the top of the upper. Those Birds
which have a long strait Bill, have not this property of moving their lower
Jaw, nor can they eat so well as a Raven. Small Birds whose Bill is sharp and
cutting, and has a Channel in it, and who only live upon Seeds, bring them to
the sides of their sharp Bill, and turn them often about till they have found
the Juncture of the Seed, and then they break it.

Toads and Serpents have so large a Throat, that they can swallow whole Fishes,
and when they happen to take them wrong, they very dexterously toss them into
the Air, and catch them again by the Tail, that so the Gills may not stick in
their Throat. Herons do not make use of their Bill to break shells, but swallow
them entire, the Heat of their Belly relaxes the Muscle which keeps them shut,
and when they perceive the shells open, they Vomit them up again to eat the
Flesh. Boars do not employ their Tushes in Mastication, but make use of them in
tearing up Plants by the Roots.

The Crocodile has no Incisores nor Grinders, all that it has are Dog-teeth,
which are extremely white, hard, round, and pointed, with a Channel
encompassing them all round, their Root is hollow and twice as long as the
Tooth, and they are disposed in such a manner, that they leave as much space
full as empty.

Crabs have three teeth placed at the bottom of their Stomach, and move that
part in the comminution of their Meat. The Fish called Orbis, has four teeth in
its Gula as big as the Incisive teeth of a Horse.

Hares, Squirrels, and Rats, have long Incisive teeth, strong enough to gnaw
any hard Body; and Beavers have very large and strong ones, with which they can
cut off great Branches of Trees for the building of their Hutts. These pass one
over another without meeting, when the Animal makes use of them.

The Insect called Spondylis has two teeth which meet like Scissars, and with
these he cuts the Grass Roots.

Besides these mentioned which are drawn from the teeth, Aristotle has long
since given us several other Marks whereby to distinguish the several Natures
of Animals, and their manner of Living.

In the Miscelanea Curiosa, Obs. 5. There is a Relation of a Child of a year
old, very lean and of a livid Complexion, who upon breeding his teeth had
several white ones, and after some time a black one came our. The Relations
were something surprised at this, however finding that in a whole years time it
did not incommode the Child, they deferred acquainting any Physician with the
Accident; but perceiving all the teeth of the same side which came out after to
be black, they called in a Surgeon, who being ignorant of the Nature of the
Distemper Scarified the Tumor on the Gum, whereupon not only the Gum it self,
but the whole Cheek Ulcerated. As soon as the Surgeon saw this, he desired the
Relations to call in a Physician, who found the Distemper to be a Raging
Cancer, with a horrible Ulcer, proceeding from improper Remedies applied to the
Part. Upon this to palliate the Case, he advised the Patient to a moist and
cooling Diet, the Child having a Hectic Fever, and prescribed some Lotions to
gargle its Mouth, but notwithstanding the use of all Means which could be
thought of, the Cancer extended to the Temporal Muscle, and the Patient died
convulsed.

Doubtless it is a thing without precedent, that so furious a Tumor should
extend it self so far, without affecting the other Teeth.

It happened some time since, that a certain Person upon pulling out a Tooth,
lost above a pint of Blood by the Wound, and the Operator could not stop it,
but at last the Flux was suppressed by a Tent wetted in the Styptick Water
before mentioned.

Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 4. Obs. 21. tells us, that a certain Prioress of 40
years of Age, being troubled with a violent pain in her Teeth, having tried
several Remedies in vain, at last had Aquafortis put in them, upon which
either by reason of the Caustic Nature of the Medicine, or the continuation of
the Fluxion, several of her Teeth rotted, broke and came away, leaving several
Cavernous Fistula's in the Chin, and Ulcers under the Glands, which voided
above three pints of Matter every Day. At length all the Teeth rotted and she
became Feverish, and the Bones of the Head were fouled.

CHAP. LIVE. Of Prothesis or supplying Parts deficient.
THIS is the Artificial supplying some Part which is deficient in Humane Bodies.

THE CAUSE. The most ordinary occasion of this, is the Extirpation or
Amputation of some Limb which cannot be cured by any other means; sometimes
indeed some Member or other is wanting in Children when they are born, or is
after eaten off by Venereal Distempers.

THE SIGNS. The Defect is visible.

The OPERATION.
Sometimes the small Bone in the Roof of the Mouth falls as in the Pox, and
then the Patients Meat comes out of his Nose; and there are many words which he
cannot pronounce plain. To remedy this Infirmity, take a thin Plate of Silver
of a Figure fit to stop the Hole, make a little King in the midst of it, and
put in a small bit of sponge, and thrust this into the hole of the Palate, the
Moisture of the Mouth swells this sponge, and fastens the Plate so close to the
Palate, that it is very difficult to draw it out, and by staying there it
supplies the place of the Bone which is lost.

Sometimes the tip of the Tongue is cut off by the Teeth, and this is
occasioned either by Convulsions, or some Accidental Blow under the Chin. When
this happens, the Patient cannot pronounce many words by reason the tip of the
Tongue cannot strike the Roof of the Mouth. For the remedying this
Inconvenience, take a small Spoon about the bigness of a Silver penny, and
apply this over the Tongue in such manner, that its Cavity may be downward and
its Convexity upwards, that it may strike the Roof of the Mouth, and by this
means the Patient may pronounce his words Articulately.

When any of the Teeth fall out make new ones of Ivory, and put them in the
place of the other, fastening them with a Silver Wire.

If the Ball of the Eye fall out of the Orbit, make one of Glass and put it in
its stead.

If there be any loss of substance, as for instance, if a Woman has lost a
portion of Flesh in her Arm, or a Man part of his Nose, or the like, then cut
superficially the Part which you intend to prolong, and cut superficially the
Arm or some Fleshy part in any person who will submit to it, and apply the two
Wounds to each other; for by this means they will be agglutinated in the same
manner as the Lips of all recent Wounds, and when they are once grown together,
cut of as much Flesh as is necessary to supply the deficiency of the Part
applied, and form it into shape with a pair of Scissars.

If you would thus inoculate, when the Nose happens to be cut off Scarifie the
sides a little, and make an Incision into the Flesh, put the Nose in, and when
it is well agglutinated, cut off as much as you think convenient, and pierce it
to make Nostrils, putting in two Pipes till the part be Cicatrized.

If Children have crooked Legs, put them on Boots of a firm Leather, and in
time they will become strait, as they grow.

If the Arms are contorted, let some straight Splints be applied on the side
which is bent, and then make a Bandage, and by degrees the Member will come to
its Natural State. In the last place, when you make any Artificial Member, let
them have the same Motion as the Natural.

THE CURE. In restoring distorted Bones, Boots, Splints, and other like
Machines are not sufficient, but you must likewise use Emollient and Relaxing
Cataplasms to make the Bone flexible, and the part must be bound straiter by
degrees, as you find it recovers its right Figure; for if it be bound too
strait at first, there is danger of its Gangrening.

REMARKS.
The Ancients repaired the loss of parts, as a Nose cut off or the like, by
inoculating Flesh out of the Arms or Buttocks of their Slaves.

CHAP. LV. Of Transfusion and Injections into the Veins.
THIS Operation is the Injection of some Liquours into the Vessels of an
Animal, or the Transfusion of the Blood of one into the Body of another.

THE CAUSE. The Intention of Transfusion, is that the Medicine may act more
promptly and effectually. This may be practiced in Paralytick Persons, when the
Patient is disabled from Swallowing, by a Debility or Convulsion of the Nervous
Fibers of the Gullet, or in Hypochondraical and Scorbutic Persons, or when
some Styptick Vapors constringe the Throat, and hinder Deglutition or the
like, happens from a swelling of the Tonsils, or Inflammation of the Muscles of
the Throat in a Quinsie, or in such Persons as have a natural Antipathy to all
Medicines, and cannot retain them in their Stomach; or lastly, when Medicines
receive too great an Alteration in the Primae viae, and lose their effect. No
internal Medicines taken by the Mouth, can act so promptly as Infusions in
acute Distempers, as Syncopes, Palpitations, Apoplexies, Vertigo's, Epilepsies.
Infusions put the Blood into a gentle Fermentation, and prevent Hypochondriack
Distempers, Convulsive Asthma's, all Chronical radicated Diseases, and are of
use in all Acute Inflammatory and Malignant Fevers.

THE SIGNS. The occasion of making Injections, are those Distempers above
mentioned.

The OPERATION.
Before you make any Injection, it is necessary to consider well which Vessel
is most proper for this p^rpose. In the first place Arteries are not very
proper; for if the Incision be large, it must necessarily be dangerous, and
cause an Aneurism, and the Wound be hard to heal, because the Vessel lies deep
in the Flesh; on the contrary, if it be very small it will be very difficult to
introduce the Instrument. Besides the injected Liquour ought to be conveyed to
the Heart, the most direct way imaginable; and for this reason the Arte^^es are
not so proper as the Veins, and the Veins in the upper. Systan ought to be
preferred to those in the lower, and the Jugular to the Veins of the Arm.
However since the latter are more accessible, and more easily managed than the
former, for the most part it is more convenient to make the Operation in them.
When you have chose the Vessel, chafe the part with Wine or Elder Water very
hot, or Spirit of Wine Camphorated. After this make two Ligatures, viz. one
above the place where you intend to make the Injection to stop the Blood, and
cause the Vein to rise, and the other below to keep the Blood from flowing out,
and hindering the Operation. When the Incision is made lay your Finger on to
close it till the Instrument be in, and then unbind the Ligature above, to give
the Infusion room to pass pressing i^ upwards to promore its passing on, and
when the Injection is make, close the Orifice in the ^ame manner as in
Bleeding, and unbind the Ligature beneath, that so the Blood may continue its
Circulation, and carry the It jection with it.

Let the Incision be made with a Lancet, and the Injection with a Bladder full
of Liquour, at the end of which there must be a Silver Siphon slender and
crooked toward the point, that so it may the better pass up the Vein, or you
may use a Silver Syringe, which is much better in all respects.

Transfusion of Blood out of the Veins of one Animal into another, is performed
in this manner. Take the Carotid Artery, for instance, of a Dog or any other
Animal, and separate it from the Nerve which accompanies it, and lay the Artery
bare for about an Inch in length, then make a strong Ligature on the upper
part, and another Ligature below toward the Heart with slip knots, which you
may loosen as occasion shall require. When you have made these two Knots, pass
two Threads under the Artery between the two Ligatures, and then open the
Artery and put a Quill into it, and tie it close with a double Thread on the
Pipe, and put a good stopple into it. When this is done, lay the Jugular Vein
of any other Animal open an Inch and a half in length, and make a slip knot at
each extremity; and between these two knots put two Threads under the Vein as
you did in the Artery, and make an Incision into the Vein, and thrust in the
two pipes, one into the lower part to receive the Blood and convey it to the
Heart, and the other into the upper, which comes from the Head by which the
Blood of this second Dog may flow out on the ground, and when the Pipes are
disposed in this manner, put in a stopple.

When all things are thus prepared, let the Dogs be tied and laid one by the
side of the other, and then begin to unstop the Pipe which goes into the
descending part of the Jugular Vein of the Recipient Animal, and after that
unstop likewise the Pipe which goes into the Artery of the other Dog, and
insert two or three Pipes between them: When you have done this untie the
Ligatures, and the Blood will pass in a rapid current from the Artery of the
first Animal into the Veins of the other. When you perceive the Blood passes,
unstop the Pipe which is inserted into the ascending part of the Jugular Vein
of the Recipient Animal, (not continually but by intervals, (having first made
a Ligature, or at least compressing with your Fingers the Veins on the opposite
side) and let the Blood run out upon the Floor, as you judge his Strength can
bear, till the Emittent begins to cry, and so faints, falls into Convulsions,
and so dies. Then take both Pipes out of the Jugular Vein, and having tied the
slip knot strait and firm, cut the Veins asunder above it. This may be done
without the least Inconvenience, one Jugular alone being sufficient to convey
the Blood to the Head and upper parts, because the two Veins communicate about
the Larynx by a large Anastomosis. When you have done this, stitch up the skin
and let the Dog go.

Let not the distance between the Dogs be so great, as to stretch the Veins
and Arteries, which would very much hinder the conveying of the Blood from one
to the other You must from time to time observe the beating of the Blood in the
Jugular Vein, and when you cannot perceive this, you may conclude that the
passage is stopped by some Clods of concreted Blood, and when this happens, you
must take the Pipe out of the Artery of the Emittent Dog, and unstop it with a
Probe to clear the passage. This is very apt to happen when the Emittent Dog is
almost spent, for then the Heart projects the Blood feebly, and i^ coagulates
much sooner; and therefore for the making this Experiment with more Success,
let the Emittent Animal be larger than the Recipient; or if you please, you may
take two or three Animals, provided you let as much Blood out of ths Recipient,
as you convey into it; for otherwise it must unavoidably be suffocated.

The Animals which emit the Blood, ought as near as is possible to be of the
same Constitution and Age, and for some days before to be fed with like
Nourishment, that so their Blaod may be of the same Temper.

Silver or Copper Pipes are better than Quills, and these must be a little
crooked and slender at the ends, that so one end may go into the Quill, and the
other into the Vein or Artery with a little rising edge, for the better
fastening the Thread.

THE DRESSING after this Operation, consists in laying a good Compress on the
Vessel which is opened, and making the same Bandage as in Bleeding, and then
dressing the Wound.

THE CURE. The Injection must be adapted to the Distemper which you intend to
cure. Purgative and Vomitive Medicines are by no means proper to be injected,
because in all Purgatives there is a latent Malignity which weakens the Patient
exceedingly, and causes Trembling of the Knees, a lean Visage, and a sinking in
of the Eyes, when they are taken by the Mouth, and by consequence cannot fail
of causing much greater disorders when they are injected by the Veins, and are
admitted into the Mass of Blood crude and unprepared. We find by Experience,
Purgatives injected into the Veins of a Dog, create mighty Disturbances and
terrible Symptoms, and Antimonial Injections cause violent Vomitings and kill
them.

Diuretic Injections by virtue of a Nitrous Salt, dispose the Blood for a more
easy separation of the Serosities in the Kidneys. Sudorificks may be injected
successfully, when the Patient cannot take them by the Mouth, or has taken them
without effect, which last point indeed ought to be considered before any
Injections are made at any time.

Authors commend half a dram of Spirit of Sal. Armoniack, to which if you
please you may add a dram of Spirit of Wine Camphorated; or Volatile Salt of Sal
Armoniack with Heinsius's, Antipestilential Oil, and so form a sort of Sal
Volatile Oleosum, a dram of which if it be injected, is an excellent Sudorisick
in Malignant Fevers. Humme Blood, Stags. Vipers or Serpents Blood, are good
Sudorificks. As for Cordials, Cinnamon and Ambergrease are the most valuable.
Spirit of Cinnamon together with distilled Oil of Amber, Ginger and Volatile
Salt of Hartshorn, are admirable. Essence of Ambergrease prepared with Spirit
of Roses, is excellent. Injections of Opium are good to calm the Impetuosity
and Fury of the Spirits. Preparations of Cinnamon and Ambergrease are admirable
in Syncapes, ar^sing from too great a Fluidity of the Blood, and so is Vinegar
made of good Wine, and rectifyed with a mixture of Spirit of Wine, and Spirit
of Roses Ambrated. But if the Syncope arise from a coagulation of the Blood,
Volatile Salts are the most proper Remedies to correct the Acid, and dissolve it
promptly. For this Reason Tincture of Coral with Volatile Salt of Tartar in a
proper Vehicle, is a very good Remedy in Deliquiums and Palpitations of the
Heart. The Ingredients of Apoplectick Injections, must be the Volatile Salts and
Spirits of Plants and Animals; for instance, of Hartshorn, Skulls and Bones of
Men, Staggs and Humane Blood, Volatile Salt of Amber is a glorious Medicine, and
so is Spirit of Wire. and Compound Theriacal Water. Spirit of Lilies of the
Valley or Black Cherries impregnated with Volatile Salt of Hartshorn and a
little Camphire by several Cohobations is an excellent Remedy.

Epileptick Injections may be made of Specificks actuated with Camphire, or
allayed with Essence of Opium. A Spirit drawn from the Secundines of a Woman,
are very good; and there is a mighty Antepileptick Virtue in Peacocks, Storks,
Lions, and Humane Dung. In short, all Specisicks are proper to inject.

REMARKS.
Etmuller tell us, that having made an Injection of Spring Water into the
Crural Vein of a Dog, the Animal licked the Incision for the space of half an
Hour, and then ran away, as if nothing had been done to him.

He injected an Ounce of Sack into the Veins of another Dog, but no alteration
appeared in him, because the Dose was too small; but if any quantity be
injected, he assures us the Dog will reel and stagger like a Drunken Man.

Upon injecting an Ounce of the Golden Purging Wine, which is a Dose sufficient
for a Man, the Dog seemed to be sick, and was perpetually running from one
place to another; and seven Hours after, he plentifully evac^ated his Body. In
some Dogs he tells us, he found this Medicine work in an hours time.

He tells us upon injecting an Ounce of a colorless Infusion of 16 grains of
Crocus Metallorum into the Veins of a Dog, the Animal Vomited two Hours after
with a Hiccough, and Sighed like Persons in a Malignant Fever, seeming to be
very much disturbed, and frisking from one end of the Chamber to the other, and
the next Morning was found dead.

Another Dog swallowed as much Opium as would kill a Man, but after when an
Ounce of the Liquid Extract was injected, the snarling Our became very quiet,
fell into a profound sleep, and in the space of half an Hour could not be
wakened; he run a pin through his Tongue, and into his Foot. He showed only
some signs of Sense, when a pin was run into his Head. The Dog continued to
sleep for the space of two Days and a Night, and then recovered and did well.

A Dog upon subjecting Tincture of Opium into an Artery fell into a Vertigo, a
great Dosiness, and after became very far.

Aqua Regia being injected into the Jugular and Crural Veins of a Dog, he died
suddenly. The Blood was found coagulated, and the principal Vessels were burst.
Spirit of Nitre being injected into the Subclavian Vein of a Dog, he died soon
after, and the Blood was found concreted in the Heart, and the other Vessels of
the Body.

A certain Soldier in the Hospital of Dantzick, being under cure for an
inveterate Pox, had seven Drams of Rosin of Scammony infused in three Drams of
Essence of Guajacunt, which vomited him excessively; whereupon the Symptoms
abated, and the Ulcers were healed in three days time.

A Servant Maid subject to an Epilepsie from her Infancy, had six grains of
Rosin of Jalap dissolved in Water of Lily of the Valleys injected into her
Veins, upon which she Vomited and continued several Months free from her
Distemper.

A little Rhenish Wine being injected into the Veins of a sucking Whelp, and it
heated it extraordinarily; upon injecting some drops of a Narcotick Liquour it
became sick and shivered. About half an hour after a little purgative Liquour
being injected into the Veins, the Animal was purged and did well.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Bones in general, and of their Structure and manner of
Nutrition.
BEfore I deliver the Method of reducing Fractures and Luxations, I think it
not a miss to premise a general Idea of the Bones, with their structure and
manner of Nourishment.

The Bones are hard, and light parts which lie within the Flesh. These are the
Stabiliment which support and give shape to the whole Fabric, and the Muscles
which move the various parts terminate in them. Their substance in Adults
appears uniform upon a Transient View, and for this reason the Ancients did
suppose them to be Simple and Homogeneous Bodies; but in a Foetus of a Month
old, they appear only to be a Congeries of Fibers of different kinds, as Veins,
Arteries, Nerves, Lymphaeducts, and composed perfectly of the same Materials
with other Flesh. Each Fluid circulates through its proper Vessels, in the same
manner as in all other parts of the Body, and the only difference consists in
the degrees of hardness which the Bones have, which does not in the least alter
their Figure, or obstruct the passing and returning of the Liquours which serve
for their Nourishment.

The Ancient Physicians imagined them to be simple and spermatick Substances,
which they founded upon their appearing like hardened Glue, and not being
reproduced when they are once cut off. Nature, say they, cures all Hurts in any
part by the first or second Intention; that is, either by reproducing the same
Substance, as in all parts that are formed of Blood, or supplying the Defect by
a Callus, or some like Accessory Substance, and those parts which admit only of
this latter way, are all Spermatick; they imagined that the Bones were formed
in the same manner as Stones and Minerals in the Bowels of the Earth, by a
subsiding of the gross and terrestrial Parts of the Seed; but this Opinion is
refuted, by reflecting on the Structure of the Bones, which plainly appear to
be Vascular, or a Congeries of Fibers with Vesiculae between them, which
communicate with each other; indeed they seem only to be Elongations of the
Tendons, and there is no Bone in the Body without a Tendon annexed to it, and
the Bones in time become distinguished from the Tendons by their hardness. The
Tendons are sometimes though rarely found, Ossified as well as Cartilages and
Membranes, which are an Expansion and Texture of Tendinous Fibers, as the Falx
of the Dura Matter, and a portion of the Aorta, which sometimes is found Bony in
old Bodies. The Bone which is found in the Basis of the Heart of a Stag or Ox,
is nothing else but the Mouth of the Aorta, in which the Valves are Planted,
ossified, and the Tendinous part of the end of Feathers in Fowls, is often
ossified, likewise all which proves the truth of our Assertion.

The Ancients thought the Accetion of the Bones like other Mineral Bodies, to
proceed from the congestion of Matter which lodging on the Part and concreting
there, in time formed several Strala lying one over another; but this Opinion
is destroyed by discovering their true Composition, and that they consist of
Fibers and Channels by which their Imperceptible Nourishment is conveyed to the
most remote extremities.

The Ancients for want of Knowledge in Anatomy, and discovering the Veins and
Arteries which every where run through the Bones, did believe them to be
nourished by the Marrow, because that Oleous substance is not only contained in
them, but has the same Color, Taste, and Sulphurous Scent with them, and
humects their Substance; But since Nature always acts in an uniform manner, it
is not probable that this can be the Nutritious Juice, since the Bones of the
Ear are entirely solid, and some other hollow Bones instead of Marrow, only
have a Membrane interspersed with Arteries and Veins, or Foliaceous Bony
Expansions with numerous Blood Vessels, as the Sinus of the Brain. The Shells
of Crawfish which are a sort of Bone are destitute of Marrow, and only have a
Muscle for the moving their parts. The Cham^leon has no Marrow in the Skull,
but only the Temporal Muscles which are contained under make their exit, from
whence it may be very well inferred, that the Bones are not nourished by the
Marrow.

Some English Anatomists have imagined the Bones to be nourished by the Nervous
Juice, which they are induced to believe, because that is of the same color
with the Bones, and abounds in the Joints, and near the insertion of the
Tendons. They imagine this Liquour being discharged from the Nerves into the
Muscles, insinuates it self into the Tendinous Fibers, which are continuous to
the Bone; but since these Gentlemen have not hitherto proved the Nerves are
hollow, or that the Liquour found near the Joints and Insertion of the Tendons
proceeds from them, their Opinion is without Foundation. It is therefore more
rational, to think that this Oily Matter is filtred through the Glands in the
Ligaments of the Joints, and serves to humect and render these parts supple,
and help their Motion, and that the Blood is their Nutriment. An Objection I
confess may be raised, that the Bones and diverse other parts of the Body are
very dissimilar; and therefore it is not probable their Nutriment should be one
and the same substance, to this I think we may reply, that the Blood however it
appear to be one uniform Liquour is composed of parts very different in their
Color, Consistence, and Quality, as appears by the separation, when it is
exposed to the Air in a Porringer, besides the parts of the Blood may assume a
new configuration, according to the various filtrations they undergo, and the
same Matter modified in these different manners, being dispensed to all parts
of the Body, may lodge in those Pores which are fitted to receive it.

For the confirmation of this Doctrine, and the evincing the Circulation of the
Blood through the Bones, there needs no other proof than this; that in the
Bones of Recent born Animals, one may perceive some drops of Fluid Blood in
their Substance, and the Cavities of the Bones are red, add to this, that when
a Bone exfoliates, and a small Plate comes off, there always appears Blood
beneath.

Of the Marrow.
The Marrow is a sort of subtle and penetrating Oil, prepared out of the more
unctuous part of the Blood and reserved in small Vesiculae, which are
interspersed with many Veins and Arteries.

Those Virtuosi who have nicely examined the Structure of Trees, find a very
great Analogy between them and Animal Bones, the Pith being nothing more than a
Collection of Vesiculae or small Bladders, which contain the Sap in the same
manner, as the Marrow is contained in Animal Bones.

When the Blood in its Circulation arrives at the narrow Extremities of the
Arteries, the fine subtle Oil is thrown off and conveyed by certain small
Channels into the Cavities of the Bones where it is reposited, for the use
which Nature has designed it, however it is not wholly lodged here, but some
portion is received into the Veins, and circulates with the Blood. By this
means it is prevented from corrupting, as all Animal Liquours must of necessity
do, when they are once extravasated and cease to circulate. This Balsamic
substance is of very great use to sheath the vicious Salts, and reduce the
Blood to a good and laudable temper, and make it more fluid and better disposed
for Circulation. This is that which the Ancients understood by their Humidum
radicale: Some portion of this Oil insinuating it self into the Porosities of
the Bones, makes them more supple, and therefore in superannuated Bodies, and
such as have an inveterate Pox where the Marrow is wasted, the Bones are more
brittle.

Of the Callus, and the manner how it is formed.
When a Bone is broke, there is a Tumor grows around it, which is called a
Callus. This proceeds from a congestion of the Nutritious Juice, which flows
out from the Extremities of the divided Vessels, and is concreted around. The
same thing happens upon dividing the Fibers, which compose the Bark of a Tree
where part of the Juice flows, and the rest forms a sort of Substance Analogous
to the Callus in Bones, and so makes Reparation of what is lost. In Women with
Child the Callus is not so soon formed, as in other Persons, because a great
part of the Nutritious Juice is employed in perfecting of the Foetus, and in
all Persons whatever the Age, Constitution, Diet, Season of the year, Climate,
Ability, and Care of the Surgeon, have a great share.

There is a vulgar Mistake, that the Bones are fuller of Marrow at some certain
times of the Moon, than at others, but Mr. Rohault has irrefragably confuted
this, and plainly shown that at all times of the Moon whetever, there is a
plenty of Marrow in the Bones of some, and very little in others; and that the
Deficience does arise from a want of Nourishment or great Fatigue. He has
observed that there is but little Marrow to be found in the Bones of Sheep,
which come from the remote Provinces to Paris, and on the contrary, that there
is a great deal to be found in those which have reposed themselves for a long
time, and have been well fed before they are killed. There is another Mistake
likewise which prevails amongst some sort of People, who think Fishes are
fatter and leaner at one time of the Moon than another; for whatever be the
time of the Moon, some Fish will be lean and others fat. The leanness of Fish
very often proceeds from Tempests, or their going too far up Rivers; for
ordinarily they are found very fat near the Sea, and very lean at a great
Distance from it. Fishes taken near Calais most commonly are lean, because the
Sea thereabouts is for the most part very rough, and all Fishes wast very much
if they are kept for any time in Nets.

Most Bones may be distinguished into four sorts of parts, the hardest which
composes the Body of it, Processes which arise from it, and are continuous with
it, the Epiphyses or Appendages which are little additional Bones contiguous to
it, and the several Protuberances which jet out in any part of it. The
Epihhyses are but external Addittaments, and in young Bodies may easily be
separated from the Main Bone, and there appears a Line which divides the one
from the other, which after disappears gradually, vanishes as the Infant grows
up, till both together appear one continuous Bone.

Most Processes serve for the Articulation of the Bones, and the Insertion of
the Tendons, Muscles and Ligaments, and have different Names imposed on them,
according to their different Figures: For instance, if the extremity be round
it is called its Head, if it insensibly grow larger, its Neck, if long and
sharp pointed, Corone; if the Heads be little and flat Condyli. The Processes
of the Bones again receive different Names from their Figure, and sometimes are
called Styloides, Ancyroides, Coracoides, P^erygoides, Mastoides, from their
resembling a Probe, Anchor, the Bill of a Raven, the Nipple of a Woman's Breast.

The Cavities of the Bones which serve for the Articulation of the Joints, if
they are Superficial are called Glene, if large Cotyle, and the small Cavities
sormed for the passing of a Tendon are called Sinus, and the Holes through
which the Vessels pass, Scissures. When the bottom of a Cavity is large, and
its entry narrow, it is likewise called a Sinus, and a Cup or Cavity if it has
a large Mouth and Bottom, and in the last place a Hole, if it passes quite
through the sides.

Of the several kinds of Articulation.
That Articulation where there is an evident Motion, is called Diarthrosis, and
that where there is no Motion at all, is called Synarthrosis. There are three
Species of Diarthrosis, viz. Enarthrosis, when the Head of the Bone is large,
Arthrodla when it is small and Ginglymos, when the Bones mutually receive each
other.

There are three sorts of Synarthrosis, viz. Sutura, Harmonia, and Gomphosis.
When two Bones enter into each other Indenturewise, this is called a Suture, in
which manner the Bones of the Skull are united; but when there is a Line only,
it is called Harmonia, and by this way the Bones of the upper Jaw are joined.
When a Bone enters into another, as a Nail into a Hole, this is called
Gomphosis. In the last place, when a Bone is flat and shelves down by degrees,
this is called a Squammous or Scale-like Suture, and in this manner the
Temple-Bone is joined to the Parietal.

Symphysis is not so properly a Species of Articulation, as the Coalition of
two or more Bones, which become one continuous Body. This is either without any
middle intervening Body, as in the tender Bones of young Children, or with some
Medium which in harder Bones unites the Parts together. This Medium is either
some Fleshy Substance, and then it is called Syssarcosis, or some Cartilage,
and then it is named Synchondrosis, or some Ligament, and then it is termed
Syncurosis. The two pieces of the lower Jaw in Children, are united by
Synchondrosis, and the Shoulder Blade and the Os Hyoides by Syssarcosis, though
to speak properly indeed, the Bones of the lower Jaw are not so much joined by
a Cartilage, as part of them remains Cartilaginous, and does not Ossifie so
soon as the rest, and the Conjunction by Flesh is really none at all,
particularly in the instances mentioned, the Superior extremity of the Hyoides
is bound to the Styloiidal Processes, and the Shoulder Blade to the Clavicle by
Ligaments, the Muscles only serving for its Motion.

The Heads of all Bones are covered with a smooth, slippery Cartilage, and in
the Cavity of the Joints, there is a Mucilaginous Liquour which serves to
lubricate them, and help their Motion. Add to all this, that the Ligaments are
exceeding pliant.

CHAP. LVII. Of Fractures in general.
A Fracture is a Division of a Bone, whereby the continuity is destroyed.

THE CAUSE. Fractures always proceed from some external Cause, as some Blow,
Fall, or other Accident.

Fractures are Complete or Incomplete, Simple or Complicate.

Complete Fractures are such where the Bone is entirely broke, and Incomplete,
where it is broke in part only, such Fractures as are accompanied with Wounds,
are called Complicate.

The Ancients reckoned up five manners, after which a Bone might be broke, and
imposed so many Greek Names of Fractures. The first where the Bone is broke
directly a cross, and this may be called a Transverse Fracture. The second,
when there is a Fissure lengthways. The third, when the Bone was round at the
end. The fourth, when the Bone was broke in several pieces. The fifth, when a
Shiver was wholly separated.

THE SIGNS that a Bone is broke, are the Crack which the Patient and the
Standers by hear, a Depression in the place of the Fracture, a privation of
Motion in the Part, and a crashing of the Bones upon touching them. Lastly, the
Part gives way when it is pressed and is crookt. If the Bones ride one over
another the part is contracted, and there is a Swelling and Pain in the place
where the Head of the Bone is. This is occasioned by the tearing of the
Periosteum, and the Compression of the Marrow. About three or four days after
the Bone is reduced, there arises an Inflammation very like an Erisypelas,
which sometimes is simple and only seated in the Skin on the Fracture, and
sometimes is attended with Rigors, and a Violent Heat. This Erisypelas arises
from a Laceration of the Nervous, Tendinous, and Membranous parts, especially
in Cacochymick Bodies. Sometimes Splinters of the Bones prick the Flesh, and
cause a Violent Fever; and thus much for Transverse Fractures which are ever
most easy to cure when they are simple, and most difficult and dangerous when
they are complicated with some Wound.

The Fissure of a Bone is more difficult to discover, than a complete
Transverse Fracture, especially if it be small; For the better finding out of
these Fractures, you must try the part well as you would a cleft stick, to see
if you can discover any inequality in it; you must ask the Patient if in
falling he could hear the Bone crack, if the swelling arose soon after, and he
could perceive any thing fall down gradually.

If a Fissure be taken in time, there is no difficulty in curing it, but if it
be neglected, or unskillfully managed, and a Cariosity ensue, it is very
dangerous, and cannot be cured without Amputation of the Limb. Fractures where
the Bones do much recede from their Natural place, are more difficult to cure
than others.

If the Fractured Bone be broke into shivers and bits, the Accident is more
dangerous, because there is a great Contusion and Laceration of the Membranous
parts which threaten an Abscess. When there are two Bones in a part and only
one is Fractured, the danger is much less than if both were broke; because the
Bone which is entire supports the other, and preserves the Natural Figure of
the part, and there is not so great an Extension necessary for the restoring it.

Fractures in the middle of any Bone are not so dangerous, as when they are
near the Joint, because it is more difficult to reduce and keep it in its
place, by reason of the numerous Tendons and Nerves which are apt to cause a
multitude of bad Accidents.

Fractures in the soft Parts if there be no Wound or Contusion, are not
difficult to be cured, but if there be, there is danger of Pain, Inflammation,
Convulsion, and sometimes of a Gangrene.

The Reunion of Bones is more speedy or slow, according as they are larger or
lesser, more porous or compact. Small Bones are most commonly united in 25
Days, and the larger ones not under 40 or 50 Days. The Thigh Bone is more
difficultly united and requires a longer time, because its Muscles are large
and thick, and it is very apt to fall out, and to assume an ill Figure, and is
rarely so well reduced, but that the Patient remains a Cripple.

If the Reduction of a Bone be deferred too long it is ever difficult, because
the Juyces which circulate through the bony Fibers being concreted about the
Extremities of the Vessels, Ossifie, and stopping the Pores, hinder a supply of
Matter for the forming a Callus.

The Bones are for the most part more brittle in Winter, than at any other
time, because the Excessive cold constringes the Pores and hinders the supply
of that Oily Marrow, which humects and makes them supple; and for the same
Reason, there is a more speedy Coalition in young, than in old Bodies, because
the Passages are more open for the distribution of that Unctuous Medullary
Substance.

The Bones in Big-bellied Women are not united without great Difficulty, the
Reason of which seems to be, that a great part of the Nutritious Juice in the
Mothers Body, is employed in the service of the Foetus.

In Oblique Fractures, the parts of the Bone are retained in their place with
less trouble than in Transverse, because they help to support each other.

The OPERATION.
The Surgeons business in Fractures is only to bring the two ends of the Bone
together, and retain them there, and in the mean time to prevent all Accidents
which may happen; but the cure it self, and the forming of a Callus for the
Re-uniting the divided Bone, is the Work of Nature. For the Successful doing
this, the Artist must have all Necessaries provided, all his Dressings in a
Readiness, and some Persons by to assist him. The Part must be kept in a strait
Situation, and the Hands which hold the Limb must be placed as near the
Fracture as may be, and not above the next Joint, which would be very
inconvenient. For instance, if the Bone be a Leg and that be broke in the
midst, the Assistants must not take hold of the Foot, and the Thigh in order to
make the Attraction, but must lay their Hands above the Foot, and below the
Knee. If both ends of the Bone are together, there is not required so great an
Extension, as when one Bone rides on the other, however it is necessary to make
some sort of Extension to prevent the breaking off some Asperities by the ends,
rubbing against each other.

Whilst the Assistants keep the Part extended, the Artist must make all Even
and Level with the Palm of his Hand, pressing the Fracture all around, and pass
his Thumb all along it to try if it be equal in all parts, for then he may
conclude that it is well reduced. If he perceive any Splinter of the Bone to
pierce the Flesh, he must make an Incision to reduce it, and then if it do not
Reunite, it will come away in the Suppuration.

If there be a Fracture in the Great Bones, and they are not reduced at first,
the Hands are not sufficient alone to perform it, but the Artist must use
Machines, especially if the Parts of the Bone ride on one another, and the
Muscles be very strong; but he must be careful not to make too strong
Extensions for fear of breaking the Vessels, and tearing the Tendons from the
Bones.

The Signs which demonstrate a Part to be well reduced, are a Cessation of
Pain, the recovery of its Natural Figure, it appearing in the same manner as
when sound, which is to be attentively considered at each Dressing,
particularly at first; because the part newly reduced may very easily be drawn
out of its place by the Patients turning himself in his Bed, or some other
Convulsive Motion of the Muscles.

When the Bone is restored make some proper Bandage, all which shall be
described in their proper places.

When there is a Fissure only let the Part be bound strait, that so the
Fracture may reunite. When there is a large, soft, Tumor on the Fissure which
seems to be filled with Blood collected there, or a certain Liquour which
exudes out of the Bone, it must be opened to give vent to the Humor contained
in it, and the Orifice kept open with a Tent, and treated in the same manner as
a Complicate Fracture, and the Bone and Wound healed together.

THE DRESSING. The Bandage must not be too strait, for fear least the
extraordinary Compression intercept the influx of the Blood and Spirits, and
the part Gangrene and come away; on the other Hand care must be taken that the
Bandage be strait enough to keep both ends of the Bone together, that they may
not fall asunder, upon the least stirring the Body. The Bandage may be
concluded to be well made, if there be a small Tumor at the extremities, and
the Patient* is sensible of a slight Pain, and if there be no rising, and the
Patient feel no Pain, the Bandage must be undone, and the Part bound straiter.

It is best to forbear all Cataplasms, for these only stop the Pores and hinder
Transpiration. There must no^ be too many Splints, nor these be bound too tight
together, but there must be at least a Fingers breadth between them, to avoid
the Pain which may arise from too great a Compression; you must begin to tie
these first in the middle, and then above, and lastly below.

The most proper time of undoing the Bandage is to be determined by the
Accidents, for instance; When the Patient is in very great pain, or the Bandage
is loose take it off. Parts which have little Flesh, will endure Bandage longer
than Carnous parts. If there be a great itching in the Part, the Bandage ought
to be taken off, for fear of an Erisypelas or Excoriation.

If there appear any Vesications on the Part when the Bandage is taken off,
they must be opened to let out the Water, and the part fomented with a Lixivium
and Spirit of Wine, or a Solution of Sal Armoniack or Salt of Lead, or a
Decoction of Sage, Camomil, Melilot, Roses, and a little Camphire in White Wind.

If no Accident happen leave the Bandage as long on as may be, taking care that
it do not grow loose.

THE CURE. When the Bone is reduced, care must be taken to take off the
Inflammation by the use of proper Medicines, as Embrocating the fractured part
with a simple Tincture of Flowers of St. John's wort in Spirit of Wine, or the
compound made by adding a third part of Earthworms.

If the Part be contused, chafe it with a Mixture of Honey and Spirit of Wine,
which is an excellent Medicine to resolve the Ecchymosis, and appease all
Symptoms. Inunctions with Oil of St. John's wort, and Fomentations made with a
Decoction of Rosemary in Wine, and a Liniment of Oil of Earthworms and
Turpentine, is very good. The following Catagmatick Emplaster is excellent..
Fine white Rosin lb Common Turpentine, iij. Melt and incorporate these with
Powder of Meadow-sweet, Bistort, Round Birthwort, till they are of the
consistence of an Emplaster, adding a little distilled Oil of Humane Bones, or
to better the Composition, put in Extract of Round Birth-wort, or melt in
Powder of Amber or Balsam of Peru when you use it. This Emplaster is to be used
after the Bone begins to reunite. The two ends of this Emplaster must not be
laid over one another, but a small Interval must be left between, and a
Liniment made of Oil of Earthworms acuated with the Chemical Oil of Rosemary
used outwardly.

Besides this, all inward and outward Means must be made use of. The Lapis
Osteocollae in Comfrey Water is a good Specific, but it is not convenient to
continue the use of it too long a time, for fear it breed too large a Callus.
Hildanus's Powder is very good.. Osleocolla prepared, i. Choice Cinnamon, iij.
Sugar, i. Mix these and make a Powder, and give ij. for a Dose, or Mix
Osteocolla in a Decoction of Perriwincle in Wine, and drink several Draughts of
it.

The Fracture must be unbound the third or fourth day, to see in what condition
it is, and then must be bathed with Simple Water, or a Decoction of the
Vulnerary Plants. The Bandage must not be too loose nor too strait, for if it
should be too strait, it would hinder the Influx of the Blood and Spirits, and
endanger a Gangrene. It is best to lay no Cataplasms on the Part, however if it
be insisted on, lay on Herb Robert pounded, or Powder of Bistort infused in
Wine, having first well rubbed the Part with Oil of St. John's wort to help the
Reunion, and prevent an Inflammation; but a Cataplasm is better than this.

In Fractures especially where there is a Contusion, if the Nerves, Ligaments,
Tendons, or any like parts happen to be contorted or dislocated, Forestus's
Cerate may be applied, which is thus made.. Solomon's Seal, iv. Root of
Marshmallows, i. Plantane Leaves two Handfulls, pound them in a Mortar, then
boil them, and then pulp them through a Sieve, and make them up with white Wax
into a soft Cerate, adding Oil of Roses and Myrtills, a^. ij. clear Turpentine,
iss. Vng. Aegyptiacum and Dialthaeae, ss. Bole Ammoniac, vi. Dragons Blood,
iij. Frankincense, i. of all the Sanders, ij. Mix these and make a Cerate,
which is to be applied on the seventh Day in all Strains of the Nerves. And
thus much for Transverse Fractures.

Of Fissures.
Recent Fissures are easily cured, there being nothing more required than the
laying on some good Catagmatick Emplaster of Rosin and Cumfrey Roots, either
with or without Splints, as occasion shall require.

The Part must be well bound to consolidate the Fracture, and if there be a
soft Tumor which yields to the Impression of the Finger, it must be opened to
let out the Matter, and the Orifice kept open with a Tent, and the Wound be
dressed like a Complicate Fracture.

When the Extremities of the broken Bone stick out of the Wound, and are
corrupted by the Air, the end must be filed or taken off with Pincers,
especially if the point of the Bone pierce the Skin, and cannot be reduced to
its Natural place, and the Wound must be kept open for a considerable time, to
give the Fragments, an opportunity of Re-uniting, or Exsoliating. If the
Splinters are separated, and neither adhere to the Bone or Peri^sleum, they
must be fetched away with a Forceps, but if they adhere, the best way is to let
Nature alone, who will either Reunite or throw them off, especially if she be
assisted by the following, or some such like Liniment.. Virgin Honey, iss.
Earthworms in powder, iij. Mix all these and make an Unguent. The following is
more potent.. Powder of Alces, Myrrh, a^. ss. Root of Comfrey, round Birthwort,
iij. Euphrobium, ij. and with a sufficient quantity of Turpentine and Wax, make
a Liniment.

THE DRESSING. The Bandage must not be too strait for fear of a Mortification,
nor must it be very loose for fear the Bones separate on the least Motion.

In making and taking off the Bandage, the same Directions are to be observed
as before.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 4. Obs. 87. relates, that a Soldier being shot in the
Body, the Bullet past through his Liver, and through the Oblique and Transverse
Muscles without hurting the Intestines, and through the Os Ilium near the
Sacrum, and sticking in the Skin was taken out by a small Incision made into
it. The Symptoms at first were very bad, but the Wound of the Liver being soon
after cured, the Patient did not find any inconvenience. The Wound made by the
Ball was soon cured in a Methodical Way, but about two years after the Soldier
had a high Fever with Rigors, and a Bubo arose in the Groin, with a great Pain
and Inflammation in the place where the Wound had been. The Surgeon procured a
good Digestion, and brought away a large quantity of Matter, and several
Splinters of Bones which presenting themselves fair, were taken out without any
great difficulty, and the Wound being healed, the Patient enjoyed a good
Health. But about a year after the Ulcer broke out again, and several Fragments
of Bones came off from the Os Ileum. This instance shows us, that a Surgeon
ought to be very careful in extracting all Extr^neous Bodies, since it appears
they may be lodged in several parts of the Body for a long space of time,
without any notable Inconvemence.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Fractures of the Nose.
THIS Operation is the Reducing of the Bones to their Natural Situation and
Figure.

THE CAUSE of this Fracture is always some External Accident, as some violent
Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS which demonstrate that there is a Fracture of the Bones, are a
Depression, and distortion of Nose which makes a disagreeable Figure.

If the Part be not reduced it is soon filled with Ozena's or stinking Ulcers,
and incurable Polypous Excrescences, the Party cannot breath through it, and
loses his Smelling.

The Nose is composed of its two proper Bones, and the Os Cribrosum and Vomer.
The two proper Bones are two small Bones pretty solid, and almost of a square
Figure pretty smooth without, but not quite so much within. They are joined by
a Suture in the place where they meet with the Bones of the Forehead and the
upper Jaw, and these two Bones form the bridge of the Nose, and it is these
which are Fractured and Dislocated by violent blows. As for the Os Cribrosum or
Ethmoides, that is described in the enumeration of the Bones of the Skull, in
the Chapter of the Trepan, the Vomer receives its Name from its resemblance to
a Plow-share; in its lower part it has a Cavity, in which a small Process from
the Sphaenoidal Bone is enchased. This Bone is very minute, and in its upper
has a small Channel in which the Tongue of the Bony Partition of the Ethmoides
is enchased. The Septum Nar^um or partition of the Nostrils is formed of these
two Bones, and Surgeons must have a great care not to hurt this when they apply
Causticks to consume Polypous Excrescences of the Nose.

The lower and inmost part of the Nose is formed by a Plane made of a Portion
of the Bones of the upper Jaw, and those of the Palate. The small Bones of the
Palate are very thin, and for that Reason very apt to cariate in the Venereal
Distemper, which if it happens, makes the party snuffle or speak in the Nose.
The way to remedy this inconvenience, is to stop that Hole with a thin Plate of
Silver, which has a Ring in the midst to put a bit of Sponge into, which is to
go into the Hole of the Roof of the Mouth. For this Sponge imbibing all the
Humidities of the Mouth, causes the Silver Plate to apply it self against the
Roof of the Mouth, that it cannot be drawn out without a great deal of Pain.
This Plate may be called the Obturator of the Palate. There is a Cartilage
fastened to the end of the Bones of the Nose, which makes the tip of the Nose
capable of Motion.

The OPERATION.
Place the Patient in a convenient Posture, and then taking a stick cut it slat
and smooth, and wrapping it round with Cotton, introduce it with the right Hand
into the Nose to raise up the Fractured Bones which are depressed, observing to
lay the Thumb of the left Hand on the Fractured Bone, that so raising it on the
inside, you may bring it to its Natural Figure; and when you have reduced one
side, you may do the same on the other, if there be occasion.

THE DRESSING. When the Bones are reduced, put a Leaden Pipe up the Nostrils to
keep them in their due Situation. This Pipe must be made flat, and of a Figure
accomodated to the Part, that so there may be no danger of hurting it. Before
these Pipes be put up into the Nose, they ought to be anointed with Balsam of
Peru, or Oil of Turpentine mixed with Spirit or Wine, and to have two Ears or
Rings on each side, that so they may be tied to the Patients Nightcap with
Ribbons. When the Pipe is put up into the Nose, lay two small Triangular
Compresses along on each side of the Nose, and lay a Past-board of the same
Figure on the Compresses.

If there be a Wound which can very hardly happen, lay proper Medicines onto
procure a good Digestion, there being no possibility of avoiding a Contusion,
and an Empl^ster on the Pledgit, on which lay Compresses and a Triangular
Past-board, keeping them on with a Sling or Fillet with sour Tails. To apply
this, take the two upper Tails with the Thumbs and Fore-fingers of each Hand,
and apply the plain undivided part on the Nose, and bring the two upper Tails
behind the Head, and back again on the first turn, and pin them where they end,
then take up the two lower Tails, and bringing them over the Head, pin them in
the same manner as the first, and this is a general Rule in the applying all
divided Fillets.

There is another Bandage sometimes used when the Nose is concerned, which is
called the Fossa of Amyntas. This is made with a Roller an inch and an half
broad, and two Else in length rolled up at both ends; you must begin to apply
this behind on the top of the Head, and bringing the two ends of the Roller
before, cross them on the Nose, and so bring them behind on the Nape of the
Neck, and so again over the first turn, crossing on the Nose, continuing in
this manner; and in the last place, making several Circular Turns on the
Forehead, to six these where they end. In making this Bandage, you must take
care not to compress the Part too much, it sufficing if it be strait enough to
keep the Applications on the Nose.

There is a third Bandage which is sometimes made use of in Fractures of the
Nose, which is called Accipiter or Hawk. To make this, take a Rag and cut it
into the shape of a Triangle, which may be large enough to cover all the
Dressings on the Nose, and stitch a narrow Fillet about a quarter of an Ell in
length, and three quarters of an inch broad to the upper Angle of this
Triangle, and lay this Fillet over the Sagittal Suture, and let it hang down
behind; then stitch two more to its lower side, viz. to each Angle, and
bringing them over the Cheeks, tie them to that which past over the Sagittal
Suture; besides these stitch two to the bottom of the Triangle, which must be
two Else in length, and more than of an inch broad, and cross these two under
the Nostrils, rising obliquely on the Cheeks to the side of the lesser Angle of
the Eye. and so making a X behind the Head, bring them forward again, and cross
them on the Nose; then bring the two ends round the Forehead and pin them.
This Triangle must have two Holes in the place of the Nostrils for Breathing.

THE CURE. Dress the Part at least once a day in the same manner as all
contus'd Wounds, forbearing to draw the Pipes out of the Nose till the Bones be
consolidated, and confining the Patient to a good Diet.

REMARKS.
If the Bones are not reduced, there is danger of Ozena's and Polypus's.

CHAP. LXVII. Of the Fracture of the lower Jaw.
THIS Operation is the Reduction of the Fractured Bones, to their proper
Situation.

THE CAUSE. Fractures in this part frequently are occasioned by Blows and Falls.

Children till the Age of 7 years or thereabouts, have their lower Jaw composed
of two Bones divided by a Cartilage, which in process of time is entirely
Ossified. The Bone of the lower Jaw is very hard and smooth and externally
unequal resembling the Letter U. The Mandible or lower Jaw has four Holes, two
Internal ones which are the largest, and two External ones which pierce its
Basis, through each of the Internal Holes there passes a Rope composed of a
Vein, an Artery, and a Nerve, the Nerve is a Ramification of the fifth Pair,
and the Veins and Arteries of the Jugulars and Carotids. The Branches of the
Nerves go out through the External Holes, and are spent on the Skin and Muscles
of the Lips. All these Vessels are dispensed to the Roots of the Teeth of the
lower Jaw, and carry Nourishment to them. The Bone of the lower Jaw has several
Protuberances to which Muscles are affixed, these Extremities are flat and
large. The lower Jaw has on each side two Processes, the one called Condylus,
and the other Corone. The first serves for the Articulation, and has its Head
armed with a Cartilage, and is received into a Cavity of the OF Petrosum, which
is likewise armed with another Cartilage, which serves to facilitate their
Motion. This Arriculation is covered with a Ligament, the Corone is slender and
acuminated, and into this the Tendon of the Temporal Muscle is inserted. All
Blows on this Muscle are dangerous, and attended with bad Symptoms, it being
covered with the Tendinous expansions o^ the Frontal, and other contiguous
Muscles, and not with the Periosteum as is vulgarly, but erroneously thought.

In the Cavities of the Mandible the Matter is contained, out of which the
Teeth are formed, and there are the Sockets in which they are set.

Of the lower Jaw in the Foetus.
The lower Jaw begins to Ossifie in the second Month, and is composed of two
Bones joined together below the Nose, and jetting a great way out. In the third
Month the Jaw is composed of four Bones, viz. two large ones joined at the
Chin, and two lesser ones which form the Corone, and these two Bones are joined
together by a thin transparent Membrane.

In the seventh, eighth, and ninth Month, it appears all around the Basis of
the lower Jaw, as well as the upper of those small Protuberances, which are
more apparent in the Foetus than in Adults.

The inequalities are the Cells in which the Teeth are set, or at least where
they are first formed, and they lessen in proportion to the growth of the Jaw.
The Holes in the inner part of the lower Jaw through which the Vessels which go
to the Teeth pass, are invisible in a Foetus of four Months old, but they are
visible in the seventh Month, as well as the external Holes which penetrate the
Bone.

The OPERATION.
If the Bones of the Jaw ride over one another, some of the Assistants must put
his Fingers into the Patients Mouth, and make a slight Extension whilst the
Surgeon presses the Extremities both within and without.

If the Teeth are loose put them into their Natural place, where they will soon
six again if they be tied with a Silver Wire or a waxed Thread to those Teeth
which stand firm. The most certain way to find whether the Teeth are reduced,
is by comparing the Teeth of the lower Jaw with those in the upper, to observe
if they answer exactly, viz. the Grinders to the Grinders, the Eye-teeth to the
Eye-teeth, and the Fore-teeth to the Fore-teeth.

THE DRESSING. Lay on the Jaw a Compress of a competent length, and made of
Rags several times doubled, and dipped in some Defensatives, and then cover this
with a Past-board of a Figure not unlike the Jaw, and make the Bandage called
the Capistrum or Bridle. To make this, take a Roller of two Else long, and an
inch and a half broad, and begin with a circular turn round the Head, then pass
under the Chin and rise on the Cheek, passing near the lesser Angle of the Eye;
then go obliquely behind the Head on the opposite Cheek and under the Chin, and
reascend on the first turn of the Roller, making an Edging on the fractured
Jaw, then continue to proceed round passing behind the Head.

Take a Roller rolled up ar one end, which must be three Else in length, and
about an Inch and a half broad, and begin with making a Circular turn round the
Forehead; then pass under the Chin and reascend on the Cheek passing near the
lesser Angle of the Eye, then turn obliquely behind the Head, and descend on
the opposite Cheek pass under the Chin, and reascend on the first turn of the
Roller, leaving an edging on the Fractured Jaw, then proceed round passing
behind the Head, over the Cheek, under the Chin, and make an edging on the
Fracture, then reascend on the Cheek, pass behind the Head, over the opposite
Cheek, under the Chin, and make a third edging on the Fracture; then reascend
and proceed over the first Turn, pass behind the Head, bring the Roller over
the Chin, and make two Circular Turns there, and finish the whole by making two
Circular Turns with the remaining part of the Roller round the Forehead and
Head, and in the last place pin the ends. In making this Bandage observe to
make edgings on the Fracture, and in all the other parts to bring the Roller
directly over the nether Turns.

If the Jaw be broke on both sides, reduce it in the manner above described;
and lay a Compress with a Hole in middle on it, to put the end of the Chin
through, and so apply each end on the sides of the Jaw respectively, over these
stitch a Past-board of a Figure adapted to the Jaw, and perforated in the midst
likewise, and keep these on with the double Capistrum or Bridle, which is made
in the following manner.

Take a Roller five Else long and an Inch and a half broad. apply this to the
Chin, and bring each end of the Roller over the Cheeks, and make an X on the
top of the Head, then pass it behind, and return on each side under the Chin
and pass over the Fractures, making an edging on each; then reascend circularly
over the same turns of the Roller, and make an X on the Head, descend under the
Chin and make edgings on the Fractures, then reascend over the Head, pass
behind, descend and pass over the Chin, then reascend on the Cheeks and pass
over the Head, and so return and bring the two ends of the Roller twice over
the Chin, making Circular Turns there, then bring them behind the Head and so
round the Forehead to keep the other turns steady, and pin it where it ends.

But before I leave this Subject, I shall describe another Bandage used in
Hurts of the Chin in Children, which though it do not properly concern Fractures
of the Jaw; yet can no where be better inserted than here, it being my Design
to give the Reader Instructions in all the several manners of Dressing and
making Bandages which can be required in a Course of Operations.

Take a Roller six Else long, and more than two Inches broad rolled up at both
ends, and apply the middle of it on the Forehead, and pin it there to the
Nightcap, then bring the two Heads behind the Patients Head, cross them there,
and so bring them under the Patients Armpits, then bring them before and pass
them behind the Head, and cross them again, and bring them over the Forehead,
behind the Head, and cross them, next bring them under the Armpits, and having
first made two or three turns about the Breast, pin the ends.

In burns of the Face, make a Mask of Linen Cloth, and having smear it with
some proper Liniment, tie it behind the Head with Ribbons.

THE CURE. Let the Patient lie on his Back for fear least the Bones should be
displaced by his lying on one side, and during the Cure, let his Diet be liquid
and Nourishing.

The lower Jaw is most commonly reunited in twenty Days.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 81. gives a Caution not to continue the use of
the Lapis Ostcocolla too long, least it make too large a Callus, and the Part
become Monstrous and Deformed, as he relates it once happened to him in a
Fracture of the Thigh. A dram of this Stone is given to the Patient in a
Morning fasting, being finely levigated in a Marble Mortar with Comfrey Water,
but the Surgeon must from time to time look to see that the Callus do not
increase more than is convenient, and forbear any longer using it when he finds
this.

When the Callus happens to grow so large as to make a sensible Deformity of
the part, Fabr. Hildanus uses this Method to lessen it. First he foments the
Part twice a day with this Emollient Decoction. Roots and Leaves of
Marshmallows, Bryony, White Lilies, Brank-ursin, Flowers of Melilot, Camomile,
a^. one Handful, Common Wormwood, Red Roses, a^. half a Handful, Linseed,
Fenugreek Seeds, a^. i. Boil these Ingredients in a Mixture of one part of
Vinegar, and four parts of Spring Water, and foment the part with this
Decoction; and after the Fomentation, anoint it with the following Liniment..
Man's, Bears and Ducks Grease, a^. ij. Juice of Earthworms and distilled
Vinegar, a^. i. Mix these and make a Liniment, and with this anoint the Callus,
and the whole Thigh. After all this he applied the following Emplaster to the
Callus.. Emplaster of Froggs with Mercury, Emplaster of the Mucilages, a^. i.
Mix these and keep them on for the space of six Days, in which time they will
extremely soften and diminish the Callus. In the last place in stead of the
Emplaster, bind on a Plate of Lead pretty straightly, till the Part recover its
Natural Size and Figure.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of the Fracture of the Clavicle or Collar-Bone.
THE Operation is the Reducing the Bone to its Natural place.

THE CAUSE is most commonly some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. If the Clavicle be completely broke a cross, that end which is
sixed to the Acromion together with the whole Shoulder Blade sinks, which is
caused by the Weight of the Arm.

If there be any Splinters, a pricking and sharp pain may be perceived; but if
the Fissure be lengthways, it must of necessity become thicker, which may be
soon discovered by comparing it with the sound Clavicle. The Clavicles are two
Bones which very much resemble an Italian s, and are placed in the upper Part
of the Sternum. The External Surface of these Bones is extremely smooth and
polite, but their inner substance is spungy and porous, which is the Reason why
they reunite so soon when they are once fractured, whilst on the other Hand
they are very much exposed to Accidents, and soon broken, having nothing
besides the Teguments to protect them. At the ends of these Bones there are two
Processes, one of which is Articulated to the Sternum, and the other to the
Acromion of the Humerus, and their principal use is to keep the Shoulder-blades
in their Natural Situation.

Of the Clavicles of the Foetus.
There are no Bones in a Foetus which are sooner Ossified, than the Clavicles
which are entirely Bony, within six Weeks after Conception. Nature seems to
contrive this for the defending the Heart, to preserve it from being comprest
by the Sternum and Scapulae, which continue Cartilaginous for a long time.

The Clavicles are the largest and most solid Bones of the whole Body, till a
Foetus arrives at the third Month, and Age only adds largeness and strength to
these Bones, their Figure being altogether the same as in Adults.

The OPERATION.
If the Clavicle be broken, asunder an Extension must be made. For this purpose
place the Patient on a Stool without a back, and draw back the Arm which is on
the same side with the Fracture, and let an Assistant stand behind and push the
Shoulder up, whilst another draws the Arm back: While this Extension is making
reduce the Bones, by thrusting back that end of the Bone which is above, and
drawing that below, so that both may exactly meet, and you may discover that
they do so by feeling with the Thumb all along the Bone.

There is another way of making an Extension of the Clavicle, which is thus;
put a Tennis Ball wrapped up in Linen Cloth, and press the Patients Elbow close
to his Side. This makes an Extension of the Clavicle, to the end the Bone may
be reduced with more facility.

Or let the Patient lie on his Back on a Quilt laid on the Floor, and lay some
unequal Body under him and between his Shoulders, and let both his Shoulders be
thrust down, that so the two ends of the Bone may be stretched as far under as
may be, and the Surgeon have an opportunity of reducing the Bone in the mean
time.

If there be any Splinters which run into the Flesh, mak^ an Incision into the
place which is pained, and lay the Bone bare to reduce the Splinters, and cut
off the Asperities which prick the Flesh, with Pincers.

THE DRESSING. When the Bone is reduced, fill the Cavities above and below with
Compresses of a length and figure suitable to the Bone, and over these
Compresses lay others of the same Figure; let each Compress be stitched to a
Pastboard of the same Figure with themselves, and keep these Dressings on with
the Bandage called the Capeline. This is made with a Roller six Else in length,
and three Inches broad rolled up at one end, the middle of this is applied on
the Clavicle, then bring one end on the Breast, and to keep that steady, bring
the other end obliquely behind the back, and so under the sound Arm, and again
forwards over the Breast, to fix that which hangs down over the Breast, and
when this is done, bring it over the Clavicle and so behind the Back, and keep
it steady there; then bring the other end under the Arm affected, to fix that
Head which passes behind; and when this is fixed, bring it again over the
fractured Clavicle, observing every time it passes over the Clavicle, to leave
an edging. In the last place, continue to make Circumvolutions with the Roller
about the Body, passing one Head under the Armpits, and carrying up the other
end over the Clavicle, till it be quite covered with the edgings; and when the
Clavicle is covered, make several Circular turns round the upper part of the
Arm, leaving a space called the Cranes Bill, which at length must be covered by
continuing the edgings on it with the two ends of the Roller, which in the last
place must be circulated around the Breast, and then pined at the ends.

If the Clavicle be broke near the Shoulder, you must make the Bandage called
the Spica, which the Reader will find described in the Chapter of the Luxation
of the Shoulder Bone.

THE CURE. Let the Patient lie on his Back, for if he should lie on one Side,
there would be danger of the Bones falling out of its place. He may eat roasted
Meats or any thing which is easy of Digestion, and there is no necessity of
Abstinence, or being confined to a spare Diet, unless there be a Fever or
Inflammation. This Bone most commonly is united in 20 Days.

REMARKS.
Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 72. censures the Practice of those who use
Viscous Meats, because they are apt to generate a thick Chile, and create
Obstructions and Schirrosities in the Liver, Spleen, and other Viscera, and the
Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, Dropsies, and an Universal Weakness; and
these Accidents he assures us he had known befall some Persons who had been
Dieted in this manner.

CHAP. LIX. Of a Fracture of the Shoulder Blade.
THE Operation is the Reducing the Fractured part to its Natural Place and
Situation.

THE CAUSE. This like other Fractures, is occasioned by some Fall or Blow.

THE SIGNS. If the middle of the Shoulder Blade be broke, the Bone which is
very thin, there yields to the impression of the Finger, and there is a great
Stupor which proceeds from the Nerves dispensed to the Muscles of that part.

The Scapulae or Shoulder-blades are large flat Bones placed on the Back, one
on each side, and have the Figure of a Scalenous Triangle, each Bone is concave
on the inside, and unequal without, and has two sides and Angles, one above and
the other below, on the backside is a long Ridge which is called the Spine,
the parts adjacent to this, are called the Supra Scapulium, that above, and the
Infra Scapulium, that which lies beneath the Spine. The large end of the Spine
where it is crooked, is called its Acromion, and that side which is next the
Vertebrae, is called its Basis. This has two Angles, the one above, and the
other below. In the Scapula there is a Cavity to receive the Head of the
Shoulder Bone, and over this there is a crooked Process, which has the Name of
Coracoides given to it, from its resembling a Ravens Bill. All the side below
which bounds the Scapula, is called its lower side, and the other are called
its Borders or Edges.

The Scapula is fastened to the Clavicle by several Ligaments. The Cavity which
receives the Head of the Bone, is almost entirely formed by Ligaments which
arise from the edge of the Cavity, and encompass the Acromion and Coracoidal
Process; and this is the reason why the Arm is so subject to Luxations, it
having nothing more than Ligaments to keep it in its place, which with a very
little straining, may be forced out of its place.

The use of the Scapulae is to defend the Ribs, help the Articulation of the
Clavicles with the Bones of the Arm, and for the Rise and Insertion of Muscles.

The OPERATION.
If any Fragments of Bones are broke off, and thrust out without pricking the
Flesh, put them into their place with the Palm of the Hand, or the Thumb. But
if they have any points and prick the Flesh, make an Incision and snip off the
Jagged end with a pair of Pincers, and reduce the Bone into its right place if
it adhere to the Scapula, but if it be loose take it off.

THE DRESSING. Lay a Compress dipped in some Desensative Liquors on it, and a
Past-board over that, both of which ought to be as large as the Shoulder Blade,
and to have the same Figure, and then keep all on with the Bandage commonly
called the Star. This is made with a Roller four or five Else in length rolled
up at one end; apply the Extremity of the Roller behind the Back under the
opposite Arm-pit, then bring it under the other Arm-pit, and over the Shoulder,
that so it may make an X on the middle of the Back, then bring it under the
other Arm-pit, and lastly over that, so it may pass behind the Back and make
another X leaving an Edging, and so bring it several times over the Back, still
leaving an Edging till both the Shoulder-blades are covered, and then finish
the Bandage by making several Circular turns round the Breast.

THE CURE. If there be a contus'd Wound on the Scapula, you must digest and
deterge the Wound, dressing it twice a Day in the usual manner; but if it be a
simple Incision, it must be united as soon as may be, and requires no more than
some Desensative to be applied on it.

If there be no Wound in the Scapula, it is best to continue the Dressings on
till the Reunion is completed, unless some Accident arising shall require the
contrary.

REMARKS.
The Scapula in a Foetus is round, and continues to be Membranous till the
third Month, and then its Ossification begins with a little white spot in the
Center, which expands it self by degrees. The Place of the Articulation of the
Scapula to the Shoulder Bone terminates in an Angle, in the midst of which
there is a white Line which extends a little farther. This Line is the first
beginning of the Ossification of the Shoulder Bone.

The Spine on the Body of the Scapula is boney in the fourth Month, but the
Acromion continues to be Cartilaginous at that time. The rest of the Bone of
the Shoulder is Membranous, as well as the Coracoides Process, the Neck and
above half the Basis of the Scapula are. About the fourth Month the Neck of the
Scapula begins to Ossifie, but its Basis and lower Angle continue to be
Cartilaginous.

This lower Angle is more remote from the Center of Ossification, and is longer
before it be converted into perfect Bone.

The two Processes of the Scapula and its Glene, and the Head of the Humerus
continue Cartilaginous till the Birth, and for this reason Recent born Infants
cannot raise up their Arm. The small Fissure which is between the Coracoidal
Process, and the upper part of the Scapula is not discernible until the fifth
Month, but after it increases, and by degrees becomes hollow, so that at the
time of the Birth it resembles a Crescent.

CHAP. LX. Of the Fracture of the Ribs.
THIS Operation is Reducing the Ribs when they are broken, to their Natural
Situation.

THE CAUSE of a Fracture of the Ribs, is most commonly some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. When a Rib is entirely broke, the ends sometimes thrust into the
Breast, and at other times continue in their Natural place. If a Rib thrusts in
it compresses and tears the Pleura and the Lungs sometimes, and this creates a
great Pain, and a constant pricking of the Part, the Patient cannot breath
without great Pain and Difficulty, spits Blood, and a Fever is kindled.

If the Fractured ends thrust out, there is a sensible rising, but if the two
ends of the Bone continue together, none of the above mentioned Symptoms
appear, and there is only a Crashing that can be perceived, in thrusting the
Ribs with the Thumb.

The Ribs are placed on each side the Spine, and may well enough be compared to
Segments of a Circle. Near the Sternum they are flat and large, and grow round
in proportion to their distance, approaching to the Vertebrae. They are
Articulated with the Vertebrae by two Productions, one of which is covered with
a Cartilage, and implanted into the Sinus, and the other is joined to the
Transverse Process of the same Vertebra on the same side.

The Exterior Surface of the Ribs is rought and unequal, the Interior is smooth
and equal. In their lower part they have a final Channel for the Reception of
the Nerve and Intercostal Artery with a Branch of the Vena Azygos, and the
Surgeon must avoid cutting these Vessels in the perforating the Breast in
making the Operation in an Empyema.

The Ribs are entirely bony, but their Extremities toward the Sternum are
Cartilaginous, for the better facilitating Respiration. They are fixed to the
Sternum by their Cartlages, which sometimes become bony, especially in Women.
The Number of the Ribs is not always alike no more than the Vertebrae;
sometimes there has been found thirteen, more rarely eleven, but the most
common Number is twelve. Of these, seven are called true Ribs, and five false
or Bastard Ribs.

The true Ribs are placed in the uppermost part of the Breast, and are fixed to
the Sternum. The Bastard Ribs are so called, because they are short, soft, and
are not implanted into the Sternum, but adhere by the Cartilages to each other.
The Bastard Ribs leave a void place before, to make room for the Motion of the
Stomach. The lowest of the Bastard Ribs is the shortest of all, and does not
adhere like the rest, but sometimes is found adhering to the Diaphragm, as well
as the eleventh Rib.

All the Ribs are unequal in length and breadth. The upper Rib is short, flat,
and more large and crooked than any of the rest. The middle are longer and
larger than the upper, and the inferior are near upon the Matter of the same
length as the upper, but not of the same breadth.

The Ribs make an Arch, which contains the Heart, Lungs, and other Organs of
the Thorax, and besides they serve to give a Rise and Termination to several
Muscles of the Thorax.

Of the Ribs in the Foetus.
The first and last Ribs in a Foetus of two Months old are Membranous, and the
other are Bony. About the same time the Scissure through which the Intercostal
Artery, Vein, and Nerve pass, begin to appear. The Ribs begin to Ossifie very
early, which is so ordered by the Providence of Nature, for the better
defending the Heart, Lungs, and other Viscera of the Thorax, which seem to want
some such Rampart to protect them, and give them liberty to grow and exert
their respective Functions. For the two first Months the Ribs are not
Articulated with the Vertebrae, but are only planted to Cartilage, which after
becomes the Transverse process of the Vertebrae.

In the third Month, as if Nature were ashamed of her lazy proceeding, on a
sudden she Ossifies the upper Rib which becomes as hard, large, and solid, as
those which were Ossified in the second Month. About this time the last begins
likewise to Ossifie, which nevertheless continues to be Cartilaginous till the
fifth Month, but this seldom happens. The Ribs continue to increase and grow
hard from the ninth Month, till the Birth.

In a Foetus the Ribs are crookt, and like so many Arches form a Vault, which
is the Cavity of the Breast, besides this there is another Curvature which is
peculiar to the Foetus, the six upper Ribs being crookt at the Extremity, and
below in the middle. These Curvatures are not sensible in Adults, and gradually
disappear as the Animal grows.

The OPERATION.
If the Rib which is hurt thrust out, place the Patient in a Chair, and let an
Assistant stand by to hold him; then bid the Patient bend his Body on the side
opposite to the Fracture, and keep close his Mouth and Nose, and hold his
Breath to dilate his Breast, this Dilatation serving in stead of an Extension,
in the mean time thrust the two ends of the Bone together and reduce it. If one
end of the Bone enter the Breast, make an Incision and take it out.

Ambrose Parre proposes this way, viz. to lay the Patient on the sound side,
and apply an Emplaster of Mastich on the Fracture, and then to pull it off with
Violence, that so the Rib be drawn up with it; and by repeating this Operation,
he pretends to raise the ends which were depressed.

Some Practitioners apply Cupping-glasses on these Fractures, pretending to
draw up the Bone by the help of the Flesh, which tumefies and rises up into the
Glass, but both these Ways are ineffectual.

THE DRESSING. Lay a single Compress dipped in some Defensative on the fractured
part, and lay two other Longitudinal Compresses over it, which must cross each
other Salterwise; then stitch two Past-boards of the same Figure with
themselves, to the two last Compresses, and lay another large Linen Compress
with an oblong Past-board, and cover this again with a Compress; in the last
place keep all on with the Bandage called the Quadriga.

To make this, take a Roller five Else long and three Inches broad rolled up at
both ends, and apply the middle under the Arm-pit, and make an X on the
Shoulder, then bring each end of the Roller over the Breast, and over the Back,
so as to cross under the Arm-pit and make another X on the Shoulder; then bring
again the two ends of the Roller one over the Back, and the other over the
Breast, so as to make an X before and behind, and leave edgings on the Breast
with both ends of the Roller descending till it be covered, and then fix it by
a Circular turn round the Breast.

Another sort of Bandage may be made with a Napkin supported by the Scapulary,
according to the Method delivered in the Operation of the Empyema.

THE CURE. Fab. Hildanus gives us the following Relation of his Process in the
Cure of an Accident of this Nature. A certain Person having broke two of his
Ribs near the Spine, the ends of the fractured Bones thrust out which he
reduced, and after Embrocated the Part with Oil of Roses, next he applied a
Cataplasm made of Flower of Barley, Powder of Roses, Balaustiums, Cypress Nuts,
Galls, Tormentil and one whole Egg, and then laid on Compresses, Splints, made
the necessary Bandages not too strait, and within a little time all the
Accidents ceased. As soon as the Ribs were reduced, he gave the Patient a
Decoction of Self-heal and Water-creases, a^. and confined him to a good Diet,
the next Day he bled him, taking off the Dressings, and continuing to give him
the forementioned Draught twice a day, for the space of eight Days, and upon
the twelfth he recovered.

REMARKS.
There did not appear any External Contusion in the above mentioned case, but
the Blood came away by the Stools abundantly in great Clods, and this Flux
continued for six Days without sensibly weakening the Patient.

CHAP. LXI. Of a Fracture of the Breast Bone.
THIS Operation is a Reducing the Bones of the Sternum into their proper
Situation.

THE CAUSE of the Fracture is ordinarily some Fall or Blow received,

THE SIGNS which demonstrate the Sternum to be fractured, are a Depression of
the Part, a Palpitation of the Heart, a Difficulty of Breathing, Delirium, and
often times a spitting of blood. These Symptoms proceed from a Compression of
the Mediastinum, Heart, Lungs, Nerves, and other Vessels.

The Sternum makes up the fore part of the Breast, and is placed in the middle
between the Ribs and the Breast, the forepart of which it composes. It is of a
porous Substance, and all of one piece in Adults, but made up of diverse ones
in the Foetus, as we shall see hereafter. It is a little forked in its upper
part where it has a Sinus on each side to receive the Head of the Clavicle,
which is Articulated with a Cartilage intervening. In its inner side there is a
Sinus to give passage to the Aspera Arteria. The Sternum ends in a point, and
throughout its whole length has lateral Sinus's which receive the Cartilages of
the Ribs. At its lower Extremity it has a Cartilage fixed into a small Cavity
of the Sternum, and this is called Xiphoides, from its resembling a Dagger. It
is sometimes Triangular, and at other times it is forked, and sometimes it is
almost round; sometimes its point turns in, and when this happens it compresses
the Stomach, and occasions Vomiting sometimes it is perforated, for the transit
of some Veins which go to the Breast. This Cartilage in some Bodies has been
found to extend to the Navil.

The Sternum serves as a Rampart to the Heart, and helps to support the Breast
and Ribs.

The Stornum of the Foetus.
This is Cartilaginous till the fourth Month, and very rarely or never bony.
The Number of bones in the Sternum of Children is not certain; sometimes it is
composed of seven, and sometimes eight. Sometimes there is but four in a Foetus
of nine Months, and there is never more than six, and there are some Foetus of
five Months old, whose Sternum is composed of two bones only.

In the sixth Month the Sternum is composed of four or five bones, and
sometimes there is no more than one. Some Foetus of six Months have the Sternum
Cartilaginous. In the eighth Month it is composed of four or five bones. In
short, it is impossible to determine any thing certain concerning the Number
and Situation of the bones of the Breast; sometimes the lower bones are larger
than the upper ones, and sometimes they are ranged by one another in Parallel
lines.

The OPERATION.
Let the Patient be laid on a Quilt on the Ground, and place some unequal Body
under him between his Shoulders, and let some Servant press on the sides of the
Breast, which push out, that by this Extension the bones may be reduced into
their Natural Situation; or if this prove ineffectual, make an Incision and say
the Fractured bone bare, that so you may raise it with the Terebellum or Screw.
This must be exquisitely sharp, that it may enter the bone upon touching it in
the lightest manner imaginable; for if it were quite deprest, it would
infallibly kill the Patient.

THE DRESSING. Lay a Triangular Compress wetted in Wine heated, and over that
another thick Triangular Compress stitcht to a Past-board of the same Figure,
and let the point of this be applied downwards; in the last place, keep the
Dressings on with a Napkin folded in two or three pleats, suspended with the
Collar in the same manner as was directed in the Chapter of the Empyema, or you
may use the Quadriga, described in the last Chapter.

THE CURE. Let the Patient lie on his Back, for if he should lie on his Side,
the Ribs would compress the bones of the Sternum, and if there be any
Inflammation, which there seldom fails to be, let him lose some blood out of
his Arm, and feed him with a good Nourishing Diet.

If there be a Wound it must be dressed twice a Day, as the Nature of it shall
require.

REMARKS.
Some Surgeons have had Sagacity enough to discover when there has been Pus
lodged in the Cavity of the Mediastinum, and have dexterously discharged it by
opening the Sternum with a Trepan.

CHAP. LXII. Of a Fracture of the Vertebrae.
THIS Operation is a Reducing the Fractured bones into their usual and natural
place.

THE CAUSE is ordinarily some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. When the Vertebrae of the back are fractured, the Arm becomes
Paralytick, and loses both Sense and Motion, the Patients Excrements come away
involuntarily, and sometimes a Suppression of Urine ensues.

The Fracture of the Body of the Vetebrae is dangerous, because the Spinal
Marrow which is the Origin of the Nerves is hurt upon these occasions. The
Fracture of the Spinal Processes is not so dangerous, as that of the Body of
the Vertebrae, because the Medulla is not hurt by it.

The whole number of Vertebrae make up one long Column of bones from the
Articulation of the Head to the Rumpbone, and all this Compages is called the
Spine, which name is given it from several pointed bones.

The Vertebrae derive their Name a Vertendo, because the whole body is turned
to and fro upon them.

The Spine has a Curvature inwards from the first Vertebra of the Neck to the
seventh, and then is unequal outwardly from the first Vertebra of the back to
the twelfth, to enlarge the capacity of the Breast; then again it is as a
curvature inwards from the first Vertebra of the Loins to the Os Sacrum, which
is composed of several Vertebrae united together, and serves to enlarge the
Hypogastrium, especially in Women who are formed by Nature for the bearing of
Children.

The Vertebrae mutually receive, and are received by each other, which Species
of Articulation is called Ginglymos, and are bound to one another by Ligaments
and Cartilages. There are for the most part seven Vertebrae in the Neck, twelve
in the Back, and five in the Loins; and the Os Sacrum is composed of several
Vertebrae more, all which form but one bone in Adults, which as the Child grows
up lessens, and ends in a point.

The Vertebrae are bound together by a strong Cartilaginous Ligament. This
Ligament hinders them from grating against each other, and by its flexibility
yields to their Motion every way. The Spine is bended, extended, and turned
round every ways. The whole Spine has a large Hole from the top to the bottom,
to give passage to the Marrow, and in the Juncture of the Vertebrae on each
side they form a Hole for the Transmitting Nerves from the Marrow.

Each Vertebra is composed of its body, and three sorts of Productions or
Processes, viz. the Oblique, of which there are two Superior, and two
Inferior, the Transverse to which the Muscles are fixed, and the third or
Spinal seated behind in the midst of these which are very solid, and give a
Denomination to the whole Column. Besides these, there are five Epiphyses or
Appendages to each Vertebra, two of which make the two edges of the Vertebra,
two of Transverse Processes, and one of the Spinal ones.

Those who have a long Neck, most commonly have eight Vertebrae in it, and but
eleven in the Neck, which lessening the Cavity of the Thorax, makes such
Persons Phthisical, on the contrary, in short Necks there is often but six
Vertebrae, and such are subject to Apoplexies. The Transverse processes are
perforated for the Transmitting Veins and Arteries, and have their ends forkt
for the implanting of Muscles. The Transverse processes are likewise forked,
short, and a little inclined.

The first Vertebra of the Neck is called Atlas, and receives and supports the
Head on two small Sinus's lined with Cartilages. This Vertebra has no Spines,
least it should hurt the two small Muscles called Obliqui Inferiores, when the
Head is bound forwards. It has on its inner part a small superficial Cavity,
which receives the Tooth-like Process of the second Vertebra of the Neck. At
the lower part of the two Superior Cavities, there are two small round
Eminences, from whence a Ligament like a Cord issues, which strongly binds the
Tooth-like Process. The first Vertebra has no more than six Processes, but on
its foreside it has a small Eminence which may be esteemed a seventh.

The second Vertebra is called Dental from its Tooth-like Process which enters
into the first. Hippocrates assures us, that the anteriour Luxation of this
Vertebra, causes an incurable Quinsie. This is likewise called the Axis,
because its Tooth-like Process serves as an Axis to the first Vertebra. The
Superior Oblique Processes of this, are received into the Cavities of the
first, and on this are made all the Rotations of the Head. The third Vertebra
is not so tall as the second, and its Spinal Process is shorter. The fourth and
fifth Vertebrae of the Neck, have their Spinal Processes more inclined than the
first. The body of the seventh is larger than any of the Superior, and its
Spinal Process is long and roundish at the end, and is very like the Process of
the first Vertebra of the Back.

The twelve Vertebrae of the Back, are larger than those of the Neck, but are
not quite so solid, and are perforated by several Holes for the passage of
Vessels. The first is called Crista, because it resembles the Crest of a
Helmet, which is not unlike that of a Cock. The second is called Axillar is,
because it lies near the Armpits, the eight lower are called Costales, because
the Ribs are implanted to them. The Transverse Processes of the Back, are
large, solid, round, at the Extremity, and a little crookt above. In each
Transverse Process there is a small Cavity, and another, on the upper part of
the Body of the Vertebra, to receive the two small Condyls of the Ribs. The
twelfth Vertebra differs in many respects; its Oblique Processes are roundish
both above and below, in such a manner, that it is received by both Ribs for
the small Heads of the Oblique Processes, enter the Cavity of the Superior
Vertebrae, and there is no Transverse Process on the twelfth Vertebrae, and the
Motion of the Back is much freer on this twelfth Vertebra, than on any of the
other; sometimes there are thirteen, and sometimes fourteen Vertebrae in the
back of large Men, but most commonly eight, and very seldom eleven.

Of the Vertebrae of the Loins.
Most commonly there are five Vertebrae in the Loins, and sometimes though
seldom, there are six. The first is called Renalis from its Vicinity to the
Kidneys. The Vertebrae of the Loins are more large and porous than those of the
Back. Their Transverse Processes are strait, long, slender, and parallel,
resembling so many small Ribs. Their Spinal Processes are strait, flat, large,
and roundish at the end. The Motion of the Trunk is principally made on the
Vertebrae of the Loins. And since their Transverse and Spinal Processes are
parallel, they cannot compress or grate against one another; on the contrary,
there is but a small space between the Transverse Processes of the Back, and
their Spinal Processes are inclined to, and touch each other exactly.

Of the Os Sacrum.
This Bone is Triangular, concave within and unequal without. It has several
small Holes which transmit the Nerves of the Spinal Marrow, and is joined to
the Os Ilium by a sort of ingranure; it has several small Processes at its
Extremity which make it uneven. In its lower part there is a small Cavity, to
which the first of the small bones which compose the Rump is implanted. The Os
Sacrum is composed of five, six, and sometime seven Vertebrae, which are so
united as to make up one large bone, which in its Figure appears like an
Isosceles Triangle, and has ten large Holes, viz. five on each side, for
Transmitting Nerves to the Thigh.

Of the Hanch or Hip-bones.
There are two bones of this Name, which are seated one on each side of the Os
Sacrum. This bone is composed of three lesser bones in the Foetus, but in
Adults it is but one distinguished into three parts, the first of which is
called the Ilium, because it receives the Ilion into its Cavity. This part of
the bone is large, and its Figure is almost semicircular, being a little unequal
and unequal in its surface, and something concave in its inner. It is fastened
to the Os Sacrum, by a strong Membranous Ligament, its Edge and Circumference
is called its Spine, and it is expanded in Women more than Men, because they
are made to bear Children. The Os Pubis makes up the second part of the
Hanchbones, and this has a large Oval Hole which is exactly stopped by a
Tendinous Membrane, to which the Musculi Obturatores are implanted, and in the
upper part of the Hole there is an oblique Sinuosity, through which the
Spermatick Vessels, and the Crural Vein and Artery pass.

The third bone which composes the Hanches is called Ischion or the Hip-bone,
in which is the Acetabulum or great Cavity which receives the Head of the
Thigh Bone. The Ischion has three parts, its Spine on the sides round the
Acetabulum, a great irregular Process called its Tuber; and lastly, a Sinus
between the Spine and the Tuberosity, for the passage of the Obturator Muscles.

Of the Vertebrae of the Foetus.
The Spine of the Foetus makes a Circle whilst it is in the Mothers Womb,
because the Head most commonly is between the Knees, but when the Child is once
born, it recovers its Natural Situation by being swadled in its Blankets.

The Spinal Processes are wanting in the Vertebrae of the Foetus, for these
would be apt to tear the Membranes, and hurt the Mother in the Birth. The first
Rudiments of the Spinal Processes which are visible, are certain, small, red
points which increase by degrees, but do not rise to any height, while the
Foetus continues in the Womb. There are no Transverse Processes, and there are
only Cartilages in their place which have a Hole on their sides for the
transmitting of the Vessels. The Body of each Vertebra is made up of three
small bones, viz. the body it self, and two other small bones seated on the
back part. These two bones are divided by an intervening Cartilage; and besides
this, there is another Cartilage which separates them from the body of the
Vertebra.

In the third Month there are two small bones which form the four first
Vertebrae of the Neck, but their body is not bony so soon. The sixth Vertebra
of the Back begins to Ossifie by its Body; the Ossification of the Vertebrae
rising from below up to the fifth Vertebra of the Back, and descending to the
third Bone of the Os Sacrum. In the fourth Month the bones of the Os Sacrum are
bony quite to the Rump-bone. At that time the third or fourth Vertebra of the
Neck is bony. The Atlas and the Dental Vertebra, as yet have no body. In the
fifth and sixth Month, there is a distinction of several Points in the Os
Sacrum where the Ossification begins; the body of the second Vertebra of the
Neck is entirely bony, its Tooth-like Process is Cartilaginous, and the first
Vertebra of the Neck, as yet has no body.

The Ossification of the Tooth-like Process of the second Vertebra of the Neck,
begins in the seventh Month, and there is a small bony point as big as a pins
Head on the Body of the first Vertebra of the Head. All Vertebrae begin to grow
about the eighth or ninth Month.

Of the Os Sacrum in the Foetus.
About six Months after Conception, the two first Vertebrae of the Os Sacrum
are made up of five Bones, viz. the Body of the Vertebra, two Wings and two
Bones, which derive their Origin from the Juncture of the Os Sacrum, with the
Ossa innominata. The three lower Vertebrae of the Os Sacrum, are made up of
three distinct Bones, but in the ninth Month they are composed of five Bones,
as well as the two upper Vertebrae.

Of the Ossa innominata of the Foetus.
In the tenth Month the Ossa innominata are made up of one Membrane, whose
Ossification begins with a small point, which appears near the Acetabulum. The
Os Ilium becomes bony on the third Month, its Figure is Semicircular, and the
Circumference of the bone is Membranous, as well as that of the Pubis and
Ischion. The Ossification of the Ischion begins in the fourth Month with a
small white point.

The Os Ilium is perfectly formed in the fifth Month, and at that time is
pretty large, and the Pubis becomes bony on that side where it is joined to the
Cavity of the Ischion. The Ischion or Hip-bone, and the Os Pubis or Share-bones
by their Junction, form a sort of Box which receives the Head of the
Thigh Bone, and this bone increases until the ninth Month, at which time they
are joined by several large, soft, intervening Cartilages. This Tendinous
connection helps the Situation of the Foetus in the Womb where it is round, and
by yielding hinders the Child from receiving any hurt in the Passage.

The OPERATION.
Since the Spine cannot be fractured unless there be a Depression of the Bone,
place the Patient on his Belly, for the better making an Incision on the
fractured place, and taking out those Splinters which press or prick the Spinal
Marrow and Nerves.

If only the Processes of the Vertebrae are broken off, place the Patient on
his Back, and so reduce them as conveniently as you can.

THE DRESSING. If the Body of the Vertebra be hurt, lay on a Compress dipped in
warm Wine or Oxycrate, and keep it on with the Napkin and Scapulary, the manner
of applying which, you may find in the Chapter of the Empyema. Take care not to
straiten the Bandage too much, for fear of pressing down the fragments of Bones
which you have raised on the Spinal Marrow.

If it be the Spine of the Vertebra which is broke, lay a small Plate of Lead
with a Compress on each side, to retain the Fractured Bone in its place, and
lay over it a Compress dipped in some good Defensative, and keep this on with the
Napkin and Scapulary.

THE CURE. When the Bones are reduced, let the Patient lie on his Side, and
feed him with Meats of good Digestion, as Roasted Flesh.

If any Incision has been made to restore the Bones to their place, dress this
like all other contus'd Wounds; that is, digest, deterge, and cicatrize it.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 45. relates, that a young Man being Hunch-backt,
and Asthmatick from his Cradle, died of a Phthisis at 16 years of Age. Upon
opening of the Cranium, he found the Crista Galli very high, and so large, that
it covered the whole Os Cribrosum, and all the small Holes being stopped, the
Ossa Plana grew so high, as to extend to the Septum Narium, and he conjectures
this last Accident was the cause of his Gibbosity, since the Pituita not being
discharged by the Nose, must necessarily lodge it self toward the Spine; and
for this reason the Vertebrae and their Cartilages by the constant Fluxion of
this Humidity, must inevitably be relaxed and protruded out, and form this
Bunch; all the Vertebrae of the Spine, Os Sacrum and Os Pubis being as soft as
Wax. The sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Vertebrae were consumed by the
Caries, especially the three last, of which nothing remained besides the
exterior Circle, and the parts which were missing, were sound in the Lungs.

CHAP. LXIII. Of the Fracture of the Rump-Bone.
THIS Operation is a restoring the fractured Bones of the Rump, to their
Natural place.

THE CAUSE of a Fracture in this part, is most commonly some Fall.

THE SIGNS of a Fracture of the Rump, are a Suppression of the Excrements, a
Paralysis of the Sphincter which proceeds from the Coccyx being deprest by a
Fall, and compressing the Rectum and its Sphincter, to which add the Extremity
of the Pain.

The Rump-bone is placed at the Extremity of the Os Sacrum, and is composed of
four or five small bones, and two Cartilages joined together, which form a sort
of a Tail crookt inwards. The first Bone of the Rump which joins to the Os
Sacrum is the largest, and has two small Transverse Processes, and two more
above them.

The Rump-bone keeps up the Rectum. This part often endures great pain in
Women's Labor, because the Child thrusts it very much back in the Birth.

The OPERATION.
To reduce a Fracture of the Rump-bone, put the forefinger of the right Hand up
into the Anus, having first pared the Nail very close, and then place the
Fingers on the outside on the Fracture, and by the help of both Fingers, put
the Bone into its place. But observe here, that this Bone for the most part is
rather luxated than fractured.

THE DRESSING. Put some Body in form of a Suppository into the Anus, to keep
the Fractured Bones in their right place after they are reduced, and lay on a
Compress wetted with some Defensative Liquour, and keep this on with the T, or
double T, or the Fillet with four Tails and the Collar, which Bandages we have
described in the Chapters of Lithotomy, and the Fistula in Ano.

THE CURE. Let the Patient lie on his side till the bone be reunited, and when
he begins to fit, let it be on a Chair with a Hole in the midst, for fear of
compressing the Bones.

REMARKS.
The Rump-bone is Cartilaginous in the eighth Month, and the two points in its
inner part whence its Ossification begins, do not appear till the Ninth Month.

The Coccyx in Men is sometimes prolonged, and forms a Tail like that of other
Animals, as Diemerbroek observes, who assures us, he had seen a Newborn Infant
with a Tail half an Ell in length; and if we may believe Pliny, there are Men
with hairy Tails in the Indies.

Dr. Harvey in his Book of the Generation of Animals tells us, that one of his
Friends who had been in the inland parts of the Isle of Borneo, had seen Wild
Men with Tails of a Foot in length.

CHAP. LXIV. Of a Fracture of the Os Ilium.
THIS Operation is Reducing the Fractured Bone to its right position.

THE CAUSE of this Fracture is some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. When the Spine of the Os Ilium is broke, there is a Stupor of the
part which extends to the Leg, and proceeds from a Hurt of the Nerves which
pass that way.

The OPERATION.
If the Os Ilium be broke, and some Splinters of it run into the Flesh, make an
Incision and take them our, and snip off the inequalities of the Bone with a
pair of Pincers, or reduce them into their proper place if they adhere to the
Bone or Periosteum. In making the Incision, take care not to hurt the Vessels.
If there be no Splinters, reduce the Bone in the most convenient manner with
your Fingers.

THE DRESSING. Lay a large Compress dipped in some good Defensative on the Bone,
and keep it on with the Bandage named Spica, which is described in the
Operation of the Bubonocele. This Bone is united in 25 or 30 Days.

H. Arniseus in a Letter to Fab. Hildanus extant in his Cent. of Epistles Ep.
45. tells him, That in Dissecting the Body of a certain Woman after Labor, he
found not only a Divulsion of the Os Pubis, but the Ossa Ilii likewise were
separated from the Os Sacrum; and he pretends that the reason why the German
Anatomists cannot find the Bones separated in Women after the Birth is, because
they defer their Execution till the sixth or seventh Week after their Delivery.

Fab. Hildanus in his Reply to the Gentleman, Ep. 45. denies that he had ever
known the former happen in the most difficult Births, and thinks the latter if
true, happens but seldom, notwithstanding his and Banlims.
THE CURE. Let the Patient forbear lying on the Fractured side, and let him use
a nourishing Diet, especially roasted Flesh.

CHAP. LXV. Of the Fracture of the Shoulder Bone.
THIS Operation is a Restoring that Bone to its properplace. THE CAUSE of the
Fracture most commonly is some Fall or Blow.

THE SIGNS. The Fracture of the Shoulder Bone, may be perceived by a crashing
of the Bone, in moving up and down the Arm, and if the ends of the Bones do not
meet, the Arm is distorted, appears shorter than the other, and the Patient
endures a great deal of Pain.

The first Bone of the Arm is called the Humerus or Shoulder Bone, and is
solid, long, and unequal, and has a Head in its upper Extremity, which is
covered with a Cartilage, and received into the Sinus of the Head of the
Shoulder Blade. This Bone has two Productions, the Exterior of which is small
and armed with a Cartilage, and receives the Radius or lesser Focil, the
Inferior has two Sinus, and resembles a Pully, with which the Elbow or greater
Focil is Articulated, and there is a small Fissure on the forepart of the
larger Head of the Humerus, through which one head of the Musculus Biceps
passes, as a Rope on a Pully.

Of the Bones of the Hand, or lower part of the Arm.
These Bones are two in number, the Cubit and the Radius. The Cubit or greater
Focil is articulated with the Humerus, and has a large Process on that side, in
the midst of which are two Cavities with an Eminence between them, which forms
a sort of Ginglymus. The posteriour Process at the Head of the Cubit is termed
Olecranon, and on this it is that a Man rests when he leans on his Elbow. The
lower end of the Cubit is round and slender, and has a small protuberance from
whence several Ligaments arise.

The Cubit has two sorts of Motions, viz. Flexion and Extension, and has one
protuberance and two Cavities, for the Reception of the two protuberances of
the Shoulderbone. The jetting out of the Cubit is received in the Cavity of the
Shoulder Bone, on which it turns after the manner of a Pully.

The Radius accompanies the CuBit but ends before it and is Triangular through
its whole length. It has a small' round Head in its upper part, at the end of
which there is a Cavity for receiving the Bones of the Carpus, and on this the
Motion of the Wrist is made. Besides this, there is another small Cavity which
turns on the inferior protuberance of the Cubit. When the Radius is turned
inwards the Hand is directed by it, and this is termed Pronation; and when it
is moved outward, the back of the Hand is turned down, and this is called
Supination. The Cubit is thick in its upper part, and slender toward its
lower; the Radius on the contrary is more slender above, and thicker below. The
Cubit receives the Radius above in a small Cavity, on which the Radius is
turned round, and below the Radius receives the Cubit. These two Bones touch at
their extremity, and leave a space all along their middle, in which there is a
a Membranous Ligament which connects one Bone to the other.

Of the upper and lower Bones of the Arm in a Foetus.
In the second Month these Bones are entirely Cartilaginous, having only three
white streaks in the middle of them. The uppermost, which is the beginning of
the Humerus, is the longest, and those which form the Cubit and Radius, are
ranged one against the other, and the middle of those Bones is more solid than
their extremities.

About the third Month the upper and lower Bones of the Arm are articulated
together, and the Cubit and Radius which cohered before, begin to separate in
their midst, and continue to touch only at their Extremity. About the seventh
or eighth Month, the small Protuberances and Epiphyses are not discernible, but
shortly after in the ninth Month, they becomes as visible as they are in the
Bones of Adult Persons. The Humerus in the Foetus is strait, round, and long,
but in Adults it is something bent.

The OPERATION.
Place the Patient on a Stool, or let him sit in his Bed, and let one Assistant
take hold of his Arm above the Elbow with both Hands, and another stand behind
and take hold of the upper part of it with both Hands, and let both of them
draw together; and at the same time let the Surgeon bring the two ends of the
Bone together, and adjust them by compressing the part around with the palm of
his Hand, till he finds there is no inequality.

If after the Fracture the two ends of the Bones continue together, yet a
slight Extension is necessary, for fear least the Surgeon break off any of the
Asperities at the end in pressing them to a Level. After the Bones are reduced,
let the Assistants continue to hold the Arm, extending it a little till the
Dressing be made.

THE DRESSING is made with a simple Compress dipped in some Defensatives to
prevent the Inflammation from extending it self to the part. When this is laid
on take a Roller above two Inches broad and two Else in leghth, rolled up at
one end, and with this make two circular turns about the Fracture, and bind the
part strait enough to keep the Bones in their proper place; then bring up the
Roller ascending lengthways of the Arm with little edgings, which must not be
altogether so strait as the turns about the Fracture, and when the Roller is
spent, pin it at the upper end of the Arm. When this is done, take another
Roller of the same breadth and length with the former, and begin to apply it on
the Fracture, making three Circular turns about pretty strait; but in this the
turns of the Roller must be made to reduce those Muscles which the first turn
had drawn a little aside, then bring down the Roller to the bottom of the Arm
leaving small Edgings, and bring it over the Flexure of the Elbow, but not so
as to bind the Joint, them bring it up again leaving little Edgings, and pin it
where it ends. After this, you must have four longitudinal Compresses of a
competent thickness, and almost as long as the Part which is hurt, and each of
these must be covered with a Pastboard, or a very thin Splint made of a very
thin Deal; in the next place take a Roller as before, but something longer, and
apply this near the Elbow, and make three Circular turns about the Fractured
part, and so bring the Roller up to the top of the Arm, still leaving Edgings;
next bring it under the Arm-pit and about the Body; and so fasten it. Besides
this, you may if you please lay on two Past-boards of an equal length with the
Part, and encompass the Arm with these, and tie them with three Ribbons,
beginning with that in the midst; and in the last place, suspend the Arm with a
Sling.

THE CURE. If the Patient keep his Bed which is most advisable for him to do,
it will be sufficient to repose his Arm half bent on a Pillow, without using
any Sling at all. If it be not a complicate Fracture, the best way is to keep
the Bandage on as long as may be; nay, not to undo it at all till the cure be
completed, except some Accidents, as Pain, Inflammation, or Itching shall
require it, or it slacken of it self, and indeed the less any Bones are
stirred, the sooner they will unite. However the Patients Arm must be moved
toand fro on the Joint, for fear least the Bones cement together, and the part
lose its Motion.

During the Cure, let the Patient be fed with Nourishing Meats, such as roasted
Flesh.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 46. tells us, that a certain Person of Three
score years of Age, had a Pain in the Articulation of the Right Elbow, for
which he used no other Remedy besides keeping his Arm still in Bed, but upon
rising, endeavoring to draw on his Glove, he broke his Arm five or six fingers
breadth above the Elbow, and upon removing the Dressings about three days
after, there was found a second Fracture near the Joint it self,
notwithstanding which, the Patient did positively deny that he ever had any
Venereal Distemper.

The same Author, Cent. 3. Obs. 81. tells us, that a certain very Aged Person
having broke his Arm between the Wrist and the Elbow, and having by reason of
ill management a great Pain and Inflammation, with a considerable discharge of
Matter which hindered the reunion of the Bone, had a Callus grew at each
Extremity, which composed a sort of Articulation, however the Patient could not
move the Bone on it without the help of his other Hand.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Fractures of the Bones of the Hand.
THE Operation is the Reducing the Fractured Bones to their Natural place.

THE CAUSE. Fractures in this Part most commonly are occasioned by some Blow or
Fall.

THE SIGNS. Fractures of this part are discovered by the Deformity, and by the
crashing of the Bones when they are stirred.

The Hand is composed of the Carpus or Wrist, Metacarpus and the Fingers.

The Carpus or Wrist is made of small Bones disposed in two Ranks, each of
which consists of four Bones. All these Bones are bound together by strong
Ligaments, and have a polite slippery Cartilage on them. The first Range of
Bones jet out, and are received into the Cavity of the Radius, and on this
Articulation all the Motions of the Wrist are made. The small Bones of the
Wrist are even without, and uneven on the inner side.

The four Bones of the Metacarpus are long, slender, and unequal in their
length, they have Processes above and below, and touch at their Extremities,
leaving Spaces in the middle, which are filled by the Musculi interossei. These
Bones are unequal and smooth in the Palm of the Hand, and are something concave
inwardly, and something of a a triangular Figure, they are straightly bound to
the second range of the Bones of the Wrist, and seem to make but one Bone with
them. In there upper part they are articulated with the small Heads of the
first Range of Bones of the Fingers.

The five Fingers are each composed of three Bones which are unequal, and
something hollow in the middle for the fastening the Sheath-like Ligament,
through which the Tendons of the Flexors of the Hand pass. The first Range of
Bones in the Fingers, are articulated with the Bones of the Metacarpus by
Arthrodia. The Bones of the Fingers are articulated by Ginglymus, and are
fifteen in each Hand.

The OPERATION.
To make the Extention, let one Assistant hold the Patients Arm above the
Wrist, and another by the Fingers, and whilst both draw it, take care to reduce
the Bones into their place.

If the Fingers only are broke, reduce them separately one after another.

THE DRESSING. If the Bones of the Carpus or Meta-carpus only are broke, lay a
Compress dipped in some Defensative on the Fracture, and another pretty thick
Compress in the Hand, making the Bandage called the Half Gantlet. To make this,
take a Roller of four or five Else long, and an Inch and a half broad rolled up
at one end; then begin to apply it on the Wrist, making three Circular turns
about it; then bring the Fillet to the Metacarpus ascending spirally, next
bring it obliquely over the Hand, and then between the Thumb and Forefinger,
and so into the Hand, and then over it and make it cross on the first turn,
then make a Circular turn about the Wrist, and bring it again over the Hand
leaving an Edging; next make a turn round the Wrist, and bring it over the Hand
leaving an Edging, and proceed in this manner till the Hand be quite covered by
the Edgings; then lay on a Compress stitcht to a Pastboard on the Back of the
Hand, and another on the inside, both which must be of a Figure adapted to the
part. These Past-boards must be kept on with the Head of the Roller, by
covering them in the same manner as the Hand, and when this is done, bring the
Filler spirally up the whole Arm leaving small Edgings, and pin it above the
Elbow, forbearing to cover that with the Circumvolations, as was noted in the
Chapter of the Fracture of the Arm.

If the Fingers are Fractured each of them requires a particular Bandage, and
must be bound strait almost in the same manner as the Arm.

THE CURE. If there be no Wound, keep the Dressings on till the reunion be
made, unless some accident require them to be removed, but if there be any,
dress it after the manner practiced in Contusions.

CHAP. LXVII. Of the Fracture of the Thigh.
THIS Operation is a Reducing the two ends of the Fractured Bones to their
Natural place.

THE CAUSE of the Fracture is some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. When a Fracture is near the Head of the Bone, it is very difficult
to know it, and it is easily mistaken for a Luxation; and for this reason not
being reduced, the Patient continues lame all his Lifetime; but if the
Fracture be in its middle and the ends do not meet, there is a visible
Deformity and inequality, and the Patient cannot stand or stir his Thigh, and
it is shorter than the other. When the ends of the Bones meet, a crashing may
be heard.

There is but one Bone in the Thigh, which is something unequal before and curve
behind, and the Artist must have regard to this curvature, because if the Bone
should be set, straight, it would be longer than naturally it ought to be and
the Patient would become lame.

This Bone has a large round Head, covered with a smooth, slippery, Cartilage.
This is received into the Acetabulum, and has a round Neck something inclined.
At the end in the Center of this Head, there is a Ligament which is fixed to
the Center of the Acetabulum. Beneath on the hinder part of the Neck there are
two Processes, which from the use they have in the Rotation of the Thigh Bone,
are called Trochanthers; the upper of these is larger and something irregular,
and is termed the greater, and the lower the lesser; besides these on the
hinder part, there is a long Process for the Implantation of diverse Muscles.

The lower part of the Thigh Bone is larger, and has two Condyli which are a
little curve on the inside. These Protuberances are roundish at the end, and
are covered with a large, smooth, Cartilage; there is a Process between these
two, and a large Cavity which receives the Protuberance of the Tibia, and makes
a sort of Hinge. At the bottom of the Thigh on the forepart there is a small
Cavity, into which the Rotula is fixed. The Thigh Bone in the Foetus continues
Cartilaginous the second Month.

The OPERATION.
Place the Patient on his Back, and let one Assistant take hold of the Thigh
above the Knee, and another grasp its upper part, and let both these at once
draw the Part strongly to bring both ends of the Bone together; and whilst they
do this, let the Surgeon reduce them, and bring them to a level.

If the two ends continue together, yet some sort of Extension is necessary,
for fear of breaking off the extremities, and by this means hindering the
Reunion of the Bone.

If the Fracture be near the Head of the Bone, there is no room to take hold of
it, and therefore a Napkin must be put between the Patients Thighs, and one
Assistant must draw this, whilst the other takes hold of the Thigh a little
above the Knee, and so makes the Extension. If this cannot be conveniently
enough done with the Hands, the Surgeon must make use of Girths, or if these be
not strong enough, of Towels.

THE DRESSING. Wrap the Fracture round with a large simple Compress dipped in
Wine heated, and lay a good Compress three quarters of an Inch thick all along
the hollow part of the Thigh to preserve its Curvature; for if it were
straight, it would be longer than it ought to be, and the Patient would be lame
all his Lifetime.

The Bandage must be made with three Rollers about three inches broad, rolled
up at one end. The first Roller must be three Else in length, and the second
four. The way of applying the first Roller is thus; First make three Circular
turns about the Fracture, then bring it up the Thigh spirally, leaving small
Edgings, and fasten it round the Body; when this is done, apply the second
Roller on the Fracture and make two Circular turns, and bring it down the Thigh
spirally leaving small Edgings, and so continue (without covering the Knee) to
descend all along the Leg, and bring the Roller under the Foot like a Stirrup,
and reascend up the Leg leaving small Edgings, and pin it where it ends. If you
please you may end below the Knee without proceeding farther; when this is
done, apply a graduated Compress at the bottom of the Thigh, to keep it equal
all along. In the last place, lay four longitudinal Compresses round the Thigh,
and let each Compress be and Inch and a half broad, and almost as long as the
Thigh it self, and cover each of these with a Past-board or a Splint of Deal,
which must be very thin and pliant, and keep these Compresses on with the third
and last Roller, in the applying which, you must begin beneath and rise up by
small Edgings, and so embrace the Dressings together with two large
Past-boards, which must be tied with Ribbons, and not lie over one another. You
must put a small Soal with a Quilt under the Patients Leg to keep it right with
the Toes up, and a small Roll of Linen under the Heel, provided it be not
swollen; for in this case there is no need of it, and in its stead with a Napkin
folded in three pleats, and rolled up at both ends, and lay this under the Leg
to prevent the Heel from being comprest; let there be one Ribbon stitcht to the
end of the Bolsrer, and another on each side to support the Foot, and tie these
to the Junks in which the Foot is laid.

These are made in the following manner, take two sticks as long as the
Patients Leg and Thigh, and wrap them in straw tying it round with a Ribbon,
then Roll these two sticks together with the Straw in which they are wrapped in a
Cloth, and lay the Leg and Thigh together with the Dressings between them.
Before you lay the Patients Thigh between the Junks, lay three Ribbons over,
and as many under the Leg, and place the Junks on these. And observe here to
make that Roll of Junks which lies on the outside, at least three Inches
longer than that on the inner; before you tie the Junks, you must place a
Bolster on each side the lower part of the Legs, about the Ancles, in the
upper part of the Leg near the Knee, in the lower part of the Thigh above the
Knee, and in the upper part of the Thigh under the Groin, that so all the
hollowness and inequalities may be filled up, and the part may lie easily.
Besides these, lay a pretty thick Compress lengthways on the Legs and Thighs.
When the Junks are thus rolled up close to the Leg and Thigh, begin to tie the
Ribbon in the midst, and so proceed to the rest. The knots must be made on the
outside of the Junks, the Ribbon at the upper end of the Pillow must be tied to
that next the Knee, and the Ribbons which are on the side of the Pillow, must
be brought a cross each other, and pinned to the Roll of Junks about the middle
of the Legs; when this is all done, place the Leg on a Pillow with the Foot a
little raised, and place a Cradle over it to keep off the Bed-cloths.

In the Hospital of the Charity des Hommes, they use Boxes matted within, and
by this means they pretend to keep the Leg Stable and in a good posture.

THE CURE. Let the Patient lie on his Back, to keep the whole Leg equally
extended; and when there is a necessity of making the Patients Bed, let two
lusty fellows place their Arms under his Buttocks, and support his Body with
their two other Hands, whilst another puts both his Hands under the Dressing to
lift up his Leg and Thigh, and then carry him to Bed or Table with a Quilt on
it, and cover him whilst his bed is made.

If there be no Wound, keep the Dressings on as long as may be without removing
them, and feed the Patient with Meats easy of Digestion, as Fowl, Roasted
Flesh, and good Broths.

REMARKS.
Avicen and several other Authors pretend, that the thigh can scarcely be so
reduced, but that the Patient will remain lame, especially if the Fracture be
in the upper part, because the Muscles and Tendons are very strong, and the
Part is so Fleshy, that a Bandage can scarce retain it.

In the Miscellanea Curiosa, Obs. 25. there is a Relation that a Woman of a
good Habit of Body, and five, Months gone with Child who broke her Thigh, and
having care taken of it without any Success, was at last delivered of a sound
Child, and in about a Month after, was perfectly cured of her Fracture.

Fabr. Hildanus, Obs. 68. tells us, the Wife of a certain Senator of Bern
having broke her Leg, could by no means be cured till she was delivered about
40 Days after. These Observations show, that in the time of Pregnancy, Nature
imploys most of the Nutritious Juice in the perfecting of the Foetus.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of the Fracture of the Rotula.
THIS Operation is the Reduction of the Bones of the Rotula into their Natural
place.

THE CAUSE of this Fracture is most commonly some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. This Fracture is discerned by a Separation of the parts of the
Bone. If the Fracture be Transverse, the Muscles sometimes draw the Fragment
pretty high under the Teguments of the Thigh. When this happens, there is great
reason to fear the Patient will continue lame.

The Rotula is a small round Bone placed on the Articulation of the Leg and
Thigh, and is covered with a smooth Cartilage, which disposes it for Motion. It
is a little unequal outwardly, and articulated by Ginglymus, and covered with
Ligaments, and the Tendons of the Muscles. This small Bone serves as a Pully to
the Tendons of the Muscles which pass over it.

The Rotula of the Foetus in the Womb begins to appear on the fourth Month, and
continues Cartilaginous till after the Birth.

The OPERATION.
If the Rotula be fractured transversly, the upper part will be drawn up; and
therefore to reduce it, place the Patient on his Back, and let some Assistants
extend the Leg, and then bring down the Bone, and with your Thumbs adjust it to
that which remains below, and here observe never to take off both Thumbs
together, for then the piece will infallibly fly out of its place.

If the Rotula be fractured lengthways, there is no need of making an
Extension, because the Bones do not start far from one another, and it suffices
to thrust them into their place, and then make the Dressing.

THE DRESSING. If the Fracture be Transverse, the way of Dressing it is in this
manner; take a Roller of three Else long, and about an Inch and a half broad
rolled up at both ends, apply the middle of this Roller above the Totula, and
make two Circular turns, then bring it down under the Ham and cross it there,
then bring it beneath the Rotula, and make a Circular turn; next bring it up
and let it cross again below the Knee, then bring it up and make a Circular
turn there, and continue thus bringing it up and down, and crossing under the
Knee, and making Circular turns above and below, till the Joint be covered with
the Edgings, and then pin the end of the Roller either above or below the Knee;
when this is done, lay the Leg in the Junks in the same manner as was directed
in the foregoing Chapter.

If the Rotula be fractured lengthways, take a Roller of about three Else long,
and two Inches broad rolled up at both ends, and having a slit in the midst,
apply the middle of this on the middle of the Fracture, and pass one of the
Heads of the Roller through the slit in the middle, so that this slit be in the
middle of the Totula; then draw the Roller pretty strait to keep the parts of
the Bone together, and cover the Rotula with several Circumvolutions, leaving
all along small Edgings; and lastly, keep all steady by several Circular turns
about the Rotula; and when this is done, lay the Leg in the Junks.

THE CURE. Embrocate the contiguous parts with good Defensatives, to prevent a
Fluxion or Inflammation, and do not remove the Bandage till the Cure be
perfected, or it slacken of its own accord, or some accident require it, and
let the Patient feed on Roasted Flesh, or Nourishing liquids.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus. Cent. 5. Obs. 88. relates, that a certain lusty Fellow of 40
years of Age, had a Transverse Fracture of the Rotula with a great Contusion,
but no Wound. Though the Patient was treated according to the Rules of Art from
the very first, yet nevertheless he was afflicted with great Pains, and several
other bad Symptoms; and after these were removed, and the cure at length
completed he continued lame, his Thigh was very weak, he could not walk
without a great deal of trouble, and had the greatest difficulty in the World
to lift up his Leg in going up any Ascent.

The same Author relates the History of a Captain who had his Rotula fractured
by a Musket Shot, upon which a great Inflammation and a Meliceris ensued, which
afflicted him so much as to obstruct Digestion and ruin his Health, and after
some time proved the cause of his Death. These Instances Demonstrate to us of
how bad consequence Hurts of the Rotula are.

CHAP. LXIX. Of a Complicate Fracture of the Leg.
THIS Operation is the Reducing the Bones into their Natural place.

THE CAUSE of Fractures in this Part, are some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. There is a visible Wound, the crashing of the Bones may be heard,
and the Part is sensibly shorter than it ought to be.

If the Tibia only be broke, the other supports it and hinders it from jetting
out; but if both Bones are broke, they very often ride on one another, and then
the Leg is shorter than it ought to be.

There are two Bones in the Leg, the Tibia or larger Focil, and the Fibula or
lesser. The Tibia forms the forepart of the Leg, and has a Protuberance at its
upper end, which is received into the Cavity of the Thigh Bone. Besides these,
there are two long Sinus's which receive the Head of the Thigh Bone, which by
reason of the Cartilages which line them appear very long. M. Sanguerdius has
observed another Sinus in the forepart lying between the two former, which are
separated by a prominence, at the Extremity of which, there springs a Ligament
which is implanted into the Thigh Bone. This Bone is Triangular, and its
anteriour part which is long and sharp, is called its Edge or Spine; at its
lower end it has a Process which makes the internal Ancle; and in the last
place, it is articulated with the Astragalus by Ginglymus.

The Fibula is much slender than the Tibia, and is placed in a manner behind
the Leg; it has a round Head at its upper End, which terminates a little below
the Head of the Tibia, but its lower end is extended below the Tibia. The
Fibula is bound to the Tibia by common Ligaments.

The two Focils of the Leg spread from each other, and leave an interstice in
the midst, which is filled with a large loose Ligament, and some Muscles which
descend all along the Leg; and for this Reason in Amputation of the Limb, it is
usual to divide these by a sharp, straight Knife, to prevent the Accidents
which might follow, if they were left to be torn by the Teeth of the Saw.

The Tibia continues to be Cartilaginous on the second Month in the Foetus, and
the Fibula does not appear distinctly at that time, but in the third Month they
are bony and visible enough.

The OPERATION.
Place the Patient on his Back, and let an Assistant take hold of his Leg above
the Foot, and another below the Knee; and if both Bones are broke, and ride one
over the other, let them make a strong Extension, which is not required to be
so great if one of the Bones remain entire, and then with both Hands bring the
Bones even.

THE DRESSING. When the Bones are reduced, dress this like other contus'd
Wounds, applying Pledgits with good Digestives, and laying on an Emplaster, and
a simple Compress over that wetted in Wine heated. When the Wound is dressed in
this manner, bind up the part with the Eighteen tail'd Bandage in this manner.

Take a large picce of Linen Cloth as long as the part, and broad enough to go
round it; when it is made up into three Pleats, cut this Cloth into three parts
equal on every side, leaving about three inches plain and undivided in the
middle to support the Leg, and stitch it along the whole length of the
undivided part. The several ranges of these Tails must be all gradually longer
and shorter than each other, viz. the inmost shortest of all, the middle
something longer than that, and the outmost longest of all; when the Bandage is
laid under the Leg lay a Compress under it to prevent the Pus from staining it.

When things are thus prepared, apply the Tails on the Fracture, raising them
one on one side, and the other on the other, and crossing them, and so continue
to raise the Heads of the first Range, next lay two Compresses (...) each side
the Leg as long as it self; then proceed to r^^^e and cross the second in the
same manner as the first, beginning with those which lie over the Fracture; and
in the last place, do the same with the third Rank, and make the remaining part
of the Dressing with Junks, Splints. Boulsters, Soals, Pillows, and Ribbons, as
was directed in the foregoing Chapter.

THE CURE. Dress the Fracture twice a Day, in the same manner as contus'd
Wounds which require Digestion. Take care to cover the Bone if it lie bare with
dry Pledgits, not suffering the Wound to close until the Bone be exfoliated,
confine the Patient to a regular Diet, and then Digest, Deterge, and Cicatrize
after the usual manner.

REMARKS.
Kerkringius, Obs. 58. tells us, that a certain young Man of 20 years of Age
having received a blow by a Horse on the Tibia, and his Surgeon not imagining
the Bone to be affected healed the Wound, but about 20 years after it broke out
again in the same place, and part of the Tibia exfoliated. Some few years
since, there was a Man in the Cha^te des Hommes at Paris, who had an Ulcer on
the T^^^ with a Cariosity of the Bone, in which there was an Artery of the
Marrow which had a sensible Pulsation.

CHAP. LXIX. Of a Fracture of the Bones of the Feet.
THIS Operation is a Reducing the Bones of the Feet to their Natural place.

THE CAUSE. This kind of Fracture can scarce happen, without some heavy thing
falling on the part, or some violent Blow.

THE SIGNS. A Fracture of these Bones may be discovered by the great Confusion,
Deformity, Depression, and crashing Noise, which may be heard upon stirring the
Part.

The Foot is composed of the Tarsus, Metatarsus and Toes. The Tarsus is made up
of seven Bones, three of which are termed Cuneiformia, because they are crowded
like so many Wedges between the rest; the four other are called Astragalus,
Calcaneum, Scapha, and Cuboides.

The Astragalus is a large irregular Bone, which is covered with a smooth
Cartilage in the place, where it is united to the Tibia by Ginglymos. It is
seated between the two Ancles, and has a Cavity below which receives the
Protuberance of the Calcaneum, and in its forepart it has a roundish
Protuberance which enters into the Cavity of the Scapha. The Calcaneum is the
largest of all the Bones of the Tarsus, the Body is supported on it in Walking.
and its Name is derived from its use. It is larger behind than where it is
joined to the Cuboides. The Scapha or Os Naviculare, derives its Name from its
resembling a Boat, and is more even without than within; it has a Cavity which
receives the Protuberance of the Astragalus, and is joined before to the three
Ossa Cuneiformia.

The Cuboides derives its Name from its Figure, though its six sides be not
equal; it touches the Calcaneum the Naviculare the Cuneiformia, and the last
bones of the Metatarsus.

The three Bones of the Tarsus are unequal, and more closely joined without
than within, and are connected to the Naviculare, and three first Bones of the
Metatarsus. All the Bones of the Tarsus are closely articulated, and bound
together by Ligaments and Cartilages, as in such manner, that the Tarsus seems
to be only one piece.

The Metatarsus which makes the sole of the Foot, is composed of a Range of
five Bones, which are smooth and unequal outwardly, and slender at that end
where they are Articulated with the first Range of the Bones of the Fingers, on
the inside they are curve, and by this means adapted to receive the Tendons of
the Muscles. These Bones have Processes both above and below their
Articulation, with the Bones of the Tarsus which is very close, and the Musculi
Inierossei lie between them.

There are fourteen Bones in the Toes, the great Toe having two, and each of
the rest three Bones. The first Range is longer than the rest, and their
Structure and Articulation is the same with the Fingers, except in this, that
they are shorter than the latter.

The Metatarsus and Toes form a Cavity under the Soal of the Foot, where the
Tendons of the Muscles pass, and this Cavity hinders them from being compressed
in Walking.

The OPERATION.
Place the Patient on a Stool or on his Bed, and if the Tarsus or Metatarsus be
fractured, let two Assistants make the Extensions, one having hold of the end
of the Foot, and the other of the Heel and the lower part of the Leg, and then
reduce the Bones.

The Toes are to be managed in the same manner as the Fingers in the Hand.

THE DRESSING. Since there is a Wound ever in a Fracture of the Foot, it must
therefore be dressed like all other Contused Wounds, that is, digested not with
greasy Unguents which are apt to rot the Tendons, but Spirituous Applications,
as Oil of Eggs, Oil of Turpentine, etc. First lay on Pledgits, and then a
simple Compress around the Foot dipped in some Defensative Liquour; and lastly,
make the following Bandage.

Take a Roller between two or three Else long, and an Inch and a half broad
rolled up at both ends, begin with making a Circumvolution about the bottom of
the Leg, and then cross on the bottom of the Foot; then bring it under the Foot
and cross again, and return over the Foot crossing, and proceed to the end of
the Foot in the same manner. (These Turns of the Roller leave Lozenge-like
spaces, which has occasioned this Bandage to have that Name given it) from the
end of the Foot return to the Heel, bringing the Roller up and covering the
Foot with the Edgings, and then fasten by several Circumvolutions about the Leg
after the Bandage is made, lay the Leg in the Junks, as directed in the Chapter
of the Fracture of the Thigh.

THE CURE. Dress this in the same manner as contus'd Wounds, and confine the
Patient to a Regular Diet.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 47. relates, that a certain Person attempting to
leap over a Ditch when the Ground was frozen, wrenched his Foot so violently,
as to force the Talus and Astragalus out of their place, and break the
Ligaments which bound the Bones together, which forced him to take off the Foot.

CHAP. LXX. Of Luxations in General.
THese kinds of Operations, are the Reducing of the Bones dislocated, into
their Natural place.

THE CAUSE. Luxations most commonly are caused by some Blow, Fall, or other
External Accident; but sometimes likewise they proceed from the too great
Humidity and Relaxation of the Ligaments and Tendons of the Muscles, which are
not firm enough to keep the Part in its place. Sometimes that Mucilage which
Nature furnishes the Joints with to lubricate and make them supple, is
condensed and coagulated by Acids, and becomes of the Consistence of Plaster;
and this filling up the Cavity, thrusts the Head of the Bone out of its place.

Sometimes the Head of the Bones, and the contiguous Nervous parts are united
and cemented together by a certain glutinous Matter, and this is more dangerous
than simple Luxations.

THE SIGNS. If a Dislocated Bone be compared with its opposite which is in its
proper place, (besides the loss of its Motion) the Part will appear very
different in its Length, Figure, and Position.

Luxations are perfect when the Head of the Bone is entirely out of the Cavity,
or Partial when it is only so in part.

The Dislocation of the Thigh is the most difficult to reduce, and that of the
Heel-bone the most dangerous. The Thigh Bone has a strong Ligament which
connects its Head to the Acetabulum, and cannot be dislocated except this be
broke some violence, or very much relaxed, and when this happens, it can never
be reunited, and the Bone lies so deep and is covered by so many Muscles, that
the Virtue of Medicines cannot reach it, and the Patient must unavoidably
continue lame all the rest of his Life. Children often escape more easily than
Men, which happens from the great Repose they take.

The Danger in a Luxation of the Foot, proceeds from the numerous Bones and
Tendons in that part; but this is a case which very seldom happens. There is a
great Pain, and sometimes a Convulsion happens in reducing these parts which
proceeds from the acute Sense of the Tendons which are distended and torn.
Though the Hurt be small the Part is inflamed, but if it be great there spring
up Fungus's, and the Patient is often convulsed.

Authors pretend there are but these three Luxations which are Mortal, viz.
That of the Spine, that of the lower Jaw when it is perfect, and that of the
Head with the first Vertebra.

The Luxation of the upper Vertebrae are very dangerous, because they compress
the Spinal Marrow, and by this means intercept the Animal Spirits.

Imperfect Luxations are more easily reduced than complete ones, because the
Head of the Bone is on the edge of the Cavity, and does not require so much
pains to bring it in.

In Luxations which proceed from a Relaxation of the Ligaments, it is easy
enough to put the Bone into its place, but very difficult to retain it there.

The Articulation of the Arm with the Scapula and Wrist being very lax, those
Bones are easily dislocated.

Luxations in Women, Children, and lean Persons, are reduced with much greater
ease than in lusty Men.

When the Ligaments are broke, the Luxations are incurable.

When a Bone has but one Head, it is more easy to reduce it, than if it had
two.

If Luxations be of long standing, it is difficult to reduce them, because the
Ligaments grow hard; the Cavity is filled up as well as the Passage, by which
the Bone should be brought into its proper place.

Luxations with Wounds are more dangerous and difficult to reduce than simple
ones, which is occasioned by the Accidents which attend them.

In Luxations where the Edges of the Cavity are broke, the Bone being reduced,
soon falls out again.

The OPERATION.
In imperfect Luxations, or such as proceed from a Laxity of the Ligaments; the
part must be drawn as little as may be, because in imperfect Luxations, the
Head of the Bone is not far out of its Natural place, and when the Ligaments
are relaxed, they easily give way.

The Bone must be drawn till the Head be near the Cavity, giving it several
little turns on one side and another, as occasion requires, and when the Head
is on the Edge of the Cavity, guide it in.

Observe here always to bring the Bone in the same way it slipped out, and if the
Part be inflamed, that must be something abated before the Reduction, least the
Patient be convulsed.

The Extension must be greater or less as necessity requires, or the Patient
can endure it.

THE DRESSING. After Reduction, keep the Part in its place with a proper
Bandage, using a Scarf if it be the Arm, Junks if the Leg or other proper
Machines in the rest of the Body.

The Bandage must not be too strait, for fear least the Blood Vessels and
Lymphaticks be comprest, and cause a Tumor, on the other Hand it must not be
too slack, for fear least it be not sufficient to keep the part in its place,
and a new Luxation happen.

THE CURE. If an Inflammation proceed from the straitness of a Bandage, it
requires such internal Medicines as promote the Fluidity and Motion of the
Blood, and such External Medicines as disperse the Inflammation.

If the Luxated Part be inflamed, you must not attempt to reduce it till the
Inflammation be abated, because it is incapable of necessary Extension, and the
Pain may cause a Mortal Convulsion.

To prevent Inflammation, foment the part which is reduced with a Decoction of
the tops of St. John's wort, Camomile, Tapsus Barbatus, Rosemary, Stoechas
Arabica, and dip the Rollers in that Liquour; this Fomentation hinders the
Stagnation of the Blood, prevents Inflammation, and restores the Natural
Springiness of the Fibers.

There is very often Oedematous Tumors on the Part which is Luxated; for the
dispersing of which, internal Sudorisicks are useful in conjunction with very
penetrating Volatile Oils. For this purpose, Liniments made with Distilled Oil
of Tartar and Humane Bones are excellent.

The following Emplaster is an excellent Discutient. Take yellow Wax and very
fine white Rosin, Melt these and put a little White Amber and Gum Elemi of each
a sufficient quantity to form a Mass, incorporate these with Balsam of Peru,
and make an Emplaster which is to be laid on the Fractured part; the two edges
of the Emplaster must not touch each other, by reason of the swelling of the
Luxated Part. The contiguous Parts must by no means be embrocated, except it be
with Oil of Turpentine, because all Oleous Medicines stop the Pores hinder
Perspiration, and relax the Parts instead of constringing them.

You must likewise forbear the use of Astringent Cataplasms which shut up the
Pores, and cause a Tumor of the Part. It is better for this purpose, to use
Decoctions made of the Nervous Plants in Wine.

If the Luxation proceed from a Hard, Plastry Matter, which by degrees has
thrust the Bone out of its Cup, Discutient, and attenuating Medicines are
required to dissolve the indurated Matter. The Internal ones are such as
mortify the Acid, as the Volatile Spirit of Tartar, the Volatile Spirit and Salt
of Human Bones, with proper Laxatives and Sudorisicks premised. The External
Discutients may be such as dissolve the Coagulum; as Balsam of Peru mixed with
Spirit of Wine, or dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg, with a little Spirit of
Ginger. Spirit of Earthworms is still better. Oil of Tartar is very proper to
resolve the Coagulum.

If the Reduction of a Bone be too long deferred, a Coagulum is formed, which
hinders it, and must be first dissolved by following Remedy.. Distilled Oil of
Humane Bodies, p. 1. the Foetid Oil of Tartar, p. 11. Mix these and put
Quicklime over them, then distill with a Retort, and rub the Part with this
Oil which is very penetrating.

If the Luxation proceed from a Relaxation of the Ligaments, internal
Sudorificks are good, and externally Discutients, Aromaticks, Astringents,
mixed with Nervine Medicines, the Wounded part in a due State. Crollius's
Styptick Emplaster mixed with Oil of Tartar, and Oil of the Philosophers spread
on Glove Leather and applied on the Part, is very proper.

If the Bone be Dislocated and Fractured, these Mischiefs must be both remedied
at once, and proper Extensions and Bandages made for each, as they shall happen
to require.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 90. tells us, That a certain young Maid having
wrenched her Foot without any Dislocation, did for some Days walk on it without
any very great trouble. But neglecting it the Pain increased some small time
after, and the Part became tumefied and inflamed; upon this a Mountebank was
sent for, who having violently hall'd and twisted about the Part, applied an
Astringent Cataplasm made of Bole Armoniack, the Four Meals, the white of an
Egg, and made a very strait Bandage, without purging her Body before the
Operation; this occasioned the Pain to increase, and there was a Fluxion on the
Part, attended with a continual Fever, Delirium and Restlessness. After some
time an Abscess which was formed in the Part broke, and several carious Bones
were thrown out, and the Patient continued lame all her Life after.

This Instance plainly demonstrates, of how dangerous consequence it is to
neglect Wrenches and Luxations, or to torment the Patient while the Part
continues pained and Inflamed.

CHAP. LXXI. Of a Luxation of the Bones of the Cranium.
THIS Operation is a Re-uniting the Bones of the Skull when they happen to be
separated.

THE CAUSE. This Distemper arises from an excessive Moisture which renders the
Bones lax and yielding, (especially if the Sutures are not close) or too great
a quantity of Blood passing through the Vessels of the Dura Matter, which
incessantly beats on the Bones of the Dura Matter, and at length forces them
quite asunder. The Famous Mounsieur Pascal, had the bones of the Cranium
separated from one another, about three years before he died, which perhaps
might proceed from abundance of Spirits emploved, by his continual and intense
thinking.

THE SIGNS. This Malady is visible, the Distance of the Bones may be perceived,
and the beating of the Brain may be selt by laying ones Hand on the Patients
Head, the Teguments giving way.

The OPERATION.
This is bringing the Bones together, by compressing them with the Palm of the
Hand, and then keeping them together by some convenient Bandage.

THE DRESSING. Cut off the Patients Hair, and lay a Compress dipped in Spirit of
Wine, or some other Discutient and Spirituous Liquour, and make the Bandage
called the Capeline, to bring the Bones together by degrees.

To make this, take a Roller about an inch and a half broad, and four or five
Else in length rolled up at both ends, and begin to apply it on the middle of
the Forehead, then bring the two Heads of the Roller behind the Head and cross
them, and engage one end of the Roller by passing the other over it; then raise
one end of the Roller and bring it over the Sagittal Suture quite to the middle
of the Forehead, and there engage it with the other Head of the Roller, which
you must bring over the Forehead; then raise the Roller and bring it over the
Head making an Edging on the first turn over the Sagittal Suture; and then
bring it down behind the Head, and engage it by the other Head, with which you
must continue to make Circular turns round the Head, while you raise the other
end, making Edgings alternately on each side of the Head till the whole be
covered. In the last place, bring the two ends of the Roller round the Read
passing round over the Forehead, and pin it at the ends.

THE CURE. Soak the Dressings every day in Red Wine, Spirit of Wine, or some
such Spirituous and Resolvent Liquour to promote the Transpiration of the watery
Matter, and let the Patient use a drying Diet, forbearing all intense thinking;
let him keep his Mind gay, and purge with Hyd^agogues, as Scammony, Jalap, or
their Rosins. When the Bandage seems to slacken, from the Bones approaching to
each other, it is time to undo it, and bind the part up again.

REMARKS.
This is a Distemper which rarely happens, however the Famous Monsieur Pascal,
a Name well known in the Learned World, had such a Disjunction of the Bones of
the Head, that the Motion of his Brain could be felt by applying the Hand on
his Head.

Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 7. tells us, that a Robust fellow of 40 years of
Age who never had been ill, was seized with a continual Fever. In the
beginning he neglected all Methods of cure, which proved of ill consequence to
him, depriving him of Sleep, and throwing him into a Delirium. Upon the sixth
or seventh day the Coronal and Sagit^al Suture separated, and the Motion of the
Brain might be felt by laying ones Finger on the Interstice of the Sutures.
Upon the seventh day the Patient had a profuse, critical, sweat, tinctured like
the Rust of Iron, by which the Morbifick Matter was thrown out, and by degrees
the Sutures reunited, and the Patient recovered.

CHAP. LXXII. Of the Luxation of the Bones of the Nose.
THIS Operation is a Reducing the Sutures of the Bones of the Nose, to their
Juncture with the Coronal Bone.

THE CAUSE of this Accident, is usually some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. When these Bones are Luxated, there appears a small Cavity between
the Bones of the Forehead and Nose, and these last shake upon the least touch;
the Nose it self is distorted, and the Patient breaths with difficulty.

The OPERATION.
This Dislocation seldom happens, the Bones of the Nose and the Coronal Bone
being very firmly united, and when it does, it must be reduced in the following
manner. Take a small stick of Deal of a proper size planed and fitted to the
Nostrils, and wrapped round with Tow; and then placing the Thumb on the Root of
the Nose, partly on the Coronal, and partly on the Nasal Bone to keep the Bones
steady, put them into their place with the stick. In putting the stick up, you
must take care not to hurt the spungy Bones of the Nose, for fear of Wounding
the Part, and causing ill-conditioned Ulcers.

THE DRESSING is the same as in Fractures of the Nose.

THE CURE. If there be a Wound, dress it once every day as a Complicate Wound.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the Luxation of the lower Jaw.
THIS Operation is Restoring the Head of the Bone into its Natural Cavity.

THE CAUSE. The Luxation of the lower Jaw often proceeds, from opening the
Mouth too wide in yawning. This Luxation most commonly happens in the
Forepart, and rarely in the hinder, by reason of the Mamillary Processes which
hinder the Bone from slipping behind. The Jaw is sometimes luxated on one side
only, and at other times on both.

THE SIGNS. When the Jaw Bone is dislocated only on one side, it is turned
transversly, and is plainer and more deprest, than the sound side on which
there is an apparent Tumor. The Patients Mouth stands wide open, and he can
neither shut it nor chew his Meat; and the Teeth of the lower Jaw stand out
farther than those of the upper, and do not answer to the correspondent ones on
the other side.

When the Mandible is luxated on both sides, it hangs on the Breast, and the
Saliva flows incessantly from the Mouth, the Parotid Glands being comprest by
the Head of the Bone. There is a Tension of the Temporal Muscles, and the
Patient can neither shut his Mouth, nor stir his Tongue.

When there is a Dislocation on both sides, the Bone is much more difficult to
reduce, than when it is on one side only, and the Accidents are more desperate;
and unless it be instantly restored, there is a great Pain, Fever, and an
Inflammation of the Throat, and the Patient dies in ten days time.

The OPERATION.
If the Bone has been out for any time, Emollient Remedies must be used before
it can be restored.

To reduce a complete Luxation when both Heads of the Bone are out; let the
Patient sit upon the Floor or a low Stool, and place a Servant behind to
support and keep his Head steady, and then put both your Thumbs into the
Patients Mouth, having wrapped them round with a Tape to defend them from being
hurt by the Patients Teeth, and to hinder them from slipping when you press on
the lower Jaw; then clap your other Fingers under the Patients Chin, to draw
the Jaw and raise it up.

But if the Mouth be so close that you cannot thrust your Thumbs in, put a
small Wooden Wedge about an inch thick, and introducing these Wedges strongly
by their thinner end, keep them on the Teeth; in the last place, put a Girth
under the Chin, and let a Servant put both his Knees on the Patients Shoulders,
and draw the ends of the Girth, while you thrust down the Wedges to bring the
Jaw into its place.

When it is only Dislocated on one side, place the Patient on a low Stool, and
let a Servant stand behind to keep his Head steady; then put your Thumb on the
Grinders of that side which is dislocated, and thrust the Jaw down, and reduce
it into its place.

The Mandible may be reduced sometimes by a blow of the Fist only, on that side
which is not luxated, but this can only take place when the Luxation is
uncompleat.

THE DRESSING is the same as in a Fracture of the Jaw.

THE CURE. Let the Patient feed on Nourishing Liquids, for he cannot eat any
thing that is solid, and let him keep himself still in his Bed; and if there be
the least signs of Inflammation, give him Clysters to keep his Body open.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of the Luxation of the Clavicle.
THIS Operation is the Reduction of the Head of the Chavicle to its
Articulation, with the Acromion of the Shoulder Blade, or the Sternum.

THE CAUSE of the Luxation, is some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. The Clavicle is most commonly dislocated in its Juncture to the
Acromion, and very seldom in that to the Sternum, because the first Rib serves
as a support to it.

When the Clavicle is dislocated, the Patient cannot lift his Arm without a
great deal of Difficulty, the Acromion causes a jetting out, and there is a
Cavity caused by the Clavicles falling down.

This Accident is hard to be remedied in Ancient Bodies, because the Ligaments
grow hard and bony, and are very difficultly agglutinated when once they are
broken.

The OPERATION.
Let the Patient lie on his Back, and put some hard unequal Body between his
Shoulder-blades, then press his Shoulders and the side of his Breast, and in
the mean time reduce the bone into its place.

THE DRESSING is the same as in a Fracture of the part.

THE CURE. Let the Patient keep his Bed, and let his Diet be Roasted Flesh, or
any other Nourishing Meat, and bleed him, and give him a Clyster if occasion
shall require.

CHAP. LXXV. Of the Luxation of the Vertebrae
THIS Operation is the Restoring one of the Vertebrae which is slipped out of its
place.

THE CAUSE. The Dislocation of the Vertebrae proceeds from some Blow, Fall,
Strain, Violent Motion of the Body, or some ill Posture, or the Relaxation of
some Ligament by a Flux of Humors.

THE SIGNS. Dislocations of the Vertebrae are complete or imperfect.

In an imperfect Luxation of the Vertebrae the Neck remains distorted, the Face
is Livid, and the Patient has a great Difficulty to speak and breath; but if
the Luxation be complete, the Nerves and Spinal Marrow suffer a violent
Compression, and the Patient must inevitably die, unless he be relieved
forthwith.

The Vertebrae of the Back may be dislocated four several ways, Outwardly,
Inwardly, to the Right, and to the Left. When any of the Vertebrae are luxated
inwardly, there is a Depression in the place, but if outwardly, onthe contrary
there is a Tumor. If the Vertebrae be slipped outside-ways, there is an unusual
rising that way.

When any of the Vertebrae are luxated inwardly, the Patient has a Difficulty
of making Water and voiding his Excrements, cannot move his Thigh without a
great deal of difficulty, and it becomes cold; because the Origin of the Nerves
which are dispensed to that Part are compressed, and these sort of Luxations
where the Vertebra is slipped inwards, are very difficult to reduce, because
there can be no compression made on the Belly for that purpose.

If the Vertebrae of the Back bunch out in Children, the Ribs do not grow at
all, or at least but very little, and jet forwards, and make an acute Angle at
the Sternum, by which means the Cavity of the Breast is not capacious enough
for the Expansion of the Lungs, but they being comprest, the Patient becomes
Asthmatick.

If the Spine be unequal, there is a stop put to its growth, but the Arms and
Legs increase exceedingly.

When the Rump-bone is dislocated, the Patient cannot bring his Heel toward
his Buttock, nor bend his Knee without a great deal of Difficulty, nor can he
sit or go to Stool without a great deal of trouble.

The OPERATION.
To reduce the Vertebrae of the Neck, of whatever kind the Luxation be, place
the Patient on a low Chair, and let a Servant lay a great stress on his
Shoulders, and while he does this, take hold of the Patients Head under the
Ears, and making an Extension of it, turn it to and fro till it be reduced; and
you may know that it is so, by his being able to turn it himself, and the
cessation of the Pain.

To reduce the Vertebrae which are luxated externally, let the Patient be laid
on a Table on his Belly, and fasten a Girth under his Armpits, and on the
Hips, and tie at the same time his Thighs and Legs, and draw both above and
below, without making so violent an Extension, and in the mean time reduce the
Part.

If the Vertebra cannot be reduced in this manner, take two sticks near a
Fingers breadth in thickness, and about four or five times as long, and wrap
these in a Cloth for fear of hurting the Patient; then lay one of these sticks
on each side the dislocated part, and make a great pressure on them, to thrust
in the Vertebrae, or take a great Roller of Wood, such as Pastry-cooks use, and
roll it to and fro on the two sticks; Note here that the two sticks which are
on the side, be higher than the Spinal Process of the Vertebrae, to prevent all
danger of breaking it.

You may conclude the Vertebra is reduced, if it be equal with the contiguous
ones.

Though the Luxation of the Vertebrae inwardly be almost impossible to reduce,
and most commonly is Mortal, you must not nevertheless abandon the Patient; and
therefore when this happens, place the Patient on his Back, and make an
Extension with Pullies, in the manner above described, and then manage the
Spine, and try to bring in the Vertebra. If this fail, make an Incision on the
Vertebra, which is deprest just over its Spinal Process, and take hold of it,
and endeavor to reduce it in this manner.

If the Rump-bone be thrust in by any Blow or Fall, put the Forefinger of the
right Hand into the Anus and pushing it up with the left Hand press it out, and
guide it into its place.

If the Luxation be external, which sometimes happens in violent Labors, put
the Bone gently in with the Fingers. These Bones are confirmed in three Weeks.

THE DRESSING. When the Vertebrae of the Neck are reduced, let the Patient
incline his Head to that side which is opposite to the Dislocation, and put a
Fillet about the Neck, which must be fastened on the Arm.

If you have made an Incision on the Vertebra, and there ensue a Flux of Blood,
stop it with Astringents.

If the Vertebra be luxated outwardly, lay a small Plate of Lead on each side
to keep it in its place, and lay a thick Compress over it, and keep this on
with the Napkin and Scapulary, as is directed in the Chapter of the Empyema.

If the Luxation be inwards, the Vertebra must not be comprest by Bandages, nor
any Plates or Splints laid on it for fear of occasioning a new Dislocation.

In a Luxation of the Rump-bone, whether inwards or outward, the Dressing must
be the same as in a Fracture of the Rump-bone.

THE CURE. If any Incision be made to bring out the Vertebra which is luxated
inwards, the Wound must be dressed after the usual manner, and the Patient must
lie on one side, and observe a good Diet.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus, Cent. 5. Obs. 68. relates, that a certain Man having a
Luxation of two Vertebrae, was Paralytick from the Navil to the Feet.

A Country Man happening to fall from a Tree, had the second Vertebra of the
Loins luxated inwards; upon which he felt a great pain, which continued for a
long time, and he Vomited his Meat before Digestion, and continued in this
condition several Days, without being able to retain any thing in his Stomach.
After some short space he was seized with a burning Fever, an unextinguishable
Thirst, want of Sleep, Restlessness, with a dryness of Tongue, and a Delirium;
all the Parts below the Navil became Paralytick, and he could neither retain
his Urine nor his Excrements.

Bartholin. Cent. 6. Hist. 48. relates, that a certain Irish Woman turned her
Head round so far, that her Nose stood in a Right line with her Shoulder, her
Head could be replaced in its Natural Situation with a great deal of ease, but
so soon as this was done, it would immediately return to its former position;
this Deformity he assures us, was caused by Mercurial Applications to the Neck.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of the Luxation of the Ribs, and the Cartilago Mucronata.
THIS Operation is the Reducing the Ribs to their Junction with the Vertebrae,
and the Cartilago Mucronata with the Sternum.

THE CAUSE of their Luxation, most commonly is some Blow or Fall.

THE SIGNS. The Luxated Ribs are either deprest inwards, or elevated outward.
When a Rib is deprest inwards, there is an apparent Cavity near its
Articulation with the Vertebrae of the Back, but if the Head of the Rib slip
outward, there is a hard Tumor on the Part, and in both one and the other
kind of Luxation, Respiration is painful and laborious, and the Patient cannot
move his Body without Pain, because the Rib presses on the Muscles.

The Mucronated Cartilage is inverted, and its point turned inwards, especially
in Women and Children; and when this happens, it usually occasions them to die
emaciated, because the Liver and upper Orifice of the Stomach are hurt, and the
Vessels being strongly comprest, by this means the Circulation of the Blood is
interrupted. When this Cartilage is luxated, there is a great hollow in the
lower part of the Breast, and the Patient cannot breath without a great deal of
Pain and Difficulty.

The OPERATION.
When a Rib is luxated outward, lay the Patients Arm over a Door to suspend
the Body, and then thrust the rising of the Rib into its place.

If the Rib be luxated inwards, you must make an Incision to bring it outward.

When the Mucronated Cartilage is depressed, lay the Patient on his Back on
some unequal Body; and then press both sides of the Breast with the Hands to
raise the Cartilage. If this fail, apply dry Cupping-glasses on it to raise it.
Before you attempt to reduce it, chafe the Part very well with Oils of Castor,
Turpentine, and such like Spirituous Topics.

THE DRESSING in Luxations, is the same as in Fractures of the Ribs.

When the Mucronated Cartilage is reduced, lay some proper Emplaster on to
strengthen it, Ambrose Parry uses this Composition.. Root of Bistort, i.
Cypress Nuts, i. Mastich, Frankincense, a^. iss. Balaustiums, i. Oil of
Walnuts, iss. Pitch and Turpentine, as much as will reduce these Ingredients to
the consistence of an Emplaster.

REMARKS.
Bartholin, Cent. 2. Hist. 12. relates, that a certain young Man having a
Looseness, had the lower Ribs on the right side luxated in such a manner, as to
be seen and felt. All the means that his Surgeons could think on proved
ineffectual, his Strength decayed, he had a lingering Fever; after some time
there arose a small pustule which suppurated and broke, upon which the luxated
Ribs returned to their place, and the Ulcer was cured, and the young Man did
well.

The same Author, Cent. 4. Hist. 58. relates, that a certain Man being very
much tired with walking in stony ways, felt a great Pain on the right side near
the Spine, and a Tumor arose on the Sternum, which incommoded him so much,
that he could not lie on the right side, or sit by any means, but when he stood
erect; he did not feel any such pain. After some time the Tumor abating, it
was found that the Symptoms proceeded from a Luxation of the eighth Rib, which
likewise was fractured without any division of the Skin.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of the Luxation of the Humerus or Shoulderbone.
THIS Operation, is the Reducing of the Head of the Bones into the Cavity of
the Head of the Scapula.

THE CAUSE. This Luxation proceeds from some Blow, Fall, or Relaxation of the
Ligaments.

The slipping of this Bone out of its Cavity is not difficult, its Head being
extremely smooth and slippery, as well as the Cavity which receives it, which
is exceeding Membranous, very shallow, and lubricated with an oleous Liquour,
which make it easily slip aside upon the application of any force outwardly.

THE SIGNS. When the Luxation is downwards, and the Head of the Shoulder Blade
is slipped into the Arm-pit, there is a Cavity on the Shoulder, the Acromion is
sharp and jets out; the Elbow stands out, and cannot be brought to the Body
without force; it is drawn forwards more difficultly than backwards, and is
longer than it ought to be; the Patient cannot lay his Hand on the opposite
Shoulder, or bring it to his Mouth, and he feels a great deal of pain when he
stirs it in any manner whatever, by reason of the Compression and Tension of
the Muscles; but observe here, that the Disability to lift or extend the Arm,
is not a sufficient of a Luxation, because the same thing must necessarily
happen on Contusions, Fractures, Inflammations, Wounds, Apostems,
Schirrosities, and Fluxions.

The OPERATION.
The Luxation of the Shoulder may be reduced in six several manners, viz. by
the Fist, by the Shoulder placed under the Patients Arm-pit, by a ball of
thread thrust by the Heel by a Ball on a Leaver, by the Ladder; and lastly, by
the Amby.

To reduce a Shoulder by the help of the Fist clenched, lay the Patient on a
Table on that side which is opposite to the Light, and let one Servant put a
Girth under his Arm-pit, and another a second above the Elbow; let him who
holds the Girth which passes under the Arm-pit keep it firm, and let him who
has hold of that above the Elbow, draw it till the Head of the Bone be directly
against the Socket, and then put it into its Cavity with your Hands or Fist; if
the Hands are not sufficient, you may make use of Pullies.

Or if you please, you may place the Patient on a low Seat (or if he be a big
Man, he may sit on the ground) and plant a Servant on one side to hold the
Patients Body with his Arms, or a Towel, and then take hold of the upper part
of the Humerus with both Hands, and let another Servant kneel behind you, and
take hold of the Luxated Arm above the Elbow which passes between your Legs,
and while both these make the Extension, do you knap the bone into its Cavity.

To reduce a Shoulder with the Heel, lay the Patient on the Ground on a
Coverlet or Quilt, and then put a Ball of thread under his Armpit, and do you
sit opposite to the Patient directly against the luxated Arm, and if it be the
Foot, place the Heel of the right, and if it be the left, the Heel of the left
Foot on the Ball; then take the Patients Arm with both Hands, and draw it
toward the Feet, and thrust the Ball strongly against the Arm-pit. In the mean
time let a Servant stand behind the Patients Head, and draw the Head of the
Humerus with a Napkin, or any other Girth, and put the Soal of his Foot on the
Patients Shoulder, and thrust it down; and let another Servant be placed behind
to keep his Body steady.

To reduce a Shoulder by the help of the Shoulder of another Person, place the
Patients Arm-pit on the Acute end of the Shoulder of a lusty Man, who is taller
than the Patient, that so he may keep him suspended; the Man who holds him
keeping his Hand to his Breast; and while this is doing, put the Head of the
Humerus into its Cavity. If the Patient be very light, and the Weight of his
Body be not sufficient to reduce the Shoulder, let some Person or other hang on
his Shoulder. If the Patient be so tall that it is difficult to find a Man of a
higher Stature, let the Man stand on some small Stool.

To reduce the Arm with the Leaver, take one four or five Foot long with a
bunch like a Tennis Ball in the midst, and on each side the Ball put in two
pegs at such a distance, that the Shoulder may lodge between them; then placing
the Patients Arm-pit on the Ball; let two Men lift up the ends of the staff and
raise the Patient from the Ground, and in the mean time do you draw down the
Arm, and reduce the Head of the Bone into its Natural place.

To reduce a Luxation of the Shoulder with the Ladder, fasten a Ball of thread
on the step of a Ladder, which must be of a convenient size to put under the
Arm-pit; then let the Patient get upon a Stool, and tie both his Legs together,
and the Arm which is sound behind his Back, that it may not rest on his
Shoulder when in the Reduction, then place the Arm-pit on the Ball, and bring
the Ladder as near him as may be, for fear least the Arm be broke in the
Reduction; in the next place, put a strong Girth above the Elbow, and let a
stout Fellow hold this strongly, and then take away the Stool, and this will
bring the Head of the Luxated Bone into its place, or if it does not, you must
twist it on one side and another, till it knaps into its place. When it is
reduced, you must put the Stool again under the Patients Feet, and take the Arm
carefully out of the Ladder, having great care not to lift it up for fear of a
new Dislocation.

In stead of a Ladder, you may if you please make use of a Door, observing the
same Circumstances.

The Amby of Hippocrates known to our Surgeons by the Name of the Commander, is
made of two pieces of Wood fastened with pins; these pieces of Wood must be near
two Inches and a half distant from each other, and to the top of these another
piece must be fastened, which is longer than a Man's Arm, and which advances half
a Foot at one end. This last moveable piece of Wood must be fastened between the
other two with a Pin on which it turns, and may be raised or let down at the
end.

To reduce the dislocated Arm with this Instrument, place the Patient on a low
Stool, something lower than the Machine, with his Feet tied together for fear
he rise when the part ought to be reduced, the Patients Arm must be laid all
along this moveable branch, the lesser end of it being applied under the
Patients Arm-pit, and tied in two or three places, and when this is done
depress the lower end, and this will bring the Head of the Bone into its place.

THE DRESSING. When the Humerus is reduced, put a small ball of Lint under the
Arm-pit to fill the Cavity, and keep this ball on with a Compress cleft at both
ends, which you must bring up and cross on the Shoulder; besides this, you must
lay a Compress on the other Arm-pit for fear least the Compress hurt it, and
make the Bandage called Spica with a Roller five Else in length, and three
inches broad rolled up at one end.

In applying this bring the end of the Roller under the Arm-pit opposite to the
Luxation, then bring the other end of the Roller over the part affected, and
back again under the same Arm-pit; and lastly over, so as to cross over the
first turn on the Shoulder, then bring the Roller over the Breast, and next
under the Arm-pit, opposite to that which is affected; then pass behind the
Back and under that Arm which was luxated, and make a small Edging there, then
bring it under the Arm-pit and over the Shoulder and continue these turns of
the Roller in this manner, making Edgings every time you pass over the Shoulder
concerned. These Edgings something resemble an Ear of Wheat, and this it is
which gives the Bandage this Name. When the Shoulder is covered, which is done
by gradually descending to the Arm, make two Circular turns round the upper
part of the Humerus, and these will make a Triangle which is called Geranium,
or the Cranes Bill; this Triangle must be covered by rising with Edgings, and
when this is done, bring the Roller round the Breast and fasten it, and put the
Arm in a Sling. The manner of which we have described in the Chapter of the
Fracture of the Arm.

THE CURE. Let the Patient keep his Arm in a Sling, the Cubit making a right
Angle with the Arm, and resting on the Ribs.

The Dressings must not be taken off the first four or five Days, unless some
Accident happen, the Patient m^^^ fe^d on Nourishing Diet, and repose himself
as much as possible.

REMARKS.
Fabr. Hildanus tells us, that a Child of eight years of Age, of a good Habit
of Body, had his right Arm dislocated by a Fall, which mightily emaciated and
wasted him, and this was the more remarkable, that lessening, while the other
parts grew larger. At length his Relations perceived a coalition in the bending
of his Arm, which hindered him from extending it, and it continued bent like a
crooked stick, without putting him to any pain.

CHAP. LXXIX. Of the Luxation of the Elbow.
THIS Operation is a Restoring the Cubit to its Articulation, with the Humerus.

THE CAUSE. This Dislocation proceeds from some Fall or Relaxation of the
Ligaments.

THE SIGNS. The Cubit is luxated in four several manners, either inwards or
outward, or on one side.

When the Cubit is luxated inwards, the Olecranon is stopped in the internal
Cavity of the Condyl of the Shoulder Bone, the Arm is bent, and the Hand is
turned inwards; but if the Luxation be outward, the Arm is strait and shorter
than the other; the internal Process of the Cubit lies in the external Cavity
of the Condyl of the Humerus, and the Olecranon passes beyond the Cavity, which
naturally it ought to lodg^ in. If the Luxation be on one side, there is a
rising in the place of the Head of the Bone, and a Depression where it is supt
out. These Luxations for the most part are incomplete.

The OPERATION.
If the Luxation be inwards, let several Servants make an Extension of the
Humerus and Arm, and in the mean time bend the Arm, and bring the Hand to the
Shoulder.

There are diverse Practitioners who lay a Ball on the Flexure of the Joint, and
then bend the Arm presently, bringing it to the Shoulder.

If the Cubit be luxated outward, let the Arm be drawn above and below, and
during these Extensions, put the Olecranon into its Cavity. In reducing this
Luxation, you must not bend the Arm as in the former case, because a Motion of
this kind would hinder its Reduction.

If you like it better you may proceed thus; take the Patients Arm and put it
round a Pillar, and fasten a Girth near the Process of the Cubitus, and then
draw this with a Leaver round the Pillar, till the Bone knap into its place. Or
take a stick of a Foot long and an inch Diameter, and wrap the middle of this
round with a Cloth, then take hold of both ends with each Hand, and push
strongly in the Head of the Bone with the middle of the stick, while the
Servants make the Extension. This last Method of Reducing the Bone is very
serviceable, when the Luxation is inwards or outward, but if the Cubit be
slipped on one side, let two Servants take hold one of the Arm, and the other of
the Shoulder; and then reduce the Bone into its place. Note here, that a
Luxation of the Cubit can hardly be without the Radius, starting from the
Shoulder Bone, and therefore in reducing the Cubit, the Surgeon must examine
whether the Radius remain in its place, which he may discover by the Pronation
and Supination of the Hand; for if he be unable to do this, it is a certain
Sign that the Radius is separated.

THE DRESSING. Lay a simple Compress dipped in some Defensative Liquour, to take
off the Inflammation. This Compress must be slit lengthways, for the better
applying it on the Juncture, and when it is on, make a Bandage with a Roller
five Else long, and an Inch and a half broad. In doing this, first make a
Circular turn on the lower part of the Humerus, then descend obliquely in the
bending of the Arm, and make a Circular turn on the upper part of the Arm, and
an X on the Flexure of the Elbow, and thus continue to ascend and descend,
making Edgings on the Elbow, and Xs on the bending of the Joint, till the Elbow
be quite covered; and when this is done, ascend up the Arm and fasten the
Roller about the Breast.

THE CURE. Put the Arm in a Sling, in the same manner as was described in the
Fracture of this part. Let the Patient use a good Nourishing Diet, and often
make a Pronation and Supination of his Arm, for fear least the Bones be
cemented together.

CHAP. LXXX. Of the Luxation of the Bones of the Wrist.
THIS Operation is a Reduction of the Bones of the Wrist, to the Cavity of the
Radius.

THE CAUSE. This Luxation most commonly proceeds from some Fall or Relaxation
of the Ligaments.

THE SIGNS. The Dislocation of the Wrist is either inwards, outward, or one
side. When the Dislocation is inwards, and the Hand is turned back when it is
outward, it is bent, when it is on the right side the side of the little
Finger; and when on the left, it is turned on the side of the Thumb.

The Articulation of the Hand being very lax, it may easily be luxated.

The OPERATION.
If the Luxation be inwards, lay the back of the Patients Hand on a Table, and
while the Extension is making, press the prominent bone into its place with the
Palm of your Hand. If the Luxation be outwardly, lay the flat of the Patients
Hand, and proceed as before. If the Luxation be on one side when the Extension
is made, twist the Bones on the side opposite to the Dislocation, and draw each
Finger separately, that so the Tendons may come into their place.

If the Bones of the Wrist are slipped into the Hand, lay the back of the Hand on
a Table, and press the Bones into their place.

If they are slipped on one side, press them to the opposite.

The Metacarpus is composed of four Bones. The two middle of these cannot be
dislocated on one side, because they are supported by the two Bones which are
on each side. That which sustains the Forefinger, and that which sustains the
little, cannot be dislocated toward the Forefinger, nor that which sustains
the little Finger, toward the middle Finger. All the other Bones may be
luxated inwards or outward; but since the manner of Reducing them is the same
as with that of the Carpus, I shall remit the Reader thither.

The Fingers may be dislocated inwards, outward, or one side. To reduce them,
there is nothing farther necessary than to pull them, and put the Head of the
Bone into its place.

In these Dislocations the Parts recover their Natural tone in twelve Days time.

THE DRESSING. This is the same with that taught in Chap. LXVI.

THE CURE. Take care that the Bandage be not too strait nor too slack, and keep
the Dressings on as long as may be, and let the Patient use a strengthening Diet.

REMARKS.
In the second Month one may perceive by the help of a Microscope, several
white spots at the extremity of the Wrist in a Foetus, and there the
Ossification of the Bone commences. In the fourth, fifth, and sixth Month, they
only increase in their Dimensions, without any other sensible Alteration. In
the seventh and eighth Months. the Epiphyses of the Fingers can hardly be
discerned; but in the ninth Month, they are as distinct and visible, as in the
Bones of Adult Persons.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of the Luxation of the Thigh.
THIS Operation is the Reduction of the Head of the Thigh bone, into the Cavity
of the Ischion.

THE CAUSE. A perfect Luxation of the Thigh cannot happen, except the Part
suffer great Violence, for the Head of the Thigh Bone is retained in the Cavity
of the Acetabulum by a strong Ligament. The Circumference of this Cavity is
edged with Cartilaginous Ligaments, which likewise cover the Neck of the Head
of the Thigh Bone, and several of the largest and strongest Muscles of the
whole Body are inserted into this Bone, and conspire to strengthen this
Articulation. Sometimes indeed a Luxation happens from too great a Relaxation
of the Ligaments, but this is ever an imperfect one.

THE SIGNS. When the Head of the Bone is stopped on the share-bones, there is a
Tumor in the place where the Head of the Bone is, one Leg is longer than the
other, and the Knee and Foot are turned outward; the Knee cannot be bent, and
the Thigh brought toward the Groin, because the Head of the Bone keeps the
Muscles extended.

If the Head of the Bone be slipped outward, the Leg is shorter, because the
Head of the Bone passes over its Cavity; the Knee and Foot is turned inwards,
and the Heel outward, and the Patient cannot support himself, except on the
end of his Foot. It sometimes happens that the Head of the Thigh Bone remaining
for a considerable time in the same place, forms a sort of a Cavity amongst the
Muscles, which are hardened by a constant compression of the Bone, and by this
means sometimes the Patient is able to walk without a stick.

When the Thigh Bone is slipped forwards, the Head of the Bone is lodged on the
Os Pubis, and makes a Tumor in the Groin, and the Muscles of the Buttocks have
Furrows in them, which is caused by their very great Tension. The Patient
cannot bring his Thigh to the Groin, nor bend his Knee, both Legs in a manner
equal, and the Luxated Leg can rest on the Heel only; and there is frequently a
suppression of Urine, which proceeds from the Compression of the Nerves.

When the Luxation is backwards, there is a large Tumor on the Buttock, which
is made by the Head of the Bone, and the Pain is very great which is occasioned
by the violent Tension of the Muscles, the Leg is shorter than the other, and
there is a depression in the Groin, the Patient cannot bend his Leg but it
hangs back.

If the Luxation proceed from an internal Cause, there is small hopes of the
Patients Recovery.

The OPERATION.
To reduce a Luxation inwards, lay the Patient with his Back on a Table, and
put into the Table a Pin a Foot or two long, and put this between the Patients
Legs near the Groin; then fasten one Girth under the Juncture of the Thigh, and
another above the Patients Knee, and with these let the Extension be made. In
the mean time put the Head of the Bone into the Acetabulum; when the Head of
the Bone is drawn enough, let the Assistants who make the Extension slacken a
little, for the more easy reducing the Head of the Bone; and this is to be
observed in all Reductions whatever.

If the Thigh be luxated outward, let the Patient lie on his Belly, and make
an Extension with Girths after the manner described, and thrust the Thigh
inwards to bring the Head of the Bone into the Cavity.

If the Luxation be forwards, lay the Patient on the opposite side, and make
the Extensions as before; and when this is done, put the Head of the Bone into
its cavity with a Tennis Ball, and push this with the Hand or with the Knee,
for the greater force, and bring the luxated Leg to the other.

If the Luxation be backwards, place the Patient on his Belly, as in a Luxation
outward, and let the Extension be made in the same manner; then take the
Patients Knee and draw it outward, to bring the Head of the Bone into the
Acetabulum.

When the Ligaments of the Thigh are relaxed, the Extension must not be strong;
for it is plain, this is both useless and hurtful, and a prudent Surgeon must
always consider the Nature of the Luxation, before the Extension be made.

THE DRESSING. The Bandage must be the Spica, and is the same which is
described in the Operation of the Bubonocele.

THE CURE. Let the Patient refrain from all Cold, Moist, and Phlegmatic Meats,
and use a strengthening Diet, and drink Ptisans aromatized with Rosemary, Sage,
Marjoram, chafe the Neighboring parts with Oils of Dill, Chamomil, and White
Lilies; and because the Patient leads a Sedentary Life, and there is apt to be
a congestion of Humors in the part, purge his Body at convenient times with
Lenitives, and if you should now and then give him a Vomit, it would not be a
miss.

As for local Applications, take a bag of leaves and flowers of Betony, Sage,
Rosemary, Primula veris, Lavender, Origanum, Wormwood, a^. one Handful, Roses,
Juniper Berries, Oak-moss a. two Handfulls, Aniseeds two ounces, boil these
with a handful of Salt, and apply it round the Luxated part, do this once every
three or four Days, and rub it together with the Contiguous Parts with Juice of
Earthworms.

If the Reader pleases, he may turn to the Hundredth Observation, in the fourth
Century of Hildanus, where that Author expatiates very much on this important
Subject.

REMARKS.
Kerkringius, Obs. 61. tells us, that in opening one of his Neeces who had in
her Lifetime been afflicted with a lameness, which had eluded all attempts to
cure her (for want of a right understanding of the Cause) he found the Cavity
of the Hip very large and deep, and the Head of the Thigh exceeding small, by
which means it easily slipped up and down, the Ligaments being relaxed, and
elongated by the Weight of the Thigh, upon drawing the Leg it would be equal to
the other, because the Head of the Thigh Bone was replaced in its Cavity, but
then again it would immediately fall out.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Luxation of the Knee.
THIS Operation is a Restoring the Tibia to its Articulation with the
Thigh Bone.

THE CAUSE of this Dislocation is some Fall, Strain, Wrench, or Relaxation of
the Ligament.

THE SIGNS. The Tibia may be luxated four ways, viz. downwards, forwards, or on
either side.

It seldom happens that the Leg is luxated forwards, because the Tendons of the
Muscles of the Leg keep the Tibia straight; and when such a Dislocation
happens, those Tendons must be lacerated or exceedingly relaxed. When the Tibia
is luxated backward, the Condyls are in the Cavi^y of the Ham, and the Leg is
bent. When the Tibia is luxated on one side, there is a rising on that side,
and a Depression on the opposite; if the Condyl be slipped inwards, there is a
Rising within, and a Depression outward, and the Leg is turned outward, and
directly the contrary happens, when it is luxated inwards.

The Tibia is easily luxated, because its Articulation is not very strict, the
Condyls of the Tibia jet out, and the Sinus are shallow.

The OPERATION.
To reduce the Luxation when the Head of the Bone is slipped backward, place the
Patient on a low Stool, or a Bench of a midling height, with his back turned
toward you, then put his Leg between yours, and bend it with both Hands
toward the Patients Buttocks.

Or let the Patient lie on his Belly, and take a Coul-staff with a Bunch or
Ball in the midst, let an Assistant put this on the bending of the Ham, and on
the end of the Bone which jets out, and let another put a Girth something more
than two Inches broad, and in the mean time bend it forcibly against the
Buttock.

If the Dislocation be forwards, let the Patient lie on his Back, and put one
Girth above the Knee, and another above the Juncture of the Foot, and put the
Knee into its place with your Hands, or a Coul-staff with a bunch in the midst.
If your Hands are not strong enough, you may make use of Pullies; when the Leg
is well reduced, the Patient can bend or extend, or make use of it in any
manner without Pain.

If the Tibia be luxated on one side when the Extension is made, bring the Head
of the Bone into its place, with your Hands or a Coul-staff with a bunch in the
midst, the Patient lying on a Table during the Operation.

If the lesser Focil be luxated in its upper part, you may thrust it into its
place with your Hand.

THE DRESSING in these Dislocations, is the same as in a Fracture of the Rotula.

THE CURE. Let the Patient keep his Bed with his Leg extended, and laid in
Junks. After some tune, let him stir it a little to prevent the Coalition of
the Bones, and during the Cure, let them use a good Nourishing Diet.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of the Luxation of the Bones of the Foot.
THIS Operation is a Reducing the luxated Bones into their Natural place.

THE CAUSE of this Dislocation, most commonly is some Wrench.

THE SIGNS. If the Juncture of the Astragalus with the Tibia be separated, is a
Rising occasioned by the Bone. If the Astragalus be slipped inwards, the Soal of
the Foot is turned out; and if it be dislocated outward, the Soal is turned
in. If it be slipped, in the great Tendon implanted into the Heel, is almost
quite hid in the Foot.

The Bones of the Tarsus and Foot are dislocated diverse ways, all which appear
by the prominences and depressions.

The OPERATION.
If the Tibia and the lesser Focil are separated, put them into their place
with your Hand, in the best manner that you can.

You may reduce the Astragalus by drawing, and forcibly thrusting the Foot to
that part opposite to that from whence it slipped.

If the Bones of the Tarsus are slipped upwards, let the Patient set his Foot on
a Table or the Floor, and then thrust the Bones into their place, if the
prominence be below or on one side; you must in the same manner thrust the Bone
into its place.

If the Bones of the Toes are dislocated, they must be reduced in the same
manner as all the other Bones after a due Extension made. Upon the whole Matter
in these and the like Matters, good Sense with some Experience goes farther,
than all the Instructions which can be delivered in Books.

THE DRESSING and CURE are the same as in simple Fractures of the Foot.

REMARKS.
The Tarsus, Metatarsus and Toes are Cartilag nous in a Foetus in the Womb on
the third Month, and about that time the Metatarsus is ossified.

In the fourth Month the Bones of the Metatarsus are entirely formed, and the
ossification of the Bones of the Tarsus begins to appear by several small
bloody Spots. In the same Month the upper and lower Junctures of the Toes of
the Foot are distinguished by several white spots, and those in the middle are
Cartilaginous.

In the fifth and sixth Month, the second Rank which is next the Thumb is
ossified. In the seventh and eighth Month the two Fingers next the Thumb are
ossified in the middle. In the ninth Month the rest of the Fingers are ossified
likewise.

From the fourth to the ninth Month, the Bones of the Foot gradually increase.
In the eighth Month the Calcaneum grows bony, and in the same Month the
Astragalus is bony likewise, and there appears a Division in the Tarsus; but in
the ninth Month the Junctures are very apparent.

Fab. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 67. relates, that a Rubust Fellow leaping over a
Ditch, wrencht his Leg in that violent manner, that he burst the Ligaments
together with the Skin, and the Astragalus was dislocated, which the Surgeon
perceiving to hang by some Fibers only, took off.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed.
A New Voyage to Italy: With a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities of that Country. Together with
usesul Instructions for those who shall travel thither. By Maxamilion Mission,
Gent. Done into English, and adorned with Figures. In two Volumes. 8 vo.

The Life of the Famous John Baptist Colbert, Late Minister and Secretary of
State to Lewis XIV. the present French King. Done into English from a French
Copy, printed at Cologn this present Year 1695.

The Complete Horseman: Discovering the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness,
and Vices of Horses, and describing the Signs and Causes of their Diseases; and
the True Method both of their Preservation and Cure. With Reflections on the
Regular and Preposterous Use of Bleeding and Purging. Together with the Art of
Shooing, and a Description of several Kinds of Shoes, adapted to the various
Defects of Bad Feet, and for the Preservation of those that are good; and the
best Method of Breeding Colts, with Directions to be observed in Backing 'em,
and Making their Mouths, etc. By the Sieur de Solleysell, one of the Heads of
the Royal Academy at Paris. The Eighth Edition, Revived and methodically
Augmented; Done into Englist, and Adorned with Figures. Folio.

Of Wisdom: Three Books. Written Originally in French by the Sieur de Charron;
With an Account of the Author. Made English by George Stanhope. D. D. Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Majesty, and late Fellow of Kings-College in Cambridge, from
the best Edition, corrected and enlarged by the Author, a little before his
Death.

The Art of Preserving and Restoring Health. Explaining the Nature and Causes
of the Distempers that afflicted Mankind. Also showing, That every Man is, or
may be, his own best Physician. To which is added, A Treatise of the most
Simple and Effectual Remedies for the Diseases of Men and Women. Written in
French by M. Flamand M. D. and faithfully translated into English.

Plate the first.
bindings and bandages Plate. 2d.
bindings and bandages An Explanation of the Figures of the following Tables,
which contain the Compound Bandages, Sutures, and some other Machines used in
the Practice of Surgery.
TAB. I.
Fig. 1. REpresents a Roller with one Head, or rolled up at one end only. Fig.
2. A Double headed Roller. Fig. 3. A Sling or Fillet with four Tails; This is
very useful for the keeping Applications on the Eyes, Nose, upper Lip, and in
short, on all parts of the Head, and Perinaeum of Persons cut for the Stone.
Fig. 4. A Sling with six Tails, which may be applied on the Ears, though one
with four is sufficient. Fig. 5. Represents an Emplaster made in form of a
Crescent to be applied behind the Ears, which is adapted as all Emplasters
ought to be, to the Figure of the part. Fig. 6. A false Tent in which a Lancet
is concealed, for the letting out Pus lodged under the Dura Matter. A Tent of
the like Figure made for drying up that which lies on the Membrane, but without
a Lancet in it. Fig. 7. A Syndon of fine Linen, which is to be wetted with some
Spirituous Liquour, and laid on the Dura Matter, after Trepanning the Skull.
Fig. 8. Is another Syndon made of Lint, which some Practitioners wet with some
Spirituous Liquour, and lay over the former. Fig. 9. Are small Pledgits of
Lint, which are to be armed with proper Medicines, and put into the
perforation. Fig. 10. A Pledgit of dry Lint put into the Hole of the Skull.
Fig. 11. Dossils which are to be armed with proper Digestives, for the filling
up the Lips of the Wound. Fig. 12. A large Pledgit armed with some proper
Digestive to lay over the Dossils. Fig. 13. A large Emplaster of Betony, to
cover the whole.
TAB. II.
Fig. 14. A large square Compress several times doubled to cover the rest. Fig.
15. A Napkin folded for the making the great Cap for the Head, and which are
the Dressings used in the Operation of Trepanning. Fig. 16. The Napkin folded
as it ought, for the keeping Applications on the Eyes, and all other parts of
the Head. This is not, however so convenient after Trepanning as the Great Cap,
because it is not so certain, and does not keep the Part so warm. Fig. 17. Is a
small Machine of Steel Wire, to keep the Applications on the Part after the
Operation of the Fistula Lachrymalis. These Wires are usually Steel, but common
Ir^n Wire is preferable for the convenience of the Surgeon, that he may adapt
them to the Part, when there is no Workman at hand to do it. Fig. 18. Is the
Accipiter or Hawk, to keep Applicatitions on the Nose. This is but an
Amuzement, the F^^^^^t with your Tails being more useful in this case. Plate 3d.
bindings and bandages

Plate 4th.
bindings and bandages

Fig. 19. A Triangular Emplaster to be laid on the Nose. The Past boards
applied on the side of the Nose when it is Fractured or Luxated, must have the
same Figure. Fig. 20. Is an Emplaster for the upper Lip, the two Branches of
which are to be applied on the side of the Nose. Fig. 21. Is the Mask used in
Burns of the Face. Fig. 22. Is the Compress and Past board which is to be
applied on the lower Jaw, when there is a Fracture and Luxation on one side
only, and this Compress must be stitched to a Past board. Fig. 23. Is the
Compress and Past board to be applied, when there is a Fracture or Luxation on
both. Fig. 24. Is the Trapezial Emplaster for the Chin.
TAB. III.
Fig. 25. A Semicircular Emplaster for the Chin. Fig. 26. The Bandage of
Heliodorus for one Breast. Fig. 27. Heliodorus Bandage for both Breasts. Fig.
28. The Emplaster, Past board, and Compress for the Sternum. This is called
Scutum. Fig. 29. The Compress and Past-board for a Fracture of the Ribs. Fig.
30. A great Capped Tent put into deep Wounds to hinder their Coalition. Fig.
31. An Emplaster in form of a double T, to be laid on the Cartilago Mucronata.
Fig. 32. An Emplaster and Compress for the Joyn^s, as the Arm or Leg. This
Figure is proper for the adapting it to the Part. Fig. 33. Is a Bandage for
Issues, which is very convenient, because the Patient candress them himself.
TAB. IV.
Fig. 34. An Emplaster and Compress for the Metacarpus. Fig. 35. A simple T for
a small Joint, as the Fingers, when the Surgeon likes it better than the. Fig.
36. Is a small Machine made of Wire, to prevent the Guts from protruding
themselves into the Groin and Navil. This must be lined, and is more convenient
than a Steel Truss, because it yields to the Motion of the Belly. Fig. 37, and
38. are Steel Trusses, one for the Right, and the other for the left Groin.
These are best made of Iron, that the Surgeon may manage them better, when he
has no Workman to assist him. They are drawn without any Lining, to show their
Figure. Fig. 39. Is a Truss made of Dimetty for the Groins in Children, and
Adult Persons, when the Descent of the Guts is recent, and not very
considerable. There is no more than one Knob required, when the Rupture is only
on one side. Fig. 40. A Bandage for the Groin. Fig. 41. A Triangular Emplaster
and Compress for the Groin.
TAB. V.
Fig. 42. The Common Truss for both sides. Fig. 43. The Common Truss for one
side only. Fig. 44. The Suspensory of the Napkin which goes round the Breast.
The midst of this is put about the Neck, and falls on the Should^rs. Fig. 45.
Is a suspensory for the Scrotum, two Straps of which cross below, and going up
are fastened to the Wastband. Fig. 46. A Contentive Bandage, to keep
Applications on the Buttocks. Fig. 47. An Emplaster whose indented part passes
between the Buttocks in a Fistula in Ano. Fi. 48. Is a small Case pierced at
the End for the passage of the Urine, without removing the Dressings. The Yard
is put into this Case, as well for the suspending it Plate 5th.
bindings and bandages Plate 6th.
bindings and bandages Plate 7th.
bindings and bandages Plate 8th.
bindings and bandages in involuntary Erections, as in a Heat of Urine or
Priapism, as to keep on the Dressings.
TAB. VI.
Fig. 49. A narrow Fillet with a Hole at one end, and a slit at the other, for
a contentive Bandage of the Yard. Fig. 50. A Bag for the Gods. This is very
convenient, because the Yard not being put into it, a Man may lie with his
Wife. This is fastened by two small Tapes to the Wast band. Fig. 51. Is a T
whose lower Tail is cut short. This is adapted to the keeping Applications on
the Perinaeum; the upper Strap goes round the Wast, and the lower are fastened
to that. Fig. 52. Is a single T for the Perinaeum and Anus. Fig. 53. Is a
Collar to keep on the sling applied to the Perinaeum, after cutting for the
Stone. Fig. 54. Is a Figure with four Tails, or the Sling mentioned. Fig. 55.
Is the Emplaster in form of a Greek U laid on the Perinaeum. Fig. 56. Another
Emplaster for the Perinaeum. Fig. 57. An Emplaster in form of a Horse-shoo for
the Womb. Fig. 58. A Pessary of Cork perforated in the midst, to support the
Womb when it falls out.
TAB. VII.
Fig. 59. Is a Cross, or the form of an Emplaster to be laid on Stumps after
Amputation. Fig. 60. Is another Figure for the same purpose. Fig. 61. Is the
Bandage with 18 Tails, for Complicate Fractures. Fig. 62. Junks for the Leg and
Thigh in Compound Fractures. Fig. 63. A Past-board to keep the Foot straight.
TAB. VIII.
Fig. 64. A small Quilt stitched to the Past board, for the ease of the Foot.
Fig. 65. A small Roll for the supporting the Heel. Fig. 66. An open Stocking
used in Burns and Scalds of the Legs. Fig. 67. The continued Suture or Glovers
Stitch, used in Wounds of the Guts and Scrotum. Fig. 68. The interrupted or
separate Stitch, used in the re-uniting Transverse Wounds, when Bandage alone
is not sufficient. Fig. 69. The twisted Suture used in Hare Lips. Fig. 70. The
Dry Stitch.
TAB. IX.
Fig. 71. The Pin Stitch. Fig. 72. The Quill Suture. This differs very little
from the former, the Ancients sometimes using Pins, and sometimes Quills to lay
on the edges of the Wounds, and make their knots on, but both are useless. Fig.
73. The Wire Stitch. These are Wires made Circular, with which some have
proposed to keep together the Edges of a Wound, but it is very Whimsical, and
never to be done, because of the great Pain and Inflammation which must
necessarily follow. Fig. 74. The Shoomakers Stitch. This creates a great deal
of Pain, and for that Reason must never be made.
TAB. X.
Fig. 75. Is the Scabbard makers Stitch, as in lacing. Plate 9th.
bindings and bandages Plate 10th.
bindings and bandages Plate 11th.
bindings and bandages Plate 12th.
bindings and bandages Fig. 76. The Stitch from within outward, and that from
without inwards, which is never to be made, because the Threads enter the
Wound, and hinder its reunion. Fig. 77. Is Celsus's Suture or the X, which is
never to be made, for the same Reason as the former. Fig. 78. Represents the
manner of Stitching the Tendons.
TAB. XI.
Fig. 79. The Stitching of a Wound with one Angle. Fig. 80. The manner of
Stitching two Wounds, one of which is lengthways, and the other Transverse with
one Angle. The Transverse is united by the help of the separate Stitch, and the
Longitudinal by the uniting Bandage. Fig. 81. The manner of Stitching a
Longitudinal and Transverse Wound; making two Angles. The Transverse is to be
united by help of the separate Stitch, and the Longitudinal, by the uniting
Bandage, and the two Angles with two Stitches and a knot. Fig. 82. The Separate
Stitch, this is only made in short Wounds.
TAB. XII.
Fig. 83. The Suture when there is four Angles. This is made with two Stitches
and one knot. Fig. 84. The Ligature of an Artery, after the Operation of an
Aneurism. Fig. 85, The Operation of a Fistula in Ano. The Bags on each side
represent the Fistula; in one of these is a Probe bent for the drawing it, and
the more casie cutting it with a pair of Scissars. Fig. 86. The Amputation of a
Leg with all the Dressings, the Ligatures above and below the Knee, the
Pastboard under the upper Ligature, which keeps the Part from being pinched;
the Longitudinal Compress on the Ham, and along the Stump, which is kept on by
two Ligatures, and the Ligature of the Artery, which is at the end of the
Stump.

