Nurseries, ORCHARDS, Profitable Gardens, AND VINEYARDS ENCOURAGED, The present
Obstructions removed, and probable Expedients for the better Progress proposed;
For the general benefit of his Majesty's Dominions, and more particularly of
Cambridge, and the Champain-Countries, and Northern parts of England. IN
Several Letters out of the Country, Directed to HENRY OLDENBURG, Esquire Secretary
to the Royal Society.

The first Letter from Anthony Lawrence; All the rest from John Beale, D. D.
and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, the West
End. 1677.

To the much Honored and Worthy HENRY OLDENBURG, Esquire Secretary to the ROYAL
SOCIETY.
SIR,
I Ought to take notice (as I think all the Intelligent do) of your Generous
Inclination, and free Readiness to communicate to the Royal Society, and thence
to the Public, whatsoever is, upon sure account, suggested for the welfare of
any of his Majesty's Dominions. And those Hortulan Affairs are not the least of
our Inland Commodities; and they have been the serious engagement of the said
Royal Society from the first Year of their Institution; and have prospered
exceedingly in many parts of England, and in some parts of Scotland and Ireland.

The great Example of his Majesty, and of our Nobility, and generally of our
chief Gentry, has prevailed from the East all over the West, so far as to
encompass Oxford. And the stop is said to be about Cambridge: And here are
those Expedients proposed, which may be effectual to remove all Obstacles. And,
if the Gentry about Cambridge shall be pleased to accept of them, and
henceforth to be stirring in the business, as is here directed, they may soon
overtake all that is done about Oxford, and advance more in five years, than
has hitherto been done in twenty, though it is not little that has been done
of late. For these Arts, and our Experience, and more Expedients also, do grow
daily.

One said, that if we had one skilful and diligent Nursery-man, who had a
complete Nursery of all sorts of good fruit, and of the best Vines that agree
best with this Climate, and Mulberry Trees, and wholesome Trees for the avenues
of Cities, Towns, and fair Mansions; That one such Nursery within ten or
fifteen miles in all the Vales of these three united Kingdoms, would make all
these Plantations spread apace, and amount to the value of Millions yearly. I
answered, That it was now doing: And every reasonable man easily apprehends,
how a noble Orchard may be raised together with such a complete Nursery, under
the same inspection, and the same care; and the one grow on and prosper the
better by the association of the other. And I shall here show, How a younger
Brother of ordinary capacities, who has but so many Acres of his own as belong
to every Cottager by Statute, may thence easily and speedily raise a
considerable gain, for the maintenance of his Family, and entertain himself
with the sweetest and most innocent of Earthly pleasures. And it is great
satisfaction, and intrinsic comfort to an ingenuous Mind, when he can truly
say, that all the good Vines, and other best fruit in all the Neighborhood,
and for some miles about him, are the product of his industry; and when he can
justly claim a posthume reputation for real services done to his Country.

And here I show, How any Gentleman may freely furnish all his neighborhood,
even Cottages (who cannot send to Mr. Rose) with the best Vines: I say, freely,
and at less charges yearly, than the usual price of a Flaggon of good Wine. Yet
I know not how it should disparage our Nobility, to suffer their Gardeners to
sell generous Plants, as their Woodmen sell Timber, and Fuel in their Woods and
Coppices, and their Tenants sell Corn and Cattle in the Market. I am sure, that
many in Wiltshire, Hampshire, Dorsetshire, and Sommersetshire are obliged and
the richer for the famous Garden of Wilton, and for the goodly Nurseries about
Salisbury. And his Majesty's Gardener, Mr. Rose, was an obliging Example for
his sale of the best Vines, and the fittest for our Climate.

By this progress, and by these rules, we cannot fail of good Nurseries within
Ten miles in all our Vales. And this I can prophecy, that where the Tenants
have not Orchards, and others have, they will shortly fail to pay their Rents.
If they cannot be trusted to preserve and to cherish Orchards raised at the
Landlords charge, they should be compelled to raise Thickets, as is here
taught; that Orchards may the sooner and the easier be there raised when a
Tenant comes that may be trusted: Otherwise the Lands of Gentlemen will fall,
whilst the Lands of small Freeholders are raised in value.

There is no need, I should say* much to invite the Consumers of their
Inheritance, and the Desertors of their Country, to put their hands to push on
this affair, since the Ingenious Author of the Gentleman's Recreation has said
enough to call them out of their B -- houses, and scurrilous P -- houses: And
the polite Author of the Planters Manual speaks good English to the Esteminate
Phantasticks. For, if none of the Rural recreations, Hunting, Hawking, Fowling,
Fishing; nor any of the Amenities, profits or pleasures of Gardens, Vineyards,
Orchards; nor spicy and fragrant Groves, can reclaim the Prodigal, I have no
more to say to him, but only, if he understands Latin, mind him of the old
style, about 1500 years ago, twice recorded against such Romans as became
degenerate: COLVMELLA in Prefat.
Omnes enim (sicut M. Varro jam temporibus Avorum conquestus est,)
Patres-familiae, falce and aratro relictis, intra murum correpsimus, and in
Cireis potius ac Theatris, quam in segetibus and Vinetis manus movemus;
attonitique miramur gestus Effoeminatorum, quod a natura sexum viris denegatum
muliebri motu mentiantur, decipiantque oculos spectantium. Mox deinde ut apti
veniamus ad ganeas, quotidianam cruditatem Laconicis excoquimus, and exucto
sudore sitim quaerimus, noctesque libidinibus and ebrietatibus, dies ludo vel
somno consumimus. Ac nosmet ipsos ducimus fortunatos, quod nec Orientem solemn
videmus, nec Occidentem: Itaque istam vitam socordem persequitur valetudo. Nam
sic juvenum corpora fluxa and resoluta sunt, ut nihil mors mutatura videatur.
At mehercule vera illa Romuli proles assiduis venatibus, nec minus agrestibus
operibus exercitata, firmissimis praevaluit corporibus, ac militiam belli, cum
res postulavit, facile sustinuit, durata pacis laboribus; semperque Rusticam
vitam praeposuit Vrbanae.



Thus much of our old Date, and with twofold Authority, in defense of the
Gentleman's Recreations, and of our Agrestic labor.

SIR, Your humble Servant John Beale.

The First LETTER. In which some plain Nursery-Books are recommended; with
Encouragements and Expedients proper to promote the planting of Nurseries and
Orchards in the Champain-Countries near Cambridge, Leicester, etc. And the
Explication of the Cumaean Sybills Wheel
From Anthony Lawrence.
SIR,
1. I Conceive, that it was merely by Incogitance, that that Industrious
Author, Mr. Austen, has not been hitherto mentioned in your Tracts amongst
others who have handled the same Arguments; Therefore I shall here endeavor to
do him right, if it may be with your favor.

His Treatise of Fruit Trees was first published Anno 1651/52 4o.

The Second Edition augmented, Anno 1657. 4o.

The Third Edition, with Notes upon Lord Bacons Observations and Experiments on
Vegetables, published Anno 1665. 8o.

And now lately he published a new Book, under this Title; A Dialogue between
the Husbandman and Fruit Trees in his Nurseries, Orchards and Gardens: In which
are discovered many useful and profitable Observations and Experiments in
Nature, in the ordering of Fruit Trees; devoutly instructing good Husbands to
adorn their own Country, and justly blaming Idle and Voluptuous Prodigals, as
Enemies to their own Country: By Ralph Austen, Practiser, at least 50 years, in
the Art of planting Fruit Trees, in 8o. 1676. All from Oxford.

2. This plain Writer, who pretends to no glory in Rhetoric, has by his
labors and Experiments done more good for Oxford, and thence for England, than
is yet done by many gaudy Gallants, who spend more in a day, than this honest
Nursery-man can spare in a year. For, good Cider (besides the pleasantness and
wholesomness) may in time save us large sums of our Money, to defend us from
Invasions: Whereas Prodigals do precipitate our Ruin by their wastes upon
Forain Vanities and superfluities, as it was represented by the worthy Merchant
Mr. Thomas Mun, to the late Earl of Southampton, Anno 1664. when he was Lord
High Treasurer, Chap. 3. page 15, 16, 20, etc. And it is to be noted, that this
judicious Treatise of Mr. Mun was licensed in Whitehall, by his Majesty's
Principal Secretary; which confirms it to be the true English Interest. And
this is the main ground on which that excellent Treatise chiefly insists.

3. Upon this authentic and sure ground, according to our best old Rules, by
which real merit is to be preferred before undeserved Titles; and by which he
that does most good for his Country has a just claim to the highest merit: In
these respects we are obliged to attribute more to a Laborious and Skilful
Nursery-man, in his homespun Raiments of English Manufacture, than to an idle
Prodigal with his sumptuous Equipage of exotic Embroideries. And in regard of
Mr. Austens merit toward Oxford and the Public, a worthy Friend has devised a
Monument for him: It is in great Roman Letters of Gold upon a Black Marble, the
best Touch: The Figure round, agreeable to the roundness of this Globe, and (as
we say) of the World: The Diameter three foot, both for modesty, and that the
largeness of the Characters may fill up the Area: In the most ancient and the
briefest manner, as here you see.

D. O. M. S. RADULPHUS AUSTEN OPTIMA POMORUM VINA PRIMUS ART ET INDUSTRIA
OXONIAE PARAVIT. Circa A. D.


4. And it is newly modern, to raise Cider that shall compare, and excel the
Wine of many Provinces nearer the Sun, where they abound with fruitful
Vineyards. It is so newly Modern, I say, to raise Cider to such perfection, and
it is generally thought incredible, and is hardly believed, where the full
proof is not at hand. And it is certain, that Mr. Austen was busy at his
Experiments in preparing Redstreaks for Oxford long before vulgar Cider was to
be gotten there for money: So that Malice it self cannot deny the truth of the
Inscription. And possibly the next Age may enroll him among Benefactors, as if
he had sounded or endowed a College. For by experience it is thoroughly
confirmed, That a seasonable and moderate use of good Cider is the surest
remedy and preservative against the Diseases which do frequently afflict the
sedentary Life of them that are seriously studious. And M. Austen has now very
lately takenin twenty seven Acres of ground, to enlarge his former Nurseries,
and for New Plantations. And this was partly the occasion of this present
Address, and of this my Adventure (though from an obscure hand) to recommend it
to your Register.

5. And my Friend seriously protests, That he shall most gladly embrace the
same occasion, to celebrate, in the best manner he can devise, the Names and
memory of those who shall have the happiness to do good in the same kind for
Cambridge, as Mr. Austen has done and still continues to do for Oxford. And
the merit will be signal: For, besides the Amenities and other Advantages of
health, and sweet Air, when both Universities shall be invested in a Golden
Grove, it will have a good influence to allure the like improvements in all
parts of England. What is well done for Ornament, Health, innocent Pleasure,
and considerable Profit (all joined together) in the Eyes of both Universities,
will doubtless more speedily be every where exemplified, and effectually obtain
a progress all over the Kingdom.

6. And, if Cambridge should be the Example, it would, without doubt, excite
very great improvements toward the North, and in many Countries about the
Heart of England. For, if any Expedient can invite the Champain-Countries, that
are about Cambridge, to Enclosures, I think, Orchards, Gardens, Nurseries, and
Groves, are most likely to do it; these yielding Quicksets and other most
profitable materials, to enable and encourage for Enclosures; and Gardens every
year repaying a full reward, whilst the standards of slower growth do yet still
grow on for a more lasting and a more noble satisfaction.

7. And for an old Authentical proof, that Vulgar Enclosures, in the old
ordinary manner, are more than a Tenfold improvement, give me leave to send you
an Extract of T. Tussers old Rhimes, made above an hundred years ago, in the
Reign of King Edward VI. A Comparison between Champain and Enclosure, by him
called Woodland.
1.
EXample by Leicestershire,
What soil can be better than that,
For any thing heart can desire?
And yet does it want ye see what:
Mast, Covert, Close pasture, and Wood,
And other things needful, as good.
2.
More plenty of Mutton and Beef,
Corn, Butter and Cheese of the best,
More wealth any where (to be brief)
More People, more handsome, and pressed
Where find ye (go* search any Coast*)
Than there where Enclosure is most?
3.
More work for the Laboring man,
As well in the Town as the Field,
Or thereof (devize, if ye can)
More profit what Countries do yield?
More seldom where see ye the Poor
Go begging from door unto door?
4.
In Wood-land the poor men that have
Scarce fully two Acres of land,
More merrily live and do save
Than the other with twenty in hand.
Yet pay they as much for the Two
As the other for Twenty must do.
If this same be true, as it is,
Why gather they nothing by this?


Sir, this is the old form; and Tussers rules are esteemed the best that are
extant at this day, for the generality of Husbandry and Huswifry, to them that
can bear his Canting Rhimes. All later Writers, and long experience do confirm
this his Sentiment; and all his Instances do hold too true to this day. By
Enclosures and Culture the worst Land in England yields Tenfold more profit
(besides many other advantages hinted here and in other parts of his
Comparison) than that which is here called the best and richest Land; as will
yet appear, if we compare these, which were lately the furzy parts of
Devonshire, with the Champain of Leicestershire and Cambridgeshire. And what he
says here, is all to very great purpose; for offices of Charity, Employment
for the Poor; and for multitudes of Laborers; for Populousness, the strength,
riches, and glory of the Kingdom. And if he may challenge a Tenfold improvement
for the ordinary Enclosures of those times; we may with modesty promise a
Twenty-fold, for our extraordinary and modern skill in Hortulan affairs. And in
his last clause Tusser shows, That the Lords of Manors are as much concerned
for the advance of their Revenues by Enclosures, as the Vulgar for their ease,
plenty, and some kind of prosperity. Again, what a Joy is it known,
When men may be bold with their own?
Says Tusser in a latter Edition.

8. Now I proceed to represent, with what facility this great and good work may
be brought on by Nurseries, and young Thickets of Quicksets. Every Lord of a
Manor, and most of the substantial Freeholders, can find a few Acres safely
enclosed for such purpose, in his own possession; and a few Acres, rightly
ordered for those Uses may furnish a Province for Quicksets, and all sorts of
better Standards for Orchards. How it may be done at small charges, and with
dispatch, our Tusser will tell us: Go, plow up, or delve up, advised with skill,
The breadth of a ridge, and in length as ye will;
Whose speedy Quickset for a fence ye will draw,
To sow in the seed of the Bramble and Haw.
October v. 8.

This is the brief of the old plain way: And this is in the worst case, namely,
to beget a Fence or Enclosure where there is none: And any Bramble or other
wild bushes are better than no fence. But where the Enclosure is already
provided, his advice is more magnificent or lofty: Sow Acorns, ye Owners that
Timber do love,
Sow haw and Rye with them the better to prove.
October v. 6.

And, if the ground be reasonably in heart, and of a sufficient depth, a strong
Plow by cross plowing, and weighty Harrows may make the ground mellow, and fine
enough for the Seeds of all hedges, bushes, and trees of the Neighborhood; for
Seeds of Ashes, Maples, Elms, Sycamores, and the like; and for Kernels of
Crabs, Apples, and Pears, and for Stones of all stone-fruit. There also they
may prick-in, or set with the Hoe, Walnuts, Chestnuts, Beech, Nuts, Filberts;
and for no great charge, the Seeds of Pines, Firrs, and whatever else the
Owners delight in, as is copiously digested in Mr. Evelyns SYLVA. For such
Seeds as require finer work, here and there the Garden-Rake may do it. And for
such as do not kindly bear Transplantation, and for such as are to remain there
for standards, the Seeds may be set, three or four in a place, at fit distance,
and in rows of the Quincunx Order, or in perfect Squares.

9. I have heard some good Husbandmen say, They can well remember, when this
slight way was the only way that was in use to raise these Orchards which are
now esteemed the best, and the most fruitful in England. And it is yet pleaded,
by some of good experience, that the Wildings, taken out of such Thickets, do
commonly thrive better upon removals into Nurseries or Orchards, than those
Plants that have been tended more curiously and nicely. And in reason we may
probably expect, That Seedlings or Stocks, drawn out of Thickets thus rudely
ordered, should be kinder than those which are taken from Roots, or from
Under-trees, or from Hedge-rows, or out of the wildest Coppices, whether the
Seeds were brought by Birds, or other casualties, where they were left to shift
for their own propagation, without other culture. And yet by common experience
we find, that these Shifters do thrive well enough for Transplantations into
Nurseries or Orchards. If the root and the lower part of the stem be sound, the
graft which is placed there seldom complains of the injuries done to the top,
before the graffing, by droppings of Trees, or by bruttings of Cattle, or by
oppression or encroachments of neighboring Plants. I have oftentimes seen
these, when at full freedom, advance their grafts more speedily, than those
that have been most tended by curious culture.

10. Some nice Wall-fruit, and such as are to be planted in Gardens, may
deserve a more curious diligence at first: And in this our thicket, if the soil
and shelter will allow it, the Rake may prepare fit places for these, or for
any kind of curiosities. For which there may be found accurate directions in
the French Gardener, and in the Sieur le Gendre his manner of Ordering
Fruit Trees by an experience of almost fifty years, as he says in his
Inspiring Preface.

11. Now we come to the main point. Some of these Quicksets will be ready and
fit to be drawn for the Neighborhood every year. And, if they be taken up with
discretion, those which remain, especially such as are fit to be left for
standards, will thrive much the better for the frequent, gentle, and wary
stirring or turning of the earth about their roots. And at this cheap rate,
(and indeed for the better advance of our own Quicksets,) here is work enough,
and stuff enough, to engage all the Ringleaders of the tumultuous Rabble, to
call in all their Parties, and to stickle as stoutly for Enclosures as ever
they did formerly to hinder them. Meanwhile, Gentlemen and Freeholders may thus
accommodate themselves, and set easy bargains to all their own Relations, and
adherents, younger Brothers, Servants, and Tenants; which, in the end, will
prove a great increase of their own Patrimonies and Revenues, and a blessing to
all the Neighborhood. And thus, many Commons, which have been hitherto little
better than waste-grounds, may in a short time become populous Villages, and
well provided of all necessaries.

12. And because our experience grows yearly, by new discoveries of excellent
Cider-fruit, for all Seasons, and for all diversities of palates; for the first
Summer, and for durance, two, three, four, or more years; some by their
peculiar kind, and some by right sorting them in mixtures, in the grinding time
(by both which ways we in the West have already found many sorts of Cider, that
do manifestly far excel all the ordinary sorts of French Wine, nemine
contradicente;) Therefore some worthy Gentlemen are endeavoring to establish a
correspondence of Free Contributers, Gardeners and Nursery-men from all the
West and South, toward Oxford, thence toward Cambridge, and so all over
England. This to be at least once, but better twice in the year, viz. in Autumn
(when the fruit and the ordering of the fruit and Cider may be seen, and when
the Kernels and Seeds of all fruits may be had;) and especially in the early
Spring, when all sorts of Grafts may be had; many thousands of Graffs easy to
be carried in a Portmantle, if they know, how the Cions may be used for a Graff
(which point few Gardeners or Graffers themselves did know, till I taught them.)

13. And thus a Gentleman, or an ingenious Gardener may learn more in a few
days traveling, than can be written in large Volumes, or than would ever come
in his mind to enquire at home. At present I offer two special and
extraordinary Remarks for Nursery-men:

The first is from Dr. Munting in the Philosophical Transactions, N. III. p.
248. To graff upon such Apple-stocks as are raised from the same kind of Seeds,
and have been deprived of the heart-root, which is the same that descends
directly. Thus, he says, we may obtain extraordinary good, big, and beautiful
Apple-fruit. I conceive it probable, and that in time by changes of the like
kind in Pears, and many other fruits, a closer friendship between the Stock and
the Graff may be established. And this is an Item for our Traveling
Nursery-man to furnish his Portmantle with the Seeds of special fruit apart, or
in the marc, where they can be had fullest, thickest, and least bruised. These
they may sow in beds apart; as, for example, the kernels of Red-strakes in beds
designed for the Graffs of Red-strakes: So of Pears, and other fruit. Some
kinds of Plants will not well endure, that the heart-root be cut off. In such
cases some put a Tile-stone under the heart-root, and bow the root aside, that
it may run on, and grow in better manner than is at distance under the surface.

My second remark I can better assure, namely, To choose for some beds the
seeds of the largest Trees, which constantly bear the greatest burden of good
and profitable fruit; as I can name, where an Apple Tree, where many Pear Trees
(some for delicate fruit, and some for their liquor,) and where Crab-trees are
of such huge bulk, and of such spreading growth, that constantly each of them
do yearly bear three, four, or five hogsheads of liquor. The seed of these for
stocks to graff of the same, would doubtless be stately Trees for a noble
Orchard, at fifty foot distance at least. But more of this hereafter. One
skilful and diligent Gardener, or Nursery-man, within ten or fifteen miles
distance, in all the Vales of England, would drive on these Plantations apace
all over England, to the great gain of the Gardener. And the like we may hope
of Scotland and Ireland.

14. To have good Red-strake, or any other excellent Cider, or the best Perry,
the fruit must be perfectly ripe and odorous, and such only shaken off the
Trees at first; the rest to abide there till perfectly ripe: And it is the
better, if they lie in heaps a week or fortnight. If some be rotten, the liquor
is not the worse (as Mr. Newburgh rightly observes,) it is the better; if the
rottenness be not fetid, musty, hoary, or black rottenness: Such must be
carefully cast away. And some say for the best Cherry-wine, the Cherries must
hang on the Trees two days fully ripe, and abide two or three days after
gathering before they be pressed; though they seem bruised, and almost rotten.
In France I have seen Grapes lie a good while in a huge Vat, pressed and
bruised with their own weight, before they began to tread them: And no Grapes
are at the best, or safely wholesome to be eaten, till three or four days after
gathering. I have ofttimes tried, and used whole hogsheads of Red-strakes and
Gennet-moyle, mixed by equal portions, in grinding time, and either apart was
generally preferred before the mixture.

I never had better Cider, than when (after the care abovesaid for ripeness
and lying in heaps) I caused it to be grinded and pressed with dispatch, and
speedily put into the Hogsheads, and the Hogsheads immediately closed up
perfectly, sufficient room being left for the liquor to ferment. All the
following Summer it continued brisk, sprightful, strong; and smoother or less
windy than when bottled. It is certain, that the gross matter (which some body
calls the crust) preserves the liquor in spirit, as kindly as if bottled: This
I observed, when the liquor was put into the Vessels very negligently, and foul
of the Mare. And they say, some Ladies do spoil their Meaths and Metheglins by
scumming them so nicely as to hinder seasonable fermentation. The liquor which
comes first and easiest from the Press is best. It is an endless trouble, to
pare and pick apples; which would be laughed at in the Cider-Countries: But I
should well accept of a Cider-mill, which would sever the rind, kernels, and
stems; as I read in Vinetum Britannicum, and in your Philosophical
Transactions, Numb. 124. p. 584.

15. Lastly, the Cumean Sibyls Wheel (used above in Mr. Austens monument) is in
the latter Impressions of Angliae Notitia. I find it first in the Sixth
Edition, Chap. 2. p. 68. Here I will do it a little more largely; The most
ancient Characters of Numbers among the Romans, which they say were used in the
old Tuscan Rites, were all drawn from the Cross in a Circle, resembling the
Church in the World,. The Circle or World is always Rolling, as Time is; so it
wheels thus, to produce St. Andrews Cross, and V the Semidecussis.

. M. D. C. L. X. V. I. 1000. 500. 100. 50. 10. 5. 1.

1000 Thus compleats all the figures, just 1666. 500 100 50 10 5 1 1666

As X before C, subducts X from C, and makes XC stand for 90; so X before
subducts X from, and makes X stand for 1656; XX, 1646; XXX, 1636; XL, 1626; so
by adding X after, thus, X, it signifies 1676.

And thus it relates to a twofold Era. Both numbers joined together relate to
the Birth of Christ: The added number relates to the Conflagration of London,
Anno 1666. Which they that are concerned for London, may take notice of in
their Monuments, or other Records of Time. I pray God to raise London, and to
preserve it, to be the great Empory of the world; and that in the prosperity of
London all his Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions may ever prosper. And it is
hoped, that the speedy and splendid Restoration had a good Omen for the
perpetual growth of that famous City. And it is believed and expected, that
before XX XX 1686 20 years after the Conflagration be completed, good Ale,
good Beer d' Angleterre, good Cider, and Brandies drawn from English Wines,
which are all of English growth, and English Manufactures, shall raise a
greater profit, both at home and by exportation, than has sometimes been
gained by our Staple-trade; and greater Revenues to the Crown by Excise and
Customs, than some of our victorious Plantagenets obtained by our Staple-trade:
And that London (by assisting the Fishery of England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland,
New Foundland, New England, Bermudas, and his Majesty's other Islands) shall
raise our Naval affairs, and all our seafaring concernments, and our Foreign
Trade, far above any former Examples And this (in the sentiment of a
Country-Clown) is the surest expedient to hold all these Kingdoms and Dominions
together, and united under one Monarchy; without which London cannot be London.
And this is Englands true Interest.

POSTSCRIPT.
TO smooth what has been here rudely advised, if any are willing to have more
indulgence for Nurseries, they may be more punctually directed by Mr. Austen,
Dr. Sharroc, Mr. Drope, the French Gardener, and Le Gendre, whose Preface I
called Inspiring, because it is able to inspire a Prince or an Emperor, a
Cyrus or a Dioclesian, to fall to the Hortulan work with his own hands.
Claudite jam rivos pueri, fat prata biberunt.

The Second LETTER. Concerning ORCHARDS and VINEYARDS, By John Beale, D. D. and
Fellow of the Royal Society.
I Am glad they have Cherry-Orchards in the Neighborhood of Cambridge. These,
if ordered for their best advantage, will be no obstruction, but a proper
expedient to bring on Plantations of Nurseries, and of Orchards for the best
Cider, and for other good fruit. And a very fine and brisk Wine may be made of
some sorts of Cherries: But few have yet hit the right Art of making the best
Cherry-Wine. Sir Kenelm Digby shows us his way of making Cherry-Wine, in his
Closet; a Book, which will shortly be in great esteem for manifold uses, but
especially when our good hospitable Ladies have thoroughly learnt the due manner
of using Sugar and seasonable Fermentations for as many or more kinds of
Artificial Wines, as heretofore, and at present, they use Honey to make Meaths,
Metheglins, Braggets, Hydromels, Medeas, and such like Compositions: Of which
sorts I think he reckons above 90 several ways, practiced by honorable Persons
in England; and where these Honey-drinks are made best, and are in greatest
esteem in other parts of Europe.

2. When the use of Sugar shall be brought into common practice, and as well
known as the use of Honey is and has been many Ages; then we shall know the
true worth of Dr. Jonathan Goddards proposal for making Wine of the Sugar-cane,
mentioned in the History of the Royal Society, p. 193. For, when we have done
our best for Cider, it is only the Sugar-cane that can challenge all the Vines
in the world. And if these be sometimes offensive by too much lusciousness,
they may be helped by wholesome mixtures of a pleasing austereness, or gentle
poignancy, more acceptable to the stomach. This may be had from some sorts of
Plums, and other Vinous Berries; of which Vinetum Britannicum gives the fullest
account of any that is yet extant. This Vinetum and Sir Kenelm Digby's Closet
are at present seasonable furniture for a Ladies Closet, to instruct in that
practical devotion and charity, which obliges our Country, and keeps the Poor
from idleness and famine.

3. And such mixtures of the Wine of the Grape as these, which I here propose
for mixtures with Sugar, and much more than I can propose (without Transcripts)
are so ancient, both in old Greece and in old Italy, that I think no Antiquary
can name their Origin. For two thousand years we are sure, and can show
abundance of particular Receipts, the Ingredients, and the Dose, punctually in
Cato, Columella, Constantine the Emperor, and Palladius, who derives one of
his Compositions from the Oracle of Apollo, (Quod Cretensibus Oraculum Pithii
Apollinis monstrasse memoratur, says he, October. Tit. 14.) And we know, that
Crete or Candy has been long famous for excellent Wines. I cannot say, how far
the ancient Conditures of Wine, and their mixtures and boylings of Wine, do
agree with our modern sophistications, and jumblings, and recoveries; but for
wholsomness I dare lay a good wager on the side of the Ancients; my self to
drink it in the old way; our Merchants and Vintners to drink it in their own
new dress. And for varieties, I dare from the Ancients challenge the
skilfullest of our New men. Peter de Crescentii^ is none of the Ancients; but I
may take him on my side against our last Innovators, dwelling at the sign of
the Bush. And this boldness I take (though with some compass) to hedge in a
defense of the design of Vinetum Britannicum, and of our honorable Ladies
artificial Wines, made by the mixture of Sugar, with all the fanative and
restorative Simples, Vegetables, Spices, and Drugs, which Nature has hitherto
brought forth.

4. But yet I have much to say for the Wine of the Grape, though with some
disparagement to our own Countrymen, who have done so little for it, after
they have had such bright Instructions, and such lively encouragements from Mr.
Evelyn and Mr. Rose in their English Vineyards, published Anno 1666. Mr. Rose
then offering all that desire it with Sets and Plants of the best Vines
(sufficiently tried in our own Soil and Climate) at reasonable rates: And Mr.
Hughes enlarging (in his Complete Vineyard,) as the manner is in Germany. And
now newly the twice-named Vinetum adds more spurs, and his particular
directions. Our Mansions, and our Outhouses, and almost every Wall, and Bank,
and Cottage, has one side aspecting the South; and both England, and Wales,
have Mountains and Hills, Precipices and Rocks, as good as Walls to ripen
Grapes, for the Table, for Wine, and for Brandy, and (when that fails) for
sauce and for Vinegar. And the labor and art is less than every Country-boy
learns in a Hop-yard; and one skilful vine-dresser may teach hundreds, and
whole Provinces; as of late years one skilful Hop-man taught a whole Country.
And multitudes raise clamours, that Trade decays, and make loud outcries, that
they want work and honest employment; and we see, and too well know, that
England swarms with idle Vagrants, Beggars, and Indigents; a great burden and
a great shame to the Kingdom. Now here is one special remedy; and gentile
employment for generous Families: And this Paper may yet offer much more of
sure and speedy remedies.

5. I must add a word for Vines, to show, How easily and speedily they may be
propagated all over England at very small charges. Before Mr. Rose obliged us,
I found in several parts of England the Black Cluster-Grape, which Mr. Rose
commends in the first place, and also a very excellent White or light Watchet
Grape; both which were so easily ripe, and constantly in such abundance, far
more Northerly than Cambridge lies, that I am persuaded, they will prosper well
in some parts of Scotland, where they have a longer Summer-day than we have;
and in those parts of Ireland, where they have the same Sun that we have, and
the Air less pluvious since they have drained many of their great Loughs or
Boggs. They are best planted from Layers well rooted: But in a bed of ten foot
square I tried Cutlings, which had at the foot somewhat of the old wood, and
there did none of them fail of sufficient root the first year, being set at a
foot distance in the bed: Yea, the small sprayes prospered, having somewhat of
the old wood, (as I may call it,) cut from the branches, on both sides of the
foot of the small sprayes. And thus we may have a hundred rooted Plants from
the prunings of one Vine. I offered them to Cottagers; but they generally
answered me churlishly, that they would not be troubled with Grapes: But being
told, how little the trouble would be, and that within five years they might
have a bushel of Grapes at a time, which might be sold for good money in the
next Market, a few bunches for a penny, they were soon of a more thankful mind.
And if Grapes were sent to Market, as other Fruit is, they would soon mind the
Plebeians to be as wise and happy, as other their Neighbors are. And thus
Plants would be ready at hand, for any to try a trench under some Sunny banks.
And doubtless some of the hottest places near the foot of the Hills and
Mountains in Wales, would bear as good Wines, as they did in the days of Gildas.

6. This is the Conduct which will be more effectual to spread Vineyards all
over England, when the meanest of the People, even Cottagers, shall be
concerned to learn somewhat of the dressing of Vines. And this will do
something toward making good my prefacing Address for the advance within five
years: Cherries and Plums will not be long behind. And the best Pears, when
graffed on the Pear-Quince, with some help of Walls or Banks, will come on
apace. And when in the Country we have learnt to dry all sorts of fruit, the
first fruit of Pears will bear a good value. I know several sorts of Pears in
England now, which, being dried, approach the dried Warden in color and taste;
and are preferred by most men before Marmalades of Quinces, which are too
luscious for men's palats. But Quinces also make some grateful return within
five years.

7. The Vinous shrubs outrun all the former, and are at full within two or
three years. And hence I say again, that, when our Country-Ladies have taught
one another the best way of drawing bush-wines or shrub-wines by the help of
Sugar; it will be a sudden improvement of England, Wales, and Ireland, and a
great kindness also to Jamaica.

8. But that which brings the present Hortulan pay the first years, to fill the
Gardeners long Pouch, as Tusser calls it, is the due execution of all points,
according to the French Gardener; first in the approaches of both Universities,
and other chief Cities and Towns, and under one wherever New Orchards (and
especially Noble Orchards) are designed. This is all the skill I have in
Rhetoric, and Eloquence, to repeat and inculcate my proofs; (...).

9. But I must not forsake the Vine, upon such easy terms, we should get all
sorts of Vines, as it is easy for the Londoners to do, though they were ten
thousand sorts; but first from our next Neighbors, from all the Coast of
France, and the nearest on the Rhine: Perhaps these may do best for our
ordinary works or first Essays. From Paris, Orleans, Graves, Poitiers (where I
always met with excellent stomach-wine.) From the Mosel, the Main, the Necker,
and the Danube in Germany. From Italy, the Aminean, and the Falernian, the best
in Augustus his Age, and so esteemed four or five hundred years after (in my
own reading;) I mean so esteemed in Italy. Sunt Thasiae vites, sunt and
Mareotides albae;
Pinguibus hae terris habiles, levioribus illae:
Et passo Psythia utilior, tenuisque lageos,
Tentatura pedes olim, vinctur aque linguam;
Purpureae, preeiaeque: and quo te carmine dicam,
Rhaetica? Nec cellis ideo contend Falernis.
Sunt and Ammineae vites, firmissima vina.
Virg. Georg. l. 2. ver. 91.

10. This for the Vines of Italy. But then the Wines of Greece and of some
Islands did challenge the Wines of Italy; and the like from other remote
places; from the next adjacent Isles, from Messina in Sicily; from Candy and
Corsica. Columella sweats and frets at it: Et vindemias condimus ex insulis
Cycladibus, and ex regionibus, Baeticis Gallicisque -- Itaque in hoc Latio and
Saturnia terra, ubi Dii cultus agrorum progeniem suam docuerant, ibi nunc ad
hastam locamus, ut nobis ex transmarinis provinciis advehatur frumentum, ne
fame laboremus.

11. And Virgil confesses the fact, and sends us far off for excellent Wine:
Tmolus and assurgit quibus, and rex ipse Phanaeus:
Argitisque minor, cui non certaverit ulla,
Aut tantum fluere, aut totidem durare per annos.
Non ego te, mensis and diis accepta secundis,
Transierim, Rhodia, and tumidis Bumaste racemis.


12. Doubtless from Smyrna our Merchants may be furnished with many kinds of
most noble Vines. And I am confirmed in this expectation of excellent Vines
from Greece, and particularly from Smyrna (from whence we have, to this day,
excellent Wines;) because Constantine the Emperor, who made diligent search
for all the best Vines that could be heard of, prefers and highly extols above
all other Vines the Myrsitis, (so he calls it) which makes the famous
Dendrogalonum of Bithynia, and the Tianum of Paphlagonia, and the best Wine in
Heraclea Ponti; and wherever it is planted, excels all other Vines, for the
generosity of the Wine, for the Nectarine delicacy (says he) of the Grape to
eat, and for the incredible fertility, Lib. 5. c. 2. In the same Chapter he
extols the Theriacal or Treacle Vine ((...)) for the most pleasant, wholsomest,
and best Wine without controversy: for this, he recites the Testimony of
Democritus. This Emperor resided, for the most part, in Constantinople; yet
could not be a stranger to the best Vines in Italy. And Lib. 5. c. 17. he
mentions the Aminean and Surrentine, and other Italian Vines, prescribing what
soil is fittest for what Vine. There he praises the Aminean for a general
capacity of abounding fertility in every kind of soil, on the Hills, in the
Vales, and in moorish, moist, or squalid places. But for rich Wine, he prefers
the Drosyllan, and the Leucothracian of Bithynia; and for early maturity, the
Boline of Bithynia. Of twenty Books of Georgical Precepts or Collections, this
Emperor employs five (namely, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII,) to remark the choicest
Vines, the fittest Soil, the best Culture, the ordering the Vintage, and the
improvement of Wines by Art, Mixtures, or Compositions.

13. Neither should we neglect the Vines of Spain, about St. Martin, and
Ribotany, and Gibraltar; of the Sherry, Malago,, and the Canaries: which last
Vines are said to prove no other with us, than the Vines of the Rhine. But
withal it is noted, that of late some Vines are found in the Canaries, which
do much excel all that were formerly there known. And the Madera Wines are of a
stout Masculine strength, which bears the heat of the Tropics, and holds out in
Barbados and Jamaica, where the best Canary is too fulsom and luscious.

14. And since Trade and Navigation has enlarged our Correspondence so far, we
should send to the other side of the World for some variety of the best Grapes
in America. The Canada-grape is in some esteem here. But what is that alone to
the infinite variety of better Vines, even in New England, which cultivate
themselves without man's aid; of better yet in Virginia and Carolina. I must
also name Barbados, Jamaica, etc.

15. Here is much for Nurseries and Nursery-men. But where are the Seeds, and
Seeds-men? This, indeed, if rightly ordered, would secure us of performing more
Vegetable Miracles, than the Sun, or the Son of Man ever yet saw, and at less
charges, and perhaps for greater profit, than by some of our Nurseries have
hitherto obtained, and (to hold to my former Terms) within five years. True, we
have long since had the stately Flower of the Sun, the Marvel of the World, the
Crown Imperial, and many bulbous beauties, Fritillaries, Anemones, and
Crocusses. But what trifles are these, in comparison of those Trees, Fruits,
Vines, and Herbs, I must say, noble, enlivening, restorative and invigorating
Pot Herbs, which may be even in our American Plantations, and easily obtained
for us, or, at least, their Seeds, for trial. Besides what Mr. Josseline has
written, I have seen such a wonderful Catalogue of all these kinds, from New
England alone, by a very intelligent person, that it forced me to cry out, O,
how lazy have we been for a whole Age! One said, It was but a step or two, and
a gentle swing from Whitehall-stains to Barbados, or to Jamaica. Barbados the
fairest Garden that ever was yet in the world; not excepting the Sky-reaching
Towers of Semiramis, nor the Gardens of any of the Ancient or Modern Monarchs
of the East, of Mogols, Sophies, or Chinese; nor of the Pharaohs or Ptolomies
of Egypt, nor of Solomon in all his glory in the Holy Land. Those had more of
the works and designs of men and women; these have more of the workmanship of
God. Their walls and defenses, the Coral-rocks (as Mr. Hughs calls and
describes them) of Jamaica and the Seas, are merely the work of God alone. And
in a short time, Jamaica may be more than ten times fairer (as it is more than
so much larger) than Barbados. One ingenious Nursery-man in each of the English
Colonies, corresponding with ingenious Seedmen in Lombard Street, and in
Bristol, and in all our chief Port-Towns, (to try all the Seeds we could send
them, and to return back to their native soil the Seeds of all our Vegetables
which prospered in any of their soyls, and we doing the like to them,) by many
returns upon trials, again and again, here and there, would make the work
short, and wonderful, and (doubtless) exceeding profitable, and show us more
than any of our Botanic Writers ever dreamt of. And in this, Ireland has the
advantage. It is but a swing of three Weeks patience from their long reach to
any of those Gardens: And the soil of Ireland is as pregnant as ours, and their
Climates as favorable.

FINIS.

