Epithalamium: OR A NUPTIAL SONG, WITH A NARRATIVE OF LOVES PROGRESS.

Consecrated to the honored fame of his much valued Friends Mr. Abraham
Cullen: AND Mrs. Abigail Rushout: The blessed Objects of this Triumphant
Solemnity: To whom I wish a Life enduring continuance of this Days felicity,
whilst I remain obliged to the Honor of Their especial favors, and rest
their most humble Servant L. L.



Deus nobis haec otia fecit. Printed Anno Domini, MDCL.

EPITHALAMIVM: OR, A Nuptial SONG, with a Narrative of Loves progress:
Consecrated to the honored fame of His much valued Friends, Mr. ABRAHAM
CULLEN, and Mrs. ABIGAIL RUSHOUT, the blessed Objects of this Triumphant
Solemnity: To whom I wish a Life enduring continuance of this Days felicity,
Whilst I remain obliged to the Honor of Their especial favors, and rest
their most humble Servant LEONARD LAURENCE.
Shall Angels leave their glorious Orbs and Sphaer,
And with the Gods vouchsafe to frolic here;
Shall to the glory of this famous Day,
So many Friends as Votaries, freely pay
The tribute of their love, and represent
Their souls in Courtship, wishing sweet content,
With matchless pleasures, copiously to flow
Spring-tydes of bliss, till to a Sea they grow
Of pure delight: (on which, whilst Zephyrs mild
Ingross the waves, like Venus great with child:
Her wel-rigg'd Pinnace, trimmed with Cambrick Sails,
And golden Anchors, wantons in the gales.)
And I rest silent, as my thoughts were grown
A lump of Ice, wrapped in the frigid Zone.
No, love forbid, I e're should perpetrate
A crime so great, as not to celebrate
This solemn Festival with all the best,
And choicest Honors lodged in my breast.
For in this Crystal Region, where the Sun,
In each fair Madams eye most brightly burns.
Should I remain congealed, and in such fires
Not straight dissolve, and fountain forth desires:
The World might judge (and soon rest satisfied,
Since Ice will melt) my breast was petrefi'd:
And fit for no expression: which conceit
I Will vindicate: and show that I as great
Respect, and honor, cordially intend,
Without presumption, as a nearer friend.
The thought of which inflames my soul with wishes,
My fancie's fier'd by the infusing Kisses
Of yo'n illustrious Virgin, in whose eyes,
Insconc'st in Diamonds, a whole Army lies
Of beauteous Rhetorique, which might well persuade
A flintie Atheist, Heaven to invade
With obsecrations: that his power would please
To crown that fair one, with perpetual ease.
But here, me thinks, I Am asked, what that I mean
By this large Prologue; how I lay my Scaene:
Or what these words imply, as Love and Wishes,
Gods, Angels, Sphaers, content, and amorous Kisses.
Why know they are attributes, that do belong
To perfect up this day a nuptial song:
The which I consecrate unto a pair,
Of Lovers chaste as is the crystal air:
Whose generous souls like Turtels symphatize,
Whilst Love draws pictures in their amorous eyes:
Whose draught, in time, may guide both her, and him,
When to the life, they undertake to limme.
At this the heavens smile, the armonious Sphaers
As in their Orbs, move in my ravished ears,
And with melodious Anthems, sweetly chime
Delightful welcomes, to this wished for time:
It Is all gaudeamus, Lutes and Viols play:
And all solemnize Hymen's holy day:
Observable, even from the youthful prime,
And infancy of long continuing time:
When pregnant Nature pinned on Adam's sleeve,
A pretty thing to play with, called Eve,
Whom he embraced, and finding that the Bride,
Was taken thence, e'ne log'd her by his side.
The parallel, this day will make appear,
The names but altered; such a Wedding's here;
Ordained by virtuous Love, whose rule allows
A sacred Hymen, to inroll their vows:
Free from fantastic passion, which bereaves
Judgment of reason, and the soul deceives.
It Is Apish love, that by a subtle Art
Flies through the eyes, and Vulturs on the heart:
Camelion courtship, subject to the fate
Of flashie Lightning, which expireth straight
Flames of that Nature do not Maetor here,
Sincere Affections solid are, and clear.
For those that with a reverent fear approach,
TO inflame their lamps at Hymen's sacred torch:
Shall beacon forth to all the world their bright
And splendent glory, which shall know no night.
But all this while, where does great Hymen stay,
Step prithee Cupid, call the God away:
For all things else in their decorum stand,
Designed and ordered by thy mothers hand.
He Is only wanting, prithee therefore run,
Thou shall have sweetmeats when thou do return.
For then thou mai'st at leisure freely sip
Conserve of Roses, from each Lady's lip.
I have my wish, he is just arrived, the flame
Of his bright Tapers, verifies the same.
Our Bridegroom follows like a rising Sun:
His chariot wheels like Titan's swiftly run:
Who as he hurries through the crystal Globe
To kiss his Thetis, in her seagreen Robe:
Presents our Bridegroom: how his worth does pace
With active speed, his Fairest to embrace.
Which that he may two spotless Virgins guide
His welcome presence, where his matchless Bride
(Like chaste Diana amongst her Nymphs) does tend
The wished for entrance, of so dear a friend,
Whose blessed appearance does delight her so,
That in a trice a spring of Roses grow
In her fresh cheeks: then sealing on her hand
His morning thoughts, a while both wondering stand
As extasis'd, with the extreme excess
Of their united mutual happiness.
Which rapture past, from her sweet lips he sups
A dram of Nectar, and ripe cherries plucks.
(Oh miracle of love! I cannot remember,
I ever saw such fruit in cold December.)
Then takes his leave, and kissing of her hand
Two of his train, that there appointed stand,
Respectively their humble service tender,
And with a kiss, receive his sweet surrender.
What want we then? the Nuptial God does stay,
Come sprightfull Bride-men, bring your charge away,
Love's chariot's fitted, and attendant stays;
The seats are trimmed with Rosemary and Bays,
The which ingenious Art has verdent kept
Spite winters rage, by tears that Roses wept.
Behold, she moves! like Juno in her state,
A troop of gallant Virgins on her wait.
Conduct her gently then (Loves Ushers) and
Resign her beauty to the honored hand
Of her dear Choice, who will not fail or miss,
To hand her in the chariot with a kiss.
Cupid drive on, it is already time,
Hark, Hark, the Angels, they all-in, do chyme.
Hold rein, thy Doves we are at the Temple gate
Descend our matchless pair with all their state
And Nuptial train: and summon then the Graces,
For to direct them to their several places;
Where while they sit, great Hymen we thee pray
TO in-augurate this solemn Mariage-day.
And since so far accompanied they are come,
With smiling Venus, and her wanton son,
Associated by the triumphant state
Of Jove and Juno for to celebrate
Those sacred rites, which their chaste vows enjoin,
To be performed at thy holy shrine.
Let all the odours which thy altars breathe
A sacred requiem to their loves bequeath.
Crown them with Myrtle chaplets, and present
Them with the treasures of all sweet content.
Let no sad Omen, no alternate fate,
The happy juncture of their hearts translate.
May Loves sweet language evermore dispute
All differences, which kisses still confute.
And if perchance, there any question rise,
Silence their tongues, and plead it with their eyes.
Bless them with all thy chief delights, and blisses,
And bless them in the enjoyment of my wishes.
So shall this day, the well penned Prologue prove
Of their lives action, in the Scaens of love.
These wishes heard, great Hymen now proceed,
Perform thy office, by the Gods decreed:
Their hands, their hearts, their souls and thoughts conjoyn
And bind them fast with thy religious twine.
They both consent, and in their vows appeal
To heaven, to witness, what their hearts do seal.
Yet let those ties that shall confine and hold
Their congruous loves, be wrought of purest gold:
That so they may like Jems, those lockets wear
Not as constraining knots, that irksome are.
Love's duty acted, every one hasts back,
Where Ganymed presents them healing Sack:
The Bridegroom in a rich impleated bowl,
Commends a health to his espoused soul;
Which she accepts, and as a pledge lets slip
A Robe and Rubie from her orient lip;
Which scarce accomplished, see the Youngsters straight,
As if all Tarquins, put her to a strait.
Nor can her prayers prevail, although she begs
It Is for the garters that surround her legs:
But those whose fortune could not reach so high,
Snatch at the ribbons which her shoes do tie.
The Virgins they as fast for recreation,
Plunder the Bridegroom, of his visitation.
And other fancies: which they multiply
With their conceits: as in their fans they tie
That regiment of knick-knacks: which as prize
Now at the mercy of their usage lies.
This battle over, they invent new sport,
One tells a story how Loves-Queen did court
Unkind Adonis: whilst her Mate cries fie,
How was he bred, that could a Queen deny.
The young men intermix, and act their part
One vows h'hath lost, and there must find his heart.
A second tells his Lady, that he spies
Cupid discharge his arrows through her eyes.
A third protests, that Juno, nor the graces,
Could ever trip it as his Mrs. paces:
Which to maintain, the Music, he ordains,
And with the Virgin danceth to their strains.
A fourth collects fresh Flowers, another seeks
A Mine of Rubies, in his Madam's cheeks.
All are employed, some kiss the Brides fair hand,
Others observe how all things ordered stand.
Whilst some applaud the Bridegrooms happy fate.
And give Encomiams to the marriage state.
Meanwhile the tables are most richly disht
With delicates, and if the Gods had whisht
To entertain their Loves, could not have been
With greater state, and order served in.
The Bridegroom's health goes round, which is replied
With full brim'd wishes, to his fairest Bride.
The day, thus hastens, to another Sphaer,
We leave the table, wearied with great cheer.
The evening falls, Illustrious Sol retires,
And in his room comands less sparkling fires:
Night in her Love-hood, having over-drawn
With tissu'd Cypress Heavens aetheriall Lawn.
Enters (the friendly crowd) attyr'd in Jet,
With glistering oes, and spangles richly set.
And whispers Venus; who straight steps aside,
And tells the errand, to the blushing Bride,
Who apprehends it; and without delay,
The signal given, nimbly trips away
Unto Loves rendevous. The Virgin's trace
Her graceful steps; and follow her apace.
Amongst which train, some few grave Matrons press,
Who while the unrobe her, preach the happiness
Of those rare pleasures, and delicious sweets,
Experienced by them in the Nuptial sheets.
Revested then in her last vestall tyres,
The non plus ultra of her Virgin fires:
They with good counsel guide her to the bed,
(Where (God be with it) adieu a Maidenhead.)
Where hardly laid, the Bridegroom gently knocks,
The door some Virgin, with a smile, unlocks:
Saluting all he enters, and apace
Hies to the bed, his Fairest to embrace;
And e're the Virgins are aware, undrest;
He by the side of his dear Love does rest,
Who like a Saint does lie, the Fairie Queen
Was in her night clothes never so pretty seen.
The unruly troop of Youngsters, fol'wing, throng:
And tax the Ladies of a mighty wrong,
In so transporting, secretly, the Bride
Without their knowledge, e're it was espied:
Which they excuse with smiles, and then incite
Them all to go, and bid the Bride good night:
Which they perform, each pouring forth his wishes;
And so retreat, taking their leaves with kisses.
The room now cleared, our Lover he invites
His pretty Consort to unknown delights:
She not acquainted with the complement,
Seeks, with her sighing Rheth'rique, to preventsa
His forward will, and begs that, as a Maid,
He Will not presume her honor to invade.
He pleads it is lawful, by the Gods decree,
She argues still, and craves repreev'd to be:
Meanwhile he takes her in his amorous arms,
And having whispered secretly some charms,
The Magic works: and by blind loves black art,
I know not how, has seized him of her heart.
With which rich Jewel, I will leave him blessed,
And recommend them to their private rest.
Only one thing they may please to remember,
It Is nine months just, 'twixt this and next September.
FINIS.

