CONSIDERATIONS Humbly proposed As well to the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army, as to others; In order to a quiet and Christian Submission to his
Highness the Lord Protector: Under these General Heads following; 1. His Legal
Inauguration. 2. The general consent and approbation. 3. The endowments of
mind and abilities that renders him meet. 4. The respects and affections from
many to his late Father. 5. The Concurrance of Providence. 6. The honor and
safety of our Nation.


With TWO QUERIES also humbly proposed to his HIGHNESS.

Existiment enim non sine divina quadam Providentia pervenisse Reges ad summam
de omnibus Potestatem.

Aug. By whose appointment men are born, by his appointment also Kings are
constituted fit for the people, etc.

Iren. By T. L. Gent.

London, Printed for the public good, and are to be sold in Pauls-church-yard,
and in Westminster Hall, 1658.

CONSIDERATIONS Humbly proposed As well to the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army, as to others; In order to a quiet and Christian Submission to his
Highness the Lord Protector.
THat the Enstalment of his Highness into that place of eminency, His Legal
Inauguration.
care and trust wherein now he stands was Legal, needs be no man's doubt or
Hesitation. I confess that the Righteousness of Proceedings for these last 20.
years, has been questionable and full of Ambiguity, as has appeared by those
fiery Contests between men of the same Country and Religion: But as to the
Legitimacy of his Highness Introduction, it is written as with a beam of the
Sun, there is no better right or property that any man has to his Inheritance,
both the one and the other being jointly sustained, upheld, and acknowledged by
the Law. Nay, the Law of Nature it self, according to learned Grotious, does
countenance and confirm the present Settlement; For, says he, natural Law is
the dictate of right Reason, and is to be judged by the necessary convenience
or inconveniency any thing has to the rational nature. Again, We conclude
(says he) that to be a point of Natures law, which is received for such
amongst all, at least the most Civil Nations. And as Seneca speaks well,
Argumentum veritatis est aliquid omnibus videri. Now then, if all Nations
Civil, desires no Ruler but what comes in by Consent and Law, and that it
agrees fully with the rational and social nature so to do, then does the Law of
Nature, which is also the Law of God, favor and countenance his Highness
Ingress to that high office of Protector.

So then, if the Legallity of his Highness standings be so evident and
perspicuous, as that the known Laws of the Land, the Law of Nature, and of
Nations are so congruous with our present Governor, certainly then it is the
indubitable law of God; for if God would and did lay such strickt injunctions
upon the primitive Christians to submit and obey their Governors though
Usurpers, as Nero, etc. Certainly it will be very displeasing to God to harbor
so much as a hard thought against one whose standing is upon such terms of
honor and justice.

General consent and approbation, The general consent and approbation.
is such a thing as has for a long time departed, and stood at a distance from
us; we have been like the Arc tossed upon the floods of uncertainties; that
has been our lot for a long tract of time. The Psalmist says of God, That He
stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the tumults of the people; the Holy Ghost
seems to intimate, Psalm. 65.7.
that the minds of the generality of men are as instable, and inconstant as
the waves of the Sea, and as apt to fall as suddenly into the same disorder,
inconvenience and molestation. Yet both the one and the other at his rebuke and
control: who is this, says some of our Savior, whom the Seas obey? now then
if that discord and variance be turned into amity and agreement, and those
insolent waves of strife and contention, into the sweet calm of peace and
unity, and all men (though once enemies) with one heart, and one mind, say
this is he, certainly its little less, if at all then a testimonial divine.

There was a thing called and urged heretofore as an Agreement of the people,
but it was only so called, as too sad experience has sufficiently testified,
but the Agreement of the People in reality, and properly so called, after many
blasts and storms, is now happily arrived in the fair haven of Peace and
Safety.

This General consent of which we now speak, is evident 2. ways.

1. By the peoples Representees met and assembled in Parliament.

2. By Proclamations with alacrity and cheerefulness in all places, as also by
Addresses from most parts, and from all sorts of men, which are nooneday
evidences of love, respect and submission. And that which is as much as all the
rest, is that all those signal testimonies were altogether voluntary and
unconstrained, there was not the least shadow or appearance of promise or
allurement on the one hand (save the merits of the person) nor fear or
threatening on the other, that should induce them thereunto: If then the consent
be so universal, as both by Parliament and the Peoples manifestation, since and
that without any urgency or constraint, it follows then, that certainly God and
men are agreed, and that the two sticks (as Ezekiel speaks) are grown into one.

As to those radiant abilities and endowments of mind which issue forth upon
all occasions, The endowments of mind that renders him meet.
and as opportunity presents, in consideration with his Call and approbation,
is of very sovereign importance to the business in hand.

By abilities, I mean that wisdom, courage, justice and mercy which he
expresses, according to the variety of affairs that is administered unto him:
As for example; That 4 or 500. Officers, the Representees of the most valiant
Army in the world, should address themselves, first, by way of submission, and
then to desire some things which he quickly discerned not to be convenient (as
well as themselves afterward) and to treat them with that strength of reason
and resolution, even to the admiration of most of those heroic spirits: as
also to entertain the famous Citizens of London, the Army at other times, and
other Corporations and Societies of men in their various and distinct addresses
unto him, with that sweetness, candor and affability, and to their exceeding
satisfaction, so that as yet it may be said hitherto as it was of Titus
Vespatian that he never sent any man sad out of his presence.

I say to behave himself upon such excellent terms in the morning of his rule
and government, argues a princely mind, and well inspired, and it is enough to
fill the hearts of all men with satisfaction for the present, and of good
expectations for the future, and that the same species of fortitude and
magnaminity lodges in his breast, which his good old father of renown expressed so
freely: he seems to be like to Dieneces the Spartan; when one thought to have
terrified him, saying, That the flight of the Persian arrows would fly so thick
as to hide the Sun; He answered, it is very good news, for then shall we fight
in the cool shade. Now this noble and generous mind in conjunction with love
of justice and mercy, which are apparent also, and will be more manifest
doubtless in due time, is another consideration, not only of our submission
but rejoicing in him, considering also, that God has delivered us from that
misery mentioned in the Proverbs, Woe to that people whose King is a child.

We have all natural affection for our Children, The respect and affection of
many to his Highness late Father.
Friends, and Allies, and certainly they the same for us, we our selves would
think it a strange solecisme in nature for them that was bosom friends and
acquaintance in war and peace, not to be favorable and indulgent to our
children in our absence, especially nothing appearing distasteful or injurious
from them, to forfit or rescind those respects which otherwise were due, and
they might challenge at their hands.

If any of us have a tree that bears plenty of good and pleasant fruit, all
care is taken to nourish the same, and to graft or inoculate, that so we may
have more of the same species, the excellency of every kind being most
desirable; it is famously known, even to the ends of the earth, that the stock
bare the execellent fruits of wisdom, valor, justice and mercy; then
doubtless, if the branch be but well cultured with our prayers to God, and by
council by those that are able and convenient, we shall not need to fear but
the branch will also bring forth fruit accordingly in its season.

General consent and approbation to this consideration is also very material:
The concurrence of Providence.
It was said concerning the children of Israel that came out of Egypt by
night, that the dogs did not bark at them, which the Holy Ghost takes notice
of, and acquaints us therein of the providential care of God toward that
people, that such a snarling and watchful creature should give no Alarm to the
Inhababitants, to prejudice or molest them in their way, there is not the least
murmurings or repininings, nay not of those that are most querelous amongst us
that is come to my ken; and not only so, but those of a different mind are
now reconciled, what is it there that thus causes the Lamb and the Lion to lie
down together, not long since we were even quot homines, tot sententiae, we
were even a Babel, a heap of confusion, and now with one heart and one mind,
consenting in one wars and strifes (says St. James) comes from our lusts, but
peace comes immediately from the God of Peace; generally if you observe
troubles, sicknesses, miseries and deaths springs up out of the dunghill of
sin and unrighteousness; but tranquillity, plenty, health and all good things
proceeds only from the throne of Gods goodness and bounty; the face of things
seems already to look with a more lovely and smiling countenance, its true,
formerly men were quiet and submissive, but it might be observed, more for
fear and dread then good will by many, but now for love and respect. Old
things are passed away, and all things are become new

That which the sword could not do for a long season, though weilded with
valiant and skilful hands, God Almighty has undertaken it, who makes the
greatest contrarieties to dwell and abide together, and has effected it, viz.
the peace, quiet, safety and glory of our Nation out of that Chaos and disorder
wherein it lay.

It is such a kind a thing which has been always reputed and esteemed next
or equal to being it self. Honor and safety of the Nation.
For suppose a Nation without Honor and safety, you would conclude it
miserable, and according to the Proverb in the High way to beggary and ruin.

Therefore first the Honor of a Nation consists in its oneness and agreement,
as it was said of Jerusalem to be a City at unity within it self, a people that
are unanimous and agreeing, resemble not only Jerusalem the City of God, but
also the whole universe.

Where all things move in their proper sphere, though infinite in number, yet
its lovely amiable and delightful to behold the Sun shining, the rain falling,
the grass growing, the fish swiming, the birds flying, the rivers running, and
all in a pleasant uniformity. But you will say these are moved necessarily. It
is true, most things do, yet its set for our example, having the use of reason,
and the benefit of further revelation by Gods word, we are in a capacity
sufficient to love one another, and to keep our selves in peace equal with
those things that are necessarily so.

Secondly, The honor of a Nation is provided for, when the people are steady
and constant, and not volatile and flitting; what affiance can any Prince or
People have in an unconstant and unstable people, that are for one thing to
day, and another to morrow, as if they were governed by the Moon: we know that
in sacred Writ, its a brand set upon persons that are given to change, and so
in the judgment of God as well as of men its a dishonorable thing: Its no
man's doubt, but as agreement and certainty tends to the honor of a Nation, it
does also upon equal terms turn to the safety, and that upon this ground in
reason. If that disagreement and unconstancy renders a people unsafe, and more
liable to a prey, then the contrary must needs follow, for the contrary of
contrarieties have their contrary consequences: from whence it follows without
all controversy, that subjection and agreement with perseverance therein ought
to be all men's care and practice, otherwise we dishonor our Nation, as well as
our selves, and render our Country unsafe.

Most Eminent Sir,
Quere 1. Whether that interposition or umpirage in the affairs of Religion be
secure and safe, otherwise then to countenance the best livers and the best
subjects, as Tertullian says, Timor hominis, Dei honor est; The reason is,
because many have broken themselves to pieces against this rock, and it cannot
well be prevented as our present case and condition stands, for at that time
that the supreme power falls in, and does peculiarise any of the forms or
methods amongst us, even at the same time does he make all the rest his
enemies, every party thinking their own way best, but the truth is, there is no
party but are fitter to serve then to rule, and I hope it will be judged so:
for it is a little too apparent, that give some an inch, they will take an ell,
set them on horseback, and they will ride -- they have an itch to be beating
their Fellow Servants, and more then that also, if the Bulrush have but mire,
the Magistrate himself shall not be quiet on his Throne, except he shall
receive the laws of his mind from them alone, and put their humors in
execution.

Quere 2. Whether that your Highness enemies are not the Armies enemies, and
Your friends their friends, and their enemies, Your enemies, and their friends
Your friends; And whether you are not both to maintain one and the same cause
and interest; And whether it be likely that that any should strengthen Your
hands to do that which all men thinks is in Your heart to do, like unto them:
Then whom God in his Providence has thus involved and joined together, let no
suggestions, jealousies or any other thing part asunder: The common enemy can
have no other door of hope left to him in all probability, but a division
amongst our selves, which the great God divert.

FINIS:

