God save the King: OR, The loyal and joyful Acclamation of Subjects to their
King.

As it was opened in a SERMON, preached in one of the Congregations of the City
of Edinburgh, upon the day of Solemn Thanksgiving for the King's Majesty his
happy Return and Restoration to his Dominions; Kept, June 19. 1660. At the
Appointment of the Presbytery of Edinburgh.

By R. L. One of the Ministers of the City.

1 Chronicles. 29.20. And all the Congregation blessed the Lord God of their
fathers, and bowed down their heads and worshipped the Lord and the King.

Solennis haec acclamatio, profecto non adulantis est, sed optimum suo Regi
statum precantis, ac fideli servo digna oration, quando Principes Apostoli
Christianos homines ad id sedulo hortantur, ut etiam alienis a Religione rect^
Magistratibus optima quaeque divinitus precentur.

Job. Wolphius in Nehem. cap. 2. v. 13. Multi futiliter ita salutant Reges
suos, Sed minime dubium est quin Daniel ex animo optaverit Regi longam vitam
and faelicem,

Johan. Calvin. in Dan. 6.24. EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in
Hearts Close, over against the Trone-Church, 1660.

2 King. 11. v. 12. -- And they clapped their hands, and said, God save the King.


THere are three expressions of a great joy in Scripture. 1. The joy of a woman
after her travel, her sore pangs and bitter showers, Joh. 16.21. our Savior
says, That she remembers no more her anguish, for joy that a man is born into
the world. 2. The joy of the harvest, that the husbandman has, after his
labors, Psalm. 126.6. He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed,
shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him. 3.
The joy of them that divide the spoil, Isa. 9.3. They joy before thee, as men
rejoice when they divide the spoil.
All three arise from a sad ground, and this makes their joy the sweeter,
their bypast sorrows, pangs and labors do feed and increase their present
joys, their present joys do compense and soften their bygone sorrows.

The joy of this day, is neither the joy of a woman after travel, nor the joy
of the harvest, nor the joy of them that divide the spoil; Yet is it a joy,
upon this account rendered most sweet unto us, that it comes after many sore
pangs, labor and toil, blood and wounds, and sad captivity to poor Scotland.
Had we enjoyed our King in peace, when he was first proclaimed and crowned King
amongst us, it would have been matter of great joy to us; But to have him now
returned to reign over us, after many a bloody battle, and long and sore
bondage to us, ten years sad exile to him, it does exceedingly heighten our
joy: The wisdom of God's providence, makes both his and our loss and
suffering an advantage in the end.

I have read to you, for the solemnity of this day, a passage that sets
forth the expressions of the joy of God's people in Judah, upon the restoring
of their rightful Sovereign and lawful Authority to them. The history you
have in the preceding part of the Chapter: After that Abaziah King of Judah,
was cruelly murdered by the Captain of the host, Jehu, Athaliah his mother
usurped the Kingdom, slew all the Kings seed, and reigned tyrannically over
Judah, the space of six years; Yet Jehosheba the Kings sister, the wife of
Jehojada the High Priest, having hid Joash the Prince, and saved him from
usurping Athaliah her cruelty, Jehojada in a convenient time brings forth the
Kings Son, crowns him, and investeth him in the Government, Upon which, all
the people Clapped their hands, and said, God save the King, in token of their
joy and approbation.

The first sign and expression of their joy, is, Clapping of hands. This,
though sometimes we find it used as an expression of grief; yet most frequently
it is an expression of joy Psalm. 47.1. and it is an expression of vehement and
greatest joy. The second sign, is an Acclamation, the ordinary salutation
people gave to their Kings: In the Original, it is, Let the King live, Vive le
Roy, well translated to us according to the customary word of our Nation, God
save the King. The life of a King is more precious and of more value, than of
many others: 2 Samuel 18.3. the people said to David, Thou art worth ten thousand
of us. Many men's lives depend upon his, and the safety of thousands upon his
safety. Therefore this was wont to be a common Salutation used toward Princes:
good Nehemiah spoke it to Artaxerxes, Nehem. 2.3. and holy Dantel ( Dan. 6.21.)
to Darius when he came to visit him in the Lions den, the Prophet so soon as
he heard him* said, O King, live for ever. And there is more in it than many
that commonly have it in their mouths do consider of: for, 1. Hereby they
signified their cordial respect to the King. 2. Their serious apprehension of
their own happiness, as being bound up in the Kings safety. 3. Their prayer
and heart-wishes to God for the Kings life, happiness, and welfare.


I have the rather pitched upon it for the ground of our Doctrine, that whilst
this word is in our mouths at such a solemn occasion, we may be advertised how
to use it religiously and to purpose, and whilst this word rings amongst us, we
may mind what is imported thereby.

The first Doctrine then I shall present you with from the words; they clapped
their hands for joy is, That when God is so favorable to a people as to
establish lawful Authority, their rightful King over them, it is their duty
to rejoice and be glad. 1 Kings, 1.4 at the inauguration of Solomon, they blew
the Trumpets and said, God save King Solomon: and all the people piped with
pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of
them. And when Solomon was anointed a second time, 1 Chronicles. ^9.22. all the
people did eat and drink before the Lord with great gladness. The Scripture
speaks of such a joy with approbation and allowance: because indeed there is
good reason for it, Lawful Government settled among a people, being both a
singular blessing of God in it self, and the bond of all other blessings a
people enjoy: it being like the girdle, that makes fast a man's armor and his
garments about him; the binding blessing that ensures to a people their Peace,
their Liberty, their Lives, their Religion, and what else they enjoy, as you
shall hear. In the want of it, all things are loose, as you may read, Isa. 3.2,
5. Where the Lord threatens, 1. to take away the stay and staff of their
natural life, Then he adds (as no lest judgment) that he will break the stay
and staff of their civil life, by taking away the Judge, the Prudent, the
Ancient: and what follows in the fifth verse? The people shall be oppressed,
every one by another, -- the child shall behave himself proudly against the
ancient, and the base against the honorable. So it is threatened as a sad
judgment, Hos. 3.4. The children of Israel shall abide many days without a
King, and without a Prince: A sad condition for a people to be without a King
to protect them, to maintain their Laws, their Liberties, and Privileges. On
the contrary, by the presence of this blessing, all other blessings are insured
to a people. See Ps. 72. where the cheerful face of the State, does speak the
comfortable influence of a good King; The people are judged with Righteousness,
the poor with Judgment, the mountains bring Peace, the little hills
Righteousness.

I cannot stand to reckon all the particular blessed fruits of a good Kings
Government; But let us consider at this time these five particulars.

1. Restraint of vice by the execution of justice, is the fruit of lawful
Authority set up. How often is that inculcat in the Book of Judges? Chap.
17.6.18.1.19.1.21.25. In these days there was no King in Israel, and every man
did that which was right in his own eyes. When there was no King to rule,
Idolatry waxed common without any punishment, whoredom and uncleanness without
controlment, murder and oppression practiced without any check, a lamentable
disorder and confusion. It is reported of the Persians, that it was their
custom, upon the death of their King, to let the people be without all Laws
and Government for some days, to dismiss malefactors, and permit a time of
licentious liberty, That so they seeing the mischief and inconvenience of being
without their King, they might the more willingly submit themselves to his
successor. But now when a good King is set up, he is a terror to evil doers,
Romans 13. And it has been truly said, if some men were not gods among men, most
men would be beasts, yea, devils among men in all kind of wickedness.

2. The second happy fruit of a good Kings Government, is Protection to the
innocent, the poor and the weak. This goes along with the former. What is
among a people, destitute of lawful Authority, but as Habakkuk^ speaks,
Chap. 1.14. Men are as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things that have
no Ruler over them? The greater fish eat up the lesser; the rich and wealthy,
oppress the poor; the great ones in whose hand is power, bear down the weak
and mean ones. But now when the good King is set up, the poor have a father and
a defender, the Jaws of the wicked are broken, the spoil plucked from his
teeth, Job 29.16, 17. There is a covering against the heat, a hiding place from
the wind, a refuge from the tempest, rivers of waters in a dry land, and the
shadow of a rock in a weary land; In his days, the righteous flourish: for he
delivers the needy when he cries, the poor and him that has no helper; He
redeemeth their soul from deceit and violence, and precious is their blood in
his sight. Hence are Princes called the Shields of the earth, Psalm. 47.9. for
the safety and defense of the innocent, and the fence they afford to our
liberty and property; if none will be subject, none can be free; if men own
not lawful Government, they shall not call any thing they have their own.

3. A third happy fruit of a good Kings Government, is peace and quietness.
Acts. 24 2. the Orator Tertullus, began his Speech to Felix with this, Seeing by
thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this
Nation by thy providence; We accept it always -- with all thankfulness, most
noble Felix: Yet Felix was none of the best Governors: a man far better than
Tertullus, inspired by the Spirit of God, the Apostle Paul, exhorts to pray
for Kings and all in Authority, upon this account, that we might live in peace
and godliness under them. Two ways is a good King the procurer of Peace, 1. By
being a bulwark against Invasions from without, keeping that there be no crying
out in our streets, no breaking in, Psalm. 144.14. All the days of Solomon,
Judah and Israel dwelt confidently every man under his own Vine-tree, from Dan
even to Beersheba, 1 King. 4.25.

2. By being the cement, to unite scattered societies within, and the healer of
breaches and dissentions: Zecha. 10.4. Out of Judah came the corner, and the
nail. The good King is not only the cornerstone for foundation for a people to
rest on* and the top-stone for ornament, but the corner, that joins the
sidewalls together; he is not only the nail, for hanging all vessels great and
small upon him, but the nail for joining the beams and rafters of the house and
building.

4. A fourth happy fruit of a good Kings Government, is Plenty. That this
follows upon the former, we cannot but understand: for, when all things run
in a right channel the laws of the land are in force under lawful Authority,
people enjoying their liberties, lives, possessions and houses in peace; Then
Industry, Learning, Arts, Trade, Traffic, are encouraged and advanced, and a
people prosper even in external things. 2 Chronicles. 9.27. You read that Solomon
brought in such wealth into Judea by his good Government, his advancing Trade
and Traffic by sea and land, that silver was nothing accounted of through the
abundance of it: Yea, God Almighty also from above, seconds the blessing of
righteous Government with the dew of heaven and the sat of the earth, Psalm.
72.16. There shall be a handful of corn upon the top of the mountains, the
fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon; a little shall yield a plentiful
increase: and left it should be said, this is for the villages and country, it
is added, They of the City shall flourish like grass of the earth; they shall
be green and grow in prosperity and wealth.

5. A fifth happy fruit of a good Kings Government, and which is the chief of
all, is the comfortable use of the Gospel, and the liberty of the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, holy freedom of conscience, which is the very marrow of our
bones, and life of our lives, when now the Church has a nursing father, Isa.
49.23. and the good King becomes, under God, a defense upon all the glory,
according to the title of our Kings, A Defender of the Faith of the Gospel.
Many Heathen people have enjoyed happy days, for Protection, Plenty and
Prosperity under their heathen Kings, as the Romans under their Augustus,
Trajan, Adrian, Titus: But when the King is a member of the Church, and is one
of Christ's Kings, who holds his Crown in subordination to the King of Saints,
Then, beside all outward blessings to the State, there is a far greater
enjoyed; The Gospel has free passage, the Ordinances of Christ are maintained
in purity, Error and Heresy, Idolatry, false Worship, Atheism and Irreligion
are banished: for, the Christian King is as Constantine to the Church,
Episcopus extra Ecclesiam, a watchman and overseer to her. We all read what
good offices David, Hezekiah, and Josiah did unto the Church, advancing true
Religion and right Worship, defacing Idolatry; and of worthy Joshua, who lived
before them, it is said, Josh. 24.31. That all the days of Joshua the people
served the Lord.

Now in all these respects it is, that a good King is compared to the Light,
whose rising makes a day unto a people, whose setting and obscuring makes their
night, as the Ancients expound that 24. verse of the 118 Psalm, that was sung
at the inauguration of David, This is the day which the Lord has made, we will
be glad and rejoice in it: It is called a day, because of the Occurrents of the
time, that David had risen upon them like a Sun to make a lightsom day. The
104. Psalm tells you what difference there is betwixt the day and the night; The
night is the time when the savage beasts range abroad, Wolves, Lions and
Serpents creep out from their dens and holes: But when the day appears, these
beasts retire to their caves, and man goes forth to his labor. So it is in
times of confusion, when Government is cast loose, all sorts of beastly men;
filthy as Swine, greedy as Wolves, cruel as Tigers, deceitful as Crocodiles,
they come abroad boldly to satisfy their lusts: But in time of lawful
Authority, when a King is on the Throne, these vermin are chased to their
holes and dens, as is declared at large, Psalm. 101. and honest men come forth,
appear and lift up their heads.

Application. Thus you have seen the Doctrine, Let us apply it to our Case. We
are assembled this day to bless God for restoring our Kings Majesty to his
Dominions: Now, if any people ever had cause to rejoice upon such an occasion,
we much more, Considering the unparalled circumstances of this our great
mercy. I desire you to consider of them in these five.

1. What is the blessing restored to us. 2. When, the circumstance of time. 3.
How, the manner. 4. Who: for a King is set over us. 5. To Whom all this
goodness is manifested, a very undeserving people.
What. 1. What is the blessing restored to us? Even our ancient fundamental
Government, under which these Kingdoms have enjoyed both the Gospel and Peace,
under which our progenitors have enjoyed many happy and good days by the Royal
protection of our Kings. It has unhappily come in debate in these late times
of confusion, what kind of Government is the best? But whoever might have
disputed such a case, it did no ways become these Nations to do it, Kingly
Government being of so old and firm and undubitable possession amongst us. In
this Nation some hundred years before Christ's incarnation it was established:
And if we go to the Scripture with it, sure I am, there is none will vye with
it, the very history of the lives of the Kings of the people of God, taking up
a great part of the Bible; and Kingly Government being such a fair Image of God
Almighties Government in the world, and Christ's Kingdom in the Church, that the
whole dispensations of providence, the whole dispensations of grace in the
Gospel, are set forth to us under the expressions of King and Kingdom: Every
other word of the Gospel sounds forth a King and Kingdom to us; And why does
the New Testament in many places, where duty to the Magistrate is pressed,
expressly and particularly mention Kings, 1 Pet. 2.13. and v. 17. 1 Timothy 2.2. if
not to set the seal and approbation of the holy Ghost upon Kingly Government in
special?

And though it be said in Scripture of Saul, that God gave Israel a King in His
wrath, and took him away in His displeasure; Yet this can no manner of ways
rub upon Kingly Government, seeing it is most clear from these two, that Kingly
Government was not given them in wrath, but in much mercy, 1. That in Moses
time the Lord had appointed, that they should be ruled by Kings, Deuteronomy. 17. and
Moses himself was King in Jesurum. 2. That after Saul, God gave them a David in
great love: and we may easily perceive that the times of David and Solomon,
were the best times that ever Israel saw, for Religion, Peace and Prosperity;
they were never so godly, never so wealthy and well every way, as under them.


I remember, when that prevailing Faction in England, made their Act, rejecting
Kingly Government, they put in this as a reason, because it had been burdensome
and troublesome to the Nations; But I appeal to all who have considered,
whether their little finger, has not been more burdensome, than the loins of an
hundred of our Kings: And I cannot forget what an English Divine has truly
printed of their Commonwealth, That we had (says he) never so much common
poverty, as since we became a Commonwealth.

When. The second circumstance, is the time When God has restored this
blessing to us, After a dark night of Confusion, a sad Interruption that has
been for many years. I told you what the Persians did in policy, to make the
people esteem more highly of Government being established; But God in his
wisdom has so disposed of us, that we have seen not only a few days
confusion, but have been under sad distractions for many years, that we might
learn more highly to prize the blessing of lawful Government when restored.

In King James the sixth his time, we had a very clear and fair day, a day like
Joshua's day, that continued for a long time. In King Charles the first his
time, we had a fair day, for the blessings of Government continued with us,
till the sins of all ranks coming to a great height, our day was turned into a
very black night; and now in respect of the comfortable blessings of Kingly
Government, we have had a sad interruption for many years. Yea, and when after
the detestable and execrable Murder committed upon Him, We in this Nation
expected a dawning of our day, by calling home our present Kings Majesty to
Scotland, and crowning him here; Behold it fell out to us as it is, Isa. 21.12.
The morning comes, and the night also. Our morning was soon turned into a
night of captivity for ten years: And as it is with the natural night, that it
is darkest just before day; So before this appearing of light, there was the
greatest darkness of confusion and reeling, The righteous Lord overturning,
overturning one thing after another, till he should come whose right it was.
And now that the Lord has made light to arise, after so long, so black and
dismal confusions, How should it make us rejoice? Psalm. 118.27. God is the
Lord, who has showed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the
horus of the Altar.

How. A third Circumstance is How. There is a book in Scripture that has its
name ECHAH, the book of Hows, and there are many doleful Hows in it, the book
of the Lamentations; How does the City sit solitary? How is the Gold become
dim? But in this our mercy, there are so many joyful Hows, that I cannot
reckon all to you: look upon these four, 1. How unexpectedly? 2. How suddenly?
3. How sweetly? 4. How wonderfully?


1. How unexpectedly? Were not all doors of hope shut upon us? Especially two
things seemed to have barred the door upon this blessing, 1. The great
alienation of heart, found in many of the Nations, from the King and his
Family: It was said of David, Psalm. 118.22. The stone which the builders
refused, is become the head stone of the corner. The Master Builders had
rejected him, yet was he advanced; they who had formerly rejected him, coming
to him (2 Samuel 5.1.) and saying, we are thy bone and thy flesh, So God has
wrought for our Sovereign. 2. Another impediment that stood betwixt us and all
hope of this blessing, was, that the power and strength of all Armies within
these Lands, stood against the King; all Armies were on the contrair part:
There was an Abner for Saul, but not a Joab these many years to appear for
David.
Now this makes the change miraculous, that the very Armies that stood against,
are now turned for him; And that a more noble and generous person than Abner,
did send unto our King, and with better success then he (2 Samuel 3.12.) saying,
Whose is the Land? my hand shall be with thee to bring about all Israel to
thee. God, who does in the Armies of the heaven and earth, what pleases him,
Dan. 4.35. He has turned all the power of Armies by sea and land for him.

2. How suddenly was this done? Isa. 66.8. Who has heard such a thing? who
has seen such things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or
shall a Nation be born at once, in so short a space, that the Lord has created
a new face of affairs, and made the hearts of three Nations to bow to their
King at one time? This is the Lords doing, and may be mavelous in our eyes.

3. How sweetly is this done? sine sudore, sine sanguine, without sweat or
toil, without bloodshed; No man lost his goods, no man lost his life in this
late revolution; Every one were, not long since, prognosticating sad things, if
ever we got a settled Government again; we can look for it no otherwise than
through a sea of blood. But, Behold! God has disappointed all these fears, and
the hopes also of the enemies of our peace, who fret and rage, and gnash their
teeth, seeing their expectation frustrated.

4. How wonderfully? Deuteronomy. 4.32. we may apply that passage, Ask now of the
days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man
upon earth, and ask from the one side of heaven to the other, whether there
has been any such thing, as this great thing is, or has been heard like it?
No history has the parallel of it, a King thrust away with the hight of
contempt, the same King returned in the highest glory, honor, respect and
observance.

Who. A Fourth Circumstance in this mercy, and a main one, is Who, For a King
is restored to us. It is true that I read in Eusebius his Eccles. Hist. That it
was laid to a Ministers charge as a challenge, Ausus est Imperatorem in ore
beatum dicere: a small praise before a Kings face. may be interpreted
adulation; but a great praise behind his back, may be no more than a just debt.
This one thing I am sure of, from the Word of God, That next to the honor of
Christ, his Gospel and his Grace, nothing is more a Ministers duty, than to
advance the honor and due esteem of lawful Authority in peoples hearts; For,
next to Fear God, is Honor the King. And the Apostle Paul, presses upon Titus
and all Ministers, as a special part of their work, Tit. 3.1. Put people in
mind to be Subject unto Principalities and Powers. He himself presses it to
purpose, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be Subject, etc. The Apostle Peter runs in
the same strain, 1 Pet. 2.13. And truly a Minister cannot do a worse turn in
his station, than to diminish the due credit of the lawful Magistrate by any
speech in public before the people. The Apostle Jude* v. 8. stands not to call
them filthy dreamers, who despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

But now, what I have to say of the Kings Person, shall be summed up in these
six.

1. We have cause to rejoice, that the righteous Heir of the Kingdom is
restored to his Throne. This is the great joint that God has put in for the
healing of those broken Nations: usually you see in Pieces of work that are
joined by Mortises and Tenons, when the principal tenon is made fast, all the
rest of the parts clap together easily. David experienced it to be so, Psalm.
75.3. The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, but I uphold the
pillars of it: all was out of joint, till he who had Gods right and man's to
Govern, came to the Throne, then proved he a healer to their broken and
disjoynted parts.

2. There is cause of joy in this, that he is a King of so good expectation.
Hiram, King of Tyrus, was a prudent man, and a godly prosolyte, and when he saw
Solomon's Letters, wherein he discovered his prudence and affection to the
house of God, though Solomon had not as yet given many other proofs of his wife
Government; he congratulats the happiness of the land, saying, because God
loved Israel, therefore has be made Solomon King, 2 Chronicles. 2.11. And what may
we say of the Gracious Letters and Messages, our King did send, before himself
came, to his people? They found themselves bound at London to keep a Solemn
Thanksgiving, even for these Gracious Letters and Messages.

3. Let me add, a King of so general approbation, that has the good
testimony of all that know him, for Prudence, Clemency, Moderation, Sobriety,
and Piety. Great is his renown among the Reformed abroad for his constancy in
the Protestant Faith, in the midst of many assaults and tentations

4. A King tried by many afflictions: he comes out of the furnace of trial.
It was all the better for Israel, that David came by the cross to the Crown:
all the better for England, that Queen Elizabeth came out of a Prison to reign.
Though we ought to be grieved for his long and sad afflictions; Yet, may we not
hope, that it shall come to pass as Joseph spoke to his brethren, Genesis 50.20?
You intended it for evil, but God has turned it into good, for the saving of
much people alive. Though men intended his down-bearing for evil, Yet we may
hope God will turn it into good unto these Nations, that he may be fitter to
Govern these Nations, being so long in the school of hard affliction.

5. A King glorious by many deliverances, Psalm. 18.50. Great deliverances
gives he to his King, and shows mercy to his anointed, even to David. As
many Countries as he has been in, with as many great deliverances has God
compassed him, from dangers both spiritual and bodily, Scotland, England,
France, Holland, Flanders, Germany and Spain. I believe if we get the history
of his Travels published, the world will see how in all those places he has
been miraculously preserved from many dangers.

6. A King signally owned of God now in restoring him after all his troubles to
his Dominions. His enemies were wont to talk of signal Providence, when they
carried a day in battle against him, and did boast of these as if God had
approved of their doings; But see, if among all they can reckon, they can speak
of such a signal providence as this. It is observed of the Egyptian Magicians
their blindness, that they could not see the finger of God, till the plague of
lice came, and then in the least, they were found Confessing, this is the
finger of God; whereas if their eyes had been opened, they might have seen
ambas manus, his whole ten fingers, in their ten plagues; So may it be said to
these who are not convinced of a work of God in this, they may see not only the
finger of God, but both his hands, even his ten fingers, not in ten plagues,
but ten gracious discoveries of his holy attributes. See, 1. the print of his
Power, that mighty finger of God, clearly appearing, Zech. 4 6. Not by might,
nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord. 2. The print of his Mercy,
Psalm. 18.50. He shows mercy to his anointed, and to us also a sinful people.
3. Of his justice, the Lord appearing against Oppressors, Isa. 51.13. Where is
the fury of the Oppressor? 4. Of his Truth and Faithfulness, making good his
word. Psalm. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest always upon the lot of
the righteous. 5. His Wisdom, in bringing order out of confusion, and light out
out of darkness. 6. His Zeal in vindicating his Providence from the
Blasphemies cast upon it. 7. His daunting Majesty, appearing in the quieting of
all hearts, upon the discovery of this work; Be still, and know, that I am the
Lord, I will be exalted in the earth: it is the language of this dispensation,
Psalm. 46.10. 8. His Providence both for our King and us, when we were so very
low, that we knew not what next to do, he has remembered us in our low estate,
Psalm. 136.23. 9. Pity and Forebearance, in the tender way of bringing it
about, not surcharging these poor harrassed Nations with new wars and troubles.
10. His Holiness: David said, Psalm. 60.6. God has spoken in his holiness, I
will divide Schechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth: his Holiness was
engaged to give him victory over his enemies that were profane, and peaceable
possession of his own People; and his Holiness does certainly shine forth in
bearing down all rebellious opposition to Princes, and opposing himself to a
profane and lawless crew.


To whom. the fifth Circumstance, is the people to whom this goodness is
manifested: and this is not the least in illustrating the glory of the
deliverance, that God should have bestowed these mercies on us, a sinful and
unworthy people, to whom he may well say, as it is, Ezekiel. 36.32. Not for your
sakes do I this, be it known unto you: Be ashamed and confounded for your own
ways, O house of Israel.

Now, for conclusion of this point, I say this, We are allowed to rejoice in
this great mercy, in this singular blessing: But let us take heed how we
rejoice, 1. That there be no excess in the expressions of our rejoicing: It is
not unlawful to express our joy by Meats, Drinks, Triumphs and other
Solemnities, Nehem. 8* Yet let us not run into excess. We have done well this
day to begin our expressions of joy in coming to the Church to hear Gods Word,
and to present our spiritual sacrifices of prayers and praises unto God. Let us
take a holy stamp of fear and love to God upon our hearts to the door with us,
that may be a restraint from excess. Remember the Kings Majesty his
Proclamation against profane and debaucht Drinkings; and how pungent that word
is, We are sufficiently ashamed of such, who give no other evidence of their
affection to Us.

2. Let not our joy be a mere carnal joy, that has no higher rise than an
earthly contentment; that has no other operation than what is sensual and
earthly; that looks no higher than the creature, and has self for its utmost
end: But let us rejoice with a spiritual joy, that God may have the chief share
in all our triumphs. joys and exultations; That God may be the principal
object of our rejoycings, and our joy may rise up to holy admirings and
exaltations, and extolling of him, Psalm. 34.3. O magnify the Lord with me, and
let us exalt his Name together. If we exclude God out of the play this day, all
our joy shall be but as crackling of thorns under a pot; Yea, we shall not be
far from the sin of those Angels that fell, and of Adam, who were contented to
rejoice in their privileges, but not in God who gave them, And so provoked God
to rob them of them David is a good example of rejoicing in mercies, who in all
his Psalms does more remember by whom he was made happy, than how happy he
was, esteeming more highly of the giver, than of any gift.

The second expression of this peoples joy, is in a loud acclamation, God save
the King; In the Original it is, Let the King live. Which, as you heard, was
the usual Salutation to the Kings of old. And the words do express three
things.

First, The peoples cordial affection to the King, which is the duty of all
loyal Subjects to their King, highly to tender and regard, even from their
hearts, the Kings happiness and welfare. See how the Scripture presses all
cordial respects to Kings, Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy
thought. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of
thy people.

One of the Ancients, writing upon 1 Samuel 6. where God smote the men of
Bethshemesh for looking irreverently into the Ark, has this Note, that God
smote them, non solum quia inspexerunt, sed quia despexerunt; because the Ark
had been taken captive, and in the Philistines hands for some time they looked
upon it with contempt. The Ark was a sign of Gods Authority, and God was so
displeased when his Authority was contemned, that he smot fifty thousand for
it. Although our King has been brought very low, has been under sad captivity
and exile, Let none, when he is now returned, despise him, or look with less
reverence upon him: The lower he has been brought by his afflictions, we
should set him the higher in our affections. And will you consider how the
Apostle Peter, twice in one Chapter, presses Submission and Honor to Kings;
and yet the Kings who ruled at that time, were heathen and strangers to the
Church. And if this precept stands in force toward a heathen King and
stranger, What then is to be done of us to such a King as God has given us, a
King of our own Nation, lineally descended of the ancient Kings of this Realm,
and a Christian King that stands for the Gospel and Protestant Faith?

Three things especially should make us yield all cordial respect to our King.
1. Regard to God, whose Image he bears, being Gods Deputy and Vicegerent,
whom God has stamped with his own Authority; God has put his own Name upon
Kings, I have said, ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. As to mind them of their duty,
that they should rule as God does, and for God, with a mind like God, free from
the mixture of a private spirit; So to mind people of their duty, freely to
submit, come under and reverence them, as visible gods, remembering any
dishonor done to them, reflecteth upon God whose Name they bear.

2. Respect to the Kings Government over us, should make us yield all cordial
affection to him. The honor of Rulers, is as useful to them, as credit is to
Merchants: take away credit from the Merchant, he can neither buy nor sell,
trade nor traffic; So a King can neither reward, nor punish, nor do any part
of his duty as a King, if you take away his credit and honor from him: If a
King be robbed of his honor, he has little behind to lose, and while he
keeps that unblemisht, he cannot be at a great loss for any thing else.

3. Respect to our own benefit should move us to this: if a man cast down the
light of the Kings countenance, let him take heed how he puts down his own; If
a Nation will not acknowledge their own head, they must unavoidably be made the
tail of all other Nations; they that will not submit to lawful Government,
they are made to submit to confusion and destruction: If the light of Israel be
quenched, Israel must be in darkness; and doubtless the light of a Nation is
quenched, when a King grows cheap in vulgar opinion, and a Prince falls
under the undervaluings of his own people.

Woe to them then that entertain the least disloyal, irreverent and seditious
thought against the King. Search the Scripture, and you will find the Seditious
and Rebellious for the most part met with, even in this life. Of such persons,
Jezabel, though a naughty woman, spoke truly, Had Zimri peace who slew his
Master? Jehu, Jeroboam, Zimri, Shallum, Pekah, the servants of Joash, or Amnon,
they found it all most true. Two especial Beacons are set up in Scripture, 1.
The punishment of Korah and his accomplices, whom the earth opening, swallowed
up. It is terrible to see the sea swallow down a ship full of people, crying
out for fear; It was far more terrible to see the solid earth rend and swallow
those down: it made all Israel cry and fly aback. 2. Another is the fall of
Absalom, who rose against David: his hair is made his halter, and whilst he
hangs in the Oak, Joab and his followers pierce him through with darts every
one tryes his weapon on so fair a mark; one death is not sufficient for
Absalom, he is at once hanged, pierced, mangled, and stoned: justly is he lift
up on the tree, who lift up himself against his Father and Sovereign; justly is
he pierced through, that pierced the Kings heart with many sorrows; justly is
he mangled, who had divided and dismembered all Israel: He was cast forth in a
ditch, and a heap of stones raised above him, which remains to this day, and
travellors as they pass by, cast to their stone, and say with a solemn
execration, Cursed be the Paricide Absalom, and cursed be all Traitors.


Secondly, These words do express their deep apprehension of their own
happiness, being bound up in the Kings welfare. Calvine on the 72. Psalm.
giving the argument of the Psalm and the scope of it, has these words, docet
veram piorum faelicitatem in eo positam esse, dum sub manu Regis divinitus.
Electi reguntur; that the whole tract of the Psalm holds forth, that it is a
great felicity to Gods people on earth, to be governed by a righteous King of
Gods choosing, who is the man of Gods right hand. And Solomon speaks out the
matter clearly, Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the
son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength and not for
drunkenness. The Original has it, Thy Blessednesses, O Land, as wondering at
the multitude and greatness of them. And the qualities expressed there, are
Nobility of birth and education and Sobriety or Temperance: the first, because
as Aristotle has it in his Politics, they that are taken from vile degree
unto principality, do oftentimes hurt the Government: for, nothing is more
sharp and bitter, than a base person exalted; Asperius nihil est humili, etc.
The Spirit of God therefore wisely provided, (as one observes) who being to
make Moses a Ruler, would not have a fisherman draw him out of the waters, but
Pharaohs daughter, that he might be enobled by his education; And where a noble
birth is beautified with a noble Education in virtue, The King is the son of
Nobles indeed, of white ones, as the Original has it. The other quality is
Temperance, a very singular ornament in Kings: Therefore Cicero in his C^^ation
for King Deiotarus, says, Did ever any see Deiotarus drunk? Now both these
being eminent in our King, Why may we not apply the Scripture, O thy
Blessednesses, O Land.

It is remarkable, that in all languages, the word that expresses a King, does
hold forth the necessity and usefullnesse of that Government. The Hebrew word
MELECH, comes from a root that signifies, counsel: and the Scripture calls
him the Head of the Commonwealth, as for Supremacy, so for Counsels, 1 Samuel
15.17. Again the Greek word (...), signifies he is the basis, the foundation
whereon a people stand, rest, and are edifyed: Thus he is not only the Head,
but the feet too: Hence that word of Luther, Unus tantum subditus in civitate
Magistratus, There is but one subject in the City the Magistrate: the weight
of all lies upon him, he bears a people and their burdens, I am not able to
bear this people alone said Moses. The Latin word Rex, is a regendo, to
govern. Thus he is the hand to the Body politic, that governs the body: The
Scripture calls him the Arm of a people, Jer. 48.25. The horn of Moab is cut
off, and his arm is broken. In our language, the word King, comes from the old
Teutonick Coming, that signifies knowledge: thus he is the eye of a people
also, and so called in Scripture, Isa. 29.10. God has closed your eyes: and,
How? In the next words it is expounded, Your Prophet and your Rulers has he
covered: and will you add the word of Lam. 4.20. The breath of our Nostrils:
which speaks no less than this, that it is as possible for a man to live
without breath, as for a people to subsist without Magistracy. And who does not
see, how many ways a good King is necessary and useful to a people? When
Kings and Rulers are taken away, the eye of the Commonwealth is put out, and
we are left in blindness; the foundation is pulled away, and how can the house
but fall? The feet are cut off, and how can the body stand? The head is gone,
and there is no counsel; The arm is broken, and there is no strong rod to be a
Scepter to rule, and this is for a lamentation and shall be for a lamentation,
Ezekiel. 19.14. The breath of a Peoples Nostrils is stopped, and what then
follows but death to the whole body? Good reason therefore have a people to
apprehend this, and be sensible of it, That their happiness is bound up in the
happiness and welfare of their King, and in the sense thereof to cry out, with
loud acclamations, Let the King live; Let him live, that we may all live, that
the Land may live, that Religion may live, Counsel may live, Justice may live,
Peace may live, that we and our posterity may have a Rest, a Center of
quietness under his shadow.

Thirdly, This acclamation has in it a short prayer, and an hearty wish to God
for the Kings safety and welfare. Our translation, and the word we use, God
save the King, expresses this most fully: Wherein the Lesson is clear. That as
it is our duty to praise God for our King, So to pray to God earnestly for him.
1 Timothy 2.12. The Apostle Paul exhorts to this I exhort therefore that first
of all, supplications, prayers. intercessions and giving of thanks be made for
all men, for Kings and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a godly and
peaceable life under them. The Apostle says first of all, because this is a
matter of prime consideration and remembrance, that should have a principal
place in all Church Assemblies; as to seek God for a blessing on all holy and
spiritual, so also upon all civil administrations, and the persons by whom
they are administered. He mentions Kings in particular, for two reasons, at
Interpreters agree, 1. Because at that time, Kings were strangers to the
Gospel, unconverted and heathen; and people might doubt, whether being so, they
should pray for them. The Apostle loses the doubt. I exhort you pray for
them, notwithstanding, for your peace sake: Yea, Eusebius tells us, that not
only Constantine and Justinian sought the prayers of the Christian Church for
them, but that even heathen Emperors, (some of them) though otherwise evil
affected to Christianity, Yet had such an esteem of Christians prayers, that
they thought themselves and their Empire more secure by them, as appears by the
Edict of Galerius Maximinus, Eusebius, Lib. 8. Cap. 29. Unde Christiani hac
indulgentia a nobis concessa devincti, debent Deo suo obnixe supplicare pro
nostra, Reipublicae, pro sua ipsorum salute, etc. And it was charged upon
Gallus, who succeeded Decius, though he was a heathen, that beginning by cruel
Edicts to proscribe Religious Christians, who were wont to make earnest prayers
for him, in driving them away, it is said he drove away with them, these
prayers also which were accustomed to be poured out to God for him.

2. For this reason also does the Apostle particularly mention Kings, to
intimate what blessed Instruments they might be to the Church of God, being
converted to the faith of the Gospel; being members of the Church themselves,
they bring in their glory and honor to the Church, Rev. 21.24. And this was
Gods promise to his Church, long before John's time, Isa. 60.16. Thou shall
suck the milk of the Gentiles, and thou shall suck the breast of Kings. And Oh!
how glorious things are spoken of the Church there, when it is so, for copper,
I will bring gold; for iron, silver, etc. to the end of the Chapter.

Let me add three motives more to this point, 1. Kings, above all persons,
should be prayed for: because the Lord challenges a special work upon the
hearts of Kings, Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart is in the band of the Lord, as the
rivers of waters: As the husbandman cuts out a channel for the watercourse
with his spade, sometimes lets it run in to water his fields, sometimes sets it
off; So does, the Lord more easily with the hearts, devices and counsels of
Kings, he turns them to water and refresh his people, as the heart of Pharaoh
to Joseph, of Darius to Daniel, of Cyrus to the Jews: sometimes he bears them
off, when they would run impetuously to do hurt, as he did with diverse of the
Roman Emperors, and with Charles the fifth to the late Reformers, Melancthon,
Pomeranius, and other famous men of God: whom, after he had conquered the
Protestant Princes, he dismissed in safety, without laying any bands upon them
at all.

2. Because as God has a special work upon the hearts of Kings, so his work
on them is of special concernment to the Church. How the heart of a King is
inclined, is of all earthly concernments, most considerable: for, it is like
the palm of the horologe, to tell the time, how Gods heart is inclined toward
a people; when the Lord is angry with a people, he says, he will make such as
hate him, reign over them; and when he is pacified, he gives them Kings
according to his own heart: So that the inclination of a Kings heart, is the
sign of Gods favor or displeasure to a people. When God was to punish Judah,
he set a Manasseh over them, who, though he was well educated under Hezekiah,
yet proved he a fierce King. Again, when God was pacified, he sets a Josiah
over them, who, though he was mis-educated under Amon, yet had he a tender
heart toward the people.

3. Because Kings have, above all others, a difficult task and most weighty
charge: great dominion carries with it always a great care, which does many
times make sleep depart from their eyes, Esth. 6.1. The Apostle Paul said of
himself, 2 Cor. 11.28. that beside his troubles without the care of all the
Churches lay upon him: So Princes have the care of all their Subjects lying
upon them, beside the many dangers they are oftentimes encompassed with above
others, The enemies of the public peace being like the King of Syria, who
commanded his Captains to fight neither against small nor great, save against
the King, 1 Kin. 22.31.

You see then your duty: set about it. The King is more obliged to them who
pray for him, and for his life and health, than to those who drink his health
in vain carrouses, So he says himself in his late Proclamation. Some that are
here on this solemn day, I believe, have no great plenty, cannot command strong
drink, cannot come at a rich table, a cup running over: Let such go home and
pray this prayer aright, with strong and fervent affection, God save the King.
This will do him more good than all the healths that others can drink to him.

And that you may know what particulars to mind in using these words, on this
solemn day, I shall give you the descant of this short word of prayer, in these
few particulars, 1. In the Original Hebrew (as you have heard) it is, Let the
King live. Then, 1. mind his natural life, to pray God that it may be precious
in the Lords sight, Ezr. 6.10. Darius renewed Cyrus Decree in favor of the
Jews, with many additional benefits, That they might offer sacrifices unto the
God of heaven, and pray for the life of the King.

2. Mind his civil life, that he may live in Honor, Freedom and Safety: that
is a main thing in the King's life, he is no living King without his Honor.
Pray for that which God gave to David, Psalm. 21.5. That Honor and Majesty may
be laid upon him. It is a great mercy from God to Kings, when he maintains
their esteem in the hearts of their people; much of God is seen in this.

3. Mind his spiritual life, that he may live a most Christian King, a sure
partaker of the Faith whereof he is a defender. David begins the Psalm of
prayer for the King (to wit. Psalm. 72.) with this, Give the King thy judgments,
O God, and thy righteousness: all that is good, all grace is called by the name
of righteousness; and Gods Laws and Judgments, are the Rules of all
Righteousness. And it is a most excellent word to remember at this time, (when
the King has to do with men of several judgments and ways, and some will be
ready to say, this is my counsel and judgment, and this is mine) Now, Lord,
give Thy judgments to the King Thy counsels; hold forth these clearly to him.

4. Mind his eternal life: Good Kings have a twofold eternal life, 1. An
eternal life in this world, in the long duration of their race and progeny. Let
us mind this, to pray God that we may never want one of the Line to sway the
Scepter, as long as the world stands, Psalm. 89.36, 37. That his seed may
endure for ever, and his throne may be as the Sun before God, and be
established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. 2.
There is a life eternal, properly so called: Remember this also, that our King
may be an heir of eternal life in heaven after he has lived many happy days
here. All Christian Kings, since the days of Constantine, have born a Cross
upon the top of their Crowns: there is no Popery in it, But to teach them,
that they must bear the cross of Christ, as well as other Christians: And if
they do so, and exalt the cross of Christ above their Crown, God will give them
a Crown of glory above their cross, according to Gods promise; James 1.12
Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life. Our King has born the cross before the Crown; and
when he has got the crown, there is no crown without a heavy cross; But let
our Prayer to God for him, be, That he may so bear the earthly Crown and the
crosses of it, that he may assuredly possess the Crown of life.


Will you a little take the words as we have them translated and as we use
them. We say, God save the King; and there is a twofold Saving we should mind,
1. One positively, when God blesses, prospers, guides, governs and
endueth a King with graces and gifts needful for his place: this is the Lord's
Salvation, wherein the Kings glory is great, Psalm. 21.5. Let it be our prayer
to God then, as it is, Psalm. 80.17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right
hand, that God may make him strong for himself, giving to him wisdom, courage
and zeal to the honor and glory of God; justice, temperance and every other
Royal endument.

2. Another Saving privativly, to wit, when God delivers from all evils and
dangers both bodily and spiritual. Mind this also: Pray God save the King from
conspiracies and treasons, from all enemies and false friends. David himself, a
King, has a terrible prayer against the Kings enemies, Psalm. 21.9, 10. Make
them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger -- That their fruit may be
destroyea from the earth, and their seed from the children of men. Abigail, a
Subject, she has a notable prayer against the enemies of David, 1 Samuel 25.29.
Let the soul of my Lord, be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord his
God; and the souls of thine enemies, slung out as out of the middle of a sling.

But pray that he may be delivered from spiritual evils and dangers, much more,
God save the King from all wickedness, Prove. 16.4. It is abomination to Kings
to commit wickedness, above all others; for, the Throne is established by
righteousness: and God save him from evil counselors, Take away the wicked
from the King, and his throne shall be established; and from liars and
flatterers that are a very Pest in the Courts of Kings. Prove. 29.12. If a Ruler
hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. Pray God to save him from
wronging the precious Interests of Christ's Kingdom, But that be may employ all
the interests of his Kingdom in subordination to Christ, using for the Lord all
the honor and authority he has received from the Lord.

And now, for conclusion of all, I shall say but this word; That same God who
has saved our King hithertils, even from the womb; who saved him when he was
hid in the Oak; That gracious God who put his vail about him in his disguise;
That God who helped him, when his nearest relations proved but unkind to him;
He who provided for him in his wants, comforted him in his straits,
strengthened him in his temptations, in France, Holland, Flanders, Germany and
Spain; Even that gracious God, who has seen and numbered all his Troubles, and
delivered him, continue his Salvation with him for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

