AN History of Angels, BEING A Theological TREATISE of our Communion and
War with them. Handled on the 6th Chapter of the Ephesians, the 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Verses. By HENRY LAWRENCE, a Member of this present
PARLIAMENT.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. and are to be sold by William Nealand in Duck Lane,
1649.

To my Most dear and Most honored Mother, THE LADY LAWRENCE.
Most honored Mother,
DVring this busy time, in the which our country (subjected to those
calamities, of which by faith we see the catastrophe glorious) has been the
stage of so much action, and the field of so many battailles, my lot was cast
to be from home, and in this retirement, if I enjoyed not the happiness of his
wish, to have otium cum dignitate, leisure with dignity, (for I pretend but to
an excuse) yet it was without any just cause of reproach, for the war found
me abroad, not sent me thither, and I have been only wary without a just and
warrantable reason, to engage my self in that condition, from which a
providence seemed to rescue me. But of all the pieces of our life, we are
accountable for those of our greatest leisure, whereas public and visible
employment gives its own account. It was said of Cato, that he conflicted
with manners, as Scipio did with enemies; The conflict with manners, as it is
a kind of war, from which no condition will free us, so leisure and
retirement is commonly the opportunity of it; for such enemies will find us
soonest in that condition, as on the other side, we have an advantage by it,
to seek out, and improove all the strengthes, and aides, that are requisite
for our own defense, and the incommodating of our enemies. In this war
therefore, to which my leisure more eminently exposed me, and to which also it
more fitted and determined me, I was diversely acted, according to the several
methods, and occasions of war, by the great General of all his people Jesus
Christ, sometimes conflicting with the known, otherwhiles persuing the
discoveryes of the unknown corruptions of my own heart, and others. I found
assuredly, That a man's foes were them of his own household, and that to be
delivered from the ill men our selves, was to be avovved as a rich and high
mercy. But as most wars, that have their rise and beginnings at home, and
from within, are not determined, and concluded within that circle, but to
greaten and assure their party, and prevailing, seek the assistance of
foreign aides, or find (at least) their homebred differences and divisions
made use of by neighboring powers, who while they pretend to help their
friends, serve themselves, or some third state, to which their proper interests
ingages and determines them: So did I conceave, that in this spiritual war,
there were not wanting aides and assistances from without, that were of mighty
influence in the business of our fighting, and who by stratagems, and methods,
as well as by fine force, contributed exceedingly, not only to the last issue
of the war, but to the success almost of every battaille. And these, though
they were of wonderful moment, yet me thought were generally little
considered, but men terminated their thoughts within the compass of
themselves, or if they went farther, looked presently, and immediately upon God,
(as in every thing it is an easy and vulgar step from the last effect to the
highest cause) whereas those hoasts of Angels, which on either side more
immediately managed and improoved this war, as they are spiritual and
invisible beings, so they pass with us, unseene, and undiscerned, in a great
proportion; and we, who are the subjects of this war, and whose interests are
especially concerned in it, by not knowing or considering, can neither improve
our most active, and most powerful friends, or enemies, to our advantage. I
was guided therefore by such thoughts as these to the ensuing meditations: and
as we usually are more sensible of our enemies then our friends, so the first
design I had, was to discover what influence the evil Angels have upon us,
and our actions, what parts they act, and how they communicate themselves to
us, and affect us for ill. But as commonly things have not the same place in
the execution, which they have in the design, so I found it necessary in the
method of this discourse, to consider first of the Angels in their pure
naturalls, and then, (as of the most eminent pattern of Angelical power and
influence) of the good Angels, and after that, (with the due difference of the
abate of power and strength which sin had caused) of the influence, and
effects, which the evil Angels have upon mankind, which every one
experienceth, though few, enough know it or consider it.

And because in a subject of this nature, nothing is more easy, then to wander
even to the loosing of our selves in the speculative part, I endeavored to
remedy that inconvenience throughout, by certain practical Corollaryes, which
might reduce the notionall part of the discourse to the use and end intended,
and might let us see how much our interest is concerned in the right knowing
and improoving these mighty spirits. And lastly, because the Scripture I first
pitched my thoughts upon in order to these things, furnished me with proper arms
for this holy war, I judged it would be a good access to this discourse (of
which also it might constitute a third part) to show those arms, and to give
what light I could to the right wearing and using of them.

For other things I, pretend neither to such a method, or language, or what
ever else of that kind, as is wont to begett a reputation with many readers;
for besides the vanity of such affectations in a subject especially so serious,
these thoughts were formed for a more private use, then their present condition
leads them to; nay such things as were but necessary, as a division of this
discourse into chapters (of which it was easily capable) a more correct
printing, and some other perfectings of a like consideration, have by reason of
the business of my own occasion, and a mistake somewhere, been wanting; this I
pretend to, to magnify God in those mighty hoasts of spiritual substances,
which he manageth wonderfully and differently, for the good of his children; to
gratify and serve the good Angels, who (if I may judge of others by my self)
have been too little considered, in order to them, or our selves; and to
profess, and (as much as in me lies) to assist, to an irreconcilable, and
everlasting war, with the greatest and most inveterate enemies of God and
man, the devil and his Angels: And last of all (which I mentioned in the
beginning) to give one instance, that I have not been idle in these busy
times, nor without the thoughts, and designs of war, in an age, when war
is become almost the profession of all men. Why I inscribe these papers to you,
My dearest Mother, will need no larger account then this; Nature and your
own goodness, have formed you ablest, to pardon me in any thing, wherein I
shall need it; And of all I have known of either Sex, I have met with
fevv more diligently inquisitive, or pertinently reasoning of things of a
raised and abstracted nature, (especially which might have influence into the
good of another life) then your self. To which I add, That I profess to have
infinite engagements, to avovv my self before all the world

Most honored Mother Your most obedient Son and Most Humble servant HENRY
LAWRENCE.

A Treatise of our Communion and war with Angels.
Ephesians. 6.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may
be able to stand against the vviles of the Devil; For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against
the Rulers of the Darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in
high places, etc.
THE great external cause of all our evils is the Devil, who has such a
kind of relation to our sins, as the holy Spirit has to our graces, saving
that he finds a foundation within us to build upon, matter out of which he
extracts his forms, whereas the holy Spirit does that work as well as the
other, and is put to the pain of foundation work as well as building. I call
him the external cause in opposition to the working of our own corruptions,
which are our own properly, and most of all within us. In other respects he
may be said to be the internal cause also, for he mingles himself with our
most intimate corruptions, and the Seat of his warfare is the inward man. Now
because he has a greater influence into us then perhaps we consider of, and
the knowledge of our enemy is of great concernement to the war we must have
with him, I desire a little to inquire into this mighty enemy of God and man,
that we may know him, and dread him, so far as to fit us for conflict, and
that we may know him and discover him, for he is a perfect Iugler, he
reigns not much when his tricks are discovered, and that we may know him and
resist him, if he shall embolden himself to stand his ground as often he
does.

The Apostle from the beginning of the 4 Chap. had taught them how they should
live in general, first among themselves, then with relation to those that are
without, ver. 18. Then he condiscends to particular duties of Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, and last of all before he
concludes, returns to that which he had mentioned in the 3. Chap. ver. 16.
where he beggs of God as the most desirable thing in the world, that they
might be strengthened according to the riches of his grace in the inner man:
Here he turns his prayer into an exhortation, wherein he provokes them to
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, ver. 10. That is to say,
though you have all faith and all knowledge, and work well, yet you must
persevere, ye must go on, and you must do it with strength: It is a great
matter to come into the lists, but it is great to run also, and to fight when
you are there, for you shall meet with those that shall oppose you and
conflict with you, therefore be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, that is with the Lord by his Spirit, which is his mighty Agent shall
work in your hearts; Be not strong in your own strength, in your own
purposes, in the freedom of your own wills, so was Peter, who got nothing by
it, but in the Lord, his Spirit can strengthen, can raise, can confirm you.

Ver. 11. Put you on the whole Armor of God; God is able to preserve you, but
he will do it by your fighting, and your Armor must be suitable to the hand
that wields it, which is the Spirit of God in you, and the enemy it conflicts
with, which is the Devil: Again, it must be the whole Armor, if you want any
one piece, that place will be exposed to danger, also, All, for offense, and
defense, that you may save your self by destroying your enemy, that ye may be
able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, that is, that ye may hold your
ground though you should receive wounds, and thrusts yet that you may not give
way, as ver. 13. that ye may withstand in the evil day; The day of temptation
is an evil day, a day of trouble, a day of trial, and often in respect of the
event, evil, therefore deliver us from evil: And having done all to stand,
that is, if you do all in this fight God commands you, and omit nothing, by
the virtue of God, you will stand, but there is no dallying with such an enemy,
your standing must be a fruit and result of doing all.

The wiles of the Devil; the word is Methods, that is, the devil like a
cunning fencer has his faints, knows how to take his advantages, and like a
great commander has his stratagemes, by which he does as much as by fine
force, and these are well laid, there is a Method in them to make the work the
surer, one thing depends upon another, and all contribute to make the result
firm.

For we wrestle, that is, de conflictu, est sermo, non de ludo, we speak of
conflicts, not of play, or sport; not against Flesh and Blood, that is, that
which we have only in our eye is flesh and blood, wicked men that wounds us
and persecute us, where note, that God calls all wicked men, all the enemies of
his Church, but flesh and blood; now they are the most perishable things when
God will blow upon them, for all flesh is grass; though the enemies be never
so great and mighty, they are but as grass and stubble.

Or secondly flesh and blood, by which may be understood your carnal lusts,
the concupiscence of the flesh, and the boiling and ebullition of the blood to
anger, and all passions, it is not so much, or it is not especially against
these you wrestle, but rather against him that acts them, and makes use of them
to your ruin and dis-advantage, which is the devil, and this he may perhaps
speak against the opinion of the Heathen, who understood not the operation of
the devil, but thought all our conflicts was against internal passions.

But against Principalities, he seems to describe the devils here which are
our enemies, first from the principality of their nature, by which the eminency
and raisednes of their nature in respect of this visible world is set forth,
that as the state of Princes differ eminently from other men, so the nature of
devils, as Princes, excells the nature of men and of all visible things.

Against Powers; he calls them Powers simply without any addition to show the
eminency of their power, as well as of their natures, that as they have a
nature, far above flesh and blood, fitted for great things, so they have a
power suitable and fitted to act this nature, as may be seen by their effects,
both upon us and upon the world, though we are not so to judge of their power
as the Manichees, who feigned two supreme powers a good and a bad; which
conflicted perpetually each with other, for their power falls as far below
Gods, as it is above us, and infinitely more.

Against the Rulers of the darkness of this world: Here the Devils are
described from the universal dominion they have in this world; they are called
the Rulers of the darkness of this world, to show what the Devil is
conversant about, all his work is to bring in darkness, and to show
principally the seat of his Empire: He is not the ruler of the world, that is
Gods Territory, but of the darkness of this world, the children of darkness;
though he cease not to interpose, and exercise rule, even over the children
of light, and within the Saints, so far as darkness possesses them. It is
also called the darkness of this world, to show the term of his Empire; it
is but in this life, in another himself shall be subject to darkness, and
eternal torments.

Against spiritual wickedness in high places: Beza translates it spiritual
malices, the words are (...), the spirituallnes of evil and wickedness,
carnal wickednesses are inferior to spiritual wickednesses, which occupies
the highest part of the soul, which possesses the understanding more, and are
not laid out in carnal passions, and concupiscences, so as the Devil has a
most excelling malice. He lays out himself in the exercise of, and
provoking us to the most spiritual wickednesses, though he is in the other
also, and labors to make even carnal sins as much spiritual as is possible,
by causing them to be acted against light, and against love and engagements.

In high places; the word is (...): Beza translates it, in sublimi, on high,
that is, in high places; your enemy has the advantage ground, he is on high,
he has gained the hill, he is in the air, how mighty an advantage this is
in a combat you know, but it signifies in Heavenly, as in the margent of your
books, which may have relation as well to things as places, and then it shows
the things about which his malicious studyes are conversant, that is to take
all heavenly things from us, and to deprive us of what ever is heavenly. And
now what say you to your Antagonist, here is a dreadful enemy formed already,
you have heard fables of Giants, here is a Giant indeed, great in subtilty,
excellent in nature, mighty in power, large in dominion, above all, eminent in
ill and malice; we are apt to fear only, what we see, but invisible things
are the best and worst, they are the greatest, as our original sin which we
see not but by its effects; and this great invisible prince that casts so many
darts at us, the blows of which we feel, but consider not the hand that
gives them, whence comes all our mischeife: I would set out this enemy a little
in his own colors, that we may know him, and know how to deal with him,
we shall surely find him as black as we can paint him, the ignorance of our
evils may cover them, but not relieve them; let us know him, and we shall
know how to deal with him, there is strength and might in Jesus Christ, God
has but raised him up as Pharaoh to make his power known upon him, we have
weapons can reach him, and an arm strong enough, but we must arm our selves,
but we must use it, we shall overcome, but we must fight. Put on therefore a
firm courage, for before all be done your enemy will appear extremely
black, and dreadful, and yet to comfort you, greater is he that is in you,
then he that is in the world.

Now for a more perfect knowledge of this great enemy, we will launch a little
into that common place, of the nature of Angels, yet keeping near the
Scripture and not departing from our assured rule, the word of God, nor
intending so large a compass of discourse as the thing will bear, though the
knowledge of it is of very great use in many respects, but so far forth as it
may afford a full light, to the discourse we have undertaken.

Aristotle will needs have them eternal substances, a thing altogether
derogatory to God, who only is eternal, and therefore as the first cause,
must needs be the former and maker of all other things: It is true that Moses
does not particularly describe their creation, accommodating himself to the
rudeness, and ignorance of that time, in which he writ, and therefore
particularizes only in visible things.

But that they were created we have clear scripture for it, Coloss. 1.16. For
by him were all things created, whether in heaven or earth, visible or
invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or powers,
all things were created by him and for him: We shall not insist here upon the
particular titles, but you see here creation of things in heaven, as well as in
earth, and invisible, as well as visible, so Psalm. 148.5. Let them praise the
name of the Lord, for he commanded and they were created. What was created?
all that he had named before, the heavens and the Angels. He begins with the
first and most eminent pieces of creation: If you ask when they were created?
certainly not before the created matter of the visible world, for Moses says,
In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth; if they had been
therefore created before, there should have been a beginning of time, and
working before that; besides its said God wrought all his works in six days,
and rested the seventh. If you ask what day they were created? in all
likelihood, the first day with the supreme heaven, in respect of the
similitude of their nature; they give also another reason Job. 38.7. When the
morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joye,
because they seem there to applaud God in the works of his creation: vizt,
when the highest heavens and first matter was created, out of which other
things was formed.

Saduces, that denied Angels and Spirits, that is, that thought by the name of
Angels was meant nothing but good or ill inspirations, or motions, or else the
wonders and apparitions which were wrought by God; but nothing is more absurd
then this for.







Angels: If you ask as an appendix to this, whether the Angels have bodies,
or are altogether incorporall, it is a question controverted between the
Philosophers, the Schoolmen, and the Fathers; the Platoniste would have them
have bodies, to which many of the Fathers adhere; Aristotle and the Schoolmen
would have them altogether incorporall, the reasons on both sides are not
unworthy considering, if one would amuse themselves in that, out of which the
Scripture gives no issue, I will not trouble you with it, only this, its safe
to say, that they are not essences so simple as they are altogether incapable
of composition, it is only proper to God to have his being and essence or
substance the same; Angels are mutable, they consist of an act which they are,
and of a power into which they may be reduced, it is one thing in them to be
simply, and another thing to be endued with understanding and will, to be and
to be good, to be and to be wise, God only is I am, incapable of any change,
as of any composition; To say God were an Angel, were a derogation, as to say
he were a body, unless you should mean by a body, a substance, as Tertullian
did, and so called God a body, that is, a substance: But if they have any such
composition, as may be called a body, it is certainly of the greatest
finenesse and subtilty a spiritual body, and therefore not like to be of that
grossenes that either the air is, or those heavens that are framed out of the
Chaos, but nearer the substance of the highest heavens, which seem to have
been made at the same time: To conclude, it will be safe to say that in
comparison of God they are bodies, in comparison of us they are pure and mighty
Spirits. From this that has been said in general, of the nature of Angels,
consider by way of corrollary.

Bless the Lord, O my soul, O Lord my God thou art very great, clothed with
honor and Majesty, why he was able to form and create those mighty things
and among them the Angels, ver. 4. Who makes his Angels spirits, his
Ministers a flame of fire, where (by the way) he gives you their nature and
office, for their nature they are spirits raised and excellent, for that
office, they are ministers.

They are reserved in chains, as well to their effects, as to their
punishments, they cannot break loose nor get beyond their Tedder: On the other
side there are good ones amongst them, which shall be ordered to your advantage
by this maker and creator of them, who minds us as well as them, and minds
them for us, of which we have a good pledge in Jesus Christ, Who took not on
him the nature of Angels, but took on him the seed of Abraham, our nature and
surely all creatures shall subserve to that composition of which God is a part.

3. If God created the Angels, fear no lowenesse,

4. How great is that love to piece up with much

5. You see reason to consider of the Angels not as their methods and wiles,
so as without a great power of God, we shall not be able to escape them: The
not considering of this enemy gives him a mighty advantage, we hope in some
measure to unmaske him.

We have considered two things already concerning the nature of Angels in
general, first that they are creatures, secondly that they are substances and
have made use of both: We shall now consider their mutability, or immutability.

And first we say that as it is peculier to God only to be without beginning,
so it belongs to God only to be without change, or shadow of change, and that
the Angels as creatures are reduceable to nothing, by the same hand that made
them, so as though there be no passive principle in them, by which they may be
called corruptible, or mortal, yet in respect of an active power of God, upon
which their being and life depends, they may be called corruptible, and
mortal, because as it is in the power of the Creator that things are, so it is
in the power of the Creator that they may not be, yea so much they are in Gods
hands, though the best pieces of nature, that if he do but withdraw his
hand, they all moulder to nothing, there need no great activity be put forth,
a mere ceasing to uphold them is sufficent to destroy them; but yet when ye
speak of changeable or corruptible, it must be understood of the next and
intrinsicall cause, and not of the remote and outward cause, as men are not
called the children of the Sun, though Sol and homo generat hominem, but of
their parents, so as the Angels may properly be called incorruptible and
immortal, because they are so by nature; I speak not now of the
changeableness of their wills, but of their nature and substance, the reasons
are.

First because the Angels are not produced out of

Secondly Angelical natures as the souls also of men,

Fourthly we will consider of the apparitions of

One manner of their appearings has been in dreams, another in visions, the
third in assumption of bodies, and that either of bodies formed of nothing, or
of pre-existant matter them formed, or possessing and acting natural bodies
already made.

Some have thought, there has been no assumption of bodies, but only an
appearance to the fancy and imagination; but that must needs be otherwise, for
what ever is a substance which is not a body, nor has a body naturally united,
and yet is sometime seen with a bodily sight or vision must needs take up a
body, and further this was not an imaginary and fantastical apparition,
because such an imagination is not seen by the senses without, but by the
fancy within.



Obj.
But if you object to what end was this assumption of bodies, since the power of
the Angels exceeds all bodily might (and this will not be unusefull to
consider since it makes way to show to what end they appear and what they have
done, and can do for us and upon us, both the good and bad.)

Ans.
The Angels assumed bodies for the manifesting themselves, not for the doing of
their work; but that they might familiarly speak with men, without their
terror and dread. Aquinas gives other reasons, that they might manifest the
intelligible society and converse which men expect with them in another life;
And in the old Testament that it was a certain figurative declaration, that
the word of God should take humane flesh, for all apparitions in the old
Testament were in order to that apparition of the son of God in the flesh: If
you ask me what kind of bodies they took, and whether they were true men or
no, in taking humane shapes? Answ. First though they appeared in a humane
shape, they were not true men, as Christ was a true man, because he was
personally and hypostatically united; but bodies were not united to the
Angels, as to their form, as the body is to the soul which is its form,
nor was the humane nature body and soul, united to the person of any Angel,
but they took bodies to them as garments which they took up, and laid down
upon occasion.

If you ask of what those bodies consisted? It is like ordinarily of some of
the Elements, as of the air. And if you object that the air is improper to
take figure or color, because it is so thin and transparent? The answer is,
that although the air remaining in its rarity does not reteyne figure or
color, yet when it is condenced and thickened, it will do both as appears
in the clouds. Another way of appearing was in possessing some natural body,
so the devil entered into the serpent, and an Angel spoke in Balams Ass; so
you read often of men possessed with evil Angels, the men spoke not, but the
devil in them, the like may be said often of the good.

Now if any shall ask what becomes of those bodies? Qu.
The answer is, Ans.
if they be created of nothing, they are reduced into nothing, by the power of
God; But if they be formed of pre-existent matter, the work being done for
which they were taken up, they are resolved again into their Elements, or
Principles, but if the bodies were natural, real and existent before, they
were left so again, by the departing of the Angels, so was Balams ass and
many bodies possessed by the devils cast out by Christ.

Another consideration is whether the Angels having assumed those bodies, did
put forth acts of life, whether they spoke and sung, or eat and drunk, as
they seemed to do; this is handled with much controversy, but it is certain
they did what they seemed to do, as appears by the plain direct story of
Moses concerning the Angels, that appeared to Abraham, and others, and this is
assured that what ever the Angels appeared to have, or do, that they had, and
did, for they never deceived your senses, their color, their shape, their
eating, their drinking, their speaking was what it seemed to be, for the senses
are not deceived about their objects, if the distance be proportionable, and
they no way distempered, for if the senses are ordinarily capable of being
deceived, then you may question any thing, subjected to sense, as whether the
snow be whit, etc. Now all this they did, not by virtue of an internal form,
but an Angelical power, quickening and mooving the body they acted; and it is
observable, that when the Angels would hide their natures, that they might
converse more familiarly with men, they would eat, and drink, and speak; But
when they would be acknowledged for Angels, then they denied to eat meat, as
Judges 6. in the story of Gedion, and of Sampson, Judges 13. If you ask what
became of the meat they eat, for their assumed bodies needed no nourishment?
I would ask you what became of their bodies, their meat as well as their
bodies was reduced into nothing, or the pre-existent Elements, of which they
consisted, as that which Christ eat after his resurrection.

Qu.
There is one question more in this subject, with which I will end, and that is;
Why the Angels make not their operations now, as formerly they have done?

Ans.
The heathen who were ignorant of the ways of God, ascribe this to the sins of
men, that God being now displeased with them, has no more mind to converse
with them; But the reason is quite otherwise, because as God would be
worshipped in spirit and truth, so he would have us walk in the spirit, and
converse more with the spirit then formerly, and Christ being now in the flesh,
and in heaven, he would have us live, by the faith of him, and a greater
measure of the spirit being now given, he would have us converse with the
spirit, and these spirits, in a more invisible way: As also the Church being
now confirmed by God, needs not those visible, and sensible confirmations, as
formerly, which is the reason also of the ceasing of miracles, they were
appropriated to the laying of fondations, both of the law and the Gospel, we
walk now in the virtue of these apparitions, which were of old and in the
power of these miracles, and besides we have faith enableing us to converse
with the Angels in a way more spiritual: So much for the apparition of
Angels.

First from the immutability of the Angels, Coral.
you see the reason of their indurance, nothing can destroy this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, this passive principle by which they are
corruptible shall be destroyed, they will then be in the same condition of the
Angels, incapable of fadeing or alteration.

From the apparition of Angels, see the care that God has had of his Church
in all times, He has not left himself without witness to the world, in that
he gave them rain and fruitful seasons, nor to his people, for he has
given them the apparitions of Angels and invisible substances.

Are they not all ministering spirits, etc.







Though he were God blessed for ever, yet did not abhor our nature, but as
he took our nature and not that of the Angels, so he took it up indeed,
not in show, as the Angels who troubled not themselves, with the heaviness,
indisposition, and vildenesse of our bodies, but Christ so took our nature, as
he subjected himself to all our natural infirmities, and to have as we, a
vilde body.

of the Angels, you may know they are not idle now, although we living by
faith have not such a visible converse with them as formerly, but as miracles
are ceased, so are their appearings seized, but not their workings though their
converse be not so sencible, yet it is as real: But of that in another place.

So as the fifth thing will be to consider about the administrations of Angels
to us, and the deputations they have from God concerning us.

And first, we must know that the doctrine of the Genius, hence are those
phrases, Invita Minerva, and contra genui facere, that when their Angel or
Genius inspired them one way, they would do acts notwithstanding contrary to
such inspirations, and to their Genius.

Secondly, some, not only Philosophers, but Christians Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them who shall be heirs of
salvation? Exclusively, that is, to them and no others. Else he would not have
made it a privilege, and prerogative to the saints, but given it in common
rather amongst men. So Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, but to whom? ver. 9. those which make the Lord their refuge, so that it
is clear, for them and for no others.

And it does not hinder, that this was spoken immediately to Christ, for so are
all the promises which concern the elect, they are made, and made good first
to Christ, and from him as a head they descend to his members.



That it is probable that every elect has his proper and peculiar Angel
deputed as his keeper and companion, yet so as extraordinarily many may be sent
to his aid, for proof of this Math. 18.10. Take heed that you despise not one
of these little ones, for in heaven their Angels do always behold the face
of my Father which is in heaven. Wherein seems to beheld out plainly the
particular guardian-ship of Angels, for he says, their Angels, that is,
their particular Angels, else he might have said the Angels, which are not
only their Angels, but the Angels of all the elect with them, so as he
seems to have meant their particular Angels which were deputed to them as
tutors and keepers, which because it was a thing so honorable to them, they
ought not to be despised; the Ancients were of this opinion; and therefore
Jerome says upon this place; It is a great dignity of souls that every one
from his nativity has an Angel delegated for his keeper. Also Acts 12.15.
when the company with one accord affirmed that it was Peter's Angel, that
knocked, as a thing notorious amongst them that men had their particular Angel
guardians; And from this opinion amongst the Jews arose that received and
common opinion among the heathen, that every one had his Angel or Genius: Now
no man affirms or need affirm that upon occasion there are not more then one
deputed to the service of an elect man (which may satisfy them of the other
opinion) for many Angels carried Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, and the Angel
of God rejoice over one sinner that repents: Besides more Angels then one
brought Lot out of Sodom. As for the answer out of that place of Peter, that
it might be one of his Angels, that looks like an evasion, nor seems it any
derogation, but an honor to the saints to have their particular Angels, so as
we do not limit them to one, in all cases; About this there are some other
questions moved; As when this Angel Guardian begins his charge, whether when
the child is borne, or baptized, or afterward. There is no reason why the
beginning should depend upon Baptism or any ordinance; for the other if one
would argue it there might be more question, I should rather think that the
Angels begins the execution of his charge, as soon as the soul is infused,
for though the child be a part of the mother, yet it has a distinct being of
his own, and is a person consisting of soul and body: Again some consider
whether the Angel keepers do ever leave men or no with whose Guardianship
they are be trusted? Certainly never totally, for as our adversary the devil
goes about seeking whom he may destroy, so our Angels intend their work, of
preserving and keeping with all diligence; But as God leaves us that affliction
or sin may follow: So may the Angels of God also, which are his messengers and
ministers, they may withdraw for a time of affliction and the like, and
return again for our advantage: for the keeping of the Angels is nothing
else, but a certain execution of Divine providence concerning us; Now God never
leaves us, therefore not the Angels, But they are often with us as Physicians
are with those who have filthy ulcers, they stop their noses, and administer
the medicine, so do they, our vanity and sins extremely offend them, as it
does God, yet their obedience to God and Love to us, keeps them steddily to
us, though in our ill ways, we are no ways pleasant to them, but They shall
always bear us in their arms, as Psalm. 91. that no evil befall us.

Qu.
The next Question as an Appendix of this is, whether Provinces, or Communities
have their Angel Guardians or no: It is very probable they have, as men their
particular guardians, and yet the concurrence and assistance of more as they
need, that place of the 10. of Daniel is famous where mention is made of the
Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, and of the Prince of Grecia, and of Michael
their Prince ver. 20.21. and ver. 13. The Prince of the Kingdom of Persia
withstood him, but Michael their Prince came to help him: Upon this place so
clear Jerome, and all expositours agree, that there are Angels deputed to the
care and protection of Provinces and Countries, some other places are brought,
but this clear one shall suffice; The same reason also might be given for
Churches which are Communities very dear unto God; The fathers were of that
mind, and many bring those places of the Revelation to the Angel of
particular Churches, as of Ephesus, etc. which they understood of the Angel
Guardian; I will not dispute that, but that place of 1. Cor. 11.10. might me
thinks as probably be urged, where the women were to have power over their
Heads, because of the Angels, in which place certainly the Angels, not the
Ministers, are meant. And me thinks it is pro ratio or an argument rather from
the lesser to the greater, God does take care for oxen, says Paul, then much
more for Ministers; So does God give such honor to Provinces, then much more
to Churches, which are Communities much dearer to him, but I shall not enlarge
this now particularly.

We will now speak of the reasons, why God uses this ministry of Angels
toward us.

If you ask in general why God uses the ministry of Angels? Qu.
It is for his own glory, he has creatures about him fit for his service,
Dan. 7.10. there is a brave Court, Thousand, Thousands minister unto him, and
ten thousand times, ten thousand stand before him.

But if you ask, Qu.
why God uses this Ministration and Guardianship of Angels, toward us?

He does it first to preserve that Eutaxy that good order, Ans. 1.
which he has put into things, as thicker bodies, and more inferior are
managed by more subtle and powerful; So the Bodies of the Beasts by a spirit
of life, and irrational spirits by rational, as Men govern Beasts, so by the
same reason of proportion, the Angels which are invisible spirits, and are all
spirits, have an influence upon men, which are partly spirits and partly
bodies. Thus the Fathers, all visible things are moderatedly invisible, which
what can it be else under God, say they, but the Angels and spirits of just
men, because things must be governed by that which is higher and purer then it
self; So that as God in respect of the earth and fruits of it, places the
Heavens next him, I will hear the Heavens; So in this sub-ordination, Angels
comes next to have an influence upon rational creatures.

2.
Secondly, God does it for our very great comfort and consolation, what a
happiness is it that a hair of our heads cannot fall to the ground without Gods
notice, that they are all numbered, that God knows and minds all our ways;
but now when God shall raise up such powers for us, when we see the chariots
and horses, this adds to our courage and assurance as it did to Jacobs, God
has said he will never leave us, nor forsake us: But when we see corn and
wine, when we see him compassing us about with means suitable to our
necessities, this confirms us, as being a help proportionable to our need,
we see our good and our desires, not only in the remote cause, but in the
next and immediate. God has formed the Angels, for the effecting many great
works about us and upon us, though we little consider it; now when we see
mighty creatures, fitted for those services, we ought to have strong
consolation, but the Angels are framed ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. God
indeed does all things, yet he speaks by men, and teaches also by his
spirit, and there is a form above men, Angels, which he uses also, they
bear us in their arms, and pitch their tents about us, and do much for us.

3.
Thirdly God uses the Angels for their good and honor, whom he vonchsafeth
to use as fellow-workemen with himself and his son; this was Paul's honor that
he wrought together with God; Now the Angels which are dear to God are used
in great employments, as God is wont to serve himself of those he loves to
some employment or other.

4.
Fourthly that there may a love and acquaintance grow between us and the
Angels, with whom we must live for ever, and whom we must be like: Now love
grows by mutual offices, as is seen in the love of mothers to their
children, which increase by fostering and tending on them.

Its good to be a Saint, Corol.
that ye may have the tutelage of Angels, This honor have all the saints,
and none but

The wicked have no Angels to look to them, to take care of them
particularly, though they may fall perhaps under some general charge and care,
as they do also of God, that they may be preserved to their condition. God
takes care of them so far, and so may the Angels, but they are properly
Guardians and ministering spirits to the saints, they are particularly
ministering spirits to the heirs of salvation.

Its good to be a Church for the same reason, there because of the Angels, on
which place Peter Martyr says, we ought to think that they have a care of
our Churches as well as of the Jews, for says he, it is said Dan. 12. that
Michael the Prince stood for the children of Israel, and that this place is
meant of the Angels and not of the Ministers, you have also the authority of
Calvin, who observes the word Angel is never appropriated to Ministers,
without some addition, as to the Angel of Ephesus, etc. besides

There would have been more reason to have said, that the women should have had
power of their heads in respect of their husbands, or the whole congregation,
then the Ministers only, and to improove this further, let this consideration
work upon you, least the Angels be provoked to withdraw, as I told you they
would, this is common to Churches and Christians both, for as the holy Angels
rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, and in our right order, so they are
offended and chastise according to their commission given them from God, when
we do otherwise.

that they might work with him, so ours also, and though the services we are
employed in may seem much below us, yet if they be Gods, and in reference to
that order he sets in the world and much more, if they be in order to the
saints and their good and advancement, then be not ashamed of the services
which Angels perform, and be not weary of working which is the best
improvement of the holy Angels.



Thus you see in general their charge you are fairly weited on, you have
particular Angel Guardians, and in case of need you may have whole legions.

Next we will come to consider of their power over our bodies and minds,
where it will be requisite to consider first of the knowledge they have of
things, after of the exercise of their power, and then proceed to the evil
workings of the evil Angels, which is that principally intended.

We have already made this corrolary, that we should so walk as the Angels
might discharge themselves with joy at the last day; But that which seems to
be the proper use of the foregoeing point, is, that we should lead here
Angelical lives, if the Angels guard us and accompany us, we should savor
of their converse: Men are known by their company, they are not idle
attendants, such as great men have for a parade and a show, nor is their
special influence upon our outward man, as we shall show hereafter, me
thinks we should not keep such company in vain, but should savor of a
spiritual abstracted communion, that as they took bodies to themselves in
their apparitions, not for any pleasure they had in them, but for our need; so
we should use outward and bodily things for the needs of the bodies, and
should please our spirits and the good Angels with whom we converse, and who
are about us, by gaining ground, as much of the flesh and corruption as is
possible, and bring the body as near as may be into a spiritual frame by
possessing it in sanctification and honor, and by making it serviceable to our
mind, using it, and not being used and commanded by it; This will gratify the
good Angels which the Scripture expects at our hands, 1. Cor. 11.10. But this
only by way of addition to what was said before.

That we have next to speak of, is the power of the Angels, then, how it is
excercised and put forth toward us.

And because a great piece of their ability lies in their knowledge, we will
consider that:

That they are endued with an excellent knowledge, as being the highest of all
intellectual creatures, is without all question, and will appear in
considering what their knowledge is.

And first Austen and the schoolmen, which follow Cognitio matutina and
vespertina, a morning and evening knowledge, or a day or a night knowledge.

They call that the morning knowledge, which respects the things in its cause,
and that the evening knowledge which respects the things in its effects, the
one is a clear knowledge, the other obscure.

So as the morning or clear knowledge is, that by which the Angels see all
things in the ward, that is in the sun by whom they were created; The
evening or dark knowledge, is that by which they see the same things in
themselves or in their own natures.

As the knowledge of a line or circle, by a Mathematicus description, is a
right knowledge in the beauty and proportion of it, but the knowledge of it as
made in the dust, is to know it with many imperfections.

But the knowledge of the Angels may be distinguished either into a natural
knowledge, of which in a great measure the good and ill were partakers, for so
it is said, that some stood in the truth, and others fell from the truth, Joh.
8.44. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth.
Therefore there was a truth and knowledge which some adhered to and some not.





saw God; and, I have formerly in another discourse affirmed, that when we
shall see God face to face, it will be impossible to sin, or to turn away
from that vision. The truth is, the reprobate Angels never saw God, as the
elect did, for the will of the good Angels would never have been firmer, if
their understanding had not been other wise enlightened, for it is the light of
the understanding that has the great influence upon the will, as we see, so
we effect and moove. Now of the elect Angels it is said, that they always
behold the face of the Father, which of the reprobate is not said; now ye know
what it is to see God face to face, that is, to see him evidently, clearly, as
he is to be seen, without a straitened and modificated vision, which is the
great happiness of men: You see now what kind of knowledge the Angels have,
the last of which, namely supernatural, was peculiar to the elect Angels, and
stood them in such stead as it kept them from falling away, when others fell
to their own perdition.

If you ask me how, or in what manner the Angels know? We must consider,
how we our selves know, we know a thing as we see it, for the eye of the
body has a kind of resemblance to the eye of the mind, now to seeing there
is required first a power of seeing in the eye. Secondly a light through which
we see, if the eye be blind, or there be a hurt or wound in it, that there be
not a faculty of seeing, you see not though you have light, and there must be
light as well as an eye, or you see not neither. Thirdly the species or image of
the thing you see, this altogether makes vision; So in the understanding there
is in like manner the power of the understanding, by which we are made able to
judge, then a light by which the mind is enlightened to perceive its object,
and then the species or image of the thing, out of the understanding, by which
the thing is made present to the understanding. The two first are common to us
with the Angels, to wit, the power of knowing, and the light by which we
know, they know more, but the way is the same. The question is only of the
last whether they understand as we, by species or images received from things
or otherwise; It is certain they know not all things by their own essence, as
God does, for God contains all things in himself, and is himself the likeness
and copy of all other things, and therefore knowing himself as he does most
perfectly, he knows every thing, else of which he is the copy: Somethings
they know by their own essence, as the eye sees the light by it self, not by
any image of it; so the Angels know themselves, by their own essence, but of
things without them, they know them by species, and representations not which
they take of from the things, but such as are put into them, by God; We take
of the image of God first by our outward senses, as the eye takes of the image,
of what ever it sees, then by our fancy, and lastly we form a kind of
intelligible species suitable and proportionable to the things we would know:
But the Angels, which have not either outward or inward senses, have not this
way of knowing things, and therefore know them by species put into them by God.

One thing more is considerable, that is, whether the Angels know by reasoning
and dividing and compounding as we know, by drawing consequences, from
principles already acknowledged.

It is certain they apprehend things quickly, as appears by the comparison of
a learned and wise man, with one who is not; give a wise man any ground or
principle, he will make out of that many conclusions: So in matters of
numbering and account; an accountant will tell you that in a quarter of an
hour, that another would be a day about. And though they do know things by
the effects, and by reasoning, yet it is with that quickness and certainty,
that our greatest understanding is darkness to it.

Another question is whether the Angels know particular things, and what ever
is done here?

First, it is granted that they know one another so

Secondly, it must needs be granted that the good with their understanding
only by the universal species of things put into them by God, they know those
things, which men take in, by their many senses, outward and inward, to wit,
particular and singular things.

But now whether the Angels know all the particular actions, what ever is
done, said, or suffered, is more questionable; Of those committed to their
charge there is no question, but to affirm so of all, and all at once, were to
entrench to much upon Gods privilege, to whom and to no other all things are
open, and naked, there is to much of infinity in that.

As for our thoughts, affections, and desires, they know them either by
revelation, or external signs. For God is only the searcher of the hearts,
Thou only know the hearts of the children of men. But they are extremely
ingenious in guessing, if Physicians, by the pulse and temper can tell your
affections and passions, as that you are in love or take care, if a wise man,
or an acquaintance can do any thing this way, they much more.

Corol.
First observe that in this vast compass of the Angels in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, when the wise and knowing men cast it far
from them; Its certain this is the greatest wisdom in the world to take
Christ, to make sure of another life, this is wisdom, and every other thing in
comparison, is folly; but whence has this poor man wisdom and others not;
but because they see nothing of God after a supernatural way, they see God in
a proportion, as the devils saw God before the fall; there wants life, there
wants fire, there wants a touch in what ever they see, that would improove all,
that would render all the rest efficatious: The same sermon that speaks to the
reason only of one man, speaks to the heart and conscience of another: It is
a goodly picture to others, but it wants life, they look upon it with
pleasure, but they will never fall in love with it; They will never espouse it,
or as we told you, they see the circle in the dust, but the beauty and
proportion, which is the tempting thing, that they see not; Pray therefore for
supernatural light, that will improove all the rest, and all the rest without
it, will but help to render you inexcusable, and so leave you.

Secondly, see the ground of the firmness of your

Thirdly, ye shall know what they know, and as

Fourthly, see how exceedingly you are exposed to

Now having considered of the knowledge of the good Angels, in which a great
part of their ability lies, we come to speak of their power, and first upon
corporal things.

It is certain they can do any thing which nature can do, either mediately or
immediately; for example, They can moove the heavens, they cannot make them
stand still, for that is against nature, they can kill men, but they cannot
raise them from the dead.

Miracles they cannot work unless as Gods instruments, as in the mooving of
the water in the poole of Bethesda, and gathering together of the dead at the
day of judgment.

God only does wonderful things: Now a miracle is not that which is against
the order of some particular nature, for then the flinging of a stone upwards
were a miracle, but that is a miracle which is against the order of nature in
general, as if a stone of it self should moove upward, without any force or
draweing.

So as the dividing of the Red Sea was a miracle, and attributed to God only,
but the killing of the firstborn was none, and therefore attributed to an
Angel; So the standing still of the Sun was ascribed to God: But the victory
they got Joshua 5.15. to the Angel.

Again, they do some things immediately, as the killing of the whole army of
Senacherib, and bringing Peter and the Apostles out of prison. So they can
moove all corporal things almost in an instant; they can stir tempests;
moove waters and winds, but other things they cannot do immediately, as
generation, etc. Nor can they do any thing as God, properly in an instant, and
at their beck, as God and Christ, but either by local motion or natural
medimus, though with an inconceiveable dexterity, and quicknes.

Lastly all this power is subjected to the will of God, for so ye have it,
Bless the Lord all ye Angels which are mighty in strength, which do his
will, Psalm. 103. so Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, that is, as
it is done by the Angels; So God sent his Angel and delivered Peter, Acts
12.17. so says Christ, Could I not have asked my Father, and he would give
me 12 Legions of Angels? For their power over us, over our bodies, it is the
same which they have over other things bodily. As for our outward senses they
have great power over them, and that either by forming new objects, so in the
2. Kings 7.6. The Lord caused a sound of many horses to be heard, by the army
of the King of Assiria, which put them to flight. So the Angels took fiery
bodies, 2. Kings 6.17. The mountains were full of horses and chariots of fire.

Again, they can make such a commotion of the humors, within our bodies, that
many things may appear without which are not; They can also shut up the
senses, as to the men of Sodom, Genesis 14. who were struck with blindness.

As for the internal senses, to wit, the fancy and imagination, they have also
a great power over them, as appears by their appearing in dreams and visions;
for in sleep, our external senses are so bound up, as we discern nothing by
them; now we being awake can by an act of our own wills stir up the memory
of things and provoke our fancies, to the apprehension of things past. An
Angel therefore can do this much more, for what an inferior power can do,
that a superior can much more do. Do we not see impressions in our fancy of
things we thought we had altogether forgotten, which certainly is done by
the Angels good and bad, which can make compositions of what they find there,
they cannot put in new ones, but work upon what matter they find.

As for their power over our understandings, and wills this to me is evident,
that the great works they have to do upon us, is upon the inward man, and
that being ministering spirits, their ministration is spiritual, and as the
Devils, who though they do some things to our bodies, do ever infect our
spirits; so the good Angels much rather apply themselves in their
ministrations to our spirits, but to show how they can operate upon our
understandings and wills, we will first lay this down.

That God can only, effectually enlighten the understanding, and determine the
will, he can bend and turn, and form it, which way he pleases; But the
Angels can speak also, to those pure spiritual parts, and their speaking
carries a power with it, though God only determine: First as one man teaches
another, so the Angel spoke to the blessed Virgin, by apparition, by voice;
Sometimes by voice without apparition, sometimes by writing, so to Balteshazer
by writing upon the wall, but they can invisibly also enlighten us, as appears
plainly in dreams, for so they spoke to Joseph in a dream, Math. 1. and to
many others; Now there is the same way and the same reason, of speaking to us
waking and sleeping: To understand this, (and herein the ministration of
Angels to our spirits will appear) we must conceive first, that the
phantasmes of things, received by the outward senses, are kept, and preserved
by the inward senses, or its organ, and instrument, as the species of sounds,
of shapes, or what ever else: Secondly that these phantasmes so kept, may be so
moved, by some extrinsecall thing, as they may move the fancy, and provoke it
to represent and conceive more things and diverse, which neither appear, nor
are at that time perceived, by any sense, this appears evidently; We can sit
in the dark, where we hear and see nothing, and multiply a fancy in
infinitum, by an act of our own will: Also without our will, this often
appears, as in dreams. Now this enlarging, alteration and composition, must
be by some motion of the subject in which these fancies are, as also by a
certain motion of our humors, and spirits. The fancy or imagination is
stirred up to the making of various apprehensions and representations of
things, this we find in dreams which follow often the temperature of the
body, as appears to every man, that has in the least observed himself; Also
in sicknesses, which altering the body and the humors, and so troubling the
fancy, begets strange fancies, and makes dreadful, and fearful
representations to us, sometimes extremely foolish, as that which falls out as
it were by chance, and by an undue jumbling of things together; Now this know,
as we said before, that what ever an inferior power can do, that a
superior can much more do, such fancies as befalls us (as it were) by chance,
as in dreams or sickness, by casual, inordinate, or natural motion of the
humors, that the Angels especially the good can most orderly and most
efficaciously move, because they do what they do from will and counsel, and
know exactly how the spirits and humors must be moved, that the phantasmes
may be conveniently applied to some conceptions or apprehensions, most
accommodate and fitted for the knowledge, of what truth they would suggest.

Again an Angel can remoove the impediments of apprehension, as it lies in
any commotion or perturbation of the spirits, or the humors, an Angel can
help it, and the impediment shall cease, or if the organ be to much intended,
an Angel can in a great measure accommodate and believe it.

Now of how great moment this is, to the enlightening of our understandings,
and mooving our wills, all men know, that have minded, that the understanding
receives things by the mediation, first of the external senses, then of the
fancy, of which the memory is the treasurer, so as all comes in to us this way,
so that to me here is the difference, between the converse of men and
Angels, men can speak to our understandings by the mediation of our external
senses, Angels which are spirits go a near way to work, and speak to the
internal, first of all, making such compositions there, as the understanding
presently takes of, and reads what is written; As on the other side, the
understanding imprints much upon the fancy what it conceives, there is such a
near relation between the body and the mind. Besides this way of writing in
our fancies, almost what they will, and so speaking to us, by which they
represent objects to our understandings, and our wills which often take and
moove us (as the objects of truth, or the appearance, has a great power upon
the understanding, and the object of good upon the will) besides this, they can
moove those sensitive passions which are in us; Anger concupiscence, which
often moove us to choose, to command, to will, and like Sophisters deceive us
with the color of good, as we find by experience, and see in Peter and
David, and all the Saints.

Corol.
First consider how great a knowledge the Angels actions, is almost to know him
all; But how many inward motions are there, which never come to the view, how
much boiling of the blood, to lust, to revenge, that never appears in the
face, that the Angels know by beholding the interior senses, much more
apparently then we see it in the face; Besides if it come to guessing what was
the meaning of such a look, such a motion, such a blush, such a palenesse,
there wisdom here helps them exceedingly, so as they are rarely deceived,
besides that as our thoughts are more in the fountain then our actions, so the
impression upon our fancy is greater then upon our face, which our fear or
wisdom often keeps in. Thus much for their knowledge and light of us, which
you see how great it is: Then for their power upon us, almost what can they not
do upon our bodies, upon our senses outward and inward, upon our minds, for
by the means I have told you, what is it that they cannot communicate to you
at their pleasure, speaking to the inward senses, and causing the understanding
to read of, what they there compound, and no time is free sleeping and waking,
they can come to you, when the senses are bound up, as in dreams, they need
not fetch the compass of our ears, and eyes, that we are feign to do,
therefore our communion is exceeding great with the Angels, both good and bad;
For (believe it) they having such a price in their hands, will not loose it on
either side, the Devils malice will not suffer them, nor the good Angels love
and duty, will not suffer them to be wanting to their abilities, He makes his
Angels spirits, his Ministers a flame of fire, this say some is with relation
to their workeing toward us, both in lightening and heating; This is therefore
first by considering the advantages they have upon us, to consider how great
and intimate our converse is with them; secondly to consider this
notwithstanding, that we give not that which is Gods due to the Angels,
though they be the beginning of his creation, for first God only knows the
heart, even our thoughts afar of, the Angels only as I have told you.





Lastly for your souls sake keep your body in a good frame, that the humors
of the body be not armed against you, to lust, and anger, and revenge, but may
be fitted for spiritual converse.

the most raging elements, water, and fire, and to the most mighty spirits the
Angels, for they are his messengers, they do his will; if you receive any
good motions or inspirations, by the Angels, any thing of comfort, it is God
that does it, he commands that creature as well as any other to give down its
milk, therefore let him have the praise, and if now you will offer a sacrifice
for this, offer it to the Lord, for so says the Angel himself, Judges 13.16.
Revel. 19.10. Worship God (says the Angel to John:) see thou do it not. The
Angel had revealed great things to John, and he would have worshipped him,
but says the Angel, see thou do it not. Also 14. Rev. 7. worship him says
the Angel that made the heaven and the earth, and the sea and the fountains
of waters. But

Fifthly, love the Angels and gratify them, for they

Lastly, we may see their love by its effects. First which things the Angels
desire to look into, and as the holy Spirit is grieved when we sin, so are
the Angels also, as appears by their contrary affection of rejoicing at our
good, and conversion, for then the Angels of heaven rejoice. And therefore the
Psalmist provokes the Angels to praise God, for his mercies to himself and to
us, and by the same reason that we hate the Devil, and resist him, we should
love and gratify the good Angels: They hate God, they hate and tempt us, the
others do purely and truly the contrary, let us know these spirits, and grow
into a greater league and familiarity with them, let them not have less of our
love, because they are spiritual and invisible, for that inables them to do
us more service, and so is God, whom we love most of all.

In this tract of Angels, that which most immediately and particularly
reatcheth my intent, is to show the power they have over us, especially over
our spirits, and the way they have to communicate themselves according to their
power, especially to our spirits, which we have done already, though other
things as a foundation, and in order to this were necessary to be known, and
particularly that about the Guardian-ship of Angels: From that formerly
delivered we deduced several corrolaries both from the knowledge of the
Angels, and from their power of communicating it, to all which we shall only
add this further.

That they have not this knowledge and power in vain, but according to their
talent betrusted with them, they lay themselves out for our advantage, as
concerning the outward man, so especially and above all, in relation to our
spirits and inward man, tacitly and in a spiritual way communicating
themselves to our spirits, suggesting good things, and provoking us to our
duties in holiness and obedience.

can in a very great measure know our minds and necessities, they can by the
mediation of our fancies, and inward senses speak to us, almost what ever they
will, therefore they do it: The reason is clear, for else they should not
serve God with all their might. But we told you before their obedience is the
pattern of ours, therefore their love also, and we proved also that they did
love us exceedingly, because God loves us, and as being their neighbors,
therefore wanting neither power to enable them to their duty, nor love to
actuate that power, and ability, they are no way wanting to such a communion,
without which as I have showed they should neither make good their love to God,
in serving him, with their strength, nor their love to us in doing us that
good they are able to do.

Secondly you may remember I told you, that they Disposition and ministration
of Angels, Acts 7.53. Gal. 3.19.

Consider those places a little, if any thing was administered by God
immediately, one would think the law was, yet here it is plainly said,
ordained by Angels, that is, the ministry of Angels was in it, perhaps the
voice that spoke it was theirs, and so some think, for so Heb. 2.2. If the
word spoken by Angels, was steadfast, that is, the law, as for the Mediator
there mentioned, some understand it of Christ, others of Moses, but it is
clear that the law was promulged by God, by the ministration of Angels, and
that though God be said to speak those words, it is Elohim, that is, the word
used respecting his office as judge and supreme, and therefore the Angel that
before founded the trumpet, now sounded articulately the words, and whereas the
phrase is God, spoke, these words, that is, but according to the style of
Viceroyes, who write in their Masters name, Charles King.

And often in Scripture the word or action of the principal Agent, is ascribed
to the Minister Timothy is said to save himself, and those that heard him. 1.
Tim. 4.16. And the Saints to judge the world, who are but Ministers and
approovers, for Christ is the great judge.

Obj.
But God is so near us, as he should do it himself, 1. Cor. 3.16. Know ye not
that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? 1.
Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost which is
in you, etc. These things are to be understood spiritually, (that is) we are
dedicated to God, as the Temple of God, and God is in us and among us by his
spirit, there is no mention made of a personal union; so Christ Math. 18.20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I am in the midst of
them; Yet notwithstanding he is so near us, he does not cease to teach us by
the channells of ordinances. (Where by the way they administer no suggestion,
but what is agreeable to the word of God, which was given by them, for they will
not contradict the rule, that themselves administered, and if any other be
suggested, it is from the other kind of Angels:) To proceed the Angel
revealed to Mary the incarnation of Christ according to the word Luke 1. And
others in the same chapter preached the nativity of the Savior of the world, so
Acts 1. they instruct the Apostles about the return of Christ to judgment,
according to the word, also that God is only to be worshipped, Rev. 19.10. And
therefore Michael contended with the Devil about the body of Moses, that it
might not be found and worshipped: Not to be long, an Angel comforted Hagar,
and admonished her of her duty, Genesis 16. So the Angel of the Lord comforted
Paul, and all that was in the ship with him, Acts 27. So an Angel strengthened
and encouraged Eliah to his work. 2. Kings 1.3. In a word what ever by way of
instruction, of admonition, of encouragement, they have done in a way more
visible in the infancy of the Church, that they do not cease to do now,
because their ministry remains, though the way of their administration, for
reasons formerly mentioned, be altered.

A third reason persuading you to this may be that about like roaring Lions,
seeking whom they may devour. Their nets are always spread, they tend their
snares always, not so much for our bodies as our spirits, as appears by all
manner of spiritual temptations, carnal lusts are as much spiritualized by
them as may be; therefore the good Angels do the like, for their power is
greater, and their love higher then the others malice.

Fourthly from their commission, Heb. 1.14. is man, they are ministering
spirits, and what kind of administration that seems to be, is excellently set
forth Psalm. 91.11.12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee
in all thy ways, they shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou dash thy
foot against a stone. In this place the Angels are compared, first to nurses,
or mothers, that have a charge over weak and infirm children, to keep them
and to guard them.

To carry them in their hands is a Metaphor, and signifies a perfect execution
of their custody, to have a special care of them, and therefore is rather
expressed so, then carrying them on their shoulders, that which one carries on
their hand they are sure to keep; and the spaniards have a proverb when they
would signify eminent favor, and friendship, they carry him upon the palms of
their hands, that is, they exceedingly love him, and diligently keep him.

Least at any time, thou should dash thy foot against a stone: He persists
in the Metaphor; Children often stumble and fall, unless they be ledd and
carried in hands, and arms; by Stones, are meant all difficulties, objections,
perils, both to the outward and inward man, as Christ is said to take care of
hairs and sparrowes, that is, of every thing even to a hair. Now we know
what this charge is saving that Zanchy adds also, the Metaphor of
Schoolmasters, and says that we are poor Rusticke people, strangers, but
being adopted into the household of God, he gives his most noble Ministers, the
Angels charge, first of our nursing, and then of our education, when we are
weaned to instruct us, to admonish, to institute, to correct us, to comfort us,
to defend us, to preserve us from all evil, and to provoke us to all good; And
these Angels seeing that we are so dear to God, that for our sakes he
spared not his own Son, takes this charge with all their hearts upon them,
and omit nothing of their duty from our birth to the end of our life.

And the same Zanchy says, that there be three special heads of the Angels
working about us, the first is to preserve us, so far as God sees it profitable
for us, from all the snares and force of the Devil, that they should be a
watch about us, they should observe all our actions and carriages, both private
and public, taking care that no evil befall us. Secondly not only this but
especially that they should take care of our souls teaching us good things,
declaring the will of God to us, revealing the misteryes of salvation, when he
pleases, taking care we may be instructed in the law of God, which formerly
they did in visions and dreams, as you have heard, now tacitly they admonish
our minds, and provoke us to good duties, to obedience, etc. Thirdly that in
afflictions they comfort us, strengthen us, raise us, etc.

Bodin tells a story in his first book of the history of Sorcerers of one who
about the time of reformation of religion, desired much of God the guidance and
assistance of an Angel, and from the 37 year of his age, he had sensible
manifestations of a spirit that assisted him, and followed him till his death;
If in company he chanced to speak any unwary words, he was sure to be
advertized, and reproved for it in a dream in the night; if he read a book
that was not good, the Angel would strike upon the book to cause him to leave
it: Also the Angel would usually wake him early and provoke him to prayer, and
holy duties, he was also ever forewarned of such accidents, as were to befall
him, either for good or ill. Amongst others he tells this particular story,
that being to go a journey by water, he was in extreme danger of his life,
as he knew afterward, for some enemies of his, were resolved in the way to
kill him, but the night before he had a dream that his father had bought him
two horses, one red, another white, which caused him in the morning to send his
servant, to hire him a couple of horses, which prooved to be of the same
color red and whit, as he had seen the vision in his draeame, although he
had spoken no words to his servant concerning the color; many other things
he mentions, very strange and considerable, but I shall enlarge this story no
further nor add any more, for the illustrating of this point.

So that you see this made good, that the Angels are of a mighty use to us,
especially in a spiritual way, and to our inward man, that their
administrations is not changed, but the way of it only.

Obj.
But what do we leave now to Christ and the spirit, if you give to the Angels
the work of teaching and hinting spiritual things?

Ans.
I answer, what will you leave to the Angels, if you take this employment from
them, you will say bodily administrations, and what will you take away that
from Christ, whose care reaches to our bodies as well as to our spirits, and to
a hair of our heads. Therefore you have no such division of work to make as
to give to the Angels a care of the body to preserve from dangers, and to
Christ the charge of the inner man, if it be no prejudice to Christ that the
Angels take care of our bodies, which is also his care, what prejudice will it
be that the Angels should also have a care of our spirits, unless you think
it be a work to high for them, and such as they cannot reach, but the contrary
to that has been shown already, and we find by woeful experience, that the
Devils, whose power is lower then theirs, reach our spirits in their daily
temptations. But secondly I leave to Christ and the spirit the all in all, that
is, the inspiration, the efficacy, and the blessing, for the Angels are but
ministering spirits not fountains, or heads of water, but cisternes and
channells, it is Christ and the spirit that employ the Angels, they give the
blessing, and make effectual what they do: But you will ask what needs this
administration, for Christ can do this work without them? I ask as well what
needs Ministers, preaching, Sacraments, but because these are Gods ways of
administration, his ordinances of which we can give no account, he uses this
chain, and sub-ordination of which one link touches another, to is Gods good
pleasure to communicate himself to us, by means, and ordinances, of which the
Angels are a great part, being a great ordinance of God to us, as effectual
but more inward, and the reasons why God uses the Angels toward us, I have
largely given you.

Now if one should be so curious to consider what is by the immediate
inspiration of God, to wit, what is done by God immediately, and what may the
mediation of Angels and other ordinances; were a search more vice then safe,
as it would be also to distinguish what the Devil produces upon us, by the
mediation of our corruptions, or without them, though this latter may be more
easily perhaps guessed at then the other, but there is no great use of it, and
therefore we will not amuse our selves, in giving an account of it; but this
remains a sure truth, that they are of mighty use to us, and that the things
communicated to our inward man, is ordinarily the administration of Angels.

Then fight manfully the Lords Battles, Coroll.
you see not only the fountain of your strength, and the finisher of your
faith, God and Christ, but all the intervening Mediums, the Saints, the
Ordinances, and another great ordinance in this kind, we have not so much
considered, the good Angels, the chariots and horses should relieve us, as
they did Elisha, and consider this in relation to your religious walking, and
to your inward man, though you should want other ordinances, yet ye have the
Angels, an ordinance to walk up and down with you; in other things we judge
it a great matter to see the means, to have besides the promise the staff of
bread, and to other ordinances also they are an addition, and improvement,
consider it also under this motion, that you may not be amassed by beholding the
Devil and our own lusts, you have not only God, and Christ, the Author and
finisher of your faith, but you have this means also, a spiritual substance
proportionable to the other, and to contend wih him in standing on their side.

Secondly walk reverently in respect of the Angels even in your bedchambers,
the presence of the Angels should hinder us from doing that which it were a
shame and dishonor, to be found doing by men, and should restrain us even to
our thoughts and fancies, which they have a great ability to discern and find
out.

Thirdly use means notwithstanding this aid, the Angels will help you in
all your ways, Christ would put them to no more, and when you have used other
means, then is their help most seasonable; so they came and ministered to
Christ after his conflict, after he had resisted the Devil, that is, then
they comforted him, and applied spiritual consolations, and if to Christ, then
much more to us, their administration will be but in and with the use of means.

So as we see the consideration of those blessed spirits, is of a practical
influence, and is not only for speculation, for what can be more availeable to
us then to know all the channells and conduits through with God conveyes
himself to us: Therefore every ordinance is so precious, because it is a vein
or artery to convey blood, or spirits from God, therefore we should love them
and reverence them, therefore we converse with them, and study to know them,
and find them out, even the least pieces and circumstances of them, because
they convey some thing of God, they are the pearls for which we sell all we
have, to buy the field where they are to be found, they are our mines, our
Elixurs, and our Philosophers stone, turning all they touch into gold;
therefore let us value the knowledge of them as things necessary for us, and
which have a great influence upon our holy walking.

And secondly let us apply our selves to them, as to

What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man that thou
visitest him? That is, with all thy mercyes and blessings; now then this man
that is thus waited on, by the whole creation and by these mighty Angels, must
either put himself into the Throne of God, and think that he it is, to whom
all these things do homage, as to their natural and sovereign Lord, as to
their utmost and highest end, and this by nature we would feign do: Or else
he must look upon himself as a well paid servant, as a well fitted instrument
for some excellent and well raised work, and that what ever comings in he
has, he must consider them in order to his layings out and his receipts to
his disbursments; He must consider the tract of obedience and the way of
working to which all this chain, and charge of benefit drive him, and must
know that he is the great accountant of the world, both for talents the means
of working, and for wages the reward of working, and should be fitted from
every administration about him to an answerable ministry in himself, with
which he is charged, both in a way of love and debt; and for instance when he
knows in this particular, that the Angels continually administer good things
to him, instru^ting, teaching, admonishing him, inspiring him with good,
comforting, strengthening him against the Devil, and his lusts, he is taught
not only to receive willingly that which is so freely and advantageously
administered, and to love that God be bove all, and then those spirits, that are
at this pains, but he is taught also to be good, to be holy, to be strong, to
let them have their efficacy upon him, to be obedient, to make right paths and
steps. The sun and the stars produce their effects upon the earth, why
should not the blessed Angels and the blessed spirits have their effects upon
thy heart?

Lastly since every ability and strength is for service, why should not we
aspire after Angelical work, we have Angel Guardians, why should not we be
Guardians of one another, they teach us, why should not we instruct the
ignorant, that are below us either in knowledge or grace; They comfort and
strengthen us, why should not we do the like; The way to have Angels reward,
to see the face of God, is to do the work of Angels, those inspired by the
spirit, are capable of Angels work, as well as of their wages. So you will
improove this piece of creation to your use as well as all the rest.

We come now to the second part of this Treaty that of the Devil, and the
evil Angels, where in we shall handle some things very briefly, and
especially insist upon those things, which are in relation to their dealings
with us.

And we will consider them not as they were, for so their nature is common to
them with the good Angels, but as they are.

If you ask, how they came into this woeful condition! Certainly by sin, for
they were not so formed by God; That they might sin, there is reason enough, in
this that they were creatures, for what is it to sin, but to depart from that
rectitude, which every thing ought to have, to pass your bounds to decline and
err from the scope appointed you, for Gods prerogative alone is to be
immutable. That they did sin, the Scripture is clear, for they left their
first estate, Jude 6. and they aboade not in the truth. And 2. Pet. 2.4. God
spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them into hell. If you ask what
sin this was that brought those blessed creatures into the depth of misery? the
Scripture is not so clear in that, some think it was pride, and rebellion
against God, others think envy at man, the most probable guess me thinks
is, that it was their opposition to the great mystery of Godliness in the
Gospel of Christ, who being to be made man, and the head of all the creation,
that all standing, all restoration was to be by God man, in which the
Angelical nature was left out, this being in a great measure revealed as it is
called Rev. 14.6. The everlasting Gospel, decreed from eternity, though
manifested but by degrees; those high spirits could not bear such a
subjection, so Christ says, they abode not in the truth, Ioh. 8.44. especially
of the Gospel, which is the greatest truth in respect of which Christ calls
himself the Truth, and is called the wisdom of God, so says he, I came
into this world, that I might bear witness of the truth; that is, this truth,
which Christ sealed with his blood, now says he, he abode not in this truth,
but was a liar; now what is that lie that Satan sets up in the world, which
he always speaks, which he studies to persuade others to, it is this to
debase the Gospel, and the saving of the world by God man, and therefore its
worth observing that the sum of al heresies, are either against the divinity
of Christ, or the humanity of Christ, or his office, to wit, that he can
contribute all things necessary to salvation, that his merits, his works alone,
are enough: And in this respect Christ accused the Jews, you are the sons of
your father the Devil, which stood not in the truth, no more will you, says
he, but you lie as he did: Now what was their lie, the very same, that Christ
was not the Son of God, the Savior of the world, and so the truth in which
they would not rest, was the truth of the Gospel, which their father the
Devil abode not in, and this is that truth which ever since has been the
ground of the conflict between the good and evil Angels, and between the
Devils, and the Saints of God.

See and tremble at the quick work that God made, Coroll.
2. Peter 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned,; he might have dealt so
with us, the wages of sin is death; How come we then to live, how comes it
that we are on this side hell, whither sin would presently have hurryed us,
thank God and Christ for it.

Secondly, honor, love and believe the Gospel,

Thirdly, fear sins against great and strong light, forsook was exceeding
great, it was truth with a witness, exceeding evident, and apparent, therefore
it carried them into the lowest sink of sin, which is a deadly hatred of God,
and all goodness, and all his creatures, which arises much from the light they
fell from, like to this fall of theirs, is the sin against the holy Ghost.
Having seen their sin, we come to their punishment, which in many respects is
necessary for us to know in order to this subject as we shall see.

The place of their punishment, seems to admit of a double consideration,
either that of their ultimate punishment, after the day of judgment, or that
for the present.

This distinction is gathered out of several places, especially that of Jude;
That everlasting fire, which Christ speaks of Math. 25.41. The common
residence of the Damned and Devils, seems rather to be prepared for them,
then possessed already by the Devil and his Angels: The same may be
understood of that utter darkness where shall be weeping and wayling and gnashing
of teeth, Math. 8.12. This seems to be the most abject, vildest and remote of
all the rest; There is the same reason of opposites, The Saints shall shine as
the Sun in the glory of their Father; And as the favor of God is called the
light of his countenance, and the Saints are said to be in light, so the wicked
and Devils to be cast into utter darkness.

Again as the holy Angels and Saints are in the highst heavens, with God and
Christ, so the Devil and reprobates, shall be in the most remote place from all
these furthest from God and all good, and light, and comfort. Between you and
us there is a great gulf, Luke 16.26. This place may be either near the
Center of the earth, or in the depths of the great waters, that is, most remote
from the highst heavens, and this appears by that place Luke 8.31. Where the
Di^ells besought Christ, that he would not command them to go into the
depths, as apprehending that eternal judgment to which they were destined,
and having it ever in their eye to astonish them, and dread them, therefore
they were afraid of Christ, and besought him not to torment them before their
time; But for the present according to that in Peter, 2. Pet. 2.4. the Angels
that sinned are cast down into hell, as we translate it, not intending by
that the place of their ultimate punishment, for he says, they are reserved
in chains till the judgment of the last day, as malefactors that endure a
good piece of their punishment, by the hardness of their prisons; but the place
of their present abode is either in the air, waters, or under the earth, as
Ephesians. 2.2. they are called the Prince of the power of the air, and in that
place of Math. they besought Christ they might possess the swine: And they
carried them into the waters, the place of their abode: Some also live on the
earth and under the earth, from whence they make their dreadful apparitions,
as he that came up in the likeness of Samuel.

Next we come to consider that place of Jude 6. I will not comment upon it,
because I bring it but as a proof: The Apostle says here, the Angels are
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, until the judgment of the
great day: By these chains Divines understand, (besides their guilt which
binds them over to punishment,) the divine power bridling and determining the
Angelical strength, either intelectuall, or operative, so as they are not
masters of their abilityes, but are bound up and restrained, they have not
liberty of acting, which the good Angels have, though God permit them to do
much, and they are called everlasting chains, because though by them they
shall be reserved to judgment, yet these chains shall shackle and bind them
for ever; By these words under darkness, is meant as before, the absence of the
light of Gods countenance, and also in dark obscure places.

This distinction of a double condition of the evil Angels till judgment,
and after judgment, is necessary to be known, (in respect of the subject in
hand) because if they were in their term already, and utmost place, they
would have nothing to do with men, in regard of tempting, not with men of this
world, because they would be secluded hence, nor with the damned, because they
in respect of their condition, are already obstinated in ill, nor in all reason
do they punish them in hell, for we find no peculier ministry, which the
Devil has over them in hell, but they go thither to be tormented with the
Devil and his Angels, rather then by them, as we find nothing of the
ministry of the good Angels in heaven to us; therefore the knowledge of this
is necessary to us, that we may know they are here with us, not in their
place and term, and that the Minister about us, and are very active
concerning us, which in utter darkness and everlasting fire they will have
little leisure to do.

Coroll.
Let us consider this a little, that the whole universe the decree has been for
ever, but since the fall the bonds have seized upon men, an attatcht them
as soon as they have had a being, so as they have lain under the arrest clogged
with shackles, and chains, which of themselves they could never put of: They
have had a wound in their wills, and a blindness in their understandings, the
spirit of bondage, through conscience of sin, and fear of wrath to come, have
fallen upon all men, who have not gone sleeping to hell. Now then see the use
of Christ, Luke 4.18. He was sent to heal the broken hearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, recovering of sight to the blind, and to set at
liberty them that are bruised. Here is one that can knock of your shackles,
can break those bonds; indeed he lays another yoke upon you, another
chain, by it you are reserved also, but it is to everlasting joys, it is to a
crown that fades not away, and it is a yoke, but it is a light one, not which
shackles and fetters, but advances your motion, and is a comely ornament to
your neck, they are the bonds of a friend, it is such an imprisonment as
excludes bondage, as gives liberty: Let those therefore that are environed with
those chains, that are honored with this yoke, glory in their bonds and
walk as freemen, these are marks of their liberty, and badges to distinguish
them from slaves; let them walk livelily and cheerfully, not as men bound up
by a spirit of bondage, and reserved under darkness, but as men set at liberty
and in a joyful light, with singing in their mouths, and laughter in their
faces, and joy in their hearts, that they may be known by their looks to be
the sons of the most High, and heirs of a free kingdom, and let your
actions and steps speak liberty, every one freedom from sin, from lusts,
from corruptions, that there may be a glory in every motion, and an impression
of sealing to eternal life.



We have considered the Devils already, under two heads, one of their sin,
another of their punishment; That of their sin we have dispatched with the
corollaries drawn from it. In respect of their punishment we considered them
under a double consideration, either that present, or that which remains them
heareafter, and found it useful for our purpose.

We will consider now of their spiritual punishment: First for their will,
they are so obstinated in ill and in hatred against God, and Christ, that they
cannot will to repent, and be saved; They are that wicked one by way of
eminency: What death is to us, that the fall was to the Angels put them into a
pertinatious, and constant state of ill, but the reason of this was the
judgment of God upon their sin, which was against the holy Ghost, because
willingly, and knowingly they opposed the truth and gospel of God, therefore
says John, he that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins
from the beginning, 1. Ioh. 3.8. Not he has sinned, but does sin, that is
pernitiously, and constantly, as a fruit of that great first sin.

self, is without all question, they being of the same substance with the
other Angels, endued with a most excellent knowledge of things, and a most
tenacious memory. It appears also, secondly from their experience sorcerers,
witches, and southsayers, who for title call the Devil their master; Yet
notwithstanding, their sin, has given their knowledge a mighty wound.

For first their natural knowledge is maimed exceedingly,

Secondly in their knowledge of things divine, and the servants of the most
high God, also Jesus they knew, and Paul they knew, Acts 19.15. they have
whereof to believe and tremble, Iam. 2.19. they raise from the effects some
dark and obscure knowledge: Yet in things of this kind the Devils believe
not very many things, which they should have believed, if they had stood, and
therefore are called darkness, and the power of darkness, because they are
exceeding dark in themselves, in respect of the good Angels, and of what they
might have been.



Their spiritual punishment will appear also, by those names, and titles,
attributed to them in the Scripture, they are called Perverse spirits, and
unclean spirits, from their quality and office, they are the authors of
unclean thoughts, and actions, they are called, The evil one, the enemy, viz.
to God and man, The Father of the wicked, John 8.44. Also the Devil, the
calumniator, the tempter, one whose work lies in deluding and depraving man.
Also the God of this world, he would be worshipped as God, as he has also a
power over men, 2. Cor. 4.4. So he would have worship from them, as they have
also formally, and explicitly from such as personally give themselves over to
their service. They are styled also the Governors of this world, or Rulers, 2.
Ephesians. 2. which govern wicked men, in and to their lusts; Also Roaring Lions, 1.
Pet. 1.8. from their fierceness and malice: A murderer, Author of our death
and all murders: Also Beliall, 2. Cor. 6.15. What agreement has Christ with
Beliall? this signifies irregular, without yoke and discipline, such he is
himself, will submit to no law, but what the power of God lays necessarily
upon him, and such he renders his.

The use that I shall make of all this to our selves, Coroll.
is, that we dread the spiritual punishments of sin: Sin draws along a
dreadful chain after it, the little sweet that was in your mouth, that your
rolled under your tongue, which you judged so good, the taste of that is
presently gone, but there is a long bitter follows, the pleasure is but skin
deep, reaches but to your sense, but the effects of it are felt upon your
conscience and mind, your most noble parts; The pleasure gives you the
enjoyment of a minute, such a one as it is, but the pain is of your life,
perhaps of all eternity; but how miserable is it to draw on a train of
spiritual punishments, that is, that sin shall be punished with sin, the
truth is, every first sin, carries punishment with it, for it is a punishment
to sin in the first act, though we consider it not, as all holy acts carry
reward with them, even in their mouth; but here is not all, this sin shall
make you sin again, Pharaoh was punished by frogs, by hail, by many things,
but the hardenings of his heart, as it was the greatest punishment, so it was
virtually all the rest: That place Romans 1.28. is dreadful, Because they
delighted not to reteyne God in their knowlegde, God gave them over to a
reprobate mind, and then they were filled with all unrighteousnes: If we will
not delight in God, God will give us up to delight in the basest things in the
world; Thou little think, that thy proud or unclean thought, shall be waited
on with such a train, not only of punishment, but sin.

And this is true to all in it is proportion, to the Saints, for sin does not
naturally dispose for further degrees of sinning of the same kind, for so
every act strengthens the habit, but the spirit of God being grieved
withdrawes, and when ye are in the dark, the spirit of darkness is bold with
you, and you want light to repel him, and God can when he pleases in
consideration of a sin past, let either a sin fall upon your spirit, or an
affliction or sickness upon your body. But oh fear such punishments, they are
not only of the worst kind, but they are multiplying of evil infinitely, if
God prevent not.

Beware therefore of sin, least you sin, and least you be given over to a
spirit of sinning, which is the greatest and worst of punishments, think that
you know not what sins are in the womb of this sin, which you are now about;
If to grieve the spirit, to please the Devil, to offend God, be dreadful to
you, fear sin above all, not only for that present act, but for those other
sins which may be contained in the womb of that, and may in time be most
cursed births of it.

And as Austin said of hell, Lord says he, burn here, cut here, punish
here; that is, in this life: So of sin, O wish rather the animadversion, to
fall upon your bodies and estates, your outward man here cut Lord, spare my
soul, my inner man, let sin rather cause death then sin, which is the worst
dying.

In the next place we come to show, what is the principal ministry of the
evil Angels, for God knows how to improove every creature, and not only the
power, but the evil of the evil Angels, and he made nothing in vain, The
wicked are for the day of wrath, muchlesse such mighty instruments and engines,
as those spirits are, which though they have received a wound and lie under
chains, yet are of mighty ability when God gives them leave to act it. That
they are at liberty for a ministry I told you before, when I spoke of their
punishment, for they are not in termino, they are not yet in the great deep
nor under the sentence of their punishment, they are not in the place prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, but they are in the air and the world, where
also they are Princes, they have the advantage of the place, and powers is also
theirs; now for their ministry which still will come nearer our purpose, the
principal and proper ministry of the evil Angels is to tempt, and induce
men to sin, they improove all the power and opportunity they have, chiefly to
this, this is manifest by Scripture, as soon as the world began, he began this
work with our parents in innocence, in the shape of a Serpent, Genesis 3.1.
Therefore Christ calls him a murderer from the beginning, Ioh. 8.44. For
as soon as the world was, he gave the greatest blow, that ever was given
mankind, he murdered our first parents, and in them all our posterity, and
this was done in a way of tempting and alluring, so Paul 2. Cor. 11.3. I fear
least as the Serpent seduced Eve; showing that that temptation was the
beginning, the first of that kind that was in the world, the first prancke he
played, the first execution of his ministry, and as it were the copy of the
rest, therefore also Math. 4.3. he is called The tempter, as being the title
of his office, other names he has which show his power, and ability, his
nature and his malice, but none declare his ministry so properly as this;
Therefore 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. Least by some means, the tempter have tempted you,
and very frequently our temptations are said to be from the Devil, so Ioh.
13.2. The Devil put into the heart of Judas to betray Christ, Judas had the
corruption in his heart before, which was fit matter to work on, but it was a
fruit of the Devils ministry, to suggest that temptation and put it into his
heart, so Christ told Peter, that Satan had desired to winnow him; We should
have said he was afraid to die, and being surpised secured himself by a lie,
and so should have imputed it to little more then the act of a timorous spirit,
but Christ said, the Devil was in it, and 1. Pet. 5.8. it is said, he goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, that is, by his
temptations, and allurements, otherwise he does not rampe upon our bodies, and
Rev. 12.9. it is said, that the great dragon was cast out, that old Serpent,
called the Devil and Satan, who deceives the whole world; this is his work,
he says, they were cast out, and his Angels were cast out with him, which
are his under-ministers in deceiving the world, as Christ Math. 25.41. calls
them The Devil and his Angels. (of the order of the Angels we speak not
now, but that there is a subordination in their state and employment appears
evidently:) But here you see the ministry of the Devil, in the most eminent
branch of it, which is to tempt, to draw men into snares, and to lead them to
misery: If you ask whence he had his power, for all ministry implies a power
from whence it is derived? I answer from God, for there is no power but of God,
Romans 13.1. which is generally true of Angelical power, as well as humane, thou
could have no power at all except it were given thee from above, says Christ
to Pilate: Therefore this power, this considerable ministry to us, is from
God, it must needs be so, because else you would set up another chief, another
supreme, from whence they must derive it, and so another God, every kingdom
is under a greater kingdom, and what ever power there be, it falls under a
greater, till you come to that which is the greatest and highest, therefore the
same reasons that make the Devils creatures, make them also subject, and if
they be subject, then the power and the mannaging of it is from God.

Now we come to consider some reasons, why God gives this ministry to the
Devils, why it is invested in them by God.

First that the excellency and power of his grace might appear, and be
illustrated, and what can do it more then to see the effect and efficacy of it
in weak man, which yet through God is begirt with might, and made able to
grapple with this mighty adversary; So Paul when he grappled with Satan, and
doubted of his strength, and therefore would feign have been quit of such an
adversary, and sought God earnestly in the matter, had this answer, Be content,
my grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2.
Cor. 12.9. which when Paul understood, he gloried in his infirmities and
distresses, that the power of Christ might rest upon him. They say of some
fields that they are good for nothing, but to be the field of a battle; Paul
had rather have his soul be the field of that battle, where Christ should
overcome, then be in the greatest rest, or bear any other fruit.

But if you object that the inefficatiousnesse of grace is as well discovered by
this, Obj.
because even the Saints are sometimes overcome?

First by that the Devil is no gainer, Ans.
that little ground he gets, tends but to his greater confusion, when he is
not able to make it good, but is beat from his strong holds, and forced to quit
the field after a victory: As the Amalekites that robbed David at Ziglag, got
nothing, for David recovered his spoil, and besides that, the other herds
that they drove before these other cattle, and which he called David's spoil,
1. Sam. 20.30. A man may be a victor in the battle and not in the war. The
Saints at last spoil the Devil, unthrone him, degrede him, as fruits of their
revenge upon him.





I will ask what art thou o man that disputest against God; and if God will
give men up to believe lies and send them strong delusions, as in 2 Thessalonians.
2.11. who is so fit to be the messenger as the father of lies, who will do it
most heartily, and most efficaciously; and therefore 1. Kings 22.22. one of
those spirits, presented himself for that work: I will be a lying spirit
(says he) in the mouth of all his Prophets. So when God will have men filled
with all unrighteousnes, fornication, wickedness, as Romans 1.29. who is so fit to
blow those bellows, as the unclean spirit, and since God ordinarily
converseth with men, not immediately but by Mediums and instruments, by men and
Angels, by Ministers, and ordinances, who is so fit for this base employment,
as the worst of creatures, the Devil.

But secondly there is great reason also for it, in A man is not crowned except
he strive lawfully, 2. Tim. 2.5. Now how shall he strive if he have not an
adversary, and if for a crown, he must have a great adversary in some sort
proportionable to the prize; Every Saint is a soldier, as in the same chapter
of Tim. ver. 3. God has put us into the lists, he has armed us, and given us
mighty aids, we have a glorious king and Captain Jesus Christ, fellow
soldiers, the whole Host of Angels and Saints, and for prize a Crown of
righteousness, a Crown of glory, therefore we have a mighty enemy, whose work
and ministry, is to oppose, assail, and tempt, one fitted at all points for a
combat, that knows all the wiles in war, and is mighty in strength, and the
end is that great victories might have great glory through Jesus Christ; but
besides this, there are other reasons, as that this great enemy, this adversary
might drive us to God, and cause us to stick close to him; God would have us
always here with him in a spiritual converse, as heareafter we shall be in
a personal; Nothing will make us keep our strength, as the assurance of a
mighty enemy if you depart from God but a little, you are sure to be overcome.
Now God that loves our company, has formed this means, to drive us to him,
and there to keep us on such terms as we may not dare to depart from him.

And thirdly that we might be kept in an humble they are of an higher nature,
and more considerable to us.

The Corollaries from hence.
First, that if there be such a ministry as tempting to sin and departing from
God, let the Saints bless God for their ministry which is so much otherwise,

an evil spirit from the Lord is upon them, and God has forsaken them; be not
scandalized at the evil of any that is not under the ministry of God, and the
holy Angels, for they are pressed and ridden by another spirit, and they cannot
but go when they are so driven.



and filthy work, before he will cast them into the great deeps.

Fifthly labor for holiness and wisdom, that ye

Sixthly, if so good an account may be given of the

Seaventhly, dread not your adversary, he shall prove

Eighthly, since there is such a ministry to tempt and

Ninthly, be secure on Gods side, this is but a ministry, as all the other
piece of the creation, for his essenciall it is above his reach, or that of any
creature.

You have seen the ministry of the evil Angels, it will not be amiss in
pursuit of it, to consider, how far they mingle themselves with temptations,
and whether they be the cause and Author of all, or of all sin.

It seems temptations goes before sin, as the cause before the effect, Iam.
1.14.15. Every one when he is tempted is drawn away of his own lusts, and
lust when it has conceived brings forth sin. Therefore:

First to state aright the case of sin, and then consider how far he
tempts.

How ever immediately or properly the Devil may concur in the point of
temptation, yet he ever concurres remotely, in respect of the sin committed,
for between the temptation of the Devil, and sin, there ever mediates or goes
between, cogitation or thought, in which the temptation properly and formally
lies, so as he may be an effectual cause of temptation but not of sin, for
he may necessitate a man to feel a temptation, but not to consent to it. The
Devil may represent such an object to us, but he cannot constrain us to be
taken with it, to close with it: The Devil when he temps us, he does not
bind us, or altogether hinder the use of reason, for though he may have an
ability naturally to do it, it is not ordinarily permitted him, or if it be
permitted him, then properly and formally, he does not tempt to sin, but
inflicts by Gods permission, some evil of punishment upon us, by which our
power of sinning, for the present is taken away, which cannot be without an
ability of reasoning or working freely: To which we may add, that as the
Devil cannot work in our wills, the consent of sin, as being the next total
and efficient cause, (for that were to destroy the liberty, and life of the
will, which is to be free and to moove freely,) as he cannot do this wholly, so
neither as a partial or half cause to operating immediately with our will,
bending and mooving of it, for even this is a branch of Gods prerogative, and
exceeds the sphere of all created capacity; the will is independent upon all
created power, both in its operation and in its being, and is out of the
natural power of all the Angels, only God the first cause of all things, can
concur with the free acts of the will, and nevertheless preserve its
liberty, he can bend it, and frame it, and reatch it, as free and as
immateriall as it is.

Then first thy perdition is of thy self, Coroll.
oh Israel, it is thy cursed will that strikes the stroke for sin, which
all they choose to do evil, that is it which strikes the stroke, lay no more
upon the Devil then is his due, he cannot force your will, and it is will
wherein your sin lies, the less voluntary any thing is, the less sin, nay
he cannot cooperate immediately with your will, he cannot bend nor moove it
to assent to the understanding, the will and the deed is not from him: Let
every sin then humble us for the will that is in it, and know that the strength
of sin lies in the will, as that is gained, as that assents, more or less.

Secondly, bless God that has preserved you this your ground, which all the
power and art he has, can never gain, unless you will.

For the second point, whether the Devil can concur to the temptation of all
sin, some have thought, that there would have been no sin, without the
temptation of the Devil, and that there can be none; but to make the Devil so
necessary to all temptations, as that they cannot be without him, I see no
reason for though there were no temptation, from without, original corruption
were sufficient to raise temptations to provoke to ill, Every one is tempted
when he is drawn aside of his own concupiscence or lust, and intised, Iam.
1.14. So Math. 15.19. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
that is, it is a bubling spring, a fountain for the worst streams: Also,
considering how ready we are to kindle and to receive fire from every spark,
without the Devil or any rational tempter, sencible objects may betray us,
The lusts of the flesh the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, something
of this nature is that which drownes worldly men in perdition, and destruction,
and creats that conflict between the flesh and the spirit in the Saints, Gal.
5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit lusts against the
flesh, so that we cannot do the things that we would; by reason of this
opposite stream, of this contrary power, we are interrupted in our working;
And besides, sencible objects which work upon corruptions within us, which are
apt to receive flame and burn, there are the ill counsels of wicked men, and
we may add over and above, that without the foment of original lust and
without an extrinsecall tempter, man might have sinned even in the state of
pure nature, why not as well as the Angels, which had no tempter, nor Devil to
fall upon them, which were in their pure naturalls. And they which received so
easily a temptation from without, as our first parents, might perhaps have
sinned without it; Therefore without all question, if we speak of the
possible of what may be, men may sin without the temptation of the Devil: But
now de facto, the Devil usually, has a part in all temptations, he finds
matter in us, and he works upon it, therefore there are not many temptations,
in which the Devil is alone, without us, and I should think there are fewer,
in which we are without the Devil. And therefore the Fathers were used to
say, when you think or do any evil thing, it is without all question, that
ye have a malignant Angel exhorting you to it; Also when you speak idly or
do any evil thing, it is the Devils counsel, but do we not find the
Scripture frequent in this? The Devil put it into the heart of Judas to betray
Christ, Ioh. 13.2. So Acts 5.3. Why has Satan put it into thy heart to lie.
So Ioh. 8.44. Christ blames them for being enemies to the truth, and for being
liars, but he wonders not at it, for he tells them the Devil is powerful
with them, and there is a confirmed relation between him and them, ye are of
your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father you will do, which may be
said of other sins, as well as of lying; so Christ said to Peter, get thee
behind me Satan: he knew Satan was in that carnal piece of policy, and so
Paul speaking to married people, bids them not be long asunder, but come
together again least Satan tempt them for their incontinency. What? Was there
not flesh and blood in them, and corrupt affections enough, to make them
incontinent? Yes. But they wrestle not only against flesh and blood, as in the
text, but against principalities and powers, against the Devil in all his
strength and power, even in these things, wherein flesh and blood, assail us
also. So Satan provoked David to number the people, 1. Chron. 21.1. which we
would have thought to have proceeded from nothing more, then from the pride of
life, and to have been a branch of it, yet the Scripture lays it to the charge
of Satan; now besides these Scripture expressions this mingling and joining in
all temptations, may be supposed easily, in reason, by them which shall
consider the innumerable numbers of the Devils, which are ministering spirits
for that purpose, (as I told you before,) when ye shall also consider the
infinite hatred they bear to God and man, which invites them with all
diligence, and endeavor to fulfill this ministry, so as they have no
intermission, no vacant time from this work, the Devils Emissaries, (wicked
men) how busye are they? They can not sleep except they cause some to sin,
they turn every stone, and leave no means unattempted, but the Devil himself
needs no sleep, nor rest, he is not clogged with a body, to weary him, he
has no other employment to distract him, no food or raiment to provide, to
interrupt him, so as he may mind his proper work, and indulge to his proper
lusts, which is to dishonor God, by abusing man, and therefore he is ever at
leisure either to offer temptations, and begin them which he does very often,
or when any bubling is of our own corruptions, or occasion off'red from
without, he is at hand and at leisure, he has heart and hand ready to join,
to sharpen the temptation, and to give it those points it wants, to make it
most taking; So as though possibly man may sin, without the immediate
temptation of the Devil, as has been showed, yet it is not improbable, that
the Devil, out of the abundance of his malice, and solicitousnes to hurt, does
concur actually, ordinarily, to all temptations, and so to all the sins of
men, and makes good the words of Peter, who says, That our adversary the
Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: All this is
that ye may know which are the Devils parts, and which ours, and how far he
can go, and when he stoppes, which is a proper part of this discourse.

But if you ask and inquire now of the method, Obj.
and whether usually have the start in raising and beginning those temptations,
our own corruptions or the Devil?

There is nothing certain, Ans.
or assured in this, but there is ordinarily a variation, with Evah it was
apparent the Devil began, with Christ, it was necessary he should begin, and
end, for there was nothing in him, to fasten temptations upon; with Judas also
it is clear he began, the Devil put it into his heart, and very ordinarily,
according as he is wise and diligent he begins with us, not only in those
temptations which men say to be properly from the Devil, namely in things
sudden, independent, and unnatural, (which yet for ought I know, may often
have their birth in original corruption) but also he begins in our most
ordinary and natural lustings, and that either mediately, by presenting the
objects of lust, or passion, or by stirring and mooving the humors of the
body, that the body may be more fittly disposed, to be moved by the object, or
else immediately, joyneing some internal persuations, and reasonings to the
motion of the object, which may more easily lead and facilitate us, to the
consenting to such a lust or inordinary. It may also be on the other side, that
corruption mooving freely, and of it self, the Devil may adjoyne himself, as
he will neglect no probable occasion, to promote his work, and it is possible
that some motions, may escape him without his concurrence.

For though he be wise and watchful, yet neither does he foresee all future
things, nor perhaps does he consider all present things, instantly, and
as soon as ever they are in act, especially such as give the least impression
upon the fancy or some of the fences, which may be supposed rather of more
transcient acts, of thought, of sudden and passing things, then of any thing
of greater moment which lies longer in thy mind, and are premeditated, it is
most probable the Devil is never wanting to them. Thus you see how he stirs
in sin, and how he mingles himself with temptations, which is according to
Scripture, and the sense and experience of our own heart.

Coroll.
From that therefore which has been said in the the body of death, we carry
about us as Paul did, and learn to keep the avenues against all lusts, which
may find away to us by our senses, by the example of others and by ill company
as well as the Devil; watch our hearts, out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, etc. The Devil could hurt us no more then he did Christ, if he had
no more matter in us, subdue corruptions, mortify lusts, and the Devil wants
so much footing, the fire is ours always though the flame be his, quench the
fire* take away the subject matter, and then ye defeat and vex him, as he
does you with his wiles.

ye fight not against flesh and blood, ye have a nature that you cannot stand
before without a special assistance, that yeeldes without a blow, or with an
easy touch, and we have a Devil able to add strength to the bluntest weapon,
to stir up corruption, where they are, most mortified, who is sufficient for
these things for this combat.

Fly to Christ to the Lion of the tribe of Judah, to resist for you this
Roaring Lion.

Thirdly in our watching think much of the Devil, Peter said to Annanias, why
has Satan filled thy heart, he charge him, reasons it out with him, not
with the Devil, it was an evasion in Evah to excuse herself by the temptation
of the Devil, and in Adam by Evah, therefore the charge of sin is ours, not
the Devils.

We have last insisted upon these two heads, what influence the Devil had
upon sin, and then secondly, what influence he had upon temptations, and how
he usually concurred in tempting, whether no temptations were without him, and
how he either begins, or joins with us in them for the several manner or
ways of conveying his temptations to us, either by presenting sencible
objects, or by speaking to us, from without as the Devil did to Evah, and does
to many in apparitions, or by applying himself to our fancies, by an inward
commotion of our humors, and stirring of the phantasmes, these with the like
it will not be needful to repeat again, but refer you to what I delivered,
concerning the good Angels in the former part of this discource.

But before we finish this head of their ministry, there is one thing more
which would be touched: How those ministeries are distributed, and whether
there be Devils appropriated to such vices or to such persons: Some have
thought that some ranks or kinds of Devils, have been to tempt, to pride,
others to lust, others to covetousnes, etc, as being called in some places a
lying spirit, in other a seducing spirit, in others a spirit of fornication,
etc. But it seems not necessary that these spirits should be ever diverse, but
that the same may do several things, in diverse times, and may from the
effects on the world gain those names; nor is there any such distinction in
the good Angels, but the Angel keepers, as you have heard before, promote to
all good, oppose all evil; So the same Devil tempted Christ to many several
things, to distrust in God, and to worship him; So Jobs Devil had power, not
only over his cattle, and children, but his body also; And besides, all the
evil Angels, have knowledge, power, and will enough, to tempt to all vices,
and as much, as in them is, they will loose no opportunity, to vent their
malice and hurt us, therefore others distinguish their ministry according to
the object of it, Persons, and States, and Societies, and therefore quote those
places of Dan. 8.20.21. where mention is made of the Kings of Persia and
Greecia, which opposed Michael their Prince, and understand also that place so,
of 2. Cor. 12.7. There was given unto me the messenger of Satan to buffet
me, and that curse, Psalm. 109.6. Let Satan stand at his right hand; and the
liberty the Devil obtained upon Job, which are still supposed to be certain
peculiar Devils, set out by Satan their Prince for that particular ministry,
to such a person or state, though they must beg leave of God for the execution;
This is not improbable, for Satan has ever been the ape of God, and there is
no doubt of his will for this method, (which he sees so advantageous for the
Saints in the other ministry, of which we have spoken,) if his power fail
him not; Now if he have instruments enough and God permit it, there is no
doubt of his power, and where God permits him to tempt, he will sure permit
him to use the best methods, and of the other, (to wit,) that he wants not
instruments, there is as little doubt; the host of heaven was great, and there
were Angels enough that fell, to conflict with all men, Satan could spare a
legion for one man, to do a great work.

Consider the difference between the Saints, Coroll.
and the wicked, in the point of temptation, I showed you an evil spirit is
upon them, and God is not with them; this shows first the excellent condition
of the Saints, and the difference between them and the reprobates; The Saints
ly bound under the decree of God, under the ministry of Angels; the wicked
are exposed as a prey to the Devil already.

But secondly let this difference in our state cause a are, and God is more
displeased with them, they are not left to the wide world, they have custodes,
and testes morum, those which are witnesses of their manners and keepers, also,
God is at the charge of giving them, tutors, and governors, great and holy
guards, they must break many cords, many bonds, before they can reatch a sin;
Let this consideration strengthen us, and begirt us to holiness, and incite us
to pity, and help wicked men, which that we may do the more, and may more
fully fall under our governors, and tutors given us by God, and may see reason
why we should not sin as do others: Let us consider a little out of the
Scripture how exceedingly the wicked fall under the Devil beyond what the
Saints do, by the decree and permission of God, Ephesians. 2.2. In them he works
(says he) that is efficatiously, he works his will in all the pieces of
disobedience. Also 2. Cor. 4.3.4. Our gospel is hid to them that are lost,
whose minds the God of this world has blinded. So 2. Tim. 2.26. they are said
to be taken captive by him at his will; he has them in a string, he can
drive them to any madness, or folly to oppose the truth, as in the preceding
verse, though it be clearer then the day, or any other thing. Therefore else
where Satan is called The God of this world, and the wicked, the children of
the Devil, who fall under his laws, easily and naturally as children do, now
none of these things is spoken of the Saints. Why? because they are under
another God, another Tutor, other Guardians, he has neither that power nor
those means of deriving it, if Satan stand at our right hand, our good Angel
stands there also; if the Devil use all his arts, God has his methods also;
Therefore let it be no matter of our glory, that we are not as the wicked are,
but of our shame, that we come near them in any measure, and of our glorying
and praise to God, who has put us in the other predicament, where though you
have the Devil who assaults us with all violence, yet he prevails not,
because you have God and the good Angels to oppose him.

In the next place under this head of the Devils ministry for temptation, we
may consider which way he lays himself out toward mankind (that is) toward
the Saints, and others, for though his power be limited toward some more then
others the temptations in respect of the subject matter of them, the things to
which he tempts are the very same.

He will venture upon the Saints, even the greatest things, though perhaps in
some difference of method, that we may see by his temptations to Christ, and
the reason is, because he is not ever assured, who is a Saint, and who is not,
they may be of his own; And because a little ground gained of them, is a great
victory, and because if as sometimes he does he can bring them very low, he
makes Trophyes, and glories in their blood and shame very much.

To handle this at large were to make a treaty of temptations, (which I at all
intend not in this subject) for as I told you, there is scarce any temptation,
with which the Devil mingles not, but to point at some heads only which the
Scripture mentions, or experience.

And first, as greatest haters of God, and his glory of worshipping him, in
plain terms, and offered all for it: This all ancient and modern stories
witness, the first thing the Devil makes out for amongst his, is an
alienation from God, and a shaped and formed worship to himself, for which
purpose he has his assemblings, where he appears personally, as appears by
the confession of many hundreds: And therefore Antichrist his eldest son,
whose coming is after the working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. (that is, who
works even as Satan works he does the like) ver. 4. He opposes and
exalts himself above God, so that he as God, sits in the temple of God,
showing himself that he is God: So as now to be of his party, is to be of
Satan's party, to obey him, is to obey the Devil; let them consider this who
are bold to vary in doctrine or worship, from the word of God, they fall under
a mighty temptation of the Devil, it is his most natural temptation, they
strike at the root of all obedience, that strike at the rule, which is the head
of worship, this is to draw men clearly and immediately from God, let us
advance the glory of God; and the worship of God, so ye shall be fighters
against Satan, as the others are fighters against God, think the promoting of
the knowledge of God; and the worship of God, to be the greatest service you
can do to God, and the greatest head you can make against the Devil.

He shall bruise thy heel, was prophesied of him of old, that is, he can go
no higher, but what ever he can, he shall do. Before Christ came he opposed
the believing of the Messiah, labored in his instrument to destroy the whole
nation of the Jews, by Antiochus; when he was borne would have destroyed him
by Herod, Math. 2. Fell fiercely upon him in the wilderness, took him at an
advantage, carries himself, so in every respect that Christ calls him the
enemy: The enemy came and sowed tares, Math. 13.39. And as at other times more
grossly, so amongst the Saints more refinedly, he opposes gospell-worship,
gospell-preaching, would mingle some things of work and merit, with the free
doctrine of justification, some thing of doubt, and slavish fear, with the
free glorying in our portion, with joy unspeakeable and glorious, some thing of
pomp or slavery with the free, and simple government, and administration of
the worship, and discipline of Christ, so as pure and naked gospel is little
known, or preached by the ministers and professors of it.

Therefore what the Devil abaseth, Coroll.
let us exalt, let us desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him
crucified; Let Christ in the Kingdom of Christ be all in all; Let us believe,
though we be nothing, let us rejoice, though we be worse then nothing in our
selves, that is, to make good the gospel, that is, to resist the Devil, let
worship be administered according to the rule, though it want pomp and
applause, and let the power of the gospel appear in changing our natures, in
healing our lusts, Grace came by Christ; let the notion of gratefulness work
in us, as effectually as that of merit, let the love of God in Christ be strong
as death, let his dyeing love constrain us to live to him, who dyed for us,
this is to magnifye the gospel, which the Devil would depresse; if you
believe strongly, if you rejoice strongly, if you work strongly, from gospel
principles and notions, then ye destroy the Devil, then you oppose Christ's
enemy; I beseech you, let us do it under this head: Do I not hate them that
hate thee, (says David;) Christ has many enemies, which should be all
hateful to us, but he has none like the Devil (as I have showed you)
therefore he came to destroy him: The fairest ground of contention that you
will ever have with the Devil will be this, that he is the mortal or rather
the immortal enemy of Jesus Christ, if you oppose him under this notion, you
will draw Christ nearest you for assistance, and fight a battle in the
strength of love, and whilst you have your head, you will secure the body and
every member, this is to put another notion in to the conflict, not only to
secure our selves from lusts, but to save Christ, therefore live according to
pure gospel, because the Devil opposes it, we have thought that to be
assured or to rejoice with joy unspeakeable and glorious, were only to do
good to our selves, that is the least in it, to a mind well-formed, the
returns are Christ's, the glory is Christ's, and the Devil (feels every blow)
who is Christ's enemy, and the enemy, God has set you up, with whom you ought
to make good a war and to contend for ever, as we shall see heareafter.

the Devils casting men into prison, Rev. 2.10. All persecutions, burnings,
imprisonment, the Devils have done it, Kings and Princes has but lent their
hands; That which the Devil did to Joshua, Zach. 3.1. Stood at his right hand
to resist him, that the Devil does generally to all those that would serve God
in the ministry of the gospel: So Paul: We would have come unto you, (says
he) but Satan hindered, this their acts and Epistles show how he would have
destroyed their ministry; Then he corrupts teachers, Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.13.14.15. by whose means men
give heed to the doctrine of Devils, 1. Tim. 4.1. he falls upon the members
also, pursues them like a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.8. Accusing them before God
day and night, Rev. 12.10. First draws them into sin the cause of Gods hatred,
and then labors to fasten upon them the effects; this he does amongst men
over whom he reigns draws them into murders and witcheryes, and then
discovers them, but his usual care in the Church is, to divide and scatter,
that he may reign alone, by difference of judgments, distracting affections:
God is love, and love is the only cement of communion; The Devil therefore,
which is the enemy, with all his might breaks those walls, loosens this cement,
that there may not one stonely upon another till all be destroyed.

Let us therefore tread the contrary paths, learn the rule from the
obliquity, as well as the obliquity from the rule; It is warrant enough for us
to resist what Satan promotes.

In pursuit of that great piece of the Devils ministry which lies in
temptation, having showed formerly what influence he had upon sin, and what
influence upon, and concurrence with temptations, we came in the last place to
show, how those ministeryes were distributed according to vices, or persons,
which when we had made use of, we came to discover to you some of the Devils
marches, in his most ordinary and high ways, that is, the great and general
snares he leads men into such as sease upon most men eminently, and to their
assured ruin, and with which the Saints are so clogged as they are rendered
unweildy, less expedite, and fit for service, they drive slowly, and
oftentimes fall scandalously, though they rise again: We will pursue two or
three of those points more, and so conclude this head, in which I purpose not
to be large.

Another effectual head of temptation, by which the Devil labors to drown
men in perdition, is the lusts of the flesh. Peter admonishes to abstain from
fleshly lusts, because they war against the Soul; The Devil knows it well,
and therefore fights against that part, by those weapons, Our bodies are the
Lords, and therefore we should serve him in body as in spirit; but fleshly
lusts though they seems to be especially in the body, yet in truth they moove
circularly, from the soul to the soul, Out of the heart comes fornications,
etc. And when they have past the body and come to the heart again, the soul
is rendered monstrously adulterous and unclean, so that as the soul is pander
to the body, so on the other side the body is vexed and harrowed, beyond its
natural desires, beyond what it would have to satisfy an unclean and filthy
mind, which appears plainly in this, that the debordments and excesses of no
beasts, are so great as those of mankind, in bodily things, because neither the
reason of bodily pleasures, or any other consideration, calls for so much
excess, as the satisfaction of a soul, made unclean, and unpure does, and
therefore where such lusts reign, and are in their excesses, a thousand bodies
would not be sufficient for the drudgery that a lustful mind would put them
to, such lusts have no mean, but not to be, such minds besides other
inco^veniences labor extremely under this unhappiness, that they conflict
continually with impossibilities, because their desires run still higher, and
their lusts have enlarged them to a sphere, and capacity that no body nor
bodily thing can reach or fill; How contrary this is to God and his holy
Spirit, besides other things, two things show, one is that he pretends to be
our spouse, and has married us to himself in holiness and righteousness, suitable
to which bond, and excellent alliance, there is a series of spiritual
lustings; proportionable to the soul, the subject of them, and to God the
object of them, which should lead both body and soul captive to an holy and
intimate converse with so great and excellent a husband, whose comeliness
should always be in our eye, and whose beauties should ever inflame our
hearts, to whom we should be holy, that is, separate, both in body and spirit,
1. Cor. 7.34. whose loves draw out our affections strongly, but orderly, whose
converse fills our mind and enlarges it altogether, which is health to our
navell, and marrow to our bones, quite contrary to the effects of other
lustings, which give men occasion to mourn at last, when their flesh and their
body are consumed, Prove. 5.11. Now for this excellent spirit to be out-bid, by
so base and harlotry love, that can make no satisfying returns to have a
spirit stolen from him, and laid under chains, for these lustings are deep
pits, out of which only an almighty spirit can rescue, to be cast of, as not
fair or not worthy, cannot but be deep in Gods heart. -- Manet alta repostum
judicium Paridis spraetaeque injuria forma.

In a word to espouse the Devil his enemy by the mediation of filthy and base
lustings, it is no wonder that men are abhorred of the Lord, when they thus
fall, Prove. 22.14.

Another thing that shows how hateful these lustings are to God, is that
these fleshly lusts, in that branch properly called uncleannes, are made the
greatest punishment of the greatest sins, Romans 1. from ver. 21. to 28. If you
ask me how I entitle the Devil to this, besides what was said in the
beginning of this head, (that the Devil who shoots at the soul, knows those
lusts ruin it, and therefore uses this great engine against it,) first how
can you make a more proper match then between the unclean spirit, and those
lusts, which are properly styled by God himself uncleaunesse in the abstract,
as being of all others most eminently unclean and impure; besides look upon
men the Devil acts and possesses most fully and immediately, their God is
their belly, they fulfill the desires of the flesh and of the mind, which is
engaged as deep as the body is in these lustings, and evil affections, 2.
Ephesians. 2.3. and not to prosecute this further, it is extremely observable that
where the Devil keeps open court, reigns personally, and absolutely, as he
does amongst infinite numbers in this world, though we are not acquainted with
such assemblings, therein all beastly shapes and manners, he does subject them
to the actual commission, of what ever we call uncleannes, although
oftentimes greatly contrary to their wills and desires, that suffer such things
from him, but the bond of their obedience is strickt, and they can refuse
nothing, who have subjected their necks to that yoke, this, innumerable and
joint confessions of witches and sorcerers, accord upon, of which I could give
you account enough upon as good record as story can give us of any thing,
although, which also we may consider, the Devils are altogether incapable of
any pleasure, from such fleshly acts, who as being spirits, have neither flesh
nor bones nor blood, they do it only to debase mankind, and by the most
sensual lusts which fight against the soul, to keep them at the greatest
distance, from spiritual, and heavenly employments, by which only the human
nature is perfected and improoved.

To conclude this besides what has been said already, the Scripture says
expressly, that not only in general amongst mankind, but even in the Church,
and therefore considerable to us all; It is Satan which tempts men for their
incontinency, 1. Cor. 7.5. And it is from him that the younger women wax
wanton against Christ, and turn after Satan, 1. Tim. 5.11.15. so as there is
cause enough to entitle Satan to this high way of perdition, to these lusts of
the flesh that fight against the soul, and therefore cause enough for us to
watch, him and our selves in this high way of perdition, in which every step
we take is a departing from Christ our spouse, to follow Satan, for the
Scripture calls it a turning after Satan; Men are apt to think that it is but
a turning after their loves, a turning after pleasures, but besides which you
leave which is Christ your husband, you follow indeed Satan in that disguise
which should keep us at the greatest distance, in every degree or step that
way.

A fifth beaten path of the Devil is Pride, the pride of life you may know
that to be the Devils way, from which God calls you of so earnestly and so
effectually: first by his denouncements against the proud and pride, Pride
goes before destruction, Prove. 16.18. as the herbenger or usher that makes
way, a man acted and filled with pride, is upon the very brincke of the
precipice of ruin, he is dropping into destruction, God delights to debase
every one that is proud, he does but stay, till they are proud enough, that
they may be more capable of ruin, and destruction, that they may fall deeper.
Therefore when pride comes, then comes shame, Prove. 11.2. and they come both
together, pride only has the upperhaud; Will you see how God sets himself
against this evil, Job 26.12. By his understanding he smites through the
proud: He divides the sea with his power, as it is said before, but imployes
his wisdom and understanding to smite through proud men, that is, to do it
most assuredly, to do it most seasonably for their ruin; so Prove. 16*5. Every
one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord. Nothing proud men,
look after more then to be had in esteem, and in honor, to be admired, and
to be to others the objects of their envies, and the measure of their wishes,
the rule and model of their actions, but says he, He is an abomination to
the Lord, that men are which they are to God, and that they shall be within a
while, to all the world, that is, they shall be a loathing and an abhorring, and
therefore the things which they would establist shall be scattered, and the
houses they would build shall be pulled down, for so says Mary; He has
scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts, Luke 1.51. that is,
there is a concentration of thoughts, castles that men build for themselves,
the imaginations, the thoughts of men's hearts drive to some height, to some
high mark, or But, suitable to the fountain from whence they flow, a proud
heart, and when they have wrought them up to a due height and proportion, and
look for the product or result of all, then God comes as with a whirlewinde,
and scatters them, and shows how ill compacted every building is, how loosely
it is laid, which is formed without him, so for the other place which I
hinted, the Lord will destroy the house of the proud, as it is Prove. 15.25.
that is, not only their works in design as before, but their works in issue
and effect; God may permit some designs to come to issue, they may build
houses and get possessions, but they shall be destroyed, it is a thing of no
assurance like a building on the sand, either their foundations shall fail
them, or from heaven the Lord shall thunder upon them, as Hanna says in her
song, 1. Sam. 2.10. which is a proper way of destroying, and pulling down
proud men, and things, which lift up their head to heaven, but says he in the
same verse. He will establish the border of the widow, that is, a widow which
being desolate and afflicted trusts in God; as it is elsewhere, widows who of
all other lie exposed enough to injury, that have no great projects of their
own, no limits, or borders, but of Gods making, and little power to defend
themselves and theirs from assaults and ruin, God will establish them, says
he, the Lord will be their keeper, and then they need not fear, there is no
fence so good, as what is of Gods making, he has bounded the sea by an
invisible bound, his word, but no bounds are like it, so if he make a hedge
about any, about his house and his ways, nothing shall be able to touch him, and
this leads me to the other part, that blessed part, which of all other graces
is the foundation, the corner stone to happiness, and blessedness, and that is
humility, when God would bring his Son into the world, he brought him in the
most himble posture; his condition, his spirit, and his work, were all of a
low and humble edition, and whereas it may be said, that this was for our
sakes and part of his sufferings for sin, not so only, but especially and
particularly, that, as of all other things, so of this grace also he might be
to us the great instance and pattern, and therefore himself says, Learn of
me for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest, that which all
the world seeks after but none find, but such as are in that condition; so
Phil. 2.5.6. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant. That
is, whither ever his work or condition lead him, into what ever abasement,
into what ever lowness, thither his mind easily carried him, therefore says
he, Let this mind be in you; It may be you shall not be lead into such
extremities, into such lownes, (for he drank deep, yet the Saints are laid
low often,) how ever let the mind be in you, have a ready mind, a mind
prepared, there is nothing fits so for all kinds of work and communion for
doing and suffering, as such a mind, for want of which, either we are not
lead into opportunities of glorifying God, or we loose them, and soil them,
and make nothing of them: Besides this (then which we cannot frame a greater
argument,) how is this frame commended to us by God, who best knows what is
best for us, and what best pleases him; He tells you that he gives grace to
the humble, Iam. 4.6. That he will dwell with the humble even as in heaven,
Isa. 57.15. where he will display his beams for comfort and joy, that he may
revive their spirit and make them live, the truth is, men are seldom empty
enough for Gods filling, nor humble enough for his revivings, which is the
reason why we have no more of this heavenly influence, but are feign to spin
our joys out of our own bowels, as the spider does her web, and with
contracted and bowed shoulders, to bear our burdens, which a little influence
from God would make exceeding light, he tells you all the ill he sends, is
but to humble you, and he is forced to do it, that he may do you good, Deuteronomy.
8.16. he tells you that if you will be pleased with any of his works, with
news from heaven, you must be humble. The humble shall see this and be glad,
Psalm. 69.32. that is, what God works in the earth, if you be not humble, you
shall not live, to see it, or have eyes to see it, and the humble shall hear
thereof and be glad, Psalm. 34.2. great things are done and no notice taken of
them, because men are not humble. The way to take in the comforts and the joys
from the works God does, or the Saints do in the world, is to be humble, for
proud men mind themselves to much, to consider God or others, not to multiply
more places, would you be great in any respect, Prove. 15.33. Before honor is
humility, and Prove. 22.4. By humility and the fear of the Lord, is riches and
honor, and life: If God have destined you for these things, that is the gate
you must enter at, would you be great in the kingdom of heaven, take it in
what capacity you will, Math. 18.4. Whosover shall humble himself as a little
child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of heaven; But you will say how
comes the Devil into this charge, first as he comes into all sins
especially such as are great and crying, what ever draws much from God, or
what ever God draws from much, that is, of the Devil, but so is pride, as you
have heard.

Another way by which we shall entitle the Devil to this march of pride, is
contention, Prove. 13.10. Only by pride comes contention, the meaning is, by
pride alone, that is, pride alone is sufficient of it self without any other
reason, to cause the greatest contentions; for instance, men are not apt to
fall into quarrels and contentions, unless distempered by drink, or that
they have their passions stirred up by injury, or are distempered, or provoked,
some way or other, but pride alone makes men quarrelsome, and contentious to
the utmost, and therefore Psalm. 10.2. the wicked in his pride does persecute
the poor; the poor middles not with him, hurts him not, but he is proud,
that is enough, and having advantage over him, being on the higher ground, he
pursuis it. So what mighty reproaches and revilings Moab, and the children of
Ammon laid upon the people of God, by which means they contended with them,
appears Zeph. 2.8. Now this, God gives merely to their pride, and therefore
when in the 9. verse, he threatens the cruellest desolations to them, he ads
ver. 10. this shall they have for their pride, their pride was enough to
entitle them to all, that injury, and to all that punishment. It was pride that
caused contention amongst the Apostles, their disputations and their strife,
who should be the greatest, Marc. 9.34. that pride was the disease, appears
because humility was the remedy, ver. 36.37. Also Math. 18.1.2.3. where Christ
tells them that except they be humble as little children, they shall neither be
first nor second, they shall not go to heaven at all, ver. 3. Except ye
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven; and
if there be any preeminency, pride obstructs the way to it; It is humility that
opens the door, ver. 4. Whosoever ever shall humble himself, as a little child,
the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of God; it is not he that puts for
place shall have it, but he that stays till he be called: But it were well,
if our contentions ended with others, if that were the bounds of them, do we
not contend with our selves, our conditions, and with God every day; Let a man's
condition be never so good, never so encompassed with mercies, pride alone
raises a contention, picks a quarrel, that is, that alone is sufficient to do
it, if there were nothing else. Why are we not contented, why are we not well,
when we have enough, or to much, do you know what makes the contention, it is
pride, ye have food and raiment, ye have not the least part of mercies, ye
have not the greatest part of afflictions; what is the matter why do ye
contend, why do you walk heavily and dejectedly, it is pride, pride only, or
pride alone can do it, can set you as fiercely upon your condition and upon
God, as upon your brother, or your neighbor, yea when there is no cause at
all; Its a glass that extenuates goods, and multiplyes ills, and which is more
then any glass can do, finds them where they are not at all, this as I told
you of lust is a most boundless thing, and will send you to impossibilities
for satisfaction; for let no man think, it lies in the power of his condition
to make him happy, pride will outrunne it faster then it can possibly flow in
upon him, and which is more, pride multiplyes with the flowing in, as fire
increases by fuel; consider therefore when you contend with your condition,
when you are not satisfied with your estate, it might possibly have been
greater or larger, or fairer, or in a word otherwise, nay when you do not
walk cheerfully and thankfully and contentedly in what you have, (for that
failing is of the same root, and spring) then you contend with God, you
murmr against God, and this a love from pride, properly and only from pride,
for the judge of all the world cannot but do justly; God cannot hurt you,
cannot injure, or provoke you, as another may, all your contentions with your
conditions and so with God, are only from pride; now I beseech you who is the
great Author and fomenter of contention, but the Devil (...), the
calumniatour, one that breeds ill blood, that does calumniate and accuse night
and day; he does not only accuse us to God, but God to us, he accused God to
Evah, he told her they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil, this
temptation took, now he intimated that God made that restraint out of envy,
because he would have none so great and so happy as himself, and therefore
there was not so much love in giving you liberty to eat of the other trees, as
there was envy and ill will in restrayning you from this, For God knows, etc.
And he accused Job to God, does Job serve God for naught? A great part of his
traynes are spent, in sowing dissentions, in making breaches, in multiplying
wrath where it is conceived, in boiling it up to revenge, and then effecting
it, and therefore there is nothing, he trains up his more in, then in
contentions, and ways of revenging themselves, to the utmost, the power of
effecting which is ordinarily the reward, his sworn vassalls get for the
slaving, and alienation of their souls and bodies; to conclude, he is the
true king over all the children of pride, Job 41.34. to whom it may be said as
to Pilate concerning Christ, Behold your King: For pride was properly the
Devils sin, 1. Tim. 3.6. It is called the condemnation of the Devil, that is,
that for which the Devil is condemned; Not a novice, least being lifted up
with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. This therefore was
his sin, and this he multiplied and derived presently he fastened it upon
Adam, to wish to be as God, knowing good and evil, and although some other
sins in respect of the constitution, and temper, may bear the title of the
master sin, that does not hinder, but that in a true sense it may be said that
pride is the master sin in all, it is the utmost root in original sin, that
which lies deepest in the ground, and can must hardly be reached; what are
afflictions generally for, but to hide pride from man, nay, temptations are let
out upon us, and sometimes corruptions, that we may not be lifted up, so it
was to Paul, what ever his temptations were, the end of all was that he might
not be proud and lifted up with his revelations; this therefore is the proper
sin of the Devil, and has so great a root in us, of his laying in, at first,
and of his fostering ever since, we should watch him especially in, as that
which has all the evils in it, we have formerly named, and is of all other
things most opposite, and contrary to our peace and comfort.

Another martch of the Devils eminent in it self, and most dangerous and
ensnaring to others, is that we call worldlines, we know the Devil is called
the God of this world, and, they that will be rich, that is, they that set
their hearts upon it, that propose this to themselves, they will be rich, they
will abound, they will, that is, what ever it cost them, though they break
never so many hedges for it, though they tread never so many unjust or weary
steps, they fall into temptation and a snare: The Devil has them in his
snares, and leads them whither he will, whither he has a mind to lead
them, 1. Tim. 6.9. Other sins have their aggravations, but this is the most
earthly of all other, and in some respects, the most unworthy a man; And
therefore the seat of this lust is ordinarily the basest spirits, there it
has its rise, and growth, and in order to effects, it is the root of all
evil, that is, as well as other vices, it is extremely fertile of ill, whether
you consider the evil of sin, or the evil of punishment for sin, this love of
riches, what will it not constrain men to, they will break all the
commandments in a round for the satisfying of those lusts, what frauds,
deceits, perjuryes, cruelties, murders, hatreds have been exercised for the
nourishing of this lust, nay what other sins of lust and uncleanness, of the
lowest and basest kind? People often subject their bodies and souls to the
satisfying of this affection; And for the evil of punishment, the Apostle
says here, that they pierce themselves thorough with many sorrows, that is,
they have a careful and sorrowful life of it, (contrary to that good Solomon
speaks of, of rejoicing in their portion, and enjoying it with thanksgiving)
they are full of cares, and their enjoying time comes never, for they grow
poor by their riches, they extenuate that in their affection, which to their
sense they abound in, when they have more then their chests or their barnes can
hold, their hearts tell them this is nothing: Besides they expose themselves to
the greatest labors, to the greatest weariness that is imaginable, they toil
by day, and they cannot rest by night, the fear of loosing pierces as much as
the pain of getting, and there is no end of their travail; But there be other
sorrows also, terrors of conscience, and flashings of hell, which ordinarily
accompany those lustings, and are the reward and salary of their actions,
besides the great evil which I have not named, that they err from the faith,
for having changed their God, and set up covetousnes, which is Idolatry, its no
wonder if they fall from the faith, and if not in profession, in deed, become
apostates; I have wondered why this should be said of covetousnes, rather then
of any other vice, that is Idolatrous, nor a covetous person, which is an
Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. It is certain ambition, and pride and self love is
idolatrous also, it is true that covetous persons worship the same things that
Idolaters do, silver and gold, the Idol of the gentile are silver and gold,
the work of men's hands; materially they worship the same, therefore says
Christ, ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Math 6.24. Ye cannot put your trust in
the Lord and in riches, the Lord and riches cannot be your strong tower
together, perhaps it may be this, that though in respect of our devotion and
addresses other things may be our God, that is, we may serve them, work to
them, labor to please them, so the Apostle says, their belly is their God,
yet in respect of trust and confidence (which is much of the worship God has
from us) riches especially carry it away there, for the world has got an
opinion (though a very false one) that riches can do all things, therefore
they vale and bow to it, and trust in it, besides because this is generally
received, and men are called wise, when they do well to themselves; therefore
the Apostle brands this especially with that, which is a truth also of other
lustings, that in a more intense and earnest pursuit of them, Idolatry is
committed; Now in this the Devil as in other things juggles with us
extremely, one of the baits and snares, with which he holds those personally
and professedly subjected to him, is some money they shall get, some hidden
treasure, these poor captives he abuses infinitely, and after several
years expectations of some great riches, and many diggings and minings,
wherein by breaking some method, or other they fail a thousand times, they
meet at last with wind in steed of gold, with that which looks like it, but
prooves leaves or dust when they use it. Remigius reports that of all the
moneys, that the witches that fell under his examination, acknowledge to have
received from the Devil, there were but three stivers prooved current, the
rest were leaves, or sand, when it came to use; he does the same in effect
with all earthly men, either he deludes their hopes, they get not what they
expected, he makes them labor for that he knows they shall not obtain, or
deceives them in their enjoyments, they make nothing of what they possess, and
it is all one, not to have and not to enjoye, in truth, that is out of his
power: The comfort of things, the good of things he cannot give if he would,
and he would not if he could, the Devil incourageth us to crack the nut,
but God takes away the kirnell, gives it to them that are good, before him;
comfort and enjoyment and delight are the portion of his people, A man's life
stands not in the abundance of the things that he possesses, that is, the
good and happiness of life, and therefore, A little that a righteous man has,
is better then the revenues of many wicked, Eccles. 2.26. God gives to a man
good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge and joye, that is, wisdom to pursue
right things, and to go right ways to attain the end he desires, knowledge
how to improove them, and joy, that is, the good and comfort of things, and
life; But to the sinner he gives travel, he gives to gather and to heap
up that he may give it to him that is good before him; they dig the mines,
they plough the ground, but the Saints enjoy, they reap and gather.

Coroll.
Therefore particularly to this, let the rich man rejoice in that he is made
low, and the brother of low degree, that he is exalted; that is, show them
God, and heaven, convert them, and they are eaven presently, both are alike
near God, and so comfort and happiness, that which the world pretends to, but
cannot give; Godliness with contentment is great gain, that is, which gives
contentment, there is the gain you look after, there is the happiness that
wealth promises, but it is God that gives it; now a rich and a poor brother
are near God alike, if the rich at least be made low, if he have learned not
to trust in uncertain riches, if his pride that riches causes be abated, and
the poor brother be exalted, that is, that he sees not such a difference in
respect of solid comfort, and happiness, he sees himself in as good a posture
as rich men. Indeed that men are, that they are to God, and their true vallue
is according to the proportion of their neernesse to him, not to what they are
to riches, to Princes, or to the great things of this world.

So ye see these six heads wherein the Devils great temptation lies, from
whence we have deducted some Corollaries, we proceed to one or two more
drawn in general from that which has been said.

And first ye see hence the drudgery of the Devil, Coroll.
Gods work and the Devils, carries wages in their to whom men obey, of the
same they are brought in bondage; now they obey the Devil, for they do his
works, they fulfill his lusts; On the other side, let not us fail to glory in
our condition, and to improove it, how sweet is our portion, the trains the
ways of God are pleasant, all his ways are pleasant, and all his paths
prosperity, to have natural desires, which exceed not their bound and liberty
to satisfy them, without the fire, the scald, the Itch of lusts, to have a
spirit so great by meeknes, and humility, as it is above those ills, it seems
most to fall under, to be be-lowe envye, for the world sees not your riches,
nor your greatness, and above misery and shame, to have a spirit so meekned as
it cannot break, again to be above your condition what ever it is, and to use
it, to possess your estate, and not to be possessed by it, to look on money as
a servant of the lowest form, to pity them that Idolyze it, and to improove
more your little by enjoyment, then they do their riches by looking on it and
Idolizing of it. Again to go further into the consideration of what we said
before, and see how you outstrippe them for another life, in knowing and loving
that which they ignorantly persecute, in having your assurance in God, whereas
they have none at all, nor in any thing; I could be large here in the
comparison of our service and our way, which should be the object of our joy
and rejoicing, when ever we think of it, and think of it we should often,
for that purpose: For since God has made the miserable condition of the
wicked, a foil to the love of his elect, we should do so also, and run over
by way of comparison, the heads and grounds of our comfort, but I shall rather
in the second place

Coroll.
Entreat you to improove these things, If you know; if you know the differences
of your conditions, if you know the ways of Satan, from your own, and where
they part, happy are you, if you tread those ways and those paths, and for
those broad high ways, those common roades, these beaten paths of Hell,
which we have described, our wisdom and our glory will be to keep a loofe
of, to keep far from them, it will be less shame for us to be shamed by
other things, to be caught by other trains, then the common snares: Although
it be true that in the pursuit of those things, Satan uses his greatest
wiles, and his finest pieces of subtilty, however let us keep a loofe of, let
us carry a watchful eye to those great and common snares, the Devil may alter
his method, but his But, and end, is the same, he finds these things suitable
to corrupt nature, and he improoves all that is within us, to work vilde and
base impressions those ways, therefore let us watch him, where he watches
us, and let us not think that because we have escaped the pollution of the
world, that therefore we shall escape him, he spinnes his web the finer for
you: Which is the reason why I have spent sometime in these particulars of his
most usual martches, that ye might see the way in some of its foulness,
together with the guide, that ye might see the hook under the bayte, and be
undeceived in things so greatly concerning you.

Now therefore having your adversary so fully and largely described to you, in
his nature, in his power, in his ministry, as has been showed at large in this
tract of Angels, (for some piece of the Devils power, you must fetch from
what has been said of the good Angels, that we might not be obliged to
repeat things twice) it remains that we should fight, that is, that we
should address our selves to the combat, for there is in this adversary what
ever might prepare you, and stir you up to a most formed and exact war.

For first he is as has been showed a most inveterate and sworn enemy, he
cease not to accuse day and night, he knows all our good, lies in
maintaining good terms with God; Therefore his care is to beget ill blood
between us, he inticeth us to offend him, and when he has done, he
aggravates this offense to the utmost capacity of it, He goes about like a
roaring Lion, he goes about; therefore he is not idle, he works
continually, and it is like a roaring Lion, he has not only a Lyonish nature
in him apt to devour, and to fall upon the prey, but he is ever roaring, that
disposition is always wound up to the height, and intended in him, other
enemies not so, so that here is the worst disposition that can be imagined
ever acted and managed, with the greatest intensenesse.

Paul of the body of death. But we wrestle not against flesh and blood; this
text tells you you have another kind of combatant, for the description of
whose power to find fit names, the highest comparisons will fail us,
Principalityes, powers, rulers, spiritual wickednesses above: They are not
called Princes, but principalityes, not Potentes, but Potestates, not mighty,
but powers, Lord not of a part, but of the whole world, of the darkness of the
world, all the wicked of the world, which are darkness are of their side,
fight under them against us, and all the darkness in our own hearts is with them
also, all those fumes and foggs of lusts, all those mists of ignorance, and
unbelief are part of his army; Again, instead of wicked spirits they are
called spiritual wickednesses, and that above, both in high things and in high
places, they are above us, they hang over our heads continually: You know what
a disadvantage it is to have your enemy get the Hill, the upperground, this
they have naturally and always.

Again there are enough of them, they can immediately beleaguer a man,
co^passing him round, possess every part of him: Seven Devils can enter at
once into one man, or if need be a whole legion; do we believe these things,
and are we not stirred, are we not afraid, if we apprehend the approach of
an enemy, and the town wherein we are be in danger, what wringing of hands is
there, what praying, what provision, and yet perhaps he may be diverted, he
may accord; But there is no truce in this war, a perpetual combat, that
time you are not upon your watch you will be taken, for your enemy knows it,
if an enemy in war knew certainly when the watch were neglected, he would
take that time, now he knows when you neglect your watch, when your faith and
affections sleep, which of other enemies cannot be said.

But then thirdly, if the contentions were for things

Captains when they make orations to their soldiers, they tell them they
fight for their country, for their possessions, for their wives and children,
for their liberties, but what is all this to our war? To our prize? We fight
for peace of conscience which passes all understanding, we fight for eternal
life, we fight for God and Christ, whose glory in us lies at the stake every
day, and suffers, or is relieved by our fighting: I beseech you are not these
things worth contending for? Will not so goodly a prize put spirits into you?
Some have done wonders while their lovers have looked upon them, others while
they have fought for their loves; What do you fight, for nothing? Yes, it is a
love you fight for too, and one that fought for you even to death, you do but
requite him, he is before hand with you; and does not your love look upon you
also? Yes. If you can see him, I assure you he sees you, and there is not a
watch you make, there is not a stroke you strike, but it pleases him, and it
refreshes him, as on the other side there is not a negligence, or a fail, but
it wounds him, and afflicts him; what say you will all this that has been said
put courage into you, and make you fight, it is brought for that purpose, I
beseech you let it put on strong resolutions to please the Lord, to resist this
cursed enemy, this damned enemy, for so he is, he carries his condemnation
about him; and yet this enemy which is left so mighty, and powerful, for our
trial, for our reward, if we fight manfully, if we fight the battles of
the Lord, (if we be wise, if we will) all tend to the glory of our victory,
to the honor of our God; only let us resist the Devil, being strong in the
faith, to which purpose I will endeavor to search a little into, and to speak
something of this heavenly armor which God has given us for that purpose.

Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand, Ephesians. 6.13. In this
13. ver. we are bid to take unto us the whole armor of God, as in the 11.
verse we are bid to put it on, with the reason added, that we may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.

From the first words observe this, that no weapons will serve to fight with
the Devil but Gods, nothing will make you shot-free, but the armor of God,
for so says the Apostle, the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, 2. Cor. 10.4. So as here you see the reason, because
carnal weapons are weak ones, to be carnal and to be weak are convertible
terms, as to be spiritual, and to be mighty, are also; now you have to do
with a mighty enemy, as you have seen already, therefore you must have mighty
weapons, you must have a wedge fit for the knot; David had never overcome
Goliath, if he had not come with spiritual weapons, 1. Sam. 17.45. Thou come
to me with a sword, with a spear and with a shield, but I am come to thee in
the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou have
defied: It was not the sling nor the stone that did the feate, but it was this
mighty Lord of Hosts, in whose name he came; To go armed therefore against
the Devil in the strength of your own resolutions, or your temper, or
constitution, or your habits, and education, is to fight against Goliath with a
stone and a sling, without the name of God; Nay your experiences, your contrary
reasonings, they may have influence into your sin, but they will never into the
victory, unless this stone and sling, these underweapons be managed by the
name of God. For your resolutions this cunning tempter knows that there is
nothing so natural, so proper to a man as man, as changeableness, as on the
contrary, it is the high and incommunicable Charracter of God to be without
variation, or shadow of changing, all the matter is but to find a plausible
reason for the saving of his credit. For our temper and constitution, he has
lusts peculiar for every temper. Besides he can easily persuade lusts to give
place to one another for a time, as pride to uncleanness, etc. And his power
is much upon the body, and the humors and constitutions of it, to stir and
work upon those humors, that by the help and mediation of the fancy shall
work to his end, and gain the will and understanding: As for your education
and habits, experience shows that many things that look like moral virtues,
are nothing but the ignorance of ill, or the law of a constraint: Besides he
has his methods, and by a few degrees will lead you to that, and by steps
that would have utterly deferred you, had it been represented to you, all at
once, and for your reasonings, and experiences you will find that to be the
proper weapon, he is elder then Adam, he is wiser then Solomon, set holiness
aside, he has been trained up to sophistry and deceit, and therefore verse
the 11. the Armor of God is applied to the wiles of the Devil, so as you have
no relief, but what was David's, Psalm. 118.10. All nations compassed me about,
but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them, they compassed me about, yea
they compassed me about, there was a perfect Paristhesis of ill, and enemies a
perfect beleaguering, so ver. 12. They compassed me about like bees; you shall
see how Bees in swarming time, will compass a bush, so will Devils and their
effects multitudes of Divelish thoughts, and temptations; A man shall not see
his way out, they are behind him and before him, and as in the words
following, They are kindled as the fire of thorns, so the Greek and Chaldea
read it, they fall quickly into a great blaze, or the word is also quenched (as
Hebrew words signify often contraries,) they kindle quickly and like thorns,
but they quench also as soon, for in the name of the Lord will I destroy them,
this is all your relief to deal with your enemies, as David did, your faith
is your victory, whereby you overcome the world, 1. John 5.4. that is, in
Christ, it is the power of his might that makes us strong; Christ has a might,
a mighty ability, he is endowed with power from above, which being put forth
in us, gives us a power to be strong, and to stand our ground, as ver. 10. for
in those words the habit seems to be distinguished from the energy and
operation, when a man is acted by the Devil, either by an immediate
possession, or some eminent strong way of lusting, that he is strong in the
Devil and in the power of his might, that is, you shall find a power full
operation of the might of the Devil upon him, so as did we not see a humane
shape, we should think it were the Devil indeed, so greatly is his might
acted upon men, with power; Now after this manner should we be strong in the
Lord, by the influence of his spirit, by the strength of his armor, other
strengths will prove but weakness, so much for that point.

Secondly it is not without its observation that it is called here and before
the whole armor of God, (...). There is no man pretends so little to religion,
but he will do a little, he will pretend to some graces, he will make some
sallyes, as if he would fight, but the difficulty, and the wisdom, and the
strength lies in the universality, there is a chain in graces, you loose all
if you loose one, as James says, He that breaks one command is guilty of
all; and God that gives you arms not to clog you, but to defend you, has
given you nothing to much, it is not the beauty, but the use of an armed man
which he considers: That place which is open, to be sure the Devil will
strike in; for he knows the bare places, and one open place will serve to
kill you as well as an hundred, therefore God has made a defense for all,
therefore the Scripture calls for a growing up in all grace, or in all things,
Ephesians. 4.15. 2. Pet. 1.5. Therefore Peter calls for an addition of one grace to
another till you be complete. Add (says he) to your faith virtue, etc. For
if these things be in you, and abound, that is, if you have all those parts,
and that in a way of height and eminency, if they be not scanty and narrow,
then you will abound also, that is, you will neither be barren, nor
unfruitful: I beseech you consider this, it is the universality, it is the
whole armor of God, that will alone serve our turns, and which alone we
stick at; All difficulty lies in exactness, in bringing things to their end,
and their perfection, every one is a beginner and a pretender to learning, to
knowledge, to arts, to religion it self, but the exactnes, the universality is
the portion but of a few, let us do otherwise. How good is God, who has given
us a whole armor, let us not show our selves at once enemies to our selves,
and unthankful to him, unless we fear neither God nor the Devil, on the
other side let this comfort us, that there is a whole armor, there is a whole
Devil, that nature is improoved to the utmost capacity of a rational nature
for ill, for hurt, if there were not a whole armor, we were undone.

take unto us this whole armor of God, and ver. 11. to put it on, God makes
it, God gives it, he makes it efficacious, but there are our parts also, we
must take it to us, and put it on, there is a sluggishnesse in men's natures, if
God would do all, and men might sleep the whilst, perhaps they would lie
still, and let him trusse on their armor, but this is not the law we live by,
this is not the terms we stand in with God, what we cannot do, God will
do for us, but what we can do, that we must do; He does not work with
us, as we work with a hatchet, or a dead instrument, but as the soul works
with the body, that is, in it, and by it, so as the body does its part, and
feels the labor, the soul at first gives life to our body, so does God to
our souls, when they are dead in sins and trespasses he quickens them; Also
the soul gives guidance to the body and direction, and assistance, so does
God, he never fails us, he is still by us, at our right hands, but we have
our parts, our reason, and understandings, our will and our affections, they
come into play every day, and if God can do nothing by them, he will do
nothing without them; This, when men believe so much in other things, as they
will scarce trust God with any thing, they will see a reason, and a means
sufficient to produce every event, they will be at every end of every
business, why do they devolue all upon him in religion, without stirring at
all? Because they mind it less, which is the means to make God mind it not
at all; Therefore I beseech you, let us do our parts, fetch assistance from
God, and work under him, receive influence and spirit from him, and use them,
intend mightily what we do, for it is to God, and for him; those that work
under any Agent, though never so mighty, do so, and this know, that the more
mighty any supreane Agent is, the more it intends, imployes, and fills the
instrument, as he that serves a wise man, though he do nothing but by the
direction and appointment of his master, yet he shall find his understanding
intended and employed, for a wise directer does more intend, and fill the
subordinate instruments, and Agents not contra.

Now he comes to the end and use of the Armor, that they might be able to
stand in the evil day, and having done all to stand, the word is (...), to
resist, to stand against; you see here is a real combat, as your enemies are
great which you have heard of before, so is the combat, it will cost you
resisting, and fighting, and there is a day appointed for it, an evil day,
that is, a day of battle, our whole life is so many evil days, therefore
says the Apostle, Redeem your time because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5.16.
that is, troublesome and full of temptations, if you would make any thing of
your lives, of the opportunities you meet with all, of the occasions that fall
out, you must redeem them, a little time and opportunity is worth much, it
will be lost to you if you redeem it not; So all our days are evil, as Jacob
said, but some more especially may be called by way of eminency the evil day.
All the days of Job were in a manner evil, because none were without some
molestation, and trouble, I had no rest (says he) neither was I in quiet yet
trouble came, Job 3.26. But the great evil day was, when Satan was let out
upon him; the great evil day to the Disciples was when Christ was crucified,
and they were Winnowed by Satan; So there are more especial times and parts
of our life, when God will try us by letting out Satan upon us, but those
times and seasons know no man, no more then the day of judgment, and therefore
we must be ever ready for them, upon our feet, and with our armor about us;
standing is a warlike posture, a posture of watch, a posture of fight, it is
not a standing still, but it is a fighting, a resisting, ye have not resisted
unto blood striving against sin; God expects that we should fight a good
fight, that we should quit our selves like men, and we had need do so,
unless we would be undone, and foiled, and therefore he adds and having
done all to stand, that is, do what you can, you will but stand, it will be
little enough to do the work, the enemies are so mighty and great, the war
is so sharp: God has an purpose for many holy ends so ordered it, that you
shall have work enough of it; some carry it thus, omnibus confectis stare,
that is, all the before said fell, and cruel enemies being overcome, having
done all, having defeated them all, vanguished them all, you may stand as
conqueror; What a glorious thing will this be, that as Christ your captain,
shall stand last upon the earth, so you shall stand with him, glorying and
tryumphing to see your enemies dead before you, when as others that were fainte
and delicate, that would not stand and fight and arm: As they were here led
captives by Satan, at his pleasure, so shall be led into triumph by him at
last: Think of this that by doing your duty, by standing your ground, by
arming, and fighting in the power of Christ, in the armor of God, this mighty
Host shall lie dead before you, And those which you have seen to day, in this
evil day ye shall see them again no more for ever, you have therefore two
things to encourage you: First, the necessity of your fight. Secondly, the
glory and pleasure of the victory; Necessity will make Cowards fight: And
therefore commanders provide dilligently, that their enemies may have a
backe-doore to run away, because necessity, and despair will produce
wonders: I beseech you do but see, and here is an absolute necessity,
unless you take all this armor, stand, and withstand ye will not stand at
last, this is little enough, you must do all this that having done all, you
may stand, but then having done all, you shall stand, that is, stand as
conqueror, stand as Christ stands, with your enemies slain about you: You
shall have the pleasure of revenge, which here you may take in by faith, and
of victory, the shouting of a conqueror; Cowards have but the pleasure of
idleness, and the shame and misery of slavery, they have their good times
here, what is their good times? To sleep, to be idle, to be abused, and
deceived, thy labors are better then his pleasures, then his enjoyments; What
then is thy good times? Thou art comforted, and he is tormented, thy captain
tells thee thou have done well, well done good and faithful servant; Thy
conscience tells thee thou have fought a good fight, but praise is not enough
in thy captains mouth, enter thou (says he) into the joy of thy Lord, he
shows thee a crown of righteousness, which he has kept by him all the while,
and which thou may think on every day, till thou have it, but then he
gives it thee, he puts it on: Where is now your ambition, where is your
spirit, and your courage, think not on mean things, but on crowns, and
victories, and glories, and if you enter the list, if you fight, do it to
purpose, labor so to withstand, that at last you may stand; So run (says
the Apostle) that ye may obstaine, 1. Cor. 9.24. Every one is a pretender, and
a runner, but few carry the prize, they find hot work, they grow weary, and
quit the list, Thou therefore (says Paul to Timothy) endure hardness as a good
soldier, of Jesus Christ, 2. Tim. 2.3. that is, though thy arms press thee,
and thy work pinch thee, yet endure, it is worth the while, that thou may
show thy self a good soldier of Christ, and may please him that has chosen
thee, thou must not please thy self in his work, for he pleased not himself
in thine. Christ pleased not himself, this is written, God took notice of it,
the time will come when he will please thee, and then it follows ver. 5. If
any man fight, he is not crowned, except he strive lawfully or duly, that
is, it is not enough to enter the list, and fight, but there is the law of
combat, and the law of fight, if you do not fight as ye ought according to
the law of combat, the law of arms, if you give over to soon, and stay not
till the victory be gotten, till your enemy be profligated, and abased, he had
as good have done nothing, this he amplifies ver. 6. by the similitude of a
labourer, The husband man that labors first, must be partaker of the fruit,
for so first has reference to laboring, not to fruit, fruit and crowns,
reaping and glory are the effects of labor, and due fighting; think not to
go to heaven with your arms acrosse, or your head upon your elbow, or with
good beginnings, and faint offers, it is lawful fighting, it is hard labor,
leads you to glory, and ver. 7. says he: Consider what I say, what were the
matters so hard, or the similitudes so deep? No, but the meaning is, turn it
in your mind, often think of it, almost continually, do not think to go to
heaven with ease, you can never think to much that you must fight hard, and
contend lawfully, and labor mightily, and endure all things, as soldiers that
would please their captain, before ever ye shall be crowned and reap, and
then he concludes with, The Lord give thee understanding in all things, which
shows how hard it is, for us to apprehend these things aright, so as to have
them work upon us, and to be affected with them to purpose, so as not to have
slight thoughts of them, though they be things not hard to be understood.

To conclude, all good things are of God, though we be taught, he must open
our understandings, as when we are commanded, he must work in us to do, and
especially in the things whereof we speak.

It will not be improper here by way of encouragement, to consider as what
power and might Satan has, so what bonds and restraints also?

First, all the Devils can do nothing without aformed commission from God,
this the example of Job makes most clear, the Devil ruined his estate, by the
Sabeans, but not till God had given him power, he infected his body with
miserable diseases, but he was feign to ask new leave for it, so 1. Kings 22.
An evil spirit offered his service to deceive Ahab, so an evil spirit from
the Lord came upon Saul, but both by commission: So the Sorcerers of Egypt,
they acknowledged the hand of God, when themselves were stopped, it was no more
impossible for them to make Lice then other things, but God let them go on a
while, that his power might appear the greater in giving the stop; So Zach.
3. The Lord rebuke thee o Satan, God can do it though no other can, so Christ
says, The Prince of this world is cast out, Ioh. 12.31. The Prince of this
world is judged, Ioh. 16.11. he is not only under God, but under Christ
God-man, he is subjected to our friend and husband, and that in little things.
They could do nothing on swine without leave, Luke 8.32. much less can the
Devil touch us in any thing, without a commission; Besides, what we have told
you of their chains which Peter and Jude mentions, shows the power God has
over them; And generally we have this assurance, that a hair from our head
shall not perish without the will of our Father. So as our greatest enemy is
subject to our best friend, and managed to our advantage, which should
encourage us to fight and secure us of the issue, for the God of peace will
tread Satan under our feet, at last, Romans 16.20.

The Devil and we are in earnest, but God, as those two captains lets the
young men play before him, and can stop them when he will, he is in no
pain in respect of the combat or issue, but he has the pleasure to see
weak saints overcome giants, by hanging on him by the string of faith. God is
on our side, and the Devil is so subject to him, as there is no greater
subjection, let hope then as well as necessity encourage us to fight, we have
both those arguments in their height; God will manage his graces in us, to our
advantage, but let us do our parts.

We come now to the particular pieces of armor, whereof the first is, The
girdle of truth, having your loins girt about with truth, In the loins is
strength, as is said of Behemoth, his strength is in his loins, Job 40.16. In
them also is the power of generation, for so God says to Jacob, Kings shall
come out of thy loins, Genesis 35.11. This metaphor therefore applied to the
mind devotes strength, steadiness and constancy; on the contrary men that are
delicate, effeminate, and unstable, the Latin calls them, clumbs without
loins, now that which fits this part, in some thing that begirts it, that the
part wherein strength lies may feel strength from without, and that is
properly a girdle, therefore Peter says, Gird up the loins of your mind, 1.
Pet. 1.13. and Christ bids us, Let your loins be girded, Luke 12.35. this
whether men travel, or whether they fight, or both together, which is our
condition, is necessary: For when they travailed, they used to gird themselves,
and the Belt or girdle, has been always a piece of soldiers armor when they
fought: You see now a reason why the loins should be girt to this war: We
need not go far for a girdle, the Holy Ghost tells us, it is truth, if you
ask me what is truth, I answer in a word, Right sights and judgments of
things, and sincerity, this is that which girds up the loins of your mind,
and therefore Christ adds, Let your loins be girded, and your lights burning,
as before Luke 12. Certainly clear and right sights of things with sincerity,
are the most begirting things in the world, this you may know, especially by
considering what is the cause of loosenes, and laxenesse, and unsteddines in
our course, and you will find it, because men are either insincere and
unfaithful, or misapprehensive, and dark; A double minded man is unstable in
all his ways, because there is a mixture in the principles of his motion, he
has two objects in his eye, two ends in his heart, and is carried up and down
diversely, according to the predominant humor, and quality, so as ye never
know where to find him, nor can ever hold him, because he is yours but in
part, for an end, such a one was Saul and Iehu, and so are all hypocrites, the
contrary to which was Nathaniel, who had this honor from Christ's mouth, that
he was a true Israelite in whom was no guile, Ioh. 1.47. that is, he was a
man round simple, candid, and plain, which came to Christ honestly, not for
ends, for lounes, or to intrappe him, as others did: Christ himself disdaines
not this commendation of whom it was said, 1. Pet. 2.22. that there was no
guile found in his mouth, and David says, He is a blessed man in whose spirit
there is no guile, Psalm. 32.2. that is, who is sincere in every thing, having
his ends what they should be, and his actions and expressions suitable, that you
may read his heart in his professions and actions; such a disposition carries
you right on, makes you steady in your motion, without turning to the right
hand or to the left, Girds you up, and strengthens your mind to motions, to
fightings, makes you intend what you do strongly, because you do but one
thing, that which put Martha, into such a distemper was, because she was
troubled about many things, you see then, now how sincerity begirts, and how in
sincerity and double mindedness loosens your loins, and nerves, but does not
misjudging and darkness do the same, loosen your loins, making you unsteddy,
and weak, contrary to this begirting? You will find it does: Men are what
they see, and what they judge, and no other, and though some men do not fill
up their light, yet none go beyond it, a man wants courage that wants light,
and He that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes, and that is
contrary to this begirting, and he must needs make many false paces, for he
knows not whither he goes, If a man walk in the night he stumbleth, because
there is no light in him, Ioh. 11.10. In him- he has the instrument of
seeing, the eye, but there is no light shining upon that eye, though a man
should be sincere, if he want right lights and sights of things he will be
rendered the weaker and more unsteddy, he will stumble often, with a good
intention about him, nothing gives more courage then knowledge, nothing
intimidates more then ignorance; Again, comfort and joy renders strong and
steady, now light is the emblem of joy, and therefore when the Angel came to
poor Peter, fettred in chains, as he was, a light shined in the prison, Acts
12.7. so says David, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I
fear, Ps. 27.1. and when in a low condition he expected comfort from God,
Thou will save the afflicted people, says he, but wilt bring down high
looks; for thou will light my candle (says he) the Lord will en lighten my
darkness, Psalm. 13.27.28. Now comfort begirts, and comfort you see comes in by
light: Again. Glory, the apprehension of it, the notion of it, begirts, and
renders strong exceedingly, Christ, for the glory set before him, etc. did
wonders, but light and glory run together, and the notion of glory comes in
by light, Isa. 60.1.2. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee, so it is called, The light of the glorious
gospel, 2. Cor. 4.4. there would have been no glory seen if there had been no
light, and there is a glory also in light, Acts 22.11. Paul said, he could not
see, for the glory of the light, therefore light is glorious, now this dazelled
his bodily eyes, but our spirits see better and more strongly for glorious
lights, which gives assurance, and courage, and so strength also; In a word,
our whole armor is called the armor of light, Romans 13.12. So great a thing is
light to armor and to strength, according to the more or less, of which men
are weak or strong to any course to which they pretend, but above all to
religion: Now for the Devil against whom we arm, does not he play in the
dark almost altogether, when he would deceive our sense, he casts sand in
our eyes, mists before us, to deceive and blind us, and then we judge of
things not as they are, but according to the medium we see through: So for our
comfort how does he enervate us, and loosen our loins, by leading us into
dark thoughts of God, and of our condition, how does he unsteddy our steps,
and intimidate us, by putting scruples in our ways, and hiding from us those
truths, wherein our strength would consist; If he can make us insincere, he
has enough, we shall then seek darkness, and choose it rather then light, of
such Christ says, that they loved darkness rather then light, because their
deeds were evil, Ioh. 3.19. But be sincere, the right eyeing, the right
seeing, the right apprehension of things is that truth which begirts us, and
together with sincerity renders us strong and mighty to fight with him, to
contest with his wiles, with his lies, with his impostures, for his dealings
with us is nothing else: But be we but sincere, that is, honest to your selves
and to God, and discover him, and he is gone; This therefore is a neat clean
piece of armor, fitted for the part, and for the enemy we contest with all.
If you ask what you shall do for it, I would advise you by way of corrolary
to two things,

First, Corroll.
converse much with the Father of lights, In his light we shall see light,
Psalm. 36.9. Be near God that he may shine upon you continually, he has no
false lights as impostures have to show their wares by, what ever light he
affords you, is right, and gives you the thing as it is; He has no false
glasses, that greaten, or lessen the proportion of things, but such as render
them as they are. Converse much with the word the book of lights, all it says
is true without a reason, though it be all reason, converse with the Saints the
subjects of lights, they have light that will shine before you, all these
lights convey truth to you, the right notion of things; And that is it which
begirts you, renders you strong and steady, fit to deal with the Devil, the
father of all impostures and deceits, also think, ruminate much of things
according to what true notion you have ever had of them; in some times and
parts of our lives we have right notions of things, with such sight as carry
their own evidence with them, represent them often to your selves, this will
make your light shine to you, your light may be under a bushel in your own
heart, and truth without this, may be to seek when you should use it, when you
should judge and walk by it, you may have many right principles in you, but
Raked under Ashes, but wisdom is to have them at hand and for use, that when
the Devil comes with his wiles and his mists, shining and blazing, truth may
scatter them and melt them, and cause them to waste away as soon as they dare
to appear for example. If he shall show the pomp and glittering of titles
and honor, and would lead you out of your way, by that foolish shine; a right
judgment of things has for him, that the outsides of things are for children,
that the masks and vizards, either of good or ill are not much considerable,
that honor is in truth, that which is lasting, which has its rise in worth,
and is given by God, and wise men, that such honor properly should rather
follow, then lead good actions, that the praise of men and the praise of God
are seldom consistent, that it is a sign of diffidence of God, to be too
anxious to receive honor from men, that there is no reason that should moove
you, which the Devil can neither give, nor continue to you: I give you but a
taste, if he tempt you to gratify the flesh by lust or idleness, by a soft and
delicate life, by indulgeing to bodily things, Truth will girde your loins,
and make you stand steady here in also, by telling him that it is wisdom to
till the better part, that nothing stands in so proper an antipathy to the
spirit as the flesh, that Paul beat down his body and brought it into
subjection, that the body is to be considered only as an instrument and not to
be idolized and indulged to, for it self, that belly and meat shall both be
destroyed ere long, but the soul dies not, that idleness is death before your
time, with this difference, that it is considerable in your punishment, which
death properly is not, for no man is punished for dying; That Jesus Christ was
a perpetual motion, that good men have used to find little rest but in their
consciences, and their graves, till they come to heaven, that your condition
here is to be a soldier, to endure hardness, and fight, for which truth arms
you, not to live delicately and take your ease, this might be enlarged in many
other particulars, and in these more fully, I only give an instance, that you
may know what I would, and may learn to begirt your selves with right notions,
against the wiles of the Devil.

For the other part, namely sincerity, for the heightening and improoving of
that, I shall put upon you but this burden, love much; sincerity is
immixednesse, and rightnesse of ends, a spirit goeing right forward, drawn
right forth, without guile or ends; Love will concentrate all in God, make all
lines meet in him, self love makes men insincere to God and others, because it
draws away from the pretensions which are to God, it sucks away the sap and
the juice that should go into the body of the tree, it is like a cut that
draynes the channel, which should run with full source into the sea; but
love gives all and wishes for more, in no respect so much as to give that also,
so as it gathers up the soul and girds up the loins for God, as bring what
subtilties and wiles you will, it measures, all you say by Gods interest, so as
offer as before, honors, or pleasures, or lusts, it will ask you; what is
this to God, how does it suite with his ends, how does it comply with his
glory, how is it squared to his liking and good pleasure, since you live if he
be pleased, you are happy if he be glorified, love has made you so much his,
that nothing can be good to you but what is to him, love has given all in
gross, and therefore can reteyne nothing in retayle, that therefore to mix
your actions or your ends, is to divide you from God, who is your love, and
under a color of bettering your condition to rob God, and undo your self
together, for love is wise, and will tell you also, that it is good loosing
your self in God, and that when by studying for God, you forget your selves,
you are then most of all remembered; I shall add no more, so much for this
first piece, only remember to act these notions, and sincerity in the virtue
and power of him, who is the real and essential truth Jesus Christ.

You have already heard of that piece, which gives the great and general
impresse, that which strengthens the part of strength, that which renders fit
and prepared for every good thing, and which is of exceeding great influence
into this battle, The girdle of truth, that is such sights, and such a
disposition of spirit as begirts and strengthens to what we should do. We
come now to arm the breast which lies as much exposed, and is as considerable
as any part; For the breast contains the noble and vital parts, the heart,
the lungs, the liver, and for this there is a Plate, a breast plate, and that
is righteousness, this Christ our captain put on before us, Is. 59.17. He
put on righteousness as a breast plate, and we, according to the duty of a
soldier that takes his example from the captain, for so say your brave
commanders (whether in order to fighting or armeing) what you see me do, do
ye likewise, and according to the charracter and impression which we receive
from his fullness, we take on righteousness also as a breast plate; if you ask
me what this piece is, for it must be something spiritual, by which you deal
with the Devil, I answer that it is holiness, and innocence of life; The
first piece was sincerity or integrety (as it lay in the will) respecting the
end and aim of all our actions, which having a continual and direct influence
upon the end begirts exceedingly; This is the walk of a Christian in order to
that end, that righteous and holy frame of spirit by which he walks and
mooves, justly and holily in all his actions, this is that wherein Paul
excercised himself so much, to have a conscience void of offense, toward God
and man, Acts 24.16. That is, so to walk as neither to offend the conscience
of another, by any scandal or stumbling block, nor to offend or wound his
own; This if you take it generally, one may call perhaps sanctification, not
taking sanctification as it is, some times for consecration or separation, as
the vessels or days were consecrated, or set a part, but for sanctity, that
is, inherent righteousness, or holiness, or more particularly considering it in
the walks and motions of it, it may be distinguished into Piety or Godliness,
and Justice or righteousness, the one respecting God more immediately, the other
men; Such a distinction you have, Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousnes of men, so Titus 2.12. We
are to live soberly, righteously and godly, there is the distinction of
righteousness and godliness, to which sobriety or temperance is added, as a
means of doing it, and living so, because by it we deny our selves in wordly
lusts, as the words before are, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, upon
these two feet therefore, this sanctity or righteousness mooves vizt. Religion
toward God, and Justice toward men: To pursue these tracts, were to give you
the whole walk of religion, which is not my intent, for I give you now, but an
exposition in order to our combat, only a few things: In this righteousness
there is an order, they gave themselves first to the Lord, and after to us, by
the will of God, 2. Cor. 8.5. God must be first considered, and secondly, what
ever you do to men, it must be for God, and as to the Lord, and not to men,
that is, not making them the Alpha or Omega the rise, or the ultimate end of
any of our motions, so as motions to wards God, are first and especially to be
considered, First seek the Kingdom of God, and David says often, early in
the morning will I seek thee, still God is especially to be considered, He
that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10.37.
and therefore in respect of intencenesse, you must Love God with all your heart,
and soul, and mind, and though we are to do acts of righteousness to wards
our brethren, with all our strength, yet that intencenesse is required
especially in respect of God, and by the virtue of religion; As for
righteousness toward man, it is that by which we are inclined, to give every
one that duty and observance which is their due, and under this consideration,
falls all men, with whom we have to do, and Angels also, for since God only
is the object of religious worship, they must fall under the notion and
consideration of our brethren or neighbors, for in refusing worship, they say,
they are our fellow servants, and of our brethren the Prophets, and of them
which keep the sayings of the book of God; so as they refuse not their due,
but Gods due, which is religious worship, Rev. 22.9. and of that moment is this
righteousness, toward our brother; that the truth of religion toward God,
cannot consist with the neglect of this, if a man say he loves God, and hates
his brother, he is a liar, 1. Ioh. 4.20. And this commandment have we of
God, that he that loves God should love his brother also: This in the negative
is a sure argument, that there is no religion toward God, where there is not
righteousness toward men, Gall. 5.19. The works of the flesh are manifest
(says Paul,) unrighteous, unworthy actions, clearily manifest a wicked man, if
he be unrighteous and unjust toward men, he is irreligious toward God.

This righteousness has for its measure, or rule, the love we bear our
selves, for God being loved by us, with the love of union, we must needs love
our selves next and immediately, which is that thing we desire to close and
join with God; but others secondarily, as those we would have also
participate of the same good, and from this love, (the rule and measure of our
righteousness,) none are to be excluded, that are capable of God, and
happiness, because the root of love as well to others as our selves, is God,
the measure of which is love to our selves, and therefore no particular enmity
should interupt, therefore we should love our enemies; You see how we have
stated, and whither we have led this notion of righteousness, we cannot
leave it in a better place, and it was fit to say some what of that of which
the word says so much, and which arms so fair and noble a part.

But how does this piece arm the breast, or how is it fitted thereunto? The
breast contains I told you the vital parts, wherein properly as in the
subject, is the feate of life, that holiness therefore, that righteousness,
that image of God is wounded by unrighteousness; by sin, the Devil that
wicked one shoots at the fairest mark, and by unrighteousnes wounds, that is
it which draws down Gods wrath, puts a sting into every condition, into death
it self, that weakens the heart, makes timorous and fearful; the breast plate
in Greek is Thorax, and they say it is derived from (...), hoc est, subsilite,
to leap or shake, Propter cordis palpitationem, for the heart ever mooves, but
unrighteousnes and an evell conscience, makes it shake inordinately, renders
men timorous, and fearful; now this piece of armor, this breast plate of
righteousness secures you of this, those shaking, those darting wounds, and
ads courage and assurance, so Prove. 28.1. The wicked flies when none pursues,
but the righteous are bold as a Lion, now the use of armor is to render you,
not only safe, but bold and secure; Contrary to which are those fears, that
make wicked men afraid of their own shaddowe, they go without being driven,
saving by their own conscience, which is also excelently expressed. Lev.
26.36.37. And upon them that are left alive of you, I will send a faintness
into their hearts in the Lands of their enemies, and the sound of a shaking
leaf shall chase them, and they shall flee, as fleeing from a sword, and they
shall fall when none pursues.

And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none
pursues, and ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies. Here is a
disposition, quite contrary to such strength and courage, as this piece, the
breast plate of righteousness gives, do you not see now need of an armor, when
wickedness and unrighteousnes brings you into that miserable condition;
unrighteousnes is opposite to the being of a holy man, the renewed state of a
man which consists in righteousness and true holiness, and to the comfort and
welbeing of a saint, which stands as you have it, Romans 14.17. In righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; mark the order, first righteousness, which is
as I may say, the materiality of peace, and then joy in the Holy Ghost. But may
not the righteousness of Christ, imputed by faith more properly be called, this
piece of armor, then our own inherent righteousness or holiness? Answ.
without all question, that is, the Root and source of all our righteousness,
Romans 8.3.4. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. That is, we are reputed in
Christ to have fulfilled the whole law, for says he, the righteousness of the
law is fulfilled in us; there were two things the law required, a just
suffering for what we were in arreare, a due expiation for sin, and a
perfect obedience, now in Christ we are reputed to have done all this, for
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes,
Romans 10.4. This was the first intention, and scope of the law videlizet, that
Christ might justify and bring men to life, by his observation and keeping of
it, and therefore the Apostle blames them verse* 3. that being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, they would establish their own righteousness, by which means
they submitted not to Gods righteousness, that is, to that way that he had set
and ordained. But secondly, having made them righteous, and acquitted by
imputation, and standing right before God; God leaves us not thus, but the love
of God producing in us, and upon us, some lovely effect, makes suitable
impressions and Charracters, to the relation we hold to him, you have the
print and Charracter of a son upon you, as well as the relation of a son,
which is nothing else but a certain image and likeness of his holiness, and
therefore if you be in Christ, you are a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. Now how
can any be a new creature, without the infusion of new qualities, new guists,
without an essential change, for it is a new creation, therefore the
scriptures describes all the parts of this infused holiness, ye were
darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. also: you have put on
the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created
him, Coll. 3.10. There is for your light, for your apprehensions, you have
another sight of things then ever you have had, other lights, other notions.
Also, you have a new heart, a new disposition of spirit, another bent and
frame, and propension, then you have had, so that of Ezekiel. 36.26. I will give
you a new heart and a new spirit, and you are to put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. Christ
therefore that does all for us does much in us, he is a head of influence, we
have him all among us, and every one has him all in their measure; and
according to those influences, and infusions, we have our denominations, so
Abell was called righteous, so Noah, Job, also Zacharij and Elizabeth, Luke
1.6. were both righteous before God, walking in all the ordinances and
commandments of the Lord blameless. In this sense a man may be called
Righteous; that is, regenerate, that is, renewed, although corruption remains,
as you call a house white as well as a Swan, though there be many spots on it,
and such a one may be said not to sin, 1 John 3.6. because he is not given up
to sin, but has his heart armed and fenced with a holy frame, and a pursuit
of righteousness. Now having thus distinguished, and explained things, this
scripture in all the parts and pieces of the armor, seems rather to speak of
the working and motion of the graces of God in us, then the imputation of
Christ's to us, which is that which indeed gives the form, enargy, and
operation to every piece; but because according to what Christ is to us, so in
a proportion, and according to our measure he is in us, by his influence, by
his infusions, therefore we are to till and improve him in us, and as the
devil could do nothing against us, but by virtue of our corruptions; so Christ
makes use of his own infusions, of his own graces, of his works in us, with
which through him, we fight against the devil, so as by the righteousness of
Jesus Christ infused into us, and derived by his spirit, our vital parts are
armed, and secure against the devil, who by unholines, and unrighteousnes
would destroy that building of Gods own rearing.

I have been some thing large in this, both in showing you what righteousness
is, as it respects God and man, and in distinguishing it from the imputed
righteousness of Christ, which is the temire we hold by, and by which we stand
accepted before God; and in showing you, how it secures you against sin, which
is the devils weapon to wound us withal; If ye ask me how you shall put it
on, in a word, be renewed in the spirit of your mind, things are maintained,
as they were gotten, be converted often, one conversion is not enough, the
work of repentance, that is, of a change of heart, is of a continual daily
use; you must be changed from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord
righteousness in you, acted, and enlarged by the spirit of God, must work out
unrighteousnes in you, acted and fomented by the devil, and you must do your
part to righteousness, as you have done to sin, and as ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity. So now yield
your members servants to righteousness and to holiness, Romans 6.19. Your
Members, that is, your whole soul, the faculties of it, the endowments of it
must be yielded in service to God, as they have been to sin and the devil,
they must be now weapons in Gods hand, under the command of his spirit, for so
says he ver. 13. neither yield your members as weapons or arms of
unrighteousnes, for so signifies the word, which we translate instruments:
Wicked men, unrighteous men furnish the devil with weapons to kill and destroy
themselves, their own weapons slayes them, the devil does but help to point
them and sharpen; but we must yield our selves to God, and our members,
weapons of righteousness to God, and by doing this, sin shall not have dominion
over you, for says he, ye are under grace, not under the law, that is, the
grace of God in Christ, and the assistance of his spirit will enable you to
overcome sin, and the devil, which the law would never have done: Nothing
hinders more then discouragement, but fear not, employ your members as weapons
for God, and you will prevail, the rigor of the law, Christ has satisfied,
and those parts which remains you, which are left for you, grace will work in
you, and by you, so as let the devil be what he will be; sin or
unrighteousness shall not have dominion over you, and consequently not the
devil, against whom ye fight, for he moves in the strength of
unrighteousness.

We are come now to the third piece of armor, which is for the feet and
legs, for the Breast Plate reached down to the knees, and this covered the
rest; by the feet are commonly denoted the affections, by which we martch or
move to good, or ill, they are the movings and outgoings of the soul, and the
feet and legs are a part, which needs as much armeing as any other thing, for in
their motion to fight, they conflict with the difficulties of the place, and in
their fightings are exposed to wounds and danger; other parts are freed from
that more, they are not so much offended with the ground on which they are, but
these are as well exposed to the difficulties of the place, as to the wounds of
the combat. The armor therefore for this part, is the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, that is, an ability and readiness with cheerfulness, to
preach and confess the Gospel.

First, that this is a great duty to confess, or manifest upon all occations,
your belief of the Gospel appears by that place, Romans 10.10. with the mouth
confession is made to salvation; that is, it is a part of the duty which you
owe to God, in order to your eternal salvation, to confess and promulge the
glorious Gospel, which in your hearts you believe, for the faith of the
Gospel should so fire your heart, with the glory of God, that the flame should
break out; On the contrary it is an absurd and foolish thing, to talk of fire
where no flame or heat appears, to speak of believing to righteousness,
where there is not at all occations, a readiness to confess with the mouth.
This being laid for a foundation, you shall see how two other places will help
to interpret this. Those shoes, the feet armor, I take to be a fitness and
readiness to preach, or declare the Gospel of peace; this semes to be
extremely parrallelled, with Romans 10.15. taken out of Isa. 52.7. How beautiful
are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, Here you have the
Gospel of peace, the same thing named in this place, and the bringing or
communicating of it expressed by feet. As here by the armor of the feet, but
if any shall say this is only applicable to Ministers, because in the
beginning of this 15. ver. it is said, How should they preach except they be
sent, that is utterly a mistake, for by sending there is not meant, the
particular and lawful call of Ministers, which the Apostle here treats not
of, but imports only, that it is a special sign of the love of God, when the
Gospel is brought any whither, for he sends it, it drops not out of the
clouds, by chance or hazard, but it comes whither God sends it, whither he
addresseth it, and therefore should be received accordingly; The other place
is, 1. Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every one of the hope
that is in you. The word ready is the same word, that is here prepared, (...),
and here (...) with a readiness, or preparation, having your feet shod with a
readiness of the Gospel of peace; that is, as here with a readiness, to
give an account of it, or preach it, or confess it, as in the former places,
as you have occation, either by offering and declaring it, or by answering and
giving account of the hope that is in you, of the Gospel the ground of that
hope, or of your actions according to that rule and word; you see how this
exposition suits with a general duty in other places commanded, and runs
parallel with the very phrases, and expressions of them, so as the exposition
falls naturally and without constraint. If you ask me now how this readiness
and preparation of preaching, and confessing the Gospel upon all occations,
arms the legs, and feet, which denotes our Martches, and Motions in this war
against the devil.

Deacon, attained a good degree, and great boldness, and as Christ says, He
that casts out devils in my name, will not lightly speak evil of me; so he
that is ready and prepared to confess and publish as he has occation, the
Gospel of God is prepared for advanceing, for martching, for goeing forward;
this therefore it implies, to wit, a boldness of mind, and a courage.



the Gospel of peace, about which, and for which you moove; this agrees
extremely well to this motion, for being to go through many uneaven ways,
and to break through the thickest ranckes of enemies; you are helped by this,
that you are at peace with God all the while, what ever enemies you meet with
in the way, so as this Gospel of peace fits you for motion, and by confessing,
and promulgeing your faith, to conflict with others. So I state this armor
which the holy spirit appropriates to the legs and feet, I alter not the words
of the Text, I show you how it fits for motion:

The help is therefore to this piece of armor, is, first to be filled with
right knowledge, how can ye believe on him of whom ye have not heard, how
can you preach him, how can you confess him, of whom ye are not well
instructed, concerning whom you are not taught; an implicit faith here to
believe as others do, as your teachers do, will not help you.

Secondly, you must be zealous, that will render you

Thirdly, you must be possessed with the peace I spoke the Gospel of peace, will
never come of from you, if your hearts be not filled with peace; this is that
Christ left his disciples to work with, and by. Peace I leave with you, my
peace, (that is, the peace of the Gospel) I give unto you, so John. 16.33.
These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the
world ye shall have tribulation, that is, you are to martch to heaven through
a troublesome world, the profession and preaching of the Gospel will cost you
much, but in Christ, and in the Gospel you shall have peace; The other is but
outward, that is the most intimate peace, a peace that passes all
understanding, a peace that will enable you to go to war, and deny your
selves of outward peace. How did this peace that made Paul and Sylas sing in
the Prison, enable them to preach Christ abroad. What bold confessions could
Stephen make in the midst of all his enemies, upon the very point of
Martyrdom, when he was at peace with God, and saw Christ the King of peace
at the right hand of God; It is not the enemy so much as the strength or
weakness to resist, and fight, that is considerable if there be more with you
then against you; It is no matter what is against you, if you have a deep and
quiet peace within, it is no matter what noyses you hear abroad. The Martirs
that were filled with that peace in their sharp warfares, could say non
patimur sed pati videmur, we rather seem to suffer, then suffer indeed; this
will make you strong in every motion toward fight, and this will aid you to
this profession, and confession of Christ, which will both assure all your own
motions, and by which as with spiritual feet, you do move mightily against
the devil.

Corrol.
For the use of this in particular, we may consider how happy our conditions
are, that we are preachers and publishers of peace, blessed are the peace
makers, and how beautiful are their feet; this we are if we be filled with
peace, a peace that passes all understanding, will pass its own bounds and
fill others also.

should be ready and prepared to communicate what ever we have of the Gospel
to others, as occation shall offer it self and draw it forth, which is both a
great motion and walk against the devil; and as it is here expressed, it arms
our feet, and secures our motion exceedingly in this war, so as we are not
subject to the shaking of objections, and disgraces which the devil would
represent to us, and cast in our way continually.

Thirdly, in this preaching and confessing the Gospel Glory to God on high, on
earth peace, good will toward men, Luke 2.14. Also fear not, for behold, I
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, ver. 10. Offer
the Gospel like the Gospel, that is, like good news, the good news of
peace, let the world know that it is brought and offered to all men, that it is
good tidings of great joy to all people: Christ is an universal good, and as
the heirs of great kingdoms, are the common possessions of all the subjects;
so the Son of the God of the whole earth, is good news to all mankind, and it
is pity but that they should know it, and that it should be offered to them,
as it might be their own fault if they intertaine it not. And as Christ said
to his disciples, when ye come into any house, say peace be to it. It is time
enough for your peace to return to you, when they refuse to receive you. This
if any thing will take with the guilty world, who from the sense of their own
ill are a thousand times apter to despair, then believe, or at least to be
hardened in a negligent desperate way: This will also make good the ends of the
Gospel, which are the glory of Christ, and the alluring, and gaining of the
elect; and a soul gained by the freest way of grace, will vent its obedience
by love, and this will put honor upon your selves, render your feet
beautiful, render you acceptable and desirable, where ever you come in the
world, when you shall be shod with the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel
of peace.

good report and ill report, when ye walk among thorns, tread upon Serpents
and Adders, and they shall not hurt you. Paul sure had his hand well armed,
when the viper dropped from it without hurting him, so it is a sign you are well
armed, when ye fear no ways into which providence shall lead you, and when
you come of without hurt, though there be pikes and stakes in the way, ye are
not pierced; this walking by example, and as occation is by voice, by
confession, or preaching, will make many followers, you will become leaders
your selves, and that will be a glorious walkeing, when ye shall not only
tread hard Paths, but lead up troops, we see even bruit beasts in motion
are put on by the voice as well as by example, or any other way: Let the world
know that war is but the Vizard, but there is peace within, underneath: Let
them know that there are sweets and roses, though they see nothing outwardly
but thorns, and Briars, your walking steddily will show that your selves are
armed, and your example and voice together, will have a great influence upon
others, to be sure a readiness and preparedness to confess the Gospel of
peace, will arm you for all the hard martches, and what ever the devil shall
object in your way.

We are come to the fourth piece of Arms, which is a Shield fitted not so
much to any one part, (as the other pieces) as to the whole, for it is
moveable, and propper to keep of at a distance, and this is faith: Now this
above all things is to be taken up, that is, Especially, this is the most
considerable piece of Armor you have; Some read it in all things, that is,
with every piece of Armor, ye must mingle faith, with Truth, with
Righteousness, with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace: or refer it to
temptations, that is, you must oppose faith to every temptation, which is true;
but I rather think it is meant here, Especially, that is, to say above all
things in a more especial manner, Take unto you the Shield of faith, like that
place Coll. 3.14. where the same word is used, And above all things but on
Charity, so as though every piece of Armor be very considerable, yet none like
the shield of faith, and he gives you the reason, because by it you shall be
able to quench the fiery darts of the Devil, who for his superabundant malice
and wickedness he calls the wicked one, that is, who with the greatest and most
intense height of wickedness pursues God and Man, but especially, good men the
Saints; And ye shall not quench, some of his darts only, but all his darts,
he has enough of them, he has of all kinds, this shield will receive them,
and repel them all; He tells you also, of what kind they are, They are fieri
darts, his Arrows are poisoned Arrows, they do not only wound as Iron and
steel does, but there is a Poison, a burning in them, of an ill quality, hard
to cure, hard to be quenched; but now the holy Ghost prescribes you a remedy,
an Arms fitted on purpose as they are darts, faith as a shield shall repel
them, as they are poisoned and fiery; faith as Water, or Balsome, or Oil,
shall Quench, by faith ye shall be enabled to Quench them: Faith properly as a
shield does not quench but repel, but faith enables you; that is, there is a
mighty power and operation in faith, doing that which nothing else can do,
that as ye have salves, properly to draw out stings, or thorns, and as ye
have Balsomes, to take out fire and poison, to quench and destroy the malignity
of a poisoned dart, so you have faith fitted and proportioned to quench the
fiery darts of the wicked, your greatest enemy, and who shoots continually, and
therefore are they called all his fiery darts; he wants not Ammunition, he
need not fear for want of Powder, he has great and cursed abilities, and a
spirit fitted to act them always; but faith can deal with him, and render all
his dartings vain, and of no effect. You see now the full meaning of these
words, and of how great a consideration faith is, to this war, so as from the
reason of the thing which the Apostle gives, it deserves an Emphesis, An above
all; that is, especially want not this, as Sallomon says of wisdom, Above
all gettings get understanding, and keep thy heart with all diligence, so
above all things take the shield of faith. Before we consider more
particularly, of this so much commended faith, we will think a little what
those fiery darts are, which are to be received, and quenched by faith; by
fiery darts here, I understand not so much temptations to all kinds of him,
though faith serves for all meets with them also, but the Breast Plate of
righteousness semes propper also for them, but some fiery envenomed impoysened
darts, to which nothing but the shield of faith can be opposed; faith will
secure you in all things as well as other pieces of armor, but especially faith
is of use here; And these darts seem to be either some burning vyolent
temptations to lusts, or after them to despair: For the first, our natures
since the first defilement by orriginall corruption, were never perfectly
cool, it is by some principle within us, that Satan works upon us, our
natures are stuble and tinder; there is a great deal of combustible matter
within us, which the wicked one knows well enough, and therefore shoots his
Grenades, his fire-workes, his fiery darts, if we were Ice and Snow, if we
were perfectly cool and cold, to lusts, the devil would not loose his pains
nor his darts, but being fiery our selves, apt to burn, he flings in fire,
fiery darts, and we are instantly and presently, in a flame, like charcoale
burnt already, or stuble prepared already for burning by the sun; so he did
to David in the case of Bathsheba, though he were a good man, took him at an
advantage, when his corruptions were most fiery, nearest burning, when
idleness, security and peace, had dried and heated him to lusts, and vanity,
then he flung in a fiery dart, and the flame was unquenchable. The like he
did with Amnon, who having received the fiery dart, was so vexed that he fell
sick for his sister Tamar, 2. Sam. 13.2. and was so destroyed with that flame,
as he never ceased till he counted folly in Israel: in ways most barbarous
and wicked, both in the prosecution of his love, and in his abusing and
rejecting of her afterward, and the one was as fiery as the other, he hated
her now more then he had loved her, ver. 15. the love was without measure, so
was the hatred; so are men stung with the fiery darts of the devil, there is
nothing but extremes, no Mediocrity, all is without measure, and then for a
little of that they call pleasure, they have a world of pain, and gall, and
bitterness; which is the other fiery darts, made way for by lusts, and that is
despair; for I should think that in this instance, the inhumanity and
barbarousnesse of Amnon afterward to his sister, came from the terror and
confusion of his conscience, what fruit had you of those things whereof you are
now ashamed, Romans 6.21. After the sin is committed, shame and horror ceazeth
presently, which hurryes the mind ordinarily as fast to despair as it did
before, to the countinent of the lust; therefore lusts should be looked upon, as
they are goeing not as they are comeing, or as they are promising, peracto
scelere magnitudo ejus conspicitur, as Tacitus inferres of Nero, after he had
killed his Mother, therefore we should look on sin with that eye, which
within a few hours we shall see them; and this is the second head of the
fiery darts I told you of, namely inections to despair, how many after the
commissions of Murders, Adulteryes, Treatheryes, have been consumed and likt
up, by these fiery darts, and brought to miserable ends, under the notion of
despair: What think you of Spira, who for a little shrincking and retracting
his confession, the profession of the Gospel I told you of, esteemed the
flames of hell less then those he felt, and wished himself often there that
he might know the difference; What think you before him of Judas, who found
no rest, no quiet of spirit, but in the Gallows, he was utterly druncke up by
despair, and went down quick to his own place. But the saints feel these
fiery darts, as David did for lusting, so himself also and diverse others for
dispairing, therefore he says, He roared all the day, and his soul, and his
bones were sore vexed, and his eye, his soul and his Belly were consumed, and
the devil herein takes the advantage of some outward lowenesse and depression
of condition, either in body, or estate, or reputation, or some melancholy of
body, or constitution, which is a temper easily fired to extremities; and that
the Saints have their fyering to lustings, or despair as well as others,
whether they be of things bulky in themselves or little.

But, Object.
what kind of faith is it that you must oppose to these burnings, to these
fiery darts, and how does faith relieve you?

Certainly it is no other then that by which you believe God, Ans.
to be yours in Christ.

The Shield here spoken of is taken from the similitude of a Door, such as
were the largest shields, it must be large enough to shield the whole body:

And secondly, as a shield it must receive the darts and repel them, and
quench the fire before it reach the body, before it incorporate it self with
the mind, and enter as it were into the substance of the spirit, for then
there will be more tearing and difficulty to get it out.

But how does faith do this?

First and especially as it calls God, God in Christ to our aid. When the
Devil shoots his fiery Darts, either for lusting, or dispairing, it is not for
flesh and blood to oppose it self, your mortalities, your resolutions, your
reasonings will prove combistible matter, and be burnt up, be burnt away, and
your spirit will be left fiered, and empoysoned by those Darts. The Dart will
stick, and it will be work to get it out; Now in this case faith leads you
directly to God, and sets God against the Devil, so as the combat by the
wisdom of faith, is changed, and made now rather between God and the Devil,
then between you and the Devil, and the Devil which could have subdued you
easily, falls under God presently, This is that stronger then he that binds
the strong man and casts him out. This was David's way, From the ends of the
earth will I cry to thee, when my heart is overwhelmed, Lead me to the Rock
that is higher then I, Psalm. 61.2. that is where ever I am, or where ever thou
art, as thy spirit can find me out, so I will find thee out, When I am
overwhelmed, when I am greatly in distress, I will cry to thee, as a child
does to his father, that is set upon by one stronger then himself, cries out
to his father and trusts to his strength; Set me upon a Rock, or thou will
set me upon a Rock, that is, it is so high, as I cannot reach it without thou
set me upon it, or higher then I, that is, above my own strength, or my own
abilities, even upon thy self and thy son, where I may be safe, for in case
of overwhelmings, in case of fiery Darts; there is no other way but to set God,
as yours, as one in covenant with you, your all, and friends against the
Devil, to stand still and see the salvation of God, when the red sea was
before, and the Egyptians behind, what could the Israelites do, (in that case
there was no way for wisdom or strength to make through). But stand still and
see the salvation of God, casting all upon God, and disparing in themselves
altogether.

the Son of Pharoahs Daughter, but the eye which he had, to the recompense of
reward, outbids them infinitely, and therefore he chose rather afflictions
which no man would simply choose: So Christ for the glory set before him,
endured and suffered any thing, a lively faith realizeth things, and makes them
present; faith will tell you presently when a fiery lust assaults you, yield
not, and in stead of pleasing your flesh, or your humor, which is passing, you
will please Christ, you will please your conscience, and that pleasure is sweet
indeed, that remains; nay you shall hear of this again, this fighting, this
quenching, shall come into your reward, in such times and in such things,
wherein you would be most of all considered. And against the burnings of
despair as in a second way, also faith will show the riches of mercy, the
merrits of the blood of Christ, and will tell you that it is dishonorable to
God to judge his goodness, less then your wickedness, or that the merrits of
Christ cannot hold balance with your sinning, will show you as great
disproportion between grace and sin, as between God and you, will make (in a
word) despair wicked in nothing as in the unreasonablenesse of it.

But then thirdly, as an effect of both these, faith Fiery darts will do no
hurt, as a Grannado that falls into a Pit of water, there is fire in it, but
before the blow gives it is quenched: O those sweet and cooling influences of
the spirit, how refreshing are they, as dew to thirsty grounds; when Dives
burned, what would he have given for some water, to cool his tongue. When
wicked men are fiered by the devils darts, to despair or lust, or
persecution, their own spirits are inflamed, burnt up, and they burn what
ever they come near, and so they must till they be utterly consumed, for there
is no heavenly dew, no water, no rain, no balsome, no droppings of the
spirit: But to us there is a River, the streams whereof shall make glad the
City of God, Psalm. 46.4. Shall refresh us, shall keep us from burning, and
fyering, and chapping, and he gives an account of it, ver. 5. God is in the
midst of her, she shall not be greatly moved; there is the head of that
fountain, he will not suffer the devil to gain upon you, to waste you, to
drink you up, very much to fire you, but the streams shall continually
refresh you, and make you glad, when others shall be like the parched heath in
the wilderness easily inflamed, a curse to themselves and others.

Coroll.
Therefore with all gettings get faith, above all take the shield of faith, and
take it as I have told you, take it on like a large shield, that it may be fit
to cover you, believe not scantily, believe not a little, have not your faith
to fetch, and prove, and spell, when the fiery Darts are shooteing, how will
you make this use of it else, that I have told you; is there any thing the
devil would rob you of so much as lively faith, effectual faith, bold and
hardy faith, he knows why well enough, it will repel his fiery darts, it
will quench them, yield him not that piece of armor in any proportion, that is
so dammageable to him, and so necessary for you; faith is useful in every
thing, but in these cases, faith does not all (as I have told you) and while
you are doing this, the obedience of faith, the use of faith is as pleasing to
God, as resisting the fiery dart is necessary for you; as therefore ye would be
relieved when you most need it, when your souls are fyered with lust or
despair, when those flames drink up your spirits, and undo you, believe
boldly, believe strongly, without if's and and's, have God tied and made one
with you, by faith according to the right notion of it, and then dread nothing,
here is good news for you, you will be able to quench all the fiery Darts of
the wicked; There now remains nothing but some helps to take this shield of
faith.

First, consider it under the notion of obedience in it,

Secondly, consider what obstructs faith, if negligence, this, that without
this you will be condemned for ever, God may seem to put it to your choice,
whether you will believe or no; but he does by no means put it to your
choice, whether you will go to hell or no, if you believe not, for that is
determined with him, that the fearful and unbeleevers shall be cast into hell,
and indeed thither are all men goeing a pace, only belief turns the motion,
and makes the earth assend upwards.

But if you say you see, you see your misery enough in unbelief, but ye want
boldness to believe, that you think that there is no proportion between sin
and such a nothing as faith is, there is a proportion between sin and
damnation, but not between sin and faith: right now I have you where I would,
but then consider that the things wherein God uses man in the way to salvation,
are indeed nothing, or as nothing, by the foolishness, that is, by the
Nothingnesse of Preaching he saves them that believe; The Vessels in which
his word comes, are earthen, as good as nothing, our righteousness reaches not
to him, and though our reward be heaven, yet our merit is nothing, just
nothing: And therefore if faith in respect of its own internal vallew, or as
a grace in this case, were any thing, we should never be saved by it, but now
our comfort and assurance is that it is nothing. But on the contrary, though
there be no proportion between sin and faith, yet there is a proportion
between sin and Christ, or if you will have me speak the truth, there is no
proportion in this regard; Christ's dyeing, Christ's suffering, makes sin
nothing, so that that which held the greatest proportion, before God, before,
and was heavyer then the sand of the sea, deeper then hell, is now nothing:
what will you think your debts greater then God can pay, will you balance
your wickedness and his love, your unkindnes may be aggranated, and made greater
by his love, but it cannot be made even with his love, for he is God; In a
word, we cannot out-sin his pardon, or grace, by any thing but unbelief, so
as this littleness, this nothingnes of faith, is your advantage, because in
this great business of our salvation God will be all in all, and you shall
thank your selves for nothing: Did it hinder Naaman the Assirian, that to wash
in Jordan was nothing, or did it relieve Jericho, that the bloweing of
Rams-hornes was nothing, if it had been any thing, it had not done it, for God
is resolved to destroy Jericho by nothing, that is, by himself alone; and
therefore he will have you by nothing, or by that which is as good as nothing,
in respect of what you do: But on the other side, he finds enough in the
balance, to make your sins nothing, even his own eternal love, and the
suffering and merrits of his own son.

Thirdly, Gods heart is in this matter of faith, never But without faith, its
impossible to please God, without faith we are Strangers and a far of. Now
that which is so near Gods heart, and so advantageous to our selves, we
should do, we should be much in what ever the devil say, to the contrary,
God neverhedged any thing about like this, never any thing came so freely off,
the making of this cost him his Ministers ordinances and seals, and without it
all is nothing.

He shall see of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied, Isa. 53.11. That
is, he has been at a great deal of pains and cost; now what are his
in-comes, what will make up this poor people for whom he did, and suffered,
all this will trust him and believe in him, for so it follows, by his
knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify many, that is, by the knowledge
and belief of him, they shall be justified, this satisfies him, this pays him,
this is the only way you have to make him amends; Now his stripes has healed
you, heal him by your faith, do a little nobly, and freely for him, that has
done so much for you, stick not with him to believe him, that stuck not to dye
for you.

shield; this of faith in God through Christ, as yours, and then when he
comes, what have you to do, ye can turn God loose to him, ye can fetch down
liquor and virtue of that temper and coolness, as shall dead and quench and
extinguish his darts, and in the thing wherein he is proud and mighty, you
will be above him, and to hard for him.

We are come in the fifth place to another piece of the great and sure armor,
with which the spirit of God arms us against the devil, a piece for our head,
the Helmet of salvation, as that before was more general applicable to the
whole Body.

That by this Helmet is meant hope, the Apostle who is his own best
interpreter tells you 1. Thessa. 5.8. And for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation:
This piece of armor is of excellent use, and proper to that part it defends;
The worth of it appears as by many things: So by the deplorable condition of
those that want it, they have no hope (says he) and they are without God in
the world, Ephesians. 2.12. they wanted that ligament, that tie to fasten them to
God, and so were left most miserable.

We must consider a little, what hope is, and then, why it is called of
salvation, and then how it fits that part, to which it is destined, and does
the work of an Helmet.

It is a received maxim, that all affections are rooted in love, and as they
are rooted in love, so they are acted by love, even hatred and malice it self,
has its rise in some thing loved, for therefore I hate such a thing, because I
love the contrary: Again as affections are rooted in love, and acted by love,
so love is felt, and appears according to the affection it acts by, and is
seen through that, as the sun which is always the same in it self, yet
works upon us according to the constellations it possesses, and the light
colors it self, according to the body through which it shines, so loves
works and appears much according to the affection it possesses, and through
which it renders it self visible, for example:

Love appears very dark in sorrow, violent in choler, tranquil and
peaceable in joy, dejected in despair, but in hope love is in its Throne,
there it appears in most pomp, there it works with most efficacy, and is
altogether lovely.

This affection of all others semes to be destined to great affairs, and has
a mighty influence either upon our doing, or suffering.

It was all that Alexander had to enable him to the conquest of the world,
distributing all his other goods that he had received from his father; Again
what is it but this that makes men every day cross the seas, labor the
ground, seek after Mines in the bowels of the earth, fight, and pursue
victories, nay it is that which accompanyes men to the scaffold, and to their
death bedds.

But to follow our methods, we consider not hope here, in that loose sense,
in which it is commonly taken, namely for a certain fault, and low
attendancy, or lookeing after some good thing desired, and so to be before
faith, and without it, as when we are apt to say, I cannot believe such a
thing, but I hope it well; but on the contrary we take it for a firm
expectation of some future good, which we do already believe, and are assured
of, so faith the scripture Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped
for. Gal. 5.5. We wait for the hope of righteousness by faith, that is,
faith gives you the ground of waiteing, which is by hope, so if we hope we
wait, Romans 8.25. so as this hope which must be our Helmet is a superadded
grace to faith, a birth and effect of it.

It is called, the Helmet of Salvation, for salvation is the great thing about
which faith and hope is conversant, so says Paul, receiving the end of your
faith, the salvation of your souls, so the hope of salvation, because, that,
as the greatest, conteynes all other inferior goods, and in the eyeing and
prosecution of which by faith and hope we secure our selves the most
abundantly.

But how does this Armor fit the part, it is destined for, and do the work
of an Helmet.

The head is as it were the principle of action, and of our intentions, as the
head governes and directs the members, so our end and intention, which is our
Simbolicall head, being the principal and rise of all our actions, that which
gives vigor and activity to them, had need of some piece of armor for its
defense, which the Apostle here makes to be the hope of Salvation.

Now this Helmet does its work thus, the world and Satan that they might
poison the fountain, corrupt our ends, and our intentions, would bribe us with
something outward, and sensual, and therefore holds over our heads many things
to tempt and allure us, suitable to our senses, and corrupted nature, offers us
crowns of applause, allures us with pates of pleasure (falsely so called) and
to makes these relish, to take the better, terrifies us with thorny paths, and
ill conditions, in holy ways, with persecutions, and scorns, gives you the
choice of crowns of thorns, and gold, but both fleshly and carnal; the Holy
Ghost now gives you for an Helmet the hope of Salvation, holds that over your
head toward of these blows, and those assaults, and what is that? The assured
expectation and waiting for of eternal glory, for so it is called in other
places, The hope of eternal life, the hope of glory, Romans 5.2* and Tit. 3.7.
First, hope in its nature and definition is the waiting for, and expectation of
a good thing, which makes it a pleasant, and releeving affection, because the
object of it is good, not as grief, nor as fear, which has for its object an
ill thing; But our hope which is our Helmet, wards and guards our head, it is
made up of the best and most suitable good, it is a good comprehending all other
goods, and therefore called salvation in the abstract, it is a glorious good,
for it is the hope of glory, and for duration it is not earthly, sensual, and
passing, but it is eternal life an eternal weight of glory.

hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man sees, why does he yet hope
for? Romans 8.24. So as it is a pleasant passing your time, in the expectation of
a desired good; But now the difference will lie not only in the degree of
good, for ours is of things eternal, but in the degree of expectation, wordly
hopes are founded upon such slight bottomes, as they contribute not much to
comfort, in regard of which some have called hope a dream, which presents it
self to wakeing men, and from thence it is said, that the Hipocrites hope
perishes; but our hope is of another constitution, for it is grafted upon
faith which gives a certainty, and reality to the thing, so as no fear of
faileing shall weaken or impair your hope, but hope shall stand upon a sure
bottom, and pleasantly, and joyfully expect what already by faith is made most
sure to us.

To speak a little more, a little more particularly of this affection, it is
of a good thing, absent, difficult and possible, I have showed you how our hope
is conversant about the best and highest good, the abuse of this affection (for
that will help to show the use of it) lies in pitching it upon things that are
not good; In truth all other things, but spiritual, God, heaven, and eternity,
have no other vallue, but what ignorance and a lie puts upon them, opinion
indeed gives them a name, honors them with a title which they deserve not, and
yet how much do outward things engage this affection: Honor which depends
upon the opinion of others, which is extremely passing, and perishing, which
is the reward oftentimes of crimes, which are succesfull, and glitter, and
pleasures which are accompanied with regret, and shame, and followed with
grief; And riches ordinarily, the object of the basest minds, and men; All
these things, and what ever more is outward, are but the shadows and pictures
of good; As in a picture you think you see the birds fly, men standing of
from the cloth, but when you come near it, there is nothing but the lines of
a pensil, nothing but marks upon a cloth or table, and so are these things,
nothing but shadows, pictures, dreams, they must have a light proper to show
them by, false lights, yet these are the objects of the hopes of the greatest
part of men.

Again, these things as they are not good enough, so they are not absent
enough for hope, for though things of sense are not ever in the possession of
them which most make after them, yet they are amongst us, they are in the
world, but this hope carries us properly beyond every thing. The eye sees, and
the ear hears, and what enters into the heart of man.

Again, things that are the object of hope are difficult, but difficult and
worthy, or great in a right sense, are of an equal extent, to labor in the
smoke and mudd, for smoke and mudd it may be difficult, but it is a
difficulty without worth, it is base and mean, and so has nothing in it of
great, or worthy, in which respect only difficult things should be undertaken.

Then, how often does hope mis-applyed engage in impossibilities, and so
becomes a mere imposture to us. How often are men befooled here, and in their
desires, and hopes (which actuate those desires) pursue impossible things. Men
foolishly think that miracles should be wrought in their favor, and the whole
order of the universe changed for their sakes, men that merit the gallows hope
for a pardon, not because they have any assurance of the judges favor, or
because their faults are pardonable, but because they would live: and which is
ridiculous, old men that are so in extremity, hope for an old age yet to come.

I have showed you already that our hope which is our Helmet, is of good
things, a good that wants a name, good enough to express it, and therefore is
called salvation, a name abstract, and comprehensive to the ut most.

Again, I have showed, that it is of good things to come, and herein it
differs from faith, for faith sees them as it were present, and therefore it is
the substance of things hoped for, but hope looks upon them, (as indeed they
are) at a distance; In a word, faith gives you the assurance, Hope the
expectation.

Again difficult they are, and great and difficult, worthy and difficult,
accordingly, they cost Christ much, and they cost us much, so difficult, as for
the attaining of them, God must come out of heaven, Christ must die and suffer:
God must set all his wisdom on work, that we may have a ground to pitch our
hopes upon, and for our part, hope is managed and conversant about difficult
things, as ye shall hear.

But then last of all, our hope is wise, the things are possible about which it
is conversant, so possible, as they are assured, and therefore its called the
full assurance of Hope, Heb. 6.11.

Let us know then where we are, Coroll.
and what use we have of this affection; The truth is Christian Religion, is
altogether founded upon hope, the things of this life are not our portion, we
breath after what is to come, let us therefore live as men, untyed from this
world, and fasten to another by hope, let the pleasures and honors, and
profits of this world be dead things to us, because we have no hope to animate
them; Hope acts and animates above any thing, but we want this engine, because
we have not that object. For instance, to appear something, to be great, wise,
and honorable, is the great contention, and pursuit of this world: When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear, etc. Heavenly
hope puts you off thither, and disputes not the thing, but the time, ye shall
have enough of appearing, but it shall be in a peculiar and advantageous time,
when Christ shall appear to fill up his triumph, to adorn that pomp, respite
your desire of appearing till then; God does but time it for us, so for
pleasures to enjoy your selves, to be satisfied, to be at ease, to gratify and
content every part of you, these are men's hopes, one time or other you shall
get it; There is a place of pleasures, the presence of God, and there is a
fulness and compleatnesse of pleasure, but it is in that place and in other,
and there are plasures for evermore, pleasures that are as long as they are
great, but it is at the right hand of God; The pleasures Satan would give you
are of a base alloey, their durance is but of that minute in which they are
enjoyed; Their fulness is worse then their emptiness, for they are not only
vain, falling short of that good they promised, but vexing also, and
deceiving, the truth is, this is not a life for pleasures, but for pains,
especially to Christians, and so says the Apostle, If in this life only we
have hope, we are of all men most miserable. If our hopes (as other men's) were
here, we were in a worse condition then they, that cannot eat their meats,
and enjoy their comforts, taste of their daintyes, partly, because there is a
greater disproportion between us and them, then between they and them, and
partly, because our light and our conscience is to much raised, and of too
great a tenderness to digest their morsells; what then have we nothing to
balance their contentments? not to speak of other things, what ever returns
faith and hope can make we have, They are without hope, wish them joy of what
they have, but hope they have none; and this let me tell you, improve this
well, and it shall pay all the charges of their gains, you have the hope of
eternal life, the hope of glory, of what ever your hearts can wish and desire:
Faith gives things a footing and a subsistence, and hope is grafted upon it,
and is ready by the expectation of better things, to outbidd the world, and by
virtue of a pleasure taken in things to come, to carry you above the false
pretensions of pleasure which the world makes ofter, therefore content your
selves with your portion, and use your Helmet to ward of the assaults of
semeing goods or ills, as Satan shall present them.

But more particularly, use hope for joy, for patience for workeing, live in
the joy of hope, let one spiritual affection in prove and provoke another,
that there is a joy of hope, appears in this, which we usually say of worldly
hopes, that things are usually better in the hopes, then in the enjoyment, and
we see men will sell any thing rather then their hopes: Now those hopes in
comparison with ours, have two or three notable defects.

First they are built upon uncertainties and contingenties,

Secondly, there is a vanity of rejoicing in boastings, as for all such
rejoicing is evil: The mixture of fear is a troublesome, but it is a
rational thing in their hopes, the foundation of which is but contingency, but
a further evil, and more sinful, and irrational, is, that they rejoice in
their boastings, they think by the determination of their wills to do that
which godly men do by faith, and when their hopes have once concluded a thing,
they think it should be established, and thereupon run away without
reckoning with their host, as we use to say, whereas the scripture says, ye
ought to say, if I live, and if the Lord will; Now for their foolish conceits
to fix that which only God can render certain, is a folly and a sin, and
the hope that rises from it, is an irrational presumptuous hope, for that
they ought to say, if we live, and if the Lord will, things that are wholly out
of their power. Now our hopes and the joy of it, is not a rejoicing in
boasting, but it is a boasting in truth, we have already the Lords will, his
will declared, his will commanded that we should have the joy of hope, and
should rejoice in hope, Romans 12.12. And that we should have the rejoicing of
the hope firm unto the end, Heb. 3.6. So as here is no rejoicing in boastings,
here is no vain fancies of our own, no castles in the air.

But then as their is a vanity in the uncertaintie of their hopes, which mixeth
them with fears, and a further and fuller vanity, in fixeing and assureing
their hopes, by their own boastings and presumptions, incerta, certa redendo.
So

our joy arising from them, are of things so great and real, as the little,
but yet the true taste we have of them, makes us desire more; It is our
knowledge that makes us vallewe our hopes, and joy in them, and it is our
ignorance that causes us to hope no more, nor rejoice in the good things,
which are the objects of them; And therefore we see faith which gives a real
evidence and sight of things, intends above any other thing our hopes, and want
of faith, and weakness of faith lessens our hopes, and the joy of them.

The object of our hopes are things great, thing heavenly, things eternal, and
these are the matter, if any other thing be, of joy; Opposite to which are the
dead, beggarly, and sensible things of this world, which are mistaken always
in hope, and usually despised in possession, so that not only simply, but in
comparison with other things, we have all reason for the joy of hope: The
warrant of this joy we have given you already, when we showed the reason of
our joy in opposition to wicked men's boastings, but the end is not only for it
self (though that be much, that we may live comfortably, that we be in as
good a condition as this state is capable of) but joy as a result and
concomitant of hope, is mighty for Battle; ye are now in the lists, and ye
put on armor, the joy of Hope, which is the joy of the Lord, is our strength:
He that rejoices not in the hope of things to come, will rejoice in vain
hopes, or in sensual enjoyments: He that cannot take in the pleasures of
salvation by hope, will assuredly joy the joys of wicked men, for he wants
this armor against pleasures and sensual joys, which is a weapon Satan
weilds to our dis-advantage, as much as any, and therefore, know how to arm
your head by hope, and against the pleasures and joys of this world, by the
pleasure and joy of hope, unless you would be exposed as a prey to things of
sense, and things of this life, against which this hope of salvation is your
armor.

Object.
But now to answer shortly an objection, if hope brings in so great and steady
a return of joy, what place will you allot for sorrow for sin, for we are
sinners, and a sinful condition, and that affection suites us very well. Answ.
Answ.
Certainly we should not sorrow as those without hope, but as those which are
full of hope, yet on the other side, as there is occasion, by renewed acts of
sins, our hope and our joy should intend our sorrow, and rectify it, God
would not have an uncomfortable, or a dispairing thought, in all sorrow, it is
the sorrow of the world that works death, that destroys, and hurts, some
inordinacie, some excess, but sorrow intended, and relieved also by hope, and
the joy of it, as it is often necessary, so it will never hurt you.

The blewnes of a wound cleanses away evil, so do stripes the inward parts
of the belly, this is applied to correction and cleansing, afflictions work
the wound to such a disposition, as is cleasing and healeing.

loves us, and pardons us, therefore should we grieve. Besides, while he
loves us, he grieves, and he grieves the more, because he loves us, and so
should we, if he did not love us, he would not grieve, and if we love him,
we cannot but grieve when we offend him, Jer. 31.19. Surely after I was
turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I
was ashamed, etc. Ephraim mournes and grieves, which he did not till God had
mercy on him, then he smote on his thigh.

If you ask how we should grieve? Never without the relief of hope, and joy,
let them act and intend your sorrow, but for the degree why should we not in
humbling our selves for sin work our selves, and our sorrow, as low as
afflictions would lay us, if chastisements should take hold on us, or sickness
to death, or any other hand of God chastising for sin, this will be no
interruption in your hope, no prejudice to the joy of it.

Thus your hope arms you against pleasures by joy, the joy of hope; but we
have pains also to conflict withal, all the evils and calamities, that
dishonor, want, and poverty, or bodily evils can inflict, patiency also in
attendancy and expectation, ye have need of patience, that after ye have done
the will of God, ye may receive the promise. We would feign have our rewards
in hand, we are loath to stay, we would have the reality of the reward, not
the vision of faith only, Heb. 10.36. Now this is needful, for the Saints
through faith and patience inherited the promises, Heb. 6.12. If you ask who
infests the Saints, who puts them to their patience? The world and wicked men,
but especially the Devil, that he might discourage us, and devour us, might
break and interrupt our course, might make us for want of continuance, do and
suffer so many things in vain, and therefore arms all his instruments, evil
men and our own corruptions against us, to make us weary of that way, which is
so sowed with thorns, which costs us so much pains and trouble; God also puts
us to our patience, by suffering manifold evils, outward and inward, to infest
us, that he might purge present evil, and prevent further evil, and that he
might try us, and use what he has laid into us, that he might say of us
another day as he did of Job, ye have heard of the patience of Job, Jam.
5.11. and might boast of us as of those enduring Saints, Here is the patience
of the Saints, behold it, Reu. 13.10. In all these respects ye have need of
patience, yea, and that patience should have its perfect work, as James says
Jam. 1.4. That it should possess our souls, that it should be fitted for
every condition, and hold out to the utmost, to the extremity, as you see
those, who are betrusted with forts, and strengths they had need of patience:
And yet must hold out to the utmost extremity, by the law of war, now then
you see the need we have of patience, but it must be the patience of hope, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. The Apostle gives there the effects and their causes, the work of
faith, said he, the labor of love, and the patience of hope, the effect or
great product of hope is patience, patience is a grace which has no shine or
glitter with it, it is sweet but dark, and obscure, and has nothing in it of
violence, and having mighty enemies, it defends it self in suffering, we gain
the victory often in loosing our lives, it scarce complains of what it
indures, so as it passes often amongst ignorant men for stupidity, and
dullness. Now this sweet and low grace (in respect of its condition, and the
manner of its operation) would be oppressed a thousand times under the victory of
its enemies, if it were not animated by the liveliness and activity of hope,
if the hope of salvation, the hope of glory, (for so it is called,) did not
continually set before its eyes, the greatness of the reward; ye can never
have a better instance, then of our Master Christ himself while he was in the
conflict of patience, (and that was his life) he was ever in the lists of
sufferings, conflicting with sorrows, and woes, for the joy that was set
before him, which was made sure to him by faith, and received and enjoyed by
hope, (for he came by his comforts even as we) this made him to endure the
cross and despise the shame, and we are commanded to run with patience the
race, that is set before us, looking to him, Heb. 12.2, 3. That is, use our
patience as he did, and relieve our patience as he did, by the joyful sights
of hope, patience without hope is the deadest thing in the world; for why do I
deprive my self of good? why do I suffer so many things in vain, if they be
in vain, and therefore the Apostle takes it for granted, that the patient
continuance in well doing, has some thing to relieve it, namely, a lookeing
after glory, and honor and immortality, etc. Romans 2.7. without which
animation, and enlivening of hope, patience were dead, and deadly, more fit to
be the property of a stone, or a block, then the grace of a Saint; thus ye
see your selves armed by hope, against the great enemies of God and man,
against the great troublers of Israel, pleasures, and pains, by having your
joys, and your patience, acted by hope, which is your Helmet.

But hope thirdly is proper for doing, as well as (the shoes of the preparation
of the Gospel of peace) inables us for acting, and the truth is, while we do
nothing good, we are not secure against doing ill; But if hope serve to any
thing, it serves to encourage to labor, and work, we use to say in a
proverb, take away hope, and take away endeavor, no work is done or can be
done without hope, he that ploweth should plow in hope, and that he that
thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hopes, 1. Cor. 9.10. A man would
be loath to plow the ground, or thresh the corn without hope, you will not do
actions of the lowest form without it: Again as you can do nothing without
hope, so ye attempt the greatest things by hope, the hopes of victory, the hope
of success, the hope of gain, whither does it not engage men, our strength
depends upon our hope, and therefore Jeremy complains, my strength and my hope
is perished, Lam. 3.18. No more hope, no more strength, they stand and fall
together, they are alike in their birth and death: On the other side, when Paul
was to give an account to Agrippa of his actions, Acts 26.6, 7. I am judged
(says he) for the hope of the promise made unto our fathers, unto which
promise our twelve tribes instantly serving God day and night hope to come. Do
you wonder why they served God, with that instance, and intensenesse, day and
night, why they do that which none of the world do besides, they hope to
attain the promise of God, that is, the thing promised, that ingageth them to
a continual and a most intense labor; so the Apostle when he gives in a very
few words all that is to be forborne and done for God, and our good, makes hope
to be the rise of all his courage and activity, Tit. 2.13. lookeing for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our savior Jesus
Christ, compared with the former verses 11. and 12. For the grace of God that
brings salvation, has appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and Godly
in this present world. And Christ when he bidds us do any thing hoping for
nothing again, Luke 6.35. Lend hoping for nothing again; he does not mean
we should have nothing, or be without hope, but tells us immediately, that our
reward shall be great in heaven, and we shall be the children of the Highest,
and presently suggests matter of hope, which he affixeth to the lending of a
penny, or the giving a cup of cold water, ye shall not loose your reward.

But to what works does hope animate us? to all for the least shall be
considered, shall not loose its reward, and the greatest shall be considered
proportionably, He that overcomes, and he that follows me here, shall sit
upon twelve Thrones. There is nothing so great, that hope cannot expect, for it
is the hope of salvation; And therefore there is no work so great, that hope
cannot put you upon, for it works from hope to salvation. Captains when they
harrang their Soldiers, tell them of the butin of the prey, tell them of
honors, and advancements; and Christ when he incourageth his, speaks Crowns
as freely as any, but spiritual crowns assured by faith; and enjoyed for the
present by hope; it is a shame that our hopes should not carry us toward
working, as far as ever any worldly has done, in all the particulars of
work. I will insist only upon one, which the scripture particularly annexeth
to hope, and is proper for us all; He that has this hope, (that is, of seeing
God, of salvation) he purifyeth himself even as he is pure, 1. Joh. 3.3. The
reason of the action about which our hope is conversant, and the proportion
lies thus, We hope, says he, ver. 2. when he shall appear to be like him,
for we shall see him as he is, says he there will be the same reason of
your being like to him, here and hereafter, and therefore if you will be like
him in heaven, you must be like him here, and your hope for the one, must
help you to the other: now as in heaven he is glorious, so here he was
pure, ye are in all estates and conditions to follow and imitate your savior,
for that is your hope to that you were predestined; Now he was holy,
harmless, undefiled, therefore ye must be like in this state also.

There shall no unclean thing enter into the kingdom of heaven, and therefore
you must purge and cleanse your selves by the way, and your hope must do it.

This purification respcteth both the body, and the mind, and is opposed to
all bodily lusts, which lies in the senses, fancy, or sensible things, and to
all spiritual lusts, which lie in the understanding, which lusts against
spiritual truths, and the ways of God, says he, this hope must purify you
from all this.

But how high? how far must this hope act you, to what degrees? Even as he
is pure, there is your pattern, there is your examplar, study what Christ was,
and be ye likewise, study what Christ did, or would do, and do the same; for
instance, we are apt to be proud and vain to be supercilious, to overlooke
men, and little things, to be every one for himself, gripeing and graspeing.
Purify your selves in this, even as he is pure, let the same mind be in you
that was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. who though he were in the form of God,
debased himself, in a word consider the disposition of Christ, and consider the
purity of Christ, and make that your copy, and as you would set no bounds to
glory, you would see him as he is, and be like him, so set no bounds to purity,
purify your selves after that pattern, even as he is pure, and let hope and
the reason of hope do it, because you have no greater pretensions to glory,
then you have to purity, namely to be like Christ your head, to whom by faith,
and hope you are conformed. Thus ye see your Helmet, in its glory, securing
you from all the evil of all the goods of the world, and securing from all the
evil of all the evil of the world, and enabling and inspiring you to work,
and service even to all, That you might be perfect and thoroughly furnished to
every good work; improove therefore this blessed piece, this hope, and get it
more abundantly.

You see it is a great matter how we settle our hopes, Coroll.
because in it lies the strength of our endeavors, we anchor in things by
hope, and fix in them, and being settled upon an immovable thing, we can moove
steddily and strongly. Archimedes could moove the world, if he could fasten
his engine, now we cast anchor in heaven, and heavenly things in salvation,
for so says the Apostle, We have an anchor of the soul both sure and
steadfast, and which enters in to that which is within the veil, Heb. 6.19.
Our anchor casts deep in heaven, where there is good earthing, whence it will
be impossible to be remooved by any storms or winds: But this we must know,
that if you would make use of this or any armor which is spiritual, it must
be first raised to a pitch, the arms must be fashioned, and formed, and then
must be kept bright, and in posture, for service, it must be weilded by a
spiritual hand.

Now to raise this grace, you must improove and raise your faith, for as in all
compositions, you have something that gives the body of it, so faith gives the
body, and substance to hope, therefore faith is called the substance of things
hoped for, and therefore of all other things your hope will never outbid or go
beyond your faith, keep therefore that full and high.

Yet Hope is a further grace and armor, faith gives you things in their
colors with your interests in them, it shows you that they are, and that
they are yours, but however faith gives them a kind of presence by believing,
yet they are in themselves future, as to us, hope therefore takes in the
pleasure of them beforehand, lives in the joyful expectation of them, and so
abridges the time, which else would be tedious, fancies to it self (as I may so
say) the pleasures and joys of eternal life, and lives in a sweet
anticipation of what it possesses but by faith, which as it is most pleasant
in it self, so it produces mighty effects, for joy, for patience, for working,
so as our life is comfortably entertained by it in joy, and pleasure, evils
and calamities are mastered, and subdued by it, even the greatest, and action
and work, the end of living is promoted.

Therefore look upon this piece, which has influence into so great effects,
as a real, not as a notionall thing, as a thing that many want in the use and
exercise of it, but they cannot live without it, they cannot live a vital life
animated with joy, armed with patience and acted, to work and service.

Therefore let not so great an engine of the Holy Ghost, so great and good an
armor lie dead by us, but rather let us improove it, and use it, try always
of raising it, for it is raised and improoved grace that works great and
considerable effects.

-- And the sword of the spirit which is the word of God. This is the last
piece of arms, and is fitted both for offense, and defense, it is an arms
that is great alone, and therefore men arm themselves with this, which use no
other, and it is also an appendix to all arms, for no man is armed at all
points, like a soldier, which has not a sword, this is a piece of a very
expedite, and continual use.

You need not go far to know what this sword is, the Apostle describes it
first by being the sword of the spirit, that is, a spiritual sword, The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, 2. Cor. 10.4.
The Devil will not give way or yield to a sword made of any other metal,
therefore it is mighty through God: The Egyptians are flesh, and not spirit,
therefore they are weak. One Devil is able to deal with all the fleshly and
carnal weapons in the world, it is not charms, and holy water, nor
resolutions, and purposes, and reasonings alone, that are weapons fit for this
combat, they must be things truly spiritual.

But then secondly, it is that sword, which the spirit uses in us, and by us,
the spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, so as there is a mighty arm, to a mighty
weapon, For we know not how to pray as we ought, how to do any thing, but
the spirit makes intercession in us, and it is the spirit that leads us into
all truth, and teaches us how to use, and improove truth, without the spirit
of God, the word of God would do us no good; The weapon would be too heavy, to
unweildy for us to use, therefore says the Apostle, The weapons of our warfare
are mighty through God, 2. Cor. 10.4. God must use, and guide the hand, as well
as give the sword, it will be else like the weapons of a mighty man in the hand
of a child, if he take it up, it will be but to let it fall.

But then thirdly, it is the sword of the spirit, the spirit he must be able
to use it well, that made it, for he made it for use, and there is no
ingredient in it, which has not an influence into the end of it, which is the
use of it. Now that he formed, it appears 2. Pet. 1.20, 21. Prophecy came not
in old time (or at any time) by the will of man, that is, by the presumptuous
will of bold men, proudly, and arrogantly goeing about to determine, that by
their will, which by their reasons and unstandings could not reach, but holy
men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; God used the
underderstandings and the wills of holy men, to derive and conveye his truth to
the world, so 2. Tim. 3.16. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, so as
the spirit forms it, frames it, suggests it, brings it to the world.

Thus having known the matter of this sword, that it is spiritual, not of a
carnal make, or composition, and secondly the mannager and weilder of this
sword, that it is the spirit, and then the maker, and former of this sword,
that it is the same spirit, we come now to the appellation it self, which the
spirit gives it, which is the word of God.



This must needs be the word of God, and no other, but as it is consonant to
this, for in a large sense, all truths may be called the word of God, as being
subjected to some scripture rule, but strictly that word which is our sword, is
some portion of that we call the scripture, which is particularly
characterized, and distinguished by this title the word of God.

This must needs be so, because this is that, which must not be added to, or
detracted from, it must stand alone Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the
word, which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it: Therefore
that is all, and only the word of God: So Deuteronomy. 12.32. Gal. 1.8. If we or
Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have
preached to you, let him be accursed.

Secondly, if God will have the balance of the Sanctuary

Thirdly, when we see this rule in practice by

We see Christ resisting the Devil, and at last confounding and expelling him
by this word, by this weapon, Math. 4.4. He followed him so long with It is
written, that at last he drove him quite away, he resisted him by this sword,
till he fled from him.

As he dealt with the Devil in himself, so he dealt with the Devil in the
Scribes and Pharisees, Have ye not read (says he) what David did, and what the
Priests did, etc. Math. 12.3, 4, 5. So he answered them, and confounded them;
The like did Stephen, and the Apostles, convinced men mightily by the
Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ, and used this sword to destroy unbelief
with. Now this word of God, which is our sword, is not so much the letter of
the word, as the sense of it, how unreasonably and foolishly have the Papists
abused themselves by sticking to the letter, in those words, This is my body,
and Origin in making himself an Eunuch, from that place, Math. 19.12. There be
Eunuchs that have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heavens sake.
Though it be also true that where the letter is not contrary to the Annalogy of
faith, that is to be our rule and guide, and upon no other ground are we to
depart from the letter.

But if it be objected, how shall men especially unlearned, know the sense of
Scripture, which seems sometimes to be subject to contrariety? Answ. This is
the great grace of God toward his, that in things necessary to faith and
manners, to be known, or done, they need not be ignorant, for they walk in
the light of the Lord, by virtue of which light they are led into all truth; so
as they need not pin, their faith upon the authority of another judgment; This
is there due by promise, They shall be all taught of God, Isa. 54.13. and
Christ says, his sheep follow him, because they know his voice, but another
they will not follow, because they know not the voice of strangers, Joh. 10.4,
5. To have the word made clear to you, and this sword fit for your use, is
your due as well as the sword it self. So the secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. The scriptures though deep are foordable by those
who are holy, and diligent, though they be not so wise and learned: On the
other side, The natural man knows not the things that are of the spirit of
God, because they are foolishness to him: But the spiritual man knows all
things, 1. Cor. 2.14, 15. So

1. John 5.6: It is the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit is
truth. And ver. 10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in
himself. So Math. 13.11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of heaven, to others it is not given. There is a sense of Scripture
that lies always not so evident and above, but it is given to you as your
peculiar, and portion.

This honor have all the Saints, they have a certain taste suitable and
proportionable to their spirits, and their new natures, by which they can
distinguish of food, and by which they can try all things, for as to other
lives, and to our bodily, there is a taste for that end, so to this also which
is spiritual; And though men in a dream can not distinguish between
sleeping, and waking, yet men that are awake, know they are awake, and know
also distinctly what they do.

This notwithstanding, God sells all thing to us by labor, and we shall not
enjoy the benefit of this great privilege without it; We must therefore keep
our selves in a holy frame: If any man will do his will, he shall know of his
Doctrine whether it be of God, Joh. 7.17. While we are doing, we are in a
way to know. If you be carnal and walk as men, you will be also carnal, and
judge as men, Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh cannot please God, (which
may be understood also of a fleshly frame in the Saints) and when we are in a
way altogether unpleasing to God, God will not accommodate himself, will not
reveal himself to us, and please us.

But this is not enough, we must search the scriptures, in which we think to
have eternal life, and light also for the way thither, we must consider, and
weigh whether those things which our own reason, or the Ministry of others
represent to us, be so or no, as those of Baerea did, Truth lies deep, errors
lies level to all: This search is extremely pleasing to God, since the
subject of it is the knowledge of his will, and the end of it is the doing of
his will; This is done by much meditation in the word, by comparing, by
examining it, by taking in all aids, and helps of the guists and abilities of
others, for God has ordered that one man should need another, that none might
be perfect alone; nothing also will more advance it then prayer, so Paul prayed
often for the spirit of revelation, and David that his eyes might be
enlightened, to see the wonderful things of Gods law; nothing cleares the
eyesight more then prayer, for that sets your ends right, and makes you fit
for light, and that leads you into the presence of God, into his light, in
whose light we see light.

It was necessary to speak some thing of this, because this is the forming and
shaping of your weapon, the weapon may be shaped in it self, but not to us;
this gives the metal to the sword, if a thing look like the word of God and
be not, that will not cut of your lusts, it will prove but a leaden sword, or
a deceitful bow, that will not reach the mark, it will be a carnal weapon,
which is weak, whereas the other is mighty through God.

Coroll.
To encourage you against spiritual enemies, because ye have spiritual arms,
and spiritual weapons ye have, what to keep of blows, and ye have wherewith
to fight and combat with your adversaries: God has not left us fatherless,
nor he has not left us weaponlesse, he deals not as Pharaoh, commands us to
make bricks, and takes away materials, he does not disarme us, and bid us
fight, but he gives us arms proper for the field of combat, and for the
enemy we dispute with, and he stands by, and looks on, and with voice, and
hand incourageth us, so as we need not fear our enemies, he gives us the
best arms: Good commanders, and officers, the holy Spirit, and holds a crown
over our heads: The truth is, we never are overcome, but when we are of the
party, when we are in a proportion false to God, and our enemy has gained us,
then we fight but for a show, and the weapon falls easily out of our hands,
but if we would stand to it, our sword would cut his cords, and if he did
stand two or three thrusts, he would vanish at last, as he did from Christ
our captain.

That we may the better use this sword, we shall do well. First to vallew it,
things that we prize and vallew, we willingly use, we think they will
effect their end, else we lay them by. Therefore we shall pitch upon some
expressions, that may teach us to vallew this weapon, when Abiathar had
mentioned the sword of Goliath, there is none like that, says David, the
dignities of the word are great, as appears by David especially, who meditated
in the law continually, and as much as any vallewed the word.

Psalm. 17.4. Concerning the works of men's hands, by the word of thy lips, I
have kept me from the path of the destroyer, the word that God spoke was that,
which armed him against wicked men.

Psalm. 18.30. The word of the Lord is tried (or refined) he is a Buckler to
all that trust him; As for God his way is perfect, it is a sure word, and which
has been often experienced, tried again and again, so as you may venture
upon it, as upon a thing that will not fail, or deceive, will not start aside,
like a deceitful and broken bow.

Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee; David knew the use of this, that it would preserve him from sin, and
therefore stored it up, hid it in a sure place, against a time of need.

Ver. 89. For ever O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven; It is an unchangeable
rule, which will never alter, and settled, will attain all it pretends to.

Ver. 105. Thy word is a lamp to my feet, and a light unto my paths; this is
against delusions, and faynts, and shadows, the Devil will cast. If you keep
near the word, you carry a light in your hand, you will not fight in the
dark, but know how to make your addresses, and approaches, and how to order
your wards, and defenses.

Ver. 140. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it; every thing
operates as it is, as things are to their beings, so they are to their
operations. That which is pure will render us pure, and the word is not an idle
thing, but for use, and being pure, it is given us to render us pure.

Ver. 172. My tongue shall speak of thy word, for all thy commandments are
righteous; I can never praise them enough, there is such a law of righteousness
in them.

Psalm. 147.19. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments
unto Israel; from the receivers of the dispensation of the word, you see its
excellency, it is the portion only of his people, it is not flung in common to
the world, as an inconsiderable thing.

Isa. 40.8. The grass withers, and the flower fades, but the word of the
Lord shall stand for ever; the excellency of good things lies in the
continuance of them, this has a good warrant for its abiding, because it is
the word of the abiding, and unchangeable God.

Isa. 55.10, 11. For as the rain comes down and the snow from heaven, and
returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and
bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my
word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void,
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
where I sent it. There is a mighty efficacy in this word, this lies as a praise
upon the whole word of God, that it shall not return empty, but be like the
bow of Jonathan, and the sword of Saul, Isay. 66.2. All those things has my
hand made, but to this man will I look even to him that is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. That word is precious, when the
respect to it is so rewarded. On the other side.

Jer. 8.9. They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in
them. Though otherwise they might be wise, yet if they undervallew once the
word, they bid a dew to their wisdom: And God the righteous judge, and which
gives true vallewes to us, ranks them in the number of fools, from the New
Testament also, we shall give some places to this purpose.

Luke 4.4. Men lives by every word of God; in him we live, and in his word we
live, which gives a being to things that which gives the being, and
determination, makes things be what they are, and men do what they do, must
needs be great and excellent in it self.

Ver. 32. His word was with power, which astonished the auditors.

Ver. 36. What a word is this, for with authority and power commands he the
unclean spirits, and they come forth; his word will fetch uncleannes out of
thy heart, as well as out of their bodies.

Luke 7.7. The centurion had so much confidence in Christ's word, as he could
depend wholly upon it, Say in a word, (says he) and my servant shall be
healed; the magnifing of the word, wrought this great effect, and that word
must needs be great, which was deservedly the object of such a confidence.

Luke 22.61. Peter remembered the words of the Lord, and he went out and wept
bitterly: Peter forgot the word, when he sinned, and indeed all sin proceeds
from ignorance or furgetfulnesse, but when he remembered it, you see the
eminent effect of it, he repents immediately, which he witnesses by his
bitter and abundant weeping.

John 15.3. Now are ye clean through the word which I have spoken to you: We
are clean mistically by the washing of Baptism, 1. Cor. 6.11. also by the
imputation of Christ's purity, and so we stand ever clear before God, we are
pure also in the change of our own hearts, and all this by the word, made ours
by faith, and abiding in us, so that as evil communication corrupts good
manners, if taken in and drunk down, so the word taken down cleanses, Acts
13.26. It is called the word of salvation, that which brings it and works it.
And

Acts 20.32. When Paul departed from Ephesus, he commended the Church to the
word of Gods grace, which was able to build them up, and to give them an
inheritance, etc. The inheritance is that to which the word leads us, and where
it will leave us at the last, but before you come thither, there is building
work, forming and fashioning, that the word does also, so as ye need not go
out of this circle, for the beginning or finishing of your faith.

2. Cor. 5.18. It is the word of reconciliation, that which brings God and man
together: We are naturally at great distances, now that which conduces to the
meeting, and according of terms so differing, must needs be of great vallew
and esteem.

1. Tim. 4.5. For every creature of God is good and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God and
prayer; it is the word of God that sanctifies, and gives a lawful use of all
things; Hence you have your liberties, as well to indifferent, as your right to
things necessary, if you have whereof freely to use for your own comforts, and
whereof to give a way, for the weakness and scandal of your brother.

If you should examine by experience the effects of the word, Gods word has
ever taken hold of men, and in this lies the great difference of the Saints
from others, that they observe those events, which others neglect, and grow by
them. Joh. 4.50. And the man believed the word of God, and it was even so as
he had believed; The word has ever found out men, and will take hold of us,
either by our faith for good, or without it for our destruction, so the
prophecies of old were not idle, but effected the end for which they came.

To conclude this great dignity the word has, that it gives its own credit,
for reason may be opposed by reason, but this is higher then reason: The Devil
can reason and distinguish us into sin, whilst we fight at that weapon, but
bring him a word, and that answers his reason.

What has been said in this head, tends to beg it in you a right vallew and
esteem of the word, which if once ye have you will use it, and have recourse
to it at all times, as an effectual weapon, mighty through God, for all the
great ends you have heard of.

Secondly, know the word of God, that ye may use

Thirdly, take up this sword, take it to you, be in a the word of God must
dwell richly in you, that you may not be to seek when you should use it.

To help you in some guards for this fight.

First, that sin is the greatest evil, manage your sword well for that guard,
have words at hand, that is, your sword ready to make that good; for the
filthiness of it, sin is compared to the blood and pollution of a newborn
child, before it be ordered and dressed, Ezekiel. 16.6. When thou wast in thy
blood, I said unto thee live; such a thing is sin in it self, and all sin holds
of the nature of that pollution.

1. Joh. 5.19. The whole world lies in wickedness, it lies there as in a
filthy grave, rotting and stinking as in a puddle.

Again sin is compared for its nature to swine, and dogs, and to their vomit,
2. Pet. 2.22. the sinner is the dog in the act of sin, and the corruption is
the vomit, and mire; it is likened also to the menstruousnesse of a woman, to a
vessel in which is no pleasure, that is, a draught or a privy, Hos. 8.8. If
besides these abasings and vilifying expressions, you would know more of sin:
It was sin that condemned the world in Adam, drowned the world in the days
of Noah, and to give you a greater charracter for ill then all this, it was sin
brought all the sufferings upon Christ which he endured: It was the day of
Gods fierce anger, Lament. 1.12. When Christ did bear the sins of many in his
body on the tree; therefore when Paul and Silas could sing in the prison, and
the Saints in their afflictions, as they have done so often, Christ was low,
and poor, and faint. Why? because he conflicted with sin, he grappled with
sin, upon him was laid the iniquities of us all; He conflicted with the
wrath of God, for sin, and had he not been God himself, he would never have
outwrastled it.

In a word every creature of God is good, and nothing offends him, irritates
him, and provokes him, but sin; Nothing reaches God, nor causes God to
reach the world in anger but sin. It is that which puts the sting into death,
and torment in Hell; Thus you are armed for that guard, that sin is the
greatest evil, the second follows easily. That then.

We should keep at the greatest distance from it, for that you have Romans 12.9.
Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good, when we meet with
any thing extremely evil, and contrary to us, nature abhorres it, and retyres
as far as it can; so on the contrary cleave to that which is good, cling to
it, as a man should cleave to his wife, or be glewed, as the word is, and they
shall be one flesh, incorporate your selves with that which is good, make your
self one with it.

So, Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. a thing may appear
to be ill, that is not, but take heed of any similitude, or appearance, or
likeness of ill, if it look like ill, though it be not, fly from it; This
gives you the benefit of a long sword, by which you keep the enemy at a
distance; so Jude 23. Hate the garments spotted with the flesh, not only the
flesh, but the garment that has touched it.

Ephesians. 5.3. Fornication and all uncleannes and covetousness, let it not be
once named among you, as becomes Saints, nor filthiness, nor foolish
speaking, nor jesting.

So Job 31.1. I made a covenant with mine eyes, why should I think on a maid;
he would not look, because he would not think, and the way to secure the
thoughts, is to keep well and strictly, the out-doores, the senses, which made
David pray to God, to turn away his eyes from vanity. Folly is bold, but
wisdom is wary to keep at the greatest distance.

Thus this sword cuts of the first risings, this is a sure way, and this saves
you a world of pains, when a temptation or a lust has once come within you,
and incorporated it self, you must tear your flesh to pull it out, you must
pull up earth and all, that the roots may come at last; but while it is at a
distance, there is some kind of modesty, and blushing in it, and it may be
snib'd with a word, use therefore some of these for a sword in time, and it may
prevent you hard work, which yet must be done if you would not perish; other
heads I thought to have run over and fitted for use, as

Thirdly, God knows our thoughts.

Fourthly, that the word must judge us even this, which we have in our hands
and mouths, and if it condemn our sins now, how is it like to acquit us
another day.

Fifthly, that every secret thing shall be made manifest.

Sixthly, that you should walk in the sense of death and changes, but I shall
prosecute this no further, only let us know, that if the Devil have got
within us, the same way he is fetched out, that he is kept out, this sword
must do both. Thus God has armed you completely, and it will be both your sin,
which you will not know how to answer, and your shame also to be foiled.

If you oppose Captain to Captain, you have Christ and the Devil, you have
as sufficient, as mighty, as experienced, a Captain as your lusts have, if
arms to arms, ye have all these spiritual arms, against his carnal arms,
for so are his, in comparison of those. Though his be spiritual also, as acted
by a mighty spirit; your reward held over you by hope, is greater for the
present then any he can offer, though not to flatter our selves. Our condition
here is to endure hardness as good soldiers, 2. Tim. 2.3. And we must
conflict according to the law of combat, if we would have the crown; But
this is no new thing to us, this we knew when we undertook religion, this
was laid in at first, as the law and condition of our undertaking.

That which follows, is prayer, praying with all prayer, which is to all other
ordinances of God as bread and salt to our repast, we cannot make a meal
without it, here it fastens on your armor, and looks up for strength and
success to him who is able to give it: If soldiers be weak or succumbe in
fight, they send to their General for supplies, and reinforcements.

Praying always, that is in all time, and every juncture, and article of time,
as you have occasion by temptations for combat, for so (...), signifies
properly occasion, this is not so much spoken here of our ordinary, and
customary use of Prayer, as it is applicable to occasions, that is temptations,
but this Prayer must be in the spirit: The Spirit in our Prayer is what the
soul is in our body, it is that which gives the life to it, to conflict with
the living God by dead words, will do no good, therefore Jude says, Praying
in the Holy Ghost, ver. 20. You have another expression Romans 8. That the spirit
makes intercession for us, the Holy Ghost must pray in us, there must be an
incorporating in that duty of the Holy Spirit, with our spirits, watching
thereunto, you must watch to prayer, therefore it must be an act of time.

With all perseverance, that is, till the work be done, for then ye persevere,
when ye give not over till you obtain your end, so as your Praying, and
fighting must run parralell till you have overcome your enemy, and slighted
his works.

Its enough to have hinted this which I intend not to speak of as being no
piece of the armor, nor resembled by the Holy Ghost to any piece.

To all that has been said, I shall add no more but this, that every thing is
strong in virtue of an ordinance, therefore bread nourishes, because it has a
word that bids it do so, and therefore the word shall cut and destroy, because
God has made it a sword, and edged and fitted it, for that purpose.

Thus have I some what largely measured the field of Battle, showed you your
friends and enemies, and fitted to you those arms which God has given you for
the service of this holy war.

To conclude therefore, The just end and design of war (for every thing is
to act in virtue of a design) is peace, now no war pretends to peace more
then this we have been speaking of, and therefore Communion, which is the
effect, and birth of peace, bears one half of the title of this discourse;
And indeed men were so formed for Communion, as no doctrine can be avowed for
good, which renders them unsociable. But experience tells us, that it is the
fate of some wars, not only to be the means by which peace is gotten, and
procured, but by which it is nourisht, and maintayn'd, and we know some
countries, which enjoy the greatest benefits of peace in the midst of a
confirmed war. And that is especially the condition of the war we have been
speaking of, that it procures, and makes good our peace; it is the wall of our
city wherein peace dwells, it is the arms of our persons, the subject of it;
For with the devil our professed and avowed enemy, God has justly determined an
everlasting war. Peace, we know, is the daughter of equality, but where both
parties (as here) pretend peremptorily to supremacy, there can be no peace.
Peace also is the birth of love, and love is an union of minds, but where
principles are laid in by nature, or formed by opposition (as here) infinitely
distant, there peace can be nothing. But an abused, and mistaken name of what
is not, and the product of such a truce or peace, would be to procure no less
assured, but a more unequal war, then what it seemed to determine, as the
experience of all, who have manadg'd this war, witness: The blessings
therefore of our peace will be reapt within the compass of our assured
friends, and allies, with whom our communion will be intended and exercised, as
otherwise, so by a common determination against the enemy: And to meet in a
common enmity, where it is just, makes particularly, and warrantably to love.
In a word therefore, we improve best our communion with our friends, the good
Angels, whilst we make war, so as whilst we make war, we shall have peace.

FINIS.
A Table directing to several particulars, in the praeceding discourse.
THe Introduction. Page 1. The Coherence, which the words insisted on, have
with other parts of the Scripture, whence they are drawn. p. 2. The explication
of the words. ibid. The whole armor. ibid. The wiles of the devil. p. 3. We
wrestle not against flesh and blood. Two things meant by flesh and blood. ibid.
What meant by Principalities. p. 4. What meant by Powers. ibid. What meant by
Rulers of the darkness of this World. ibid. What meant by spiritual
wickednesses p. 5. What meant by high places. ibid. A Transition, leading into
the discourse of the nature of Angels in general. p. 6. That the Angels are
Creatures. ibid. and p. 7. That the Angels are substances, and do really exist.
p. 8. Whether the Angels be incorporall. p. 9. Several Corollaries, from what
has been spoken of Angels. p. 10. Of the mutability or immutability of Angels.
p. 12. Of the apparitions of Angels. p. 13. Of their assumption of bodies.
ibid. Why they Assumed bodies. p. 14. Whether in taking humane shapes, they
were true men. ibid. Of what their assumed bodies consisted. p. 15. What become
of those assumed bodies. ibid. Whether they really put forth acts of life.
ibid. Why the Angels make not apparitions, now as formerly they have done. p.
16. Coroll. from the immutability of Angels. p. 17. From the apparition of
Angels seven Coroll. ibid. Of the Administration of Angels to us, and the
deputations they have from God, concerning us. p. 19. Of the doctrine of Angel
guardians. ibid. That the tutelage of good Angels is the portion only of the
Elect. ibid. Whether every elect person, is under the deputation of a
particular Angel guardian. p. 20. The affirmative is asserted. ibid. The
saints not so concluded to one Angel, as not to enjoy oftentimes the service
of many. p. 21. When the Angel Guardian begins the execution of his charge.
ibid. Whether the Angel guardian ever quits the party, committed to his
charge. ibid. Whether communityes, as well as persons fall under the
guardianship of Angels. p. 22. The affirmative is probable. ibid. Why God uses
this ministration and guardianship of Angels toward us. p. 23. Four reasons
thereof. ibid. and p. 24. Four Coroll. from the guardianship and tutelage of
Angels. p. 25. The happiness of being a saint in that respect. ibid. Also of
Churches. ibid. 1 Cor. 11.10. opened. ibid. Our happiness lies in working as the
Angels. p. 26. We ought to lead abstracted lives. p. 27. Of the power the
Angels have over us. ibid. Of their power or abilities in themselves. ibid.
First of their knowledge. ibid. Cognitio matutina ad vespertina. ibid. Their
knowledge, natural, by revelation, by experience, supernatural. p. 28. The
reprobate Angels never saw God as the Elect. p. 29. How, or in what manner the
Angels know. ibid. Comparison of theirs, with our manner of knowing with the
difference. ibid. and p. 30. What things contribute to vision external and
internal. p. 29. The power of knowing, and light by which we know, common to
us with the Angels. p. 30. Somethings the Angels know by their own Essence,
somethings by intelligible species infused. ibid. Whether the Angels know
particular things, and what ever is done here. p. 31. How they know things
particular. ibid. The Angels know the particularities of those committed to
their charge. p. 32. They are extremely ingenious at guessing at things more
hidden. ibid. Corollaries from the knowledge of Angels. ibid. Supernatural
knowledge stands the Angels and us in the greatest steed. ibid. Other
knowledge in respect of the effect, a picture without life. p. 33. Of the power
of the good Angels upon corporal things. ibid. They can do what nature can. p.
34. Miracles they cannot work. ibid. What a miracle is. ibid. They cannot do
things as God in an instant, though in a very short space of time. ibid. Their
power subjected to Gods will. p. 35. What power they have upon the fancy and
imagination. ibid. The great works they have to do upon us, is upon the
innerman. p. 36. Being ministering spirits, their ministration is spiritual
especially. ibid. How the Angels speak to our understandings, and have
influence upon our wills. ibid. Of their several ways of effecting this
wherein the way of their ministration to our spirits will appear. ibid. and p.
37.38. The same way of speaking to us waking and sleeping. p. 36. Of the use of
phantasmes. p. 37. Whatsoever an inferior power can do, a superior can do it
much more. ibid. The Alteration of the body by sickness or otherwise,
contributes much to a different apprehension and vision of things. ibid. Angels
can moove the humors, as also remoove impediments. ibid. Angels go a nearer
way to work in conversing with us then men can, and can very presently
represent to us what they will. p. 38. In what way this is wrought. ibid.
Several Corollaries from the former head of the knowledge of the Angels, and
their way of communicating themselves to us. ibid. In that respect they have
great advantages upon us. p. 39. They cannot put in new species into the fancy.
p. 40. Beware of receiving ill impressions, for they are matter to work on.
ibid. Gratify and love the Angels for their love and service to us. p. 41. We
may read their love in its effects. ibid. The good Angels, according to their
talent and trust lay out themselves for our advantage, and are extremely
communicating to us, but especially to our spirits and inward man. p. 42.
Prooved by several reasons. p. 43.44.45.46.47. A story of one guided and
conducted by an Angel, out of Bodin his first book of the history of
sorcerers. p. 47. Objection, What do you leave to Christ and the spirit?
Answered. p. 48. Coroll. from the administration of Angels. p. 49. The Angels
an ordinance continually by us. p. 50. A spiritual substance assisting
proportionable to the devil, who opposes us. ibid. Walk holily in respect of
the Angels. ibid. Every ordinance valuable, because conveying something from
God, therefore should love the Angels. p. 51. Reverence the Angels, and learn
to converse with them. ibid. The whole creation serviceable to man, the Angels
not excepted. p. 52. The use to be made thereof. ibid. Aspire after Angelical
work. p. 53. The second part of this treaty, which is of the evil Angels.
ibid. Of the sin of the evil Angels. p. 54. Coroll. from thence. p. 55. Of
the punishment of the evil Angels, and first of the place. p. 56. Which admits
of a double consideration. ibid. The place of the sixth of Jude considered. p.
57. The devils not yet in their utmost term. p. 58. Coroll. from what has
been last treated on. ibid. The whole universe of rational creatures under
chains and bonds. ibid. The use to be made thereof. p. 59. Of the spiritual
punishment of the evil Angels. p. 60. Their wound in their will. ibid. Their
knowledge great. p. 61. Their wound in their knowledge. ibid. In some respects
perfectly blind. p. 62. Their punishment demonstrated from their names and
titles. ibid. Corollaries. p. 63. Dread the spiritual punishment of sin.
ibid. This considerable to the saints also. ibid. Of the ministry of the evil
Angels. p. 64. The principal ministry of the evil Angels to tempt and induce
to sin. p. 65.66. Whence the evil Angels had power for this ministry. p.
66. Why the devils are invested with this ministry by God. p. 67. Several
reasons in respect of God. ibid. Also in respect of men, and first of wicked
men. p. 68. Then of the saints. p. 69. Several Coroll. from hence. p. 70. Let
the Saints bless God for their ministry. ibid. Wonder not that evil men are
so wicked. ibid. Do not the devils work. ibid. Expect not the present
destruction of men extremely wicked. ibid. Be secure on Gods side
notwithstanding this ministry. p. 71. How the evil Angels operate in order to
temptation, and sin. p. 72. Corollaryes from hence. p. 73. Whether the devil
concur to the temptation of all sin. p. 74. Men may sin without the
temptation of the Devil, but de facto, usually, he has a part in all
temptations. ibid p. 75, 76. Whether usually has the start herein, our own
corruptions, or the devil. p. 77. Several corollaryes. p. 78, 79. How the
ministryes of the evil Angels are distributed, whether to vices, or persons.
p. 80. Corollaryes from the praeceding discourse. p. 81. A shame for the saints
to give ground and fail, as others that want their aides. ibid. The saints and
the wicked fall very differently under the power of the Devil. p. 82. Which
ways especially the devils are laid out toward mankind, in matter of
temptation. p. 83. The devil would hinder the worship of God, and in order to
that, the knowledge of him. ibid. The devil amongst his most assured vassalls,
pretends to a shaped and formed worship, as appears by the confession of
witches. p. 84. The devils, the greatest enemies of Christ and the Gospel.
ibid. Gospel worship, and Gospel preaching most opposed by the devil, and his
instruments. p. 85. Coroll. from this. ibid. Exalt what the devil opposes
most. ib. The Devil exercises his ministry especially against the church of
Christ. p. 86, 87. Some more instances of the Devils usual martches in the
discharge of his ministry. p. 88. One, the lusts of the flesh. ibid. The
excesses of no beasts so great as those of mankind in bodily things. ib. This
frame infinitely contrary to God, appears so to be by two things especially. p.
89, 90. The Devil where he reigns most absolutely subjects persons to the
actual commission of what ever we call uncleanenes. p. 90. The Scripture
particularly intitles Satan to this temptation. p. 91. Another beaten path of
the devil, pride. ibid. That men are which they are to God. p. 92. No thing
more contrary to God then pride. ibid. The imaginations of proud men how
scattered by God. ibid. The honor and advantage of humility. p. 93, 94, 95.
Only by pride comes contention, how understood. p. 95, 96. Pride makes us
contend with our conditions, and with God himself. p. 96, 97. How the Devil is
entitled to this temptation. p. 97, 98. Another eminent temptation of the
devils, coveteousnesse. p. 99. The seat of this lust the basest spirits. ibid.
Coveteousnesse extremely fertile of ill. ibid. and p. 100. Why this sin
styled Idolatry. p. 100, 101. Men of this humor extremely deluded. p. 101.
The comfort and enjoyment of things is the portion of the saints. p. 102.
Coroll. particularly from this last head. ibid. General Corollaryes drawn
from these common roades of temptation. p. 103. The misery of sin lies in
sinning. ibid. The happiness of a holy spirit. p. 104. The devil spinnes his
web finer for the saints, but his But and End is the same. p. 105. Provocations
to fight. ibid. The devils power and operation upon us in communicating
himself to our understandings, and inward man must be fetched from what has
been said of the good Angels largely. p. 36, 37, 38. ibid. The devil an
inveterate enemy, his evil nature ever intended. p. 106. His power wonderfully
great. ibid. The contentions for things of the greatest moment. p. 107. The
prize of other wars nothing to ours. p. 108. A great advantage to fight for a
love, and in the presence of a love, and so do we. ibid. The third part of the
discourse, wherein of the armor fitted for this war. p. 109. No weapons fit
for combatt with the devil, but Gods. ibid. Lusts will take their turns, and
give place one to another. p. 110. Somethings which look like virtues, are but
the ignorance of ill. ibid. The incompassing of temptations. ibid. Some men
strong in the devil, and in the power of his might. p. 111. What Is intended by
(...). ibid. Every one will do a little in Religion. ibid. and p 112.
Difficulty in Religion lies in universality, and exactnes. p. 112. What our
parts are in this combatt. p. 113. The more mighty any supreme agent is, the
more it intends and fills the instrument. ibid. The end and use of the Armor.
p. 114. Days of temptation evil days. ibid. Things encouraging to fight, the
necessity of it, the glory, and pleasure of victory. p. 115. Cowards have but
the pleasure of Idleness, and the misery of slavery. p. 116. 2 Timothy 2.3. opened.
ibid. and p. 117. The bonds and restraints that lie upon the devil, are
considered for encouragement sake. p. 118. The particular pieces of armor,
first the girdle of truth. p. 119. What meant by this metaphor. ibid. What
truth is. p. 120. The cause of all instability, because men are insincere, or
misapprehensive. ibid. Men are what they see and judge. p. 121. Comfort and joy
renders strong, and light the Emblem of joy. ibid. The notion of glory
begirts, but light and glory run together. p. 122. The devil plays in the
dark, and deceives under the veil of mists and shadows, in respect of work
and comfort. ibid. Corollaryes from this piece. p. 123. Converse much with the
father of lights, and with the word the book of lights, and with the saints
the subject of light. ibid. Help our selves by what right sights of things we
ever have had. ibid. How truth and right sights of things answers, what ever
Satan can object to our praejudice in this fight. p. 124. Sincerity is
immixednes. p. 125. How love determines and squares every thing to the interest
of the object loved. ibid. The second piece of armor, the breast plate of
righteousness. p. 126. Wherein this consists. ibid. and p. 127. The first
piece respected the end, this the walk of a Christian. p. 127. Righteousness
toward God and men, what. p. 128. The good Angels fall under the consideration
of the object of this righteousness. ibid. The rule and measure of this
righteousness in regard of men, self love. p. 129. The object of this
righteousness, all, capable of God and happiness. ibid. How this piece arms the
breast. ibid. The tremblings and astonishments of those which want this armor.
p. 130. How Christ's righteousness is to be considered here. ibid. The love of
God makes lovely Characters and impressions upon us. p. 131. What it is to be a
new creature. ibid. Christ a head of influence. p. 132. This Scripture speaks
rather of the working of the spirit of God in us, then the imputation of Christ
to us. ibid. How this piece is to be put on. p. 133. Wicked men furnish the
devil with weapons to destroy themselves. ibid. The third piece of arms
fitted for the feet and legs. p. 134. Wherein this armor consists. ibid. The
notion of it cleared by several Scriptures. p. 135. Also by reason. p. 136.
Helps for the obtaining this necessary piece of armor. p. 137.138.
Corollaryes from this particular. p. 138. The Gospel should be administered
like it self, like good news. p. 139. The guilty world need such a kind of
administration. ibid. We need much knowledge to discharge our selves in this
particular. p. 140. Example of great influence. ibid. The fourth piece of
arms, a shield. p. 141. That to be joined with all the rest. ibid. What meant
by fiery darts. ibid. Faith repells, and quenches, how. p. 142. This above all
to be procured. ibid. Our natures not perfectly cool since defiled by
original corruption. p. 143. Two fiery darts accompany great sins, scil. of
lust, and despair, as in the example of Ammon. p. 144. Example of Spira and
Judas ibid. Look on sins as you will see them within a few hours. ibid.
Melancholy and depression of spirit, a temper easily fired to extreamityes. p.
145. What kind of faith is to be opposed to fiery darts. ibid. And how faith
does it. ibid. The combatt by the wisdom of faith changed from our selves to
God. ibid. This was David's way. p. 146. Faith releives in extremity by
out-bidding sights: examples thereof. ibid. Both against sinning and
dispairing. p. 147. Faith suckes down the dew of the spirit, the cooling
waters, etc. ibid. Believe not scantily, nor a little, have not your faith to
fetch and spell while the fiery darts are shooting. p. 148. The use of faith is
as pleasing to God, as the resisting necessary for us. ibid. Consider believing
under the notion of obedience. p. 149. Faith not a Privilege left to the
arbitrament of our own will, but an indispensible duty. ibid. Consider the
obstruction of faith. ibid. The objection from the disproportion between sin
and faith, answered. p. 150. God gloryes to effect his great works by nothing,
or things which are as nothing. p. 151. Nothing so fenced with motives,
threats, commands, etc. as the business of believing, which shows that Gods
heart is in it especially. ibid. The best salve ye can apply to the wounds of
Christ, is believing, your sins made them, your faith heales them. p. 152.
Get faith ready against an evil day, a day of fiery darts, ye will then need
cool and quenching liquor which faith draws down ibid. The fifth piece of
this armor, the helmet. p. 153. What this is. ibid. All affections routed in
love and acted by it. ibid. Love is made visible according as the affection is,
it acts by and through. ibid. In hope love is in its throne, and appears most
lovely. p. 154. Hope considered here not as a flatt and low attendancy, and
looking after some good desired, a thing less then faith and before it, but as
a firm expectation of some future good, which we do already believe. ibid.
Hope a birth, and effect of faith. ibid. How this piece does its work and fitts
the head, as an helmet. p. 155. The head the principle of action. ibid. The
end, the simbolicall head. ibid. The world holds over our heads infinite things
to corrupt us, the holy Ghost wards of all with the helmet of salvation. ibid.
Our hopes differs from others not only in the object of them, the good things
hoped for, but in the bottoming of them by expectation. p. 156. All things but
spiritual, have no considerable value, but what ignorance and a lie puts upon
them. p. 157. They are but shadows, pictures, and dreams of good. ibid.
Worldly things not absent enough to be the object of hope. ibid. Hope
misapplyed often ingages to impossibilityes, and so becomes a mere imposture.
p. 158. Hope is of things difficult, but such as are worthy, and difficult.
ibid. Coroll. from this piece. p. 159. Christian religion wholly founded upon
hope. ibid. Heavenly hope changes but the time, puts you of to another day for
all. ibid. The pleasures of this life but for a minute, their fullnes worse
then their emptiness. ibid. If our hopes as other men's were here, we were in a
worse condition then they for two reasons. p. 160. Faith gives things a
bottom, and hope is grafted upon it. ibid. The hopes of worldly men in respect
of the saints, have several notable defects. p. 161. The possessions of
worldly men are ballanc^d with uncertaintyes, and their hopes with fears.
ibid. The happiness of heaven lies in the fixing of joys by eternity. ibid. The
joy of our hope is fixed by faith. ibid. What it is to rejoice in boastings. p
162. Men think by the determination of their wills, to effect that which godly
men do by faith. ibid. An extreme vanity in the matter of the hopes of worldly
men, as being of things low and mean. ibid. The object of our hopes things
great. p. 163. Our knowledge makes us value our hopes and joy in them. ibid.
Joy as a result and concomitant of hope is mighty for battaille. ibid. He that
rejoices not in the hopes of things to come, will rejoice in vain hopes, or
sensual inioyments. ibid. Objection, if hope bringes in so great and steady a
return of joy, what place do we leave for sorrow for sin? Answered. p. 164.
There is a double use of sorrow for sin. ibid Whilst God loves us, he greeves
for our sinnings, and he greeves the more, because he loves us and so should
we. p. 165. Never greeve without the relief of hope, and joy. ibid. For the
degree, why should we not work our selves and our sorrows as low as
afflictions would lay us. ibid. We have pains to conflict with as well as
pleasures, hope arms us for them also. ibid. We must hold out to the utmost
extremity by the law of war. p. 166. Patience fits for this, but it must be
the patience of hope. ibid. The praise of patience. ibid. Patience would sink
and be oppressed, if it were not animated by the activity and livel^nes of hope.
p. 167. We should use our patience, and releeve our patience, as Christ did by
the joyful sights of hope. ibid. Hope proper for doing, as well as suffering.
ibid. As we can do nothing without hope, so we attempt the greatest things by
hope. p. 168. Hope and strength stand and fall together. ibid. Proov^d by the
example and praecept of Paul. ibid. Hope animates to all works. p. 169.
Particularly it purifyes the heart. ibid. The same reason of our being like to
Christ, here and hereafter. p. 170. Purity opposed to bodily and spiritual
lustings. ibid. To what degree hope must purify. ibid. Coroll. from the
settling our hopes. p. 171. To raise our hopes, we must improove and raise our
faith ibid. In all compositions something gives the body, faith gives the body
and substance to hope. ibid. Hope abridges the time of expectation, and lives
in an anticipation of eternal joys. p. 172. The last piece of Arms, the
sword of the spirit. ibid. This is a spiritual weapon. p. 173. That, the
spirit uses. ibid. That, the spirit form^d ibid. What meant by the word of God
here. p. 174. Proov'd to be the Scripture. ibid. Christ made use of this weapon
against the devil himself, and in others. p. 175. Whether the letter or sense
be the word meant here. ibid. How shall ignorant men know the sense of
Scripture. p. 176. To have the sword fitted for our use, is our due as well as
the sword it self. ibid. The Scriptures though deep, are fordable by men holy
and diligent. ibid. The saints have a taste proportionable to their spirits, by
which they can distinguish of food. ibid. and p. 177. Try all things. p. 177.
The way to know the will of God, is to do it. ibid. Also we must search which
is pleasing to God. ibid. How it is done. ibid. Corollary to encourage to
fight. p. 178 Men are seldom overcome, but when they are of the party. ibid.
Several Scripture expressions teaching us to value this sword, the word of
God. p. 179, 180, 181, 182. All sin proceeds from ignorance or
forgetfullnesse. p. 181. The difference of men lies in the observing, or
neglecting, the fullfilling of Gods words in the events of things. p. 182. The
word gives its own credit. p. 183. To help in some guardes for this fight.
ibid. Sin is the greatest evil. ibid. Several Scriptures expressing the
filthynesse of sin. p. 184. The reason why Christ lay so low, when others
could sing. ibid. Keep at the greatest distance from sin. p. 185. This the
wisest and safest way. ibid. There is a modesty in sin at first, if it
incorporate, it will tear the flesh to get it out. ibid. Other heads hinted,
but not prosecuted. p. 186. Captain to Captain, and Arms to Arms, opposed.
ibid. Prayer no piece of these Arms, and therefore not insisted on. p. 187. It
fastens on the Arms and draws down success. ibid. What meant by (...) here.
ibid. Every thing powerful in the virtue of an ordinance. ibid. The
Conclusion. p. 188.
FINIS.
These principal faults escaped in the printing, the Reader may correct as
follows.
Page Line. Error. Correct. 2 27 with which 9 2 incorporall incorporeall 10 20
that their 11 24 beingh beings 13 28 them then 16 28 operations apparitions 19
16 genui genium 23 3 pro ratio par ratio 23 27 moderatedly moderated by 28 4
ward word 5 sun son 9 Mathematicus, Mathematicians 30 20 God things 31 14
not must be put out. 33 28 raisedned raisednes 34 31 medimus mediums 38 2
believe relieve 39 14 light sight 49 23 may by 25 vice nice 50 14 motion notion
18 and must be put out. 19 their your 51 5 with which 15 Elixurs Elixars 33
ones ends 52 24 well must be put out. 55 25 let set 58 22 the they 61 18 mote
more 63 7 your you 33 not not only 73 5 to operating cooperating 77 30
inordinary inordinacy 78 10 thy the 79 10 he be 86 9 have save 89 20
altogether together 31 forma formae 91 22 which what 97 26 a love alone 98 33
must most 99 5 therefore is therefore that is 100 28 that is that it is 103 24
peoples puples 108 30 all will 110 17 deferred deterred 20 the proper the
devils proper 116 24 obstaine obtain 117 9 he ye 119 18 devotes denotes 21
clumbs clumbes 22 in is 120 22 lounes loaves 129 29 subsilite subsilire 133 4
temire tenure 136 13 imployes implies 137 11 help is helps 26 of from of well
from 140 13 jou you 141 18 but put 142 30 him sin 143 26 counted committed
144 10 countinent commitment 17 inections injections 145 4 that thus 146 17 all
allye 147 17 nothing as, nothing so much as 148 25 not must be put out. 150 27
fin sin 151 13 is was 14 have save 21 mottinesse motives 154 21 fault faint
155 12 principal principle 23 pates paths 30 toward to ward 159 10 fasten
fastened 29 in other in no other 33 alloey allay 160 26 ofter after 161 5
contingenties contingencies 164 8 and a and in a 29 cleasing cleansing 165 23
patiency patience 170 15 respcteth respects 174 8 by must be put out. 9
unstandings understandings 182 27 if must be put out.


