THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRIE HIS SPEECH OR His Funeral Sermon:

Preached by himself on the Scaffold on Towerhill, on Friday the tenth of
January, 1645. Upon Hebrews 12. 1, 2.

Also, the Prayers which he used at the same time and place before his
Execution.

All Faithfully written by John Hind, whom the Archbishop beseeched that he
would not let any wrong be done him by any phrase in false Copies.

LONDON Printed with License, and entered according to Order.

THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY HIS Funeral Sermon, Preached by himself on the
Scaffold on Tower Hill. Upon Heb. 12. 1, 2.
Let us run with patience that race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despiside the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God.
Good people,

You Will pardon my old Memory, and upon so sad occasions as I am come to this
place, to make use of my Papers, I dare not trust my self otherwise.

Good people,

This is a very uncomfortable place to preach in, and yet I shall begin with a
Text of Scripture, in the twelfth of the Hebrews, Let us run with patience
that race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of
our fait^, etc.

I have been long in my race, and how I have looked unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of my faith, is best known to him: I am now come to the end of my
race and here I find the Cross, a death of shame, but the shame must be
despised, or there is no coming to the right hand of God; Jesus despised the
shame for me, and God-forebid but I should despise the shame, for him; I am
going apace, as you see toward the Red Sea, and my feet are upon the very
brinks of it, an Argument, I hope that God is bringing me to the Land of
promise, for that was the way by which of old he led his people: But before
they came to the Sea, he instituted a passover for them, a Lamb it was to be
eaten with very sour Herbs, as in the twelfe of Exodus.

I shall obey, and labor to digest the sour Herbs, as well as the Lamb, and I
shall remember that it is the Lords Passover; I shall not think of the Herbs,
nor be angry with the hands which gathered them, but look up only to him who
instituted the one, and governs the other: For men can have no more power
over me, then that which is given them from above; I am not in love with this
passage through the Red Sea, for I have the weakness and infirmity of flesh
and blood in me, and I have prayed as my Savior taught me, and exampled me Vt
tansiret calix ista.

That this Cup of red Wine might pass away from me, but since it is not that
my will may, his will be done; and I shall most willingly drink of this Cup as
deep as he pleases, and enter into this Sea, I and pass through it, in the way
that he shall be pleased to lead me.

And yet (Good people,) it would be remembered, That when the servants of God,
old Israel, were in this boistrous Sea, and Aaron with them, the Egyptians
which persecuted them, and did in a manner drive them into that Sea, were
drowned in the same waters, while they were in pursuit of them: I know my God
whom I serve, is as able to deliver me from this Sea of blood as he was to
deliver the three Children from the furnace Daniel 3.

And I must humbly thank my Savior for it, my Resolution is now, as theirs was
then: their Resolution was, They would not worship the Image which the King had
set up: nor shall I the Imaginations which the people are setting up, nor will
I forsake the Temple, and the truth of GOD, to follow the Bleating of Ieroboams
Calves in Dan and in Bethel.

And I pray God bless all this people, and open their eyes, that they may see
the right way: For if it fall out that the blind lead the blind, doubtless
they will both into the ditch: For my self, I am,) and I acknowledge it in all
humility) a most grievous sinner many ways, by thought, word and deed, and
therefore I cannot doubt but that God has mercy in store for me a poor
penitent, as well as for other sinners: I have upon this sad occation,
ransacked every corner of my heart, and yet I thank God, I have not found any
of my sins that are there, any sins now deserving death by any known law of
this Kingdom: and yet thereby I charge nothing upon my Judges (I humbly
beseech you I may be rightly understood, I charge nothing in the least degree
upon my Judges) for they are to proceed by proof, by valuable Witnesses, and in
that way I or any innocent in the world may justly be condemned: And I thank
God, though the weight of the Sentence Iye very heavy upon me, yet I am as
quiet within, as (I thank Christ for it) I ever was in my life: And though I am
not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that dyed in this way, yet
some of my predecessors have gone this way, though not by this means: For
Elfegus was hurried away and lost his head by the Dans; and Simon Sudbury in
the fury of Wat Tyler and his fellows: And long before these Saint John
Baptist had his head danced of by a lewd woman, and Saint Cyprian Archbishop
of Carthage submitting his head to a persecuting sword. Many examples great and
good, and they teach me patience, for I hope my cause in Heaven will look of
another dye then the colors, that is put upon it here upon earth, and some
comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great men in their
several generations, but also that my charge (if I may not be partial) looks
somewhat like that against S. Paul in the 25. of the Acts, for he was accused
for the Law and the Temple, that is the Law and Religion: and like that of S.
Stephen in the sixth of the Acts, for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave
us, which Ordinances were Law and Religion; but you will say, do I then compare my
self with the integrity of Saint Paul and Saint Stephen: no, God forbid, far
be it from me: I only raise a comfort to my self that these great Saints and
servants of God were thus laid up in their several times: And it is very
memorable that Saint Paul who was one of them, and a great one, that helped on
the accusation against Saint Stephen, fell afterward into the self same
accusation himself, yet both of them great Saints and servants of God, I but
perhaps a great clamor there is, that I would have brought in Popery, I shall
answer that more fully by and by, in the mean time, you know what the
Pharisees said against Christ himself in the eleventh of John, If ye let him
alone, all men will believe on him Et veninnt Romani, and the Romans will come
and take away both our place and our Nation. Here was a causeless cry against
Christ that the Romans would come, and see how just the Judgment of God was,
they crucified Chriss for fear least the Romans should come, and his death
was that that brought in the Romans upon them, God punishing them with that
which they most feared: and I pray God this clamor of veniunt Romani (of which
I have given to my knowledge no just cause) help not to bring him in: for the
Pope never had such a Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now
upon the Sects and divisions that are amongst us: in the mean time, by honor
and dishonor, by good report and evil report, as a deceiver, and yet true, am
I now passing out of this world.

Some particulars also I think not amiss to speak of, and first this I shall
be bold to speak of the King, our gracious Sovereign, He has been much
traduced by some for laboring to bring in Popery, but upon my conscience (of
which I am now going to give God a present account) I know him to be as free
from this Charge I think as any man living, and I hold him to be as sound a
Protestant, according to the Religion by Law established as any man in this
Kingdom, and that he will venture his Life as far and as freely for it: and I
think I do or should know both his affections to Religion, and His grounds
upon which that affection is built, as fully as any man in England

The second particular is concerning this great and populous City, which God
bless: here has been of late a fashion to gather bands, and then go to the
Honorable and great Court of the Kingdom, the Parliament, and clamor for
Justice, as if that great and wise Court, (before whom the causes come which
are unknown to many:) could not or would not do Justice, but at their call and
appointment: a way which may endanger many innocent man, and pluck innocent
blood upon their own heads, and perhaps upon this City also, which God forbid:
and this has been lately practiced against my self, God forgive the setters of
this, with all my heart I beg it, but many well meaning people are caught by
it: In S. Stephens case, when nothing else would serve, they stirred up the
people against him, Acts 6. and Herod went just the self same way, for when he
had killed Saint James, he would not venture upon S. Peter too, till he saw
how the people took it, and were pleased with it, in the 12 of the Acts. But
take heed of having your hands full of blood, in the first of Isaiah, for there
is a time best known to himself, when God amongst other sins makes
inquisition for blood: and when inquisition is on foot, Psalmest tells us,
Psalm. 9. that God remembers, that is not all, that God remembers and forgets
not (says the Prophet) the complaint of the poor, and he tells you what
poor they are in the ninth verse, the poor whose blood is shed by such kind
of means: Take heed of this, It is a fearful thing (at any time) to fall into
the hands of the living God, in the 12. of the Hebrews: but it is fearful
indeed, and then especially, when he is making his Inquisition for blood, and
therefore with prayer to advert the prophecy from the City, let me desire
that this my cup would remember the Prophecy that is expressed, Ier. 26. 15

The third particular, is this poor Church of England, that has flourished
and been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven on
them, but, alas, now it is in a storm it self, and God knows whether, or how
it shall get out; and which is worse then a storm from without, it is become
like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and that
in every cleft profaneness and irreligion is creeping in apace: while as
Prosper says, Men that introduce, profaneness are cloacked with a name of
imaginary religion: for we have in a manner almost lost the substance, and
dwell much, nay too much a great deal in opinion: and that Church which all
the Jesuits machinations in these parts of Christendom could not ruin, is
now fallen into a great deal of danger by her own.

The last particular (for I am not willing to be tedious, I shall hasten to go
out of this miserable world) is my self, and I beseech you; as many as are
within hearing, observe me: I was borne and baptized in the bosom of the
Church of England, as it stands yet established by Law, in that profession I
have ever since lived, and in that profession of the Protestant Religion here
established I come now to die: this is no time to dissemble with God, least of
all in matter of Religion; and therefore I desire it may be remembered: I have
always lived in the Protestant Religion established in England, and in that I
come now to die: what Clamors and Slanders I have endured laboring to keep an
Uniformity in the external service of God, according to the Doctrine and
Discipline of this Church, all men knows, and I have abundantly felt: Now at
last I am accused of high Treason in Parliament, a crime which my soul ever
abhorred: This Treason was charged upon me to consist of two parts: An
endeavor to subvert the Law of the Realm, and a like to overthrow the true
Protestant Religion established by those Laws, Besides my answers which I gave
to the several Charges, I protested my innocence in both Houses: It was said,
Prisoners Protestations at the Bar must not be taken de ipso: I can bring no
witness of my heart, and the intentions thereof, therefore I must come to my
Protestation, not at the Bar, but to my Protestation at this hour and
instant of death, in which (as I said before) I hope all men will be such
charitable Christians as not to think I would die, and dissemble my Religion,
I do therefore here, with that caution that I delivered before, without all
prejudice in the world to my Judges, that are to proceed secundum allegata and
probata, and so to be understood, I die in the presence of Almighty God, and
all his holy and blessed Angels; and I take it now on my death, that I never
endeavored the subversion of the Laws of the Realm, nor never any change of
the Protestant Religion into Popish superstition, and I desire you all to
remember this Protest of mine, for my innocence in these, and from all manner
of Treasons whatsomever.

I have been accused likewise as an enemy to Parliaments, no, God forbid, I
understood them, and the benefits that comes by them, a great deal too well to
be so; but I did indeed dislike some misgovernments (as I conceived) of some
few one or two Parliaments: And I did conceive humbly that I might have reason
for it; for corruption optimi est pessima: There is no corruption in the world
so bad, as that which is in the best thing it self, for the better the thing is
in nature, the worse it is corrupted: And this being the highest and greatest
Court, over which none other can have the jurisdiction in the Kingdom, if any
way a mis-government (which God forbid) should any ways fall upon it, the
subjects of this Kingdom are left without all manner of remedy, and therefore
God preserve them, bless them, and direct them, that there may be no
misconceit, much less misgovernment amongst them. I will not enlarge my self
any further, I have done, I forgive all the world, all and every of those
bitter enemies, or others whatsoever they have been, which any wise prosecuted
me in this kind, and I humbly desire to be forgiven first of God, and then of
every man, whether I have offended him or no, if he do but conceive that I
have, Lord do thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of him, and so I heartily
desire you to join with me in prayer.

The Bishop of Canterburies first Praye^ on the Scaffold.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in
the riches and fullness of all thy mercies, look down upon me, but not till
thou have nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ: look upon me, but not till
thou have bathed me in the blood of Christ: look upon me, but not till I have
hid my self in the wounds of Christ, that so the punishment that is due to my
sins may pass away and go over me: And since thou art pleased to try me to
the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee give me now in this great instant, full
patience, and proportionable comfort a heart ready to die for thine honor,
and the Kings happiness, and the Churches preservation, and my zeal to these,
(far from arrogancy be it spoken, and all the inhumane frailty excepted, and
all incidents thereunto) which is yet unknown of me in this particular, for
which I now come to suffer, I say in this particular of Treason, but otherwise
my sins are many and great, Lord pardon them all, and these especially,
whatsoever they be, which have drawn down this present judgment upon me,
and when thou have given me strength to bear it, then do with me as seems
best in thine own eyes: And carry me through death, that I may look upon it
in what visage soever it shall appear to me, and that there may be a stop
of this issue of blood in this more than miserable Kingdom. I shall desire
that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my self: O Lord, I beseech
thee give grace of repentance unto all people, that have a thirst for blood,
but if they will not repent, then scatter their devices so, and such as are, or
shall be contrary to the glory of thy great Name, the Truth and Sincerity of
Religion, the establishment of the King, and his posterity after him, in their
just Rights, and Privileges, the honor and conservation of Parliaments in
their ancient and just power, the preservation of this poor Church in her
truth, peace and patrimony, and the settlement of this distracted and
distressed people under their ancient laws, and in their native Liberties, and
when thou have done all this, in mere mercy for them, O Lord, fill their
hearts with thankfulness, and with religious dutiful obedience to thee and
thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord Jesus, And I beseech thee,
receive my Soul to mercy. Our Father which art in Heaven. Hallowed be thy
Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us
this day our daily bread, And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from
evil,

Amen.
When he had finished his prayer, he gave his paper to Doctor Stern, saying,
Doctor, I give you this, that you may show it to your fellow Chaplains, that
they see how I am gone out of the world, and Gods blessing and his mercy be
upon them.

Then turning to Master Hind, he said, Friend, I beseech you here me, I
cannot say I have spoken every word as it is in my Paper, but I have gone very
near it, to help my memory as well as I could: but I beseech you let me have
no wrong done me.

Hind. Sir, you shall not, if I do any wrong, let it fall on my own head, I
pray God have mercy upon your soul.


Cant. I thank you: I did not speak with any jealousy, as if you would do so,
but I spoke it only as a poor man going out of the world, it is not possible
for me to keep to the words of my paper, and a phrase may do me wrong.

I did think here would have been an empty Scaffold, that I might have had
room to die: I beseech you let me have an end of this misery, for I have
endured it long.

When room was made, he spoke thus; I Will pull off my Doublet, and Gods will be
done, I am willing to go out of the world: no man can be more willing to send
me out, then I am willing to be gone.


Sir John Clathworthy. What special Text of Scripture now is comfortable to a
man in his departure?


Cant. Cupio dissolvi and esse cum Christo.


Sir Clothworthy. That is a good desire, but there must be a ^^undation for
that desire, as assurance.


Cant. No man can express it, it is to be found within.


Sir John Clothworthy. It is founded upon a word though, and that word would be
known.


Cant. That word is the knowledge of Jesus Christ and that alone.


And turning to the Executioner, he gave him money, saying, here honest friend,
God forgive thee, and do thy office upon me in mercy.

The Executioner desiring him to give some sign when he should strike, he
answered, Yes, I will, but let me fit my self first.

Then kneeling down on his knees, he prayed thus:

The Bishop of Canterburies last prayer on the Scaffold.
LORD, I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of
death before I can come to see thee, but it is but umbra mortis, a mere shadow
of death a little darkness upon nature, but thou by thy merits and passion
have broke through the jaws of death: So Lord, receive my soul, and have
mercy upon me, and bless this Kingdom with peace and plenty, and with
brotherly love and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian
blood among them, for Jesus Christ's sake, if it be thy will.

And when he had said, Lord receive my Soul (which was his sign) the
Executioner did his office.

FINIS.

