A LETTER SENT BY WILLIAM LAVVD Archbishop of Canterbury.

With diverse Manuscripts to the University of OXFORD.

Which Letter, in respect it has Relation to this present Parliament, is here
inserted.

TOGETHER, With the Answer which the University sent him, wherein is specified
their Integrity, as he is their Chancellor. The Tenor whereof ensues.

Printed in the Year, 1641,

A LETTER SENT BY WILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of Canterbury.
To my most loving friend Doctor Potter, and the rest of the Doctors, Proctors,
and to all the Convocation House in the University of Oxford.
SO difficult (most flourishing Academians) are the present times, (and the
present business so urgent) that we have no leisure for writing. This writing
of what Nature soever receive readily, I will transmit a few things to you, as
yet (most flourishing University) we have most difficult times and businesses,
which every way urge, us. But in what estate Ecclesiastical businesses are all
men may see, there is more then one Fountain of these evils. But there is but
one fury of those, who not enduring sound Doctrine, which St. Hilary observed,
desire a corrupt Doctrine, among whom, thus stung with the Summer-flye, how
hard a thing it is to live amongst them: But I am more sensible of it, to whom,
I thank God, it is the same to live, and to do my duty, but these things are
to be passed by, neither can we know what will be the issue of these things,
and we have no milder times nor suffer, then our complaints; But I desire to
give you to understand, that I pray you may have all things happy, while here
amongst the higher Spheres, the Stars of any magnitude, scarce keep their
motion, and in regard of ye thickness of the clouds, send forth a weak light,
while all things are at this pass, I have resolved to lay down in safety (as
I hope) with you certain Manuscripts of former times, they are fevv, but like
to the former, if not equal, and such they are which I hope, I have not be^n
wanting to provide for your use, notwithstanding the difficulty of the times,
but amongst them there are 6. Hebrew, 11. of Greek, 34. of Arabicke 21. of
Latin, 2. of Italian, and as many of English, and of Persian 5. one of the
which, (being of a large volume) contains a History from the beginning of
the World, to the end of ye Saracen Empire, and without doubt, is of great
vvorth, let these be carried by you, into the Library of Bodley, I reverence
the name, let me not be superstitious, and I desire, they may be placed by
others, which of late were mine, and under the same conditions, I have given
the former. There is no need of many words to set forth this too small a gift
of ours, neither did I ever desire it, This I daily pray for earnestly at God,
that the University may ever flourish, and that Religion and Piety, and
whatsoever may set forth true Doctrine, may arise to the height, and that the
Tempests (which are high) being once laid, you may enjoy your selves, your
studies, and above all things God, which shall be always my desires.

Your faithful and loving Chancellor, W. CANTERBVRY.

THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD: Their answer, unto a Letter sent to WILLIAM LAVVD,
Archbishop of Canterbury their Chancellor.
To the most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
WE wish all eternity most Reverend Chancellor, oh how great are the virtues
which arise from the streights, which are pressing, while the Stars shine,
you think of conforming and strengthening the Universitie, and to make it
famous and Illustrious, being careful for all, and as we hope secure for your
self. You have made a new Harvest for us, by adding to the former Manuscripts
these latter, yet with great price and labor, and with the like variety of
Tongues, and weights of Arguments, and variety of examples, worthy to be
perused, so in number, and one volume, which with the like faith, and
thankfulness, we will most safely keep and carefully observe. There are
diverse Judgments of those that observe and read these books, but there is but
one sense, which is this, That you are the man that desires the Muses, and our
Mother the University, to the height of happiness; These were the Monuments of
former Ages, but they shall be yours, by giving us the treasury of this
History, a deserved History, the tumultuousnesse of the times do double the
gifts, which now, will hardly admit, either the leisure of writing or reading,
notwithstanding it leaves it is place, for the incomparable pains of doing
good, and space of giving advice, whatsoever you put into the bosom of the
University, you may assure your self in safety, we hope it is beyond
Fortunes reach, not in that it is given to us, but because the reward of such
Works, is treasured with the chief of Mortals, we in the mean time (who are
nourished by hope) are under the same fate, The hand that hates the Orchard,
and hates the Orchard-Keeper, does not spare what is sown into the ground, or
what the tree produces, only the Orchard-keeper who adventures himself for
the safety of the Seminary and unmindfull of his own, to increase their
prosperity, he stands in a slippery place, he is more to be reverenced, then
when there is a most straight rule, certainly without the Church (without the
which we cannot hope for safety) we will not hope for comfort, we desire no
such safety, no such pleasure, we desire rather to perish, then to depend on
those Travels, when that unhappy day shall come, when nothing shall be more
displeasing then the faithful mysteries of God, and nothing more dangerous
when innocence, and too much integrity shall be counted a fault. These evils
God turn far from us, and appease the fury popular, who causes the waves
or winds.

Our members are ready to be your Champions, but our minds ( notwithstanding
all interpositions) are more ready, for by this time, we shall muster up our
forceable troops of sighs, and shall dispose of all the force of your
desires, joyfully and earnestly looking up, and spreading our hands toward
Heaven, praying on our knees that (with other gifts given to the House) we may
enjoy (this the great Gift) and you the Giver:

From Oxford 1640. Your most observant, Strode,
Orator in the University.
FINIS.

