THE Preaching BISHOP Reproving Unpreaching PRELATES. Being A Brief, but
Faithful Collection or Observeable Passages, in several Sermons Preached by the
Reverend Father in God, Mr Hugh Latimer, Bish. of Worcester, (One of our first
Reformers, and a Glorious Martyr of Jesus Christ) before K. Edw. the Sixth;
before the Convocation of the Clergy, and before the Citizens of London, at
Paul's. Wherein, Many things, relating to the Honor and Happiness of the King
(Our Most Gracious Sovereign) the Honorable Lords, the Reverend Judges, the
Citizens of London, and Commons of all sorts, but especially, the Bishops and
the Clergy are most Plainly, Piously and Pithily represented.

He that hates Reproof, is brutish,

Pro. 12. 1. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Booksellers, 1661.

QUem dabis mihi de numero Praelatorum, qui non plus invigilat Subditorum
vacuandis Marsupiis, quam Vitiis exterpandis? O Utinam tam vigiles reperirentur
ad curam, quam alacres currunt ad Cathedram,

Barn. Sermon. 77. in Cant. To the Reverend FATHERS, the BISHOPS OF ENGLAND.
My Lords,
THe Name of Bishop Latimer is of all good men had in great Veneration, See his
sweet memorial in the Book of Martyrs.
and therefore it is not to be doubted, but your Lordships will afford him a
Favorable Reception: Where should the Labors of a Reformed Bishop and Martyr,
find a safer Patronage, then under the wings of the Bishops of the Reformed
Churches? You succeed him in Place and Dignity, tread also in the steps of his
Zeal and Diligence. The Tongues and Pens of men are very busy with you; but be
confident, if you be clad with the Zeal of your Quondam Brother, they will be
as loath to part with you, as they are now willing to be rid of you: For who is
he that will harm you, if ye be Followers of that which is good? ^ Pe. 3. 13.


Your Reverend Brother tells you in these Following Pages, that, though in the
time of King Edward the Sixth much was done in the work of Reformation, yet all
was not done that was necessary: The greater rubbish of Popery was thrown out,
but (says he) the House is not clean swept yet: The Broom is once more in your
Lordships hands, sweep clean, we beseech you, out with the dust of Ceremonies
and Superstition, as well as with the Garbidge and Filth of Idolatry. Take not
from a Thread to a Shoe-latchet, lest Rome should say, I have made England rich,
If Ornaments and Ceremonies (though judged indifferent) be so necessary, can no
other be pitched upon, then such as are found in the Idols Temple? Why should
the Spouse of Christ be arrayed in the Attire of an Harlot? Rev. 17. 5


Your pious Brother pleads very heartily for the Ordinance of Preaching,
lifting it up above all other parts of Worship, and tells you more then once,
Take away Preaching, take away Salvation; a Sentence most worthy the mouth of a
Bishop, and fit to be engraven on the doors of your Palaces, and Porches of
your Churches.

And your Lordships know what that Jewel of Bishops said, Oportet Episcopum
conciona^tem mori: Oh imitate the zeal and Forwardness of your Famous
Predecessors, both in your Persons and Clergical Charge.

My Lords, by a Series of merciful Providence, we are brought under the
Government of the best King in the world, whom one of your Brethren not
undeservedly styles, Bish, Reinolds.
A Prince of the greatest suavity: His Majesty's Gracious Declaration for the
ease of tender Consciences, (like a silken Thread) has tied a faster and
closer knot of Love and Loyalty upon the hearts of his Subjects, then all the
Cords and Cables of your severest Canons; had your Lordships seconded his
Majesty's Clemeney, with a Profession of your future Moderation and Gentleness
toward Ministers and People, how well had it savoured?

My Lords, Barnard gives you good Counsel, in Sermon. 23. super Cantica.

Audiant hoc Prelati, qui sibi commissis semper volunt esse formidini,
utilitati raro. Discite subditorum vos esse matres debere, non dominos, studete
magis amari, quam metui; and si severitate interdum opus sit, paterna sit, non
tyrannica, Matres fovendo, Patres vos corripiendo exhibeatis: Mansuescite,
ponite feritatem, suspendite verbera, producite Ubera, pectora lacte
pinguescant, non Typho turgeant. Quid jugum vestrum super eos aggravatis,
quorum potius onera portare debeatis! --.

You live, my Lords, in a discerning and jealous age; England so called
formerly by the Pope.
you are like to find the good old Ass more skittish now, then in former
times. Your Fathers made our yoke grievous, let it be your Glory, to make the
heavy yoke they put upon us, lighter, and we will serve you.

Let not all the trouble seem little before your eyes, that has come upon us,
on our Kings, on our Princes, on our Parliaments, on our Ministers, on this
Famous City, and on all this People.

We cannot be deaf to those sad Complaints (His Late Majesty, our dear
Sovereign has left behind him) of the Vulgars violence and tumults in the
dawning of our late unhappy Differences: Whence blew the wind that raised the
noise and madness of those raging waves? Came it not out of your Quarter?

Remember, and forget not your and caetera Oath, Then sadly complained of.
Innovations in Worship, corruption of your Courts Discipline, the decay of the
Soul-saving Ordinance of Preaching, the swarming of scandalous and idle Clergy,
the steighting and silencing of pious and painful Ministers. These (my Lords)
with much more, were those Vapors (which being not purged out, but) by your
countenance pent up in the Bowels of the Kingdom, caused that hate overturning
Earthquake.

After this Earthquake (through the working of our good God) 1 Kings 19. 12.
a still small voice is heard, a voice of peace from his Majesty, speaking
peace to all his people.

A Voice of Praise from his People, rejoicing and blessing God for such a King.

Beware my Lords, you step not back into your old Circle, and conjure up again
the dangerous spirit of this mobile Vulgus.

My Lords, Sir Harbottle Grimston's first Speech in the Banqueting house at
Whitehal.
His Majesty has bin twice crowned since his Happy Arrival, once, by the
Commons of England, with a Crown of Hearts, and lately, by the Nobles of
England, with a Crown of Gold. It is much in your hands, to continue and
increase the Glory of the first and best Crown.

The Management of that Indulgence, His Majesty in His pious Declaration,
offers to His Subjects, is like to be committed to your Care: Be tender of His
Majesty's Honor, See His Majesty's Speech to the Lords House.
before the People (of which His Majesty is very tender) Clip not His Royal
Bounty. Let Ministers and People under your Charge, taste the Fruit of it in its
greatest Latitude. What if you decrease in some irregular excess? If His
Majesty increase His Dominion over the best part of His Subjects Possessions,
their hearts, The Kings Declaration mentions some that censure His Majesty for
want of Zeal to the Church, because he presses not a general Conformity to
Lyturgies, etc.
let it be no Grief of heart to you.

This you may observe (in that which is here dedicated to your Honors) was the
genuine Temper and Bent of the Spirit and Labors of,

Your Reverend Brother, Hugh Worcester.

Postscript.
LEst this Reverend Bishop should lie under the suspicion of singularity and
Phanaticisme, your Lordships may observe the same spirit breathing in one whom
you will judge far enough from such an Imputation; it is Cornelius a Lapide;
whose Zeal for Englands return to Rome, stands a tipto: You shall find him upon
his knees at Prayer, in his Commentary on Zechar. c. 1. v. 12.

Moraliter id ipsum dicamus, id ipsum oremus and obsecremus pro Anglia, Scotia,
Dania, Suetia, Germania, in quibus stetit, statque Stabitque
Haeresis -- usquequo Domine non misereris Angliae?

Yet this devout Orator speaks the same sense, though in another Language, in
his Commentary on Ezekiel, c. 24. v. 4. with this Reverend Father. Take his own
words, as follows;

Audiant has Prophetae minas Ecclesiastici, Pastores and Praelati illi, qui ex
beneficiorum proventibus lucris in hiantes,, arcarum opes quaerunt, non
Animarum; qui Beneficia Beneficiis, pensiones pensionibus accumulantes,
quaestuarii potius sunt quam beneficiarii. Nonne hi detondent oves, tonsasq,
and nudas aliis misellis pascendas relinquunt, qui pastoratus, Canonicatus,
Episcopatus resignant in alios, ac fructus pene omnes sibi reservant; ut si
aureos mill annue det Beneficium, ipsi ducentos vel trecentos cum eo
resignent, sed oct^ngentos caeteros sibi praetextu pensionis reservent. Nonne
hos direct jaculo suo ferit and configit hic Deus? dicens, Vae pastoribus
Israelis, qui pascebant semetipsos: Lac comedebatis, and Lanis operiebamini,
and quod crassum erat occidebatis, Gregem autem meum non pascebatis.

Nonne in hos detonat Jeremias? c. 6. v. 13. A minore usque ad majorem, omnes
avaritiae student, and a Propheta usque ad Sacerdotem, cuncti faciunt dolum.
and Isaias, c. 56. v. 11. Ipri pastores ignorarunt intelligentiam, omnes in
viam suam declinaverunt, unusquisque ad avaritiam suam.

Sanctio prisca Ecclesiae est, beneficium dari propter Officium. Quomodo ergo
hi beneficii commoda and lucra captant, qui officium non praestant, sed illud
in alium transferunt? Haeccine, fuit men's Fundatorum Ecclesiae, alere homines
in ea nihil agentes and otiosos?

Nonne si ad nos redirent, Here Latimer leaves him.
protestarentur (imo jam in Coelo aut in Purgatorio degentes protestantur) sua
Legata and Testamenta everti, se sua bona legasse Ecclesiae ad alendos Pastores
and Ministros, qui reipsa per se fideles Christi docerent, pascerent, regerent,
non ut iis alii, Nota.
qui nihil Ecclesiae suae conferunt, fruerentur and ditescerent? ^onne Dei
Hominumque fidem implorarent, ut haec iis quibus ipsi ea legarunt
restituerentur?

Ingens sane est haec Iniquitas? Primo, In Deum and Christum. Christi enim
patrimonium Christi Ecclesiae ministrantibus deputatum, ab iis evertitur, and
in extraneos non ministrantes transfertur.

Secundo, In Ecclesiam quamque particularem, quae hisce suis proventibus
spoliatur; ac proinde doctos and insignes pastores and Ministros nancisci
nequit, sed pauperes, misellos, quin and ignorantes and inidoneos qui quodvis
stipendium acceptant, ut vivant. Quod si quando dignos nanciscatur illi pro
dignitate officium administrare, imo vivere nequeunt.

Tertio, In populum and fideles, qui ab hisce Misellis ita erudiri, corrigi,
formari, and dirigi in vita Christiana nequeunt, Nota.
uti a doctis and cordatis erudirentur and dirigirentur; quare multorum salus
periclitatur, imo de facto multi pereunt, and damnantur Ministrorum Ecclesiae
ignorantia, inexperientia, incuria, qui salvati fuissent, si Ministros dignos,
quales poscebant opes Ecclesiae, nacti fuissent. Annon hasce animas, Christus
in die judicii requiret ab hisce lucrionibus?

Quarto, In ipsos Fundatores, quorum ultima voluntas, ipsaque Legata and
donationes evertuntur, ut dixi; ipsi enim rogati dicerent, aliam prorsus fuisse
suam mentem, Nota.
nunquam se in hasce pensiones, imo, lacerationes and distractiones suarum
oblationum consensisse, nunquam consensuros.

Quinto, In Canones omnes antiquos, qui hasce pensiones vetant, statuuntque ut
non nisi justa and gravi de causa, praesertim been de Ecclesia meritis, and
emeritis assignentur, idque ut habet communis mos, ea proportione, ut tertiam
fructuum beneficii partem non superent.

Sexto, In Ecclesiam Universalem, cui ingens datur Scandalum. Rident and
subsannant Haeretici, sicubi vident hasce avaritiae in Praelatis Ecclesiae
nundinationes. Gemunt fideles. Clerici imitantur, ut Pastorum and Praelatorum
exempla sectentur, ac pensionibus similibus inhient.

Septimo, In Episcopos and Patres omnes priscos and sanctos, quorum Sanctiones,
vita and exempla violantur. Haec lucra, has pensiones, non sectatus est, imo in
nullo suorum admisit S. August. qui test Possid. in Episcopatu non opes, sed
animas quaesivit; ideoque opes suas in pauperes erogavit: non S. Gregor. cujus
liberalitatem and Eleemosinas depraedicat Ecclesia Romana: non S. Ambrosius,
non Chrysostomus, non Basilius, non Nazianzenus, non Athanasius. Patres in ea
invehuntur, Idle Clergy guilty of Sacrilege.
quasi in Crimina, imo, Sacrilegia, eisque inhiantes, Sacrilegii accusant: Tum
quia patrimonium Christi diripiunt; tum quia indignos and inidoneos se faciunt
suo gradu, dignitate and officio: Officium enim eorum est verbo, and magis vita
docere.

Dominus pars haereditatis meae and calicis mei, ille est, qui restituet
haereditatem meam.

Clericus enim a (...), id est, sors, dicitur, quod scilicet sortem non ambiat
in terra, sed quod instar Levitarum and Sacerdotum veteris Testamenti; sors
ejus sit dominus, a quo haereditatem expectat in coelo.

Clericus ergo profitetur se non quaerere opes in terra, sed in caelo se cor
habere fixum in Deo. Jam si quis lucris terrenis studeat, contrarium
profitetur, clamat enim re ipsa cor suum non esse in aethere, sed in aere,
sortem suam non esse Deum, sed Mammonam.

Rursum, officium eorum est, praedicare Regnum Coelorum, Nota.
quod Christus and Apostoli praedicarunt, ut scilicet homines a carne and terra
ad spiritum and coelum avocent; ut a superbia, gula, avaritia, homines ad
humilitatem, temperantiam, opum contemptum traducant. Jam quomodo praedicabunt
opes coelestes, qui toti terrestribus inhiant? Quomodo oppugnabunt avaritiam,
qui non nisi pensionibus accumulandis student? Quomodo aeternitatem and bona
aeterna inculcabunt, qui non nisi temporalia and caduca sectantur?

S. Hilarious Can. 4. in Matthew. explicans illud Christi, Vos estis Sal terrae,
ait, quod Apostoli and eorum Successores sint rerum coelestium praedicatores,
and aeternitatis velut Satores, immortalitatem omnibus corporibus, quibus eorum
sermo aspersus fuerit, conferentes. Merito igitur Sal terrae sunt nuncupati,
per doctrinae virtutem salientes, aeternitati corpora reservantes. At quomodo
aeternitatis erunt Satores, qui toti temporalium sunt Messores? Quomodo erunt
Sal terrae, qui quasi sal infatuatum in terram and terrena conversi sunt? qui
ut subdit S. Hilarious, sensu accepti saporis amisso, vivificare corrupta non
possunt, and projecti de Ecclesiae promptuariis, cum iis quos salierint,
pedibus incedentium proteruntur.

Denique in hos graviter invehitur S. Scriptura and Patres. Clamat Zachar. c.
11. v. 17. O Pastor and Idolum, derelinquens Gregem, q. d. Videris esse populi
Pastor, sed revera es Idolum and Larya pastoris, es fictus and pictus, non
vivus and verus pastor, qui gregem deseris, and te pascis. Pascentes semetipsos
culpat S. Judas. Lex Apostoli est, qui in Sacrario operantur quae de Sacrario
sunt, edunt; and qui Altari deserviunt, cum Altari participant, 1 Cor. 9. 13.
Qui ergo Sacrario and Altari non deserviunt, ex eo non edant, ex eo non vivant,
nec deservientes stipendiis sibi constitutis defraudent, eaque ad se
transferant.

Apostoli (quorum hi sunt posteri) fidenter dicunt Christo, Matthew. 19. Ecce nos
reliquimus omnia, and secuti sumus te.

Quomodo hi relinquunt non omnia, sed sua, qui inhiant alienis? Act. 3. 6. S.
Petrus ait claudo, petenti Eleemosynam; Argentum and Aurum non est mihi, quod
autem habeo, hoc tibi do. Ac per hoc meritus est id, quod ait S. Aug. in Psalm.
103. Dicens, prorsus totum mundum dimisit Petrus, and totum mundum Petrus
accepit: quasi nihil habentes, and omnia possidentes. Quomodo haec dicent S.
Petri asseclae and Discipuli, qui immodice aurum auro, pensionem pensioni,
beneficium beneficio, and quasi talpae terram terrae accumulant?

Merito de his quaestus est S. Bonifacius, Germaniae apostolus, and in Frisia
Martyr, Anno Christi, 755. atque ex eo Conc. Triburiense, C. 18. and habetur de
Consecr. did. 1. c. Vasa quibus, olim, inquit, sacerdotes aurei celebrabant in
vasis ligneis, nunc sacerdotes lignei celebrant in vasis aureis. Et S. Gregor,
Hom 17. in Evangel. Pensate, ait, Fratres, quantae damnationis est, sine labor
percipere mercedem laboris; quanti criminis, peccatorum pretia accipere, and
nihil contra peccatum praedicando dicere. --

S. Bernard. Epist. 2. Ubi de his inter alia dicit, quicquid praeter
necessarium victum, Note,
ac simplicem vestitum de Altari retines, tuum non est, Rap ina est,
sacrilegium est.

S. Nazianz. Apolog. 1. Spiritualis omnis prefecturae, ait, finis est, privata
utilitate neglecta, commodis aliorum inservire.

Denique inter alia, Fas est and ab host doceri.
de pensionibus ita sancit Council. Tridentinum, Sess. 24. c. 13. Omnes
Cathedrales Ecclesiae, quarum redditus summa^ Ducatorum mill; and Parochiales
quae summam Ducatorum centum non excedunt nullis pensionibus aut
reservationibus fructuum graventur. --

O aeterna veritas, vera sanctitas, sancta foelicitas, illumina tenebras
nostras, aperi oculos mentis nostrae, ut nulla nos seducat, nulla inquinet,
nulla condemnet phylargyriae vanitas. Eja, aspiret dies, and lux tua, and
inclinentur umbrae. Infunde cordi nostro Justitiam, ut quae Ecclesiae sunt
Ecclesiae, quae Dei sunt, Deo reddamus. Infunde continentiam, ut modico (pro
modica enim via hujus vitae modico opus est viatico) victu and amictu contenti,
sobrie, just, and pie vivamus in hoc seculo, beatam spem expectantes, and
adventum Gloriae magni Dei. Infunde Religionem and pietatem, ut non Mammonae
iniquo sed tibi domino nostro serviamus in sanctitate and justitia, omnibus
diebus nostris.

Infunde Charitatem, ut animam magis diligamus quam arcam ut pauperes and
inopes magis amemus, quam Aurum and Opes.

Infunde sapientiam, ut veras divitias ambiamus and coacervemus, quae nobiscum
perennent in coelis, non vanas and mox perituras in terris.

Da nobis sic transire per bona temporalia, ut non amittamus aeterna. Da, ut
domos, nomen and familiam construamus non apud homines brevi morituros, sed
apud te and S. Angelos, beatos and gloriosos, quae in omnia secula durent and
aeternent. Da ut simus sal terrae, and lux mundi, ut tam exemplo, quam verbo
omnes trahamus ad te, eosque doceamus reipsa contemnere terrena, and amare
coelestia, ut in magno illo decretorio mundi die, a te Judice audire mereamur,
Euge Serve bone, quia in pauca fuisti fidelis, super multa te constituam, intra
in gaudium Domini tui, AMEN.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
HEre is presented to thee some Gleanings out of the Labors of that eminent
Instrument of Gods Glory, Bishop Latimer (who may worthily be styled our
English Luther.) The times wherein he lived and preached, and the enormities
against which he strugled, bear so great a conformity with ours, that with a
little variation, he seems to speak to us, both as to our Maladies and Remedy:
Which as it was an Invitation to the transcribing of these Passages; so if thou
be one that longest after the Peace and Purity of the Church, they will be
found worthy of all acceptance; thou will here see a most Glorious Pattern of
Zeal, Piety and Godly Simplicity, fit for the imitation of the Bishops and
Ministers of this age.

Thou will find also our first Reformation (how much soever gloried in) not
brought to its desired perfection, even by the Confession of one of the prime
Reformers. That there are so many stops and pauses in the several pages, is
not, because the rest that is omitted, is not worthy to be known, but merely to
avoid the trouble of transcribing, and prevent thy Charge, It is desired that
these few Rivulets may entice thee to visit the Fountain, the Book it self;
wherein as thou will prove the sincerity of these Collections, so thou will
receive fuller satisfaction in any Obscurities, occasioned by this Brevity.
Brevis esse laboro, obscurus fio.
The Reformation and Edification of the Church is the only Project of

Bishop Latimer

THE Preaching Bishop Reproving Unpreaching Prelates.
Part of a Sermon that the Reverend Father in Christ Mr Hugh Latimer Bishop of
Worcester, made to the Convocation of the CLERGY.
Luke 16. 8. Filii hujus seculi, etc.
CHrist in this saying, touched the sloth and sluggishness of his, and did not
allow the fraud and subtilty of other: neither was glad that it was indeed as
he said, but complained rather that it should be so; as many men speak many
things, not that they ought to be so, but that they are wont to be so. Nay this
grieved Christ, that the children of this world should be of more policy then
the children of light; which thing was true in Christ's time, and now in our
time it is most true. Who is so blind but he sees this clearly, except
perchance there be any that cannot discern the children of the world, from the
children of light? The children of the world conceive and bring forth more
prudently, and things conceived and brought forth, they nourish and conserve
with much more policy, then do the children of light: Which thing is as
sorrowful to be said, as it seems absurd to be heard. When ye hear the
children of the world, you understand the world as a father; for the world is
father to many children, not by the first creation, but by imitation and love.
He is not only a father, but also the son of another father. If you knew once
his father, by and by ye shall know his children; for he that has the devil to
his father, must needs have devilish children. The devil is not only taken for
father, but also for Prince of the world, that is, of worldly folk. It is
either all one thing, or else not much different, to say, children of the
world, and children of the devil, according to that that Christ said to the
Jews, Ye are of your father the devil; whereas undoubtedly he spoke to the
children of this world. --

Then this devil being such a one as can never be unlike himself; Lo, of Envy,
his welbeloved Lemmon he begat the world, and after left it with Discord at
Nurse: Which world after it came to man's state, had of many Concubines, many
sons, he was so secund a father, and had gotten so many children of Lady Pride,
Dame Gluttony, Mistress Avarice, Lady Lechery, and of Dame Subtilty, that now
hard and scant ye may find any corner, any kind of life, where many of his
children be not: In Court, in Cowl's, in Cloisters, in Rochets, be they never
so white, yea where shall ye not find them? Howbeit, they that be secular and
lay men, are not by and by children of the world; not the children of light,
that are called spiritual, are of the Clergy. No, no, as ye may find among the
Laity many children of light, so among the Clergy (how much soever we arrogate
these holy titles unto us, and think them only attributed to us; Mat. 5. 1 Pet.
2.
Vos estis lux mundi, peculium Christi, etc. ye are the light of the world, the
chosen people of Christ, a Kingly Priesthood; an holy Nation, and such other)
ye shall find many children of the world, because in all places the world
gets many children. --

These be our holy, holy men, that say they are dead to the world, when no men
be more lively in worldly things, then some of them be. But let them be in
profession and name farthest from the world, most alienate from it, yea so far,
that they may seem to have no occupying, no kindred, no affinity, nothing to do
with it; yet in their life and deeds they show themselves no bastards, but
right begotten children of the world, as those which the world long since had
by his dear wife Dame Hypocrisy; and since has brought them up, and
multiplied to more than a good many, increasing them too much, albeit they
swear by all He-Saints and She-Saints too, that they know not their Father nor
Mother, neither the world, nor hypocrisy; as indeed they can semble and
dissemble all things, which thing they might learn wonderful well of their
Parents. I speak not of all religious men, but those that the world has fast
knit at his Girdle, even in the midst of their Religion. --

And I marvel, if there be not a great sort of Bishops and Prelates, that are
Brethren German unto these; and as a great sort, so even as right-born, and
worlds Children, by as good Title as they? But because I cannot speak of all,
when I say Prelates; I understand Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Archdeacons, Deans
and other of such sort, that are now called to this Convocation, as I see to
entreat here of nothing, but of such matters as both appertain to the Glory of
Christ, and to the wealth of the people of England; which thing I pray God they
do as earnestly as they ought. But it is to be feared, lest as Light has many
of her Children here, so the world has sent some of his whelps hither. I know
there can be no agreement betwixt these too, as long as they have minds so
unlike, and so contrary Affections, and Judgments so utterly diverse in all
points: But if the children of this world be either more in number, or more
prudent than the children of Light, what then avails us to have this
Convocation? Had it not been better, we had not been called together at all?
For as the children of the world be evil, so they breed and bring forth things
evil, and yet there be more of them in all places, or at least. --

And as now I much pass not how you were engendered, or by what means ye were
promoted to those dignities that ye now occupy, so it be honest, good and
profitable, that ye in this your consultation shall do and engender. The end of
your Convocation shall show what ye have done; the fruit that shall come of
your Consultation, shall show what generation ye be of. For what have ye done
hitherto, I pray you, these seven years and more? What have ye engendered? What
have ye brought forth? What fruit is come of your long and great Assembly? What
one thing that the people of England has been the better of an hair? or your
selves either accepted before God, or better discharged toward the people
committed unto your cure? For that the people is better learned and taught now,
than they were in time past, to whether of these, ought we to attribute it, to
your Industry, or to the Providence of God, and the foreseeing of the Kings
Grace? Ought we to thank you, or the Kings Highness? Whether stirred other
first, Note, Does not the King in his Declaration do so.
you the King, that ye might preach, or He you by his Letters, that ye should
preach ofter? Is it unknown, think you, how both ye and your Curates were in a
manner by violence enforced to let Books be made by profane and Lay Persons,
and sold abroad, and read for the Instruction of the People? I am bold with
you, but I speak Latin, and not English; to the Clergy, not to the Laity. I
speak to you being present, and not behind you backs. God is my witness, I
speak whatsoever is spoken, of the good will that I bear you: God is my
witness, which knows my heart, and compels me to say that I say.

Now I pray you, in Gods name, what did you, so great Fathers, so many, so long
a season, so often assembled together? What went you about? What would you have
brought to pass; two things taken away? The one, That ye (which I heard) burned
a dead man: The other, that ye (which I felt) went about to burn one being
alive: Him, because he did, I cannot tell how, in his Testament withstand your
profit; in other Points, as I have heard, a very good man, reported to be of
honest life, while he lived, full of good works, good both to the Clergy and
also to the Laity. This other, which truly never hurt any of you, ye would have
raked in the coals, because he would not subscribe to certain Articles, that
took away the Supremacy of the King: Take away these two noble Acts, and there
is nothing else left, that ye went about, that I know, saving that I now
remember, that somewhat ye attempted against Erasmus, albeit nothing as yet is
come to light. Ye have often sit in Consultation, but what have ye done? Ye have
had many things in deliberation, but what one is put forth, whereby either
Christ is more glorified, or else Christ's people made more holy? I appeal to
your own Conscience.

How chanced this? How came this thus? Because there were no children of Light,
no children of God among you, which setting the world at naught, would study to
illustrate the Glory of God, and thereby show themselves Children of Light? I
think not so: certainly, I think not so. God forbid, that all you which were
gathered together under the pretense of Light, should be children of the world.
Then why happened this? why I pray you? Perchance either because the children of
the world were more in number, in this your Congregation, as it often happens, or
at the least of more policy than the Children of Light in their Generation.
Whereby it might very soon be brought to pass, that those were much more
stronger, in gendring the evil, than these, in producing the good: The children
of light have Policy, but it is like the policy of the Serpent, and is joined
with dovish simplicity; they engender nothing but simply, faithfully, and
plainly, even so doing all that they do. But the children of this world have
worldly policy, foxly craft, lion-like cruelty, power to do hurt, more than
either Aspis or Basiliscus, ingendring and doing all things fraudulently,
deceitfully, guilfully. -- The children of this world be like crafty Hunters,
they be mis-named children of light, forasmuch as they so hate light, and so
study to do the works of darkness. If they were the children of light, they
would not love darkness. It is no marvel, that they go about to keep others in
darkness, seeing they be in darkness, from top to toe overwhelmed with
darkness, darker than the darkness of Hell. Wherefore it is well done, in all
Orders of men, but especially in the Order of Prelares, to put a difference
between the children of Light, and children of the world, because great deceit
arises in taking the one for the other. Great Imposture comes, when they,
that the common people take for the Light, go about to take the Sun and Light
out of the world. But these be easily known, both by the diversity of minds,
and also their Armors; for whereas the children of light are thus minded, that
they seek --

These worldlings set little by such works as God has prepared for our
salvation, Note.
but they extol Traditions and works of their own invention: The Children of
Light contrary. Note.
The worldlings, if they spy Profit, Gains or Lucre in any thing, be it never
such a trifle, be it never so pernicious, they preach it to the people (if they
preach at any time) and these things they defend with tooth and nail; they can
scarce disallow the abuses of these, albeit they be intolerable, least in
disallowing the abuse, they lose part of their profit. The Children of light
contrary, put all things in their degree, best highest, the worst lowest. They
extol things necessary, Christian, and commanded of God. They pull down
will-works feigned by men, and put them in their place. The abuse of all things
they earnestly rebuke. --

Now to make have, O Glorious zeal!
and to come somewhat nigher to the end, go ye to (good Brethren and Fathers)
for the love of God, go ye to, and seeing we are assembled, let us do something
whereby we may be known to be the children of light. Let us do somewhat, lest we
which hitherto have been judged children of the world, seem even still to be
so. All men call us Prelates; then seeing we be in council, Excellent Counsel
fit to be taken by this Convocation.
let us so order our selves, that as we be Prelates in honor and dignity, so
we may be Prelates in holiness, benevolence, diligence and sincerity. All men
know, that we be here gathered, and with most fervent desire they can, hale,
breath and gape for the fruit of our Convocation. As our Acts shall be, so they
shall name us, so that it now lies in us, whether we will be called Children
of the world or children of the light. Wherefore lift up your heads (Brethren)
and look about with your eyes, spy what things are to be reformed in the Church
of England. --

How think you by the Ceremonies, Note.
that are in England, oftentimes with no little offense of weak consciences
continued, more often with superstition so defiled, and so depraved, that you
may doubt whether it were better for them to tarry still, or utterly to take
them away? Note.
have not our Forefathers complained of the Ceremonies, of the superstitions,
and estimation of them? do ye see nothing in our Holy Days? of the which very
few were made at the first, and they to set forth goodness, virtue, and
honesty. But sithence, there is neither mean or measure in making new
Holy Days: Was it not so of late.
as who say this one thing in serving of God, to make this Law that no man may
work. But what do the people on these Holidays, do they give themselves to
godliness, or else ungodliness? See you nothing Brethren? if you see not, God
sees: God sees all the whole Holidays to be spent miserably in drunkenness,
in glossing, in strife, in envy, dansing, dicing, idleness, and gluttony. Thus
men serve the Devil, for God is not thus served, albeit ye say ye serve God; no
the Devil has more service done unto him in one Holy Day then on many working
days; let all these abuses be counted as nothing, who is he that is not sorry
to see in so many Holy Days rich and wealthy Persons to flow in delicates, and
men that live by their travel, poor men to lack necessary meat and drink for
their Wives and Children, and that they cannot labor upon the Holy Days,
except they will be cited, and brought before our Officials. Were it not the
office of good Prelates, This winking caused God to open his eyes, and so
sorely to visit us as of late.
to consult upon these matters and to seek some remedy for them? Ye shall see
(my Brethren,) ye shall see once what will come of this our winking.

What think ye of these images. --

If there be nothing to be amended abroad, concerning the whole, let every one
of us make one better. If there be nothing at home or abroad to be amended and
redressed; My Lords, be ye of good cheer, be merry: and at the least because we
have nothing else to do, let us reason the matter how we may be richer; let us
fall to some pleasant communication; after let us go Home, even as good as we
came hither, that is right begotten Children of the World, utterly Worldlings.
And while we live here let us all make boon cheer. For after this life there is
small pleasure, little mirth for us to hope for, if now there be nothing to be
changed in our factions. 1. Pet. 4
Let us say, not as St. Peter did: Our end approaches nigh, this is an heavy
hearing, but let us say as the evil Servant said: It will be long ere my Master
come. This is pleasant; let us beat our fellow Servants: let us eat and drink
with Drunkards. Surely as often as we do not take away the abuse of things, so
often we beat our fellows. As often as we give not the people their true food, so
often we beat our fellow. As often as we let them dye in superstition, so often we
beat them. To be short, as often as we blind, lead them blind, so often we beat,
and grievously beat our fellows. When we welter in pleasures and idleness, then
we eat and drink with Drunkards.

But God will come, God will come, he will not tarry long away. He will come
upon such a day as we nothing look for him; and at such an hour as we know not.
He will come and cut us in pieces. He will reward us as he does the Hypocrites.
He will set us where wailing shall be, my Brethren, where gnashing of Teeth
shall be, my Brethren. And let here be the end of our Tragedy, if ye will.
These be the delicate dishes, prepared for the world's well-beloved Children.
These be the wafers and junckets provided for worldly Prelates, wailing and
gnashing of Teeth: Can there be any mirth, where these two courses last all the
Feast? Here we laugh, there we shall weep; our Teeth make merry here, ever
dashing in delicates, there we shall be torn with Teeth, and do nothing but
gnash and grind our own: To what end have we excelled others in policy: what
have we brought forth at last? Ye see Brethren what sorrow, what punishment is
provided for you, if you be worldling? if ye will not thus be vexed, be ye not
the Children of the world: if ye will not be the Children of the world, be not
stricken with the love of worldly things, lean not upon them, if ye will not
dye eternally, live not worldly. Come, go to; leave the love of your profit,
study for the glory and profit of Christ, seek in your Consultations, Let the
Bishops learn their duty from this blessed Saint.
such things as pertain to Christ, and bring forth something at last that may
please Christ. Feed ye tenderly with all diligence the Flock of Christ. Preach
truly the word of God, love the Light, walk in the Light: and so be ye the
Children of Light while ye are in this world; that ye may shine in the world
that is to come bright as the Sun, with the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost;
To whom be all Honor, praise and Glory. Amen.

Part of a Sermon preached by Mr. Hugh Latimer at Paul's Church in London, the
Title of which Sermon is The Plough.
-- I Told you in my first Sermon (honorable Audience) that I purposed to
declare unto you two Things. The one, what seed should be sown in Gods Field,
in Gods Plough-Land.

And the other who should be the Sowers. That is to say, what Doctrine is to be
taught in Christ's Church and Congregation, and what men should be the Teachers
and Preachers of it. The first part I have told you in three Sermons past, in
which I have essayed to set forth my Plough, to prove what I could do. And now
I shall tell you who be the Plowers; for Gods Word is a Seed to be sown in
Gods Field, that is, the faithful Congregation, and the Preacher is the Sower.
As it is in the Gospel, Math. 13. 3.
Exivit qui seminat seminare semen suum. He that sows, the Husbandman, the
Ploughman went forth to sow his Seed, so that a Preacher is resembled to a
Plowman, as it is in another place; no man that puts his hand to the Plough
and looks back, is apt for the Kingdom of God. That is to say, let no
Preacher be negligent in doing his office. Albeit this is one of the places
that has been racked, as I told you of racking Scriptures. And I have been one
of them myself, that have racked it, I cry God mercy for it, and have been one
of them that have believed and have expounded it against religious persons that
would forsake their Order which they had professed, and would go out of their
Cloister: Whereas indeed it touches not Monkery, nor makes any thing at all
for any such matter. But it is directly spoken of diligent preaching of the
Word of God: For preaching of the Gospel is one of Gods Plough-works; and the
Preacher is one of Gods ploughmen: Ye may not be offended with my similitude,
in that I compare preaching to the labor and work of plowing, and the Preacher
to a plowman. Ye may not be offended with this my similitude; for I have been
slandered of some persons for such things. It has been said of me, Oh Latimer!
nay, as for him, I will never believe him while I live, not trust him, for he
likened our ever blessed Lady to a Saffron. Bag; where indeed I never used that
similitude. --

But in case I had used this similitude, it had not been to be reproved, but
might have been without reproach: For I might have said thus; as the
Saffron-Bag that has been full of Saffron, or has had Saffron in it, does
ever after savor and smell of the sweet Saffron that it contained: So our
Blessed Lady, which conceived and bare Christ in her womb, did ever after
resemble the manners and virtues of that precious Babe which she bare. And what
had our Blessed Lady been the worse for this? --

Ye may not then I say, be offended with my similitude, because I liken
Preaching to a Plow-mans labor, and a Prelate to a Plowman.

But you will now ask me, whom I call a Prelate? A Prelate is that man,
whosoever he be, that has a Flock to be taught of him, whosoever has any
spiritual Charge in the faithful Congregation, and whosoever he be that has
Cure of souls.

And well may the Preacher and Plowman be likened together, First, For their
Labor in all seasons of the Year; for there is no time in the year, in which
the Plowman has not some special work to do; as in my Country, in
Leicestershire, the Plowman has a time to set forth his Plow, and other times
for other necessary works to be done.

And then also they may be likened together, for the diversity of works, and
variety of Offices that they have to do.

For as the Plowman first sets forth his Plow, and then tilleth his Land,
and breaks it in Furrows, and sometime ridgeth it up again; and at another
time harroweth it, and clotteth it, and sometime dangeth and hedgeth it, diggeth
it and weedeth it, purges it, and makes it clean: So the Prelate, the
Preacher, has many, diverse Offices to do.

He has a busy work to bring Parishioners to a right Faith, as Paul calls
it; and not a swerving Faith, but to a Faith that embraces Christ, and
trusts to his Merits, a lively Faith, a justifying Faith, a Faith that makes
a man righteous without respect of works as ye have it very well declared in
the Homily. Prelates have a busy work to do.
He has then a busy work, I say, to bring his Flock to a right Faith, and
then to confirm them in the same Faith; now casting them down with the Law and
threatenings of God for sin; now ridging them up again with the Gospel, and the
Promises of Gods Favor; now weeding them, by telling them their Faults, and
making them forsake sin; now clotting them by breaking their stony hearts, and
by making them supple-hearted, and making them to have hearts of flesh, that
is, soft hearts, and apt for Doctrine to enter in; now teaching to know God
rightly, and to know their duty to God and to their Neighbors; now exhorting
them, when they know their duty, that they do it, and be diligent in it; so
that they have a continual work to do. Great is their Business, and therefore
great should be their Hire. They have great Labors, and therefore they ought
to have good Livings, that they may commodiously feed their Flock: For the
Preaching of the Word of God unto the People, Strawberry Preachers once or
twice a year.
is called Meat: Scripture calls it Meat, not Strawberries, that come but
once a year, and tarry not long, but are soon gone; but it is Meat, it is no
Dainties. The people must have meat that must be familiar and continual, and
daily given unto them to feed upon. Many make a Strawberrie of it, ministering
it but once a year; but such do not the Office of good Prelates: For Christ
says, Quis (putas) est Servus prudeus and fidelis? Qui dat cibum in tempore.
Who, think you, is a wise man, a faithful servant? He that gives meat in due
time: So that he must at all times convenient preach diligently: Therefore
says he, Who, trow you, is a Faithful Servant? He speaks it, as though it
were a rare thing to find such a one; and as though he should say, there be but
a few of them to find in the world: And how few of them there be throughout
this Realm, that give meat to their Flocks, as they should do, the Visitors can
best tell: Too few, too few, the more is the pity, and never so few as now.

By this it appears, that a Prelate, or any that has cure of souls, must
diligently and substantially work and labor: Therefore says Paul to Timothy,
Qui Episcopatum de siderat, hic bonum opus de siderut. 1 Timothy 3.1
He that desires to have the Office of a Bishop or Prelate, that man desires
a good work: Then if it be a good work, it is work; ye can make but a work of
it. It is Gods work, Gods Plow, and that Plow God would have still going: Such
then as loyter, and live idly, are not good Prelates or Ministers. And of such
as do not preach and teach, God says by his Prophet Jeremy, maledictus qui
facit opus Dei fraudulenter, guilfully or deceitfully; some Books have
negligenter, negligently or slackly. How many such Bishops, how many such
Prelates (Lord for thy mercy) are there now in England? And what shall we in
this case do? Shall we company with them? O Lord, for thy mercy shall we not
company with them? O Lord, whither shall we flee rfom them? But cursed be he
that does the work of God negligently, or guilfully: A sore word for them that
are negligent in discharging their Office, Idle Ministers make evil people.
or have done it fraudulently; for that is the thing that makes the people
ill, But true it must be that Christ says: Multi sunt vocati, Math. 11.
pauci vero Electi, many are called, but few chosen. Here I have an occasion by
the way, somewhat to say unto you; yea, for the place that I alleged unto you
before out of Jeremy. Ier. c. 48.
And it was spoken of a spiritual work of God, a work that was commanded to be
done, and it was of shedding-blood, and destroying the Cities of Moab. For
(says he) cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from shedding of blood. As
Saul when he kept back his Sword from shedding of blood (at what time he was
sent against Amalek) was refused of God, for being disobedient to Gods
Commandments, in that he spared Agag the King: so that, that place of the
Prophet was spoken of them that went to the destruction of the Cities of Moab,
among the which there was one called Nebo, which was much reproved for
Idolatry, Superstition, Pride, avarice Cruelty, Tyranny, and for hardness of
Heart, and for these sins was plagued of God and destroyed.

Now what shall I say of these rich Citizens of London? what shall we say of
them? shall I call them proud men of London, malicious men of London, O London
see thy self in this glass.
merciless men of London? No, no, I may not say so, they will be offended with
me then; yet must I speak, for is there not reigning in London, as much pride,
as much covetousness, as much cruelty, as much oppression, as much
superstition, What would he have said if he had seen so many eminent Ministers
as are now in London?
as was in Nebo? Yes I think, and much more too. Therefore I say repent O
London, repent, repent. Thou hear thy faults told thee, amend them, amend
them. I think if Nebo had the preaching that thou have, they would have
converted.

And you Rulers and Officers, be wise and circumspect, look to your charge, and
see you do your duties, and rather be glad to amend your ill living, then to be
angry when you are warned and told of your fault; what a do there was made in
London at a certain man, because he said (and indeed at that time on a just
occasion) Burgesses (quoth he) nay Butter-flies. Lord! what a do there was for
that word. And yet would God they were no worse then Butterflies. Butterflies
do but their nature, the Butterfly is not covetous, is not greedy of other
men's goods, is not full of envy and hatred, is not malicious, is not cruel, is
not merciless. Note.
The Butterfly glories not in her own deeds, nor prefers the traditions of
men before Gods Word, it commits not Idolatry, nor worshippeth false Gods;
but London cannot abide to be rebuked, such is the nature of men, if they be
pricked they will kick, if they be rubbed on the gall, they will winch: but yet
they will not amend their faults, they will not be ill spoken of. But how shall
I speak well of them? if you could be content to follow the Word of God, Look
to it Citizens.
and favor good Preachers, if you could bear to be told of your faults, if ye
could amend them when ye hear of them, if ye would be glad to reform what is
amiss: If I might see any such inclination in you, that you would leave to be
merciless, and begin to be charitable, I would then hope well of you, I would
then speak well of you. But London was never so ill as it is now. In times
past, men were full of pity and compassion; but now there is no pity, Is this
amended at this day.
for in London their Brother shall die in the streets for cold, he shall lie
sick at the door between stock and stock, I cannot tell what to call it, and
perish there for hunger, was there any more unmercifulness in Nebo? I think not.

In times past, Iniquity abounds and love waxes cold.
when any rich men died in London, they were wont to help the poor Scholars of
the Universities with exhibition. When any man died, they would bequeath great
sums of money toward the relief of the poor. When I was a Scholar in Cambridge
my self, I heard very good report of London, and knew many that had relief of
the rich men of London, but now I can hear no such good report, and yet inquire
of it, and hearken for it; but now charity is waxen cold, none helps the
Scholar, nor yet the poor.

And in those days, what did they when they helped the Scholars: Marry, they
maintained and gave them livings that were very Papists and professed the Popes
Doctrine: Oh shame.
and now that the knowledge of Gods Word is brought to light, and many
earnestly study and labor to set it forth, now almost no man helps to
maintain them.

O London, London, repent, repent, for I think God is more displeased with
London, then ever he was with the City of Nebo. Repent therefore, repent
London, Hearken London.
and remember that the same God lives now that punished Nebo, even the same
God and none other, and he will punish sin as well now as he did then, and he
will punish the iniquity of London as well as he did them of Nebo. Amend
therefore.

And ye that be Prelates look well to your Office, for right prelating is buisy
laboring, and not lording. Therefore preach and teach, and let your Plough be
going. Ye Lords I say that live like Loiterers, Hear ye Bishops.
look well to your Office, the Plough is your Office and Charge, if you live
idle and loiter, you do not your duty, you follow not your vocation, let your
Plough therefore be going and not cease, that the ground may bring forth fruit.

But now me thinks I hear one say unto me, wot you what you say? is it a
work? is it a labor? how then has it happened, that we have had so many hundred
years, so many unpreaching Prelates, lording Loiterers, and idle Ministers?

Ye would have me here to make answer, and to show the cause hereof?

Nay, this Land is not for me to plough, it is too stony, too thorny too hard
for me to plow. Note.
They have so many things that make for them, so many things to say for
themselves, that it is not for my weak team to plough them. They have to say
for themselves long customs, ceremonies, and authority, placing in Parliament,
and many things more. And I fear me this Land is not yet ripe to be plowed.

For as the saying is, Prelacy has lain a withering this 20 years. It is hoped
it will not be so churlish as formerly.
it lacks withering: this Gear lacks withering, at leastwise it is not for
me to plow.

For what shall I look for among Thorns but pricking and scratching? what among
Stones but stumbling? what (I had almost said) among Serpents but stinging?

But thus much I dare say, that since lording and loitering has come up, Note.
preaching has come down, contrary to the Apostles times, for they preached
and lorded not; and now they lord and preach not.

For they that be Lords will not go to plough; it is no meet office for them,
it is not seeming for their Estate. Thus came up lording loiterers, thus crept
in un-preaching Prelates; and so have they long continued; for how many
unlearned Prelates have we now at this day?

And no marvel, for if the Ploughmen that now be, were made Lords, they would
clean give over ploughing, they would leave off their labor, and fall to
lording too outright, and the Ploughstand. And then both Ploughs not walking,
nothing should be in the commonweal but hunger.

For ever since the Prelates were made Lords and Nobles, the Plough stands,
there is no work done, the people starve.

They hawk, they hunt, they card, they dice, they pastime in their Prelacies
with gallant Gentlemen, with their dancing minions, and with their fresh
Companions. So that ploughing is set aside; And by their lording and loitering
preaching and ploughing is clean gone.

And thus if the Ploughmen in the Country, were as negligent in their Office as
Prelates be, we should not long live for lack of sustenance. --

But they that will be true Ploughmen must work faithfully for Gods-sake, for
the edifying of their Brethren. And as diligently as the Husbandman ploweth for
the sustentation of the body: so diligently must the Prelates and Ministers
labor for the feeding of the Soul.

Both the Ploughs must be still going as most necessary for man.

And wherefore are Magistrates ordained, but that the tranquillity of the
Commonweal may be confirmed limiting both Ploughs.

But now for the fault of unpreaching Prelates, me-think I could guess what
might be said for excusing of them.

They are so troubled with Lordly living, they be so placed in Palaces, couched
in Courts, ruffling in their rents, Note.
dancing in their Dominions, burdened with Ambassages, pampring of their
panches, like a Monk that makes his Jubilee, mounching in their mangers, and
moiling in their gay Manors and mansions, and so troubled with loitering in
their Lordships that they cannot attend it.

They are otherwise occupied, some in Kings matters, some are Ambassadors,
some of the privy Counsel, some to furnish the Court, some are Lords of the
Parliament, some are Presidents and Comptrollers of Mintes.

Well, well, Is this their duty? Is this their Office? Is this their calling?
should we have Ministers of the Church to be Comptrollers of the Mintes? Is
this a meet Office for a Priest that has cure of Souls, is this his charge?

I would here ask one question: I would fain know who controlleth the Devil at
home at his Parish, while he comptrolleth the Mint? If the Apostles might not
leave the Office of preaching to be Deacons, shall one leave it for minting? --

In this behalf, I must speak to England; Hear my Country England, as Paul said
in his first Epistle to the Corinthians chapt. 6. For Paul was no sitting
Bishop, but a walking and a preaching Bishop: But when he went from them, he
left there behind him the Plough going still, for he wrote unto them, and
rebuked them for going to Law, and pleading their causes before Heathen Judges.
I speak, says he, to your shame, is there not a Wiseman, etc.

So England, I speak it to thy shame, is there never a Noble man to be a Lord
President, but it must be a Prelate? is there never a Wiseman in the Realm to
be a Comptroller of the Mint? I speak it to your shame, I speak to your shame:
if there be never a Wiseman, make a Water-bearer, a Tinker, a Cobbler, a Slave,
a Page Comptroller of the Mint. Make a mean Gentleman a Groom, a Yeoman, make a
poor beggar Lord President.

Thus I speak, not that I would have it so, but to your shame, if there be
never a Gentleman meet nor able to be Lord President.

For why are not the Noblemen and Young Gentlemen of England, Note.
so brought up in knowledge of God and in learning, that they may be able to
execute Offices in the Commonweal?

The King has a great many of Wards, and I trow there is a Court of Wards, why
is not there a School of Wards, as well as there is a Court for their Lands;
why are they not set in Schools where they may learn? or why are not they sent
to the Universities, that they may be able to serve the King when they come to
age.

If the Wards and Young Gentlemen were well brought up in learning and in the
knowledge of God, they would not when they come to age so much give themselves
to other vanities. And if the Nobility were well trained in Godly learning,
Note.
the people would follow the same train. For truly, such as the Noblemen be
such will the people be, and now the only cause why Noblemen be not made Lord
Presidents, is because they have not been brought up in learning.

Therefore, for the love of God, appoint Teachers and Schoolmasters, you that
have charge of Youth, and give the Teachers Stipends worthy their pains, that
they may bring them up in Grammar, in Logic, in Rhetoric, in Philosophy, in
the civil Law, and in that which I cannot leave unspoken of, the Word of God.
--

It is as unmeet a thing for Bishops to be Lord Presidents, or Priests to be
Minters, as it was for the Corinthians to plead Matters of Variance before
Heathen Judges. Note this ye Nobles.
It is also a slander to the Noblemen, as though they lacked wisdom and
learning, to be able for such Offices, or else were no men of conscience, and
not meet to be trusted.

A Prelate has a charge and cure otherwise, and therefore he cannot discharge
his duty, and be a Lord President too; for a Presidentship requires a whole
man, and a Bishop cannot be two men.

A Bishop has his Office, a flock to teach, to look unto; and therefore he
cannot meddle with another Office, which alone requires a whole man. He should
therefore give it over to whom it is meet, and labor in his own business, as
Paul writes to the Thessalonians: Let every man do his own business, and
follow his calling. Let the Priest preach, and the Nobleman handle the temporal
matters. Moses a mavelous man, a good man, Moses was a wonderful fellow, and
did his duty, being a married man; we lack such as Moses was. Well, I would
all men would look to their duty, as God has called them, and then we should
have a flourishing Christian Commonweal.

And now I would ask a strange question? who is the most diligent Bishop and
Prelate in all England, that passes all the rest in doing his Office?

I can tell, for I know him who it is, I know him well. But now I think I see
you listening, harkening, that I should name him. There is one that passes all
the other, and is the most diligent Prelate and Preacher in all England: The
Devil a busy Preacher.
And will ye know who it is? I will tell you, it is the Devil: He is the most
diligent Preacher of all other, he is never out of his Diocese, he is never from
his Cure, you shall never find him unoccupied, he is ever in his Parish, he
keeps residence at all times, ye shall never find him out of the way; call
for him when you will, he is ever at home, the diligentest Preacher in all the
Realm, he is ever at his Plow, no Lording nor Loytering can hinder him, he is
ever applying his business, you shall never find him idle, I warrant you.

And his Office is to hinder Religion, Satan the great hinderer of Religion.
to maintain Superstition, to set up Idolatry, to teach all kind of Popery. He
is ready as can be wished for, to set forth his Plow, to devise as many ways as
can be, to deface and obscure Gods Glory.

Where the Devil is resident, and has his Plow going, there away with Books,
and up with Candles, away with Bibles, and up with Beads, away with the Light
of the Gospel, Note.
and up with the Light of Candles, yea, at Noondaies.

Where the Devil is resident, that he may prevail, up with all Superstition and
Idolatry, Censing, Painting of Images, Candles, Palms, Ashes, Holy water, and
new Service of men's devising, as though men could invent a better way to honor
God with, Note.
than God himself has appointed.

Down with Christ's Cross, up with Purgatory Pick-Purse, up with him, the
Popish Purgatory, I mean.

Away with Clothing the Naked, the Poor and Impotent; up with decking of
Images, and gay garnishing of stocks and stones.

Up with man's Traditions and his Laws, down with Gods Traditions, and his most
holy Word.

Down with the old Honor due to God, and up with the new gods honor. --

But here some men will say to me, What Sir, are ye so privy of the Devils
Counsel, that ye know all this to be true?

Truly I know him too well, and have obeyed him a little too much, in
condescending to some Follies. And I know that he is ever occupied, and ever
busy, in following his Plow. I know by St Peter, 1 Pet. 5.
which says of him, Sicut Leo rugiens circuit, quaerens qu^m devoret: He goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. I would have this Text
well viewed. --

There was never such a Preacher in England as he is: Who is able to tell his
diligent Preaching? who every day and every hour labors to sow Cockle and
Darnel, that he may bring out of form, and out of estimation, and room, the
Institution of the Lords Supper, and Christ's Cross. --

The Devil by the help of that Italian Bishop yonder, his Chaplain, Pope the
Devils Chaplain
has labored by all means that he might, to frustrate the Death of Christ,
and the Merits of his Passion. And they have devised for that purpose, to make
us believe in other vain things; as to have Remission of sins for praying on
Hallowed Beads, for drinking of the Backhouse Bole, as a Canon of Walton Abbey
once told me, that whenever they put their Loave; of Bread into the Oven, as
many as drank of the Pardon-Bole, should have pardon for drinking of it. A mad
thing, to give pardon to a Bole! --

Woe worth thee, O Devil, woe worth thee, that have prevailed so far, and so
long, that have made England to worship false gods, forsaking Christ their
Lord; woe worth thee Devil, woe worth thee Devil, and all thy Angels. --

When the Kings Majesty, Note.
with the Advice of His Honorable Council, goes about to promote Gods Word,
and to set an Order in matters of Religion, there shall not lack Blanchers,
that will say, as for Images, whereas they have been used to be Censed, and to
have Candles offered unto them, none be so foolish to do it to the Stock or
Stone, or to the Image it self, but it is done to God and his Honor before the
Image. And though they should abuse it, these Blanchers whould be ready to
whisper the King in the ear, and to tell him, that this Abuse is but a small
matter; and that the same, with all other Abuses in the Church, may be reformed
easily; it is but a little Abuse, Why our reformation is so imperfect
say they, and it may be easily amended. But it should not be taken in hand at
the first, for fear of trouble or further Inconveniences; the People will not
bear sudden Alterations, and Insurrection may be made after sudden Mutations,
which may be to the great Harm and Lofs of the Realm: Therefore all shall be
well, but not out of hand, for fear of further business.

These be the Blanchers that have hitherto stopped the Word of God, and hindered
the true setting forth of the same. Note this well.
There be so many put offs, so many put by's, so many respects and
considerations of worldly wisdom.

And I doubt not, but there were Blanchers in the old time, to whisper in the
ear of good King Hezekiah, Note.
for the maintenance of Idolatry done to the Brazen Serpent, as well as there
has been now of late, and be now, that can blanch the abuse of Images as other
like things: But good King Hezekiah would not be so blinded, he was like to
Apollo, fervent in Spirit, he would give no ear to these Blanchers, he was not
moved with these worldly respects, with these prudent Considerations, with
these Policies, he feared not Insurrections of the people.

He feared not, Note.
lest his people would not bear the Glory of God; but he (without any of these
respects, or Policies, or Considerations) like a good King, for Gods sake, and
for Conscience sake, by and by plucked down the Brazen Serpent, and destroyed
it utterly, and beat it to powder: He out of hand did cast out all Images, he
destroyed all Idolatry, and clearly did extirpate all Superstition.

He would not hear these Blanchers, and worldly wise men, but without delay
follows Gods Cause, and destroys all Idolatry out of hand.

This did good King Hezekiah, for he was like Apollo, fervent in spirit, and
diligent to promote Gods Glory.

And good hope there is, that it shall be likewise here in England; for the
Kings Majesty is so brought up in knowledge, virtue and godliness, that it is
not to be mistrusted, but that we shall have all things well, and that the
Glory of God shall be spread abroad through all parts of the Realm, Note, Who
hindered a more perfect reformation.
if the Prelates will diligently apply their Plow, and be Preachers rather than
Lords.

But our Blanchers which will be Lords, and no Laborers, when they are
commanded to go and be resident upon their Cures, and preach in their
Benefices, they will say;

What! I have set a Deputy there, I have a Deputy that looks well to my
Flock, who shall discharge my duty. A Deputy (quoth he) I looked for that word
all this while. And what a Deputy must he be, trow ye? Even one like himself,
he must be a Canonist, that is to say, one that is brought up in the study of
Popes Laws and Decrees, one that will set forth Papistry as well as himself,
and one that will maintain all Idolatry and Superstition, and one that will
nothing at all, or else very weakly, resist the Devils Plow; yea, happy it is,
if he take no part with the Devil; Little hope of good by Curates.
and where he should be an enemy to him, it is well, if he take not the Devils
part against Christ.

But in the mean time, the Prelates take their pleasures, they are Lords, and
no Laborers; but the Devil is diligent at his Plow, he is no unpreaching
Prelate, he is no Lordly Loyterer from his Cure, but a busy Plowman; so that
amongst all the Prelates, and among all the pack of them that have Cure, the
Devil shall go for my money; for he still applies his Business. Therefore ye
Unpreaching Prelates, learn of the Devil to be diligent in doing your Office.
Learn of the Devil: And if ye will not learn of God and good men, for shame
learn of the Devil; ad erubescentiam vestram dico, I speak it for your shame,
if you will not learn of God nor good men, to be diligent in your Office, learn
of the Devil.

Howbeit there is now very good hope, that the Kings Majesty being by the help
of good governance of his most Honorable Counselors, trained and brought up
in Learning and Knowledge of Gods Word, will shortly provide a remedy, and set
an order herein; which thing, that it may so be, let us pray for him; pray for
him good people, pray for him, ye have great cause and need to pray for him,
Amen.

Part of the First Sermon Preached by the Reverend Father, Master Hugh Latimer,
before our Late Sovereign Lord, of Famous memory, King Edward the Sixth, within
the Preaching place in the Palace at Westminster, 1549. the Eight of March.
Romans 15. Quaecunque scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt. --
IN Taking this Part of Scripture, (most Noble Audience) I played as a Truant,
which when he is at School, will choose a Lesson wherein he is perfect, because
he is loath to take pain in studying a new Lesson, or else fears stripes for
his sloathfulness. In like manner I might seem now in my old age, to some men,
to take this part of Scripture; because I would wade easily away therewith, and
drive my matter at my pleasure, and not to be bound to a certain Theme.

But ye shall consider that the foresaid words of Paul are not to be understood
of all Scriptures, but only of those which are of God written in Gods Book, and
all things which are therein, Excellency of Gods Word.
are written for our Learning. The Excellency of this word, is so great, and of
so high dignity, that there is no earthly thing to be compared do it.

The Author thereof is great, that is, God himself, Eternal, Almighty,
everlasting. The Scripture because of him, is also Great, Eternal, most Mighty,
and Holy.

There is no King, Emperor, Magistrate and Ruler of what state soever they be,
but are bound to obey this God, and to give credence unto his Holy Word, in
directing their steps ordinately according to the same Word: Yea truly, they
are not only bound to obey Gods Book, but also the Ministry of the same, so far
as he speaks sitting in Moses Chair. --

For in this world God has two Svvords, the one is a Temporal Svvord, the
other a Spiritual. --

The King corrects Transgresson with the Temporal Svvord, yea, the Preacher,
if he be an Offender. But the Preacher cannot correct the King, if he be a
Transgressor of Gods Word, with the Temporal Svvord: But he must correct and
reprove him with the Spiritual Svvord, fearing no man, setting God only before
his eyes, under whom he is a Minister, to supplant and root up all Vice and
Mischief by Gods Word. --

Therefore let the Preacher teach, reprove, amend and instruct in
Righteousness, with the Spiritual Svvord, fearing no man, Hear ye Preachers
though death should ensue.

Thus Moses Ex. 5. 6, 7.
did reprove Pharaoh. --

Thus Micheas did not spare to blame King Ahab, 1 Kin. 22.
for his wickedness, and to prophecy of his destruction, contrary unto many
False Prophets. --

These foresaid Kings being admonished by the Ministers of Gods Word, because
they would not follovv their godly Doctrine, and correct their lives, came
unto utter destruction. --

Let the Preacher therefore never fear to declare the Message of God unto all
men: And if the King will not hear them, then the Preachers may admonish and
charge them with their duties, Note.
and so leave them to God, and pray for them.

But if the Preachers digress out of Christ's Chair, and shall speak their own
fantasies, then in stead of whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and
do.

Change into these words follovving, Beware of False Prophets, change,
quaecunque jusserint, Mat. 23. 3.
into Cavete a Fermento Pharisaeorum. Luke 12. 1
--

All things written in Gods Book, are most true, and profitable for all men;
for in it is contained meet matter for Kings, Princes, Rulers, Bishops, and for
all Estates: Wherefore it behooves every Preacher, Let court preachers note this
somewhat to accomodate himself and his matter to the Comfort and Amendment of
the Audience to which he declares the Message of God.

If he preach before a King, let his matter be concerning the Office of a King,
if before a Bishop, --

I have thought it good to entreat upon these words following, which are
written in the seventeenth Chapter of Deuteronomy, from Verse 14. downwards. --

As the Text does rise, I will touch and go a little in every place. --

To have a King, the Israelites did with much importunity call unto God, and
God long before promised them a King, and they were fully certified thereof,
that God had promised that thing: For unto Abraham he said, Genesis 17. 6. Kings
shall come out of thee. These words were spoken long before the Children of
Israel had any King; notwithstanding here yet God prescribed unto them an
Order, how they should choose their King, and what manner of man he should be,
where he says, When thou shall come, etc.

As who should say, O ye Children of Israel, I know your nature right well, --
I know that thou will choose a King to reign over thee, and to appear glorious
in the face of the world, after the manner of the Gentiles: But because thou
art stiff-necked, wild, and art given to walk without a Bridle or Line,
therefore now I will prevent thy evil and beastly Manners, I will hedge
strongly thy way, I will make a durable Law which shall compel thee to walk
ordinately, and in a plain way, that is, thou shall not choose thee a King after
thy Will and fantasy, but after me, thy Lord and God.

Thus God conditioned with the Jews, that their King should be such a one as He
himself would choose them.

This was not much unlike a bargain that I heard of late, should be betwixt two
friends for a Horse, the Owner promised the other should have the Horse if he
would, the other asked the price, he said 20. Nobles; The other would give him
but four pounds; the Owner said he should not have it then, the other claimed
the Horse, because he said he should have him if he would.

Thus this bargain became a Westminster matter, the Lawyers got twice the value
of the Horse, and when all came to all, two fools made an end of the matter.

Howbeit the Israelites could not go to Law with God for choosing their King,
for, will they, nill they, their King should be of his choosing, lest they
should walk inordinately -- for as they say commonly, Qui vadit plane, vadit
sane; that is, He that walks plainly, walks safely. And the Jews were
stiff-necked, and were ever ready to walk inordinately. No less are we
Englishmen given to untovvardness and inordinate vvalking. --

There is a great error risen now: days among many of us, Let our wild
Phanatiques observe this.
which are vain and new fangled men climbing beyond the limits of our
capacity and wit, in vvrenching this Text of Scripture hereafter follovving
after their own Fancy and Brain, their error is upon this Text, 1 Samuel 8.
7. They wrench these words after their own fantasies, and make much doubt as
touching a King and his Godly name.

They that so do, walk inordinately, they walk not directly and plainly, but
delight in balks and stubble way. It makes no matter by what name the Rulers
be named, if so be they shall walk ordinately with God, and direct their steps
with God, for both Patriarchs Judges and Kings had, and have their authority
from God, and therefore Godly.

But this is to be considered which God says, Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
thou may not set a stranger over thee.

It has pleased God to grant us a natural liege King and Lord, This is our
mercy.
of our own Nation, an Englishman one of our own Religion, God has given him
to us, and he is a most precious Treasure, and yet many of us do desire a
stranger to be King over us, Note this ye Kingkillers.
-- Let us follow Daniel, let us not seek the death of our most Noble and
rightful King, our own Brother, both by nativity and Godly Religion. Let us
pray for his good estate that he live long among us: Oh what a plague were it,
that a strange King of a strange Land, and of a strange Religion should reign
over us: where now we be governed in the true Religion, he should extirpe and
pluck away all together, and then plant again all Abomination and Popery, God
keep such a King from us.

Well, the Kings grace has two Sisters, Latimer proved a true Prophet*
my Lady Mary, and my Lady Elizabeth, which by Succession and Course, are
Inheritors to the Crown, who, if they should marry with strangers, what should
ensue? God knows. But God grant (if they so do, whereby strange Religion
comes in) that they never come to coursing not succeeding.

Therefore to avoid this Plague, let us amend our Lives, and put away all
pride, which does drown men in this Realm, at these days; all Covetousness,
wherein the Magistrates and rich men are overwhelmed, all lechery, and other
excessive vices, provoking Gods wrath (were he not merciful) even to take from
us our natural King and Liege Lord; Note.
yea to plague us with a strange King for our unrepentant hearts.

Wherefore if as ye say, The true Roaylist.
ye love the King amend your lives. --

Now I hear all things shall be ended after a Godly manner shortly. Make have,
make have, and let us learn to convert to repent and mend our lives: if we do
not, I fear, I fear, lest for our sins and unthankfulness an hypocrite shall
reign over us. --

Let us pray, that God maintain and continue our Most Excellent King here
present. --

He does Rectify us in the liberty of the Gospel, (...) mercy at this day.
in that therefore let us stand. --

He shall not prepare unto himself many Horses, etc. In speaking of these Words
ye shall understand, that I do not intend to speak against the strength, policy
and provision of a King, but against excess and vain trust that Kings have in
themselves, more then in the living God, the Author of all goodness and Giver
of all Victory. Many Horses are requisite for a King, but he may not exceed in
them, nor triumph in them more then is needful, for the necessary affairs and
defense of the Realm.

What means it, that God has to do with the Kings Stable; but only he would
be Master of his Horses, The Scripture says: In altis habitat, he dwells on
high; it follows, Humilia respicit, he looks on the low things, yea upon
the Kings Stables* and upon all the Offices in his House.

God is a great Grand Master of the Kings house, Let Courtiers observe this.
and will take account of every one that bears rule therein; for the
executing of their Offices, whether they have justly and truly served the King
in their Offices, or no.

Yea, God looks upon the King Himself, if he work well or not. Every King is
subject unto God, and all other men are subjects unto the King.

In a King God requires faith, not excess of Horses, Horses for a King be good
and necessary, if they be well used, but --

Neither shall he multiply wives, etc. --

Let us not think that, because we read that Kings among the Jews had liberty
to take more wives than one, that we may therefore attempt to walk
inordinately. --

For Christ has forbidden this unto us Christians, and limiteth unto us one
wife only. And it is a great thing for a man to rule one wife rightly and
ordinately; for a Woman is frail, and proclive unto all evils; a Woman is a
very weak Vessel, and may soon deceive a man, and bring him into evil. Many
Examples we have in Scripture, Adam by Eve. --

How did wicked Jezebel? --

Therefore let our King, what time his Grace shall be so minded to take a wife,
choose him one which is of God; that is, which is of the Household of faith --
And that she be such a one as the King can find in his Heart to love, and lead
his life in pure and chaste Espousage; and then shall he be the more prone and
ready to advance Gods Glory, and to punish and extirpe the great lechery used
in this Realm.

Therefore we ought to make a continual Prayer unto God, Our present duty
for to grant our Kings Grace such a Mate as may knit his heart and hers,
according to Gods Ordinance and Law, and not to consider and cleave only to a
politic matter or conjunction, for the enlargeing of Dominions for surety and
defense of Countries. --

We have now a pretty little shilling, indeed a very pretty one, I have but one
I think in my Purse, and the last day I had put it away almost for an old
Groat, and so I trust some will take them; the fineness of the Silver I cannot
see: but therein is printed a fine sentence, that is, A good wish.
Timor Domini fons sapientiae. The fear of the Lord is the Fountain of wisdom.
I would to God this Sentence were printed in the heart of the King in choosing
his Wife and all his Officers.

For as the fear of God is fons sapientiae, so the forgetting of God is (...)
stultitiae, the fountain of foolishness; though it be never so politic. --

Let the King therefore choose unto him a Godly wife, whereby he shall the
better live chaste, and in so living* all Godliness shall increase, and
righteousness be maintained.

Notwithstanding I know hereafter, some will come and move your Grace toward
wantonness, and to the inclination of the flesh, and vain Affections. But I
would your Grace would bear in memory, and History of a good King, called Lewis
(that traveled toward the Holy Land) which was a great matter in those days,
and by the way sickned, being long absent from his Wife, and upon this matter,
the Physicians did agree, that it was for lack of a Woman; and did consult with
the Bishops therein, who did conclude, that because of the Distance from his
Wife (being in another Country) he should take a Wench.

This good King hearing their Conclusion, would not assent thereunto, but said,
he had rather be sick even unto death, than he would break his Espousals. Woe
worth such Counselors, Bishops! nay rather Buzzards.

Nevertheless, if the King should have consented to their Conclusion, and
accomplished the same, if he had chanced well, they would have excused the
matter; as I have heard, one being reproacht for such Counsel given, he excused
the matter, saying, that he gave him none other Counsel, but if it had been his
case, he would have done likewise; so I think the Bishops would have excused
the matter, if the King should have reproved them for their Counsel: I do not
read, the King did so; but if he had, I know what would have been their Answer,
they would have said, We give you no worse counsel, than we would have followed
our selves, if we had been in like case.

Well Sir, this King did well, and had the fear of God before his eyes. --

Let the King therefore choose a Wife which fears God, let him not seek a
proud Wanton, one full of rich Treasures and worldy Pomp.

Neither shall he multiply to himself too much silver and Gold. etc.

He shall not multiply unto himself too much Gold and Silver: Is there too much
think you for a King? God does allow much unto a King, and it is expedient that
he should have much; for he has great expenses. --

Necessary it is, that the King have a Treasure always in readiness for such
affairs as be daily in his hands: The which Treasure, if it be not sufficient,
he may lawfully and with a safe Conscience, take Taxes of his Subjects; for it
were not meet, --

But who shall see this too much, or tell the King of this too much? Think you
any of the Kings Privy Chamber? No. For fear of loss of Favor. Shall any of
his Sworn Chaplains? No. They be of his Closet, and keep close such matters.
But the King himself must see this too much, and that he shall do by no means,
with Corporal eyes: Wherefore he must have a pair of Spectacles, which shall
have two clear Sights in them; that is, the one is Faith, the other is Charity:
By them two, must the King ever see when he has too much. --

I will tell you, my Lords and Masters, this is not for the Kings Honor: Yet
some will say, Know thou what is for the Kings Honor better than we?

I answer, the Kings Honor is most perfectly painted forth in Scripture; of
which, Note.
if ye be ignorant, for lack of time, that ye cannot read it, though your
Counsel be never so politic, yet it is not for the Kings Honor. What his
Honor means, ye cantot tell.

It is the Kings Honor, that his Subjects be led in the true Religion: That
all his Prelates and Clergy be set about their work, in Preaching and Studying,
and not be interrupted from their Charge. Also it is the Kings Honor. --

Part of the Second Sermon preached by Mr. Latymer before King Edward.
And when the King is set in the Seat of his Kingdom, he shall write him out a
Book, Deuteronomy. 17.
I Told you in my last Sermon, of Ministers of the Kings people, and had
occasion to show you, how few Noblemen were good Preachers. I left out an
History then, which now I will tell you.

There was a Bishop of Winchester in King Henry the Sixth's days. --

This Bishop was a Great man born, and did bear such a stroke, he was able to
shoulder the Lord Protector; it chanced the Lord Protector and he fell out, and
the Bishop would bear nothing at all with him, but played me the Satrapa; so --

Was not this a good Prelate? He should have been at home preaching in his
Diocese with a Wanniaunt. This Protector was so Noble a Godly man, that he was
called of every man the good Duke Humphrey: He kept such a House, --.

And the Bishop for standing so stiffly by the matter, and bearing up the Order
of our Mother, the Holy Church, was made a Cardinal at Calice, and thither the
Bishop of Rome sent him a Cardinals Hat: He should have had a Tyburne-Tippet, a
half penny Halter, and all such proud Prelates.

When he sits upon the Throne, what shall he do? Shall he dance and dally,
banquet, havvk and hunt?

No forsooth Sir.

What must he do then? He must be a Student; not thinking, because he is a
King, he has License to do what he will, as these vvorldly Flatterers are
wont to say, ye trouble not your self, (Sir) ye may havvk and hunt, and take
your pleasure; as for the guiding of your Kingdom and People, let us alone
with it.

These flattering Clavv-backs are Original Roots of all Mischief; and yet a
King may take his Pastime in Havvking and Hunting, or such like Pleasures, but
he must, --

It follovveth in the Text, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. He shall have it with him, in his
Progress. --

He shall read in it, not once a year, but all the days of his life. Where are
these Worldlings now? these Bladder-puft-up vvily men? Note,
Woe vvorth them, that ever they were about any King.

But how shall he read this Book? As the Homilies are read? Some call them
Homilies, and indeed so they may be well called, for they are homely handled.

For though the Priest read them never so well, yet if the Parish like them
not, there is such talking and babbling, that nothing can be heard.

And if the Parish be good, and the Priest naught, he will so hack and chop
it, that it were as good to be without it, for any word that shall be
understood. And yet (the more pity) it is suffered of your Graces Bishops in
their Diocese unpunished.

But I will be a Suitor to your Grace, that you will give your Bishops charge
ere they go home, A good motion.
upon their Allegiance, to look better to their Flock, and to see your
Majesty's Injunctions better kept, and send your Visitors in their Tayls, and
if they be found negligent in their duties, out with them, I require it in
Gods behalf, make them Quondams, all the Pack of them.

But ye will say, Where shall we have any to put in their rooms? --

Your Majesty has diverse of your Chaplains, well learned men, and of good
knowlede, and yet ye have some bad enough, hangers on the Court, I mean not
these, --

What an Enormity is this in a Christian Realm to serve in a Civility, Note.
having the profit of a Provostship, and a Deanery, and a Parsonage? But I will
tell you what is like to come of it: It will bring the Clergy shortly into a
very Slavery. I may not forget here my Scala Caeli, that I spoke of in my last
Sermon; I will repeat it now again, desiring your Grace in Gods behalf, that
you will remember it.

The Bishop of Rome had a Scala coeli, It is now upon the matter a common
Prayer matter.
but his was a Masse-matter: But this Scala Coeli that I now speak of, is the
true Ladder that brings a man to heaven: The top of the Ladder, or first
Greese is this; Whosoever calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved. Romans
10
The second step, How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed?
The Third Stair is this, How shall they believe in him, of whom they never
heard? The Fourth Step, How shall they hear without a Preacher? Now the nether
end of the Ladder is, How shall they preach except they be sent? This is the
Foot of the Ladder. So that we may go backward now, and use the
School-Argument, a primo ad ultimum. Take away Preaching, Note,
take away Salvation. But I fear one thing. --

Ever since the Bishop of Rome was first in authority, Note.
they have gone about to destroy the Gospel, but God works wonderfully, he
has preserved it, maugre all their hearts, and yet we are unthankful, that we
cannot consider it.

I will tell you what a Bishop of this Realm said once to me, he sent for me,
and marvelled, that I would not consent to such Traditions as were then set out.

And I answered him, Latimer desired Gods Word to be the Rule of reformation.
that I would be ruled by Gods Book, and rather than I would dissent one jot
from it, I would be torn with wild horses. And I chanced in our Communication,
to name the Lords Supper: Tush, says the Bishop, What do you call the Lords
Supper? What new Term is that? There stood by him a Dubber, one Doctor Dubber,
he dubbed him by and by, and said, that this Term was seldom read in the
Doctors. And I made Answer, that I would rather follow Paul, in using his
Terms, than them, though they had all the Doctors on their side.

Why, (said the Bishop) cannot we without the Scriptures order the people? How
did they before the Scripture was first written?

But God knows, full ill yet would they have ordered them. Note.
For seeing, that having it, they have deceived us, in what case should we have
been now without it? But thanks be unto God, that by so wonderful a Miracle
he has preserved the Book still. --

It is in the Text, that a King ought to fear God, he shall have the dread of
God before his eyes. Work not by vvorldly Policy, for vvorldly Policy fears
not God. Take heed of these Clavv-backs, these venomous people, that will come
to you, that will follovv you like Gnato's and Parasites, Note.
if you follovv them, you are out of your Book, if it be not according to Gods
Word, that they counsel you; do it not for any vvorldly Policy, for then you
fear not God. --

But wherefore shall a King fear God? It follovveth in the Text, that he may
prolong his days in his Kingdom. --

Remember this, I beseech your Grace; and when these Flatterers and Flebergibs,
another day shall come and claw you by the back, and say, Sir, trouble not your
self: What, shall you study? Why should you do this or that?

Your Grace may answer them thus, and say, What Sir! I perceive you are a
weary of Us, and our Posterity: Does not God say in such a place, that a King
shall write out a Book of Gods Law, and read it? Learn to fear God. And why?
That he, and his might reign long. I perceive now, thou art a Traitor.

Tell him this Tale once, and I warrant you, he will come no more to you,
neither he, nor any, after such a sort.

And thus shall your Grace drive such Flatterers and Claw-backs away. --

You have heard how a King ought to pass the time. --

He may learn at Solomon. --:

What was Solomon's Petition? Lord, said he, Da mihi cor docile: he asked a
docible heart, a wise heart, and wisdom to go in and to go out. --

So your Grace must learn how to do of Solomon. Latimer a faithful Bishop.
You must make your Petition, now study, now pray. --

Now when God had given Solomon wisdom, he sent him by and by occasion to
occupy his Wit. For God never gave a Gift, but he sent occasion at one time or
other, to show it to Gods Glory: As if he send Riches, he sends poor men to
be helped with them. --

One Word note here for Gods sake, and I will trouble you no longer.

Would Solomon, being so Noble a King, hear two poor women? They were poor, for
as the Scripture says, they were together alone in a House, they had not so
much as one servant betwixt them both. Would King Solomon, I say, hear them in
his own person? Yea forsooth. And yet I hear of many matters before my Lord
Protector, and my Lord Chancellor, Note this court Preachers
that cannot be heard. I must desire my Lord Protectors Grace to hear me in
this matter; That your Grace would hear poor men's Suites your self: Put them to
none other to hear: let them not be delayed.

The Saying is now, that Money is heard every where; if he be rich, he shall
soon have an end of his Matter. --

Hear men's Suites your self, I require you in Gods behalf; put it not to the
hearing of these Velvet-Coats, these Up-skips. --

I cannot go to my Book, for poor Folks come to me, desiring me, --

I walk sometimes in my Lord of Canterburies Garden, looking in my Book, as I
can do but little good at it; but something I must do, to satisfy this place:
Note.
I am no sooner in the Garden, anon my man comes, and says, Sir, there is one
at the Gate would speak with you: When I come there, then it is some one or
other, that desires me, that I would speak his matter may be heard; that he
has lien thus long, --

A Gentlewoman came to me, --

There is a poor Woman that lies in the Fleet. --

I beseech your Grace that you will look to these Matters, hear them your self,
view your Judges, and hear poor men's Causes.

And you proud Judges hearken what God says in his Holy Book. Audite illos,
ita parvum ut magnum: Hear them says He, the small as well as the great, the
poor as well as the rich. Regard no person, fear no man, why? Quia Domini
judicium est, the judgment is Gods.

Mark this saying thou proud Judge. The Devil will bring this Sentence at the
day of doom: Hell will be full of these Judges: If they repent not and amend.

They are worse then the wicked Judge that Christ speaks of, Luke 18.
that neither feared God nor the world. --

Our Judges are worse then this Judge was: for they will neither hear Men for
Gods sake, nor fear of the world, nor importunateness, nor any thing else. Yea,
some of them will command them to ward, if they be importunate. I heard say,
that when a Suitour came to one of them, he said, what fellow is this that
gives these folk counsel to be so importunate, he would be punished and
committed to ward. Marry Sir, punish me then, it is even I that gave them
counsel, I would gladly be punished in such a cause. And if ye amend not, I will
cause them to cry out upon you still: O zeal!
even as long as I live. I will do it indeed. But I have troubled you long:
Beati qui audiunt, etc.

Part of the Third Sermon of Mr. Hugh Latimer, preached before King Edward.
A Preacher has two Offices. 1 To Teach true Doctrine; 2 To confute
Gainsayers. --

Why you will say, will any body gainsay true Doctrine? --

Was there ever yet Preachers, but there were Gainsayers. --

Jeremy was the Minister of the true Word of God. --

Elias had Baals Priests supported by Iezebel, to speak against him. --

John Baptist, and our Savior Christ. --

The Apostles had Gainsayers, Acts 28. 22. This Sect is every where spoken
against. --

In the Popish Mass time there was no gainsaying. --

So long as we had in adoration, the Popish Mass we were then without
gainsaying. --

When Satan the Devil has the guiding of the House he keeps all in peace.
--

When he has the Religion in possession, he stirs up no sedition, I
warrant you.

How many dissentions have we heard of in Turkey, -- look whether ye hear of any
Heresies among the Jews. --

And if ever concord should have been in Religion, when should it have been,
but when Christ was here? Ye find fault with Preachers, and say, they cause
sedition: Note.
We are noted to be rash, and indiscreet in our preaching: yet as discreet as
Christ was, there was diversity. --

There was never Prophet to be compared to him, and yet there was never more
dissension, then when he was, and preached himself. --

This day I must do somewhat in the second Office. --

But first, I will make a short rehearsal to put you in memory. --

The peevish people in this Realm, have nothing but the King, the King in their
mouths, when it makes for their purpose. As there was a Doctor that preached,
the Kings Majesty has his Holy water, he creeps to the Cross; and then they
have nothing but the King, the King in their mouths. These be they my good
people that must have their mouths stopped: but if a man tell them of the Kings
proceedings, now they have their shifts and their put ofts, saying we may not
go before a Law: we may break no order. These be the wicked Preachers, their
mouths must be stopped, these be the gainsayers. --

Now to my confutation.

There is a certain man that shortly after my first Sermon, being ask't, if he
had been at the Sermon that day? Answered, yea. I pray you said he, how liked
you him? Marry, said he, as I liked him always, a seditious Fellow Oh Lord, he
pinched me there indeed nay, Note.
he rather had a full bit at me Yet I comfort my self with that, that Christ
was noted to be a Stirrer up of the People. --

It becomes me to take it in good part, I am not better then He was. In the
Kings days that dead is, a many of us were called together before him, to say
our minds in certain matters. In the end, one kneeled me down, and accused me
of sedition, that I had preached seditious Doctrine. A heavy salutation, and a
hard point of such a man's doing, as if I should name him, ye would not think
it. The King turned to me, and said, what say you to that Sir? Then I kneeled
down, and turned me first to mine accuser, and required him; Sir, what form of
preaching would you appoint me to preach before a King; would you have me to
preach nothing, Note.
as concerning a King in the Kings Sermon? have you any Commission to appoint
me what I shall preach? Besides this, I asked him diverse other questions, and
he would make no answer. Then I turned me to the King, and submitted my self to
his Grace, and said I never thought my self worthy, nor ever sued to be a
Preacher before your Grace, but I was called to it, and would be willing (if
you mislike me) to give place to my betters. For I grant there be a great many
more worthy of the Room then I am; and if it be your Graces pleasure so to
allow them for Preachers, I could be content to bear their books after them.

But if your Grace allow me for a Preacher, I would desire your Grace to give
me leave to discharge my conscience. Note.
Give me leave to frame my Doctrine according to my Audience, I had been a very
dolt to have preached so at the borders of your Realm, as I preached before
your Grace. And I thank Almighty God, which has always been my Remedy, that
my sayings were well accepted of the King, for like a gracious Lord he turned
into another communication: it is even as the Scripture says: Cor Regis in
manu Domini, the Lord directs the Kings (...).

Certain of my Friends came to me with tears in their Eyes, and told me they
looked I should have been in the Tower the same night.

Thus I have been ever more burdened with the word of sedition.

I have offended God grievously, Note.
transgressing his Law, and but for this remedy and his mercy, Confession of
sin.
I would not look to be saved.

As for sedition, for ought that I know, methinks, I should not need Christ, if
I might say so. But if I be clear in any thing, I am clear in this, so far as I
know mine own heart, there is no man farther from sedition then I; which I have
declared in all my doings, and yet it has been ever laid to me. Note.


Another, when I gave over mine Office, I should have received a pentecostal,
it came to the sum of fifty and five pound, I set my Commissary to gather it,
but he could not be suffered, for it was said a sedition would rise upon it.

Thus they burdened me ever with sedition.

So this Gentleman, comes up now with sedition: and wot ye what? I chanced in
my last Sermon to speak a merry word of the new shilling (to refresh my
Auditory) how I was like to put away my new shilling for an old groat, I was
herein noted to speak seditiously -- When I was in trouble, it was objected to
me that I was singular, that I took a way contrary to all. Marry Sir, this was
sore thunderbolts, I thought it was possible it might not be true he told me.
--

I have gotten one Fellow a Companion of sedition; and wot you who is my
Fellow? Esai the Prophet. I spoke but of a little pretty shilling, but he
speaks to Jerusalem after another sort, Esai. 1. 21, 22, 23. and was so bold
to meddle with their coin. --

Ah seditious wretch, what had he to do with the mint. --

Was not this a seditious Harlot, to tell them this to their beards? to their
face. --

I am content to bear the title of sedition with Esai. Thanks be to God I am
not alone. --

In the latter end of my Sermon, I rehearsed a parable of a wicked Judge.

Belike good Judges were rare at that time; and trow ye, the Devil has been
asleep ever since? No, no, --

The common manner of wicked Judge, is neither to fear God or Man. He
considers what a man he is, and therefore cares not for man; He seems to
be in a protection t well shall he escape? Ho, ho, Est Deus in coelo. There is
a God in Heaven, He accepts no persons, He will punish them. --

Cambises was a great Emperor, such another as our Master is --

It chanced, he had under him in one of his Dominions, a Briber, a Gifttaker, a
Gratifier of rich men, a Handmaker in his Office, to make his Son a great man
(as the old saying is, Happy is the Child whose Father goes to the Devil) the
cry of the poor Widow came to the Emperors ear, which caused him to slay the
Judge quick, and laid his skin in the Chair of judgment, that all Judges that
should give judgment afterward should sit in the same skin.

Surely it was a goodly Sign, a goodly Monument, the Sign of the Judges Skin; I
pray God we may once see the Sign of the Skin in England. -- I do it
charitably, for the love I bear to my Country. God says, Ego visitabo. I will
visit. God has two Visitations: the first is, when he revealed his Word by
Preachers, and where the first is accepted, the second comes not; the second
Visitation is Vengeance. He went to Visitation, when he brought the Judges skin
over his ears. --

Germany was visited twenty years with Gods Word, but they did not earnestly
embrace it, and in life follow it, but made a mingle mangle and a hotch potch
of it.

I cannot tell what, partly Popery, partly true Religion mingled together.

They say in my Country when they call their Hogs to the Swine-trough, come to
thy mingle mangle, compyr, compyr; even so they made mingle mangle of it; they
could clatter and prate of the Gospel, but when all comes to all, Note.
they joined Popery so with it, that they marred all together.

We have now a first Visitation in England; let us beware of a second. We have
the Ministration of his word, we are yet well; but the House is not clean swept
yet. Note.
God has sent us a Noble King in this his Visitation, let us beware, let us
not be unthankful and unkind, let us beware of by-walking and contemning of
Gods Word. --

Part of the fourth Sermon preached by Mr. Hugh Latimer before King Edward.
I Remember well what St. Paul says to a Bishop, and though he spoke it to
Timothy being a Bishop, yet I may say it now to the Magistrates, 1 Timothy 5.
for all is one case, all is one matter; Thou shall not be partaker of other
men's faults, be not hasty in making of Curates, in receiving men to have Cure
of Souls, that either cannot, or will not do their duty; do it not. Now me
thinks it needs not to be partakers of other men's sins, we shall find enough of
our own. And what is it to be partaker of other men's sins, if this be not, to
make unpreaching Prelacy, and to suffer them in their unpreaching Prelacy?

If the King and his Council should suffer evil Judges to take Bribes, and
suffer the great to overgo the poor, and should look through his fingers, to
wink at it, should not the King be partaker of their naughtiness? And Why, is
be not Supreme Head of the Church? What! Is the Supreme a Dignity, and nothing
else? Is it not countable? I think it will be a chargeable Dignity, when
account shall be asked of it.

Oh! what advantage has the Devil? What entry has the Wolf, when the
Shepherd tends not his Flock? St. Paul does say, Qui been praesunt
Presbyteri, honor digni sunt. What is this praeesse? It is as much as to say,
is to take charge and cure of Souls, We say, ille praeest, he is set over the
Flock, he has taken charge upon him; And what is been praeesse? to discharge
the Cure well, to rule well, to feed the Flock with pure food, and good example
of living. --

There was a merry Monk in Cambride, in the College that I was in, and it
chanced, a great company of us to be together, intending to make good cheer,
and to be merry, (as Scholars will be merry when they are disposed) one of the
Company brought this Sentence, Nil melius quam laetari and facere been. There
is nothing better than to be merry and to do well: A vengeance of been, quoth
the Monk, I would that been had been banished beyond the Sea; and that been
were out, it were well; for I could be merry, and I could do, but I love not to
do well, that been marres all, I would been were out, quoth the merry Monk, for
it imports many things to live well, to discharge the Cure.

Indeed it were better for them if it were out; and it were as good to be out,
as to be ordered as it is: it will be a heavy been for some of them, when they
shall come to their Account.

But peradventure you will say, Note.
what and they preach not at all? yet praesunt. Are not they worthy double
honor? Is it not an honorable Order they be in?

Nay an horrible misorder, it is an horror, rather than an honor, and
horrible, rather than honorable, if the Preacher be naught, and do not his
duty. And thus go these Prelates about to wrestle for honor, that the Devil
may take his Pleasure. --

Are they not worthy double honor? Nay rather, double dishonor, not to be
regarded, not to be esteemed among the people, and to have no Living at their
hands?

For (...) good Preachers be worthy double honor, so unpreaching Prelates be
worthy double dishonor, they must be at their Doublets.

But now these two dishonours what be they? our Savior Christ does show; Si
Sal, --

If the salt be unsavory, it is good for nothing, but to be cast our, and
trodden of men.

By this S^lt is understood Preachers, and such as have Cure of Souls, What be
they worthy then? Wherefore serve they? For nothing else but to be cast out.

Make them Quondams, out with them, cast them out of their Office: What should
they do with Cure, that will not look to it?

Another dishonor is, to be trodden under men's Feet, not to be esteemed or
regarded.

St. Paul in his Epistle qualifieth a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.
and says, he must be apt to teach? What shall a man do with Aptness, Note.
if he do not use it; It were as good to be without it.

A Bishop came to me the last day, and was angry with me for a Sermon that I
made in this place. His Chaplain, he complained against me, because I had
spoken against unpreaching Prelates. Nay, quoth the Bishop, he made so
indifferent a Sermon the first day, that I thought he would mar all the
second day; he will have every man a Quondam, as he is.

As for my Quondamship, I thank God, that he gave me the Grace to come by it by
so honest means as I did, I thank him for mine own Quondamship; and as for
them, I will not have them made Quondams, if they discharge their Office; I
would have them do their duty, Note.
I would have no more quondams as God help me. I owe them no more malice than
this, and that is none at all.

This Bishop answered his Chaplain, Well says he, well, did I wisely to day,
for as I was going to the Sermon, I remembered that I had neither said Mass nor
Mattins, and homeward I gat as fast as I could, and I thank God, I have said
both, and let his unfruitful Sermon alone.

Unfruitful, says one, another says seditious: Well, Unfruitful is the best,
and whether it be unfruitful or no, I cannot tell, it lies not in me to make
it fruitful; and God work not in your hearts, Note.
my preaching can do you but little good.

I am Gods instrument but for a time, it is he must give increase, and yet
preaching is necessary: For, take away Preaching, and take away Salvation. --

Christ is the Preacher of all Preachers. --

As wisely, as circumspectly, as he preached, yet the Fourth Ground only was
fruitful; and if he had no better Luck, that was Preacher of all Preachers;
what shall we look for? yet there was no lack in him, but the Ground. And so
now there is no fault in Preaching, the lack is in the People, who have stony
and thorny hearts. I beseech God to amend them.

And as for these Folk that speak against me, I never look to have their good
word so long as I live: yet I will speak of their wickedness as long as I shall
be permitted to speak, Note.
as long as I live, I will be an enemy to it, no Preachers can pass it over
with silence. It is the Original root of all mischief.

As for me, I owe them no other ill will, but I pray God amend when it pleases
him. --

Oh that a man might have the contemplation of Hell, that the Devil would allow
a man to look into Hell, to see the estate of it, as he showed all the world,
when he tempted Christ. --

If one were admitted to view Hell, and behold it thoroughly, the Devil would
say,

On yonder side are punished Unpreaching Prelates, I think a man should see as
far as a Kenning, and see nothing but Unpreaching Prelates, he might look as
far as Calice, I warrant you.

And then if he would go on the other side, and show where Bribing Judges are,
I think he should see so many, that there were scant room for any other: Our
Lord God amend it.

Part of the Fifth Sermon of Master Latimer, Preached before King Edward.
1 Samuel 8. 1. etc. It came to pass when Samuel was old, etc.
FAther Samuel, a good man, a singular Example, and a singular pattern, a man
alone, few such men as Father Samuel was. --

He thought his Sons would have proved well. Ver. 2.
But Samuels Sons walked not in his ways. --

Why is the Son always bound to walk in the Fathers way? no, ye must not take
it for a general rule; all Sons are not to blamed for not walking in their
Fathers ways. Hezekiah did not follow the steps of Ahaz, and was well allowed.
--

Samuel would never have thought his Sons would have been so corrupted, they
felt the smack of this world, Ver. 3.
A perilous thing.

It is a perilous thing, a dangerous state to be a Judge -- I have told you of
scala coeli: This I am sure is scald inferni, Note,
the right way to Hell, to be covetous and take bribes, and pervert justice.

If a Judge would ask me the way to Hell, I would show him this way. First, let
him be a covetous man, let his heart be poisoned with covetousness; then let
him go a little farther, and take bribes; and at the last pervert judgment. Lo,
here is the Mother, and the Daughter, and the Daughters Daughter: Avarice is
the Mother, she brings forth bribe taking, and bribe taking perverting of
judgment. There lacks a fourth thing to make up the Mess; which (so God help
me) if I were Judge should be Hangum Tunum, a Tiburn Tippet to take with him,
and it were the Judge of the Kings Bench, my Lord chief Judge of England; yea,
and it were my Lord Chancellor himself, to Tiburn with him. --

One will say you speak unseemly, so to be against the Officers, for taking of
rewards in doing pleasures. Note.
You consider not the matter to the bottom; their Offices be bought for great
sums, how should they receive their money again? --

And is it so, trow ye? are civil Offices bought for money? Lord God! who
should have thought that? --

God fore-fend that ever any such enormity should be in England, that civil
Offices should be bought. --

And if ye be a selling civil Offices, ye are as they which fell their
benefices, and so we shall have omnia venalia.

I marvel the ground gapes not, and devours us. Surely, it is the great lemity
of God that suffers it. O Lord, in what case are we. --

There was a Patron in England, that had a benefice fallen into his hand, and a
good Brother of mine came to him, and brought him thirty Apples in a dish, and
gave them to his man to carry them to his Master; it is like he gave one to his
Man for his labor, to make up the game, and so there was thirty one. This Man
comes to his Master, and presented him with the dish of Apples, saying; Sir
such a man has sent you a dish of fruit, and desires you to be good unto him
for such a benefice. Tush, tush, quoth he, this is no Apple matter, I will none
of his Apples. I have as good as these (or as he has any) in my own Orchard.

The Man came to the Priest again, and told him what his Master said: Then
quoth the Priest, desire him yet to prove one of them for my sake, he shall
find them much better then they look for. He cut one of them and found ten
pieces of gold in it. Marry, quo^h he, this is a good Apple. The Priest
standing not far of, hearing what the Gentleman said; cried out and said, they
are all one Apples I warrant you Sir, they grew all on one Tree, and have all
one taste. Well, he is a good Fellow, let him have it, quoth the Patron. Get you
a Graft of this Tree, and I warrant you it shall stand you in more stead then
all St. Paul's learning. Well, let Patrons take heed. --

Part of the sixth Sermon of Mr. Latimer, preached before King Edward.
I Intend this day to entreat of a piece of Scripture, out of the first Chapter
of Luke v. 1. 2, 3, etc.

I am occasioned to take this place by a Book sent to the Kings Majesty that
dead is, by Master Pool. It is a Text that he does greatly abuse for the
Supremacy, he racks it, and violents it to serve for the maintenance of the
Bishop of Rome. --

The Text says, the people pressed upon him; so that Christ was in peril to be
thrust into the Pond. A wondrous thing, what a desire the people had to hear
our Savior preach. --

Where read you that a great number of Scribes and Pharisees, and Bishops
followed him.

There is a Doctor that writes of this place, his name is Dr. Gorrham,
Nicholas Gorrham: I knew him to be a School Doctor a great while ago: but I
never knew him to be an interpreter of Scripture, till of late; he says thus:

Major devotio in laicis and vetulis quam in clericis. There is more devotion,
says he, in lay folk and old wives, and in these simple and vulgar people,
then in the Clarks: they be better affected to the Word of God, then the
Clergy. I marvel not at the Sentence; but I marvel at such a Sentence in such
a Doctor. If I should say so much, it would be said to me, it is an evil Bird
that defiles his own nest. --

Our Savior had said, Luke 4. 43. That he must preach the Kingdom of God to
other Cities also; For therefore am I sent, --

Is it not a mavelous thing that our unpreaching Prelates can read this
place, and yet preach no more then they do? I marvel that they can go quietly
to bed, and see how he allureth them by his example, to be diligent in their
Office. --

The preaching of the Gospel, is the power of God to salvation, to every one
that Believes, Romans 1. 15, 16. Beware, Note.
beware ye diminish not this Office, for if ye do, ye decay Gods Power.

Christ says, Jo. 3. 3. Except a man be born again. --

What is this Regeneration? it is not to be Christened in water (as these fire
brands expound it) and nothing else.

How is it to be expounded then? Saint Peter shows, 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24, 25. It
is the circumstance, and collation of places that make Scriptures plain. We are
born says he, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of
God. --

By the Word of God, by the Word of God preached and opened.

Thus comes in our new birth.

Here you may see how necessary this Office is to our Salvation.

This is the thing that the Devil wrastleth most against: It has been all his
study to decay this Office; he works against it as much as he can, he has
prevailed too much, too much in it.

He has set up a state of unpreaching Prelacy in this Realm this seven hundred
years, a stately unpreaching Prelacy, he has made unpreaching Prelates.

He has stirred up heaps to persecute this Office in the title of Heresy: he
has stirred up the Magistrates to persecute it in the title of sedition. Note.
And he has stirred up the people to persecute it, with exprobrations and
slanderous words --

And with Impropriations he has turned preaching into private Masses; if a
Priest should have left Mass undone on a Sunday within this ten years, Note.
all England would have wondered at it; but they might have left off the Sermon
twenty Sundaies and never have been blamed. And thus by these Impropriations
private Masses were set up, and preaching of Gods word trodden under foot. But
what does he now? he stirs men up to outrageous rearing of rents, that poor men
shall not be able to find their children at the School to be Divines. What an
unreasonable devil is this? he provides a great while before hand, for the time
that is to come.

He has brought up now a most monstrous kind of covetousness that ever was
heard of; he has invented a Fee-farming of Benefices, Note.
and all to decay this Office of Preaching; insomuch that when a man shall
hereafter have a Benefice, he may go where he will, for any house he shall have
to dwell upon, or any Glebe-land to keep hospitality withal; but he must take
up a chamber in an Alehouse, and there sit and play at Tables all day. A
goodly Curate. He has caused also Patrons to sell their Benefices. Yea, what
does he more? He gets him to the University and causes great men to send their
sons thither, and put out poor Scholars that should be Divines: for their
parents intend not they shall be Preachers: but that they may have a show of
learning.

But it were too long to declare unto you, what deceit and means the Devil has
found to decay the office of salvation. --

It is in the Text he taught sitting; Preachers be-like were sitters in those
days, Math. 23.
as it is in another place, they sit in Moses Chair.

I would our Preachers would Preach sitting or standing one way or other.

It was a goodly Pulpit that our Savior Christ had gotten him here, an old
rotten Boat. And yet he preached his Fathers will, his Fathers message out of
this Pulpit. He cared not for the Pulpit, so he might do the people good.

Indeed it is to be commended; Note.
for the Preacher to stand or sit as the place is, but I would not have it so
superstitiously esteemed, but that a good Preacher may declare the Word of God
sitting on a Horse, or preaching in a Tree.

And yet and this should be done, the unpreaching Prelates would laugh it to
scorn.

And though it be good to have a Pulpit set up in the Churches, that the people
may resort thither, yet I would not have it so superstitiously used, but that
in a profane place the Word of God may be preached sometimes. --

To have Pulpits in Churches it is very well done to have them, but they would
be occupied, for it is a vain thing to have them as they stand in many Churches.

I heard of a Bishop of England that went on visitation (and as it was the
custom) when the Bishop should come and be rung into the Town, the great Bells
clapper was fallen down, the ty-all was broken, so that the Bishop could not be
rung into the Town. There was a great matter made of this, and the chief of the
Parrish were much blamed for it, in the visitation. The Bishop was somewhat
quick with them, and signified that he was much offended. They made their
answers, and excused themselves as well as they could, it was a chance said
they, that the clapper brake, and we could not get it mended by and by, we must
tarry till we can have it done it shall be mended as shortly as may be.

Among the other there was one wiser then the rest, and he comes to the Bishop.
Why (my Lord) says he, does your Lordship make so great a matter of the Bell
that lacks his clapper; here is a Bell (says he) pointing to the Pulpit,
that has lacked a clapper this twenty years. We have a Parson that fetches
out of this benefice fifty pound every year, but we never see him.

I warrant you the Bishop was an unpreaching Prelate, he could find fault with
a Bell that wanted a clapper to ring him into the Town; but he could not find
any fault with the Parson that preached not at his Benefice.

Ever this Office of preaching has been least regarded, it has scant had the
name of Gods service. They must sing Salve festa dies about the Church, that no
man was the better for it, but to show their gay coats and garments.

I came once my self to a place, Note.
riding on a journey homeward from London, and I sent word overnight into the
Town, that I would preach there in the morning, because it was Holyday; and me
thought it was a Holidays work, the Church stood in my way. And I took my
Horse and my Company and went thither, (I thought I should have found a great
Company in the Church) and when I came there, the Church door was fast locked,
I tarried there half an hour and more; at the last the Key was found, and one
of the Parish comes to me, and says; Sir, this is a busy day with us, we
cannot hear you, it is Robin-hoods day. The Parish are gone abroad to gather
for Robin-hood. I pray you let them not. I was fain there to give place to
Robin-hood. I thought my Rochet should have been regarded, though I were not,
but it would not serve, it was fain to give place to Robin-hoods men.

It is no laughing matter, Note.
my friends, it is a weeping matter, a heavy matter, a heavy matter, under
pretense of gathering for Robin Hood, a Traitor and a Thief, to put out a
Preacher, to have his Office less esteemed, to prefer Robin Hood before the
Ministration of Gods Word, and all this has come of Unpreaching Prelates. This
Realm has been ill provided for, rhat it has had such corrupt Judgments in
it, to prefer Robin Hood to Gods Word: If the Bishops had been Preachers, there
should never have been any such thing; but we have a good hope of better. We
have had a good beginning, I beseech God to continue it. But I tell you, it is
far wide, that the people have such judgments: The Bishops they could laugh at
it, what was that to them; they would have them to continue in ignorance still,
and themselves in unpreaching Prelacy.

Part of the Seventh Sermon preached by Mr. Latimer before King Edward.
MAny speak of Faith, but few there be that have it. This Faith is a great
State, a Lady, a Duchess, a great woman, and she has ever a great Company and
Train about her (as a Noble State ought to have.) First, She has a Gentleman
Usher, that goes before her, and where he is not, there is not Lady Faith.

This Gentleman Usher is called Agnitio Peccatorum, knowledge of sin, when we
enter into our hearts, knowledge our faults, and stand not about to defend
them. He is none of these Winkers, he kicks not, when he hears his Fault. Now
as the Gentleman Usher goes before her, so she has a great Train behind her,
following after her; the Fruits of good works, the walking in the Commandments
of God. He that believes, will not be idle, he will walk, he will do his
business. Have ever the Gentleman Usher with you: So if you will try your
Faith, Note.
remember this Rule. Consider whether the Train be waiting upon her: If you
have another Faith than this, you are like to go to the scalding House, and
there you shall have two Dishes, weeping and gnashing of teeth, much good do it
you, you see your Fare. --

Not long ago, a great man said in an Audience, they babble much of Faith, I
will go and lie with my Whore all night, and have as good a Faith as the best
of them all: I think he never knew other, but the Whoremongers Faith; it is no
such Faith that will serve.

It is no Bribing Judges nor Justices Faith, no Whoremongers Faith, nor no
Sellers of Benefices Faith. --

If you will believe and acknowledge your sins, so you shall attain to
everlasting Life, to which the Father of Heaven bring you and me, AMEN.

FINIS.

