A CATECHISM Shorter then the short Catechism compiled principally by Mr
Ball, out of which this (for the most part) was taken.

OR THE EPITOME and CONTRACTION of Mr Balls short Catechism.

ALSO A Spiritual Song for the Lords Supper or Communion, put into an ordinary
tune, that it may be sung by common people, for their spiritual quickening and
edification in that Ordinance.

Together with two other Hymns or Psalms, the first concerning Submission, the
second the Lords Prayer.

By S.L. M.A. and F. C.C.Camb.

London, Printed by A.M. for Tho. Underhill at the Bible in Wood-street. 1649.

A CATECHISM, Shorter then the short Catechism composed principally by Mr
Ball, out of which this for the most part was taken.
Intended chiefly for the use of weaker memories, or such as cannot read,
being of the Congregation which meets ordinarily at Swettenham in Cheshire.
By S.L. M.A. and F. C.C.Camb.
THat which is endeavored to be performed here, is 1. To reduce the
unquestionable and principal truths of Christianity into a less compass,
that weak memories may better retain them. 2. To cut off many questions which
are more difficult and less necessary, and therefore not fitly to be ranckt
amongst principles of Religion. 3. To make every answer an entire proposition
in it self, without dependence upon the question to make up the sense of it:
the want of this in this Catechism of Mr Bals, experience teaches, has
hindered young, weak and less considerate learners from understanding the
answers they have repeated, as also from a certain fitting the right answer to
a question propounded 4. To cull out the choicest and most evident texts of
Scripture to confirm every part of each answer, which may easily be learned by
any; multitude of proofs before confounding, and the strength of many of them
not easily appearing to such capacities as such a Catechism is intended for. 5.
Yet to retain, for the most part in the questions and answers, the very words
of Mr Balls Catechism; be cause it has been so much used (not without
exceeding apparent profit) both in families and public Congregations, that
other words might be a means to puzzel some in learning this, who have formerly
taken pains in that. The God of knowledge and grace give a blessing to this
poor yet sincere endeavor, for his glory and his peoples good, of his most
unworthy and meanest servant,

S. Langley.

A Short CATECHISM,
Section 1.
Q. WHat ought to be the chief and continual care of every one in this life?

A. Every ones chief and continual care in this life, should be 1 Corinthians.
10.31.
to glorify God and Matthew. 16.26.
save his soul,

Q. Whence must we take direction to attain hereunto?

A. We must take direction for the glorifying God and saving our own souls out
of the word of God, Joh. 20.31.

Q. What does the word of God (called the Scripture) especially teach us?

A. The Scripture teaches us the saving knowledge of God through Jesus Christ,
Joh. 17.3.

Section 2.
Q. What is God?

A. God is Joh. 4.24.
a Spirit, having his Exodus 3.14.
being of himself,

Q. How many Gods be there?

A. There is only one God revealed, as 1 Corinthians. 8.6.
Father, Matthew. 28.19.
Son, and 1 John 5.7.
holy Ghost (called three persons)

Q. How may we conceive of God?

A. We may conceive of God Exodus 34.6, 7.
by his properties and Psalm. 19.1.
by his works,

Section 3.
Q What are the manifest or visible works of God?

A. The visible works of God are Creation and Providence.

Q. What is Creation?

A. Creation is that whereby God made all things in six days, Exodus 20.11.

Q. What is Providence?

A. Providence is that whereby God does preserve and govern all things with all
their actions, Psalm. 36.6. Matthew. 10.29.

Q. What are the special creatures made, preserved and governed by the Lord?

A. The special or principal creatures of God are Angels and Men, Col. 1.16.

Section 4.
Q. What was the estate of man by creation?

A. The estate wherein man was first created, was holy and happy, Eccl 7.29.
Genesis 1.27, 28, 29.

Q. What special commandment was given to man upon his creation?

A. The special commandment which God gave man upon his creation was this, Of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat, for in the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall die the death, Genesis 2.17.

Q. Did man continue in his good estate?

A. Man did not continue in his good estate, but wilfully fell from God through
the enticement of the serpent, Genesis 3.1, 4, 5.

Q. What was the sin he did commit?

A. Man sinned by eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.6.

Q. What is the state of all men by reason of Adams fall?

A. By this sin of Adam, all men (being in his loins) are Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
dead in sin, Romans 6.23.
bondslaves to Satan, and Gal. 3.10. Romans 5.12.
liable to all misery,

Section 5.
Q. By what means may we escape this misery and recover happiness?

A. We may escape this misery and recover happiness only by Jesus Christ, Act.
4.12.

Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. Jesus Christ is the Isa. 9.6.
eternal Son of God, who in Gal. 4.4, 5.
time became man, to 1 Timothy 2.5.
reconcile God and man,

Q. How did Christ reconcile God and man?

A. Christ became a Mediator to reconcile God and man, by his Matthew. 3.15.
fulfilling the law, and by his Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.10, 18, 19.
sufferings (or by his obedience unto death)

Section 6.
Q. Did Christ always abide under the power and dominion of death?

A. Christ did not abide under the power of death; but the 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
third day he rose again, ascended into heaven, and Mar. 16.19.
now fitteth at the right hand of his Father, Heb. 7.25.
making intercession for his people,

Q. What are the special parts of Christ's Mediatorship?

A. The special parts of Christ's Mediatorship are these three, to be a Act.
3.22.
Prophet, Heb. 2.17.
Priest, and Psalm. 110.1.
King,

Q. What benefit do we receive by the death and resurrection of Christ?

A. By the death and resurrection of Christ, we are Gal. 3.13. Col. 1.14. Tit.
2.14.
redeemed from the guilt, punishment and power of sin, and 1 Cor. 15.13.
shall be raised up at the last day,

Section 7.
Q. How are we made partakers of Christ with all his benefits?

A. We are made partakers of Christ with all his benefits by faith alone, Joh.
3.16. Romans 4.3, 4, 5. Romans 5.1, 2.

Q. What is faith?

A. Faith is a resting upon Christ in his way for salvation, Joh. 1.12.

Q. How is faith ordinarily wrought and increased in us?

A. Faith is wrought and increased in the due use of the Romans 10.14, 17.
word, Luk 17.5.
prayer and Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 11.25.
Sacraments, the Joh. 14.16, 17.
Spirit of God working it in us thereby,

Q. How does the word work faith in us?

A. The word is a means of working faith, by Romans 7.7.
showing us our misery, and Gal. 4.4, 5.
the true means of our recovery, Matthew. 11.28. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. Revel. 22.17.
encouraging us, being humbled, to receive the promises of the Gospel,

Section 8.
Q. To whom must we pray?

A. We must pray to God alone, in the Name of Christ, Joh. 16.23.

Q. What rule of direction is there according to which we ought to frame our
prayers?

A. The 1 John 5.14.
general direction for prayer is the Word of God, the more Matthew 6.9.
special is the Lords prayer,

Q. Rehearse the Lords prayer?

A. Our Father, etc. See Matthew. 6.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Q. Who can and may pray with hope to speed?

A. They only can pray aright, with hope to speed, who depart from iniquity,
Psalm. 66.18.

Section 9.
Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament (in the use of it) is a seal of the Covenant of grace, Romans
4.11.

Q. How many Sacraments have we?

A. In the new Testament we have two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper,
1 John 5.8.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament of our Gal. 3.37.
ingraffing into Christ, communion with him, Matthew. 28.19.
and entrance into the Church,

Q. To what condition is the party baptized bound?

A. The party baptized, by baptism is obliged to Act. 8.37.
believe in Christ, and Mat. 3.8.
forsake his sin,

Section 10.
Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament of our continuance and growth in Christ, 1
Cor. 10.16.

Q. What do the bread and wine betoken in this Sacrament?

A. In the Lords Supper, the bread betokens the body of Christ broken for us,
and the wine betokens his blood, 1 Cor. 10.16. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.

Q. For what end and use ought we to receive this Sacrament?

A. We are to receive the Lords Supper for the 1 Cor. 11.34, 25.
remembrance of Christ's death, wherein we have 1 Cor. 10.16.
communion with Christ and 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
the Saints,

Q. What is the danger of unworthy receiving?

A. Unworthy receivers of the Lords Supper are guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, and do eat and drink judgment to themselves, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.

Q. What graces are required for a worthy receiving?

A. A worthy receiver must have, and exercise in receiving, these five graces,
Exodus 12.26, 27.
Knowledge, Matthew. 11.28. Revel. 22.17.
Desire, 1 Cor. 10.21, 22. Matthew. 3.8, 11.
Repentance, Heb. 4.2. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
Faith and 1 Cor. 11.18, 22. Mark 11.25.
Love,

Section 11.
Q. Can faith being wrought in us be fruitless and unprofitable?

A. Faith being wrought in us, cannot be fruitless, but will work Gal. 5.6.
by love, making us Heb. 11. James 2.17.
obedient to all Gods Commandments,

Q. Rehearse the ten Commandments.

A. I am the Lord, etc. See Exodus 20, from verse 1. to 18.

Section 12.
Q. What shall be the end of all men after this life?

A. After this life, in Luke 23.43.
part at death, and 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9, 10.
fully at the general resurrection and judgment, the Matthew 25.46.
wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into eternal
life,

FINIS.
A SPIRITVALL SONG OR AN AFFECTIONAT HYMN for the use of Christians in the
Celebration of the COMMUNION OR Lords Supper.
By S.L. M.A. and F. C.C. Camb.
And when they had sung an hymn (viz. Christ with his Disciples at the Lords
Supper, after the Passover) they went out,

Matthew. 26.30. Mark. 14.26. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, in Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. And whatsoever
you do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks
to God and the Father by him,

Colos. 3.16, 17. LONDON, Printed by A.M. for Tho. Underhill at the Bible in
Woodstreet, 1649.

THe design aimed at in the composing o^ this Song, is to affect the soul with
melting joies and thankful mournings according to the nature of the Lords
Supper. It is made public to save the labor of often transcribing it for the
benefit of these for whose use it was particularly at first intended. Besides
^t is hoped other sincere Christians who may see it, if they make use thereof,
may have cause to glorify God in this weak, yet well-meant labor of the
Compeser thereof,

S. LANGLEY,

AN HYMN OR Spiritual Song for the Communion of Saints in the Lords Supper.
GReat God! who made and saved'st the world,
Our souls do bless thy Name:
Thy goodness fills our hearts and mouths
Therefore we praise the same.
When we in Adams fall were dead,
Then did thy Mercy speak,
those words of Life, The Woman's seed
The Serpents Head shall break.
The lightsome Beams of freest grace,
To shine did now begin,
^n stubborn Man; who sought not thee,
But pleaded for his sin.
With blood of Bulls and other Beasts
Thy people first did see
^rit in red Letters, darkly yet,
How they redeemed should be.
the fullness of that Time
Which thou decreed'st was come;
This Mystery more plain was made
By sending of thy Son.
only Son, Eternal God,
Veiled in our Nature came
Into this world through Virgins womb
To take away our shame.

To circumcise our Hearts:
Baptized too; that thou might wash
And cleanse our inward parts.

Great Master! thou did teach;
And secrets of the Gospel rare
In word and deeds did preach.

And all thy Precepts take:
Begging thy strength, that so we may
None of thy statutes break.

Unto thy Garden-sweat:
Thy scourgings, piercings, mocks we do
With joyful grief repeat.
Body on the Cross,
Nailed by our sins we see:
We hear thee cry, My God! My God!
Have thou forsaken me?
Blood, sweet JESUS, thou have shed
For us who guilty were
Of spilling it: At this thy Board
These things to us appear.

And mourn to see thee bleed:
As Peter said) We Will die with thee,
Our sins their blood shall sheed.

Together with our shame:
^s our sins show thy Love more great,
So does thy Love our blame.

Our LOVE have crucifi'de:
^et weeping joy, thankful that he
Would Death for us abide.
Testament which thou have left
Here sealed with thy Blood,
LORD, we embrace, and like the Terms
On which thou wilt make it good.
cursed pins which pierct
Thy Feet with both thy Hands:
We sin abhor, seeing that it
Of thy Death guilty stands.
Brethren we will love in thee
Who out of love did die:
Nor Grudges against our Neighbor shall
Within our Bosoms lie.
Dear LORD, in all we say,
We wholly do depend,
Upon the fullness of that Grace,
Thou have and wilt us send.

Who in Heavens Quier sing
All Creatures pay your homage thanks
To Ransomd Zions KING.
tongues and lives shall gladly speak
The praises of the LORD;
All flesh to praise his holy Name
For ever shall accord.
To fill up the remaining vacant pages, these t^^ following Hymns are added.

Submission.
What mean thou wandering Heart to fly
From Heavens order pettishly?
^tay trembling soul, and pawse a while,
(...) Fathers frowns lies veiled a smile.
^ast thou not often said, thy God
^uch wiser is then thou? his rod
^he ensign of his careful grace?
Wrangle not then in any case.
(...) that thy wish were granted still,
and thou had ever had thy will;
^peak in experience: Do not know
^uine has seaz'd thee long ago?
(...) this crosse-way, then hope, believe;
^hy God is plotting to relieve
and help thee though thou see not how;
^dore the more, and to him bow.
(...) thy distemper thou do trust
^hy Doctor, that he is skilled and just,
and his prescribed loathsome draught
^inking sup'st off, though yet untaught
and ignorant what simples be
^^gredients of it, or how he
^is hidden learned plot does lay
^o take thy sickness's cause a way.
Oh! blush for shame then that thou have
Thy makers Love and skill deba'st,
Beneath a mortall's. Silly soul
Learn these Repinings to control.
Do not forget, thou have resigned
Thy self unto thy Makers mind;
And dare such sacraledge commit
Thy deed surrendered now to quit?
Think whither save to him can run,
And not for certain be undone?
Is not the world all sea? What land
Can find where one may safely stand?
To the Ark again, fly with the Dove,
Where only is thy Rest, thy love.
Hope not the ship of thy self will
Undrown'd can save thee; if it fulfill
The same, thou run'st another way
Then God has sent thee; he will lay
Thy moving grave and living Tomb
In Jonahs Whales vast roomy womb.
God may destroy thee: True; and so
Cannot he, if thou from him go?
Return, Return, poor soul, for he
Abounds in kindest courtesy;
Witness the wounds thy dearest dear
In glory, glories still to bear;
Where Didymus might feel his love,
His passions and compassions prove.
Sweet Lord, do thou me wholly hide
In those holes of the Rock, thy side!
Where lying close I shall not fear
When all thy judgments do appear.
And still, my soul, consider if
Thy Sav'our was a man of grief;
Then grudge not that thy passage is
Chequr'd with sorrows like to his.
The Lords Prayer.
OUr Father, who in Heaven do sit,
Which Heaven is, 'cause thou in it:
Thy Name be hallowed! let each voice
And raised heart in thee rejoice!
Thy Kindome come!
Thy will be done!
By us below
As Angels do,
Who winged wait above, that they
Thy nod may watch, and so obey!
Give us this day the bread we need!
Thy blessing only can us feed.
Forgive our Trespasses as we
Forgive them who our Debtors be!
Lead us not on
Temptation!
But from all ill
Lord save us still!
For Kingdom, Power, Glory, all
Be thine now and for ever shall.
Amen.
FINIS.

