THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT BY WILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of Canterbury, to the
UNIVERSITIE of OXFORD.

Wherein he relates his present condition, and Resignes the Office of his
Chancellourship, with an Advertisement, for the Election of another.

portrait of William Laud

Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

A LETTER WRITTEN BY THE Archbishop of Canterbury to the University of Oxford.
MY present condition is not unknown to the whole world, yet by few pitied, or
deplored. The righteous God best knows the lustice of my sufferings; on whom
both in life and death I will ever depend, the last of which shall be unto me
most welcome, in that my life is now burdensome unto me, my mind attended with
variety of sad and grievous thoughts, my soul continually vexed with anxieties
and troubles, groaning under the burden of a displeased Parliament, my name
dispersed, and grossly abused, by the multiplicity of libellous Pamphlets, and my
self debarred from my wonted access to the best of Princes, and it is vox
populi that I am popishly affected. How earnest I have been in my disputations,
exhortations, and otherwise, to quench such sparks, lest they should become
Coals, I hope after my death you will all acknowledge, yet, in the midst of
all my afflictions, there is nothing has so nearly touched me, as the
remembrance of your free and joyful acceptance of me to be your Chancellor,
and that I am now shut up from being able to do you that service, which you
might justly expect from me; When I first received this honor, intended to
have carried it with me to my Grave, neither were my hopes any less, since
the Parliament by his Majesty's command committed me to this Royal Prison; But
since (by reason of matters of greater consequence yet in hand) the Parliament
is pleased to precrastinate my trial, I do hereby as thankefully resign my
office of being Chancellor, as ever I received that dignity, entreating you to
elect some Honorable person, who upon all occasions may be ready to serve you,
and I beseech God send you such a one, as may do all things for his glory, and
the furtherance of your most famous University. This is the continual prayer
of

Tower, June 28, 1641. Your dejected Friend and Chancellor, being the last
time I shall write so, W. Cant.

FINIS.

