A HORSE OR A NEW-YEARES-GIFT To the Right worthy, and worshipful Sr. PHILLIP
BALFOUR, Knight.

Colonel of a Scottish Regiment in the service of the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Provinces.

BY G. LAWDER

depiction of a horse

AT MIDDELBURGH, Printed by JAMES FIERENS, Booke-seller at the sign of the
GLOBE, in the Gift-street. Anno 1646.

A HORSE
AMid the crowd of clients, that does choack
The thronged streets, and temples, with the smoke
Of love and incense, where true zeal does burn
In happy wishes, for the years return;
Whilst each his Patron humbly does present
Due hommage, in some gift or complement:
Roused from sad silence, dark, and drouzy shade:
My bashful Muse comes blushing forth, afraid,
And shames to be surpised at such a time;
(When so much Reason should awake her rhyme)
That Noble BALFOUR should no token find
Of LAUDER'S love, respect, and honest mind:
But whilst her grief in wandering thoughts does stray
To find a present for this Holy day;
On flowrie Peleon, fair Thessalia's pride,
In single choice she nimbly does bestride
A pransing Steed, and backwards bends her course
To give him for a New-yeares-gift, this HORSE.
What could my wish in all the world have found,
Brave BALFOUR, worthier of my duties bound,
Or your acceptance, then what here I bring?
The noblest Creature, next to man, their king:
The warlike Courser whose high courage warmes,
When trumpets sound, and drums do beat alarmes;
The battles strength, in whose Heroic breast,
True valor harbors, and true love does rest.
The noblest Patme in the fairest feature
And justly Sovereign of the speechles creature.
The HORSE is full of wonder and delight,
The sweetest object that presents the sight;
And would you have his qualities descride,
The GOD of Hoasts, and Israel's Armies guide
When with his Servant JOB, Job. 39.22.
he held discourse
Told him the rare perfections of the ^ORSE;
"His Crest is clothed with thunder: None can make
"His sinevvy limbs like grasshoppers to quake:
"His flouting nostrills breath a fearful smoack:
"The valley trembles, at his hoofs hard stroack:
"He glories in his strength; And trampling goes
"To meet the squadrons of his armed foes:
"He scorneth fear, and is no whit afraid;
"Nor turns about at sight of brandished blade;
"The quiver ratleth in his raised ears:
"He slights the glance of glistring shields and spears:
"His fiercenes, rage does swallow up the ground:
"And he disdaines the trumpets auvvfull sound:
"He neighs and curbets at the trumpets noise;
"And smells the war a far: Hears the lovvd voice
"Of thundering Captains; And the shouts and cries
"Of Soldiers, and shootes lightning from his eyes.
The generous HORSE has a great Sympathy
With his proud Ryder, and can presently
Conceive his meaning, when He finds him stir
The reins, or raise his rod, or vvagg his spur;
As if his mouth and flanks had eyes and ears
To hear and see his riders dumb desires;
Or that his limbs were members of that head
Whose hand and fancy does his motions lead;
What greater pleasure, then to see him go
Puffing side-vvaies turning to and fro?
His Head and body, or a gallop strike
With Majesty and measure raisd alike,
Or when he finds the reins more free, to fly
More swift then Parthian shaft, outrun the eye
Until his speed have left behind the plain
And he come bravely foaming home again.
Then with a sense of honor, as it were
Puffd up, he proudly casts, now here, now there
His flaming eyes, and chafes his clattring bitt,
As if he would say something but for it,
But when he is armd for fight; And on his head
A lofty pannach vvafting plumes do spread:
What Curbetts, and what capriolls he makes,
What volts? with whose sad weight the center shakes:
With what disdain he strikes and scrapes the ground?
Whilst neighing loud he makes the fields resound,
And in a noble fury seems to plain
The curbing reins his courage should restrain:
His rage enflames, and breathing fire and smoke
He capers, kicks, and does himself prouoak;
Turns round, and rises over end, to see
With froathing mouth, a far the Enemy.
This noble creature since the world began
Has been the darling, and delight of Man;
And for his vvorth more Princes love has vvonne
Then all the rest together, He alone:
So much that when I name him, I protest
I blush, and grieve to call him but a beast.
The wise and valiant CIMON, whom proud Greece
So much does boast of, thought it no disgrace
To lay his HORSE beside himself, and have
Cloase by his tomb his Horses joining grave.
Great ALEXANDER, who the earth over ran,
And greedy vvishd more worlds for him to vvonne,
Did found a City in his conquests course
In honor of Bucephalus his HORSE.
Brave Julius CAESAR, Romes triumphant God,
Whose conquests ore his countries freedom rode?
And reft by force the crown to prove Her course
So much esteemed dearly loved his Horse,
That in his temple where the people bovvd
To worship him, his HORSE in marble stood.
Mild ANTONIN, whose wise and happy Reign
A pattern yet for Princes does remain:
So loved the HORSE, that he with cost did mould
And cast his Statue into purest gold.
And VERUS buried in the Vatican
A HORSE with all the honors due to Man.
CALIGULA, though othervvaies a beast
Did often inuit his Horse to be his guest,
Drunck healths unto him, decked him with his cloack
And would have made him CONSUL, had he spoke.
Yea when he vvrongd the Priesthood, and would take
That place, he did his HORSE his Colleague make.
NERO, that never loved Creature, young nor old,
Even scarce himself; his HORSE so dear did hold
That clad in purple, he must wear the Govvne
As SENATOR, and walk abroad the town:
And his fine wanton wench SABINA would
Her HORSE have shod with none but shoes of gold.
The HORSE is often cause of victory,
And in the battle fights furiously;
He bites and strikes, and beats whole squadrons down
Rides over the ranks, till all be quite o'rethrowne;
And will not hear the sound of the retreit,
But follows those that fly, and are defeat.
The HORSE was fatal unto famous TROY
Which ten years lingering siedge could not annoy;
And those white steeds ANCHISES first did see
Upon the long sought shore of ITALY,
Portended war; the land could not be won,
But with hard blows, by his tossd wandering Son.
A HORSE discovered him that should be king Herod. lib. 3.

When Persia's wise men forth their Peers did bring
Without the City gate well mounted all:
And he whose HORSE first neigh'd; ('t was said) should fall
The Crown by lot; which Darius did obtain,
And by that means came over the Land to reign.
The HORSE, Wars Simbole, is alive, or dead,
As well was seen in CARTHAGE, by the Head
Of one was found, when first fair Dido founded
That Town; and with strong walls the Port surrounded.
For Rome never found a folk more hard to daunt
And Hanniball of Canna's field could vaunt.
The HORSE for speed and strength so far excells
All other Creatures made for service else;
That even the Apostles sometime are compared
To HORSES, for their toil and travel hard:
As when the Zechariah. 1.6.
Prophet in the vale of Night
Among the Mirtles saw that vision bright:
"A Man that sat upon a HORSE was red
"And others speckled more behind him stood
"He asked what they were, and it was said
"Those whom the Lord his messengers had made
"To walk abroad the earth, and shovv his will
"Though all the world in wickedness sat still.
What greater marck of true magnificence
To shovv the state and puissance of a Prince;
Then in the choice and number of his HORSE?
Which prove his power, and do proclaim his force.
The Mirror and the Map of Majesty.
Great SOLOMON, whose glory reached the sky;
In nothing more his royal pomp maintaind
Then forty thousand HORSE he entertaind.
The HORSE may for his Courage justly claim
A share in honors, and surviving fame,
With all those worthies that the world admires
Those valiant vvandring Knights, and sturdie Squires
For had not He, as forvvard been as they
Where should we find our Chiualry to day.
St. Georg himself, but for his HORSE I fear,
Had never killed the Dragon with his spear;
But he has his revvard, and fares no worse
Then his proud Ryder; honored as a Horse.
The HORSE alone is vvorth a world of creatures;
Whose several service, suits but with their natures,
He Is fit for all things, and you cannot choose
A work becomes him vvrong; or wants his use
In peace and war for profit and for pleasure
He is the Prince and Peasants choicest treasure.
Though Fables in fine tires have truth disguised
And tell us tales of Monsters, Men devised,
As that the Centaures were half HOSRE, half Man:
The Moral's good, and from this ground began:
There dwelled a people, on mount Pelions side
Who first broke Horses, and were seen to ride,
Their simple neighbors thought both Man and horse
Had been but One, and feared their mighty force
(As of late years, the sauadge Indians thought
When Cortez first from Spain, his horsemen brought:
For when they fought on foot they feared no evil
But durst not stand against that Spanish Devil.)
From thence the Poets faind that pretty tale
To shovv that strength and reason still prevail:
And therefore fained Chiron to be One
That did instruct fair Thetis vvarrelike Son:
The better in that fiction to express
Those parts required in him that is put to dress
A Princes youth, whose wise and deep discourse
To manly Reason joines the strength of HORSE.
But soft my Muse, it is too much I fear
Stop here thy course: and hold in full cariere
The gentle HORSE should not be spurred too sore;
Nor must thou vvrong his patience any more,
The gentle HORSE should not be spurred too sore;
Nor must thou vvrong his patience any more,
That daings to hear thy harsh, and ill-timed song
The Day is holy; hold thy prattling tongue.
Behold Brave BALFOUR, with what confidence
I kindly beg your favor will dispense
With this plain freedom: and accept my love
In this poor token, though a toy it prove:
The Gods of old were pleased with poorest things
And petty flovvers are presents for great Kings.
What here I offer, if it please your eye,
My vvish is full, my verse to Heaven will fly.
And I shall reach PARNASSUS sacred sourse
On this Pegasian COLT, my Flying HORSE.
SVNT ARTIBVS ARMA DECORI.

