CHRIST's POWER OVER Bodily DISEASES.

Preached in several Sermons on Mat. 8.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

And published for the Instruction especially of the more Ignorant people in
the great Duty of Preparation for Sickness and Death.

By Edward Lawrence, M.A. Minister of the Gospel at Baschurch in the County of
Salop.

Isaiah 38.12. He will cut me off with pining sickness: from day even to night
will thou make an end of me.

Exodus 23.25. I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.

Valent mihi stillae temporum. August.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed by J.C. for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet.
1672.

To the Worshipful, and my very much honored, Robert Corbet of Stanwardine in
the Wood, in the County of Salop Esquire and to his Religious Consort, Mrs.
Elizabeth Corbet; together with the rest of the Congregation in the Parish of
Baschurch, over which the Holy Ghost has made me Overseer.
My very much honored in the Lord,
THE reason of this inscription is not because you are preferred by God, by
your birth, family, estate, and other outward privileges, to be the chief of
the Inhabitants of my Parish: for although I acknowledge the Wisdom and Will of
God, as the cause of this order and distinction among men; and therefore do
heartily give you the honor which belongs to you upon this account; yet I must
confess, that this is not the cause of this public acknowledgment: But the
reason is, that whereas many great persons are a great curse to their Country,
which they fill with their own sins, and Gods Judgments; God has made you the
blessing of your Age, in endeavoring to fill your place with the Name, and
Kingdom, and Will of Jesus Christ; and that in the great changes of our days,
you have not, as many, served the times, and your sins, but served the Lord,
and your Generation: And also because of your great honor, and love to the
godly, able, and Orthodox Ministers of Christ, and to his holy, humble, sober,
and peaceable people, which have been loathsome to others, as the sink of the
world; but savoury to you, as the salt of the earth: for which although you
have joyfully suffered reproach from some; yet you have had the honor, like
that gracious couple, Andronicus and Junia, to be of note among the Apostles:
And particularly, that you were of the first that called me to exercise my
Ministry in this place, wherein I have by your constant favor and countenance
received much comfort and encouragemet: The sense of all which, together with
my great joy in you, by my hopes of your being of the blessed number of those
who are really joined to Jesus Christ, and clothed with his righteousness, and
who bring forth fruit in him, (which alone can make of you a sweet savor to
God, and for that reason precious, and acceptable to his Saints) has caused me
to signify my sincere honor, and love, and thankfulness to you, by this
Dedication. Now although I hope I write this in the singleness of my heart, as
believing that God will cut off all flattering lips, and that a lying tongue is
but for a moment; yet I confess it fills me with serious thoughts, to consider
that this when I am dead, will be yet speaking: And that hereby I speak to you,
as it were, in the hearing of the world; and that some whom we are bound in
Christian wisdom and charity to judge as upright Saints, yet the
heart-searching God may justly judge as Hypocrites; and that many who have made
a greater profession of godliness then any of us, have proved fearful
Apostates, when they have been tried by Errors, Persecutions, or Preferments: I
shall therefore, looking upon my self and you as just in our very fall into
Eternity, and as presently going to Judgment, and with the greatest belief and
thoughts that I can get of Heaven and Hell upon my heart, seriously beseech you
(according to the intent of this ensuing Treatise) to examine your selves
whether (if you were to die in the reading of this) you have a true
Scripture-right to go to heaven; that so you may find the Witness of God by the
word in your own consciences, agreeing with this public testimony of your poor
Minister: for it is but a poor thing for a man of so little credit, and less
worth, to confess you before men; but this will be an honor indeed, to have
Jesus Christ to confess you before his Father in Heaven, on the great day of
the manifestation of the Sons of God. And continue to live as discerning the
great difference betwixt a godly and ungodly man, that you may still be known
by this character, to be persons in whose eyes a vile person (though never so
great in the world) is contemned; but to honor them (though never so poor)
that fear the Lord. This difference must needs be great, when I dare be bold to
say, that it is beyond the tongues of men and Angels fully to express the
excellency and glory of the one, and the vileness and misery of the other: And
certainly the further insight you have in the Scriptures, in God and Christ,
Men and Devils, Sin and Grace, Heaven and Hell, the more clearly you will know
this difference. Do but look on the Godly, and Wicked, as they appear in
sickness and death, and in the Day of Judgment; these put an eternal period to
all other distinctions: there will be then no such difference as Prince and
Subject, Landlord and Tenant, Rich and Poor, but only Godly and Ungodly; see
the difference now, as it will appear, when, Come ye blessed, and Go ye cursed:
and the right hand and left hand of Christ has distinguished and parted the
world.

Be resolved to cleave to Christ, his truth and people, through all the
sufferings and stumbling blocks which you meet with in your way to heaven:
sufferings will be harder to you, then to many others: the greater your names
and estates are, the greater must your graces be to enable you to part with
them; you have a greater self to deny, and a greater cross to take up: great
riches, and great preferments, make many great Persecutors, and great
Apostates, but few great Martyrs: you must buy the truth, whatever it cost you:
and the more you give for it, the more you will gain by it: if you sell all for
Christ, you shall never complain of a dear purchase. Look with the dearest
affections upon your Posterity, and believe that you will never have such an
opportunity to make them happy, and to entail the blessings of God upon them,
as when you are called to suffer for the sake of Christ: you may be called to
make a great exchange; either to part with your lives and estates, and to keep
Christ, and heaven; or to part with Christ, heaven, and your souls, to keep the
world: if ever such a day come, look to the poor soul; above all keeping, keep
your poor souls: remembering that of our Savior, What shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Be pleased to accept this poor thing, which I humbly
offer to you: give it a little room in your Study and Closet, and let the
truths therein have a great place in your hearts. Now blessed of the Lord be
you, and your hopeful posterity, for the precious things of the earth, and the
fullness thereof, and especially for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush.

NOw for the rest of you, my dearly beloved, my joy, and my longed for.

It is now thirteen years since upon your free choice and consent, I was settled
to be your Minister; I mourn that I have done you no better service; yet I
bless God, that I have done you no worse: Some of you are the people of my joy,
others are the people of my hopes, but (God knows) you are all the people of my
love: possibly you may not enjoy my Ministry long; though if any thing but
death part us, it is like for your sakes to be one of the saddest days of my
age. Some know I might have had better places both before, and since I knew
you; but I never thought my self too good for you: the Lord make me better
whilst I stay, and give you a better when I am gone. You will wonder to see me
appear to you thus public; my late visitation, whereby I was brought down to
the gates of the grave, and brought up again, was the occasion of my preaching
these Sermons; and the unanimous advice of four godly, reverend, and learned
Ministers, all known to you, caused their printing, without which my own
private thoughts of them had never consented to have them licensed for the
Press. I have devoted this little plain Treatise to the Will of God, knowing
that if he put power and savor in it, it will prosper: I expect to be scorned
by some; but if God say, Well done, I care not who finds fault; I had rather
bear the reproaches of thousands, then that one poor ^oul should lose the least
spiritual and saving good, which I may be a means to help him unto. I leave it
with you as a testimony of my sincere love to you, not so much that you may
remember me, but that you may remember your selves, your sins, and your souls;
and that you may remember God, Christ, Heaven, Hell, Death and Judgment, which
are always present before you. Brethren, I must needs witness that most of you
have been constant hearers of the Word, and that you have many hundred Sermons
to answer for; but you must be doers, as well as hearers of the word: the sins
of men, and the terrors of the Lord, make me afraid that there is a storm
rising, and I doubt there will be a great fall of many professors; and if you
will believe our Savior, you shall find that those only are built on a rock,
and shall certainly stand, who are both the hearers and doers of the word; I
refer you to his own words, Matthew. 7.24, 25, 26, 27.

I beseech you let not the world and sin come between your hearts and Christ;
let nothing keep you from heaven, which cannot keep you from hell. Now the God
of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd
of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect
in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing
in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Your servant for Jesus sake, Edward Lawrence.
Baschurch, July 11. 1661.
Reader,
THough nothing be more certain and common then Death, it is no common thing to
be prepared for it; or else salvation would be common: As there are no Truths
that are more necessary to be often preached and heard, then those which almost
all men know; so also no duties are more necessary to be urged, then those that
almost all confess, and think they practice: who will not acknowledge that
preparation for death should be the daily business of our lives, and done with
the first and most serious of our cares! And yet, to the shame of corrupted
humane nature, we must speak it, thousands that are uncertain to live an hour,
and certain to be lost for ever, if death surprise them in the state which they
are in, are as mindless of a serious preparation, and of the change which
should go before that change, as if it were no part of their concernment:
Methinks it is a very doleful spectacle to see men unprepared to dye, as busily
taken up with impertinent diversions, as if their work were done already: One
drinking, and prating, and singing in an Alehouse or Tavern, though unprepared
to dye: another employed in feasting, and complement, and such company and
discourse as will least trouble him with such thoughts, while yet he is
unprepared to dye: another scraping for deceitful riches, or gaping and
scrambling for preferment, while yet he is unprepared to dye: another quieting
his carnal heart with mere hypocritical outsides and lip-service, as if he
could charm an unprepared soul into Heaven, by saying or hearing a few words:
and few will know feelingly what an important work Preparation is, till the
terrors of approaching death be upon them.

One of Gods means for men's preparation, is, to give his Ministers a special
fitness to assist them in the work. As Christ took part with the children that
were partakers of flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. and in all things must be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
and in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted, v. 17, 18. so that we have not an High Priest that cannot be
touched with the feeling our of infirmities, Heb. 4.15. Even so his Ministers
must be mortals, frail, and subject to like passions as other men, James 5.17.
and the treasure of the spirit must be in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4 7. They
must be sick, that they may the better teach you to prepare for sickness; and
they must be exercised in preparing for death themselves, that they may be the
fitter to teach you to prepare. The God of Comfort comfort them in all their
tribulations, that they may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble,
by the Comfort whe^ewith they are comforted of God -- and whether they be
afflicted or comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation. Even when
they are pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch as they despair of
life, they receive the sentence of death in themselves, that they may not trust
in themselves, but in God that raised the dead -- that thanks may be given by
many on their behalf, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11. Whereas those that are
insensible of their neerness to eternity, and in healthful prosperity grow
secure, are like to be no lively feeling Preachers, nor fit to waken others to
that serious preparation, which they are wilful strangers to themselves: but
rather like to be corrupted with ambition, worldliness, idleness,
flesh^pleasing, man-pleasing* superficialness, formality, and trifling in
Religion, and vexing the Church with their contentions about their Ceremonies
and Opinions, till the approach of death do help them to juster apprehensions,
and bring them to such confessions as Bishop Ridley made to Hooper in his
imprisonment. Thou have here in this Treatise the wholesome savoury fruit of
sickness: This servant of the Lord was cast down and delivered, to teach him
how to teach thee to prepare. The subject is of such universal usefulness, and
yet fully handled by so few, so needful to be much studied in health, and the
Book so fit for the reading of the sick, or for those friends to read to them
that are about them, or visit them, that (though urgent business prohibited me
to read it all; yet having perused the most of it, and observed the scope and
spirit of the work,) I think it my duty to recommend it to thy thankful
acceptance and improvement; assuring thee, (upon long experience of the
benefits of a dying life) that the time is at hand, when the studies of death,
and thy everlasting state, will appear to have been more necessary and wise,
then all those impertinences that now divert distracted worldlings, and are but
the seed of endless sorrows.

Thy Brother in the Patience and Hope of Believers, Richard Baxter.
August 1. 1661.
Matthew. 8.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 5. And when Jesus was entered into
Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurion, beseeching him,

6. And saying, Lord, my servant lies at home sick of the Palsy, grievously
tormented.

7. And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal him.

8. The Centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy thou should come
under my roof; but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.

9. For I am a man under Authority, having Soldiers under me: and I say to
this man, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my
servant, Do this, and he does it.

10. When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, Verily
I say unto you, I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel.

11. And I say unto you, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall
sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven.

12. But the children of the Kingdom shall be cast into outer darkness; there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

13. And Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have believed,
so be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the self-same hour.


THE mighty Hand of God, which has of late come upon me, whereby (I must bear
him witness that) he has in his Fatherly Wisdom, and Goodness, and
Faithfulness visited me, has caused me to wink a little at the pomp and
bravery of this world, and to set before my eyes the ghastly sight of those
many Beds of Sickness, wherein the poor children of men lie languishing: I have
seriously thought what a poor Creature Man is, when he lies gasping under the
power and torture of a disease; and withal have considered how little a
Consumption, or a Fever, or the Small Pocks, or any other disease, cares for
the strength, or wealth, or youth, or beauty of a man. I have seen the great
changes which these make in Nations, and Cities, and Families, and Persons
where they are sent. I have endeavored to stand at the Door of Eternity,
looking on these Messengers, carrying multitudes before me out of this into the
other world. The Grave, that House of Darkness tells me, These bring my ghastly
Inhabitants to lodge in me; the Worms say, These bring our Brethren and Sisters
unto us; Hell from beneath cries, These have turned multitudes of damned Souls
into me; and Heaven from above cries, These have brought many blessed Spirits
into me.

Upon these, and other considerations, I have desired for my own, and others
good, to see clearly out of whose hands all sicknesses and diseases come, that
I may acknowledge my self, and assert and testify unto others, the absolute
Command and Dominion which God and Jesus Christ have over all these things; the
true knowledge and improvement whereof, may have a powerful influence upon us
in our health, to make us daily look and prepare for sickness; and in our
sickness to make us fit to live, or fit to die: and when we are restored to
health, to teach us to whose Will and Glory we should live; and to make us
ready for sickness and death, when they return; and by all, to cause us to
hasten into that blessed state, and to live in that gracious frame, that both
in life and health, sickness and death, we may have always a plain passage, and
a clear and safe entrance into that everlasting Kingdom of Glory, which is
always set open before us. For these ends I have chosen this Text, which is full
of this Argument, viz. to prove that all sicknesses and diseases, are under the
Command of Jesus Christ. This Scripture is recorded by two Evangelists; by
Matthew in the place beforementioned, and by Luke, Cap. 7. from ver. 1. to
ver. 11. they differ chiefly in two things.

1. Luke makes a more prolix and large relation then Matthew; and therefore we
read some things there, not mentioned here.

2. Matthew speaks as if the Centurion came, and spoke to Christ in Person, v.
5, 6. but Luke tells us expressly, that he sent unto him the Elders of the Jews,
v. 3. and after sent other friends to meet him, v. 6. This difference has made
some conceive, that they are distinct Relations of two distinct Miracles; but
without ground: for it is ordinary to speak of that which a man does by others,
as if he did it by himself; as the words which John the Baptist spoke by his
Disciples, are mentioned as if he had spoken them himself, Matthew. 11.2, 3.

So the Evangelist here reports, that the Centurion came to Christ, beseeching
him; meaning, not that he came in person, but that he came and spoke by his
messengers, as St. Luke explains it: and thus the two Evangelists are
reconciled. Now why the Centurion came not to Christ in person; whether it was,
because he thought he had no right to come for such a mercy, being a Gentile;
or whether the sense of his unworthiness made him afraid or ashamed to come; or
what other reason there was, because it cannot certainly be known, therefore it
is not wisdom too curiously to enquire.

The Text is a Narration of Christ's miraculous healing the Centurions servant
of a deadly disease, upon the faith and prayer of his good Master. There are
three main things which make up the subject of this Narration.

1. The Servants mortal disease.

2. The Masters miraculous Faith.

3. Christ's Miraculous Cure.

In the whole, observe these four particulars.

1. Here is the Centurions servant lying diseased, ver. 6. Lord, my servant
lies at home sick of the Palsy, grievously tormented. Luke says, Cap. 7.2. He
was sick, ready to die. The person thus visited, was a servant: in Matthew, the
Centurion is said to call him (...), which may be translated, my child; for the
word is ambiguous, signifying either a child, or a servant: but in Luke he is
called (...) a servant; yet it is said, a servant who was dear to him: and it
seems, by considering both together, that he was a good, faithful, and obedient
servant, and therefore as dear to his Master as his child.

I shall take occasion from hence to call upon servants to do the Will of God
in their Relation: Servants, labor in all faithfulness, and diligence, to
honor your Masters; keep up their Authority in your Souls, and let your whole
carriage savor of a heart that willingly, cheerfully, and humbly yields up it
self in obedient subjection thereunto: 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants, be subject to
your Masters with all fear. 1 Timothy 6.1. Let servants count their own Masters
worthy of all honor.

1. Consider the Family where thou live is Jesus Christ's; he is the Great
Master of every Family; and he has given Authority to the Master of the Family
where thou dwell to be his Vicegerent therein, and to bear his Image and
Authority, and to rule in his stead: therefore as thou art a Christian, and so
to honor Christ by believing in him, and by rejoicing in him, and by doing his
Will; so the honor thou owe to Jesus Christ, as thou art a servant, is to
honor, and serve, and obey thy Master in him: The Apostle requires the
obedience of servants to their Masters for this very reason, Col. 3.23, 24. And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men. -- For ye
serve the Lord Christ.

Servants, believe that you are threshing for Christ, and plowing for Christ,
and spinning for Christ; this will make you do your service heartily, when you
consider that you are therein serving the Lord Christ; and this will make you
afraid of disobeying, and despising your Masters, when you consider that you do
thereby, as much as in you lies, depose the Authority of Jesus Christ from
ruling and governing in the Family.

2. Consider, that you do hereby adorn the Gospel of Christ: This is the
Apostles argument, Tit. 2.10. That they may adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior in all things. What Doctrine this is, appears by the following words,
the Doctrine of the Grace of God, which brings Salvation. Oh how should this
prevail with you, to consider, that when in conscience to God you are faithful,
diligent, quiet, and obedient servants, you are a precious Ornament to the
Gospel of Jesus Christ! The Gospel is honored, not only by Ministers when they
preach the Gospel, and by Martyrs when they die for the Gospel; but also by
poor servants, when they live in their service, as those who are ruled by the
Gospel: therefore believe the Glory of Jesus Christ, as it is revealed, and
appears in the Gospel; and then own and honor the Face, and Image, and
Authority of the same Christ, as it shines in thy Master, whom he has placed
to bear his Authority over thee.

3. Consider, that faithful servants are exceeding precious to Jesus Christ:
Thou think it a sad case, that thou must spend all thy days to toil and
drudge like a poor servant; but consider the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.21. Art thou
called being a servant? care not for it: never let that trouble thee, that thou
art a servant: And the Apostle gives this reason for thy comfort, verse. 22. For
he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lords freeman. When
many a gallant Lord and Lady is a servant to sin, and a slave to the Devil, and
stands bound to suffer the wrath of God for ever; thou that art but a poor
godly servant, and art bound to men; yet thou art set free from Sin, and Satan,
and Hell, and have a sure right to all the privileges of Believers; though
thou art in this mean relation of a servant amongst men, yet thou stand in
all the glorious relations to Jesus Christ: a poor servant, and a King and
Priest to God: a poor servant, and a Wife and Brother of Jesus Christ: a poor
servant, and a glorious Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven. I tell thee, though thou
art but a poor servant, yet godliness will put such a grace upon thee, as to
make thee a glory to Christ, a crown and joy to thy Minister, a delight to Gods
people, a terror to the greatest wicked man about thee, and a very torment to
the Devil of Hell.

Lastly, consider, that this is thy particular way, wherein thou art called to
please and honor God, and to work out thy own salvation, Psalm. 37.23. The
steps of a good man (be he never so poor) are ordered by the Lord, and he
delights in his way. It was an high and holy saying of one, That a poor
Milkmaid walking in obedience to God in her calling, does bring more glory to
God then heaven and earth. There is no duty which thou art bound unto, as a
man, or as a Christian, which hinders thee in thy duty to God and man, as thou
art a servant: for Gods commandments do not cross and interrupt one another;
and we cannot sin against Gods Will, whilst we are doing his Will; and true
Grace will make thee a gracious servant, as well as a gracious Christian: the
same faith and love which causes thee to believe in, and to cleave unto Jesus
Christ, will cause thee to see, and to love, and to obey his will and authority
in thy Master: So that when thou art most faithful, and diligent, and obedient
in thy service, thou will find most freedom and sweetness in Prayer, in
Sermons, in singing Psalms, and in feeding upon the Lords supper. The Apostle
requires all servants to be filled with this principle, in their walking
obediently to their Masters: Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the
reward of inheritance, Col. 3.24. teaching all servants to walk in their
Callings so, as those that know, that this is their way to heaven: Ah poor
servants, rejoice in your work, for heaven is your wages; and let me tell you,
that you are never like to see a fairer way to heaven, then you have now you
are servants: you will find, if ever you come to be husbands, and wives, and
parents, and rulers of families, that it is harder to rule then to obey.

Now there are amongst many other excuses, these three things, which servants
pretend, to excuse their irreverence and disobedience to their Masters, which I
shall briefly answer, and then proceed.

First, the servant will plead that his Master is a poor man; if he were as
rich and great a man, as some other Masters are, then I would honor him; but
he is poor, and I am come of as good friends as he.

Answ. Though thy Master be poor and mean, yet he stands in the place, and
bears the authority of the great and glorious God: and if thou see reason to
obey a Master because he is rich, and see no reason in the authority of God
upon him, and in the command of God upon thee to obey a poor Master, it is a
sad sign that thou do honor riches more then God.

Secondly, but my Master is a wicked man, and then how can I honor him and
obey him?

Answ. Thy Master indeed cannot bind thee to sin against God: for it can in no
case be a man's duty to hate God, and to damn his own soul; yet when thou
disobeyest his sinful commands, let it appear, that this is not to cross thy
Master, but to please God: and though he be wicked, yet still honor and obey
him in the Lord, and own the image and authority of Christ upon him, which is
holy and good.

Lastly, my Master is so friendly, that he looks for no such reverence: he
allows me to be bold, and to be fellow-like with him.

Answ. This is thy Masters sin, who is bound to keep up that order, which God
in wisdom has appointed; and he cannot give away the authority of Jesus
Christ, nor loose thee from thy duty, whereby God has bound thee to honor,
and reverence, and obey him.

So much for the first Particular, viz. the Centurions servant lies diseased.

Secondly, Here is the care of the good Master over his faithful servant; the
servant lies gasping at the door of death, and the Master lies praying for him
at the door of mercy, ver. 5, 6. He came beseeching him, saying, etc.

Here is an example for all Masters, to teach them to be tender, and careful
of, and to use all good means for the healing of their sick servants; as the
good Centurion does here, whose fatherly care and love toward his dear dying
servant, appears in four things.

1. He keeps him at home.

2. He is full of compassion toward him, being sensible of his grief;
therefore (says he) he lies grievously tormented; his bowels earned toward
him, and he uses words to move the bowels of Jesus Christ.

3. He uses the best means in the world for his cure; he seeks help of Jesus
Christ, and exercises all the might of his Soul, in praying for, and believing
a Miracle for the healing of his poor servant. You that are Masters, learn here
your duty; consider you have men and women to your servants, made after the
same Image of God with your selves; let not then such a workmanship of God
perish by your cruelty, covetousness, or negligence. They are Christian
servants; Christ paid as dear for servants, as for Masters; they are all bought
with the same price, 1 Cor. 7.23.

Your poor servants have need of further season for repentance, and to work out
their salvation; therefore let not them by your negligence be hastened into
eternity: your servants sickness is an affliction from God upon you; he lays
this burden on your family; therefore submit to him, and wait upon him in the
use of means to remove it; and ease not thy self by thy sin, to bring a worse
burden upon thy conscience. Consider further, your estate is Gods, and you use
it for him in a relieving a sick servant; and I dare say, neither you, nor your
children, shall be the poorer, by exercising such charity. To conclude,
consider that of the Apostle, Col. 4.1. Masters, give unto your servants that
which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven. Now this
is one thing, which by the Law of God, and the Law of Humanity and Charity, is
just and equal, that Masters use all good means in their power, for the health,
and ease, and life of a sick servant; and this you must do, as knowing that you
have a Master in Heaven, to whom all the wrong, and injustice, and
unmercifulness which you show to your servants, will cry for vengeance against
you; therefore think with thy self, as Job did in the like case, Chap. 31.14.
What then shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I
answer him?

Here is one thing more for all servants to learn; that is, to choose to live in
families where God is worshipped: What a mercy was it to this sick servant, that
he had a Master that prayed for him! Certainly it would much promote
Family Worship, if servants would not choose to live in a prayer-less family. I
know it is a dishonor to God, a reproach to Religion, and a wrong to servants,
that in many families there is used such unseasonable times for family worship:
I do therefore seriously advise all Masters of Families, into whose hands this
shall come, to order your business so, as to make that your ordinary set time
to worship God, when you are like to be in the best frame; and I am persuaded
you will find, when once you have wisely set your season for morning and
evening worship, and diligently observed it, that in a short time your business
will ordinarily fall so, as at those times to leave room for those duties;
however, choose your own time for family worship, and not your servants time;
rather when your servants should work, then when they should sleep; and let all
servants make it their choice to dwell in such families, where they are most
like to be helped forward in their way to heaven.

Observe. 3. Christ's answer to the Centurions prayer for his sick servant, ver.
7. And Jesus said, I will come and heal him: He offers his presence to come,
and his power and mercy to heal him; he grants more then the Centurion begs.
Observe, God often gives more, but never less then believers sincerely ask;
Ephesians. 3.20. He is able (and willing) to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we ask or think: for the power and goodness of God, is infinitely above the
highest Faith of the greatest Believer; we can pray but like men, but he gives
like an Infinite God. Now Christ offers to come to his house, as it appears, to
set awork the Centurions faith: for this passage, I will come, gives occasion
for the following words, wherein he pleads two things against Christ's coming to
his house.

1. His own unworthiness, ver. 8. I am not worthy that thou should come under
my roof. Wherein we may see the gracious modesty of this great Believer: when
he has the highest thoughts of God, he has the lowest thoughts of himself;
this is Fidei ingenium, as one calls it, the ingenious property of Faith: by
it, when a Believer does most exalt God, he does most abase himself.

2. He pleads, that it was unnecessary for Christ to trouble himself to come to
his house, for he could heal him by speaking a word: Speak the word only, and
my servant shall be healed. Herein he acknowledges the Godhead of Jesus
Christ, whose peculiar Prerogative it is to speak creating words, Psalm. 33.9.
He spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast: And this truth,
that Jesus Christ could by speaking a word, command and create the cure, he
proves by an argument taken from the less to the greater, ver. 9. For I am a
man under Authority, having Soldiers under me, etc. You may easily see the
strength of this argument in this plain Paraphrase; I am but a man, and thou
art the true God; I am under Authority, but all the power in Heaven, and in
Earth, is thine; I have Soldiers and servants under me, and thou have all
things under thee. Now (says he) if I bid my Soldier go and march to such a
place, he goes: and if I command another to come from quartering in such a
place, he comes: and if I say to my servant, Do such a business, he does it.
Thus all sicknesses and diseases are under thy command: if thou say to a
Fever, Go and turn the moisture of such a one into the drought in Summer, it
goes; and to the Consumption, Go and rot the Lungs, and eat up the flesh of
such a one, it goes; and to the Palsy, Go and torment such a one, it goes; and
if thou command back a disease, and say, Come away, and spare the life of
such a one, it presently comes. And again, if thou biddest any disease Do this,
make such a Father Childless, such a Wife a Widow, such Children Fatherless,
it presently does it. And thus he wisely and strongly pleads, that all diseases
are at the Will of Jesus Christ; so that a word from him makes them go and
come, and do what he will.

Obs. 4. Christ's carriage after the Centurions speech, ver. 10. When Jesus
heard it, he marvelled: That must needs be a mavelous Faith, which makes
Jesus Christ himself to marvel.

2. He highly commends the Centurions Faith: I have not found so great Faith,
no not in Israel. There are three things which speak the greatness of his Faith.

1. It was the Faith of a Gentile; and this Christ seems to intend, by
comparing it with, and preferring it before the Faith of his Israel; saying, I
have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel.

2. Because he did believe a great truth: this is a great truth, worthy of thy
strongest faith to be exercised in, that Jesus Christ is that God who commands
and rules all the diseases and sicknesses of men.

3. Because of the great power and life which appeared in the grace it self:
now the might and strength of his faith is seen, both because by it he saw the
substance of the truth with so much evidence, and clearness, and certainty, as
he did: he did as plainly see, that Christ had the command of diseases, as that
he himself had the command of his Soldiers and servants. Beloved, the stronger
faith is, the more plain and piercing insight it has into its object; and the
great power of his faith appeared in believing this truth at such a time, when
the infinite power and Eternal Godhead of Christ was so little known and
believed in the world. And lastly, by the strong pleadings of his heart,
grounded upon this truth, whereby he draws virtue and power from Christ to heal
his dying servant: So that you see great reason why our Savior commends the
greatness of the Centurions faith.

3. Our Savior from hence takes occasion to teach the Doctrine of the
Conversion of the Jews, and Rejection of the Gentiles, ver. 11, 12. and Christ
makes this seasonable digression into this Doctrine, because at this time a
poor Gentile excels ever a Jew of his age in believing the power of Jesus
Christ.

Lastly, Christ commands the sick servants cure; he speaks such a word as the
Centurion did pray that he would, and believe that he could speak, ver. 13. And
Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have believed, so be it
done unto thee: and his servant was healed in the self-same hour. And thus
Christ is honored for his Miracle, the Centurion is honored for his Faith,
and the poor dying servant has the comfort of both.

I shall now pass by all other Observations that may be made out of this Text,
and only insist upon this one Doctrine, which I have chosen to be the subject
of this discourse, viz.

Doct. THat all sicknesses and diseases are at the will, and under the command
and government of Jesus Christ, so that he bids them go and come, and do what
he will to the children of men.

This Doctrine is grounded upon the Centurions pleading with Christ, that all
diseases were under his command and government, as the Centurions soldiers
were under him; and also upon this, that Christ testifies the truth of this, in
commending the Centurion for the greatness of his faith in believing this
truth, and improving it as he did.

To prevent the misunderstanding of this Doctrine, I shall premise these three
Cautions.

1. That I do not hereby deny the power and influence that inferior causes may
have in bringing diseases upon us; for I know that many sicknesses come from
God through the hands of Angels and Devils; and that other men, and also our
selves, and that unwholesome diet, the seasons of the years, and diverse other
things, may be the instruments and means of diseases unto us; but yet God is
the first and chiefest cause of all diseases; for it is not in the power of any
creature to suspend or withold that Divine Power and influence which causes
our health; but this is continued, or denied unto us, according to the will and
pleasure of God: and no creature can cause our trouble without God; for without
him a creature can neither be, nor work, but falls to nothing, and so cannot do
good or evil.

2. I do not exclude the Art of Physicians, nor deny the virtue that is in any
medicines for the healing of diseases; knowing that the same God who had
ordained food for our health, has also ordained physic for us in our
sickness: but still the first and chief of all is Jesus Christ.

3. I do not exclude the power of God the Father, or of God the holy Ghost: but
because I find that by diseases God does execute great judgments in the
world, and that he is pleased to make great use of these in his government,
both of his Church, and of his enemies; and that the Father has committed all
judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22. and because this command and government is
ascribed to Christ in the Text, therefore I shall frequently mention the name
and authority of Jesus Christ, God Redeemer, in this case.

Now in the handling of the Doctrine, I shall follow this familiar method.

1. I shall explain the terms. 2. I shall show for what ends Jesus Christ does
thus cause and command diseases.
Lastly, I shall make Use and Application.

For the first: In the explication, I shall tell you what I mean by sicknesses;
and then explain the exercise of Christ's government and command of diseases, in
those acts of it which are mentioned in the Text, viz. his commanding diseases
to go and come, and do this.

By sicknesses I mean all those evils which are sent by Christ to disease the
bodies of living men and women: The author of diseases is Jesus Christ; the
formal nature of them is their diseasing the bodies of men, depriving them of
health, strength, ease, etc. and afflicting them with pain and grief, etc. the
subjects of these sicknesses are the bodies of living men and women: hereby
they are distinguished from the wounds and troubles of the soul so far as they
are only spiritual; but those bodily diseases which are the effects of the
wounds and wastings of the soul, are also comprehended herein; they are hereby
distinguished also from that corruption which corrupts the body after death;
and herein are employed all manner of bodily diseases, as wounds, hurts, sores,
breaking of bones, etc. I shall speak of these under this formal consideration,
as Jesus Christ is the cause, and ruler, and healer of them, and so they come
within the subject of Divinity, and not of Medicine or Chyrurgery.

I now come to explain the exercise of Christ's government of diseases in those
three particulars mentioned in the Text.

1. Christ bids diseases go, and they go. Take the meaning of this, 1. In
general, 2. In some particulars.


First, in general: these words, Go, and they go, are words whereby God works
what he speaks; he immediately creates what he commands, like those words at
the creation: Let there be light, and there was light: thus he spoke, and it
was done, Psalm. 33.9. and so the meaning is, that it is the will and power of
God, which causes all diseases to come upon us. Hence David calls the peoples
falling into the Pestilence, a falling into the hand of God, 2 Samuel 24.14. Let
us fall into the hand of the Lord: and in his own visitation he cries out,
Psalm. 38.2. Thy hand presses me sore. And Psalm. 39.10. I am consumed by the
blow of thy hand. Beloved, God has a heavy hand, he gives a great blow; what
is the greatest man in the world, when God can strike him to hell at a blow? So
sicknesses are called Gods arrows, Job 6.4. The arrows of the Almighty are
within me. Psalm. 38.2. Thy arrows stick fast in me. God has his Quiver full of
these Arrows, full of the Pestilence, of Fevers, and Dropsies, and
Consumptions, and all manner of Diseases; and he shoots these Arrows into our
Families, Friends and Children; and none but himself can pull them out: as the
Keeper shoots his barbed Arrow into the Deer, and he runs, and leaps, and lies
down, but the Arrow sticks still: so God shoots, suppose a Consumption into the
lungs of a man, or the Gout into the limbs of a man; and the poor man walks,
and eats, and sleeps, but the Arrow sticks still: Friends pull, and Physicians
pull; but he may say with David, Thy arrows stick fast in me. Thus, beloved,
all diseases are subject to the will of God, so as to go upon any man at his
appointment. Sinner, if thou will not do the Will of God thy self, God has the
Stone, Gout, Strangury, and millions of Diseases more, to do his will upon
thee: for as it is observable that there is a passive obediential power in every
creature, to yield to the will and power of God to be what he will, as a stone
to be turned into a child of Abraham: So there is an active obediential power
in every creature, whereby it is ready to be an instrument of Gods power to do
what he will: if he say to the earth, Open thy mouth, and swallow up such a
company; it presently opens, and becomes a great grave to bury them all alive,
as in that dreadful judgment mentioned, Numb. 16. So if God say to the
thunderbolt, Smite such a person, he is presently shattered in pieces; and in
the same cases the heavens, seas, winds, fire, and all creatures obey him: so
that if God set on a fly, a spider, an hair of the head against a man, all the
care and power in the world cannot save him. So, my Brethren, if God command
the Pestilence, Fever, Smallpox, to go into such a City, or such a Family, or
upon such a person, they presently fasten upon them, though all the world be
against it.

More particularly in Gods bidding diseases go, and they go, there is employed
these five things.

First, He commands whatsoever diseases he will to go, and they go; the
Centurion has his hundred of Soldiers and he sends whom he will, and he goes:
so our Lord of hosts has as many sicknesses as he himself will make at his
command, and whichsoever he appoints to go, it presently goes: Beloved, many
cry out of their diseases, as the Church of her sorrows, Lam. 1.12. Is there
any sorrow like my sorrow! is there any sickness like my sickness! we are too
apt to complain with the Israelites, that the way of the Lord is not equal,
Ezekiel. 18.25. We are forward to judge the best of our selves, and the worst of
our afflictions: but we must know, that God does in great justice and wisdom
choose and single out what diseases he will visit us with; he corrects with
judgment, Jer. 10.24. and therefore God checks the impatience of Job thus, Job
40.8. Will thou disanul my judgment? will thou make nothing of my judgment,
which in wisdom and counsel I exercise in all my visitations? So that whatever
disease comes upon us, our hearts and wills should agree with the Will of God
therein: for the difference betwixt thy affliction and others, is made by the
Wisdom and Will of Christ; he has chosen and appointed this, as the fittest
disease for thee; and it is a sign thou will be discontent with another
affliction, if thou quarrel with this: therefore labor to be so filled with
the Will of Christ in thy visitation, as to conclude that this is the best
sickness for thee, and the fittest disease for thee; and this is the good
servant, which Christ in wisdom has sent to do him service upon thee, and to
bring him glory from thee.

2. To whomsoever Christ bids diseases go, they go; as when the Centurion
commands his servant to go, it is implied that he appoints him whither to go.
So (my Brethren) as God does pick and choose which arrows he will shoot, so he
does not, like the man in the Syrian Camp, 1 Kings 22.34. draw his bow at a
venture, but in great wisdom marks, and singles out the persons in whom he will
strike these arrows. See Psalm. 91.7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten
thousands at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh unto thee; whereby it
appears that God directs and determines the Pestilence to whom it shall go, and
the same power he has over all other diseases; which are the instruments of
his power to do his Will: and this is clear; for every instrument is
overruled, and limited by the will and power of him who works with it; so that
although there be an equal aptness in the instrument to do one thing as well as
another, yet it is determined in its work, according to the pleasure of him
that guides it: as if a man go with an ax into the wood to fell his trees,
there is an equal aptness in the ax to cut down one tree as well as another;
but it is at the pleasure, and in the power of him that works with it, to
determine which tree shall stand, and which shall fall. So (my Brethren
sicknesses are the instruments of Gods power to do his will, and are equally
apt to disease one as well as another; but they being all in his hands, and
overruled and guided by him, they only go and afflict those to whom he sends
and appoints them: God sends the Pestilence into a City; now the hand of God
carries it into what street, or family, or person he will: It is observable,
that God makes great use of diseases to do his Will, and to serve his design
in the ruin of his enemies, and salvation of his people; and therefore they
must needs be ordered by God, where they may work most for his glory; as for
example, God sees how men of the earth (as great worldlings are called, Psalm.
10. ult.) fill a Nation or Country either with Error and Heresy, or with
Atheism and Profaneness; and these men lift up the horn on high, Psalm. 75.5.
crying, Who is lord over us? Psalm. 12.4. as if neither God nor man durst speak
to them: now it is for Gods honor to show himself above such; and therefore he
baffles Job with this argument, That he can look on every one that is proud,
and abase him; and that he can tread down the wicked in his place. Oh you proud
Nimords, you mighty Hunters, you are out of your place, you must come lower;
God will have you under his feet shortly, and will tread you down in your
place. See Job 40.11, 12. Now as a proof of this power and glory of God, he
often sends a Fever, or a Consumption, or some other disease, and then down
falls the great Gallant groaning under the power and torture of his sickness;
and then look what a sight is here: here are magnificent Buildings, pleasant
Gardens pampered Horses, etc. but the great Master lies languishing in the
midst of all: and now the great talk of this mighty man is come to this, P^al.
52.7.
Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the
abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness. Again,
sometimes God looks upon a beautiful person; and sees him, as it were, turning
his own Fancy into a Looking-glass, wherein he is always looking, and
admiring, and pleasing himself with his beauty: Well (says God) to a
Consumption, Go, and wither yonder pretty flower; and it goes, Psa. 39.11.
and presently his beauty consumes away like a moth: Or else says God to the
small-Pocks, or some other disease, Go, and it goes, and scorns and shames his
beauty: and now the wounds stink, and are corrupt, and the body is filled with
a loathsome disease, Psalm. 38.5, 7. and there is burning instead of beauty, as
it is said in another case; Isa. 3.24. So sometimes a Minister has but one or
two malicious enemies in a Parish; and God commands a disease to fetch away
them: and what welcome such have in eternity, they are like to know best, that
have a mind to try it.

Sometimes a Minister has a gracious man or woman in a Parish, which are to
him as that gracious couple, Aquila and Priscilla were to Paul, his helpers in
the Lord, Romans 16.3. and when many a malicious Atheist lives, it is the good
will of God that they dye.

Sometimes parents have but one child, and God denies to lend them that.
Sometimes there is but one Life in a Living, and a disease comes by the
appointment of Christ, and spares all the rest of the Family, and takes away
that; but one good Abijah in a house, and God calls away him: Thus all diseases
go to whomsoever they are sent and appointed by Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Whenever Christ commands a disease to go, it goes: This is also
plainly implied in the Centurions speech; for if he have authority to bid his
soldiers go, it must be at his own pleasure, when he will bid them go: now it
is clear that Jesus Christ has this authority over all diseases; both because
he is a free agent, and therefore works when he will upon his creatures; and
because every thing whose acting depends on the power and pleasure of another,
works only then when it is his pleasure to work with it: as an arrow only
flies then when the archer will shoot it; so diseases, which as you have heard
are Gods arrows, can only hit us, and hurt us, when it is Gods will to shoot
them into our bodies. Beloved, God is the Lord of our times: the belief of
which comforted David, when his enemies were conspiring his death, Psalm. 31.13,
14, 15. I trusted in the Lord, I said, Thou art my God, my times are in thy
hands, not in my enemies hands: It is sweet satisfaction to see clearly our
times of life, and peace, and health, and sickness in Gods hands; we shall
never be sick till our Father be willing to make us sick; he fills our times
with what changes he will. It is observable, that in Gods working toward
Nations, or Families, or Persons, he ha^h in his determinate counsel appointed
an unchangeable method of providence, and in infinite wisdom has set a sit
nick of time for every dispensation; so that the glory and beauty of the
Providence is much seen in the season of it: So in this case God has set the
times for the several changes in the life of man, Job 7.1. Is there not an
appointed time to man upon earth? and in all diseases, his wisdom, and power,
and justice, and mercy is glorified in the season of the Visitation. Sometimes
God smites a child in the womb, and the poor mother carries a dead corpse
instead of a living child: And thus the body and soul are no sooner united,
but presently parted again; and so multitudes fly from the womb into heaven
and hell.

Some die in their full strength, Job 21.23. We see many when they were most
like to live, they presently dye; and like the strings of an instrument, break
when they are best in tune.

Sometimes when men stand upon the foot of pride, Psalm. 36.11. they are
suddenly taken in their pride, Psalm. 59.11. and so fall suddenly from the top
of pride to the bottom of hell. See a fit instance of this, Acts 12.21, 22, 23.
Herod makes a popular Oration, and the flattering multitude shout and cry, It
is the voice of God, and not of man: and the Lord suddenly smites him with a
strange disease, and there lies the Royal Orator, as it were, in the same
breath, deified by men, and devoured by worms.

Sometimes a Father is too fond of a child, and the very might and strength of
his heart, which might be better exercised in the love and service of God and
Jesus Christ, is vainly wasted and spent in the inordinate love and delight
which he takes in his child: then God bids a disease go, and it presently
leaves a fatherless child, or a childeless father.

Sometimes, when godly men are ripe for glory, so that with Paul they have
finished their course, 2 Timothy 4.7. then God does finish their time, and sends a
sickness as a messenger to fetch them home, as a shock of corn in its season,
Job 5.26. There are multitudes of other seasons, wherein God chooses to visit
his people; which considerate Christians may observe, and dilate, and amplify
upon in their own thoughts.

4. How often soever Christ commands diseases to go, they go: this we may also
gather from the Centurions speech: for by virtue of the same authority by which
he bids his soldiers go once, he bids them go as often as he sees reason to
command them. So by the same power that Jesus Christ causes diseases at any
time, he can cause them as often as he will: for his power being unchangeable,
is not spent in any work; but it is the same after as before, Heb. 13.8. Jesus
Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: and his power being
infinite, there is never any thing to hinder, but he can do what he will. Hence
many times diseases come thick upon us, Job 10.17. Thou renewest thy witnesses
against me: by witnesses he (...) diseases, as well as other afflictions, which
God renews at his pleasure. So Job 16.14. He breaks me with breach upon
breach: when persons are sick, we usually say o^ them as David speaks of
himself, Psalm. 38.8. They are sore broken: and it is God that thus breaks
them with breach upon breach; with one breach after another. Beloved, when God
begins to trouble us, we are usually like Mariners on the seas, one wave of
affliction comes rolling after another: Perhaps God first smites us in a beast,
then in a child, then in our selves. David elegantly describes this, Psalm.
42.7. Deep calls unto deep, at the noise of thy water-spouts: all thy waves
and billows are gone over me: As at the noise of thunder or rain from the
clouds, which are Gods water-spouts, the Brooks, as it were, call on the
Clouds, Come and fill us; and the Rivers call unto the Brooks, Come ye and
raise us: Or, as in a terrible storm at Sea, one wave calls to another, Come
and roll after me; and that to another, Come and follow me: so one deep
affliction calls to another to follow it; the Ague cries to the Fever, Follow
me; and the Fever to the Consumption, Follow me; and the Consumption to Death,
Follow me. And thus all Gods waves and billows go over us; so that a man may
say with Heman, Psalm. 88.7. Thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. And thus
the day of our life is like a stormy day, wherein are some shining gleams, and
then storms follow one another all the day; and therefore as soldiers in a
garrison, when they have gallantly beaten back one storm of the enemy, do not
presently throw down their arms, and dismantle the garrison; but they make up
their breaches, and keep up their Guards and Sentinels, to be ready for a more
desperate assault: So when one affliction is past, when one disease is healed,
let us be prepared for another, till we have accomplished our warfare. I refer
you for more of this, to the Application.

Lastly, How long soever God appoints a disease to stay, it will continue upon
us: this is also implied in the Centurions speech. For by the same Authority
that he commands a Soldier to go to a place, he can appoint him to stay till
he give order for his return: So Jesus Christ can as long as he will, continue
the exercise of the same power which first caused the disease, upon the
exercise of which must needs follow the continuance of the disease: and
therefore we often see, that some man continues in a sickly and dying condition
for many years together, so that their lives hang in doubt, as it is said,
Deuteronomy. 28.66. they live, as it were, between the two Worlds, being neither w^ll
enough to live, nor sick enough to die. This (it seems) was Hemans case, Psalm.
88.15. I am afflicted, and ready to dye from my youth up: Thus Job tells us,
cap. 7.3. I am made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are
appointed to me; whilst some are in their sweet and refreshing sleep, they
little dream what wearisome nights others spend on their beds of langushing,
crying out with Job in the next verse, When I lie down, I say, When shall I
arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossing to and fro, unto the
dawning of the day: Many may cry out in their long and tedious sickness with
Hezekiah, Isa. 38.12. I am cut off with pining sickness, from day even to night
will thou make an end of me: This is the sad case or many, they eat, and drink,
and sleep, and walk abroad; but they carry about them perhaps a Hectic, or
Flux, or Consumption, whereby God is from day even to night making an end of
them: Oh look about thee man, and consider, What have thou to take too, when
the hand of God has made an end of thee! when thou find thy heart blessing
thy self in thy wealth, friends, and other enjoyments, go alone a while, and
tell thy soul, This is but a poor portion: when (as to my enjoyment of it) I am
spitting it away, and sweating it away, and it goes away in the very filth and
excrements of my body every day. Beloved, it has cost me some serious
thoughts, to see an irresistible disease feeding upon a near and dear friend:
Friends provide the wholesomest Diet, Physicians prescribe the fittest
Medicines; many Closets, and Families, and Congregations are full of fervent
prayers for their health; but still God bids the disease stay, and waste, and
eat up the life of the friend: and as Job speaks, He is in one mind, and who
can turn him? Job 23.13. and he takes away, and who can hinder him? Job 9.12.

So much for the explication of the first particular: God commands diseases to
go, and they go.

Secondly, He commands diseases to come, and they come: As the Centurion bids
his soldier come, and he comes: so Christ can call away a disease from a sick
person when he will: and this is clear, for God can at his pleasure suspend the
exercise of his power, which was the cause of our sickness, and so the disease
must needs cease: and all the creature-causes of diseases must cease to be,
when God denies the work of his power, which caused their being: and they
cannot work to disease and trouble us, if God will not work with them: and
besides, he can at his pleasure exercise that power which causes our health,
and can work with Angels, Physicians, Medicines, Food, or any other things,
which he shall please to use as the instruments and means of health to us: and
therefore he tells his people, Exodus 15.26. I am the God that heals thee. And
this is acknowledged by the Leper, and practiced by Christ, Mat. 8.2, 3. Lord,
if thou will, thou can make me clean, (says the Leper) Christ answers, I
will, be thou clean. Beloved, God has deliverances from sickness, as well as
from all other afflictions, at command, Psalm. 44.4. Thou art my King, O Lord,
command deliverances for Jacob: So (says David) when the Water-spouts of
affliction came pouring upon him: The Lord will command his loving kindness in
the daytime: This power of God appears by that of David, Psalm. 68.20. To God
the Lord belong the issues from death: all the issues and means to escape
death, belong to God: when a man falls into a dangerous sickness, he falls into
the hands of death, he sticks as it were in the very jaws of death; as it is
said of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.1. He was sick unto death. Now in this case there is
no visible issue, or escape out of the snares of death: the man himself
strives, friends strive, Physicians strive, but there appears no discharge in
that war, Eccl. 8.8. But now God comes in the greatness of his Power, and he
makes an issue from death; and by these things men live, Isa. 38.16. For God
says to the Fever, to the Small Pocks, to the Consumption, etc. Come away; let
the Minister live with his People; let the Father live with his Children; let
the Children live with their Father; let the Wife live with her Husband: and
thus he commands them away, and they are presently gone; as it is said of the
waters, Psalm. 104.7. At his rebuke they fled, and at his voice they hasted away.

So much for the second particular.

Thirdly, Whatsoever Christ commands diseases to do, they do it; they are
herein like the Centurions servant, when his Master bids do this, and he does
it: the meaning of this is, that Jesus Christ by all sicknesses fulfils his own
will; and the reason is, because it is the power of Christ that works in all
diseases: Now Christ works by his power according to his will, Ephesians. 1.11. He
works all things according to the counsel of his will. Beloved, wherever a
disease comes, it has always some work to do. 1. Sometimes Christ commands it
to fill a man with grievous pain and torment; so the Centurions servant here
was grievously tormented: and we read, Job 33.19. He is chastened with pain
upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain. This did so
torture David, that he roared for the very disquietness of his heart, Psalm.
38.8. And Jobs pain was so great, that he says, Job 16.12. God has taken me
by my neck, and shaken me to pieces. And Sirs, although now we sit, and walk,
and eat, and sleep at our ease, yet our bodies may be breeding those diseases,
which may shortly cause torturing pain and anguish to come upon us, as Travel
upon a Woman with child.

Sometimes God bids a disease to waste and wither a man in the prime and flower
of his age, and he does it: Many that are now enclosed in their own fat, Psalm.
17.10. and cover their faces with fatness, and make collops of fat on their
flanks, Job 15.27. yet when sickness comes, they are strangely altered; then
their flesh is consumed that it cannot be seen, and their bones that were not
seen, stick out, Job 33.21. Then such a man may cry out with David, I may tell
all my bones. ^sa. 22.17.
Oh what a sad case is this man in! he looks on his silver and gold, and they
shine upon him; and upon his precious jewels, and they sparkle and twinkle upon
him; and upon his pleasant pastures, and green meadows, and fruitful fields,
and they smile upon him: but he looks upon himself, and his own body, and there
he sees a ghastly spectacle. Oh now if the face of a reconciled God in Christ
do not shine, what a fearful condition does the poor man lie in?

Again, sometimes God commands a disease to take away a man's appetite and
stomach to his meat, and it does it, so that his life abhors bread, and his
soul dainty meat, Job 33.20. So Psalm 107.18. and this is the sad case of many
a man, who has with Dives fared sumptuously every day, Luke 16.19. But now
poor wretch, he has money enough to buy meat; but all the world cannot
purchase him a stomach.

Sometimes men are just finishing their design of hurting Gods people, and
Christ commands a disease to stop them. Thus Jeroboams hand was stretched out
against the Prophet, and God withered it presently, and the good Prophet was
delivered. See 1 Kings 13.

But to conclude, sometimes God bids a disease tumble such a soul into hell,
and it does it; and the poor friends are winding up the Christless body, when
the Devils are worrying the damned soul.

Sometimes he commands a sickness to loose a Saint out of the earth into
heaven, and it does it; and here lies the ghastly jewel, the redeemed body, but
thither flies the blessed and glorified soul.

I now come to show you diverse of the main Ends of Christ's exercising this
government of diseases, in commanding them to go and come, and do what he will.

I shall mention these seventeen Ends.

First, To convince us of the great evil of sin, which is the meritorious cause
of diseases. I conceive that the understanding of a man cannot comprehend the
evil of sin; that is, he cannot know it quantum est cognoscibile, so far as it
may be known, or so far as nothing of the evil of it is unknown: I think none
can know it so but God; because a man cannot know all the holiness and goodness
of God, which sin is against, nor all the wrath of God, which sin deserves: yet
a man may by the power and light of Gods Spirit be so far convinced of the evil
of sin, as to judge it the greatest evil in the world, and therefore to loath
it, and abhor it most, and to desire more to be saved from it, then from any
evil: And this is one great use of all afflictions, thus to convince us of the
evil of sin, Jer. 2.19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee; know
therefore, and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God. And this God intends by visiting us with sicknesses,
Job 33.27. He looks upon men (meaning in their sickness; for this was the
case mentioned in the foregoing verses) and if any say, I have sinned, and it
profited me not, etc. Beloved, God stands looking and hearkening at your sick
beds, to see and hear, if upon deep conviction, and by sincere confession, any
of you say, I have sinned: this God looks for in his Visitations upon us: We
find this to be the effect of David's sickness, Psalm. 38.3, 4. There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thy anger; neither is there any rest in my
bones, because of my sin: For mine iniquities are gone over my head as an heavy
burden; they are too heavy for me. Beloved, people would not be so fond of
their sins, if they saw the diseases and dangers which they bring upon them, as
a man would not be greedy of the daintiest meat, if he knew it were mixed with
Rats-bane; nor be proud of the finest clothes, if he knew they were infected
with the Pestilence: So if people saw the Plague, Pocks, Dropsy, Fever, and
the Consumption, in their pride, and oaths, and lies, and drunkenness, and
covetousness, it would make them afraid of sin, as well as of sickness: and
therefore look not upon sin as it appears in your honors, profits and
pleasures, as it appears at an Alehouse, May Pole, or Maurice-dance, or
Cockpit, or Bear-bait, or Stage Play; for there thou can not see sin for its
pleasures; but look upon thy self on a bed of languishing, and there see thy
sins standing in order before thee; and then tell me what fruit thou have in
these things: Look upon thy self as hanging over the lake of brimstone, and
then call thy drunken Companions about thee, and bid them pour out their
flagons, and quaff off their cups, and see whether all these can make thee
merry: when the flames of hell begin to catch and kindle in thy guilty soul,
call in thy lies, and injustice, to bring thee thy treasures of wickedness, and
lay them under thy pillow, and see whether they can bring thee ease, when
Death, and Hell, and the day of Judgment stand present before thee.

And (my Brethren) it is observeable, that when we sin in our sickness, we
should see far more evil in it then as it is the meritorious cause of that
disease: as we should look further into a sickness, then as it causes present
aches and pains in the body, we should see that Death and Eternity which comes
after; so we should see more evil and danger in sin, then as it brings such a
disease; for the evil of it is not spent in that: therefore we should look upon
it as provoking God to punish us with diseases, and with death, and hell, which
diseases are loosing us into.

The second End, to convince us of the vanity of the creature: now we are truly
convinced of the vanity of the creature, when we judge it to be empty of that
good which must free a sinful man from misery, and fill him with true
happiness: It must needs be a vanity, when a man may be miserable with it, and
happy without it. Now Christ appoints diseases as means to convince us of this
vanity of the creature: for, as one says wittily, the world is the Devils
Chess-board, wherein a man can neither move forward nor backward, but the Devil
attaches him with some creature or other: and indeed we are so full of the
spirit of the world, as it is called, 1 Cor. 2.12. which does so fill our hearts
with the world, that God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Salvation, are nothing to
us; and therefore this sin is called, a denying God that is above, Job 31.24,
25, 28. and Agur tells us, that when a man is full of the world, he is apt to
deny God, and to say, Who is the Lord? Prove. 30.9. Oh what poor scornful
thoughts a covetous, proud, secure worldling has of God, and Christ, and
Saints, and Ordinances, and Salvation! Now this is one great use of sicknesses,
to convince a man of the vanity of the world: and this is a most convincing
argument; for I dare challenge all the worldlings which the world it self can
own, to name me that earthly creature, and tell me what I shall call it, which
can heal the wounds of a guilty conscience, or can take out the sting of death;
or of which a man can truly say, Here is a treasure which a lump of phlegm
cannot take from me: If thou can not say this of the creature, I grant thou
may use it for thy good; but be ruled by a friend, never choose it for thy
portion.

But more particularly, we may hereby be convinced of the vanity of these five
things.

First, Of the vanity of our selves: Sickness moved David to beg wisdom of God,
to know how frail he was, Psalm. 39.4. and this made Job compare himself to a
leaf, and to the dry stubble, and to a flower and shadow, Job 13.25. and Cap.
14.2. and we read, that this is the use of sickness, to hide pride from man,
Job 33.17. that is, to take it quite away, to be seen no more: and if we did
look on every thing which we are usually proud of, as it will prove on a sick
bed, or deathbed, it would be an effectual means to abase us, and to hide
pride from us. Beloved, it is a most precious thing for a man to be filled with
the knowledge and sense of his own emptiness and vanity: The Kingdom of heaven
is unchangeably entailed upon all such, Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Hereby a man is sweetly qualified
for every duty: Faith never acts with more integrity and strength, then when it
acts from the belief of a man's own emptiness* for when self is most denied,
Christ is most acknowledged and believed; then does a man most heartily and
strongly receive and rest upon Christ to justify and to save him, when he sees
what a guilty, condemned, lost wretch he is in himself; and when he sees what a
weak helpless creature he is, then does he most trust to the infinite power of
Jesus Christ: and this also does exceedingly endear his heart in love to God,
when he sees that God is so good, and so full of grace, and love, and mercy, as
to choose, and call, and pardon, and save such a vile and loathsome creature as
he; then repentance is most inward and spiritual, when a man with Job, abhors
himself, and repents in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. and this fills the heart with
prayer; for prayer begs of God what a man wants in himself: therefore when a
man sees himself poor, and empty of all good, and knows that he cannot be
supplied from himself, then does he pray to be filled with the fullness of God.
Now, I say, sickness is a special means to convince a man of his emptiness and
vanity; for hereby a man is left bare and empty of all those creature comforts
which seemed to fill him before, and now he sees that nothing will fill him but
grace and glory; and that there is nothing in him to make up this fullness.

Secondly, To convince us of the vanity of great men. Oh what is a Prince, or a
Nobleman, or Gentleman, when the Pox, or the Fever, or the Consumption will
insult over him, and scorn him, and make nothing of him; and there is nothing
in him to resist or remove these, because the irresistible Arm and Power of God
works in them; and therefore he may cry in his sickness, Help ^riends, help
riches, help honors: But if God do not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers
stoop under him, Job 9.13. The places of the world are called slippery places,
Psalm. 73.18. and they that know what God is, and what sin, and what the
creature is, know by the causes the slipperiness of them, and see you sliding
down as fast as you are rising up. And tell me, Psalm 10.18.
you great men of the earth, where is the place which you can name and say,
Here I can stand, and cannot slip into hell! I tell you, there are standers by
can see your magnificent buildings situated on the borders of hell, your beds
made at the very mouth of hell, your tables spread over the pit of hell, your
horses prancing with you, and Coaches rattling with you at the very edge and
brink of hell: Ah great vanities! wherever you are, the mouth of hell is
gaping upon you, and there are thousands of diseases and deaths to loose you
in: We may hence then conclude with David, Psalm. 62.9. That men of high degree
are a lie and vanity; and if we weigh nothing in the balance with them, they
will prove lighter then nothing, and vanity.

Thirdly, The vanity of strong men: Solomon tells us, Prove. 20.29. The glory of
young men is their strength: and men are apt to be very proud of their
strength, that they can leap, and lift, and run, and wrestle, and fight, and
excel others in bodily exercises: But what is all this strength, when God comes
upon thee by sickness, and with his strong hand opposes himself against thee?
Job 30 21. Thy bones are now full of marrow and strength; but when a disease
comes, thy strength will be dried up like a Potsheard, or pitcher baked and
burnt in the fire, Psalm. 22.15. therefore when thy heart is lifted up in the
sense of thy bodily strength, consider, Have thou an arm like God? Job 40.9.
or art thou stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10.22.
can thou fight with a Fever? or wrestle with the Falling sickness? or
outrun a Consumption? No, no: this conflict will prove like that of Jobs with
the Leviathan, to teach thee to remember the battle, Job 40.9.
and do no more. David was a man of such strength, that he tells us, that a bow
of steel is broken by mine arms, Psalm. 18.34. but when he came to grapple with
sickness, then he was so feeble and sore broken, that says he, Psalm 22.14. I
am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint. Besides, if thou
live to it, old age will creep upon thee shortly: and then the keepers of the
house, viz. the hands and arms, will tremble: and the strong men, viz. the
limbs that support thee, will bow, as we read^ Eccles. 12.13. and at last death
shall devour thy strength, Job 18.13. and the very worms of the earth will be
too strong for thee: Let not therefore the mighty man glory in his might, Jer.
9.23. for as David infers from Gods wasting men with sickness, Psalm. 39.5.
Verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity.

4. To convince us of the vanity of children; these indeed are sweet comforts,
and it is a great mercy to be instruments in Gods way of bringing such an
excellent creature as a man-child or woman-childe into the world: and I have
often thought, that when some do take too much pleasure in a horse, or in a
dog, as a spaniel, or the like, that it is a great blessing to parents to have
such objects of their delight, as their own children. Hence says Job, O that I
were as in months past; -- when my children were about me! Job ^9.2. -- 6. and
truly though the fare be but course, yet it makes it more pleasant to have
these plants about the table: Psalm. 128.3.
These are indeed sweet flowers; but a sickness comes, and then, like a Posie,
they wither in thy bosom; so that we must conclude with Solomon, Eccles. 11.
ult. that childehood and youth is vanity.

Lastly, of the vanity of wealth and riches: Oh how bare will sicknesses and
death make a man! Sirs, a dead corpse is but a poor thing: How poor does a rich
man go out of the world, when sickness and death has stripped him of all his
enjoyments! and then as he came naked out of his mothers womb, so naked must he
return: Job 1.21. Eccles. 5.15. 1 Timothy 6.7. look on the world with your hearts
filled with the thoughts of sickness and death, and then you will see the
vanity of it; look on thy self as stretched on a bed of languishing, see thy
self lying in a Coffin, or in a Grave, or standing before the judgment seat of
Christ; and then see how all the riches of the world appear before thee: If a
man look on his stately house and buildings, what a pleasant dream is he in to
see a sweet situation, wholesome air, convenient rooms, etc. but let him see
death coming up into the windows; Jer. 9.21.
and then, what pleasure has he in his house after him, when the number of his
months is cut off in the midst? Job 21.21.
So when a man is feeding himself with the pleasant thoughts of a feast, 2 Kin.
4.40.
let him remember that death is in the Pot, and that death stands between the
cup and the lip; and then he will not be so apt to make his belly his God, like
those, Phil. 3.19.

So when men are proud of their Pedigrees, and take pleasure in reckoning up
their Kindred, and telling of their Families; let them take in these with the
rest of their Relations, saying to corruption, Thou art our father, and to the
worms, You are our mothers and sisters, Job 17.14. and this will show all to be
but noble dust, and rich earth, and great vanity.

So much for the second End of Christ's visiting men with sickness.

End 3. To fill our hearts with the sense of death: Sicknesses are fit means
for this purpose, for sickness it self is a kind of death: for death is a
privation of life, a separation from that which is our life: And now we know we
have, as it were, a life in food, friends and estates, etc. and sickness parts
and separates us from these; it stops the passage betwixt these and a man, so
that the pleasure and comfort of these cannot come to the man for his disease;
but the man stands, as it were, betweeen the two worlds, at the end of this
world, and at the beginning of the other, and all creature enjoyments are shut
up from him; and the great things of eternity stand open before him: So that
what the Apostle speaks of persecution, is for the same reason true of
sickness, 2 Cor. 4.12. Death works in us: when sickness comes, death works
apace; it works away your health, it works away your ease, it works away your
stomachs, it works away your strength, and at last works you into your graves.
Hence we find that the godly in Scripture were full of the thoughts of death
in the time of their sickness. David prays on his sick bed that his visitation
may be sanctified; to this purpose, Psalm. 39.4. Lord make me to know my end --
and this improvement made Heman of his sickness, when the wounds of his soul
caused wastings and diseases in his body, Psalm. 88.3, 4, 5. For my soul is full
of troubles, and my life draws nigh unto the grave -- and this was good
Hezekiah his frame in his sickness, Isa. 38.10, 11, 12. I said in the cutting
off my days, I shall go to the gates of the grave; I am deprived of the residue
of my years: I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the
living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the earth. Mine age
is departed, and is removed from me, as a shepherds tent: I have cut off like a
weaver my life. He will cut me off with pining sickness; from day even to night
will thou make an end of me. So when Job was almost throtled with a disease;
for, says he, Job 30.8. It binds me about as the collar of my coat: He makes
this gracious use of his Visitation, verse. 23. I know that thou will bring me
to death, and to the house appointed for all living. So that by all we see,
that sickness is a special means to fill our hearts with the thoughts of death.

End 4. To fill the heart with the knowledge and sense of God. Beloved, our
hearts are apt to be senseless of God as he appears in the ordinary course of
his Providence and mercy; therefore God often manifests himself in the crosses
and changes of our life, which makes us more apt to inquire into the cause of
such alterations: as when corn grows in its ordinary course, first the blade,
then the ear, then the full corn in the ear, few observe the good Providence of
God herein; but when God by frost, hail or blasting, destroys the fruits of the
field, so that it neither yields bread to the eater, nor seed to the sower,
hereby his hand is more remarkably seen and observed: so whilst God continues
men in health, and ease, and strength, few are sensible of his goodness herein:
but when he fills their bodies with aches, pains and diseases, then his power
and providence is more observed in such visitations. Hence says Job, cap.
10.17. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me: as Gods mercies are called his
witnesses, his doing good, and giving rain, and fruitful seasons, Act. 14.17.
so sicknesses, and other judgments, are fitly called Gods witnesses, the use
of which is to declare and testify of God to us: Oh, says the Pestilence, He
is a terrible God that sent me; and says the Fever, He is a mighty God that
sent me; and says the Consumption, He is a just God that sent me: If you will
not receive the testimony of Gods Ministers, and of his Mercies, will you
receive the testimony of your afflictions! certainly every sickness, if the
conscience be awakened, will testify the same things of God and Christ, which
Ministers preach to you. Consider further, I pray you, that there is a more
special aptness in diseases to convince the heart of man, then in diverse other
things which yet will leave us inexcusable: as it is the use of outward mercies
to commend the power, and wisdom, and care, and goodness of God to ours heart;
and a man may improve every mercy so, as out of it to fill his heart with God;
but there are snares and temptations in these to steal the heart from God, and
therefore men are apt to lose God, and to forget him, when they are most full
of these mercies: So in injuries form men, we should see the hand of God. From
men, which are thy hand, O Lord, says David, Psalm. 17.14. but we are usually
so filled with anger and revenge toward men, that we forget the hand of God.

But now in a sickness, the name of God and the hand of God is more clearly
known and seen, so that there is no such provision for lust in a sickness, as
in the mercies: here is no profit, nor credit, nor pleasure for lust to feed
upon; and here is no instrument to quarrel with: will a man be angry with a
Fever, or be revenged on a Consumption? No, we must own the Power and Will of
God, who is the cause of the visitation.

End 5. Christ sends diseases to turn men from sin and the world, unto himself.
Hence God complains of the want of this, as a great disappointment, Amos 4.10.
I have sent among you the Pestilence (to cause you turn to me) yet have ye not
returned unto to me, says the Lord: and therefore it is observable, that in a
sickness God does blast that which makes the snare to hold our hearts from God:
as we know, much of the life and strength of pride, and covetousness and other
lusts is in the profits, and pleasures, and preferments of the world; now what
are all these to a sick man? his sickness does, as it were, block up all
provision from the flesh; and now he may see that none but God and Jesus Christ
can answer the necessity of his soul: and therefore let me ask you, What is the
best thing which you would propound to a friend on a sick bed, who is just upon
his flight into eternity? will you provide him a sumptuous feast, or a rich
suit of clothes, or offer him some place of preferment? No, no, show him a God
and Christ to save his poor soul; show him a happiness which will make him
blessed, when he is turned out of all which sickness and death can take from
him. Moreover, it appears that sickness is appointed by God as a means for our
conversion, because this and every affliction calls us to do that which the
word calls us unto: Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, Psalm. 94.12.
O Lord, and teach him out of thy law. This makes a man a blessed man, when
in his chastenings he is full of the teaching of the Law. Hence we are
commanded to hear the rod, and who has appointed it, Micah 6.9. Beloved, the
rod speaks as well as strikes; and we should hear the rod, as well as feel the
rod: now what does the rod speak? I answer, The rod speaks the mind and will
of God, who smites with it: the rod and the word speak the same language;
therefore we should see our sickness full of Scripture. Oh, says the Dropsy,
Turn to the God that sent me; and says the Ague, Make your peace with God that
sent me: And this is the voice of every disease which comes upon us: And
therefore consider, that God does often so bless and sanctify a sickness to
us, that it is a means to turn the heart to God, and causes us to bring forth
the fruit of many other dispensations: as for example, God sends to allure us
by his mercies, Hos. 11.4. I drew them with the cords of a man, with the bands
of love; there are secret cords and bands in all our mercies, to draw and to
bind our hearts to God; and when we find our selves nourisht with meat, and
refresht with sleep, we should find a secret virtue in these mercies to join
our hearts to God; but God uses this means with many one, but the soul yet
abides in his sins: then God sends another servant; he sends a faithful
Minister to call him to himself, and a faithful friend to persuade him to come;
but yet the poor sinner will not come: Well, says God, I will yet try another
messenger; Go Fever, Go Ague, etc. Now these are often so blessed, that all the
former dispensations work afresh: Now he remembers his mercies, and Sermons,
and counsels, and they all work so effectually, that the poor sinner is
savingly converted unto God.

End 6. To convince people of the necessity and excellency of godly Ministers.
Beloved, Gods Ministers are the strength of King and Kingdom, the very Militia
of the Land: The charets of Isreal's, and the horsemen thereof, 2 Kin. 2.12. The
Apostle shows how we should esteem godly Ministers, 1 Cor.4.1. Let a man so
account of us, as the Ministers of Christ: If we esteem Ministers aright, we
should prize them as Ministers, prize them for that which makes them differ,
and wherein they are separated from other men; as if you would truly prize the
Lords day, and call it a delight and honorable, as the Scripture requires, you
must esteem it as sanctified and separated from other days, and thereby you
shall see it a more holy and blessed day: so if you would prize the Lords
Supper, you must esteem the bread and wine as separated from other bread and
wine, and as consecrated and sanctified to such a use: so if you would honor
an Ambassador from a great King, you do not so much look upon his personal
worth, but he is honored and received as he is sent from the King, and stands
in his stead. So, my Brethren, if we would prize a Minister aright, look upon
him as separated to the Gospel, as clothed with authority to preach the Word,
and administer the Sacraments, as one through whose hands God has in wisdom
chosen to transmit the treasures of the Gospel to you, and as one who stands in
the stead of Jesus Christ, who is ready to revenge all the affronts that are
offered unto him. Now, my Brethren, there are no sorts of men so much abhorred
by the world, as godly Ministers; these whom our Savior calls the salt of the
earth, Matthew. 5.13. as if the world of men would be but as a piece of stinking
carrion, if it were not for godly Ministers and godly people. And the Apostle
tells us, they are unto God a sweet savor in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.15. yet they are
hated, as if they were the loathsomest excrements in the world. This Paul
elegantly expresses, 1 Cor. 4.13. We are made as the filth of the world, and
are the offscouring of all things unto this day. Ministers are loathed, as if
they were a curse and plague to the world, and as if they were the nastiest
jakes or sink on the earth; for thus the words in the original, (...) and
(...), imply. But now when God throws a sinner on a bed of sickness, then a
^aithful Minister is for worth and excellency one of a thousand, Job 33.23. for
the more a man sees his need of those soul-saving mercies, which Christ sends
by his Ministers, the more he will prize Ministers themselves: If a man sees
what hell is, he will prize Ministers that labor to save him thence: If a man
believes what heaven is, he will account Ministers precious, who are to be the
greatest means under God to bring him thither: If the soul be wounded for sin,
then how beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things! Romans 10.15. So look on thy self as gasping
under sickness at the door of Eternity; and then see whether thou dare boast,
that thou had rather hear a Piper then hear a Preacher, or rather set up a
May Pole then set up a Minister; these will prove but poor frolicks, when thou
see nothing but death and hell, and the day of judgment before thee; thou will be glad then to send for these Elders, Jam. 5.14.
the Ministers of the Church to pray over thee; and as fast as thou can spit
in their faces now, thou would be glad then to lick the very dust of their
feet, for the least sound comfort that ever dropped from their sanctified lips.

End 7. Christ by sicknesses does further and promote the Salvation of his own
people, (as the following particulars do more fully evince) and the reason of
this is, because Jesus Christ does every thing to his people as their Savior,
and therefore there is a saving Power and Virtue works from Christ in and
through all his dispensations toward them; as whether a father feed or whip
his child, he does it with the heart of a father, for the good of his child:
so if Christ afflict his child, he does it with the heart of a Savior, to
save his child; and therefore all Gods people may say of their sickness, as
Paul in another case, Phil. 1.19. I know that this shall turn to my salvation.
We have full proof of this, 1 Cor. 11.32. When we are judged, we are chastened
of the Lord, (meaning by those sicknesses and weaknesses mentioned in verse.
30.^ that we should not be condemned with the world, nor go to hell with the
world. Hence Tertullian speaking of Gods fatherly love in correcting his
people, has this pathetical passage, O servum illum beatum, cujus emendationi
Dominus instat, cui dignatur irasci! de patientia, cap. 11. O blessed is that
servant, for whose correction or amendment the Lord is so earnest, with whom he
vouchsafes to be (so lovingly) angry. Beloved, it is observable, that God does
not distinguish his people from the wicked, by making them Lords and Ladies, or
by filling them with the treasures of the earth: these are not the effects of
distinguishing grace; for a wicked man may have his belly full of these things:
Whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasures: Psalm. 17.14.
And therefore Job tells us of those that provoke God, that into their hands
God brings abundantly of worldly things, Job 12.6. he brings a whole Empire of
the world into the hands of a Nero, or a Turk. But God distinguishes his
people from the world by making them holy and happy: and therefore though the
common mercy of God, which brings riches, and honors, and health, etc. does
not so much abound to the godly, yet the distinguishing grace of God, which
brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. never fails; and therefore when they have many
things which hinder their estates, and liberty, and health; yet nothing shall
hinder their salvation, but still the infinite power of Christ is working and
prevailing to bring them to heaven.

End 8. Christ by sickness does change his people more and more into his own
likeness: So that as the fire melts and softens the gold, and thereby fits it
for the stamp; so these sicknesses soften the hearts of the godly, and thereby
fit them to receive the stamp of Gods Image. Hence many a Saint comes more full
of God from a sick bed, then he did from a Sermon, or Sacrament, for many a day
before. To this purpose agrees the saying of learned and holy Rolloc on his
sick bed, I am not ashamed (says he) to profess, that I never attained to such
a great measure of the knowledge of God, as I have gained by this sickness. The
Apostle assures us, that this is Gods end in all our corrections, Heb. 12.10.
He chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. If
we lose by corrections one way, as in our health, liberty, or estates; profit
comes in another way, in holiness, in graces, and in comforts. There is a fit
proof of this, 2 Cor. 4.16. Though the outward man perish, yet the inward man
is renewed day by day. In v. 12. (as was observed before) he tells us, that
death works in them: Death was busily working to take away their lives: Well,
says he, but though the outward man perish, that is, though the body and
bodily things perish and decay, yet the inward man, that is, the new man, the
spiritual man, is renewed day by day. To apply this to our particular case, we
often see, that whilst sickness is withering and wasting the body, the outward
man, there comes a newness of life and spirit from Jesus Christ, to quicken and
renew the inward man: So that although the outward man be feeble, speech weak,
and hands weak, and limbs weak, yet look in the inward man, and you shall see
every thing in its prime; faith strong, and love strong, and patience strong,
and comfort strong: so that as the outward man is wasting and falling toward
the earth, the inward man is rising and ripening toward heaven.

End 9. Christ visits his people with sickness, to try whether they will cleave
to him notwithstanding he thus visit them. Beloved, you often hear and read of
the trials of Gods people; I shall therefore acquaint you what this trial is,
whereby you will more clearly understand this end of Gods Visitation. A trial
is that whereby God puts his people to give a proof and experiment of their
graces. As for example, there was a question between God and Satan, concerning
the integrity of Job: God testifies of Job, c. 1.8. That he was a perfect and
upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil. Satan denies this, and
undertakes to prove Job to be an Hypocrite, and a Dissembler, verse. 9, 10, 11.
Does Job fear God for naught? No marvel if he fear thee; thou payest him well
for it; thou have made a hedge about him, that no body must hurt him: but he
makes but a Trade of Religion; do but throw down the hedge about him, and he
will quickly throw down his service and obedience; he will curse thee to thy
face. Now upon this, Job is put to the trial: but though in a few hours he is
changed from a man of great riches, etc. to a poor Job; yet still he holds fast
his integrity, as God witnesses of him, Job 2.3. Afterward arises another
question, Whether Job will prove a hypocrite if God visit him with sickness;
for, sa;ith Satan, Job 2.5. Touch his bone, and his flesh, and he will curse
thee to thy face. Upon this, Job is put to another trial, he is sorely and
sadly diseased from top to toe, v. 7. yet his heart proves sound still, v. 10.
In all this did not Job sin with his lips. And if we observe him in the whole
course of his trial, though the infirmities of a man appeared in him, yet he
would never be baffled out of his integrity; and at last he comes out of the
furnace like gold, Job 23.13. And thus God often visits his people, to try
their graces. I shall leave this particular; only I shall direct you how to
prove sound in all the trials which can befall you; as thus: Make that a ground
of your Religion, which no trial can ever take away: if thou will be Religious,
because it brings thee credit or profit, etc. then if a trial comes, and God
and Mammon clash, and thou must be either a Martyr or an Apostate, thy Religion
is then gone and lost, because the ground and reason of it is gone: but if thou
trust God, and love God, because he commands thee, and because he is a faithful
and good God, here is a cause and ground and reason for thy Religion, which
nothing can take away; and so thy holiness and godliness is everlasting,
because it is built and grounded upon an everlasting foundation.

End 10. To try his people whether they will leave this world, and come to him
in the other world. Beloved, we should live in this world so, as to be always
ready at an hours warning to leave all, and to go into Eternity. Now when God
sends a sickness, we should look upon it as a Call into Eternity, and be ready
to give a willing and obedient answer* Job 14.1, Thou shall call, that is
(says Lavater) call me out of this life, and I will come, I will answer thee.
And thus in a Fever, or Consumption, etc. God stands as it were by the sick
bed, and calls, Come away Husband from thy Wife, come away Wife from thy
Husband, come away Father from thy Children: now we should be ready to leave
all, and to come home to God; for this is one choice part of our obedience, to
yield up our lives to God as his right and due, when he calls for them. Hence,
says Paul, 2 Timothy 4.6. I am now ready to be offered. Every believer should
look upon his life as a sacrifice sanctified and set apart for God, and to be
always ready to be offered to him at his will and pleasure. It is observeable
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.48, 49* 50. God there appoints Moses to go up to Mount Nebo,
and die: and did not Moses (think ye) go up with a heavy heart? No, he
cheerfully and obediently submits, and thither he goes up, and there he dies,
Deuteronomy. 34. So if God say to thee by his Providence, Go into a Fever and die, or
go into a Dropsy and die, go upon thy sickbed and die, thou must yield, thou
must go at the pleasure of God. And certainly if Believers did but clearly see
whither sickness and death would bring them, it would be a thousand times
harder duty to be content to live, then to be willing to die.

End 11. To try his people, if they will resign their friends to God when he
calls for them by sickness: a friend is a choice treasure, he is alter ego,
another self; but we must obediently give up our friends to the will of God: I
shall tell you what this is, thus quietly to resign our friends to God; It is
that whereby we solemnly worship God, acknowledging and praising his Name, and
subjecting our hearts to his will, as he is a God of this dispensation. As for
example, God smites a Husband with a disease; now says God by this Providence
to the Wife, What if I make thee a Widow, and thy Children Fatherless? Why!
Lord (says the Wife) thou art herein a wise, holy, and good God; and I will
still own, and trust, and love, and rejoice in thee. Thus the heart must
worship and praise God as he appears in this sad Providence; and so the heart
agrees with the Will of God, as it is signified by this dispensation. Now if
there appear any rising of discontent, we must quiet all such tumults with the
Will of God, as Eli did, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems
good in his sight. We have an excellent pattern of this in Job, Cap. 1.20, 21.
when amongst other sad Providence, he heard of the sudden death of his sons,
he fell down and worshipped God (whom he saw in the Providence) saying, The Lord
gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Thus he
worshippeth and praises God, as it appeared, in taking away his Children. And
thus when any friends are diseased, labor to get thy heart into this frame;
this will make the mercy more sweet if they live, and the affliction less
bitter if they die. I know your thoughts will now be full of the goodness of
your friends; Oh such a wise, faithful, loving Husband, such a careful, meek,
loving Wife! etc. Well, look upon them at the very best, and as such offer them
up to God: offer to God the best of thy flock, the best of thy friends; the
better they are, the better is thy patience and obedience in parting with them:
and withal all remember, that if God will have thy friends to Eternity, there
is no ransom to be taken for them, Psalm. 49.7.
but they must be gone: Thou may cry after them, as Elisha did by Elijah* 2
Kings 2.12. My Father, my Father; but Elijah never stops to answer him: So thou
may cry, My Husband, my Husband; my Wife, my Wife; my Child, my Child! but
to Eternity they will go, and never stay to answer thee; for God takes away,
Job 9.17.
and who can hinder him? or who can say unto him, What do thou? We cannot
hinder him, and we must not question him, but resign all to him.

End 12. Christ visits his people with sickness, to fill their hearts with
prayer: Solomon tells us, Prove. 15.8. The prayer of the upright is his delight.
For a Believer being in Christ, and found in his Righteousness at the Throne of
Grace, there arises such a sweet smell and savor to God, which makes the
Believer and his prayers pleasant and delightful to him: and therefore God
often sends sickness to stir up a spirit of prayer in the hearts of his people.
Hence we read of that sick man, Job 33.26. He shall pray unto God, and he will
be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy. So when Hezekiah
was sick, he turned his face to the wall (as he lay in bed) and wept, and
prayed unto the Lord, Isa. 38.2, 14. So David, as appears by Psalm. 30, and 38,
and 39. when his body was full of sickness, his heart was full of prayer. See
further, Psalm. 107.17, 18, 19.

That was a savoury speech of a Reverend Divine in his sickness to his friends:
Sinite me Psittaci instar cum Domino meo balbutire: Suffer me to stammer like a
Parret with my Lord by prayer.

The hearts of Gods people are called, as Mr. Brightman observes on. Rev. 5.8.
Vials full of Od^urs; that is, hearts full of sweet and savoury prayers. Oh
when the bodies of the godly are as a sink full of filthy humors, their hearts
are as Vials full of the precious odours of prayer. This is the blessed
privilege of a Believer, that in the most sad and deplorate condition in the
world, he has always access with boldness into the presence of God, Ephesians.
2.18. Through Christ we have access by one Spirit unto the Father, Hebr. 10.19.
Having boldness to enter into the Holiest ( viz. into heaven) by the Blood of
Christ. Thou may by faith and prayer step out of thy sick bed into heaven*
Job says in his affliction, Chap. 31.37. As a Prince would I go near unto him.
Sirs, the Spirit of Prayer is a Royal Spirit, whereby a Believer goes with a
Princely boldness and confidence unto God. Now indeed sickness is a most
special season for prayer, because of our present need of those things which we
are bound to pray for, not only in regard of our need of ease, and health, and
life, though the want of these is a reason of prayer, Isa. 38.14. I am
oppressed (with pain and trouble) undertake for me. Hence David prays, Psalm
39.13. O spare me, that I may recover strength before I go hence, and be seen
no more. But now our present need of soul-saving mercies should set awork our
hearts in prayer: now a man is perhaps just in his fall into Eternity, and is
like to find within a few hours, whether Heaven or Hell be his portion: This
man has need to pray earnestly for sound repentance, and saving faith, and
pardon of sin, and everlasting salvation.

End 13. To fill the hearts of the godly with sympathy to one another: as a
distemper in a toe or finger, afflicts all the rest of the members; so when one
member of Christ is visited, all the members about him are called to sympathize
and condole with him, 1 Cor. 12.26. If one member suffer, all the members
suffer with it. Hence we find, that when a Christian is diseased, there is a
spirit of prayer poured out in his behalf from all the Christians about him.
When Melancthon was sick, it is reported, that Lutheri and Crucigeri precibus
non tam convaluit, quam revixit: By the prayers of Luther and Cruciger, he was
not only restored from sickness to health, but as it were from death to life.
Melch. Adam. in vita Melancth. So when Myconius was sick, Luther affectionately
prays, Peto ut loco tuo me faciat Dominus aegrotum: I pray that the Lord would
make me sick in thy stead. Melch. Adam. in vita Mycon. David had this charity
for his enemies in their sickness, Psalm. 35.13. But as for me, when they were
sick my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer
returned into my own bosom.

I behaved my self as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down
heavily, as one that mourned for his Mother. Shall David thus fast and pray for
his sick enemies, and shall not we for our sick friends? Job professes what
his carriage should have been for his friends, which proved such miserable
Comforters to him, Job 16.4, 5. If your souls were in my souls stead, I would
strengthen you with my mouth, and the movings of my lips should assuage your
grief. Oh Sirs, how sweet and savoury is it to a sick Christian, to receive
spiritual Cordials from the wholesome tongue of a cordial friend! Now this will
be a reason and ground of our sympathy, if we look on Believers in their
sickness, in their union and relation to Jesus Christ; for says Christ, Mat.
25.36. I was sick ( viz. in my sick members) and ye visited me. Consider, this
diseased Christian is a member of that Body, whose Head sits at the right hand
of the Majesty of the most High: And as poor as this sicK Saint lies here, yet
he is virtually raised up with Christ, Ephesians. 2.6.
and sits together with him in heavenly places: As miserable as he appears now,
yet the next time we see him, we shall see him appearing with Christ in glory.
Col. 3.4.
Come with these considerations when you visit one another, and you will
account it a mercy and great privilege, if you, or any thing of yours be so
blessed, as to be the instrument of ease, or health, or comfort to such a
precious one; and you will find all well improved, when Christ shall say unto
you, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; for I
was sick, and ye visited me.

End 14. Christ visits his people with sickness, to glorify his power and
mercy in strengthening and comforting them in their sickness: That of the
Apostle is true of bodily, as well as of spiritual weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. My
strength is made perfect in weakness. Now is a time for God to show his
strength in the weakness of his people, Psalm. 41.3. The Lord will strengthen
him on a bed of languishing; thou will make all his bed in his sickness.
Methinks that man should lie easily, who has the God that made all the world,
to make all his bed in his sickness: The meaning is, God will be the cause of
rest, and ease, and peace to him in this condition. Hence Myconius in a fit of
sickness writes to Luther, Se non lethaliter, sed vitaliter aegrotare; that he
is not sick unto death, but sick unto life, having so much spiritual life and
comfort in his sickness: And one of Mr. Dods Converts told him in her sickness,
That she was full of comfort, and could as hardly forbear singing now, as she
could crying when she was in Childbearing. That of the Psalmist agrees to
this, Psalm 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

It Is observable, that God has this title in Scripture, The God of all
comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. because whatever comfort we have from any creature, it
comes from God through the creature: it is the goodness of God in the creature,
which makes it a comfort; it is the goodness of God which makes a Wife a
comfort, a Child a comfort, etc. And then he is the God of all comfort,
because he comforts us against all troubles: there is comfort from God through
the creatures, but this is but some comfort: Money comforts a man against his
debts, and meat comforts him against his hunger; but there are other cases, as
of sickness, and spiritual wounds, and temptations, etc, wherein these yield no
comfort: But whatever the trouble be to a Believer, there is comfort in God
against it: we have often God the Holy Ghost called in Scripture, The
Comforter: now it is a special skill to observe, which way God in a most
especial manner glorifies his several Titles: This Title, The Comforter, is
glorified by Gods exercising his infinite power to comfort the hearts of his
distressed people: Now sickness is an affliction, wherein a man can have
nothing to comfort him but God and Jesus Christ; this is clear: for true
comfort is the strengthening of the heart against the present trouble: now that
which comforts us, must be as truly ours, as the trouble is ours; we must say,
Our God, and our joy, as well as Our sickness, or else we cannot have comfort.
And again, it must be as near as our trouble; for it is no comfort to an hungry
man to know he has meat, if he cannot come at it. Now faith sees God and
Christ as near to the soul to comfort it, as sickness is to the body to trouble
it. And then lastly, that which comforts us, must be good enough to take away
the evil that troubles us: now a man's great trouble on his sickbed, is, for
fear of losing his poor soul: and in this case, to show him riches, and
honors, and pleasures, will not comfort him, for they can do nothing in the
removing his trouble; but if God say, I am thy salvation, now the man is
comforted, and sings at the very door of death. Solomon tells us, Prove. 14.32.
The righteous has hope in his death. Now his hope is not for some place of
preferment, or some rich purchase, or the like; for death brings no such
things; but he hopes for preferment in the great City that has foundations,
Heb. 11.10. where he is for ever to dwell in his house not made with hands, 2
Cor. 5.1. and these sickness and death bring him into. That Scripture is sweet,
Heb. 6.19, 20. Which hope we have, as an anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the vail, whither our forerunner
is for us entered, even Jesus. -- The place within the vail is heaven, where the
anchor of hope enters and sticks: So that though a poor believer lie gasping
and groaning on his sick bed, or in other afflictions; yet this is his comfort,
he is still anchored and fastened to heaven.

End 15. Christ visits his people with sickness, to fit them for greater
sufferings: As the Martyr Bilney put his finger in the fire, to fit him to burn
in the flames. Christ by sickness makes a man fit to die, and then he is fit
for any sufferings; for he that can obediently sacrifice his life to God, can
for the same reason offer up his health, liberty, and estate to God: and this
made Paul ready to suffer all persecutions, because he was ready to die, Acts
20.22, 23, 24. He knew that every where bonds and afflictions did way-lie him;
but, says he, v. 24. None of these things move me: I will not stir a step out
of my way of obedience, for all the bonds and afflictions that the hands of
devils and men can make: What is his reason? because I count not my life dear
unto my self, so that I may finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I
have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.
Precious Paul, so that he could die in joy, and die in duty, he did not think
his life too dear or too good to be spent for Jesus Christ. So, says he, 1
Cor. 15.32. I protest by your rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord,
I die daily. He was so acquainted with death, that he made it his daily
practice to put himself into a frame and posture to die: and so many a
Christian has got such acquaintance with death by sickness, that he lives in a
continual frame and readiness to die: besides, his sickness makes him less
fearful of men: for he knows, Luke 12.4.
when they have killed the body, they have no more that they can do; they have
done their worst, which is no more then an ordinary disease can do: and
therefore, as the Philosopher told the Tyrant, when he threatened to kill him,
that a Fly could do that: so Believers need not fear what men can do, because
they can do no more then a Fever, Dropsy, Consumption, or any other disease
can do: and thus he is prepared by sickness for other afflictions.

End 16. To prepare them for great mercy. Beloved, sometimes mercies are more
dangerous for Gods people then afflictions; they are often worse in plenty then
in poverty, in credit then in disgrace; more secure in health and ease, then in
pains and sickness. This happens, when our mercies are too big for our graces;
as when we have great credit, and little humility: or else when our outward
mercies do most feed our inward corruptions; as when riches do meet with a
heart much inclined to covetousness, and health and ease are given to a
Christian who is apt to be idle and secure: now therefore God melts his people
in the Furnace of Affliction, to prepare them to be vessels of mercy. Hence we
read, Hebr. 12.11. That no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby: As whilst a Child is
under the discipline of the Rod, he receives the fruit of his dullness and
idleness in the smarting of the Rod; but afterward, he receives the fruit of
his learning and education in honors and preferments: So whilst Gods children
are corrected with sickness, and other afflictions, they receive the bitter
fruit of their sins, of their pride, frowardness, security, and
creature-confidence, etc. and this is not for the present joyous, but grievous;
but afterward they reap the fruit of righteousness and holiness, of faith,
fear, love, prayer, etc. and this is sweet and peaceable fruit: we have a
pertinent proof of this, Psalm. 126.5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy.

He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him. As the Husbandman in a
year of famine, when corn is dear, and seed scarce, he sows, he ventures it in
the ground, but he sows in tears, he goes out with his seed weeping: Ah, thinks
he, this corn would have made so much bread for my poor wife and children, or
would have given so much money toward paying my rent: Thus with a sad heart he
sows his seed; but when harvest comes, and brings forth a plentiful crop, then
he reaps in joy, and brings home his sheaves with singing, shouting and
rejoicing. Thus it is with Gods child in affliction, as suppose in sickness,
his grief is great, and his pains grievous; yet he sows, though it be in
sorrow; he believes in tears, and hopes in tears, and prays in tears: well,
after comes the harvest of health, and he reaps the fruit of faith, hope and
prayer, and he goes about rejoicing and praising God, and carrying his sheaves
of mercy and comfort about with him. Our Savior speaks fully to this case,
Joh. 16.20, 21. -- Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy.

A woman when she is in travel has sorrow, because her hour is come: but as
soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguish, for
joy that a man is born into the world. As a woman with child, when the hour of
her travel is come, is full of sorrow with the throws and pains of her travel;
but when she is delivered, she forgets her sorrow, and with a joyful heart
falls a kissing and embracing her child: So, my Brethren, when the hour of
sickness, or other affliction comes upon us, we are full of sorrow with the
pains and travels of our affliction; but when we are delivered, and see what
mercy our affliction has brought forth, the joy and comfort of our graces, and
experiences, and deliverances, does swallow up the sorrow of our affliction.

We have a special instance of the glorious chain of Gods wonderful Providence
toward Joseph, to confirm the truth in hand: his afflictions lasted about
thirteen years: (for he was seventeen years old when he visited his Brethren,
Genesis 37.2. and thirty years old, when he was preferred in Pharaohs Court, Genesis
41.46.) Now in all this time his afflictions were sad; he was parted from his
tender father, he was bought and sold; after this unjustly defamed and
imprisoned; he was put like a Rogue in irons, Psalm. 105.18. his afflictions
were so great, that the afflictions of Gods people were long after, and ever
will be to the end of the world, called the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.6.
yet he was after all this raised up in great mercy, and was made a blessed
instrument to save the Church and Israel of God from perishing with famine. We
have another instance in Job. I shall say no more of him, but only apply to
his afflictions, what the Apostle says of his patience, Ye have heard of the
afflictions of Job, Jam. 5.11.
and have seen the end of the Lord; for as we read, Job 42.12. The Lord blessed
the latter end of Job.

David upon this ground encouraged himself in his afflictions, because he
believed a good issue out of them, Psalm. 71.20, 21. Thou which have showed me
great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again
from the depths of the earth. Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me
on every side.

Consider further, that sickness when sanctified, exceedingly fits a man both
for Spiritual and Temporal mercies; for then a man comes out of sickness, as
one who is raised from the grave, and so he is filled with the thoughts of
death and eternity; and this is a frame of heart, which gives a kindly relish
to all spiritual mercies; this makes him taste God and Christ to be exceeding
gracious, in the likeness and enjoyment of whom he sees himself blessed and
satisfied through all eternity: And this also fits him for Temporal mercies;
for it teaches him to use friends, lands, food, and all his temporal
enjoyments for eternity; he hereby learns to turn his treasures in earth into
treasures in heaven: This makes him at the will of God to leave father and
mother, and lands, and life, knowing that he shall receive the comfort of all
in another world; so he cheerfully gives to Christ in his members, Phil. 4.17.
knowing that this fruit will abound to his account when Christ and he come to
reckon: and that this is laid up in store as a good foundation against the time
to come, 1 Timothy 6.19. As a man that intends to transplant himself beyond the
Seas, turns his stock here into such things which will make his life
comfortable when he comes there: So a Saint knowing that he is upon a journey
beyond this world, turns his stock and estate to Gods glory here, believing
that it will be returned to him a thousand fold in the glory and joys of
heaven, when he comes there.

End 17. Which is the last that I shall mention, is to gain to himself praise
and glory in recovering his people from their sickness. Hence we read, Job
11.3, 4. when it was told Christ, that Lazarus, whom he loved, is sick: Christ
answers; This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the
Son of God might be glorified thereby. Beloved, recovery from sickness is a
great mercy both to a man's self and others, as St. Paul acknowledges of
Epaphroditus, Phil. 2.27. He was sick, nigh unto death: but God had mercy on
him, and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon
sorrow. And therefore upon this reason the hearts of Gods people have been
filled with the praises of God: Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and all that is within me praise his holy name: And this is one ground of this
-- Who heals all thy diseases. This was Hezekiah his practice in this case;
Isa. 38.19. The living, the living, they shall praise thee, as I do this day.
-- See also, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10, 11. We had the sentence of death in our selves;
that is, our danger was so great, (whether by sickness, or persecution, or
rather both, I shall not inquire) that we looked on our selves as sentenced to
dye; and this sentence was in us, and did fill us: but, says he, God who
raises the dead, delivered us from so great a death, for this end, that thanks
may be given by many on our behalf. Beloved, sometimes our sicknesses are very
grievous and dangerous, as Job cries out, cap. 23.2. My stroke is heavier then
my groaning; and says, Job 10.16. Thou show thy self mavelous upon me;
that is, thou exercisest thy mavelous power and greatness in afflicting me.
Now this should cause us to make the praises of God more glorious for our
recovery; and therefore in such cases the godly have acknowledged this mercy to
be a kind of resurrection from the dead: as Psalm. 30.3. O Lord, thou have
brought up my soul from the grave, 1 Samuel 2.6. Who brings down to the grave,
and brings up. Job 33.28, 29, 30. He will deliver his soul from going down
into the pit, and his life shall see the light. And this is the Providence that
all are to observe and acknowledge: Lo! all these things works God
oftentimes with man, to bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened
with the light of the living.

Uses.
First, Use of Information, to inform us of five things.

First Information is, that Jesus Christ is a terrible God: this appears, in
that he has all diseases at command, to bid them go, and come, and do what he
will. The Scripture makes known God to be a terrible God, Deuteronomy. 7.21. He is a
mighty God, and terrible, Nehem. 9.32. The great, the mighty, and terrible God,
Job 37.22. With God is terrible Majesty, Psalm. 47.2. For the Lord most high is
terrible: And we find this inference made from Gods visiting men with
sickness, Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name, The
Lord thy God. Beloved, it is one of the most devouring delusions of the Devil,
to persuade men, that God is so merciful, that he will never question them for
their sins. Hence we read that the wicked man, who contemns God and his
judgments, says in his heart, God will not require it, Psalm. 10.13. They
think in their hearts and conscience, that God will never trouble them for
their sins: this secure temper of the ungodly is seen by that of the prophet,
Ezekiel. 7.7. The morning is come upon thee -- the time is come, the day of
trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the mountains; or as Junius and
Termellius read it, not the Echo of the mountains: implying, that they feared
no more the threatenings of the Prophets, then a vain airy noise or Echo in the
mountains: this makes secure sinners to bear no fear of God, Psalm. 36.1. The
transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God
before his eyes. Their sins are so notorious and visible, that they declare in
the very hearts and consciences of the godly, that there is no fear of God
before their eyes. Now to awaken you out of this damnable security, I shall
propound four Considerations to convince you that God is a very terrible God.

1. Consider, that when the terrors of all bodily evils are past, yet then God
falls upon men with everlasting terrors: we usually account great men very
terrible; but God tells the wicked, Isa. 47.3. I will take vengeance, and I
will not meet thee as a man; thou have been afraid oftentimes of meeting with
thy Creditor, or of meeting with the Magistrate, etc. but consider when thou
come to meet God in his taking vengeance for sin, he will not meet thee as a
man, as a hard Creditor, or as a harsh Landlord, or a furious Soldier, or a
severe Magistrate, but he will meet thee as a God of wrath and vengeance: Upon
this ground our Savior presents God terrible, Luke 12.4, 5. And I say unto
you, My friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have
no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you should fear; fear
him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto
you, fear him. Observe, that what our Savior says of men, is true of all
bodily evils, when they have killed the body, they have no more that they can
do; then the fear of them is past; there is no fear of Pestilence, or Fever, or
Consumptions in eternity: but now a wicked man can never say the worst is past,
because he can never be past hell: for God after he has killed, has power to
cast into hell; so that when you think it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of a merciless Usurer, or a cruel Landlord, or a bloody man; or to fall
into the fire, or water; or to fall into the Pestilence, Fever, Dropsy, etc.
then consider that, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God. Heb. 10.31


Secondly, consider, God is not only a God of mercy, but also a God of
judgment: the Devil devours most men by persuading them, either that God has
no wrath, which makes them presumptuous; or that he has no mercy, which makes
them desperate. Now to arm you against the former temptation, which concerns
the business in hand, fill your hearts with the belief of God, as he is a God
of judgment, for the Lord is known by the judgment which he executes, Psalm.
9.16. therefore he tells us: I kill, and I make alive, Deuteronomy. 32.39. So says
he, Isa. 45.7. I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create
evil: I the Lord do all these things: All the evil of punishment which comes
into the world, comes from God; all the hurt that is done by fire, water, wind,
thunder, earthquakes, God does it; all the hurt that comes by famine,
pestilence, sword, blasting, mildew, God does it; all that dye, God kills them;
all that go to hell, God damns them: and is not this a terrible God?

Thirdly, look not on God as men judge of him, when they are secure, and God is
patient; but as he appears, when men awake with guilt, and God awakes in wrath.
Beloved, if every Sin should presently bring a Judgment, if every Oath should
kill a Cow, and every Lie break a Bone, and every act of Drunkenness turn a man
into a Dropsy; then sin would be accounted more dangerous, and God more
terrible: But as we read, Psalm. 55.19. Because they have no changes, therefore
they fear not God. When men can swear, lie, be drunk, scoff at godliness,
profane Sabbaths, and yet eat, drink, sleep, work, and play all alike; this
makes them confident, that God is not so angry with them, as a company of
precise Puritans would have them believe. We read of this Atheistical temper,
Psalm. 50.21, 22. These things have thou done (meaning the crying sins
forementioned) and I kept silence (says God) I did not disturb thee, nor
hinder thee; and thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self,
that I liked sin as well as thou did; but thou will be of another mind, when
I come to reprove thee, and to set thy sins in order before thee, and to tear
thee in pieces, when there shall be none to deliver thee. We read, Psalm. 40.11.
Evil shall hunt the violent man to destroy him; and it is said, Numb. 32.23.
Your sin shall find you out. Sinners lie close and hide themselves in their
sins, as if judgment could never find them: Oh, but consider, sicknesses, and
death, and hell are looking for thee, they are hunting after thee. Hark,
methinks I hear the cry of the hunters, and the sound of the feet of death
pursuing thy soul: I may say unto thee as she said to Sampson, The Philistines
are upon thee Sampson: Sickness is upon thee sinner; death and judgment is
coming upon thee; the wrath of the eternal God is roaring against thee: these
things should make thee cry out with David, Psalm. 119.20. My flesh trembles
for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Lastly, Consider God as a God of all sicknesses and diseases, to convince thee
that he is a terrible God; these with other judgments are called the terrors
of God, Job 6.4. The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me; and
it is clear that God for this reason is terrible; for that is terrible which is
destructive to the health, and life, and being of man; this makes fire, water,
wind, thunder, men and devils terrible; and this makes Sickness, the
Pestilence, Fever, the Pocks, the Stone, the Consumption, and Death, and
Judgment terrible. Now therefore what a terrible Majesty is God, who makes
all these so terrible? for as there is no fear of an Ox-goad, or of the
Jaw Bone of an Ass; but the one in the hand of a mighty Shamgar, was a terrible
instrument of death to six hundred men, Judges 3.31. and the other in the hand
of a strong Sampson killed heaps upon heaps, heaps upon heaps, a thousand men,
Judges 15.16. So this makes all diseases, and all instruments of death
terrible, because they are in the hand of a mighty God, who for this reason is
to be acknowledged and feared as a very terrible God.

Secondly, informs us of the infinite patience of God toward ungodly men;
which appears, in that God has all diseases, and death at command to avenge
himself upon them, and yet that he is pleased so long to forbear. The Scripture
makes known the glory of God to us by this Attribute, Exodus 34.6. The Lord
merciful and gracious, long-suffering. So Psalm. 86.14. Romans 2.4. This patience
of God is his infinite goodness, whereby he does moderate and with- hold his
wrath from falling upon sinners. Pardoning grace takes a way the wrath of God,
and loses the believer from being bound to suffer it: But here the sinner
lies condemned, and stands bound over by the Law, to suffer Gods wrath; but God
by his infinite patience forbears to inflict it.

Now I shall briefly propound these three Considerations, to convince us of the
patience of God.

1. Consider the greatness of that wrath which God withholds from falling on
you, viz. all the punishments which are threatened in the curses of Gods Law:
God does not only keep off millions of diseases, but also mountains of torments
from coming upon thee every day: the great difference which is betwixt thee and
a damned soul in hell, is made by the patience of God. Oh poor Christless
sinner, when I stand seriously looking on thee eating, and drinking, and
laughing, and sporting in thy sins, as if thou thoughtest thy self as safe as
ever an Angel of heaven; and then believe what the Scripture speaks against
thee, and see what is in God against thee; I cannot but tremble to look thee in
the face, to see whither thou art so merrily going, and what an alteration
sickness and death is shortly like to make with thee, but for present God in
infinite patience withholds all the wrath that thou deservest.

2. Consider the great provocations that God does bear: Sin is said to provoke
or call forth the wrath of God; and notwithstanding such horrid sins call and
cry for his wrath, yet in the infinite power of his patience he forbears. The
Scripture ascribes a Voice to three things which cry aloud for Gods wrath.

1. Sin cries, Genesis 18.20, 21. The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is great. --
Swearing cries, Pour out thy wrath on the Blasphemer, that belcheth out me:
Drunkenness cries, Oh thou consuming fire, devour this Beast that commits me.
So there is a cry against a Nation, and against a City or Family: Oh
Profaneness cries, Come away Pestilence, come away Famine, and devour England,
that is so filled with me: but yet God in infinite patience withholds his
Judgments.

2. The Estates of men which are gained by sin and wickedness cry for
vengeance, James 5.4. Hab. 2.11. The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber shall answer it. The Prophet speaks, as if all the parts
of a house built by fraud and blood, did consent to cry one after another for
vengeance against the founders of it: the Stone cries, Lord revenge the cruelty
and injustice that laid me; and the Timber answers and cries, Make inquisition
for the blood that laid me. Oh you that eat the bread of deceit, and live upon
lies and injustice, were your consciences awakened, you might hear the very
bread on your tables, and the money in your purses, and the stones and timber
of your houses cry for the vengeance of God against you; and yet this
infinitely patient God bears with you.

Lastly, the sighs and groans of Gods people cry aloud for vengeance against
their Persecutors and Oppressors. Exodus 3.7. I have seen the affliction of my
people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry: Psalm. 12.4. For the
oppression of the poor, and the sighing of the needy, will I arise. Beloved,
the godly are hated for their likeness to God: this makes the difference
betwixt them and the wicked; for herein they differ from the world; and a man
must either make God his enemy, and the Devil his father, and be content to
damn his own soul, or else the world and he will never be friends, Gal. 4.29.
but he that is born after the flesh will persecute him that is born after the
spirit. Now herein is glorified the patience of God, when they that wrong his
people, rake in the apple of his eye; and yet this tender Father stands by, and
sees his children scorned, and loathed, and murdered, for choosing, and
honoring, and fearing, and pleasing him, and for a long time bears all.

Lastly, the infinite patience of God appears, in that he can always ease
himself of his enemies, and yet he forbears. God complains, that the sins of
men are a trouble to him, Isa. 1.14. and that they weary him, Isa. 43.24. and,
says he, Amos 2.13. Behold, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that
is full of sheaves. Now the Scripture speaks, as if God did ease and comfort
himself in the destruction of his enemies, Isa. 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of my
adversaries -- Ezekiel. 5.13. I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will
be comforted. Now God can suddenly thus ease and comfort himself: let him but
command the Pestilence, the Fever, the Pocks, etc. they will quickly fetch them
to hell, never to trouble him more; but in his infinite patience, and
long-suffering, he spares them, and bears with them.

Thirdly, Informs us of the reason why godly Ministers are so serious in
showing men their danger, and pressing them to repentance, because they see
Almighty God armed with such a multitude of diseases, and judgments, and deaths
against men: when a Minister is filled with love to, and longing for the
salvation of his people, and sees the diseases, and other judgments, which lie
at the door of every sinner; and knows, that the want of his care and
faithfulness may be the damnation of a soul, or more, before another
opportunity; this must needs make Ministers labor earnestly for the salvation
of their people: and therefore it is an excellent thing for a Minister to
preach, and pray, and administer Sacraments, and live, as if he saw God, and
Christ, and Angels, and Devils, and Death, and Judgment looking him in the
face; to preach as if he were to die preaching, and people were to die under
his Sermons. Hence, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ: whence he infers, verse. 11. Knowing therefore the
terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. Beloved, we know what Christ will do to
us, if we preach the word deceitfully, and damn the souls whom we are sent to
save. We know the doom of those who know not God, and obey not the Gospel, 2
These. 1.8, 9. We know whither drunkards, and whoremongers, and blasphemers, and
worldlings, and all unregenerate persons are going; and therefore knowing the
terrors of the Lord, we persuade men: we are sent in the stead of Christ to
persuade you to heaven, and therefore dare not stand in the stead of Devils to
flatter you into hell. Sirs, it is not many weeks since I was even past
preaching, and I know that death and I must shortly meet again, and I know ere
long you will be past hearing; and therefore I would preach and live so, that
when sickness and death return, I may be found laboring to save my self, 1 Timothy 4.16.
and them that hear me. In the mean time, when I look upon God, and see
millions of deaths in his hands, Rev. 6.8.
and every death hell following it; I dare not but warn you to flee from the
wrath to come, Mat. 3.7. Beloved, a faithful Minister would never tell you of
your sins, but to cause you to forsake them; and the word Hell should not be so
often in his Pulpit, but that he is afraid lest his people should come there:
he has no secret grudge against you, neither desires the woeful day, God knows,
Jer. 17.16. but he dares not deceive you, he dares not be damned for you, in
preaching you and himself into hell.

The fourth informs us, whence it is that we hear so much of the unexpected
deaths of men; why here is the cause, God commands a disease, or some other
messenger of death, to go and to fetch them away, and they are gone: if any
die, God tells all the world who kills them; I kill, says he, Deuteronomy. 32.39.
Hence we see great men for a while fill a Country; and a frown of their faces,
and a stamp of their foot, makes all to quake about them: but they prove like
Pharaoh, of whom we read, Jer. 46.17. Pharaoh King of Egypt is but a noise. So
they make a great noise in the Country a while, and then like a sound in the
Air pass away. Methinks a great man is like a great wind, it blows violently,
and rages a while, as if it would throw down all before it; but it proves but a
wind which is soon spent and laid. So a furious wicked man, he blusters and
ruffles a while, as if he would blow down God and man; but a disease, and death
comes, and he gives up the ghost, and where is he? David made this observation,
Psalm. 37.35, 36. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself
like a green Bay Tree. Observe, he spreads himself, he enlarges his power, and
riches, and greatness: But see what follows, Yet he passed away, and lo, he was
not; yea, I sought him, but he could not be found: for a sickness comes, and
like a tempest takes him away in a night, Job 27.20. and so by the blast of God
they perish, Job 4.9. So we see others which would be as great sinners, but
that they are not so great men; for instrumenta explicandae nequitiae desunt,
as Seneca speaks, they want instruments to do mischief: these cursed Kine have
short horns, and so cannot do so much hurt: these men are full of lies, oaths,
drunkenness, and are set on fire against God and godliness, sinning with that
impudence, as if they would outface and brow-beat God and man, and make death
and hell afraid of them; but a sickness and death comes, and they are driven
away in their wickedness, Prove. 14.32. whose end Job describes, cap. 24.29.
Drought and heat consume the snow-waters, so does the grave those that have
sinned.

So also we see godly people, who are the blessing of their Age, of whom the
world is not worthy, Hebr. 11.38. the world deserves not the prayers, and
counsels, and examples of such men; yet these perish, though few lay it to
heart, Isa. 57.1. (for in this case there is one event to all, Eccles. 9.2. for
as they lie at the graves mouth, we cannot see the difference betwixt a skull
that sleeps in Jesus, and a skull that is condemned to hell) and therefore it is
true of these gracious ones, as was said of the good Patriarch, Genesis 47.29.
Israel must die; or as we read of David, Acts 13.36. After he had served his
own generation, by the will of God, he fell asleep. All these things are from
Jesus Christ, who sends sicknesses and death at his pleasure; and many such
things are with him. Job 23.14


Lastly, It informs us of the great mercy of God, that we enjoy our health and
lives so long, when he has so many diseases in his hands to deprive us of
both: Hence he is called, the Preserver of men, Job 7.20. Deuteronomy. 30.20.
It is the Lord who is our life, and the length of our days; who preserves us,
and keeps us alive. Psalm. 41.2.


Consider the many deaths and dangers we are preserved from, that thereby we
may see and acknowledge the greatness of this mercy. Our Bodies and Souls were
no sooner united in the Womb, but thousands of deaths were ready to part us
again: we were liable to all the dangers that our Mothers were in, in whose
lives our lives were bound up; besides, multitudes of evils might have killed
us there, and a miscarrying Womb might have loosed us into Eternity. And if we
look through the whole course of our Age, what year, or week, or day can we
name, wherein some have not died? Oh infinite mercy, that keeps us alive in a
world of devouring devils and bloody men! what multitudes of diseases might
have bred in our own bodies! what sudden deaths by Falls, Fire, Water,
Thunderbolts, etc. There is never a beam in our houses, or beast in our fields,
or bit of meat on our tables, or stones in the streets, but methinks it is like
a Pistol charged and cockt (if God say the word) to strike us dead in the
place: where ever we sit, ride, walk, lie down, there is from thence a fall
into Eternity. We may well wonder, when we read of the three Childrens
preservation in the Fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. and of Daniels safety in the Lions
Den, Dan. 6. and yet I tell you, our daily and hourly deliverances are as
great, only they are not so rare: for to name no more, Devils can as easily
kill us, as the Fire or Lions could them; and we have no more power to resist
or escape these Murderers, then they had the merciless Flames, or greedy Lions;
but as God miraculously preserved them, so does he wonderfully preserve us,
even in a crowd of deaths and dangers.

Use 2. Of Reprehension.
Secondly, This Doctrine reproves those who in time of sickness do either for
themselves, or friends, seek to Witches or Wizards for cure; Christ makes them
sick, and they will go to the Devil to make them well: but if Christ command
all diseases to go and come at his will, it must needs be a damnable sin to
forsake Christ, and the Ordinances appointed by him for our health, and to seek
help from the Devil. This was King Saul's sin, though in another case, who
consulted the Witch of Endor, when he was invaded by the Philistines, 1 Samuel
28.7. Then did Ahaziah in his sickness send to enquire of Baalzebub the god of
Ekron, 2 Kings 1.2. And this is the horrid wickedness of many ignorant
Atheistical wretches, who when they have lost their goods, or are visited with
sickness, seek to Conjurers and Wizards, such as they call wise men, or wise
women, to help and relieve them: This sin is often condemned in Scripture, Lev.
19.31. Regard not them that have familiar spirits. Observe, do not regard them,
but look upon them as the basest people in the Country, neither seek after
Wizards. See Isa. 8.19. Lev. 26.6.

Observe the evil and danger of this sin, in these four particulars.

First, This is a sin which brings a man under the heavy wrath and curse of
God, Lev. 20.6. The soul that turns after such as have familiar spirits, and
after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against that
soul, and will cut him off from among his people. Observe, for this sin God
will set his face against thee, all his power and wrath is set and bent against
thee: O how can thou hold up thy face, when the face of God is set against
thee! and whereas thou think thou art planted in thy Country, and planted in
the Church of God, and planted in thy Family, God will cut thee off from among
thy people. Thus, poor wretch, thy disease is perhaps abated, and thou
rejoycest in thy ease and health; but remember, thou have got the Devils
blessing, and Gods curse.

Secondly, This is that filthy sin of whoredom. See again, Lev. 20.6. The soul
that turns after such as have familiar spirits -- to go a whoring after them.
Do not you account this a beastly sin, for people to go up and down a whoring?
Well, though thou think thou keep thy self honest, and wilt say, I thank
God no body can touch me in my honesty; yet although all thy Neighbors judge
thee to be honest, the Lord judges thee to be a filthy Whore, and Whoremonger:
for though perhaps thou have not defiled thy body with a Whore, yet thou have
defiled thy soul with the Devil, Lev. 19.31. Regard not them that have familiar
spirits -- to be defiled by them; and thou may be assured, that the Devil
will not heal thy body, except it be to kill thy soul; and thou do hereby
join that person to the Devil, which should be united to Christ; thou do
yield thy self to the power and will of the Devil: Hence those are the most
ignorant, sottish, profane, or covetous people, that seek to Witches. Beloved,
we should do nothing, but what we may comfortably go from the doing of it into
the presence of God in any duty, or to enjoy his presence into Eternity: Now,
as a wife can have no delight to go from a whoremonger, into the presence or
society of her husband; so how can thou comfortably go from a Wizard to
Prayer, to a Sacrament, or to a Sermon, or from a Wizard into Eternity?

Thirdly, This sin is the most abominable sin of Idolatry, Lev. 11.31. Regard
not them that have familiar spirits -- I am the Lord your God: Implying, that
they that seek to such, do deny God to be the Lord, and do disown him from
being their God, and make the Devil and his Instruments their God. Idolatry is
that sin whereby men forsake the true God, and set up any thing in the place of
God; and this sin is so much the worse, by how much that is more vile, and more
unlike God, and more against him, which thou make an Idol of; and therefore
this is the worst kind of Idolatry: for what is more vile, and more unlike God,
and more against him, then an ugly damned Devil? yet by seeking to Wizards in
thy distress, thou do in effect deny the power, and goodness, and mercy of
God, and accountest the Devil more able, and more merciful, and more willing to
do thee good then God himself.

Lastly, This sin is an horrible violation of our Covenant with God, which we
entered in by Baptism; for thereby we are bound to be for God, and Christ, and
the Church, and Salvation, against the Devil and all his party: Now hereby thou
go against God, and ownest the Devil to be thy friend to heal thee. The
Prophet pleads this argument against this sin, Isa. 8.19. When they shall say
unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto Wizards, that
peep and mutter (do not be tempted thereunto) should not a people seek unto
their God, the God in Covenant with them, but to the Devils and their
Confederates, whom they have covenanted against? We have the same argument
pleaded, 2 Kings 2.3, 4. where we find that Elijah meets Ahaziah his
messengers as they were going to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron; and he
tells them in effect, You may spare your labor, for Ahaziah shall die. But
mark how he expostulates with them, verse. 3. Is it not because there is not a
God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? So Sirs, Is
there not a God in England? And are there not means of his appointment? and are
there not Ministers and Christians to pray for you, who are in league with him,
but must you seek to such who are in league with the Devil? Beloved, do not you
look upon your selves as parts and members of Jesus Christ? and will you bring
a member of Christ to be healed by the Devil? What, has the Devil more care of
Christ's members, then Christ himself? or has Christ need of the Devil to help
or heal ever a member of his? I tell you, Christ would not himself, and he
abhors that ever a member of his should fall down, or worship, or stoop to the
Devil.

Now to excuse this horrid sin, people ordinarily make such Objections as these.

Object. 1. My loving neighbors and friends gave me counsel to send to the
wise woman for the health of my child, etc.

Answ. 1. It is a device of Satan, when he tempts to sin, to make as many as he
can partakers of it* and therefore in this case he may tempt one to give this
devilish counsel, and thereby he signifies he is willing of it, and so becomes
guilty both of the sin it self, and of being a Devil to his neighbor, by
tempting him to the same sin: another is tempted to take the counsel, and so
both consents unto, and also commits the sin; another applauds it; another is
hired to go to the Witch; the Witch her self is hardened in her sin: and thus
the sin goes through many hands, and spreads over many persons; so that often
in this case, many in the neighborhood, and the whole family where the person
is visited, and many more are fearfully brought into the same condemnation.

2. Consider what persons they are who advise thee: Did ever any godly Minister
or Christian give thee such counsel? Did ever these loving friends and
neighbors (as thou call them) seriously tell thee of thy danger by sin, and
exhort thee to become a new ereature, and to set up the worship of God* in thy
family, and to labor for the salvation of thy precious soul? I tell thee, thou
may go to hell with the love of such as thou call loving neighbors, but
that will not ease thy torments when thou come there.

Lastly, Let thy Counselors be who they will, the Word of God has plainly
prevented this objection, Isa. 8.19. When they shall say unto you, (when they
shall give you this damnable counsel) Seek unto them that have familiar
spirits, do not be tempted by them; for should not a people seek unto their God?

2 Object. Many in the like case seek to the wiseman, or wise-woman, as well
as I; they come far and near to them for help.

Answ. It is most certain, as long as such ignorant, unbelieving, covetous
Atheists as thou art, live in the world, the Devil shall never want Customers;
and if thou will follow a multitude to sin, thou will find when thou come to
hell, and stand at the left hand of Christ at the day of Judgment, that thou
art never like to want such company.

3 Object. I know not that such to whom I seek for help, are in league with the
Devil; I am sure they speak godly words of God and Christ, and they do no hurt;
and therefore for ought I know, they are as godly people as any are in the
Country.

I shall answer this Objection in these four particulars.

1. A Wizards using the Name of God, and Christ, or some Scriptures, excuses
not his being in league with the Devil; they that know not this, are grossly
ignorant both of the wisdom and will of God, and also of the depths and devices
of the Devil; for the Devil does most despite and blaspheme God, when he
conceals his own name, and forgeth the name of God to the most horrid
wickedness: and therefore let not the cursed wretches deceive you with the name
of God, and so bring you into communion with, and into the condemnation of the
Devil; but follow the directions of the Word of God, which is purposely given
to undeceive those that are apt to be a prey to these delusions, Isa. 8.19, 20.
-- To the law, and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them.

2. Judge no better of them, because thou think them so harmless: thou
think it is pity but such a Hag were burnt, who bewitcheth peoples bodies,
children, cattle, etc. but thou say these do no hurt, but much good, in
telling to stolen goods, in healing the sick, and curing diseased cattle, or the
like. But beloved, this is but a pretense for the Devil; for his greatest wiles
are to bring you to be tormented with him in hell: and therefore he is content
you should be healthful, and wealthy, and merry, (for as we say, the Devil is
kind to his own) so that he can tempt you to be sinful: Hence it is, that he
will entice you to seek to him for the healing your bodies, because it serves
his design to kill your souls: Besides, there is a confederacy among the
Devils, so that one Witch by her league with the Devil, may bewitch you into
sickness; another, by as bad a league, will (as it is termed) bless you into
health; but though these seem to counter-work one another, yet the Devils in
both agree to devour your souls.

3. It is enough to deter thee from ever seeking to such, when they are branded
with the names of Witches, Wizards, Conjurers, etc. When they are so reputed,
not only by some malicious slanderers (for Christ himself was slandered as one
who had commerce with the Devil, Matthew. 12.24.) but also by the voice of the
country, and by the sober, wise, charitable and godly Ministers and people, who
hear of their Clyents, and of their practice.

Lastly, this is a sufficient reason for all to abhor the thoughts of seeking
to them, because they use such means, upon the use of which thou have no
Scripture-ground to believe, or call upon God for a blessing; as when they use
enchanting words, spells, circles, herbs, salt, stones, etc. which have no
natural virtue to work such effects: for these are but signs upon the use of
which the Devil has bound himself to his confederates, to do what they trust
him for: For as Peter Martyr well observes, the Devil is herein Gods Ape to
imitate him; and therefore as God has made a covenant of grace with his
people, and has ordained Sacramental signs and seals, upon the faithful use
of which he is present to believers, to perform all that he has promised in
the Covenant. So the Devil makes a covenant with Witches, and appoints them to
use certain signs and tokens, upon the use of which he is present to do (so
far as he can, and God permits) all that they call upon him, and trust to him
for: And thus you may see the nature, evil and danger of this horrid wickedness
of seeking in your sicknesses to Witches and Wizards for health; that such as
are guilty may repent and pray to God, ^ct. 8.22.
that the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven them: and that others who
may be tempted to this sin, may hear, ^eut. 13.^1.
and fear, and do no more any such wickedness.

Secondly, This Doctrine reproves those who are full of murmuring and
discontent, when Christ visits them or their friends with sickness: If Christ
commands diseases to go, there can be no reason to murmur; if Christ does it,
no body must find fault: yet most people are very apt to this sin in time of
sickness; for this is the property of a man, that what ever is most in his
heart, when he is troubled, it presently rises, and works up into his
affections, thoughts, looks, words and actions. I shall illustrate this by a
clear similitude: Take two bottles of wine, the one with sugar, the other with
dregs at the bottom; now shake them, and the sugar and dregs will rise and work
up, and the one fills the wine with a sweet and pleasant taste, and the other
will make it muddy and unpleasant both to taste and look upon: so if a godly
man and ungodly man be visited with sickness, when the godly man is stirred and
troubled, his graces will presently work, and the man will be full of faith,
love, patience and prayer, which makes his words and carriage exceeding sweet
and savoury; but when the wicked man is visited, the dregs of sin presently
rise and work up* and his words and actions are then full of pride, anger and
discontent, which make him sinful and unsavory: so that I say a murmuring and
discontented spirit usually prevails with men in sickness, or other
afflictions. The Jews are often branded for this sin, which was so notorious in
them, that the Scripture warns all people to take heed of murmuring for their
sake, 1 Cor. 10.10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer. Now to arm you against this sin, I shall briefly 1.
Show you the Nature and Properties of it; 2. The Causes, 3. The sad
Consequences of it.

For the first, observe the nature of it in this description: The sin of
murmuring is an unruly, disobedient, and unquiet frame of spirit, whereby the
heart rises against God, so as to question and quarrel with him, as if he were
unholy, cruel, unjust, and unmerciful in his proceedings against us.

As by the grace of contentation the heart does quietly and obediently yield to
the Will of God, so as to approve and praise all his dealings as holy, just and
fatherly to him; so a discontented spirit does resist God, and judge of all his
dispensations, as if they were unworthy and injurious to him. This sin is
further known by these four filthy properties.

1. It is a rebellious rising of the heart against God, especially as he
appears in that Providence which is the present occasion of his murmuring.
Hence murmurers are called rebels, Numb. 16.41. for now all the powers of a man
are up in a tumult and insurrection against God; the affections and thoughts
rise up in a quarrel with him. Oh what a fearful case is this, that when a man's
body is so weak that he cannot rise out of bed, yet his corruptions are so
strong, that they rise in an uproar against the Will, and Authority, and
Justice of God!

2. It is an unjust judging of God: for whatever the murmurer pretends, his
quarrel is against God, as the cause of his visitation: Perhaps in thy
sickness, thy discontented spirit flies out toward thy husband, wife,
children, or servants which are about thee: but they may say with Moses to the
Israelites, Exodus 16.8. What are we? (did we make thee sick? are we the causes
of thy aches and pains?) thy murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord: Nay, sometimes the spirit rises so high, that it expressly complains of
God, as if the parties grieved would set themselves above him, and call him to
their bar, and be the judges of God and his dispensations: so did the
Israelites, Numb. 14.3. Wherefore has the Lord brought us into this land? --
Oh horrid pride and insolency! they challenge God as if he had wronged and
deceived them in bringing them from Egypt: Such men practice what Jobs wife
tempted him unto in his sickness, Job 2.9. Curse God and dye; they have cursed
and blasphemous thoughts of God and his Providence* it appears that men do thus
judge God, Psalm. 51.4. That thou might be justified when thou speak, and
be clear when tho^ judge; implying, that God is judged and condemned by
wicked men; and therefore he is said to justify and clear himself: Oh thou
proud worm, thou conceited clay, judge thy self, Job 33.13
and not God; for he gives not account of any of his matters; and to be sure
he will overcome when he is judged. Romans 3.4.


3. A murmuring spirit makes his mercie^ little, and his afflictions great.
This cursed property is seen in the Israelites; for although their deliverance
from Egypt was such a Providence as God delights to be owned by: Hence he is so
often called, The God that brought them out of the land of Egypt; and God
chooses this as a fit preface to the Ten Commandments, as if it were a
sufficient reason to all to worship and obey him, Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, etc. yet how often did the
discontented Jews upbraid God with that mercy? Exodus 16.3. and 17.3.
Would to God we had died in the land of Egypt! wherefore have thou brought us
out of the land of Egypt? Thus many in sickness and pain forget the mercy of
God in all the days of their health and life: in a few hours sickness, they
forget a whole age of rich mercy.

Lastly, discontent frets and disquiets a man's self, Psalm. 37.1. and therefore
it hurts them more then the affliction; as if man have a cut, or wound in his
flesh, this will disease and trouble him: but if a fretting humor fall in the
wound to vex and inflame it, this is far more hurtful and dangerous then the
wound it self: so thy sickness must needs trouble thee; but if under thy
visitation thy heart abound with proud and peevish humors, which makes thee
fret against God; this makes thy condition far more miserable then the disease
it self would make it.

Secondly, observe four Causes of Discontent.

1. Ignorance of Gods dominion over his creatures: this is clear by the parable
of the laborers in the Vineyard, Matthew. 20. where our Savior does silence the
laborers murmuring about their wages with this, Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with mine own? verse. 15. implying, that if they had known and
considered that it was his own, they would have found no cause to quarrel: So
many murmr in their sickness, to see worse sinners have their ease and
health; but they do not consider that their life, health, and bodies, are Gods
own, and all diseases are his own, and he sends them to whom he will; and
though others have more mercy, yet they have no wrong: do not you put your Oxen
to labor, and after that to the slaughter? yet if any question you for using
the poor cattle so cruelly, you will not stick to tell them, Friends, we hurt
nothing of yours, may we not do what we will with our own* Sirs, God has a
greater right over you, then you have over your cattle; if he disease you, and
destroy you, he hurts nothing of yours; and therefore he may do what he will
with his own.

2. Discontent arises from men's expectation of settlement in the world; for
certainly they that trust to vanity, shall be filled with vexation of spirit;
for disappointment always breeds discontent: as the Husbandman that dungs, and
ploughs, and sows his ground, if his expectation of a crop be too great, and he
does not consider how many thousand dangers may come between the Plough and the
Sickle, but reckon aforehand of so many measures for his family, and so many to
pay rent, and so many for seed: now if the crop fail at harvest, here is a sad
repining and discontent: so if a man's expectation of the world is too high, and
having heaped up riches, he begins to bless himself, saying, I have so much for
a purchase, and so much for portions for my children; now if when he is just
catching at them to use them, Prove. 23.5.
they take themselves wings and fly away; no marvel if they leave the owner
murmuring at the Providence. When the Israelites were so miraculously saved
from Egypt, they thought that deliverance had put a period to all their
troubles; and therefore every cross being a disappointment, sets them on
murmuring: so they that promise themselves health, and ease, and plenty in the
world, when sickness and want comes, they presently fret and complain; whereas
they that look and prepare for changes, live in a more composed and quiet
frame; if mercy comes, they are thankful; and if affliction comes, they are
content.

The third Cause of discontent is Unbelief. Hence the Israeliles murmr,
because they believed not the good report which Joshua and Caleb gave of the
land of Canaan, Numb. 14.11. How long will it be ere they believe me for all
the signs which I have showed among them? Sirs, an unbelieving heart is always
a discontented heart; for an unbeliever has nothing to still and quiet the
heart with, in his afflictions: observe, every cross takes away something which
did feed and please the heart, as health, riches, credit, pleasures and
friends, etc. now when these are lost, a man does, as it were, feel something
go out of his heart; but then faith fills, and stills the heart, by bringing
into it God, and Christ, and heaven: Why art thou disquieted, O my soul! trust
still in God, Psalm. 43.5. but now God, and Christ, and the promises, and
heaven, are nothing to an unbeliever, and so yield him no peace and comfort;
therefore he must needs be like the troubled sea, Isa. 57.20.
when the storms and winds of affliction blow upon him, and he has nothing to
calm and comfort his soul.

Lastly, discontent arises from men's being so very sensible of the evil of
affliction, and senceless of the evil of sin. Men's bodies are tender, and their
senses quick, and therefore even the biting of a flea, the scratching of a Pin
is presently felt: and men are so tender of their reputation, profits and
delights, that the least touch in these is a cross to them: but their hearts
are so hard, and consciences feared, that they can lie securely under all the
curses of Gods book, and have mountains of wrath abide on them, and feel
nothing; and therefore afflictions lie so heavy, because sin lies so easy:
Whereas, if a man knew what sin is, and saw at night what wrath he had
treasured up all the day, he would rather wonder, that he were out of hell,
then murmr that he were in trouble: this did silence the Church, when she
remembered the wormwood and the gall; Lam 3.19, 22.
because she knew that it was of the Lords mercies, that she was not consumed:
therefore she pleads, Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain! A man
that deserves death and hell, cannot reasonably complain if he be alive; as it
is unreasonable for a Thief that deserves to be hanged, to complain because he
is whipped: And then it is added, a man for the punishment of his sin: Why should
a man complain of that which he has brought upon himself? Solomon speaks of
this as very unequal, Prove. 19.3. The foolishness of a man perverteth his way;
that is, man's sin brings him into trouble, and his heart fretteth against the
Lord. Man is in all the fault, and he would have God to bear all the blame.

In the next place, observe four sad consequences of this Sin.

First, murmuring debaseth a man, by turning him into the likeness of the
basest creature: we have a remarkable Scripture for this, in Psalm. 59. in the
sixth verse; David says of his enemies, They return at evening, they make a
noise like a dog, and go round about the City; that is, they go about like the
Devils beagles, hunting Gods people: Well, says David, verse. 14. seeing they
love the sport so well, At evening let them return, and make a noise like a
dog, and go round about the City; that is, let thy judgments so afflict them,
that they may like hungry and angry Curs go crying and yelling about the City:
so that here the murmuring of a man in trouble, is compared to the yelling of a
dog; so this sin is compared to the roaring of Bears, Isa. 59.11. We roar all
like bears: and Zanchy observes, that the word (...) translated murmurers,
Phil. ^.14. signifies a noise like the grunting of a swine: nay, this sin makes
a man like the very Devil, who is a most restless and discontented spirit, and
therefore is said, Matthew. 12.43. To walk about seeking rest, and finding none.
And it is true of many on their sick-beds, which we read, Hos. 7.14. They have
not cried unto me, when they have howled ( viz. like beasts) upon their beds.
Now what a fearful case is this, that when in thy sickness thou should have
been full of the thoughts, and language, and savor of a Christian, so as to be
praying unto, and praising and pleasing God, and saving, and edifying others,
and quieting and solacing thy own soul, that thou should by murmuring and
discontent, be yelling like a Dog, roaring like a Bear, howling like a Beast,
grunting like a Swine, and be like a restless and desperate Devil!

Secondly, discontent unfits the soul for every duty: you cannot endure to see
your children go grumbling to meat, and grumbling to School, and grumbling to
bed, and grumbling to ask you blessing: so it greatly provokes God to see
people go murmuring to prayer, and murmuring to Sermons, and murmuring to
Sacraments. Beloved, lay this up as a rule, and let it always reign in your
hearts, viz. That a man can never go holily and comfortably to any duty, except
his heart be reconciled to these three things; To God, to all men, and to all
Gods Providence: Therefore when a man is quarrelling with God and men, and
murmuring at all Gods dealings; always either complaining that his mercies are
too little, or his afflictions too great: how miserably unfit is such a man to
look God in the face in any duty!

Thirdly, murmurers are always miserable, according to our Proverb, An angry
person never wants woe; as if a man that has his body full of sores, come in a
crowd where he is always jogged and thrust, this must needs hurt and vex his
sores. Beloved, a discontented spirit is a sore spirit, and the least touch of
affliction does vex it: and therefore for such a man to live always in a crowd
of miseries, wherewith he is continually hurt and vexed, this must needs be a
miserable man. It is observable, that God himself is set to cross such a man,
Lev. 26.27, 28. If ye walk contrary to me, I will walk contrary to you: As
thus, God would have you to believe, love, fear, and please him: Now you walk
contrary to God, you deny, hate, despise and provoke him: Well, you would have
God to bless, preserve, pardon and save you: Oh but God will walk contrary to
you, he will curse, destroy, and damn you: Now they cannot but be in an unquiet
condition, who have God himself always crossing and thwarting them. See Psalm.
18.26. With the froward thou will show thy self froward: If you will be cross
with God, he will be cross with you: and therefore observe when you are
discontented, something falls out from Wife, Children, Servants or Neighbors,
to exasperate and fret you more: so that I say this sin makes a man spend his
days in bitterness and sorrow.

Lastly, murmurers shall be judged at the last day as ungodly men, Jude v. 14,
15, 16. where we see, that when the Lord comes with ten thousands of his
Saints, one great work of that day will be, to execute judgment on ungodly
murmurers and complainers: therefore as you fear the portion of murmurers then,
do not live the life of murmurers now.

Thirdly, this Doctrine reproves those who are so stupid and senceless in their
sickness, as not to own the hand of Christ in their visitation: for seeing all
diseases come from him, we are to receive them as the good messengers of
Christ, saying with Naomi, Ruth 1.13. The hand of the Lord is gone out against
me. This stupidity of spirit is that sin whereby men slight and despise the
judgments of God, so as neither to be affected in the sense of their sins, nor
of Gods displeasure for them: We have a clear instance of this sin, Jerem.
10.19. -- I said truly, This is my grief, and I must bear it. In the beginning
of the verse, the people sadly bewail their present afflictions: Woe is me for
my hurt, my wound is grievous: now it aggravates their present misery, to be
upbraided with their former stupidity: I said ( viz. in my trouble heretofore)
truly this is my grief, and I must bear it off as well as I can; implying, that
they formerly thought, that they could easily bear off the strokes of God. We
often hear the like confident language from many stupid sinners on their sick
beds, saying, Indeed I am not well, I am something out of order; but I will
strive with it, and hope to shake it off shortly, and so go on with my
building, or trading, or purchasing, etc. Thus usually men flatter themselves
in their sickness, talking as if they were but beginning to live, when perhaps
they are ready to die: these strive to put far from them the evil day, Amos
6.3. Like those who boasted, that they had made a covenant with death, and an
agreement with hell, Isa. 28.15. as if they had made some bargain with Death
and Hell, and had them in Bond and Covenant not to hurt them: this senseless
spirit possessed those, Hos. 7.9. Isa. 42.25. This sin is forbidden, Prove. 3.11.
My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord. Beloved, it is a fearful thing
to despise any affliction; perhaps yet it is but little, but it comes from a
great God, and upon a great Errand: therefore remember, Psalm 2.11. If his
wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in
him. Consider further the evil and danger of this sin, in two particulars.

First, It does greatly provoke and call forth the wrath of God, Isa. 26.11.
When thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, they will take no notice of thy
displeasure; but they shall see: Oh then is the judgment of God fearful on the
ungodly, when Gods wrath puts them past security, when the seared conscience is
turned into a gnawing conscience: I tell thee, sinner, if sickness will not
awaken thee, hell will. You know if a Father whip his Child to humble and melt
him, it cuts the very heart of his Father to see his Child laugh in his face:
So when God visits a sinner with sickness, or other afflictions, if he scorn
his Rod, it must needs be an unspeakable provocation: for as it savours much of
the spirit and grace of a Child of God, to be suitably affected to the various
manifestations of God, so that it is his most inward pleasure to have God
pleased, this puts gladness into his heart, Psalm. 4.6, 7. and if God in
displeasure hide his face, he is troubled, Psalm. 30.7. so on the contrary, it
is a sign of a base spirit, when, as it is said of Miriams disease, Numbers
12.14.
God spits in his face, then to be so shameless and impudent, as if he could
outface the frowns of his Majesty.

Secondly, This speaks a man's condition to be incurable, Isa. 1.5. Why should
ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: as if they were grown so
desperate, that corrections made them worse. Beloved, this stupidity does
frustrate the end and use of Gods Visitation; for they cannot hear the rod, if
they do not feel the rod, because the rod speaks by its strokes; therefore they
lose its teachings, when they do not feel it smart: the condition then of such
wretches must needs be hopeless, when they make Gods last remedy useless: as
when a man is sick, first you seek to restore him by keeping him warm, and by
wholesome diet; if this fail, you send to the Physician; but if the Physic do
not stir the body, if he will not vomit, nor purge, nor bleed, then you look
for nothing but death: So when mercies will not melt, nor Sermons change a
sinner; and after all, God sends sickness, or other judgments, and yet these do
not work, what remains but a fearful looking for of eternal judgment? And now
to conclude this, we may see the dreadful condition of senseless and secure
sinners on their deathbeds; they say they have made their peace with God, when
it is but a peace with sin, and an agreement with hell; and that they hope for
salvation, when perhaps the Pulse has not many strokes to beat, before they
are sure of damnation: yet they will go confidently with the foolish Virgins,
as it were, to the door of heaven, till Christ tell them there to their faces,
Job 21.23
he knows them not; and thus they die, being wholly at ease and quiet: and
carnal friends think they have made a comfortable end, when for my part I do
not doubt to say, it is as comfortable to see men die drunk, as die secure.

Fourthly, This doctrine reproves those who in their diseases trust to
Physicians for health: Diseases (you see) are not at the command of Physicians,
but of Christ. This was Asa his sin, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. in his disease he sought
not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. His sin was not in seeking to the
Physicians, but in not seeking to the Lord. I know it is a great sin, upon
pretense of Gods power, to be disobedient to his will in despising Physic,
which God has ordained to be his means to restore us to health: this sin is a
tempting God, wherein we will try what God can do, and yet neglect what he
commands; but we must use the Physician, yet so, as to live by faith, and not
by Physic: and therefore the rule is, to honor and use them as Gods
Instruments, but not to put them in Gods place.

Fifthly, It reproves those who usurp Authority, and use their own power to
hurt or disease the bodies of men; I mean not those who have authority from God
and man to execute bodily punishments, as Magistrates, Parents, Masters, etc.
nor would I abrogate the Law of self-preservation in the case of a violent and
unavoidable assault: but my aim is, to convince those of their sin, who delight
in quarrelling and fighting; who are said to enter into contention, Prove. 18.6.
who neglect their callings to go to Cock-pits, Bear-baits, etc. on purpose to
quarrel and fight; and such, who upon every little provocation, will be at
daggers drawing; no more with them, but a word and a blow, a lie and a stab;
and such mankeen beasts, who delight to feed on the wounds and blood of men,
accounting it a piece of gallantry and bravery to beat, hurt, wound and maim
others. Now if all diseases are at the command of Christ, so that he bids them
go, etc. then thou should not usurp Christ's Authority, to hurt or disease
others. Now that you may for ever abhor and be afraid of this sin, lay to heart
these five Considerations.

First, This is a damnable sin; without speedy repentance, it will bring thee
to hell: I say unto thee as Paul said to Ananias, Acts 23.3. God shall smite
thee, thou whited wall, for smiting thy brother: Oh look upon those strong arms
and limbs burning with thy body and soul in hell! Oh consider, what a poor
credit it is to go valiantly to hell! for this will be thy case: for if he that
gives his brother but a foul word, be in danger of hellfire, Mat. 5.22. how
much greater danger art thou in, who woundest and hurtest that body which God
has bound thee upon pain of damnation, in the sixth Commandment, to preserve!

Secondly, Consider what spirit works in thee, when thou art fighting and
quarrelling with others: I say to thee, as Job in another case to his friend,
Job 26.4. Whose spirit came from thee? Is this the holy, loving, humble,
patient, meek, and peaceable spirit, which is so precious and savoury to God
and men? Is this the way to please and honor the God of thy life, and limbs,
and strength, who stands by, and looks thee in the face, and sees thee like a
fool in thy rage? The Apostle clearly determines, that these fightings are
fruits of your lusts, James 4.1. And is this thy valor and gallantry, to fight
so stoutly to fulfill a base lust?

Thirdly, Consider how thou do hereby abuse thy own body: Is thy body a
member of Christ, and thy hands and arms parts of Jesus Christ? and will thou
make a member of Christ a murderer?

Fourthly, Consider the person whom thou smitest; Is he not one toward whom
thou should put on bowels of compassion, and whose salvation thou art bound
to seek; and do thou think to bring him to heaven by Club-law? Is he not
fearfully and wonderfully made by God, in whose book all his members are
written? and will thou by thy inhumane and merciless blows mar such a choice
piece of Gods workmanship? Is not, or may not his body be the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, and an instrument to serve God and his generation? and will thou by
maiming and wounding him, make him less serviceable? Nay further, he is made
after the Image of the Invisible God; and I tell thee, in striking him, thou
do, as it were, strike God in the face.

Lastly, Consider the many sad and fearful consequences of this sin; it breeds
malice and revenge, and causes further quarrels and contentions among persons
and families; it begets many chargeable suits at Law, to the expense of thy
precious time and Estate: besides, men are hereby so flesht with cruelty, and
given to fight, that oftentimes the end of such, is either to be killed or
hanged.

Now for the defense of this cursed sin, men usually pretend these and
suchlike Objections; which I shall briefly answer, and so proceed to other
Uses.

Object. 1. Must I then be branded for a base Coward, in suffering every one to
abuse me?

Answ. He is a base Coward, that is so poor spirited as to serve a base lust,
and to be a slave to a conquered Devil; but he has a Divine Spirit that will
do the will of God, and rule his own spirit, and conquer himself: therefore
show thy courage, by setting all thy might against thy sins. Tertullian uses
this ingenious art to divert the Christians from beholding the spectacles of
cruelty in the Heathenish Games, by directing them to behold how grace does
conflict with, and conquer over sin: Behold (says he) wantonness destroyed by
chastity; falsehood slain by faith; cruelty beaten by mercy; malapertness
overcome by modesty, and tales sunt apud nos agones, in quibus ipsi coronamur;
and such are the conflicts with us, in which we are crowned. De spectaculis,
cap. 29. So I say, if thou love fighting, fight with thy sins, so shall thou
be crowned for a Champion, when a company of strong and stout fellows shall be
damned for Cowards: besides, thou may have opportunity to show thy self no
Coward, when thou art called to suffer reproach, poverty, banishment,
imprisonment, or death, for the sake of Christ; by thy cheerful and obedient
suffering of which, thou will be more then a Conqueror over sin, the world,
death, devils; when a company of proud Swaggerers, who venture their limbs and
lives in quarrelling and fighting for the Devil, will basely turn Papists or
Infidels, before they will venture any thing for Jesus Christ.

Object. 2. But I shall do them good by beating them, and make them rule their
tongues, and carry themselves more civilly hereafter.

Answ. Thou may do them good by thy graces, but never expect to do them good
by thy sins. The Scripture directs thee to a better way to do thy enemy good,
Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that
hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you. Romans
12.21. Overcome evil with good: And Solomon tells us, Prove. 25.15.
that a soft tongue, and not a hard cudgel, breaks the bone.

Object. 3. How then must I live? I can never be in quiet, I am abused by such
that would provoke any man alive to strike them.

Answ. I confess the world is full of many daring contentious spirits, whose
mouths call for strokes, Prove. 18.6. and who, as Austin speaks, carry the Devil
in their tongues: But this will not excuse thee; if thou can not rule their
tongues, rule thy own hands. Remember David; how was that Royal person rated by
Shimei! 2 Samuel 16.7. Come out, come out thou bloody man, and thou man of
Belial. -- But see how David takes it, verse. 10, 12. Let him curse, because the
Lord has said unto him, Curse David: It may be the Lord will look upon my
affliction, and that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day. I
would therefore seriously advise thee, when thou art thus provoked, to see
heaven and hell looking thee in the face, and hear the Scripture crying in thy
conscience, Render good for evil, and go to heaven; but, Render evil for evil,
and go to hell. This may work thy heart into David's frame, which appeared in
his carriage toward Saul, 1 Samuel 24.13. Wickedness proceeds from the wicked,
but my hand shall not be upon him: So when thou art provoked by the insolent
behavior of unreasonable men, say, Wickedness proceeds from the wicked; I can
expect no better from such, but I will leave my cause with God, for I am
resolved, that my hand shall not be upon him.

Sixthly, This Doctrine reproves those who threaten to do hurt and mischief
unto others: This was Jezabels sin, who threatened to slay Elijah, as he had
caused Baals Prophets to be slain, 1 Kings 19.2. So let the gods do to me, and
more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them, by to morrow
about this time. Thus Saul is said to breath out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples of the Lord, Acts 9.1. and so those bloody Jews bound
themselves under a curse, that they would neither eat nor drink till they had
killed Paul. Act. 23.12
And so many threaten others, that they will be even with them, that they will
do them a mishief, or that they will be the death of them: Now thou see, that
power to hurt, or disease, or any other way to trouble a man, belongs to Jesus
Christ; and what ground have thou to expect that Christ will exercise his power
to fulfill thy lusts? besides, this is a fearful curse of God upon many, that
they are so far left to themselves, as to will, and intend, and threaten
mischief, and thereby bring guilt upon their own souls; and yet are never able
to finish their sin, so as to do the hurt they intend to others: and this is a
very torment to many a malicious wretch, that he lives traveling with
iniquity, and yet is never able to bring it forth. Furthermore, how dare thou
threaten to do a man hurt, when thou art bound to pray to God to do him good,
yea, and to preserve him from that very evil which thou threatnest against him?
Again, it often appears, that God intends the very same mischief to thee, which
thou intendest to others, Psalm. 35.8. Let his net that he has hid catch
himself, into that very destruction let him fall. But to conclude this,
consider, that when many a man is threatening and devising mischief to others, a
disease from Christ does suddenly take him and turn him to hell, before he can
bring it to pass.

Seventhly, It reproves the great wickedness of such who curse others, by
wishing diseases or other judgments upon them: We often hear such horrible
speeches as these, A plague on him, a pox on him, etc. as if they, and not
Christ, had power to command diseases to go, and they will go; or as if the
power of Jesus Christ must be the servant and instrument of a proud, froward,
and malicious heart: This sin is forbidden to be used toward our worst
enemies, Romans 12.14. Bless them that persecute you; bless, and curse not: and
it is made the sign of a graceless man, to have his mouth full of cursing,
Romans 3.14. for his heart is full of pride, malice, and anger, and these fill
his mouth with cursing. Consider, if thou curse others, God will curse thee,
Psalm. 109.17, 18, 19. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him. -- Consider
further, some will curse their friends, their husbands, wives, or children; and
sometimes God has punished such cursed speeches in bringing their curses to
pass. We read of a Mother that in a passion cursed her Son thus: Get thee gone,
I would thou might never come again alive: and the same day her Son went
into the water, and was drowned: Another woman said in her anger to her Child,
The Devil take thee; and presently the poor child was possessed with the
Devil. These, and many more such dreadful examples should make all afraid of
such, or any other words of cursing. Consider once more, that every man should
have his heart filled with love unto, and earnest desires of the good of all
men, and should be always in a frame to offer up these desires in prayer to
God: Now how contrary to this is that devilish spirit which inclines thee to
hate and to curse others! The Apostle James sets out the great hypocrisy and
wickedness of a man, who with the same tongue will bless God, and curse men,
James 3.9, 10. Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we
men which are made after the similitude of God. Out of the same mouth
proceeds blessing and cursing: My brethren, these things ought not so to be.

Lastly, This Doctrine reproves those who hasten diseases and death to
themselves by their own sins: I may reason with such sinners in Solomon's words,
Eccles. 7.17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish; why should
thou die before thy time? It is not meant the time absolutely appointed by God,
for that cannot be prevented; but it is meant that time, which in the course of
nature they might have probably lived unto; as a Lamp will burn till the Oil be
spent, but it may be quenched, or blown out sooner: So in the course of nature,
many a man might have probably lived many a year, but oftentimes, either by a
sudden blast of God, or by some diseases which are bred by his own sins, the
lamp of his life is quickly blown out; and some of such sins I shall here
particularly reprove: I might instance in that horrible sin of self-murder,
which ordinarily proceeds from pride, unbelief, revenge, covetousness,
discontent, or despair: when men cannot despite God and man enough by their
lives, they will attempt to do it by their deaths, and will venture with their
own hands to cut the thread of their own lives, and to loose themselves out of
the troubles of earth into the torments of hell.

I might also mention the horrid sins of Treason, Murder, Witchcraft, Theft,
etc. which sins bind their bodies to the wrath and justice of men, and their
souls and bodies to the wrath and vengeance of God; These sins bring men to be
hanged like dogs, because they could not be contented to live like men. I shall
instance in these five sins which do provoke God to visit men with diseases,
some of which do of their own nature bring men to untimely sickness and death.

1. Persecution of Gods people: This is a sin which does not only bring
everlasting damnation hereafter, but usually it also brings some fearful
judgments on the bodies and families of Persecutors here. Hence we read, Psalm
55.23. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. It would
take up far more room then I can here spare, to instance in the fearful
examples of Gods vengeance upon the very bodies of the cruel enemies of Gods
Church and people: whereby we might see, that all the cruelty which the most
barbarous persecutors have invented to torment the Christians with, has not
been comparable to those torments wherewith God has tortured their Enemies
with fearful and strange diseases. We read of that bloody Herod, who murdered
the Infants, Matthew. 2.16. that he was smitten by the hand of God with a most
shameful and painful disease, so that his body boiled and burnt with heat, and
his bowels were gnawn: he was tormented with a ravenous and insatiable appetite
after meat: his privy parts were rotten, and full of filthy vermin: and after
he had endured a while the horririble pangs of a lingering death, he died in
desperate madness and misery: See Eusebius Ecclesiastic. Histor. Lib. 1. Cap. 8.

Tertullian, amongst other examples of the like kind, reports, that one
Claudius Herminianus in Cappadocia, being enraged that his Wife was turned
Christian, to revenge himself, did exercise much cruelty upon the precious
Christians; for which God did smite him with a fearful plague, wherewith after
a while he was tormented, he dyed, ad Scapulam, cap. 3.

Steven Gardener, a bloody butcher in Queen Mary's days, hearing that Bishop
Ridley and Master Latimer were burned at Oxford, rejoiced greatly, and being at
dinner ate his meat merrily; but whilst the meat was in his mouth, the wrath of
God came upon him, so that he was taken from his board to bed, where continuing
fifteen days in intolerable anguish, by reason he could not expel his urine,
his body being miserably inflamed within, he was brought to a wretched end,
with his tongue all black and swollen, hanging out of his blasphemous mouth.

I shall conclude this, by warning all that either love their souls, lives, or
posterity, or country, to take heed of wronging the precious people of God, the
truth is, the Nation, which persecutors are a curse unto, and the souls of
persecutors themselves are dearer to godly Christians, then all their own
private interest which persecution can take from them: and therefore I say to
all malicious enemies, as Tertullian said to Scapula, a Ruler in Carthage, and
a cruel enemy to Christians. Parce tibi, si non nobis: parce Carthagini, si non
tibi -- Spare thy self if thou will not spare us; spare Carthage, if thou will
not spare thy self. So I say, if ye will not spare the holy people of God,
spare your selves; if ye will not spare your selves, spare your families, spare
your poor children; if you will not spare your families, spare the precious
nation, spare London, spare England; for you swallow up all, by swallowing up
Gods people.

The second sin which I shall here reprove, is unworthy receiving the Lords
Supper. God often punishes this sin with bodily diseases. Hence we read, 1
Cor. 11.30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep:
Now that you may know the evil and danger of this sin, I shall show you what it
is to eat and drink the Lords Supper unworthily: A man eats and drinks the
Lords Supper unworthily, when he is without the gracious qualifications which
make the heart fit, and meet, and agreeable to this blessed Ordinance. The best
way to understand this, is to consider what is in the Ordinance, and what is in
the heart; and then by comparing them together, to see whether they do meet and
agree: as for example, in the Lords Supper Jesus Christ crucified, with all the
blessings of the Gospel are showed forth, 1 Cor. 11.26. well, and there is a
Believer who by faith sees and discerns the Lords Body, as it is set forth
therein: now such a heart and the ordinance do meet; the heart agrees, and is
suitable to the ordinance, and so is fit, and worthy to receive it; but on the
other hand, here is a dead unbelieving sinner that has no principle or faculty
to discern Jesus Christ, or to receive him as hereby offered; therefore he
comes unworthily, he is not fit; for his heart and the ordinance do not agree,
but he is like a blind man before the most glorious show. Again, here is
spiritual food, meat indeed, and drink indeed, to feed and satisfy a soul,
with grace, and pardon, and salvation: Well, and here is a poor soul hungring
and thirsting after this very food. Now such a man is fit, and comes like a
hungry man to a good and wholesome feast; but here is another dead sinner that
sees and feels his want of nothing, and so is no more fit and meet for such an
ordinance, then a man that lies dead in a Coffin is to eat the bread and wine
which is dealt at his funeral: nay, further, you may see the unworthiness of a
wicked man, in that his heart is against the Lords Supper; as a man is very
unfit for a feast, when he loathes, and his stomach does rise against every dish
on the table, and against all the company: So, my Brethren, a man is very unfit
for the Lords Supper, when his heart hates and rises against Christ, and
against holiness, against all godly Christians. Sirs, here is set before us
that which condemns all sins, and which requires the greatest strictness and
holiness: so that to be sure the man that hates Christ in a Minister, or in a
Christian, cannot but hate him in the Lords Supper. Well, you see who are
unworthy, and who by this sin bring diseases and other judgments of God upon
themselves in this life, and also damnation on their bodies and souls in the
life to come. I might here also tell you, that the godly themselves, for want
of the present exercise of grace suitable to this Ordinance, may bring diseases
and death upon themselves; for as Christ with all his benefits is herein
actually set forth, so grace should actually come forth to meet him, to take,
receive, and enjoy him; as when a feast is ready dressed and disht up, those that
are fit guests must not only have life and stomachs, etc. but they must also
actually eat and drink. The application is easy: I shall therefore conclude
this reproof in seriously warning all to take heed of unworthy, receiving the
Lords Supper: would any man eat that which he knows would breed the Pestilence,
or the Fever, or the Dropsy? Why, Christ tells you, if you come unworthily,
you eat and drink judgment to your selves: And certainly, though the food be
precious and wholesome, and it is your duty to receive it worthily; yet by
unworthy receiving, you do that which may bring the Plague, Pox, Fever, etc.
upon you, and without sound repentance will bring damnation upon your bodies
and souls for ever.

The third sin to be here reproved, is niggardliness: this is a sin whereby men
restrain from themselves the lawful use of the creature; they have not hearts
to take and use the creatures to those ends which God has made them good for,
but basely defraud their own backs and bellies, by grudging themselves the
meat, drink, clothes, recreations, physic, which nature requires, and God
allows: The word speaks expressly against this sin, Eccles. 6.12. such men play
the thieves, in robbing God of the honor, and themselves of the use of these
mercies: and they love their ^ states better then themselves; and by pr^serving
their riches, they disease and destro^ their own bodies.

4. Drunkenness, to which may be add^ the sin of gluttony. The former bring
themselves to untimely sicknesses an^ death by taking too little of Gods
cre^tures, and these by taking too much consider the evil and danger of thi^
sin of drunkenness in these five particulars.

1. Drunkenness does unman the drunkard, and turns him into a very beast. Henc^
says the Prophet, Hos. 4.11. Whoredom and wine, and new wine take away the
heart. This is given as one reason of the peoples wickedness mentioned in this
Chapter, because they were so besotted with drunkenness and whoredom, which
sins took away all knowledge and wisdom from them. Augustine says, Ebrietas
est blandus demon, quam qui habet, seipsum non habet; Drunkenness is a
flattering Devil, which he that has, has not himself. Drunkenness is
voluntaria insania, wilful madness, as Seneca speaks: A Drunkard, though at
other times he may be learned, yet now he can neither understand, discourse,
see, go, ride, nor do any business as becomes a reasonable man: look on a
drunkard, and consider, yonder goes one with the immortal soul and precious
body of a man; yonder staring eyes, stammering tongue, staggering limbs, would,
if they were filled with the Spirit, be precious instruments to honor God, and
become blessings to man; but what a beastly creature is he made by this filthy
sin!

2. A drunkard is unfit for any employment, he is good for nothing: Who will
venture his business with a drunken Servant? or his life with a drunken
Physician? or his soul with a drunken Minister? how many thousand of men's lives
have been lost by drunken soldiers? Whatever a man's estate be, he may be
cheated of all when he is drunk.

3. A drunkard is unfit for all societies, and that for diverse reasons: I shall
mention but this one, viz. a man cannot commit a secret to a drunkard; who will
choose such a friend to whom a man can speak nothing, but what he will have
proclaimed in every Alehouse or Tavern in the Country? Now what ever a man says
to a drunkard, no body knows but that the next time he is drunk, he will tell
all.

4. Drunkenness betrays a man to all sin: for a man at the best is full of the
principles of Sin: Now drunkenness is apt to set all a work, and leaves a man
incapable of many restraints which might be used to a sober person; who knows
what a man full of sin may do in his drunken mood, when he has neither grace,
nor reason, nor counsel of others, nor fear, nor shame to restrain him? and
therefore what horrid sins are committed in drunkenness! swearing, cursing,
whoring, fighting; yea, and murdering also. Clitus was a dear and faithful
friend to Alexander, yet Alexander murders him when he was drunk, though he was
ready to kill himself for it when he was sober.

Augustine reports, that a son of one in Hippo, who was too much cockered by
his Father, came home drunk, in which sin he would have ravished one of his
Sisters, slew his Father, and wounded to death two of his other Sisters.

Lastly, drunkenness shuts a man out of heaven, and by untimely sicknesses and
death hastens him to hell. The Apostle assures us, 1 Cor. 6.10. that no
drunkards shall inherit the kingdom of God. Oh what a fearful sin is this! it
hurries a man into eternity, and sinks him into hell when he comes there:
drunkenness is a sin which of its own nature breeds Dropsies, Consumptions, and
other diseases, as we read, Hos. 4.7. The Princes makes themselves sick with
bottles of wine; and daily examples witness the sudden and untimely death of
many drunkards: It is reported of one, that when he was drunk, as he was
getting up on his Mare, he said in a drunken frolic, that his Mare would carry
him to the Devil; and his Mare threw him down and broke his neck. Sirs, do not
venture to be drunk, lest you fall into hell before you be sober.

The last sin which I shall here reprove, is the beastly sin of whoredom: This
is a sin against a man's own body, 2 Cor. 6.18. hence we read, Prove. 6.26. The
Adulteress will hunt for the precious life. See further Prove. 7.22. 26.27. He
goes after her as an ox goes to the slaughter. For she has cast down many
wounded, yea, many strong men have been slain by her. Her house is the way to
hell, going down to the chambers of death. And thus you see, that by this
filthy sin, men and women sacrifice their health, estates, names, bodies, and
souls to their stinking lusts, carrying a filthy and guilty soul in a rotten
body whilst they live, and shutting themselves out of heaven into hell when
they dye. Now that this use of reproof may leave some deep convection in your
consciences, consider what thy health and life is giv^n thee for, viz. that
thou may have opportunity of serving and honoring the great God, and of
providing for eternity: Now therefore what a bloody wretch art thou to thy
self, that thou should by thy own sins shorten thy space of repentance, and
put a sad period to all thy blessed opp^rtunities, and days of Salvation, and
dispatch thy self beyond all ordinances, and means, and hop^s, and
possibilities o^ Salvation, and so make thy self unable to live before thou art
ready to dye!

Use 3. Of Consolation to the truly godly.
This Doctrine is a great ground of comfort to all the children of God, whereby
they may see that all sicknesses, dangers, and deaths come through the hands of
their own father: for it is a most certain way of comfort to the godly in any
sickness, to bring their hearts to the first Cause and Author of their
Visitation; for if they are at peace with him, they will be sure to find peace
and comfort in their affliction. Hence the Apostle teaches us, Phil. 4.6, 7.
Be careful for nothing (that is, do not torture, and distract, and break your
hearts with sinful cares and fears) but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God:
(bring your hearts and desires unto him) And the peace of God, which passes
all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.
Perhaps thou have nothing to keep thy estate from loss, nor thy body from aches
and pains, nor thy name from reproach, nor thy life from death. But however,
thou shall have the peace of God to keep thy heart full of grace and comfort
through Christ Jesus; and if the heart be thus kept, the blessing and comfort
of all is kept in it; for in this case thou may lose friends out of thy
company, riches out of thy estate, health and ease out of thy body, and yet
thou may keep the peace and comfort of all in thy heart.

Now that your hearts may be refreshed with this Doctrine, I shall show herein
these five grounds of comfort.

1. In respect of the season of the visitation. 2. Of the end. 3. In respect of
the godly themselves who are visited, 4. In respect of death. Lastly, in
respect of the day of judgment.

1. In respect of the season of our Visitation, we may be assured that Jesus
Christ will choose the best and fittest season to visit us in. See 1 Pet. 1.6.
Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need be) ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations: This is an argument of comfort, that
our afflictions come in a season when we have most need of them. Husbandmen
know that there is a season when the ground has need of frost and snow; and
parents know that there is a season when their children have need of the rod:
And so there are seasons, wherein we that are Gods husbandry, Cor. 3.9.
and Gods children, have need of his fatherly chastisements; and in these times
he chooses to visit us.

I shall contract all that I will say of this, in the application of a general
truth to this particular case, viz. that the time and season of Gods remarkable
Providence, is called the fullness of time in Scripture: So we read, Gal. 4.4.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son -- so that place
seems something pertinent to our purpose, Ephesians. 4.10. That in the dispensation
of the fullness of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ,
both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him. Where note, that
this is the great and mysterious work of God, to gather together in one full
body all his Elect, that those which are already in heaven, with those who are
to be gathered out of the world, may all meet in Christ their Head; and so be
the fullness of him that fills all in all: Now this work is said to be done in
the fullness of time: So that this is the glorious work which God is carrying on
by ordinances, mercies, afflictions, diseases, death; he is gathering all his
people together, bringing them into a body unto their head; and, I say, this is
all done in the fullness of time.

Now there are two things which make a fullness of time.

1. When it is a time set and appointed by God for such a dispensation; a time
full of the Decree and Counsel of God, and wherein his Decrees are fulfilled:
So the coming of Christ was in the fullness of time, viz. in the time set by God.

2. When time is fitted and prepared for such a work; in which respect also
Christ came in the fullness of time: time had been traveling, as it were, for
this many ages: Prophesies, and promises, and the faith and expectation of
Believers were full of Jesus Christ; and so the time being fitted for his
coming, he comes in the fullness of time.

Now to apply this to the case in hand; whenever sickness or death comes, it is
in the fullness of time.

1. In that time which is set by the wisdom and counsel of our Father, for the
good of his children; he set the time of thy birth, and of thy new birth: so he
has appointed the time of thy visitation, and of thy death; which are all
times appointed to demonstrate and glorify his infinite power and love toward
thee.

2. They come in a time most fit for such a work. Sin grows to such an head,
that it is time for sickness, or some other affliction to come and bring it
down: Grace grows to such a strength, that now it is able to bear a trial: a
storm is ready to fall; therefore, says God, now it is to time to fetch my
child home: The Christian is grown so ripe, that it is time to bring him to
heaven, as a shock of corn in its season. Thus you see for your comfort, that
sickness and death come from Christ in the best and fittest season: Sickness
never comes, but to bring thee nearer heaven; and Death shall never come, but
to loose thee into heaven. Ah Christian! heaven and happiness never come out of
season.

Secondly, Comfort, in respect of the end of all sicknesses and death; they
come from Jesus Christ for our good. We read, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory: where we see, that in all our afflictions there is a
secret Power working us to heaven and salvation. As for example, in a Fever,
Ague, or Consumption* etc. we feel a Power working outwardly against us,
against our health, strength, case, and life; so there is a mighty Power
working inwardly for us, working us from sin and the world, to God, and Christ,
and Heaven. Hence is that known and tried Scripture; I say, it is a tried
Scripture, it has comforted many thousand hearts, I mean Romans 8.28. We know
that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are
called according to his purpose. Methinks this Scripture is a Spring which
always runs with new and fresh comfort; and it is a sure way to find comfort,
to look upon all our diseases, and other afflictions, through this Scripture.
Now to apply the comfort of it to the present case, consider what is that good
which all things work together for; and this you may know by the following
verses, wherein the Apostle demonstrates this truth, That all things work
together for our good: therefore, says he, verse. 31. What shall we say to
these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? that is, let us look
upon all our afflictions and miseries, and then look upon our Predestination,
Vocation, Justification, and Glorification, mentioned verse. 29, 30. And we may
joyfully conclude, that seeing God is for us, so as to predestinate, call,
justify, and glorify us; and these links can never be broken; then nothing
can be against us, but all shall work for our good* so that the great good that
all things work for, is not to make the godly the great Gallants of the world,
but to bring them grace and peace here, and glory hereafter: and all
sicknesses, diseases, and deaths, and all other dispensations, are united and
joined together in this work, to bring Soul-saving good to them that love God.
And the clear cause of this is in the Doctrine, viz. because our Savior has
the working of all these things; he sends, and rules, and governs them: and
therefore there must needs be a Fatherly work in them, because Jesus Christ, as
our Father and Savior, sends them to us, and orders them for us: That of the
Apostle makes clearly for this, 1 Cor. 3.23. Death is yours: and by the same
rule, sickness is ours, and for our good. But why ours? Answ. Because the Lord
of sickness and death is ours. Hence we read, Phil. 1.21. To die is gain.
Sickness is gain, and death is gain to Gods Children. Many a Child of God
gains more by a months sickness, then by the outward mercies of many years;
and death will bring you more gain in one hour, then all the prayers, and
Sacraments, and Sermons of a whole age: and therefore labor to see your gains
as real and present to the eye of Faith, as your pains, troubles and losses are
to the eye of Sense: and in your sad parting with those things which sickness
and death take you from, comfort your hearts with those things which they bring
you unto; say, Farewell my dear and pleasant Country, thou have fed me well, and
clothed me well, but I must leave thee for a better Country, that is, an
heavenly, Hebr. 11.26. Farewell my inward and faithful friends; farewell my dear
Jonathans! How pleasant have you been to me! Your love to me is wonderful:
Methinks when I am with you, I feel the truth of Tertullians saying of the
fellowship of the Primitive Christians: Animo animaque miscemur; Our very
hearts and souls do enter into, and are mingled and united with one another.
Many a sweet meeting and sad parting I have had with you; but I must leave you
a while, to go to better friends in Heaven: Magnus illie nos charorum numerus
expectat; Cyprian. de mortalitate.
I have a great company of dear friends in the other world which look for me,
and will rejoice to see me with them; with whom I shall always be serious, yet
never sad; always merry, and yet never vain.

Farewell my sweet Sabbaths, savoury Sermons, melting Sacraments; farewell my
dear Bible, and all the blessed Ordinances, wherein I have seen the Lord, even
the Lord in the land of the living. I must no longer look in these glasses, but
go where I shall see him face to face. 1 Cor. 13.12.


Farewell my dear yoke fellow, parents, my sweet children, my beloved brothers
and sisters; I must leave you all, to go to a better Father, and Husband, and
Brother in heaven.

Farewell my good and convenient house, my sweet place of secret and
Family Worship! I must be gone to my house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. 2 Cor. 5.1.


Farewell my poor, but precious body! go thou and sleep in Jesus in the earth,
whilst my Soul is reigning with Jesus in heaven, where I shall remember thee,
and long to see thee, till I meet thee again clothed with Immortality and
Glory. These things, Christians, are the comforts of a sickbed, the sweet joys
of a deathbed.

3. Comfort, in respect of the godly who are visited: Herein is thy comfort,
that thou art a true part and member of Jesus Christ, from whom all diseases
come; so that whatsoever Christ does to thee, he does to himself: I was sick,
says Christ, when his members were sick, Mat. 25.36. So when the body is dead,
the poor ghastly corpse continues still joined and united to Jesus Christ.
Hence the bodies of believers are said to sleep in Jesus, and are called the
dead in Christ, 1 These. 4.14, 16. and it is a most sweet and savoury
consideration, when a man looks on such a sad spectacle as a loathsome diseased
body, or thinks on the rotten carcass when the body is dead and sown in
corruption, then to fix the eye of Faith upon his glorious head, at the right
hand of the Father: As thus; look on thy face covered with the Small Pox, and
then look on the Face of Jesus Christ: look on thy bones staring upon thee in a
Consumption, and then look upon the glory and beauty of Jesus Christ. Nay, go
further, look upon thy self as it were in the grave, and see thy ghastly skull
lying in the dust among the worms of the earth, and then look on thy glorious
Head in Heaven: and so comfort thy self with this, that as vile and loathsome a
spectacle as thy diseased body is now, and thy dead body will be shortly, yet
it is a precious member of Jesus Christ, who will by his infinite power, change
and fashion this contemptible dust into the likeness of his glorious body in
heaven. Phil. 3.21.


4. Comfort, in respect of death; it comes to the godly without a sting: In
this we are taught to triumph, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. O death, where is thy sting?
-- Now to clear up your comfort in this, consider, that sickness and death are
said to sting, when God as a revenging Judge sends them to execute the curse of
the law for sin; so that death is compared to a fearful Serpent, which kills
and devours all the men and women in the world: And, says the Apostle, the
sting of this Serpent Death, is sin; it is sin that makes the sting; and then he
adds, the strength of sin is the law: The strength that sin has to sting, is
from the curse of the Law, and the Law has its strength and power from the
wrath of God; for the law works wrath, Romans 4.15. So that by all you see,
that by the sting of death is meant the dreadful torments of hell, which at
death come from the wrath of God through the curse of the Law for sin. O poor
Christless sinner! what a miserable case art thou in? Look well as thou fittest
in thy seat, and thou may see this stinging Serpent Death lie under thy feet;
when thou lie down, this Serpent lies under thy bed; when thou art at meat,
this Serpent lies under thy table; when thou go out of thy house, thou may
see this Serpent at the door, ready to sting thee to he^ But now here comes in
the unspeaka^ comfort of believers; for though death h^ power to kill them, yet
it has no po^er to sting them; because all the cau^ of Deaths sting are taken
away by Jes^ Christ.

1. Sin is gone; for this lamb of G^ has taken away the sins of the world, Jo^
1.29. Observe, they are taken away, ^ if they had never been. Hence, 1 Pet. ^
24. Who his own self bare our sins in his ow^ body on the tree: So that by the
righteou^ness of Christ given to us by God, and received of us by Faith, and
thereby man our own, we are fully cleared and abso^ved from sin, and God will
never impu^ it to us.

2. It follows, that the curse of the Law is gone; for Christ has delivered us
from the curse of the law, Gal. 3.13.
being made a cur^ for us: So that the law has no strength t^ bind us to
punishment, there being neither sin to bind us for, nor punishment t^ bind us
unto.

3. The wrath of God, which makes the punishment, is also taken away, for it i^
God that justifies, Romans 8.33. and we have thereby peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. So that God is ours, and for us, to love, bless,
and save, and glorify us: and therefore every believer may with comfort hold
up the Blood of Christ in the very face of the King of Terrors, and say, Here
is my Christ, my righteousness; but, O death, where is thy sting?

Nay further, Death is now changed from coming to execute the curses of the
Law, for it comes to fulfill the blessings of the Gospel; for death to a
believer, is a work of a reconciled Father, whereby he loses his child out
of earth into heaven; so that we may see death so full of the love and goodness
of God, that it should even indear it to us, and make it lovely and precious to
our souls. That is a most comfortable promise, Joh. 8.51. Verily, verily I say
unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. It is not meant,
he shall never die, as the Jews understood it, ver. 52. And I conceive it is
not only intended, he shall never die the second death; but the meaning also
seems to be this, that a Child of God shall see so much of God, and Christ,
and Heaven, that he may even overlook the fears of death, which are swallowed
up by God, and Christ, and Life.

Lastly, Comfort, in respect of our glorious victory over all diseases, and
death, at the day of Judgment. This victory consists in two things.

1. In putting a final period to all diseases, and death: Sickness shall never
trouble us more, and death shall never kill us more: I warrant thee Christian,
thy head will never ache in heaven, and for certain there will be no Funerals in
that Country, but corruptible must put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.54.
and mortal shall put on immortality. 2. In that the bodies of believers shall
then be never the worse for the diseases and death which they have suffered;
but the bodies which were sown in dishonor, 1 Cor. 15.43.
shall be raised in glory.
Beloved, a Saint may live comfortably in any condition, by living in the
joyful knowledge of the day of judgment. Hence, when the Apostle had propounded
this as an argument of comfort, that yet a little while, Heb. 10.37, 38.
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry; He adds this, Now, the
just shall live by faith: meaning, they shall live a life of holiness and
comfort in believing the day of judgment. And Saint Paul having made a glorious
description of that great day, 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17. makes this use of it,
verse. 18. Wherefore comfort one another with these words: And in this the godly
did comfort themselves, Romans 8.23. And not only they, but our selves also,
which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our
selves, waiting for the adoption; to wit, the redemption of our bodies. This is
a most comfortable life, to live as those that are always groaning and waiting
for the day of judgment. A believer may apply this to his comfort against any
particular trouble: Art thou disgraced and reproached in thy name? summon, as
it were, all thy accusers to the day of judgment, and believe what a name thou
shall have then, and that thou shall be sure to come off with credit at that
day, when the glorious Judge of quick and dead shall confess thee before his
Father, and Angels, and Men: and as mean and obscure as thou seem now, the
world will have other thoughts of thee, when they see thee appear with Christ
in glory, Col. 3.4. And therefore we learn, that one great work of that day
will be, to make a clear and open manifestation of the sons of God, Romans 8.19.

Art thou troubled with unreasonable and wicked men, so that thou may say
with David, My soul is among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on
fire? Psalm. 57.4. Consider what Christ will do to them at the day of judgment,
and what work the great shout will then make among the profane Swaggerers and
Ranters o^ the world.

So when thou art troubled with diseases and the fearful thoughts of death,
consider thy glorious victory over them at the day of judgment, 1 Cor. 15.54.
When thi^ corruptible shall have put on incorruption and this mortal shall have
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed u^ in victory. Look on this corruptible an^ mortal body,
which is now sometimes s^ loathsome with diseases, that a man ca^ scarce endure
to carry it about him, or to lie with it, and will shortly be so contemptible,
that the worms of the earth will crawl and feed all over it; and these ver^
arms, and thighs, and legs, may be throw^ up, and lie like the bones of horses
an^ sheep at the graves mouth; yet the day i^ coming, when this corruptible and
mortal body shall put on immortality and glory: and, says the Apostle, Then,
at that day, shall come to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory. Beloved, here diseases conquer the strongest bodies, and death
overcomes the lives of the best and greatest men, and the grave devours and
eats up our flesh; but then we shall obtain a glorious victory over all, when
in despite of them, the bodies of Believers shall be raised incorruptible and
immortal; and diseases, death, and the grave, which have prevailed for so many
thousand years to swallow up so many millions of men and women, shall
themselves be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5.4.
and swallowed up in victory.

Last Use is of Exhortation.
I shall conclude this discourse with a Use of Exhortation, which I shall first
direct to all in general, and then more particularly, 1. To such who are in
health. 2. To such who have been sick, but are recovered. 3. I shall direct to
some duties to be practiced in time of sickness.


I begin with the first; wherein I shall exhort all to these six duties,
grounded o^ this Doctrine.

1. Live in the knowledge and sense o^ this truth, that the health and lives of
al^ men are at the will and command of Jesus Christ.

1. See your own health and lives at the command of Christ; acknowledge with
David, Psalm. 31.15. My times are in thy hands. Consider that of the Apostle,
Jam* 4.13, 14. Go to now, ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such
a City* and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain; whereas ye
know not what shall be on the morrow: For what is your life? it is even a
vapor that appears for a little time, and presently vanishes away. Observe,
Go to, ye that say, To day, or to morrow. Why, a day is but a little while, and
it is but a short time till to morrow: Well, but time has a teeming womb, and
you know not what a day may bring forth. Prove. 27.1
We often see one day working strange changes and alterations with men: a day
may bring you into eternity, and put an eternal period to all your designs;
and it is most certain, that you know not what shall be on the morrow: thou
may be sick or dead to morrow; thou may be in heaven or hell to morrow:
oh, but sure there is no such danger! yes that there is; and therefore it is
added, What is your life? It is even a vapor that appears a little while,
and presently vanishes away. As a vapor fills the air, and makes a show a
little while, and then presently vanishes away: So man appears a little while
in his family, in the Field, Market, or Congregation, but presently vanishes
out of sight. How would the serious thoughts of this make men hasten to repent,
if they did know that there is very great danger, that unbelief and impenitency
may bring them to hell before to morrow: If so, surely they would not venture
one hour out of Jesus Christ, for as many mountains of gold, as there are sands
upon the Seashore; yet for want of this, poor souls are still deferring their
repentance till to morrow, until at last death seiseth upon them, and leaves
them never a morrow to repent in. So, how vain would the world appear to them,
if they did consider that they could not say, they should enjoy their riches,
and pleasures, and preferments till to morrow! Consider thus with thy self, I
have provided meat, but I may be in Eternity before I eat it; I have bought me
good clothes, but I may be put in a winding sheet before I wear them; I have
sowed great fields, but I may be in hell before I reap them: Look on all the
world about thee, and tell thy soul, This is but a poor portion, when thou
may loose all in a breath.

2. See thy Friends and Relations in the hands of Jesus Christ. Beloved, herein
appears the great difference betwixt our worldly and heavenly enjoyments: As
for our heavenly enjoyments, we are best when we are most fit to enjoy them;
but as for our worldly comforts, we are best when w^ are most fit to loose
them: as thus, it is ou^ holiness and happiness, to be fit to abide for ever
with God and Christ in heaven; but we are most holy and spiritual, when we are
in a readiness to part with Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, etc. Now what
poor comforts are these, when a man is in the best frame, when he can be
content to be without them?

3. See the great ones of the world in the hands of Jesus Christ: Oh what a
sight is this, to look upon all the Kings, and Nobles and Gallants of the
world, in their very fa^ into Eternity? Sirs, as you see them catching at the
Crowns, and Honors, and Estates of the world, so see diseases and death
catching at them: We have this passage, Psalm. 49.12. -- 20. Man being in honor
abides not, he is like the beasts that perish; that is, say some, like beasts
that die of the Murrain, which are thrown away for stinking Carrion, which is
good for nothing. Did we consider this, we should not make men our trust and
confidence. See Jer. 17.5. What a cursed sin is this, for a man that has the
Immortal God to be his trust, to rest on a lump of flesh, that cannot so much
as keep himself from being sick, or dead, or damned for one day? Psalm. 146.3,
4. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth; in that very day his
thoughts perish. Observe, the Psalmist pleads against putting our trust in the
Princes and great ones o^ the world, because they are dying men, and in the day
of death their thoughts perish. Many great men have great thoughts of honors
and preferments, and perhaps thoughts of doing much mischief to Gods Church and
people; but death comes, and in that very day their thoughts perish. In Esth.
6. we read, that Hamans thoughts were full of this project, to have himself
honored, and Mordecai hanged, verse. 4, 6. But in on^ night God turned the
scales, by a Divine touch upon the Kings heart; and so Mordecai is brought to
the honor, and Hama^ to the gallows. Oh what became of thi^ great Courtiers
thoughts, when instead o^ the honor which he expected, he had the halter which
he deserved! And thus w^ find that God has gracious thoughts o^ love and
mercy to his people; and the counsel of the Lord stands for ever, Psa. 33.11.
and the thoughts of his heart to all generations. But men have thoughts of
setting up themselves, and throwing down the Church of God; but they fade in
their ways, and their thoughts perish.

Lastly, See your enemies in the hands of Christ: What are they all, when they
may be sick, or dead, or damned before they can do thee any hurt! Isa. 51.12 I,
even I am he that comfort thee: Who art thou, that thou should be afraid
of a man that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass? We
may learn here, that a Christians fear of man, proceeds from his ignorance of
three things.

1. Of God: therefore, says God, I, even I am he that comfort thee. Sirs,
if there be more power, and goodness, and wisdom in him that comforts us, then
there is strength, and subtilty, and malice in them that trouble us, what need
we be afraid? do but believe who comforts thee, and thou needst not fear or
care who troubles thee; for God can take away the troubles of man, but man
cannot take away the comforts of God.

2. Of themselves: Therefore says God, Who art thou? What thou who art my
child, and have me thy father to comfort thee, and yet will thou be afraid of
a man! Oh what a poor-spirited creature art thou, to be afraid of a man!

3. Of the vanity of man. Therefore says God, He is a man, and can do no more
then a man: and he is a man that shall dye and wither as the grass. Christians,
God, and Sickness, and Death, and Hell are nearer your enemies then they are to
you; and I tell you, do but believe Gods threatenings against them, and you will
see no reason to fear their threatenings against you.

Secondly, live in a holy awe and fear of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 33.8. Let all the
earth fear the Lord; let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him:
A man that is a tenant at will can tell you, he is afraid of offending his
Landlord: for, says he, I live under him, I am at his mercy, he can keep me
in, and turn me out of my living when he will. Beloved, if we knew the power of
Christ, as well as we do the power of a Landlord; and were as much afraid of
hell, as we are of loosing our livings, the same reason would prevail with us
to be afraid of offending him; for we live at his mercy, and life and death is
at his Will: let me therefore warn you, as God did the Israelites, speaking to
them of Jesus Christ, Exodus 23.21. Beware of him, and obey his voice; provoke
him not, for (if you continue in your sins) he will not pardon your
transgressions: for my Name is in him. Upon this ground we are required to fear
him, Psalm. 2.9, 10, 11. He will break his enemies with a rod of iron, and dash
them in pieces like a potters vessel: Therefore it is made the wisdom of Kings
and Judges of the earth, to serve the Lord with fear. It is very observable,
that as Gods Attributes give being and life to a Christians graces; so a
Christians Graces bring glory to Gods Attributes: as for example, the Power and
Truth of God causes Faith, and the Goodness of God causes Love, and the
Greatness of God causes Fear in the hearts of the godly: So God has a
peculiar name of praise and glory from the graces of his people; because of
their faith and hope in him, he is called the trust, and confidence, and hope
of his people; and because of their delight in him, he is called the song and
joy of his people; and because of their awe and dread of him, he is called the
fear of his people, the fear of Isaac, Genesis 31.42. See Isa. 8.13. Sanctify the
Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. We
have a special instance of this in Job, cap. 31. in which Chapter Job by many
solemn protestations and serious imprecations asserts his innocence in several
duties, as in chastity, equity to his servants, charity to the poor, etc. Now
he clears himself, that the reason of his integrity in these things, was not
because he was afraid of ever a man alive. Hence, says he, verse. 34. Did I
fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families terrify me? No, no, he
had a great awe upon his heart, verse. 23. For destruction from God was terror
to me, and by reason of his greatness I could not endure. How contrary to this
is the secure temper of many, who rage in malice against God and godliness, and
fill the land that bears th^^ with lies, oaths, drunkenness, whoredoms,
injustice, Sabbath-breaking, contempt of Ordinances, etc. yet they make no more
of God and his Judgments, then the very stones or dirt under their feet. But
oh what work will diseases and death make among these secure and senseless
Atheists shortly! methinks I hear the wrath of God roaring against them; and
the Lion has roared, who will not fear? Amos 3.8. Be persuaded then to stand
in awe of God; for which purpose lay up that Scripture, Eccles. 8.12, 13.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely
I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, that fear before him. But
it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days which
are as a shadow, because he fears not before God.

3. Labor to make your peace with God: you see what he can do against you; he
can disease, or kill, or damn you when he will; therefore it is your great
wisdom and safety to have this God on your side, and to be at peace with him.
The Scripture persuades to this duty with this argument, Isa. 27.4, 5. Who
would set the briars and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them,
I would bur^ them together: meaning, if my enemies, who are but as briars and
thorns before me, who am a consuming fire, will fight it out against me, I will
burn them up quickly, I will have them in hell presently: but, says he, verse.
5. If they will (by sincere faith and prayer) take hold on my strength, and
make peace with me, they shall make peace with me. Now to prevail with you
herein, consider what this peace with God is; it is that blessed State, whereby
God in Christ is for the good, and happiness, and eternal salvation of
Believers; and whereby they are wholly turned and set for the service and glory
of God: So that in this case, a man may improve his knowledge and faith by all
the advantages both from Scriptures and Creatures, and get his soul filled with
the highest thoughts of the infinite power, and wisdom, and goodness of God;
and then boldly say, This is my infinitely great and good Father, and all his
glorious power, and wisdom, and love is on my side: then he may look into the
world, and see all things working busily about him; and then conclude, that
this is the greatest work upon the wheels to bring happiness and salvation to
me, and to that body of which I am a member. And then on the other hand he may
look in himself, and see all the powers of his body and soul united in this
great design to please, and praise, and enjoy God. So that by these things you
may learn what it is to be at peace with God: whereby you may also see what is
the enmity betwixt God and a sinner; it is that whereby a sinner is against
God, so as to be fearfully bent to hate, and deny, and despite him; and God is
against the sinner, so as to blast, and curse, and damn him; so that this is
thy case, sinner, if thou art not at peace with God, all manner of diseases,
and all kinds of deaths and dangers, yea, and all the curses of the Bible are
against thee, because the God of all these is against thee. I would therefore
seriously persuade you to come to agreement with God; which that you may do,
let me tell you, that I am this day sent as an Ambassador of peace from the
Lord of life and death, who has committed to me the word of reconciliation: 2
Cor. 5.19.
So that I have authority from him to offer most blessed conditions of peace,
viz. if you will this day sincerely turn from sin to God, and truly receive
Jesus Christ as he is offered in the Gospel, you shall have the great God to be
your Father, his only begotten Son, the true God, to be your Husband and
Savior, the infinite and blessed Spirit to be your Comforter; you shall have
grace and peace to abide with you here, and an everlasting Kingdom of glory to
possess and enjoy hereafter. Sirs, are not these blessed and honorable terms?
Well, where lies the difference? Answ. In nothing but sin: Now what a fearful
case is this, that after God the Father has sent his only begotten Son, and
after he has dyed the most shameful, painful, and accursed death of the Cross,
and after so many hundred Sermons and offers of peace; Will thou now break with
God for a base lust? can thou endure hereafter to lie among the Devils and
damned in everlasting burnings; and to see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God; and hear thy own conscience upbraiding thee to all eternity,
that thou have lost heaven, and do lie in hell for loving thy cups, oaths,
whores, or the dust of the earth, better then Jesus Christ? O Sirs, repent and
believe quickly; you have more need to do it, then either to eat, drink or
sleep: for ought you know, you may be in hell before such another offer be
made. I am sure there are millions of diseases and deaths waiting at your doors
to break up the treaty: I shall therefore conclude this in the words of Eliphaz
to Job, cap. 22.21, 22, 23. Aquaint now thy self with God, and be at peace;
thereby good shall come unto thee.

Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thy
heart.

If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, thou shall put away
iniquity far from thy Tabernacles.

Fourthly, prize and improve godly Ministers and people, whilst you have them,
seeing it appears by this Doctrine, that you know not how soon they may be sent
for to heaven, where I am sure they will be better respected. Now the greatest
honor that you can show to godly Ministers, is, to be doers of the Word, Jam.
1.22.
which they are Preachers of. Ministers are more honored by the conversion,
though of the poorest servants, then by the highest commendations, which the
most able and learned Doctors are able to express: for this is their greatest
glory, to be instruments of Gods glory in the salvation of poor souls; for
thereby the Word of God is glorified, 2 These. 3.1. By the applause of men,
Ministers may be cried up for persons of excellent gifts and parts; but this is
their greatest glory, when by the salvation of souls, 2 Cor. 4.7.
the excellency of the power appears to be of God, and not of men. But
Beloved, the ignorant unbelieving world knows not the worth of godly Ministers
or Christians, because they see not the excellency of God, and Christ, and
Holiness, and Heaven, which are the causes which make them so precious: The
world knows us not, because it knew him not, 1 John 3.1. But whatever the men
of the world think, who can prize nothing but honors, and riches, and
pleasures, to which they should be dead and crucified; I tell you, godly
Ministers and Christians are the blessings of their age; and those are the best
Kingdoms, and Countries, and Towns, and Parishes, and Families, which have most
of them, and which love them best. Solomon tells us, Prove. 10.11. The mouth of
a righteous man is a well of life. I need not tell you what a necessary public
mercy, a well of good and wholesome water is to the Town or Family where it
springs: Now a righteous man is a Well of Life; he is a spring of spiritual
Aqua vitae: Many a poor sinner, or sad swounding Christian, receives the
spiritual life of grace, and strength, and comfort from the mouth of a godly
Minister or Christian, Prove. 15.4. A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: It Is a
Metaphor taken from the Tree of Life in Paradise, which was Gods Ordinance to
preserve man alive, had he continued in innocence. Thus a godly man is a tree
of life in this evil world; he turns a Family into a Paradise where he grows,
and is prized: so that many a man who was dead in sin, and many a fainting
child of God, is quickened and revived by feeding on the fruit of his wholesome
tongue.

Now my Brethren, the serious consideration that these blessings are by
sickness and death ready to be taken from us, should cause us to esteem and
improve their spiritual and savoury company. How did Elisha cleave to Elijah,
when he knew he was presently to be taken from him! and therefore we find,
that three times Elijah (to try Elisha his constancy) seemed to shake him off:
but Elisha every time answers most solemnly, As the Lord lives, and as thy
soul lives, I will not leave thee, 2 Kin. 2.2, 3, 6. and if you read the
story, you will find that it proved well for Elisha, that he was so wise and
careful to improve that precious opportunity. See Acts 20.25. where Paul uses
this Argument to press his following exhortation: And now behold, I know that
you all among whom I have gone preaching the kindom of God, shall see my face
no more. Oh people, honor your Ministers; children, be instructed by your
Parents whilst you have them; for shortly you must see their faces no more.
Christians, exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day: Heb. 3.13.
For yet a little while, and you shall see one another faces no more. We find
that Saint Paul having exhorted Timothy to those great and necessary duties
mentioned 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 5. he presses all with this melting motive, verse. 6.
For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand: as
if he had said, My dear son Timothy, I am not like to counsel and instruct thee
long; therefore hearken to the counsel of thy dying father Paul: Preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season, etc. Sirs, look upon your Ministers
as dying Ministers, and your Friends as dying Friends; and labor to draw from
these wells of life whilst they live; for you little know what a loss you will
have of them when they dye.

Fifthly, believe and improve those precious Promises which God has made for
the preservation of your health and lives; and in the use of means, live by
faith and prayer upon those gracious promises. See Prove. 3.1, 2, 7, 8. My son,
forget not my law, but let thy heart keep my commandments. For length of days,
and long life, and peace shall they add unto thee, verse. 7, 8. Fear the Lord,
and depart from evil: It shall ^e health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.
See also Prove. 4.20, 21, 22. Job 33.25. His flesh shall be fresher then a
childs, he shall return to the days of his youth. Hence we often see, that
when a man's body is withered by sickness, and baked like a potsherd, he is
restored by the blessing of God to such a good constitution and temper, that
his body becomes fresh like the flesh of a child: This is elegantly expressed
by David, Psalm. 103.5. Who satisfies thy mouth with good things, so that thy
youth is renewed like the Eagles. Some say that the Eagles at every ten years
end cast off their old Feathers, and are quickly clothed again with new, as if
they began to be young again, and so live till they be an hundred years old.

Some also write of this property in the Eagles, that when by reason of old
age, they have the upper part of their Bills bending down so far below the
lower, that they are scarce able to feed, and so languish with hunger, that
then they break their beaks upon a rock, whereby being able to feed, they grow
to their former strength; to which the translation in the singing Psalms seems
to allude: Like as the Eagle casts her bill,
Whereby her age renew'th.
Whether these, and many other such relations of the wonderful properties of
the Eagles be true, is uncertain; yet it is generally received, that they are
Birds long-lived, and for many years continue so healthful, that they seem to
grow young again. And thus God often blesses men with health, and strength,
and long life, that their strength is renewed like the Eagles: and although
that which we read of Moses was extraordinary, that when he was an hundred and
twenty years old, his eye was not dim, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
nor his natural force abated; yet we often see many live to a great age, with
their health, and strength, and parts through Gods mercy continued youthful
and fresh to them. Now Sirs, lay up these promises in your hearts, and improve
them by faith and prayer; so they may be the better to you then the wholesomest
diet, or best physic in the world.

Lastly, use the means of health and life so, as that the God of life may bless
you in the use of them: for this purpose, make conscience of these four things.

First, Of your food: It is God that gives a blessing to this, Exodus 23.25. He
shall bless thy bread and thy water, and I will take away sickness from the
midst of thee. Therefore pulse and water with Gods blessing, made those
conscientious Saints look and like better then others that were fed with royal
dainties, Dan. 1.15. Take then your food, as it were, out of the hands of God,
who opens his hand, and satisfies the desire of every living thing, Psalm.
145.16. and eat, and drink, as those that see a presence of God at your table:
Deuteronomy. 12.7. Ye shall eat before the Lord your God: eat as those that therein
seek to please and honor God, Romans 14.6. He that eats, eats to the Lord,
and gives God thanks. I know these Scriptures intend particular occasions of
eating; yet they hold out upon the same reason our duty to eat and drink so, as
to do the will of God, and to bring glory to him, according to that, 1 Cor.
10.31. Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God: as God turns all to a Christians good, so it is the admirable property of
grace to turn all to Gods glory: A gracious heart can feed upon the goodness of
God in, and bring glory to God out of every morsel of meat that comes into his
mouth. Tertullian gives a very savoury relation of the Feasts of the primitive
Christians: Before (says he) they sit down to taste their meat, they first
taste of prayer to God; they eat so much as hunger requires, and drink no more
then is profitable for chaste and sober persons; they are so filled, as thereby
fitted to worship God in the night; they discourse at meat, as those that know
that God hears them: and as they began, so they conclude the meal with prayer;
and so they depart, not as if they fed only upon meat, but also upon
discipline and instruction. I refer the learned Reader to his own words,
Apolog. cap. 39. here is a most gracious example, worthy of the imitation of
all Christians.

Secondly, make Conscience of your apparel; let it be such as becomes a holy,
chaste, humble member of Christ, and not a proud, vain, wanton limb of the
Devil; let your garments be both wholesome and comely; neither so immodest as
to dishonor the Gospel of Christ, nor sordid as to disgrace the Body of a
Christian.

Thirdly, make Conscience of lawful and seasonable recreations: These are
healthful for our bodies, and when used in the fear, and according to the Will
of God, do very much fit us for the most inward communion with him. What
Solomon says of one kind of labor, is true of others, that it is a weakness
and weariness to the flesh, Eccles. 12.12. For as it weakens a bow to keep it
always bent, and mars the strings of an instrument to keep them always
stretched; so it weakens the body to keep it too long bent to one employment;
therefore it is Gods will that it should be remitted to its harmless,
inoffensive, and honest recreations.

Lastly, make Conscience of the duties of your relations, so that you may
refresh, and revive, and not disease and destroy one another; our health and
life does much depend under God upon our relations.

You therefore that are parents, do not spend your childrens bread in whoredom,
drunkenness, idleness and revenge: many parents find their lusts more
chargeable then their children: It is very sad that children may cry out, We
might have had better education, better trades, better portions better health,
had not our merciless Parents loved their sins better then their children.

You that are children, make not your parents lives miserable, who have been a
means of life to you: be not such foolish children, as to be the heaviness of
your parents, Prove. 10.1.

Husbands, Nourish and cherish your own flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. Make not provision
for your lusts, with that which should make provision for your wives.

Wives, do your Husbands good, and not evil, all the days of your lives, Prove.
31.12. labor to be their Comfort, Prove. 12.4.
and Crown, and not as rottenness in their bones.

So much for the Exhortation to all in general.

2. Exhortation directed to people as they enjoy their health.

The duty which I shall exhort unto, is to prepare for sickness and death. In
this Exhortation I shall use this method.

1. I shall show what this work of preparation is.

2. I shall press this duty on several sorts of persons.

3. Urge it with some Motives.

Lastly, I shall give several Directions to direct us how to be prepared for
sickness and death.

For the first.

This work of preparation is that whereby every sound believer is by the spirit
of Jesus Christ settled in such a blessed state and frame, that he is fitted for
all that Christ shall do to him by sickness and death.

In this description observe three things.

1. The principal efficient cause which makes this great preparation in us,
viz. the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Hence Christ is called, The Author and
finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.12. Where Jesus Christ begins a work of grace
and salvation in a soul, he never leaves it till he has finished it, and made
it up for heaven: therefore, says the Apostle, Phil. 1.6. Being consident of
this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it,
or finish it till the day of Jesus Christ; that is, till the day of death, and
of judgment: so that this is the great work of Jesus Christ in every true
believer, to fit him, and make him ready for sickness, and death, and the day
of judgment.

2. Here is the subject of this work, or the person prepared, viz. every true
believer, who is a vessel of mercy prepared for glory.

3. Here is that wherein the nature of this work of preparation consists, viz.
in three things.

1. He must be settled in the state of grace and salvation; that is, he must
have a Scripture-right to God, as he is the God of salvation by Jesus Christ,
and so a right to heaven, and to all the blessings of the Covenant of Grace.

2. He must be wrought into a gracious frame, whereby he is bent to yield up
himself in subjection and obedience to the will of God, in sickness, and in
death.

Lastly, Here is that which he must be prepared for, viz. all that God shall do
to him by sickness and death: If God fill him with pain and misery, he has his
graces of faith, love, patience, humility, and meekness, to enable him to lie
quietly, and obediently, and cheerfully under the power and will of his
heavenly Father. If God call him by sickness into Eternity, he is with Saint
Paul, ready to be offered; and is made fit by grace, to receive and enjoy the
glory of heaven. This gracious frame of heart is fully epxress'd, Romans 14.8.
Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die unto the
Lord; that is, we live to this end, to please, and do the will, and to seek the
glory of the Lord, and we are ready to die to the will and glory of the Lord.

So much for the Explication of this work of preparation.

Secondly, I shall press this Exhortation upon these seven sorts of persons.

1. I shall exhort little children (so far as they are capable to know and
practice this duty) to prepare for sickness and death. Now because this
applica^ion may seem strange, consider, that God himself thinks it not below
him to be a Teacher of young children, Psalm 148.12, 13. Both young men and
maidens, old men and children, let them praise the name of the Lord. And all
parents are commanded to teach their children to know and do his will, Deuteronomy.
6.6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart;
and thou shall teach them diligently; (or wh^t and sharpen them) upon thy
children. So Prove. 22.6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he
is old, he will not depart from it. Observe, there is a way for young children
to go to heaven, and it is that wherein they should be found when they are old;
and all parents are bound to set them in that way: and indeed; children are
sooner capable then most conceive, to know something of God, and Christ, and
Heaven, and Hell. Timothy knew the Scriptures, (...), from a sucking child, 2 Timothy 3.15. And this appears by the timely fruits of the Spirit that sometimes
drop from their pretty sanctified mouths.

And certainly baptized children being Christ's Disciples, and admitted into his
School, the Church, have a right to be taught in the way to salvation; and
Christ is a Prophet to them, and his Ministers are Ministers to them, as well
as to others: And really, Ministers have often more comfort from catechized
Boys and Girls, then from many old ignorant Atheists, who are worse then
children in the understanding of the Scriptures. And lastly, it makes much for
Gods glory, to have his Name praised by the mouths of little children, Psalm.
8.2. Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength,
because of thy enemies, that thou might still the enemy and avenger.
Observe, God has ordained that his praise in the mouths of little children,
shall be a strong and powerful means to stop the mouths of malicious subtle
Atheists, to still the enemy and avenger. So we read, Matthew. 21.16. Out o^ the
mouths of babes and sucklings have tho^ perfected praise. The praises that come
to God by the blessed Angels, and all the Saints in heaven and earth, is
perfected and made up by the praises of these young Saints. Now considering
these things, and seeing sickness and death fetch away so many young children
into Eternity, I have chosen to direct one brief Exhortation to the young Boys
and Girls among us.

Oh come therefore, you sweet and pretty children, and I will teach you the
fear of the Lord: be you prepared for sickness and death. Hark, sweet
Children, you were born children of the Devil, and you must be born again if
ever you will be the children of God.

Good children, know and love the God that made you, and Jesus Christ who died
for you, to redeem and save you.

You can be afraid of the Rod, and a Bugbear; be afraid of sin and hell.

Perhaps you have godly parents, who instruct and catechize you in the
knowledge of God: Prove. 1.8.
Why, good children, hear the instruction of your fathers, and forsake not the
law of your mothers. God does not love you as his children, because you are
pretty or witty children, or because you are the children of rich parents; but
if you will love and fear the Lord, Psalm. 22.30.
then you shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.

Good children, look on the graves in the Churchyards, and you shall see many
who were no elder nor taller then you, dead and buried before you: as young as
you are sick, and as young as you are dead, and as young as you are in heaven
and hell; therefore be Gods children whilst you are young, lest you be sick,
and dead, and damned before you be old.

2. Exhort parents to do their duty in endeavoring to prepare their children
for sickness and death, Ephesians. 6.4. (...), feed or nourish your children in the
fear of the Lord. Beasts can take care to save their young ones lives; but men,
and women, and Christians should be careful to save their childrens souls: when
thy children dye, if thou have neglected their salvation, it must (if thy
conscience be ever awakened) cause stinging reflections in thy soul. There is a
story of a father, who consented that his daughter should commit whoredom;
which she did, and soon after dyed* whereupon the poor guilty father cries out,
I have damned my daughters soul, I have damned my daughters soul. Sirs, do not
teach your children to to lie, swear, to be drunk or covetous, to scoff at Gods
children or holiness, lest one day you have cause to cry out when it is too
late, We have damned our childrens souls. When your hearts are affected to see
your children about you, then see diseases and death at your doors, ready to
make your children orphans, or you childless; and consider withal, how sad it
is, that such pretty sweet children should be for ever burned in hell. Beloved,
I would not have you worse then Infidels, in not providing for your childrens
bodies; and yet I would have you better then Devils, in providing for their
poor souls: It is a pleasant sight to see parents live, as if they were going
with all their children to heaven: It is comely to see parents sitting in their
house, and their children about them; or to see them sitting in a Congregation,
and their children about them: but how much more glorious will it be, to see
them sitting in heaven, and their children about them! though the relation will
end, yet the comfort of being a means to bring them thither will abide for
ever. Parents, if you cannot make your children heirs of houses and lands,
labor to make them heirs of heaven; do not only teach your children how to
live, but also teach them how to dye: thou art troubled sometimes to think,
Alas, how will my poor children live! I tell thee thou have more need to think,
How will my poor children dye! for there are few so poor, but they can make
some shift to live; but there are millions so miserable, that they know not how
to dye.

3. Exhortation to young men. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is unto the
sons of men, Prove. 8.4. make it your care to prepare for sickness and death.
Solomon having taught, that childhood and youth is vanity, Eccles. 11.10. he
infers this Exhortation to young men, Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in
the days of thy youth. It is necessary for all young people to live, as those
that know, that God will bring them to judgment, Eccles. 11.9. Consider, you
are never prepared for sickness and death, till you are prepared for judgment.
Oh young men and women, look upon your selves as going to judgment: Hark, do
not you hear the great shout that calls you all to make your appearance before
the judgment seat of Christ. Sirs, be nothing now, but what you would appear to
be at that great day: Would thou be judged as a Drunkard, or Swearer, or
Whoremonger, or Worldling, or as an enemy to godly Ministers and Christians at
the day of judgment? If not, then be not such a one now; do not think your
selves too young to enter into a serious way of godliness: For what if sickness
and death will not stay till you are old? Thou art not too young to be sick, or
to die: Do not then think that thou art too young to go to heaven, lest God
think thee old enough to go to hell.

4. Exhortation to old men to prepare for sickness and death: The days which
Solomon calls evil days, Eccl. 12.1.
are already come upon you. Methinks I may allude to that of our Savior, Joh.
4.35. Look on the fields, for they are white already unto Harvest. When I look
on old people, I see a white crop of gray hairs, which speaks them to be ripe
for the sickle of death. Sirs, diseases and death have done a great deal of
their work upon you already; they have worn away your color, beauty and
strength: yet how sad is it to see an old man more unfit to die, then a very
child that begins to live! He is old and ignorant, old and covetous, old and
malicious, old and cruel, old, and yet a drunkard. Oh poor man, what have thou
been doing all thy days? Have thou had fifty, threescore, almost fourscore
years, to prepare for sickness and death, and to lay up treasures in heaven;
and have thou done nothing else, but been heaping up wrath in hell! Hark, old
Father (for I must needs honor thy hoary head) the sickbed, death, the grave
call for thee: Oh then repent, and believe presently; let not the Devil, who
long ago persuaded thee thou wast too young, now persuade thee thou art too
old; for as old as thou art, yet it is better for thee to go to heaven a young
Babe of Christ, then to go to hell an old slave of the Devil.

5. Exhortation to rich and great men of the world to prepare for sickness and
death. Sirs, there are messengers at your doors to fetch you, where mountains
of gold are worth nothing; your riches cannot guard you against sickness and
death: God can as easily turn a Bed of Down into a Bed of Languishing, as a Bed
of Straw; and a disease cares no more for the richest Velvet, then the poorest
Sheep skin; and a sickness can as easily catch thee in a Coach, as in a Cart;
and death enters into the stateliest Castle, as soon as the poorest cottage.
Read your case, Jam. 1.10, 11. As the flower of the grass he shall pass away:
For the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withers the grass,
and the flower thereof falls, and the grace of the fashion of it perishes;
so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways. Oh tell thy friends, lands,
silver and gold, that thou art going into Eternity, and art presently to stand
before the Judge of Quick and Dead, and see what help they can afford thee:
Thou will certainly find Solomon's words true, Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in
the day of wrath.

Beloved, If we would know whether a man be happy or miserable, we must not
look upon him as he appears in his honors and riches, etc. but follow him to
his death, and the day of judgment; see how he speeds there, and how he comes
off then, for then the man comes to his proof: and we shall see, that all the
riches of the world yield no profit in those great days, but then the highest
carnal Monarch shall be no more respected by the Judge of all the world, then
the ugliest Devil of Hell; when a poor godly servant, or day-labourer, shall be
crowned with incorruptible glory before his face. Oh therefore you rich men,
look among all your jewels and treasures, whether you have a God, and Christ,
and grace for your poor souls; these only are the provision which will maintain
you against the terrors of death, and the dread of judgment.

6. Exhortation to poor men to prepare for sickness and death. We think them
poor who have nothing to live on in this world; but they are poor, who have
nothing to live on in the other world. Poor people! you cannot come at the
silver, and gold, and riches of this world, when you will; but you have as much
freedom to the riches of the other world, as the mightiest Prince upon earth.
Thou may call God Father, and ask what thou will, and live upon the
everlasting Kingdom of heaven as thy own: and therefore you that are poor and
godly, let your riches of the other world comfort you against the poverty of
this: Look on thy cold Cottage, and then look on thy house not made wi^h hands:
Look on thy poor leathern clothes, and then look how thou shall be cloa^hed
when thou appearest with Christ in glory: Look on thy brown bread, and course
fare, and then remember the entertainment which Angels and Saints have in
heaven. Oh poor people! though you know not how to be maintained whilst you
live, yet get saving grace, and you will be rich enough to go to heaven when
you die.

The last Exhortation shall be to such, who, in some respects, seem nearer
death then other persons. I shall instance only in three sorts of people, to
whom I shall direct this Exhortation to prepare for sickness and death.

First, Such whose callings and employments do expose their lives to daily and
great dangers; as Watermen, Colliers, Carpenters, Masons, etc. These men, by a
leak in a Boat or Ship, a fall of a little earth, a slip of a foot, may be
turned to heaven or hell every day: Yet we often see, that many who live in the
greatest dangers, live in the greatest sins. My earnest advice to you is, to
prepare for death, that though you stand in dangerous places, yet you may stand
upon sure ground for the salvation of your souls. Sirs, for ought I know, you
may get heaven with less danger then you get your livings: Remember what
precious souls you have, and that every time you venture your lives, you
venture your souls too: Labor by sound repentance to forsake your sins, and to
turn to God. Do not swear, and lie, and be drunk, and deceive others: Do not
profane the Lords days, if you expect that God should preserve you on working
days; labor by a sound faith to rest on Christ to save your guilty souls; see
your nearness unto Eternity; be often looking from the places where you are,
into heaven and hell, and see what a little there is betwixt you and them; and
seriously consider, if now you should fall into Eternity, in which of those two
places would be your portion: Get such a saving knowledge of God, that you may
comfortably commit the keeping of your lives unto him, and solemnly worship God
in your Closets and Families, and live in the fear of God, and in peace with
him, and use your callings to his glory, that he may preserve you in your ways;
or however, that if you do die in your callings, you may not die in your sins.

Secondly, Such, who though they have ordinarily present case and health, yet
they are subject to dangerous and sudden pains, and fearful distempers, as
Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Stone, etc. you have need, in regard of these,
to be always prepared for sickness and death: you would not be without what
remedies you can get, when your distempers come: Oh do not be without God, and
Christ, and Grace, if death should come in them. Whatever you are doing,
consider, Now my distempers may surprise me; therefore if they take you in bed,
at meat, at work, let them not take you in your sins: in all likelihood, these
fits will shorten your days; therefore let them hasten your repentance: these
distempers will fill you with torturing pains, or for present deprive you of
your reason, parts, senses, etc. so that then will be a very unfit time to
prepare for death; therefore improve your times of health and ease, as merciful
opportunities, that when your diseases or death find you, they may not find
you unprovided. Sirs, always remember, that you carry death in your bodies;
therefore be sure to carry grace in your souls.

Lastly, Women that are with child, have special reason to be prepared for
sickness and death: God has inseparably fixed this punishment upon this Sex,
that in sorrow they shall bring forth children, Genesis 3.16. And our Savior
tells us, Joh. 16.21. A woman when she is in travel, has sorrow: And
experience witnesses the grievous pangs and pains of all, and the sad deaths
of very many in this condition: so that thou must certainly within a few weeks
be grievously diseased, and thou may probably dye: do not then venture into
such dangers in a Christless state. Poor woman! perhaps thou have bred that
life which will be thy own death: therefore labor to find that Christ is as
sure formed in thy heart, as the babe is formed in thy womb; and before that
sad and dangerous hour of the birth of thy child come, examine thoroughly
whether the new birth be past in thy soul: I would not have thee oppress thy
heart with the dismal forethoughts and distracting fears of that time: for to
be sure, sufficient to that day will be the evil thereof; but I would have thee
so prepared, that the short pangs of childe-bearing may not end in the
everlasting pangs and torments of hell; and that thou may be a new creature,
and found in the righteousness of Jesus Christ, that if thou should no longer
live with thy Husband, nor enjoy the fruit of thy womb upon earth, thou may
live with Christ, and enjoy the fruit of his righteousness in heaven for ever.
I shall conclude this with that suitable Scripture, 1 Timothy 2.5. Notwithstanding
she shall be saved in childe-bearing, if they continue in faith, and charity,
and holiness with sobriety: lest poor women should be swallowed up with the sad
thoughts of the sin mentioned in the former verse, where it is said that Adam
was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the gransgression: for
which sin, disgrace and punishment is fixed to the Sex: these words are added
for their comfort, to show that, notwithstanding that sin and the punishment
thereof, yet they shall be saved in childe-bearing, if they continue in faith,
and charity, and holiness with sobriety. Poor woman! methinks I see thee
walking with two souls over eternity, and both full of sin; Oh therefore hasten
to make thy peace with that God whose power alone must take the child out of
the mothers bowels; Psalm. 71.6.
that so thou may comfortably depend and call upon him to save both your
lives, but however to save your poor souls.

I come now to urge this duty with these seven Motives.

Mot. 1. It is the will of God that you should be prepared for sickness and
death; in so doing, you do the will of God; he commands you to wait, and watch,
and prepare for the day of judgment, Matthew. 24.42. Mar. 13.33, 35. Now it is a
certain rule, that all those Scriptures which command us to prepare for the day
of judgment, do imply our duty to be prepared for sickness and death, which
are the forerunners of that day; and the same preparation which is made for the
one, will serve for the other. Now, my Brethren, this is a sufficient reason to
move you to this duty: for it is the will of God which makes it our duty, and
binds us to it, and must be the reason to us why we do it, or we can never be
prepared aright. Beloved, God would have us to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. to reign
with him in heaven; and therefore to be always ready against the time that he
sends for us thither.

Mot. 2. It Is a sign of a very wise man to be prepared for sickness and death,
Prove. 22.3. A prudent man fore-seeth the evil, and hides himself. A wise godly
man sees sickness, and death, and the day of judgment before him: he knows he
must go through all these, and therefore he takes care to provide so as to be
safe and happy in those great dangers. Beloved, it is the greatest wisdom in the
world, 2 Timothy 3.15.
to be wise to salvation: It Is better miscarry in a thousand businesses then in
the business of Salvation: Now he that is wise to salvation, prepares against
all the dangers that he must be saved from; and the greatest danger is at
death, when a man must go through that door where so many millions fall into
hell: what a wise man then is he who is prepared so, as that door to him is the
door of heaven! Many that get estates and preferments in the world, are much
admired for their wisdom; and yet when death comes, they must be damned for
their folly! Remember the Parable of the ten Virgins, Matthew. 25.
five whereof were wise, and five were foolish: Now why were those five called
wise? the reason was, Verse. 6.
because when that great cry was made at midnight, Behold, the Bridegroom
comes, Verse. 8.
they were prepared: and why were the other five foolish? because they were
unprepared for that great time. Beloved, when the great God our Savior shall
come out of heaven with his mighty Angels, and his glorious Saints, and shall
show his blessed face in the clouds, and sound a trumpet that will call all the
quick and dead before him in the twinkling of an eye; certainly they will prove
the wisest persons, that are so prepared as to stand, and triumph, and lift up
their heads with joy in that great appearance. Ah Sirs, when Come ye blessed,
and Go ye cursed, has distinguished and parted the world, it will then be
known, who are wise men, and who are fools.

Mot. 3. Because it is altogether uncertain when sickness and death will come,
the Scripture uses this argument, Mar. 13.33. Watch and pray: for ye know not
when your time is. Solomon elegantly sets forth the uncertainty of our time,
Eccles. 9.12. For man also knows not his time: as the fishes that are taken
in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons
of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them. As the
fishes are sporting in the water, and are presently masht in the net; and as
the birds are hopping in the chaff, and are presently caught in the snare; so
poor man is suddenly and unexpectedly surprised in the snares of death.
Sometimes a man is fast asleep, and sickness awakens him: sometimes he is
feeding at the table, and death comes between the cup and the lip: sometimes he
is riding a journey, and death throws him into eternity: and sometimes he is
making a purchase, and death comes and breaks the bargain: sometimes he is
marrying a wife, and death comes and mars the match. Sirs, sickness and death
are under no rules of civility; they care not for disturbing the weightiest
business in the world: if therefore we cannot say of any thing, I will do this,
or I will have that, before I am sick or dead; certainly our very next work
should be to prepare for sickness and death.

Mot. 4. Because thou know not what kind of sickness or death may come upon
thee. We read of a great death, 2 Cor. 1.10. Sometimes death comes with great
pains, and great terrors, and great temptations, which make it a great death;
so that the provision of a whole age of grace will not, without the mighty
support of Gods Spirit, keep thee holy and cheerful at such a time. It is said,
Job 18.13. The firstborn of death shall devour his strength. The firstborn is
the chiefest and mightiest in it is kind; and therefore the meaning is, that
death shall come in the most cruel and terrible manner to devour a man: Now set
before thee those that have dyed in the most fearful pains of body, and have
been assaulted with the most horrid temptations, and consider, this may be thy
case; however, prepare against the worst, that Sin, and Death, and Devils, and
men can do against thee.

Mot. 5. By thy being prepared for sickness and death, thou art also prepared
for health and life; for there is none so fit to live, as he who is fit to dye;
the same graces which will make thee holy, and patient, and joyful in sickness,
will make thee so in health; for the same faith, love, humility, meekness and
patience, which qualify the soul for passive obedience, do also fit the soul
for active obedience; as the same provision of victuals or money which is made
against a siege or famine, will be useful and profitable, if such times do not
happen: so that you can neither be well, nor sick, nor live, nor dye without
this work of preparation.

Mot. 6. That man is in a most blessed condition, who is prepared for sickness
and death; for every thing which makes him prepared, makes him blessed. I shall
only instance in two things.

1. All the happiness of the other world is his own, 1 Cor. 3.22. Things to
come are yours. Christians, your sins, snares and troubles are almost past, but
they will be all over shortly; but your joy, glory and happiness are to come:
The happiness of heaven is to come, and the glory of the day of judgment is to
come: Now all these joys that are to come, are yours; for they are settled upon
you in the Covenant of Grace, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness has the promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come. Now that man is fit to dye, and
is in a most blessed condition, who when sickness and death comes, has a right
to go to heaven. Poor child of God! the best of thy hopes, and comforts, and
happiness, lies beyond death, and thou can not come at them for this life;
but sickness and death will put thee into possession of all, and thou art like
to see a strange sight, so soon as death has loosed thee out of this life.

2. He is by the graces of Gods Spirit fitted for heaven; he is made meet to be
partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. Beloved, grace
makes a man fit to receive glory; the joys of heaven are brought and received
into the soul by grace; if thou will be prepared for death, live now as thou
hopest to live for ever in heaven; do nothing but what thou would do going to
heaven. Besides, by grace the heart of a Believer fastens on heaven; he lays
hold on eternal life; he prays, hears and receives Sacraments with his heart,
having fast hold on heaven. How fit therefore is such a man to have sickness
and death come to let him into heaven!

Last Motive. If you are not prepared for sickness and death, you will be
prepared for hell. Sirs, if a godly man does good, and a sinner does evil, both
go into eternity; the one to be a treasure in heaven, the other to be a
treasure in hell. Now what a fearful condition is this, for a man to be always
laying up provision against himself in hell! We read, Romans 9.22. of vessels of
wrath fitted or made up for destruction; if you will not be made up for heaven,
you must be made up for hell: Oh believe what a fearful condition this is, to
be always ready to be turned into hell; thou do not think of this whilst the
pleasures of sin and the patience of God last: But what a case will thou be in,
when there will be nothing in thee but torments, and nothing in God toward
thee but wrath! Beloved, be convinced of the certainty of hell; thou may as
certainly see hell by the light of Scripture, as thou may see men, and
beasts, and earth, and trees by the light of the Sun; hell is as certain as sin
and sinners; there is wrath in God as sure as there is sin in man. God's
justice is as sure as his mercy; and he has bound himself to condemn
unbelievers, as well as to save believers. See Joh. 3. ult. Mark 16.16.

See your nearness to hell, whilst you are unprepared for sickness and death:
methinks I see that every step thou go, thou art ready to tread in the
flames. Poor soul! thou hangest over the lake of brimstone by the twined thread
of life; when that breaks, thou art drowned and damned for ever; there is
nothing appears between thee and hell, but the hand-breadth of time: Oh what a
sight is this, to see a company of secure sinners drinking, and swearing, and
swaggering, and ranting, and roaring within an hand-breadth of everlasting
burnings! Again, consider the greatness of hell torments; here is a depth that
thou can not fathom; who can speak of the greatness of hell torments, when
it is our duty to believe they are unspeakable? Can thou tell how many years
eternity lasts? or how much punishment sin deserves? Do thou know how much
wrath Omnipotency can inflict? or how much torment a vessel of wrath can hold?
then may thou measure the torments of hell, and fathom the lake of fire and
brimstone. Consider but this one thing, viz. the greatness of God who inflicts
the torments; he is a God to whom vengeance belongs, and he were no God if he
could not do that which belongs to him: consider God is great in every thing
that he is; to whom he is a father, a portion, a husband, he is a great father,
a great portion, a great husband; to whom he is an enemy, he is a great enemy:
Oh how great must their misery be, who must for ever feel the weight of that
hand which made heaven and earth! Beloved, if but the ach of a tooth be so
grievous, that it takes away the taste of a whole monarchy of the world while
it lasts; how inconceiveably great must their torments be, who have the power
that made all the world set awork to torment their bodies and souls through all
eternity! Nay, consider further, God will raise up his glory out of his enemies
misery; those are always great works which God makes to please himself, and to
demonstrate his glory: when he would glorify his power, and goodness, and
wisdom, he makes a world; when he would glorify his grace, and love, and
mercy, he gives a Christ; and when he would glorify his justice and holiness,
he damns a sinner. O woe, woe, woe be those poor souls, out of whose torments God
will raise up to himself an everlasting revenue of unspeakable glory! Oh then
what a miserable cheated soul art thou, who wilt venture to be one hour
unprepared for sickness and death, when for ought thou know thou may be in
the bottom of hell before the clock strike next!

I shall now in the last place conclude this Use, by giving you ten Directions
to direct you how to prepare for sickness and death.

Direct. 1. Labor by a strong and lively faith to be always receiving and
resting upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ. Beloved, the greatest danger
you are to provide against, is, that sickness and death do not bring you to
hell: Now being found in Christ's righteousness, you shall have thereby a safe
and comfortable way and passage through these into heaven; for by reason of
this, you may stand on the very gates of death, and triumph with the Apostle,
Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies; who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. Now this righteousness of Christ is as truly thine by
faith, as it is Paul's, or ever a Saints in heaven, Romans 3.22. The righteousness
of God is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe;
for there is no difference. So that I say thou may stand in this
righteousness, and put all the enemies of thy salvation to the trial, and ask,
Who can lay any thing to thy charge? or condemn thee? And thou may in effect
hear from all the like answer, which was made by other things in Job in another
case: Sin says, It is not in me; and Satan says, It is not in me; and the Law
says, It is not in me; and Death says, It is not in me; we have nothing to
charge upon a justified person: and therefore be always taking new and fresh
hold in this righteousness; for it is observable, that God does not only in a
set and solemn way, as in Sacraments, and Sermons, etc. offer and give Jesus
Christ; but also he is constantly offering him in the Gospel, and declaring it
to be his will that we should take him: and thou should not only in the
duties of Gods worship, but also upon all opportunities in secret, and at other
times, be applying to thy self, and owning and glorying in this righteousness
of Jesus Christ; believe that God is always smelling a sweet savor in this
righteousness, as offered for thee, and that Christ is by his continual
intercession presenting it to his Father for thee, and it is always offered in
the Gospel to thee; do thou therefore always take it for thy righteousness to
justify thee, that when sickness and death come, thou may be found so doing.

Direct. 2. Learn to dye daily; for it is a certain truth, that he that will
live when he dies, must die whilst he lives: and therefore Paul affirms it to
be his practice, 1 Cor. 15.31. I protest by your rejoicing that I have in
Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily.

But how can a man dye daily?

Answ. Three ways.

1. By a daily separating and loosing his heart from all things, which death
can loose him and separate him from: I mean so as not to account his life and
happiness to consist in them* death you know is a separation from that which is
our life. Now we have a kind of life in husbands, wives, children, estates,
etc. and when death comes, it separates us from these; therefore I say we dye
daily by a daily loosening and parting the heart from them; this duty is
clearly taught by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. where the Apostle exhorts,
that because our time to enjoy relations, pleasures and estates is but short,
and we are presently to spend an eternity without them, therefore let them that
have wives be as though they had none, and they that rejoice be as though they
rejoiced not, and they that buy be as though they possessed not; that is, they
must live with their hearts loosed and parted from these things: for as a
traveller uses the necessary accommodations of his Inn soberly, seasonably
and cheerfully whilst he stays, yet so as to forward, and not to hinder his
journey home: So a Christian must use the comforts of this life holily,
cheerfully and thankfully, yet so as not to stop him in his way to heaven: Our
sweetest enjoyments must neither make the thoughts of eternity less sweet, nor
our passage into eternity more hard. Now hereby a man is very much prepared for
sickness and death; for one thing which makes these so grievous, is, because
the heart has taken such hold of the creature, that it exceedingly torments
him to be broken from it; so that it is often a greater trouble to loose his
soul from the world, then to loose it from the body: but when by grace the
heart is already loosed from the world, a great part of deaths work is done
already, because death finds him dead to the world when it comes to take him
out of the world.

2. A man dies daily, by a daily living on those things which he must live upon
after death. We are commanded this duty, Col. 3.1, 2. If ye then be risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God. Set your affections on things above, and not on things on the
earth: As the heart must be parted from the things on earth, so it must be set,
and fixed, and fastened on the things in heaven: and this is the property of
grace, to make the heart dead to the world, by turning it to a life in God, and
Christ, and heaven. Now this also is a dying daily, for death to a child of
God is a removing him from a life on earth, to a life in heaven; and hereby he
does, as it were, go beyond death, and has his life, and joy, and comfort in
the other world: He walks by faith in the streets of the City that has
foundations, and rests and refreshes his soul in his house not made with
hands; he secretly departs from the company and comforts of this life, and gets
his heart among Angels and Saints in heaven, beholding, and praising, and
rejoicing in the face of God and Jesus Christ. Now such a man must needs be fit
to dye, because his heart is set on every thing that death brings him unto:
Like Paul, who having his heart fixed on Christ in heaven, cries out, Phil.
1.23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Lastly, a man dies daily, by daily looking upon himself as a dying or dead
man: he lays death to his heart, Eccles. 7.2. his heart is full of the serious
thoughts of death, Job 17.13, 14. If I wait, the grave is my house; I have made
my bed in the darkness. I have said to corruption, Thou art my father; to the
worm, Thou art my mother and my sister. Ah sirs, to one that knows he shall dye
and sleep in Jesus, death and the worms are as sweet as his dearest relations.
And thus a man prepares for death, when he does, as it were, accustom himself
to dye, and makes death familiar to him. Christians, look upon your selves, as
always at the very point of death; when you are putting your flowers in your
bosoms, remember you are, as it were, dressing a Corpse for the grave; when you
are washing and kembing your heads and faces, and looking on them in the glass,
remember what ghastly skulls they will be shortly; yet let thy thoughts be
often among the graves; think, here lies my Grandfather and Grandmother;
there lies my Father and Mother; yonder lies my Brother and Sister; and I my
self am just going to lie down amongst them. Thus learn to dye daily.

Direct. 3. Labor by an eye of faith to discern between things that differ.
Beloved, faith has a very deep and piercing insight into things; it judges of
things by Scripture, it believes what God in his Word speaks of them; and so a
believers carriage toward every thing is according as the Word describes and
presents it to him: and surely this makes people so unprepared to dye, because
they want an understanding of things: It cannot sink into their hearts, that
sin is so bad, and Christ so good; or the world so vain, or grace so precious;
or hell so terrible, or heaven so glorious: but they are so confident that lust
is sweet, and riches are precious, and death is far off, and hell is but a bug
bear, and heaven is but a fancy: And in this confidence they will live and
dye; and therefore the Apostle prays that the Philippians may try things that
differ, Phil. 1.9, 10.
that they may be fit for the day of Christ. I shall therefore give you this
Direction in these following particulars.

1. Look upon God and the world together, and you shall see the difference; for
this end I beseech you search and believe that Scripture, Isa. 40.15,-17.
Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance. Behold, he takes up the isles as a very little thing. All
nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then
nothing and vanity. Now let thy heart judge of, and act toward God and the
world, according to this difference: Set all the world before thee, give every
creature its due; see what a vast world of Kingdoms and Nations it is; look
upon the strong Islands which are fortified and moted about with the Seas,
which this great God takes up as a very little thing; see a world of great and
mighty men before thee; see the rich world of gold, and silver, and precious
stones, lying on heaps before thee; look upon the lands and buildings which
make all the woods, fields, pastures, medows, orchards, vineyards, gardens,
towns, cities and stately houses in the world. O what a glorious world is this,
which made the very Angels shout for joy at the rearing of it! Well, Job 38.7.
take a full survey of the glory and beauty of this great world: and then
looking on a drop of water hanging on a bucket, what a poor thing is this?
which is ready to break, and fall on the ground, and no body catches at it:
look also upon the small dust of the balance, a thing of neither weight nor
worth, it does not so much as turn the scales: Now labor by faith to have such
a clear insight into the greatness and goodness of God and Jesus Christ, that
thou may be able to judge all the world to be but as a drop of the bucket, or
as the small dust of the balance, to thy Father and Savior; and let thy whole
man act according to such a wise, holy, just judgment: and this will
exceedingly fit thee for sickness and death, which come to loose thee from such
a vain world, into the presence and everlasting enjoyment of such a glorious
God.

2. Look upon sin, and upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ; look upon these
together Beloved, faith has a deep insight into the evil of sin, for it sees
the glory of God, which sin is against, wherein the evil of it appears, and
believes the dreadful curses of the law, and what the wrath of God, and what
hell is, and what an immortal being a man is that must suffer these. Faith also
has a piercing insight into the excellency of Christ's righteousness; it sees
what an infinitely-glorious God Jesus Christ is, which makes his righteousness
so precious and meritorious, and so savoury and satisfactory to the Father; and
for this reason, so all-sufficient for faith to rest and live upon: for this is
the precious property of justifying faith, that it receives Christ's
righteousness for salvation, for the same reason which God receives it for
satisfaction; that is, because it is the righteousness of God; and indeed,
faith must see God satisfied, before it can see the believer saved: and seeing
enough in Christ for the satisfaction of God, it sees the same sufficiency in
him for the salvation of the Believer. Now Christ's righteousness never appears
more precious then when the soul is filled with the deepest sight and sense of
sin; for then the soul believes him to be a great Savior, when he sees the
great evil of sin which he saves him from: and therefore it is observable, that
the Apostle demonstrates the direful guilt and filth of sin, as a preface to
that great Doctrine of Justification by faith in the righteousness of Christ,
Romans 3. from verse. 9. to the end of that Chapter.

And as you know, it was a sad and fearful case for the poor Jews to be bitte^
with the fiery Serpents, and to lie groaning under the pain and anguish of
those poisonous and deadly wounds: yet then what a glorious sight was it to
look upon the brazen Serpent, and thereby to find power and virtue to heal
them presently?

So, my Brethren, it is a fearful case in it self, for a man to stand in the
very jaws of death, and to look into the horrid nature of sin, and see death,
and devils, and hell, and all the curses of the law ready to flee in his face:
and yet how glorious is it then to look upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ
and see them all swallowed up, and himself saved? And thus as he sees the grace
of God in Christ reigning and over-abounding all sin, Romans 5.20, 21. so his
faith, and hope, and joy grounded thereon, does rise above, and over-abound and
swallow up all his fears of death and hell which he was in because of his sins.

3. Look upon all your sufferings on earth, and upon the glory of heaven
together. The Apostle tells us, Act. 14.22. We must through much tribulation
enter into the kingdom of God. Observe, there is an entrance into the Kingdom
of Heaven out of all our afflictions, and our way to heaven lies through much
tribulation: an hypocrite seems to go strongly in the way to heaven, but
oftentimes when he comes to trouble, persecution, etc. there he is stopped, and
can go no farther; but he that believes the goodness of duty, and the glory of
heaven, if tribulation, sickness, poverty, persecution seek to stop him, he
goes through them; he knows duty is sweet and safe, and therefore he will
follow it, till it bring him to heaven, whatever it cost him. Tertullian
comforts the Martyrs in prison with this, That in their close and dark prisons
they might see illam viam, quae ad Deum ducit, that way which leads them to
God: There is a way to heaven out of prison, sickbed, or any other affliction.
Hence those that come to heaven, are said to come out of great tribulation,
Rev. 7.14. Sometimes a poor Saint comes hot, as it were, out of the furnace of
affliction into heaven; from chains and bolts in a prison, he is loosed into
heaven; from gasping and groaning upon a sickbed, to heaven: surely when he
comes there, he finds a strange alteration. Well, look upon thy self now as
standing between the two worlds: a world of sin, snares, persecution, poverty,
sickness and death on the one hand; and a world of life, and immortality, and
fullness of inconceivable joy and pleasure on the other hand. Thus the Apostle
seems to stand, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. we stand looking from our afflictions, on the
things that are not seen. So Rom 8.17, 18. If we suffer with him, we shall be
glorified with him. Well, put these together; put the persecution from wicked
men, and the Crown of Glory together; put a moment of pain and misery on a sick
bed, and an eternity of joy in heaven together; and thou must needs conclude
with the Apostle, verse. 18. For I reckon (says he) I have cast them both up,
and I find, that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

Lastly, look upon time and eternity together. Oh what is time, when a man
looks into eternity! it seems but a breath, a twinkling of an eye, a stroke of
a pulse, to a man that sees eternity before him. Methinks a believer is like a
man on a hill by the seaside: he sees a little spot of ground, and the great
Ocean lying beyond it; so he sees a little spot of time, and the great Ocean of
eternity lying beyond it: he sees the end of all things: Oh, says he, I am
gone, I am gone: look how all the honors, and riches, and comforts of this
life do vanish out of my sight; and everlasting fire, or everlasting glory will
receive me presently! Sirs, this would make us live in a posture to dye, if we
did but see what a little while it is before we must sit with Christ in heaven,
or burn with Devils in hell.

Direct. 4. Labor to fill up your time: this is the way to fit you for
eternity: but you will say, What is it to fill up our time?

Answ. Time is filled by applying our time to that work which God has given us
our time for: God has given us time for our callings, to labor and do all
that we have to do; time to worship God, and do his will; time for recreations,
meat, drink, sleep, etc. and by all these, to honor God, to be blessings to
men, and to seek salvation for our selves: and by doing these things, we fill
our time: as for example, if a man should write down his days work, (not that I
would impose upon the consciences of men) So long I was slugging in bed, so
long I was glutting at meat, so long filling my self with drink, at such a time
belching out oaths; and then look upon this on a sickbed, here would be a
black day to look upon, such a day would make work in eternity. So if a man
spend a day in idleness, as Seneca speaks of some idle persons, that are busied
between the comb and the looking-glass; now if such a one were to write his
days work, he must leave a blank for such a day, which would cause stinging
reflections when he comes to know the loss of his precious time: But if a godly
man should write down, Such an hour I spent in secret prayer and meditation,
such an hour in family worship, such a time in the works of my calling, and
such time in a sober use of recreations; now if this were done in a right
manner, notwithstanding many invincible infirmities, yet here is a day well
filled, and may cause sweet reflections, when he sees his days ending in
eternity. Now that you may thus improve, and fill up your time, I shall briefly
give you these five Directions.

1. Labor to have your hearts filled with grace. Beloved, a man's time is full
of that which his heart is full of; the heart fills the tongue, and fills the
life, and so fills the time. Solomon tells us, Prove. 10.20. The heart of the
wicked is little worth: when all that is in a man's heart is good for nothing,
neither good to honor God, nor to save himself, nor others, then his time must
needs be good for nothing; it must needs be an empty, sinful, unprofitable
time; for such a man has nothing to fill up his time with. But on the
contrary, our Savior tells us, Matthew. 12.35. A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart brings forth good things: The graces of Gods Spirit
make a good treasure in the heart; and all things that come from faith, love,
humility, meekness, etc. are good things, and do much good: and a man's time is
happily filled, that is full of prayer, of holiness, of godly conference, etc.
which are all brought forth out of the good treasure of grace in the heart.

2. Do nothing in time, but what will pass in your account, when your time is
at an end: Christ will one day say to thee, Give an account of thy stewardship;
for thou may be no longer steward, Luke 16.2. Give an account of thy Health,
Life, Parts, Estate; of Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, and all thy precious
opportunities; for thou must no longer use or enjoy these. Now what a sad
reckoning will here be, if he has one nothing with these that will pass in his
account? as if a great man entrust a servant to be his Steward, and commit to
him his money, rents, etc. to disburse according to his Masters pleasure: Now
if when the Steward is called to give up his account, he is able to reckon, So
much laid out for provision for the family, so much for the education of the
children, so much to relieve the poor; these things will pass in his account:
but if he reckons, So much wasted in drunkenness, so much converted to my own
use, etc. the Master will never accept of this. So, my Brethren, when God calls
us to an account of our stewardship, if a man can say, Lord, I spent my estate
in the education of my children, in feeding and maintaining my family, in
relieving the poor; I spent my parts in making God and Christ known to others;
I spent my time to please and praise thee, to profit others, and save my self;
these things will pass in thy account; and thou shall be sure of thy reward and
honor of a faithful servant, when the time of my Stewardship is expired: but
if it appear that a man has wasted his estate on his lusts, and spent his time
in his sins, his account must needs be sad, when he must have hell for his
wages: whatever ye do, consider whether it will pass in your account; and look
upon every thing now, as it will prove when you are to give an acount for it.
It is a remarkable expression, Phil. 4.17. I desire fruit that may abound to
your account; many things which a believer does with an upright heart, seem but
little now, but they will rise, and abound to his glory, when he comes to give
an account.

3. Do nothing but what thou art willing to have thy self; the very Nation
wherein thou live, and thy time, to have a name from the doing of it: for it
is observable, that the actions of men give a name to these three things, viz.
to themselves, to the places, and to the times wherein they live.

1. Then do nothing but what thou would have a name from the doing of it: man
loves sin, but he cannot endure to be called according to his sins; but if thou
do abhor the name of a drunkard, swearer, liar, why do thou live in the
sins of drunkenness, swearing and lying?

2. Do nothing that thou would not have the land to have a name from; for the
land has a name from the practice of the people; a holy people make a holy
nation; a profane, unclean, perfidious people make a land of profaneness, of
whoredoms, of treachery, etc. What sins thou live in, thou do not only
make thy self, but also, as much as in thee lies, thou make the land
laothsome to God and men.

3. Do nothing which thou would not have thy time have a name from; it makes
thee have sad thoughts to think of the time of drunkenness, whoredom, lying,
etc. but times of prayer, meditation, holy conference, etc. are sweet.

4. Take heed of idleness; this sin makes empty and unprofitable times, and
leaves people unprepared for sickness. When Calvin was reproved for inordinate
labor, he gives this savoury answer: What, says he, would ye have my Lord
find me idle? Sirs, would you have sickness, and death, and the day of
judgment find you idle? Our Savior in the Parable having entrusted his
servants with their talents, he bids them, Occupy till I come, Luke 19.13. See
Christ's coming, and improve your talents for him till he come. Now that you
may abhor this sin of idleness,

1. Consider, that if you be not doing good, you will be doing hurt; man is a
busy creature: let a man look at any time within himself, he can never see his
heart stand still. We read of some, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. Who work not at all, and yet
are busybodies. Sirs, the soul is quick at work; a man may quickly lay up
abundance of treasures in heaven or hell: For as Bernard says well, If you are
not exercised in the labors of men, you are in the labors of devils.

2. Make the work of Salvation thy main business; labor to turn every day into
a day of Salvation. Sirs, it is an excellent thing for a man to live so in his
calling, relations, recreations, afflictions, duties of Gods worship, as if all
the powers of his body and soul were set upon the work of Salvation: this will
keep a man from idleness; For that man will never want business, that knows he
has a soul to save.

3. Consider what little time thou have for this great work: perhaps it may
never be done, if it be not done now: they were fools that said, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we dye: it had been a wiser speech to have said, Let us
repent, believe and pray, for to morrow we dye.

4. Consider what thou have to set thee on work, and to keep thee from
idleness, look into hell, and see sin, and the world, and devils thrusting thee
therein, and thou will find it business enough to save thee from those
unquenchable flames: Look into heaven, and see God, and Christ, and Ministers,
and Christians always calling thee thither; and see thy own sins, carnal
friends, men, devils, a world of stumbling blocks lying in thy way to stop thee
from going into that everlasting happiness, and thou will find work enough to
go to heaven: Look into thy self, and see what sins thou have to conquer and
bewail, what wants to supply, what graces to quicken and ripen, what duties to
perform, what storms and troubles to prepare against: Look on God, on Christ,
and see what objects are there, for all the powers of thy body and soul to be
exercised upon. Have thou any time for idle thoughts, or words, or affections,
that have such a God and Christ to think of, and to speak of, and to set and
fix thy heart, and love, and delight upon! Look into the family, and town, and
place where thou live, and see Christless parents, or Christless children, or
Christless brothers and sisters, or Christless servants, or Christless
neighbors, and thou may have that in thee to speak or do, which may save
their souls from hell; and shall they perish and be damned by thy idleness?
Look into the Church and Kingdom where thou live, and consider wherein thou
may serve them, and be a blessing to them; and how thou may be an
instrument to fill them with the Name, and Kingdom, and Will of Jesus Christ:
Nay, look upon every creature about thee, the Heavens, Earth, Waters, Birds,
Beasts, Plants, etc. see them all filled with the Power, Wisdom and goodness of
God, and, as it were, bringing their praises to thee, that thou may be their
mouth to honor and exalt God. Methinks, Sirs, these things should keep us from
idleness.

5. That thou may fill up thy time, take heed of losing a suffering
opportunity. Beloved, a suffering opportunity is a precious opportunity; it is
an opportunity to honor God, further the Gospel, to save thy own and others
souls, to be a blessing to thy posterity, and to leave thy name as a blessed
savor behind thee. I would not tempt men to lust after sufferings; I know the
Devil would have his servants to serve him by passive as well as active
obedience; yet I would have none so base, as to choose to sin rather then to
suffer, and to prefer Apostasy before Martyrdom. Sometimes a man may fall into
such a nick of time, that duty may cost him his life, and a sin may save his
life: This case is implied in the words of our Savior, Mat. 16.25. Whosoever
will save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my
sake, shall save it. Now that is a sad loss of a suffering opportunity, when a
man saves himself from suffering by sin: Consider the fearful consequences of
this; hereby thou savest thy estate, name, life, and losest thy soul; which is
clearly implied in the next words, verse. 26. For what is a man profited, if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Remember, when thou runnest into a known sin, to avoid
suffering, thou make a bargain, thou make an exchange; thou gettest the
world, and the Devil and Hell get thy soul. Consider further, it is the highest
improvement of thy name, estate and life, to sacrifice it to the glory and will
of Christ, by suffering for him: this is the best that thou can make of thy
self. Sirs, it is more honorable (if thou art called to it) to be burned at a
stake for Christ, then to be burned with Fever; or to die for Christ in a
Prison, then to die in a sick bed.

Consider lastly, What a woeful case will sickness and death find thee in, when
those evils which thou fearedst from men, shall be brought upon thee by God;
when God shall fill thy body with greater pains then the cruellest Persecutor
could invent or inflict! Oh what a loss will then a suffering opportunity be,
when a man may say, I had an opportunity to lose my life, and save my soul; and
now I must lose my life, and my poor soul too!

Direct. 5. That you may be prepared for sickness and death, do nothing but
what you would have sickness and death find you doing. Remember, what ever
thou art about, that sickness and death may find thee in it: Death found Zimri
and Cozbi in whoredom, Numb. 25.8. and Death took Ananias and Saphira in a lie,
Acts 5. and Death caught Eutychus sleeping at a Sermon, Acts 20.9.

And on the other hand, God took Enoch walking with God, Genesis 5.24. And when
Elijah and Elisha were talking together, no doubt of some good, Elijah was fain
to break off his good discourse to go to heaven, 2 Kings 2.11. and Christ went
blessing his people to heaven, Luke 24.51. And good Stephen, as he was praying,
was taken from off his knees into heaven, Acts 7.60. Oh Sirs, if you would not
go lying, or swearing, or drunk, or swaggering, or ranting into Eternity, do
not practice these sins now, but walk in your callings, recreations and duties,
as if you saw sickness and death fetching you out of these into heaven.

Direct. 6. Labor to be filled with a merciful and tender disposition toward
others in their sickness and misery; this is a sure way for thee to find mercy
from God in thy sickness: With the merciful, thou will show thy self merciful,
Psalm. 18.25. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Matthew. 5.7.
We have a precious promise to this purpose, Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. Blessed is he
that considers the poor. By the poor is meant, not only the poor in estate,
but also those that are poor and afflicted, in respect of other afflictions.
And it is a most blessed frame of heart for men, when they sit in health, and at
ease, and swim in wealth, to be seriously considering their poor diseased and
afflicted brethren: The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord will
preserve him, and keep him alive. The Lord will strengthen him on the bed of
languishing; thou will make all his bed in his sickness. I say therefore, show
mercy to others in their sickness; and when the day of sickness, and death, and
judgment comes, 2 Timothy 1.18.
thou shall be sure (as Paul prayed for Onesiphorus in the like case) to find
mercy at that day.

Direct. 7. Be fully satisfied in the belief of Gods care and providence
toward thy friends whom thou art to leave behind thee. Beloved, it makes the
thoughts of sickness and death more grievous to many, because of the sad and
miserable condition which their poor Orphans and Widows will be left in when
they are gone; and especially if their condition be like that of learned and
godly Oecolampadius, who when he should have made his Will, had nothing to
bequeath. But this trouble is not so much for want of an Estate, as for want of
Faith: therefore go cheerfully to your sick beds, or deathbeds, with the
belief of these following Scriptures, Jer. 49.11. Leave thy fatherless
children, I will preserve them alive, and let thy Widows trust in me. In which
words, as appears by the context, God threatens the Edomites, that their
children and wives shall be left so desolate, that they shall have none but God
to provide for them: Yet God is so tender of poor fatherless children and
widows, that though they were of the families and posterity of Esau, yet,
says he, I will preserve them alive. How much more tender then will he be of
the poor families of his Jacob!

See also Psalm. 10.14. The poor commits his cause to thee; thou art the
helper of the fatherless. Perhaps it troubles thee to think what a company of
poor helpless children thou art to leave behind thee: Why consider, the
infinite and all-sufficient God makes it one of his great works to help
fatherless children; therefore this great Creator of the world will be
glorified by this name, The helper of the fatherless.

See further, Psalm. 68.3, 4, 5. Observe here, one great reason why the
righteous must be glad, and exceedingly rejoice, and sing forth the praises of
God, is, because he is a father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widow in
his holy habitation. Observe, In his holy habitation: God is in heaven, not
only filling Angels and Saints with his glorious likeness and presence, but he
is there also full of gracious thoughts toward poor fatherless children and
widows upon earth. And although I do not think that there is any intercourse
betwixt a Saint in heaven, and his family upon earth; and I do not know that he
will in heaven be offering prayers for them upon earth; yet I do not doubt but
he will there know, that he has left a family behind him upon earth, and by
his glorious vision of God, will see that Infinite Power and Providence which
provides for his and all other families upon earth, so far as is for his own
glory, and the good of his Church.

See again, Hosea 14.3. In thee the fatherless find mercy. It may trouble thee
to think, that although now thy wife and children are respected for thy sake,
yet when thou art gone, they are like to find the world cruel and unfaithful,
friends hard and unkind, etc. but take comfort and satisfaction in this
Scripture, where thou see not only that there is mercy in God for fatherless
children, but also that they shall find it, and have the comfort and
experience of it. I shall therefore conclude this with the exhortation of the
Apostle, Phil. 4.6, 7. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God: and
then, as to any trouble about these things, The peace of God, which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

Direct. 8. Labor to make a wise and holy use of the spectacles of mortality;
look upon your selves as following your dead neighbors and friends, whom you
see going before you into Eternity. It is said of a dead man, Job 21.33. The
clods of the valley ( viz. the Graves and Sepulchers) shall be sweet unto him;
and every man shall draw after him, as there are innumerable gone before him.
Consider, when you see any one buried, that he is gone to an innumerable
company that are dead and buried before him, and that every man shall draw
after him. Oh remember, that you are drawing after your dead grandfathers, and
fathers, and friends, which are gone before you. Poor wretch, thou think
that thou should be like thy Neighbors, to have as much wealth, and
honors, and pleasures as they: but look upon other Neighbors, who are lodged
in the chambers of death, and remember, thou art shortly to be like unto them.
The very carcasses in the graves are ready to say unto thee, as the Prophet
brings in the inhabitants of the Tombs crying to the King of Babylon, Isai.
14.10. All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we?
Art thou become like unto us? Look upon every thing about thy friends Funeral
with a particular application to thy self; look on the Bier at the door, as if
it stood there to receive thee; look on the Coffin, as if it were made for
thee; and look on the Winding Sheet, as if it were washed and made ready for
thee: Look on the Sextons Spade, as ready to dig a grave for thee: Certainly
these things would prove excellent means to fit us for sickness and death.

Direct. 9. Keep up a spirit of prayer; for surely a man is in a great measure
fit to die, who is fit to pray. This appears by the Preface to the Petitions in
the Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in heaven; whereby we see, that a Child
of God by prayer does, as it were, part from the world, and is with his Father
which is in Heaven. Hence, Heb. 10.19. Prayer is called, An entering into the
Holiest, viz. into Heaven: Besides, it is easy to demonstrate, that the same
things which make us fit to pray, make us fit to die, and that a praying frame
is a dying frame; for our hearts are most set upon those things when we pray,
which we must receive when we die: Death brings us to the things which we pray
for; and he that is unwilling to die, is unwilling to receive an answer to his
own prayers. Beloved, it often puzzles the thoughts of men, to think what will
be the issue of things, what things will come to at the last. Now it seems to
me a clear and excellent expedient for our satisfaction herein, to study well
the Lords Prayer, and to believe that all the Petitions therein shall certainly
be granted; and whatever we see before, for certain at the Day of Judgment
every Petition therein shall be fulfilled: and therefore the more a man's heart
is set on those things for which we are thereby taught and bound to pray, the
more ready and fit he is for Death and Judgment. Prayer is one of the first and
last things of a Christian: so soon as ever the spiritual life is begun, it
presently breaths in prayer; and I am persuaded, that the godly do usually die
in prayer.

Last Direct. Live as one that knows that there are bounds set to thy life: It
makes many so unprepared for sickness and death, because they look upon their
lives as boundless; they always think they have some time to live, and
therefore think of no time to die. Now it is clear, that God has set bounds to
the life of every man; and when he comes to those bounds, he is stopped, and can
go no further, Job 14.5. Thou have appointed his bounds, that he cannot pass.
Proud men climb to such a height of preferment; and as they are rising higher,
Death stops them, and they can go no further: The covetous man gets such an
estate; and as he is reaching after greater wealth, Death stops him, that he
can get no more. Oh what a sudden stop did Death cause that rich Fool to make,
Luke 12.20
when he was constrained to die the same very night, when he thought he was, as
it were, beginning to live: The malicious man goes to such a height of
persecuting the godly; and as he is raging in his malice and madness, Death
stops him, that he can go no farther. Oh what a stop did Haman meet with in the
very height of his bloody design against the Church of God! On the other hand,
the poor Child of God is zealous in worshipping and serving God; and as he is
seeking to serve and praise him more, Death stops him, and his work is done:
therefore do every thing is knowing that thou may meet with thy bounds, and
be stopped in the very midst of thy work: All the days of my appointed time will
I wait till my change come, says Job, Cap. 14.14. Job knew that there was a
change to come, and that Death would make a great alteration with him shortly,
and that there was a secret time appointed for this change; therefore he will
every day wait and look for it. Think with thy self in a morning, I may see a
great change before night; and think with thy self at night, I may see a great
alteration before morning. Sirs, when a man goes from his house, friends, food
and estate, to heaven or hell, believe it, he will find a great alteration. Oh
then live, as if every day were to be the day of thy change; as if every
journey, and work, and duty, would bring thee to the end and bounds of thy life.

So much for Exhortation, to be prepared for sickness and death.

The next Exhortation is to such who have been visited with sickness, but are
by the mercy and power of Jesus Christ restored to health. I shall exhort such
to these five duties.

1. Bless and praise God, who has restored thee to thy health: God tells his
people, Exodus 15.26. I am the God that heal^^ thee: And certainly there comes
power and virtue from Jesus Christ to heal our ^iseases: Therefore when Christ
had heal^d the woman diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, I perceive,
says he, that ^irtue is gone from me, Luke 8.46. And beloved, when ever we
have been diseased and restored, there came virtue from Christ ^^to the head,
or lungs, or liver, or where ^ver the disease lay, and caused the cure; which
we must in all thankfulness acknowledge. Thus did David, Psalm. 116.6. -- 8. I
was brought low, and he helped me. -- For thou have delivered my soul from
death, ^y eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. Now for the performance of
this du^y of praising God, observe these five directions.

1. Get a clear knowledge of the glorious and excellent Name of God, Psalm.
76.1. I^ Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel. Gods Name is great
only where it is known; and it is a most savoury thing to hear people speak of
God, as those that know whom they speak of: Where God is thus savingly known,
the workings of the heart toward God are answerable to the glory and
excellency of his Name, Psalm. 48.10. According to thy Name, O God, so is thy
praise, Psalm. 150.2. Praise the Lord according to his excellent greatness.
Grace is more or less in a man, according to his knowledge and sense of the
Name of God and Jesus Christ: In that heart where God has no Name, the man
has no Grace; but it causes great faith, and great love, and great joy in a
Believer, to see the great power, and the great love, and the great goodness of
God and Jesus Christ.

2. Praise God as he is a God of mercy to thee; ascribe unto him a name from
that which he has done for thee, Psalm. 42.8. My prayer shall be to the God of
my life. He honors God with this Title, The God of his life, Psalm. 59.10. The
God of my mercy, Psalm. 18.1, 2. I will love thee, O Lord, my strength. The Lord
is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer. -- Believe it poor Christian,
that the God of all the world is pleased and praised by thy calling him thy
God; and therefore praise God as his glory shines and appears in all other
things, and as it appears to thee: As thus, the God of all the world, and my
God; the Father of Jesus Christ, and my Father; the God of life and health to
his people, and the God of my life, and of my health.

3. Labor to the utmost of thy power to fill all places with the Name of God,
and Jesus Christ, Psalm. 66.2. Make his praise glorious. This is a right
praising God, when we endeavor to make his Name glorious in the hearts of all
that are about us: our lives should be such, that in every thing that we do,
there may be reason to cause others to love, bless, praise, and rejoice in God,
Mat. 5.16. Our works should be such, that they should set all that see them on
work to glorify our Father which is in heaven; and we should live so, that it
may be an honor to God to be called the God of such a people. Now is it any
honor to God to be called the God of Drunkards, or the God of Swearers, or the
God of Whoremongers? No, no; but as Master Latimer said, they may say, Our
father which art in hell: But the God of Believers, the God of all that love
him, and fear him, and seek him, it is his honor to be called the God of such
a people; and, as it is said, Heb. 11.16. He is not ashamed to be called their
God.

4. Let every thing that has been the subject of mercy, be the instrument of
praise. David calls upon all that is within him to praise Gods holy Name -- Who
heals all his diseases, Psalm. 103, 1, 3. -- And we are commanded to yield our
members as instruments of righteousness unto God, Romans 6.13. Sirs, every member
of a Christian is a member of Christ, and the Life of Christ spreads all over,
and fills his whole body; and this life should branch out in all the parts and
members of our bodies: Christ has bought and paid for all; the Law binds all;
every member can be an instrument of sin, every member must at last be clothed
with glory: therefore we should glorify God with our bodies and souls, which
are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.20. Consider, What may I do for God with my tongue, hands,
feet, countenance? etc. Perhaps, not long since, thy whole body was overspread
with a disease, and there was no soundness in thy flesh, Psalm. 88.3.
because of Gods anger; neither was there any rest in thy bones, because of thy
sins: Never a bone or joint was free from pain. Now then, seeing God has
healed all, thou should say with David, Psalm. 35.10. All my bones may say,
Lord, who is like to thee?

Lastly, Let the consideration of the greatness of thy mercy, cause thee to
praise God: Consider this in four particulars.

1. Thou art restored to life; God has, as it were, clearly given thee a life:
We have this passage in Jer. 45.5. and elsewhere in Scripture, Thy life will I
give unto thee for a prey; the meaning seems to be thus, that when a man's life
is in great danger, though he suffer diverse losses, yet if his life be saved,
he triumphs in the preservation of his life, as if he had got a great prey or
spoil from an enemy. Now to apply this to the present case: perhaps thou have
suffered diverse losses and crosses in thy sickness, and now thou art restored:
thou may see many things sad in the Church, and in thy family; but thy life
is given instead of a prey to thee, and in this thou have cause to rejoice:
Look at thy life, and consider what a mercy that is, and thou will see great
reason to praise God in the midst of thy greatest afflictions. Oh then let thy
life be laid out to the will and glory of God: say with David after his
recovery from a great danger, Psalm. 116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the
land of the living; do nothing but what thou can with comfort do before the
Lord, as seeing the all-seeing God looking on.

2. Thou art restored to thy health; consider how lately the multitude of thy
bones were tortured with strong pains; thy stomach was gone, and thy life did
abhor bread, and thy soul dainty meat, Job 33.19, 20. Thou would have given
much for a nights sleep, when wearisome nights were appointed to thee, Job 7.3.
yet now God has given thee health, he has caused thy bones to rejoice, and
filled thy heart with food and gladness, and thou lie down, Acts 14.17. Prove.
3.24.
and thy sleep is sweet unto thee.

3. Thou art restored to thy friends and relations; to thy husband, wife,
children, parents, brothers and sisters, and to thy dear and bosom-friends: the
day would have been sad to these mourners going about the streets, following
thee to thy long home: But now God has restored comfort to thee, and to thy
mourners, Isa. 5.18. therefore let the sight of all thy friends fill thee with
a fresh sense of the goodness and mercy of God: Say as Jacob said of his
Brother Esau in another case, Genesis 33.10. I have seen thy face as though I had
seen the face of God: See the gracious face and presence of God shining upon
thee in the face of all thy friends; look on thy yoke fellow, and look upon
God; look on thy parents, and look upon God; look on thy children, etc. and
look upon God; and so as the sight of every friend fills thee with new and
fresh thoughts of thy mercy, let it also renew in thee a fresh and thankful
remembrance of the God of thy mercy.

Lastly, thou art restored to thy blessed and soul-saving opportunities. Sirs,
if we consider how precious time is, we must needs acknowledge this to be a
precious mercy: now that you may see time precious, and so for this reason may
esteem your recovery a precious mercy; look on thy time as the season allowed
thee to glorify God, and to work out the Salvation of thy soul: you know in
other cases we prize our time according to the worth of those things which time
gives us an opportunity to gain: as the husbandman accounts Harvest-time
precious, because it is his season to reap the precious fruits of the earth, as
St. James calls them, Jam. 5.7. The Merchant accounts the time precious when
the wind blows him to his prize. The soldier accounts the time precious when
he marches for his life.

And is not that time much more precious which God has given thee to save thy
soul? If God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Grace, and the Soul be precious, then
that time must needs be precious, which gives thee an opportunity to gain
these. The Apostle determines this, 2 Cor. 6.2. Now is the accepted time, now
is the day of salvation: Now God is offering Christ for thy Salvation; now the
Spirit is striving for thy Salvation; now Ministers are praying, preaching and
traveling for thy Salvation. Thus God fills thy time with salvation-work. Oh
then what a mercy it is to be restored to such precious opportunities! when
perhaps, if thou had dyed in thy last sickness, thou wast in great danger to
be damned; and now thou have time to labor to be saved.

The second Duty to be performed by those who are restored to health, is this:
Keep up a frequent remembrance of thy visitation, and of the Lords dealing with
thee therein. It seems by the contents of it, that David penned Psalm 38. in a
time of great sickness; and it is very observable, that he gives that Psalm this
title, A psalm of David to bring to remembrance: Implying, that one special use
of this Psalm was to bring his sickness to remembrance: Whence we may learn,
that it is our duty in our health to be often remembering the hand of God in our
sickness: when thou art full of mirth, and find thy heart apt to be loose
from God in thy recreations; then remember the pains of sickness, and this will
cause a spirit of moderation and sobriety to rule thy heart: when thou art
going to worship God, it may much quicken thee with a new and fresh spirit, to
consider how near thou wast to eternity in such a sickness, and to go to duty
as one that is newly risen out of a sickbed; and that thou art still praying,
hearing, receiving Sacraments, as it were, in the very gates of death.

So when thou art tempted to any sin, remember thy sickness: consider, Will thou bring again upon thy self an Ague, Fever, Dropsy, Consumption etc?
Beloved, in abundance of cases it will do your souls much good to be often
remembering your visitation.

Thirdly, examine what good thou have got by thy visitation. Beloved, many come
out of a sickness like Rogues out of a gaol; Rogues they went in, and worse
Rogues they come out: So they were Drunkards, Whoremongers, Persecutors of Gods
people, when they went into sickness; and are far worse, and more hardened in
their sins, when they come out of sickness: Let us therefore all examine what
good we have got by our sickness; as you know after a man has been in a course
of Physic, he observes whether he coughs less, or burns less, etc. and whether
his stomach be better, and strength better, and sleep better; so if thou have
been in a course of sickness, observe whether thy corruptions abate, and
whether thy heart be better since thy visitation: is pride less, and
peevishness less, and covetousness less? and can thou pray better, and
sanctify Sabbaths better, and hear Sermons better? and is thy discourse
better, and thy life better? David upon search found sweet experience of the
blessed effect of his affliction, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted, I went
astray, but now have I kept thy statutes: So, can thou say, Before I was
sick, I could not endure to be provoked; I was very light and loose in company,
I was very apt to be proud and self-conceited; but now I bless God I am more
patient, and more serious, and more humble.

Fourthly, take special care to avoid sin after thy recovery; I say to thee, as
Christ said to another upon the same occasion, Joh. 5.14. Thou art made whole,
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee: Thou thoughtest thy disease was
very bad and grievous; but consider, there are worse things then thy sickness
was, worse pains and worse miseries. Oh then sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee: I shall press this duty in these four Particulars.

First, watch especially against those sins which thou wast most inclined unto
before thy sickness. Some conceive that the impotent man beforementioned, was
visited especially for some particular sin, which our Savior did particularly
aim at in bidding him sin no more. The Apostle tells us of some, 2 Pet. 2.22.
that return with the dog to his own vomit; where he compares those that seemed
to loath sin, and after return to the same sin, to a sick dog, which when he
has eased himself by vomiting up that which made him sick, goes and licks up
again his own loathsome vomit: and so we see very many who lick up in time of
health those very sins which they seemed to loath and vomit up in time of
sickness. Beloved, sin appears in its actings most strong, when the instruments
are most strong therewith a man commits it; and the weakness of the instruments
causes a weakness in the actings of sin; and therefore when the body is weak,
all those sins which are fulfilled by the body, seem weak too: but now when the
body gathers strength, as a man has strength to eat, and strength to work, and
strength to walk; so without the mighty power of the Spirit, strength will also
return into sin. Therefore I say, Watch, and pray, and fight against those sins
which thou wast most apt to commit before thy sickness.

Secondly, take heed of surfeiting with the profits, and pleasures, and
preferments of the world; for as a man after long fasting is apt to surfeit
when he returns to his meat; so when a man by sickness has been long withheld
from the creature, there appears such a fresh kind of pleasure and delight in
the world, and the heart is so eager in the desires of it, that there is great
danger of being glutted with it: We should therefore receive all the blessings
of the creature, as the Israelites did eat the Passover, Exodus 12.11. where we
find that they were to eat the Passover, as those that were ready to go out
of Egypt toward Canaan, with their loins girt, their shoes on their feet,
their staves in their hands, and they were to eat it in haste. So, my Brethren,
we should eat, drink, buy, fell, work, take our recreations, as those that are
hasting away into eternity, and as if we were ready dressed to go to heaven.

Thirdly, Beware of security: for we are apt herein to be like Pharaoh, who
when one plague was past, thought himself safe enough from that or any other:
So when one fit of sickness is past, we look for no more, but dream of a long
time of ease, and peace, and health before us: but we should be rather like one
that is sick of an Ague, who when the fit is over, eats, drinks, and is merry,
but yet he looks for another fit: So Sirs, is a sickness over and past? why, I
do not deny but that God who has given thee a stomach, and provided food,
would have thee to eat and drink; and he that has created matter for thy
delight, and made thee a risible creature, does allow thee to be merry and
cheerful; yet look for another fit: sickness is like to come again, and death
will be sure to come shortly; therefore take heed of security.

Lastly, that heed of pride and vainglory; this was the sin of good Hezekiah,
of whom we read, that after he was recovered from his sickness, his heart was
lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 22.24, 25. and this appeared, in that when he was courted
by the King of Babylon, he did in a bravado show all his riches, Isa. 39.2.
Poor Hezekiah, thou wast in a better frame, when on thy sickbed thou wast
turning thy face to the wall; but we may see by this sad instance, how apt we
are after a mercy and deliverance, to be puffed up with high thoughts and
conceits of our selves.

The last Duty which I shall mention, is this: Be careful to perform thy
sick-bed-vows and resolutions. A vow is a solemn promise made to God, either of
a duty, or of something which may further us in our duty to God. The matter of
a vow is either to do that which God commands, or to forsake sin which God
forbids, or to do something to further our obedience, or to abstain from
something which might be an occasion of sin, and which we may abstain from: A
vow must not be of a thing unlawful; for that were as if we should promise God
to hate him, or not to love him; it must be also of that which we have power to
do, else we have no power to promise to do it: The nature of a vow is a promise
made to God, which promise brings an obligation upon us to perform it: this
promise must not be made rashly; for a vow must be the fruit of grace, and not
the fruit of sin: and we must not make promises to God in a passion; yet I do
not deny, but such vows must be performed; for it is one thing sinfully to vow,
and another thing to vow to sin; in such a case we must be humbled for the
manner of the vow, and graciously pay what we sinfully vowed. It has been the
practice of the godly to make vows to God in their troubles, Psalm. 132.1, 2.
Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions; how he swear unto the Lord, and
vowed to the mighty God of Jacob. Now Sirs, in the fear of God make conscience
to perform your sick-bed-vows: Indeed, wicked men are forward to make vows when
they are sick, and as forward to break them when they are well: As Pharaoh,
when the plagues were upon him, he would let Israel go; but when they were
removed, his heart was hardened, and they should not go. But it is the property
of a godly man to make good his vows, Psalm. 15.4. Hence says David, Psalm.
56.12. Thy vows are upon me, O God. Beloved, vows are heavy things; David felt
them lying upon him, and pressing him to the performance of them. Vows take up
a great deal of room in the soul; they fill the conscience: when a man is
tempted to do that which he has vowed against, his vow will be upon him
presently, that he dare not do it. See what conscience David made of his vows,
Psalm. 66.13, 14. I will pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered, and my
mouth has spoken when I was in trouble, Psalm. 116.14. I will pay my vows unto
the Lord now in the presence of all his people. Sirs, if you break your vows*
your vows will break you. I shall conclude this in the words of Solomon,
Eccles. 5.4, 5. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay; for he has
no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed. Better it is that thou
should not vow, then that thou should vow, and not pay.

So much for the Exhortation to those who are recovered from sickness.

My last Exhortation is, to exhort you to some Duties to be performed in time
of sickness, which I shall lay before you in these twelve particulars.

Duty 1. Own and acknowledge the hand of God in thy visitation: as a man in a
crowd, that receives a blow upon his head; will presently turn about to see
whence the stroke comes; so, as soon as Gods hand touches thee, let thy eye be
upon him, and labor to find a special presence of God appearing in thy
visitation. Poor soul! thou art now parted from the use of Ordinances in
public, and thou must labor to find Sabbaths, and Sermons, and Sacraments in
thy sickness; that is, thou must endeavor to find the presence of God that
appears in these Ordinances, appearing to thy soul in the aches, and troubles,
and pains of a sickness. To this purpose, I have read a saying of an holy
Minister of the Gospel, which he spoke on his sickbed concerning people that
were then worshipping God in public, Oh (said he) that they did now see, what
I do now feel! we have a choice example of this duty of acknowledging the hand
of God in our visitation, in Job, cap. 1. where we read, that after he had
stood still, and heard the messengers which came one upon the heels of the
another, with the sad tidings of the loss of his cattle, and servants, and
children; the very first thing he does, is to turn to God, and to fall down and
worship him, and acknowledge his hand in his affliction, verse. 20, 21. so I
say, So soon as ever thy disease begins, presently own, and acknowledge, and
worship God, who is the cause of thy visitation; so did David, Psalm. 38.2. Thy
arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. Consider, this
affliction comes from the Wisdom, and Will, and Power, and Justice of God; and
by this disease he has now chosen to come to thee, and to appear to thee;
therefore labor to have thy heart filled with him, that all thy words and
actions may favor of him. Hereby thou will see Reason against all Sin, and
Reason for all Duties, and withal a ground for all comforts.

Duty 2. Labor to have thy heart filled with the thoughts of thy death and
judgment: it is the great sin of many, that in their sickness strive to put
the thoughts of death and judgment far from them, and labor to fill their
hearts with confidence that they shall live; and so many poor wretches fall
into hell before they did think they should dye. But certainly, it is the safest
and wisest way, so soon as thou art assaulted with sickness, to see thy death
and judgment standing before thee, and to receive the sentence of death in thy
self, 2 Cor. 1.9. Look upon thy disease as bringing thee to death, and after
that to a judgment, which will settle thee in heaven or hell presently. As
thou lie on thy sickbed, look into the other great world, where thou art
entering; see in what state, place and company thou art now to all eternity to
be fixed: Look into hell, and see those many millions of Devils that are chained
up there: Look what a dreadful case the learned, great, rich, strong and
beautiful swaggerers, ranters, and gallants of the proud, presumptuous,
scornful, unbelieving, envious, s^cure, covetous world are now flaming in; and
consider, that thou deservest to lie in the midst of them; and therefore now
the greatest care of thy soul should be, how to be saved from those
unquenchable flames.

Then look into heaven into thy Fathers house, and behold there the high and
lofty one dwelling in that high and holy place, and the Lord Jesus sitting at
his right hand in glory, and an innumerable company of Angels looking him in
the face; and there see a great multitude of blessed and glorified Saints:
Illic Apostolorum gloriosus chorus, illic Prophetarum exultantium numerus,
illic Martyrum innumerabilis populus: There is the glorious quire of Apostles,
there is a company of triumphant Prophets, and there is an innumerable
multitude of blessed Martyrs, says Cyprian: There thou may see those who
were upon earth, the poor, reviled, despised, afflicted, persecuted,
imprisoned, banished, hanged, burnt Children of the most high God, whom the
world could not bear; but are now happily possessed of their everlasting Kingdom,
where they are filled and satisfied with the likeness and presence of God, and
are singing and rejoicing with unspeakable joy to behold his glory: And then
consider, Yonder is the place, wherein I am now to seek to enter. And thus let
thy sickness fill thee with the deep and serious thoughts of death, judgment,
and the world to come.

Duty 3. Be sure of a well-grounded Scripture-peace settled betwixt God and thy
soul: It Is a good saying, That the day of death is a day of truth: See
therefore that thou have a peace which will prove true and sound when it comes
to the great trial of death and judgment. The unbeliever is not then to be
tried at the bar of his own secure and seared conscience, nor by a Jury of
carnal atheistical neighbors. The Believer has then a present appeal from the
^ash and false judgment of his enemies, and also from the dismal sentences of
his own doubting heart; and the Cause of both is presently to go to a hearing
before the judgment seat of Christ: Now see that thy peace be settled on such a
sure foundation, that thou may be found in safety and glory, when thou art
called to appear before the Judge of quick and dead. There are two main things
which may assure thy heart of peace and reconciliation with God.

1. If Christ's righteousness be thy own, so that as sure as thou art a sinner
in thy self, thou art righteous in and by the righteousness and obedience of
Jesus Christ: See therefore that all causes agree to make this righteousness
thy own.

1. Set the Lord before thy eyes, and be able to say, I know, and am surely
convinced, that God is a good God, a living, kind and merciful God, and that
he is good to poor sinners; by the salvation of whom, he has chosen to make
his goodness glorious to all eternity: I know that there are forgivenesses with
him; that he has a heart to pardon iniquity, transgression and sin; that he is
inclined, and ready to pardon according to his infinite goodness and loving
kindness; and this goodness is the cause of all that great Salvation revealed
in the Gospel: and I come to him, and my soul does cleave to him, and love him;
and all my expectation is from him, as he is a God of such infinite and
incomprehensible goodness.

2. I know that out of this infinite goodness he has sent Jesus Christ to me,
that to me a child is born, and to me a son is given, Isai. 9.6. I know surely
that he came out from the Father, and I do believe that he has sent him, John
17.8. I know that the Son of God is come, and has given me an understanding,
that I might know him that is true, and I am in him that is true. This is the
true God, and eternal life.

3. God has herein commended his love to my soul, Romans 5.8.
in that Christ dyed for me; and I know this true God, the Lord Jesus Christ,
did in his infinite love to me, as my Surety, dye for me, and thereby satisfied
Gods justice for my sins, which he bore in his body upon the tree, Ephesians. 5.2.
1 Pet. 4.24. And that he loved me, and gave himself for me an offering, Gal.
2.20.
and a sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling savor.

4. I know that it is the will of God concerning me, that I should take this
righteousness of Jesus Christ to be mine; for he has commanded me to take his
^ody as broken for me, and his Blood ^s shed for the remission of my sins: And
this is his commandment, that I ^ould believe on the name of his Son Jesus
Christ. 1 John 3.23.


5. I know that God by his Spirit has convinced me, that I am lost without
Christ, and that he has made me to see his righteousness so precious, and
meritorious, and necessary for my Salvation, that I do by the power of his
Spirit willingly, obediently, lovingly and joyfully receive and take this
righteousness of Christ for my own, and rest only upon it for the pardon of my
sins, and for my Salvation, as it is freely offered and given by God to me in
the Gospel.

Lastly, I know that God hereupon imputes this righteousness to me, and
accounts it my righteousness; and that I am bound to account it my own, so as
to own it, live upon it, and to glory in it: and by this righteousness God
justfies me, being he is just, and the justifier of them that believe in Jesus,
Romans 3.26. And thus being justified by faith in Christ's righteousness, I have
peace with God through the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. And hereby I have a
right through the free grace of God to go from my sickbed into the everlasting
Kingdom of peace: And when I am called to the Judgment Seat of Christ, being
found in his righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.14.
I shall be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

2. That thou may be assured of a Scripture-peace and reconciliation with
God, labor to find thy self truly joined and united to Jesus Christ, thy
whole body and soul joined to all of Christ, so as with him to make one self,
one mystical Christ, that thou may be able to say, As poor and weak as I lie
here groaning on this bed of languishing; yet this aching head, pale face, weak
hands, feeble limbs, withered body, is all a member of Christ's body, of his
flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. For by the grace of God I can say, that
whereas I am in my self a dead plant, and as separated from Christ can doing
nothing, yet by faith my heart is truly rooted in Christ; and I do receive him
to rule me, as my Lord, according to his will, and to teach, and every way to
save me; and my mind is set upon him, and my heart and affections do cleave,
and are fastened to him; and there comes true spirit and life from him, which
spreads and works in all the powers of my soul and members of my body; and I
can say ^f many things that I do, that they come ^ot from my created nature, or
corrupted nature, but from Christ that lives in me: and I am convinced of this
by such things ^s these.

1. I can look on my sins, and find a ^ower within me that loathes them, and
would crucify them, and be revenged of them; and it is the greatest burden of
my ^ge, that I have any thing in me, against the will and glory of so good a
God, and which ^s displeasing to him, and makes me so un^ike unto him.

2. I can look at Gods Commandments, and find a power within me agreeing with
them, so that they are the very law of my mind; I account them all holy, just
and good; and they are for that reason precious to me, because they are against
my sins: and I judge it the best work that I can do, to be doing the Will of
God revealed in these good Commandments.

3. I can look upon the world, and upon the Kingdoms and Country where I live;
and I judge it the greatest happiness and glory of a Nation, which I most pray
for, and in my place and calling contend for, to have all places filled with
the Name, and Kingdom, and Will of Jesus Christ.

4. I look upon men, and I see amongst them a company who are separared from
the world, and differ from the world, and are of another spirit, who appear and
shine in the image and likeness of the most holy God, in whom there is a sweet
agreement betwixt their lives and the Scriptures, and the life of Jesus Christ
is manifested in them. Now my heart does judge these the best people in the
world, and to be far more excellent then their carnal Neighbors; I love and
delight in them, and desire living and dying to be found with my heart joined
to them. Poor soul! i^ thou can find these things sincerely in thee, thou
art certainly a part of Christ and shall go in peace from thy deathbed to thy
head, to sit together with him in heavenly places.

Duty 4. If thou find on Scripture grounds that thy sins are pardoned, and thy
peace is made with God, then improve^ thy experience in a spiritual triumph
over all the enemies of thy Salvation: Say to Death that stands daring an^
staring thee in the face, O death, where i^ thy sting? And Death must answer in
effect thus: When Christ laid down his life, I lost my sting; but Christ took
up again his life, but I could never take up again my sting.

Ask the grave, O grave, where is thy victory? The grave must answer: I lost
the victory, when Christ rose again from me; and I must needs give up thy
precious Body, when it is called for at the resurrection of the just.

Look on the Devils, and see how Christ has spoiled these principalities and
powers, and triumphed openly over them, Col. 2.15. and now rejoice thou in the
spoil: Let that be spiritually fulfilled in thee, which was spoken, Isa. 33.23.
The lame take the prey: Death and Devils are spoiled by Christ; and the poor,
weak, sick Christian takes and triumphs in the prey: So that because of this,
Let the weak say, I am strong, Joel 3.10. This may make thee even to forget thy
aches and pains, so that thou shall not say, I am sick, because the Lord has
forgiven thy iniquities, Isa. 33.24.

Duty 5. Having thus seen a settlement of my soul and body to all eternity,
make a godly, conscientious and seasonable settlement of thy outward estate;
this ought to be done, if it be not done before, and if thou art in a capacity
to do it: This was part of Isaiah his message to Hezekiah on his sickbed,
Isai. 38.1. Set thy house in order, for thou shall dye, and not live. Now in
making thy Will, be ruled by this principle: Be sure that thy will be ruled by
the Will of God, that so thy last Will and Testament, which is the
signification of thy will, may make it appear that thy will is in subjection to
the Will of God; and that thou do Gods Will, when thou make thy own will.
For this purpose, observe these three Directions.

1. If thou have got any thing unjustly, take order, so far as is possible, to
make restitution; do not dye in injustice, to go with a curse to hell thy self,
and to leave the curse of God behind thee upon thy family.

2. Be full of love and faithfulness to thy Relations. Christ himself is our
pattern herein, who when he was nigh unto death, commended the care of his
Mother to his beloved Disciple, John 19.27. Then says he to his disciple,
Behold thy mother. Let thy last Will and Testament witness that thou die in
conjugal love to thy wife; Give her of the fruit of her hands, Prove. 31. ult.
endeavor to make thy poor widows life as comfortable as thou can: and
although I advise not husbands to leave power in the hands of their wives to
wrong and defraud their poor fatherless children; for sad experience
witnesses, that many widows are so careful to get themselves husbands, that
they grow careless of their poor children; yet however leave no tie upon her to
bind her from after-marriage; seeing God has made her free, do not thou leave
her bound.

Again, provide so for thy children, that there be neither want, nor strife,
nor emulation among them: and though I advise to nothing to prejudice the
first-borns birthright, yet I must witness against it as the great sin of many
Parents, that are so ambitious to set up their Families, that they highly
advance the elder brothers, and often leave the younger to be as poor as
beggars, or as bad as thieves.

3. Dye in dear love to the Church of God, and to the poor, that so far as thou
art able, thy last Will and Testament may savor of good will toward them. It
is the wickedness of many, that they seek to make a Monopoly of the world, by
engrossing to themselves and their families, and restraining the good and use
of it from others: but every man (keeping to the rules of justice) should
dispose of his estate so, as may make it most useful for Gods glory, and to be
a blessing unto man: And therefore consider, that if thou expectest when thou
dyest to be received into the everlasting habitation of Gods poor in the other
world, let their lives be made somewhat more comfortable by thee in this world.

Duty 6. Use all lawful means to recover thy health; though thou art ready to
dye, yet it is thy duty to endeavor to live; thy life is Gods, and he has
bound thee to keep it for him till he call for it; and thou art the Churches
servant, and must not by thy sinful neglect defraud her of her right: thou have
yet need to mortify sin, and to grow in grace, and to strengthen thy assurance
of Salvation, and to lay up more treasures in heaven; and thou ought to use
all lawful means to preserve thy life for these ends: grudge not therefore thy
self wholesome and fit diet: send for a skilful and careful Physician, and
depend upon the God of thy life in the use of them. To conclude, be ruled by
this Principle: When life is most sweet, be willing to dye; and when life is
most bitter, be wiling to live: without this, a man lives to himself, and dies
to himself.

Duty 7. Bear thy Visitation patiently. The Apostle pleads for this duty,
though in a more general case, Heb. 12.9. Furthermore, we have had fathers of
our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them revence; shall we not much
rather be in subjection to the father of spirits, and live? As it is a most
unchildlike temper in children, to carry themselves stubbornly under their
fathers rod; so it is very unchildlike for Gods children to carry themselves
stubbornly under the correction of their heavenly Father: therefore yield thy
self in patient subjection to thy Father under all his chastisements. Now
because patience is such a necessary, seasonable and proper Duty for a sick
man, I shall press this Exhortation with some Motives, and then by some
Directions teach you how to be patient.

I shall use these five Motives.

Mot. 1. Now is a special season, wherein you have great need of patience, Heb.
10.36. for the greater our a^^lictions are, the greater is our need of
patience: now every affliction is greater, by how much it comes nearer to a
man's life; so that a man better bears afflictions in his Estate or Friends,
then in his own Body: and therefore there never appeared a want of Jobs
patience, till his body was so sore visited. Besides, there are many
afflictions accompany sickness, which make our condition more grievous, and
patience more necessary: as for example, our enemies are now apt to triumph in
our misery. Thus they did by David, Psalm. 41.8. An evil disease say they,
cleaves fast unto him; and now that he lies, he shall rise up no more: So
that we have need of patience to bear the insultings and upbraidings of our
enemies: our friends also may be now estranged from us. Thus they were from Job
and Heman, Psalm. 88.8. and David complains of this, Psalm. 38.11. My lovers and
my friends stand a loof from my sore, and my kinsmen stood afar off: Nay, our
dearest relations sometimes deal unkindly with us in this condition: This did
aggravate Jobs misery, Job 19.17. My breath is strange to my wife, though I
entreated her for the childrens sake of my own body: I begged of her, Good
wife, do not forsake me now, but remember our poor children, which are gone,
which were the sweet pledges of our Matrimonial Love: Yet for all this (says
he) she was so nice, that she could not endure to come near my breath, which
did stink, being corrupted by my disease. so that we have upon all these, and
diverse other considerations, great need of patience.

Mot. 2. Your patience will prove you to be complete Christians. Thus the
Apostle pleads, Jam. 1.4. Let patience have her perfect work, that you may be
perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Beloved, many seem to be good Christians
till they come to passive obedience; but then they cannot endure to be wronged,
or provoked, or to suffer losses, or pains in body, etc. Now here is a want in
Christiany; and it is better want any where, then be wanting in godliness: but
when a man can with patience bear all sufferings, he is a perfect entire
Christian, and wants nothing, because he can patiently want every thing.

Mot. 3. Thy bearing thy visitation patiently, makes thy suffering to be a
suffering for the sake of Christ: Perhaps thou may think, Oh if I had the
honor to suffer banishment, imprisonment, yea death it self for the sake of
Christ, how patiently could I hear it! But consider the answer which Cyprian
makes to this objection, which the Christians did object in his days in a time
of great sickness, Non sanguinem vestrum Deus quaerit, sed fidem: God seeks not
your blood, but your faith. If you did suffer for Christ, it is not your blood
and your death that pleases God, but the faith and patience which you exercise
in your sufferings; and by these thou may exceedingly please God in this
Visitation: And consider further, that a man does not only suffer for Christ's
sake, when he suffers for the name and truth of Christ; though I confess it is
ordinarily taken in that sense, yet there is another way of suffering for the
sake of Christ, which is indeed a clearer argument of sincerity then the
former, that is, when we suffer patiently for the sake of Christ's Will; so the
reason of our patience and submission is, because our visitation comes from the
Will of Jesus Christ; and indeed this demonstrates that the same graces, and
the same reasons, which make thee so patient under this visitation, would make
thee run with patience through all the suffering which thou should be called
unto for the sake of Christ.

Mot. 4. This puts a great grace upon a Christian, to lie quietly and patiently
under the hand of God in sickness. David gives a relation of his sweet temper
in the exercise of this grace, Psalm. 131.2. Surely I have behaved and quieted
my self as a child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned
child: As a weaned child eats, and drinks, and plays, and sleeps quietly
without the breasts; so David was obedient, and quiet, and patient, and
teachable under all Gods dispensations: I tell you, in the midst of all nasty
and loathsome diseases, this spirit of patience puts a beauty and glory upon
the very body of a Christian. Tertullian elegantly expresses the comely
carriage of a patient Christian under his sufferings thus: His countenance is
calm and pleasant; his face smooth, not wrinkled with sorrow or anger; his
eyelids let down in a cheerful manner; his eyes cast down not with misery, but
humility; his mouth sealed with silence, etc. De patientia, cap. 15.

Last Mot. This will be a sure proof to thee, that all thy sicknesses and
misery will end in heaven, Heb. 6.12. That ye be not slothful, but followers of
them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises. Observe, all the
glory of heaven is laid up in the promises; and the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs and Saints which have dyed in all ages, are now in heaven
inheriting the promises; they are enjoining that happiness which was promised
to them in the Scriptures: but how came they to inherit these promises? why
through faith and patience. Now we have the same promises made to us, which
they do now inherit: but how shall we come to inherit the same promises? those
Saints are possessed of glory, yonder they live and reign; but how shall we do to
come among them? why be followers of them; they are gone a little before you;
away after them, follow their steps through faith and patience, and you shall
with them inherit the promises, Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience, that
after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.

So much for the Motives. Now that you may practice this Duty, observe these
f^ve following Directions.

1. Labor by patience to (...) under the Rule and (...) graces, Luke 2^.^.9.
(...) ye your ^orts (...) ^^e sweet posses^ion and (...); by this gra^^ (...)
^is spirit, Prove. 15.32. Beloved, when the body is troubled, it is an hard thing
to rule the soul, to keep the affections, passions, thoughts, words, looks,
actions in their place; much covetousness, pride, unbelief, anger, and
discontent, are apt to work, and disturb, and displace the soul at such a time:
Now a patient man bears off his troubles by the strength of his graces, and the
strength of all graces work in patience; he believes patiently, hopes
patiently, and lies patiently under the will of God, loving and rejoicing in
him; so that patience keeps the soul from sinking, and it keeps corruption from
rising, and keeps all graces working, so that the heart is full of duty, when
it is full of patience; and hereby the heart is established and settled in a
holy, even, cheerful and obedient frame under the will of God.

2. Be patient in obedience to the will of God; for it cannot be true patience,
except thou bear thy affliction patiently for this reason, because it comes
from the will of God: I know a sickness is not a thing it self which a natural
will should choose; but when God signifies that it is his will that thou should
be visited, then here comes in the work of patience, to deny thy own will,
whereby thou wast willing to have ease, and health, and life; and to say, I am
willing to go into a sickbed, or deathbed, to fulfill the Will of God. We have
our Saviors example for this; he was innocently willing to avoid the
sufferings by his created Humane Will; but looking upon them as coming from the
Will of his Father, he submits his will to his Fathers; saying, Mat. 26.39. Not
as I will, but as thou will. So a child of God may say, I am willing to have
my health and life, to live in the world with my Friends and Relations, and to
be a blessing to the Church of God: but if it be Gods Will that I shall be sick
and dead, let me die to fulfill the Will of God, rather then live to fulfill my
own will.

3. Humble and abase your selves under the Hand of God in your Visitation, 1
Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God. See what a mighty
Hand of God is upon thee, and humble thy self under it; the humblest Christians
are always the patientest Christians. It Is observeable, that the reason of Jobs
impatience, was his too high thoughts of himself, and his too low thoughts of
God: and therefore observe how God pleads with him, Job 38.2, 3. Who is this
that darkens counsel by ^ords without knowledge? What prating ^ellow is this,
that by his ignorant talk ^^rkens my Wisdom, and Justice, and Pro^^dence?
Because thou did challenge me (...) dispute with thee, and did promise to
^nswer me, Job 13.22. Gird up now thy ^^yns like a man; for I will demand of
thee, and answer thou me. Now when God had (...) the following words
demonstrated his ^^finite power and wisdom in the works ^f Creation and
Providence, Job is there^pon so deeply convinced of the Majesty ^f God, and of
the vanity of himself, that ^e resolves for ever after to be humble, pa^ient
and silent, Job 40.4, 5. Behold, I am ^ile, what shall I answer thee? I will
lay ^y hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken (like a fool as I was) but I will
not answer; yea, twice, but I will proceed no further.

4. Consider the desert of thy sins; it will make thee bear patiently what thou
suffer, to consider what thou deservest. It was a savoury saying of a good
man being then tortured with the pain of sickness; Oh (says he) this is not
Hell. He that believes what Hell is, and knows that he deserves to be there,
will see great reason to lie patiently under the greatest pains of the most
tormenting sickness, and to resolve with the Prophet, Micah 7.9. I will bear
the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.

Lastly, Wait by patience for a comfortable issue out of thy sickness, James
1.4. Let patience have her perfect work. Some are patient a while, and after
fly into passion and discontent: but as long as there is any work for patience,
let her have her perfect work, James 5.7. Be patient, brethren, unto the coming
of the Lord. Sirs, the Lord is coming, and he will put an end to sickness and
death when he comes: Consider what the Lord will do to thy body and soul at his
coming, and be patient till his coming; for when thou meetest him, thou will
see he did not stay too long.

It Is observeable, that God and his people have both the same end: Thy great
end is the glory of God, and the salvation of thy self, and of all Gods Church;
and this now is Gods end: But God has set thee thy way to this end, and he
has set and appointed to himself his own way. Now Gods way is not as thy way:
Thou think such and such a way were best to make God glorious, and his
Church happy; but God, he has a way above and contrary to thy way: and so as
to this ^ase, thou may think it is the best way for Gods glory, and for thy
family, and for ^hy self, for thee to enjoy thy health and ^ife, etc. but Gods
way is to bring thee ^o sickness and death: Well, what must be done in this
case? Answ. Still keep thy heart fixed upon thy glorious end; and do thou follow
thy way of duty, and patiently wait upon, and submit unto God in his way of
providence; and thou shall find, that at the last Gods working in his way of
providence, and thy keeping to thy way of duty, will meet in the same end, viz.
Gods glory, and thy everlasting salvation.

Duty 8. In sickness give good counsel to thy Friends about thee: See how Moses
stands over Eternity, and preaches to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32. See also the
language of a dying King to his Successor, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Thou, Solomon my son,
know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind. See again the solemn charge of the dying Apostle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom Preach the
word, be instant in season, out o^ season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
patience and long suffering. And you know the farewel-Sermon of our dying Lord
Joh. 14.15, 16. It was a sweet and savoury saying of Hyperius to his little Son
tha^ stood by his deathbed; Disce mi fili mandata Domini, and ipse enutriet
te: Learn m^ child the commandments of the Lord, and he will nourish thee.

Let thy last words be such that may savor of a heart breathing after the
salvation of those that are to come after thee Thou art now standing at the end
of al^ worldly perfections; thy stomach is almos^ closed for ever, thy sleep is
even gone for ever; thou art at the end of all the pleasures of sin, at the end
of all worldly enjoyments, of all the Ordinances and duties of this life, and
thou have now but a step to that judgment which will quickly resolve all thy
thoughts about thy Eternal Estate: Now thou see what a vanity man is, what a
lie the world is, what a cheat sin is, what a lost wretch an unbeliever is,
what a precious Jewel a Saint is, what a treasure grace is, what a pearl the
Gospel is, what a Father God is, what a Savior Christ is, what a place Hell
is, what a portion Heaven is: Now thou can speak of these things with more
faith, and heart, and feeling, then ever: thy yoke fellow, children, brothers,
sisters, friends, neighbors, have now more then ever their hearts and ears
open to thee; and who knows what a saving work a savoury word from one that is
just in his flight to Eternity may make! and therefore speak so, as one that
earnestly desires, that the meeting between thee, and all thy sad friends about
thee, may be joyful, when you come together next.

9. Pray earnestly, that as long as thou have a gasp to breathe, it may appear,
that thou have a spirit to pray. I dare be bold to say, Thou may gain more
good by one spiritual breathing in prayer, then the most prosperous Merchant
can by the most successful returns of a whole Age.

Pray with obedient submission to Gods Will, that he will restore thee to
health and life: Beg of God to spare thee a little; this will sweeten health
and life to thee, when it is given as a fruit of prayer, if thou live; and it
will be a sweet testimony, that thou do not leave the world in discontent, if
thou die.

Pray for everlasting salvation: See how many miscarry at death, and what a
great crowd of Men and Women will stand at the left hand of Christ at the day
of Judgment; and beg of God, that for his great Names sake, and for the sake of
Christ's obedience, thou may find mercy at those great days: Let thy Faith
and Hope be never so strong, and thy experiences never so sweet, and thy
evidences never so clear, yet thou may see reason and need enough of these
prayers.

Pray earnestly for the Militant Church, and particularly for that part of it
to which thou have a more special Relation: Believe what a Father, and Head,
and Husband, and Savior, the Church has; and what a Body, and Spouse, and
Family, the Church is; and what an everlasting Covenant of Grace there is
betwixt God and his Church; and what a multitude of mighty, subtle, cruel,
implacable Devils and men there are against the Church; and that yet in despite
of all, Christ will present it to himself a glorious Church. It is very good on
thy sick bed to set this Body, the Church, before thee, to let thy thoughts
walk about Sion, and go round about her, and tell the Towers thereof; and to
mark well her Bulwarks, and consider her Palaces, etc. Psalm. 48.12, 13. And see
thy self of this blessed Flock and Family: and so with all thy might pray for
this Church. Thus dying Moses cries to God for his Church, Numb. 27.16, 17. Let
the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
which may go out before them, and which may go in before them; and which may
lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the congregation of the Lord
be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

Pray for thy Family, Friends and Relations. The prayer of Cruciger in his
sickness is worthy of our imitation: Fac meos Orphanos vasa misericordiae;
Lord, make my poor Orphans Vessels of Mercy. Beg of God not to charge thy sins
upon thy house, and that he will graciously supply the want of thee when thou
art gone.

Pray that thy name, graces, counsel, reproofs, and example, may be blessed, to
Gods glory, and the good of others; that by them, even when thou art dead, Heb.
11.4.
thou may be speaking.

Pray also for thy enemies: You know the practice of Christ, and Stephen, who
almost breathed out their last gasps in prayer for their enemies. Tertullian
makes love to enemies, to be a property peculiar to Christians; saying, Amicos
diligere omnium est, inimicos autem solorum Christianorum: All men may love
their friends, but none but Christians can love their enemies, ad Scapulum,
cap. 1. Every Christian should be always much in that, which will prove him to
be a Christian; especially now thou art dying, and going to heaven, be found
with thy heart filled with love to, and prayer for thy enemies, that thou may
appear to be a child of thy Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5.45. Set before
thy heart thy most malicious, spiteful, and injurious enemy: consider, he is a
man made after the Image of the same God with thy self: consider what the Word
threatens against him, and into what a Hell he is falling, and what a blessed
instrument he may be, if God would please to convert him; and labor to find
thy soul filled with love and compassion toward him, which will cause in thee
strong desires after his everlasting Salvation; and do thou earnestly offer up
these desires by prayer unto God: this will be a sweet testimony of thy
integrity, and will be a service of a sweet savor to God in Christ; and
perhaps God may in answer to thy prayers, give eternal life to thy poor
miserable enemy.

Duty 10. Fasten by faith on some choice place of Scripture: When Mr. John Knox
lay dying, he called some about him to read Joh. 17. For, says he, there I
cast my anchor: and he also called for 1 Cor. 15. and when it was read, he
cries, Oh the sweet and saving comfort which God has refresht my soul with,
out of this chapter! and I have heard it reported, that when holy and learned
Mr. Blake lay on his deathbed, he fastened on those words, Act. 13.39. By him
all that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses: And cries out, I Will dye with this, I Will dye with
this. Thus I say, Settle thy soul upon some Scripture which settles pardon of
sin and salvation upon thee; this will be a sweet evidence that thou dyest in
faith: And thus believing the promises whilst thou live, thou shall be sure
to inherit the promises when thou dyest.

Duty 11. Be willing in obedience to God to dye; this is to die to the Lord,
Romans 14.18. I tell you, a man may with courage and resolution burn at a stake,
and men burn him to death, because of his profession of the truth of Christ;
and yet this is but the height of hypocrisy, and he may hereby dye to himself:
And though men may commend him for a Saint, yet God may justly condemn him for
an hypocrite: but he that willingly yields himself to dye in obedience to God,
dies in the Lord, and to the Lord, and graciously offers up his life as a
sacrifice of a sweet savor to God in Christ. Consider further, thou do
hereby graciously finish all passive and active obedience; thou now leavest thy
Country, and Estate, and Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, to fulfill
the will of God. So also, all that thou have been doing by Prayer, Meditation,
Sacraments, Sabbaths, etc. thou willingly yeildest to have finished by death;
thou art heartily willing that the old man of sin be put off by death for ever,
and that the new man of holiness be put on for ever: Consider thou have often
prayed to be filled with the likeness and presence of God; which can never be
till death. Christ has prayed that thou may be where he is, that thou may
see his glory, Joh. 17.24. and this can never be till thou dyest; therefore, I
say, be willing to dye: call upon the sad mourners about thee, saying to them
as Jacob to Joseph, Genesis 46.30. Let me dye. Dear yokefellow, let me dye; sweet
children, let me dye; my pleasant Jonathans, let me dye: and turn thy face to
God, and say with Simeon, Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart
in peace.

Lastly, Commend thy soul to God; this is an act of a Believer, whereby he
freely gives up himself to God and Christ as his right and due to glorify and
to enjoy him for ever in heaven: Now by giving up thy soul to God, thou give
up thy body too; for the body will be sure to follow the soul; if the soul go
to hell, the body must go thither too; if the soul go to heaven, the body must
be glorified there too: therefore see God, as it were, standing by thy
bedside, saying to thee, My son, Prove. 23.26.
give me thy heart: give me thy soul, give it me from sin and self; give it me
from the world and devils; give it me, for I made it, and bought it, and I will
save it: Oh then give it up, and commend it to God: See the infinite and
unchangeable love and mercy of God in Christ to thy soul, and believe that with
this love he will graciously and lovingly receive thy soul: and see what God
will do with thy soul, in what fullness of holiness, and joy, and glory he will
settle it for ever: See that thy soul be such, as thou may comfortably
commend it unto God; do not present to him a drunken, ignorant, proud,
covetous, unbelieving soul; but a believing, loving, holy, humble soul: See thy
soul clothed with Christ's righteousness, and a^ such, give it up to God to be
blessed and glorified for ever in Heaven, saying, Father, into thy hands I
commit my spirit.

FINIS.

