Laws and Ordinances OF WAR, Established for the good Conduct of THE ARMY
BY COLONEL MICHAEL JONES Commander in Chief of all the Forces in the Province
of Leinster, and the rest of the Garrisons late in the power of the Lord of
ORMONDE.

DVBLIN, Printed by William Bladen, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1647.

TO all the Officers of the Army, Colonells, Lieutenant-Colonells,
Serjeant-Majors, Captains, other Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot, and
all others whom these Laws and Ordinances shall concern.
Which Laws and Ordinances hereby published, all the said Persons
respectively and severally, are Required and Commanded to observe and keep, on
the Pains and Penalties therein expressed.

Laws and Ordinances OF WAR.
Of Duties to GOD.
I.
Blasphemy.
FIrst, Let no man presume to Blaspheme the holy and blessed Trinity; God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; nor the known Articles of our
Christian Faith; Upon pain to have his Tongue boared with a red hot iron.

II.
Cursing.
Unlawful Oaths and Execrations, and scandalous acts in derrogation of Gods
honor, shall be punnished with loss of pay, and other punnishment at
discretion.

III.
Neglecting Divine Worship.
All those who often and wilfully absent themselves from Sermons and public
Prayer, shall be proceeded against at discretion: And all such who shall
violate places of public worship, shall undergo severe sensure.

Of Duties in general.
I.
Intelligence with the Enemy.
ALL such as shall practice and entertain intelligence with the Enemy, by any
manner of means or flights, or have any communication with them, without
direction from the Commander in in Chief, shall be punished as Traitors and
Rebels.

II.
Relief of the Enemy.
No man shall relieve the Enemy with Money, Victuals, Ammunition, neither
harbor or receive any such, upon pain of death.

III.
Yielding up of Forts.
Whosoever yields up any Town, Fort, Magazine, Victuals, Arms, Ammunition,
or that motioneth any such thing, but upon extremity, and that to the Governor,
or in council, shall be executed as a Traitor.

IIII.
Careless service.
Whosoever shall be convicted to do his Duty negligently and carelessly, shall
be punished at discretion.

V.
Violating of a safeguard.
Whosoever shall presume to violate a Saveguard, shall die without mercy.

Of Duties toward Superiors and Commanders.
I.
Violating of the co^mander in Chief.
Whosoever shall use any words tending to the death of the Commander in Chief,
shall be punished with death.

II.
Quarrelling with Officers
No man shall presume to quarrel with his superior Officer upon pain of
casheering, and arbitrarie punishment, nor to strike any such upon pain of
death.

III.
Departing from Captains and Masters.
No Soldier shall depart from his Captain, nor servant from his Master
without license, though he serve still in the Army upon pain of death.

IIII.
Silence in the Army.
Every private man and Soldier upon pain of imprisonment shall keep silence,
when the Army is to take lodging, or when it is marching, or imbattallio, so as
the Officers may be heard and their commandments executed.

V.
Resisting against Correction.
No man shall resist, draw, lift, or offer to draw or lift his weapon against
any Officer correcting him orderly for his offense upon pain of death.

VI.
Unlawful Assemblies.
No person shall make any mutenous assemblies, or be present or assisting
thereunto, or in, or by them demand their pay, upon pain of death.

VII.
Resisting of the Provost Martial.
No man shall resist the Provost marshall or any other Officer in the execution
of his Office, or break prison upon pain of death.

VIII.
Seditious words.
None shall utter any words of sedition and uproare, or mutenie, upon pain of
death.

IX.
Concealing of mutenous speeches.
A heavy punishment shall be inflicted upon them who after they have heard
mutenous speeches, acquaint not their Commanders with them.

X
Receiving of Injuries.
Whosoever shall receive an injury, and shall take his own satisfaction,
shall be punished by imprisonment, and as it shall be thought fit by the
Marshall-Court; but he that is injured shall be bound if he do not forgive the
injury, to seek reparation by complaint to his Captain, or Colonel, or other
superior Officer, and it shall be given him in ample manner.

Of Duties Moral.
I.
Drunkenness.
Drunkenness in an Officer shall be punished with loss of place, in a Common
soldier with such penalties as a Court-marshall shall think fit.

II.
Unnatural abuses.
Rapes, ravishments, unnatural abuses shall be punished with death.

III.
Adultery.
Adultery, fornication, and other dissolute lasciviousness shall be punished
with discretion according to the quality of the offense.

IV.
Theft.
Theft and robbery exceeding the value of twelve-pence, shall be punished with
death.

V.
Provocation.
No man shall use reproachful nor provokeing words or acts to any, upon pain
of imprisonment, and further punishment as shall be thought fit to be inflicted
upon enemies to discipline and service.

VI.
Seizing upon dead men's goods.
No man shall take or spoil the goods of him that dies or is killed in
service, upon pain of restoring double the value, and arbitrary punishment.

VII.
Murder.
Murder shall be expiated with the death of the Murderer.

Of a Soldiers duty touching his Arms.
1.
Full Armor.
ALL Soldiers coming to their Colors to watch or be exercised, shall come
fully Armed upon pain of severe correction.

2.
Slovenly Armor.
None shall presume to appear with their Arms unfixt or undecently kept, upon
pain of Arbitrary Correction.

3.
Losing of horses and Arms.
If a Trooper shall lose his Horse or Hackney, or a footeman any part of his
Arms by negligence or lewdness, by dice or cards, he or they shall remain in
quality of pioners and scavengers till they be furnished with as good as were
lost, at their own charge.

4.
Pawning or selling of Armor.
No Soldier shall give to pawn or sell his armor upon pain of imprisonment,
and punishment at discretion, and wheresoever any armor shall be found so sold
or pawned, they shall be brought again into the Army.

5.
Wilful spoiling of horses.
If a Trooper shall spoil his horse willingly of Purpose to be Rid of the
service, he shall lose his horse and remain in the Camp for a Pioner.

6.
Borrowed Arms.
If one borrowes arms of another to pass the Muster withal, the borrower
shall be rigorously punished, and the lender shall forfeit his goods.

7.
imbezelling of Ammunition.
None shall presume to spoil, sell, or carry away any ammunition delivered
unto him, upon pain of death.

Of Duty in Marching.
1.
Waste and extortion.
NOne on their march through the countries shall waste, spoil, or extort any
victuals, money, or pawn, from any good Subject or protected person upon any
Pretense of want whatsoever, upon pain of death.

2.
Taking of horses out of the Plough.
No Soldier shall presume upon no occasion whatsoever to take a horse out of
the Plough, or to wrong the Protected husbandmen in their persons, or cattle,
or goods, upon pain of death.

3.
Straggling from the Colors.
No Soldier either horse or foot shall presume in marching to straggle from
his Troop or Company, or to march out of his rank, upon pain of death.

4.
Spoiling of trees.
No Soldier shall presume in marching or lodging, to c cut down any
fruit trees, or to deface or spoil walks of trees belonging to any good
Subject or Protected Person, upon pain of severe punishment.

Of Duties in the Camp, and Garrison.
1.
Going from the Camp.
NO man shall depart a mile out of the Army or Camp without license, upon pain
of death.

2.
Going in or out by-ways.
No man shall enter or go out of the Army or garrison but by ordinary ways,
upon Pain of death.

3.
Drawing of swords after setting the watch.
No man shall presume to draw his sword without order, after the watch is set,
upon pain of death.

4.
Giving a false Alarm.
No man shall give a false Alarm, or discharge a Piece in the nigh, or make
any noise without lawful cause, upon pain of death.

5.
Drawing swords in a quarrel.
No man shall draw any sword in a private quarrel within the Camp or Garrison
upon pain of death.

6.
Reve^ling the Watchword.
H^ that m^kes known the watch word without O^der, or gives any other word but
what is given by the Officer, shall dye for it.

7.
Offering violence to Victual^ers.
No man shall do violence to any that bring victuals to the Camp upon pain of
death.

8.
Speaking with the Enemies Messengers.
None shall speak with a Drum or Trumpet, or any other sent by the Enemy,
without Order, upon pain of punishment at discretion.

9.
A sentinel a sleep or drunk.
A sentinel or perdu found asleep, or drunk, or forsaking their place before
they be drawn off, shall dye for the offense without mercy.

10.
Failing at the Rendevouz.
No man shall fail wilfully to come to the Rendevouz or Garrison appointed him
by the Commander in Chief, upon pain of death.

11.
Remaining untolled in the Army.
No man that carries Arms and pretends to be a Soldier, shall remain three
days in the Army without being enrolled in some Company, upon pain of death.

12.
Departing without leave.
No man that is enrolled, shall depart from the Army or Garrison, or from his
Colors, without license, upon pain of death.

13.
Out-staying a pass.
No Private Soldier shall out-stay his Pass without a Certificate of the
Occasion under the hand of a Magistrate at the next Master, upon pain of
losing his Pay during all the time of his absence.

14.
Absenting from the watch
He that absents himself when the sign is given to set the watch, shall be
punished at discretion, either with bread and water in Prison, or with the
wooden horse.

15.
Discontented with their Quarters.
Whosoever shall express his discontent with his Quarter given him in Camp or
Garrison shall be punished as a Mutineer.

16.
Lying or supping out of the Quarters.
No Officer of what quality soever shall go out of the Quarter to dinner or
supper, or lie out all night, without making his superior Officer acquainted,
upon Pain of casheering.

17.
Keeping of the quarters clean.
Letting of Horses feed in sown grownds.
All Officers whose charge it is, shall see the Quarters kept clean and sweet,
upon pain of severe Punishment.

None shall presume to let their horses feed in sown grounds whatsoever, or to
endamage the husbandmen any way, upon severest punishment.

Of duties in Action.
1.
Repairing to the Colors upon an alarm.
NO man shall fail immediately to repair unto his Colors (except upon
evident necessity) when an Alarm is given, upon Pain of death.

2.
Flying.
No man shall abandon his Colors, or fly away in any Battle, upon Pain of
death.

3.
Flinging away Arms.
If a Pikeman throw away his Pike, or a Musketier his Musket or Bandilier, he
or they shall be punished with death.

4.
Burning and wasting.
No man shall Burn any House or Barn be it of friend or foe, or wilfully
spoil any Corn, H^y or Straw, or Stacks in the fields, or any Ship, Boat,
Carriage, or any thing that may serve for the Provision of the Army, without
Order, upon pain of death.

5.
Flinging away Powder.
Whosoever in skirmith shall fling away his Powder out of his Bandiliers, that
he may the sooner come off, shall be punished with death.

6.
imbezelling of the prey.
No Soldier shall imbezzell any part of the Prey till it be disposed of by the
Command in Chief, or others authorized, upon Pain of death.

7.
Concealing of Prisoners.
No Officer or Soldier shall ransom, or conceal a Prisoner, but within
twelve hours shall make the same known to the Commander in Chief.

8.
Pillaging with out license.
No man upon any good success shall fall a Pillaging before license, or a
sign given, upon Pain of death.

9.
Retreating before handy-blowes.
A Regiment, or Company of Horse or Foot, that cha^g^th the Enemy, and retreats
before they come to handy strokes, shall answer it before a Council of War;
and if the fault be found in the Officers, they shall be banished the Camp; if
in the Soldiers, then every tenth man shall be Punished at discretion, and the
rest serve for Pioners and Scavengers, till a worthy exployt take off that Blot.

Of the duties of Commanders and Officers in particular.
1.
Commanders must see God duly served.
AL Commanders are straightly charged to see Almighty God reverently served,
and Sermons and Prayers duly frequented.

2.
Acquainting the co^mander in Chief with dangerous hamours.
All Commanders and Officers that find any of discontented humors, apt to
mutinize; or any swerving from direction given, or from the Policy of the Army
set down, shall straight way acquai^t the Commander in Chief therewith, or
other authorized, as they will answer their neglect.

3.
Defrauding of soldiers pay.
Any Officers that shall presume to defraud the Soldiers of their Pay, or any
part of it, shall be cash^ered.

4.
Stopping of Duellers.
No Corporal, or other Officer commanding the Watch, shall willingly suffer a
Soldier to go forth to a Duel, or Private fight, upon Pain of death.

5.
Drunken and quarrel ome Officers.
What Officer soever shall come drunk to his Guard, or shall quarrel in the
Quarter, or commit any disorder, shall be cash^ered without mercy; and the next
Officer under him shall have his place, which he may pretend to be his right,
and it shall not be refused to him.

6.
Careless Captains
A Captain that is careless in the training and governing of his Company
shall be displaced of his charge.

7.
Officers out-staying their Pass.
All Captains of Officers, that shall out-stay their pass, shall be punished
at the discretion of the Co^mander in Chief.

8.
All Officers to part quarrels.
All Officers, of what condition soever, shall have power to part quarrels and
frayes, or sudden disorders betwixt the Soldiers, though it be in any other
Regiment or Company, and to commit the disordered to prison for the present,
until such Officers as they belong unto are acquainted with it: And what
Soldier soever shall resist, disobey, or draw his sword against such an
Officer (although he be no Officer of his Regiment or Company) shall be
punished with death.

9.
Officers non-resident in Garrison.
A Captain or Officer non-resident in the place assigned him for Garrison,
without license, shall have one months pay defaulked for the first offense, and
two months for the second: upon the third offense he shall be discharged of
his Command.

10.
Casheering of soldiers.
After the Army is come to the General Rendezvous, no Captain shall Casheere
any Soldier that is enrolled, without special warrant of the Commander in
Chief.

11.
Mustering of false and counterfeit Troops.
No Captain of a Troop shall present in the Muster any but real Troopers,
such as are bound by their pay to follow the Troops upon pain of Casheering,
without mercy: And if any Victualler, Fee-booter, Enter-loper, or Soldier
whatsoever, of any other Troop or Company, shall present himself or his horse
in the Muster, to mis-lead the Muster-Master, and to betray the Service, the
same shall be punished with death.

12.
Commissaries must be true.
No Provider, Keeper or Officer of Victual or Ammunition shall imbezell or
spoil any part thereof, or give any false account to the Commander in Chief,
upon pain of death.

Of the duty of the Muster-Masters.
1.
Muster-masters conniving at counterfeits.
No Muster-Master shall wittingly let any pass in the Muster; but such as are
really of the Troop or Company presented, upon pain of death.

2.
Captains must send a Roll of their men to the comander in chief.
All Captains shall cause their Troops or Companies to be full and complete,
and two days after the General Mustering they shall send to the Commander in
Chief, a perfect list or Roll of all their Officers of their Troops and
Companyes, and likewise of all the troopers and soldiers that are in actual
service, putting down distinctly on the head of each man his monthly pay.

3.
Every pay day.
The like Roll or List shall the Captains send to the Commander in Chief and
to the Treasurer of the Army upon every pay-day during the service, with a
punctual expression at the botome of the said Roll, what new Troopers or
Soldiers have been entertained since the last pay-day, in lieu of such as are
either deceased or casheered, and likewise the day whereon they were so
casheered and entertained.

4.
Subscribed by all the Officers of the Troop or Campany.
Which said List of Roll shall be subscribed not only by the Captain and his
Lieutenant and Corronet or Ensign, but also by the Sergeants and Corporals
respectively, who shall declare upon their oaths that the Troopers and
Soldiers enrolled in the said List are real and actual Troopers and
Soldiers of the respective Troops and Companies. And whosoever shall be
convicted of falsehood in any of the premises shall be casheered.

5.
Muster Master must use no other Rowles.
No Muster Master shall presume to receive or accept of any Roll to make the
Musters by, but the forementioned Rowls, upon pain of the loss of his place
and other punishment at discretion.

6.
Counterfeit names in the Rowles.
No man shall presume to present himself to the Muster, or to be enrolled in
the Muster rols by a counterfeit name, or surname, or place of birth, upon
pain of death.

Of Victuallers.
1.
Victulers issuing naughty Victuals.
No Victuallers shall presume to issue or sell unto any of the Army, unsound,
unsavory, or unwholesome victuals, upon pain of imprisonment, and further
arbitrary punishment.

2.
No soldier must be a Victuler.
No Soldier shall be a Victualler without the consent of the Commander in
Chief, or others authorized, upon pain of punishment at discretion.

3.
Unseasonable hours kept by Victuallers.
No Victualler shall entertain any Soldiers in his house, tent, or hut, after
the warning-piece or other signs at night, or before the beating of the
Ravalce in the morning.

4.
No Victualler shall forestall any victuals, nor sell them before they be
appraised by the Marshall General, upon severe punishment.

Of Administration of Justice.
1.
Summary proceedings.
All controversies between Soldiers and their Captains, and all others, shall
be summarily heard and determined by the Counsel of War, except the
waightinesse of the cause require further deliberation.

2.
The Provost Marshall must look to his Prisoners.
No Provost Marshall shall refuse to keep a prisoner committed to his charge;
nor dismiss him being once received, upon pain of being liable to the same
punishment which should have been inflicted upon the party dismissed.

3.
Goods of the defunct.
The goods of such as die in the Army or Garrison, or be slain in the service,
if they make any will by word or writing, shall be disposed of according to
their will. If they make no will, then shall go to their wives or next kin.
If no wife or kindred appear within a year after shall be disposed of by the
appointment of the Commander in Chief according to the Laws civil and
military.

4.
Civil Magistrates imprisoning soldiers
No Magistrate of Town or Country shall without license imprison any Soldier
unless for capital offenses.

5.
For debts and other small offenses.
In matter of debts or trespass or other inferior cases, The Magistrate shall
acquaint his Captain or other Chief Officer therewith, who is to end the
matter with the consent of the complainant, or to leave the party grieved to
take his remedy by due course of law; The Commander in Chi^fe upon complaint of
the party grieved, will not only see him righted but the Officer punished for
his neglect in this behalf.

6.
Braving the Court of Justice.
No man shall presume to use any braveing or menacing words, signs, or
gestures, while the Court of justice is sitting, upon pain of death.

7.
Receiving of Run-awaies.
No Inhabitant of City, Town, or Country shall presume to receive any
Soldier into his service or conceal, or use means to convey such Runawaies,
but shall apprehend all such and deliver them over to the Provost-Marshall.

8.
Detecting of offenders.
All Captains, Officers, and Soldiers shall do their endeavors to detect,
apprehend and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall assist the Officers
of the Army for that purpose, as they will answer their slacknesse in the
Marshalls Court.

9.
Offenses whatsoever to be punished by the Laws of War.
All other faults, disorders and offenses not mentioned in these Articles shall
be punished according to the general customs and laws of War.

And to the end that these Laws and Ordinances be made more public and
known, as well to the Officers as to the common Soldiers, every Colonel and
Captain is to provide some of these books and within a short time after that
the Army shall come to the general Rendezvous, these Laws in every several
Regiment, in the presence of all the Officers are plainly and distinctly to be
read by the Marshalls of the several Regiments, or by some other Officer
assisted by the Marshall General, in the Horse-quarters by sound of Trumpet,
and amongst the Foot by beat of Drum; And weekly afterward upon the
pay-day, every Captain is to cause the same to be read to his own Company in
presence of his Officers. And also upon every maine Guard, the Captain is to
do the like, that none may be ignorant of the Laws and duties required.

FINIS.
BY virtue of the authority given me by the Parliament, I command these
Ordinances to be observed and obeyed in the Army: And by these presents give
order that the same shall be forthwith printed and published.

Given under my hand this 18th of June, 1647. MICHAEL JONES.




