A TRVE COPY OF CERTAIN PASSAGES OF THE Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRY HIS
SPEECH SPOKEN on the Scaffold on Tower Hill immediately before his Death Ian.
10. 1644.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

Good People,
THis is an uncomfortable time to Preach, yet I shall begin with a Text of
Scripture, Heb 12. 2. Let us run with Patience that race which is set before
us, looking unto JESUS the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to JESUS the Author and
finisher of my Faith, He best knows: I am now come to the end of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a death of shame, but the shame must be despised, or no
coming to the right hand of God; JESUS despised the shame for me, and God
forbid but I should despise the shame for Him: I am going apace (you see)
toward the Red Sea, and my feet are now upon the very brink of it; an
Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me to the Land of Promise, for that was
the way through which he led his People: But before they came to it, He
instituted a Passover for them, a Lamb it was, it must be eaten with sour
Herbs. Exodus 12.8.
I shall obey, and labor to digest the sour Herbs, as well as the Lamb,
For I shall remember it is the Lord's Passover; I shall not think of the
Herbs, nor be angry with the hand that gathers them; but look up only to Him
which instituted that, and governes these; For men can have no more power over
me then what is given them from above. Ioh. 19.11.
I am not in love with this passage, through the Red Sea, for I have the
weakness and infirmities of flesh and blood in me; And I have prayed, as my
Savior taught me, Luke 22.42.
ut transiret Calix iste, that this Cup of Red-wine might pass from me: But if
not, God's will (not mine) be done, and I shall most willingly drink of this
Cup as deep as He pleases, and enter into this Sea, yea and pass through it,
in the way that he shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (Good people) that when Gods Servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them
(and in a manner drove them into that Sea) were drowned in the same waters,
while they were in pursuit of them; I know my God whom I serve, is as able to
deliver me from this Sea of blood, as he was to deliver the three Children from
the Furnace; Dan. 3.
and (I most humbly thank my Savior for it) my Resolution is now as theirs was
then; They would not worship the Image the King had set up, nor I the
Imaginations which the People are setting up; I will not forsake the Temple and
truth of God, to follow the bleating of Ieroboams Calfe in Dan or in Bethel. As
for this Peo^ple, they are at this day miserably misled, (God of his mercy open
their Eyes that they may see the right way) for now the Blind do lead the
Blind, Luke 6.39.
and if they go on, both will certainly fall into the ditch. For my self, I
am (and I acknowledge it in all humility) a most grievous sinner many ways, by
thought, word, and deed, and I cannot doubt, but God has mercy in store for me
(a poor Penitent) as well as for other sinners. I have now, upon this sad
occasion, ransacked every corner of my Heart, and yet (I thank God) I have not
found (among the many) any one sin which deserves death by any known Law of
this Kingdom; And yet hereby I charge nothing upon my Judges; for if they
proceed upon Proof (by valuable witnesses) I or any other Innocent, may be
justly condemned; But (I thank God) though the weight of the sentence lies
heavy upon me, I am as quiet within, as ever I was in my life. And though I am
not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever dyed by an Ordinance
of Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have gone this way, though not by
this means; For Elphegus was hurried away and lost his head by the Danes;
Simon Sudbury was beheaded in the fury of Wat Tyler and his fellows; and long
before these, St John Baptist had his head danced often by a lewd woman; And St
Cyprian, Archbishop of Carthage, submitted his head to the persecuting Sword.
Many Examples (great and good) and they teach me patience; for I hope my Cause
in Heaven will look of another dye then the color which is put upon it here.
And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great men
in their several generations, but also that my Charge (as foul as it is made)
looks like that of the Jews against St Paul ( Acts. 25.) For he was accused
for the Law and the Temple, that is, the Law and Religion; And like that of St
Stephen ( Acts. 6.) for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, that is, Law
and Religion, the holy place and the Law ( verse. 13.) But you will say, do I
compare my self with the integrity of St Paul and St Stephen? No, far be it
from me; I only raise a Comfort to my self, that these great Saints and
Servants of God were laid at in their several times, as I am now. And it is
memorable, that St Paul who helped on the Accusation against St Stephen, did
after fall under the very same Accusation himself. Yea, but here is a great
Clamor that I would have brought in Popery; I shall Answer that more fully by
and by; In the mean time you know what the Pharisees said against Christ
himself, Joh. 11.48.
If we let him alone all men will believe in him, Et venient Romani, and the
Romans will come and take away both our place and Nation. Here was a
Causeless Cry against Christ, that the Romans would come; And see how just
the Judgment of God was; they crucified Christ for fear the Romans should
come, and his death was it which brought in the Romans upon them, God
punishing them with that they most feared: and I pray God, that this Clamor of
Venient Romani (of which I have given no cause) help not to bring them in; for
the Pope never had such a Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has
now upon the Sects and Divisions that are amongst us. In the mean time by
Honor and dishonor, by good report and evil report, as a deceiver and yet
true, am I passing through this world, 2. Cor. 6.8. -- Some other particulars I
think not amiss to speak of.

And first, for His Sacred Majesty, the King our gracious Sovereign; He also
has bin much traduced for bringin^ in of Popery, but on my Conscience (of
which I shall give God a very present account (...)ow Him to be as free from
this Charge, as any (...) (according to the Religion by Law established) as any
man in this Kingdom; And that He will venture His Life as far, and as freely
for it; and I think I do, or should know, both His affection to Religion, and
his grounds for it, as fully as any man in England.

The second particular is concerning this great and Populous City, (which God
bless.) Here has been of late, a fashion taken up, to gather hands, and then
go to the Great Court (the Parliament) and clamor for Justice; as if that
great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which are unknown to the
many) could not, or would not do Justice, but at their appointment. A way,
which may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his blood upon their own
heads, and perhaps upon this City also: And this has been lately practiced
against my self; the Magistrates standing still, and suffering them openly to
proceed from Parish to Parish without Check; God forgive the Abetters of this
(with all my heart I beg it) but many well meaning People are caught by it.
In St Stephens case, when nothing else could serve, they stirred up the People
against him; Act. 6.12.
and when Herod had killed St James, he would not venture on St Peter, till he
found how the other pleased the People. Act. 12.3.
But beware you that cry so much for Justice, lest when you cry for your selves
you have nothing but Justice; Take heed, take heed of having your hands full of
blood, Isa. 1.15.
for there is a time (best known to Himself) when God (above other sins)
makes Inquisition for blood, and when that Inquisition is on foot, the Psalmist
tells us, Ps. 9.12.
That God remembers (that is not all) He remembers and forgets not the Complaint
of the Poor, that is, him whose blood is shed by oppression, verse. 9. take
heed of this; Heb. 12.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, but then
especially, when he is making Inquisition for blood; And (with my Prayers to
avert it) I do heartily desire this City to remember the Prophesy that is
expressed, Ier. 26.15.

The third particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches when storms have driven upon
them. But, alas, now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether, or
how it shall get out; and (which is worse then a storm from without) it is
become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and
at every cleft, Profaneness and Irreligion are entering in, while as Prosper
speaks (in his second Book De vitae contemptu, cap. 4.) Men that introduce
profaneness are cloaked with the name of Imaginary Religion; for we have lost
the Substance and dwell too much in Opinion, and that Church which all the
Jesuits could not ruin, is fallen into danger by her own.

The last particular (for I am not willing to be long) is my self; I was borne
and baptized in the bosom of the Church of England established by Law; in that
profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to dye; what
Clamours and Slanders I have endured, for laboring to keep a Conformity in
the external service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church, all men know, and I have abundantly felt.

Now at last I am accused of High Treason in Parliament: a Crime which my soul
ever abhorred; this Treason was charged to consist of two parts, An endeavor
to subvert the Laws of the Land, and a like Endeavor to overthrow the true
Protestant Religion Established by Law. Besides my answers which I gave to the
several Charges, I protested my Innocence in both Houses. It was said Prisoners
protestations at the Bar must not be taken, I can bring no other witness of
my heart and the intentions thereof; I must therefore come now to it upon my
Death, being instantly to give God an account for the truth of it; I do
therefore here in the presence of God and his holy Angels, take it upon my
death, That I never endeavored the subversion either of Law or Religion; and I
desire that you would all remember this Protestation of mine for my Innocence,
in these, and from all Treason^ whatsoever whereof I would not for all the
World be so guilty as some are. I have been accused likewise as an Enemy to
Parliament^: Noe, I understand them, and the benefit that comes by them, too
well, to be so; But I did dislike the misgovernment of some Parliaments many
ways, and I had good reasons for it; Corruptia optimi est p^ssima, and that
being the highest Court, over which no other has Jurisdiction, when That is
misinformed or misgoverned, the Subject is left without all remedy. But I have
done, I forgive all the World, all and every of those bitter Enemies which have
persecuted me, and humbly desire to be forgiven of God first, and then of every
man: and so I heartily desire you to join in Prayer with me.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the
Riches and fullness of thy mercies look upon me; but not until thou have
nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the
blood of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ: that so
the punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased
to try me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee to give me now in this great
instant, full Patience, pr^portionable Comfort, and a heart ready to dye for
thy Honor, the Kings happiness, and this Churches preservation. My zeal to
these (far from Arrogance be it spoken) is all the sin (humane frailty
excepted and all incidents thereunto) which is yet known to me in this
particular, for which I now come to suffer; I say in this particular of
Treason; but otherwise my sins are many and great; Lord pardon them all, and
those especially (whatsoever they are) which have drawn down this present
judgment upon me: and when thou have given me strength to bear it, do with me
as seems best in thine own eyes. Amen. And that there may be a stopp of this
Issue of blood, in this more then miserable Kingdom, O Lord I beseech thee,
give grace of Repentance to all Blood-thirsty people; but if they will not
repent, O Lord, Confound all their devices, Defeat and Frustrate all their
Designs and Endeavors, which are or shall be contrary to the Glory of thy
great Name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King
and His Posterity after Him in their Just Rights and Privileges, the Honor
and Conservation of Parliaments in their Just power, the perservation of this
Poor Church in its Truth, Peace, and Patrimony, and the settlement of this
distracted and distressed People under their ancient Laws, and in their native
Liberties. And when thou have done all this in mere mercy for them, O Lord,
fill their hearts with thankfulness, and Religious dutyfull obedience to thee
and thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen, and receive
my Soul into thy Bosom, Amen. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.


