The most Reverend Father Father i^ God Dr. William Laud lat^ Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Metropolitan of a^^ England.


Officium Quotidianum: OR A MANUAL OF PRIVATE DEVOTIONS. BY The Most Reverend
Father in God Dr. William Laud late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

(...). B^s. romans 1. 594.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Crofts at the Crown in Chancery lane. 1663.

Et Conversus vivificasti Me, Psalm. 71. 20.
O come hither, and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul, Psalm. 66. 14.
Pater noster, Oration Dom, Gerson aliter par. 3. p. 1147.
LAEsus est, sed tamen Pater

qui es in coelis; Eminenter, noninclusive

Sanctificetur In Me, per Me, super Me

Nomen tuum: Patris in Nobis, ut simus filii Patris nostri

Adveniat regnum tuum Ut destruatur Regnum Peccati, per quod regnant Mors and
Diabolus.

Fiat voluntas tua, sicut, etc. In me qui sum terra, sicut in Sanctis Angelis.

Panem Et super Coelestem and Corporeum.

nostrum Proprium, licite acquisitum

quotidianum, etc. Pro quotidiana necessitate

Et remitte nobis Debita, sicut, etc. Talenta dimitte nobis, minuta
remittentibus,

Et ne nos inducas in tentationem. Nec facias intrare ductos, promosque

Sed Libera Nos Ab Authora Malo Extra Nos Diabolo and Mundo: Intra

a Malo. Nos Nobis ipsis. a Malo Culpa per gratiam; and poenae per
misericordiam.

Quia tuum est Omniper Pacem.

Regnum, Absolutum in Se.

Potentia, Independens ab aliis.

Gloria, Circumfulgens Omnia and in Omnibus

Tuum, Amen. Et a Te, and per Te, and ad Te, in Gloria and Salute servorum
tuorum. Amen.

Oration Dominica.
The Preface.
OUr Father which art in Heaven,

Petitions.
1 Hallowed by thy Name;

2 Thy Kingdom come.

3 Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

4 Give us this day our daily Bread:

5 And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

6. And lead us not into Temptation:

7 But deliver us from Evil.

The Doxologie.
For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever,

Amen.
Symbolum Apostolicum divisum in Articulos.
1. I Believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

2. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord.

3. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

4. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried.

5. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the Dead.

6. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father.

7. From thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead.

8. I Believe in the Holy Ghost.

9. The Holy Catholic Church; The Communion of Saints.

10. The forgiveness of sins.

11. The Resurrection of the Body.

12. And the life Everlasting,

Amen.
OFFICIUM QUOTIDIANUM
In Nomine Patris, and F. and Sp. Sti. Amen.
O Lord I am risen up and fallen prostrate before thee; Pro Gratia preveniente.
prevent me, I beseech thee, in all my doings with thy most gracious favor,
and further me with thy continual help, that in all my works begun, continued
and ended in thee, I may Lyt. Angl.
glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain everlasting life:
Through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Almighty God and most merciful father, Al-merciful, Mercy it self; I have
erred willingly, and strayed Confessio cum precatione.
willingly, nay even from thy ways, more like an untamed heifer, then a lost
and wandering sheep. I have followed too much, even altogether, the absurd
devices, and brutish desires of my own heart. I have offended against, nay been
offended at thy holy, most holy laws. I have left undone, Per L. A. W.
not done at all, those things which I ought to have done. And I have done,
done nothing else but those things which I ought not to have done. And there is
no health, no hope of health, in me. But thou O Lord, have mercy upon me,
miserable, most miserable sinner; the greatest sinner, and most unthankful for
so great grace. Spare me, and them all, O God, which confess their faults:
Restore me and them all, O God, that be penitent, that desire to be penitent,
that wish they were, would be glad if they were so, that fear they are not
enough, and are sorry they are no more; for this is according to thy promises,
most gracious, most sweet promises declared unto Mankind in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Grant therefore, O most merciful Father, for his sake, who is our
Redeemer, Advocate, Author, and Finnisher of our faith, our Propitiation,
Righteousness and Justification, that I and all penitents may hereafter live a
godly, righteous, and sober life, to the glory of thy holy Name, and the
salvation of our own souls, Amen.

O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, pardon I beseech thee, all the sins,
Omissions and Commissions, Pro remissione Peccatorum.
thoughts, words, and deeds, by which I have provoked thee to anger, from the
time of my birth unto this present moment, that no one, nor all of my sins
together, may ever be able to cry oftener, or louder in thy ears for vengeance,
then the cry of my prayers may ascend up unto thee for mercy and forgiveness,
and obtain that they sue for; particularly, I humble beseech thee, forgive unto
me my great and clamorous sins, such as are, etc.

O Lord, against heaven and against thee have I sined, and committed foul
transgressions, in thy sight, but I beseech thee, wipe them all out of the book
of remembrances, which thou have written; through Jesus Christ our Lord and
only Savior, Amen.

Give unto me, O Lord Pro Donis.
I humbly beseech thee, a wise, a sober, a patient, an understanding, a devout,
a religious, a courageous heart: Chaste and temperate reins and thoughts. A
soul full of devotion to do thee service, strength against all temptations,
especially the temptations of etc. Through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord I give the humble Gratiarnm Actio.
and hearty thanks; increase my thankfulness I beseech thee, for all benefits
and blessings, both Spiritual, and temporal, which in the riches of thy great
mercy thou have liberally poured down upon me, but especially Spiritual. Lord
let me not live, but to praise and magnify thy glorious Name. Particularly, I
give thee most unfeigned thanks for my preservation from the time of my birth
unto this present moment; for, etc. for bringing me safe to the beginning of
this day, in which and all the days of my life, I beseech thee, preserve me
from sin and from danger, in soul and in body, that all my thoughts, words, and
works, may tend to the glory, and honor of thy Name, the good of the Church,
and the discharge of my duty, the salvation of my soul, in the day of my
appearance, and account, to be made before thee; through Jesus Christ our
Savior and redeemer Amen.

O Eternal God, and merciful Father, I humbly Pro Ecclesia Cathol.
beseech thee, bless thy whole Catholic Church; wheresoever spread upon the
face of the whole earth; good Lord purge it from all Atheism, Heresy, Schism,
and superstition, factious maintenance of groundless Opinions, that
Uniformitas.
one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, may in all places be professed, as thy
Church is, and can be but one. And grant, good Lord, that I may be, and
continue, a faithful, living, and a working member, under Christ the head, in
the Church the body, all the days of my life, and through the hour of my
death, through the merits, and by the Grace of thy Son, Jesus Christ our Lord
and only Savior, Amen.

O Most Merciful God, Pro Ecclesia part.
bless this particular Church in which I live, make it, and all the members of
it, sound in faith and holy life, that they may serve thee, and thou bless
them, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Lord, bless our most Pro Rege.
Gracious Sovereign; treasure up in him all thy hidden blessings; make him, and
keep him, a devout servant to thee, a constant Pastor of thy Church and Truth,
that he may live long, and be full of honorable success all his days, in his
person, in his actions, in his Queen, in his children, in his servants, in his
people; and Crowned with glory after life: under him bless the whole State,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, that righteousness and peace may kiss each other,
and we serve and honor thee for ever, Amen.

Good Lord bless all the Pro Amicis and Consanguineis.
places to which thou have made me have any nearer reference, the place where I
was borne, etc. Every Soul contained in any of these: All my friends, kindred,
acquaintance: Any unto whom thou have made me any ways beholding: especially
my nearer and bosom friends, all those, etc. Lord I beseech thee, forgive me,
and them, all our sins; and continue us thy servants, both in life and death,
Amen.

Gracious Father, bless my servants, and make Pro Servis.
them thine; give them grace to serve thee first, then me, with faithfulness,
soberness and dilgence Make me ever willing, and in some measure able, to
repair unto them, the time, and the strength which they, either have, or shall
spend, to do me service, even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

O Lord, bless all the Pro Afflictis.
afflicted members of the Body of thy Son, wheresoever, howsoever afflicted;
send them constant patience, and speedy deliverance, as seems best to thee, and
is best for them, according to their several wants and necessities whatsoever;
particularly, etc. And do unto them, according to all those mercies, which I
would or should S. Aug. 2. cont. Adv. Sa. Le. and Proph. cap. 2.
desire thou should show unto my own soul; if at any time, thou shall be
pleased to make mine estate, as theirs is at this present. And O Lord be
merciful, Amen.

Blessed Father, bless all Pro omnibus, etiam Inimicis.
sorts of men in their particulars; mine enemies wish I forgiveness of sins.
Turn their heart, that they may no longer hate thy servant; and if they will
not be turned, deliver me not over, I beseech thee, into their power. And, next
after the salvation of my soul, I humbly beg it; deliver me not into the hands
of men, to the shame and scorn of the world, Amen.

Submissio Mei.
O Domine Jesu, da quod Jubes, and Jube quod vis; facias animam meam paratam in
adventum tuum, and veni quando vis. Des mihi, ad minimum, sufficientem, si
placet pacatissimam patientiam; and veni quo modo vis, O tu qui salus es omnium
sperantium in te. Et in super interpone, obsecro O Domine Jesu, Mortem, Crucem,
Passionem, Meritum and Sanguinem tuum inter Judicium tuum and animam meam, Nunc
and semper, and pracipue in hora Mortis meae: Quae Mors, obnixe precor, nunquam
Hora Mortis.
sit subitanea, nunquam adveniat and inveniat me imparatum: Nunquam it a
adveniendo saeviat, quin ut retineam Fidem, spem and Charitatem Memoriam and
intellectum sanum, usque ad Extremum halitum. Et esto mihi in Deum Protectorem.
Des Peccatis meis Misericordiam and veniam, Ecclesiae Pacem and Concordiam;
Mihi Peccatorum primo, Gratiam in hac vita, and Gloriam in futura. Ita, Ita
venias Domine Jesu, and miserere Mei, Amen.

Lord here I am, do with me as it seems best in thy own eyes; only give me, I
humbly beseech thee, a penitent and a patient spirit, to expect thee, Amen.

Lord, make my service acceptable to thee while I live, and my soul ready for
thee when I dye, Amen.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

I.
O Lord by thy mercy I Hora 1. h. e. Mane.
am risen out of my grave where I might have slept in death, but that thou
preserved'st me. Make it I beseech thee, a resurrection to grace in this life,
and to glory in the life to come; through Jesus Christ, who merited both for
us, Amen.

This day by the resurrection of thy Son our blessed Savior, was made holy to
us. Give me that grace, that I may keep it holy unto thee, through Jesus
Christ, Amen.

O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me to thy
holy hill, and to thy dwelling, that I may go unto the Altar of thee, O my God,
even the God of my Joy and Gladness, and give thanks unto thee, Amen. Psalm.
43. 3, 4.

Almighty and everlasting Dom. 2. post Epiph.
God, who governs all things both in heaven and earth; mercifully hear my
prayers for my self, and all thy people; and grant us thy peace, even all the
days of our life, even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Almighty God, I humbly Adventus Dom. 1.
beseech thee, give me grace to cast away the works of darkness, and to put on
the Armor of light, now in the time of this mortal life, in which thy Son
Jesus Christ came to visit us, in great humility; that in the last day, when
he shall come again in his glorious Majesty, to judge both the quick and the
dead; I with all thy faithful servants may rise up to the life Immortal,
through him who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, now and for
ever, Amen.

Blessed God, which have Adventus Dom. 2.
caused all holy Scripture to be written for our learning; grant unto me and
all Christians, that we may in such wise read, hear, mark, learn, and inwardly
digest them, that by patience and comfort thereof, we may embrace, and ever
hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou have given us in our
Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

Lord, I humbly beseech Adventus Dom. 4.
thee, raise up thy power and come amongst us, and with great might succor us;
that whereas by our sins we are sore let and hindered, thy bountiful grace and
mercy, through the satisfaction of thy Son, our Lord, may speedily deliver us;
to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without
end, Amen.

Lord, let thy Angels (...) 3. ^. e. no^a Matu^ina.
tarry round about me, and deliver me, that I may taste and see how gracious
thou, my God, art; and how blessed the man is that trusts in thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Psalm 34.

I will wait for thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple; and
there will I praise thee, Amen, Psalm. 48. 9.

Lord, let me behold thee in thy Sanctuary, and there see thy power and glory,
for thy loving kindness is better than life, therefore my lips shall praise
thee. Thus will I magnify thee all my life, and lift up my hands in thy Name:
Oh! satisfy me with the riches of thy mercy, which is in Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen. Psalm. 63. 2.

O how amiable are thy dwellings, O Lord of Hosts! my soul has a desire and a
longing to enter into the Courts of thee, O Lord: My heart and my flesh rejoice
in thee, O merciful GOD, Amen. Psalm 84. 1.

Lord, I humbly beseech Dom. 1. post Epiph.
thee to hear, and accept my prayers for my self, and for the people that call
upon thee; and grant that we may perfectly know all things we ought to do, and
also, have grace and power, faithfully to fulfill the same, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Almighty and everlasting Dom. 3. post Epiph.
God, mercifully look upon all my infirmities; and in all dangers and
adversities, stretch out thy right hand to help and defend me, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

God, thou which know Dom. 4. post Epiph.
us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers, that for man's frailty
we cannot always stand upright; grant I most humbly beseech thee, to me, the
health both of body and soul, that all those things which I suffer for sin, I
may, by thy help, well pass and overcome, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, the Sun is at Hora 6. h. e. Meridie.
the height for this day; lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, and I
shall be whole. Make all darkness, and spiritual shadows short upon me, and
shorter in me, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Who can tell how ofthe offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins; Keep
me, also, O Lord, from presumptuous Praesumptio.
sins, lest they get the Dominion over me: and keep me innocent from the great
offense, I humbly beseech thee, Amen. Psalm. 19. 12, 13.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be always praising thee;
blessed is the man, whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways.
Lord, thus bless the heart of thy servant, for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.
Psalm. 84. 4.

O Sancta Adoranda and Longanimis Trinitas! Longanimis n. es, quae eos a quibus
Orar. Naz. 13.
scinderis, tam diu toleras. O Trinitas, Cujus Ego, ut Cultor and minime fictus
Praeco essem, jampridem Charites.
dignus habitus sum. O Trinitas, omnibus aliquando vel per Illuminationem vel
per poenam agnoscenda! Oro te, ut hos, qui nunc Contumeliis te afficiunt,
adoratores accipias, ne quisquam vel ex Minimis pereat: Et hoc, etiamsi mihi
propterea aliqua Gratiae Jactura facienda Sit. Neque n. tantum dicere audio,
Quantum Apostolus. Concede autem hoc, per and propter Merita Jesu Christi,
Redemptoris Nostri, Amen.

Almighty God, who Dom. Paschae.
through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ, have overcome death, and opened
unto us the gate of everlasting life; I humbly beseech thee, that as by thy
special Grace preventing Pro Gratia.
me, thou do put into my mind good desires; so by thy continual help, I may
bring the same to good effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Almighty God, who Die Martis in Pasch.
have given thine Only Son to die for our sins, and to rise again for our
Justification, give me grace so to put away the Leaven of Malice, and all
wickedness, Contra Malitiam.
that I may always serve thee in pureness of living, and in truth, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Almighty God, who Dom. 2. post Pasch.
have given thine only Son, to be unto us both a sacrifice for sin, and an
example of good life; give me grace, that I may always most thankfully receive
that inestimable benefit, and also daily endeavor to sollow the blessed steps
of his most holy life: Even for the same thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Lord, give me that grace, Hora 9. h. e. tertia pomeridiana.
that I may hold me still by thee, and abide patiently upon thee; that I may
not grieve my self at the man whose way does prosper, nor against him that
does after evil counsels: that I may leave off from wrath, and let go
displeasure, lest I fret my self, and be moved to do evil, Amen.

Tribuat hic Mihi Dominus, Paulin. (...). 9.
ut in Me, pro me fiat Ignis Consumens: Et ardeat hoc Igne Cor Meum in Lumen
AEternum Mihi: Ne codem ardeat Anima Mea in Poenam perennem; Per Jesum Christum
Dominum Nostrum, Amen.

O Lord, make me like a green Olive Tree in thy house, for I trust in thy
tender mercy for ever; and I will always praise thee for that thou have done,
and hope in thy name for ever, Amen. Psalm. 52. 8.

O Lord, I beseech thee, Pro Meipso.
make me remember how much more then other men, I have need to call upon thee.
My Charge is great, and my strength is little; O give me grace to come always
before thee, and to ask that help which thou art readier to give, then I to
ask, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Have mercy upon me, Aug. 14. 1629.
O Lord, consider the troubles which I suffer of them that hate me, O thou
which did lift me up from the gates of death, Amen. Psalm. 9. 8.

O Lord, increase in me Pro Omni Dono.
Faith and Devotion; replenish my heart with all Goodness, and by thy great
mercy keep me in the same. Give me Godly zeal in Prayer, True Humility in
Prosperity, Perfect Patience in adversity, and continual Joy in the Holy Ghost:
Even for Jesus Christ his sake, my only Lord and Savior, Amen.

O God, who have Pentecoste.
taught the hearts of thy faithful people, by sending to them the light of thy
holy Spirit, Grant me by the same Spirit, to have a right Judgment in all
things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy Comfort, through the merits of
Jesus Christ our Savior, who lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the
same Spirit, One God world without end, Amen.

Almighty and everlasting Dom. Trinit.
God, which have given unto thy servants grace, by the confession of the true
Faith, to acknowledge the Glory of the AEternal Trinity, and in the power of
the Divine Majesty, to worship the Unity: I humbly beseech thee, bless me
also, that I may live in the steadfastness of this Faith, and through it, be
evermore defended from all Ghostly and Bodily dangers, for thy mercy sake, who
live and raignest one God, world without end, Amen.

O my God, incline thine Vesperi.
Ear and hear; open thine Eyes and see. Lord forgive; O Lord, consider and do
it; for thine own sake, O God, and for my Savior Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.
Dan. 9. 19.

Lord, let me not be afraid, Patientia.
though one be made rich, or though the glory of his house be increased; for he
shall carry nothing away with him when he dies, neither shall his Pomp follow
him. But ever make me afraid to offend thee, Amen. Psalm. 49. 16, 17.

Mine eyes long sore for thy Word, saying, when will thou comfort me? Lord
comfort me, for I am become like a Bottle in the smoke; yet let me not, I
beseech thee, forget thy Law, even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 119.
82.

O Lord God, which Dom. Sexagesima; Contra Adversitatem.
see that I put not my trust in any thing that I do, mercifully grant that I
may be desended against all adversities, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only
Savior, Amen.

O Lord, which have Dom. Quinquagesima.
taught us, that all our doings without charity, are nothing worth, send thy
holy Ghost, and pour into my heart that excellent Pro Charitate.
gift of charity, the very bond of peace, and all virtues; without the which,
whosoever lives is counted dead before thee; grant this for thy only Son
Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

O Lord, fill me with Completorium. The Complyne is before bedtime.
grace, that I may fulfill all the service I owe thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

O Lord God, spare I beseech thee; who shall raise up Jacob, for he is small?
Spare him therefore, O Lord; spare thy people: spare me. Say unto my soul, Thou
have repented of the evil intended, and it shall not be, Amen. Amos 7. 2, 5.

Lord, when I am asleep, Somnus.
let me not be made afraid, but let my sleep be sweet, that I may be enabled to
serve thee, Amen. Prove. 3. 24.

Grant I beseech thee, Dom. 4. Quadrages. Pro Auxilio.
most merciful Father, that I, which for my evil deeds am worthyly punished,
may, by the comfort of thy grace, be mercifully relieved, through Jesus Christ
our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

Consider and Hear me, Bedtime. Et nocte, si vigiles.
O Lord, my God; Lighten my eyes, that I sleep not in Death, Amen. Psalm. 13. 3.

O Lord, thou have proved and visited my heart in the night season; Thou have
tried me, O blessed Father; purge me, that thou may find no wickedness in
me, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Psalm. 17. 3.

O Lord, hear me, that seven times a day I may praise thee; and be acquainted
with that great peace which they have, which love thy law, Amen. Psalm. 119. 164.

O Lord, from whom Dom. 5. post Pasch.
all good things do come; grant unto me thy humble servant, that by thy holy
Inspiration, I may think those things that are Cogitationes.
good; and by thy merciful guiding, may also perform the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
II.
POnder my words, O Mane.
Lord; Consider my Meditations: O hearken unto the voice of my calling, My King
and My God; for unto thee will I make my prayer: My voice shall thou hear
betimes, O Lord; early in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and
will look up. But make me to remember, that thou ar^ God, and have no pleasure
in wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee, Amen.

Gratiae.
O Lord bless me, and I will sing unto thee, and praise thy Name; and be telling
of thy salvation from day to day, Amen, Psalm. 96.2.

Consilium.
O Lord, let Counsel preserve me, and understanding keep me; deliver me from
the evil way, and from the man that speaks forward things: and from all such
as leave the ways of righteousness, to walk in the ways of darkness, even
fot Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Prove. 2. 11.

O Lord, I know the way Viarum directio.
of Man is not in Himself; It is not in man that walks, to direct his own
steps; Therefore, O Lord, I beseech thee, make me know my way; and direct my
steps to thy honor, and my own salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen. Jerem. 10. 23.

Be not wrath with me, Hora tertia.
O Lord, but spare me, and have mercy upon me; for thou will be merciful unto
Pro Misericordia,
thy Creature. O Lord, I and my fathers, have all had the same sickness; but
because of us that are siners, thou shall be called Merciful, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen. 2 Esdras 8.

O Lord, Guide me here Consilium.
with thy Counsel, and after that, receive me into Glory. For, whom have I in
Heaven but thee; and there is none upon earth that I desire, in comparison of
thee. O Lord, preserve me in those longings toward thee, Amen. Psalm. 74. 24.

O Lord, take from me Veritas.
the way of lying, and cause Obedientia.
me to make much of thy Law; that I may choose the way of truth, and lay thy
judgments before me; that I may stick unto thy Testimonies, and run the way of
thy Commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty, Amen. Psalm. 119. 26.

O God, the strength of Dom. 5. post Trinit.
all them that trust in thee, mercifully accept my prayers; and because the
weakness of man's nature can do no good thing without thee; Grant me Pro gratia
the help of thy Grace, that in keeping of thy Commandments, I may please thee
both in will and in deed, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, thou art just, Hora Sexta,
and all thy ways are mercy and truth; thou judge truly for ever: remember
me, and look upon me; punish me not according to my sins, or my Ignorances,
or my Fathers that have sinned before thee. Misericordia.
Deal not with me according to my sins, but as seems best unto thee, O Lord,
my strength and salvation, Amen. Job 3. 2, 3, 6.

Lord, I acknowledge my Venia.
wickedness, and the iniquity of my Fathers; we have sinned against thee, O
Lord be merciful, Amen. Jer. 14. 20.

Lord, I beseech thee, Dom. 3. post Trinit.
mercifully to hear me; and as thou have given me an hearty desire to pray, so
Pro defensione.
grant that by thy mighty aid I may be defended both in soul and body, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, be gracious unto Hora nona.
me, and give me an heart to worship thee, and to do thy Will: and open my
heart in thy Law; and send me peace: Hear my Misericordia.
prayer, and be reconciled to me, and never forsake me in the time of trouble,
for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. 2 Match. 1. 3, 4, 5.

Remember me, O Lord, according to the favor that thou bear to thy people;
O visit me with thy salvation; that I may see the Felicity of thy Chosen; and
rejoice in the gladness of thy people, and give thanks with thine inheritance,
Amen. Psalm 106.4.

O God, the Protector Dom. 4. post Trinit.
of all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is strong, nothing is holy;
increase and multiply upon me thy mercy: that thou being my Ruler and Guide, I
may so pass through things Temporal, that I lose not the things AEternal.
Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Grant, O Lord, that I may live in thy fear, and die in thy favor; rest in thy
peace, rise in thy power, reign in thy Glory; for thy beloved Son's sake, Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Hear, O Lord, Consider Vesperi.
my complaint, hearken unto my prayer, that goes not out of feigned lips; and
prevent me in Mercy, before the Evening of my days close upon me; Even for
Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 17. 1.

O Domine Oro Te, Ultra S. Hillar. l. 12. do Trinit. p. 195.
se Infirmitas mea non tendat, sed loquatur hoc solum in quo Animae Salus est.
Neque in id stultitiae simul and Impietatis unquam erumpam, ut Omni potentiae
tuae and Sacra mentorum Arbiter esse velim. Neque permittas me erigere
Infirmitat is Meae sensum, ultra aut Infinitat is Tuae religiosam Opinionem,
aut significatam Mihi AEternitat is tuae fidem. Amen.

Illumina Quaeso Domine, Collect. Vesp. pro auxilio contra Omnia pericula.
tenebras nostras, and totius hujus Noctis insidias a Me and Omnibus fidelibus
tuis, ab animabus precipue, sed and a Corporibus nostris repelle Propitius, Per
Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O God, which have prepared Dom. 6. post Trinit.
for them that love thee, such good things, as pass man's Understanding, pour
into mine heart such love toward thee, that I Obedientia.
obeying thee in all things, may obtain thy promises, which exceed all that I
can desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Incline thine ear unto Completorium.
me, O Lord, and hearken unto my words; show thy mavelous loving kindeness,
thou that art the Savior of them that put their trust in thee. Keep me as the
Apple of thy Pro defensione.
Eye, and hide me under the shadow of thy wings; Even for Jesus Christ his
sake, Amen. Psalm 17. 6, 7, 8.

O Lord, I cry unto thee: Exaudire.
let my Prayer be set forth in thy sight as Incense; and the lifting up of my
hands be an Evening sacrifice, even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm 141.
2.

The Lord is my shield Gratiae.
and my strength, my heart has trusted in him, and I am helped: Therefore my
heart danceth for joy, and in my song will I praise thy Name, Psalm. 28. 8.

O Lord of all Power Dom. 7. post Trinit.
and Might, who art the Author and Giver of all good things, graff in my heart
the love of thy Name; increase in me true Religion; nourish me Religio.
with all goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep me in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Lord let me know my Bedtime. Et nocte, si vigiles.
End, and the number of my days, that I may be certified how long I have to
live. Behold, thou have made my days as it were a span long, and my Age is
even as nothing in respect of thee; and verily every man living is altogether
vanity: For he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. And
now, Lord, What is my hope? Truly, my hope is even in thee. Deliver me from all
mine offenses, and make me not a rebuke unto the foolish, Even for Jesus Christ
his sake, Amen. Psa. 39. 5.

O Domine, mea, omnia Gr. Naz. Or at. 8. Submissio meiipsius.
and Meipsum Tibi dono offero; Actionem and Sermonem, Quietem and silentium:
Tantum Me habeas, and ducas; and Manum, and Mentem and Linguam ad ea quae
honesta sunt and tibi grata moveas: Et ab omnibus a quibus abstinere praestat
abducas; Per and propter Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

III.
Mane:
LOrd preserve me, that neither this day, nor Preservatio.
any day of my life, I may walk in the Counsel of the ungodly, stand in the way
of sinners, or sit down in the seat of the scornful; but that my delight may
be in thy law, O Lord; and my Exercise in it day and night, Amen.

O Sol Justitiae, Pater and Erasmus.
Origo Omnium; Tuo sydere afflari reviviscere est: Tuo foveri Lumine proficere
est: Tuis accendi flammis perficere est: Abs te deseri perire Illuminatio.
est. O ter foelices, quibus Mitis and Rosidus exoreris. Bees me, O Domine
Jesu, Lumine Tuo: Et discute Nebulas Ignorantiae meae, and Caliginem Peccatorum
meorum: ut non aberrans a via mandatorum tuorum, te sequar in Lumen aeternum,
Per te ipsum unicum Salvatorem and Redemptorem meum. Amen.

O Lord, thou art my Assurance; preserve my foot from taking, I humbly beseech
thee, Even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Prove. 3. 26.

O Lord, give me, I beseech Dom. 9. post Trinit. Cogitationes.
thee, thy Spirit, to think and do always such things as be rightful; that I
who cannot be without thee, may by thee be able to live according to thy will,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, I lift up my Hora Tertia.
soul to thee, My God, I have put my trust in thee, O let me not be confounded,
neither let my enemies triumph over me. Show me thy ways, O God; and teach me
thy paths: Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me thy statutes; for thou art
the God of my salvation; in thee is my hope all the day long. Call to
remembrance, O Lord, thy tender Mercies; and thy Loving kindness which has
been ever of old: O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, or of my
riper Age; but according to thy mercy, think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy
goodness, and the merits of Jesus Christ my Savior, Amen.

Almighty God, who Dom. 2. Quadrages.
see that we have no power of our selves, to help our selves; keep me, Per
preservatione.
I beseech thee, both outwardly in my body, and inwardly in my soul, that so I
may be defended from all adversity which may happen to my body, and from all
evil thoughts which may assault and hurt my soul, through Jesus Christ my Lord
and only Savior, Amen.

Hearken unto my voice, Hora Sexta.
O Lord, now I cry unto thee; have mercy upon Exaudire.
me and hear me. My heart has talked of thee, seek ye my face; Thy face, Lord,
will I seek. O hide not thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in
Displeasure. Thou have been my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God
of my salvation, Amen. Psalm 27. 8, 9, 10. 11.

At Evening, Morning, Paul'n. Epis. 17. p. 181.
and at Noon day will I pray, and that instantly; hear my voice. O deliver my
soul in peace from the practices that are against me, Amen. Psalm 55. 18.

Let thy merciful Ears, Dom. 10. post Trin.
O Lord, be open to the prayers of me, thy humble servant; and that I may
obtain my petitions, make me to ask such things as shall please thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Lord, let me not be confounded, Hora Nona. Psalm. 31. 19. 21. Gloria Dco.
for I have called upon thee. O how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee; and that thou have prepared for them that put
their trust in thee, even before the sons of men! Lord, I trust in thee, Have
mercy upon me, Amen.

My tears have been my Tempore adverso.
meat, day and night, while they daily say unto me, Where is now thy God? but
let them have no cause to say it any more, Even for Jesus Christ his sake,
Amen. Psalm. 42. 3.

Almighty God, which Dom. 3. post Pasch.
show to all men that are in Error, the light of thy truth; to the intent,
that they may return into the way of Righteousness: Grant, I beseech thee,
unto Illuminatio.
me, and all them that are admitted into the fellowship of Christ's Religion,
that we may eschew those things which are contrary to our profession, and
follow all such Obedientia.
things as are agreeable to the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Domine Salvator. Qui Vesperi.
habes in potestate Peccatum solvere, Dicas mihi, Oro, Exi de vinculis tuis,
Exi de nexibus peccatorum tuorum; and dicendo solve funes Er. S. Ambr. Sermon. 8.
in Psalm. 118.
rorum meorum quibus Circumdatus and ligatus sum. Etsi enim nequissimus sim.
omnium and detestabilis usu Venia.
Peccatorum; Te tamen jubente, liber co. Amen.

Lord give me grace, that Auxilium
I may dwell under the defense of the most highest, and that I may abide under
thy shadow, O thou Almighty; for thou art my hope, and my strong hold, in thee
will I trust, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Psalm. 91. 1.

O God, thou which declarest Dom. 11. post Trinir.
thy Almighty power, most chiefly, by showing mercy and pity, Give unto me
abundantly thy Gratia.
grace, that I running to thy promises, may be made partaker of thy heavenly
treasure, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O God, thou art my Completorium.
hope and my strength, a present help in trouble. Confirm me, that I may not
fear, though the earth be moved, and the hills carried into the midst of the
Sea; Though the waters thereof rage and swell, and the mountains shake at the
tempest of the same. O be in the midst of my Auxilium.
soul, and I shall never be removed, Amen. Psalm 46. 1.

O Lord, look upon me, Misericordia.
and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do to those that fear thy name.
Order my steps in thy Word, and so shall no wickedness have dominion over me,
Amen. Psalm. 119. 132.

Almighty God, give unto Dom. 14. post Trinit. Pro omni dono.
me, I beseech thee, a full increase of Faith, Hope, and Charity. And that I
may obtain that which thou do promise, make me love that which thou do
Command, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Lord, I call upon thee Bedtime. Et nocte, si vigiles.
in the day of my trouble, in the night of my heaviness: O deliver me, and I
will glorify thee, Amen. Psalm. 50. 15.

O Lord correct me, but with Judgment; not in thy anger, lest thou bring me to
nothing. And grant that thy Correction may amend me, and make me thine, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Jer. 10. 24.

Respice Me quoque, O Domine Jesu, ut propria possim recognoscere Peccata, and
fletibus piis culpas solvere. Da, quaeso, lachrymas Petri; Nolo Laetitiam
Peccatoris. Utque hic fiat, Respice tu, and des, ut mihi etiam miserrimo
Peccatorum Coeli quoque gallus cantet; ut liberatus tibi Cantem in sacula
saeculorum. Amen.

O Eternal God, and Dom. 4. post Pasch.
Merciful Father, Grant, I humbly beseech thee, that I may love all those
things that thou command, and desire that which thou do Obedientia.
promise; that among the sundry and manifold changes of the World, my Heart may
surely there be fixed, where true Joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ
our Lord,

Amen.
IV.
O Lord, I have sinned, Mane.
and dealt wickedly; nay, offended in all thy Ordinances. Let thy wrath turn
from me, for I am weak: And hear my prayers Poenitentia.
and deliver me, for thy own self, and the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ,
Amen.

Gracious Father, without thee I can do nothing but sin; nor can I confess it,
to have pardon, but by thee. I was conceived and born in sin; and though thou
did wash me from that in the Laver of Baptism, yet I have since defiled my
self again; and by many grievous Actual sins, have made my self a sinner above
all other men, considering the great measure of grace which thou have given me.
Lord, increase thy grace, and by it, weaken first, and then cut off my
Resistance; that I may see, and confess, and hate, and for sake all my sins,
and find mercy and salvation in the merits of my Blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
Amen.

O Lord, early this morning Exaudirc.
did I cry unto thee, for in thy Word is my trust: Hear me, O Lord, for Jesus
Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 119. 147.

O Lord, let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee
is my trust. O show me the way that I should walk in this day, and all the days
of my life; for I lift up my soul unto thee, in the mercies of Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen. Psalm. 143. 8.

Deliver me, O Lord, Hora tertia.
from all my offenses, and make me not a rebuke to the foolish; for man walks
in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: But Lord, what is Spes.
my hope? Truly, my hope is even in thee; and there let it still continue,
acceptable in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Psalm. 39. 6, 7, 8.

O Lord, look upon me Poenitentia.
in mercy, in the greater mercy, because the Calling and place I am in, must
give a stricter Account to thee, Look therefore upon me, O Lord, but not till
thou have nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ. Not till I have hid my self in
the wounds of Christ: That so the punishment which would otherwise overtake me,
may pass over Me. Then look, and say unto my soul, I have forgiven thee; and
by the work of thy mercy in my soul, make me feel it, through Jesus Christ my
Lord and only Savior, Amen.

O Domine, Qui Magnos Gr. Naz. Orat. 6. in fine. P. 144.
Greges Perficis, and Parvos per Gratiam auges, Per amplissimam Benignitatem
tuam copiose me Consolare, and Gregem mcum, mecum and Pro Grege.
Pasce, and Conserva: Per Jesum Christum summum Pastorem, and salvatorem
nostrum, Amen.

O Lord, plead thou my Hora Sexta. Defensio.
Cause with them that strive with me; and fight against them that fight against
me. Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me. Say
unto my soul, I am thy Salvation, Amen. Psalm. 35. 1, 3.

Give ear, O Lord, unto Exaudire.
my prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires. In the time of my
trouble will I call upon thee; for thou hear me, Amen. Psalm. 86. 6.

Deliver my soul, O God from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue, Amen.
Psalm. 120. 2.

Keep me, O Lord, thy Dom. 15. post Trinit.
poor humble servant, with thy perpetual mercy; and because the frailty of man,
without thee, cannot but fall, preserve me ever by thy help, and lead me to all
things profitable to my salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, give me such Hora Nona.
grace, that I may seek thee while thou may be found; and call upon thee
while thou art near: that I may detest and forsake the wickedness of my ways
and the unrighteousness of my own imaginations, that I may return unto thee,
and thou have mercy upon me, in Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior, Amen.

Teach me thy ways, Timor Dei.
O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth. O knit my heart unto thee, that I may
fear thy name, Amen. Psalm. 86. 11.

Lord, I beseech thee, Dom. 17. post Trinit.
grant that thy grace may always prevent and follow me; and make me
continually to be given to all good works, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Have mercy upon me, Vesperi.
O God, after thy great goodness, and according to the multitude of thy
mercies, do away my offenses; Poenitentia.
wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sins: For I
acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me: But let not this Evening
take from me the light of the Sun of Righteousness, Jesus Christ my Savior,
Amen.

O Domine, Exaudire dignare S. Aug. Sermon. 30. de ver. Dom.
Preces meas in Beneplacito tuo. Inimicum ab Actibus meis and Cogitationibus
virtute tua expelle. Multiplica mihi fidem: Guberna Mentem: Spirituales Pro
Omni dono.
Cogitationes concede super stratum vigilanti: et ad Beatitudinem tuam
producito; Per Jesum Christum filium tuum, and salvatorem nostrum. Amen.

Lord, I beseech thee, Dom. 18, post Trinit.
give me grace to avoid the Infections of the Devil; and with a pure heart and
mind, to follow thee the Obedientia.
only true GOD, Amen.

Lord, I offer up unto Completorium.
thee my Evening sacrifice, thy Sacrifice, even a troubled spirit, a broken,
and Poenitentia.
a contrite heart, which thou will not despise, in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Domine, Supplex te Oro, Respice Me, and purga mentem meam and Cogitationes
meas ab impuris Concupiscentiis and ab omni Inquinamento Carnis and spiritus,
and ab omni Diabolica Operatione, Per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Domine, Inestimabilem Misericordia.
Misericordiam tuam clementer ostende, and simul exue Me a Peccatis quae
Commisi, and Eripe Me a Poenis quas merui, Per Jesum Christum Dominum Nostrum.
Amen.

O God, for as much as Dom. 17. post Trinit.
without thee, I am not able to please thee, grant, that the working of thy
mercy, may in all things direct and rule my heart, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

O Lord, give me that Bedtime. Et nocte, si vigiles.
grace, that I may remember thee upon my bed; and think upon thee when I am
waking: Thou have been my helper, therefore under the shadow of thy wings, I
will hope to pass through the darkness of this night, in the comfort of Jesus
Christ my Lord and only Savior, Amen. Psalm. 63. 6.

O Lord, make my eyes prevent me the night watches, that I may be occupied in
thy words, Amen. Psalm. 119. 148.

O Lord, thou which Somnus.
have made the night for man to rest in, as well as the day to labor; Grant, O
dear Father, that I may so take my bodily rest, that my soul may continually
watch for my deliverance out of this mortal life: And that my sleep be not
excessive, after the Insatiable desires of the flesh, but sufficient to relieve
and maintain Nature, to live and serve thee in all sober and godly
Conversation; through the aid and assistance of Jesus Christ my only Lord and
Savior,

Amen.
V.
O Hold thou up my Mane.
goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not, Amen. Psalm. 17. 5.

Subveni Domine meus S. Aug. de. 5. Haer. c. 7.
Jesu, Et Accingere Gladium tuum circa Femur, Potentissime; Omnium Potentissime
Auxilium
egredere, Occide Me in Me, ut vivam in te, and desinant Inimici persequi me.
Amen.

O God, thou art my Consolatio.
God, early will I seek thee: My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs
greatly after thee in a barren and dry land, where no water is. O satisfy this
thirst with the freshest waters of comfort, in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
Psalm. 63. 1.

O Lord, have mercy upon me; I have waited for thee; Be thou my arm in the
morning, and my help in the time of trouble: that I may exalt thy name which
dwell on high; that I may live in the stability of thy times, and that thy
fear may be my treasure, even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Esaias 33. 1, 5, 6.

O Almighty God, and Ascensionis dies.
merciful Father, grant, I beseech thee, that as I do believe thy only Son our
Lord, to have ascended into the heavens, so I, and all thy faithful servants,
may in heart and mind thither ascend, and with thee continually dwell, Amen.

O God, the King of D om. post Pasch.
Glory, who have exalted thy only Son Jesus Christ with great triumph into thy
Kingdom in heaven, I beseech thee, leave, neither thy Church, nor my poor self
comfortless. But send us thy Holy Ghost to comfort us, and exalt us unto the
same place, whither our Savior Christ is gone before, who lives and reigns
with thee, One God world without end, Amen.

Hear my prayer, O God, Hora Tertia.
and hide not thy self from my petition; take heed Exaudire.
unto me, and hear me, how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed: Give me strength
and comfort in thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Psalm. 55. 1.

O God, the proud are Inimici.
risen against me, and the Congregation of factious men have sought after my
soul, and have not set thee before their eyes. But thou, Lord God, art full of
compassion and mercy, long-suffering, plenteous in goodness and truth. O turn
thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me; show some token upon me for good,
that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed, because thou, Lord, have
helped me, and comforted me, in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Psalm. 86. 14.

Assist me mercifully, O Lyt. Ang. Pro defensione.
Lord, in these my supplications and prayers; and dispose my way toward the
attainment of everlasting salvation, that among all the changes and chances of
this mortal life, I may ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O deliver me from them Hora Sexta.
whose words are softer Contra blandites.
then butter, when they have war in their hearts; and from them whose words are
smoother then oil, while they are very swords: Lord, I cast my burden upon
thee, that thou may sustain me, and not suffer me to fall for ever, Amen,
Psalm. 55. 22.

Bless me, O Lord, when Correctio.
thou chastenest me, and teach me in thy laws; that thou may give me
patience in time of adversity, till the pit be dug up for the ungodly. O
Lord, fail me not, neither forsake me; for I am part of thy inheritance,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Psalm. 94. 12.

Almighty and Merciful Dom. 20. post Trinit.
God, of thy bountiful goodness, keep me from all things, that may hurt Pro
desensione.
me, that I being ready both in body and soul, Pro Obedientia.
may with a free heart accomplish those things that thou would have done;
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Hora Nona.
O AEterne Deus! quandiu hic in terris sum, supplex Oro, In quantum terrena mihi
serviunt, Patientia.
doceant me esse Dominum suum, sed a Te constitutum: In quantum molesta sunt,
doceant me servire S. Aug. cont. Epise. funda. cap. 37.
tibi Domino meo, Cui dum non obtempero, illa in vindictam justam molesta esse
solent: ut sive illa mihi serviant, sive non, Ego semper serviam tibi: In and
per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Hold not thy tongue, Opprobrium.
O God of my praise, for the mouth of the ungodly, yea and the mouth of the
deceitful is opened upon me: and they have spoken against me with false
tongues; they compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against
me without a cause: But I give my self unto prayer: Lord, forgive them, and
hear me, Amen. Psalm. 119. 11.

O God, which art the Coll. 2. per Mat.
Author of Peace, and lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom stands our
AEternal life, whose service is perfect freedom: Pro pace and defensione.
Defend me and all thy servants, in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely
trusting in thy defense, may not fear the power of any adversary, through the
might of Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Dic O Domine meus Jesu, Vesperi. S. Aug. de 5. Haer. c. 7.
doce, discam (a te) quod doceam (de te), Amen.

Deliver me, O Lord, Inimici.
from the man that is evil, and preserve me from the cruel man, which
imagines mischief in his heart, and stirs up strife all the day-long. The
proud have laid a snare for me, and spread their net abroad with cords, and set
traps in my way. Lord keep me from treacherous hands, and preserve me, that
though they purpose, yet they may not be able to overthrow my goings; Even for
Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 140. 2.

Coll. 1. pre vesp. Pro Pace.
O God, from whom all holy desires, all just Counsels, and all good works do
proceed, give unto me and all thy servants, that peace which the world cannot
give, that both our hearts may be set to obey thy Commandments: and also that
by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in
rest and quietness; through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior,
Amen.

Have mercy upon me, O Completorium.
God, have mercy upon me, for my soul trusts in thee and in the shadow of thy
Spes.
wings will I trust, till these afflictions be over-past. O send out thy mercy
and truth upon me, even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 57. 1.

O Domine Misericors, qui S. Aug. Nom. Scalae paradisi ca. 4.
ad cor Altum non accedis, humilia Animam meam! O Tu, qui non videris nisi a
mundis cordibus veram Cordis Munditiem dato mihi. Sitio, O Domine, saltem da
Guttam Coelestis Pluviae qua refrigerare possium sitim meam, quia Amore ardeo.
Sitire Deum.
Nec hoc peto Domine propter merita mev, Indignissimus enim sum qui gustem, sed
pro Misericordia tua, and meritis salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi, Amen.

Lyt. Angl. Praeservatio.
Almighty God, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to direct, sanctify, and govern both
my heart and body, in the ways of thy laws, and in the works of thy
Commandments, that through thy mighty protection, both here and ever, I may be
preserved by night and by day, in body and in soul, through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

O Lord, I cry unto thee, Bedti me. Et nocte, si vigiles.
hearken unto me, O God; thou hold my eyes waking: I am so feeble, that I
cannot speak; and in the night season my soul refuses comfort: yet even then
give me grace especially, that I may commune with my own heart, and search out
my spirits, and compose them in thee, that I may rise to serve thee, Amen.
Psalm. 7. 1, 2.

Da Mihi, Domine, dormitum Somnus.
abeunti requiem Corporis and Animae. Custodi me a Caliginoso peccati somno! Ab
omni tenebrosa and nocturna Mollitie. Ignita maligni tela dolose in me vibrata
extinguito. Rebelliones Carnis meae reprimito: Et omnem terrenam and mundanam
in Me Cogitationem sopito; Per ipsum Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

I humbly beseech thee, Coll. in sine Lyt. Angl. Defensio.
O Father, mercifully to look upon my infirmities; and for the Glory of thy
Name sake, turn from me, and the rest of thy servants, all those evils which we
most justly have deserved; and grant, that in all our troubles, we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator
and Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
VI.
Mane.
DEus Magne, Deus Omnipotens, Deus summae Bonitatis; quem Inviolabilem and
Incorruptibilem credi and intelligi fas est: Trina unitas, S. Aug. lib. 1. The.
cap. 15.
quam Catholica Ecclesia colit, supplex Oro, expertus in meipso misericordiam
tuam, ne homines cum quibus mihi in pueritia in omni victu suit summa
Consensio, in tuo cultu a me dissentire permittas: Nec vel me, vel illos a
veritate and salute quae est in Jesu Christo, Amen.

O Lord, I will call upon thee, and early shall my prayer come before thee.
Lord, do not abhor my soul, neither hide thy face from me, for Jesus Christ his
sake, Amen. Psalm. 88. 13.

Lord, make me to have Dom. 2. post Trinit.
a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name; for thou never failest to help and
govern them, whom thou Timere and amare Deum.
do bring up in thy steadfast love. Grant this, even for Jesus Christ his
sake, Amen.

Almighty and Everlasting Parascue, h. e. Dom. ante pasch.
God, which of thy tender love toward man, have sent our Savior Jesus Christ,
to take upon him our flesh; and to suffer death upon the Cross, that all
mankind should follow the example of his great humility, mercifully grant, that
I may both follow the Example of his patience, and be made partaker of his
Resurrection, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Almighty God, I humbly Coll. 1. Dies.
beseech thee, graciously to behold thy family, for the which our Lord Jesus
Christ was content to be betrayed, Ecclesia.
and given up into the hands of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the
Cross, who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, one God, word
without end, Amen.

Almighty and everlasting Coll. 2. Dici.
God, by whose Spirit, the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified,
receive these my supplications and prayers, which I offer up before Pro Omnibus.
thee, for all Estates of men, in thy holy Church; that every member of the
same, in his vocation, may truly and devoutly serve thee, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Amen.

Dieu est, O Domine, Ex quo Hora tertia.
contra haereses laboravi, and sum pene fatigatus: veni Domine meus Jesu
Praeliator fortissime, Princeps Exercitus S. Aug. de 5. Haer. 7.
Domini qui Diabolum vicisti and saeculum; Apprehende arma and scutum, and
exurge in adjutorium Mihi. Amen.

Deal with me, O God, according to thy Name; for sweet is thy mercy. O deliver
me, for I am helpless and poor, and my heart is wounded within me. Lord save
my soul, Amen. Psalm. 109. 20.

My eyes are ever looking unto thee: O Lord, pluck my feet out of the net,
Amen. Psalm. 25. 14.

Almighty God, who Lyt. Angl.
have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in thy sons Name, I
beseech thee, mercifully to incline thy Ear unto me, Exaudire.
now that I make my prayers and supplications unto thee; and grant that those
things which I have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be
obtained, to the relief of my necessity, and the setting forth of thy glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O remember not my Hora Sexta.
old sins, but have mercy upon me, and that soon, for I am come to great
misery. Help me, O God of Venia.
my salvation; O deliver me, and be merciful to my sins, for thy names sake,
Amen. Pial. 79. 8.

Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise, end that
for thy loving mercy, and for thy truth's sake, Amen. Psalm. 115. 1.

O Tu unus Deus, Pater and S. Athan. lib. 5. de. unita deitate Trin. p. 444.
Dom. Trinit.
Fili and S. Spiritus, qui unitam Deitatem Nobis declarasti, and S. S. solius
Divinitatis indivisam Gloriam revelasti, and perfectam Trinitatis Tuae
sempiternitatem demonstrasti; Da Nobis, Obsecro, fidem and Obedientiam in hac
vita, and Gloriam in futura: Per and propter Redemptorem nostrum Jesum
Christum, Amen.

O Lord God of hosts, Hora Nona.
how long will thou be angry with thy poor servant that prays. O turn me
again, O God, show me the light of thy Countenance, and I shall. be whole,
Amen. Psalm. 80. 4. S. Chry. lib. 3. de Sacerdotio.


Tibi Gloria, tibi Gloria Domine; quanta apud te Clementiae abyssus? quanta
Patientiae Copia? En, qui Nominis tui praetextu ex ignobilibus and obscuris,
Clari and Illustres effecti sunt, honor abutuntur, and Contra Te qui honorem
largitus es, audentque non audenda; in S. S. Mysteria tua Injurii; ut homines
perditis moribus praediti summa cum quiet and licentia conturbanti omnia. O
Domine, Exurge, Adjuva Ecclesiam tuam, and ne sinas Ecclesia.
Animam meam in eorum Consilium descendere; Per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum,
Amen.

O Lord, I will cry day Vesperi.
and night before thee, let my prayer enter into thy presence; incline thy ear
unto my calling: for my Afflictiones.
soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto the pit. O let not thy
Indignation lie too hard upon me, neither vex me with all thy storms; but
remember of what mould thou have made me, even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

O Domine, ne sit mihi S. Hilar. l. 12. de Trinitate.
inutilis Pugna verborum, sed, incunctantis fidei constans professio. Conserva
in me, Oro, fidei incontaminatam Religionem: and usque ad excessum spiritus mei
hanc Conscientiae meae vocem dona mihi; ut quod in Regenerationis meae symbolo
Baptizatus in Pa: and F. and Sp. Sto professus sum semper obtineam; ut te
habeam Patrem, and una tecum filium tuum adorem, and Sp. Sanctum tuum
promerear; Per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Lord be merciful unto Completorium.
me, and I will sing praises unto thy name, yea I will tell of thy loving
kindness early in the morning, and of thy truth in the night season: O bless
me, and fulfill all thy works of grace in me, even for Jesus Christ his sake,
Amen. Psalm. 92. 1, 2.

Dona mihi Domine, mentem Nox.
vigilem, Cogitationem sobriam, Cor castum, somnum placidum, and ab omni
diabolica cogitatione liberum; and deinde excita me Domine hora Orationis, ut
praeceptis tuis firmiter adhaeream, ut memoriam retineam inviolatam Judiciorum
tuorum, Amen.

Lord, remember thy Bedtime. Et nocte, si vigiles.
promise unto thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust; that
thy statutes may be my songs in the house of my pilgrimage; and that I may
remember thy name in the night season, Amen. Psalm. 119. 54, 55.

In manus tuas Domine Commendo animam meam and corpus meum; creasti enim and
redemisti ea, Domine Deus veritatis. Commendo etiam mecum and mea Omnia; Tu
enim mihi gratiose largitus es illa pro beneplacito tuo. In Pace ergo me, simul
cubare and dormire facias, O Domine. Qui solus me habitare facias secure; Per
Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

O omnium Domine and Effector; Gr. Naz. Orat. 10. p. 176.
O Deus tuorum Pater and Gubernator; O vitae and Mortis Arbiter; O Animarum
Custos and Benefactor; O Qui omnia facis, and tempestive, and ut ipse pro
sapientiae tuae and Administrationis altitudine nosti, artifice Sermon
transmutas, Me Opportuno tempore tuo suscipe, tamdiu in Carne vitam meam
moderatus, quamdiu conducibile fuit mihi ipsi, and Ecclesiae: Et suscipe quaeso
ob metum tuum paratum, Non turbatum, nec in Extremo Mors.
tempore Terga vertentem; Nec invito Animo tanquam abstractum and avulsum a
Mundo, sed ut prompte and alacriter ad beatam illam and aeternam vitam
proficiscentem, quae est in Domino nostro Jesu Christo, Cui Gloria in saecula
saeculorum, Amen.

VII.
Mane.
O Lord, I will sing of thy power, and praise thy mercy in the morning, for thou
have been Laus Dei.
my defense, and my refuge in the day of my trouble; unto thee, O my strength,
will I sing, for thou, O God, art my defense and my merciful God, Amen. Psalm.
59. 16.

The Glorious Majesty Benedictio.
of thee, O Lord, my God, be upon me, prosper thou the works of my hands upon
me, O prosper thou my handiwork, Amen. psalm. 90. 17.

O Lord, open my eyes, Illuminatio.
that I may see the wonders of thy law: I am a stranger upon earth, O hide not
thy Commandments from me, for thy testimonies are my delight and my
Counselors. Lord, continue thy favor to me, that so they may ever be, Amen.
Psalm. 119. 18.

O Lord, our heavenly Coll. prae Mat.
Father, Almighty and everlasting God, which have safely brought me to Pro
Gratia.
the beginning of this day, defend me in the same with thy mighty power; and
grant, that this day I Auxilium
fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger, but that all my doings
may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that which is righteous in thy
sight; through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Hora tertia.
O my soul, wait thou still upon my God, for my hope is in him: He is my
strength and my salvation, He is my defense, so that I shall not fall; so Amen
Lord Jesu, Amen. Psalm. 62. 5.

O Lord God, be merciful Orat. Ezekiae. Imperfectio.
to every one that prepares his whole heart to seek thee, O Lord God, the God
of his fathers, though he be not according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, Amen. 2 Chronic. 30. 19.

O Lord, I walk in the Inimici.
midst of troubles, I beseech thee refresh me; stretch forth thy hand upon the
fury of my Enemies, that thy right and thy cunning hand may save me. O make
good thy loving kindness toward me: And despise not, I beseech thee, the work
of thy own hands, Amen. Psalm. 138. 7.

I deal with the thing that is lawful and right; O give me not over to my
Oppressors, Amen.

O make me, thy poor servant, still to delight in the thing that is good, that
the proud do me no wrong, for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 119. 121, 122.

Almighty God, the Lyt. Ang.
fountain of all wisdom, who know our necessity before we ask, and our
Ignorance in asking, I beseech thee to have Infirmitas.
Compassion upon my Infirmities; and those things which for my unworthiness I
dare not, and for my blindness I cannot ask, vouchsafe to give me, for the
worthynesse of thy Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, I will put my Hora Sexta.
trust in thee always: O let the people do it with me, and I will pour out my
heart before thee, Amen. Psalm. 62. 8.

O that my ways were Viarum directio.
made so direct, that I might keep thy statutes: O Lord direct them, Amen.
Psalm. 119. 5.

O Lord, teach me the Timor Dei.
way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end; yea I shall keep it
with my whole heart. O stablish thy Word in thy servant, that I may fear thee;
And that for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 119. 33.

O Lord, I will call upon Hora Nono.
thee in my troubles: O deliver me and hear me; Exaudire.
and then especially, what time any storm falls upon me; Even for Jesus Christ
his sake, Amen. Psalm. 81. 7.

Blessed art thou, O Lord: Viarum directio.
O teach me thy statutes; that my whole heart may seek thee: and that I may not
go wrong out of thy Commandments; that I may take greater delight in thy
testimonies, then in all manner of riches, Amen. Psalm. 119. 10, 12.

O praise the Lord all ye Vesperi.
his servants, ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord: with these; O
Laus Dei.
Lord, I lift up my hands unto thy Sanctuary, and will praise thy name: O Lord,
be with me this Evening, in all the mercies of Jesus Christ my Savior, Amen.
Psalm. 134. 1.

Miserae Carnis meae Infirmitatem, Protectio.
tu nosti qui finxisti me. Invisibilium hostium meorum vigilantiam, Tu nosti,
qui vides eos: protegat me Ala Bonitatis tuae; Per Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum, Amen.

O Lord, there is no hiding Completorium.
me from thy presence: for if I should say, the darkness shall cover Confessio.
me, then shall my night be turned to day; for the darkness is no darkness
with thee, but the night is as clear as the day; the darkness and the light,
to thee, are both alike: therefore, O God, I present my self open before thee;
O cleanse my soul, that it may rejoice to be seen of thee, In Jesus Christ,
Amen.

Die jam transacto, Gratias Gratiarum Actio.
tibi ago Domine; Gloriam tibi tribuo, quod sine scandalo, Hymnis effero quod
liber ab insidiis diem transegerim, Per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

Thy Righteousness, O Laus Dei.
God, is very high, and great things are they which thou have done for me; O
God, who is like unto thee? Thou have brought me to great honor, and comforted
me on every side; therefore will I praise thee and thy righteousness, O God:
and unto thee will I sing, O thou holy One of Israel. My lips will be glad when
I sing unto thee, and so will my soul which thou have delivered: My tongue also
shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long; for many are confounded and
brought to shame, that seek to do me evil. O Lord, continue thy blessings to
me, and multiply thankfulness to thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
Psalm. 71. 17. 19.

O Lord, thou keeper of Bedtime. Et nocte, si vigiles.
I rael, which in the watch of thy servants, do neither slumber nor sleep, be
my keeper, and preserve me this night: O keep my soul, Amen. Psalm. 121.4:

O Lord, give me grace Procrastinatio.
to make have, and not to prolong the time to serve thee, to keep thy
Commandments; that I may call my own ways to remembrance, and turn my feet to
thy testimonies, and then at midnight will I rise and give thee thanks,
because of thy righteous Judgments; O Lord my strength and my Redeemer, Amen.
Psalm 119. 59.

Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my
Habitation among the tents of Kedar; for my soul has too long dwelt among them
that are enemies to peace; Too long, Mors.
O Lord, but that it is thy good pleasure to continue my dwelling in this vale
of misery, Amen. Psalm 120. 4.

Quid es O Deus meus? quid rogo, nisi Dominus Deus? Quis enim Dominus praeter
Dominum, aut quis Deus praeter Deum nostrum? Adoratio and Glorificatio dei mei
Sum, Optime, Potentissime, Misericordissime, and Justissime, secretissime,
and prasentissime, Pulcherrime S. Aug. lib. 2. Cons. cap. 4.
and fortissime, stabilis and Incomprehensibilis, Immutabilis mutans Omnia;
Nunquam Novus, nunquam vetus, innovans omnia, and in vetustatem perducens
superbos, and nesciunt: Semper agens, semper quietus, colligens and non egens;
Portans and implens and proiegens. Creans and nutriens and perficiens. Quaeris
quum nihil desit tibi. Amas, nec aestuas. Zelos, and securus es. Poenitet te,
and non doles. Irasceris, and tranquillus es. Opera mutas, non Consilium.
Recipis quod invenis, and nunquam amisisti. Nunquam inops, and gaudes Lucris.
Numquam Avarus, and usur as exigis. Supererogatur tibi and debeas, and quis and
quicquam non tuum? Reddis debita, nulla debens. Donas debita, nihil perdens. Et
quid dicemus Deus meus, vita mea, Dulcedo mea sancta? Aut quid dicet aliquis,
quam de te dicit? Et vae tacentibus de te, quoniam loquaces multi sunt.
Miserere Mei Deus, ut loquar de, te and glorificem Nomen tuum. Amen.

Lord, this is the time Presumptio.
of fear, keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion
over me; that though my sins be many and great, yet I may be innocent from the
great offense; Even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm 19. 13.

O Lord make me worthy of the place to which thou have raised me in thy Church,
that all my endeavors may be, to make Truth and Peace meet together. In this
course give me understanding to discover my Enemies, and wisdom to prevent
them; An heart to love my Friends, and carriage that may bind them. Lord, make
me to love thy Church, and the place where thy honor dwells; that as thou
have honored me above many others, so I may honor thee above all; and spend
whatsoever is acceptable in the poor remainder of my life, to serve thee in thy
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, turn away my eyes, that they behold not vanity, and quicken thou me in
thy way, Amen. Psalm. 119. 37.

O Domine Misericors Salvianus, lib. 6. de gubern. dei. page 222.
quando a te ipse exoratus pacificos dies, proventus uberes, divitem bonis
omnibus tranquillitatem and abundantiam dederis super vot a crescentem; ne
sinas me tanta secundarum rerum prosperitate corrumpi, ne and tui penitus
obliviscar and mei; sed humilitatem and gratititudinem adauge, Per Jesum
Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

Visita quaeso Domine habitationem meam, and Omnes infidi and Inimici ab ea
long repellantur: Angeli tui Sancti habitent in ea, and nos in pace and
sanitate custodiant: and benedictio tua sit super Nos semper, Per Jesum
Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

Linguae Froenum.
LEt the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my Redeemer, Amen. Psalm. 19.
14.

Lord keep my tongue from evil, and my lips that they speak no guile; that so
I may eschew evil, and do good, seek peace, and ensue it, Amen. Psalm 34. 12,
13.

O Lord, give me the mouth of the righteous, that it may be exercised in
wisdom, and that my tongue may be talking of Judgment, Amen. Psalm 37. 31.

Lord, I have said in thy Grace, I will take heed to my ways, that I offend
not with my tongue: Give me, O give me that grace, that I may take this heed,
that I may keep my mouth as it were with a bridle, especially, when the ungodly
is in my sight, be it never so much pain or grief to me. Hear me, and grant,
Even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm, 39.1, 2.

Let the free will Offerings of my mouth please thee, O Lord; and teach me thy
Judgments, Amen. Psalm. 119. 108.

O Lord, set a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips; and let not
my heart be inclined to any thing that is evil, Amen. Psalm. 141. 3.

O Lord, set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips, that I
fall not suddenly by them; and that my tongue destroy me not, Amen. Ecclus. 22.
27.

Afflictiones.
IF I find favor David fugiens.
in thy Eyes, O Lord, thou will bring me again, and show me both the Ark and
the Tabernacle; and set me right in thy service, and make me joyful and glad
in thee: But if thou say, (O for Jesus Christ his sake, say it not,) I have no
pleasure in thee, Behold, here I am, do with me as seems good in thy own Eyes,
Amen. 2 Samuel 15. 25.

O Lord, though I be afflicted on every side, let me not be in distress;
though in want of some of thy comfort, yet not of all; though I be chastened,
yet let me not be forsaken; though I be cast down, let me not perish; and
though my outward man decay and perish, yet let my inward man be renewed daily;
even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 16.

O Lord, whatsoever thou shall lay upon me, I will hold my peace, and not open
my mouth, because it is thy doing, Amen. Psalm. 38. 10.

O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with thy servant according to thy Word;
before I was troubled I went wrong, but now have I prayed, that I may keep thy
law: and it is good for me that I have been in trouble, that so I may learn
still to keep it better; in the mercies of Jesus Christ, Amen. Psalm 119.65, 75.

I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. O let thy merciful kindness be my
comfort, according to thy Word, to thy servant, even for Jesus Christ his sake,
Amen. Psalm. 119. 75.

O Lord Almighty, O God of Israel, the soul that is in trouble, and the spirit
that is pierced cries unto thee; Hear, O Lord, and have mercy, for thou art
merciful; and have pity upon me, because I have sinned before thee; for thou
endurest for ever: but unless thou have mercy, I utterly perish: Have mercy
therefore, even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

O Lord, remember the promise, that the poor shall not always be forgotten,
nor the patient abiding of the meek perish for ever, Amen. Psalm. 9. 18.

Lord, I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my
trouble, and have known my soul in adversities, Amen. Psalm. 31. 8.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord; for I am in trouble, and my eye is consumed for
very heaviness, yea my soul and my body: my strength fails me because of my
Iniquity, and my bones are consumed. I am even become like a broken vessel; for
I have heard the Blasphemy of the multitude, and fear is on every side: but my
hope has been, and is in thee, O Lord; thou art my God, save me and deliver
me, for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 31. 10, 12, 14, 15, 16.

Why art thou so full of heaviness, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted
within me? O but thy trust in God, that I may yet give him thanks for the help
of his countenance. O my God, my soul is vexed within me, therefore will I
remember thee, Amen. Psalm 42. 6.

Up Lord, why sleep thou? Awake, and be not absent from us for ever:
wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery, and trouble? For our
soul is brought low, even unto the dust, our belly cleaves unto the ground.
Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercies sake, Amen. Psalm.
44. 23.

In thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion;
deliver me in thy righteousness: bow down thy Ear to me, make have to deliver
me: be thou my strong rock, and house of defense, that thou may save me. Be
thou also my Guide, and lead me for thy names sake, Amen. Psalm. 31. 1.

O God, the enemy cries so, and the ungodly comes on so fast, that they
threaten to overbear me; they are minded to do me some mischief, so maliciously
are they set against me: my heart is disquieted within me, and the fear of
death is sallen upon me: Fearfullnesse and trembling, and an horrible dread
have overwhelmed me; and I said, O that I had wings like a Dove, that I might
make haste to escape the storm, wind, and tempest: but be thou my helper, and I
will magnify thee, O Lord my strength, and my Redeemer, Amen. Psalm. 55. 3.

O be thou my help in trouble, for vain is the help of men, Amen. Psalm. 60. 11.

Gracious Father, the life of man is a warfare upon earth, and the dangers that
assault us are diversely pointed against us: I beseech thee, be present with me
in all the course and passages of my life; but especially in the services of my
calling; suffer not malice to be able to hurt me, nor cunning to circumvent me;
Nor violence to oppress me; Nor falsehood to betray me. That which I cannot
foresee, I beseech thee prevent. That which I cannot withstand, I beseech thee
master: That which I do not fear, I beseech thee unmask and frustrate; that
being delivered from all dangers, both of body and soul, I may praise thee, the
Deliverer; and see how happy a thing it is, to make the Lord of hosts my
helper, in the day of fear and trouble. Especially, O Lord, bless and preserve
me at this time from, etc. that I may glorify thee for this deliverance also,
and be safe in the merits and mercies of Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior,
Amen.

O Lord, thou have fed me with the bread of affliction, and given me plenty of
tears to drink. I am become a very strife to my neighbors, and my enemies
laugh me to scorn; but turn thee again. thou God of Hosts, show me the light of
thy countenance and I shall be whole, Amen. Psalm. 80. 5.

Help me, O Lord my God, O save me according to thy mercy; and the world shall
know, that this is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it; Amen, Lord Jesu,
Amen. Psalm. 109. 25.

If my delight had not been in thy law, I should have perished in my trouble: O
continue my delight, Amen. Psalm. 119. 92.

Pestilentia.
DEliver me, O Lord, from all my offenses, and make me not a rebuke to the
foolish; take, I humbly beseech thee, thy plague away from Pestilentia.
thy people, for we are even consumed by means of thy heavy hand: and for Jesus
Christ his sake, lay neither me, nor mine, under this uncomfortable disease,
Amen. Psalm. 39. 9, 11.

O Lord, deliver me from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence: O defend me under thy wings, and keep me sase under thy feathers;
that I may not be afraid for any terror by night, nor for the arrow that
flies by day; for the pestilence that walks in the darkness, nor for the
sickness that destroys at noonday; though thousands fall before me, and ten
thousands at my right hand, yet let it not come near me, for Jesus Christ his
sake, Amen. Psalm 91. 3.

O Lord, thou art my hope, I beseech thee, let no evil happen unto me, neither
let any plague come nigh my dwelling; but, give thy Angels charge over me, to
keep me in all my ways, O Lord, my strength, and my Redeemer, Amen. Psa. 91.
10.

O let the sorrowful sighing of them whom thou have visited, come before thee,
and according to the greatness of both thy power and thy mercy, preserve them
that are appointed to die; Even for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 79. 12.

O Lord, I beseech thee, Dom. Sepruagtsima.
favorably to hear the prayers of thy humble servant; that I, and my Si
pestilentia familiam intret.
Family, that are justly punished for our offenses, may be mercifully delivered
by thy goodness, from this and all other Infection, both of soul and body,
that so we may live both to serve and praise thee, to the glory of thy great
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, Amen.

O Almighty God, which Lyt. Ang.
in thy wrath in the time of King David, did slay with the plague of
Pestilence, threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy mercy, did
save the rest; have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now are visited with
great sickness and mortality; and like as thou did then command thy Angel to
cease from punishing, so it may now please thee to withdraw from us this plague
and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, who have wounded Lyt. Ang. Gratiarum. actio, post liberationem.
us for our sins, and consumed us for our transgressions by thy late heavy and
long continued visitation, and in the midst of thy judgment remembering mercy,
have redeemed us from death; we offer up unto thee our selves, our souls and
bodies (which thou have now delivered) to be a living sacrifice unto thee. And
here I offer up unto thee, most merciful Father, in the name of all thy people,
all possible praise and thanks, and shall ever magnify thee, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, the sorrows of death compass me, and the snares of death are ready to
overtake me; when thou will dissolve my tabernacle, thou alone know;
therefore in this my trouble I will call upon thee, O Lord; and will complain
unto my God: O be with me at the instant of my death, and receive me, for Jesus
Christ his sake, Amen. Psalm. 18. 3, 4, 5.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth, Amen. Psalm. 31. 6.

O Lord, thy hand is heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is become
like the drought in summer: I acknowledge my sin unto thee, O Lord; and my
unrighteousness have I not hid: O Lord be merciful unto me, Amen. Psalm. 34. 4.

O Lord, hear my prayer, and with thy ears consider my calling, hold not thy
peace at my tears; for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my
fathers were: O spare a little, that I may recover my strength, before I go
hence, and be no more seen, Amen. Psalm. 39. 13.

O Domine media vita in morte sumus: unde aut a quo quaerimus auxilium nisi a
te Domine? qui tamen pro peccatis nostris merito infensus est nobis. Sancte,
fortis; sancte, Misericors salvator, amarissimis poenis mortis aeternae ne
tradas me: Ne projicias me in tempore aegritudinis meae, quum deficit virtus
mea ne derelinquas me. Domine, ante te omnia desideria mea, and suspiria mea a
te non sunt abscondita; Nosti Domine: Tu Domine, Nosti intima Cordis mei, ne,
quaeso, occludas precibus meis aures misericordiae tuae: quin parce mihi, O
Domine Sanctissime, O Omnipotens Deus, Sancte, and salvator maxim misericors.
Dignissime and AEterne Judex, ne sinas me in hora mea novissima pro quocunque
terrore mortis excidere a te; Amen: O Domine Salvator Jesu.

O Lord, the snares of death compass me round about, the pains of hell get
hold upon me: I have found trouble and heaviness, but I will call upon thy
name, O Lord; O Lord deliver my soul, deliver my soul from death, my eyes from
tears, and my feet from falling, that I may walk before thee in the land of the
living, Amen. Psalm. 116. 2, 3.

Thou, O Lord, have chastened and corrected me, but not given me yet over unto
death: Open me the gates of righteousness, that I may go into them, and give
thanks unto the Lord, Amen. Psalm. 118. 18.

There is no health in my flesh, by reason of thy wrath; neither is there any
rest in my bones, by reason of my sins: yet, O Lord, be mercisul to me, and
heal me for thy names sake, Amen.

O Lord, I give thee Liberatio a morbo Gravissimo, in quem incidi. Aug. 14.
Ann. 1629.
humble and hearty thanks, for the great, and almost miraculous bringing me
back from the bottom of my Grave; what thou have farther for me to do, or
suffer, thou alone know. Lord, give me patience and courage, and all
Christian resolution to do thee service, and grace to do it; and let me not
live longer then to honor thee: through Jesus Christ,

Amen.
INDEX.
A
AMici. folio 11. Afflicti. f. 12 Auxilium. fol. 58, 59, 75, 104. Tempore
adverso. 56 Afflictiones. f. 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131,
132. Adoratio and glorificatio dei mei 114. Adventus Dom. 1. f. 18 Dom. 2. 19
Dom. 4. 19.
Dies Ascensionis. fol. 76 Dom: post Asc. 77
B
BLandientes. fol. 80. Benedictio. 103
C
COnfessio peccatorum. fol. 2, 110 Completorium, quid? fol. 34. in Margin.
Completorium, fol. 34 47, 59, 71, 95, 99, 109 Concubium. i. Bedtime, fol. 35,
49, 60, 73, 87, 100, 112 Charitas. 25, 34 Cogitationes. 37, 52 Consilium. 38,
40 Consolatio. 75 Correctio. 80
D
DOna. fol. 6. 30, 60, 71 Directio viarum. 39 Defencio. fol. 42, 47, 67 79, 81
E
ECclesia Cathol. fol. 8, 92, Ecclesia Part. 9, 97 Exaud re. 47, 54 64, 67, 78,
94, 108 post Epiphaniam. Dom. 1. fol 22 Dom. 2. 17 Dom. 3. 22 Dom. 4. 22

G
Gratia. fol. 1, 26, 41, 59, 104 Gratiae, 6, 38, 48 Gloria Deo. 56 Grex. 67
H
HOrae Orationis, viz. Prima, Mane. Tertia, i. e. Nona Matutina. Sexta,
Meridies. Nona. Tertia pomeridiana. Vesperi, Completorium, Concubium: quas
omnes videas sub literis Capitalibus, M. P. V. B.
Hora Mortis. fol. 14, 101, 113
I
INimici, fol. 13, 78, 83, 105 Illuminatio. 51, 57, 103 Imperfectio. 105
Infirmitas. 106
L
LAus Deo. fol. 102, 109 Linguae Froenum. 119, 120, 121 Liberatio a
pestilentia. 136 Liberatio a morbo gravissimo in quem incidi, Aug. 14. 1629.
143
M
MAne. fol. 16, 37, 50, 62, 75, 89, 102 Nona Matutina. 20, 39, 52, 65, 78, 80,
93, 104 Meridics. fol. 23, 42, 43, 56, 67, 69, 80, 94. 107, 108 Malitia. 26
Misericordia. 39, 42, 43, 60, 72 Mors. fol. 14, 101, 113 Submissio Mei-ipsius.
14, 50 Pro meipso. 29,
O
ORat. Gr. Naz. fol. 25, 50, 66 Orat. S. Hilar. 45 Orat. Ezekiae. 105
Obedientia. 40, 46, 57, 62, 71, 91 Opprobrium. 82 Pro Omnibus. 13, 92.
P
PEccatorum Confessio. fol. 2, 110 Peccatorum remissio. 4 Patientia. 32, 91
Presumptio. 24, 115 Preservatio. 50, 44 Poenitentia. fol. 63, 65, 70, 71 Pax.
83, 84 Protectio. 109 Procrastinatio. 112 Pestilentia. fol. 133, 134, 135, 136,
137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143 Hora tertia pomeridiana. fol. 27, 43, 54, 56,
91, 96, 108 Parasceue, i. e. Dom. ante Pasch: 91 Die Martis Pasch. 26 post
Pasch. Dom. 1. fol. 26 Dom. 2. 27 Dom. 3. 57 Dom. 4. 62 Dom. 5. 63
Pentecoste. fol. 30
Q
Dom. Quing. fol. 33 Dom. 2. Quadr. 63 Dom. 4. Quadr. 35
R
Pro Rege. fol. 10
S
SItire Deum. fol. 86 Spes. 65, 95 Somnus. 35, 74, 87 Pro Servis. 11 Submissio
mei-ipsius. 14, 50, 122 Dom. Septuag. 135 Dom. Sexag. 33
T
TImor Dei. fol. 69, 90, 107 Trinit as. 95, 98 Dom. Trin. 31 post Trinit. Dom.
1. fol. 41 Dom. 2. 90 Dom. 3. 42 Dom. 4. 44 Dom. 5. 41 Dom. 6. 46 Dom. 7. 48
Dom 9. 52 Dom 10. 55 Dom. 11. 58 Dom. 14. 60 Dom. 15. 68 Dom. 17. 69 Dom. 18 71
Dom. 19. 72 Dom. 20. 91

V
VEsperi. fol. 32, 45, 57, 70, 83, 97, 109 Vniformitas. 8 Veritas. fol. 40
Venia. fol. 42, 58, 95 Viarum directio. fol. 39, 107, 108.
FINIS.

