THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT From WILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of Canterbury the 28.
of June MDCXLI. unto the Universitie of OXFORD: SPECIFYING, His willingness to
resign his Chancellor-ship, And withal deploring his sad Estate now in the
time of his Imprisonment.



Printed in the year, 1641.

The Archbishops Letter to the University of OXFORD, declaring his willingness
to resign up the Chancelorship. Dated June 28. 1641.
MY present Condition is not unknown to the whole world, yet by few pitied,
or deplored; The righteous God best knows the justice of my sufferings, on
whom both in life and death, I will ever depend, the last of which shall be
most welcome, in that my life is now burdensome unto me, my mind attended
with sad, and grievious thoughts, my soul continually vexed with anxiety and
trouble, groaning under the heavy burden of a displeased Parliament; my name
dispersed, and grossly abused by the multiplicity of Libellous Pamphlets, and
my self bard from any wonted access to the best of Princes, and it is vox
populi that I am Popishly affected: How earnest I have been in my
disputations, exhortations, and otherwise, to quench such sparks, least they
should become coals. I hope after my decease, you will acknowledge, yet in the
midst of my afflictions there is nothing has so nearely touched me, as the
remembrance of your free and joyful acceptance of me, to be your Chancellor,
and that I am now shut up from being able to do you that Service which you
might justly expect from me, when I first received this honor, I intended to
have carried it with me to the Grave, neither were my hopes any less, since
the Parliament by his Majesty's Command, committed me to this Royal Prison.

But since (by reason of matters of greater consequence yet in hand) the
Parliament is pleased to procrastinate my trial, I do hereby as thankefully
resign my office of being Chancellor, as ever I received that dignity,
entreating you to elect some honorable Person; who upon all occasions may be
ready to serve you; I do beseech God to send you such a one as may do all
things for his glory, and the furtherance of your most famous University,

This is the continual Prayer of

Your Dejected Friend and Chancellor, W. CANT.

FINIS.

