DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn

LAWS AND ORDINANCES OF WAR, Established for the better government of the
ARMY in the Northern parts.

By His EXCELLENCE, The Earl of Holland, Lord General of His MAJESTY'S ARMY.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1641.

DITIOR EST QVI SE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE blazon of Henry Rich, first Earl
of Holland, flanked by a dragonon either side

HENRY Earl of Holland, Baron of Kensington, first Gentleman of His Majesty's
Bedchamber, Chief Justice and Justice in Air of all His Majesty's Forests,
Chases, Parks and VVarrens on this side Trent, Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, Constable of the Honor and Castle of Windsor, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, and Captain General of His Majesty's Army;
To all Officers of the Army, Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Sergeant-Majors,
Captains, other Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot: And all His Majesty's
Subjects, and others, whom these Laws and Ordinances ensuing shall concern;
Which Laws and Ordinances hereby published, all the said persons respectively
and severally, are required and commanded to swear unto, and to observe and
keep on the pains and penalties therein expressed.
Laws and Ordinances of War.
1 Blasphemy. FIrst, let no man presume to blaspheme the holy and blessed
Trinity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost; nor the known
Articles of Christian Faith; Upon pain to have his tongue boared with a
red-hotiron.

2 Cursing. Unlawful oaths and execrations, and scandalous acts in derogation
of Gods honor, shall be punished with loss of pay, and other punishments at
discretion.

3 Profaning of Churches. In the same manner shall be punished all those who
abuse and profane places and utensils dedicated to Gods public worship, or
wrong his Ministers.

4 Neglecting of divine Service. All those who often and wilfully absent
themselves from Sermons and Morning and Evening prayer, shall be proceeded
against at discretion.

5 Traitorous words. No man shall use any traitorous words against his
Majesty's sacred person, or Royal authority, upon pain of death.

6 Careless service. Whosoever shall be convicted to do his Majesty's service
negligently and carelessly, shall be punished at discretion.

7 Violating of sa^eguard. Whosoever shall presume to violate his Majesty's
saveguard, shall die without mercy.

8 Violating of the Lord General. Whosoever shall use any words tending to the
life or dishonor of the Lord General, shall be punished with death.

9 Quarrelling with officers. No man shall presume to quarrel with his
superior Officer, upon pain of casseering, and arbitrary punishment; nor to
strike any such, upon pain of death.

10 Departing from Captains and Masters. No Soldier shall depart from his
Captain, nor Servant from his master without license, though he serve still in
the Army, upon pain of death.

11 Silence in the Army. Every private Man and Soldier, upon pain of
imprisonment, shall keep silence when the Army is to take lodging, or when it
is marching or imbattayling; so as the Officers may be heard, and their
commandments executed.

12 Resisting against correction. No man shall resist, draw, lift, or offer to
draw, or lift his weapon against an Officer correcting him orderly for his
offense, upon pain of death.

13 Unlawful assemblies. No persons shall make any unlawful Assembly, or be
present or assisting thereunto; or in, or by them demand^^^ (...) pay, upon
pain of death.

14 Resisting of the Provost-Marshall. No man shall resis^ t^^
Provost-Marshall, or any other Officer in the execution of his office, or break
prison, upon pain of death.

15 Seditious words. None shall utter any words tending to sedition and uproar,
or mutiny, upon pain of death.

16 Concealing of mutinous speeches. The same punishment shall be inflicted
upon them, who after they have heard mutinous speeches, acquaint not their
Commanders with them.

17 Revenging of injuries. Whosoever shall receive an injury, and shall take
his own satisfaction, shall be punished by imprisonment, and as it shall be
thought fit by the Marshall-Court. But he that is injured, shall be bound, if
he do not forgive the injury, to seek reparation by complaint to his Captain,
or Colonel, or other superior Officer, and it shall be given him in ample
manner.

18 Drunkenness Drunkenness in an Officer shall be punished with loss of
place. In a common soldier, with such penalties as a Court-Marshall shall
think fit.

19 Provocation. No man shall use reproachful or provoking words or acts to
any, upon pain of imprisonment, and such further punishment as shall be thought
fit to be inflicted upon enemies of discipline and service.

20 Seazing on dead men's goods. No man shall take or spoil the goods of him
that dies, or is killed in service, upon pain of restoring double the value, and
arbitrarie punishment.

21 Full armor. All soldiers coming to their Colors to watch, or to be
exercised, shall come fully armed, upon pain of severe correction.

22 Slovenly armor. None shall presume to appear with their Arms un-fix or
undecently kept, upon pain of arbitrary correction.

23 Losing of horses or Arms. If a Trooper shall lose his Horse or Hackney; or
a Footman any part of his Arms by negligence or lewdness, by dice or cards:
He, or they, shall remain in quality of Pioners and Scavengers, till they be
furnished with as good as were lost, at their own charge.

24 Pawning of Arms. No Town or Countryman shall presume to buy or take to
pawn an Horse, or Arms, or furniture of Tents and Hutts, of any Soldier, upon
pain of forfeiting the double value thereof, and to be punished at discretion:
And the Soldier giving them to pawn, shall suffer a severe punishment.

25 Wilful spoiling of horses. If a trooper shall spoil his Horse willingly,
of purpose to be rid of the service, he shall lose his horse, and remain in the
camp for Pioner.

26 Borrowed Arms. If one borrows Arms of another to pass the Muster withal;
the borrower shall be rigorously punished, and the lender shall forfeit his
goods.

27 Imbeazeling of ammunition. None shall presume to spoil, fell or carry away
any ammunition delivered unto him, upon pain of death.

28 Waste and extortion. None on their march through the Countries, under his
Majesty's obedience, shall waste, spoil, or extort any victuals, money, or pawn
from any subject, upon no pretense of want whatsoever: but shall pay for their
meat and drink the usual rates, upon pain of death.

29 Taking of horses out of the Plough. No soldier shall presume, upon no
occasion whatsoever, to take an horse out of the Plough, onto wrong the husband
men in their persons, or cattle, or goods, upon pain of death.

30 Scraggling from the Colors. No soldier either horse or foor, shall
presume in marching to straggle from his troup or company, or to march out of
his rank, upon pain of death.

31 Spoiling of trees. No soldier shall presume in marching or lodging, to cut
down any fruit trees, or to deface or spoil walks of trees, upon pain of severe
punishment.

32 Swarving from the Camp. No man shall depart a mile out of the Army or Camp
without license, upon pain of death.

33 Drawing of swords after setting of the watch. No man shall presume to draw
his sword, without order, after the Watch is set, upon pain of death.

34 Giving a false alarm. No man shall give a false Alarm, or discharge a Piece
in the night, or make any noise without a lawful cause upon pain of death.

35 Drawing of swords in a quarrel. No man shall draw any sword in private
quarrel within the Camp, upon pain of death.

36 Revealing the watchword. He that makes known the Watch word without order,
or gives any other word but what is given by the Officer, shall die for it.

37 Offering violence to victuallers. No man shall do violence to any that
bring victuals to the Camp, upon pain of death.

38 A Sentinel asleep or drunk. A Sentinel or Perdue found asleep, or drunk,
or forsaking their place before they be drawn off, shall die for the offense
without mercy.

39 Failing at the Rendezvous. No man shall fail wilfully to come to the
Rendezvous appointed him by the Lord General, upon pain of death.

40 Remaining unrolled in the Army. No man that carries Arms, and pretends to
be a soldier, shall remain three days in the Army without being enrolled in
some Company, upon pain of death.

41 Out staying a Pass. No private soldier shall out stay his Pass, without
a Certificate of the occasion, under the hand of a Magistrate at the next
Muster, upon pain of losing his pay during all the time of his absence.

42 Absenting from the Watch. He that absents himself when the sign is given
to set the watch, shall be punished at discretion; either with bread and water
in prison, or with the wooden Horse.

43 Discontented with their quarter. Whosoever shall express his discontent
with the quarter given him in Camp or Garrison, shall be punished as a Mutineer.

44 Lying or supping out of the quarter. No Officer of what quality soever,
shall go out of the quarter to dinner or supper, or lie out all night, without
making his Superior Officer acquainted, upon pain of casseering.

45 Keeping of the quarters clean. All Officers whose charge it is, shall see
the quarters kept clean and sweet, upon pain of severe punishment.

46 Repairing to the colors upon an alarm No man shall fail immediately to
repair unto his Colors (except upon evident necessity) when an Alarm is given,
upon pain of death.

47 Burning and wasting. No man shall burn any House or Barn, or spoil any
Corn, Hay, or Straw, in stacks in the fields; or any Ship, Boat, Carriage, or
any thing that may serve for provision of the Army, without order, upon pain of
death.

48 Commanders must see God duly served. All Commanders are straily charged to
see Almighty God reverently served, and Sermons and Prayers duly frequented.

49 Commanders must acquaint my Lord General with dangerous humors. All
Commanders and Officers that find discontented humors, apt to mutinies, or
any swarving from directions given, or from the policy of the Army set down,
shall straightway acquaint the Lord General therewith, or others authorized; as
they will answer their neglect.

50 Defrauding of Soldiers pay: Any Officer that shall presume to defraud the
soldiers of their pay, or any part of it, shall be casseered, and punished at
the Lord General his discretion.

51 Stopping of Duellers. No Corporal, or other Officer, commanding the watch,
shall wittingly suffer a Soldier to go forth to a Duel or private fight, upon
pain of death.

52 Drunken and quarrelsome Officers. What Officer soever shall come drunk to
his guard, or shall quarrel in the quarter, or commit any disorder, shall be
casseered without mercy; and the next Officer under him, shall have his place,
which he may pretend to as his right, and it shall not be refused to him.

53 Careless Captains. A Captain that is careless in the training and
governing of his Company, shall be displaced of his charge.

54 Officer out-staying then Pass. All Captains or Officers that shall
out-stay their Pass, shall be punished at the Lord General his discretion.

55 All Officers bound to part quarrels. All Officers of what condition soever,
shall have power to part quarrels, and fraies, or sudden disorders, betwixt the
Soldiers, though it be in any other Regiment or Company, and to commit the
disordered to prison for the present, until such Officers as they belong unto
are acquainted with it. And what Soldier soever shall resist, disobey, or draw
his sword against such an officer, although he be no Officer of his Regiment or
Company, shall be punished with death.

56 Officers non-residents in Garrison. A Captain or Officer non-resident in
the place assigned him for Garrison, without license, shall have one months
pay defalked for the first offense, and two months for the second. Upon the
third offense he shall be discharged of his command.

57 Casseering of soldiers. No Captain shall casseer any Soldier that is
enrolled, without special warrant of the Lord General.

58 Mustering of false and counterfeit Troopers. No Captain of a Troop shall
present in the musters any but real Troopers, such as are bound by their oath
and pay to follow the troop, upon pain of death without mercy. And if any
Towns, or Countreyman, Victualler, Freebooter, Enterloper, or Soldier
whatsoever, of any other troop or company, shall present himself or his horse
in the muster, to mis-lead the Muster-master, to defraud his Majesty, and to
betray the Service, the same shall be punished with death.

59 Inhabitants of Garrisons must not be soldiers there. No captain of a Troop
or Company, shall take into his troop or company any inhabitant of that place
where the troop or company is in garrison, upon pain of severe punishment.

60 Commissaries of victuals and ammunition, must be true. No provider, keeper,
or Officer of his Majesty's victual or ammunition, shall embeazell or spoil
any part thereof, or give any false account to the Lord General, upon pain of
death.

61 Muster-Masters conniving at counterfeits. No Muster-Master shall vvittingly
let any pass in the musters, but such as are really of the troop or company
presented, upon pain of death.

62 Captains must send a roll of their men to the Lord General. All Captains
shall cause their Troops and Companies to be full and complete. And two days
after the general mustering, they shall send to the Lord General a perfect
List or roll of all the Officers of their troops and companies, and likewise of
all the Troopers and Soldiers that are in actual service; putting down
distinctly on the head of each man his monthly pay.

63 Every pay-day. The like roll or list shall the Captains send to the Lord
General, and to the Treasurer of the Army upon every pay-day, during the
service, with a punctual expression at the bottom of the said roll, what new
Troopers or Soldiers have been entertained since the last pay day, in lieu of
such as are either deceased or casseer'd; and likewise the day whereon they
were so casseer'd and entertained.

64 Subscribed by all the Officers of the Troop or company. Which said list or
roll shall be subscribed not only by the Captain, his Lieutenant, and Cornet,
or Enseign, but also by the Sergeants and Corporals respectively; who shall
declare upon their oaths, that the Troopers and Soldiers enrolled in the said
List, are real and actual Troopers and Soldiers, of the respective Troops
and Companies; And whosoever shall be convicted of falsehood in any of the
premises, shall be punished with death.

65 Muster-masters must use no other rolls. No Muster-master shall presume to
receive or accept of any roll to make the Musters by, but the forementioned
rolls, upon pain of the loss of his place, and other punishment at discretion.

66 Counterfeit names in the rolls. No man shall presume to present himself to
the Muster, or to be enrolled in the Muster-rolls by a counterfeit name, or
surname, or place of birth; upon pain of death.

67 Victuallers issuing naughty victuals. No Victualler shall presume to issue
on sell unto any of the Army, unsound, unsavourie, or unwholesome victuals, upon
pain of imprisonment, and further arbitrary punishment.

68 No Soldier shall be a victualler. No Soldier shall be a Victualler
without the consent of the Lord General, or others authorized, upon pain of
punishment at discretion.

69 Unseasonable hours kept by victuallers. No Victualler shall entertain any
Soldiers in his house tent or hutt, after the warning peiece at might, or
before the beating of the Ravalee in the morning.

70 Summarie proceedings. All controversies between Soldiers and their
Captains, and all others, shall be summarily heard and determined by the
Council of War: except the weightinesse of the cause require further
deliberation.

71 The Provost Marshal must look to his prisoners. No Provost-Marshall shall
refuse to keep a prisoner committed to his charge; nor dismiss him being once
received, upon pain of being liable to the same punishment which should have
been inflicted upon the party dismissed.

72 For debts and small offenses. In matters of debt, or trespass, or other
inferior causes, the Magistrate shall not lay hands upon any Soldier, but
shall acquaint his Captain, or other chief Officer therewith: Who is to end the
matter with the consent of the complainant, or to leave the party grieved to
take his remedy by due course of Law. And if the Officer fail of his duty
herein, the Lord General, upon complaint of the party grieved, will not only
see him righted, but the Officer punished for his neglect in this behalf.

73 Braving the Court of justice. No man shall presume to use any braving or
menacing words, signs or gestures, while the Court of justice is sitting, upon
pain of death.

74 Detecting of offenders. All Captains, Officers, and soldiers shall do
their endeavors to detect, apprehend, and bring to punishment all Offenders,
and shall assist the Officers of the Army for that purpose, as they will answer
their slacknesse in the Marshals Court.

Of the Soldiers Oath. All Soldiers that are really and actually in his
Majesty's service, shall take this ensuing Oath.
I Promise and swear to be true and faithful to my Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES. To obey my Lord General, and the Commanders and Officers under Him.
To observe the Laws and Ordinances of War established by Him. To continue in
the service, or to Disband according as I shall be commanded, with all
quietness of behavior and obedience. As God shall help me.

ALL which Laws and Ordinances are to be read plainly and distinctly by the
Captain, or other Chief Officer to his own Company, at least once a week. And
the Oath shall be administered in the respective quarters, by the Sergeant Major
General, assisted by the several Officers of each Regiment. In the
Horse-quarters by sound of Trumpet; and amongst the foot by beat of Drum.

FINIS.

