A SUMMARIE OF DEVOTIONS, Compiled and Used by Dr WILLIAM LAUD, Sometime Ld
Archbishop of CANTERBVRY.

Now Published according to the Copy written with his own hand, and reserved in
the Archives of St. John Baptist's College Library in OXON.

OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, Anno Dom. 1667.

Imprimatur,

GILBERTUS CANT.
Dat. Lambethae Dec. 12. 1666.
Imprimatur,

JOHAN. FELL. Vicecan.
Oxon. Dec. 28. 1666.
Et Conversus vivificasti me. Psalm: 70. 20.
O Come hither and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he
has done for my Soul. Psalm. 66. 16.

Pater noster Laesus est, Oration Dominica.
sed Pater. Qui es in Coelis Eminenter, Gerson ali^er: par. 3. pa^ 1147.
non Inclusive. Sanctificetur In me, per me, super me. Nomen tuum. Patris in
nobis, ut simus filii Patris nostri. Adveniat Regnum tuum. Ut destruatur Regnum
Peccati, per quod regnant Mors and Diabolus. Fiat voluntas tua, sicut in Caelo,
and in Terra. In me, qui sum Terra, sicut a sanctis Angelis. Panem Super
Caelestem and Corporeum. Nostrum Proprium, licite acquisitum. Quotidianum da
nobis hodie. Pro quotidiana necessitate. Et remitte nobis debita, sicut etc.
Talenta dimitte nobis Minuta remittentibus. Et ne nos inducas in tentatione^:
Nec sinas intrare ductos pronosque. Sed libera nos a Mal^. Ab authore mali
extra nos, Diabolo and Mundo; Intra nos, Nobisipsis: Et a malo Culpae, per
Gratiam; Poenae, per Misericordiam: Omni, per Pace^. Quia tuum est Regnum
Potentia Absolutum in se, Independens ab aliis. Gloria: Circumfulgens omnia and
in omnibus. Tuum. Et a Te, and per Te, and ad Te, in gloria and salute servorum
tuorum AMEN.

The Preface.
OUr Father, which art in Heaven, Petitions.
1. Hallowed be thy Name. 2. Thy Kingdom come. 3. Thy Will be done in Earth, as
it is in Heaven. 4. Give us this day our daily bread. 5. And forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. 6. And lead us not
into temptation. 7. But deliver us from evil.


The Doxologie.
For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Symbolum Apostolicum divisum in Articulos.
1 I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

2. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord.

3. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

4. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried.

5. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead.

6. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.

7. From thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead.

8. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

9. The Holy Catholic Church, The Communion of Saints.

10. The Forgiveness of Sins.

11. The Resurrection of the Body:

12. And the Life Everlasting.

AMEN.
Officium Quotidianum. In nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. AMEN.
O Lord, I am risen up, Pro Gratia Praeveniente. Liturg. Anglic.
and fallen prostrate before thee: Prevent me, I beseech thee, in all my doings
with thy most gracious^ Favor, and further me with thy continual Help; that in
all my Works begun, continued, and ended in thee, I may glorify thy Holy Name,
and finally by thy mercy obtain Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Confessio cum precatione. Per L. A. W.
ALmighty God and most Merciful Father, all Merciful, Mercy it self; I have
erred wittingly, and strayed willingly, nay Run from thy ways, more like an
untamed Heifer, then a lost or wandering Sheep. I have followed too much, even
altogether, the absurd devices and brutish desires of my own heart. I have
offended against, nay been offended at thy holy, most holy Laws. I have left
undone, not done at all, those things which I ought to have done. And I have
done, done nothing else, but those things which I ought not to have done. And
there is no health, no hope of health in me. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon
me, miserable, most miserable sinner, the greatest sinner, and most unthankful
for so great Grace. Spare me, and them all, O God, which confess their faults.
Restore me, and all them that be penitent, that desire to be penitent, that
wish they were, would be glad if they were so, that fear they are not enough,
and are sorry they are no more: For this is according to thy Promises, most
precious, most gracious, most sweet Promises, declared unto mankind in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Grant therefore, O most merciful Father, for his sake, who is
our Redeemer, Advocate, Author and Finisher of our Faith, our Propitiation,
Righteousness, and Justification; that I and all Penitents may hereafter live a
Godly, Righteous, and Sober life, to the Glory of thy Holy Name, and the
Salvation of our own Souls. Amen.

Pro Remissione Peccatorum.
O Eternal God and merciful Father; Pardon, I beseech thee, all the Sins,
Omissions, and Commissions, Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, by which I have
provoked thee unto anger, from the time of my Birth to this present moment:
That no one, nor all of my sins together, may ever be able to cry oftener or
louder in thine ears for vengeance, then the Cry of my Prayers may ascend up
unto thee for mercy and for forgiveness, and obtain that they sue for.
Particularly I humbly beseech thee, forgive unto me my Great and my Clamorous
sins, such as are, etc.

O Lord, against Heaven, and against Thee have I sinned, and committed foul
Transgressions in thy sight, but I beseech thee wipe them all out of the Book
of Remembrances which thou have written, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior. Amen.

Pro Donis.
GIve unto me, O Lord, I humbly beseech thee, a wise, a sober, a patient, an
understanding, a devout, a religious, a courageous Heart: Chaste, and temperate
reins, and thoughts: A soul full of devotion to do thee service, strength
against all temptations, especially the temptations of etc. Through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Gratiarum Actio.
O Lord, I give thee humble and hearty thanks, (increase my thankfulness, I
beseech thee) for all benefits and blessings both Spiritual and Temporal, which
in the riches of thy great mercy thou have liberally powered down upon me, but
especially Spiritual. Lord, let me not live, but to praise and magnify Thee and
thy glorious Name. Particularly I give thee most unseigned thanks for my
preservation from the time of my birth to this present moment; for etc. For
bringing me safe to the beginning of this day, in which and all the days of my
life, I beseech thee, preserve me from sin, and from danger, in Soul, and in
Body, that all my thoughts, words, and works may tend to the honor and glory
of thy Name, the good of thy Church, the discharge of my Duty, the salvation of
my Soul in the day of my appearance and account to be made before thee, through
Jesus Christ, our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Pro Ecclesia Catholica.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee, Bless thy Holy
Catholic Church, wheresoever spread upon the face of the whole Earth: Good
Lord, purge it from all Atheism, Heresy, Schism, Superstition, Factious
maintenance of Groundless Opinions; that one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism may
in all places be uniformly professed, as thy Church is, and can be but one. And
grant, Good Lord, that I may be, and continue a faithful, living, and a working
member under Christ the Head, in that Church the Body, all the days of my
life, and through the hour of my death, through the Merits, and by the Grace of
the same Jesus Christ, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

O Merciful God, Pro Ecclesia Particulari.
bless this Particular Church, in which I live: make it and all the members of
it sound in Faith, and holy in Life, that they may Serve thee, and thou Bless
them, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Pro Rege.
LOrd, bless our most gracious Sovereign, treasure up in Him all thy hidden
Blessings; make him, and keep him a devoted Servant to Thee, a constant Patron
of the Church and Truth, that He may live long, and be full of honorable
success all his days, in his Person, in his Actions, in his Queen, in his
Children, in his Servants, in his People, and crowned with Glory after life,
and in that good time that shall be best both for Him and Us, make him a joyful
Father of happy and successful Children: Under him bless the whole State
Ecclesiastical and Civil, that Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other, and
we serve and honor thee for ever. Amen.

GOod Lord, Pro Amicis and Consanguineis.
bless all the places to which thou have made me have any nearer Reference, the
place where I was borne, etc: Every Soul contained in any of these. All my
Friends, Kindred, Acquaintance, any unto whom thou have made me any way
beholding; especially my nearer and my bosom Friends, Dr, etc. All those etc.
Lord I beseech thee, forgive me and them all our sins, and continue us thy
servants both in Life and Death. Amen.

Pro Servis.
GRacious Father, bless my Servants and make them thine. Give them Grace to
serve thee first, then me with Faithfulness, Soberness, and Diligence: Make me
ever willing, and in some measure able to repay unto them the time and the
strength, which they either have or shall spend to do me Service, even for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Pro Afflictis.
O Lord, bless all the Afflicted members of the body of thy Son, wheresoever,
howsoever afflicted; Send them constant Patience or speedy Deliverance, as
seems best to thee and is best for them, according to their several wants and
necessities whatsoever; (particularly, etc.) And do unto them according to all
those mercies, which I would or should desire thou should show to my own
Soul, S. Aug. 2. cont. Advers: Leg. and Prophet. cap. 2.
if at any time thou shall be pleased to make my estate as their's is at this
present. And, O Lord, be merciful. Amen.

BLessed Father, Pro Omnibus, etiam Inimicis.
bless all sorts of men in their Particulars; mine Enemies with the Forgiveness
of sins: Turn their hearts that they may no longer hate thy Servant, and if
they will not be turned, deliver me not over I beseech thee into their Power.
And next after the Salvation of my Soul, I humbly beg it, deliver me not into
the hands of men, to the shame or scorn of the World. Amen.

Submissio mei.
O Domine Jesu! Da quod jabes, and jube quod vis. Facias animam meam paratam in
adventum tuum, veni quando vis. Des mihi ad minimum sufficientem, si placet
pacatissimam patientiam, and veni quomodo vis, O Tu, qui Salus es omnium
sperantium in Te. Et in super interpone obsecro, O Domine Jesu, Mortem, Crucem,
Passionem, Meritum and Sanguinem tuum inter Iudicium tuum and Animam meam, nunc
and semper, and praecipue in hora mortis meae. Hora Mortis.
Quae mors (obnixe precor) nunquam sit subitanea, nunquam adveniat and inveniat
me imparatum; nunquam ita adveniendo saeviat, quin ut retineam Fidem, Spem, and
Charitatem, memoriam and intellectum Sanum usque ad extremum halitum. Et esto
mihi in Deum Protectorem. Des peccatis meis Misericordiam and Veniam, Ecclesiae
tuae Pacem and Concordiam, mihi peccatorum primo Gratiam in hac vita and
Gloriam in futura. Ita, ita venias, O Domine Jesu, and miserere mei. Amen.

Lord, here I am, do with me as seems best in thine own eyes; only give me, I
humbly beseech thee, a Penitent and a Patient spirit to expect thee. Amen.

Lord make my Service acceptable to thee while I live, and my Soul ready for
thee when I die. Amen.

Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc.

SUNDAY.
O Lord, Hora 1. i.e. Mane.
by thy mercy I am risen out of my Grave where I might have slept in death, but
that thou preservedst me. Make it, I beseech thee, a Resurrection to Grace in
this Life, and to Glory in the Life to come, through Jesus Christ, who merited
both for us. Amen.

This day by the Resurrection of thy Son our blessed Savior was made Holy to
us: Give me that Grace that I may keep it Holy to thee, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

O send out thy Light an^ thy Psalm. 43. 3,4.
Truth that they may lead me, and bring me unto thy holy Hill, and to thy
Dwelling; that I may go unto the Altar of thee, O my God, even the God of my
joy and gladness, and give thanks unto thee. Amen.

Domin. 2. post Epiph.
Almighty and everlasting God, who governest all things both in Heaven and
Earth; Mercifully hear my supplications for my self and all thy people: and
grant us thy peace all the days of our life, even for Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

Ad vent. Dom. 1.
Almighty God, I humbly beseech thee, give me grace to cast away the works of
darkness, and to put on the Armor of light now in the time of this mortal
life, (in which thy Son Christ Jesus came to visit us in great humility;) that
in the last day, when he shall come again in his glorious Majesty, to judge
both the quick and the dead, I with all thy faithful servants may rise up to
the life immortal, through him who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy
Ghost, now and for ever. Amen.

Blessed God, Domin. 2.
which have caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our learning; Grant
unto me and all Christians, that we may in such wise hear, read, mark, learn,
and inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort thereof, we may embrace
and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting Life, which thou have given
us in our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Dom. 4.
Lord, I humbly beseech thee, raise up thy power and come among us, and with
great might succor us: that whereas by our Sins we are sore let and hindered,
thy bountiful Grace and Mercy, through the satisfaction of thy Son our Lord,
may ^peedily deliver us; To whom, with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honor
and glory, world without end. Amen.

Hor. 3. sive ^ona Matutina.

Psalm. 34. 7, 8.


Lord, let thine Angels tarry round about me, and deliver me: that I may taste
and see how gracious thou my Lord art, and how blessed the man is that trusts
in thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

I will wait for thy loving kindness, Psalm. 48. 9.
O God, in the midst of thy Temple, and there will I praise thee. Amen.

Lord, Psalm. 63. 3.
let me behold thee in thy Sanctuary, and there see thy Power and Glory. For
thy loving kindness is better then life, therefore my lips shall praise thee.
Thus will I magnify thee all my life, and lift up my hands in thy Name. O!
satisfy me with that Riches of Mercy which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O how amiable are thy Dwellings, Psalm. 84. 1.
thou Lord of Hosts? My Soul has a desire and a longing to enter into the
Courts of thee, O Lord; my heart and my flesh rejoices in thee, O merciful
God. Amen.

Domin. 1. post Epiph.
Lord, I humbly beseech thee to hear and accept my prayers for my self, and for
thy people which call upon thee; and grant that we may perfectly know what
things we ought to do, and also have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the
same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Domin. 3. post Epiph.
Almighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon all my infirmities; and in
all dangers and adversities, stretch out thy right hand to help and defend me,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

God, Domin. 4^ post Epiph.
thou which know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers,
that for man's frailty we cannot always stand upright; Grant, I most humbly
beseech thee, to me the health of body and soul, that all those things which I
suffer for sin, I may by thy help well pass and overcome, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, Hora 6. i. Meridie.
the sun is at height for this day upon me, but lift up the light of thy
countenance, and I shall be whole. Make all darkness and spiritual shadows
short upon me, and shorter in me, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 19. 12, 13.
Who can tell how often he offends, O cleanse thou me from my Secret sins; Keep
me also, O Lord, from Presumptuous sins, Praesumptio.
least they get the Dominion over me: And keep me innocent from the Great
offense, I humbly beseech thee. Amen.

Psalm. 84. 4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be always praising thee.
Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways.
Lord, thus bless the heart of thy servant, ^or Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Nazianz Orat. 13. Charitas.
O Sancta, adoranda, and longanimis Trinitas! Longanimis enim es, quae eos a
quibus scinderis, tam diu toleras. O Trinitas, cujus ego ut cultor ac minime
fictus praeco essem, jam pridem dignus habitus sum: O Trinitas omnibus
aliquando vel per Illuminationem vel per Poenam agnoscenda! Oro te, ut hos
quoque qui nunc contumeliis te afficiunt, adoratores accipias, ne quisquam vel
ex minimis pereat; Et hoc, etiamsi mihi propterea aliqua Gratiae jactura
facienda sit. Neque enim tantum dicere audeo, quantum Apostolus. Concede autem
hoc per and propter merita Jesu Christi Redemptoris nostri. Amen.

ALmighty God, Domin. Pasch.
who through thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ, have overcome Death, and
opened to us the gate of Everlasting Life: I humbly beseech thee, Pro Grati^.
that as by thy special grace preventing me, thou do put into my mind good
desires; so by thy continual help, I may bring the same to good effect,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Dom. 1. post Pascha.
ALmighty God, who have given thine only Son to die for our Sins, and to rise
again for our Justification; Give me grace so to put away the leaven of Malice
and all Wickedness, Contra Malitiam.
, that I may always serve thee in p^reness of living and in truth, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, Domin. 2. post Pascha.
who have given thine only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for sin, and an
Example of godly life; Give me grace that I may always most thankfully receive
that inestimable benefit, and also daily endeavor to follow the blessed steps
of his most holy life, even for the same thy Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

LOrd give me that grace, ^ora 9. i. e. Ter^ia Pome^^d^

Psalm. 37. 7, 8.


that I may hold me still by thee, and abide patiently upon thee. That I may
not grieve my self at the man whose way does prosper, nor against him, that
does after evil counsels. That I may leave off from wrath, and let go
displeasure, least I fret my self and be moved to do evil. Amen.

Paulinus Epist. 9. Princip.
Tribuat hic mihi Dominus, ut in me, pro me, fiat ignis consumens: and ardeat
hoc igne cor meum in lumen aeternum mihi, ne eodem ardeat anima mea in poenam
perennem; per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Psalm. 52. 8.
O Lord, make me like a green Olive Tree in thy house; for I trust in thy tender
mercy for ever: And I will alwais praise thee for that thou have done, and hope
in thy name for ever. Amen.

Pro meipso.
O Lord, I beseech thee, make me remember how much more then other men I have
need to call upon thee. My charge is great, and my strength little; O give me
grace to come often before thee, and to ask that help, which thou art readier
to give then I to ask, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Have mercy upon me, Psalm. 9. 13.

Aug. 14. 1629.


O Lord: Consider the troubles which I suffer of them that hate me, O thou which
did lift me up from the gates of death. Amen.

O Lord, Pro omni dono.
increase in me Faith and Devotion: replenish my heart with all goodness, and
by thy great mercy keep me in the same. Give me godly zeal in prayer, true
humility in prosperity, perfect patience in adversity, and continual joy in
the holy Ghost; even for Jesus Christ his sake, my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Pentecoste.
O God, who have taught the hearts of thy faithful people by sending to them the
Light of thy holy Spirit; Grant me by the same Spirit to have a right judgment
in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort, through the merits
of Christ Jesus our Savior, who lives and reigns with thee, in the unity of
the same Spirit, one God world without end. Amen.

Domin. Trinit.
Almighty and everlasting God, who have given unto thy servants grace by the
confession of true Faith to acknowledge the Glory of the Eternal Trinity, and
in the power of the Divine Majesty to worship the Unity; I humbly beseech thee,
bless me also, that I may live in the stedfastness of this Faith, and through
it be evermore defended from all Ghostly and Bodily dangers, for thy mercies
sake who live and reignest one God world without end. Amen.

O My God, Vesperi.

Dan. 9. 19.


incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and see. O Lord forgive: O Lord
consider and do it, for thine own sake, O my God; and for my Savior Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

Psalm. 49^ 16, 17. Patientia.
Lord let me not be afraid, though one be made rich, or though the glory of his
house be increased: For he shall carry nothing away with him when he dies,
neither shall his pomp follow him. But ever make me afraid to offend thee. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 82.
Mine eyes long sore for thy word, saying, When will thou comfort me? Lord
comfort me, for I am become like a bottle in the smoke; yet let me not, I
beseech thee, forget thy Law, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Domin. Sexagesima.

Contra Adversitatem.


O Lord God, which see that I put not my trust in any thing that I do;
Mercifully grant that I may be defended against all adversity, through Jesus
Christ my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

O Lord, which have taught us, Domin. Quinquagesima.
that all our doings without Charity are nothing worth; Send thy holy Ghost,
and pour into my heart that most excellent gift of Charity, Pro Charitate.
the very bond of Peace and all Virtues, without the which whosoever lives is
counted dead before thee: Grant this for thy only Son Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

O Lord, Completorium.

The Compline is before bed time.


fill me with grace that I may fulfill all the service which I owe thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord God, spare, I beseech thee: who shall raise up Jacob? for he is small.
Spare him therefore, O Lord; Amos 7. 2, 5.
spare thy people, spare me. Say unto my soul, thou have repented of the evil
intended, and it shall not be. Amen.

Prove. 3. 24.

Somnus.


Lord, when I am asleep, let me not be made afraid: but let my sleep be sweet,
that I may be enabled to serve thee. Amen.

Domin. 4.

Quadrag.


Grant, I beseech thee, most Merciful Father, that I who for my evil deeds am
worthily punished, may by the comfort of thy grace be mercifully relieved, For
Relief.
through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

COnsider and hear me, Bed^ time. Et Nocte, si vigiles. Psalm. 13.3.
O Lord my God: Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 17.3.
thou have proved and visited my heart, in the night season thou have tried me:
O blessed Father, purge me that thou may find no wickedness in me; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, hear me, Psalm. 119. 164.
that seven times a day I may praise thee; and be acquainted with that great
peace, which they have that love thy Law. Amen.

Domin. 5. Post Pascha.
O Lord, from whom all good things do come; Grant unto me thy humble servant,
that by thy holy inspiration I may think those things that are good,
Cogitationes.
and by thy merciful guiding may also perform the same, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

MONDAY.
POnder my words, O Lord, Mane

Psalm. 5. 1, 2, 3.


consider my meditations. O hearken unto the voice of my calling, my King and
my God; for unto thee will I make my prayer. My voice shall thou hear betimes,
O Lord: early in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look
up. But make me remember, that thou art God, and have no pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee. Amen.

Psalm. 96. 2.

Gratiae.


O Lord, bless me and I will sing unto thee, and praise thy Name, and be telling
of thy salvation from day to day. Amen.

Prove. 2. 11.

Consilium.


O Lord, let counsel preserve me, and understanding keep me. Deliver me from
the evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things; and from all such
as leave the ways of Righteousness to walk in the ways of Darkness: even for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Jerem. 10. 23.
O Lord, I know the way of man is not in himself. It is not in man that walks
to direct his own steps. Therefore, O Lord, I beseech thee, make me know my
way, Viarum Directio.
and direct my steps to thy honor and my own salvation, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

BE not wroth with me, Ho^a tertia.

2 Esdr. 8. 45, 31.

Misericordia.


O Lord, but spare me and have mercy upon me; for thou will be merciful unto
thy creature. O Lord, I and my Fathers have all had the same sickness: but,
because of us that are sinners, thou shall be called merciful; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 74. 24.

Consilium


guide me here with thy Counsel, and after that receive me into Glory. For
whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I desire in
comparison of thee. Sitire Deum.
O Lord preserve me in those longings after thee. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 29.
O God, take from me the way of lying, and cause me to make much of thy Law,
that I may choose the way of Truth, Veritas.
and lay thy Judgments before me: that I may stick unto thy Testimonies,
Obedientia.
and run the way of thy Commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty.
Amen.

Domin. 1. post Trin.
O God, the strength of all them that trust in thee; Mercifully accept my
prayers: and because the weakness of man's nature can do no good thing without
thee; Pro Gratia.
grant me the help of thy Grace, that inkeeping of thy commandments, I may
please thee both in will and in deed, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, thou art just, Hora 6. Tob. 3. 2,3,6.
and all thy ways are mercy and truth: thou judge truly for ever; remember me
and look upon me: Misericordia.
punish me not according to my sins or my ignorances, or my Fathers, which have
sinned before thee: deal not with me according to my sins, but as seems best
unto thee, O Lord my strength and my salvation. Amen.

Lord, Jer. 14. 20.

Venia.


I acknowledge my wickedness, and the iniquity of my Fathers: we have sinned
against thee, O Lord be merciful. Amen.

Remember not Lord our offenses, Liturg. Angl.
nor the offenses of our forefathers; neither take thou vengeance of our sins:
spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever. Amen.

Domin. 3. post Trinit.
Lord, I beseech thee, mercifully to hear me: And as th^^ have given me an
hearty desire to pray; so grant that by thy mighty aid I may be defended both
in soul and in body, Pro Defensione.
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Aug. Sermon. 18^ de Sanctis.
O Domine, accipe quaeso quas offero preces, dona quod rogo, excusa quod timeo:
quia tu per Christum tuum es unica spes peccatorum, and per eum spero veniam
delictorum. Amen.

O Lord, be gracious unto me, Hora. 9. 2 Macc. 1. 3, 4,5.
and give me an heart to worship thee, and to do thy Will; and open my heart in
thy Law, and send me peace: Misericordia.
hear my prayers, and be reconciled to me, and never forsake me in the time
(...) trouble, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Remember me, O Lord, Ps. 106.4. Remember me.
according to the favor that thou bear unto thy people. O visit me with thy
salvation, that I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in the
gladness of thy people, and give thanks with thine inheritance. Amen.

O God the Protector of all that trust in thee, Dom. 4. post. Trin.
without whom nothing is strong, nothing is holy; Increase and multiply upon me
thy mercy, that thou being my ruler, and guide, I may so pass through things
temporal, that I finally lose not the things eternal. Grant this, O heavenly
Father, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Grant, O Lord, that I may live in thy fear, dye in thy favor, rest in thy
peace, rise in thy power, reign in thy glory, for thy only beloved son's sake
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Vesperi.

Psalm. 17. 1.

Exaudire.


HEar, O Lord, consider my complaint, hearken unto my prayer, that goes not out
of feigned lips: and prevent me in mercy, before the Evening of my days close
up upon me; even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Domine! Oro te, S. Hilar. L. 12. de Trin. p. 195.
ultra se infirmitas mea non tendat, sed loquatur hoc solum, in quo animae
salus est. Neque in id stultitiae simul and impietatis unquam erumpam,
Praesumptio.
ut omnipotentiae tuae and Sacramentorum arbiter esse velim. Neque permittas me
erigere infirmitatis meae sensum ultra aut infinitatis tuae religiosam
opinionem, aut significatam mihi aeternitatis tuae fidem. Amen.

Illumina quaeso, Domine, Coll. Vesp. pro auxilio contra omnia pericula.

Nox.


tenebras nostras, and totius noctis hujus insidias a me and omnibus fidelibus
tuis, ab animabus praecipue, sed and a corporibus nostris repelle propitius per
Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Dom. 6. post Trin.
O God, which have prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass
man's understanding; Pour into my heart such love toward thee, that I obeying
thee in all things, Obedientia.
may obtain thy promises, which exceed all that I can desire, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Compline.

Psalm. 17. 6, 7, 8.


Incline thine ear unto me, O Lord, and hearken unto my words. Show thy
mavelous loving kindness, thou that art the Savior of them that put their
trust in thee. Defensio.
Keep me as the apple of thine eye, and hide me under the shadow of thy wings,
even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, I cry unto thee, Psalm. 141. 2.

Exaudire


let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as Incense, and the lifting up of my
hands be an Evening Sacrifice, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

The Lord is my Strength and my Shield, Psalm. 28. 8.
my heart has trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart danceth for
joy, Gratiae.
and in my song will I praise him. Amen.

O Lord of all power and might, Dom. 7. post Trin.
who art the Author and giver of all good things; Graft in my heart the love of
thy Name, increase in me true Religion, Religio.
nourish me with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep me in the same,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Bedtime Et Nocte, si vigiles.

Psalm. 39. 5. etc.

Mors.


LOrd, let me know my end, and then umber of my days; that I may be certified
how long I have to live. Behold, thou have made my days as it were a span
long, and my age is even as nothing in respect of thee: and verily every man
living is altogether vanity. For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth
himself in vain: he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell, who shall gather them.
And now, Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee. Deliver me from
all mine offenses and make me not a rebuke to the foolish, even for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

O Domine! Gregor. Nazian. Orat. 8. Submissio meiipsius.
Mea omnia and meipsum tibi dono offero, actionem and sermonem, quietem and
silentium. Tantum me habeas and du^cas; and manum and mentem and linguam, ad ea
quae honesta sunt and tibi grata, moveas: and ab omnibus, a quibus abstinere
praestat, abducas. Per and propter Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

TUESDAY.
Mane.

Psa. 1.1,2.

Praeservatio.


LOrd, preserve me, that neither this day, nor any day of my life I may walk in
the counsel of the ungodly, stand in the way of sinners, or sit down in the
seat of the scornful; but that my delight may be in thy Law, O Lord, and my
exercise in it day and night. Amen.

Erasmus. Illuminatio.
O Sol Iustitiae, Pater and Origo omnium, tuo sydere afflari reviviscere ^est,
tuo foveri lumine proficere est, tuis accendi flammis perfici est, abs^ te
deseri perire est. O ter felices, quibus mitis and roscidus exoreris. Bees me,
O Domine Jesu, lumine tuo, and discute nebulas ignorantiae meae, and caliginem
peccatorum meorum: ut non aberrans a via mandatorum tuorum, te sequar in lumen
aeternum, per teipsum unicum Salvatorem and Redemptorem meum. Amen.

O Lord, Prove. 3. 26.
thou art my Assurance; I humbly beseech thee preserve my foot from taking,
even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, Dom. 9. post Trin. Cogitationes.
give me, I beseech thee, the spirit to think and do always such things as be
rightful; that I who cannot be without thee, Gratia.
may by thee be able to live according to thy will, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Hora. 3. Psalm. 25. 1,3,4. etc.

Pro omnis generis auxilio.


O Lord, I lift up my soul to thee, my God, I have put my trust in thee: O let
me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph over me. Show me thy
ways, O God: and teach me thy paths. Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me:
for thou art the God of my salvation; in thee is my hope all the day long. Call
to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy loving kindness, which has
been ever of old. O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, or my riper
age: but according to thy mercy think thou upon me, O Lord, of thy goodness,
and the merits of Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

Almighty God, Domin. 2. Quadrages:
who see that we have no power of our selves to help our selves; Keep me, I
beseech thee, Pro Praeservatione.
both outwardly in my body, and inwardly in my soul, that so I may be defended
from all adversity which may happen to my body, and from all evil thoughts
which my assault and hurt my soul, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only
Savior. Amen.

HEarken unto my voice, Hora 6. Psalm. 27. 8,9,10, 11.

Exaudire.


O Lord, now I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and hear me. My heart has
talked of thee, Seek ye my face; thy face, Lord, will I seek. O hide not thou
thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure. Thou have been my
succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my Salvation. Amen.

Psalm. 55. 18.

Paulin. Epist. 17. page 181.

Deliverance.


At Evening, Morning, and at Noon day will I pray, and that instantly: Lord hear
my voice. O deliver my Soul in peace from the practices that are against me.
Amen.

Dom. 10. post Trin
Let thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the prayers of me thy humble servant;
and that I may obtain my petitions, make me to ask such things as shall please
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

LOrd, let me not be confounded, Hora 9. Psalm. 31. 19, 21.

Gloria Deo.


for I have called upon thee. O how plentiful is thy goodness, which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee, and that thou have prepared for them that put
their trust in thee, even before the sons of men! Lord, I trust in thee, have
mercy upon me.

My tears have been my meat day and night, Psalm. 42. 3.

Tempore advero.


while they daily say unto me, Where is now thy God? But let them have no cause
to say it any more, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Dom. 3. post Pasc.
ALmighty God, which show to all men that are in error, the light of thy
truth, Illuminatio.
to the intent that they may return into the way of Righteousness; Grant, I
beseech thee, unto me and all them that are admitted into the Fellowship of
Christ's Religion, that we may eschew those things which are contrary to our
profession, Obedientia.
and follow all such things as are agreeable to the same, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Vesperi.

S. Ambros. Ser. 8. in Psalm. 118.


O Domine Salvator, qui habes in potestate peccatum solvere, dicas mihi, oro,
Exi de vinculis tuis, Exide nexibus peccatorum tuorum, and dicendo solve funes
errorum meorum quibus circumdatus and ligatus sum. Venia.
Etsi enim nequissimus sim omnium and detestabilis usu peccatorum, te tamen
jubente liber ero. Amen.

LOrd, Psalm. 91.1

Auxilium.


give me grace that I may dwell under the defense of the most highest, and that
I may abide under thy shadow, O thou Almighty: For thou art my hope and my
strong hold; in thee will I trust, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, Dom. 11. post Trinitatem.
thou which declarest thy Almighty power, most chiefly by showing mercy and
pity, Give unto me abundantly thy grace, that I running to thy promises, may be
made partaker of thy heavenly treasure, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Completorium.

Psalm. 46.1.


O God, thou art my hope and strength, a very present help in trouble; Confirm
me, that I may not fear, Auxilin^.
though the earth be moved, and the hills carried into the midst of the sea:
though the waters thereof rage and swel, and the mountains shake at the tempest
of the same. O be in the midst of my soul, and I shall never be moved. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 122.

Misericordia.


O Lord, look upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do to those
that fear thy Name, Order my steps in thy word, and so shall no wickedness have
dominion over me. Amen.

Almighty God, give unto me, Dom. 14. post Trin. Donum omne.
I beseech thee, a full increase of faith, hope, and charity: And that I may
obtein that which thou do promise, make me love that which thou do command,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

LOrd, ^ed time Et Nocte, ^i vigiles.

Psalm. 50. 15.


I call upon thee in the day of my trouble, in the night of my heaviness. O
deliver me, and I will glorify thee. Amen.

O Lord correct me, ^er. 10. 24.
but with judgment, not in thy anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. And grant
that thy correction may amend me, and make me thine, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Respice me quoque, O Domine Jesu! ut propria possim recognoscere peccata, S.
Ambr. 5. Hexa^. ca. 25.

Poenitentia.


and fletibus piis culpas solvere. Da quaeso lacrymas Petri: nolo laetitiam
peccatoris. Utque hoc fiat, Respice tu, and des ut mihi etiam miserrimo
peccatorum aliquis gallus cantet; ut liberatus tibi cantem in secula seculorum.
Amen.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, grand, I humbly beseech thee, Dom. 4. post
Pasc.
that I may love all those things which thou command, and desire that which
thou do promise, Obedientia.
that among the sundry and manifold changes of the world, my heart may surely
there be fixed, where true joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

WEDNESDAY.
O Lord, I have sinned, Mane.

Baruch 2. 12,14.

Poenitentia.


and dealt wickedly; nay, offended in all thine Ordinances. Let thy wrath turn
from me, for I am weak; and hear my prayers, and deliver me for thine own sake,
and the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Gracious Father, without thee I can do nothing but sin; nor can I confess it
to have pardon but by thee. I was conceived and born in sin: And though thou
did wash me from that in the laver of Baptism, yet I have since defiled my
self again, and by many grievous actual sins, have made my self a sinner above
all other men, considering the great measure of grace that thou have given me.
Lord, increase thy grace, and by it weaken first, and then cut off my
resistance, that I may see, and confess, and hate, and forsake all my sins, and
find mercy and salvation in the merits of my blessed Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 147.

Exaudire.


O Lord, early this morning do I cry unto thee; for in thy word is my trust.
Hear me, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Psalm. 143. 8.
O Lord, let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is
my trust. O show me the way that I should walk in this day, and all the days
of my life; for I lift up my soul unto thee in the mercies of Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Deliver me, O Lord, Hora. 3. Psalm. 39. 9,7, 8.
from all mine offenses, and make me not a rebuke to the foolish. For man
walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain. But Lord, what is my
hope? Spes.
truly my hope is even in thee: And there let it still continue acceptable in
Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

O Lord, Poenitentia.
look upon me in mercy; In the greater mercy, because the calling and place I
am in, must give a stricter account to thee. Look therefore upon me, O Lord,
but not till thou have nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ: not till thou
have bathed me in the Blood of Christ: not till I have hid my self in the
Wounds of Christ, that so the punishment, which should else overtake me, may
pass over me: then look, and say unto my soul, I have forgiven thee; and by the
work of thy mercy in my soul make me feel it, through Jesus Christ our only
Lord and Savior. Amen.

Gr. Naz. Orat. 6. fine. page 144.

Pro grege


O Domine, qui magnos greges perficis, and parvos per gratiam auges, pro
amplissima benignitate tua copiose me consolare, and gregem meum mecum and
pasce and conserva: per Jesum Christum summum Pastorem, et Salvatorem nostrum.
Amen.

O Lord, Hora 6. Psalm. 35. 1, 3.

Defensio.


plead thou my cause with them that strive with me, and fight against them that
fight against me. Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them that
persecute me. Say unto my soul, I am thy Salvation. Even so. Amen.

Give ear, O Lord, Ps. 86. 6.

Exaudire.


unto my Prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires. In the time of my
trouble I will call upon thee; for thou hear me. Amen.

Deliver my soul, O God, Ps. 120.2.

Deliverance.


from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. Amen.

Dom. 15. post Trin.
Keep me, O Lord, thy poor humble servant, with thy perpetual mercy: And because
the frailty of man without thee cannot but fall, preserve me ever by thy help,
and lead me to all things profitable to my salvation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O Lord, Hora 9. Esai. 55. 6,7.
give me such grace as I may seek thee while thou may be found, and call
upon thee while thou art near; that I may detest and forsake the wickedness of
my ways, Paenitentia.
and the unrighteousness of my own imaginations: that I may return unto thee,
and thou have mercy upon me in Jesus Christ my only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Teach me thy ways, O Lord, Psalm. 86. 11.

Timor Dei.


and I will walk in thy truth. O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy
Name. Amen.

Lord, I beseech thee, Dom. 17. post Trin.

Pro Gratia.


grant that thy Grace may always prevent and follow me, and make me continually
to be given to all good works, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

HAve mercy upon me, Vesperi.

Psalm. 51. 1.

Poenitentia.


O God, after thy great^ goodness, and according to the multitude of thy
Mercies do away mine offenses. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and
cleanse me from my sin: For I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before
me. But let not this Evening take from me the light of the Sun of
Righteousness, Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

S. Aug. Ser. 30. de Verb. Dom. and Ser. 120. de Diversis, et Ser. 2.

Donum omne.


O Domine, exaudire dignare preces meas in beneplacito tuo. In^micum ab actibus
meis and cogitationibus virtute tua expelle. Multiplica mihi fidem, guberna
mentem, spirituales cogitationes concede (super stratum vigilanti,) and ad
beatitudinem tuam perducito, per Jesum Christum Filium tuum, and Salvatorem
nostrum. Amen.

Dom. 18. post Trin.

Obedientia.


Lord, I beseech thee, give me grace to avoid the infections of the Devil, and
with a pure heart and mind to follow thee the only true God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

LOrd, Compline.

Ps. 51.17.

Poenitentia.


I offer up unto thee my Evening Sacrifice; thy Sacrifice, even a troubled
spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, which thou will not despise, in Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Domine, supplex te oro, respice me, and purga mentem meam and cogitationes
meas ab impuris concupiscentiis, and ab omni inquinamento carnis and spiritus,
and ab omni diabolica operatione, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Domine, Misericordia.
ineffabilem misericordiam tuam clementer ostende, and simul exue me a peccatis
quae commisi, and eripe me a poenis quas merui, per Christum Dominum nostrum.
Amen.

Dom. 19. post Trin.
O God, for as much as without thee I am not able to please thee, grant that the
working of thy mercy may in all things direct and rule my heart, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Bedtime Et Nocte, si vigiles.
O Lord, give me that grace, that I may remember thee upon my Bed, and think
upon thee when I am waking. Psalm. 63.6
Thou have been my helper; therefore under the shadow of thy wings I will hope
to pass through the darkness of this night, Nox.
in the comfort of Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 148.
O Lord, make mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I may be occupied in thy
words. Amen.

O Lord, thou which have made the night for man to rest in, as well as the day
to labor; Grant, dear Father, that I may so take my bodily rest, that my soul
may continually watch for my deliverance out of this mortal life. Somnus.
And that my sleep be not excessive, according to the insatiable desires of the
flesh, but sufficient to relieve and maintain nature; to live and serve thee in
all sober and godly conversation, through the aid and assistance of Jesus
Christ my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

THURSDAY.
Mane.

Psalm. 17. 5.


O Hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. Amen.

S. Aug. de 5. Haeres. cap. 7.

Auxilium.


Subveni Domine mi Jesu, and accingere gladium tuum circa femur Potentissime.
Omnium Potentissime egredere: Occide me in me, ut vivam in te, and desinant
inimici persequi me. Amen.

Ps. 63.1.

Consolatio.


O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: My soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs greatly after thee, in a barren and dry land, where no water is.
O satisfy this thirst with thy freshest waters of comfort, in Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O Lord, Esaias 33. 2,5,6.
have mercy upon me; I have waited for thee: Be thou my arm in the morning, and
my help in the time of trouble: that I may exalt thy Name which dwell on
high, that I may live in the stability of thy times, and that thy fear may be
my treasure, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Almighty God and merciful Father, Ascensioonis dies.
grant, I beseech thee, that as I do believe thy only Son our Lord to have
ascended into the heavens; so I, and all thy faithful Servants, may in heart
and mind thither ascend, and with thee continually dwell. Amen.

Dom. post Ascen.
O God, the King of glory, who have exalted thine only Son Jesus Christ with
great triumph into thy Kingdom in heaven, I beseech thee leave neither thy
Church, nor my poor self comfortless; but send us thy Holy Ghost to comfort us,
and exalt us unto the same place, whither our Savior Christ is gone before,
who lives and reigns with thee, one God world without end. Amen.

Hora 3. Ps. 55. 2.

Exaudire.


HEar my prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my petition. Take heed unto
me and hear me, how I mourn in my prayer and am vexed. Give me strength and
comfort in thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, Ps. 86.14.

Inimici.


the proud are risen against me, and the Congregation of factious men have
sought after my soul, and have not set thee before their eyes. But thou Lord
God art full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, plenteous in goodness and
truth. O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me: show some token upon
me for good, that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed, because thou
Lord have helped me, and comforted me in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Assist me mercifully, O Lord, Liturg. Angl. Defensio.
in these, and all other my supplications and prayers, and dispose my ways
toward the attainment of everlasting salvation, that among all the changes and
chances of this mortal life, I may ever be defended by thy most gracious and
ready help, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Hora 6. Psalm. 55. 22.

Blandientes.


O Deliver me from them whose words are softer then butter, when they have war
in their heart: And from them whose words are smoother then oil, while they are
very swords. Lord, I cast my burden upon thee, that thou may sustain me, and
not suffer me to fall for ever. Amen.

Bless me, O Lord, Ps. 94.12.

Correctio.


when thou chastenest me, and teach me in thy law; that thou may give me
patience in time of adversity, till the pit be dug up for the ungodly. O
Lord, fail me not, neither forsake me, for I am part of thine Inheritance in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and merciful God, Dom. 20. post Trin^
of thy bountiful goodness keep me from all things that may hurt me; Defensio.
that I being ready both in body and soul, Obedientia.
may with a free heart accomplish those things that thou would have done,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Hora 9. Patientia S. Aug. cont. Epist. Fundam. c. 37.
O AEterne Deus, quamdiu hic in terris sum, supplex oro, in quantum terrena
mihi serviunt, doceant me esse Dominum suum, sed a te constitutum: In quantum
molesta sunt, doceant me servire ^ibi Domino meo, cui dum non obtempero, illa
in justam vindictam molesta esse solent: Ut sive illa mihi serviant, sive non,
ego semper serviam tibi, in and per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Psalm. 109. 1.

Opprobrium.


Hold not thy tongue, O God of my praise; for the mouth of the ungodly, yea, and
the mouth of the deceitful is opened upon me: And they have spoken against me
with false tongues, they compassed me about also with words of hatred, and
fought against me without a cause. But I give my self unto prayer; Lord,
forgive them, and hear me. Amen.

O God which art the author of peace, Prec. Mat. Coll. pro Pace.
and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom stands our eternal life, whose
service is perfect freedom; Et pro defensione.
defend me and all thy servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely
trusting in thy defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the
might of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

DIc, o Domine mi Jesu, doce, disca^ a te, quod doceam de te. Vesperi.

Aug. de 5. Haeres. c. 7.

Psalm. 140. 1, 2.

Inimici.


Amen

Deliver me, O Lord, from the man that is evil, and preserve me from the cruel
man, which imagines mischief in his heart, and stirs up strife all the day
long: The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread their net abroad with
cords, and set traps in my way. Lord keep me from treacherous hands, and
preserve me, that though they purpose, yet they may not be able to overthrow my
goings, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Coll. 1. Precum Vespert.
O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do
proceed: Give unto me, and all thy servants, that peace which the world cannot
give, Pro Pace.
that both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by
thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest
and quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

HAve mercy upon me O God, Compline.

Psalm. 57.1.

Spes.


have mercy upon me, for my soul trusts in thee, and in the shadow of thy
wings will I trust, till these and all other my afflictions be over-past. O
send out thy mercy and truth upon me, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Domine misericors qui ad cor altum non accedis, S. Aug. Nom. Scala Paradisi.
c. 4.
humilia animam meam. O tu, qui non videris nisi a mundis cordibus, veram
cordis munditiem dato mibi. Sitio, O Domine, Sitire Deum.
da arrham haereditatis futurae, saltem da guttam coelestis pluviae, qua
refrigerare possim sitim meam, quia amore ardeo. Nec hoc peto, Domine, propter
merita mea, indignissimus enim sum qui gustem; sed pro misericordia tua, and
meritis Salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi. Amen.

Liturg. Angl.

Praeservatio.


Almighty God, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to direct, sanctify and govern both
my heart and body in the ways of thy Laws, and in the works of thy
Commandments, that through thy mighty protection, both here and ever I may be
preserved by night and by day, in body and in soul, through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Bedtime Et noc^e, si vigiles

Ps. 77.1,2.


O Lord, I cry unto thee, hearken unto me, O God. Thou hold my eyes waking: I
am so feeble that I cannot speak: And in the night season my soul refuses
comfort; Tempore valde premente.
yet even then give me grace especially, that I may commune with mine own
heart, and search out my spirits, and compose them in thee, that I may rise to
serve thee. Amen.

Da mihi, Domine, Somnus.
dormitum abeunti requiem corporis and animae. Custodi me a caliginoso peccati
somno, ab omni tenebrosa and nocturna mollitie. Ignita maligni tela dolose in
me vibrata extinguito. Rebelliones carnis meae reprimito. Et omnem terrenam and
mundanam in me cogitationem sopito, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

I humbly beseech thee, Coll. in fine Lit. Anglic.
O Father, mercifully to look upon my infirmities; Defensio.
and for the glory of thy Names sake, turn from me and the rest of thy
servants, all those evils which we most justly have deserved: And grant that in
all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and
evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and
glory, through our only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FRIDAY.
DEus magne, Deus omnipotens, Mane.

S. Aug. L. 1. Ret. c. 15. and de Duab. Anim. cont. Manich. c. 15.


Deus summae bonitatis, quem inviolabilem and incorruptibilem credi and
intelligi fas est; Trina Unitas, quam Catholica Ecclesia colit, supplex oro,
expertus in meipso misericordiam tuam, ne homines, cum quibus mihi a pueritia
in omni victu fuit summa consensio, in tuo cultu a me dissentire permittas: nec
vel me vel illos a veritate and salute, quae est in Christo Jesu. Amen.

O Lord, I will call upon thee, Ps. 88.13.
and early shall my prayer come before thee. Lord, do not abhor my soul,
neither hide thy face from me, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Dom. 2. post Trin. Timere, Amare Deum.
Lord, make me to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy Name; for thou
never failest to help and govern them whom thou do bring up in thy steadfast
love. Grant this even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Parasceue.

Domin. ante Pasc.


Almighty and everlasting God, which of thy tender love toward man, have sent
our Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon him our flesh, and to suffer death upon
the cross, that all mankind should follow the example of his great humility:
Mercifully grant that I may both follow the example of his patience, and be
made partaker of his resurrection, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, Coll. 1. diei.
I humbly beseech thee graciously to behold thy Family, Ecclesia.
for the which our Lord Jesus Christ was content to be betrayed, and given up
into the hands of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the cross, who lives
and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen.

Almighty and everlasting God, Coll. 2. diei.
by whose Spirit the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified;
Receive these my supplications and prayers which I offer up before thee, Pro
omnibus.
for all estates of men in thy holy Church, that every member of the same, in
his vocation, may truly and devoutly serve thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Hora 3.

S. Aug. de 5. Haeres. cap. 7.

Haereses.


Diu est, O Domine, ex quo contra Haereses laboravi, and sum poene fatigatus.
Veni Domine mi Jesu, praeliator fortissime, Princeps exercitus Domini, qui
Diabolum vicisti and seculum: Apprehende arma and scutum, and exurge in
adjutorium mihi. Amen.

Psalm. 109. 20.

Deliverance.


Deal with me, O God, according to thy Name; for sweet is thy mercy. O deliver
me, for I am helpless and poor, and my heart is wounded within me. Lord save my
soul. Amen.

Ps. 25.14.
Mine eyes are ever looking unto thee, O Lord; O pluck my feet out of the net.
Amen.

Almighty God, Liturg. Angl.
who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy Son's Name, I
beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to me, now that in his Name I
make my prayers and supplications unto thee; Exaudire.
and grant that those things which I have faithfully asked according to thy
will, may effectually be obtained, to the relief of my necessity, and to the
setting forth of thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Remember not my old sins, Hora 6. Ps. 79. 8.

Venia.


but have mercy upon me, and that soon, for I am come to great misery. Help me,
O God of my salvation; O deliver me, and be merciful unto my sins, for thy
Names sake. Amen.

Psalm. 115. 1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise; and that
for thy loving mercy and for thy truths sake. Amen.

S. Athan. Lib. 1. de Vnita Deitate Trinit. page 444.
O tu unus Deus Pater, and Fili, and Sancte Spiritus, qui unitam Deitatem nobis
declarasti, and sacrosanctae solius Divinitatis indivisam gloriam revelasti, et
perfectam Trinitatis tuae sempiternitatem demonstrasti; Da mihi obsecro fidem
et obedientiam in hac vita, Dom. Trinit.
and gloriam in futura, per and propter Redemptorem nostrum Jesum Christum.
Amen.

O Lord God of hosts, Hora 9. Ps. 80. 4.
how long will thou be angry with thy poor servant that prays? O turn me
again, O God; show the light of thy countenance, and I shall be whole. Amen.

Tibi gloria, tibi gloria, Domine! S. Chrysostom. L. 3. de Sacerdotio.
Quanta apud te clementiae abyssus? quanta patientiae copia? En, qui nominis
tui praetextu ex ignobilibus and obscuris clari and illustres effecti sunt,
honor abutuntur, and contra te, qui honorem largitus es; auden^que non audenda
in sacro sancta mysteria tua injurii. Probos quantum possunt extrudunt, ut
homines perditis moribus praediti summa cum quiet and licentia conturbent
omnia. Ecclesia.
O Domine, exurge adjuva Ecclesiam tuam, and ne sinas animam meam in eorum
Consilium descendere, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Vesperi.

Psalm. 88. 1, 2.


O Lord, I will cry day and night before thee, let my prayer enter into thy
presence, incline thine ear unto my calling; for my soul is full of trouble,
Afflictiones.
and my life draws nigh unto the pit. O let not thine indignation lie too hard
upon me, neither vex me with all thy storms: But remember of what mould thou
have made me, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

S. Hilar. l. 12. de Trin. fine. Fides.
O Domine, ne sit mihi inutilis pugna verborum, sed incunctan^is fidei constans
professio. Conserva, oro, in me fidei incontaminatam religionem. Et, usque ad
excessum spiritus mei, hanc conscientiae meae vocem dona mihi: ut, quod in
regenerationis meae symbolo baptizatus in Patre and Filio and Spiritu Sancto
professus sim, semper obtineam. Ut te habeam Patrem; ut una tecum Filium tuum
adorem, and Spiritum Sanctum tuum promerear, per Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum. Amen.

O Lord, be merciful unto me, Compline.

Psalm. 92. 1, 2.

Misericordia.


and I will sing praises unto thy Name; yea, I will tell of thy loving kindness
early in the morning, and of thy truth in the night-season. O bless me, and
fulfill all thy works of grace in me, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Nox.
Dona mihi, Domine, mentem vigilem, cogitationem sobriam, cor castum, somnum
placidum, and ab omni diabolica imaginatione liberum. Et deinde excita me,
Domine, hora Orationis, ut praeceptis tuis firmiter adhaeream, and memoriam
retineam in violatam judiciorum tuorum. Amen.

Bedtime Et Nocte, si vigiles.

Psalm. 119. 49, 54.


LOrd, remember thy promise unto thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to put
my trust. That thy statutes may be my songs in the house of my pilgrimage; and
that I may remember thy Name in the night season. Amen.

In manus tuas, Domine, commendo animam and corpus meum: creasti enim and
redemisti ea, Domine Deus veritatis. Commendo autem mecum et mea omnia; tu enim
mihi gratiose largitus es illa pro beneplacito tuo. In pace ergo me simul
cubare and dormire facias, o Domine, qui solus me habitare facis secure, per
Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O omnium Domine and effector, Gr. Naz. Orat. 10. p 176.
O Deus tuorum Pater and Gubernator, O vitae and mortis arbiter, O Animarum
Custos and Benefactor; O qui omnia facis, and tempestive, atque ut ipse pro
sapientiae tuae and administrationis altitudine nosti, artifice sermon
transmutas! me opportuno tempore tuo suscipe, Mors.
tamdiu in carne vitam meam moderatus, quamdiu conducibile fuerit mihiipsi and
Ecclesiae. Et suscipe quaeso ob metum tuum paratum, non turbatum, nec in
extremo die terga vertentem, nec invito animo tanquam abstractum aut avulsum a
mundo, sed ut prompte and alacriter ad beatam illam and aeternam vitam
proficiscentem, quae est in Christo Jesu Domino nostro, cui gloria in secula
seculorum. Amen.

Aug. Ser. 53. de diversis.
O Domine Deus meus, voca me, ut accedam ad te: firma me, ne recedam a te, per
Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

SATURDAY.
O Lord, Mane.

Ps. 59.16.

Laus Dei.


I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy in the morning, for thou
have been my defense and my refuge in the day of my trouble. Unto thee, O my
strength will I sing; for thou, O God, art my defense and my merciful God. Amen.

The glorious Majesty of thee, Ps. 90.17.

Benedictio


O Lord my God, be upon me: prosper thou the work of my hands upon me, O
prosper thou my handiwork. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 119. 18
open mine eyes that I may see the wonders of thy Law. Illuminatio.
I am a stranger upon earth, O hide not thy Commandments from me. For thy
Testimonies are my delight and my counselors. Lord continue that favor to me,
that so they may ever be. Amen.

Prec. Mat. Coll. pro Gratia.
O Lord, our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought me to the beginning of this day; Auxilium.
defend me in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day I fall
into no sin, nor run into any kind of danger: but that all my doings may be
ordered by thy governance, to do always that which is righteous in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O My soul, Hora. 3. Ps. 62. 5.
wait thou still upon my God, for my hope is in him: he is my strength and my
salvation, he is my defense so that I shall not fall. So Amen Lord Jesus, Amen.

O Lord God, Oration Ezekiae, 2 Chronicles. 30. 19.

Imperfectio.


be merciful unto every one that prepares his whole heart to seek thee, O Lord
God, the God of his Fathers, though he be not according to the Purification of
the Sanctuary. Amen.

O Lord, Ps. 138.7.

Inimici.


I walk in the midst of trouble, I beseech thee refresh me. Stretch forth thy
hand upon the fury and the cunning of mine enemies, that thy right hand may
save me. O make good thy loving kindness toward me, and despise not, I beseech
thee, the work of thine own hands. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 121.

Inimici.


I deal with the thing that is lawful and right; O give me not over unto mine
oppressors. Amen.

ver. 122.
O make me, thy poor servant, still to delight in that which is good, that the
proud do me no wrong; for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Liturg. Angl.
Almighty God, the fountain of all wisdom, who know our necessities before we
ask, and our ignorance in asking; I beseech thee to have compassion upon my
infirmities, Infirmitas.
and those things which for my unworthiness I dare not, and for my blindness I
cannot ask, vouchsafe to give me, for the worthiness of thy Son Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, Hora 6. Ps. 62. 8.
I will put my trust in thee always: O let thy people do it with me, and I will
pour out my heart before thee, O God my hope. Amen.

O that my ways were made so direct that I might keep thy Statutes! Ps. 119.5.

Viarum directio.


O Lord direct them. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 119. 33.
teach me the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end: yea, I
shall keep it with my whole heart. O stablish thy word in thy sevant, that I
may fear thee; Timor Dei.
and that for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Hora 9. Ps. 81. 7.

Exaudire.

Afflictiones.


O Lord, I will call upon thee in my troubles, O deliver me and hear me; and
then especially at what time any storm falls upon me, even for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 10, 12.

Viarum directio.


Blessed art thou, O Lord, O teach me thy Statuts: That my whole heart may seek
thee, and that I may not go wrong out of thy Commandments: That I may take
greater delight in the way of thy Testimonies, then in all manner of riches.
Amen.

Vesperi.

Ps. 134. 1.

Laus Dei.


O Praise the Lord all ye his servants, ye that by night stand in the house of
the Lord. With these, O Lord, I lift up my hands to thy Sanctuary, and will
praise thy Name. O Lord, be with me this Evening in all the mercies of Jesus
Christ my Savior. Amen.

Miserae carnis meae infirmitatem tu nosti, qui finxisti me: Invisibilium
hostium meorum vigilantiam tu nosti, qui vides eos; Protectio.
Protegat me ala bonitatis tuae, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Lord, Completorium.

Psalm. 139. 10.


there is no hiding me from thy presence: For if I should say, the darkness
shall cover me, then shall my night be turned to day. For the darkness is no
darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as the day, the darkness and the
light to thee are both alike. Therefore, O God, Confessio.
I present my self open before thee, O cleanse my soul, that it may rejoice to
be seen of thee in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Gratiarum actio.
Die jam transacto, gra^ias tibi ago Domine, gloriam tibi tribuo, quod sine
scandalo; hymnis effero, quod liber ab insidiis diem transegerim, per Jesum
Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Psalm. 71. 17, 19. etc.
Thy righteousness, O God, is very high, and great things are they which thou
have done for me. O God, who is like unto thee? Thou have brought me to great
honor, and comforted me on every side. Laus Dei.
Therefore will I praise thee and thy righteousness, O God, and unto thee will
I sing, O thou holy One of Israel. My lips will be glad when I sing unto thee,
and so will my soul which thou have delivered. My tongue also shall talk of thy
righteousness all the day long: for many are confounded and brought to shame
that have sought to do me evil. O Lord, Gratiarum actio.
continue thy blessings to me, and multiply my thankfulness to thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, thou keeper of Israel, Bedtime Et Nocte, si vigiles.

Ps. 121.4.


which in the watch over thy servants do neither slumber nor sleep, be my
keeper, and preserve me this night. O keep my soul. Amen.

Lord, Psalm. 119. 59.
give me grace to make haste, Procrastinatio.
and not prolong the time to keep thy Commandments. That I may call my own ways
to remembrance, and turn my feet to thy Testimonies. And then at midnight will
I rise and give thee thanks, because of thy righteous judgments, O Lord my
strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

Ps. 120.4.
Woe is me, that I am constrain^d to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation
among the tents of Kedar: For my soul has too long dwelt among them that are
enemies unto peace: Mors.
Too long, O Lord, but that it is thy good pleasure to continue my dwelling in
this vale of misery. Amen.

Quid es, o Deus meus? Adoratio and Glorificatio Dei mei.

S. Aug. l. 2. Confess. c. 4.


Quid rogo nisi Dominum, Deus? Quis enim Dominus praeter Dominum, aut quis Deus
praeter Deum nostrum? Sum, Optime, Potentissime, Misericordissime and
Iustissime, Secretissime and Presentissime, Pulcherrime and Fortissime,
Stabilis and Incomprehensibilis, Immutabilis, mutans omnia. Nunquam novus,
nunquam vetus, innovans omnia, and in vetustatem perducens superbos, and
nesciunt. Semper agens, semper quietus, colligens and non egens. Portans, and
implens, and protegens, creans, and nutriens, and perficiens. Quaeris, cum
nihil desit tibi. Amas, necaestuas. Zelas, and securus es. Poenitet te, and non
doles. Irasceris, and tranquillus es. Opera mutas, non consilium. Recipis quod
invenis, and nunquam amisisti. Nunquam inops, and gaudes lucris. Nunquam
avarus, and usuras exigis. Supererogatur tibi ut debeas, and quis habet
quicquam non tuum? Reddis debita, nulli debens: Donas debita, nihil perdens. Et
quid dicimus, Deus meus, vita mea, dulcedo mea sancta? Aut quid dicit aliquis,
quum de te dicit? Et vae tacentibus de te, quoniam loquaces muti sunt: Miserere
mei Deus, ut loquar de te, and glorificem nomen tuum. Amen.

PROSPERA.
LOrd, this is the time of fear, Ps. 19.13.
keep thy servant from Presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over me:
That though my sins be many and great, yet I may be innocent from the Great
offense, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, make me worthy of the place to which thou have raised me in thy
Church, that all my endeavors may be to make Truth and Peace meet together. In
this course give me understanding to discover my enemies, and wisdom to prevent
them: A heart to love my friends, and carriage that may bind them. Lord, make
me love thy Church, and the place where thine honor dwells; that as thou
have honored me above many others, so I may honor thee above all, and spend
whatsoever is acceptable in the poor remainder of my life to serve thee in thy
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 37.
O Lord, turn away mine eyes that they behold not vanity, and quicken thou me in
thy way. Amen.

Salvian. l. 6. de Gubernatione Dei. p. 222.
O Domine misericors, quando a te ipse exoratus, (nec enim unquam ita vivimus,
ut exorare mereamur,) pacificos nobis dies, proventus uberes, divitem bonis
omnibus tranquillitatem, and abundantiam dederis super vota crescentem, ne
sinas me tanta secundarum rerum prosperitate corrumpi, ne and tui penitus
obliviscar and mei: sed humilitatem and gratitudinem adauge, per Jesum Christum
Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Familia. Domus.
VIsita quaeso, Domine, habitationem meam, et omnes insidias Inimici ab ea
long repelle: Angeli tui sancti habitent in ea, and nos in pace and sanitate
custodiant, and benedictio tua sit super nos semper, per Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum. Amen.

Linguae fraenum.
Ps. 19.14.
LEt the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

Psalm. 34. 12, 13.
Lord, keep my tongue from evil, and my lips that they speak no guile: that so I
may eschew evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it. Amen.

Ps. 37.31.
O Lord, give me the mouth of the righteous, that it may be exercised in wisdom,
and that my tongue may be talking of judgment. Amen.

Psalm. 39. 1, 2.
Lord, I have said in thy grace, I will take heed unto my ways, that I offend
not in my tongue. Give me, O give me that grace, that I may take this heed,
that I may keep my mouth, as it were with a bridle; especially when the ungodly
is in my sight, be it never so much pain or grief unto me. Hear me, and grant,
even for Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

Let the freewill offerings of my mouth please thee, Psalm. 119. 108.
O Lord, and teach me thy Judgments. Amen.

O Lord, Ps. 141.3.
set a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, and let not my
heart be inclined to any thing that is evil. Amen.

O Lord, Ecclus. 22. 27.
set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips, that I fall
not suddenly by them; and that my tongue destroy me not. Amen.

Afflictiones.
David fugiens 2. Sam. 15. 25.
IF I find favor in thine eyes, O Lord, thou will bring me again, and show me
both the Ark and the Tabernacle, and set me right in thy service, and make me
joyful and glad in thee. But if thou say, (O for Jesus his sake say it not,) I
have no pleasure in thee; behold, here I am, do with me as seems good in
thine own eyes. Amen.

2 Cor. 4. 8.
O Lord, though I be afflicted on every side, let me not be in distress: Though
in want of some of thy comforts, yet not of all: Though I be chastned, yet let
me not be forsaken: Though I be cast down, let me not perish: And though my
outward man decay and perish, ver. 16.
yet let my inward man be renewed daily, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 38. 10.
whatsoever thou shall lay upon me, I will hold my peace, and not open my
mouth, because it is thy doing and my deserving. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 119. 65.
thou have dealt graciously with thy servant according to thy word. For before
I was troubled I went wrong, but now have I prayed that I may keep thy Law. And
it is good for me that I have been in trouble, that so I may learn still to
keep it better, in the mercies of Jesus Christ. Amen.

ver. 75.
I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. O let thy merciful kindness be my
comfort, according to thy word unto thy servant, even for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

Baruch 3. 1, etc.
O Lord Almighty, O God of Israel, the soul that is in trouble, and the spirit
that is vexed, cries unto thee. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy, for thou art
merciful, and have pity upon me, because I have sinned before thee. For thou
endurest for ever, but unless thou have mercy I utterly perish. Have mercy
therefore even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, Ps. 9. 18.
remember thy promise, that the poor shall not always be forgotten; nor the
patient abiding of the meek perish for ever. Amen.

Lord, Psalm. 31. 8, etc.
I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my trouble,
and have known my soul in adversities. Amen.

Have mercy upon me, ver. 10.
O Lord, for I am in trouble, and mine eye is consumed for very heaviness, yea,
my soul and my body. 12.
My strength fails me because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed:
14.
I am even become like a broken Vessel: 15.
For I have heard the blasphemy of the multitude, and fear is on every side. 16.
But my hope has been and is in thee, O Lord, thou art my God, save and
deliver me for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Ps. 42. 6.
Why art thou so full of heaviness, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted
within me? O put thy trust in God, that I may yet give him thanks for the help
of his countenance. O my God, my soul is vexed within me, therefore will I
remember thee. Amen.

Psalm. 44. 23.
Up Lord, why sleep thou? Awake, and be not absent from us for ever:
wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgetest our misery and trouble? For our
soul is brought low even unto the dust, our belly cleaves unto the ground.
Arise O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercies sake. Amen.

In thee, O Lord, Ps. 31. 1.
have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion, deliver me in thy
righteousness. Bow down thine ear to me, make haste to deliver me. Be thou my
strong rock and house of defense, that thou may save me. Be also my guide,
and lead me for thy Names sake. Amen.

O God, the enemy cries so, Ps. 55. 3.
and the ungodly comes on so fast, that they threaten to overbear me, they are
minded to do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set against me. My heart
is disquieted within me, and the fear of death is fallen upon me. Fearfulness
and trembling and an horrible dread has overwhelmed me. And I said, O that I
had wings like a dove, that I might fly away and be at rest: that I might make
have to escape the stormy wind and tempest. But be thou my helper, and I will
magnify thee, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

Psalm. 60. 11.
O be thou my help in trouble, for vain is the help of man. Amen.

Pericula.
Gracious Father, the life of man is a warfare upon earth, and the dangers which
assault us are diversely pointed against us. I humbly beseech thee be present
with me in all ^^e course and passages of my life; but especially in the
services of my Calling. Suffer no malice to be able to hurt me, no cunning to
circumvent me, no violence to oppress me, no falsehood to betray me. That which
I cannot foresee, I beseech thee prevent: That which I cannot withstand, I
beseech thee master: That which I do not fear, I beseech thee unmask and
frustrate; that being delivered from all danger both of soul and body, I may
praise thee the deliverer, and see how happy a thing it is to make the Lord of
Hosts my helper in the day of fear and trouble. Especially, O Lord, bless and
preserve me at this time from, ^c. that I may glorify thee for this
deliverance also, and be safe in the merits and the mercies of Jesus Christ my
only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Ps. 80. 5.
O Lord, thou have fed me with the bread of affliction, and given me plenty of
tears to drink. I am become a very strife to my neighbors, and mine enemies
laugh me to scorn. But turn thee again, thou God of Hosts, show me the light of
thy countenance, and I shall be whole. Amen.

Psalm. 109. 25.
Help me, O Lord my God, O save me according to thy mercy; and then the world
shall know that this is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it. Amen Lord
Jesus, Amen.

If my delight had not been in thy Law, Psalm. 119. 92.
I should have perished in my trouble. O continue my delight. Amen.

Pestilentia.
DEliver me, O Lord, Ps. 39. 9, 11.
from all my offenses, and make me not a rebuke to the foolish. Take, I humbly
beseech thee, thy plague away from thy people, for we begin to be consumed by
means of thy heavy hand. And for Jesus Christ his sake lay neither me nor mine
under this uncomfortable disease. Amen.

Ps. 91. 3.
O Lord, deliver me from the ^nare of the hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence: O defend me under thy wings, and keep me safe under thy feathers,
that I may not be afraid for any terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies
by day; for the pestilence that walks in the darkness, nor for the sickness
that destroys in the noonday. Though thousands fall beside me, and ten
thousands at my right hand, yet let it not come near me, even for Jesus Christ
his sake. Amen.

ver. 10.
O Lord, thou art my hope, I beseech thee let no evil happen unto me, neither
let any plague come nigh my dwelling; but give thine Angels charge over me to
keep me in all my ways, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

O let the sorrowful sighing of them whom thou have visited come before thee;
Ps. 79.12.
and according to the greatness both of thy power and mercy preserve thou them
that are appointed to die, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, Domin. Septuagesima. Si intre^ Familia^.
I beseech thee favorably to hear the prayers of thy humble servant; that I
and my Family, which are justly punished for our offenses, may be mercifully
delivered by thy goodness from this and all other infection both of soul and
body: that so we may live both to serve and to praise thee, to the glory of thy
great Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Liturg. Angl.
O Almighty God, which in thy wrath in the time of King David did slay with
the plague of Pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy
mercy did save the rest: Have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now are
visited with great sickness and mortality; and like as thou did then command
thine Angel to cease from punishing, so it may now please thee to withdraw from
us this plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord God, Liturg. Angl. Gratiarum actio post Liberationem.
who have wounded us for our sins, and consumed us for our transgressions by
thy late heavy and long-continued Visitation, and in the midst of that Judgment
remembering mercy, have redeemed us from death: We offer up unto thee our
selves, our souls and bodies (which thou have now delivered) to be a living
sacrifice unto thee. And here I offer up unto thee, most merciful Father, in
the name of all thy people, all possible praise and thanks, and shall ever
magnify thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Morbus.
Psalm. 18. 3, 4, 5.
O Lord, the sorrows of death compass me, and the snares of it are ready to
overtake me. When thou will dissolve my tabernacle, thou alone know:
therefore in this my trouble I will call upon thee my Lord, and will complain
unto my God. O be with me at the instant of my death, and receive me for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

Psalm. 31.6.
Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
Truth.

Psalm. 32.4.
O Lord, thy hand is heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is become like
the drought in Summer. I acknowledge my sin unto thee, O Lord, and my
unrighteousness have I not hid. O Lord be merciful unto me. Amen.

O Lord, hear my prayer, Psalm. 39. 13.
and with thine ears consider my calling, hold not thy peace at my tears. For I
am a stranger with thee and a sojourner, as all my Fathers were. O spare me a
little, that I may recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen.
Amen.

O Domine, media vita in morte sumus, unde aut a quo quaerimus auxilium, nisi a
te Domine, qui tamen pro peccatis nostris merito infensus es nobis? Sancte
fortis, sancte misericors Salvator, amarissimis poenis mortis aeternae ne
tradas me. Ne projicias me in tempore aegritudinis meae, quum deficit virtus
mea ne derelinquas me. Domine, ante te omne desiderium meum, and suspiria mea a
te non sunt abscondita. Nosti, Domine, nosti intima Cordis mei; ne quaeso
occludas precibus meis aures misericordiae tuae. Quin parce mihi o Domine
sanctissime, o Omnipotens Deus, sanctus and Salvator maxim misericors,
dignissime and aeterne Iudex, ne sinas me in hora mea novissima pro^ quocunque
terrore mortis excidere a te. Amen, O Domine Salvator Jesu.

Psalm. 116. 2, 3.
O Lord, the snares of^ death compass me round about, the pains of hell get hold
upon me. I have found trouble and heaviness, but will call upon thy Name, O
Lord; O Lord deliver my soul. Deliver my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling: that I may walk before thee in the land of the
living. Amen.

Thou, O Lord, Psalm. 118. 18.
have chastened and corrected me, but not given me yet over unto death. Open me
the gates of righteousness, that I may go into them, and give thanks unto the
Lord. Amen.

There is no health in my flesh by reason of thy wrath, neither is there any
rest in my bones by reason of my sin. Yet, O Lord, be merciful unto me and heal
me, even for thy Names sake. Amen.

Liberatio a morbo gravissimo, in que^ incidi Aug. 14. 1629.
O Lord, I give thee humble and hearty thanks for the great and almost
miraculous bringing of me back from the bottom of my grave. What thou have
further for me to do or to suffer, thou alone know: Lord give me patience
and courage, and all Christian resolution to do thee service, and grace to do
it. And let me not live longer then to honor thee, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Bellum.
Esai. 8. 9, 10.
O My God, though mighty Nations gather together on heaps, yet let them be
broken in pieces: though they take counsel together, bring it to naught. For
though they pronounce a decree, yet it shall not stand, if thou, O God, be with
us. Be with us therefore, O God, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Blessed be thou, 1 Macc. 4. 30.
O Savior of Israel, which did destroy the assault of the Mighty man, by the
hand of thy servant David, and gave the Host of strangers into the hand of
Jonathan; shut up this Army in the hand of Israel, and let them be confounded
with their power, and with their horsemen. Make them afraid, and consume their
boldness and strength, that they may be astonished at their own destruction.
Cast them down by the sword of them that love thee; that we which love thy Name
may praise thee and sing unto thee. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Ps. 18.37.
O Lord of Hosts, give us strength that we may follow on upon our enemies and
overtake them, and not return till we have destroyed them. O gird us with
strength unto the Battle, that we may smite them that they may not be able to
stand, but fall under our feet. And when thou have thus blessed us, make us
fall down at thy feet, and ever worship thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

Ps. 46. 9.
O make the wars to cease in all the world, break the Bow, and knap the Spear in
sunder, and burn the Chariot in the fire; that men may be still and know that
thou art God, that thou will be exalted among the hea^hen, and in the earth.
Amen.

Lord, be not far off, Ps. 44.10.
put us not to confusion, but go out with our Armies and prosper them, that we
may not turn our backs upon our Enemies, while they that hate us spoil our
persons, our honor, and our goods. O sell not us thy poor people for naught;
make us not a rebuke to our insolent neighbors, nor a scorn to them that are
round about us. Our confusion by reason of our sins is daily before us, and the
shame of our face has covered us. But, Lord, we humbly beseech thee forgive us
our sins and deliver us, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Psalm. 108. 11.
Have thou forsaken us, O God? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our
Hosts? O help us against the Enemy, for vain is the help of man. O Lord help
us. Amen.

Liturg. Angl.
O Almighty God, King of Kings, and Governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent: Save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from the hands of our Enemies, abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devices, that we being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all perils, to glorify thee who art the only giver
of all victory, through the merits of thy only Son our Savior, Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Almighty God, Liturg. Angl. Gratiarum actio.
who art a strong tower of defense unto thy servants against the face of their
Enemies: We give thee praise and thanks for our deliverance from those great
and apparent dangers wherewith we were compassed. We acknowledge it thy great
goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto them. And we humbly
beseech thee to continue such thy mercies toward us, that all the world may
know that thou art our Savior and mighty Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O Lord, bless the King, all his Commanders under him, and all his Soldiers.
Cover all their heads, his especially, in the day of Battle. Teach all their
hands to war, and their fingers to fight. And bless all the Guides and
Conductors of his Armies under him, with wisdom and courage, and faithfulness,
watchfulness and diligence, and whatsoever else may lead on good success. And
set a happy end, we humbly beseech thee, to all these Bloody distractions, and
restore Peace and preserve Religion in integrity among us, even for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

Paupertas.
O Lord, Ps. 9. 12.
when thou make inquisition for blood, remember and forget not the complaint
of the Poor.

Arise, O Lord God, Psalm. 10, 13, 16.
and lift up thy hand, forget not the Poor. Take his cause into thy hand, for
he commits himself unto thee, and thou art the helper of the friendless. O be
so still, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O praise the Lord ye that fear him, Psalm. 22. 23
and magnify him all ye of the seed of Jacob: For he has not despised nor
abhorred the low estate of the Poor, he has not hid his face from him, but
when he called unto him he heard him. O bow down thine ear and hear him still,
O thou holy one of Israel. Amen.

Ps. 70.5.
I am poor and needy, O God, make haste unto me: Thou art my helper and my
deliverer, O Lord make no long tarrying. Amen.

Dolor.
Psalm. 25. 15.
LOrd, turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in
misery. The sorrows of my heart are enlarged, O bring thou me out of my
troubles. Look upon mine adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sins,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Hear my crying, O God, Psalm. 61.1.
give ear unto my prayer: from the ends of the earth, whither soever thou shall
cast me, I will call upon thee when my heart is in heaviness. O set me upon the
Rock that is higher then I, to be my hope and a strong tower against my
oppressors. Amen.

Save me, O God, Psalm. 69. 1, 15.
for the waters are entered into my soul. I stick fast in the deep mire where no
stay is, I am come into deep waters, and the streams run over me. They that
hate me without a cause are more then the hairs of my head, and they which
would destroy me causless are mighty. O let not these waterfloods drown me,
neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.
Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is great, turn unto me according to
the multitude of thy tender mercies. Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I
am in trouble, but draw near unto my soul and redeem it, for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 28.
My soul melts away for very heaviness, comfort thou me according to thy word.
Amen.

Psalm. 119. 143.

Tristitia.


O Lord, trouble and heaviness have taken hold upon me^; patience, good Lord,
that for all this my delight may be in thy Commandments. Amen.

Infamia.
O Lord, Psalm. 44. 14.
my sins have made me a rebuke to my neighbors, and to be laughed to scorn of
them that are round about me. O suffer me not longer to be a byword among the
people. My confusion is daily before me, and the shame of my face has covered
me. The voice of the slanderer and blasphemer has overtaken me. And though all
this be come upon me, suffer me not, O Lord, to forget thee, or to behave my
self frowardly in thy Covenant, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 55. 9, 16.
Destroy their tongues, O Lord, and divide them, for I have seen cruelty and
strife in the City. But I will call upon thee, O Lord, and thou will save me.
Amen.

Psalm. 57. 3, 4.
O Lord, send down from heaven, and save me from the reproof of them that would
swallow me. Send out thy mercy and truth, for my soul is among Lions, I lie
among the children of men that are set on fire, whose teeth are spears and
arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. O deliver me, and I shall magnify thy
Name for ever. Amen.

I am become a Monster to many, Ps. 71.7.
but thou art my sure trust. O be my Anchor for ever. Amen.

O remember, Lord, Psalm. 89. 49.
the rebuke that thy servant has, and how I do bear in my bosom the rebukes of
many people. O remember me. Amen.

Vis.
O Lord, Psalm. 119. 95.
the ungodly laid wait for me to destroy me, yet make me the more thankful, and
the more careful to consider thy testimonies. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 119. 150.
they draw nigh that of malice persecute me; therefore be thou nigh at hand to
help me, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

ver. 157.
Many, O Lord, they are that trouble me and persecute me, yet do I not swerve
from thy Testimonies: yes, Lord, I do daily swerve from them. Quicken me as
thou art wont. Amen.

Psalm. 119. 22.
O take from me shame and rebuke, and I will keep thy Testimonies. O take away
the rebuke that I am afraid of, ver. 39.
for thy Judgments are good. O Lord do this for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Timor.
LOrd, Ps. 19. 9.
make me remember that the fear of thee is clean, and that thy Judgments are
true and righteous altogether. Amen.

O Lord, give me that grace that I may so carry my self, and that courage that
I may so bear up my self, as that I may fear none but thee, nothing but that
wherein I offend thee, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Frauds. Dolus.
O Lord, watch over thy servant; Ps. 41. 9.
for my familiar friends whom I trusted have laid wait for me. Be thou merciful
unto me, O Lord, and deliver me from them: that even in this I may know thou
favourest me, that mine Enemies are not able to triumph against me. Amen.

Ps. 57. 5.
Exalt thy self, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory upon all the earth. For
men have laid a net for my steps, they have pressed down my soul, they have
dug a pit before me. Lord, I desire not that they should fall into the midst
of it themselves, but I beseech thee keep me out and deliver me, for thy mercy
sake. Amen.

Psalm. 71. 10.
Mine enemies lay wait for my soul, and take counsel together: They pursue me
out of an opinion that thou, O God, have forsaken me. But go not far from me, O
God; my God, haste to help me. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 119. 85.
the proud have dug pits for me: They persecute me falsely, O be thou my
help. They had almost made an end of me upon earth, yet suffer me not, I
beseech thee, to depart from thy Commandments, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Lord, Psalm. 141. 10.
keep me from the snare which malicious men have laid for me, and from the
traps of wicked doers. If they will not repent, let them fall into their own
nets together, but let me ever escape them. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 142. 2, 7.
I pour out my complaints before thee: Consider them, for I am brought very
low. O deliver me from my persecutors, for they are too strong for me. Amen.

Templi ingressus.
Psalm. 9.7.
LOrd, I will come into thy house upon the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy
fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple. O bless me that I may. Amen.

Ps. 28. 2.
Hear the voice of my humble Petitions, O Lord, when I cry unto thee in this
place, when I hold my hands toward the mercy-seat of thy holy Temple, even for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

I will dwell in thy Tabernacle for ever, Ps. 61. 4.
and my trust shall be under the covering of thy wings. O Lord, hear our
desires, and give an heritage unto those that pray unto thee, and fear thy
Name. Amen.

O my God, Psalm. 100. 3, 4.
I will go into thy Gates with thanksgiving, and into thy Courts with praise: I
will be thankful unto thee, and speak good of thy Name: For thou, Lord, art
gracious, thy mercy is everlasting, and thy truth endures from generation to
generation. Amen.

O Lord, Ps. 26. 8.
I love the habitation of thy House, and the place where thine Honor dwells.
O shut not up my soul with impenitent sinners, but give me plenty of thy grace,
even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Fames.
Psalm. 37. 19.
BE merciful, O Lord, and remember us, that we be not confounded in these
perilous times, and that in these days of dearth we may have enough, and a
free heart and hand to bestow it upon thy poor ones, even for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

Psalm. 65. 3, 9.
O Lord, our sins have prevailed against us, yet be thou merciful unto our
transgressions. O visit the earth, and prepare corn for the Inhabitants
thereof. Crown the year with thy goodness, and let no cloud drop other then
fatness; that the very Hills may rejoice (...) every side; that the Pastures
may be covered with sheep and the Valleys with corn, that thy People may
rejoice and sing unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God heavenly Father, Liturg. Angl.
who by thy Son Jesus Christ have promised to all them that seek thy Kingdom
and the righteousness thereof, all things necessary for their bodily
sustenance: Behold, we beseech thee, the afflictions of thy people, and grant
that the scarcity and dearth (which we do now most justly suffer for our sins)
may through thy goodness be mercifully turned into cheapness and plenty, for
the love of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Litan. Angl.
O Lord, be m^^cifully pleased to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits
of the Earth, so that in due time we may enjoy them, and praise thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Pluvia.
Liturg. Angl.
O God, heavenly Father, whose gift it is that the Rain does fall, the Earth is
fruitful, Beasts increase, and Fishes do multiply; Send us, we beseech thee,
such moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of the earth to
our comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Serenitas.
O Lord God, Liturg. Angl.
which for the sin of Man did once drown all the world except eight persons^
and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never to destroy it so again: We
humbly beseech thee, that though we^ for our iniquities have worthily deserved
a plague of rain and waters, yet upon our true repentance thou will give us
such weather, whereby we may receive the fruits of the earth in due season; and
learn both by thy punishment to amend our lives, and for thy clemency to give
thee praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Poenitentiales. 6. 32. 38. 51. 102. 130. 143. Psalmi.

Psalm. 90. 13.
O Lord, turn thee again now at the last, and be gracious unto thy servant. O
satisfy me with thy mercy, and that soon, so shall I rejoice and be glad all
the days of my life. And when thou have forgiven my sins, O comfort me again
after the time that thou have plagued me, and for the years wherein I have
suffered adversity, O Jesus Christ my Savior, and be merciful. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 119. 116, 120.
my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments; yet
stablish me according to thy word, that I may live, and let me not be
disappointed of my hope, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost; ver. 176.
O seek thy servant, that I may not forget thy Commandments, bu^ return to
thee. Amen.

O Lord, Jer. 14. 7, 8, 9.
our iniquities testify against us; for our backslidings are many, and we have
sinned against thee: yet, O thou hope of Israel, thou Savior thereof in time
of trouble, show mercy for thy Names sake; and on me especially. For why
should thou be as a stranger in my soul, or as a wayfaring man that turns
aside to tarry but for a night? O Lord be and dwell in the midst of me, for thy
Name is called upon me. Leave me not O God of my salvation, but have mercy for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Psalm. 25. 10.
For thy Names sake, O Lord. be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Amen.

O Lord Almighty, I acknowledge and confess I am not worthy to lift up mine
eyes to heaven, much less to present my self before thee with any confidence
that thou should hear my pray^ers and grant my requests, if I consider my
own deser^ing: For my Conscience accuses me, and my sins witness against me;
and thou art a just and an upright Judge, and wilt not justify any sinner in
his transgressions. O Lord, suffer me not to be swallowed up of death and
desperation, but in the multitude of thy mercies pardon me, O Lord, for thy
goodness sake. For though I am a worm and no man, yet thou art my Creator, and
I am the work of thy hands; yea, thou art my Father, and I thy Son: Thou my
Shepherd, and I one of thy straggling Flock: Thou my Redeemer, and I one of thy
People whom thou have dearly bought: Thou my God, and I thy Creature. O correct
me not in thine anger, O Lord, neither punish me according to my deservings,
but remember my weakness as well as my sin, and have mercy upon me for my
dearest Saviors sake Jesus Christ. Amen.

Coll. in die Ciner.
Almighty and everlasting God, which hate nothing that thou have made, and
forgivest the sins of all them that are penitent; Create and make in me a new
and contrite heart, that I may worthily lament my sins, and acknowledge my
wretchedness, and obtain of thee the God of all mercy perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and everliving God, Dom. 12. post Trin.
which art always more ready to hear then we to pray, and usest to give more
then either we desire or deserve; Pour down upon me most miserable sinner the
abundance of thy mercy, forgiving me those things whereof my conscience is
afraid, and giving me that which my prayer dares not presume to ask. Grant this
for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Grant, Dom. 21. post Trin.
I beseech thee merciful God, to me thy sinful but humble servant pardon and
peace, that I may be cleansed from all my sins, and serve thee with a quiet
mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Dom. 24. post Trin.
Lord, I beseech thee, free me from all my offenses, and by thy bountiful
goodness deliver me from the bands of all those sins which by my ignorance,
frailty, or wilfulness I have committed. Grant this even for Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Coll. in fine Lit. Angl.
O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as besorrowful; Mercifully assist my prayers that I make
before thee in all my troubles and adversities whenever they oppress me: and
graciously hear me, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the devil
or man works against me be brought to naught, and by the providence of thy
goodness so dispersed, that I thy poor servant being overcome by no temptation,
nor hurt by any persecution, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, Lit. Angl.
of thy great goodness I beseech thee give me true repentance, and forgive me
all my sins, negligences, and ignorances, and indue me with the grace of thy
holy Spirit, that I may amend my life according to thy holy word, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, Liturg. Angl.
whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive, receive my
humble petitions: And though I am tied and bound with the chain of my sins, yet
let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose me, and that for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

Exaudi quaeso, Domine, supplicis preces, and confitentis tibi parce peccatis,
ut pariter mihi indulgentiam tribuas benignus and pacem, per Dominum nostrum
Jesum Christum. Amen.

Omnipotens Deus, qui aquam de petra produxisti, educ de duritia cordis mei
compunctionis lachrimas; ut peccata mea ita plangere valeam, ut remissionem
eorum te miserante accipiam, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Almighty God, Liturg. Angl. in Commun.
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of all men; I
acknowledge and bewail my manifold sins and wickedness, which I have from time
to time most grievously committed, by thought, word, and deed against thy
divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against me. I
do earnestly repent, and am heartily sorry for these my misdoings, the
remembrance of them is grievous unto me, the burden of them is intolerable.
Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, most merciful Father. For thy Son our
Lord Jesus Christ his sake, forgive me all that is past, and grant that I may
ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to the honor and
glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Ibidem.
Almighty God, and my most merciful Father, who of thy tender mercy have
promised forgiveness of sins to all them which with hearty repentance and true
faith turn unto thee; Have mercy upon me, pardon and deliver me from all my
sins, confirm and strengthen me in all goodness, and bring me to everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

S. Aug. Ser. 7. de Tempore.
Piissime Domine, misericordissime Deus, sufficiat mihi quod hucusque peccavi,
quod contempsi, quod foetoribus carnis meae satisfeci, jam nu^^ te inspirante
voveo me a nequitia mea conversurum. Adjuva, Domine, and des ut impleam, in and
per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Gratiarum actio and Lauds.
I Will magnify thee, O Lord, Pro liberatione ab Inimicis.

Ps. 30. 1.


for thou have set me up, and not made my foes to triumph over me. O Lord, my
God I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me, thou have kept my life from
them that go down into the pit. Sing praises unto the Lord, O my soul, and give
thanks unto him for a remembrance of his holiness. Amen.

Ps. 35.9.
O my soul, be joyful in the Lord and rejoice in his Sal^^^ion. All my bones
shall say; Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the poor from him that
is too strong for him: yea, the poor and him that is in misery from him that
spoileth him. Amen.

Ps. 7. 18.
I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, according to thy righteousness, and I
will praise thy Name, O Lord most high.

Psalm. 47. 2, 3.

Post Victoriam in bell^.


O Lord, thou art high and terrible, a great King over all the Earth; thou have
subdued the people under us, and the Nations under our feet: therefore will I
sing praises unto thee, O God, who art greatly to be exalted. Amen.

Thy Vows are upon me, Psalm. 56. 12.
O my God, I will render praise unto thee; for thou have delivered my soul from
death, and my feet from falling, that I may yet walk before thee, O my God, in
the light of the living, and bless thee. Amen.

Gratias tibi Deus; S. Aug. Orat. de 5. H^res. cap. 7.
Gratias tibi vera and una Trinitas, una and trina Veritas, trina and una
Unitas. Gratias tibi Deus Pater, qui and Filium tuum ostendisti, and mihi
Doctorem dedisti. O and semper des in misericordiis antiquis. Amen.

My heart is ready, O Lord, Psalm. 57. 7.
my heart is ready, I will sing and give praise; yea, I will praise thee among
the People, and I will sing unto thee among the Nations. O let thy Mercy which
is great unto the heavens^ and thy Truth which reaches unto the clouds,
embrace me and preserve me to thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 9.1.
I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will speak of all
thy mavelous works: I will be glad and rejoice in thee, yea, my songs will I
make of thy Name, O thou most highest. For thou have maintained my right and my
cause, thou art set in the Throne that judge right. Lord, continue to be my
defense against the oppressor, and my refuge in due time of trouble, that I may
ever rejoice in thy Salvation Jesus Christ. Amen.

My trust is in thee, O God, Ps. 13. 5.
and my heart is joyful in thy salvation. I will sing unto thee, O Lord,
because thou have dealt so lovingly with me; yea, I will praise thy Name, O
Lord most highest. Amen.

O praise the Lord with me ye that fear him, Psalm. 22. 23.
magnify him all ye of the seed of Jacob. My praise shall be of thee in the
great Congregation, and my vows will I perform in the sight of them that fear
thee. Amen.

What profit is there in my blood, Ps. 30. 9.
when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust give thanks unto thee, or shall it
declare thy truth? Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me; Lord, be thou my
helper. Thou have turned my heaviness into joy; thou have put off my sackcloth,
and girded me with gladness: therefore will I sing of thy praise without
ceasing. O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Amen.

Ps. 34. 1.
I will always give thanks unto thee, O Lord, thy praise shall ever be in my
mouth. My soul shall make her boast of thee, O my God, and the humble shall
hear thereof and be glad. For I sought thee, O Lord, and thou heardest me, and
did deliver me out of all my fear, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Ps. 71. 8.
Let my mouth be filled with praise, and with thy glory every day. Amen.

O Lord, who is like unto thee? Psalm. 71. 20.
For thou have showed me great troubles and adversities^ but thou will, I hope,
return and quicken me, thou will return and take me out of this depth. Amen.

I will thank thee, Psalm. 86. 12.
O Lord my God, with all my heart, and will praise thy Name for ever: For great
is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost
Hell. O deliver it still for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, I give thee humble and hearty thanks for the measure of knowledge
which thou have given me of thy truth; for giving me a love to it, and thy
Church: for quieting my soul in the midst of thy Churches distractions; for the
measure of rest and repose which thou have given me in thee, whereas no true
content is found without thee. Lord, I give thee humble thanks likewise for the
temporal blessings which thou have heaped on me; the favor of my Liege Lord
and Sovereign: the place to which thou have raised me: the means which thou
have given me to do good. Lord, I cannot name all thy blessings, how shall I
thank thee for them? Lord, I will thank thee for them by honoring thee in
them. O give a heart to desire all this, and grace to perform it; that my sins
may be forgiven me, and that I may be thine, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

O praise the Lord, Psalm. 135. 3.

Psalm. 138. 1.


for he is gracious: O sing unto his Name, for it is lovely. I will give thanks
unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will worship toward thy holy Temple,
and praise thy Name; and that because of thy loving kindness and truth, for
thou have magnified thy Name and thy Word above all things. Lord, give me grace
to obey thy Word, and to honor thy Name for ever, in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Pro Inimicis.
S. Mat. 5. 44.
O Lord, I beseech thee, forgive mine enemies all their sins against thee; and
give me that measure of thy grace, that for their hatred. I may love them, for
their cursing I may bless them, for their injury I may do them good, and for
their persecution I may pray for them. Lord, I pray for them; forgive them, for
they know not what they do. Amen.

Deus Pacis and Charitatis, da omnibus inimicis mihi pacem and charitatem,
omniumque remissionem peccatorum, meque ab eorum insidiis potenter eripe; per
Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 25. 18.
consider mine Enemies how many they are; and they bear a tyrannous hate
against me. Lord, deliver me from them. Amen.

Almighty God, Dom. 3. Quadrag.
I humbly be^seech thee, look upon the hearty de^ires of thy humble servant,
and stretch out the right hand of thy Majesty to be my defense against all
mine Enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Be merciful unto me, O God, Ps. 56. 1.
for mine Enemies would swallow me up, and many they are which fight against
me, O thou most highest; they gather together and keep themselves close, they
mark my steps, because they lay wait for my soul. But when I was afraid I
trusted in thee and when I cry, then shall mine Enemies turn back. This thou will make me know, when thou art with me: Be with me therefore, O Lord, and let
me see deliverance. Amen.

Psalm. 35. 19.
O Lord, let not them that are mine Enemies triumph over me, neither let them
wink with their eyes that hate me either without a cause, or for thy cause.
Amen.

Psalm. 7.1.
O Lord God, in thee have I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute
me, and deliver me; lest they devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces
while there is none to help. Lift up thy self, O God, because of the
indignation of mine Enemies: arise up for me in the Judgment which thou have
commanded, that my help may still be from thee, O God, who preservest them that
are true of heart. Amen.

Have mercy upon me, Ps. 9. 13.
O God, consider the trouble which I suffer of them that hate me, O thou that
liftest me up from the gates of death. Amen.

Hear my voice, O God, Psalm. 64.1.
in my prayer, preserve my life from fear of the Enemy; hide me from the
conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of the workers of iniquity. They
have whet their tongues like a sword, and shoot out their arrows, even bitter
words: Lord, deliver me from them. Amen.

Episcopatus.
Menev. Bathon. London. Dioecesis.
DE^s omnium fidelium Pastor and Rector, me Famulum tuum, quem Pastorem
Ecclesiae Cantuar. praeesse voluisti, propitius respice: Da mihi, humillime
peta, verbo and exemplo quibus p^aesum proficere. Ut una cum Grege mihi credito
ad vitam perveniam sempiternam, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

S. Aug. lib. 22. contra Faust. ca. 69. de Mose.
O Deus mi, Pater clementissime, gratia tua ita in me operetur, ut sim humilis
in recusando omne magn^m minist^^ium, subditus tamen in suscipiendo, ^idelis in
servando, st^enuus in exequendo, i^ regendo populo vigilans, in corrigendo
vehemens, in amando a^dens, in sustinendo patiens, in moderando prudens: ut
proiis quibus praesum Deo me interponam consulenti, opponam i^ascenti, in
fiducia and meritis Jesu Christi Salvatoris nostri. Amen.

O Lord, Esal. 55. 10.
as the rain comes down from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the
Earth, and makes it bud and bring forth, that it may give seed to the sower,
and bread to him that eats: So let thy Word be that goes out of my mouth,
let it not return to me void, but accomplish that which thou will, and prosper
in the thing whereto thou have sent it, that the people committed to my charge
may go out with joy, and be led forth in peace to thy freshest waters of
comfort, in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Son of God, thou which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me
in this heavy Charge. Amen.

Rex.
Ps. 61. 6.
O Lord, grant the King a long life, that his years may endure as many ages:
Furnish him with wise and safe Counsels, and give him a heart of courage and
constancy to pursue them. O prepare thy loving mercy and faithfulness for him,
that they may preserve him; so will I always sing praises unto thy Name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 20.1.
hear the King in the day of his trouble, that thy Name, O God of Jacob, may
defend him. Send him help from thy Sanctuary, and strength out of Sion. Grant
him his hearts desire, and fulfill all his mind. Set his heart firm upon thee,
and upon other things, but as they are in and from thee: that we his Servants
under thee may see with joy that thou helpest thine Anointed, and that thou will hear him from thy holy Heaven, even with the wholesome strength of thy
right hand. And, O Lord, close not mine eyes till I see thy favor shine ou^
upon him, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Ecclesia.
Dom. 5. po Epistphan.
O Lord, we humbly beseech thee to keep thy Church and Household continually in
thy true Religion, that they which do lean only upon hope of thy heavenly
grace, may evermore be defended by thy mighty power: And that I may humbly and
faithfully serve thee in this thy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Gracious Father, I humbly beseech thee, for thy holy Catholic Church, fill it
with all truth; in all truth with all peace. Where it is corrupt, purge it:
where it is in error, direct it: where it is superstitious, rectify it: where
any thing is amiss, reform it: where it is right, strengthen and confirm it:
where it is in want, furnish it: where it is divided and rent asunder, make up
the breaches of it, O thou holy one of Israel. Amen.

O merciful God, since thou have ordered me to live in these times, in which
the rents of thy Church are grievous; I humbly beseech thee to guide me, that
the divisions of men may not separate me either from thee or it, that I may
ever labor the preservation of truth and peace, that where for and by our sins
the peace of it succeeds not, thou will yet accept my will for the deed, that I
may still pray, even while thou grantest not, because I know thou will grant it
when thou see it fit. In the mean time bless, I beseech thee, this Church in
which I live, that in it I may honor and serve thee all the days of my life,
and after this be glorified by thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 80. 8.
O Lord thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt and planted it; thou made room
for it, and when it had taken root it filled the land. O why have thou broken
down her hedge, that all which go by pluck off her grapes: the wild boar out of
the wood rooteth it up, and the wild beasts of the field devour it. O turn thee
again thou God of Hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visit this Vine, and
the place of the Vineyard that thy right hand has planted, and the branch that
thou made so strong for thy self. Lord, hear me for Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 127. 1.
except thou buildest the house, their labor is but lost that build it: and
except thou, O Lord, keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. It is but
lost labor to rise early, and take late rest, and to eat the bread of
carefulness, if thou bless not the endeavors that seek the peace and the
welfare of thy Church. Therefore, O Lord, build thy Church and keep it, and
take care for it, that there may be no lost labor among the builders of it.
Amen.

Ecclesia Angl. post Possessiones direptas.

Nehem. 9. 32, 33.


O Lord our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God; O thou which
keep covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem little before thee
that has come upon us, upon our Priests, upon the Houses built and dedicated
to thy Name, upon the Maintenance for them that serve at thy Altar, upon our
Kings, State, and People since that day of affliction. Thou art just in all
that is brought upon us: For thou have done right, but we have done wickedly.
Yet, O Lord, have mercy, and turn to us again, for Jesus and his mercy sake.
Amen.

Respublica.
O Lord, Psalm. 33. 10, 12.
thou which bring the counsels of the Heathen to naught, and make the
devices of the people to be of none effect, and castest out the counsels of
Princes when they have offended thee: Have mercy upon this Kingdom, forgive the
sins of this People; turn thee unto them and bless them, that the world may
say, Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord Jehovah, and blessed are the
folk that he has chosen to him to be his Inheritance. Lord, hear and grant for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Lord, bless this Kingdom, that Religion and Virtue may season all sorts of
men: that there may be Peace within the Gates, and Plenty within the Palaces of
it. In Peace I beseech thee so preserve it, that it corrupt not: In War so
defend it, that it suffer not: In Plenty so order it, that it riot not: In Want
so pacify and moderate it, that it may patiently and peaceably seek thee, the
only full supply both of Men and States; that so it may continue a Place and a
People to do thee service to the end of time, through Jesus Christ our only
Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

O Lord, Dan. 9. 16, 17.
according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee let thine anger be turned
away from this City and thy People; and cause thy face to shine upon whatsoever
is desolate therein, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Pro Afflictis.
O Let the sorrowful sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, Psalm. 79. 12.

Alias the Sick, the Afflicted.


and according to the greatness of thy power preserve thou them that are
appointed to die, even for Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Regnum Angliae.
BEnedic, Domine Deus omnipotens, Regnum hoc, ut sit in eo sanitas, castitas,
victoria, virtus omnis, and gratiarum actio Deo Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui
Sancto: et haec Benedictio maneat super hoc Regnum, and super habitantes in eo,
per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Iejunium.
Psalm. 69. 9.
O Lord, the zeal of thine house has even eaten me up, and the rebukes of them
which rebuked thee, are fallen upon me: Therefore I wept and chastned my self
with fasting, and that was turned to my reproof. I put on sackcloth also, and
they jested upon me: they that sat in the gate also spoke against me, and the
drunkards made songs upon me. But, Lord, I make my prayer unto thee, and, I
hope, in an acceptable time. O hear me in the multitude of thy mercies, which
are in Jesus Christ our Savior Amen.

Quadragesima.
O Lord, Dom. 1. Quadrag.
which for our sake did fast forty days and forty nights; Give us grace to
use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the spirit, we may ever
obey thy godly motions, in righteousness and true holiness, to thy honor and
glory, who live and raignest one God with the Father and the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Rogationes.
Dom. 25. post Trin.
STir up, I beseech thee O Lord, the wills of thy faithful people, that they
plenteously bringing forth the fruit of good works, may of thee be plenteously
rewarded, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Iejunia quatuor Temporum.
ALmighty God, the giver of all good gifts, who of thy divine Providence have
appointed diverse Orders in the Church; Give thy grace, I humbly beseech thee,
to all those which are to be called to any Office and Administration in the
same: and so replenish them with the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of
life; that they may faithfully serve before thee, to the glory of thy great
Name, and the benefit of thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Consecrationes. Ordinationes.
O Lord, I am now at thy Altar, at thy work; 1 Timothy 5. 22.
keep me that I lay not my hands suddenly upon any man, lest I be partaker of
other men's sins: but that I may keep my self pure, in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Lord, give me grace, that as often as they shall come in my way, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
I may put them in remembrance whom I have ordained, that they stir up the gift
of God that is in them by the putting on of my hands, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Dom. 5. post Trin. Pro Ecclesia.
Grant, O Lord I beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so peaceably
ordered by thy Governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in all godly
quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord, I beseech thee, Dom. 16. post Trin.
let thy continual mercy cleanse and defend thy Church. And because it cannot
continue in safety without thy succor; preserve it evermore by thy help and
goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord, I beseech thee, Dom. 22. post Trin.
keep thy Household the Church in continual godliness; that through thy
protection it may be free from all adversities, and devoutly given to serve
thee in good works, to the glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Exilium.
Psalm. 137. 1.
LOrd, send me not to the waters of Babylon, that I may have no cause to weep
when I remember Sion: that no man's cruelty may lead me away captive, nor no
man's scorn call upon me to sing in my heaviness. But that in my Country where I
learnd to serve thee, I may live to honor thee all the days of my life, even
for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Martyrium.
Psalm. 141. 8.
LOrd, make me remember the bones of thy Saints, how they lie scattered before
the pit, even as when one heweth wood upon the earth. O Lord, mine eyes look
unto thee, in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul. And if my bones also
must be broken, O Lord I beseech thee give me courage and abundance of
patience, that no torment may make my faith fall away from thee, for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

Eucharistia.
Quaecunque ab Infantia usque ad momentum hoc, Praevia.
sciens vel ignorans, intus vel extra, dormiens vel vigilans, verbis, factis
vel cogitationibus, per jacula Inimici ignita, per desideria cordis immunda
peccavi tibi, miserere mei, and dimitte mihi, per Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum. Amen.

Almighty God and most merciful Father, give me I beseech thee that grace, that
I may duly examine the inmost of my heart, and my most secret thoughts, how I
stand before thee. Lord, I confess all my sins, and my unworthiness to present
my self at thine Altar. But thou can forgive sin and give repentance; do
both, Gracious Father, and then behold I am clean to come unto thee. Lord, make
me a worthy receiver of that for which I come, Christ, and remission of sin in
Christ: And that for his own mercy sake and thine. Amen.

O Lord, into a clean, charitable, and thankful heart, give me grace to receive
the blessed Body and Blood of thy Son, my most blessed Savior, that it may
more perfectly cleanse me from all dregs of sin; that being made clean, it may
nourish me in faith, hope, charity, and obedience, with all other fruits of
spiritual life and growth in thee: that in all the future course of my life, I
may show my self such an ingrafted member into the Body of thy Son, that I may
never be drawn to do any thing that may dishonor his Name. Grant this O Lord,
I beseech thee, even for his merit and mercy sake. Amen.

O Lord God, hear my prayers, I come to thee in a steadfast faith: yet for the
clearness of my faith, Lord, enlighten it; for the strength of my faith, Lord,
increase it. And, behold, I quarrel not the words of thy Son my Savior's
blessed Institution. I know his words are no gross unnatural conceit, but they
are spirit and life, and supernatural. While the world disputes, I believe. He
has promised me if I come worthily, that I shall receive his most precious
Body and Blood, with all the benefits of his Passion. If I can receive it and
retain it, (Lord, make me able, make me worthy) I know I can no more die
eternally, then that Body and Blood can die and be shed again. My Savior is
willing in this tender of them both unto me: Lord, so wash and cleanse my soul,
that I may now and at all times else come prepared by hearty prayers and
devotion, and be made worthy by thy grace of this infinite blessing, the Pledge
and Earnest of eternal life, in the merits of the same Jesus Christ, who gave
his Body and Blood for me. Amen.

Almighty God, Coll. pro Mundatione Cordis.
unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are
hid: Cleanse the thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit,
that I may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy Name, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Litan. brevis.
Pater de coelis Deus, qui unigenitum tuum pro nobis ad mortem tradidisti.

Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, qui sanguine tuo pretioso nos a peccatis abluisti.

Spiritus Sancte Paraclete Deus, qui corda sanctorum tua gratia visitas and
confirmas.

Sacra, summa, sempiterna, beata, benedicta Trinitas; Pater bone, Fili pie,
Spiritus benign: cujus opus vita, amor gratia, contemplatio gloria: cujus
majestas ineffabilis, potestas incomparabilis, bonitas inaestimabilis: Qui
vivorum Dominus es simul and mortuorum: Te adoro, te invoco, and toto cordis
affectu nunc and in seculum benedico. Amen.

O Domine Jesu, da vivis misericordiam and gratiam: da tuis regimen and lucem
perpetuam: da Ecclesiae tuae veritatem and pacem; da mihi miserrimo peccatorum
poenitentiam and veniam. Amen.

O Domine, errantes oro corrige, incredulos converte, Ecclesiae fidem auge,
Haereses destrue, Hosts versutos detege, violentos and impoenitentes contere,
per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Misericors Pater, pro beneficiis quae mihi largiti sunt in terris Benefactores
mei, praemia aeterna consequantur in coelis. Oro etiam ut cum his pro quibus
oravi, aut pro quibus orare teneor, and cum omni populo Dei, introduci mihi
detur in Regnum tuum, and ibi apparere in justitia, and satiari gloria, per
Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Lord, consider my complaint, for I am brought very low. O Lord, how long
will thou be angry with thy servant that prays? O Lord give me grace and
repentance, and thou can not be angry with my prayer. O Lord, I am thine save
me, and deliver me not into the will of mine enemies, especially my ghostly
enemies. O Lord, I am thy servant, thy unprofitable wastful servant, yet thy
servant. O Lord, set my accounts right before thee, and pardon all my
mis-spendings and mis-reckonings. O Lord, I am thy son, thy most unkind,
prodigal, runaway son, yet thy son. O Lord, though I have not retained the
love and duty of a son, yet do not thou cast off (I humbly beg it) the kindness
and compassion of a Father. O Lord, in thy grace I return to thee; And though I
have eaten draugh with all the unclean swine in the world, in my hungry absence
from thee, yet now, Lord, upon my humble return to thee, give me, I beseech
thee, the bread of life, the Body and Blood of my Savior into my soul, that I
may be satisfied in thee, and never more run away from thee, even for Jesus
Christ his sake, that gave himself for me. Amen.

Coll. 3 in die Parasc.
Misericors Deus, Creator omnium hominum, qui nihil odisti eorum quae
condidisti, nec vis mortem peccatoris, sed magis ut convertatur and vivat;
Miserere omnium Iudaeorum, Turcarum, Infidelium, and Haereticorum. Aufer ab iis
ignorantiam, duritiem cordis, and contemptum verbi tui: and reduc eos,
misericors Domine, ad Gregem tuum, ut serventur inter reliquias very Israelis,
ut fiat unum Ovile, and unus Pastor, Jesus Christus Dominus noster, qui vivit
and regnat, etc. Amen.

Dum Altari adsto, si fieri possit. Si non, tum mane, etc
Tanquam pro Tribunali tuo tremendo (ubi nullus erit personarum respectus) reum
memet peragens, ita hodie antequam praeveniat me dies judicii mei coram sancto
tuo Altari prostratus, coram te and stupendis Angelis tuis a propria
conscientia dejectus, profero improbas and nefarias cogitationes and actiones
meas. Respice, oro Domine, humilitatem meam, and remitte omnia peccata mea,
quae multiplicata sunt super capillos capitis mei. Quodnam enim est malum quod
non designavi in anima mea: quin and multa and nefanda opere perpetravi. Reus
enim sum, o Domine, invidiae, gulae, etc. Omnes sensus meos, omnia membra mea
pollui. Sed incomparabilis est multitudo viscerum tuorum, and ineffabilis
misericordia bonitatis tuae, qua peccata mea toleras. Quare, o Rex omni
admiratione major, O Domine longanimis misericordias tuas mirificato in me
peccatore: potentiam benignitatis tuae manifestato, clementissimae propensionis
tuae virtutem exerito: and me Prodigum revertentem suscipito, per Jesum
Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Immediate ante perceptionem Panis.
O Lord God, how I receive the Body and Blood of my most blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, the price of my Redemption, is the very wonder of my soul, yet my most
firm and constant belief upon the words of my Savior. At this time they are
graciously tenderd to me and my faith: Lord, make me a worthy receiver, and be
it unto me as he has said. Amen.

Immediate po^t receptionem utriusque speci^^.
Lord, I have received this Sacrament of the Body and Blood of my dear Savior.
His mercy has given it, and my faith received it into my soul. I humbly
beseech thee speak mercy and peace unto my Conscience, and enrich me with all
those graces which come from that precious Body and Blood, even till I be
possessed of Eternal life in Christ. Amen.

O qui sursum Patri assides and hic nobiscum invisibiliter versaris, venito and
sanctificato praesentia haec dona; eos item pro quibus, and eos per quos, and
ea propter quae offeruntur. Amen.

Pro Duce Buckinghamiae.
GRacious Father, I humbly beseech thee, bless the Duke of Buckingham with all
spiritual and temporal blessings, but especially spiritual. Make and continue
him faithful to his Prince, serviceable to his Country, devout in thy Truth and
Church: a most happy Husband and a blessed Father; filled with the constant
love and honor of his Prince, that all thy blessings may flow upon himself and
his posterity after him. Continue him a true-hearted friend to me thy poor
servant whom thou have honored in his eyes: Make my heart religious and
dutiful to thee, and in and under thee true, and secret, and stout, and
provident in all things which he shall be pleased to commit unto me. Even so,
Lord, and make him continually to serve thee, that thou may bless him,
through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

O most merciful God and gracious Father, The Spanish Journey.
the Prince has put himself to a great Adventure, I humbly beseech thee, make
a clear way before him: Give thine Angels charge over him, be with him thy self
in mercy, power, and protection: in every step of his journey: in every moment
of his time: in every consultation and address for action, till thou bring him
back with safety, honor, and contentment, to do thee service in this place.

Bless his most trusty and faithful Servant the Lord Duke of Buckingham, that
he may be diligent in service, provident in business, wise and happy in
counsels: for the honor of thy Name, the good of thy Church, the preservation
of the Prince, the contentment of the King, the satisfaction of the State.
Preserve him, I humbly beseech thee, from all envy that attends him; and bless
him, that his eyes may see the Prince safely delivered to the King and State,
and after it live long in happiness to do them and thee service, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Isle of Re, 1627.
O most gracious God and merciful Father, thou art the Lord of Hosts; all
victory over our Enemies, all safety against them is from thee: I humbly
beseech thee go out with our Armies, and bless them. Bless my dear Lord the
Duke that is gone Admiral with them, that wisdom may attend all his Counsels,
and courage and success all his Enterprises: that by his and their means thou will be pleased to bring safety to this Kingdom, strength and comfort to
Religion, victory and reputation to our Country. And that he may return with
our Navy committed to him, and with safety, honor, and love both of Prince and
People. Grant this for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O merciful God, His death Aug. 23. 1628.
thy Judgments are often secret, always just: At this time they were
temporally heavy upon the poor Duke of Buckingham, upon me, upon all that had
the honor to be near him. Lord, thou have (I doubt not) given him rest, and
light and blessedness in thee. Give also, I beseech thee, comfort to his Lady.
Bless his Children, uphold his Friends, forget not his Servants. Lay open the
bottom of all that irreligious and graceless plot that spilt his blood. Bless
and preserve the King from danger, and from security in these dangerous times.
And for my self, O Lord, though the sorrows of my heart are enlarged, in that
thou gave this most honorable Friend into my bosom, and have taken him again
from me; yet blessed be thy Name, O Lord, that have given me patience. I shall
now see him no more till we meet at the Resurrection: O make that joyful to us
and all thy faithful servants, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Senectus.
O Lord, Ps. 71.9.
cast me not off in the time of mine Age, forsake me not now my strength begins
to fail me. Amen.

Forsake me not, O God, ver. 16.
in mine old age, now I am gray headed, until I have declared thy strength unto
this Generation, and thy power to all them that are to come. Amen.

Psalm. 89. 44.
O Lord, though thou have shortened the days of my youth, yet cover me not with
dishonor. Hide not thy self from me for ever, but remember how short my time
is, and make me remember it, O Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 90. 12.
O Lord, teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. Amen.

Psalm. 102. 2.
O Lord, hide not thy face from me in the time of trouble; ver. 3.
for my days are consumed away like smoke, and my bones are burnt up like a
firebrand. My days are gone like a shadow, ver. 11.
and I am withered like grass. Thou, O Lord, ver. 23.
have brought down my strength in my journey, and shortened my days. But, ver.
24.
O my God, take me not away but in the timeliness of my age, that I may
continue to serve thee, and be faithful in thy service, till thou remove me
hence. Amen.

Tentationes.
O Lord, as thou art faithful, 1. Cor. 10. 15.
so suffer me not, I beseech thee, to be tempted above that I am able, but give
an issue with the temptation, that I may be able to bear it. Amen.

Omnipotens Deus, respice preces meas, and libera cor meum a malarum
cogitationum tentationibus, ut te miserante dignum esse possim Spiritus Sancti
habitaculum, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Deus, qui diligentibus te facis cuncta prodesse, da cordi meo inviolabilem
charitatis tuae affectum and nulla unquam tentatione mutabilem, per Dominum
nostrum Jesum Christum. Amen.

Misericors Deus, da mihi in Fide tua constantiam, and in Charitate firmitatem,
ut nullis tentationibus ab earum integritate possim divelli, per Jesum Christum
Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Carcer.
O Lord, have mercy upon me, Psalm. 142. 9.
and bring my soul out of Prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name, even in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 146. 4, 6.
blessed is the man that has thee for his help, and whose hope is in thee. O
Lord, help me and all them to right that suffer wrong. Thou art the Lord which
loosest men out of Prison, which helpest them that are fallen. O Lord, help and
deliver me when, and as it shall seem best to thee, even for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

O Lord, Psalm. 88. 6, 7.
thine indignation lies hard upon me; and though thou have not (for thy mercy
is great) vexed me with all thy storms, yet thou have put my acquaintance far
from me, and I am so fast in Prison that I cannot get forth. Lord, I call daily
upon thee, hear and have mercy, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Ps. 68. 6.
O Lord, thou which bring the Prisoners out of captivity, while thou let
the Runagates continue in scarceness; Have mercy upon me, and deliver me out of
the Prison and affliction in which I now am: and give me grace, that being
free, I may faithfully and freely serve thee all the days of my life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Confessiones.
O Domine, in multis deliqui, and improbe egi, and tristitia affeci spiritum
tuum sanctum. Exacerbavi viscera clementiae tuae, cogitatione, sermon, opere,
noctu and interdiu, palam and in occulto, consult^ and in consulto. O si
constituas peccata mea in conspectu meo; O si rationem a me exigas peccatorum
in se non ignoscibilium, quae scienter commisi, quid faciam? quo fugiam? Sed O
Domine, ne in furore tuo arguas me, nec in ira tua corripias me. Miserere mei,
non solum quia infirmus sum, sed quia figmentum sum tuum. Obsecro t^, ne intres
in judicium cum servo tuo: si enim iniquitates observaveris Domine, Domine,
quis in judicio consistet? Non ego certe, si quis alius. Ego enim sum peccati
pelagus, and non sum dignus in coelum suspicere prae multitudine peccatorum
meorum, quorum non est numerus; probra, injuriae, etc. et mill praeterea
nefandae passiones sunt, a quibus non destiti. Quibus enim non corruptus sum
peccatis? Quibus non sum constrictus malis? Inutilis factus sum tibi Deo meo,
and hominibus. Quis me in talia prolapsum suscitabit? In te, Domine, confido,
qui es Deus meus: esto mihi Salvator secundum viscera compassionis tuae, and
miserere mei secundum magnam misericordia^ tuam, and ne retribuas mihi secundum
opera mea, sed converte te ad me, me ad te. Remitte omnia quae in te peccavi:
serva me propter misericordiam tuam, and ubi abundavit peccatum, superabundet
grat^^ tua; and laudabo and glorificabo te per omnes dies vitae meae. Tu enim
es Deus poenitentium, and Salvator peccantium. Tibi gloria per Jesum Christum
Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Anniversaria.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, Apr. 11. 1594.

^ors Pa^ris.

Dies erat Mercurii.


with whom do rest the souls of them that die in thy faith and favor: Have
mercy upon me, Et Nov. 24. 1600.

Mors Matris.


and grant that my life may be a preparation to die, and my death an entrance
to life with thee. As upon this day it pleased thee to take my dear Father to
thy mercy, when I was yet young. O Lord, he was (...) servant, thy meek,
humble, fai^hful servant: and I assure my self he is in rest, and light, and
blessedness. Lord, while I am here behind in my pilgrimage, shower down thy
grace upon me. Thou have been more then a Father to me: thou have not suffered
me to want a Father; no, not when thou had taken him from me. O be pleased to
be a Father still, and by thy grace to keep me within the bounds of a Sons
obedience. Thou have given me temporal blessings beyond desert or hope; O be
graciously pleased to heap spiritual blessings on me, that I may grow in faith,
obedience, and thankfulness to thee; that I may make it my joy to perform duty
to thee. And after my painful life ended, bring me, I beseech thee, to thy
joys, to thy glory, to thy self: that I and my Parents, with all thy Saints
and Servants departed this life, may meet in a blessed glorious resurrection,
ever to sing praises and honor to thee, in and through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

O Deus meus, December. 26. 1605.

Dies erat Iovis, and Festum S. Stephani. ^om. Devon. and E.M. An. 1609.


respice servum tuum, and miserere mei secundum viscera misericordiae tuae.
Scandalum ecce factus sum Nomini tuo, dum ambitioni meae and aliorum peccatis
servio. Quin and hoc licet aliorum suasu, oblatrante tamen Conscientia
perpetravi. Obsecro, Domine, per misericordias Jesu, ne intres in judicium cum
servo tuo, sed exaudi sanguinem ejus pro me perorantem: nec hoc Conjugium sit
animae meae Divortium a sinu tuo. O quanto satius f^isset si vel hujus diei
satis memor, Martyrium cum Proto-martyre tuo potius perpessus essem, negando
quod urgebant, aut non satis fidi, aut non satis pii amici mei. Pollicitus sum
mihi tenebras peccato huic, sed ecce statim evolavit, nec lux magis aperta,
quam ego qui feci. Ita voluisti Domine prae nimia misericordia tua implere
ignominia faciem meam, ut discerem quaerere Nomen tuum. O Domine, quam gravis
adhuc est memoria peccati hujus etiam hodie, etiam p^st tot and toties
repetitas preces a tristi and confusa anima mea coram te profusas. O Domine
miserere; exaudi preces depressi and humiliati valde servi tui. Parce, Domine,
et remitte peccata, quae peccatum hoc and induxerunt and sequuta sunt. Nam
confiteor, Domine, iterum and eodem die revolventis anni, nec satis adhuc
cautus, aut satis humilis factus in aliud grave peccatum incidi; lapidatus
iterum non pro, sed a peccato. Nunc plene suscita me, Domine, ne moriar ultra
in peccatis meis; sed des ut vivam, and vivens gaudeam in te, per merita and
miserationes Jesu Christi Salvatoris nostri. Amen.

O merciful God, Iulii 28. 1617.

Die Lun^ E. B.


thou have showed me much mercy, and done great things for me; Et Martii 6.
1641/^.
and as I was returning, instead of thankfulness, I wandered out of my way from
thee, into a foul and a strange path. There thou made me see both my folly
and my weakness; Lord, make me ever see them, ever sorry for them. O Lord, for
my Saviors sake forgive me the folly, and strengthen me against the weakness
for ever. Lord, forgive all my sins, and this; and make me by thy grace, thy
most true; humble, and faithful servant all the days of my life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Sept. 26. 1617.

Die Veneris. Ignis and periculum inde.


O misericors Pater, quo me vertam? Qui and exeundo and revertendo peccavi
contra te. Abii cum Prodigo p^^digus in longinquam regionem. Dissipavi
substantiam meam, tuam luxuriose. Ibi primum sensi omnia consumpta, and me
dignum non meliori quam porcorum consortio: Nec tamen aut vita illa immunda,
aut fames gratiae, de reditu ad meliorem frugem vel cogitare fecit. Reversum
jam ab itinere infausto ecce judicia tua, Domine, insequuntur me. Ignis
corripit tecta sub quibus sum; vidit enim Deus, nec multum distulit, sed ignis
accensus est in Jacob, and ira ascendit in Israel. Et scelera (non dubito) mea
conflagrationem Collegio minitabantur, and mihi. Nam dum igni extinguendo
intentior sum, parum abfuit, quin ab igne extinguerer. Quam ecce misericordia
tua, Domine, vix sine miraculo me flammis ^^puit. Nam dum amica manus astantis
me vi quadam amovit, eodem instanti ex eodem loco, ubi pedem figere decrevi,
prorupit inclusus ignis, in flammas subsidunt gradus, and ego, st ibi
invenisset incendium, una periissem. O peccata mea nunquam satis deflenda! O
misericordia tua, Domine, nunquam satis praedicanda! O poenitentia nunquam mihi
magis necessaria! O gratia tua, Domine, humillime and jugiter imploranda!
Surgo, o Domine Pater, and ecce venio; lento quidem and instabili gressu, sed
venio, and confiteor: peccavi enim in coelum and contra te, nec dignus sum
vocarifilius tuus. Sim, o Domine, quid vis, modo tuus. Ablue peccata mea in
sanguine Filii tui, ut sim tuus. Et concede obsecro, ut sicut tum terror, ita
quotidie memoria ignis hujus exurat faeces omnes and reliquias peccatorum
meorum: ut me cautiore^ factum melior ignis charitatis and devotionis in amorem
tui and in odium peccati accendat, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Domine misericors, Febr. 5. 1628. die Martis Computo Iuliano Tendone^ fregi,
and iter. Mar. 6. die Soli^ inter ambulandum in cubiculo in Turri London. Anno
1641/2.
glorificetur beatissimum nomen tuum: Ecce enim ego, dum pro Officio Regem
sequor, and tui, and humanorum casuum immemor, and mihi praefidens, infausto in
via saltu in terram infidam incidi, and Tendonem fregi. Levatus in curtum,
Hamptoniam perveni. Cruciatus talis fuit, qualem nervi sentire solent. Et certe
in febrem ferventiorem ipse angor conjecisset, nisi ingens defluxus sanguinis
me ab illo metu liberasset. Magna infirmitate laboravi, et fere per biennium
claudus incessi. Infirmitatem aliquam adhuc sentio, sed, gratiae immortales
tibi, O beatissima Trinitas, usum satis perfectum Crurium dedisti mihi, and
confirmasti praeter omnium expectationem, gressus meos. Dirigas nunc eos, O
Domine, in viis mandatorum tuorum ut nunquam vel inter te and falsum cultum,
vel inter te and mundum claudicem; sed recta pergam, and viam testimoniorum
tuorum curram, quum dilatasti cor meum. Oro itaque ne differas vel dilatationem
cordis, vel confirmationem pedum in semitis justificationum tuarum, per and
propter Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Eternal God, Maii 11. 1640.

My house at Lambeth beset with violent and hase people.


and my most merciful Father, as this day the fury of the enraged multitude was
fierce upon me and my house, to destroy me and to pillage it, it pleased thee
in mercy to preserve both, and bring some of them to shame and punishment. I
have sinned many ways against thee, O Lord, and this was a loud call of thine
and a merciful to bring me to repentance, which I beseech thee give me grace to
hear and obey. But what I have done to hurt or offend them, that should stir up
this rage against me, I know not. Lord, in thy mercy look down upon me; fill my
heart with thankfulness for this great deliverance, and suffer me not to forget
it, or the Examination which I took of my self upon it. And as for them and
their like, let them not have their desire, O Lord, let not their mischievous
imaginations prosper against me, nor their fury lay hold upon me; lest they be
too proud, and lest I end my weary days in misery. Yet forgive them, O Lord,
for they know not why they did it. And according to thy wonted mercy preserve
me to serve thee, and let the same watchful Protection which now defended me,
guard me through the remainder of my life. And this for thine own goodness
sake, and the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, December. 18. 1640.

I was accused by the House of Commons of High Treason.


I humbly beseech thee look down upon me in this time of my great and grievous
affliction. Lord (if it be thy blessed will) make mine Innocence appear, and
free both me and my Profession from all scandal thus raised on me. And
howsoever, if thou be pleased to try me to the uttermost; I humbly beseech
thee, give me full patience, proportionable comfort, contentment with
whatsoever thou sendest, and an heart ready to die for thy Honor, the Kings
Happiness, and this Churches Preservation. And my zeal to these is all the sin
(humane frailty excepted) which is yet known to me in this particular, for
which I thus suffer. Lord, look upon me in mercy, and for the merits of Jesus
Christ pardon all my sins many and great, which have drawn down this Judgment
upon me, and then in all things do with me as seems best in thine own eyes: and
make me not only patient under, but thankful for whatsoever thou do, O Lord,
my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

October. 24. 1643.

I received Additional Articles and Summo^s to my Trial.


O Eternal God and merciful Father, after long imprisonment I am now at last
called to answer; I most humbly ^eseech thee to strengthen me through this
Trial, to preserve the patience with which thou have hitherto blessed me
through this affliction. Suffer no course language, or other provocation to
make me speak or do any thing that may mis-become my person, mine age, my
calling, or my present condition. And Lord, I beseech thee, make me able to
clear to the world that Innocence which is in my heart concerning this Charge
laid against me. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O merciful Lord, Nov. 1. 1644.

I received Summo^s to appear in the House of Commo^s next morning.


I have had a long and a tedious Trial: And I give thee humble and hearty
thanks for the wonderful strength that I have received from thee in the bearing
up of my weakness. Lord, continue all thy mercies toward me, for the storm
gathers and grows black upon me, and what it threatens is best known to thee.
After a long Trial I am called to answer in the House of Commons; and that not
to Evidence, but to one single man's report of Evidence, and that made without
Oath. What this may produce in present or in future, thou know also. O Lord,
furnish me with patience and true Christian wisdom and courage, to bear up
against this drift, and send not out thy storms to beat upon me also; but look
comfortably upon me to my End, in and through the merits of Jesus Christ my
Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Prayers added since the restoring of this Book to me, which was taken from me
in a search by Mr. Prinne May 31. 1643: and with much difficulty restored unto
me Nov. 6. 1644.
O Domine, August. Ser. 193. de Temp.
ad Adventum tuum secundum paratus sim, ne talem me non invenias, qualem
voluisti invenire, qui omnia pro me passus es, ut invenires talem, cui non
supplicia inferres, sed praemia redderes sempiterna. Amen.

O Domine, Ibidem Ser. 198.
cum Christi adjutorio sic agere studeam, ut te tam pium Dominum, non solum
hospitem recipere possim, sed etiam perpetuum habitatorem habeam, per Jesum
Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Ibidem Ser. 202.
O AEterne Deus, auxilium tuum imploro, ut veram discretionem, et perfectam
charitatem praestare mihi pro tua pietate digneris, cui est gloria and imperium
cum Patre and Spiritu Sancto in secula seculorum. Amen.

Ibidem Ser. 204.
O Domine misericors, qui tanta mihi beneficia concessisti, des insuper mihi cum
omni humilitate fidem rectam tenere, charitatem integram cum omnibus hominibus
conservare, mundo cord and casto corpore tibi Domino meo servire usque ad
finem vitae serio laborem, ut post labores desiderabilem illam vocem audire
possim; Euge serve bone, intra in gaudium Domini tui. Amen.

Meditationes praeparantes ad Mortem.
O Lord, quicken and comfort my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Lord, I
call to mind all the years of my life past in the bitterness of my soul for my
sin. My misdeeds have prevailed against me, O be thou merciful unto my sin; O
for thy Names sake be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Amen.

Namely and especially, O Lord, be merciful unto me, etc.

Herein O Lord be merciful unto thy servant. O Lord, lay not these, nor the
rest unto my charge.

O let the depth of my sin call up the depth of thy mercies, of thy grace.
Lord, let it come, that where my sin has abounded, grace may supe^abound.

Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

O Lord, though thou kill me, yet will I put my trust in thee.

Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no
evil. For I hope verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living.

O let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless, if it may not pass from me, but
that I must drink of it, thy will be done.

Thou art the Lord, do what seems good in thine own eyes.

For I will take it as the Cup of Salvation, and give thanks to thy Name, O
Lord.

O Lord, grant that all the days of my appointed time upon earth I may wait
when my Changing shall come.

O that thou would hide me in the grave, and keep me secret until thy wrath
be past, and appoint me a time in which thou will remember me!

Say unto my soul, O say it now, I am thy Salvation.

Command my spirit, whenever thou will command it, to be received up to thee in
peace.

O bid me come unto thee: say unto me, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

Lord thus, and now let thy servant depart in peace, that mine eyes may see thy
Salvation.

O Lord, thou blessed Trinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy upon me.

I commend my self into thy hands as to a faithful Creator.

Lord, receive thine own Creature, not made by any strange God, but by thee the
only living and true God.

Psalm. 138 8.
Despise not, O Lord, the work of thine own hands.

Genesis 2. Ephesians. 4. 24.
I am created to thine own Image and likeness; O suffer not thine own Image to
be defaced, but renew it again in righteousness and true holiness.

I commend my self into thy hands, as to a most gracious Redeemer: For thou
have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

O Lord, I am the price of thy Blood, of thy most precious Blood; O suffer not
so great, so unvaluable a price to perish.

O Lord, thou came down from heaven to redeem that which was lost; suffer not
that to be lost which thou have redeemed.

I commend my self into thy hands, as to my most blessed Comforter.

O Lord, I am weary and heavy laden, and I come to thee to be refreshed by
thee. Behold, O Lord, I have been the Temple of thy holy Spirit; I have I
confess, strangely polluted it; yet destroy me not, but dedicate me anew, and
sanctify me to thy self yet once again.

Dan. 9. 19.
O Lord, I wear thy Name: it is thy Name that is called upon me. For thy Names
sake therefore be merciful unto me. O spare, Lord, if not me, yet thine own
Name in me. And do not so remember my sin, O Lord do not, as that in remembering
it, thou forget thine own Name. I have desired to fear thy Name, Neh. 1.11.
to love and to honor thy Name. And I now desire to depart this life, in the
Invocation and Confession of thy Name. Lord, I confess it and call upon it, O
come Lord Jesus. Amen.

Peccavi O Domine!

Sed non negavi te: O nunquam praevaleat Inimicus ut negem.

Sed credo; O Domine adauge fidem, and non confundar in aeternum.

Sed spero; et quae spes mea nisi tu solus? suscipe me secundum eloquium tuum,
and non confundar ab expectatione mea.

Sed praeparavi and direxi cor meum ad te quaerendum: and etiamsi non secundum
munditiem Sanctuarii, tamen linum fumigans, and quassam arundinem nec extinguas
nec frangas, O Domine Jesu.

Sed patienter sustineo castigationem tuam, and taceo quia tu fecisti.

Sed remitto debitoribus meis, et tu pollicitus es remissionem remittenti.

Sed projicio me in te; ne te subtrahas, and venientem ad te ne ejicias for as.

Sed in Nominis tui confessione and invocatione opto decedere.

Quare non propter me, O Domine Jesu, aut quicquam mei, sed propter temetipsum.
Propter Nomen tuum. Propter gloriam Nominis tui, and veritatem tuam. Propter
misericordias tuas multas, magnas, mirificas. Propter Christum Mediatorem, and
Spiritum Paracletum, suscipe reversum ad se, and revertentem ad te. Amen.

Et ideo o Domine Deus meus!
Inter te and me.
Christum Sacerdotem, Agnum, Sacrificium.
Inter Satanam and me.
Christum Regem, Leonem, Triumphum.
Inter Peccatum and me.
Christi Innocentiam in vita.
Inter Poenam peccatorum et me.
Christi Satisfactionem, Passionem, Sanguinem.
Inter defectum Iustitiae et me.
Christi Iustitiam, Obedientiam absolutam.
Inter defectum ad Praemium and me.
Christi Meritum.
Inter defectum Doloris pro peccatis, and me.
Christi Lachrimas, and Sudorem.
Inter defectum fervoris in Orando and me.
Christi Intercessionem.
Inter accusationem Satanae vel propriae Conscientiae, et me.
Christum Advocatum.
Inter Concupiscentiam and me,
Christi Charitatem ostendo, offero, commemoro. Acceptum habe Domine, propter.
Christum ipsum. Amen.
Peccavi O Domine!

Sed non abscondo peccatum.

Sed non excuso.

Sed ultro fateor.

Sed recogito in amaritudine animae.

Sed meipsum propter peccata in te odi: des gratiam, ut judicem and vindicem;
ut non sine venia exeam e vita hac mihi miserrima. Amen.

Psalm. 78. 40.
O Lord, I have not only sinned, but provoked thee with many and grievous sins;
yet, I beseech thee, remember that I am bnt flesh, even a wind that passes and
comes not again.

Et plus potest ad salutem misericordia Servatoris, quam ad perniciem nequitia
mei peccatoris. Amen.

O Domine Jesu, S. August. T. 3. in S. Johan.
non habebas tu quare morereris, and mortuus es pro me: ego habeo quare, des
gratiam ne dedigner mori, et paratus sim. Amen.

O Domine Jesu, propter illam amaritudinem quam pro me miserrimo sustinuisti in
Cruce; maxim in illa hora, quando nobilissima anima tua egressa est de
benedicto corpore tuo, deprecor te miserere animae meae in egressu suo, and
perduc eam in vitam aeternam. Amen,

Pro Infirmis.
DEus, sub cujus nutibus vitaenostrae mome^ta decurrunt, suscipe quaeso preces
meas pro aegrotantibus famulis tuis, pro quibus humillime misericordiae tuae
auxilium imploro. Ut reddita sibi sanitate, gratiarum tibi in Ecclesia tua
referant actiones, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum. Amen.

Visitatio Infirmi.
EXistimas ne?





nihil unquam permittat contingere, nisi quum expedit?









Si sic; subdes hac in re Divinae voluntati voluntatem tuam, sacrificium omnium
(post Christi) Deo gratissimum.

Confiterisne?











possis? and poenitetne id etiam quod vel ignoras, vel oblitus es?









Credisne?







Petisne ipse, and visne nos tuo nomine a Deo supplices petere, ne deficiat in
te Fides haec ad ipsum, atque adeo ne in ipso mortis articulo?

Jesu Christi, utcunque in vita tua periit, tamen ne pereat in morte?



Remittisne?





Remittisne illis satisfactionem ad quam tenentur ratione illorum, quibus te
verbo vel facto laeserunt?











vel nonum praeceptum Legis Divinae, nisi fiat restitutio. Paratusne es
restituere illis rem, quibus in re familiari; and illis famam, quibus in fama
detraxisti: idque sine dolo, and dila^ione?



Symbolum Apostolicum.
CRedo Domine (tu meae incredulitati subvenito) esse te Unum Deum, Patrem,
Filium, Spiritum Sanctum.

Pro summa tua benignitate and potentia creasse Coelos and Terram.

Pro immensa charitate omnia in Christo recapitulasse.

Qui caro factus et conceptus est.

Natus. Mortuus. Resurrexit. Revertetur. Passus. Sepultus. Ascendit. Retribuet.
Crucifixus. Descendit. Assedit.
Virtute et operatione Spiritus Sancti, ex Universo vocasse Ecclesiam ad
sanctitatem.

In ea nos consequi bonorum participationem, and peccatorum remissionem.

In ea nos expectare carnis resurrectionem, vitam aeternam.

CRedo Domine (osupple defectus Fidei meae!)

Patris benevolum affectum.

Omnipotentis potentiam salutarem.

Creatoris providentiam in custodia, gubernatione, consummatione mundi.

Credo magnum Pietatis Mysterium, propter nos homines, pro nostra salute Deum
in Carne revelatum, Filium Patris, Unctum Spiritus, Dominum Jesum.

Conceptum esse, et Natum; ad purgandam impuritatem Conceptionis and
Nativitatis nostrae.

Passum esse; quae nos oportuit, (inexplicabilia) ne nos oporteret.

Crucifixum, Mortuum, et Sepultum, ne haec pro eo timeamus subire.

Descendisse; quo nos oportuit, and ne nos omnino.

Resurrexisse, Ascendisse, Consedisse; ubi nihil nobis, et ut nos quoque.

Adventurum Iudicem mundi, ut nos assumat.

Credo eum esse.

In Conceptione and Generatione, Naturae Purgatorem.

In Passione Crucis, Mortis Sepulturae, Redemptorem Personae.

In descensu, Triumphatorem Inferni and Mortis.

In Resurrectione, Primitias Dormientium.

In Ascensione, Praecursorem.

In Sessione, Paracletum sive Advocatum.

In secundo Adventu and Iudicio, Consummatorem Fidei.

Sic loco Abaddon. Satanae. Diaboli. Delatoris. Captivantis. Aculei. Jesum
intueor. Mediatorem. Paracletum. Intercessorem. Redemptorem. Christum.


Credo autem et Spiritus vim vivificam, sanctificantem.

Invisibiliter, extra, efficaciter, tanquam ventus.

In Increpatione, Compunctione, Doctri^a, Commone factione, Advocatione,
Consolatione, Attestatione, Diffusione Charitatis, Illuminatione Cognitionis.

Credo praeterea Spiritus Sancti Corpus mysticum Vocatorum ex universo mundo,
ad fidem veritatis and sanctitatem vitae.

Membrorum vero Corporis reciprocam participationem.

Praeterea Remissionem peccatorum in praesenti, spem vero Resurrectionis et
Translationis ad vitam aeternam.

DOmine, add mihi fidem; non fidem quae legem annihilet.

Sed fidem per Charitate^ operantem. Operibus efficacem. Vincentem mundum.
Sanctissimam denique, ut te amem ut Patrem, verear ut Omnipotentem.

Ut fideli Creatori animam in beneficentia committam.

Ut in me Christus formetur; ego vero conformer imagini ejus.

Ut pro iis, quae pro me passus est, agam gratias; ipsi compatiar: pro ipso
patiar, quodcunque ipsi visum fuerit.

Ut pro ejus Cruce, Morte, Sepultura ulciscar, crucifigam, interimam, sepeliam,
quod istis causam praebuit, peccatum.

Ut pro descensu ad Inferos, vivus frequenti meditatione descendam in Infernum.

Ut conformer Resurrectioni ejus, in novitatem vitae resurgens.

Ascensioni vero, quae sunt supra meditans, and quaerens.

Ut et Consessus sim memor, quoties dono aliquo Coelestis Consolationis egeo;
and quoties in Invocatione frigeo.

Adventus autem, and Iudicii nunquam obliviscar.

Tubae resonantis sonum semper audiam, and semper orem, donec ad Dextram
constitutus sim. Amen.

Conscientiae Quotidianum Examen.
O Anima mea!









Benedicta sit sancta and individua Trinitas nunc and semper, and in secula
seculorum. Amen.

Itinerarium.
O Domine, stellam ducem non sum meritus, tribue t^men quaeso mihi iter
prosperum, tempus tranquillum, reditum felicem. Ut Angelo tuo sancto comite and
custode, ad eum quo pergo locum, deinde ad domum propriam, and demum ad
aeternae salutis portum, pervenire feliciter valeam, per Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum. Amen.

Adesto, quaeso Domine, et me famulum tuum custodi; esto mihi in lubrico
baculus, in naufragio portus. Ut te duce, quo tendo prospere perveniam, and
demum incolumis ad propria redeam, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Exaudi Domine supplicationes meas, and viam famuli tui dispone: ut inter omnes
vitae and viae hujus varietates, tuo semper protegar auxilio, per Jesum
Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

O Domine, salvum me fac servum tuum sperantem in te. Mitte mihi auxilium de
Sancto, and de Sion tuere me. Esto mihi turris fortitudinis a facie Inimici.
Nihil proficiat Inimicus in me, and filius iniquitatis non opponat nocere mihi.
O prosperum iter faciat mihi Deus salutarium nostrorum. Domine exaudi orationem
meam, and clamor meus ad te veniat, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

At the laying of the first Stone of a Chapel.
Hammersmith Chapel March 11. 1629.
O Lord merciful and gracious, this thy People are preparing to build a place
for thy Service: Accept I humbly beseech thee their present Devotion, and make
them perfect both in their present and future duty; that while thou give them
ease to honor thee, they may with the greater alacrity go on in thy Service.
And now, O Lord, I have by thy mercy and goodness, put to my hand to lay the
first stone in this Building: it is a Cornerstone, make it, I beseech thee, a
happy Foundation, a durable Building. Let it rise up, and be made, and continue
a House of Prayer and Devotion through all ages; that thy People may here be
taught to believe in Jesus Christ the true Cornerstone, upon whom they and
their souls may be built safe for ever. Grant this for the merit of the same
Jesus Christ our most blessed Lord and Savior. To whom with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Power, Majesty, and Dominion this day and for
ever. Amen.

Prayers upon sundry Public Occasions.
For the H. Court of Parliament, 1625.

Tempore Iejunii ob Pestem gravissimam.


MOst gracious God, we humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in general, so
especially for the High Court of Parliament, under our most Religious and
Gracious King at this time assembled; that thou would be pleased to bless
and direct all their Consultations, to the preservation of thy Glory, the good
of thy Church, the safety, honor, and welfare of our Sovereign and his
Kingdoms. Lord, look upon the humility and devotion with which they are come
into thy Courts. And they are come into thy House in assured confidence upon
the merits and mercies of Christ (our blessed Savior,) that thou will not deny
them the grace and favor which they beg of thee. Therefore, O Lord, bless them
with that wisdom which thou know necessary to speed, and bring great
designs into action; and to make the maturity of his Majesty's and their
Counsels, the happiness and the blessing of this Commonwealth. These, and all
other necessaries for them, for us, and thy whole Church, we humbly beg in the
Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ our most blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

For the Navy, 1625.
O Eternal God and our most gracious Father, thou art the Lord of Hosts, and the
strength of all Nations is from thee: If thou keep not the City, the
Watchman waketh but in vain. And no Victory can wait upon the justest Designs,
upon the wisest Counsels, upon the strongest Armies, if thou teach not their
hands to war, and their fingers to fight. Thou art the steady hope of all the
ends of the earth, and of them which go and remain in the broad sea. Lord, at
this time we need thy more special Assistance both by Land and Sea; and ^or the
mercy of Christ deny us neither. Be with our Armies, and the Armies of our
Allies and Associates by Land; be with our Navy at Sea. Be not from the one,
nor from the other in power and in great mercy, until thou have brought them
back with honor and a settled Peace. Lord, turn our Enemies sword into their
own bosom: For we sought Peace and ensued it; and while we did so, they did
more then make themselves ready to battle. We are thy servants, truly and
heartily sorry for our sins. Lord, forgive them, and then we will trust upon
thee, that thou will pour down all thy blessings upon this and all other
designs and actions of this State, undertaken for thy glory, the honor of our
most gracious King CHARLES, and the peace and welfare of this Church and
Commonwealth. Grant this we humbly beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake our
only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

In time of Pestilence and unseasonable Weather, 1625.
Most gracious God, we humbly beseech thee pardon and forgive all our many,
great and grievous transgressions. We may not hope thou will take off thy
punishments, until thou have forgiven our sins. We may not think thou will
forgive our sins, until our humiliation and repentance come to ask forgiveness.
We have been too slow to come, and now thou have apparelled thy Mercy in
Justice, to force us to thee. Lord, we believe, but do thou increase our Faith,
our Devotion, our Repentance, and all Christian Virtues in us. At this time the
viols of thy heavy displeasure drop down upon us, and while we smart under one
Judgment, thou threatnest the rest. The Pestilence spreads in our Streets, and
so as if it sought whom to devour. No strength is able to stand against it, and
it threatens to make Families, nay, Cities desolate. While the Pestilence eats
up thy People, we hear the sound of War, and the Sword calls for such as it
would devour. In the mean time the heavens are black over us, and the clouds
drop leaneness; and it will be Famine, to swallow what the Pestilence and the
Sword shall leave alive, unless thou send more seasonable weather to give the
fruits of the earth in their season. Our sins have deserved all this and more,
and we neither do nor can deny it. We have no whither to go but to mercy. We
have no way to that, but by the Alsufficient merit of thy Son our blessed
Savior. Lord, for his merit and mercies sake look down upon us thy distressed
servants: Command thine Angel to stay his hand, and remember that in death we
cannot praise thee, nor give thanks in the pit. Go forth with our Armies when
they go, and make us remember that all our strength and deliverance is in thee.
Clear up the Heavens over us, and take not from us the great plenty with which
thou have crowned the Earth: but remember us, O thou that feedest the Ravens
when they call upon thee. Lord, we need all thy mercies to come upon us, and
thy mercies are altogether in Christ, in whom, and for whose sake we beg them
of thee, who live and reignest in the unity of the Spirit, one God, world
without end. Amen.

O Eternal God and most merciful Father, In danger of Enemies. 1626.
we humbly beseech thee be merciful unto us, and be near to help us in all
those extremities which our sins threaten to bring upon us. Our Enemies are
strengthened against us, by our multiplied Rebellions against thee. And we
deserve to suffer whatever our Enemies threaten. But there is mercy with thee
that thou may be feared. O Lord, show us this mercy, and give us grace so to
fear thee, as that we may never be brought to fear or feel them. And whenever
thou will correct us for our sins, let us fall into thy hands, and not into the
hands of men. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our only Mediator and
Redeemer. Amen.

O Eternal God and most gracious Father, we have deserved whatsoever thy Law
has threatened against sinners. Our Contempt of thy Divine Worship is great,
and we hear thy Word, but obey it not. Forgive us, O Lord, forgive us these and
all other our grievous sins. Give us light in our understanding, readiness and
obedience in our will, discretion in our words and actions; true, serious, and
loyal endeavors for the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, the unity and glory
of this Church and State: that so we may love it and prosper in it, and be full
of grace in this life, and filled with glory in the life to come, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen. Gratiarum actio pro Pestilentia extincta. 1626.


O most merciful God, we give thee praise and thanks for the wonderful ceasing
of the late raging Pestilence in the chief City of this Kingdom and other
places. Lord, show us yet fa^ther mercy, and look upon all parts of this Land
with tender compassion. Keep back the destroying Angel, that he enter not into
places that are yet free, nor make farther waste in those which are already
visited. Comfort them that are sick, preserve them that are sound, receive them
that die to mercy, that living and dying, they and we may continue thy faithful
servants, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In danger of Enemies. 1626.
O most gracious God and loving Father, we have felt thy manifold mercies, no
Nation more: and we have committed sins against thee, few Nations greater.
Enter not into judgment with us, O Lord, but for Christ and his mercy sake,
pacify thine anger, and save us from the malice and cruelty of our Enemies.
They are our crying sins that have called them upon us. Let it be an addition
to thy wonted mercy, to restrain their fury. To this end, Lord, p^t thy bridle
into their mouths, and thy bit between their teeth. Frustrate their designes^
and let them find no way in our Seas, nor any path in our Floods: but scatter
them with thy tempest, and follow them with all thy storms; that we being
delivered by thy hand, may bless and honor thy Name, devoutly serving thee all
our days, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

1626. 1628.
O Lord, thou gracious Governor of all the Kingdoms of the Earth: Look down, we
beseech thee, in mercy upon this Realm, and upon all other Reformed Churches.
Save and deliver us and them from the hands of all such as threaten our
destruction. Protect the person of our Gracious Sovereign, direct his Counsels,
go forth with his Armies, be unto him and to us a wall of brass, and a strong
tower of defense against his and our Enemies; that so we being safe through thy
mercy, may live to serve thee in thy Church, and ever give thee praise and
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, For the s^fe childbearing of the Queens
Majesty, 1628.
all peace and strength of Kingdoms is from thee: and lineal Succession is thy
great blessing both upon Princes and States; the great means to preserve unity,
and confirm strength. We therefore give thee humble and hear^y thanks, as for
all thy blessings, so especially at this time for thy great mercy and
loving kindness to our dread Sovereign, his Royal Queen, and this whole State,
in giving her Majesty hope of her long desired Issue, thereby filling their and
our hearts with gladness. Lord, go along with thine own blessings to perfect
them. Be with her in soul and in body, preserve her from all dangers. Keep her
safe to and in the hour of Travel, that there may be strength to bring forth
her Joy and our Hope. And make her a joyful Mother of many Children, to the
glory of thy great Name, the happiness of his Majesty, the security of this
State, and the flourishing of the Church and true Religion amongst us. Grant
this, even for Jesus Christ his sake our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

For the safe child^bearing of the Q^eens Majesty. 1629.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, since lineal Succession is under thee, the
great security of Kingdoms, and the very life of Peace. We therefore give thee
most humble and hearty thanks for the great blessing which thou 1631.
have again begun to work for our Gracious King CHARLES and this whole State,
in giving the Queens Majesty further hopes of a desired and happy Issue. And as
we give thee humble and hearty thanks for this, so we pray thee to perfect this
great blessing thus begun, to preserve her from all dangers, and to be with her
by special assistance in the hour of Travel. Lord, make her a happy Mother of
succesful Children, to the increase of thy glory, the comfort of his Majesty,
the joy of her own heart, the safety of the State, and the preservation of the
Church and true Religion among us. Grant this even for Jesus Christ his sake
our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for the Queens safe Delivery, and happy Birth of Prince Charles
1630. May 29.
O most merciful God and gracious Father, thou have given us the joy of our
hearts, the contentment of our souls for this life, in blessing our dear and
dread Sovereign, and his virtuous Royal Queen with a hopeful Son, and us with a
Prince in thy just time and his to rule over us. We give thy glorious Name most
humble and hearty thanks for this. Lord, make us so thankful, so obedient to
thee for this great mercy, that thy goodness may delight to increase it to us.
Increase, it good Lord, to more Children, the prop one of another against
single hope. Increase it to more Sons, the great strength of his Majesty and
his Throne. Increase it in the Joy of his Royal Parents, and all true-hearted
Subjects. Increase it by his Christian and happy Education both in Faith and
Goodness: that this Kingdom and People may be happy in the long life and
prosperity of our most Gracious Sovereign and his Royal Consort. And when
fullness of days must gather time, Lord double his Graces, and make them
apparent in this his Heir and his Heirs after him, for all Generations to come,
even for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for the Queens safe Delivery, and happy Birth of the Lady Mary,
Nov. 4. 1631.
O most gracious God and loving Father, we give thee, as we are bound, most
humble and hearty thanks for thy great mercy extended to us and this whole
State, in blessing the Queens Majesty with a happy Deliverance in and from the
great pains and perils of Childbirth. We humbly beseech thee to continue and
increase this Blessing: to give her strength, that she may happily overcome
this, and all dangers else: that his most Gracious Majesty may long have joy in
her happy life: that she may have joy in his Majesty's prosperity; that both of
them may have comfort in the Royal Prince Charles, the newborn Princess the
Lady Mary, and with them in a hopeful, healthful and succesful Posterity: that
the whole Kingdom may have fullness of joy in them; and that both they and we
may all have joy in the true honor and service of God: that both Church and
Kingdom may be blessed, and their Royal Persons filled with honor in this
life, and with eternal happiness in the life to come, even for Jesus Christ his
sake our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, A Thanksgiving for his Majesty's Recovery
from the Small Pocks 1632.
we give thee all humble and hearty thanks for our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
King Charles; both for the gentleness of thy hand in a disease otherwise so
troublesome and fearful. And for the mercifulness of thy hand in taking it off:
so soon, and so happily. We know and acknowledge before thee our sins, and what
grievous punishments they have deserved. But Lord we beseech thee still to
remember us in mercy, and long to bless our Gracious King with life and heal^h,
and strength, and happiness; and above all with the fear of thy holy Name: that
so he may continue under thee, and over us, a Father of the State, a Patron of
the Church, a Comfort to his Royal Queen, till he see his Childrens Children,
and peace upon Israel. Grant this good Lord, even for Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

Most gracious God and loving Father, A Thanksgiving for the Queens safe
Delivery, and happy Birth of James Duke of York.
we give thee all humble and hearty thanks for thy great mercy in blessing the
Queen's Majesty with a happy Deliverance in and from the great pains and peril
of Childbirth. We humbly beseech thee to continue thy mercies toward her,
that she may happily overcome this and all other dangers; that his most
Gracious Majesty may long have joy in her most happy life, and both of them
comfort in the Royal Prince Charles, and the rest of their Princely Issue;
particularly in the newborn Prince the Duke of York, that they all may prove a
healthful, hopeful, and a succesful Posterity; that both Church and Kingdom may
have fullness of joy in them. That their Majesty's Royal Persons may be filled
with honor in this life, and with eternal happiness in the life to come. And
this even for Jesus Christ his sake our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer for the King's Majesty in his Northern Expedition, 1639.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, by whom alone Kings reign, thou Lord of
Hosts, and giver of all Victory, we humbly beseech thee to guard our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles; to bless him in his Person with health
and safety, in his Counsels with wisdom and prudence, and in all his Actions
with honor and good success. Grant, blessed Lord, that Victory may attend his
designs, and that his liege People may rejoice in thee; but that shame may
cover the face of thine and his treacherous Enemies. Give him, blessed Father,
so to settle his Subjects in Peace, and the true fear of thy Divine Majesty,
that he may return with joy and honor, and proceed long to Govern his Kingdoms
in peace and plenty, and in the happiness of true Religion and Piety all his
days. These blessings, and whatsoever else shall be necessary for him, or for
our selves, we humbly beg of thee, O merciful Father, for Jesus Christ his sake
our only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

For the King in his Northern Expedition, 1640.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, by whom alone Kings reign, thou Lord of
Hosts and Giver of all Victory: We humbly beseech thee both now and ever to
guide and preserve our most gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES. To bless him
in his Person with health and safety; in his Counsels with wisdom and prudence,
and in all his Actions with honor and good success: especially against those
his Traitorous Subjects, who having cast off all Obedience to their Anointed
Sovereign, do at this time in Rebellious manner invade this Realm. Grant,
Blessed Lord, that Victory may attend his Majesty's designs, that his Liege
People may rejoice in thee; but that shame may cover the faces of thine and his
treacherous Enemies, Enable him (blessed Father) so to vanquish and subdue them
all, that his Loyal Subjects being settled in Peace and the true fear of thy
holy Name, he may return with joy and honor, and continue to Govern his
Kingdoms in peace and plenty, and in the happiness of true Religion and Piety
all his days. These blessings, and whatsoever else shall be necessary for him,
or for our selves, we humbly beg of thee, O merciful Father, for Jesus Christ
his sake, our only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

Quotidie.
O Lord, forgive me all my sins that are past. O Lord, strengthen me against
all Temptations, especially the Temptations of, etc.

O Lord, fill my heart with thankfulness: and I do give thee most humble and
hearty thanks for the great deliverance of me from the rage and fury of the
Multitude. O Lord, let the same wings of thy merciful protection be spread over
me all the days of my life. O Lord, give me a faithful, a patient, a penitent,
a persevering heart in thy service; that so I may with comfort daily nay hourly
expect when my Changing shall come. So Amen, Lord Jesus. Amen.

Absolutio.
OUr Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to Absolve all
sinners, which truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive
thee thine offenses. And by his Authority committed to me, I Absolve thee from
all thy sins, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

Admissio in Ecclesiam.
GOd, who of his mercy has given you grace to give your self to his Church;
Preserve and keep you in his Truth, free both from Superstition and
Profaneness. The Lord bless and keep you. Numb. 6. 24.
The Lord make his face shine upon you, and be merciful unto you. The Lord lift
up his countenance upon you, and give you peace in Conscience, and constancy in
Truth. And by the power of Ministration committed to me by our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, I Readmit you into the Fellowship of his Church, in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

His Grace's Speech, according to the Original, written with his own hand, and
delivered by him upon the Scaffold on Tower Hill, Jan. 10. 1644. to his
Chaplain Dr. Stern, now Lord Archbishop of York.
Good People,
THis is an uncomfortable time to preach; yet I shall begin with a Text of
Scripture, Heb. 12.2. Let us run with patience that race which is set before
us: Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked unto Jesus the Author and
Finisher of my Faith, he best knows. I am now come to the end of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a death of shame. But the shame must be despised, or no
coming to the right hand of God. Jesus despised the shame for me, and God
forbid that I should not despise the shame for Him.

I am going apace (as you see) toward the Red sea, and my feet are upon the
very brink of it: An argument (I hope) that God is bringing me into the Land of
Promise; for that was the way through which he led his people.

But before they came to it, he instituted a Passover for them. A Lamb it was,
but it must be eaten with sour herbs, Exodus 12. 8. I shall obey, and labor to
digest the sour herbs, as well as the Lamb. And I shall remember it is the
Lords Passover. I shall not think of the herbs, nor be angry with the hands
that gathered them; but look up only to him who instituted that, and governs
these. For men can have no more power over me then what is given them from
above, S. John. 19. 11.

I am not in love with this Passage through the Red Sea, for I have the
weakness and infirmity of flesh and blood plentifully in me. And I have prayed
with my Savior, Ut transiret calix iste, that this cup of red wine might pass
from me, S. Luke 22. 42. But if not, Gods will, not mine, be done. And I shall
most willingly drink of this cup as deep as he pleases, and enter into this
Sea, yea, and pass through it in the way that he shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (Good people) that when Gods servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them,
and did in a manner drive them into that Sea, were drowned in the same waters,
while they were in pursuit of them.

I know my God, whom I serve, is as able to deliver me from this Sea of blood,
as he was to deliver the three Children from the Furnace, Dan. 3. And (I most
humbly thank my Savior for it) my resolution is, as theirs was: They would not
worship the Image which the King had set up, nor will I the Imaginations which
the People are setting up. Nor will I forsake the Temple and the Truth of God
to follow the bleating of Ieroboams Calves in Dan and in Bethel.

And as for this People, they are at this day miserably misled: God of his
mercy open their eyes, that they may see the right way. For at this day the
blind lead the blind; and if they go on, both will certainly into the ditch, S.
Luke 6. 39.

For my self, I am (and I acknowledge it in all humility) a most grievous
sinner many ways, by thought, word, and deed: And yet I cannot doubt but that
God has mercy in store for me a poor penitent, as well as for other sinners. I
have now upon this sad occasion ransacked every corner of my heart; and yet I
thank God I have not found among the many, any one sin, which deserves death by
any known Law of this Kingdom.

And yet hereby I charge nothing upon my Judges: For if they proceed upon proof
by valuable witnesses, I or any other Innocent may be justly condemned. And I
thank God, though the weight of the Sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet
within as ever I was in my life.

And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever
died by an Ordinance in Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have gone this
way, though not by this means. For Elphegus was hurried away and lost his head
by the Danes; Simon Sudbury in the Fury of Wat Tyler and his fellows. Before
these S. John Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd Woman: And S. Cyprian
Archbishop of Carthage submitted his head to a persecuting sword. Many examples
great and good; and they teach me patience. For I hope my Cause in heaven will
look of another die, then the color that is put upon it here.

And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great men in
their several Generations; but also that my Charge, as foul as it is made,
looks like that of the Jews against S. Paul, Acts 25. 8. For he was accused for
the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion. And like that of S. Stephen, Acts 6.
14. for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law and Religion, the
Holy Place and the Law, ver. 13.

But you will say, Do I then compare my self with the integrity of S. Paul and
S. Stephen? No, far be that from me. I only raise a comfort to my self, that
these great Saints and Servants of God were laid at in their times as I am now.
And it is memorable that S. Paul, who helped on this accusation against S.
Stephen, did after fall under the very same himself.

Yea, but here is a great clamor that I would have brought in Popery. I shall
answer that more fully by and by. In the mean time you know what the Pharisees
laid against Christ himself, S. John 11. 48. If we let him alone, all men will
believe on him: Et venient Romani, and the Romans will come, and take away both
our Place and the Nation. Here was a causeless cry against Christ, that the
Romans would come. And see how just the judgment of God was. They crucified
Christ for fear lest the Romans should come; and his death was it which brought
in the Romans upon them; God punishing them with that which they most feared.
And I pray God this clamor of Venient Romani, of which I have given no cause,
help not to bring them in. For the Pope never had such a Harvest in England
since the Reformation, as he has now upon the Sects and Divisions that are
amongst us. In the mean time, by honor and dishonor, by good report and evil
report, as a deceiver and yet true, am I passing through this world, 2 Cor. 6.
8.

Some particulars also I think it not amiss to speak of.

1. And first, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our gracious
Sovereign: He has been much traduced also for bringing in of Popery. But on my
Conscience (of which I shall give God a present account) I know him to be as
free from this Charge as any man living: And I hold him to be as sound a
Protestant according to the Religion by Law established, as any man in his
Kingdom; and that he will venture his life as far and as freely for it. And I
think I do or should know both his affection to Religion, and his grounds for
it, as fully as any man in England. 2. The second particular is concerning this
great and populous City (which God bless.) Here has been of late a fashion
taken up to gather hands, and then go to the great Court of the Kingdom, the
Parliament, and clamor for Justice; as if that great and wise Court, before
whom the Causes come which are unknown to the Many, could not or would not do
Justice but at their appointment; a way which may endanger many an innocent
man, and pluck his blood upon their own heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also.

And this has been lately practiced against my self: the Magistrates standing
still and suffering them openly to proceed from Parish to Parish without check.
God forgive the setters of this, withal my heart I beg it: but many
well-meaning people are caught by it.

In S. Stephens case, when nothing else would serve, they stirred up the people
against him, Act. 6. 12. And Herod went the same way: when he had killed S.
James, yet he would not venture upon S. Peter, till he found how the other
pleased the people, Acts 12. 3.

But take heed of having your hands full of blood, Esai. 1. 15. For there is a
time best known to himself, when God above other sins makes Inquisition for
blood. And when that Inquisition is on foot, the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 9.
12. that God remembers; but that is not all, he remembers, and forgets not the
complaint of the poor, i. e. whose blood is shed by Oppression, ver. 9.

Take heed of this: It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, Heb. 12. but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for blood.

And with my prayers to avert it, I do heartily desire this City to remember
the Prophecy that is expressed Ierem. 26. 15.

3. The third particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished, and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven upon
them. But alas now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether or how
it shall get out. And which is worse then a storm from without, it is become
like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body. And at every
cleft profaneness and irreligion is entering in; While (as Lib. 2. de vitae
contempt. cap. 4.
Prosper speaks) men that introduce profaneness are cloaked over with the name
Religionis Imaginariae, of Imaginary Religion: for we have lost the Substance,
and dwell too much in Opinion. And that Church, which all the Jesuits
machinations could not ruin, is fallen into danger by her own. 4. The last
particular (for I I am not willing to be too long) is my self. I was born and
baptized in the bosom of the Church of England established by Law. In that
Profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to die.
What clamours and slanders I have endured for laboring to keep an Uniformity
in the external Service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of
this Church, all men know, and I have abundantly felt. Now at last I am accused
of High Treason in Parliament, a crime which my soul ever abhorred. This
Treason was charged to consist of two parts, An endeavor to subvert the Laws
of the Land: and a like endeavor to overthrow the true Protestant Religion
established by Law.

Besides my answers to the several Charges, I Protested mine innocence in both
Houses. It was said, Prisoners Protestations at the Bar must not be taken. I
must therefore come now to it upon my death, being instantly to give God an
account for the truth of it.

I do therefore here in the presence of God and his holy Angels take it upon my
death, that I never endeavored the Subversion either of Law or Religion. And I
desire you all to remember this Protest of mine for my innocence in this, and
from all Treasons whatsoever.

I have been accused likewise as an Enemy to Parliaments: No, I understand
them, and the benefit that comes by them too well to be so: But I did dislike
the misgovernments of some Parliaments many ways, and I had good reason for
it; for Corruption optimi est pessima. And that being the highest Court, over
which no other has jurisdiction, when it is misinformed or misgoverned, the
Subject is left without all remedy.

But I have done. I forgive all the world, all and every of those bitter
Enemies which have persecuted me; and humbly desire to be forgiven of God
first, and then of every man. And so I heartily desire you to join in prayer
with me.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fullness of all thy mercies. Look upon me, but not till thou have nailed my
sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the blood of
Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ; that so the
punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased to
try me to the uttermost, I most humbly beseech thee, give me now in this great
Instant, full patience, proportionable comfort, and a heart ready to die for
thine honor, the Kings happiness, and this Churches preservation. And my zeal
to these (far from arrogance be it spoken) is all the sin (humane frailty
excepted, and all incidents thereto) which is yet known to me in this
particular, for which I come now to suffer: I say in this particular of
Treason. But otherwise my sins are many and great; Lord pardon them all, and
those especially (what ever they are) which have drawn down this present
judgment upon me. And when thou have given me strength to bear it, do with me
as seems best in thine own eyes, Amen.

And that there may be a stop of this issue of blood in this more then
miserable Kingdom, O Lord, I beseech thee give grace of repentance to all
Blood-thirsty people. But if they will not repent, O Lord confound all their
devices, defeat and frustrate all their designs and endeavors upon them,
which are or shall be contrary to the glory of thy great Name, the truth and
sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King and his posterity after
him in their just Rights and Privileges, the honor and conservation of
Parliaments in their just power, the preservation of this poor Church in her
Truth, Peace, and Patrimony, and the settlement of this distracted and
distressed People under their Ancient Laws, and in their native Liberties. And
when thou have done all this in mere mercy for them, O Lord, fill their hearts
with thankfulness, and with Religious dutiful obedience to thee and thy
Commandments all their days. So, Amen Lord Jesus, Amen. And receive my soul
into thy bosom. Amen.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The Lord Archbishop's Prayer, as he kneeled by the Block.
LOrd, I am coming as fast as I can. I know I must pass through the shadow of
death, before I can come to see thee. But it is but Umbra mortis, a mere shadow
of death, a little darkness upon nature: but thou by thy Merits and Passion
have broke through the jaws of death. So, Lord receive my soul, and have mercy
upon me: and bless this Kingdom with peace and plenty, and with brotherly love
and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood amongst
them, for Jesus Christ his sake, if it be thy will.

Then he laid his head upon the Block, and after he had prayed to himself, said
aloud, Lord receive my Soul, which was the signal given to the Executioner.

FINIS.

