THE Daily Office OF A CHRISTIAN.

BEING The DEVOTIONS Of the most Reverend Father in God Dr. WILLIAM LAUD, Late
Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Fourth EDITION.

Wherein several Catechetical Paraphrases and other very Excellent PRAYERS
selected out of the Primitive Writers, formerly published in Latin, are now
made English; and the whole reduced to an exact Method for the Benefit of the
DEVOUT.

London: Printed for Matthew Gillyflower and William Hensman, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Westminster Hall. 1683.

William Laud Lord ArchBishop of Canterbury his grace Privy Councilor to King
Charles ye ^^


THE Preface.
THere needs no more to recommend this Manual to the pious Reader, than the
Name of its great Author, who was both so excellent a Judge of the Matter and
Language of Devotion, and so lively an Example of its use, as made him in all
parts qualified and furnished to direct others.

Yet most probably this H. Prelate designed them at first to serve only for
himself in his Retirements: But however, that they are exceedingly well fitted
for all sorts of persons (excepting here and there some peculiarities, which
may soon be noted and past over) any one may discern, that will but take the
pains of a cursory perusal. And the World has pretty well witnessed it, having
taken off three Editions (or more) so entirely, that it is extremely difficult
to meet with one single Copy of either; though none of them were printed to the
Advantage of the Writer, nor well contrived for the Benefit of the devout
Reader.

The first that came abroad contained only the Officium Quotidianum or Daily
Office, with the addition of some few short Collects; and wanted the richest
part of this noble Treasure.

The second was printed at Oxford by Dr. Bailey from the Bishop's own
handwriting; but it might have been wished, for the public good, that other
measures had been taken, both in regard of the Price, and the Language and
Order of the Book.

For the Character being large and fair, made a fine show indeed, but perhaps
hindered the speedy spreading of it, by enhancing the purchase, and making it
too bulkie.

And many Prayers of most general and incomparable use being altogether in
Latin, were perfectly unserviceable to the Devotion of such who had learnt to
pray only in their Mother Tongue, and were Strangers to all others.

The Method no doubt was the same which he found in the Original; but the whole
being composed at several times on different Motives, the Order could not be
very natural, nor very apposite for the ready finding of ordinary persons;
though the Bishops constant practice might have made it so familiar to himself,
that possibly he could with ease, and without interruption, dip on what place
he pleased.

What other Editions of it are extant, were printed after this Copy; but seem
to be stolen out in haste for filthy Lucre's sake, most intolerably faulty, and
upon very bad Paper.

But none of all these being to be had, care has been taken to oblige the World
with a new Impression, and at the same time to remedy all those Inconveniences.

1. The Book therefore (now complete and perfect) is brought into such a
compass, as to be afforded at a very easy rate, though the Paper be good, and
the Letter handsome.

2. The Latin part, which is very considerable (especially the Paraphrases on
the Lords Prayer and Creed, etc. and the Offices for the Sick) are here
faithfully rendered into English, with much plainness, and, as nigh as could
be, in the Scriptures and Churches Language; so that the meanest capacity may
enjoy with good success, what the most refined and searching have so justly
admired. That you may know the Translations, each is marked (thus*) with a small
Asterisk at the beginning.

3. Some perhaps, on sudden thoughts, may judge it too bold an attempt to
change the Order of the Book; and indeed it would have been so, if the Author
himself had published it as a perfect Work. But considering what was said
before, that 'twas intended only for himself in private, and gathered
occasionally in his reading, or meditated with regard to emerging
circumstances, the Method could not be exact or accurate; and therefore to
alter it, will be no injury to the Memory of this great and learned Man, who in
all likelihood would himself have done as much, if he had lived and resolved to
communicate it to the World. So that the usefulness of our Undertaking in this
behalf, must certainly outweigh the presumption of it.

Therefore immediately after the Daily Office, we have set the Daily
Examination of Conscience, which is the proper place; and then follow the other
short Collects (more naturally rankt lation and Method, is, as to its
usefulness, become almost a new Work.

We concluded it to be expedient to acquaint the good Reader with this modest
Account of our Care and Pains; and having done so, it is pity to detain him any
longer. May his honest Endeavors be successful in the practice of what we
recommend to him, as our own in the Enterprise.

-- And yet did thou turn and refresh me. Psalm. 71. 18.

O Come hither and hearken, all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he
has done for my Soul, Psalm. 66. 16.

The Lords Prayer.
Our Father Though offended, yet a Father. Which art in Heaven, More Gerson
interprets otherwise, part 3. p. 1147.
eminently there, but not there only. Hallowed In me, by me, upon me. Be thy
Name. The name of a Father in us, that we may become Sons of thee our Father.
Thy Kingdom come. To destroy the Kingdom of Sin, by which Death and the Devil
reign. Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. By me that am but Earth,
as it is by thy holy Angels. Give us this day Our Our own, lawfully begotten.
Daily As the necessity of each day requires. Bread. The Spiritual Food of our
Soul, and also that of our body. And forgive us our Trespasses, as, etc.
Forgive us our Talents, who forgive others their Pence. And lead us not into
temptation, Nor suffer us to enter into temptation, when we are led away, and
ready to yield to it. But deliver us from evil. From that Author of evil that
is without us, the Devil and the World; and from the Author of evil that is
within us, our own selves: from the evil of sin by thy Grace, and from the evil
of punishment by thy mercy; from all evil by thy Peace. For thine is the
Kingdom, Absolute in it self. The Power, Independent on any other. The Glory,
Shining round about all things, and in all things. Thine. And from thee, and by
thee, and to thee, in the glory and salvation of thy Servants.
Amen.
OUr Father, which art in The Prefact.
Heaven,

1. Hallowed be thy Name. Petitions.


2. Thy Kingdom come.

3. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

4. Give us this day our daily bread.

5. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

6. And lead us not into temptation.

7. But deliver us from evil.

For thine is the Kingdom, The Doxologie.
the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
The Apostle's Creed divided into Articles.
1. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

2. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord.

3. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

4. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried.

5. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead.

6. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.

7. From thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead.

8. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

9. The Holy Catholic Church, The Communion of Saints.

10. The Forgiveness of Sins.

11. The Resurrection of the Body.

12. And the Life Everlasting.

Amen.
An Advertisement CONCERNING The Division of the Hours of PRAYER.
IT appears, both by the Histories of the Jews, and by plain Observations out
of the New Testament, that the space of the Day from the Morning to the Evening
was solemnly divided into four equal parts, which they called Hours, [to wit]
the First, the Third, the Sixth, and the Ninth. The First Hour comprehended the
whole space from the Sun being risen, about six of the clock in the Morning
after our account, till Nine, or thereabouts. The Third Hour began from thence,
and lasted till High-noon with us. The Sixth, from thence to our three of the
clock after Noon. The Ninth, from that hour, to the Vespers, or Evensong, about
six in the evening, or Sunset. And what was done in any part of these four
spaces, was indifferently taken and said to be done in that Hour, whereunto
every space of time was allotted. In which respect St. Mark, chap. 15. 25.
says, It was the Third Hour when they crucified Christ: and yet St. John,
chap. 19. 14. says, It was about the Sixth Hour before he was yet crucified.
Nor is there any contradiction at all between these two Evangelists; St. Mark
understanding the last part of the Third Hour, which was now at the very end;
and St. John meaning that it was now near upon the beginning of the Sixth Hour,
which was immediately to follow; the ending of the Third, and the beginning of
the Sixth, being both one and the same point of time.

THE DAILY OFFICE OF A CHRISTIAN.
The Office for every day.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Amen.
O Lord, I am risen For preventing Grace.
up, and fallen prostrate before thee: Prevent me, I beseech thee, in Engl. Lit.
all my doings with thy most gracious Favor, and further me with thy continual
Help; that in all my Works begun, continued, and ended in thee, I may glorify
thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain Everlasting Life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
ALmighty God and The Confession, with a Prayer by L. A. W.
most merciful Father, all Merciful, Mercy it self; I have erred wittingly, and
strayed willingly, nay run from thy ways, more like an untamed Heifer, than a
lost or wandering Sheep. I have followed too much, even altogether, the absurd
devices and brutish desires of my own heart. I have offended against, nay been
offended at thy holy, most holy Laws. I have left undone, not done at all,
those things which I ought to have done. And I have done, done nothing else,
but those things which I ought not to have done. And there is no health, no
hope of health in me. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon me, miserable, most
miserable sinner, the greatest sinner, and most unthankful for so great Grace.
Spare me, and them all, O God, which confess their faults. Restore me, and all
them that be penitent, that desire to be penitent, that wish they were, would
be glad if they were so, that fear they are not enough, and are sorry they are
no more: For this is according to thy Promises, most precious, most gracious,
most sweet Promises, declared unto mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord. Grant
therefore, O most merciful Father, for his sake who is our Redeemer, Advocate,
Author and Finisher of our Faith, our Propitiation, Righteousness, and
Justification; that I and all Penitents may hereafter live a Godly, Righteous,
and Sober Life, to the Glory of thy holy Name, and the Salvation of our own
Souls.

Amen.
O Eternal God and merciful For forgiveness of Sins.
Father, pardon, I beseech thee, all the Sins, Omissions and Commissions,
Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, by which I have provoked thee unto anger, from the
time of my Birth to this present moment: That no one, nor all of my sins
together, may ever be able to cry oftener or louder in thine Ears for Vengeance,
than the Cry of my Prayers may ascend up unto thee for Mercy and for
Forgiveness, and obtain that they sue for. Particularly, I humbly beseech thee,
forgive unto me my Great and my Clamorous sins, such as are, etc.

O Lord, against Heaven, and against Thee have I sinned, and committed foul
Trangressions in thy sight; but I beseech thee, wipe them all out of the Book
of Remembrances which thou have written, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
only Savior.

Amen.
GIve unto me, O Lord, I For Gifts.
humbly beseech thee, a wise, a sober, a patient, an understanding, a devout, a
religious, a courageous Heart: Chaste and temperate Reins and Thoughts: A Soul
full of Devotion to do thee service, strength against all Temptations,
especially the Temptations of, etc. Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, I give thee humble Thanks giving.
and hearty thanks (increase my thankfulness, I beseech thee) for all Benefits
and Blessings both Spiritual and Temporal, which in the riches of thy great
Mercy thou have liberally poured down upon me, but especially Spiritual. Lord,
let me not live, but to praise and magnify Thee and thy glorious Name.
Particularly I give thee most unfeigned thanks for my preservation from the
time of my Birth to this present moment, for, etc. For bringing me safe to the
beginning of this day, in which and all the days of my life, I beseech thee,
preserve me from sin, and from danger, in Soul and in Body, that all my
thoughts, words, and works may tend to the honor and glory of thy Name, the
good of thy Church, the discharge of my Duty, the salvation of my Soul in the
day of my appearance and account to be made before thee, through Jesus Christ,
our only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
O Eternal God and For the Catholic Church.
merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee, bless thy Holy Catholic Church,
wheresoever spread upon the face of the whole Earth: Good Lord, purge it from
all Atheism, Heresy, Schism, Superstition, factious maintenance of Groundless
Opinions; that one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, may in all places be uniformly
professed, as thy Church is, and can be but one. And grant, good Lord, that I
may be and continue a faithful, living, and a working Member under Christ the
Head, in that Church the Body, all the days of my life, and at the hour of my
death, through the Merits, and by the Grace of the same Jesus Christ, our Lord
and only Savior.

Amen.
O Merciful God, bless For this particular Church.
this Particular Church in which I live: make it and all the Members of it
sound in Faith, and holy in Life, that they may serve thee, and thou bless
them, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
LOrd, bless our most For the King.
gracious Sovereign, treasure up in him all thy hidden Blessings; make him, and
keep him a devoted Servant to thee, a constant Patron of the Church and Truth,
that he may live long, and be full of honorable success all his days, in his
Person, in his Actions, in his Queen, in his Children, in his Servants, in his
People, and crowned with Glory after life, and in that good time that shall be
best both for Him and Us, make him a joyful Father of happy and successful
Children. Under him bless the whole State Ecclesiastical and Civil, that
Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other, and we serve and honor thee for
ever.

Amen.
GOod Lord, bless all For Friends and Relations.
the places to which thou have made me have any near Reference, the place where
I was born, etc. every Soul contained in any of these. All my Friends, Kindred,
Acquaintance, any unto whom thou have made me any way beholding; especially my
nearer and my bosom-Friends, Dr. etc. all those, etc. Lord, I beseech thee,
forgive me and them all our sins, and continue us thy Servants both in Life and
Death.

Amen.
GRacious Father, bless XFor Servants.
my Servants, and make them thine. Give them Grace to serve thee first, then me
with Faithfulness, Soberness, and Diligence: Make me ever willing, and in some
measure able to repay unto them the time and the strength which they either
have or shall spend to do me service; even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
O Lord, bless all the afflicted For those in affliction.
Members of the Body of thy Son, wheresoever, howsoever afflicted; send them
constant Patience or speedy Deliverance, as seems best to thee, and is best for
them, according to their several wants and necessities whatsoever;
(particularly, etc.) And do unto them according to all those mercies which I
would or should desire thou should show to my own Soul, if at any time thou
shall be pleased to make my Estate as theirs is at this present. And, O Lord,
be merciful.

Amen.
BLessed Father, bless all For all men, even our enemies.
sorts of men in their Particulars; mine Enemies with the Forgiveness of sins:
Turn their hearts that they may no longer hate thy Servant; and if they will
not be turned, deliver me not over, I beseech thee, into their power. And next
after the Salvation of my Soul, I humbly beg it, deliver me not into the hands
of men, to the shame or scorn of the World.

Amen.
* O Lord Jesus, give me to Resignation of my self.
do what thou command, and command what thou will. Prepare my Soul against
thy coming, [and] come when thou will. Give me, if it please thee, a most
serene Patience, [but] at least as much as is sufficient for me, and come how
thou will, O thou that art the Savior of all that hope in thee. And moreover I
beseech thee, O Lord Jesus, interpose thy Death, Cross, Passion, Merit, and
Blood between thy Judgment and my Soul, now and ever, and especially in the
hour of my death. Which In the hour of Death.
Death I earnestly beg may never be sudden, may it never come and find me
unprepared: and when it comes, never let it rage so, but that I may retain
Faith, Hope, and Charity, a sound Memory and Understanding even to the last
gasp. And be thou my Defender O God. Grant mercy and pardon to my sins, to thy
Church Peace and Concord, to me the chief of Sinners Grace in this life, and
Glory in the life to come. So, even so come, O Lord Jesus, and have mercy upon
me. Amen.

Lord, here I am, do with me as seems best in thine own eyes; only give me, I
humbly beseech thee, a Penitent and a patient spirit to expect thee. Amen.

Lord, make my Service acceptable to thee while I live, and my Soul ready for
thee when I die. Amen.

Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc.

The daily Examination of Conscience.
* O My Soul,

1. Have thou given God thanks for the Benefits [which] thou have received? 2.
Have thou prayed for [the assistance of] Gods Grace, that thou may know thy
sins and cast them out? 3. Have thou called thy self to [an] account for the
sins thou have committed this present day, by thought, word, and deed, in every
hour since thou have been awake? 4. Have thou begged pardon for thy offenses,
and [hast thou] purposed through Gods Grace to amend [them]?
Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity now and for ever, World without end.

Amen.
A daily Prayer.
O Lord, forgive me all my sins that are past. O Lord, strengthen me against
all Temptations, especially the Temptations of, etc

O Lord, fill my heart with thankfulness: and I do give thee most humble and
hearty thanks for the great deliverance of me from the rage and fury of the
Multitude. O Lord, let the same wings of thy merciful protection be spread over
me all the days of my life. O Lord, give me a faithful, a patient, a penitent,
a persevering heart in thy service; that so I may with comfort daily, nay
hourly expect when my Change shall come. So Amen, Lord Jesus.

Amen.
For the King.
O Lord, grant the King Psalm. 61. 6.
a long life, that his years may endure as many ages: Furnish him with wise and
safe Counsels, and give him a heart of courage and constancy to pursue them. O
prepare thy loving mercy and faithfulness for him, that they may preserve him;
so will I always sing Praises unto thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

O Lord, hear the King in Psalm. 20. 1.
the day of his trouble, that thy Name, O God of Jacob, may defend him. Send
him help from thy Sanctuary, and strength out of Sion. Grant him his hearts
desire, and fulfill all his mind. Set his heart firm upon thee, and upon other
things but as they are in and from thee; that we his Servants under thee may
see with joy that thou helpest thine Anointed, and that thou will hear him from
thy holy Heaven, even with the wholesome strength of thy right hand. And, O
Lord, close not mine eyes till I see thy favor shine out upon him, even for
Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
For the Church.
O Lord, we humbly beseech 5 Sund. after Epiph.
thee to keep thy Church and Household continually in thy true Religion, that
they which do lean only upon hope of thy heavenly Grace, may evermore be
defended by thy mighty power: And that I may humbly and faithfully serve thee
in this thy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Gracious Father, I humbly beseech thee, for thy holy Catholic Church, fill it
with all Truth, in all truth with all Peace. Where it is corrupt, purge it:
where it is in error, direct it: where it is superstitious, rectify it: where
any thing is amiss, reform it: where it is right, strengthen and confirm it:
where it is in want, furnish it: where it is divided and rent asunder, make up
the breaches of it, O thou holy One of Israel. Amen.

O merciful God, since thou have ordered me to live in these times, in which
the rents of thy Church are grievous; I humbly beseech thee to guide me, that
the divisions of men may not separate me either from thee or it, that I may
ever labor the preservation of Truth and Peace, that where for and by our sins
the Peace of it succeeds not, thou will yet accept my will for the deed, that I
may still pray, even while thou grantest not, because I know thou will grant it
when thou see it fit. In the mean time bless, I beseech thee, this Church in
which I live, that in it I may honor and serve thee all the days of my life,
and after this be glorified by thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, thou have brought Psalm. 80.8.
a Vine out of Egypt and planted it; thou made room for it, and when it had
taken root it filled the land. O why have thou broken down her hedge, that all
which go by pluck off her Grapes? the wild Boar out of the Wood rooteth it up,
and the wild Beasts of the Field devour it. O turn thee again, thou God of
Hosts, look down from Heaven, behold and visit this Vine, and the place of the
Vineyard that thy right hand has planted, and the Branch that thou made so
strong for thy self. Lord, hear me for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, except thou Psalm. 127.1.
buildest the House, their labor is but lost that build it; and except thou, O
Lord, keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. It is but lost labor to
rise early, and take late rest, and to eat the bread of carefulness, if thou
bless not the endeavors that seek the peace and the welfare of thy Church.
Therefore, O Lord, build thy Church and keep it, and take care for it, that
there may be no lost labor among the Builders of it. Amen.

O Lord our God, the For the Church of England, when robbed of her Revenues.
Nehem. 9.32, 33.
great, the mighty, and the terrible God; O thou which keep covenant and
mercy, let not all the trouble seem little before thee that has come upon us,
upon our Priests, upon the Houses built and dedicated to thy Name, upon the
Maintenance for them that serve at thy Altar, upon our Kings, State, and
People, since that day of Affliction. Thou are just in all that is brought upon
us: For thou have done right, but we have done wickedly. Yet, O Lord, have
mercy, and turn to us again, for Jesus and his mercies sake.

Amen.
For the Commonweal.
O Lord, thou which Psalm. 33. 10, 12.
bring the counsels of the Heathen to naught, and make the devices of the
People to be of none effect, and castest out the counsels of Princes when they
have offended thee; have mercy upon this Kingdom, forgive the sins of this
People; turn thee unto them and bless them, that the World may say, Blessed are
the People whose God is the Lord Jehovah, and blessed are the Folk that he has
chosen to him to be his Inheritance. Lord, hear and grant, for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

Lord, bless this Kingdom, that Religion and Virtue may season all sorts of
men; that there may be Peace within the Gates, and Plenty within the Palaces
of it. In Peace I beseech thee to preserve it, that it corrupt not: In War so
defend it, that it suffer not: In Plenty so order it, that it riot not: In
Want so pacify and moderate it, that it may patiently and peaceably seek thee,
the only full supply both of Men and States; that so it may continue a Place
and a People to do thee service to the end of time, through Jesus Christ our
only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

O Lord, according to all Dan. 9. 16, 17.
thy Righteousness, I beseech thee let thine anger be turned away from this
City and thy People; and cause thy face to shine upon whatsoever is desolate
therein, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
For the Kingdom of England.
O Almighty Lord God, bless this Kingdom, and grant that Health, Chastity,
Victory, and all Virtue may abound therein, with Thanksgiving to God the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost: And may this Blessing remain upon this
Kingdom, and upon all the Inhabitants thereof, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For House and Family.
* O Lord, I beseech thee, visit this Habitation, and keep away from it all the
snares of our [ghostly] Enemy: Let thy holy Angels dwell in it, and let them
preserve us in peace and health, and let thy Blessing be upon us for ever,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For government of the Tongue.
LEt the words of my Psalm. 19. 14.
mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be always acceptable in thy sight, O
Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

Lord, keep my tongue Psalm. 34.12, 13.
from evil, and my lips that they speak no guile; that so I may eschew evil and
do good, seek peace and ensue it. Amen.

O Lord, give me the Psalm. 37.31.
mouth of the righteous, that it may be exercised in wisdom, and that my tongue
may be talking of judgment. Amen.

Lord, I have said in thy Psalm. 39.1, 2.
grace, I will take heed unto my ways, that I offend not in my tongue. Give me,
O give me that grace, that I may take this heed, that I may keep my mouth as it
were with a bridle; especially when the ungodly is in my sight, be it never so
much pain or grief unto me. Hear me, and grant, even for Christ Jesus sake.
Amen.

Let the freewil-offerings Psalm. 119. 108.
of my mouth please thee, O Lord, and teach me thy Judgments. Amen.

O Lord, set a watch before Psalm. 141.3.
my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, and let not my heart be inclined to
any thing that is evil. Amen.

O Lord, set a watch before Ecclus 22. 27.
my mouth, and a seal of Wisdom upon my lips, that I fall not suddenly by them;
and that my tongue destroy me not.

Amen.
Against Temptations.
O Lord, as thou art faithful, 1 Cor. 10. 15.
so suffer me not, I beseech thee, to be tempted above that I am able, but give
an Issue with the Temptation, that I may be able to bear it. Amen.

* O Almighty God, have respect unto my Prayers, and deliver my heart from the
temptations of ill thoughts, that by thy mercy I may become a fit habitation
for thy holy Spirit, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

* O God, who make all things work together for good to those that love Thee;
inflame my heart with such an inviolable sense of thy love, as may never be
shaken by the force of any Temptation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

* O [most] merciful God, grant me constancy in thy Faith, and firmness in thy
Love; that I may retain both entirely, and may never be turned from them by any
Temptations, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For a good Journey.
* O Lord, I deserve not the guidance of a Star to guide me, yet I beseech
thee, grant me a good Journey, seasonable Weather, [and] a happy return; that
thy holy Angel being my Companion and Protector, I may arrive happily to my
Journeys end, and back again to my own home, and at last to the Port of
everlasting Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

* Be present [with me] O Lord, and preserve thy Servant: be thou my Upholder
when I am in slipperie places; and [be thou] my Haven [when I am] in [danger
of] shipwreck, that by thy guidance I may finish this Journey prosperously, and
at length return in safety to my own [place,] through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

* Give ear, O Lord, to my Supplications, and [so] dispose the way of thy
Servant, that amidst all the changes [and chances] of this life and [this] way,
I may ever be defended by thy [most gracious] help, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

* O Lord, save me thy servant who put my trust in thee; send me help from thy
holy place, and defend me out of Sion: Be thou unto me a strong tower from the
face of my Enemy: Let the Enemy have no advantage over me, nor the Son of
Wickedness approach to hurt me. O make my Journey prosperous [to me] thou [that
art the] God of my Health. O Lord, hear my Prayers, and let my Crying come unto
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For Rain.
O God, heavenly Father, English Liturgy
whose gift it is that the Rain does fall, the Earth is fruitful, Beasts
increase, and Fishes do multiply, send us, we beseech thee, such moderate Rain
and showers, that we may receive the Fruits of the Earth to our comfort, and to
thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For Fair Weather.
O Lord God, who for the English Liturgy.
sin of Man did once drown all the World except eight persons, and afterward
of thy great mercy did promise never to destroy it so again; we humbly
beseech thee, that though we for our iniquities have worthily deserved a Plague
of Rain and Waters, yet upon our true repentance thou will give us such
Weather, whereby we may receive the Fruits of the Earth in due season; and
learn both by thy punishment to amend our lives, and for thy Clemency to give
thee praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
In Fasting.
O Lord, the zeal of thine Psalm. 69.9.
house has even eaten me up, and the rebukes of them which rebuked thee, are
fallen upon me: Therefore I wept and chastned my self with fasting, and that
was turned to my reproof. I put on sackcloth also, and they jested upon me:
they that sat in the gate also spoke against me, and the drunkards made songs
upon me. But, Lord, I make my Prayer unto thee, and, I hope, in an acceptable
time: O hear me in the multitude of thy mercies, which are in Jesus Christ our
Savior.

Amen.
In Lent.
O Lord, which for our sake 1 Sund.
did fast forty days and forty nights, give us grace to use such
abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we may ever obey thy
godly motions in righteousness and true holiness, to thy honor and glory, who
live and raignest one God with the Father and the Holy Ghost.

Amen.
The Fast of the four Ember-weeks.
Almighty God, the giver of all good gifts, who of thy divine Providence have
appointed diverse Orders in the Church; give thy Grace, I humbly beseech thee,
to all those which are to be called to any Office and Administration in the
same: and so replenish them with the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of
life, that they may faithfully serve before thee, to the glory of thy great
Name, and the benefit of thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Earnest Prayer.
STir up, I beseech thee, O 25 Sund. after Trin.
Lord, the wills of thy faithful People, that they plenteously bringing forth
the fruit of good works, may of thee be plenteously rewarded, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
In time of Afflictions, Perils, and Adversities.
IF I find favor in thine David flying, 2 Samuel 15.25.
eyes, O Lord, thou will bring me again, and show me both the Ark and the
Tabernacle, and set me right in thy service, and make me joyful and glad in
thee. But if thou say, (O for Jesus his sake say it not) I have no pleasure in
thee; behold, here I am, do with me as seems good in thine own eyes. Amen.

O Lord, though I be afflicted 2 Cor. 4. 8.
on every side, let me not be in distress: Though in want of some of thy
comforts, yet not of all: Though I be chastned, yet let me not be forsaken:
Though I be cast down, let me not perish: And verse. 16.
though my outward man decay and perish, yet let my inward man be renewed
daily, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, whatsoever Psalm. 38.10.
thou shall lay upon me, I will hold my peace, and not open my mouth, because
it is thy doing and my deserving. Amen.

O Lord, thou have dealt Psalm. 119. 65.
graciously with thy servant according to thy Word. For before I was troubled I
went wrong, but now have I prayed that I may keep thy Law. And it is good for
me that I have been in trouble, that so I may learn still to keep it better, in
the mercies of Jesus Christ. Amen.

I know, O Lord, that thy verse. 75.
Judgments are right, and that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be
troubled. O let thy merciful kindness be my comfort, according to thy Word unto
thy Servant, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord Almighty, O Baruch 3. 1, etc.
God of Israel, the Soul that is in trouble, and the Spirit that is vexed,
cries unto thee. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy, for thou art merciful; and
have pity upon me, because I have sinned before thee. For thou endurest for
ever, but unless thou have mercy, I utterly perish. Have mercy therefore,
even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, remember thy Psalm. 9. 18.
promise, that the poor shall not always be forgotten; nor the patient abiding
of the meek perish for ever. Amen.

Lord, I will be glad and Psalm. 31. 8, etc.
rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my trouble, and have known my
Soul in Adversities. Amen.

Have mercy upon me, O Verse. 10.
Lord, for I am in trouble, and mine eye is consumed for very heaviness, yea,
my soul and my body. My strength fails 12.
me because of mine iniquities, and my bones are consumed. I 14.
am even become like a broken Vessel: For I have heard the 15.
blasphemy of the multitude, and fear is on every side. But 16.
my hope has been and is in thee, O Lord; thou art my God, save and deliver
me, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Why art thou so full of Psalm. 42. 6.
heaviness, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy
trust in God, that I may yet give him thanks for the help of his countenance. O
my God, my soul is vexed within me, therefore will I remember thee. Amen.

Up Lord, why sleep Psalm. 44. 23.
thou? Awake, and be not absent from us for ever: Wherefore hidest thou thy
face, and forgettest our misery and trouble? For our soul is brought low even
unto the dust, our belly cleaves unto the ground. Arise, O Lord, and help us,
and deliver us for thy mercies sake. Amen.

In thee, O Lord, have I Psalm. 31. 1.
put my trust, let me never be put to confusion; deliver me in thy
righteousness. Bow down thine ear to me, make haste to deliver me. Be thou my
strong rock and house of defense, that thou may save me. Be also my guide,
and lead me for thy Names sake. Amen.

O God, the enemy cries Psalm. 55. 3.
so, and the ungodly comes on so fast, that they threaten to overbear me; they
are minded to do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set against me. My
heart is disquieted within me, and the fear of death is fallen upon me:
Fearfulness and trembling and an horrible dread has overwhelmed me. And I
said, O that I had wings like a Dove, that I might fly away and be at rest;
that I might make haste to escape the stormy wind and tempest. But be thou my
helper, and I will magnify thee, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

O be thou my help in Psalm. 60. 11.
trouble, for vain is the help of man. Amen.

Gracious Father, the life of man is a warfare upon earth, and the dangers
which assault us are diversely pointed against us. I humbly beseech thee, be
present with me in all the course and passages of my life, but especially in
the services of my Calling. Suffer no malice to be able to hurt me, no cunning
to circumvent me, no violence to oppress me, no falsehood to betray me. That
which I cannot foresee, I beseech thee prevent: That which I cannot withstand,
I beseech thee master: That which I do not fear, I beseech thee unmask and
frustrate; that being delivered from all danger both of soul and body, I may
praise thee the deliverer, and see how happy a thing it is to make the Lord of
Hosts my helper in the day of fear and trouble. Especially, O Lord, bless and
preserve me at this time from, etc. that I may glorify thee for this
deliverance also, and be safe in the merits and the mercies of Jesus Christ my
only Lord and Savior. Amen.

O Lord, thou have fed me Psalm. 80.5.
with the bread of affliction, and given me plenty of tears to drink. I am
become a very strife to my neighbors, and mine enemies laugh me to scorn. But
turn thee again, thou God of Hosts, show me the light of thy countenance, and I
shall be whole. Amen.

Help me, O Lord my Psalm. 109.25.
God, O save me according to thy mercy; and then the World shall know that
this is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it. Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen.

If my delight had not Psalm. 119.92.
been in thy Law, I should have perished in my trouble. O continue my delight.

Amen.
In Misery and Adversity.
LOrd turn thee unto me, Psalm. 25.15.
and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery. The sorrows of my
heart are enlarged, O bring thou me out of my troubles. Look upon mine
adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sins, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Hear my crying, O God, Psalm. 61.1.
give ear unto my Prayer. From the ends of the earth, whither soever thou shall
cast me, I will call upon thee when my heart is in heaviness. O set me upon the
Rock that is higher than I, to be my hope and a strong tower against my
oppressors. Amen.

Save me, O God, for Psalm. 69.1, 15.
the waters are entered into my Soul. I stick fast in the deep mire where no
stay is; I am come into deep waters, and the streams run over me. They that
hate me without a cause, are more than the hairs of my head; and they which
would destroy me causeless, are mighty. O let not these water-floods drown me,
neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.
Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is great; turn unto me according to
the multitude of thy tender mercies. Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I
am in trouble; but draw near unto my soul, and redeem it, for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

My soul melts away Psalm. 119.28.
for very heaviness; comfort thou me according to thy Word.

Amen.
O Lord, trouble and In Trouble and Heaviness.
heaviness have taken hold upon me; patience, good Lord, that for all this my
delight may be in thy Commandments.

Amen.
Against Reproach.
O Lord, my sins have Psalm 44.14.
made me a rebuke to my neighbors, and to be laughed to scorn of them that are
round about me. O suffer me not longer to be a byword among the people. My
confusion is daily before me, and the shame of my face has covered me. The
voice of the slanderer and blasphemer has overtaken me. And though all this be
come upon me, suffer me not, O Lord, to forget thee, or to behave my self
frowardly in thy Covenant, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Destroy their tongues, Psalm. 55.9, 16.
O Lord, and divide them; for I have seen cruelty and strife in the City. But
I will call upon thee, O Lord, and thou will save me. Amen.

O Lord, send down Psalm. 57. 3, 4.
from heaven, and save me from the reproof of them that would swallow me. Send
out thy mercy and truth, for my soul is among Lions; I lie among the children
of men that are set on fire, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their
tongue a sharp sword. O deliver me, and I shall magnify thy Name for ever.
Amen.

I am become a Monster Psalm. 71.7.
to many, but thou art my sure trust; O be my Anchor for ever. Amen.

O remember, Lord, the Psalm. 89.49.
rebuke that thy servant has, and how I do bear in my bosom the rebukes of
many people. O remember me.

Amen.
Against Fraud and Deceit.
O Lord, watch over thy Psalm. 41. 9.
servants; for my familiar friends whom I trusted have laid wait for me. Be
thou merciful unto me, O Lord, and deliver me from them: that even in this I
may know thou favourest me, that mine Enemies are not able to triumph against
me. Amen.

Exalt thy self, O God, above Psalm. 57.5.
the heavens, and thy glory upon all the earth: For men have laid a net for my
steps, they have pressed down my soul, they have dug a pit before me. Lord,
I desire not that they should fall into the midst of it themselves, but I
beseech thee keep me out and deliver me, for thy mercy sake. Amen.

Mine enemies lay wait Psalm. 71.10.
for my soul, and take counsel together: They pursue me out of an opinion that
thou, O God, have forsaken me. But go not far from me, O God; my God, haste to
help me. Amen.

O Lord, the proud have Psalm. 119.85.
dug pits for me; they persecute me falsely, O be thou my help. They had
almost made an end of me upon earth; yet suffer me not, I beseech thee, to
depart from thy Commandments, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Lord, keep me from the Psalm. 141.10.
snare which malicious men have laid for me, and from the traps of wicked
doers. If they will not repent, let them sall into their own nets together, but
let me ever escape them. Amen.

O Lord, I pour out my Psalm. 142. 2, 7.
complaints before thee: Consider them, for I am brought very low. O deliver me
from my persecutors, for they are too strong for me.

Amen.
In time of Fear.
LOrd, make me remember Psalm. 19.9.
that the fear of thee is clean, and that thy Judgments are true and righteous
altogether. Amen.

O Lord, give me that grace that I may so carry my self, and that courage that
I may so bear up my self, as that I may fear none but thee, nothing but that
wherein I offend thee, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
In Poverty.
O Lord, when thou make Psalm. 9.12.
inquisition for blood, remember and forget not the complaint of the Poor.

Arise, O Lord God, and Psalm. 10. 13, 16.
lift up thy hand, forget not the Poor. Take his cause into thy hand, for he
commits himself unto thee, and thou art the helper of the friendless: O be so
still, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O praise the Lord, ye Psalm. 22.23.
that fear him; and magnify him, all ye of the seed of Jacob: For he has not
despised nor abhorred the low estate of the Poor; he has not hid his face from
him, but when he called unto him he heard him. O bow down thine ear and hear
him still, O thou holy One of Israel. Amen.

I am poor and needy, O Psalm. 70.5.
God, make haste unto me: Thou art my helper and my deliverer, O Lord make no
long tarrying.

Amen.
In Imprisonment.
O Lord, have mercy upme, Psalm. 142.9.
and bring my soul out of Prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name, even in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, blessed is the Psalm. 146.4, 6.
man that has thee for his help, and whose hope is in thee. O Lord, help me
and all them to right that suffer wrong. Thou art the Lord which loosest men
out of Prison, which helpest them that are fallen. O Lord, help and deliver me
when, and as it shall seem best to thee, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, thine indignation Psalm. 88.6, 7.
lies hard upon me; and though thou have not (for thy mercy is great) vexed me
with all thy storms, yet thou have put my acquaintance far from me, and I am so
fast in Prison that I cannot get forth. Lord, I call daily upon thee, hear and
have mercy, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, thou which Psalm. 68. 6.
bring the Prisoners out of captivity, while thou let the Runagates
continue in scarceness: Have mercy upon me, and deliver me out of the Prison
and affliction in which I now am; and give me grace, that being free, I may
faithfully and freely serve thee all the days of my life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
Against Banishment.
LOrd, send me not to the Psalm. 137.1.
waters of Babylon, that I may have no cause to weep when I remember Sion: that
no man's cruelty may lead me away captive, nor no man's scorn call upon me to
sing in my heaviness. But that in my Country where I learned to serve thee, I
may live to honor thee all the days of my life, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Against the Violent.
O Lord, the ungodly laid Psalm. 119. 95.
wait for me to destroy me, yet make me the more thankful, and the more careful
to consider thy testimonies. Amen.

O Lord, they draw nigh Psalm. 119. 150.
that of malice persecute me; therefore be thou nigh at hand to help me, even
for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Many, O Lord, they are verse. 157.
that trouble me and persecute me, yet do I not swerve from thy Testimonies:
Yes, Lord, I do daily swerve from them. Quicken me as thou art wont. Amen.

O take from me shame and Psalm. 119. 22.
rebuke, and I will keep thy Testimonies. O take away the rebuke that I am
afraid verse. 39.
of, for thy Judgments are good. O Lord, do this for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
For strength in Martyrdom.
LOrd, make me remember Psalm. 141. 8.
the bones of thy Saints, how they lie scattered before the pit, even as when
one heweth wood upon the earth. O Lord, mine eyes look unto thee; in thee is my
trust, O cast not out my soul. And if my bones also must be broken, O Lord I
beseech thee give me courage, and abundance of patience, that no torment may
make my faith fall away from thee, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
In time of Dearth.
BE merciful, O Lord, and Psalm. 37. 19.
remember us, that we be not confounded in these perilous times, and that in
these days of dearth we may have enough, and a free heart and hand to bestow it
upon thy poor ones, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, our sins have prevailed Psalm. 65. 3, 9.
against us, yet be thou merciful unto our transgressions. O visit the Earth,
and prepare Corn for the Inhabitants thereof. Crown the year with thy goodness,
and let no cloud drop other than fatness; that the very Hills may rejoice on
every side; that the Pastures may be covered with sheep, and the Valleys with
corn, that thy People may rejoice and sing unto thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O God heavenly Father, Engl. Liturgy.
who by thy Son Jesus Christ have promised to all them that seek thy Kingdom
and the righteousness thereof, all things necessary for their bodily
sustenance: Behold, we beseech thee, the afflictions of thy People, and grant
that the scarcity and dearth (which we do now most justly suffer for our sins)
may through thy goodness be mercifully turned into cheapness and plenty, for
the love of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, be mercifully pleased to give and preserve Engl. Litany.
to our use the kindly fruits of the Earth, so that in due time we may enjoy
them, and praise thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
In time of War.
O My God, though mighty Esai. 8. 9, 10.
Nations gather together on heaps, yet let them be broken in pieces: though
they take counsel together, bring it to naught. For though they pronounce a
decree, yet it shall not stand, if thou, O God, be with us. Be with us
therefore, O God, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Blessed be thou, O Savior 1 Macc. 4.30.
of Israel, which did destroy the assault of the mighty man, by the hand of
thy servant David, and gave the Host of strangers into the hand of Jonathan;
shut up this Army in the hand of Israel, and let them be confounded with their
power, and with their horsemen. Make them afraid, and consume their boldness
and strength, that they may be astonished at their own destruction Cast them
down by the sword of them that love thee; that we which love thy Name may
praise thee and sing unto thee. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord of Hosts, give us Psalm. 18. 37.
strength that we may follow on upon our enemies and overtake them, and not
return till we have destroyed them. O gird us with strength unto the Battle,
that we may smite them that they may not be able to stand, but fall under our
feet. And when thou have thus blessed us, make us fall down at thy feet, and
ever worship thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O make the Wars to cease Psalm. 46.9.
in all the World; break the Bow, and knap the Spear in sunder, and burn the
Chariot in the fire; that men may be still, and know that thou art God, that
thou will be exalted among the Heathen, and in the Earth. Amen.

Lord, be not far off, put Psalm. 44.10.
us not to confusion, but go out with our Armies and prosper them, that we may
not turn our backs upon our Enemies, while they that hate us spoil our persons,
our honor, and our goods. O sell not us thy poor People for naught; make us
not a rebuke to our insolent neighbors, nor a scorn to them that are round
about us. Our confusion, by reason of our sins, is daily before us, and the
shame of our face has covered us. But, Lord, we humbly beseech thee forgive us
our sins, and deliver us, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Have thou forsaken us, Psalm. 108.11.
O God? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our Hosts? O help us against
the Enemy, for vain is the help of man. O Lord, help us. Amen.

O Almighty God, King of English Liturgy.
Kings, and Governor of all things, whose power no creature is able to resist,
to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and to be merciful to them that
truly repent; save and deliver us, we humbly beseech thee, from the hands of
our Enemies; abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound their
devices; that we being armed with thy defense, may be preserved evermore from
all perils, to glorify thee who are the only giver of all victory, through
the merits of thy only Son our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defense English Liturgy. Thanksgiving.
unto thy servants against the face of their Enemies; we give thee praise and
thanks for our deliverance from those great and apparent dangers wherewith we
were compassed. We acknowledge it thy great goodness that we were not delivered
over as a prey unto them. And we humbly beseech thee to continue such thy
mercies toward us, that all the World may know that thou art our Savior and
mighty Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, bless the King, all his Commanders under him, and all his Soldiers.
Cover all their heads, his especially, in the day of Battle. Teach all their
hands to war, and their fingers to fight. And bless all the Guides and
Conductors of his Armies under him, with wisdom, and courage, and faithfulness,
watchfulness and diligence, and whatsoever else may lead on good success. And
set a happy end, we humbly beseech thee, to all these bloody distractions,
and restore Peace and preserve Religion in integrity among us, even for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Amen.
Against Enemies.
O Lord, consider mine Enemies Psalm. 25.18.
how many they are; and they bear a tyrannous hate against me. Lord, deliver me
from them. Amen.

Almighty God, I humbly 3 Sund. in Lent.
beseech thee, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble servant, and stretch
out the right hand of thy Majesty to be my defense against all mine Enemies,
through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

Be merciful unto me, O Psalm. 56.1.
God, for mine Enemies would swallow me up; and many they are which fight
against me, O thou most highest; they gather together and keep themselves
close, they mark my steps, because they lay wait for my soul. But when I was
afraid, I trusted in thee; and when I cry, then shall mine Enemies turn back.
This thou will make me know, when thou art with me: Be with me therefore, O
Lord, and let me see deliverance. Amen.

O Lord, let not them Psalm. 35.19.
that are mine Enemies triumph over me, neither let them wink with their eyes
that hate me either without a cause, or for thy cause. Amen.

O Lord God, in thee have Psalm. 7.1.
I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me; lest
they devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces while there is none to
help. Lift up thy self, O God, because of the indignation of mine Enemies:
arise up for me in the Judgment which thou have commanded, that my help may
still be from thee, O God, who preservest them that are true of heart. Amen.

Have mercy upon me, O Psalm. 9.13.
God, consider the trouble which I suffer of them that hate me, O thou that
liftest me up from the gates of death. Amen.

Hear my voice, O God, Psalm. 64.1.
in my Prayer, preserve my life from fear of the Enemy; hide me from the
conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of the workers of iniquity. They
have whet their tongues like a sword, and shoot out their arrows, even bitter
words: Lord, deliver me from them.

Amen.
For Enemies.
O Lord, I beseech thee S. Mat. 5. 44.
forgive mine Enemies all their sins against thee; and give me that measure of
thy grace, that for their hatred I may love them, for their cursing I may bless
them, for their injury I may do them good, and for their persecution I may
pray for them. Lord, I pray for them; forgive them, for they know not what they
do. Amen.

* O [thou that art the] God of Peace and Love, grant Peace and Charity to all
[that are] my Enemies, and forgive them all their sins, and deliver me by thy
power out of all the snares they have laid for me, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
Penitentials.
Psalm. 6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, 143.

O Lord, turn thee again Psalm. 90.13.
now at the last, and be gracious unto thy servant. O satisfy me with thy
mercy, and that soon; so shall I rejoice and be glad all the days of my life.
And when thou have forgiven my sins, O comfort me again after the time that
thou have plagued me, and for the years wherein I have suffered adversity, O
Jesus Christ my Savior, and be merciful. Amen.

O Lord, my flesh trembles Psalm. 119. 116, 120.
for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments: yet stablish me according
to thy Word, that I may live; and let me not be disappointed of my hope, even
for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

I have gone astray like a verse. 176.
sheep that is lost; O seek thy servant, that I may not forget thy
Commandments, but return to thee. Amen.

O Lord, our iniquities Jer. 14. 7, 8, 9.
testify against us; for our backslidings are many, and we have sinned against
thee: yet, O thou hope of Israel, thou Savior thereof in time of trouble, show
mercy for thy Names sake; and on me especially. For why should thou be as a
stranger in my soul, or as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry but for a
night? O Lord, be and dwell in the midst of me, for thy Name is called upon me.
Leave me not, O God of my salvation, but have mercy, for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

For thy Names sake, O Psalm. 25.10.
Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Amen.

O Lord Almighty, I acknowledge and confess I am not worthy to lift up mine
eyes to Heaven, much less to present my self before thee with any confidence
that thou should hear my Prayers and grant my Requests, if I consider my own
deserving: For my Conscience accuses me, and my sins witness against me; and
thou art a just and an upright Judge, and wilt not justify any sinner in his
transgressions. O Lord, suffer me not to be swallowed up of death and
desperation, but in the multitude of thy mercies pardon me, O Lord, for thy
goodness sake. For though I am a worm and no man, yet thou art my Creator, and
I am the Work of thy Hands; yea, thou art my Father, and I thy Son: Thou my
Shepherd, and I one of thy straggling Flock: Thou my Redeemer, and I one of thy
People whom thou have dearly bought: Thou my God, and I thy Creature. O correct
me not in thine anger, O Lord, neither punish me according to my deservings,
but remember my weakness as well as my sin, and have mercy upon me for my
dearest Savior's sake Jesus Christ. Amen.

Almighty and everlasting Coll. for Ashwednesday.
God, which hate nothing that thou have made, and forgivest the sins of all
them that are penitent; create and make in me a new and contrite heart, that I
may worthily lament my sins, and acknowledge my wretchedness, and obtain of
thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and forgiveness, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and everliving 12 Sund. after Trin.
God, which art always more ready to hear than we to pray, and usest to give
more than either we desire or deserve; pour down upon me, most miserable
sinner, the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving me those things whereof my
Conscience is afraid, and giving me that which my Prayer dares not presume to
ask. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Grant, I beseech thee; 21 Sund. after Trin.
merciful God, to me thy sinful but humble servant, pardon and peace, that I
may be cleansed from all my sins, and serve thee with a quiet mind, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord, I befeech thee, 24 Sund. after Trin.
free me from all my offenses, and by thy bountiful goodness deliver me from
the bands of all those sins, which by my ignorance, frailty, or wilfulness I
have committed. Grant this, even for Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God merciful Father, Collect at the end of the Liturgy.
that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as
be sorrowful; mercifully assist my Prayers that I make before thee in all my
troubles and adversities whenever they oppress me: and graciously hear me,
that those evils which the craft and subtlety of the devil or man works
against me be brought to naught, and by the providence of thy goodness so
dispersed, that I thy poor servant being overcome by no temptation, nor hurt by
any persecution, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, of thy great Engl. Litany.
goodness I beseech thee give me true repentance, and forgive me all my sins,
negligences and ignorances, and indue me with the grace of thy holy Spirit,
that I may amend my life according to thy holy Word, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O God, whose nature Engl. Liturgy.
and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive, receive my humble
Petitions: And though I am tied and bound with the chain of my sins, yet let
the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose me, and that for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

* Give ear, O Lord, I beseech thee, to the Prayers of thy humble servant, and
spare me who confess my sins unto thee, and grant me of thy mercy both pardon
and peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

* O Almighty God, who broughtest waters out of the [hard] rock, bring forth
out of my stony heart the tears of Contrition, and give me grace so to bewail
my sins, that I may obtain forgiveness of them by thy mercy, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, Father Engl. Liturgy, in Communion.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of all men; I acknowledge
and bewail my manifold sins and wickedness, which I have from time to time most
grievously committed, by thought, word, and deed, against thy divine Majesty,
provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against me. I do earnestly
repent, and am heartily sorry for these my misdoings; the remembrance of them
is grievous unto me, the burden of them is intolerable. Have mercy upon me,
have mercy upon me, most merciful Father. For thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ
his sake, forgive me all that is past, and grant that I may ever hereafter
serve and please thee in newness of life, to the honor and glory of thy Name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, and Engl. Liturgy.
my most merciful Father, who of thy tender mercy have promised forgiveness of
sins to all them which with hearty repentance and true faith turn unto thee;
have mercy upon me, pardon and deliver me from all my sins, confirm and
strengthen me in all goodness, and bring me to everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

* O most holy Lord, S. Aug. Sermon. 7. de Tempore.
most merciful God, let it suffice me to have been a sinner hitherto, to have
despised thee, to have indulged the unclean motions of the flesh; now at this
time by thy inspiration I make a vow to return from mine iniquities. Assist me,
O Lord, and grant I may fulfill it, in and through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Confessions.
* O Lord, in many things I have offended and done wickedly, and [have] grieved
thy holy Spirit. I have provoked [to wrath] the bowels of thy mercy, by
thought, word, and deed, by night and by day, in public and in private,
deliberately and by surprise. O if thou should set my sins in the sight of
thy countenance; O if thou should call me to account for my sins, those sins
which are unpardonable in themselves, [those] which I have committed against
[my own] knowledge, [O] what shall I do? whither shall I fly? But, O Lord,
rebuke me not in thy fury, nor chasten me in thine anger. Have mercy upon me,
not only because I am weak, but [also] because I am the work of thy hands, I
beseech thee, enter not into Judgment with thy servant; for if thou, Lord,
shall [be extreme to] mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it?
whosoever may, yet [most] certainly I shall not: For I am a sea of sin, and am
not worthy [so much as] to look up to Heaven, by reason of the multitude of my
sins which cannot be numbered, evil speakings, injuries, etc. and [besides] a
thousand other abominable passions [there are] from which I have not refrained
my self. For with what wickedness am I not defiled? to what sins am I not
enslaved? I am [altogether] become an unprofitable servant to thee my God, and
to all mankind. Now that I am fallen into such sins as these, who shall raise
me up again? O Lord, thou art my God, in thee is my trust; be thou my Savior
according to the bowels of thy compassion, and be merciful to me according to
the greatness of thy mercy, and reward me not according to my works, but turn
thy self to me, and [turn] me to thee. Forgive me all the sins that I have
committed against thee, [and] save me for thy mercies sake: and where sin has
abounded, [there] let thy Grace abound much more; so shall I praise and
glorify thee all the days of my life: For thou art the God of those that
repent, and the Savior of sinners. Glory be to thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
SUNDAY.
O Lord, by thy The first hour, i.e. from Sunrise to 9 in the morning.
mercy I am risen out of my Grave, where I might have slept in death, but that
thou preservedst me. Make it, I beseech thee, a Resurrection to Grace in this
life, and to Glory in the life to come, through Jesus Christ who merited both
for us. Amen.

This day by the Resurrection of thy Son our blessed Savior was made Holy to
us: give me that Grace that I may keep it Holy to thee, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

O send out thy Light Psalm. 43.3, 4.
and thy Truth, that they may lead me, and bring me unto thy holy Hill, and to
thy Dwelling; that I may go unto the Altar of thee, O my God, even the God of
my joy and gladness, and give thanks unto thee.

Amen.
Almighty and everlasting God, who governest 2 Sund. after Epiph.
all things both in Heaven and Earth; mercifully hear my supplications for my
self and all thy People, and grant us thy peace all the days of our life, even
for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Almighty God, I humbly 1 Sund. in Advent.
beseech thee, give me Grace to cast away the works of darknefs, and to put on
the Armor of Light now in the time of this mortal life, (in which thy Son
Christ Jesus came to visit us in great humility) that in the last day, when he
shall come again in his glorious Majesty to judge both the quick and the dead,
I with all thy faithful servants may rise up to the life immortal, through him
who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, now and for ever.

Amen.
Blessed God, which have 2 in Advent.
caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our learning, grant unto me and
all Christians, that we may in such wise hear, read, mark, learn, and inwardly
digest them, that by patience and comfort thereof, we may embrace and ever hold
fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou have given us in our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Lord, I humbly beseech 4 in Advent.
thee, raise up thy power and come among us, and with great might succor us;
that whereas by our sins we are sore let and hindered, thy bountiful Grace and
Mercy, through the satisfaction of thy Son our Lord, may speedily deliver us:
To whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, World without
end.

Amen
LOrd, let thine Angels The third hour, or 9 in the morning. Psalm. 34.7, 8.
tarry round about me, and deliver me; that I may taste and see how gracious
thou my Lord art, and how blessed the man is that trusts in thee; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

I will wait for thy loving Psalm. 48. 9.
kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple, and there will I praise thee.
Amen.

Lord, let me behold thee Psalm. 63. 3.
in thy Sanctuary, and there see thy Power and Glory. For thy loving kindness
is better than life, therefore my lips shall praise thee. Thus will I magnify
thee all my life, and lift up my hands in thy Name. O, satisfy me with that
Riches of Mercy which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O how amiable are thy Psalm. 84. 1.
Dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! My soul has a desire and a longing to enter
into the Courts of thee, O Lord; my heart and my flesh rejoices in thee, O
merciful God.

Amen
Lord, I humbly beseech 1 Sund. after Epiph.
thee to hear and accept my Prayers for my self, and for thy people which call
upon thee; and grant that we may perfectly know what things we ought to do, and
also have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the same, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen
Almighty and everlasting 3 after Epiph.
God, mercifully look upon all my infirmities; and in all dangers and
adversities, stretch out thy right hand to help and defend me, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen
God, thou which know us to be set in the midst 4 after Epiph.
of so many and great dangers, that for man's frailty we cannot always stand
upright; Grant, I most humbly beseech thee, to me the health of body and Soul,
that all those things which I suffer for sin, I may by thy help well pass and
overcome, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, the Sun is at Sixth hour, i. e. Noon.
height for this day upon me, but lift up the light of thy countenance, and I
shall be whole. Make all darkness and spiritual shadows short upon me, and
shorter in me, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Who can tell how often Psalm. 19. 12, 13.
he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins; keep me also, O Lord,
from Against Presumption.
presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over me: And keep me innocent
from the great offense, I humbly beseech thee. Amen.

Blessed are they that Psalm. 84. 4.
dwell in thy House, they will be always praising thee. Blessed is the man whose
strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways. Lord, thus bless the heart of
thy servant, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

* O [Most] holy, adorable, and longsuffering Trinity! for thou art [indeed]
long-suffering, who bear so long with those that divide thee. O holy
Trinity, who have long since vouchsafed me [the honour] to be thy Worshipper
and Proclaimer unfeigned. O holy Trinity, whom every man must one day
acknowledge either by illumination or by punishment, I pray thee make and
accept even those also to be thy Adorers who now blaspheme thee, that not one
even of the least of these may perish. And this, though on condition that I
lose some part of thy favor; for I dare not say what the Apostle does. Grant
this by and for the merits of Jesus Christ our Redeemer.

Amen.
Almighty God, who Collect for Easterday.
through thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ, have overcome Death, and opened
to us the gate of Everlasting Life; I humbly beseech thee, that as by thy For
Grace.
special Grace preventing me, thou do put into my mind good desires, so by
thy continual help I may bring the same to good effect, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
Almighty God, who have 1 Sund. after Easter.
given thine only Son to die for our Sins, and to rise again for our
Justification; give me Grace so to put away the leven of Against Malice.
Malice and all Wickedness, that I may always serve thee in pureness of living
and in truth, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Almighty God, who 2 Sund. after Easter.
have given thine only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for sin, and an
Example of godly life; give me Grace that I may always most thankfully receive
that inestimable benefit, and also daily endeavor to follow the blessed steps
of his most holy life, even for the same thy Son Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
LOrd, give me that Ninth hour, i. e. 3 afternoon. Psalm.37. 7, 8.
Grace, that I may hold me still by thee, and abide patiently upon thee. That I
may not grieve my self at the man whose way does prosper, nor against him that
does after evil counsels. That I may leave off from wrath, and let go
displeasure, lest I fret my self, and be moved to do evil. Amen.

* The Lord grant that here, Paulinus Epist. 9. Princip.
in me, and for me, he may be a consuming fire: And [O] that my heart may be
kindled with this fire, that it may be an eternal light to me, lest my soul
burn in it unto everlasting punishment; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, make me like a Psalm. 52. 8.
green Olive Tree in thy House; for I trust in thy tender mercy for ever: And
I will always praise thee for that thou have done, and hope in thy Name for
ever.

Amen.
O Lord, I beseech thee, For my self.
make me remember how much more than other men I have need to call upon thee.
My charge is great, and my strength little; O give me Grace to come often
before thee, and to ask that help, which thou art readier to give than I to
ask, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Have mercy upon me, Psalm. 9. 13. Aug. 14.1629.
O Lord: Consider the troubles which I suffer of them that hate me, O thou
which did lift me up from the gates of death. Amen.

O Lord, increase in For all Graces.
me Faith and Devotion: replenish my heart with all goodness, and by thy great
mercy keep me in the same. Give me godly zeal in Prayer, true humility in
Prosperity, perfect patience in Adversity, and continual joy in the Holy
Ghost; even for Jesus Christ his sake, my only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
O God, who have taught Collect for Whitsunday.
the hearts of thy faithful People by sending to them the Light of thy holy
Spirit; grant me by the same Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and
evermore to rejoyes in his holy comfort, through the ments of Christ Jesus our
Savior, who lives and reigns with thee, in the unity of the same Spirit,
one God, World without end.

Amen.
Almighty and everlasting Collect for Trinity-sund.
God, who have given unto thy servants Grace by the confession of true faith to
acknowledge theGlorie of the eternal Trinity, and in the power of the Divine
Majesty to worship the Unity; I humbly beseech thee, bless me also, that I
may live in the stedfastness of this Faith, and through it be evermore defended
from all Ghostly and Bodily dangers, for thy mercies sake, who (...) and
reignest one God, world without end.

Amen.
O My God, incline thine At Evening. Dan. 9.19.
ear and hear, open thine eyes and see. O Lord, forgive: O Lord, consider and
do it, for thine own sake, O my God, and for my Savior Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Lord, let me not be afraid, Psalm. 49.16, 17. For Patience.
though one be made rich, or though the glory of his house be increased: For
he shall carry nothing away with him when he dies, neither shall his pomp
follow him. But ever make me afraid to offend thee. Amen.

Mine eyes long sore for Psalm. 119.82.
thy Word, saying, When will thou comfort me? Lord, comfort me, for I am become
like a bottle in the smoke; yet let me not, I beseech thee, forget thy Law,
even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord God, which Sexages. Sunday.
see that I put not my trust in any thing that Against Adversity
I do; mercifully grant that I may be defended against all Adversity, through
Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
O Lord, which have Quinquages. Sund.
taught us that all our doings without Charity are nothing worth; send thy
Holy Ghost, and pour into my heart that most excellent gift of Charity, the
very For Charity.
bond of Peace and all Virtues, without the which whosoever lives, is counted
dead before thee. Grant this for thy only Son Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
O Lord, fill me with The Compline: a Prayer before bedtime.
Grace that I may fulfill all the service which I owe thee, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Lord God, spare, I Amos 7.2, 5.
beseech thee: who shall raise up Jacob? for he is small. Spare him therefore,
O Lord; spare thy People, spare me. Say unto my soul, thou have repented of the
evil intended, and it shall not be.

Amen.
Lord, when I am asleep, Prove. 3.24. For Sleep.
let me not be made afraid; but let my sleep be sweet, that I may be enabled to
serve thee. Amen.

Grant, I beseech thee, 4 Sund. in Lent.
most merciful Father, that I who for my evil deeds am worthily punished, may
by the comfort of thy Grace be mercifully For Relief.
relieved, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
COnsider and hear At bedtime, and in the night if thou wake. Psalm. 13. 3.
me, O Lord my God: Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death.

Amen.
O Lord, thou have proved Psalm. 17.3.
and visited my heart, in the nightseason thou have tried me: O blessed Father,
purge me that thou may find no wickedness in me; through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, hear me, that Psalm. 119. 164.
seven times a day I may praise thee, and be acquainted with that great peace
which they have that love thy Law.

Amen.
O Lord, from whom all 5 Sund. after Easter.
good things do come; grant unto me thy humble servant, that by thy holy
inspiration I may think those things For good thoughts.
that are good, and by thy merciful guiding may also perform the same, through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Entrance into the Church.
LOrd, I will come into thy Psalm. 9.7
house upon the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I worship
toward thy holy Temple. O bless me that I may. Amen.

Hear the voice of my Psalm. 28.2.
humble Petitions, O Lord, when I cry unto thee in this place, when I hold my
hands toward the mercies sent of thy holy Temple, even for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

I will dwell in thy Tabernacle Psalm. 61. 4.
for ever, and my trust shall be under the covering of thy wings. O Lord, hear
our desires, and give an heritage unto those that pray unto thee, and fear thy
Name. Amen.

O my God, I will go into Psalm. 100.3, 4.
thy Gates with thanksgiving, and into thy Courts with praise: I will be
thankful unto thee, and speak good of thy Name: For thou, Lord, art gracious,
thy mercy is everlasting, and thy truth endures from Generation to
Generation. Amen.

O Lord, I love the habitation Psalm. 26. 8.
of thy House, and the place where thine Honor dwells. O shut not up my soul
with impenitent sinners, but give me plenty of thy Grace, even for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Amen.
In the Holy Sacrament.
* FOrgive me, [O Lord] Preparations.
whatsoever I have transgrest against thee, from [the time of] my infancy even
to this very moment, [whether] against knowledge or through ignorance, at home
or abroad, sleeping or waking, in thoughts, words, or deeds, [whether
occasion'd] through the fiery darts of [our ghostly] Enemy, or by the unclean
desires of my [own] heart; have mercy upon me, and grant me pardon, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God and most merciful Father, give me, I beseech thee, that grace,
that I may duly examine the inmost of my heart, and my most secret thoughts,
how I stand before thee. Lord, I confess all my sins, and my unworthiness to
present my self at thine Altar. But thou can forgive sin, and give
repentance; do both, gracious Father, and then behold I am clean to come unto
thee. Lord, make me a worthy Receiver of that for which I come, Christ, and
remission of sin in Christ: And that for his own mercy sake and thine. Amen.

O Lord, into a clean, charitable, and thankful heart, give me Grace to receive
the blessed Body and Blood of thy Son, my most blessed Savior, that it may
more perfectly cleanse me from all dregs of sin; that being made clean, it may
nourish me in Faith, Hope, Charity, and Obedience, with all other fruits of
spiritual life and growth in thee: that in all the future course of my life, I
may show my self such an ingrafted member into the Body of thy Son, that I may
never be drawn to do any thing that may dishonor his Name. Grant this, O Lord,
I beseech thee, even for his merit and mercy sake. Amen.

O Lord God, hear my Prayers. I come to thee in a steadfast Faith; yet for the
clearness of my Faith, Lord, enlighten it; for the strength of my Faith, Lord,
increase it. And behold, I quarrel not the words of thy Son my Savior's
blessed Institution. I know his words are no gross unnatural conceit, but they
are spirit and life, and supernatural. While the World disputes, I believe. He
has promised me if I come worthily, that I shall receive his most precious
Body and Blood, with all the benefits of his Passion. If I can receive it and
retain it, (Lord, make me able, make me worthy) I know I can no more die
eternally, than that Body and Blood can die and be shed again. My Savior is
willing in this tender of them both unto me: Lord, so wash and cleanse my Soul,
that I may now and at all times else come prepared by hearty Prayers and
Devotion, and be made worthy by thy Grace of this infinite Blessing, the
Pledge and Earnest of Eternal Life, in the merits of the same Jesus Christ, who
gave his Body and Blood for me.

Amen.
Almighty God, unto Coll. for purifying the Heart.
whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid;
cleanse the thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit, that I
may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy Name, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
* O God the Father of A brief Litany.
Heaven, who have delivered thy only begotten [Son] to death for us.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, who by thy precious Blood have cleansed
us from our sins.

O God the Holy Ghost the Comforter, who by thy Grace do visit and establish
the hearts of thy Saints.

O [most] holy, high, eternal, happy, [ever] blessed Trinity; [O] good
Father, holy Son, loving Spirit, by whose operation we receive our Being, by
whose love we obtain Grace, and in contemplation of whom we hope for Glory;
whose Majesty is unspeakable, [whose] Power is incomparable, [whose] Goodness
is inestimable: [O} thou that art the Lord both of Quick and Dead, I adore
thee, I call upon thee, and with the utmost affection of my heart I bless thee,
now and for evermore. Amen.

* O Lord Jesu, grant us while we live Mercy and Grace: guide us thy Servants
by thy perpetual Light; grant to thy Church Truth and Peace; grant me a most
wretched sinner Repentance and Forgiveness. Amen.

* O Lord, I pray thee correct those that are in error, convert the
unbeliever, increase the Faith of thy Church, root out [of it] all Heresies,
discover [and confound] her secret designing Enemies, and break in pieces those
that are openly fierce, violent, and impenitent, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* O merciful Father, let my Benefactors obtain eternal Rewards in Heaven, for
the benefits [which] they have bestowed upon me on Earth. I pray thee also,
that thou would [vouchsafe to] bring me, together with those whom I have
prayed for, or whom I am bound to pray for, and together with all the People of
God, into thy Kingdom, that there we may appear in Righteousness, and be fully
satisfied with [thy] Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, consider my Complaint, for I am brought very low. O Lord, how long
will thou be angry with thy servant that prays? O Lord, give me Grace and
Repentance, and thou can not be angry with my Prayer. O Lord, I am thine,
save me, and deliver me not into the will of mine enemies, especially my
ghostly Enemies. O Lord, I am thy servant, thy unprofitable wastful servant,
yet thy servant. O Lord, set my accounts right before thee, and pardon all my
mis-spendings and misreckonings. O Lord, I am thy son, thy most unkind,
prodigal, runaway son, yet thy son. O Lord, though I have not retained the
love and duty of a son, yet do not thou cast off (I humbly beg it) the
kindness and compassion of a Father. O Lord, in thy Grace I return to thee; and
though I have eaten draugh with all the unclean Swine in the World, in my
hungry absence from thee, yet now, Lord, upon my humble return to thee, give
me, I beseech thee, the Bread of Life, the Body and Blood of my Savior into
my soul, that I may be satisfied in thee, and never more run away from thee,
even for Jesus Christ his sake, that gave himself for me.

Amen.
* O merciful God, 3 Coll. for Goodfriday.
who have made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made, nor would
the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and live; have
mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, and take from them all
ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word; and so fetch them home,
blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may be saved among the remnant of the
true Israelites, and be made one Fold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ our
Lord, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Spirit, one God, World
without end.

Amen.
* As I must [one Whilst standing at the Altar (if it may be:) if not, in the
morning.
day] appear and answer at thy dreadful Tribunal, where there shall be no
respect of persons, so at this time, ere the day of Judgment overtakes me, I
prostrate my self before thy holy Altar; and being burdened by my own
Conscience, I lay open my evil thoughts and ungodly deeds before thee and thy
glorious Angels. I beseech thee, O Lord, regard my lowliness, and forgive me
all my sins, which are more in number than the hairs of my head. For what evil
have I not designed in my heart? but many and most abominable things have I
committed in very deed: For I am guilty, O Lord, of Envy, Gluttony, etc. All
my Senses [and] all my Members have I polluted. But incomparable is the
multitude of thy Bowels, and unspeakable [is] the mercy of thy Goodness,
through which thou bear with my sins. Wherefore, O King whom we can never
praise enough, O thou long-suffering Lord, magnify the wonders of thy mercy
upon me a sinner, discover [in me] the power of thy kindness, show forth the
goodness of thy most merciful favor, and receive me a Prodigal returning [unto
thee,] through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord God, how I Immediately before the sight of the Bread.
receive the Body and Blood of my most blessed Savior Jesus Christ, the price
of my Redemption, is the very wonder of my soul, yet my most firm and constant
belief upon the words of my Savior. At this time they are graciously tendered
to me and my Faith: Lord, make me a worthy Receiver, and be it unto me as he
has said.

Amen.
Lord, I have received Immediately after receing both kinds.
this Sacrament of the Body and Blood of my dear Savior. His mercy has
given it, and my faith received it into my soul. I humbly beseech thee speak
mercy and peace unto my Conscience, and enrich me with all those Graces which
come from that precious Body and Blood, even till I be possessed of Eternal
Life in Christ. Amen.

* O thou that sit on high with the Father, and art here invisibly present
with us; come and sanctify these [thy] gifts [here present], and those also by
[whom] and [those] for whom, and the end for which they are offered up.

Amen.
MONDAY.
POnder my words, In the Morning. Psalm. 5. 1, 2, 3.
O Lord, consider my Meditations; O hearken unto the voice of my calling, my
King and my God: for unto thee will I make my Prayer. My voice shall thou hear
betimes, O Lord: early in the morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and
will look up. But make me remember that thou art God, and have no pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee.

Amen.
O Lord, bless me, and Psalm. 96. 2. Thanksgiving.
I will sing unto thee, and praise thy Name, and be telling of thy salvation
from day to day.

Amen.
O Lord, let Counsel Prove. 2. 11. Against Evil Counsel.
preserve me, and Understanding keep me. Deliver me from the evil way, and from
the man that speaks froward things; and from all such as leave the ways of
Righteousness, to walk in the ways of Darkness: even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
O Lord, I know the way Jer. 10. 23.
of man is not in himself: It is not in man that walks to direct his own
steps. Therefore, O Lord, I beseech thee, make me know my For direction in
walking.
way, and direct my steps to thy honor and my own salvation, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
BE not wroth with The third hour. 2 Esdr. 8. 45, 31. For Mercy.
me, O Lord, but spare me and have mercy upon me: for thou will be merciful
unto thy creature. O Lord, I and my Fathers have all had the same sickness:
but, because of us that are sineers, thou shall be called merciful, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, guide me here Psalm. 74. 24. For Counsel.
with thy Counsel, and after that receive me into Glory. For whom have I in
Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire, in comparison of
thee. O Lord, preserve Thirst for God.
me in those longings after thee. Amen.

O God, take from me Psalm. 119.29.
the way of lying, and cause me to make much of thy Law, that I may choose the
way For Truth.
of Truth, and lay thy Judgments before me: that I may stick unto thy
Testimonies, For Obedience.
and run the way of thy Commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty.
Amen.

O God, the strength of 1 Sund. after Trin.
all them that trust in thee; mercifully accept my Prayers: and because the
weakness of man's nature can do no good thing without thee, grant me the For
Grace.
help of thy Grace, that in keeping of thy Commandments I may please thee both
in will and in deed, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, thou art just, The sixth hour. Tob. 3. 2, 3, 6.
and all thy ways are mercy and truth: thou judge truly for ever; remember
me, and look upon me: punish me not For Mercy.
according to my sins or my ignorances, or my Fathers which have sinned before
thee: deal not with me according to my sins, but as seems best unto thee, O
Lord my strength and my salvation. Amen.

Lord, I acknowledge Jer. 14. 20. For Pardon.
my wickedness, and the iniquity of my Fathers: we have sinned against thee, O
Lord, be merciful. Amen.

Remember not, Lord, Engl. Litany.
our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers; neither take thou vengeance
of our sins: spare us, good Lord, spare thy People whom thou have redeemed with
thy most precious Blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Amen.
Lord, I beseech thee, 3 Sund. after Trin.
mercifully to hear me: And as thou have given me an hearty desire to pray, so
grant that by thy mighty aid I may For Protection.
be defended both in soul and in body, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, I beseech Aug. Sermon. 18.
thee, accept the Prayers that I offer [thee]; give what I ask, forgive what I
fear: for thou through thy Christ art the only hope of sinners, and through
him I hope for pardon of my sins.

Amen.
O Lord, be gracious unto Ninth hour. 2 Macc. 1. 3, 4, 5.
me, and give me an heart to worship thee, and to do thy Will; and open my
heart in thy Law, and send me peace: hear my Prayers, and be For Mercy.
reconciled to me, and never forsake me in the time of trouble, for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

Remember me, O Lord, Psalm. 106.4. Remember me.
according to the favor that thou bear unto thy People. O visit me with thy
salvation, that I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in the
gladness of thy People, and give thanks with thine Inheritance.

Amen.
O God, the Protector of 4 Sund. after Trin.
all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is strong, nothing is holy;
increase and multiply upon me thy mercy, that thou being my Ruler and Guide,
I may so pass through things temporal, that I finally lose not the things
eternal. Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Grant, O Lord, that I may live in thy fear, die in thy favor, rest in thy
peace, rise in thy power, reign in thy glory, for thy only beloved Son's sake
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
HEar, O Lord, consider At Evening. Psalm. 17. 1. To be heard.
my complaint, hearken unto my prayer that goes not out of feigned lips; and
prevent me in mercy, before the Evening of my days close up upon me; even for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

* O Lord, I pray thee S. Hilar. l. 12. de Trin. p. 195.
let not my weakness distract me, but let my speech be of that alone in which
the salvation of my soul consists; and let me never break forth to that degree
both of folly and wickedness, as to wish to be a Judge of thy Omnipotence, and
of thy Sacraments; and suffer me not to exalt my weak opinion above either the
divine determination of thy Infinity, or that belief of thy Eternity which
has been revealed to me.

Amen.
* Lighten our darkness Coll. for Evening, against all dangers.
I beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy mercy keep off all the snares [and
dangers] of this whole night from me, and from all thy faithful; from our souls
[more] especially, but [even] from our bodies also, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
O God, which have prepared 6 Sund. after Trin.
for them that love thee, such good things as pass man's understanding; pour
into my heart such love toward thee, For Obedience.
that I obeying thee in all things, may obtain thy promises, which exceed all
that I can desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Incline thine ear unto The Compline. Psalm. 17. 6, 7, 8.
me, O Lord, and hearken unto my words. Show thy mavelous loving kindness,
thou that art the Savior of them that put their trust in thee. Keep me as the
apple of thine For Defense.
eye, and hide me under the shadow of thy wings, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
O Lord, I cry unto Psalm. 141. 2. To be heard.
thee, let my Prayer be set forth in thy sight as Incense, and the lifting up
of my hands be an Evening-Sacrifice, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

The Lord is my strength Psalm. 28. 8.
and my shield; my heart has trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my
heart danceth Thanksgiving.
for joy, and in my song will I praise him.

Amen.
O Lord of all power and 7 Sund. after Trin.
might, who art the author and giver of all good things; graft in my heart the
love of thy Name, increase in me For true Religion.
true Religion, nourish me with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep me
in the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
LOrd, let me know Bedtime, and at night if thou wakest. Psalm. 39.5. etc.
my end, and the number of my days, that I may be certified how long I have to
live. Behold, thou At Death.
have made my days as it were a span long, and my age is even as nothing in
respect of thee; and verily every man living is altogether vanity. For man
walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up
riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. And now, Lord, what is my hope?
truly my hope is even in thee. Deliver me from all mine offenses, and make me
not a rebuke to the foolish, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
* O Lord, I give and offer Greg. Naz. Orat. 8. For submission.
up unto thee my self and all that is mine, [my] actions and words, [my] repose
and silence; only do thou preserve and guide me, and direct my hand and mind
and tongue to things that are honest and acceptable to thee, and withdraw me
from any thing from which it were better to abstain, by and for the sake of
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
TUESDAY.
LOrd, preserve me, In the Morning. Psalm. 1. 1, 2. For Preservation.
that neither this day, nor any day of my life, I may walk in the counsel of
the ungodly, stand in the way of sinners, or sit down in the seat of the
scornful; but that my delight may be in thy Law, O Lord, and my exercise in it
day and night.

Amen.
* O Sun of Righteousness, Erasmus. For Illumination.
Father and Original [cause] of all things; when we are influenced from above
by thee, we receive new life; when we are cherisht by thy [blessed] beams, we
grow up [in Grace]; when we are inflamed by thy love, we are made perfect; when
we are forsaken of thee, we perish. O thrice-happie are they upon whom thou
arisest with the dew of mercy! O Lord Jesus, bless me with thy light, and
scatter the clouds of my ignorance, and the [thick] darkness of my sins, that I
may not go astray from the way of thy Commandments, but follow thee unto Light
eternal, through thee thy self, my only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

O Lord, thou art my Prove. 3.26.
Assurance; I humbly beseech thee, preserve my foot from taking, even for Jesus
Christ his sake.

Amen.
O Lord, give me, I 9 Sund. after Trin. For good thoughts.
beseech thee, the spirit to think and do always such things as be rightful;
that I who cannot be without For Grace.
thee, may by thee be able to live according to thy will, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, I lift up my Third hour. Psalm. 25.1, 3, 4, etc. For Assistance.
soul to thee; my God, I have put my trust in thee: O let me not be confounded,
neither let mine enemies triumph over me. Show me thy ways, O God, and teach me
thy paths. Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me: for thou art the God of my
salvation; in thee is my hope all the day long. Call to remembrance, O Lord,
thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness, which has been ever of old. O
remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, or my riper age; but according
to thy mercy think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness, and the merits of
Jesus Christ my Savior.

Amen.
Almighty God, who see 2 Sund. in Lent.
that we have no power of our selves to help our selves; keep me, I beseech
thee, For Preservation.
both outwardly in my body, and inwardly in my soul, that so I may be defended
from all adversity which may happen to my body, and from all evil thoughts
which may assault and hurt my soul, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only
Savior.

Amen.
HEarken unto my Sixth hour. Psalm. 27. 8, 9, 10, 11. To be heard.
voice, O Lord, now I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and hear me. My heart
has talked of thee, Seek ye my face; thy face, Lord, will I seek. O hide not
thou thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure. Thou have been
my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. Amen.

At evening, morning, Psalm. 55. 18. Paulin. Epist. 17. page 181.
and at noonday will I pray, and that instantly: Lord, hear my voice. O For
Deliverance.
deliver my soul in peace from the practices that are against me. Amen.

Let thy merciful ears, 10 Sund. after Trin.
O Lord, be open to the Prayers of me thy humble servant; and that I may obtain
my Petitions, make me to ask such things as shall please thee, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
LOrd, let me not be Ninth hour. Psalm. 31. 19, 21. Glory to God.
confounded, for I have called upon thee. O how plentiful is thy goodness which
thou have laid up for them that fear thee, and that thou have prepared for them
that put their trust in thee, even before the sons of men! Lord, I trust in
thee, have mercy upon me.

My tears have been Psalm. 42. 3. In bad times.
my meat day and night, while they daily say unto me, Where is now thy God? But
let them have no cause to say it any more, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Almighty God, which 3 Sund. after Easter.
show to all men that are in error, the light For Illumination.
of thy truth, to the intent that they may return into the way of
Righteousness; grant, I beseech thee, unto me, and all them that are admitted
into the Fellowship of Christ's Religion, that we may eschew those things which
are contrary For Obedience.
to our Profession, and follow all such things as are agreeable to the same,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* O Lord my Savior, In the Evening. St. Ambrose Sermon. 8. on Psalm. 118.
in whose power it is to remit sins, I beseech thee say unto me, Loose thee
from thy chains, come out of the bonds of thy sins; and when thou say it,
loose those cords of my errors wherewith I am entangled and bound: for though
I am the most wicked of all men, and to be abhorred by reason of my continuance
in sins, yet when thou command, I shall be free from them.

Amen.
Lord, give me grace that Psalm. 91.1. For Help.
I may dwell under the defense of the most highest, and that I may abide under
thy shadow, O thou Almighty: for thou art my hope and my strong hold; in thee
will I trust, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, thou which declarest 11 Sund. after Trin.
thy Almighty power most chiefly by showing mercy and pity; give unto me
abundantly thy grace, that I running to thy promises, may be made partaker of
thy heavenly treasure, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O God, thou art my The Compline. Psalm. 46. 1.
hope and strength, a very present help in trouble; confirm me, that I may not
For Help.
fear, though the earth be moved, and the hills carried into the midst of the
sea; though the waters thereof rage and swell, and the mountains shake at the
tempest of the same. O be in the midst of my soul, and I shall never be moved.
Amen.

O Lord, look upon Psalm. 119.122. For mercy.
me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do to those that fear thy Name.
Order my steps in thy Word, and so shall no wickedness have dominion over me.

Amen.
Almighty God, give 14 Sund. after Trin. Increase of Grace.
unto me, I beseech thee, a full increase of Faith, Hope and charity: And that
I may obtain that which thou do promise, make me love that which thou do
command, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
LOrd, I call upon thee At bedtime, and in the night if thou wakest. Psalm. 50.
15.
in the day of my trouble, in the night of my heaviness. O deliver me, and I
will glorify thee. Amen.

O Lord, correct me, but Jer. 10.24.
with judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. And grant
that thy correction may amend me, and make me thine, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
* Look on me also, O St. Ambrose. For Penitence.
Lord Jesus, that I may call to mind my own sins, and wash away my offenses
with tears; grant me, I beseech thee, the tears of St. Peter: I would not have
the joy of a sinner. That I may obtain this, turn thee, O Lord, and look upon
me, and grant the same Cock may waken even me a most miserable sinner, that
being delivered, I may sing unto thee for ever and ever.

Amen.
O eternal God and merciful 4 Sund. after Easter. For Obedience.
Father, grant, I humbly beseech thee, that I may love all those things which
thou command, and desire that which thou do promise; that amongst the
sundry and manifold changes of the world, my heart may surely there be fixed,
where true joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
WEDNESDAY.
O Lord, I have sinned In the morn. Baruch 2.12, 14. For Penitence.
and dealt wickedly; nay, offended in all thine Ordinances. Let thy wrath turn
from me, for I am weak; and hear my prayers, and deliver me for thine own sake,
and the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Gracious Father, without thee I can do nothing but sin; nor can I confess it
to have pardon but by thee. I was conceived and born in sin: And though thou
did wash me from that in the laver of Baptism, yet I have since defiled my
self again, and by many grievous actual sins, have made my self a sinner above
all other men, considering the great measure of grace that thou have given me.
Lord, increase thy grace, and by it weaken first, and then cut off my
resistance, that I may see, and confess, and hate, and forsake all my sins, and
find mercy and salvation in the merits of my blessed Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

O Lord, early this Psalm. 119.147. To be heard.
morning do I cry unto thee; for in thy Word is my trust. Hear me, O Lord, for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, let me hear thy Psalm. 143. 8.
loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is my trust. O show me the
way that I should walk in this day, and all the days of my life; for I lift up
my soul unto thee in the mercies of Jesus Christ.

Amen.
DEliver me, O Lord, from Third hour. Psalm. 39. 9, 7, 8.
all mine offenses, and make me not a rebuke to the foolish. For man walks in
a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain. But Lord, what For Hope.
is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee: and there let it still continue
acceptable in Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
O Lord, look upon me For Penitence.
in mercy; in the greater mercy, because the Calling and Place I am in must
give a stricter account to thee. Look therefore upon me, O Lord, but not till
thou have nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ: not till thou have bathed me
in the Blood of Christ: not till I have hid my self in the Wounds of Christ;
that so the punishment which should else overtake me, may pass over me: then
look, and say unto my soul, I have forgiven thee; and by the work of thy mercy
in my soul make me feel it, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior.
Amen.

* O Lord, who bring Gr. Naz. Orat. 6. For my Flock.
the great Flocks to perfection, and increasest the little ones by thy Grace;
comfort me abundantly according to the exceeding greatness of thy bounty, and
feed and preserve my Flock, together with my self, through Jesus Christ the
chief Shepherd, and our [onely] Savior.

Amen.
O Lord, plead thou my Sixth hour. Psalm. 35.1, 3. For Defense.
cause with them that strive with me, and fight against them that fight against
me. Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me. Say
unto my soul, I am thy Salvation. Even so. Amen.

Give ear, O Lord, unto Psalm. 86. 6. To be heard.
my Prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires. In the time of my
trouble I will call upon thee; for thou hear me. Amen.

Deliver my soul, O Psalm. 120. 2. Deliverance.
God, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. Amen.

Keep me, O Lord, thy 15 Sund. after Trin.
poor humble servant, with thy perpetual mercy: And because the frailty of
man without thee cannot but fall, preserve me ever by thy help, and lead me to
all things profitable to my salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, give me such Ninth hour. Esai. 55. 6, 7.
Grace, as I may seek thee while thou may be found, and call upon thee while
thou art near; that I may detest For Penitenca.
and forsake the wickedness of my ways, and the unrighteousness of my own
imaginations; that I may return unto thee, and thou have mercy upon me, in
Jesus Christ my only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Teach me thy ways, O Psalm. 86. 11. For the fear of God.
Lord, and I will walk in thy truth. O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear
thy Name.

Amen.
Lord, I beseech thee, 17 Sund. after Trin. For Grace.
grant that thy Grace may always prevent and follow me, and make me continually
to be given to all good works, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
HAve mercy upon At Evening, Psalm. 51. 1. For Penitence.
me, O God, after thy great goodness, and according to the multitude of thy
Mercies do away mine offenses. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and
cleanse me from my sin: for I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before
me. But let not this Evening take from me the light of the Sun of
Righteousness, Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

* Vouchsafe, O Lord, to St. Aug. Sermon. 30.
hear my Prayers. According to thy good pleasure, drive out the Enemy by thy
might, from my thoughts and deeds. Increase my Faith, govern For all Gifts.
my mind, grant me spiritual thoughts whilst I lie waking on my bed, and
conduct me to thy bliss, through Jesus Christ thy Son and our Savior.

Amen.
O Lord, I beseech thee, 18 Sund. after Trin. For Obedience.
give me grace to avoid the infections of the Devil, and with a pure heart and
mind to follow thee the only true God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
LOrd, I offer up unto Compline. Psalm. 51. 17. Penitence.
thee my Evening-Sacrifice; thy Sacrifice, even a troubled spirit, a broken and
a contrite heart, which thou will not despise, in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

* O Lord, I humbly pray thee look upon me, and cleanse my mind and my thoughts
from unclean motions, and from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and from
every work of the Devil, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

* O Lord, graciously show For mercy.
forth thy unspeakable mercy, and both free me from the sins I have committed,
and deliver me from the punishments I have deserved, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O God, for as much as 19 Sund. after Trin.
without thee I am not able to please thee, grant that the working of thy
mercy may in all things direct and rule my heart, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, give me that Bedtime, and at night if thou wakest.
grace, that I may remember thee upon my Bed, and think upon thee when I am
waking. Thou have Psalm. 63. 6.
been my helper; therefore under the shadow of thy wings I will hope to pass
through the darkness of this night, in the comfort of Jesus Christ my Lord and
only Savior. Amen.

O Lord, make mine Psalm. 119.148.
eyes prevent the night-watches, that I may be occupied in thy Words.

Amen.
O Lord, thou which have made the night for man to rest in, as well as the day
to labor; grant, dear Father, that I may so take my bodily rest, that my soul
may continually watch for my deliverance out of this mortal life. And that my
sleep For moderate Sleep.
be not excessive, according to the insatiable desires of the flesh, but
sufficient to relieve and maintain Nature; to live and serve thee in all sober
and godly conversation, through the aid and assistance of Jesus Christ my only
Lord and Savior.

Amen.
THURSDAY.
O Hold thou up my In the morn. Psalm. 17. 5.
goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. Amen.

* Help me, my Lord Jesu, St. Aug. de Haeres. For Help.
and gird thy sword about thy thigh, O thou most Mighty. Go forth, O thou most
powerful of all: Kill me in my self, that I may live to thee, and let my
Enemies cease to persecute me. Amen.

O God, thou art Psalm. 63. 1. For Consolation.
my God, early will I seek thee: My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs
greatly after thee, in a barren and dry land, where no water is. O satisfy
this thirst with thy freshest waters of comfort, in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, have mercy Esaias. 33.2, 5, 6.
upon me; I have waited for thee: Be thou my arm in the morning, and my help in
the time of trouble; that I may exalt thy Name which dwell on high, that I
may live in the stabilitie of thy times, and that thy fear may be my treasure,
even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
O Almighty God For Ascension day.
and merciful Father, grant, I beseech thee, that as I do believe thy only Son
our Lord to have ascended into the Heavens; so I, and all thy faithful
Servants, may in heart and mind thither ascend, and with thee continually
dwell. Amen.

O God, the King of glory, Sund. after Ascension.
who have exalted thine only Son Jesus Christ with great triumph into thy
Kingdom in Heaven; I beseech thee leave neither thy Church, nor my poor self
comfortless; but send us thy Holy Ghost to comfort us, and exalt us unto the
same place whither our Savior Christ is gone is before, who lives and
reigns with thee, one God, world without end.

Amen.
HEar my Prayer, O Third hour. Psalm. 55. 2. To be heard.
God, and hide not thy self from my petition. Take heed unto me and hear me,
how I mourn in my Prayer and am vexed. Give me strength and comfort in thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, the proud are Psalm. 86. 14. Against Enemies.
risen against me, and the Congregation of factious men have sought after my
soul, and have not set thee before their eyes. But thou, Lord God, art full of
compassion and mercy, long suffering, plenteous in goodness and truth. O turn
thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me: show some token upon me for good,
that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord have
helped me, and comforted me in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Assist me mercifully, English Liturgy. For Defense.
O Lord, in these and all other my supplications and prayers, and dispose my
ways toward the attainment of everlasting salvation, that among all the
changes and chances of this mortal life, I may ever be defended by thy most
gracious and ready help, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Deliver me from them Sixth hour. Psalm. 55. 22. Against Flatterers.
whose words are softer than butter, when they have war in their heart: And
from them whose word, are smoother than oil, while they are very swords. Lord,
I cast my burden upon thee, that thou may sustain me, and not suffer me to
fall for ever. Amen.

Bless me, O Lord, when Psalm. 94. 12. In time of Correction.
thou chastenest me, and teach me in thy Law; that thou may give me
patience in time of adversity, till the pit be dug up for the ungodly. O
Lord, fail me not, neither forsake me, for I am part of thine Inheritance in
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Almighty and merciful God, of thy bountiful 20 Sund. after Trin: For Defense.
goodness keep me from all things that may hurt me; that I being ready both in
body and soul, may with a For Obedience.
free heart accomplish those things that thou would have done, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* O Eternal God, I humbly Ninth hour. For Patience. St. Aug.
beseech thee, that whilst I am on Earth, as far as earthly things serve me,
they may remember me that I am their owner, but by thy appointment; and so far
forth as they offend me, let them teach me to serve thee my Lord; whom when I
do not obey, they are wont to become offensive for just vengeance: that whether
they serve me or not, [yet] I may always serve thee, in and through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Hold not thy tongue, Psalm. 109. 1. Against Revilings.
O God of my praise; for the mouth of the ungodly, yea, and the mouth of the
deceitful is opened upon me: and they have spoken against me with false
tongues; they compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against
me without a cause. But I give my self unto prayer. Lord, forgive them, and
hear me. Amen.

O God, which art the Morner-prayer, Coll. for Peace.
author of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom stands our
eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; defend And for Defense.
me and all thy servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely
trusting in thy defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the
might of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* TEach me, O my Lord At Evening. St. Aug.
Jesus, [and] instruct me, that I may learn from thee what I ought to teach
[others] concerning thee. Amen.

Deliver me, O Lord, Psalm. 140. 1, 2. Against Enemies.
from the man that is evil, and preserve me from the cruel man, which imagines
mischief in his heart, and stirs up strife all the day long. The proud have
laid a snare for me, and spread their net abroad with cords, and set traps in
my way. Lord, keep me from treacherous hands, and preserve me, that though they
purpose, yet they may not be able to overthrow my goings, even for Jesus Christ
his sake. Amen.

O God, from whom Collect 1. Evening-prayer.
all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do proceed; give unto
me, and all thy servants, that Peace For Peace.
which the world cannot give, that both our hearts may be set to obey thy
Commandments, and also that by thee we being defended from the fear of our
enemies, may pass our time in rest and quietness, through the merits of Jesus
Christ our Savior.

Amen.
HAve mercy upon The Complint. Psalm. 57. 1. For Hope.
me, O God, have mercy upon me, for my soul trusts in thee, and in the
shadow of thy wings will I trust, till these and all other my afflictions be
over-past. O send out thy mercy and truth upon me, even for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

* O merciful Lord, who come St. Aug.
not [in] to the proud heart, humble thou my soul. O thou who art seen by those
only that are pure in heart, give me true purity of heart. O Lord, I am
athirst Thirst for God.
[for thee], give me the pledge of the Inheritance [which is] to come, give me
at least a drop of thy heavenly showers to refresh my thirst, for I burn with
Love. Neither do I beg this for my own merits, for I am most unworthie [so much
as] to taste it, but for thy mercies, and the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Almighty God, English Liturgy. For Preservation.
vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to direct, sanctify and govern both my heart and
body in the ways of thy Laws, and in the works of thy Commandments, that
through thy mighty protection, both here and ever, I may be preserved by night
and by day, in body and in soul, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
O Lord, I cry unto Bedtime, and at night if thou wakest. Psalm 77. 1, 2.
thee, hearken unto me, O God. Thou hold my eyes waking: I am so feeble that
I cannot speak: And in the night season my soul refuses comfort; yet even then
give me In time of great trouble.
grace especially, that I may commune with mine own heart, and search out my
spirits, and compose them in thee, that I may rise to serve thee.

Amen.
Grant, O Lord, to me that Sleep.
am lying down to sleep, rest both of body and soul. Preserve me from the
dismal sleep of sin, from all the black defiling pleasures of the night. Quench
the fiery Darts of the evil one which he aims craftily against me. Subdue the
Rebellions of my flesh, and lay asleep in me all earthly and worldly thoughts,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
I humbly beseech thee, Collect at the end of the Liturgy.
O Father, mercifully to look upon my infirmities; Defense.
and for the glory of thy Names sake, turn from me and the rest of thy
servants, all those evils which we most justly have deserved: And grant that in
all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and
evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and
glory, through our only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FRIDAY.
* O Great God, Almighty In the. Morn. St. Aug.
God, God of infinite goodness, whom we ought to believe and apprehend to be
inviolable and incorruptible: O thou Trinity in Unity, whom the Catholic
Church adores; I that have experienced thy mercy in my self, do [most] humbly
entreat thee that thou would not suffer those men to differ from me in thy
Worship, with whom I have perfectly agreed in all conversation from my
Childhood; and suffer thou not either me or them to wander from thy truth and
salvation which is in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Lord, I will call upon Psalm. 88. 13.
thee, and early shall my prayer come before thee. Lord, do not abhor my soul,
neither hide thy face from me, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Lord, make me to have 2 Sund. after Trin. Fear and love of God.
a perpetual fear and love of thy holy Name; for thou never failest to help and
govern them whom thou do bring up in thy steadfast love. Grant this even for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Almighty and everlasting Passion of our Lord.
God, which of thy tender love toward man, have sent our Savior Jesus Christ
to take upon him our flesh, and to suffer death upon the Cross, that all
mankind should follow the example of his great humility; mercifully grant that
I may both follow the example of his patience, and be made partaker of his
resurrection, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, I humbly First Collect for the day. For the Church.
beseech thee graciously to behold thy Family, for the which our Lord Jesus
Christ was content to be betrayed, and given up into the hands of wicked men,
and to suffer death upon the Cross, who lives and reigns with thee and the
Holy Ghost, one God, world without end.

Amen.
Almighty and everlasting Second Coll. for the day.
God, by whose Spirit the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified;
receive these my supplications and prayers which I offer up before thee, for
all estates of men in For all men.
thy holy Church, that every member of the same, in his vocation, may truly and
devoutly serve thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
* It Is now long, O Lord, Third hour. St. Aug.
that I have been striving against Heresies, and I am almost tired. Come, my
Lord Jesus, thou most mighty Warrier, thou Captain of the Armies of the Lord,
who have overcome the Devil and the World; lay hold on the shield and buckler,
and stand up to help me.

Amen.
Deal with me, O God, Psalm. 109. 20. Deliverance.
according to thy Name; for sweet is thy mercy. O deliver me, for I am
helpless and poor, and my heart is wounded within me. Lord, save my soul. Amen.

Mine eyes are ever looking Psalm. 25. 14.
unto thee, O Lord; O pluck my feet out of the net. Amen.

Almighty God, who English Liturgy.
have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy Son's Name, I
beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to me, now that in his Name I
make my prayers and supplications unto thee; and grant that those things which
I To be heard.
have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be obtained, to
the relief of my necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Remember not my Sixth hour. Psalm. 79. 8. For Pardon.
old sins, but have mercy upon me, and that soon, for I am come to great
misery. Help me, O God of my salvat io n deliver me, and be merciful unto my
sins, for thy Names sake. Amen.

Not unto us, O Lord, Psalm. 115.1.
not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise; and that for thy loving mercy
and for thy truths sake.

Amen.
* O thou Father, Son, and St. Athan.
Holy Ghost, one God, who have declared unto us the Unity of the Deity, and
have revealed the undivided glory of the only ever-blessed Divinity, and
demonstrated the perfect eternity of thy Trinity; Trinity-sunday.
grant me, I beseech thee, Faith and Obedience in this life, and Glory in the
life to come, by and for the sake of Jesus Christ our Redeemer.

Amen.
O Lord God of Hosts, Ninth hour. Psalm. 80. 4.
how long will thou be angry with thy poor servant that prays? O turn me
again, O God; show the light of thy countenance, and I shall be whole. Amen.

* Glory be to thee, St. Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerdotio.
glory be to thee, O Lord! How great is the depth of thy mercy! how great the
abundance of thy patience! Behold how some that have been raised from a mean
and obscure degree to honor and renown, under pretense of thy Name, how they
abuse their honor, and use it against thee the Donor: they are unjust, and
assume to themselves what they should not dare against thy most holy Mysteries:
they use their utmost to thrust out men of approved integrity, that profligat
men may with the greatest fecuritie and licentiousness put all things into
confusion. Arise, O Lord, and help thy Church, and suffer For the Church.
not my soul to come into their counsels, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, I will cry day At Evening. Psalm. 88.1, 2.
and night before thee, let my prayer enter into thy presence; incline thine
ear unto my calling, for my soul is full of trouble, Against Affliction.
and my life draws nigh unto the pit. O let not thine indignation lie too hard
upon me, neither vex me with all thy storms; but remember of what mould thou
have made me, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
* O Lord, let me St. Hilary, l. 12. de Trinitate.
have no idle contention about words, but let me constantly profess the Faith
without delays. Preserve in me, I beseech thee, an unblemished reverence to thy
Faith; and grant me this restimonie of my Conscience, whilst I have my being,
that I may always retain that Profession which I made at the Sacrament of my
new Birth, when I was baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost. That I may acknowledge thee the Father, and together with
thee may adore thy Son, and may merit thy holy Spirit, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, be merciful unto Compline. Psalm. 92. 1, 2. For Mercy.
me, and I will sing praises unto thy Name; yea, I will tell of thy loving
kindness early in the morning, and of thy truth in the night-season. O bless
me, and fulfill all thy works of grace in me, even for Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

* Grant me, O Lord, a At Night.
watchful mind and sober thoughts, a pure heart and pleasant sleep, and free
from all diabolical phancies. And raise me again, O Lord, at the hour of
prayer, that I may adhere firmly to thy precepts, and keep an entire
remembrance of thy Judgments.

Amen.
LOrd, remember thy Bedtime, and at night if thou wakest. Psalm. 119. 49, 54.
promise unto thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust. That
thy statutes may be my songs in the house of my pilgrimage; and that I may
remember thy Name in the night-season.

Amen.
* Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my soul and body; for thou have created
and redeemed them, O Lord thou God of truth. And together with my self, I
commend unto thee all that is mine; for thou [Lord] have graciously bestowed
them on me, according to thy good pleasure. Cause me therefore, O Lord, both to
lie down and sleep in peace, for it is thou only make me to dwell in
safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* O Lord and maker of Gr. Naz. Orat. 10.
all things, O God the Father and Governor of thine, O thou disposer of Life
and Death, O thou preserver and benefactor of Souls; O thou that make all
things, and changest them by the creating Word which framed them both
seasonably and wisely, according to the depth of thy Wisdom and Providence!
govern thou my life Death.
in the flesh as long as shall be most expedient for me and thy Church. And in
thy good time receive me, I beseech thee, as one prepared, not surprised, so as
I may not fly thee at the last day, nor come with an unwilling mind like one
forcibly broke off and snatched away from this world, but that I may go readily
and cheerfully to that [most] blessed and eternal life which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, to whom be glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
* O Lord my God, call S. Aug. Ser. 53. de Diversis.
me, that I may come to thee; fix me, that I may not leave thee, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
SATURDAY.
O Lord, I will sing In the morn. Psalm. 59. 16. Praise.
of thy power, and will praise thy mercy in the morning, for thou have been my
defense and my refuge in the day of my trouble. Unto thee, O my strength, will
I sing; for thou, O God, art my defense and my merciful God.

Amen.
The glorious Majesty of Psalm. 90.17. Blessing.
thee, O Lord my God, be upon me: prosper thou the work of my hands upon me, O
prosper thou my handie-work. Amen.

O Lord, open mine Psalm. 119. 18. Illumination.
eyes that I may see the wonders of thy Law. I am a stranger upon earth, O hide
not thy Commandments from me: for thy Testimonies are my delight and my
counselors. Lord, continue that favor to me, that so they may ever be.

Amen.
O Lord our heavenly Morning-prayer. Collect for Grace.
Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely brought me to the
beginning of this day; defend For Aid.
me in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day I fall into no
sin, nor run into any kind of danger; but that all my doings may be ordered by
thy governance, to do always that which is righteous in thy sight, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O My soul, wait thou Third hour. Psalm. 62. 5.
still upon my God, for my hope is in him: he is my strength and my salvation,
he is my defense, so that I shall not fall. So Amen, Lord Jesu,

Amen.
O Lord God, be Ezekiah's prayer. 2 Chronicles. 30. 19. Mercy for imperfection.
merciful unto every one that prepares his whole heart to seek thee, O Lord
God, the God of his Fathers, though he be not according to the Purification of
the Sancturie.

Amen.
O Lord, I walk in the Psalm. 138. 7. Against Enemies.
midst of trouble, I beseech thee refresh me. Stretch forth thy hand upon the
fury and the cunning of mine Enemies, that thy right hand may save me. O make
good thy loving kindness toward me, and despise not, I beseech thee, the work
of thine own hands. Amen.

I deal with the thing Psalm. 119. 121. Against Enemies.
that is lawful and right; O give me not over unto mine Oppressors. Amen.

O make me, thy poor servant, verse. 122.
still to delight in that which is good, that the proud do me no wrong, for
Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Almighty God, the English Liturgy.
Fountain of all Wisdom, who know our necessities before we ask, and our
ignorance in asking; I beseech thee to have compassion upon my infirmities; and
those Infirmities.
things which for my unworthiness I dare not, and for my blindness I cannot
ask, vouchsafe to give me, for the worthiness of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, I will put my Sixth hour. Psalm. 62.8.
trust in thee always: O let thy people do it with me, and I will pour out my
heart before thee, O God my hope. Amen.

O that my ways were Psalm. 119. 5. For direction in walking.
made so direct that I might keep thy Statutes! O Lord, direct them.

Amen.
O Lord, teach me the Psalm. 119.33.
way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end: yea, I shall keep it
with my whole heart. O stablish thy Word in For the fear of God.
thy servant, that I may fear thee; and that for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
O Lord, I will call Ninth hour. Psalm. 81. 7. To be heard in trouble.
upon thee in my troubles, O deliver me and hear me; and then especially at
what time any storm falls upon me, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Blessed art thou, O Psalm. 119.10, 12. Direction of our ways.
Lord, O teach me thy Statutes: That my whole heart may seek thee, and that I
may not go wrong out of thy Commandments: That I may take greater delight in
the way of thy Testimonies, than in all manner of riches.

Amen.
O Praise the Lord, all Evening. Psalm. 134. 1. The Praise of God.
ye his servants, ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord. With these,
O Lord, I lift up my hands to thy Sanctuary, and will praise thy Name. O Lord,
be with me this Evening in all the mercies of Jesus Christ my Savior.

Amen.
* Thou know the infirmity of my wretched flesh, O thou that made me:
Thou know the watchfulness of my invisible Enemies, O thou that see them.
For Protection.
[O] protect me under the wings of thy goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, there is no hiding Compline. Psalm. 139. 10.
me from thy presence: for if I should say, the darkness shall cover me, then
shall my night be turned to day. For the darkness is no darkness with thee, but
the night is as clear as the day; the darkness and the light to thee are both
alike. Therefore, O God, Confession.
I present my self open before thee; O cleanse my soul, that it may rejoice to
be seen of thee in Jesus Christ. Amen.

* The day being now Thanksgiving.
passed over, O Lord, I give thanks unto thee, I glorify thee that I have
passed it away without scandal; I magnify thee with a Song, because I have
passed it without falling into any snare, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Thy righteousness, O Psalm. 71. 17, 19. etc.
God, is very high, and great things are they which thou have done for me. O
God, who is like unto thee! Thou have brought me to great honor, and comforted
me on every side. Therefore Praise of God.
will I praise thee and ty righteousness, O God, and unto thee will I sing, O
thou holy One of Israel. My lips will be glad when I sing unto thee, and so
will my soul which thou have delivered. My tongue also shall talk of thy
righteousness all the day long: for many are confounded and brought to shame
that have sought to do me evil. O Lord, Thanksgiving.
continue thy blessings to me, and multiply my thankfulness to thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord, thou keeper Bedtime, and at night if thou wakest. Psalm. 121. 4.
of Israel, which in the watch over thy servants do neither slumber nor
sleep; be my keeper, and preserve me this night. O keep my soul.

Amen.
Lord, give me grace to Psalm. 119.59. Procrastinating.
make haste, and not prolong the time to keep thy Commandments. That I may call
my own ways to remembrance, and turn my feet to thy Testimonies. And then at
midnight will I rise and give thee thanks, because of thy righteous judgments,
O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

Woe is me, that I am Psalm. 120. 4.
constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of
Kedar: For my soul has too long dwelt among them that are enemies unto peace:
Too long, O Lord, but that it is Death.
thy good pleasure to continue my dwelling in this vale of misery.

Amen.
* What art thou, O my Adoration and Glorification of God. St. Aug. lib. 2.
Confess. cap. 4.
God? what art thou, I beseech thee, but the Lord my God? For who is Lord
besides our Lord? or who is God besides our God? O thou supreme, most powerful,
most merciful, most just, most secret, most present, most beautiful, most
mighty, most incomprehensible; most constant, and yet changing all things;
immutable, never new and never old, yet renewing all things; ever in action,
and yet ever quiet; heaping up, yet needing nothing; creating, upholding,
filling, protecting, nourishing and perfecting all things. Thou love, and yet
thou art not transported; thou art jealous, yet thou art void of fear; thou
do repent, yet thou art free from sorrow; thou art angry, and yet never art
unquiet; thou take what thou find, yet did thou never lose any thing;
thou art never poor, and yet thou art glad of gain; never covetous, and yet
thou exactest profit at our hands. We bestow largely upon thee, that thou may
become our debtor, yet who has any thing but of thy gift? Thou payest debts,
when thou owe nothing: thou forgivest debts, and yet thou losest nothing. And
what shall I say, O my God, my life, my joy, my holy, dear delight? Or what can
any man say, when he speaks of thee? And woe be to them that speak not of
thee, but are silent in thy presence. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, that I may
speak unto thee, and praise thy Name.

Amen.
Prayers added since the restoring of this Book to me, which was taken from me
in a search by Mr. Prynne, May 31. 1643. and with much difficulty restored unto
me, Nov. 6. 1644.
* GRant, O Lord, that Aug. Sermon. 193. de Temp.
I may be ready to meet thee at thy second coming, lest thou should find me
such a one as thou desire not [to find me]. O thou, who that thou might
not find me such, have undergone all punishments for me, even that thou
might not inflict upon me any punishments, but might everlastingly reward
me.

Amen.
* O Lord, let it be my care The same, Sermon. 198.
so to behave my self, through the help of Christ, that I may [be able to]
receive thee my most holy Lord, that thou may not only be my Guest, but
may abide with me for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* O eternal God, I sue to The same, Sermon. 202.
thee for help, that of thy goodness thou would vouchsafe to give me [the]
true Wisdom and perfect Charity; for thou, with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
have the Glory and the Kingdom for ever and ever.

Amen.
* O merciful God, who The same, Sermon. 204.
have afforded me so many favors, add [to the rest] this also, that I may
retain the right Faith in all humility, that I may preserve perfect Charity
with all men, that I may seriously endeavor to serve thee my Lord with a pure
heart and a chaste body, even to my life's end; that after [all] my labors, I
may hear that most desirable voice, Well done, thou good servant, enter thou
into the Joy of thy Lord,

Amen.
Praise and Thanksgiving.
I Will magnify thee, O For deliverance from Enemies. Psalm. 30. 1.
Lord, for thou have set me up, and not made my foes to triumph over me. O Lord
my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me, thou have kept my life from
them that go down into the pit. Sing praises unto the Lord, O my soul, and give
thanks unto him for a remembrance of his holiness. Amen.

O my soul, be joyful in Psalm. 35. 9.
the Lord, and rejoice in his Salvation. All my bones shall say, Lord, who is
like unto thee, which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him!
yea, the poor and him that is in misery, from him that spoileth him. Amen.

I will give thanks unto Psalm. 7. 18.
thee, O Lord, according to thy righteousness, and I will praise thy Name, O
Lord most high.

O Lord, thou art high Psalm. 47. 2, 3. After victory in War.
and terrible, a great King over all the Earth; thou have subdued the people
under us, and the Nations under our feet: therefore will I sing praises unto
thee, O God, who art greatly to be exalted. Amen.

Thy Vows are upon Psalm. 56. 12.
me, O my God, I will render praise unto thee; for thou have delivered my soul
from death, and my feet from falling, that I may yet walk before thee, O my
God, in the light of the living, and bless thee.

Amen.
* Thanks be to thee, S. Aug. Orat. de 5. Haeres. cap. 7.
O God; thanks be to thee, O true and undivided Trinity, O Verity, one and
three, O Unity, three and one. Thanks be to thee, O God the Father, who have
both manifested thy Son unto me, and given him to be my Teacher: O grant
likewise that he may be so for ever, according to thy mercies of old time.

Amen.
My heart is ready, O Psalm. 57. 7.
Lord, my heart is ready, I will sing and give praise; yea, I will praise thee
among the people, and I will sing unto thee among the Nations. O let thy
Mercy, which is great unto the Heavens, and thy Truth, which reaches unto the
Clouds, embrace me and preserve me to thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

I will give thanks unto Psalm. 9.1.
thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will speak of all thy mavelous works: I
will be glad and rejoice in thee, yea, my songs will I make of thy Name, O thou
most highest. For thou have maintained my right and my cause, thou art set in
the Throne that judge right. Lord, continue to be my defense against the
oppressor, and my refuge in due time of trouble, that I may ever rejoice in thy
Salvation Jesus Christ. Amen.

My trust is in thee, O Psalm. 13. 5.
God, and my heart is joyful in thy salvation. I will sing unto thee, O Lord,
because thou have dealt so lovingly with me; yea, I will praise thy Name, O
Lord most highest. Amen.

O praise the Lord with Psalm. 22.23.
me, ye that fear him, magnify him all ye of the Seed of Jacob. My praise
shall be of thee in the great Congregation, and my vows will I perform in the
sight of them that fear thee. Amen.

What profit is there in Psalm. 30. 9.
my blood, when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust give thanks unto thee, or
shall it declare thy truth? Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me; Lord, be
thou my helper. Thou have turned my heaviness into joy; thou have put off my
sackcloth, and girded me with gladness: therefore will I sing of thy praise
without ceasing. O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Amen.

I will always give thanks Psalm. 34.1.
unto thee, O Lord, thy praise shall ever be in my mouth. My soul shall make
her boast of thee, O my God, and the humble shall hear thereof and be glad. For
I sought thee, O Lord, and thou heardest me, and did deliver me out of all my
fear, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Let my mouth be filled Psalm. 71. 8.
with praise, and with thy glory every day. Amen.

O Lord, who is like unto Psalm. 71.20.
to thee? For thou have showed me great troubles and adversities; but thou will, I hope, return and quicken me, thou will return and take me out of this
depth. Amen.

I will thank thee, O Psalm. 86. 12.
Lord my God, with all my heart, and will praise thy Name for ever: For great
is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost
Hell. O deliver it still, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, I give thee humble and hearty thanks for the measure of knowledge
which thou have given me of thy truth; for giving me a love to it, and thy
Church; for quieting my soul in the midst of thy Churches distractions; for the
measure of rest and repose which thou have given me in thee, whereas no true
content is found without thee. Lord, I give thee humble thanks likewise for the
temporal blessings which thou have heaped on me; the favor of my Liege Lord
and Sovereign; the place to which thou have raised me; the means which thou
have given me to do good. Lord, I cannot name all thy blessings, how shall I
thank thee for them? Lord, I will thank thee for them, by honoring thee in
them. O give a heart to desire all this, and grace to perform it; that my sins
may be forgiven me, and that I may be thine, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

O praise the Lord, for he Psalm, 135. 3. Psalm. 138. 1.
is gracious: O sing unto his Name, for it is lovely. I will give thanks unto
thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and
praise thy Name; and that because of thy loving kindness and truth, for thou
have magnified thy Name and thy Word above all things. Lord, give me grace to
obey thy Word, and to honor thy Name for ever, in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
In Prosperity.
LOrd, this is the time Psalm. 19. 13.
of fear, keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion
over me: That though my sins be many and great, yet I may be innocent from the
great offense, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, make me worthy of the place to which thou have raised me in thy
Church, that all my endeavors may be to make Truth and Peace meet together. In
this course give me understanding to discover my enemies, and wisdom to prevent
them; a heart to love my friends, and carriage that may bind them. Lord, make
me love thy Church, and the place where thine honor dwells; that as thou
have honored me above many others, so I may honor thee above all, and spend
whatsoever is acceptable in the poor remainder of my life to serve thee in thy
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, turn away mine Psalm. 119.37.
eyes that they behold not vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way.

Amen.
* O merciful Lord, Salvian. de Gub. Dei. l. 6. p. 222.
when thou have prevailed with thy self (for [alas] we never live so as to be
worthy to prevail with thee) to give us seasonable weather, plentiful crops,
and peaceful times that enrich us with all good things, and abundance of
increase, even above our wishes; [O] suffer me not to be corrupted through so
great prosperity of happy events, lest I should altogether forget thee and my
self too; but increase also my humility and my thankfulness, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
In time of Pestilence.
DEliver me, O Lord, Psalm. 39. 9, 11
from all my offenses, and make me not a rebuke to the foolish. Take, I humbly
beseech thee, thy plague away from thy people, for we begin to be consumed by
means of thy heavy hand. And for Jesus Christ his sake, lay neither me nor
mine under this uncomfortable disease. Amen.

O Lord, deliver me from Psalm. 91. 3.
the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence: O defend me under
thy wings, and keep me safe under thy feathers, that I may not be afraid for
any terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day; for the pestilence
that walks in the darkness, nor for the sickness that destroys in the
noonday. Though thousands fall beside me, and ten thousands at my right hand,
yet let it not come near me, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O Lord, thou art my verse. 10.
hope, I beseech thee let no evil happen unto me, neither let any plague come
nigh my dwelling; but give thine Angels charge over me to keep me in all my
ways, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

O let the sorrowful Psalm. 79. 12.
sighing of them whom thou have visited come before thee; and according to the
greatness both of thy power and mercy, preserve thou them that are appointed
to die, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
O Lord, I beseech thee Septuag. Sunday. If the Family be infected.
favorably to hear the prayers of thy humble servant, that I and my Family,
which are justly punished for our offenses, may be mercifully delivered by thy
goodness, from this and all other infection both of soul and body: that so we
may live both to serve and to praise thee, to the glory of thy great Name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

O Almighty God, which English Liturgy.
in thy wrath, in the time of King David, did slay with the plague of
Pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy mercy did
save the rest; have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now are visited with
great sickness and mortality; and like as thou did then command thine Angel
to cease from punishing, so it may now please thee to withdraw from us this
plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O Lord God, who Engl. Liturgy. Thanks giving for deliverance from the Plague.
have wounded us for our sins, and consumed us for our transgressions by thy
late heavy and long-continued Visitation, and in the midst of that Judgment
remembering mercy, have redeemed us from death; we offer up unto thee our
selves, our souls and bodies (which thou have now delivered) to be a living
sacrifice unto thee. And here I offer up unto thee, most merciful Father, in
the name of all thy people, all possible praise and thanks, and shall ever
magnify thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
In Old Age.
O Lord, cast me not off Psalm. 71. 9.
in the time of mine Age, forsake me not now my strength begins to fail me.
Amen.

Forsake me not, O God, in mine old age, now I am grayheaded, ver. 16.
until I have declared thy strength unto this Generation, and thy power to all
them that are to come. Amen.

O Lord, though thou Psalm. 89. 44.
have shortened the days of my Youth, yet cover me not with dishonor. Hide not
thy self from me for ever, but remember how short my time is, and make me
remember it, O Lord. Amen.

O Lord, teach me to Psalm. 90. 12.
number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. Amen.

O Lord, hide not thy Psalm. 102. 2.
face from me in the time of trouble; for my days are ver. 3.
consumed away like smoke, and my bones are burnt up like a firebrand. My
days ver. 11.
are gone like a shadow, and I am withered like grass. Thou, O Lord, have
brought ver. 23.
down my strength in my journey, and shortened my days. But, O my God, take me
not away ver. 24.
but in the timeliness of my age, that I may continue to serve thee, and be
faithful in thy service, till thou remove me hence.

Amen.
For the Sick and Afflicted.
O Let the sorrowful Psalm. 79. 12. Alias the Sick, the Afflicted.
sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, and according to the greatness of
thy power preserve thou them that are appointed to die, even for Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
In time of Sickness.
O Lord, the sorrows of Psalm. 18. 3, 4, 5.
death compass me, and the snares of it are ready to overtake me. When thou will dissolve my Tabernacle, thou alone know: therefore in this my trouble I
will call upon thee my Lord, and will complain unto my God. O be with me at the
instant of my death, and receive me for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Into thy hands I commend Psalm. 31. 6.
my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

O Lord, thy hand is heavy Psalm. 32. 4.
upon me day and night, and my moisture is become like the drought in Summer. I
acknowledge my sin unto thee, O Lord, and my unrighteousness have I not hid. O
Lord, be merciful unto me. Amen.

O Lord, hear my prayer, Psalm. 39.13.
and with thine ears consider my calling; hold not thy peace at my tears. For I
am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my Fathers were. O spare me a
little, that I may recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen.
Amen.

* O Lord, in the midst of life we are in death: from whence or of whom do we
seek for succor, but of thee, O Lord, who yet art justly displeased with us
for our sins? O holy and mighty, O holy and merciful Savior, deliver me not
into the most bitter pains of eternal death. O cast me not away in the time of
my sickness, forsake me not when my strength fails me. Before thee, O Lord,
is all my desire, and my groanings are not hid from thee. Thou know, O Lord,
[all] the secrets of my heart; I beseech thee shut not the ears of thy mercy
to my prayers. But spare me, O Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and
most merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal; suffer me not at my
last hour for any terror of death to fall from thee. Amen, O Lord Jesus my
Savior.

O Lord, the snares Psalm. 116.2, 3.
of death compass me round about, the pains of hell get hold upon me. I have
found trouble and heaviness, but will call upon thy Name, O Lord; O Lord
deliver my soul. Deliver my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet
from falling: that I may walk before thee in the land of the living. Amen.

Thou, O Lord, have chastened Psalm. 118.18.
and corrected me, but not given me yet over unto death. Open me the gates of
righteousness, that I may go into them, and give thanks unto the Lord. Amen.

There is no health in my flesh by reason of thy wrath, neither is there any
rest in my bones by reason of my sin. Yet, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and
heal me, even for thy Names sake.

Amen.
O Lord, I give thee Deliverance from a great Sickness, which began Aug. 24.
1629.
humble and hearty thanks for the great and almost miraculous bringing of me
back from the bottom of my Grave. What thou have further for me to do or to
suffer, thou alone know: Lord, give me patience and courage, and all
Christian resolution to do thee service, and grace to do it. And let me not
live longer than to honor thee, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
For the Sick.
* O God, by whose appointment the moments of our life run out, I bessech thee
receive my prayers for thy sick servants, in whose behalf I most humbly beg the
assistance of thy mercy, that their health being restored to them, they may
return thanks to thee in thy [holy] Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
At the Visitation of the Sick.
* ARe you persuaded,

1. That no sickness or cross comes to any one by chance, or at all adventures?

2. But that they come from God, without whose providence no body is afflicted
with diseases?

3. And that God being most wise, never will suffer any thing to befall us, but
when it is expedient [to be so?]

4. And that this sickness or cross which God has now sent upon you, is
[therefore] expedient for you?

5. And moreover, that God has the assection of a Father toward us? And that a
Father, whether he be indulgent to his Children, or whether he correct them, is
a Father alike [in both], and that he does the latter with no less kindness,
nay perhaps with greater, than [he does] the former?

6. That for a long time he has bestowed good things upon you; and though now
he gives you evil things, yet he would not have brought the evil upon you but
only to be the occasion of greater good, that is, that you may return to him?

7. That it is an effect of his [gracious] favor, that notwithstanding you have
so often rejected him, yet he does not leave you so, but does visit you at
last, and seek [after] you again?

Now if this be the Case, submit your own Will in this matter to the Divine
Will, a Sacrifice, which is of all others next to that of Christ [himself] the
most acceptable unto God.

* Do you confess,

1. That you have not lived so well as you ought? nay, that you lived ill, and
that you have often and grievously sinned?

2. Is there any [particular] sin besides or above the rest? or are there any
sins that lie heavy upon your Conscience, so that you need the benefit of a
peculiar Absolution?

3. Have you any scruple about those things which appertain to Faith or
Religion?

4. Do you call to mind the past years of your life in the bitterness of your
soul?

5. Would you wish to feel greater bitterness for them than you are now
sensible of? and would you be glad if you felt more? and are you grieved that
you feel no more?

6. Do you desire to have your mind enlightened concerning those things which
you are ignorant of, or which you have forgotten, that you may repent of them?
and does it also repent you that either you do not know them, or have forgotten
them?

7. Do you purpose, if you live, to judge [your self], and [to] take vengeance
upon your self for your offenses?

8. Do you purpose, if you live, to amend your life, and to avoid both the
means and [the] appearances of those sins which you have lived in?

9. Do you solemnly promise thus much?

10. And do you desire to be freely admonisht of this [your] promise?

Do you believe

1. Those matters that are contained in the Articles of [the] Christian Faith
once delivered to the Saints?

2. [And] that you cannot be saved unless you do believe them?

3. Do you rejoice and give [heartie] thanks to God [for] that you were born in
this Faith, [that you] have lived in it, and that now you shall die in it?

4. Do you your self desire, and would you have us in your name humbly to beg
of God that this Faith in him may not decay in you, and [especially] that it
may not [fail] when you are just at the point of death?

5. Do you desire also that the fruit this of [your] Faith, and chiefly of
yourFaith in the death of Jesus Christ, may not be lost at your death, how much
soever it may have been lost in your lifetime?

6. If your sense should fail, or if [your] pain or weakness should bring you
to that pass that any expressions should fall from you [that are] contrary to
Religion or its precepts, would you have them be accounted as not spoken [by
you]? and do you renounce them as none of yours?

Do you forgive

1. Those that any manner of way have offended you, as [freely as] you your
self would be forgiven?

2. And do you desire of God that he also would forgive them?

3. And do you forgive them the satisfaction they are bound to make you upon
account of those things wherein they have offended you, [whether] in word or
deed?

4. Will you have thus much signified in your name to those that have offended
you, that you for your part have forgiven them all their injuries?

5. Would you be ready to forgive them if they had done you more and greater
mischiefs?

6. Would you be glad if you had more [enemies] to forgive, that so God might
bestow on you a more plentiful remission of your own sins?

* 1. IF you your self have offended any [others] do you beg pardon of them
[likewise], [and desire] that they may forgive you?

2. Whom do you chiefly remember [that you have offended]? and would you have
thus much made known to them in your name?

3. Forasmuch as no forgiveness is to be hoped for of sins against the eighth
or ninth Commandment of God's Law, unless restitution be made, are you ready
to restore Goods to those whom you have wronged in their Estates? and repair
the credit of those whom you have injured in their good Name; and that without
fraud or delay?

4. And now at last, can you call to mind who these are?

The Apostles Creed paraphrased.
* OLord, I believe (help thou my unbelief). [I believe] that thou the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost art one God.

I believe,

That of thy unlimited goodness and power thou did create the Heavens and the
Earth. That of thy unbounded love thou have gathered together in one, all
things in Christ: Who was made Flesh, and [was] conceived. Was born, suffered,
was crucified, Dead, buried, descended, Rose again, ascended, sits, Shall
return, shall reward.

I believe,

That by the power and operation of thy holy Spirit, thou have called thy
Church out of all the world unto Holiness. That in it we are made partakers of
all good things, and of forgiveness of sins. That in it we expect the
Resurrection of the Flesh, and life everlasting.
* LOrd, I believe, (O supply thou my want of Faith.)

I believe

The affectionate kindness of the Father. The saving power of the Almighty.
The wisdom of the Creator, in the preservation, government, and consummation of
the world. The great mystery of Godliness, that for us men, and for our
salvation, God was manifested in the flesh, [even] the Lord Jesus, the Son of
the Father, the Anointed of the Spirit. That he was conceived and born to
cleanse us from the filthiness of our Conception and Birth. That he suffered,
what we ought [to have suffered], most unspeakable torments, that we might
escape them. That he was crucified, dead, and buried, that we may not be afraid
to undergo the same things for his sake. That he descended to [that (dismal)
place] whither we must have gone, that he might wholly excuse us from it. That
he rose again, ascended, and sits [in that place] where we had no portion,
that even we also might inherit it. That he shall come to judge the World, that
he may take us up [into his glory.]
I believe [that] he is come,

By his Conception and Birth, the Purifier of our Nature. By his Suffering on
the Cross, Death, and Burial, the Redeemer of our Bodies. By his Descent, a
[triumphant] Conqueror over Hell and Death. By his Resurrection, the first
Fruits of them that sleep. By his Ascension, our Forerunner [gone to prepare a
place for us.] By his Session [at the right hand of God] the Intercessor, or
our Advocate. By his second coming to Judgment, the Finisher of our Faith. Thus
Instead of the I behold Destroyer, Jesus [a Savior.] Tormenter, A Mediator.
Accuser, An Advocate. Slanderer, An Intercessor. Enslaver, A Redeemer. Sting
[of the Serpent] Christ [the Anointed.]
But I believe also the Quickening and Sanctifying Power of the Holy Ghost.

[A Power that works]

[Inwardly and] invisibly, [openly and] outwardly, effectually, as the Wind
[that blows where it lists.] By Reproof, by Compunction [of the heart], by
Doctrine, by Admonition; as an Advocate, as the Comforter, as a Witness; by
Diffusion of Charity, by Illumination of Knowledge.
I believe also

The mystical Body of this Holy Spirit, [consisting of] those that are called
out of the whole world unto belief of the Truth and Holiness of life. The
mutual fellowship of the members of that Body. The remission of sins in this
present time, and the hope of a future Resurrection, and of our translation to
the life eternal.
* O Lord, give me Faith, not such Faith as would make the Law of none effect:
But such Faith as Works by Love. Is powerful in working. Overcomes the World.
[And besides] a most holy Faith, That I may love thee as a Father, and fear
thee [as] the Almighty. That I may commit my soul unto thee in well-doing, as
unto a faithful Creator. That Christ may be formed in me, and that I may be
conformed unto his Image. That I may give [him] thanks for those things which
he has suffered for me, [that I may] suffer [together] with him; [that I may]
suffer for him, whatsoever he shall see good. That for his Cross, Death, [and]
Burial, I may revenge, crucify, kill, bury my sins, which caused [all] these.
That for his descent into Hell, I may descend thither whilst I live [here], by
frequent meditations [upon it]. That I may be [made] conformable to his
Resurrection, by [my] rising again to newness of life. And to his Ascension, by
meditating upon and seeking [after] those things that are above. That I may be
also mindful of his Session [at Gods right hand] whenever I want any gift of
heavenly consolation, and as often as I am cold in my Devotions. And that I may
never forget his second coming at the day of Judgment, [O] that I may always
think I hear the noise of the last Trumpet sounding, and that I may pray
without ceasing till I am placed at the right hand.



Amen.
Preparatory Meditations for Death.
O Lord, quicken and comfort my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Lord, I
call to mind all the years of my life past in the bitterness of my soul for my
sin. My misdeeds have prevailed against me, O be thou merciful unto my sin; O
for thy Names sake, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Amen.

Namely and especially, O Lord, be merciful unto me, etc.

Herein, O Lord, be merciful unto thy servant. O Lord, lay not these, nor the
rest unto my charge.

O let the depth of my sin call up the depth of thy mercies, of thy grace.
Lord, let it come, that where my sin has abounded, grace may superabound.

Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

O Lord, though thou kill me, yet will I put my trust in thee.

Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no
evil. For I hope verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living.

O let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless, if it may not pass from me, but
that I must drink of it, thy will be done.

Thou art the Lord, do what seems good in thine own eyes.

For I will take it as the Cup of Salvation, and give thanks to thy Name, O
Lord.

O Lord, grant that all the days of my appointed time upon earth, I may wait
when my changing shall come.

O that thou would hide me in the grave, and keep me secret until thy wrath
be past, and appoint me a time in which thou will remember me.

Say unto my soul, O say it now, I am thy Salvation.

Command my spirit, whenever thou will command it, to be received up to thee in
peace.

O bid me come unto thee: say unto me, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

Lord, thus, and now let thy servant depart in peace, that mine eyes may see
thy Salvation.

O Lord, thou blessed Trinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy upon me.

I commend my self into thy hands, as to a faithful Creator.

Lord, receive thine own Creature, not made by any strange God, but by thee the
only living and true God.

Despise not, O Lord, the Psalm. 138. 8.
work of thine own hands.

I am created to thine Genesis 2. Ephesians. 4.24.
own Image and likeness; O suffer not thine own Image to be defaced, but renew
it again in righteousness and true holiness.

I commend my self into thy hands, as to a most gracious Redeemer: for thou
have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

O Lord, I am the price of thy Blood, of thy most precious Blood; O suffer not
so great, so unvaluable a price to perish.

O Lord, thou came down from Heaven to redeem that which was lost; suffer not
that to be lost which thou have redeemed.

I commend my self into thy hands, as to my most blessed Comforter.

O Lord, I am weary and heavy laden, and I come to thee, to be refreshed by
thee. Behold, O Lord, I have been the Temple of thy holy Spirit; I have, I
confess, strangely polluted it; yet destroy me not, but dedicate me anew, and
sanctify me to thy self yet once again.

O Lord, I wear thy Dan. 9.19.
Name: it is thy Name that is called upon me. For thy Names sake therefore be
merciful unto me. O spare, Lord, if not me, yet thine own Name in me. And do
not so remember my sin, O Lord, do not, as that in remembering it, thou forget
thine own Name. I have Neh. 1.11.
desired to fear thy Name, to love and to honor thy Name. And I now desire to
depart this life, in the Invocation and Confession of thy Name. Lord, I confess
it, and call upon it: O come Lord Jesu. Amen.

O Lord, I have sinned,

1. But I have not denied thee; O never let the Enemy prevail with me to deny
thee.

2. But I believe; O Lord, increase my Faith, and let me never be confounded.

3. But I hope; and what is my hope, but in thee alone? receive me, O Lord,
according to thy Word, and let me not be disappointed of my hope.

4. But I have prepared and directed my heart to seek thee; and though [I am]
not [purified] according to the purification of the Sanctuary, yet O Lord
Jesu, quench not the smoking flax, nor break the bruised Reed.

5. But I bear thy correction patiently, and I hold my tongue, because thou
Lord have done it.

6. But I forgive those that have trespassed against me, and thou have promised
forgiveness to him that forgives them.

7. But I cast my self upon thee, [O] withdraw not thy self [from me] and in no
wise cast me out when I come unto thee.

8. But I desire to depart confessing unto thee, and calling on thy Name.

Wherefore not for my sake, O Lord, nor for any thing that belongs to me, but
for thine own sake, for thy Names sake, for the glory of thy [great] Name, and
for thy Truths [sake], for thy many great [and] wonderful mercies [sake], for
the sake of Christ the Mediator, and of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, receive
me that am returned to my self, and returning unto thee. Amen.

And therefore O Lord my God,
I show forth, I offer, I commemorate,
Between thee and me,
Christ the Priest, the Lamb, the
Sacrifice.
Between me and Satan,
Christ a King, a Lion, a [triumphant] Conqueror.
Between me and sin,
Christ's Innocence in his Life.
Between the punishment of me and [my] sins,
Christ's Satisfaction, Passion, [and]
Bloud-[shedding]
Between me and [my] want of Righteousness,
Christ's Righteousness and unsinning Obedience.
Between me and my unworthiness to be rewarded,
Christ's Merits.
Between me and my want of sorrow for [my] sins,
Christ's Tears and [bloudie] sweat.
Between me and my want of fervencie in Prayer,
Christ's Intercession.
Between me and my own
Conscience, or the Accusation of Satan,
Christ the Advocate.
Between me and [my] Concupiscence,
Christ's Love.
Let it be acceptable unto thee, O Lord, for the same Christ's sake. Amen.

O Lord, I have sinned,

But
I do not cover my sin. I do not excuse [it]. I willingly confess[it]. I
reflect on it in the bitterness of my soul. I abhor my self for the sins I have
committed against thee: [O] give me grace, that I may judge and take vengeance
on my felf, that I may not depart this most miserable life without forgiveness.
O Lord, I have not only Psalm. 78.40.
sinned, but provoked thee with many and grievous sins; yet, I beseech thee,
remember that I am but flesh, even a wind that passes and comes not again.

* And the mercy of my [blessed] Savior can avail more toward the salvation
of me a sinner, than my iniquity can do to my destruction. Amen.

* O Lord Jesus, in thee S. Aug. T. 3. in S. Johan.
there was [found] no cause of death, and yet did thou suffer death for me: I
have deserved death; give me grace [O Lord] that I may not fear to die, and
that I may be prepared for it. Amen.

* O Lord Jesus, for those bitter pains which thou did endure on the Cross
for me a most miserable Creature, and especially at that hour when thy most
precious soul went forth from thy blessed body, I beseech thee have mercy on my
Soul when she takes her flight, and bring her unto life eternal.

Amen.
Absolution.
OUr Lord Jesus Christ, who has lest power to his Church to Absolve all
sinners which truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee
thine offenses. And by his Authority committed to me, I Absolve thee from all
thy sins, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Amen.
Consecrations, Ordinations.
O Lord, I am now at thy 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Altar, at thy work: keep me that I lay not my hands suddenly upon any man,
lest I be partaker of other men's sins; but that I may keep my self pure, in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord, give me grace, 2 Timothy 1.6.
that as often as they shall come in my way, I may put them in remembrance whom I
have ordained, that they stir up the gift of God that is in them by the putting
on of my hands, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Grant, O Lord, I beseech 5 Sunday after Trin. For the Church.
thee, that the course of this world may be so peaceably ordered by thy
Governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in all godly quietness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord, I beseech thee, 16 Sund. after Trin.
let thy continual mercy cleanse and defend thy Church. And because it cannot
continue in safety without thy succor; preserve it evermore by thy help and
goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord, I beseech thee, 22 Sund. after Trin.
keep thy Household the Church in continual godliness; that through thy
protection it may be free from all adversities, and devoutly given to serve
thee in good works, to the glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For his Episcopal Charge.
* O God the Pastor and S. David's, Bath, London.
Governor of all thy faithful people, look down in mercy upon me thy servant,
whom thou have been pleased to appoint chief Pastor of the Church of
Canterbury; grant, I most humbly beseech thee, that I may profit those whom I
am set over, both by [my] Doctrine and [my] Example; that I together with my
Flock committed to my charge, may come [at last] to eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* O my God, my most St. Aug. lib. 22. cont. Faust. c. 22. de Mose.
merciful Father, let thy grace work so in me, that I may be [truly] humble in
the refusal of every great Office, and yet obedient to undertake it; that I may
be faithful in the possession, and courageous in the administration of it;
[that I may be] watchsul in ruling [them], earnest in correcting them, servent
in loving them, patient in bearing with them, prudent in governing them: That
in behalf of those who are under my care, I may wrestle with God when he has a
Controversy with them, and stand in the gap when he is angry, through the
faith and merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

O Lord, as the rain comes Esai. 55.10.
down from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the Earth, and makes it
bud and bring forth, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to him that
eats: So let thy Word be that goes out of my mouth; let it not return to me
void, but accomplish that which thou will, and prosper in the thing whereto
thou have sent it, that the people committed to my charge may go out with joy,
and be led forth in peace to thy freshest waters of comfort, in Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Son of God, thou which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon
me in this heavy Charge.

Amen.
At the laying of the first Stone of a Chapel.
O Lord merciful and Hammersmith-Chappel, March 11. 1629.
gracious, this thy People are preparing to build a place for thy Service:
Accept, I humbly beseech thee, their present Devotion, and make them perfect
both in their present and future duty; that while thou give them ease to
honor thee, they may with the greater alacrity go on in thy Service. And now,
O Lord, I have by thy mercy and goodness, put to my hand to lay the first
Stone in this Building: it is a Cornerstone; make it, I beseech thee, a happy
Foundation, a durable Building. Let it rise up, and be made, and continue a
House of Prayer and Devotion through all Ages; that thy People may here be
taught to believe in Jesus Christ the true Cornerstone, upon whom they and
their souls may be built safe for ever. Grant this for the merit of the same
Jesus Christ our most blessed Lord and Savior: To whom with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Power, Majesty, and Dominion, this day and for
ever.

Amen.
Upon Admission into the Church.
GOd, who of his mercy has given you grace to give your self to his Church;
preserve and keep you in his Truth, free both from Superstition and
Profaneness. The Lord bless and keep you. The Numb. 6.24.
Lord make his face shine upon you, and be merciful unto you. The Lord lift up
his countenance upon you, and give you peace in Conscience, and constancy in
Truth. And by the power of Ministration committed to me by our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, I re-admit you into the Fellowship of his Church, in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Amen.
For the Duke of Buckingham.
GRacious Father, I humbly beseech thee bless the Duke of Buckingham with all
spiritual and temporal blessings, but especially spiritual. Make and continue
him faithful to his Prince, serviceable to his Country, devout in thy Truth
and Church: a most happy Husband, and a blessed Father; filled with the
constant love and honor of his Prince; that all thy blessings may flow upon
himself and his Posterity after him. Continue him a true-hearted friend to me
thy poor servant whom thou have honored in his eyes: Make my heart religious
and dutiful to thee, and in and under thee, true, and secret, and stout, and
provident in all things which he shall be pleased to commit unto me. Even so,
Lord, and make him continually to serve thee, that thou may bless him,
through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
O most merciful God The Spanish Journey.
and gracious Father, the Prince has put himself to a great Adventure; I
humbly beseech thee, make a clear way before him: Give thine Angels charge over
him, be with him thy self in mercy, power, and protection; in every step of
his Journey; in every moment of his time; in every Consultation and Address for
action; till thou bring him back with safety, honor, and contentment, to do
thee service in this place.

Bless his most trusty and faithful servant the Lord Duke of Buckingham, that
he may be diligent in service, provident in business, wise and happio in
counsels: for the honor of thy Name, the good of thy Church, the preservation
of the Prince, the contentment of the King, the satisfaction of the State.
Preserve him, I humbly beseech thee, from all envy that attends him; and bless
him, that his eyes may see the Prince safely delivered to the King and State,
and after it live long in happiness to do them and thee service, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O most gracious God The Isle of Re, 1627,
and merciful Father, thou art the Lord of Hosts; all victory over our
Enemies, all safety against them is from thee: I humbly beseech thee go out
with our Armies, and bless them. Bless my dear Lord the Duke that is gone
Admiral with them, that wisdom may attend all his Counsels, and courage and
success all his Enterprises: that by his and their means thou will be pleased
to bring safety to this Kingdom, strength and comfort to Religion, victory
and reputation to our Country: And that he may return with our Navy committed
to him, and with safety, honor, and love both of Prince and People. Grant
this for thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O merciful God, thy His death, Aug. 23. 1628.
Judgments are often secret, always just: At this time they were temporally
heavy upon the poor Duke of Buckingham, upon me, upon all that had the honor
to be near him. Lord, thou have (I doubt not) given him rest, and light and
blessedness in thee. Give also, I beseech thee, comfort to his Lady. Bless his
Children, uphold his Friends, forget not his Servants. Lay open the bottom of
all that irreligious and graceless Plot that spilt his blood. Bless and
preserve the King from danger, and from security in these dangerous times. And
for my self, O Lord, though the sorrows of my heart are enlarged, in that thou
gave this most honorable Friend into my bosom, and have taken him again from
me; yet blessed be thy Name, O Lord, that have given me patience. I shall now
see him no more till we meet at the Resurrection: O make that joyful to us and
all thy faithful servants, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Anniversaries.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, with whom do rest the souls of them that
Apr. 11. 1594. the death of my Father, being Wednesday. And Nov. 24. 1600. the
death of my Mother.
die in thy faith and favor; have mercy upon me, and grant that my life may
be a preparation to die, and my death an entrance to life with thee. As upon
this day it pleased thee to take my dear Father to thy mercy, when I was yet
young. O Lord, he was thy servant, thy meek, humble, faithful servant: and I
assure my self he is in rest, and light, and blessedness. Lord, while I am here
behind in my pilgrimage, shower down thy grace upon me. Thou have been more
than a Father to me: thou have not suffered me to want a Father; no, not when
thou had taken him from me. O be pleased to be a Father still, and by thy
grace to keep me within the bounds of a Sons obedience. Thou have given me
temporal blessings beyond desert or hope; O be graciously pleased to heap
spiritual blessings on me, that I may grow in faith, obedience, and
thankfulness to thee; that I may make it my joy to perform duty to thee. And
after my painful life ended, bring me, I beseech thee, to thy joys, to thy
glory, to thy self; that I and my Parents, with all thy Saints and Servants
departed this life, may meet in a blessed glorious resurrection, ever to sing
praises and honor to thee, in and through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* Have regard unto December. 26. 1605. being Thursday, and the Feast of St.
Stephen. Com. of Devon, and E. M. in the year 1609.
thy servant, O my God, and be merciful to me according to the bowels of thy
mercy. Behold, I am become a reproach to thy Name, by serving my own ambition
and the sins of other men. And though the persuasion of others moved me to do
this [thing], yet my own Conscience cried aloud against it. I beseech thee, O
Lord, by the mercies of Jesus, enter not into judgment with thy servant, but
hearken to his blood that pleads for me; and let not this Marriage divorce my
soul from thy embraces. O how much better had it been [for me] (if I had been
but duly mindful of this day) rather to have suffered Martyrdom with thy first
Martyr, for denying the vehement importunity of those my friends who were
either too unfaithful [to me] or else too ungodly. I flattered my self with
hope that this sin should have been hid in darkness, but lo, the night
presently vanished, and the day it self was not more apparent than I that
committed it. Thus it pleased thee, O Lord, for the abundance of thy mercy, to
cover my face with confusion, that I might learn to seek thy Name. O how
grievous to me, still even at this day, is the remembrance of this my sin, even
after [those] so many and so often-repeated prayers which I have poured out
before thee from my sorrowful and troubled spirit! O Lord, have mercy, hear
the prayers of thy most dejected and lowly servant. Spare me, O Lord, and
forgive [me] all those sins which brought in this, and which followed upon it:
For I confess, O Lord, that yet [once] again, and upon the very same day of the
returning year, for want of due caution still, and sufficient humiliation, I
fell into another grievous sin; I was stoned again, not for my sin, but by it.
Now, O Lord, raise me up again entirely, that I may no longer lie dead in my
sins; but grant that I may live, and living may rejoice in thee, through the
merits and mercies of Jesus Christ our Savior.

Amen.
O merciful God, thou have showed me much July 28. 1617. Monday. E. B. And
March 6. 1641/2.
mercy, and done great things for me; and as I was returning, instead of
thankfulness, I wandered out of my way from thee, into a foul and a strange
path. There thou made me see both my folly and my weakness; Lord, make me
ever see them, ever sorry for them. O Lord, for my Saviors sake forgive me
the folly, and strengthen me against the weakness for ever. Lord, forgive all
my sins, and this; and make me by thy grace, thy most true, humble, and
faithful servant all the days of my life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
* O [most] merciful Sept. 26. 1617. being Friday. Fire, and the peril thereof.
Father, whither shall I turn my self? who both [in my] going out and coming in
have sinned against thee. I a Prodigal departed like the Prodigal into a far
Country, and riotously wasted my substance which thou gave me. There first
of all I grew sensible that all I had was consumed, and my self not worthy of
[any] better company than the Swine; and yet neither that filthy life, nor
the famine of thy Grace, did [so much as] make me think of returning to a
better temper. But now at my return from this unhappie Journey, behold, O Lord,
thy Judgments overtake me, a Fire catches hold of the roof under which I was;
for God saw and delayed not long, but a fire was kindled in Jacob, and there
came up heavy displeasure against Israel. My wickedness (no doubt) it was
which threatened this conflagration to the College and to my self: For whilst I
was busily employed about putting out the fire, I was within very little of
being destroyed by it, when lo, thy mercy, O Lord, rescued me from the flames
almost by miracle: For whilst a friendly hand of one that stood by thrust me
away with a kind of violence, the very same instant, at that very place where I
intended to take up my standing, the fire that had been [a while] pent in,
broke out, the stairs sunk down all in flames, and if the fire had found me
there, I had also perished. O my sins, which I never can bewail enough! O thy
mercies, O Lord, which I can never sufficiently extol! O Repentance, that never
was more necessary for me! O thy Grace, O Lord, which I ought to implore with
all Humility and without ceasing! I arise, O Lord my Father, and lo, I come;
my pace indeed is but slow, and ['tis] unsteadie, but yet I come, and [I]
consess I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son. Let me be what thou will, O Lord, so I [may] be but thine.
Wash away my sins in the blood of thy Son, that I may be thine: And grant, I
beseech thee, that as the terror then, so now the remembrance of that fire may
daily burn up [in me] all the dregs and relics of my sins, that I may grow
more circumspect [for the future] that a better fire of Charity and of Devotion
may inflame me with [the] love of thee, and [with] hatred of sin, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

* O [most] Feb. 5. 1628. being Wednesday according to the Julian Account, I
broke a Vein; and again, March 6. being Sunday, walking in my Chamber in the
Tower of London, 1641/2.
merciful Lord, glorified be thy ever - blessed Name: for behold, whilst I was
attending on the King, according to my Place, unmindful of thee, and of the
misfortunes that are incident to mankind, and having too much confidence in my
self, by an unhappie leap in the road, I fell to the ground, mistaken ground,
and broke a Tendon. I was helped up into a Coach, and came to Hampton: The
torment [I had] was such as the Nerves are wont to feel, and [so great, that]
the very anguish [of it] had certainly cast me into a violent burning Fever,
but that a vast quantity of Blood flowed out, [and so] delivered me from that
fear. It brought me very low, and I went lame [for] almost two years: I am
sensible of some weakness [by it] still; but immortal thanks be unto thee, O
[thou] ever-blessed Trinity, thou have given me the use of my legs perfectly
enough, and have established my goings beyond all men's expectation. Direct them
now, O Lord, in the ways of thy Commandments, that [so] I may never halt
between thee and a false Worship, nor between thee and the World; but that I
may walk uprightly, and run the way of thy Testimonies when thou have enlarged
my heart. I pray thee therefore set my heart at liberty without delay, and
confirm my steps in the paths of thy righteousness, by and for the sake of
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O eternal God, and May 11. 1640. My house at Lambeth beset with violent and
base people.
my most merciful Father, as this day the fury of the enraged multitude was
fierce upon me and my house, to destroy me, and to pillage it; it pleased thee
in mercy to preserve both, and bring some of them to shame and punishment. I
have sinned many ways against thee, O Lord, and this was a loud call of thine,
and a merciful, to bring me to repentance; which I beseech thee give me grace
to hear and obey. But what I have done to hurt or offend them, that should stir
up this rage against me, I know not. Lord, in thy mercy look down upon me;
fill my heart with thankfulness for this great deliverance, and suffer me not
to forget it, or the Examination which I took of my self upon it. And as for
them and their like, let them not have their desire, O Lord, let not their
mischievous imaginations prosper against me, nor their fury lay hold upon me,
lest they be too proud, and lest I end my weary days in misery. Yet forgive
them, O Lord, for they know not why they did it. And according to thy wonted
mercy, preserve me to serve thee; and let the same watchful Protection which
now defended me, guard me through the remainder of my life. And this for thine
own goodness sake, and the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
O eternal God and December. 18. 1640. I was accused by the House of Commons of
High Treason.
merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee look down upon me in this time of my
great and grievous affliction. Lord (if it be thy blessed will) make mine
Innocence appear, and free both me and my Profession from all scandal thus
raised on me. And howsoever, if thou be pleased to try me to the uttermost, I
humbly beseech thee, give me full patience, proportionable comfort, contentment
with whatsoever thou sendest, and an heart ready to die for thy Honor, the
Kings Happiness, and this Churches Preservation. And my zeal to these is all
the sin (humane frailty excepted) which is yet known to me in this particular,
for which I thus suffer. Lord, look upon me in mercy, and for the merits of
Jesus Christ, pardon all my sins many and great, which have drawn down this
Judgment upon me, and then in all things do with me as seems best in thine own
eyes: and make me not only patient under, but thankful for whatsoever thou
do, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer.

Amen.
O eternal God October. 24. 1643. I received additional Articles, and Summons to
my Trial.
and merciful Father, after long imprisonment I am now at last called to
answer; I most humbly beseech thee to strengthen me through this Trial, to
preserve the patience with which thou have hitherto to blessed me through this
affliction. Suffer no coarse language, or other provocation, to make me speak
or do any thing that may mis-become my person, mine age, my calling, or my
present condition. And, Lord, I beseech thee, make me able to clear to the
world that Innocence which is in my heart concerning this Charge laid against
me. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
O merciful Lord, I have had a long and a Nov. 1. 1644. I received Summons to
appear in the House of Commons next morning.
tedious Trial: and I give thee humble and hearty thanks for the wonderful
strength that I have received from thee in the bearing up of my weakness. Lord,
continue all thy mercies toward me, for the storm gathers and grows black upon
me, and what it threatens is best known to thee. After a long Trial I am called
to answer in the House of Commons; and that not to Evidence, but to one single
man's report of Evidence, and that made without Oath. What this may produce in
present or in future, thou know also. O Lord, furnish me with patience and
true Christian wisdom and courage, to bear up against this drift; and send not
out thy storms to beat upon me also, but look comfortably upon me to my end, in
and through the merits of Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
Prayers upon sundry Public Occasions.
MOST gracious For the High Court of Parl. 1625. In a Fast for that great
Plague.
God, we humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in general, so especially for
the High Court of Parliament, under our most Religious and Gracious King at
this time assembled; that thou would be pleased to bless and direct all
their Consultations, to the preservation of thy Glory, the good of thy Church,
the safety, honor, and welfare of our Sovereign and his Kingdoms. Lord, look
upon the humility and devotion with which they are come into thy Courts. And
they are come into thy House in assured confidence upon the merits and mercies
of Christ (our blessed Savior) that thou will not deny them the grace and
favor which they beg of thee. Therefore, O Lord, bless them with that wisdom
which thou know necessary to speed, and bring great designs into action;
and to make the maturitie of his Majesty's and their Counsels, the happiness
and the blessing of this Commonwealth. These, and all other necessaries, for
them, for us, and thy whole Church, we humbly beg in the Name and Mediation of
Jesus Christ our most blessed Lord and Savior.

Amen.
O eternal God and our For the Navy, 1625.
most gracious Father, thou art the Lord of Hosts, and the strength of all
Nations is from thee: If thou keep not the City, the Watchman waketh but in
vain. And no Victory can wait upon the justest designs, upon the wisest
Counsels, upon the strongest Armies, if thou teach not their hands to war, and
their fingers to fight. Thou art the steadie hope of all the ends of the Earth,
and of them which go and remain in the broad Sea. Lord, at this time we need
thy more special Assistance both by Land and Sea; and sor the mercy of Christ,
deny us neither. Be with our Armies, and the Armies of our Allies and
Associates by Land; be with our Navy at Sea. Be not from the one, nor from the
other, in power and in great mercy, until thou have brought them back with
honor and a settled Peace. Lord, turn our Enemies sword into their own bosom:
for we sought Peace and ensued it; and while we did so, they did more than make
themselves ready to battle. We are thy servants, truly and heartily sorry for
our sins. Lord, forgive them, and then we will trust upon thee, that thou will
pour down all thy Blessings upon this and all other designs and actions of
this State, undertaken for thy glory, the honor of our most gracious King
CHARLES, and the peace and welfare of this Church and Commonwealth. Grant this
we humbly beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Mediator and
Advocate.

Amen.
Most gracious God, In time of Pestilence and unseasonable Weather, 1625.
we humbly beseech thee pardon and forgive all our many, great, and grievous
transgressions. We may not hope thou will take off thy punishments, until thou
have forgiven our sins. We may not think thou will forgive our sins, until our
humiliation and repentance come to ask forgiveness. We have been too slow to
come, and now thou have apparelled thy Mercy in Justice, to force us to thee.
Lord, we believe, but do thou increase our Faith, our Devotion, our Repentance,
and all Christian Virtues in us. At this time the Vials of thy heavy
displeasure drop down upon us; and while we smart under one Judgment, thou
threatnest the rest. The Pestilence spreads in our Streets, and so as if it
sought whom to devour. No strength is able to stand against it, and it
threatens to make Families, nay, Cities desolate. While the Pestilence eats up
thy People, we hear the sound of War, and the Sword calls for such as it
would devour. In the mean time the Heavens are black over us, and the Clouds
drop leanness; and it will be Famine to swallow what the Pestilence and the
Sword shall leave alive, unless thou send more seasonable Weather to give the
Fruits of the Earth in their season. Our sins have deserved all this and more,
and we neither do nor can deny it. We have now hither to go, but to Mercy. We
have no way to that, but by the All-sufficient merit of thy Son our blessed
Savior. Lord, for his merit and mercies sake, look down upon us thy distressed
servants; command thine Angel to stay his hand, and remember that in death we
cannot praise thee, nor give thanks in the Pit. Go forth with our Armies when
they go, and make us remember that all our strength and deliverance is in thee.
Clear up the Heavens over us, and take not from us the great plenty with which
thou have crowned the Earth: but remember us, O thou that feedest the Ravens
when they call upon thee. Lord, we need all thy mercies to come upon us, and
thy mercies are altogether in Christ, in whom, and for whose sake we beg them
of thee, who live and reignest in the unity of the Spirit, one God, world
without end.

Amen.
O eternal God and In danger of Enemies, 1626.
most merciful Father, we humbly beseech thee be merciful unto us, and be near
to help us in all those extremities which our sins threaten to bring upon us.
Our Enemies are strengthened against us, by our multiplied Rebellions against
thee. And we deserve to suffer whatever our Enemies threaten. But there is
mercy with thee that thou may be feared. O Lord, show us this mercy, and
give us grace so to fear thee, as that we may never be brought to fear or feel
them. And whenever thou will correct us for our sins, let us fall into thy
hands, and not into the hands of men. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, our
only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

O eternal God and most gracious Father, we have deserved whatsoever thy Law
has threatened against sinners. Our contempt of thy Divine Worship is great,
and we hear thy Word, but obey it not. Forgive us, O Lord, forgive us these and
all other our grievous sins. Give us light in our Understanding, readiness and
obedience in our Will, discretion in our Words and Actions; true, serious, and
loyal endeavors for the peace and speritie of Jerusalem, the unity and glory
of this Church and State: that so we may love it and prosper in it, and be full
of grace in this life, and filled with glory in the life to come, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O most merciful God, Thanks giving for ceasing the Plague, 1626.
we give thee praise and thanks for the wonderful ceasing of the late raging
Pestilence in the chief City of this Kingdom, and other places. Lord, show us
yet farther mercy, and look upon all parts of this Land with tender
compassion. Keep back the destroying Angel, that he enter not into places that
are yet free, nor make farther waste in those which are already visited.
Comfort them that are sick, preserve them that are sound, receive them that die
to mercy; that living and dying they and we may continue thy faithful
servants, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
O most gracious God In danger of Enemies, 1626.
and loving Father, we have felt thy manifold mercies, no Nation more; and we
have committed sins against thee, few Nations greater. Enter not into judgment
with us, O Lord, but for Christ and his mercy sake, pacify thine anger, and
save us from the malice and cruelty of our Enemies. They are our crying sins
that have called them upon us. Let it be an addition to thy wonted mercy, to
restrain their fury. To this end, Lord, put thy bridle into their mouths, and
thy bit between their teeth. Frustrate their designs, and let them find no way
in our Seas, nor any path in our Floods: but scatter them with thy tempest, and
follow them with all thy storms; that we being delivered by thy hand, may bless
and honor thy Name, devoutly serving thee all our days, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, thou gracious 1626. 1628.
Governor of all the Kingdoms of the Earth: Look down, we beseech thee, in
mercy upon this Realm, and upon all other Reformed Churches. Save and deliver
us and them from the hands of all such as threaten our destruction. Protect the
person of our gracious Sovereign, direct his Counsels, go forth with his
Armies, be unto him and to us a wall of brass, and a strong tower of defense
against his and our Enemies; that so we being safe through thy mercy, may live
to serve thee in thy Church, and ever give thee praise and glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O eternal God, For the safe childbearing of the Queens Majesty, 1628.
and merciful Father, all peace and strength of Kingdoms is from thee: and
lineal Succession is thy great blessing both upon Princes and States; the great
means to preserve unity, and confirm strength. We therefore give thee humble
and hearty thanks, as for all thy blessings, so especially at this time for
thy great mercy and loving kindness to our dread Sovereign, his Royal Queen,
and this whole State, in giving her Majesty hope of her longdesired Issue,
thereby filling their and our hearts with gladness. Lord, go along with thine
own blessings to perfect them. Be with her in soul and in body, preserve her
from all dangers. Keep her safe to and in the hour of Travel, that there may be
strength to bring forth her Joy and our Hope. And make her a joyful Mother of
many Children, to the glory of thy great Name, the happiness of his Majesty,
the security of this State, and the flourishing of the Church and true
Religion amongst us. Grant this, even for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord
and Savior.

Amen.
O eternal God For the safe childbearing of the Queens Majesty, 1629.
and merciful Father, since lineal Succession is, under thee, the great
security of Kingdoms, and the very life of Peace; we therefore give thee most
humble and hearty thanks for the great blessing which thou have again begun to
work for our gracious King CHARLES and this whole State, in giving the Queens
Majesty further hopes of a desired and happy Issue. And as we give thee
humble and hearty thanks for this, so we pray thee to perfect this great
blessing thus begun, to preserve her from all dangers, and to be with her by
special assistance in the hour of Travel. Lord, make her a happy Mother of
successful Children, to the increase of thy glory, the comfort of his
Majesty, the joy of her own heart, the safety of the State, and the
preservation of the Church and true Religion among us. Grant this even for
Jesus Christ his sake, our only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
O most merciful A Thanksgiving for the Queens safe delivery, and happy birth
of Prince Charles, 1630. May 29.
God and gracious Father, thou have given us the joy of our hearts, the
contentment of our souls for this life, in blessing our dear and dread
Sovereign, and his virtuous Royal Queen with a hopeful Son, and us with a
Prince, in thy just time and his to rule over us. We give thy glorious Name
most humble and hearty thanks for this. Lord, make us so thankful, so obedient
to thee for this great mercy, that thy goodness may delight to increase it to
us. Increase it, good Lord, to more Children, the prop one of another against
single hope. Increase it to more Sons, the great strength of his Majesty and
his Throne. Increase it in the Joy of his Royal Parents, and all true-nearted
Subjects. Increase it by his Christian and happy Education both in Faith and
Goodness; that this Kingdom and People may be happy in the long life and
prosperity of our most gracious Sovereign and his Royal Consort. And when
fullness of days must gather time, Lord, double his Graces, and make them
apparent in this his Heir and his Heirs after him, for all Generations to come,
even for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
O most gracious A Thanksgiving for the Queens safe delivery, and happy birth
of the Lady Mary, Nov. 4. 1631.
God and loving Father, we give thee, as we are bound, most humble and hearty
thanks for thy great mercy extended to us and this whole State, in blessing
the Queens Majesty with a happy deliverance in and from the great pains and
perils of Childbirth. We humbly beseech thee to continue and increase this
Blessing; to give her strength, that she may happily overcome this, and all
dangers else: that his most gracious Majesty may long have joy in her happy
life: that she may have joy in his Majesty's prosperity; that both of them may
have comfort in the Royal Prince Charles, the newborn Princess the Lady Mary,
and with them, in a hopeful, healthful, and successful Posterity: that the
whole Kingdom may have fullness of joy in them; and that both they and we may
all have joy in the true honor and service of God: that both Church and
Kingdom may be blessed, and their Royal Persons filled with honor in this
life, and with eternal happiness in the life to come, even for Jesus Christ his
sake, our only Lord and Savior.

Amen.
O eternal God and A Thanksgiving for his Majesty's Recovery from the Small
Pocks, 1632.
merciful Father, we give thee all humble and hearty thanks for our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, both for the gentleness of thy hand in a
disease otherwise so troublesome and fearful, and for the mercifulness of thy
hand in taking it off so soon, and so happily. We know and acknowledge before
thee our sins, and what grievous punishments they have deserved. But, Lord we
beseech thee still to remember us in mercy, and long to bless our gracious
King with life, and health, and strength, and happiness; and above all, with
the fear of thy holy Name: that so he may continue under thee, and over us, a
Father of the State, a Patron of the Church, a Comfort to his Royal Queen, till
he see his Childrens Children, and peace upon Israel. Grant this, good Lord,
even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Most gracious God A Thanksgiving for the Queens safe delivery, and happy birth
of James D. of York.
and loving Father, we give thee all humble and hearty thanks for thy great
mercy in blessing the Queens Majesty with a happy deliverance in and from
the great pains and peril of Childbirth. We humbly beseech thee to continue
thy mercies toward her, that she may happily overcome this and all other
dangers; that his most gracious Majesty may long have joy in her most happy
life, and both of them comfort in the Royal Prince Charles, and the rest of
their Princely Issue; particularly in the newborn Prince the Duke of York;
that they all may prove a healthful, hopeful, and a successful Posterity; that
both Church and Kingdom may have fullness of joy in them: That their Majesty's
Royal Persons may be filled with honor in this life, and with eternal
happiness in the life to come. And this even for Jesus Christ his sake, our
only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
O eternal God and merciful Father, A Prayer for the Kings Majesty in his
Northern Expedition, 1639.
by whom alone Kings reign, thou Lord of Hosts, and giver of all Victory; we
humbly beseech thee to guard our most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles; to
bless him in his Person with health and safety, in his Counsels with wisdom
and prudence, and in all his Actions with honor and good success. Grant,
blessed Lord, that Victory may attend his designs, and that his Liege-people
may rejoice in thee; but that shame may cover the face of thine and his
treacherous Enemies. Give him, blessed Father, so to settle his Subjects in
Peace, and the true fear of thy Divine Majesty, that he may return with joy
and honor, and proceed long to govern his Kingdoms in peace and plenty, and
in the happiness of true Religion and Piety all his days. These blessings, and
whatsoever else shall be necessary for him, or for our selves, we humbly beg of
thee, O merciful Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Mediator and
Redeemer.

Amen.
O eternal God and For the King in his Northern Expedition, 1640.
merciful Father, by whom alone Kings reign, thou Lord of Hosts and giver of
all Victory; we humbly beseech thee both now and ever to guide and preserve
our most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles: To bless him in his Person with
health and safety, in his Counsels with wisdom and prudence, and in all his
Actions with honor and good success; especially against those his traitorous
Subjects, who having cast off all Obedience to their Anointed Sovereign, do at
this time in rebellious manner invade this Realm. Grant, blessed Lord, that
Victory may attend his Majesty's designs, that his Liege-people may rejoice in
thee; but that shame may cover the faces of thine and his treacherous Enemies.
Enable him (blessed Father) so to vanquish and subdue them all, that his Loyal
Subjects being settled in Peace and the true fear of thy holy Name, he may
return with joy and honor, and continue to govern his Kingdoms in peace and
plenty, and in the happiness of true Religion and Piety all his days. These
Blessings, and whatsoever else shall be necessary for him, or for our selves,
we humbly beg of thee, O merciful Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only
Mediator and Redeemer.

Amen.
His Grace's Speech, according to the Original, written with his own hand, and
delivered by him upon the Scaffold on Tower Hill, Jan. 10. 1644. to his
Chaplain Dr. Stern, after Lord Archbishop of York.
Good People, THis is an uncomfortable time to preach; yet I shall begin with a
Text of Scripture, Heb. 12. 2. Let us run with patience that race which is set
before us: Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the
joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked unto Jesus the Author and
Finisher of my Faith, he best knows. I am now come to the end of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a death of shame. But the shame must be despised, or no
coming to the right hand of God. Jesus despised the shame for me, and God
forbid that I should not despise the shame for Him.

I am going apace (as you see) toward the Red Sea, and my feet are upon the
very brink of it: An argument (I hope) that God is bringing me into the Land of
Promise; for that was the way through which he led his People.

But before they came to it, he instituted a Passover for them. A Lamb it was,
but it must be eaten with sour herbs, Exodus 12. 8. I shall obey, and labor to
digest the sour herbs, as well as the Lamb: And I shall remember it is the
Lords Passover. I shall not think of the herbs, nor be angry with the hands
that gathered them; but look up only to him who instituted that, and governs
these. For men can have no more power over me than what is given them from
above, S. John 19.11.

I am not in love with this passage through the Red Sea, for I have the
weakness and infirmity of flesh and blood plentifully in me. And I have prayed
with my Savior, Vt transiret calix iste, that this Cup of red Wine might pass
from me, S. Luke 22.42. But if not, Gods will, not mine, be done. And I shall
most willingly drink of this Cup as deep as he pleases, and enter into this
Sea, yea, and pass through it in the way that he shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (good People) that when Gods servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them,
and did in a manner drive them into that Sea, were drowned in the same waters,
while they were in pursuit of them.

I know my God, whom I serve, is as able to deliver me from this Sea of blood,
as he was to deliver the three Children from the Furnace, Dan. 3. And (I most
humbly thank my Savior for it) my resolution is as theirs was: They would not
worship the Image which the King had set up, nor will I the Imaginations which
the People are setting up. Nor will I forsake the Temple and the Truth of God,
to follow the bleating of Jeroboam's Calves in Dan and in Bethel.

And as for this People, they are at this day miserably misled: God of his
mercy open their eyes, that they may see the right way. For at this day the
blind lead the blind; and if they go on, both will certainly into the ditch, S.
Luke 6. 39.

For my self, I am (and I acknowledge it in all humility) a most grievous
sinner many ways, by thought, word, and deed: And yet I cannot doubt but that
God has mercy in store for me a poor penitent, as well as for other sinners. I
have now upon this sad occasion ransacked every corner of my heart; and yet I
thank God I have not found among the many, any one sin which deserves death by
any known Law of this Kingdom.

And yet hereby I charge nothing upon my Judges: for if they proceed upon proof
by valuable Witnesses, I or any other Innocent may be justly condemned. And I
thank God, though the weight of the Sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet
within as ever I was in my life.

And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever
died by an Ordinance in Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have gone this
way, though not by this means. For Elphegus was hurried away and lost his head
by the Danes; Simon Sudbury in the fury of Wat Tyler and his fellows. Before
these, S. John Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd woman: And St. Cyprian
Archbishop of Carthage submitted his head to a persecuting sword. Many examples
great and good; and they teach me patience. For I hope my Cause in Heaven will
look of another dye, than the color that is put upon it here.

And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great men
in their several Generations, but also that my Charge, as soul as it is made,
looks like that of the Jews against S. Paul, Acts 25. 8. for he was accused for
the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion. And like that of St. Stephen, Acts 6.
14. for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law and Religion, the
Holy Place and the Law, ver. 13.

But you will say, Do I then compare my self with the integrity of St. Paul and
St. Stephen? No, far be that from me. I only raise a comfort to my self, that
these great Saints and Servants of God were laid at in their times as I am now.
And it is memorable that St. Paul, who helped on this Accusation against St.
Stephen, did after fall under the very same himself.

Yea, but here is a great clamor that I would have brought in Popery. I shall
answer that more fully by and by. In the mean time you know what the Pharisees
laid against Christ himself, St. John 11. 48. If we let him alone, all men will
believe on him: Et venient Romani, and the Romans will come, and take away both
our Place and the Nation. Here was a causeless cry against Christ, that the
Romans would come. And see how just the Judgment of God was. They crucified
Christ for fear lest the Romans should come; and his death was it which brought
in the Romans upon them; God punishing them with that which they most feared.
And I pray God this clamor of Venient Romani, of which I have given no cause,
help not to bring them in. For the Pope never had such a Harvest in England
since the Reformation, as he has now upon the Sects and Divisions that are
amongst us. In the mean time, by honor and dishonor, by good report and evil
report, as a deceiver and yet true, am I passing through this world, 2 Cor. 6.
8.

Some particulars also I think it not amiss to speak of.

1. And first, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our gracious
Sovereign: He has been much traduced also for bringing in of Popery. But on my
Conscience (of which I shall give God a present account) I know him to be as
free from this Charge as any man living: And I hold him to be as sound a
Protestant according to the Religion by Law established, as any man in his
Kingdom; and that he will venture his life as far and as freely for it. And I
think I do or should know both his affection to Religion, and his grounds for
it, as fully as any man in England.

2. The second particular is concerning this great and populous City (which God
bless.) Here has been of late a fashion taken up to gather hands, and then go
to the great Court of the Kingdom, the Parliament, and clamor for Justice; as
if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come which are unknown to
the Many, could not or would not do Justice but at their appointment: a way
which may endanger many an innocent man, and pluck his blood upon their own
heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also.

And this has been lately practiced against my self: the Magistrates standing
still and suffering them openly to proceed from Parish to Parish without check.
God forgive the setters of this, with all my heart I beg it; but many
well-meaning people are caught by it.

In St. Stephen's case, when nothing else would serve, they stirred up the
people against him, Acts 6. 12. And Herod went the same way; when he had killed
St. James, yet he would not venture upon St. Peter, till he found how the other
pleased the people, Acts 12. 3.

But take heed of having your hands full of blood, Esai. 1. 15. for there is a
time best known to himself, when God above other sins makes Inquisition for
blood. And when that Inquisition is on foot, the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 9.
12. that God remembers; but that is not all, he remembers, and forgets not the
complaint of the poor, i. e. whose blood is shed by Oppression, ver. 9.

Take heed of this: It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, Heb. 12. but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for blood.

And with my Prayers to avert it, I do heartily desire this City to remember
the Prophecy that is expressed Jer. 26. 15.

3. The third particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished, and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven upon
them: but alas now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether or how
it shall get out. And which is worse than a storm from without, it is become
like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body; and at every
cleft profaneness and irreligion is entering in; While (as Lib. 2. de vitae
contempt. cap. 4.
Prosper speaks) men that introduce profaneness are cloaked over with the name
Religionis Imaginariae, of Imaginary Religion: for we have lost the Substance,
and dwell too much in Opinion. And that Church, which all the Jesuits
Machinations could not ruin, is fallen into danger by her own.

4. The last particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self. I was
born and baptized in the bosom of the Church of E gland established by Law. In
that Pr fession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to die.

What clamours and slanders I have endured for laboring to keep an Uniformity
in the external Service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of
this Church, all men know, and I have abundantly felt. Now at last I am accused
of High Treason in Parliament, a Crime which my soul ever abhorred. This
Treason was charged to consist of two parts: An endeavor to subvert the Laws
of the Land; and a like endeavor to overthrow the true Protestant Religion
established by Law.

Besides my Answers to the several Charges, I protested mine innocence in both
Houses. It was said Prisoners Protestations at the Bar must not be taken. I
must therefore come now to it upon my death, being instantly to give God an
account for the truth of it.

I do therefore here in the presence of God and his holy Angels, take it upon
my death, that I never endeavored the Subversion either of Law or Religion.
And I desire you all to remember this Protest of mine for my innocence in this,
and from all Treasons whatsoever.

I have been accused likewise as an Enemy to Parliaments: No, I understand
them, and the benefit that comes by them, too well to be so: But I did dislike
the misgovernments of some Parliaments many ways, and I had good reason for it;
for Corruption optimi est pessima. And that being the highest Court, over which
no other has jurisdiction, when it is misinformed or misgoverned, the Subject
is left without all remedy.

But I have done. I forgive all the world, all and every of those bitter
Enemies which have persecuted me; and humbly desire to be forgiven of God
first, and then of every man.

And so I heartily desire you to join in prayer with me.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fullness of all thy mercies. Look upon me, but not till thou have nailed my
sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the blood of
Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ; that so the
punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased to try
me to the uttermost, I most humbly beseech thee, give me now in this great
instant, full patience, proportionable comfort, and a heart ready to die for
thine honor, the Kings happiness, and this Churches preservation. And my zeal
to these (far from arrogance be it spoken) is all the sin (humane frailty
excepted, and all incidents thereto) which is yet known to me in this
particular, for which I come now to suffer: I say in this particular of
Treason. But otherwise my sins are many and great; Lord, pardon them all, and
those especially (whatever they are) which have drawn down this present
Judgment upon me. And when thou have given me strength to bear it, do with me
as seems best in thine own eyes. Amen.

And that there may be a stop of this issue of blood in this more than
miserable Kingdom, O Lord, I beseech thee give grace of repentance to all
Bloodthirsty people. But if they will not repent, O Lord confound all their
devices, defeat and frustrate all their designs and endeavors upon them,
which are or shall be contrary to the glory of thy great Name, the truth and
sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King and his Posterity after
him in their just Rights and Privileges, the honor and conservation of
Parliaments in their just power, the preservation of this poor Church in her
Truth, Peace, and Patrimony, and the settlement of this distracted and
distressed People under their ancient Laws, and in their native Liberties. And
when thou have done all this in mere mercy for them, O Lord, sill their hearts
with thankfulness, and with religious dutiful obedience to thee and thy
Commandments all their days. So, Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen. And receive my soul
into thy bosom. Amen.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The Lord Archbishop's Prayer as he kneeled by the Block.

LOrd, I am coming as fast as I can. I know I must pass through the shadow of
death, before I can come to see thee. But it is but Vmbra mortis, a mere shadow
of death, a little darkness upon Nature: but thou by thy Merits and Passion
have broke through the jaws of death. So, Lord receive my soul, and have mercy
upon me: and bless this Kingdom with peace and plenty, and with brotherly love
and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood amongst
them, for Jesus Christ his sake, if it be thy will.

Then he laid his head upon the Block, and after he had prayed to himself, said
aloud, Lord receive my soul; which was the signal given to the Executioner.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
* THe Division of the hours of Prayer page 1 The Office for every day 3 A
Prayer for preventing Grace ibid. A Confession and Prayer by L.A.W. 4 A Prayer
for forgiveness of sins 5 for Gifts and Graces 6 A thanksgiving 7 A Prayer for
the Catholic Church 8 A Prayer for this particular Church 9 A Prayer for the
King ibid. for Friends and Relations 10 for Servants ibid. for those in
affliction 11 for all men, even our Enemies ibid. * for resignation of himself
in the hour of death 12 * A daily Examination of Conscience 14 A daily Prayer
15 A Prayer for the King 16 for the Church 17 for the Church of England when
robbed of her Revenues 20 for the Commonweal 21 for the Kingdom of England 22 *
for House and Family 23 for government of the Tongue ibid. against Temptations
25 * for a good Journey 26 for Rain 28 for fair Weather ibid. in time of
Fasting 29 in Lent 30 for the Fast of the four Ember-weeks ibid. An earnest
Prayer 31 in time of Afflictions, Perils, and Adversities 32 in Misery and
Adversity 38 in Trouble and Heaviness 40 against Reproach ibid. against Fraud
and Deceit 42 in time of Fear 44 in Poverty 45 in Imprisonment 46 against
Banishment 47 against the violent 48 for strength in Martyrdom 49 in time of
Dearth and Scarcity 50 in time of War 51 against our Enemies 56 for our Enemies
59 Penitentials 60 Confessions 68 A Prayer for Sunday, the first hour 71 second
Sunday after Epiphany 72 first Sunday in Advent ibid. second Sunday in Advent
ibid. the third hour 73 first Sunday after Epiphany 74 third Sunday after
Epiphany 75 fourth Sunday after Epiphany ibid. the sixth hour 76 against
Presumption ibid. * for salvation of desperate Sinners 77 A Collect for
Easter Day, for Grace ibid. first Sunday after Easter 78 second Sunday after
Easter ibid. the ninth hour 79 for himself 80 for Graces ibid Collect for
Whitsunday 81 Collect for Trinity-sunday ibid. A Prayer at Evening 82 for
Patience ibid. Sexages. Sunday 83 Quinquages. Sunday, for Charity ibid. The
Compline, a Prayer before bedtime ibid. for Sleep 84 for Relief ibid. fourth
Sunday in Lent ibid. A Prayer at bedtime, and in the night if thou wake ibid.
fifth Sunday after Easter 85 for good thoughts ibid. Meditations at entrance
into the Church 86 * preparatory Devotions to the Holy Sacrament 87 * Collect
for purifying the heart 90 * A brief Litany in order to the blessed Sacrament
ibid. * for the Church 91 * against the Enemies of the Church ibid. * for
Benefactors 92 * An humble Confession, a Prayer before the Sacrament ibid.
Collect for Goodfriday 94 * Ejaculations whilst standing at the Altar, or in
the morning before receiving the Sacrament ibid. Immediately before the sight
of the Bread 96 * Immediately after receiving both kinds ibid. A Prayer for
Munday-morning 98 a Thanksgiving ibid. against evil Counsel ibid. for direction
in walking ibid. the third hour, for mercy 99 for Counsel, thirst for God, for
Truth, for Obedience, 1 Sund. after Trin. for Grace 100 the sixth hour, for
mercy, for pardon 101 3 Sund. after Trin. for protection 102 the ninth hour,
for mercy, for Remembrance ibid. 4 Sund. after Trin. 103 in the Evening, a
Prayer to be heard 104 * Collect for Evening against all danger ibid. 6 Sund.
after Trin. for Obedience 105 the Compline, or before bedtime, for Defense
ibid. To be heard, Thanksgiving 7 Sund. after Trin. for true Religion 106 at
bedtime, and at night if thou wakest ibid. at death, for submission 107 For
Tuesday-morning, for Preservation 108 for Illumination ibid. 9 Sund. after
Trin. for good thoughts the third hour, for Assistance 109 for Preservation, 1
Sund. in Lent 110 the sixth hour, to be heard, for deliverance, 10 Sund. after
Trin. 111 the ninth hour, glory to God, in bad times 112 3 Sund. after Easter,
for Illumination ibid. for Obedience 113 * in the Evening ibid. for Help, 11
Sund. after Trin 114 the Compline, for Help, for mercy ibid. 14 Sund. after
Trin. for increase of Grace 115 at bedtime, and in the night if thou wakest
ibid. * for Patience 116 4 Sund. after Trin. for Obedience ibid. For
Wednesday-morning, for Penitence 117 to be heard 118 the third hour, for Hope
ibid. for Patience, for my Flock 119 the sixth hour, for Defense, for
Deliverance, 15 Sund. after Trin. 120 the ninth hour, for Penitence, for the
fear of God 121 17 Sund. after Trin. for Grace 122 at Evening, for Penitence, *
for Gifts ibid. 18 Sund. after Trin. for Obedience 123 The Compline, for
Penitence, * for Mercy ibid. at bedtime, and at night if thou wakest 124 for
moderate Sleep ibid. For Thursday-morning, for Help, for Consolation 126 for
Ascension-day, Sund. after Ascension 127 the third hour, to be heard, against
Enemies, for Defense 128 the sixth hour, against Flatterers, in time of
Correction 129 20 Sund. after Trin. for Defense, for Obedience 130 the ninth
hour, for Patience ibid. against Revilings, for Peace, for Defense 131 at
Evening, against Enemies, Evening-prayer for Peace 132 the Compline, for Hope,
* thirst for God 133 for Preservation 134 at bedtime, and at night if thou
wakest 135 in time of great Trouble, * for Sleep ibid. a Collect for Defense
ibid. For Friday-morning, * a Prayer out of St. Aug. 137 2 Sund. after Trin.
for fear and love of God, Passion of our Lord, 1 Collect for the day, for the
Church 138 2 Collect for the day, for all men 139 The third hour, * a Prayer
out of St. Aug. ibid. for Deliverance, to be heard, out of the Liturgy 140 the
sixth hour, for Pardon ibid. * for Trinity Sund. out of S. Aihanasius 141 The
ninth hour, a Prayer for the Church, out of St. Chrysostom. 142 At the Evening, a
Prayer against Affliction 143 A Prayer out of St. Hillary ibid. The Compline, a
Prayer for Mercy, * at night 144 Bedtime, and at night if thou wakest, a
Prayer 145 * Another Prayer ibid. * Another out of Gregory Nazian. ibid. *
Another out of St. Augustine ibid. Saturday-morning, Praise 147 A Prayer for
Gods Blessing; another for Illumination ibid. Collect for Grace, out of the
Liturgy ibid. The third hour, a Prayer Ezekiah's Prayer 148 A Prayer against
Enemies 149 A Prayer out of the Liturgy ibid. The sixth hour, a Prayer for
direction in walking 150 A Prayer for the fear of God ibid. The ninth hour, a
Prayer to be heard in trouble 151 A Prayer for direction of our ways ibid.
Evening, the praise of God ibid. * A Prayer for Protection 152 The Compline, a
Confession, a Thanksgiving ibid. Bedtime, and at night if thou wakest A Prayer
against Procrastination 154 * Adoration and Glorification of God, out of S.
Aug. 155 * A Prayer out of S. Augustine 157. * Another out of the same ibid. *
Another out of the same 158 Another out of the same ibid. Praise and
Thanksgiving, for deliverance from Enemies 159 After Victory in War 160 * A
Thanksgiving out of St. Augustine ibid. Several out of David's Psalms 161 A
Prayer in time of Prosperity 165 Another out of Salvian 166 Prayers in time of
Pestilence 167 if the Family be infected 169 A Thanksgiving for deliverance
from the Plague, out of the Liturgy 170 Prayers in old Age 171 for the sick and
afflicted, in time of sickness 172 A Thanksgiving for deliverance from great
sickness 175 A Prayer for the sick 176 * At the Visitation of the sick,
Questions to be proposed 177 * Confessions to be made * Things to be believed
and done 180 * Forgiveness of Enemies 182 * Desire of forgiveness from others *
The Apostles Creed paraphrased 184 * Preparatory Meditations for Death 191 * A
preparatory Confession 195 Absolution 199 Consecrations, Ordinations 200 For
the Church 201 * For his Episcopal Charge 202 A Prayer out of St. Augustine
ibid. At laying the first Stone of a Chapel at Hammersmith 204 Upon Admission
into the Church 205 For the Duke of Buckingham 206 Upon the Spanish Journey 207
On the Expedition to the Isle of Ree On the Duke of Buckingham's Death 209
Anniversaries on the death of his Father and Mother 210 * A Prayer on the Feast
of St. Stephen 213 A Prayer on March 6. 1642. 214 * Thanksgiving for
deliverance from fire 215 Thanksgiving for deliverance after imminent dangers,
when beset with violent and base people 219 When I was accused of High Treason
220 When I received my Summons to Trial 221 Upon my Summons to appear ar the
House of Commons 222 For the High Court of Parliament 223 For the Navy 224 In
time of Pestilence and unseasonable Weather 226 In danger of Enemies 228
Thanksgiving for ceasing the Plague 230 In danger of Enemies ibid. For safe
Childbearing of the Queen 233 Another of the same ibid. A Thanksgiving for the
birth of Prince Charles 234 A Thanksgiving for the safe delivery of the Lady
Mary 236 A Thanksgiving for his Majesty's recovery from the Smallpox 237 A
Thanksgiving for the delivery of James Duke of York 238 A Thanksgiving for the
King in his Northern Expedition 240 Another for the same ibid. His Grace's
Speech, according to the Original, written with his own hand, and delivered by
him upon the Scaffold on Tower Hill, Jan. 10. 1644. to his Chaplain Dr. Stern,
after Lord Archbishop of York 242
FINIS.

