A BRIEF ANSWER TO THREE BOOKS, ONE By John Faldo, called an Independent, and
Two by Thomas Hicks, a Baptist, put forth against the People called QVAKERS.
Wherein the Presbyters, (Inde) pendents, and Baptists, though they differ among
Themselves, yet like Herod, Pontius Pilate, Judas, and the Jews are all joined
against the Truth. But that which is not of God, shall not Stand.
WHen I intended to go my Journey, I met with a Book given forth by One John
Faldo against the Quakers. I do not know what this John Faldo is, nor where he
dwells, nor never heard of his Name before: but I know, he is like Thomas
Hicks, that Wrote the Dialogue. Yet I do not know Thomas Hicks neither; but I
know they are alike, they are both Mockers; themselves proves it in their
Title-pages, and throughout their Books. They call names, as Quaker, and
Quakerism, gone from Scripture-words; and yet call the Scripture their Rule.
Herod and Pilate were made Friends; yet did despise and mock Christ the Head;
and these Two mock and make Lies against his Members: their Books declare it. I
cannot tell, which was first in the Lies? but I can tell, who is the Father of
Lies, the Devil. He abode not in the Truth, neither do these Two Perspicuity
and Brevity are two chief Points in Oratory; but these Two supposed great
Orators have neither. When They Treat on a subject, their Porch is bigger then
the House: they are so long and tedious, like the Orator, when his Glass was
near run out said; Now to the Matter. They are in the many Words, Digressions,
and Distinctions that they lose themselves and Reader also, except he abide in
the Light. For Example:

J. Faldo spends an Hundred and Nineteen pages to prove, That Quakers deny the
Scriptures; and has not proved it neither: but runs begging after the Quakers,
that they would prove the Contrary. page 26, 27. And when he has traveled to
page 37. says, Now to clench the Nail, I have been driving hitherto. I pursued
him to page 130. to find the Nail clenched, but could not: so I left my
Pursuit. Yet he says; If one, or all these Arguments together will not prove,
what I have brought them to confirm, I will forever despair to prove any thing.

When T. Hicks and J. Faldo says, The Scriptures are the Word of God, and Rule
of Faith. They run into Thickets of Words, but here they have no shelter; for
all people do, or may know, That Quakers do own S^r^ptures, and have, and do
daily dis-prove their false Doctrines by plain Scripture words.

J. Faldo says in the Second part of his Book, That Quakers deny all Gospel
Ordinances. Answ. They deny none, but such, as the false Churches do practice
in their own wills without the Spirit, Life and Power.

1. In Particular he says, They deny the Ministry and Min^sters of the
Gospel. Answ. Quakers deny no Ministry, that is true; nor no Ministers, that
are sent of God.

2. He says, Quakers deny the Gospel Church. Answ. Quakers own that Church
which is in the Living God, the Ground, and Pillar of Truth: but do deny all
that say, They are a true Church, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.

3. J. Faldo says, Quakers deny the Ordinance of Hearing the Word preached.
Answ. Blush for shame: do thou not know, they go sometimes many Miles, and
many hundreds at a time; but thou go not to hear Truth thy self; but
hindrest as many as thou can, and wishest, as in thy Preface, That many
Thousand of small pieces of four or five sheets were printed, and sold at a
cheap rate, to discover the Quakers Principles. But that would discover and
hurt thy Cause.

4. Quakers deny Gospel-prayer. Answ. They do own and practice Prayer, and
Thanksgiving at meals, in Families, and elsewhere.

5. Quakers deny the Ordinance of Reading the Scriptures. Answ. They say,
Reading and other holy Duties are to be performed in Families: and several have
been convinced by Reading Quakers Books, before ever they heard a Minister.

6. Quakers deny Water Baptism and the Lords Supper. Answ. When the Substance
is come, and enjoyed, the shaddows fly away. -- These Charges against the
Quakers are all false; and so are many more in J. Faldo's Book.

Page 8. he says, Quakers preach a Christ within, in Opposition to a Christ
without. Answ. We feel, taste, and handle Christ within our Hope of Glory: he
is but one, and not divided. And so a wicked Slander to say, we oppose Christ
without.

Page 10. He says, They decry the Scriptures of the Old, and New Testament as
altogether needless, if not Mischievous. Answ. We believe and read the Holy
Scriptures to our Profit and Comfort, being come to the same Spirit, by which
they were given forth, and is the Interpreter of them.

Page 40. The Quakers equalize their Writings, and Sayings with the Scriptures,
and prefer them above them. Answ. They set the Scriptures in their place; but
neither set them nor their Writings above the Spirit, as ye do.

Many more might be noted; but this is enough. -- I do admire, that ever a Man
so Learned, as J. Faldo is, should so fail in his Learning, Senses and Reason,
to charge so desperately, and perform so weakly. For I cannot find any Errors
in the Quakers words, that J. Faldo has cited; nor Strength in his Arguments
to prove any.

J. Faldo in the Third part of his Book concerning Apostolical Inspirations
has many Distinctions and Differences between the Spirit which the Apostles
had, and the Spirit that Believers now have: But he is neither brief, nor
plain; but endeavors in many pages to manifest some great matter; but his
distinctions, and differences are not in Substance, but in Circumstances; not
differing in Truth and Kind, but in Degree and Measures. There are Diversities
of Gifts, Administrations and Operations; but the same Spirit. If J. Faldo has
found out another Spirit, it is a false one.

J. Faldo would seem much a Scholar; but T. Hicks is more a subtle one; He
hides his Work in Mists, and Thickets to cover his Wickedness. How can all the
People of England, or elsewhere, where T. Hicks's Books may be seen, see the
Quakers Books also (whom he has charged) to know certain, whether his Charge
be true? which is a thing unlikely, if not impossible. Why then, what color of
Reason is there in the least, that T. Hicks should be believed at any time, or
in any thing, who is found a Liar so oftentimes, and in so many things; but all
his Labor to be lost, and as Water spilt upon the Ground? And so no search
after the Quakers Books need be; but T. Hicks accounted vir nulla fide, a man
of no Faith or Credit.

Now for me to detect a man without just Cause, were unjust: therefore hear,
what I can say

I. To the false Charges in his Book.

1. The Quakers deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God. The Answer is in the
first Chap. of John, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God; all things were made by it. But the Scriptures were not
in the beginning with God, nor Scriptures never was God, nor were all things
made by the Scriptures.

2. They deny the Scriptures to be as the Rule of Faith and Practice to
Christians. Answ. The Spirit of God was, and is the Unchangeable, Everlasting
Rule of Faith and Practice to all true Believers in all Ages. Who can
understand the Scriptures, but by the same Spirit, that gave it forth? Then how
can it be an infallible Rule without the Spirit to open and apply them?

3. Quakers deny the Person of Jesus Christ. Answ. They do believe the One
M^diator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. Where do the Scriptures
(that T. Hicks calls his Rule) say, That Christ is a Person? or that the Son is
One Person, and the holy Ghost Another ^erson? We own Christ Jesus born of the
Vigin Mary, his Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and his Coming again in
Spirit, who said, He that is with you, shall be in you.

4. Quakers deny the Resurrection of the Body. Answ. They believe, All that are
in the Graves, shall come forth; they that have done good, to the Resurrection
of Life; and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of Condemnation, And
it shall be raised a Spiritual Body. But that the Body of Flesh and Blood shall
rise in the same Form, and inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, let T. Hicks prove
that, by that which he calls his Rule, if he can: but that says; Thou sowest
not that Body which shall be.

5. They say, that the Light in every Man is sufficient to guide unto
Salvation, if it be obeyed. Answ. The Light is sufficient, whether any obey it,
or not: but none shall be saved by it, but they that do obey it, and yet not
saved by obeying only.

6. Also ye maintain Perfection attainable in this Life; but what Perfection do
ye mean? Answ. 1. There is Perfection to which nothing can be added; and so no
Man, but God only is perfect. 2ly. There is Perfection from Sin: and so the
first Adam was made perfect by Creation; and true Believers are made perfect by
Redemption; else Christ Jesus the second Adam, has less Power to deliver Man
out of Sin, then the first Adam had to bring him into Sin.

The most do not believe, there is such a State as Freedom from all Sin in this
Life; some others do believe, there is. Yet none know it, but they that are in
it: nor none can come into it, but they that are led and guided by the Word and
Spirit of God in them. There is Perfection from Sin and Growth in Holiness. The
Man Christ Jesus was free from all Sin, and grew in Wisdom and Stature: And
such as come to this State grow up in Christ, the Resurrection and the Life, in
the Unity, being set down together in the Heavenly Places, have fought a good
Fight, and know the Overcoming, and enjoy a State, which the World knows not,
but make War against it.

II. There are many absolute Lies recorded in T. Hicks's Book; I give a hint
but of some.

1. He says, All things necessary to Salvation are contained in the
Scriptures, and in no other Record in the World, either without or within Men.
Answ The Record of God is true, which is within men.

2 He says That the Light within is so far from being a sufficient Guide, that
it ought to be rejected. Indeed Thomas Hicks does reject it; which he ought not
to do.

3. T. Hicks says, That p^rfect Freedom from all Sin will cause much Pride,
and Presumption, and hinder holy Fear, and holy Watchfulness, and industrious
Endeavors to walk in a holy Course to the end. Answ. If T. Hicks's Sins and
Imperfections would have kept him from Pride and Presumption, why then is he so
proud and presumptuous, hardly any like him, as his Books do manifest.

III. Now besides his absolute -- note some of T.H's suspected Lies.

1. P. 9. T. H. says, A Quaker told him, that he esteemed the Blood of Christ
spilt at Jerusalem no more, than an Unholy or Common Thing.

2. P. 29 T. H. says, That G. Fox and R. H. said, It is dangerous for Ignorant
People to read the Scriptures. Who will believe this?

3. Page 30. T. Hicks asked J. Story, Whether the Light in every man is
sufficient to guide to Salvation? J. Story answered (as T. Hicks says in his
Book) That he did not come to be Catechized. Answ. But J. Story did not answer
three Priests so at the Town Hall in Marlbrough (where I dwell) before the
Magistrates and a Multitude, sixteen years ago; but answered so, that they
never desired, or not endeavored to dispute with Quakers since.

4. The Ill Report, that T. Hicks has cast upon (as he calls) Fox, Dewsbury,
Atkinson, Whitehead, Crisp, Buroughs, Howgill, Penn, and others, is a
suspected Lie. Who will believe T. Hicks, but such as are deceived with him by
the Accuser of the Brethren, in whose Steps he treads?

Now I expect, what I shall receive: It is likely the same, which T.H. says in
his Title page, and Postscript of his Dialogue; namely, That the Method and
Manner of the Quakers reasoning is Scurrilous Language: though they speak
Scripture-words, as to name Dog, Swine, Viper, Serpent, Liar, etc. but when the
Persons spoken to are such, then it is Truth, and no Scurrilous Language.

To J. Faldo, and Tho. Hicks.
Friends,
YE are both Strangers to me: I have no certain Knowledge of you, but by your
Books; which when I received, and took Notice of your Waters, I found your
dis-ease. Your Waters are not Rivers of Living Water, which flow out of the
Belly of such, as believe in Christ, as Joh. 7, 38. nor the pure River-Water
clear as Crystal out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Rev. 22. but
brackish, foul Water out of the foaming Sea, that casts up Mire and Dirt, out
of which the Beast rose. Rev. 13. Waters, upon which the Whore sits, that has
made the Nations Drunk with the Wine of her Fornications. Rev. 17 So according
to these Scriptures your Dis-ease is a Beastly, Drunken, Whorish Distemper.
Consider in your own hearts, and be wise: Paul Persecuted that Truth, which
afterward he preached. Come; I hope, your Day is not wholly over: I can assure
you of a Remedy, if ye in Faith and Patience take it. It is this; Turn into the
Light of Christ within you; notwithstanding ye have spoken all manner of evil
against it, slighted, reproached, and vilifi'd it; Yet come now, submit to it,
and follow it, it will cure all your Maladies. Ye have a sufficient Warrant for
what I tell you. Joh. 8.12. Jesus says, I am the Light of the World; he that
follows me, shall not abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life.

Object. But if ye should object, and say, what is one sheet in Answer to Three
Books containing 556. pages?

Answ. I did fear, ye were affected with Tautology more then Brevity, with
Obscurity more then Perspicuity. John saw in the Hand of the Angel a little
Book, Rev 10. I have answered the Sum and Substance of your Three Books, though
brief, yet plain; particulars in them of little Value are reduceable, and
comprehended in the Summary. There is enough charged against you; clear your
selves of that first, and make invalid my Proofs, if ye can.

Thomas Lawrence.


ONe day before I came forth, I met with another Book of Tho. Hicks, entitled
A Continuation of his former Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker. Why
Thomas, are not Quakers Christians? what! are all Pagans, but whom T. Hicks
will allow the name of Christian? Some Baptists, whose dwelling is in
Marlbrough, said in my hearing, That Master Hicks having a Book in his hand,
written Dialogue-way, cast it away with great dis-like, and said; It was an
unjust way of Printing: And gave his reasons for it: First, said he, The
Translator has all in his own hand, and can make his Opposer say, what he
pleases to serve his own Turn. Secondly, he will take the weakest part of his
Opponent to work upon, and (as I may say) rather then fail, make Lies of his
own, and fence with them? as he has done in both his Books. So instead of
Repenting of doing that, which he then condemned, he Continues in his Sin
after Conviction, as if he were wholly hardened, regarding neither Justice, nor
Honesty, nor his Account at the Day of Judgment, when he must answer for all
his Deeds done in the Body. He says, That Printing Dialogue way is unjust, and
has given his Reasons; yet has printed two Dialogues himself: and so has
done the same thing, for which he has condemned another: and therefore he is
inexcusable, Rom 2. So to conclude, he has condemned all his own Writings;
what need any more Proof, or Arguments against him?

Friends, J. Faldo and T. Hicks,
I wonder, that Men so Learned and Eloquent, as ye would seem to be, and would
be accounted solid and leading Men, should be so much in the vain Jangling,
Contentions, and needless Repetitions: In the tenth part of the Paper you might
have written more, and to better purpose. Though Quaking and Trembling is that,
which some of God's dear Servants have known, yet who has ever said, That
Quaker or Quakerism is Christianity? or in what Tongue or Language have ye
found the words? Ye fight against less then a Shadow, a Figment of your own,
as T. Hicks calls. I Will tell you, from whence your words are? from the Beast,
that rose out of the Sea; from the blind World, that lies in Wickedness; from
the Stock of Ishmael, who are Mockers, born after the Flesh; from the Devil,
the Father of Lies. Now take notice of your Original, and what your State and
Condition is, whilst ye stand where ye are. If I had had more time, I know not,
that I should have written any more. There is enough charged against you
already, answer that first, if ye can. There be some Books printed already, and
some to print to lay open your Weakness more at large: Ye had better proceed no
further, lest ye be found Fighters against God.

T. L.



