THE Leacherous ANABAPTIST: OR, The Dipper Dipped. A New Protestant Ballad,
To the Tune of Packingtons Pound.
1.
O Ye Roundheads and Whiggs, for ever be silent,
Cease to scandalize Tory, and honest Tantivy;
I Will tell you strange News that happened nigh Lent,
Which if you disprove, I swear I Will forgive ye:
Of Protestant Francis,
That tells us Romances,
Of horrible Plots more strange then Miles Prances;
For Frank twelve Geneva good Bibles did proffer,
To lie with his Maid, but she slighted his offer.
2.
This Protestant News-monger, and Munster Imp,
Endeavored to Switchel her upon the Sabbath,
And made his Bibles his leacherous Pimp;
But some think that they together near lay both:
For the Maid was as Chaste
As Lucretia, at least,
(...)ut had he been Tarquin, there had been the Jest;
For Frank twelve Geneva good Bibles did proffer,
To lie with his Maid, but she slighted his offer.
3.
Then he offered one Bible if he might but Grope her,
But the resolute Queen still stoutly denied him;
(...)uoth she, Master Frank you a Leacherous Fop are,
And after that manner severely did chide him:
You're the Brethrens Teacher,
An Anabaptist Preacher:
^eply'd he then to her, You a Papist and Bitch are;
For Frank twelve Geneva good Bibles did proffer,
To lie with his Maid, but she slighted his offer.
4.
He writes twice a week News Domestic and Foreign,
As Seditious as Care, Ben. Harris, or Curtis;
Great Lies in abundance from France and from Lorrain
But never says word of his Maid: what a Cur it is?
He tells us strange Stories,
Of Papists and Tories;
But this I Will say for him, that his Maid no Whore is:
For Frank twelve Geneva good Bibles did proffer,
To lie with his Maid, but she slighted his offer.
5.
Then Frank be not angry cause she would not comply,
For Saints in this world have misfortunes and crosses:
Suppose that she had the best Thing you could try,
You could have but tickled it with your Probosses;
After that you would curse,
You were not starved at Nurse,
Because you would then be twelve Bibles the worse:
For Fra^^ twelve Geneva good Bibles did proffer,
To lie w^^^ his Maid, but she slighted his offer.
6.
From this Godly deed, St. Francis, you're called,
Because you endeavored to save your Maids Soul,
Though Satan your Pious intentions forestalled,
And the Scriptures could not prevail on the Fool:
Though she would not grant,
Yet deny it we cannot,
But that you deserved to be called a Saint;
For Frank twelve Geneva good Bibles did proffer,
To lie with his Maid, but she slighted his offer.
LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Harris, 1681.


