THE LAWS OF PARADISE Given forth by Wisdom TO A Translated SPIRIT.

The LAW shall go forth of ZION, Mic. 4. 2.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street. 1695.

ERRATA.
PAge 65. line 17. read, by the Decease of my Father I came to be involved. But
not being able to be long Absent from.

THE PREFACE.
TO a certain Person, that for many Years had been led wonderfully in the Ways
of God, it came to pass that one day upon a deep Contemplation of the
Paradisical World, there appeared in the midst of a most bright Cloud, a Woman
of a most Sweet and Majestic Countenance, her Face shining as the Sun, and her
Vesture of Transparent Gold, who said, Behold! I am God's Eternal Virgin
Wisdom, whom thou have been enquiring after: I am to unseal the Treasures of
God's deep Wisdom unto thee, and will be, as Rebecca was to Jacob, a true
natural Mother; for out of my Womb thou shall be brought forth after the manner
of a Spirit, being Conceived and Born again: This thou shall know by a new
Motion of Life, stirring and giving a restlesness, till Wisdom be Born within
the inmost parts of thy Soul. Now consider of my Sayings, till I shall return
to thee again. Then after three days the same Figure appeared in greater Luster
and Glory to this Person, bearing a Crown on her Head, and spoke to this
effect. Behold thy Mother, and know that thou art to enter into Covenant with
me, to Obey the Laws of the New Creation which shall be revealed. And upon this
a Golden Book being Sealed with Three Seals, was by her presented to the said
Person, declaring that in it were declared the deep Mysteries of the Divine
Wisdom, which had been Sealed up from the past Ages, and were now to be opened
and manifested to her Children, that should be found willing to receive, and to
observe such LAWS, as she should deliver forth in the New Heart, and in the New
Spirit. After Six days the Vision again returned, and the Virgin Queen showed
her self in most Mighty Majesty, being attended with a numberless Train of
Virgin Spirits, and with a very great Army of Angels; and this Person was
called by Name to come and view Her, with her Firstborn Children, and invited
to join with them. To which there being a ready and hearty Consent given, the
said Person was immediately admitted into their Number. Then said the Divine
Virgin, I shall cease to appear in a Visible Figure to thee, but I will not
fail to Transfigure my self in thy Mind; and there open the Spring of Wisdom
and Understanding. She also promised that by the Opening of this Spring there
should be revealed Great and Wonderful Things, that were to be made Public in
the Appointed Day: And so exhorting to Vigilance, and Obedience to those
Counsels and Laws which should be given out from her, she disappeared, having
first received such an Answer, as the Blessed Virgin Mary gave to the Message
of the Angel Gabriel, from this Person who was encompassed about with the
Heavenly Host, and made a Spirit of Light. And as the Law was given to Moses of
old, being taken up to Mount Sinai to converse with God; so in like manner it
has pleased the same God our Father, to give forth in these Last Days the Law
of Paradise to This Spirit, who was some Years after this caught up on purpose
into Mount Sion to receive it. There is no doubt to be made, but that these
holy Commandments so received will carry along with them to many Awakened
Souls, the Evidence of their Divine Original: And as for such as from the many
horrid Abuses that have been made through Pretensions to the Holy Spirit,
cannot believe that there either is, or can be any True Inspiration at this Day
in the World; I doubt not to convince the Sober amongst them, and all such as
are willing to humble themselves before the Truth, of the Possibility,
Expediency, and necessity of Revelation to be again restored, in a Particular
Discourse, which is designed to come forth very shortly. As for any Particular
Objections against either the Manner, or the Matter of these Laws, then, when
they shall be Proposed, it will be time to consider of them. Now let us, who
know that the Law is spiritual, Romans 7. 14. be altogether spiritually-minded,
and worship him who is Spirit, in Spirit and Truth.

The MOTTO.
WIsdom I have sought, and
Wisdom I have found:
And now I wear her as
My Garland and Crown.
THE LAWS OF PARADISE.
CHAP. 1.
The Delivery of the Law in Ten Particulars, given forth by Wisdom to a
Translated Spirit.

THese are the Laws of Paradise, which must be observed by All who set footing
there, according as they were declared and given forth by Wisdom, as I was in
the Spirit. Who thus spoke unto me;

Having cautioned thee that thou may not be secure, telling thee that the
Tempter, and the Tree, are both here, I Wisdom bid thee take good heed,
considering thou art yet but a Stranger, and know not the Constitutions,
Orders, and Worships required by the King of this Holy Land. Lest therefore
thou shold'st miscarry here, as did the First Adam, and many more since, who
have come thus far, after the Similitude of the Second, whom the Dragon has
plucked down again, awakening in them the Essences which were slain by the
Death; I do now present to thee, out of my peculiar Love, CHRIST thy
Looking-glass. In Him behold thy self, who was thy Dying Pattern, and now must
be thy Living Spirit; to act answerable to Him, Bodily, and Spiritually. And as
he was in Paradise Invisible, and in this World Visible, in like manner as now
thou art; so the same Law which was enjoined by the Father to Him, is expressly
to be observed by thee: Not one Jot or Tittle is to be abated therein. For here
the New Covenant is to be re-established, in which the Laws of pure and
uncorrupted Nature are again revived, which were Engraven upon the Heart before
Sin entered to obliterate them. And as this Internal Law of Liberty was lost in
Paradise, so in all Ages it could never be found by any, till they returned
thither again, to fulfill the whole Righteousness hereof, through the Birth,
Power, and Spirit of JESUS; that has imprinted the Law of Eternal Nature upon
the Fleshly Table of a pure Heart, which becomes a Law of Life unto it self,
that none need to say, Know the Lord from henceforth, if once come to know
themselves after the Law of this Paradisical Life; which I will give thee out
as GOD gave to Moses in Ten Particulars, that what is given thee may answer to
the Out-spoken Word from ME: Who for a General Benefit do require thee to
Record these following Precepts, purely as they flow from my Unknown Deep.

The First Commandment.
THou shall own, and bear witness to the True God, manifested through his
Virgin Wisdom, as come to restore Nature to its own Eternal Originality, which
consisted in Light, Purity, and Power: And thou shall have no other God live in
thee but JEHOVAH, whose Arm alone has redeemed, and brought thee into thy
Primitive Liberty, and Sovereignty again, through the Internal Dying, as the
acceptable Propitiation.

The Second Commandment.
THou art not to Frame, or Carve out in thy Mind a strange God, though it may be
after an Heavenly Likeness; worshipping thou know not what, or whom. The
Fallen Essences would make a God like unto themselves, Gross and Elementary,
with which the Earthly Sense might be familiar, and have recourse to for supply
in a gross Visible manner; owning the Invisible Creator in word, but denying
the Faith in his Omnipotency, through the going a Whoring after the God of
Reason, bowing down, and worshipping the Rising Sun which governs the Day of
this Fallen Creation; the Apostate Spirits still crying in Man's Nature as of
old, Up, make us Gods which may go before us, that we may have our sensible
sight fed: As for this Invisible Working Power, it delays to come down to us;
though his Arm has been made bare, and wrought great deliverance, yet now
being withdrawn, we wist not what is become of this Unknown God, that keeps in
such a Circle as we can not break in to him: Therefore says the Unbelieving
Israel, We will make choice of a God for our selves after our own Likeness. Now
from this high Idolatry thou art prohibited, upon pain of losing Wisdom's
Blessing. For thy God will not bear or suffer any one, whom he has placed in
this New Land, to have any other God but himself, who is Jealous of his Honor,
and who will be trusted to and rested upon, and have the whole worship and
subjection of the Will, and adoration of the Mind; not admitting either Sense
or Reason to be his Rival. Faith without doubting, and Love unfeigned, is the
Sum of this Commandment, which observe thou with all fear.

The Third Commandment.
LET none dare to make mention of the most Holy Name in their Mouths, that are
not with their Hearts incorporated into it. Oh! what a Covering has VVisdom's
all-piercing Eye seen this Sacred Name vainly to be made, and highly to have
been abused by many dead rotten Spirits, that have put it on as a Mantle to
hide their VVitchcrafts, and Spiritual Sorceries, which is one of the greatest
of Grievances this day to thy God. It is not so ill taken from the unbridled
and Profane Spirit, as from the civilized Righteous one; whose Leaven be thou
aware of: And understand from me, what weight this Name bears, when not taken
in vain, but to good purpose; as thou art required now to do, according to
these my Directions.

I. First, Suffer thy Restored Creaturely Being, as being become a New
Believer, to be Baptized, and plunged throughout into this Name; which is the
Golden Pool, where the Holy Ghost opens his Fiery Stream. And he invites to
drink down this precious Name, or else all will be in vain. No Unbeliever is
capable of this Fiery Baptism; for the solemnizing of this holy Seal must,
according to what is Recorded, follow after Believing.

II. A Second Rule is, That thou may receive, and bear this Name worthily,
give it place that it may all overrun thee in such wise, that thou may
disappear, and be hid in it; so as nothing may be found, but this Holy Flaming
Name, purifying every Property, turning all into a Godlikeness, as becomes this
holy Place. Thus will you come to know what is the Effectual VVorking of this
Name, as it is written, not only Within, but upon the Forehead, being all over
clothed therewith. This is no less than the Establishing the New Covenant,
making good this Promise, I will be to thee a God, and thou shall be to me a
People; to show, a cementing into each other, so as there shall be no need, for
such as are come here to say, Know the Lord, for his Name is now become One,
and All; knowing himself in Thee to be JEHOVAH, acting in a restored simplified
Nature, as of old time. After this manner it is only worth taking, and bearing
the Name of thy God: To which take thou heed, and drink it in.

The Fourth Commandment.
THis is a considerable Duty that thou art charged to call to remembrance;
minding whereto thou are called to solemnize an holy Sabbath. And since none
but those who are Dead can cease from their Working Properties, this
Commandment reaches only the Children of the Resurrection, that know nothing
of serving in the Martha-like Carefulness. Here must be a Rest in Paradise, yea
all that smells, or favors of the six days Labor, which entered in with the
Curse of Mortality is to be ceased from: I say, all sinful Workings either in
Mind, or in Body we are to rest from; not doing our own pleasure, or speaking
our own words. This is that true Inward Sabbath we are called to sanctify our
God with. This is a Truth, but there is a Rest which reaches further than all
this: But you will say wherein, and from what must we cease? Pray give us the
Particulars of it.

I. The First is this, A Total Cessation from the Working Property of Reason,
the motion of which must be stopped: Here is no occasion for it in this New
Paradisical World: It is Forbidden Fruit to the Children of the Resurrection,
that must live one and the same Life with JESUS, and with the Angels; that is,
a Divine Magical Life, strictly bound up to the Mystery of Faith here to be
revealed. Thou must, as one alive from the dead, forget all those Morsels of
Mortality, which maintained the sensitive Properties, and which are only
allowable for the Inhabitants of the Earth.

II. A Second Particular is, That not only thy Eternal Spirit, and Mind rest
from Labor and Commerce, but also thine Outward, in whom live the Working
Essences, which would be continually Trafficking, like a whirling Wheel that is
never at rest: These are the Son and the Daughter, the Man-servants, and the
Cattle within the Gates of the External Man that are prohibited working; having
fulfilled the time hereof, in the six days Working Properties, being now entered
into this holy Sabbath, where nothing must be known, but such a Life as can
take pleasure in loving the Lord thy God with all thine Heart: No Work being
required of thee, but to believe, and rest upon his Omnipotency, to bring all
into thy hand: Thou need not to wander out from the Tabernacle which the
Lord has pitched, to gather Provision, it shall be rained down into thy Tent,
if thou continuest in this holy Rest of Believing.

The Fifth Commandment.
HEre thou art required to honor thy Eternal Father, and Wisdom thy true
Natural Mother, which has brought thee forth, and up, to that stature and
degree in which thou now art: Hence no less is expected from thee; and as my
Fear and Love is with thee, so my Honor must be thy great Concern; that so
length of days may be thy Blessing from thy Father, and Me, for evermore.

But to answer to the thoughts of thine Heart, which says, Oh! my Mother,
wherein, and how may I come to laud and honor God my Father, and Wisdom my
Mother, according as thy Firstborn Son, my Pattern, has in his Paradisical
Body done, while he was in this World. Consider thy JESUS then in his high and
holy Calling, from his Birth to his Ascension, holding forth one pure Act of
Glorifying his Father, in observing the Law of Wisdom his Mother, from whose
Eternal Virgin Nature he had his Existence: And now know, that as thou have had
thy Birth from me, so thou art in the same Line to run parallel; having passed
through the Birth-death, answerable to him that was before thee, whom thou art
to follow after in hallowing that Great Name, which is secret, and known but to
few, according to these following Rules.

I. First, in being Partaker with thy Jesus in the holy Calling and Order of
Priesthood, which is a perfect separated Life; whereto being once taken in,
thou art to consider what thy Charge is. Thou art by this come under the Vow of
a Nazaritical Life, and art to go no more out, having the Consecrated Oil upon
thine Head; and this circling about thine Heart, thou must no more defile thy
self, either for any dead Father or Mother, Son or Daughter; lest thou
profanest the Name and holy Sanctuary of thy God, instead of honoring it: Who
will be sanctified in, and through the whole Royal Priesthood. Because the
Crown of the Anointing Oil is therefrom pressed, giving glory to God on high.

II. A Second Rule, by which thou may answer the Life of him that did always
magnify the Father, is, to rest and live in the Prophetical Spirit, as a Seer
into that which is beyond the Vail of the pernicious sensitive Life; to do and
determine all things according to what thou art made quick-sighted in, through
that Oil which makes the Eye to be all Light, so as to see what is done within
that Region and Kingdom, where the Father, and Wisdom the Fountain of Light,
govern jointly together. To whom thou art to make thy Application, and Enquiry
at the Oracle of Wisdom, which is fixed in thy inward part. For thou can not
lessen, or impeach the honor of thy God more, than in not obeying the Spirit
of Prophecy, that is, and shall ever rest, as a sign for distinction upon the
Holy Priests, who are called to be nigh to the Holy One, and who may be known
from others by such Gifts and Powers, whereby they may be enabled to glorify
the Fountain, and the Giver of this Spiritual Eminency.

III. A Third is, when thou art come to take unto thee the Dominion and Power
to rule, and to subject, as Christ has done, all things as thy footstool; It
is certainly the pleasure of Wisdom to give thee a Kingdom, and all others
whose Ears are open, to her Discipline. Soveraignity well becomes thy
Paradisical Habitation, for there it was first left, and there thou, by abiding
faithful to these Laws, shall recover it again, and shall know how to manage as
well the Golden Scepter of Power, as the Rod of Iron, which is for the
Idolatrous Party who stand out, and refuse to submit to the Reign of Jesus in
this his Second Appearance. Neither will he now be awed, or frighted out of his
Right, but will make all those Usurping and Tyrannical Spirits, which have
lived hitherto in Man's Nature, to yield and bow, whether in Bodies, or out of
Bodies. Wherever this Name is written upon, there terrible Majesty will appear,
to consume with the Brightness of the Eye, all such as would oppose God's
return to Nature again with his mighty Sovereignty. See now here to what thou
may arrive: It is well worth thy running for such a Prize, by taking which
thou will thy Father highly bless. And with a greater and more acceptable
Tribute than this thou can never honor thy great King, and Chief High Priest.

The Sixth Commandment.
WHereas it was said in the Old Covenant, Thou shall not Kill, here thou art
required to do Self-murder, and not to spare cutting off the Head of that Life,
which would cut thee out from having a Name and Place in the New Jerusalem.

But you will say that is done already, or I could never have known a
Resurrection into this Paradisical Light and Liberty, where I frequently behold
Glorified Objects, and hear the unutterable Sounds, condescending to come down
to the Organical Senses, so to let me understand the mind and pleasure of the
Father of this my new begotten Spirit. True it is, thou art now quickened into
such a Life as is no more to be put to death: For there is no Condemnation to
such as are risen with Christ. But yet know there is a Mortal Sense, that has
not yet left thee, which has thrust in here along with thee; and this as it
was by the First Adamical Man awakened, so by the Second (in Thee) it must be
extinguished, if thou desire to know no more Curse. Which Curse did enter as
soon as the Windows of the Earthly Senses were opened: Then Adam came into the
strife of the Four Elements, and he needed not to be told that he was Naked, or
Hungry, the Intelligencer being now in his own Depraved Sense. But you will
further say, How can this be till Mortality be swallowed up in Life, so as to
have no more occasion to use this World, whose very Consistency is hereby; for
take away the two Foundation Pillars, and it will not, nor cannot exist longer?
Well, it is no more than what is decreed: For Babylon must fall. Let it be then
the Cry, and the Endeavor, that in thy self thou may first behold its Fall:
Nor be thou afraid of thy Undoing as to this self-degradation; for it is the
Injunction of Paradise that all strife should cease, that thou may come only
to know a Life of Serenity and Peace in this holy Place, where a Cessation of
Mobility, and of all Working Essences is required. Which Essences, if not
stopped, would busily ply thee, and so destroy the Magical Property, which acts
through the All-seeing Eye of Eternity, and refuses all contribution from the
Sensitive Part; well knowing its own sufficiency to make thee again, to flower
forth in Paradisical Power. Be now henceforvvard wholy Passive, as a Seed,
that through the Conjunction of the heavenly Powers, a bright Lilly Body thou
may put forth, which shall be above all Creaturely Addition: And no more
doubt that shovvers shall here be vvanting for the Increase, for all is ordered
in its proper course and season, to the bringing this up unto its perfect
growth. All thy Danger will lie in this Temptation, when thou shall see that
there is nothing of Visibility to live upon, but that all must be continually
renewed from the Virtual Power of the White Stone, given to answer to all and
every Necessity. Therefore take good heed thou do it not mistrust, or deny:
For herein was the Transgression of that Chosen Generation, whom JEHOVAH by his
Wonder-working Deeds would have convinced, and made to understand, that no
other Fountain Blessing they should ever stand in need of, having given so many
proofs of his All Sufficiency, bringing them even through the deep Red Sea,
that so they might have no cause to question, but that the same Almightiness
would still be their subsistence in all places; by the means of which the
barren Wilderness should have been as a fruitful Lebanon: had they not
revolted, God intended no less than miraculously to feed and cloth them, but
the Inundation of Sense overwhelmed them with such Diffidence, as turned that
which would have been a Paradise into a waste howling Desert, as the Reward of
Unbelief. This Instance I have set before thee, that cautioned thou may be to
hold out the set time of Probation in the pure Faith of Dependence on the
Almighty Power, that then will be a perpetual springing Paradise be thou
wherever thou will, with fresh and new Ideas of Powers and Love-joys, which
will always thy pure Spirit greet. Receive now this Charge from Me, who say
unto thee, Live only by the Virtual Power of the Generating Word, which
renews Bread every Hour, as being that true Multiplying Virtue, which beware
thou do never more quench, or kill: For in this lies the Precious Gem, the
All-acting Stone, which only can give the Remove to Mount Paran.

The Seventh Commandment.
THou art not to break the Marriage-knot, which is tied betwixt thee, and the
Lord thine Husband, to whom thou art betrothed through the Eternal Spirit. For
it is an high Breach of the Covenant of Love, which is established upon
immutable Promises on God the Father's part, and on thine: Wherein there is a
passing over to each other before Witnesses, that bear Record in the high Court
of Heaven of this Espousal betwixt Thee, and my Beloved Son, the Heir of all
the Riches of Heavens Glory.

Now seeing this Royal Match is made, and concluded on, by consent of the
Everlasting Father, and of Wisdom thy Mother, who could not propose a more
Honorable, Worthy Person to unite thy Spirit unto, thou art required to abide
most Constant and Loyal to Him, and never more so much as to look upon, or
entertain any other Lover, thereby to defile the Marriage Bed, in committing of
spiritual Adultery; which does consist in these following Particulars.

I. First, in the Lust of the Eye after this or that Creaturely Object, which
soon betrays the Heart, stealing it away insensibly, before it is aware of it.
In great Temptation thou do here stand, having such variety of Objects still
to court and captivate thy Mind, from thy True and Royal Consort, who watches
every Motion and Affection thereof which way it works, being a very Jealous
Lover, and one who is resolved to prove thy Constancy in this time of his
absence. He therefore permits this and that Dalilah to allure, and subtly
to encroach into thee, that he may know what is in thine Heart: And according
as in this time thou do carry it, so will the Decree come forth for a further
proceeding as to the Consummating part.

II. The Second Caution I have to give thee, is not only to make a Covenant
with thine Eyes, but also with thine Ears. For all Enchantments come in through
the Senses, which though even in Paradise, are yet obnoxious to be ensnared; as
Adam was with his Eve by their means. Who taken with the sight of their Eye,
and entrapped with the hearing of their Ear, were drawn on by one Sense after
another, even to the tasting of Eternal Death, and the cutting asunder hereby
the Golden Link; which gave them the heavy Fall out of Paradise into This
World. This was the Effect of the Adulterous Eye and Ear. Stand then upon thy
guard with fear; see thou be not snared in by them; hearken not to any other
Voice but what thy JESUS, through ME, shall to thee speak; by whom thou art
prohibited to confer with any other, well-knowing of what dangerous consequence
such a Liberty would prove. It would provoke thy Lord to Jealousy, who cannot
bear that thou should be familiar to talk with any other Spirit: For as much
as the Serpent is most subtle, and seeks many ways to make a Prize of thee,
watching to break the Royal Band of this intended Marriage-Union, which has
been so long contrived by Me, and which I would now see Finished. Let therefore
my Counsel take place with thee, so as thou neither taste, nor handle, those
inviting pleasant Fruits, that seem to say, Come, eat of me, try whether I do
not excel all whatever is in Paradise, who have all that is capable to suit the
Palate of thy Sense. Why should thou deny thy self to taste hereof,
depending only upon what the Spirit of Faith must bring down to thee, which
also is not always present with thee, to be commanded to run to and fro on
thine Errand, as occasions require? But I will be sure never to fail thee, who
am thine old Lover and Friend. Why then should thou forsake me, for one that
is unseen, and that cannot be handled sensibly? After this manner, O my Bride,
will thou be exercised, if that so by any means thou can be drawn away to
break thy Faith with me, who would fain knit thee wholly to my self so as thou
may not regard at all this Spirit of Reason, that thus seeks to flatter and
entice thee from me, who have plighted my Troth unto thee, never to forsake, or
cast thee off, if thou thy Virginity do retain, and suffer thy self by none of
these fine twisted Cords from Me to be drawn down. For thy JESUS cannot admit
any other Lover to sit in thine Heart: And if at any time a Stranger he shall
find there, know that from thee he will take the same most unkindly: Although
they may say perhaps, they are the Friends, not the Enemies of the Bridegroom,
being of a more Spiritual Train, yea, such as are perfumed with a Paradisiacal
Scent; against which thou must also stop that Sense: For it is possible to
commit Adultery with Seraphick Angels, if thou awakenest any Lusting Desire to
them more than to thy Jesus. So beware then of running into any Spirit, though
never so sublime; for there is more danger in this, than in those Objects that
are of a more visible, gross and earthly Dress; thinking with these who are
Spiritual, thou may be more free, and more bold. True it is, thou may; but
yet here it is good to be limited, that thou be not circumvented, and suffer
thy Virgin Head to be deflowered. Wherefore from all keep thy self an unspotted
Mirror, and so shall thou come to be the Chaste Bride of the Lamb, and to
enjoy the Nuptial Bed. But after all this, methinks, I hear this Question in
thee to arise, How long shall it be before the Marriage shall be Solemnized?
For I am now kept in suspense, not knowing how long my Jesus in Paradise will
yet prove me, to try my Loyalty, who like a desponding Lover, would fain know
the very Day and Hour, that so I might get my self all in a readiness, to meet
my Beloved; that when he calls I may not be surprised. This is a Query that may
be allowed, though not as to the date or prefixed time to be resolved. Have thou
not learnt how the Times and Seasons the Father still reserveth in his own
Power, who keeps always this Prerogative to himself, while he admits none
to look into his Calender, no not the Angels, till they are ordered the Trumpet
to sound for Proclamation, when the Marriage Feast is ready: Therefore go thou
thy way, and stand in thy Lot: It is enough thou art chosen, and elected
hereto: Thy present Business is to observe this Law of pure Chastity, in which
thou art to wait patiently the Motion of thy Bridegroom, who does not forget
the Cry of the Spirit and Bride, but suddenly may come e're thou art aware:
Therefore at all times watch, and have thy Virgin Robe on, and thou shall not
need to fear that he will stay long.

The Eighth Commandment.
WHereas it is said, Thou shall commit no Theft; so by Me it is again
confirmed, as the Law of Paradise, that thou this Rule also observe, as it
relates to thy God in the first place, and in the second to thy Neighboring
Inhabitants in the Outward World, where thou visibly art resident.

Now wherever there is a peculiar Property, there may be an Offering of
Violence by way of Robbery to it. Here therefore understand that the
Everlasting Father does appropriate unto himself that which he will not give
to, much less be robbed of by any. What is that? You will say. It is his
Godhead, which none are to assume to themselves, after any manner whatever. For
in this does absolute Sovereignty, and Greatness of Majesty and Honor consist;
which are Essentially Appropriable to Him, and to none other. Wherefore of this
high Sacrilege be thou aware; and give not this Honor, or rather steal it
not, away from that Holy Being, to whom it does belong, But you will say, Far
be it from me ever to rob the most High of his Honor. Knowingly thou would
not do it; but I shall unfold to thee a most subtle and hidden way of deceit,
which the First Adam was guilty of, so making it Hereditary to all his
Posterity, who by that first Act of Disobedience, purloined from God his Maker,
the Glory of his Sovereignty, and would have assumed the Godhead to himself, by
going forth into a Divided Essence, to be wise in a Self-property; which
awakened the sinful Arrogance to those sad Effects that are known throughout
the whole Universe of Fallen Spirits, to this very day. For Adam committed this
high Theft in Paradise, and stole out there in the Divided Property from God,
with whom he should have kept in an Indissoluble Band of Unity; whereby he lost
his Godlike Power and Dignity, which would have been appropriated to him, had
not he rent, and gone out from, the Eternal Essences of God, the Abyss of his
Being; out of which he was generated, to be a Mighty Potent King, and Hierarchy
in the Angelical, and Paradisical World; the which, under God, he was to have
Ruled, like a God, uncontroulably; and did so till it was lost most Cowardly.
Well, but now in thine Heart, I know, thou say, How may I bring back into
Paradise this Honor, Name, and Praise, which I would not for a Thousand
Millions of Worlds be reckoned to rob my God of, now that I, O Mother, see in
thy Glass the Evil Consequences hereof? If so, then Call and Summon in all
those Essences, wherein stand the Virtual Powers and Mights, which belong to
thy God, to whom thou art to return with them, and to work in an Undivided
Spirit, according to the Operative Power, which will work Godlike through all
thy Properties, unto the recovering of those lost Goods, which the subtle
Serpent, together with the Harlotry Spirit of this World, had Cheated thy God
in Thee of. But now Wisdom is come to direct how all should be cemented, and
gathered in again, that so thou may not take from the Inhabitants of the
Outward World any of their bitter unsavory Morsels; in all which lies hid to
this day the secret Venom of that Evil Tree, which the whole Universe of
Spirits do still take, and feed upon, as if it were lawful for them so to do,
making it matter of Necessity, or even of Ordination from the most High. But
that this is not so, will soon be made appear when the Sun shall break forth,
the Day spring being now upon its Rising, that shall convince the Unbelievers,
that there is quite another way for the Ransomed of the Lord to live. Which way
I will declare and open to thee, that thou may take nothing of Egypt's stuff
along with thee into thy Father's House, where is All in abundance. But these
Treasures indeed cannot be come at but by the Key of Faith, which opens, and
shuts, and does all here at pleasure, bringing down, and carrying up, as a
mighty Power, which Spirit is God's only Familiar Friend, that can do any thing
with him. Then with all gettings do thou aim at this, which will make thee do
Exploits indeed. As it is my Gift and Skill to make this Key, so it lies in
thy power to turn it into the Lock, which will make this Magical Door to fly
open, uniting the Divided Essences to act Miraculously.

The Ninth Commandment.
HEre thou art required not to bear false Witness against thy Neighbor, but to
love him as thy self, being one with, or nearer to thee than thy self.

But you will say, Who is this my Neighbor? Do thou not know him, thou that
have been so long an Inhabitant in the Paradisical Ground? He is even that true
Samaritan who has poured in the Restorative Oil for thy Healing, who has
taken the care of thee wholly, and undertook thy Cure then when he saw thee
wounded unto Death. His Eye pitied, and officiated in this Love Service, as one
that had a fellow-feeling of thy Calamity and Suffering, under the Violence of
Cruel Blood-thirsty Spirits, under whose power thou were fallen: And seeing
thee now in such imminent danger to lose thine Eternal Life, he was immediately
sent by the Everlasting Father to rescue thee out of the Hands of these
Robbers, that designed to kill the Heir of Life and Glory in Thee. So here you
may see who is that true Worthy Neighbor, whom you are obliged to bear witness
to, and for, and not against; steadfastly bearing Record of the Truth, from the
Spirit of God's Wisdom dwelling in you, which is the only True Prophet, and
Witness for Jesus in Thee. Verily there are intruding Spirits, that would come
in as False Witnesses, of whom be thou aware, and be not found in the
Conspiracy with them, who would condemn that Just One again, and Crucify the
Life afresh, that is risen out from the Morning Womb of God's Virgin, to be the
Anointed Nazarite. Against whom out of thine own Nation, false Prophets will
arise to seduce, and if possible, deceive my Elect and precious Seed, now
formed into the Heavenly Similitude. But I am come to give thee Light from my
Celestial Glass and Globe, that in it thou may see all the false
transforming Spirits that would subtly bring in old Traditional things;
instead of, and in opposition to my Pure and Unmixed Doctrine, the which I do
into the Clean and Gold-refined Vessels never fail to pour: That so by it thou
may be Tinged throughout, and in thy self feel a mighty Burning Oil,
spiriting thee for Infallible Prophecy. This will give thee the true Witness
for Divine Wisdom in her First-begotten Son Jesus, that now must be testified
unto, as the Finisher and Consummator of what is yet left behind to be done;
and who will not come as a bare Record, only to Prophecy, or Preach the
Everlasting Gospel in thine Earth: This witnessing is much too short before the
coming down of the New Jerusalem, in which thou art to wait, until thou be
transfigured all over by the Holy Ghost, who will then be the true and
undeniable Witness, that will need no John Baptist by Voice to cry, or
proclaim, That this JESUS verily is the Son of God. A greater Testimony than
that of Man verily now is required, for God seeing that to be but weak and
ineffectual, has ordained a more glorious Demonstration, which shall convince
the Unbelieving World that JESUS is risen, and does appear to certain
Witnesses, upon whom the Lot is fallen, and according to Foreknowledge: Who
are to show in their Age and Time, at the Opening of this Oriental Stone and
Diadem of Glory, what manner of Persons they shall in, and through the Touch,
and Sight hereof, come to be, in being made by it all Pure, Wise, and Potent,
according as their JESUS is. For nothing short of this will be worth bearing a
Record to. Therefore I do give you this Charge to look and wait upon this
Change on your selves to see; that so my worthy Recorders ye may be, and
Eyewitnesses of JESUS in your own Personalities. The Dominion will to Wisdom's
Offspring first come down, because they are trained up to Perfection through
Wise Discipline, obeying in all things my Revealed Will. Know also this
Commandment does further reach, than to love thy JESUS in thy Self: That must
not be all; thou art Conjugally and Neighbourly to know him wherever he
dwells Bodily; and with the same Love, Care, and Concern, as for thy self,
always to his Necessities administer supplies, as God gives to thee.

The Tenth Commandment.
THis is the Great, Full, and Last Charge, which I shall leave with thee, still
running Parallel with those Old Covenant Laws which are never to be nullified,
but to be fulfilled according to the Original Exemplar, which was given forth
to the First Paradisical Man; and to be revived now afresh unto a full and
perfect Accomplishment, without abating one Iota or Tittle of them; according
to that Word of thy JESUS, who said he came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it in Thee, and for Thee; who will be the End and the Consummation of
the same, through the obliterating of Sin, and bringing in the Everlasting
Righteousness. Here then thou art forbid all coveting or engrossing Desires,
after what is the Possession and Enjoyment of another. For whatever is of this
does proceed from an Evil Eye, which must be plucked out, as being never to be
satisfied, but still apt to envy at, and covet after what is his Neighbors.
Now here is to be understood a Threefold Neighborhood, that borders upon the
Intellectual Mind. The First, as was showed, is Wisdom's Root and Offspring,
JESUS the Firstborn of all New Creatures, existent Bodily in thy self.
Secondly, He is thy Neighbor, as he may be considered Incarnated in another,
as well as in Thy self. Thirdly, thine Outward Man; which hangs, and cleaves
to thee, as the subtle Gibeonites, that would still be adjoined to the Inward
Man, and never be separated from it. This last Neighbor is as the Esau, that
would come in for his Birthright, who is rejected, and must live by his Sword,
that is to bring him in his Blessing, consisting of the fat things of this
Outward Principle, to which his Blessing gave him Right: And he being thus here
to confined, is not to meddle with Jacob's Portion, that is quite of another
Nature, to whom the Dominion is pronounced to have the Lordship over All, in,
and through Cohabitation with the Shiloh of God, that is thy true Neighbor
indeed.

I. Now as to what thy JESUS in thee has, thou need not to covet; for thou
art in Propriety with Him. As all that is the Father's and mine is his, so what
is his is thine, in common: Which thou shall better understand when to the
Tenth Number thou art come.

II. Thy Restriction lies here at present, not to let out thine Eye upon what
is another's Portion as to Eternal Possessions; for one may come to his
Inheritance before another, according to that Spirit which works as a free
Agent, to increase Spiritual Substance. And this may be either sooner or later,
as the Spirit works more or less industriously; which uses to operate
diversely, according as the Soil and the Nature of the Ground is, that of a much
different Constitution is found. In some this Internal Ground is richer,
pleasanter, fatter, and every way better than it is in others; like as you may
see in the Visible Earth: But every one is to be contented with his Lot, as it
is divided. Caleb's Portion was much above that of his Fellow Brethren, whose
Dwelling was betwixt the upper and nether Springs. So if thou should see thy
Spiritual Neighbor much increased in Powers, in Gifts of Prophecy, in
Knowledge, in understanding the deepest of all Mysteries, and living in a more
stately Habitation than thou, enjoying therein the Virgin Wife of Youth, having
Menservants and Maidservants to command, saying to this, Go, and he goes,
having all things put under, and in subjection to him, as a Solomon in great
Dominion and Glory in the Reign of the Holy Ghost: Yet all this must not draw
thee out to covet. No, you will say, this is hard to come to see all these high
Preferments conferred upon my Spiritual Neighbor, and yet I must not desire
the like Dowry and Riches, to stand upon equal Ground with him. Mistake thou
not, for I do not here prohibit any from looking after the same Immunities and
Increase: But let it be from their own Fountain, opening out of their own deep
Ground, from which every one is to be blessed, according to what Nature and
Soil they are planted in. And there are you to dig deep, till that you shall
come to find that precious Stone, with your own Name upon it, which may advance
and establish you in the like state of Glory. For so it is ordained, that all
that are mine, should improve their own stock of Life, and so each one wear
their own Crowns; not coveting any thing out of themselves, because I have
enough to give to every one of my Children, even a full Revenue; so as there
shall be no occasion of grudging one at another: But their Growths, Degrees,
and Gifts may be different, according as in my own wise Counsel I shall see
meet to dispense, who will be Uncontrollable, giving no account to any
Creature, but will confer my Favors upon such as I see, and know to be most
diligent. For which they shall have no cause to repent who have their Minds
wholly inclined and bent toward ME, and who unto these my Laws do entirely
cleave; which Laws, without a Mosaical Vail, I now present; that thou may
behold the good Will that I do bear unto thee, and unto such as love and know
My Name, so as in pure Nazariteness to separate for the Work, which I have cut
out for you to imitate exactly, as approving your selves in all things, willing
to please Her who will be your Crowning Reward.

III. But I must not forget to caution thee concerning that Out-birth
Neighbor, lest thou should covet that which is his Right in this Outward
Principle: Where he also has a great Lordship, and a Might-Soveraignty, over
all whatever the Visible Earth does bring forth. Here is in this World likewise
a Temporal Kingdom, consisting in Riches, Honor, and Majesty, with Dominion
over their Fellow Creatures, where-from I set thee free.

CHAP. II.
The Opposition which this Translated Spirit met with, during the Delivery of
these Laws.

AS I was strictly engaged to attend the giving out of Wisdom's Paradisical
Laws; that opened in me like a Flaming Shower, which drowned the Old World,
that a New World might in the room of it spring up, my whole New Man walking up
and down therein, and drinking of that pleasant River Pison, which waters this
new-entered Land, into which no Earthly Stuff must be admitted; I could not yet
be free from molestation. For though Sin, that strange deformed Monster, must
look for no welcome here, being for ever Banished this Holy Place, yet after
Death in several Shapes he threatens still to haunt me, often saying he will be
avenged of me, for that I have exposed him to a violent Death, for the making
my way into Paradisical Freedom. Therefore he transforms himself now into a
Spirit, and pursues me, and would bring all my dead Works after me; that so I
might be restless even here, where according to the Eternal Law of Liberty, I
should rest from all Fear and Care.

This occasioned somewhat of Complaint, which I brought before my Mother
Wisdom, telling her, That after Death I did hope, I should have been freed, and
that all Wars should have ceased, when I was once got in within this Gate. But,
replied her Witness, the Spirit of Prophecy in me, I never said Death would
acquit thee so, as that no Temptation at all should molest thee through the
subtilty of the Serpent, who has liberty to prove thee Here, in like manner as
he had liberty to prove thy dear JESUS; who for this end suffered him, that he
might give proof of an unconquerable stedfastness, during the appointed time
that he was in Paradise to abide. So must thou here expect, that the Man of Sin
may by the Angel of the Bottomless Pit be, though dead, again assumed; and may
make War against the Angel of the Covenant: As it is said, There was War in
Heaven; as of Old, so Now again in thee. Therefore to the Law, and to the
Testimony, which within thy Heavens do open, do thou give good heed; that thou
may prevail, and come off a Conqueror, by the keeping of the Commandments,
and the Faith of JESUS. The last Battle which is to be fought is in this
Paradisical Field: Thou art now to engage in a single Combat. Therefore to thee
I bring my Flaming Armor, which is Love and Faith, by which thou will only an
Overcomer be. Remember that Charge of Honoring thy Father and Mother, and do
not thou them disgrace: For now thou art upon the Public Stage, where the
whole Hierarchy of Throne-Powers do thee view, to behold how thy Michael in
thee will Fight against the Dragon, with his Fiery Might. The Honor of thy God
is much herein concerned, that thou do over the Beast and the False Prophet
prevail, defying the Number, and renouncing the Mark of his Name, that nothing
any more he may be ever able to claim in thee. For through Victorious Faith
holding out, thou will see him Cowardly sneak out of Paradise. Since he will
not care to abide there, if he see thee resolutely fixed in the Spirit of my
Might, who foreseeth all his cunning Slights, by which he would pluck thee down
out of Paradise. Then says he, my Design would take place, and I should have
Wisdom in derision, that has no better provided for her Children, but left
them thus to be foiled by the Dragon. See now how this Evil One will, if thou
should fall, reflect upon GOD thy Father, and ME thy Mother: Therefore, dear
Child, for our Honor stand; that so thy days may not be short in the Promised
Land. To which thou will surely come, if thou can hold out all the appointed
time of Temptation: Then another Remove thou shall see, where no more shall
thou to the Dragon's Fury be exposed, but shall the long and everlasting Day
inherit, and keep this Sabbath without end rejoicing, according as thou shall
here Meritoriously vindicate that Name of Mine, which to the World is an
unknown Secret.

I was also further Encouraged by Wisdom against the great Opposition which I
felt, when waiting for the Opening of the Sixth Commandment, there appeared to
me all on a sudden, while She was giving her Counsel and Charge, a glorious
Circle with all Flaming Colors: Upon which I looked very steadfastly. It
continued a good space, as well as I might guess, near upon half a quarter of
an hour, before it vanished. This Circle consisted of various and wonderful
Colors, the inmost part of it was all clear and bright, as the Air without a
Cloud. Then spoke Wisdom's Spirit in me, What have thou seen here but the
Magical Eye, which is an All-seeing Globe, that includes all Light, Power and
Might within its Circle, so that there is no need to go out for any Supply, for
that all lies within the compass of this All-generating Eye: And like as thou
did see it rise in a Moment, so shall it give new Existencies from its own in
the twinkling of an Eye. This is the manner of Paradisical Living, quite
different from the Way of the Inhabitants of the Outward World, who live upon
the Moldy Bread of Sense, upon whose Breast they hang, and cannot endure to be
plucked from it; though they suck in thence the Curse and Poison of God's
Anger, which came in when the Paradisical Life ceased. But to thee that art
come out and separated from these, my Counsel is, that thou entirely rest and
depend upon this Divine Magical Eye, and never wander out from it; so will it
become to thee thy Basket and thy Store: So will it be to thee thy
Fountain-blessing, and thou shall need to know no more, and to take care of no
more, than what this will give forth to thee. For it is an endless Procreating
Source, that still puts forth New Births altogether Supernatural, to which
belongs a pure, sublime, organical Body, having highly irradiated Senses, with
uncorrupted and divine Rationality, such as is grounded upon what is Seen and
Known by This Eye. Hence may be demonstrated the Singularity of those Holy
Beings, which are generated from this Source and Origin. Here also may be
added the Perfect Animal and Vegetable Life, with the Sensitive and Rational,
they all making up the New Creature or Paradisical Man; but after a much
different manner than that after which they are in the Degenerated, or those
that are departed from the Faith. Which Faith is here again to be restored,
through a Magical Operative Life that maintains its own Being, after a
wonderful manner, cutting off all occasions of contracting more with a sinful
state. For there is here no coveting any Mortal or Perishing Things, which the
Low Rational Life stood in need of: But thou being Born into this Seraphical
Nature, which looks only in to God, whose Eternal Stores stand open and free
for thee to come, and take of, as thy proper Right, have no need to go to any
other Fountain. Now as Christ said, All that the Father had was his, so is it
thine by virtue of the same Spirit of Christ in thee, who never crouch'd to
this World for any of its unrighteous Mammon, and who would not disparage his
Father's Housekeeping, to seek any Benevolences from Creatures that lived upon
Self-propriety. Him therefore herein I present to be thy Example; who had a
Body Terrestrial, as thou have, but his Celestial Paradisical Man had Keys to
open all the Treasures either in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath. But I
know thou will say, This is too wonderful for me to aspire to, or to expect.
Nay, not so: For whatever thy JESUS acted here and did, thou may not fear to
imitate: That which is Formed in thee, will certainly drive thee to this, if
thou do not check it by Unbelief. The Nature of that Holy Thing which is
Coagulated within, will contend for this its High Prerogative, and not always,
as it were Ass-riden, be subject to Bestial Properties, and Earthly Spirits.
Who must all to that New Name written within Vail themselves and Bow: And that
so it may accordingly be, I will not fail to aid thee with my Magical Eye.

Which shall give Skill in this for thee to try,
How good it is to live by Faith's supply.
CHAP. III.
The Opposition which this Translated Spirit met with After the Delivery of
these Laws.

UPon the giving down and opening these Paradisical Laws, I was beset with a
Seditious Party, that would have stirred up a Mutiny in me, to contradict this
worthy and precious Covenant, so as it might not take place, or be of force
with me: Saying, These were intolerable Impositions; that none could, or ever
did, reach to the requirings of them: And what was I? Or where was my
Sufficiency more than others, that I should hope, or expect the Accomplishment
of them in my self? This was to go into a Legal Dispensation, and turn the
Covenant of Grace into Works again, so to Yoke and Fetter my self within the
Confines of these strict and severe Laws; and then where was the Liberty that
was to come in by JESUS to set me Free? He having satisfied the Law for me,
that I might not be obligatory to it. Come, come, cried the King-crowned Beast,
away with these Innovations, and receive my Laws, in the performance of which
there will be Ease and Rest. Do thou not see how peaceably all my Subjects
live under me, that bear my Mark and Name? Who are like them, great in Fame,
and mighty through Honor and Riches, which they obtain, by observing my Orders
and Rules? Which I will give to thee, who would have thee Great in my
Principle, and not Despiseable as now thou art.

I. Whereas it is said thou must have no other God but One, and that thou must
own him as thy Creator, and none other before him, this I will permit, and thou
art not prohibited herefrom: Nevertheless thou art not so strictly tied up
here, but that thou may own Subordinate Powers under God, and obey Nature's
Laws for its Self-preservation. This is but equal, and therefore do not slight
these Laws, that are founded upon Reason's bottom, but Sail thou with its Tide,
as thou desire Blessing and Prosperity in this World. Is it not great Folly
in thee, and in such as do join with thee, to be Singular, and to observe such
Laws as none are able to agree with you in, that wisely intend to maintain
their Interest as to the Friendship, and the Favors from the Kingdom of the
World, which, as thou have a Terrestrial Life, and a Mortal Body, thou do
stand in as much need of, as any of the Natural Offspring whatever? Now has
God said indeed unto thee, that thou must neither Eye, nor have reference to
any other, either in the Heavens above, or in the Earth beneath; but must live
upon him for all, singly and undoubtingly, by a Spirit of Faith alone: This is
a Law for Angelicks, but not for Creatures that bear Mortal Shapes, who are
fallen under the Line and Dominion of the Starry Constellations. It is
unavoidable, thou must bow, and be subject subordinately unto the Starry
Heavens, which govern, and constitute, and give forth Right Laws, being such as
consist very well with refined Reason, which you would exclude: And then what
will become of you, when you shall forsake the Order of Sense and Reason, which
your New Laws call Low and Earthy? Must you not hereby needs bring all into
Desolation and Ruin upon your External Comely Station, and be a Byword, and a
Derision to all your Fellow Creatures, that you will before your Eyes see fair
and flourishing Branches, thriving through obedience to the Laws of this my
present, and visible Kingdom? For I do not defer my Rewards, but do give them
as soon as their Work is done; neither do I keep my Subjects and Children in
such suspense and waiting for what they do not See, so awing them in the mean
time, as they must not so much as look awry, or be Company for any other but
Seraphicks. O who can such a Life as this bear, while living in this Mortal
Sphere? Oh come out, and regard not this self-destroying Covenant, which will
infallibly make a Breach, and set all at variance against thee, if thou
should keep to it. Then I must tell thee, Wars from my Principle shall for
ever annoy thee: Lo, this is my last Summons to thee, and if thou all my
Love-Intreaties, and Rational Laws shall still renounce and disobey, then
expect that I will raise up the whole Earth's Monarchy against thee. For they
will all concur with me against such, as design to observe these singular Laws,
which are so opposite to Our Decrees, that if we should among our Subjects any
of these once allow, we soon should lose our Sovereignty over them, and be our
selves made to own a Superior Monarchy, by the utter loss of our own Dominion.
Ah, but this will not be yielded to, I do assure thee: For verily all Power and
Force to the utmost ends of the Earth we will call in, and will War with
Reason's mighty Sword and Spear, till we see Garments rouled in Blood every
where: Thou shall through Blood the Conquest get, and seeing that Terms of
Peace thou have refused, War within thy Paradise is Proclaimed. Now think not
that State with all its Laws, which Wisdom thy Mother has brought down, shall
from our mighty power thee secure, or from our sharp and piercing Hosts thee
deliver. Therefore in short, if thou will set thy Seal to these Articles that I
do here present to thee, then thou may hereby purchase thy Peace and
Content. As,

I. In the first place, thou art to own me who am the Prince that Rules in the
Astral Region, who by these visible natural Planets do rule the whole Day of
all lower Created Beings.

II. I require to be feared, worshipped, and confided in; the Image of whom
thou shall make to thy self.

III. Thou shall not be ashamed to bear my Name, or to act forth in all my
Natural and Sensual Properties, as Baptized into the Laver of Common
Regeneration.

IV. Thou shall rest from thine ordinary Calling, and from the work of thine
Hands, and shall dedicate a Day in special, to bring in thy Peace Offerings,
and to pay thy Vows, as a Tributary unto me thy King.

V. Thou shall love and honor me, as a Father that has begotten thee, and
that does also take care to provide worthily for thee; that thou may not
disparage thy Birthright to all these visible good Things.

VI. Thou art not to kill, or wound, the Life of that Judicious Spirit of
Reason, which is the Choicest Plant in thy Ground, and my True Prophet that
gives forth my Mind expressly.

VII. Thou art not to Adulterate from me, who am thy Natural Husband, being
joined and knit together, by that immutable Bond of Love's Sensuality; from
which if thou do depart before Death, thou highly transgressest against the
Law of me thy First Husband, who will never acquit thee, nor hold thee
guiltless in so great a Disloyalty.

VIII. Thou art not to Rob me of what is my Right, as I am the chief and the
great Monarch in this Outward World, who will not have any one Title,
Prerogative, or Revenue belonging to my Region taken from me, or diminished.

IX. Thou art not to witness against, or be at Enmity with thy Fellow
Offspring, thine adjoining Neighbor; but art to love him as thy self, as
being compacted together, and growing up Naturally with him as an Inhabitant
in, and from, the Earthly Source.

X. Thou art not to Covet, or to Desire any thing which I have not to give.

If this my Charge thou do observe, the whole Earthly Principle shall then be
employed to Contrive, Traffic, and get increase of Riches and Honors for
thee, that thou may spend thy Life in Pleasantness, Joy, and Content. Expect
not that Heaven will give forth any thing unto thee, till after the dissolution
of thy Body: Therefore thou art not to covet in this Lifetime the things that
are reserved for Eternity. Not but that thou may have liberty of setting up
Divine Ordinances, and attending them in their appointed Course, so long as
thou do not rend, or neglect the Duties of thy Outward Calling; giving God
his due, and Man his, and thy self his, so all together jointly and mixedly as
thy Rational Service. Thus thou see my Kingdom has substantial, good, and
prudent Laws, which now I expect thou should subscribe to, as thou art
under, and in, my Dominion: Who though I cannot reach thy Paradisical Man, yet
so long as thou live in a Terrestrial Body, that is, and will be, liable to
all the Penalties that shall for the Breach of these Laws be inflicted.

CHAP. IV.
The Reply of Wisdom's Paradisical Inhabitant to the King-Crowned Beast, as in
Conjunction with the False Prophet.

O Thou subtle Spirit! How long will thou not cease to seduce and tempt, plying
hard upon the Newborn Innocent, which from thy Kingdom is gone out? I am not
now ignorant of thy great rage, neither can thou deceive me by putting on a
seeming holy Shape, pretending to an Unparalled, Judicious Uprightness, with
all thy cunning slight. These Arguments thou have to me presented, to draw me
from the Great Work that is intended by Wisdom: But know that I this day do thy
Laws defy, and am not afraid of thy terrible Might; and all Summons, in order
to a Compliance with that low, sordid, corrupt Rational Life, I do here in
Wisdom's holy fear, renounce and despise. Far be it from me ever to listen to
them: I, who have had such a Call out of the Precinct, where the Dragon and the
Beast, the professed Enemies of My God and his Wisdom, do exercise their
Sovereignty, can have no Inclinations of returning back: I cannot, I will not,
let them threaten me never so long, to make me feel the Effects of their Fury,
which they boast they can let forth upon that part, which is not yet freed from
their Astral Dominion. All this, O mighty subtle Prince, I have well
considered: Even how far your Power against me may extend. I go not about to
diminish you of your Right: Neither do I in the least envy you your strong,
jealous and fiery Might, or Dominion.

Only this you must give me leave to do, to disclaim your Usurped Power, as
making a Challenge to any part in me, who do well know that from your Arbitrary
Government, I am set free by the Birth of Jesus in me. And now upon my own
Peril it would be, should I own any other Lawgiver or King, besides Virgin
Wisdom in Him, who is the Yea, and the Amen.

Now if this be the Ground of your Quarrel and Despite, that I will not yield
to your Summons, or agree to any of your Articles, I slight both your Cause and
you. Nor will I ever submit to any Conditions that shall be inconsistent with
what Wisdom has already my Hand and Seal to, that so I might not from her Laws
depart, in adherence to which, I doubt not but perfect Freedom to find, and to
be delivered from your Insolence wholly; the most Potent Instrument that you
have in your Kingdom, being too weak to Encounter God's Agent, the Spirit of
Wisdom, who will with me rest, and so defeat all Plots and Counsels that are
contrived by the whole Dark Hierarchy, conspiring in your Earthly Sphere.
Therefore I will not fear you, O great Leviathan, though you have defied and
made light of that unspotted Mirror of God's Wisdom; saying, Tush, let me see
if she can secure you, or deliver you out of my Hands, who can command Legions
of Spirits to torment and devour you. Such like Threats as these I can hear,
and your Denunciations against Faith's Resoluteness bear, knowing who is my
Standard Bearer, who will come in to my Relief, bringing in that which will
make me able to hold out, even for a long Siege. For which Wisdom has taught
me to provide, expecting as little Favor from thee, and thy Principle, as from
an open Proclaimed Enemy: The Contest is come now to be so great, that the
Virgin Seed must yet again in Nature spring and rise, till thy Head, O Serpent,
be brought under foot, and by the Lamb of God so crushed; that no more Revenge
or Plots may by that Head be contrived. Which Head is the Seat of the Imaginary
Mind, that flows in like a mighty Torrent, as I have seen sometimes witnessed
in sorrow; as also out of the same Source the flowings of strong Reasonings,
which are as the Artillery of War, that thou have against me to display. By
which indeed I grant thou have overcome World after World, so that all People,
Nations, and Languages, have bowed and submitted to thy Monarchy; because it is
agreeable to an Outward Natural Birth, which is conceived and brought forth out
of the Lapsed Womb of Rationality. The Life's Food, of which is only
Sensibility, united with these gross and low Elements, in which the Universe of
Creatures consisting, do like Natural Children fall under thy Starry Dominion,
and to all thy Laws and Constitutions incline, and voluntarily them obey.
Against such, O King of the Bottomless Pit, thou will never proclaim War: Only
these shall live peaceably within thy Gates. But for such as are again
conceived in Virgin Wisdom's Womb, and brought forth from between her
Everlasting Knees, at whose Birth the Eternal Day Star breaks out, there is
no Quarter to be given: Therefore Consultations from thy dark Herodian Kingdom
do begin immediately, as that which is not able to bear or hear of another
King, that comes to thwart or alter the whole Course of Things, as they are
established in thy Natural and Earthly Kingdom. But why, O great Prince of
Darkness, should thou be offended at the Birth of Emmanuel from the Virgin
Womb? It will not so presently turn thee out of Dominion and Possession every
where, as to have no place in the Earth more. Why art thou so Jealous? Thy
Dominion here is large enough, and like so to be; for the Earthly Inhabitants
will still be thine, even all such as are of the Unrighteous and Serpently
Seed; there is no danger but they will still bear thine Image, and Likeness,
and so be on thy side to make War against the Lamb, and his Bride, who are
agreed to live, and to maintain against thee, their Ancient Rights, in their
Paradisical Kingdom; out of which they are resolved to throw thee, with all
thine accursed and insinuating Powers, which like so many Caterpillars would
eat holes in, and so spoil and devour our Paradisical Flowers. Do not think
thou shall for ever ingross all Spirits to thy self: Thy Date is seen in
Wisdom's Calendar, and the Number of the Time of thy Ten-horned Beast almost
accomplished, when he must return to his own place, and be no more suffered to
tempt those that have received the most Holy, and most Precious Name: Whose
Engraving Within and Without, shall be that signal Token of Victory over thee,
and thy Seven-headed Nations, whom thou have called in to thine Aid, if that
possibly hereby thou might overturn the great Design of Wisdom. Who now has
sounded her Trumpet, that whosoever will fly to her Banner, shall be securely
hid from thy Eye, and be made so Strong and Wise, as to do such Exploits, by
the Weapons of Faith, as shall thee Amaze and Terrify.

Therefore know, that to the Eternal Law and Testimony given forth in Paradise;
to that I say, and say it again, as an immutable Assertion from which I shall
never depart; I am resolved to cleave, and by it to stand, until it shall make
me altogether Righteous, and so Complete, that thou may be grieved to see
that God has perfected Holiness in so high a degree, in that which was the
Fallen Humanity, and which under thy Dominion did once lie, but is now
recovered out of it by the Mighty Arm of the Lord of Hosts. And he will guard
me from thy Fury, JEHOVAH will be my Safeguard, yea, the whole Blessed Trinity
will consult my Security, if I am found to confide therein, Wherefore I shall
not be further solicitous to Answer any of thy Upbraidings; But to my Ark of
Strength I will retire, And I leave thee in thy Anguishing Fire. From Wisdom's
Offspring this total and final Answer is given in, with which let thy Mouth, O
roaring Lion, be for ever stopped; even so, Amen.

Whoever would be further informed of the Leadings of the Divine Wisdom, may
consider what is said of Her Twelves Gates, and of the Magical Eye, in a Book
called, The Revelation of Revelations, Printed 1683. Quarto.

THE CONCLUSION.
THere is a Mystical Paradise, as well as a Local, which opens from a pure
Magical Center, and is a wonderful state to know and witness: It chiefly stands
in Divine Visions, Revelations, Idea's, Presentations, Manifestations in
Sounds, Trumpets, Voices, Inspeakings; in Powers, Raptures, Joys, and Sensible
Feelings: All which Golden Springs flow from out of the Bowels of the New
Paradisical Earth; according as Wisdom did some time afterward Declare; who was
then also pleased to Declare her Mind in this manner;

Ye that are resolved to Taste of these flowing Sweets, take heed to the LAWS
of PARADISE, and be not in the DUALITY, halting between Two Principles.

The Law FROM Thy Mouth is better unto me, than Thousands of Gold and Silver.
Psalm. 119. 72.

Uncover thou mine Eyes, [by the taking away of the EARTHY Vail, and the
opening of the PARADISICAL Life and Sensation] that I may behold Wondrous
Things out of thy Law, ver. 18.

FINIS.

