A LETTER To the Right Honorable WILLIAM LENTHALL, Esquire. Speaker of the
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.

Giving a true Relation of a late great Victory obtained by the Parliaments
Forces against the Scots near Dundee.

The taking the old General Lesley, Lord Chancellor Louden, Lord Crauford
Linsey, Lord Ogleby, and 300 more, whereof diverse of quality.

AS ALSO, A true Relation (with the particulars) of a great Victory by our
Forces near Worcester, against the King of Scots Army, 5000. of the Enemy killed
and taken, and the taking of the Royal Fort in WORCESTER.

Printed and Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Francis Leach. 1651.

A LETTER For the Right Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire Speaker of the
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
SIR,
I Could not choose but acquaint you with the blessing of God upon our
proceedings here in Scotland: since Sterling Castle was taken in, Lieut. Genesis
Monk is marched to Dundee for the reducing of that place, who when he had
planted himself conveniently before the town, summoned it; the enemy in answer
to his summons sent him a Proclamation from their King to this effect, That
whosoever among them would lay down their arms and come into them should have
mercy: this impudence of theirs was occasioned by the promise of old Lesley
Earl Leven, with diverse other Lords and Ministers Commissioned from their King
to raise forces, whereby he would relieve the town; private intelligence being
given of their place of rendezvous about 7 miles from Dundee, Col. Allured with
his Regiment of Horse, and two Troops of Dragoons on Thursday the 28 of August,
1651. surprised old Lesley E. Levin, Lord Chancellor Loudoun, Lord Crawford
Linsey, Lord Ogleby, 6 or 7 of their principal Ministers, with three hundred
more, whereof diverse of Quality and Eminency. By which mercy you will I am
confident have a good account of Dundee speedily, which is a rich town, and
has in the Harbor forty or fifty Sail of Ships. These and other late Successes
I hope will extort thankfulness from us to the God of our mercy and
consolation; which is all at present from

Your most humble Servant, T. L.
Leith Aug. 30. 1651
A true Relation, with the particulars of a great Victory by our Forces near
Worcester, against the King of Scots Army, etc.
SIR,
THis day has been a very glorious day, this day twelve-moneth was glorious at
Dunbar, this day has been glorious before Worcester, the word then was the
Lord of Hosts and so it was now, and indeed the Lord of Hosts was wonderfully
with us, the same signal we had now as then, which was to have no white about
us, and indeed the Lord has clothed us with white garments, though to the
enemy they have been bloody: only this has been the difference, that at Dunbar
our work was at break of day, and done ere the morning was over, but now it was
toward the shutting of the evening, and not past till the night came so on us
that we could not see far before us; that was the beginning of their fall
before the appearance of the Lord Jesus, this seems to be the setting of the
young Kings glory.

In the morning Lieut. Genesis Fleetwood had order to advance with his brigade on
the other side Severn, and all things being prepared for the making of a bridge,
and having cleared our passages with a forlorn, we laid a bridge over severn in
that place where the river Team runs into it, so that by that means we had an
advantage to lay another bridge over the river Team which accordingly was done,
our foot disputed the hedges with much courage and resolution, the fight began
on the other side of Severn, and our Foot from this side began it, they
clearing the way for the rest to come over after them, the right Wing of Lieut.
General Fleetwoods Forces came over the bridge that was made over Team, while
the left Wing disputed the bridge at Poyke a quarter of a mile beyond the
River, which dispute lasted a long time, and was very hot, but the Lord gave
our men to gain ground of the Enemy, till we had beaten them out of the
ground, the charges was very hot for a while, but the Lord owned us in this
Contest, and the Enemy fled before us; while this was doing, the enemy rallying
made a very bold sally out on this side of the Town, and came with great
bodies of horse and foot, supposing most of our Army had been drawn out on the
other side, they gave our men a very hot salute, and put them to a little
retreat, and disorder; but in a short while the Lord gave us victory on this
side also, our foot did very noble and gallant service, and they disputed with
them not only the hedges, but followed them boldly to the very mouth of their
Cannon which was planted on their Mountain works, at length we gained their
works, (and planted their great Guns against them in the Town) and we hear
that some of our horse and foot are in the North and East end of the Town; the
night came on so fast that he could not pursue further; most of their horse are
escaped, but my Lord General has dispatched Major General Harrisons Brigade
after them, to follow them which way soever they are gone; we cannot yet give
an account who are taken or slain, but we conceive the number of their slain
far exceeds the number of the prisoners (but I guess the number of the killed
and taken to be about 5000) to morrow we shall be able to give you a fuller
relation, the Lord has done great things for England. Our Quartermaster
General, and Cap. Jones are slain, and Mr. Howard Captain of the Lifeguard
is wounded; Major Genesis Lamberts horse was shot under him, but through the
goodness of God we have not lost many; a prisoner that we have taken tells us,
that he believes their King is either slain or taken. The Country would do
well to rise upon the Fugitives, that they may not rally again, or imbodie to
do any more mischief. You know now what you are to do, bless the Lord with
us, and for us; the next shall be more punctual, I am

Yours to serve you ROBERT STAPYLTON.
From our Quarters on the East side of Severn, near the River, 10 at night, 3
Sept. 1651. For Cap. George Bishop these at Whitehall.



FINIS.

