THE OFFICE AND DVTIE of Constables, Churchwardens, and other the Overseers of
the Poor: Together with the Office and Duty of the Surveyours of the
Highways. Collected for the help and benefit of such as are ignorant and
unskilful in the discharge and execution of the said Offices.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel, and are to be sold by Francis Eaglesfield
at the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

To the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, the labor I have taken for thy behoof, I may boldly say,
does require a favorable acceptance: for matters of as small moment as this
have threatened on thee as great kindness, and received for their pains
friendly entreaty. I have studied to be brief I hope without obscurity, for
sparing thy time, the chiefest treasure. And did I doubt that these my weak
endeavors in the equal judgment of such as be indifferently affected, would
not be admitted as commodious, rather then rejected as superfluous, I had
procured them a veil of greater brightness, which might increase the
reputation of their perfections, if any, and shadow their wants and
deformities. It is true, I am not ignorant how dangerous it is to put my self
so far forth into the Sea of common opinion, and I cannot but see that by
reason of the shelves and rocks of injurious conceits, which are ready to be
found on every hand, I am like to pass no small adventure; however for once I
have ventured to commit my self to thy favorable censure, who am

Thine, JOHN LAYER.

A brief direction touching the office and duty of Constables, collected for
the help of such as are unskilful and ignorant in the discharge and execution
of the said office.
COnstables are inferior officers ordained for the conservation of the peace,
Constables defined.
and are of two sorts.

Constables of Hundreds and Franchises, Two kinds of Constables.
called the chief or high Constables. Constables of Villages and Parishes,
called the petty Constables.

The general office and duty of the chief Constables consists in the
maintenance of the peace, Chief Constables their office.
in presenting to the Justices the defects of watches, and defaults of the
Kings highways, to collect and pay the moneys charged and raised in and upon
the Country, to distribute the precepts and warrants of the Magistrates to the
petty Constables of villages, and to have respect to the Arms within their
hundred, etc.

In ancient time these officers were appointed and sworn by the Sheriff of the
shire in his Court called the Sheriff's Turn: Where anciently, and now,
elected and svvorn.
But at this day they are usually elected and sworn at the general Sessions of
the peace (of the most sufficient and discreet yeomen) and sometime from thence
referred to the choice and swearing of the Justices of their division.

Constables of Villages were devised for the ease and help of the Constables of
Hundreds, Petty Constab. their use and office.
and have the same power within their parish, as the chief Constable has in
his hundred. Who they ought to be.
They are to be chosen of the abler sort of Parishioners, and the office not to
be put upon the meaner sort, if it may be.

It is requisite also that they have these three properties, honesty,
knowledge, and ability. First, honesty, to execute their office truly and
indifferently without malice or affection. Secondly, knowledge, to understa^d
what they ought to do. Thirdly, ability as well in estate as in body, that they
may intend and execute their office fully and substantially, so as neither
through impotency of body or indigency of estate he neglect the same.

The proper place to choose and swear the petty Constables is the Leet; Where
elected and svvorn.
but in their default, or for insufficiency of choice there made, the common
practice is that the Justices of peace in their division do cause the
inhabitants, where such default or insufficiency of choice is made, to make
better choice and to bring them before them to take their oath. But others are
of opinion, that the remedy of the choice of mean Constables in the Leets ought
rather to be reformed at the general quarter Sessions, who are not only to
make new choice, but to punish the Steward of such Leet for making the
insufficient choice.

The form of the oath of a Constable.

You shall swear well and truly to serve our Sovereigne Lord the King in the
office of a Constable; Oath.
you shall see and cause his Majesty's peace to be well and duly kept and
preserved to the utmost of your power; you shall arrest all such persons, as in
your presence shall ride or go armed offensively, or shall commit or make any
riot, affray, or other breach of his Majesty's peace; you shall do your best
endeavor upon complaint to you made to apprehend all Felons, Barritours and
Rioters, or persons riotously assembled, and if any such offenders shall make
resistance with force, you shall levy Huy and cry, and shall pursue them until
they be taken: You shall do your best endeavor that the watch in your town be
duly kept, and that Huy and cry be duly pursued according to the statutes: And
that the statute made for the punishing of rogues, vagabonds and night-walkers,
and such other idle and wandering persons coming within your liberties be duly
put in execution, you shall have a watchful eye to such persons as shall
maintein or keep any common house or place where any unlawful games or plays
are or shall be used, as also to such as shall frequent or use such places, or
shall exercise or use any unlawful games or plays there or elsewhere
contrary to the statute, and you shall have a care for the maintenance of
archerie, according to the statute. At your Assizes, Sessions or Leet, you
shall present all and every the offenses committed or done contrary to the
statutes made and provided for the restraint of the inordinate haunting and
tippling in Taverns, Innes, Alehouses and other Victualling-houses, and for the
repressing of drunkenness and profane swearing; you shall true presentment
make of all bloud-shedding, affraies, outcries, rescues, and other offenses
committed or done against the Kings peace within your limits; you shall well
and duly execute all precepts and warrants to you directed from the Justices of
the peace and others in authority in this County. And you shall well and duly
according to your knowledge, power and ability, do and execute all other things
belonging to the office of a Constable, so long as you shall continue in the
said office. So help you God, etc.

This or the like oath may be administered to the Constable of the Hundred, with
this addition, St. 5. Elis. c. 4.
that they keep their statute Sessions at such times and in such manner as is
prescribed by the statute; and that in all such rates and taxes where they have
authority to charge their Hundred, they do it justly and indifferently in each
behalf.

I have exemplified this oath at large, because therein as well the Constables
of Hundreds as of Villages may briefly see and discern the chief particulars of
their office.

The duty as well of the chief Constables of hundreds as of the petty
Constables of villages and parishes consists chiefly in matters concerning
the peace, Division of their office.
either by their own authority or under the authority of others.

The conservation and maintenance of the peace stands in these three things.
Their office concerning the peace.
First, in foreseeing that nothing be done that tends either directly, or by
means, to the breach of the peace; Secondly, in quieting or pacifying those
that are occupied in the breach of the peace; Thirdly, in punishing such as
have already broke the peace

The endeavor of all these belongs to the Constables, but the first and last
more esspecially apperteineth to the Justice of the peace.

By the breach of the peace is understood, What is the breach of the peace.
not only that actual fighting, affray and battery, but also every murder,
manslaughter, rape, robbery, and other felony whatsoever; and by some opinions
every assaulting or putting in fear of the Kings people, whether it be by
unlawful wearing of armor, or by assembling of people to do any unlawful act
whatsoever.

And for the better preventing that nothing be done against the peace, any of
these officers may take and arrest all suspected persons, as well strangers as
others, which walk in the night and sleep in the day, or which do haunt any
house suspected of bawdry, or shall in the night use other suspicious company,
or shall do or commit any outrage or other misdemeanour, and they may carry
them before a Justice of the peace to find surety of their good behavior. And
if any such officer be not of sufficient strength to do it alone, he may
require meet aid of his neighbors thereto, and they in such case are
punishable for neglecting to assist him. Night-vvatches.


They shall also appoint night-watches from the feast of Ascension until
Michaelmas yearly, by two or more watchmen, according to the number of the
inhabitants of the town, all the night from sun setting to sun rising, for
the arresting of all such persons as do walk abroad in the night season as well
strangers as others.

These officers ought not only to see these watches duly set and kept, Huy and
cry.
but ought also to raise huy and cry after such as shall disturb and refuse to
obey the arrest of the watchmen, and that the persons appointed for this
service be men of discretion, able bodies and sufficiently armed.

These watchmen shall be appointed by the Constable by course or turn, Watchmen
how appointed.
and not at the Constables discretion. Refusers to vvatch.
And if any one so appointed shall refuse to watch, the Constable ex officio
(by some opinions) may set such person in the stocks for such his contempt, but
the safest way (as I conceive) is to charge the next in turn, and forthwith to
convent the party before the next Justice of peace, by him to be bound over to
the next general Sessions of the peace there to be indicted for his offense.

The watchmen thus appointed, may have these or the like instructions or
directions given them.

To keep the peace amongst themselves, Watchmans charge.
to continue their watch diligently until the Sunne-rising without noise and
disturbance of the inhabitants, that they abide and frequent the common
passages, but so as they have regard also to all other places, that they
examine all such persons as they shall see stirring or shall pass by them,
what they be, whence they come, whether they go, and the reason of their late
travel or being abroad, and if cause of suspicion be found in them to stay
them, if they obey not but resist, to constrain them by force, and to beat them
for resisting the peace of the Realm, if they be too strong or fly them, to
levy huy and cry for the apprehending of them, and to set them in the stocks
until the morning, and then to have them before some Justice of peace to be
dealt withal according to justice; to resort such places where they behold any
candle or fire-light to know the cause, or where they hear any noise of
people, especially in Taverns, Innes, and Alehouses, and finding any thereto
admonish them to depart, and refusing, to compel them as aforesaid. And if any
unknown person, horseman or footman shall pass by them, or that shall drive
any cattle, horse, or the like, or that shall carry any burden on horse back,
cart or otherwise to stay them till the morning to justify themselves, unless
they can render good account both of themselves, their company and carriage,
and if any post come by them to know what number they have, lest offenders also
pass under that pretense.

And the Constables are also to be aiding and assisting to these watchmen upon
all occasion. Constables must aid the vvatch.


And the Constables of hundreds and of towns ought to present to the Justices
the defaults of watches and of highways, Defaults of watches.
and of such as lodge strangers for whom they will not answer.

If any person whatsoever (except the Kings servants and ministers, Offensive
arms.
in his presence, or in executing his precepts, or such as shall assist them,
or except it be upon pursuit of huy and cry, appeasing of riots, or the like,
or in going to, or from the musters) shall ride or go armed offensively, or in
terrore^ populi, by night or by day, in fairs, markets or any other place, the
Constables may take and seize such armor from him, and may apprise and sell
the same for the Kings use, and may also carry him before a Justice of peace
who may bind such party to the peace or good behavior, and for want of
sureties may commit him to the gaol.

And all officers that have been remiss or negligent in the execution of this
statute shall be punished according to the discretion of the Justices of Assise.

If any great assemblies or rumor of people be made in manner of insurrection,
Insurrections, riots, etc.
then the Sheriff, Constables, etc. having knowledge thereof, ought to attend
the Sheriff and the Justices, and to go with the strength of the County and to
oppose themselves against it, and also to take arrest and imprison the
offenders; and so ought they to do upon riot, rout, or unlawful assembly, or
against any forcible entry or deteiner.

If any man threaten to kill or wound another in the hearing of a Constable,
One threatened.
and he who is so threatened do pray such Constable to arrest the other to find
surety of the peace, then may and ought the said Constable to arrest him to go
and find surety before a Justice of peace, and if he refuse to go or flies,
the Constable may imprison him in the stocks, till he have sufficient aid to
convey him as aforesaid. But if he yield to go it is requisite that he take the
party threatened with him to the Justice.

If a Constable shall see any man going about to break the peace, Pacifying the
breach of the peace.
as by using hot words by which an affray is like to grow, he may and ought in
the Kings name to command them to depart and surcease upon pain of
imprisonment, and if they will not depart but shall draw weapon or give any
blow, then ought he to do his best endeavor to depart them, And he may for
that purpose both use his own weapon, and may also command others to assist
him, And if thereby such officer, or any other person coming to assist him do
take any hurt, he shall have good remedy by action against him that hurt him;
but if any of them that made the affray be hurt by such officer, or by any of
his company, then such person so hurt shall have no remedy for it.

If the affray be great and dangerous then may he in the Kings name make
Proclamation, Make Proclamation.
that the affrayers shall keep the Kings peace and depart. And if they will not
depart but make resistance, he may commit them for a time to the stocks, till
their heat be over, or that he may carry them before a Justice of the peace to
find surety, especially, if any person have received hurt in the affray.

If the affray be in a house, Pursuit of affrayers.
and the doors shut, the Constable may break into the house to see the peace
kept, though none of the parties have taken any hurt; or if he that makes the
affray fly into any house, the Constable (in fresh suit) may break into the
house and apprehend the affrayers, or if he fly into another County, the
Constable (in fresh suit) may pursue them, and cause them to be taken there,
but he can meddle no further with them but as a private person may do, that is,
to carry them before a Justice of peace of the County where they are taken, to
cause them to find surety for the peace. But if the affrayers fly into a
franchise within the same County, the Constable may in fresh suit pursue and
take them out of the franchise.

The Constable after an affray, The affray ended.
and not present at the same, cannot without a warrant arrest the affrayers,
except some person have received some hurt.

If the Constable that shall be present at an affray, Punished for not
assisting.
does not his best endeavor to part the affrayers, or being requested to
assist in the pacifying of an affray done out of his presence does not go
forthwith, in both these cases he shall be deeply fined.

If any shall assault a Constable in the execution of his office, Assault a
Constable.
he may not only lawfully defend himself, but may also arrest the offenders,
and carry them before a Justice of peace, etc.

Every private man being present before, Private man.
or in, and during the time of an affray, may and ought to stay and part the
affrayers, or any that shall come to their assistance, but may not hurt or
imprison them unless some person be dangerously hurt in the affray.

Note that it is properly no affray, Affray what.
unless there be some weapon drawn, or some stroke given, or offered to be
given, or other attempt to such purpose; for if men contend only in hot words,
this is no affray, neither may the Constable for words only, lay hands upon
them unless they shall threaten also to kill, beat, hurt, or wound another.

If one assault a man in or nigh the highway to rob him and he be taken by the
true man, or by any other, Assault.
and be brought to the Constable, then ought such a Constable not only to take
him to his ward, but also to carry him before a Justice of peace to cause him
to find surety for the good behavior.

So if any man do suspect another of murder or felony, Arrest.
and do declare the same to the Constable of the place, then may the Constable
arrest such suspected person, and carry him with his accuser to some Justice of
the peace, etc.

A felony being newly committed, Search.
the Constable within his limits may search for the felon, or the goods
stolen, for it is a chief part of their office to suppress felons, for if
there be but a common fame that A. B. has done a felony, it is cause
sufficient for the Constable that shall thereof suspect him to arrest him for
it.

If any man shall fly for felony, Seize the goods of a felon.
it is the office of the Constable of the town to seize on his goods, and to
keep them safely: for the town is to answer for the loss and impairing of
them; and therefore it is fit that he do it by Indenture taken in the presence
and under the testy of the honest inhabitants.

In like manner upon the apprehension of any person for felony, the Kings
officers may seize on all the goods and chattels of the offenders, but shall
preserve them, dispending only so much of them, as is fit for the necessary
sustentation of the owner imprisoned, without wasting or disposing of them
until the party be convicted; for then, and not before the property of them is
in the Crown.

Observe, that in all cases, Conveying of prisoners.
where this officer has arrested, or has committed to his ward an offender,
that ought to be conveyed to the goal, such officer is not bound instantly to
carry him thither, but may for a reasonable time safely detain him in the
stocks, or elsewhere, until convenient provision of strength may be made to
convey him safely.

The jailer of the Prison, to which such an offender is sent, must receive him
freely, without taking any thing of the bringer. And every person that shall be
so sent, having means and ability, shall bear his own charges, Charges of
conveying Prisoners.
to be levied of his goods and chattels by the Constable by warrant from a
Justice of the peace; and not having any goods, etc. then to be born by the
Parish where such a fellon is apprehended by an indifferent assessement to be
made by the Constables and Churchwardens, and two or more of the honest
inhabitants there, by allowance of one Justice of peace.

The Constable having received a huy and cry for any felony, Huy and Cry.
murder, robbery, etc. ought with all possible speed to make diligent pursuit
after the offenders, both by horsemen and footmen, from town to town and from
County to County, which way it is directed, and to make diligent search and
enquiry for such within his own limits, for otherwise it is no lawful pursuit.
And the Constable for his particular neglect herein, shall be fined, and the
whole hundred where the robbery was done shall answer for the robbery and the
damages, if none of the felons be taken or known within forty days after the
robbery committed

And the inhabitants of any other hundred wherein negligence or defect of
pursuit and fresh suite shall happen shall answer and satisfy the one moity
to the hundred so damnified.

And when huy and cry is first levied, it ought to be sent to every town round
about, East, West, North, and South, and they shall do well to express in
writing to the pursuers the quality of the thing stolen, with the color and
marks, and also to describe the number of the felons, their horse, apparel, etc.

If a man be slain within the limits and bounds of any town, in the day time,
and the murderer escape, the whole town shall be amerced for the escape.

Upon any felony committed all men generally shall be ready at the commandment
of the Sheriff, All men must pursue felons.
etc. and at the cry of the Country to pursue and arrest felons upon pain to
be grievously fined. And every man is a sufficient Bailiff or Officer to
apprehend him that is pursued by huy and cry; and if he be taken with the thing
supposed to be stolen, though he neither be of evil fame, nor a stranger, yet
every man may commit, as well such suspected person, as also such goods to the
Constable of the town where they be apprehended, to answer the King according
to the Law.

Note that these officers may break open any man's house to apprehend a felon,
Break into a house for felons.
or any person vehemently suspected of felony, being in the said house, and so
may they do in any other case where the King is a party.

As watches in the night, Ward.
so warding by the day shall be appointed in every town and village for the
apprehending of rogues and vagabonds, and for safety and good order. And for
that purpose, that there be able persons appointed and sufficiently weaponed to
assist the Constables of every town to attach such vagabonds, etc. And if any
township shall not observe this order for the attaching and punishing of the
said vagabonds, then the Justices to set due punishment by fine upon the whole
township or upon such party in the town as shall be found in default.

Note that every person whatsoever, Rogues and Vagrants.
above the age of seven years, that under any pretense or color whatsoever
shall wander and beg out of their own parish, whether with pass or certificate
or without, and every one that carries any manner of pass, or other
certificate for that purpose without a guide shall be apprehended, punished and
conveyed as a rogue; for the law allows no person whatsoever to wander and
beg, nor any to make passes to that end: wherefore all pasports and
certificates to ask relief in any kind are either false and counterfeit or
otherwise contrary to the Law, and the bearers of such passes are to be
punished and conveyed as aforesaid, and their false passes taken from them, or
else to be carried before the next Justice of peace to be sent to the gaol, or
to be strictly examined touching the makers of such passes, to the end they may
be found out and punished. These persons hereafter named shall be deemed and
punished as rogues, viz. all persons wandering and misordering themselves, all
persons which cannot render a lawful account of their travel, all Irish people
wandering and begging under any pretense whatsoever, all persons calling
themselves scholars going about begging, all seafaring men pretending loss of
their ships or goods going about begging, all idle persons going either about
begging or feigning themselves to have knowledge in Physiognomy, Palmestry, or
other like crafty science, or pretending that they can tell destinies,
fortunes, or such other fantastical imaginations; all persons calling
themselves Proctours, Procurers, Patentgatherers, or collectours of gaols,
prisons or hospitals; all Fencers, Bearwards, common Players of interludes, and
Minstrels wandering abroad being not lawfully authorized; all Juglers, Tinkers,
Pedlers, petty Chapmen and Glassemen wandering abroad, all wandering persons and
common laborers, being of able bodies, using loytering and refusing to work
for such reasonable wages as is taxed, or commonly given there where such
persons do inhabit, having not living otherwise to maintain themselves; all
persons delivered out of goals that beg for their fees, or otherwise do travel
begging; all persons that shall wander abroad begging, pretending loss by fire
or otherwise, and all persons not being felons wandering and pretending
themselves to be Egyptians, and all persons wandering in that habit, form, or
attire of Counterfeit Egyptians.

Soldiers and Mariners which have been pressed for their Countrey's service,
Soldiers and Mariners.
and shall return from beyond the Seas disabled, or otherwise, and shall bring
with them a lawful discharge under the hand and seal of the general of the
Army, or Captain of the ship under whom they served, signifying their service
and cause of return, are by the next Justice of the peace to the place of their
landing to have a pass or landing-brief made them, wherein they are to be
allowed a competent time to travel the next straight way to the place where
they were born, or from whence they were impressed, there to be provided for
according to the statute. And in this their travel they are to repair to the
Treasurers of every town and County through which they pass, who is to allow
them sufficient means to convey them to the next Treasurer until they arrive
at the place limited. And if any soldier or mariner (other then such as have
suffered shipwreck) whether he have a pass or no, shall in his travel as
aforesaid, beg or demand relief of any person whatsoever, officer or other, the
Treasurers excepted, he is to be punished as a rogue, unless through sickness
or other apparent infirmity, he be disabled to travel with his aforesaid
allowance betwixt one Treasurer and another, and in these cases to be releived
only by the Constable. And if such a soldier or mariner shall depart from his
colors or Captain without a lawful discharge, or shall counterfeit such
testimonial, or shall carry any such knowing it to be false and counterfeit,
or shall wilfully exceed such testimonial fourteen days, or shall not settle
himself in some lawful calling, but live idly, it is felony of death in all
these cases, and the Constable. knowing or suspecting the same ought to apprehend
the offender, etc. And every Constable. may examine all soldiers and mariners
hereof, as also of their return from the wars, etc.

Persons allowed by two Justices of peace to travel to the Bath or Buxton for
cure of their grief, Persons traveling to the Bath.
and persons permitted by one Justice of the peace to seek harvest work, are to
be provided of sufficient maintenance in their said travel, and are not to beg
upon pain to be punished as rogues.

The Constable being assisted by the advice of the Minister and one other of
the parish, Punishing of rogues.
upon the apprehension of every such rogue as aforesaid, shall cause them to be
stripped naked from the middle upward, and to be openly whipped until his or
her body be bloody, and then to be sent from parish to parish by the officers
thereof, or other sufficient guide with a pass, the next straight way to the
parish where he or she was born, or last dwelt by the space of a year (as the
case is) or being unknown, to the parish where he or she was suffered last to
pass unpunished.

Rogues are either such as never had any certain dwelling or place of abode,
Two kinds of rogues.
or such as have had or have some settled dwelling or place of abode, the first
of these are to be sent to the place of their birth, being known; or being
unknown, to the house of correction or gaol thence to be bestowed in some
service, How to be settled.
hospital, etc. the second are to be sent to the place of their last settling
by the space of a month, etc.

The form of the said Pass or Testimonial may be this.

A. B. Testimonial of a rogue.
a sturdy rogue of middle stature, etc. being taken begging and vagrant in the
parish of Shep. in the County of Cambridge, and there punished this day of J.
1639. according to the statute: These are therefore in his Majesty's name to
charge and command you to whom it does appertein, to convey the said A. B. from
parish to parish by the officers thereof the next and ready way to the Town of
D. in the county of N. where he or she affirms he does dwell, or did last
inhabit, or was born, (as the case is) there to be provided for according to
the law, and for his or her travel to the place aforesaid is allowed days and
no longer, at his and your peril; Sealed and subscribed the day and year above
written. By us, S.W. Minister, H.R. Constable, I.G. Parishioner.
Or any two of them, the Constable to be one.

And if such rogue (through his own default) do not accomplish the order of
such Testimonial, then is he or she to be whipped at every place for every
such default, Again punished.
till he or she repair to the place limited. And this Testimonial is not to be
committed to the hands of the rogues, but is to be conveyed together with such
rogue by the officer himself, or other sufficient guide, who is to deliver both
to the officers of the next parish, How conveyed,
till etc. and if default be made by the officer, he may be indicted therefore.

Rogues sent as aforesaid, And used.
are to be lodged and allowed some small relief in their said travel by the
Constables of the township through which they pass or lodge, and are not to be
suffered to beg. And if any officer shall relieve or harbor any, or in any
other manner then is expressed, he shall not only bear the loss thereof
himself, but shall also forfeit the sum of ten shillings.

Constables are not to post away such persons as shall come or be sent unto
them that are desperately sick, Directions in passing of Cripple^ and Vagrants.
or women with child ready to be delivered, but are to keep such till they
recover strength; for by this means many have perished: neither are they to
deliver any vagabonds or cripples to the next Constables after sunset, or to
convey such, especially cripples by horse or cart upon the Lords day, upon pain
of punishment.

And the Constables that shall send a rogue, etc. General pasports.
by a general pasport without conveying him from parish to parish, or that
shall refuse to recieve a rogue sent, or does not convey and deliver him to the
officers of the next parish, in all these cases he shall forfeit five pound,
Hinderers of their punishment.
and be bound to his good behavior; and so shall every other person that in
any wise shall hinder or disturb the execution of the law, concerning the
punishing and conveying of rogues, etc. and every person that shall receive,
relieve, or harbor any rogue or vagabond, and shall not apprehend and carry
them to the Constable to be punished and conveyed shall forfeit for every
default ten shillings.

Constables shall answer for every rogue or vagabond that shall be seen to
pass the town unpunished, Relieving and harboring and not punishing rogues.
and his absence shall not excuse him; for he is by himself, the watchmen, or
other sufficient deputy to be always present.

None shall be suffered to straggle and beg within their own parishes, None
shall beg.
but are to be relieved by work or otherwise at home, and if in any parish
there be found any persons that live out of service, or that live idly, and
will not work for reasonable wages, or live to spend all they have at the
Alehouse, those persons are to be brought by the high Constable and petty
Constables to the Justices at their monthly meetings, there to be ordered and
punished as shall be found fit.

Searches shall be made for rogues.
General privy searches shall be made twice at the least every year in every
Hundred Town and Village by the appointment of the Justices for the finding out
of all rogues, wandering and idle persons, and for the bringing of them before
the said Justices at their said meetings to be punished and conveyed, or being
incorrigible to be sent to the gaol, etc. And if the chief or petty Constable
shall not appear as aforesaid, or shall not give an account upon oath in
writing, and under the hand of the Minister of every parish, what rogues and
vagabonds they have apprehended both in the same search, as also between every
such assembly and meeting, and how many have been by them punished and
otherwise sent unto the house of correction, they shall forfeit such fines as
by the said Justices shall be thought fit, not exceeding 40. shillings. St. 39.
Elis. cap. 4.
And the Minister shall forfeit for every default five shillings. Incorrigible
rogues.


Incorrigible rogues are such as shall appear either to be dangerous to the
inferior sort of people, or such as will not be reformed of their roguish kind
of life.

The Constable is to execute the said punishment of whipping; either himself,
Whipping of rogues.
or by some other by his appointment.

Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Unlawful games.
Constables, and other head-officers within every City, Borough and Town,
within this Realm, ought, under pain of forty shillings for every default, once
every month at the least to make search, as well within liberties as without,
in all places where any unlawful games shall be suspected to be kept or used,
and may arrest and imprison as well the keepers of such places as the haunters
of the same, till they be found no more to keep or haunt such places. And if
any such officer as aforesaid shall find or know that any artificer, craftsman,
husbandman, apprentice, labourer, servant at husbandry, journeyman, or
serving-man does play at the Tables, Dice, Cards, Tennise, Bowls, Close,
Coyting, Logatine, or any other unlawful games invented or to be invented, out
of Christmasse time, or out of their Masters house or presence in the
Christmasse time, unless it be by license of such masters as have a hundred
pound by year or above, and then also that playing to be within the precincts
of such masters house, garden or orchard, such officer may commit every such
offender to Ward, till he be bound by obligation to the Kings use, in such
sum (as to the discretion of such officer shall be thought reasonable) that
he shall not from thenceforth use such unlawful games.

The Constables are likewise to have care for the maintenance of Archery,
Archerie,
according to the stature, that every person not being lame, or not having
other impediment, being within the age of threescore years, (except spiritual
men and Judges) shall have and use along bow and arrows upon pain of six
shillings eight pence for every default. And that Butts be made and continued
in every City and Town, and that the inhabitants do exercise themselves with
the long bow in shooting at the same, and elsewhere, upon pain for every three
months so lacking Butts twenty shillings.

All Constables, Disorders in Alehouses.
Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tithing-men, Alecunners and Sidemen shall in
their several oaths incident to their offices be charged to present the
offenses done contrary to the statutes made for the repressing of drunkenness,
and other disorders, in Innes and Alehouses.

Constables and other inferior officers shall every of them once in every
fifteen days search and enquire the defaults and disorders of Innes and
Alehouses.

And by the Articles given in charge by the Justices of peace at their monthly
meetings, the chief and petty Constables are to give an account upon oath in
writing of the number of Alehouses, which are licenced, and which are not; and
of those that be licenced, which of them keep ill orders in their houses,
either by maintaining of play, receiving of Tinkers, Pedlers, vagabonds or
other suspected persons, or by suffering of tippling drunkenness, etc. or by
selling by unlawful measures, or measures unsealed, or less then one full
ale-quart of their best ale or beer for a penny, and two of their small.

And of Innekeepers that use their Innes as Alehouses, by uttering their ale or
beer out of doors, or by suffering of drunkenness, tippling, play, or other
disorder.

The Constable that shall not by warrant from the Justice levy the twenty
shillings forfeited for keeping alehouse without license, Penalties of the
Constables.
or for default of distress by like warrant do not openly punish the offender
by whipping him, shall be imprisoned until he do the same, or pay the sum of
forty shillings, or if he shall not by like warrant levy the sum of five
shillings upon the person convict of drunkenness, or set the party in the
stocks six hours, or shall not levy the sum of three shillings four pence
for unlawful tippling, or set the party in the stocks four hours; and of the
Innekeepers and Alehousekeepers for their offense and permission of these
disorders the sum of ten shillings for each of them, or shall not levy the
sum of twenty shillings for selling their beer or ale under the assize, shall
in every of the said cases forfeit the sum of ten shillings.

All Constables, etc. Constables shall attend the quarter Sessions.
are to be attendant, aiding and assisting to the Justices of the peace for the
execution of their Commission of the peace, and of all such laws and statutes
whereof they have power to hear and determine, and to make presentment at their
general quarter Sessions of the peace, and of all offenses committed and done
against any of them, and of all bloud-sheddings, affraies, outcries, rescues
and other offenses done and committed against the Kings peace within their
several limits or power to make fine.

The petty Constables of parishes, Shall present offenses at the Assizes.
because their personal appearance at the general Assizes and jail-deliver
is not required, shall in convenient time before every Assise bring their
presentiments and answer of the Articles of the said Justices of Assise, fairly
writ under their hands, to some Justice of peace within that limit, who shall
take them sworn of the truth of the said presentiments, and subscribe his name
to testify so much. And if any petty Constable be remiss herein, the chief
Constable, who is to receive these presentiments, and to certify them with his
own at the said Assizes, shall do well to acquaint the Justices of that
Division therewith before the said Assizes, that such petty Constable may
recieve due punishment for his neglect, upon pain of like punishment himself.

The Constables, etc. Shall execute the precepts of Justices of peace.
ought also to show themselves obedient to the precepts of the Justices of the
peace, neither ought they to dispute whether their commandments be grounded
upon sufficient authority or no; for if a Justice of peace which is a Judge of
record shall direct a warrant beyond his authority to a Constable or other
officer, yet such officer shall be held excused for executing the same,
although the Justice of peace himself may be blamed for it. A warrant is sent
by a Justice of peace to a Constable or other officer, such officer must serve
it himself, and cannot by word or writing appoint another.

The Constable or other officer to whom such warrant is sent or delivered,
Serving of warrants.
ought with all convenient speed and secrecy to seek and find out the party,
and to execute the same, requiring the party in the Kings name to go with him
according to the warrant; if the party refuse, the Constable by virtue of his
said warrant may arrest and carry him by force before the Justice, and may
require aid to assist him; and if such party shall resist, the Constable may
imprison him in the stocks till the said party be willing to go. If it be for
surety of the peace or good behavior, such officer before he arrest the party,
ought first to acquaint him with the matter, and withal to require and charge
him in the Kings name to go with him before the Justice to find and put in
sureties according to the warrant, which if he refuse to do, then ought such
officer forthwith to arrest him (and if his warrant express so much) may
convey him to the gaol without carrying him before the Justice: and if the
party shall make any resistance or seek to escape, such officer may justify
the beating or hurting of him. And such officer ought at the next quarter
Sessions of the peace to present and deliver his said warrant, and certify his
proceedings in this behalf.

A warrant is directed from a Justice of peace to bring one before him, such
officer shall carry the party before that Justice: but if it be to bring one
before himself or some other Justice, etc. then may such officer give liberty
to the party to go to what Justice he likes; howbeit it is in the power of the
officer to carry his prisoner to what Justice he pleases. The officer ought to
acquaint the co^plainant with the time when he carries the delinquent before
the Justice, and is in no wise to send his warrant, but must be present
himself; neither need such officer dance attendance after his prisoner until
he can find out sureties, but he may lawfully keep him until he can get
surety.

The Constable upon a warrant for the peace or good behavior, or in any other
case where the King is party, may by force of such warrant break open a man's
house to arrest the offender: But note that the officer before he break open
the house or doors must first signify the cause of his coming, and desire
that the doors may be opened to him.

Every man that shall be required ought to assist the officer in the execution
of his warrants, and to pursue and arrest offe^ders against the peace.

A Constable has a warrant to arrest J. C. and he arresteth W. C. who in deed
he knows to be the offender, and he against whom in very truth the complaint
was made (howsoever mistaken) yet the arrest is tortious, and the officer
subject to an action of false imprisonment; for the officer ought to pursue the
very letter of his warrant.

A Constable etc. has a warrant to bring one before a Justice upon the
complaint of another, and the parties do after agree the matter betwixt
themselves, yet ought the Constable to bring the said parties before the
Justice, for etc.

An officer having served a warrant upon one to go before a Justice, takes his
promise that he will come to him such a time to go before the Justice according
to such warrant, and so lets the party go, who fails at the time
appointed, it seems the officer cannot after arrest or take him by virtue of
that warrant, for that this was done by the voluntary consent of the officer,
but if the party arrested had escaped of his own wrong, without the consent of
the officer, the officer upon fresh suit may take him again and again, so often
as he escapes, although he were out of view or that he shall fly into another
County.

If a warrant be directed to a Constable to arrest one that is indicted of
felony, such officer may justify the killing of such a party, if it be so
that he cannot otherwise possibly take him; the like may be done with a felon
that is sent to the gaol, if he shall resist or fly.

If the party against whom any lawful warrant is granted shall make
resistance, or shall make an assault upon the officer, or shall fly, the
officer after arrest may justify the beating or hurting of him, and may also
imprison him in the stocks for the same; but if the party refuses or flies
before the arrest, the officer cannot justify the beating of him.

The Constable having arrested any to be conveyed to the gaol, Conveying of
person to the gaol.
or having a Mittimus from the Justice for that purpose, must take heed he
suffer not such party to escape, either willingly or negligently; for if the
arrest were for felony then by a willing escape, the officer himself becomes a
felon also: and of whatsoever other kind the offense be, if the officer do by
his will or otherwise suffer the party to escape he shall be fined for it
according to the quality of the offense, by the discretion of those that shall
be Judges of it. And least any officer may flatter himself, in thinking he may
escape with some easy fine, let him know that the Judges of his fault may set
his fine equal with the value of his goods, if the quality of his default do
so require.

The High Constables, Constables attendance at the monthly meetings of the
Justices.
petty Constables, Churchwardens and other the Overseers for the poor of
every Hundred, Parish and Village, shall attend the Justices at their monthly
meetings, and there inquiry shall be made, and information taken by the
Justices, of the defaults of the said Officers, in the execution of the Laws
and Statutes of this realm, etc. and what persons have offended against any of
the said laws; and where neglect or default is found in any of the said
officers in making their presentiments, condign punishment to be inflicted upon
them by the Justices according to Law.

Which informations may be reduced into these or the like Articles following.

Articles to be diligently inquired of and distinctly, Articles.
particularly answered (upon oath) in writing by the chief Constables, petty
Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers for the poor, at the said monthly
meetings of the Justices. IMprimis, I Huy and cry, Watch and ward.
you shall diligently inquire and certify whether huy and cry have been made,
and duly pursued, according to the Statute, for the apprehending of felons and
robbers; and whether watches by night and warding by day appointed in every
town and village for apprehending of rogues and vagabonds, and for safety and
good order, be duly observed and kept, and by whose default the same has been
neglected.

You shall inquire and certify who have been remiss and negligent in
apprehending of such rogues and vagabonds, 2 Apprehension and punishing of
rogues.
what Constables have been remiss in receiving, punishing and conveying them,
and who by any ways or means have hindered the execution of the Statutes for
the punishing and conveying of them: And what persons since our last assembly
have harbored or relieved any of them: and what vagabonds or rogues have you
since pu^ished.

You shall inquire and certify, 3 Laborers and Servants.
whether the Statute of laborers for retaining of servants and ordering of
wages betwixt the servant and the master, be not deluded by private contracts,
before they come to the Statutes, and what servants are put out of service, or
have put themselves out of service, their terms being not expired; where this
has happened, and in whose default, and what is become of such servant or
apprentice: and what unmarried persons of able bodies live out of service, that
have not means otherwise to maintain themselves; or if they labor for their
living who sets them on work, and what persons live idly, or that will not
work for reasonable wages, or live to spend all that they have at the Alehouse.

You shall inquire and certify wat Taverns, Ins, Alehouses, 4 Innes and
Alehouses.
or other victualling houses, are within your precinct, who keep the same, and
how long have they so kept them, and by what authority, and which are licenced
and by whom, and which are not; and whether those that are licenced, be fit as
well in regard of themselves, as their dwelling, and whether they sell their
beer and ale according to the assize, that is to say, lawful measures sealed
and allowed, and not less then a full ale-quart of the best beer or ale for a
penny, and of the small two full ale quarts for a penny. what haunters of
Taverns, Innes and Alehouses are there within your liberties, and what are
their names, etc. Which of those Innes entertain people to sit tippling and
drinking as Alehouses; who have been drunk or have sitten tippling in any one
of them, since the last monthly meeting, and in what Tavern, Inn or Alehouse
has the same happened; and which of them has kept ill orders, by maintaining
of play, receiving of Tinkers, Pedlers, vagabonds or other suspected persons.

You shall inquire and certify whether your Bakers and Brewers do keep the
assize according to the Statutes; 5 Bakers and Brevvers.
Bakers after the now prises, viz. Wheat being forty shillings the quarter, the
weight of the penny white loaf drawn from the fine cocket eight ounces four
penny weight, the weight of the penny white loaf drawn from the course cocket
twelve ounces three quarters, the weight of the penny household loaf according
to the course cocket sixteen ounces: And whether every Baker has his own
proper mark set upon his bread, and does sell no more then thirteen penny loafs
to the dozen. Whether common brewers do serve their beer and ale to any
alehouse keepers, victuallers or tiplers, but at such prices as by the
Justices of the peace shall be set down and appointed according to the Statute:
And whether the same be well sodden, and brewed, and of wholesome grain, and
with wholesome hops, and whether they sell any beer or ale to any unlicenced
alehousekeepers or tiplers; Forestallers. Ingrossers. Regraters.
what forestallers, ingrossers, and regraters of corn or other dead victual or
fuel, what tradesmen or other that sell any kind of commodities by false and
unlawful weights or measures, False weights and measures.
or things made in deceit: what victuallers or others are there which sell
their victual at excessive prices, or things unwholesome; and whether your
millers do take excessive toll for grinding, Millers.
or by heaped measure, or use other falsehood.

You shall inquire and certify what Bridges, 6 Highwayes Bridges, etc.
Causies, and Highwayes are in decay within your limits, and through whose
default the same has happened, and whether your ways are so repaired that
they be sufficient for winter.

You shall present the names of all such persons as do not duly resort to
divine service and sermon every Sunday according to the statutes, 7 Absence
from Church.
and certify whether the twelve pence forfeited for absence be required and
received, and duly employed upon the poor, and of whom it has been levied,
and of whom neglected, Profane svvearers.
and what profane swearers or cursers are in your parish.

You shall inquire and certify what stocks of money are provided in every
parish for the setting the poor on work, 8 Stocks of money to set the poor on
work.
and whether the same be sufficient to set all such on work as are of able
bodies, and want means to set themselves on work, and how and by what means are
they set on work, and what are the names of all those that are so set on work,
and what and how much work have each of them had or has wrought since the last
meeting, and what or how much do you give them for their work by the day or
otherwise, and who have refused to work, or working have spoiled, impaired, or
abused the same, and whether they be so provided for that they be not suffered
to straggle and beg within their own parish or elsewhere; and whether your
weekly or monthly taxation for the impotent poor be sufficient in every parish
to relieve them, Relieving of the impotent.
and what be the names of all those that have contribution since the last
meeting, and what sum or sums of money has been given to each of them, and
what poor peoples children are fit to be bound out apprentices, Apprentices.
and who are fit to take them, and what apprentices have been formerly put
forth, and have not been received, and in whose default the same is, or being
received have misused them, or have not sealed their indentures.

You shall inquire and certisie what private gifts have been given in every
parish for the relief of the poor or other charitable uses, 9 Private gifts.
and whether is the same continued and employed according to the will of the
donour; if not how long has the same been discontinued or misimployed, and by
whom; and whether such gifts be any occasion of lessening the rates of the
parish.

The first six of these articles (properly) are to be answered unto by the
Constables, the three latter by the Churchwardens and Overseers for the poor.

The Constables of every town, Constables rates.
and the greater part of the parishioners (upon notice given) may assemble and
make rates, and may tax every inhabitant by their lands (or goods in some
cases) for all manner of town or countrey-charges; and if the greater part of
the parishioners will not meet, then the Constable alone, and so many of the
parish as will meet, may make such rates: and if any shall refuse to pay the
rates so made, and allowed by the Justices of that Division under their hands,
the party refusing, by the Justices shall be bound over to the next general
Sessions of the peace, there to be ordered, and is not to be presented for his
default to the said Sessions by the officers, before the said Justices of the
peace have heard the parties allegations. How raised.


Constables rates (in country towns and villages) are usually raised by land,
yet where the Statutes in particular cases give no special direction, it is
good discretion to go according to the rule of taxations for the poor: What
estates and persons are liable to them.
All estates and conditions, as well Spiritual as Temporal, are by some
thought to be liable to these taxations, but then they distinguish them in this
manner: 43. Elis. cap. 3.14. Elis. cap. 5.1. Jac. cap. 25.
The Constables rate (say they) consists of sundry particulars, that is to
say, of quarterly payments for the relief of lame soldiers, marshalsies, and
prisoners of the gaol, All Ecclesiastical persons are included in the general
words of the statutes, person or persons.
the conveying of cripples, wandering people, and the like, all which are acts
of charity, expenses in martial affairs, musters, training and levying of
soldiers, and such like, to which all persons whatsoever, are chargeable by
the law or the State without exemption; 9. Hen. 3 cap. 21. 3. Ed. 1. cap. 1. 9.
Ed. 2. cap. 11. 14. Ed. 3 cap. 1. 18. Ed. 3 cap. 4. 1. Ric. 2. cap. 3.
but if the Constables will insert into their rates (as some usually have done)
compositions for purveyances and carriages for his Majesty and his household,
from which the Clergy are specially by the Statutes exempt, I conceive they are
not ratable in this respect.

If rates be made for his Majesty's carriages, Rates for carriages.
these officers (as I think) are not to put the same in their general account
for town-charges; for then the poor and such as are not liable thereunto, and
those that neither have lands nor means must bear a part and share therein,
which seems not reasonable: besides by this course of hiring, his Majesty is
often times deceived, and the country much abused by the cart-takers: and that
this charge may the more equally be born, such persons as have lands in
occupation, may be proportioned to some certainty, what number of acres shall
be assigned for a carriage, and so to take the same by course; and for
posthorses, that none be charged by rate, or of those that have no horses, for
avoiding the like abuse.

Books to enter rates.
And for this purpose these Officers shall do well to keep a book fairly writ,
how every person is charged, to the end that no man be surcharged, or out of
course; wherein also these and all other Officers of the town may write their
rates, which otherwise in loose papers are subject to be lost, torn or abused,
which books may be delivered from Officer to Officer as they shall succeed.

Lastly, for the help, as well of the chief, as the petty Constables, in the
execution of diverse Statutes, which are most useful and ordinary in the
discharge and practice of their said office, and for avoiding of sundry
penalties ordained for their neglect therein, I have collected these few
following, and first of the chief Constables.

5. Elis. c. 4.
High Constables Statute-Sessions.
High-Constables of Hundreds in all such Shires, where petty Sessions for
servants and laborers (otherwise called Statute-Sessions) were used to be
kept, may yet still hold their said Sessions, so that nothing be done in them
repugnant to the said Statute.

The Constables of Hundreds and of Franchises ought to make presentment to the
Justices of peace, Defaults of watches and high-vvayes.
and to all other Justices thereto assigned of the defaults of watches, and the
defaults of the Kings highways not enlarged, so as no ditches, underwoods or
bushes, be within two hundred foot on either side of the same, and also of such
as lodge strangers in uplandish towns, for whom they will not answer.
Unlawful Arms.


Stat. Northhampton. 2. Ed. 3. cap. 3.7. Ric. 2 cap. 13.
Every chief Constable may arrest any person that shall go or ride armed
unlawfully or offensively by night or by day, in affray or terror of the Kings
people, and may seize and take away such arms.

Collections for soldiers, and prisoners.
43. Elis. cap. 3.
The chief Constable that has received the moneys appointed for the relief of
maimed Soldiers and Mariners, and for the prisoners of the Kings bench and
Marshalsey, failing to pay the same at the next quarter Sessions following,
shall forfeit for every default forty shillings, 14. Elis. cap. 5. 1. Jac.
cap. 25.
or in making such quarterly payment of such sums of money as are raised in
every Parish for the relief of the Prisoners in the common goal, and paid unto
them by the Officers of such Towns, shall forfeit five pound for every default.

4. Ed. 4. cap. 1.
Clothiers and their workers.
Chief Constables of hundreds may hear and determine the complaints of workers
to Clothiers, and of Clothiers against their workfolks, by examination of the
parties, and may commit to the goal such as refuse to pay the said workfolks.

2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 8.5. Elis. cap. 13.18. Elis. cap. 10.
Highvvayes
By estreats indented from the Clerk of the peace, or by Stewards of leets, the
Constables of the hundred, may levy by distress the forfeitures for defects in
repairing of High ways.

Popish Recusants.
3. Jac. c. 4.
The chief Constables of the Hundred in default of the Churchwardens and
Constable of every parish shall once every year present the monthly absence
from Church of all popish recusants within such parishes, and the names of
their servants and children being above nine years old, etc. at the general
quarter Sessions upon pain to forfeit twenty shillings; and if by such
presentment such recusant be indicted and convicted, not being for the same
offense formerly presented, the presenter shall have forty shillings to be
levied out of the recusants goods and estate by warrant under the hands and
seals of most of the Justices there present.

Purveyers. 2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 6.
The name or mark of every high Constable or petty Constable, etc. shall be
subscribed to the blanks expressed in the Kings Purveyer's Commission, in which
shall be fairly written all such beeves, weathers, etc. with the prices of the
same as shall be levied or purveyed, etc. and to whom any precept is directed,
or shall be privy to the delivery. And such Purveyer, etc. shall make and
deliver unto the said high Constable, etc. a docket or brief in writing
subscribed with their names a particular of the things purveyed, which dockets
or briefs the said Constables, etc. shall deliver over to the Justices at their
general Sessions, etc.

Petty Constables.
23. H. 6. cap. 4.
If any person shall without lawful bargain take or purvey any thing of any of
the Kings subjects to the use of any other then the King and his house, and
notice and request thereof be made to the Constable of the place to be aiding
and assisting to the party wronged, such officer ought under pain of twenty
pound to arrest such taker, and carry him before some Justice of peace to be
sent to prison there to remain until he answer the law.

Purveyers shall pay.
20. H. 6. cap. 8.
The Kings takers that make purveyance of any thing not exceeding forty
shillings shall make ready payment in hand for the same, otherwise the owner
may retain the thing so taken and may resist, and the Constable, etc. of the
place being thereunto required ought to be aiding and assisting therein upon
pain to yield to the party grieved the value of the thing taken and his double
damage.

2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 6.
And if the thing taken be above forty shillings then dockets shall be
delivered to the chief Constable or petty Constables, by the purveyer under his
hand, who shall deliver them to the Justices at their next quarter Sessions.

5. Ed. 3. cap. 1. 26 Ed. 3 c. 3.
Purveyers.
The Kings takers shall make their purveyance by the very value of the thing
taken, and by the view of the Constable, and by the apprisement under the oath
of four of the goodmen of the town where the taken shall be, who are to be
appointed by the Constable. and tallies or indentures ought to be made and sealed
between the taker and the owner in the presence of the Constable and prisers,
by which satisfaction is to be made to the owner.

Commission for purveyance.
28. Ed. 1. c. 2.
Note that no Commission for purveyance of victual shall endure above six
months; and it shall be written in the English tongue.

Cart-takers.
28. H. 6. c. 2.
No Purveyer etc. of the Kings shall take any horse or cart without agreement
with the owner, and by the delivery of the Constable of the place where such
takings shall be.

Laborers in harvest.
5. Elis. cap. 4.
In the time of hay or corn-harvest the Constable of any Township upon request
made, and for the avoiding of loss of corn, grain and hay may cause all such
artificers and persons (as be meet to labor in his discretion) to serve by the
day for the mowing, reaping, sheering, getting or inning of corn or hay,
according to the skill and quality of the person; and if any shall refuse so to
do, then may and ought such officer under the pain of forty shillings to
imprison such refuser in the stocks by the space of two days and one night.

2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 8. 29. Elis. cap. 5.
Surveyers of high-vvayes.
The Constables and Churchwardens of every parish ought yearly upon the tuesday
or wednesday in Easter week to call together a number of the parishioners, and
to choose two honest men of their parish to be Surveyers of the work, for
amendment of the high ways within their parish, leading to any market town;
and then ought also to appoint six days for the amendment of those ways
before Midsummer then next following, and ought also openly in the Church the
next Sunday after Easter to give knowledge of the same six days, upon pain of
sine making, to be assessed by the Steward of the Leet; or in default thereof
by two Justices of peace in open Sessions, as in their discretion shall be
thought meet.

Tax for lame soldiers and prisoners.
43. Elis. c. 3.
In default of the Parishioners themselves, the Constable and Churchwardens of
every Parish, or the more part of them may assesse within their Parish the tax
imposed upon the same by the Justices, for the relief of maimed Soldiers and
Mariners, and for the Prisoners of the Kings Bench and Marshialsies, and may
also levy the same upon any parishioner by distress and sale of his goods etc.
and shall pay the same over unto the High-Constable, in whose Division such
parish shall be situate, ten days before every quarter Sessions, upon pain to
forfeit for every default twenty shillings

14. Elis. cap. 5.
Tax for prisoners in the Gaol.
The money imposed upon each Parish for the relief of Prisoners in the common
goal, ought to be levied and paid by the Churchwardens, upon the pain of five
pound: but the Constables do with us also pay the same.

Malt.
The Constables also of every Borough or Town may search and survey all such
Malt as shall be made or put to sale there; and if they find any Barley-malt
made at any time (the months of June, July and August only excepted) but that
the same shall have the space of three weeks at the least in the fat, floor,
steeping and sufficient drying thereof, and in these three months, the space
of seventeen days at the least, or if he find any person to put to sail any
good malt mingled with malt not sufficiently made, or with malt made with
mow-burnt or spyred barley, or that put to sail any malt not sufficiently well
trodden, rubbed and fanned, whereby half a peck of dust or more may be fanned
out of one quarter thereof, then may such Constable with the advice of one
Justice of peace of that Shire, cause the same malt to be sold to such persons,
and at such reasonable prices under the common price of the market as to his
discretion shall seem fit.

The Constables, Lent.
1. Jac. cap. 29.
etc. may yearly in time of Lent enter into the houses of victuallers, and
finding there any beef, mutton, veal or hogs flesh, except flesh to be killed
three days before Easter, may seize the same as forfeit, and may give it to
prisoners or other poor folk at his discretion.

The Constable, 1. Jac. cap. 31.
Plague.
etc. that shall wilfully make default in levying such money, as they shall be
commanded to levy by the warrant of two Justices of the peace upon the Statute
for the relief of any Town infected with the plague, shall forfeit for every
such offense ten shillings.

3. Car. cap. 3.
Unlicenced Alehouse.
The Constable refusing or neglecting upon command of one Justice of peace,
openly by himself or some other to whip an offender according to the Statute,
for keeping Alehouse without license, shall be imprisoned until he do it, or
pay forty shillings for his contempt.

The Constables, Stoned horse.
32. H. 8. cap. 13.8. Elis. cap. 8.
etc. or the three persons that shall be requested to be at the measuring of
any stoned horse being above the age of two years, and going in any common
Marsh or Fenne-ground within this County of Cambridge, or the Isle of Ely,
etc. according to the Statute, that shall refuse to do the same, or do not
truly measure such horses, shall forfeit for every such offense forty
shillings. And so shall that Constable within whose precincts and limits such
Moors, Commons, Fennes, and Marshes, etc. be not yearly, at the feast of S.
Michael the Archangle, or within fifteen days after effectually driven.

43. Elis. cap. 7.
Hedgebreakers.
The Constable must whip or cause to be whipped such hedge-breakers, robbers of
Orchards, cutters of corn or wood, etc. as for that purpose are committed unto
him by any justice of peace, upon pain to be committed themselves to the common
goal without bail until it be done.

3. Jac. cap. 4.
Popish Recusants.
The Constables of Parishes and Villages, shall once a year present the
monthly absence from Church of all Popish Recusants, etc. upon the like
penalty as is before declared of the chief Constable, and shall have the like
reward, etc.

The Ruler, 5. Ed. 4.3. Acc sur le case B. 76.
Constable, Lodging of travelers.
or other Officer of any Town, may compel any common Inne-holder or
Ale-housekeeper, to lodge such as travel.

The Constable, Servants departing.
5. Elis. cap. 4.
etc. under his seal, and two honest householders shall make this testimonial,
for a servant retained in husbandry or in any the Arts appointed by the Statute
of laborers, whose time of retainour being expired, shall depart out of the
Town or Parish where he last served, to serve in another, as follows.

Memorandum, That A. B. late servant of C. D. in the County of C. Husbandman,
or Tailor, etc. is licenced to depart from his said master, and is at liberty
to serve elsewhere, according the Statute in that case made and provided, In
witness whereof, etc. Dated, the day, month, year and place of the making
thereof. And if such person be accepted into any other service without showing
such testimonial to the Constable, etc. of the place where he shall be
accepted, he shall be imprisoned till he procure such a testimonial; which if
he do not within twelve days next after the first day of his imprisonment, he
shall be whipped as a vagabond.

Huy and cry.
The money recovery upon the hundred by the party robbed, 27. Elis. cap. 13.
and assessed by the Justices upon the statute of huy and cry, shall be levied
by the Constables ratably, by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of
such as refuse to pay the same.

The Minister or Curate of the parish, 35. Elis. cap. 1.
Popish Reeusant sent.
and the Constable etc. of the town to which any Popish Recusant shall be sent
by order of the statute, shall enter the same into a book to be kept in every
parish for that purpose, and shall certify the same at the next
Quarter Sessions of the peace in that County.

Sundry other Statutes there are wherein the Constables are ministers, but
because they have special direction by the precepts of the Justices of peace
in the execution of them, I have willingly omitted them; yet must they know
that if they be found cold, remiss, or negligent therein, or in any wise in
the execution of their office, Co^mis. pacis.
they are liable to be indicted therefore, and to receive such punishment and
censure as the Justices in open Sessions shall appoint. If any action, bill,
plaint, A remedy for Constables, etc. against contentious suits prosecuted
against them for the lavvfull execution of their office.
information or suit upon the case, 7. Jac. cap. 5.21. Jac. cap. 12.
trespass, battery, or false imprisonment shall be brought or co^menced
against any Justice of peace, Mayor, Bailiff of City or Town corporate,
Headborough, Portrecue, Constable, Tithing-man, Collectour of subsidy or
fifteens, Church wardens, and persons called swornmen executing the office of
Churchwarden or Overseer of the poor, and their deputies, or any of them, or
any other which in their aid or assistance, or by their commandment shall do
any thing touching his or their office, for or concerning any matter cause, or
thing, by them or any of them done, by virtue or reason of their or any of
their office or offices, that the said action, bill, plaint or suit shall be
laid within the County where the trespass or fact shall be done or committed,
and not elsewhere, and it shall be lawful to, and for all and every person or
persons aforesaid to plead thereunto the general issue, that he or they are
not guilty, and to give such special matter in evidence to the Jury which
shall try the same, which special matter being pleaded, had been a good and
sufficient matter in law to have discharged the said defendant of the trespass
or other matter laid to his charge. And if upon the trial of any such action,
etc. the plaintiff therein shall not prove to the Jury which shall try the
same, that the trespass, battery, imprisonment, or other fact, etc. was, or
were had, made, committed or done within the County wherein such action bill,
etc. shall be laid, that then in every such case the Jury which shall try the
same shall find the defendant in every such action, etc. not guilty, without
having any regard or respect to any evidence given by the plaintiff therein,
touching the trespass, etc. for which the same action etc. is or shall be
brought. And if the verdict shall pass with the defendant, in any such action,
etc. or the plaintiff therein become nonsuit, or suffer discontinuance thereof,
that in every such case the Justices or Justice, etc. before whom the said
matter shall be tried, shall allow unto the defendant his or their double
costs, which he or they shall have sustained by reason of such wrongful
vexation in defense of the said action, etc. for which the said defendant shall
have like remedy as in other cases, where costs by the Laws of this Realm are
given to the defendants.

Directions touching the office and duty of the Overseers for the Poor.
THe Churchwardens of every parish, Overseers chosen.
St. 43. Elis. cap. 2.
and two or more substantial householders there shall be nominated and
appointed yearly in Easter week, or within one month after Easter, under the
hands and seals of two or more Justices of the peace in the same County, etc.
to be Overseers for the poor of the same parish; and they or the greater part
of them shall take order from time to time by and with the consent of the said
Justices for setting to work of the children of all such whose parents shall
not by the said Churchwardens and Overseers, or the greater part of them, Their
office.
be thought able to keep and maintain their children; To set poor to work.
and also for setting to work of all such persons married or unmaried having no
means to maintain them, or having no ordinary and daily trade of life to get
their living by: To raise. sums of money.
And also to raise weekly, or otherwise, by taxation of every inhabitant,
Parson, Vicar, and other, and of every occupier of lands, Who are to be taxed,
and for what.
houses, tithes impropriate, or propriation of tithes, cole mines, or salable
underwoods in the said parish, in such competent sum and sums of money as
they shall think fit for the raising of a convenient stock of flax, hemp, wool,
thread, yarn, and other necessary ware and stuff to set the poor on work.
Materials to set the poor on work.
And also to raise competent sums of money for and toward the necessary
relief of the lame, impotent, To relieve the impotent.
old, blind, and such other among them, being poor and not able to work: And
also for the putting out of such children to be apprentices, To put out
apprentices, etc.
to be gathered out of the same parish according to the ability of the said
parish, and to do and execute all other things as well for the disposing of the
said stock, as otherwise concerning the premises, as to them shall seem
convenient.

In which words you may perceive that the office and duty of these overseers
for the poor chiefly consists in setting the poor on work, in relieving the
impotent, and in putting out poor children to be apprentices, and in making of
rates for these purposes: and first touching Rates I will observe these three
particulars, The making of Rates.
The levying of Rates.
The disposing of Rates.


In the raising or making of rates these three things are most considerable.

1. The persons who are to make the rates.

2. The circumstances observable in the making of them.

3. The persons and estates that are chargeable to them.

First the persons that are to make them, are the Churchwardens, and other the
Overseers of the poor, or the greater part of them, with the consent of the
Justices, etc. particularly appointed and assigned by the said statute to raise
rates for the purpose aforesaid, and doubtless warrantably may do the same
without the assistance and allowance of the other parishioners, yet for the
avoiding of all exception these officers shall do well to give public notice
to all, or so many of the said parishioners as will assemble to be present at
the making of them.

2. The circumstances to be observed in the making of rates, these rules may be
considered.

regard of the persons and estates that are to contribute unto them.



and disposing of lands belonging to them.







N. Resol. 18.
for which the land is to be taxed in the first place equally and
indifferently, with an addition for the visible ability of the party according
to good discretion, but the common custom is that he that has both lands and
goods is charged only by the best of them.



sc. one hundred pounds in stock or goods after five or six pound a year in
lands.



rates, are the persons and estates that are liable unto them.

All manner of persons as well spiritual as temporal, All person and estate,
liable to these rates.
43. Elis. cap. 2.
of what estate, quality, condition or degree they be of, are hereby
chargeable, unless these officers, (as in good discretion they ought) spare
the poor labourer, cottager, and hired that have no considerable personal
estate.

All estates, lands and possessions whatsoever seem chargeable to these rates,
which yield a clear and certain profit, N. Resol. 14.
as well the not guildable as the guildable, yea although the same be not
annual, as Old Resol. 19.
under-woods, etc. sheep-walks, mills, dovehouses, etc. are in like manner
chargeable; but herein consideration is to be had of the casualties, charges
and disprofits issuing out of them.

Parsonages or tithes are charged by the statute to contribute to these rates,
Parsonages how chargeable.
and where they have the full tenth of the annual profits arising out of the
parish, there to pay the tenth; and so proportionably as they receive profit in
that respect, paying also for their glebe-land ratably by the acre, as other
men pay for theirs.

If a parishioner, Bringers in of forreiners.
etc. shall bring into the parish without the consent of the parish a stranger
of another parish, which is (or apparently is like to be) burdensome to the
parish, such person may be taxed to the charge of the rates for the poor
there, not only having respect to his ability or land he occupies, but
according to the damage or danger he brings to the parish by his folly.

Secondly in the levying of rates these things may be observed. Levying of
rates.


1. Distr. Saac. 51. H. 3 28. Ed. 1. c. 12.
What goods properly by the law are to be distrained.

2. Where and how long a distress may be kept and detained.

3. How and in what manner the same shall be apprised and sold.

No man shall be distrained by his beasts which till his land, nor by his
sheep, What goods are distrainable.
neither a Tradesman by his tools wherewith he gets his living, etc. so long
as any other sufficient distress may be had, except it be impounding of beasts
which a man finds damage fesant, according to the custom of the Realm.

Distress shall be reasonable.
51. H. 3. cap. 1, 4.52. H. 3. c. 1.2, 3.28. Ed. 1. c. 12.
Distresses shall be reasonable according to the quantity of the debt or
damage, and not grievous, and he that takes unreasonable and excessive
distresses shall be amerced.

No distress shall be driven out of the County where it was taken, Where
distress shall be impounded.
51. Hen. 3. c. 52. Hen. 3. cap. 4.3. Ed. 1. cap. 16.9. Ed. 2. cap. 9.
nor out of the hundred, rape, wapentake, or lath, except it be to a pound
overt within the same shire, being not above three miles distant from the place
where it was taken: 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 12.
none shall impound in several places goods distreined for any cause at one
time, nor shall take above four pence for the impounding of any one whole
distress, nor shall distrein out of their fee, or in the Kings highway or
common street, but the Kings officers only having special authority so to do;
nor in the fees of the Church, nor shall take wrongful distress, or without
authority.

Distr. Scac. 52. H. 3.
The owner without disturbance or paying any thing therefore, may give his
beasts meat of his own, while they remain in a pound overt.

If a distress be taken of any household stuff or the like, that may take hurt
in a pound overt, these officers may keep and detain the same in their own
hands till satisfaction made.

By the ancient law, Distr. Scac. 52, H. 3.
How long distress may be kept.
no cattle nor other distress taken for the Kings debt, nor for any other
thing was to be sold or given within fifteen days after the taking thereof.
But this Statute of the 43. of Elis. 43. Elis. cap. 2.
limiteth no time for detaining the distress before sale, as in some other
statutes you may observe it does, and must follow the direction thereof: these
officers upon refusal of the owner to redeem it may instantly sell the same.

A distress thus taken and detained, Distress how apprised and sold.
these officers (upon the owners refusal, or neglect within some reasonable
time to redeem it) shall procure two or more honest substantial and
indifferent persons to apprise and value the same, and then upon refusal of
the owner to redeem it, may make present sale thereof according to the said
apprisement, rendering to the owner the overplus that shall remain upon the said
sale.

The principal work of these officers is the well ordering and disposing of
these rates, which especially tends to these ends.

1. To set the poor on work.

2. To relieve the impotent.

3. To put forth apprentices.

In the setting the poor on work consideration may be had,

1. Who are to be set on work.

2. By whom they are to be set on work.

3. How and in what manner they are to be employed.

St. 43. Elis. cap. 2.
Who shall be set on work.
First and principally it regards the training up of children by a timely
education and employment of them, and to acquaint them with labor, thereby to
prepare and make them fit to be apprentices to husbandry and trades, whereby
they shall not only be able to maintain themselves but become profitable
members of the commonwealth. In like manner all other persons as well men as
women, married or unmaried, young or old, that want means and have no ordinary
and daily trade of life to get their living by, are by this statute to be set
on work, and such as have trades if they want means to set up, are to be helped
by these officers out of the town stock, whose office and duty it is, not only
to set all those on work which are willing and seek unto them for work, but
those especially that live idly and shun labor.

The Churchwardens and Overseers for the poor, 43. Elis. cap. 2.3. Cha. cap. 4.
Who shall set the poor on work.
or the greater part of them are not only by this Statute 44. Elis. specially
enabled to set the poor on work, but are also further enabled and authorized
by that of King Charles, (with the consent of the Justices of peace of the same
Division) to set up, use and occupy any trade, mystery or occupation for the
setting on work and better relief of the poor of the same parish, town or
place; and it were much to be wished that this Statute were put in execution
with us, as it is in some parts of this kingdom, whereby the commonwealth may
receive profit, the poor relief, the several town-ships ease, and God in all
may have the glory

This statute ordains, that there be a convenient stock of flax, Where with
the poor are to be set on work.
hemp, wool, thread, 43. Elis. cap. 2.
yarn, etc. provided in every parish to set the poor on work: but these
officers are not precisely tied to the very letter concerning the materials
therein mentioned, wherewith the poor are to be set on work, as may be
observed by these words, and other necessary ware and stuff; for all countries
do not afford and produce one and the same things, neither are all persons apt
and fit for the same work, and therefore (without doubt) the statute herein
relyeth much upon the discretion of these officers, together with the direction
of the Justices of the peace.

The women and children may be employed in spinning and carding of woollen and
linen, in knitting etc. gathering of stones to mend the highways, and the
like. The men and those of able bodies in beating of hemp, working of yarn, or
such like. And in Countries where these commodities are not to be had, public
works may be devised by these officers for the good of their towns, and the
commonwealth; as repairing of Highways, Cawsies, Bridges, Banks, drayning of
fennes, moorish grounds, casting up or scouring of ditches, raising of banks,
and the like, all which are profitable and commendable works, and are agreeable
to the statute, and specially commanded and commended by his Majesty.

And here by the way I hold it not unfit to remove this common objection, Loss
of the townstock a common objection.
which seems much to hinder and discourage these officers from a willing and
cheerful proceeding in this course, namely, the usual loss and decay (as is
pretended) of the townstocks. To this it may be answered, that whatsoever the
loss is, it is far short of the benefit, that both that particular town and
the whole County receives by their employment; besides if these officers will
be faithful and diligent to buy at the best hand such commodities as be good,
and weigh them in and out, and look that the work be well and orderly done,
there will be the less loss. And if they find the said stuff diminished
beyond the ordinary loss, or be otherwise misused or evily wrought, they may
cast it upon the hands of such as have so lessened or abused it, and the value
thereof may be levied upon their goods, where they be able; or not having
wherewithal to answer they may be punished or sent to the house of correction,
for an example to others. And if these officers fail to do as is specified,
they are worthy to bear the whole loss themselves. Nor is it sufficient that
these officers make return of the town stock once in the year only, (as the
common course is) but they ought to make return thereof once in every quarter
of the year. And whereas it is sometimes objected, that there are no poor to
set on work, which for the most part is otherwise yet being so the stock ought
not to lie idly, but may be employed in buying of bread-corn, fuel, or such
like at the best hand for the benefit of the poor.

The second general work of these officers in the disposing of rates, is to
relieve the impotent.

And herein consideration may be had of three sorts of poor, Impotent poor to
be relieved.
and how every of them shall be relieved.

1. Three sorts of impotent poor.
Impotent poor by infirmity. Fatherless children educated; Aged, blind,
lame, diseased persons relieved and harbored.

2. Impotent poor by casuality. Wounded soldiers, decayed householders,
visited and sick persons relieved.

3. Impotent poor by unthriftinesse. Riotous spenders, vagabond loyterers,
idle strumpets sparingly relieved.

But these last sort being of able bodies are to be sent to the house of
correction there to be set on work, and duly punished.

His Majesty has commanded that the weekly taxations for the relief of the
poor and other purposes, Taxations raised in time of scarcity.
mentioned in the Statute of 43. Car. Re. Direct. 5.
Elis. be in times of scarcity raised to higher rates in every parish then in
times before were used, and contributions had from other parishes to help the
weaker parishes; Relief from other parishes.
especially from those places where depopulations have been some good
contributions to come for help of other parishes. And where any money or stock
has or shall be given to the relief of the poor of any parish, Private gifts
not to lessen public rates.
such gift to be no occasion of lessening the rates of the parish.

The last, but not the least, general duty required by this Statute of these
Officers, Apprentices.
is the putting out of poor children to be apprentices, wherein may be
observed these particulars.

1. Who shall be put forth apprentice.

2. When and how long they shall be placed out apprentice.

3. By whom, and to whom, they shall be put forth apprentice.

First, What children shall be put forth apprentices.
it is not meant by this Statute, that the children of those only that receive
collection (as some have imagined) shall be put forth apprentices, or such as
are destitute of parents or friends, but likewise the children of all those
that are poor and overburdened with children; and those whose labors are not
sufficient to maintain them, or have not means to support their charge, as well
in sickness as in health: but as the Statute has it, the children of all
such, whose parents shall not by the Officers or the greater part of them, be
thought able to keep and maintain their children.

Secondly, At what age they may be put forth.
at what age children of both sexes shall be put forth apprentice, this Statute
gives no special direction, but leaves it wholly to the discretion of the
Officers and Justices, but so as none shall be put apprentice before they be
able to do some service, nor after they are of able bodies, and can do good
service for their parents, 5. Elis. cap. 4.43. Elis. cap. 4.39. Elis. cap.
12.1. Jac. cap. 6.7. Jac. cap. 3.
or may have competent wages from others to maintain themselves: and this
seems to be betwixt the age of ten and sixteen; but yet by consent, or in
some special cases, they may be put forth sooner or later. See for this the
Statutes; 43. Elis. 5. Elis. 39. Elis. 1. Jac. 7. Jac.

How long they shall continue.
43. Eli. cap. 2.
A man child shall be bound apprentice until he come to the age of four and
twenty years; a woman child, until she come to the age of one and twenty
years, or marriage.

And none are compellable to be bound apprentices, 5. Elis. cap. 4.
that are one and twenty years old or above.

Thirdly, the Churchwardens and Overseers for the poor, Who shall put forth
apprentices
or the greater part of them, are not only specially enabled by this statute
to raise competent sums of money for the putting out of apprentices, but may
also bind any such children as aforesaid to be apprentices, where they shall
see convenient.

By which several branches of that Statute, 43. Elis. cap. 2.
Two ways of putting out of apprentices.
there seems to be a twofold way of putting forth of apprentices; the one by
raising sums of money for the placing of them with men of trades, or in
husbandry, as these officers and they can agree; but whether they are
compellable to take them without satisfaction given, seems doubtful; but the
children (without question) may be enforced: and whosoever shall refuse to
contribute to a rate made for this purpose, these Officers, by warrant from the
Justices, etc. may levy the same by distress and sale of the goods of the
party so refusing.

The other way of putting forth apprentices (and warranted both by command and
practice) is by putting them out without money to men of good ability, using
Husbandry or the like, who are thought compellable by the Statute to take them,
and for refusal may be bound to the Sessions or Assizes, there to be indicted
or imprisoned for their contempt. If the Parents shall refuse to suffer their
children to be bound out apprentice, or shall entice them away being bound,
they may be sent to the house of Correction, and so may the children refusing.

I have known when the Justices have also enjoined the masters to pay sums of
money to their apprentices at the end of their term, and have inserted the same
as a covenant in their indentures; but whether this may be done without consent
or no I cannot determine; and it is to be done upon special consideration.

Every person, N. Res. 3, 4.
Who shall take apprentices.
as well Clergymen as others, who by their calling and profession, or manner
of living entertaineth and must have use of other servants of the like
quality, must entertain such an apprentice; wherein discretion must be the
guide, upon due consideration of circumstance.

And doubtless every person of wealth and ability, Who shall contribute.
although he have no use of such an apprentice, must contribute to the charge
of putting forth such apprentices, as to other charges for the poor, or may be
compelled to give a sum of money to help a weaker man in estate that shall
take such apprentice.

In the putting forth of these apprentices, Considerations in putting out of
apprentice.
there must be special regard had to these circumstances: The Master, the
Child, the Faculty, the Parents.

1. The Master, Master.
as well for his ability, as honesty; for otherwise by hard usage, they may
provoke their apprentice to run away.

Secondly, Trade.
his trade and employment, least the apprentice waste and consume his time
without learning any thing and so be made worse then at the first.

3. The Children, Children.
that they be put out while they be young and tractable, and before they be
corrupted with vice and idleness, for then they will hardly keep their
service, or be held to labor.

4. The Parents, Parents.
to take away such Children from them as are burdensome, or brought up loosely
and idly.

These Officers, or such of them as shall not be let by sickness, 43. Elis.
cap. 2.
or other just excuse (to be allowed by two Justices of peace) shall meet
together, at the least once every month in the Church of the same parish, upon
the Sunday in the afternoon, after divine service, there to consider of some
good course to be taken, and some meet order to be set down in the premises,
and shall within four days after the end of their year, and after other
Overseers nominated, make and yield up to two such Justices a true and perfect
account in writing, subscribed under their hands, of all sums of money by
them received, or rated and sessed and not received, and also of such stock as
shall be in their hands or in the hands of the poor to work, and of all other
things concerning their said office. And such sum or sums of money as shall
be in their hands, they shall pay and deliver over to the Churchwardens and
Overseers newly nominated and appointed, upon pain that every one of them
absenting themselves without lawful cause, as aforesaid, from such monthly
meeting for the purpose aforesaid, or being otherwise negligent in their
office, or in the execution of the orders aforesaid, Forfeiture.
being made by and with the consent of the said Justices of peace, or any two
of them, to forfeit for every such default of absence or negligence twenty
shillings.

These officers at the end of their year shall yield an account unto the
Justices,

1. Of all sums of money by them recieved, or rated and not received.

2. Of all such stock of ware and stuff, as they or any of the poor have in
their hands to work, and how often they have returned the same.

3. Whether they have assessed the inhabitants and occupiers of lands, etc. in
their parish, to wit, all such as are of ability, and with indifferency.

4. Whether they have endeavored to levy and gather such assessements.

5. Whether they have distributed the same with indifferency and without
partiality.

6. What poor they have set on work, and in what manner, and whom they have
relieved by contribution.

7. What apprentices they have put out according to the Statute, and whether
all those that have been put forth do remain and abide with their masters, if
not, in whose default the same is.

8. Whether they have suffered their poor to wander and beg, either within
their own parish or elsewhere.

9. Whether they have monthly met together to consider of these things
according to the Statute.

10. Whether they have duly executed the precepts of the Justices, and levied
the several forfeitures appointed by the Statute, etc.

And if they be found remiss and negligent in any of the premises, etc. they
shall forfeit twenty shillings for every default.

And if the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the poor, or any of them,
Refuse to account.
shall refuse to make and yield up a true and perfect account to the said
Justices, the said Justices may commit them to the common gaol until they
shall willingly do the same.

Or having accounted, Refuse to pay.
shall refuse or neglect to pay the same, the said Justices by their warrant
may cause the same to be levied upon their goods by distress and sale thereof;
and in defect of such distress may commit him or them to the common gaol,
there to remain without bail or mainprise until payment be made of the said
sum, arrerages and stock, etc.

Build houses and place inmates.
43. Elis. cap. 2.
These officers or the greater part of them by leave of the Lord or Lords of
the Manor, whereof any wast or common within their parish is or shall be
parcel, and upon agreement before with him or them made in writing under the
hand and seal of the said Lord or Lords, or otherwise according to an order to
be set down by the Justices of the peace of the said County at their general
quarter sessions, by like leave and agreement of the said Lord or Lords in
writing under his or their hands and seals may erect, build, and set up in fit
and convenient places of habitation, in such wast and common (at the general
charge of the Parish, or otherwise of the Hundred or County to be taxed, rated
and gathered as aforesaid) convenient houses of dwelling for the said impotent
poor, and also to place Inmates, or more families then one in one house or
cottage, which cottage and place for Inmates shall not at any time after be
used or employed to or for any other habitation but only for the impotent and
poor of the same parish, that shall be placed from time to time by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor of the same parish, or the most part
of them upon the pains and forfeitures contained in the statute made in the one
and thirtieth year of Queen Elisabeth.

CHurch wardens of parishes be taken (in favor of the Church) to be for some
purposes a manner of corporation at the common Law, Office of Churchwardens by
the common law.
that is to say, persons enabled by that name to take moveable goods or
chattels of the Church, and to sue and be sued at the law concerning such
goods, for the use and profit of their parish, They may not wast the Church
goods.
and therefore they cannot give away, release or wast the goods of the Church,
but are liable to be removed and to be brought to an account for the same: for
as touching any estate in lands, They have not to do with lands.
or the profit of any lands, Churchwardens have not to meddle at all; insomuch
that if the walls, windows, or doors of the Church be broken, or the trees in
the Churchyard be cut down, or the grass thereof be eaten up, then the Parson
or Vicar and not the Churchwardens shall have the action for it, because
Churchwardens are not by law allowed to be a corporation for any other thing
then for moveable goods only.

Lastly, some statutes there are that do concern them: as namely, of the 1. of
Elis. c. 2. Repair to the Church.
and the 3. of K. Ja. c. 4. for absence from Church, and the levying of the 12.
pence forfeited by distress and sale, to the use of the poor of the parish.

Of the 2. Highvvayes.
and 3. of Phil. and Mar. c. 8. and the 5. of Elis. c. 13. for the choosing of
Surveyers of the Highways, on pain of twenty shillings: See more hereof in
the office of Surveyers.

Of the 5. of Elis. c. 5. for eating flesh in lent, Flesh in Lent.
and levying the third part of the forfeitures after conviction, and to take
notice of license granted by the Minister to eat flesh.

Of the 43. Overseers for the poor.
of Elis. c. 2. of being Overseers for the poor See the office of Overseers
for the poor.

The 43. Money for prisoners and soldiers.
of Elis. c. 3. for the raising and paying of money for the relief of lame
soldiers, and prisoners of the Marshalsies and gaol of the County, and the
penalty of twenty shillings for their default.

The 1. Jac. c. 9. etc. Tippling in Alehouses, etc.
of the forfeiture of forty shillings for omitting their duty in levying the
penalties of Inne-keepers and Alehouse-keepers suffering tippling or other
disorder, 3. Car. cap. 3.
or selling ale or beer under the assise, etc. or neglecting by twenty days
to certify the default of distress in offenders against this Act.

The 5. of Elis. c. 4. Testimoni, all of a servant.
touching the testimonial of a servant.

Of the 35. of Elis. c. 1. Refusers to come to Church.
of giving notice to forbear to receive or keep any obstinately refusing to
come to Church.

Of the 3. of King Ja. c. 4. Popish Rocusants.
of presenting the monthly absence from Church of Popish Recusants, their
penalty and reward.

The 23. Destruction of game.
Elis. c. 10. and 1. Jac. c. 17. of levying the forfeitures to the use of the
poor, for destroying of the game of Phesants, Partridge, Prisoners.
etc.

The 3. of K. Jam. c. 10. of raising money for conveying prisoners to the gaol.

The Office and Duty of Surveyers for the amending of Highwayes.
Surveyers shall be chosen.
2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 8.5. Elis. cap. 13.29. Elis. cap. 5.
THe Constables and Churchwardens of every parish shall yearly upon the Tuesday
or Wednesday in Easter week call together a number of the parishioners, and
then shall choose two honest persons of the parish to be Surveyers for one year
of the works for the amendment of the highwayes in their parish leading to any
market town; and shall then also name and appoint six days for the amending of
the said ways, before the feast of Saint John Baptist then next following; and
shall openly in the Church the next Sunday after Easter give knowledge of the
same six days, Six days shall be appointed.
and upon the said days the parishioners shall endeavor themselves to the
amendment of the said ways upon pain of such reasonable fines and amercements
as shall be thought meet by the Steward of the Leet, Penalty for omitting it
or in his default by the Justices at their quarter Sessions.

They shall take upon them the execution of their said office upon pain of
every of them making default to forfeit twenty shillings. Forfeiture for not
executing.
Their office.


And the said persons so named have authority hereby to order and direct the
persons and carriages that shall be appointed for these works by their
discretion.

Every person for every plow-land in tillage or pasture that he or she shall
occupy in the same parish, Parishioners how charged.
and every other person keeping there a draught or plow shall find and send at
every day and place to be appointed for the amending of the ways in that
parish one wain or cart furnished after the custom of the Country, with oxen,
horses or other cattle, and all other necessaries meet to carry things
convenient for that purpose, and also two able men with the same, upon pain of
every draught making default ten shillings.

And every other householder, cottager, or labourer of that parish (having no
plow or draught) able to labor, and being no hired servant by the year, shall
by themselves or one sufficient labourer for every of them, upon every of the
said six days, work and travel in the amendment of the said Highways, upon
pain of every person making default to forfeit for every day twelve pence.

Charge of persons taxed in the subsidy at five pound in goods.
18. Elis. cap. 10.
Every person (except such as dwell in the City of London) that shall be
assessed to the payment of any subsidy to his Majesty to five pound goods, or
forty shillings in lands or above, during the time he shall stand so assessed
and not altered, and being none of the parties chargeable for the amendment of
highways by any former law, but as a cottager, shall find two able men yearly
to labor in the highways at such days and time as by the several statutes
are appointed.

A plowland in several Parishes.
Every person that shall occupy a plow-land in tillage or pasture lying in
several parishes shall be chargeable to the making and mending of the
Highways within the parish only where he dwells.

Several plow-lands in several Parishes.
And every person occupying several plow-lands in several parishes shall be
charged to find one cart, etc. furnished in each town or parish where the said
plow-land does lie.

2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 8.18. Elis. cap. 10.
Instruments to work.
Every person and carriage abovesaid shall have and bring with the^ such
shovels, spades, picks, mattocks, and other tools and instruments as are fit
and necessary for the said work, and shall perform, do, and keep their work,
as they shall be appointed by the said supervisours, What hours they shall
work.
or one of them, 29. Elis. cap. 5.
eight hours of every of the said six days, unless they shall be otherwise
licenced by the said supervisours or by one of them.

Two able men in stead of carriages.
If the carriages of the parish or any of them shall not be thought needful by
the supervisours to be occupied upon any of the said days, then every person
that should have sent any such carriage shall send to the said work for every
carriage so spared two able men to labor for that day, upon pain to loose for
every man not so sent twelve pence.

Every supervisour, etc. for the amendment of the said highways according to
the Statute within the parish where he is supervisour may 5. Elis. cap. 13.
take and carry away so much of the rubbish or smallest broken stones of any
quarry lying within the parish, Rubbish in quarries
where they shall be supervisours, without license or impeachment of the owner,
as by their discretion shall be deemed necessary for the amendment of the said
ways: And for default of such quarry or rubbish, every such supervisour for
the use aforesaid, in the several grounds of any person within the parish and
limits where they shall be supervisours, and nigh adjoining to the highway to
be repaired, and wherein gravel, sand or cinder, is likely to be found, may
dig, or cause to be dug for gravel, Dig gravel sand or cinders. Gather
stones.
sand or cinder, and likewise to gather stones, lying in any ground or lands
within the parish and meet to be used to such purpose, and to take and carry
away so much thereof as by the discretion of the supervisours shall be thought
necessary to be employed in the amendment of the said ways

Not dig in quarries, etc.
But it is not lawful for them to cause any rubbish to be dug out of any
quarry, but only shall extend to such rubbish as shall be found there ready
dug, etc. 5. Elis. cap. 13.
nor to dig or cause to be dug any gravel, sand or cinder, in the house,
garden, orchard, or meddow of any person; May dig in several grounds.
nor above one only pit to be dug for gravel in any several and enclosed
ground, and the same not to be in breadth or length above ten yards over at the
most.

And the supervisors, Fill up the pit.
which shall cause such pit to be dug for gravel, sand or cinder, shall
within one month next after such digging or pit made; cause the same to be
filled and stopped up with earth, at the cost and charges of the parishioners,
upon pain to forfeit to the owner of the soil, wherein such pit is made, 5
marks to be recovered by action of debt.

5. Elis. cap. 13.
Turn a water course.
It is lawful for every such supervisor in the parish where he is supervisour,
to turn any watercourse or spring of water, being in any highway and
offensive to the same, into any ditch of the several ground or soil of any
person next adjoining to the said ways, in such manner as in the discretion of
the said supervisours shall be thought meet.

The hayes, 18. Elis. cap. 10.
fences, ditches and hedges, next adjoining on either side, to any high or
common-faring way, shall from time to time be diked, scoured, Ditches to be
scoured, and hedges and Trees kept low.
repaired and kept low, 18. Elis. cap. 10.
and all trees and bushes growing in the highways cut down by the owner of
the ground or soil, which shall be enclosed with the said hayes, fences,
ditches or hedges, whereby the said ways may be open, and the people have more
ready and easy passage in the same, upon pain to forfeit for every default ten
shillings.

Highwayes enlarged.
13. Ed. cap. 1.
And by the Statute of Winchester it was inacted, that the highways leading
from one market town to another be enlarged whereas bushes, woods or ditches
be, so that there be neither ditch, nor bush, whereby a man may lurk to do
hurt, within two hundred foot on each side of the highway. If by default of
the Lord that will not avoid the ditch, underwood or bushes in the manner
aforesaid, any robbery be done therein, the Lord shall be answerable for the
felony; and if murder be done, the Lord shall make a fine at the Kings
pleasure. If the Lord be not able to fell the underwoods the County shall aid
him therein.

15. Elis. cap. 10.
Ditching and scouring.
Every person that shall occupy any lands adjoining to any such highway or
common faring-way, where any ditching or scouring should or ought to be as
aforesaid, shall from time to time as need shall require ditch and scour his
ground so adjoining, whereby the water conveyed from the said highwayes, and
over the ground next adjoining may have passage over the said ground so next
adjoining to that ground, upon pain of forfeiture for every time so offending,
for every rod not so ditched and scoured, twelve pence.

No soil to be cast in the highwayes.
No person having any ground by lease or otherwise adjoining to any highway
leading to any market town, shall cast or scour any ditch, and lay the soil
thereof in the highway, and suffer it to lie by the space of six months to
the annoyance of the said highway, upon pain to forfeit for every load of soil
so cast into the highway twelve pence. And where any soil has been cast into
the highway, that there is a bank between the said highway and the ditch, the
surveyers and workmen may make sluices or other devices, 18. Elis. cap. 10.
by their discretions, to convey the water out of the said way into the ditch.

5. Elis. cap. 13.
Supervisours to present.
Every surveyer as aforesaid for the time being, within one month next any
default or offense committed or done by any person contrary to the provision
and true meaning of the Statutes, 2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. and 5. Elis. shall
present every such default or offense to the next Justice of peace, upon pain
to forfeit for every such offense in such sort not by them presented forty
shillings.

5. Elis. cap. 13.
Justices to certify.
And every Justice of peace not certifying such default presented unto him at
the next general Sessions, etc. shall forfeit five pound. And every Justice of
peace upon his own proper knowledge, in the open general Sessions, Justices
may present.
may make presentment of any highway not well and sufficiently repaired, or of
any other default or offense committed or done as aforesaid, contrary to the
intent of the Statute.

Who may hear and determine.
2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 8.
And the Justices of every County, where the said defaults or offenses shall
be committed, have authority to inquire thereof, within the limits of their
commission at every their said quarter Sessions, 5. Elis. cap. 13.
and to assesse such fines for the same, as they or two of them, whereof one to
be of the quorum, shall think meet.

Justices of Assise, Justices of Assise. Justices of peace.
18. Elis. cap. 10.
and of oyer and terminer, Justices of peace in their Sessions, and Stewards of
Leets and Lawdayes, in their Leets and Law-dayes, shall hear and determine all
offenses concerning this Statute.

Stewards of Leets, etc. Steward of Leets.
and in their default the Justices of peace of every place and county, in
their quarter Sessions may enquire against every point and article of this
Statute, and may assesse such reasonable fines and amercements for the same as
shall be by them thought meet. And the said Steward or Clerk of the peace
respectively shall make estreats indented of all the fines and forfeitures,
etc. Estreats of the fines.
and shall deliver one part thereof sealed and signed to the Bailiff or
High-constable of the hundred, etc. within six weeks after Michael mass, 18.
Elis. cap. 10.5. Elis. c. 13.
whereby they (or the Surveyers of the highways, they being directed to them)
may levy the same by distress and sale, etc. If no sufficient distress can
be found, or if the said offender shall obstinately refuse to pay the said
amercement, Refusing to pay.
2. and 3. Phil and Mar. cap. 8. 5. Elis. cap. 13.
or do not pay the same within twenty days after a lawful demand thereof by
the said officers, then that person to forfeit double the sum that he should
before have paid.

Every Bailiff, Account and pay.
head-Constable, etc. shall once every year, betwixt the first of March and
the last of April, make a true account and payment of all such sums of money
(to the Constables and Churchwardens of every parish wherein the offense was
committed, or to two of them) as is collected upon the said estreats, upon pain
to forfeit for every offense forty shillings.

The Churchwardens, etc. may call the Bailiffs and High-Constables to account
before the Justices of peace or two of them, who shall take the said account,
and may commit them to prison without bail, until they pay all such arrerages
as shall be adjudged by the said Justices. The said Bailiffs and
High-constables upon their accounts shall be allowed for every pound they shall
collect and pay eight pence for their own pains.

The successors of every Churchwarden shall have the like remedy against their
successors, as is before appointed against the Bailiffs, etc.

All fines, 5. Elis. cap. 13.
amercements and forfeitures, Fines and forfeitures, how they shall be levied
and bestowed.
due for any offense against these Statutes shall be to the Churchwardens of
every parish, wherein the offenses shall be committed, to be bestowed upon the
high ways in the said parish.

18. Elis. cap. 10.
All penalties or sums of money forfeited for any cause within this Statute,
shall be levied in every parish by the surveyers of the ways within that
parish for the time being by distress and sale, in manner and form as fines or
amercements in leets have been used. And the money so levied, to be employed
upon the highways where the offense was committed; and if the surveyers shall
or will not levy and employ the same within one year after the offense so
committed, that then the same sums or forfeitures shall be levied in form
aforesaid by the Constables, or Churchwardens of the town or parish where the
offense was committed; and that he or they so levying any of the said penalties
or forfeitures shall make and yield such account as is appointed in the before
recited statute.

9. Hen. 3. c. 14.
Who shall make and repair bridges.
No Town nor Freeman shall be constrained to make Bridges nor banks, but such
as of old time and of right have been accustomed to make them.

22. Hen. 8. c. 5.
Four Justices of peace may award process against them who ought to repair
bridges.

Where it is not known who ought of right to repair a Bridge, four Justices
may tax the inhabitants of the Shire, Riding, City, or Town corporate, as the
case shall be, and may also make and appoint two Collectours of every Hundred,
who may distrain for the money so taxed, and also may appoint two Surveyers,
who shall see and direct the work, etc.

Where any is chargeable by law to repair a Bridge, Crompt. f. 186. b
he must also maintain the way at each end thereof by the space of three
hundred foot, though the soil belong to another.

If a man voluntarily makes or mendeth a Bridge, 21. Ed. 4 46.
Cawsie or Highway, he is not compellable to do the same again, unless he or
his ancestors have used so to do time out of mind.

If a man makes a Bridge for easement to his mill, or the like, and it
decays, he nor any other are chargeable to repair this, for it is no common
passage.

Thus much concerning the Statutes for Highways, etc. here follows a word
or two in explanation of them for the help of those that shall be chosen to
this office. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 8.
Who ought to be chosen surveyers.
First therefore touching the election of these surveyers, etc. where the
Statute appoints to make choice of two honest persons of the parish to be
Surveyers, it implies also, that they be discreet, and persons of some ability
of estate, and not of the meaner sort of inhabitants (as the manner is) who
neither dare command the service to be done, nor present it being undone,
ofttimes for fear of displeasing those they depend upon.

2. What ways shall be repaired by the Statute.
The six days work enjoined by this statute are to be employed upon the
Highways in the parish, leading to some market town, which is via Regia, the
Kings highway, free for all men to pass with cart and carriage, and they nor
any part of them are to be bestowed in the mending or repairing of any private
way or other field-way, such as is called Iter or Actus, unless the said
Highways be otherwise well and sufficiently repaired, and shall not need the
said whole six days.

3. The same days.
The Parochians must go and perform the service the same six days that are
appointed, and though they shall do full six days work at other times before
Midsummer, yet are they presentable therefore, and shall be amerced.

4. Other days may be appointed.
If the said six days so appointed or any of them prove unseasonable for the
service, these officers may appoint such or so many other days as shall be
behind; and all persons are liable to do every thing as in the former six
days; yea, by some opinions although Midsummer be past.

5. If the said six days be not sufficient to make their said ways perfect,
they ought to do more: for if the Township be indicted for any default in their
said ways, Every town must make their ways passable and good.
it will be no sufficient excuse or plea for them to allege they have fully
performed their dayes-works appointed by the Statutes, but for those days thus
charged above the statute, no man shall be punished thereby for his neglect,
but the whole Township or that person in whom the defect of the ways is found,
shall by the common law be indicted and fined.

6. Sufficient at all times.
These Officers are not only to see that these ways be made good and
sufficient for the summer time, but that they be good and sufficient also for
the winter season.

7. Where a township is not able.
If a town or parish be not sufficient to repair their highways, the
neighboring towns that have frequent use of the said ways shall aid and
assist them with their helps; if they be insufficient, then the whole Hundred
or County shall help them, because it is a public good.

8. If the Kings highways be not passable, whereby the Kings subjects cannot
with safety pass them, Where ways are impassable.
they may ride over men's corn to pass that way, and there lies no action of
trespass against such for so doing.

9. Money given to repair a way.
Where any sum or sums of money is or shall be given for the making,
mending or repairing of any Highway, Cawsie, or the like, and it be
insufficient to do the same, that town within which the said way does lie ought
to help to mend and repair the same.

Three sorts of persons are chargeable by law to repair Highways.

1. Who are charged to mend the ways.
The inhabitants of towns in general.

2. Those that by right or custom have always done them.

3. Those that by new enclosures against the Highways straighten and annoy
the same.

10. Enclosures against the ways.
Duncomb's case.
Every person which has or shall make any enclosure next the Kings Highway
adjoining to his enclosure, and if one man has enclosed on the one side, and
another on the other side, both of them shall be charged to mend the same way:
and he that has land adjoining next the Kings Highway by the common law
(before these statutes) was bound of common right to cleanse and scour the
ditches adjoining to the said way.

11. What a plow-land is.
The Statute declares not what a plow-land contains: some hold that a
plow-land, Carucata terrae, or a hide of land, which is all one, contains 120.
acres; others say that a plow-land (meant by the statute) is not of any certain
content, A carve of land, or a plow-land, may contain house, meadows, pasture,
wood.
but so much as a plow by course of husbandry can plow in a year, which is
much more in some Countries then in other, which occasioneth many contentions
and much prejudice to the service in the repair of the highways, by reason
that since this statute most men strive to get much more land into their hands
then in former times, Co. Lit. fol. 69.
and do manage with one plow almost double that quantity of land they then
held, and many plow lands are so broken and divided, that they are lost, and
yield no help to the maintenance of these ways, besides the daily engrossing
of farms which decays the strength of the kingdom both in men and horse,
diminishes the Kings subsidies, the increase of corn and grain, hinders
hospitality, and the setting of poor men on work, oppresses others by the
often revolution of offices, and lastly the visible decay of the Highways in
all places occasioned by the lessening the number of draughts and teams, there
being now scarce three parts of four which were in former times; and therefore
it were to be wished that a certain proportionable quantity of land might by
agreement be assigned in every town according to the temper and disposition of
the soil, what number of acres should be accounted a Plow-land, by which means
many questions and controversies daily arising may be appeased, the number of
plow-lands in every Town increased, and consequently the highways in all
places bettered and amended.

12. Who are charged.
He that occupies a plow-land in pasture, etc. and keeps no cart or team,
and he that keeps a team or cart, and has no land in occupation, are both of
them charged by the Statute to provide one wain or cart furnished, etc. and two
able men with tools and instruments.

13. Carriages, Persons, Instruments.
These supervisours are not only to have respect to the number of the
carriages and persons, but to the quality and condition of them, and that they
be sufficient and meet for the service; for now he that has four or five
horses, and makes of them for his own occasions but one teem or draught, for
the service of the highways divides them into two, whereby this service is
weakly performed: but it is the duty of these officers to see that the King and
the Country be no worse served then themselves, and he that for his own
private affairs does usually, or for the most part of the year make two
draughts, shall also for the King and his Countries service be charged with 2.
carts or draughts, though he occupy his land sometime with one plow. So are
they to have regard to the persons that are to work, both where, when, what,
and how they shall work, and where and how they shall load and bestow their
materials; and if any shall do otherwise then they shall be appointed by these
officers, they are liable to be presented by them.

Hired servant.
Where it says that no hired servant by the year shall be charged to this
service, it is not intended that retainers to Noble men and gentlemen, parish
clerks, common townservants, as Shepherds, Heardmen, Haywards, and the like,
that are inhabitants and of able bodies should hereby be discharged.

15. Sufficient labourer.
By this word Sufficient-labourer is meant, men of able bodies, etc. not of
women and children, which are usually employed in this service.

16. Lastly, Presentment.
whereas it is thought that if the Surveyers shall not present the defaults of
the parishioners, till after the month, though the Justices do certify it at
the next Sessions, it is not good against the offender, yet if the Justice
shall present the said default by his own authority, the delinquent shall not
escape unpunished by the penalty of the Surveyer.

Surveyer refuse.
And if any chosen to be Surveyers shall refuse or do not take upon him the
execution of the said office, every Justice of peace may present it; but yet it
is fit that another be chosen in his stead.

FINIS.

