THE True Notion OF GOVERNMENT: Showing,

I. The Original of Government. II. The several Forms of Government. III. The
Obligations betwixt Governors and Governed.
In Vindication of KINGLY-PREROGATIVE.

By T. L. Gent.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Gellibrand, at the Golden-Ball in St. Panl's
Churchyard. 1681.

The True NOTION OF Government, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.
THe Discovery of our late Popish Plot has been (though in its own particular
sinal and good, yet) not unlike some bad Physic, which raises more Humors
than it can carry-away; and tho perhaps working off that for which it was
intended, yet leaves the rest in an unhappy fermentation. The Common People had
their easy (and it may be now not altogether panick and unnecessary) Fears
magnified to prodigious Jealousies; The Great ones seemed to be at a stand,
hardly knowing which way to steer; some indeed of the middle sort would pretend
to be the only Physicians for these Epidemic Maladies. But the Gentlemen were
somewhat too eager in their Preparations, too hot and fiery; and their
Applications to the Feet, supposing the Distemper would fly up toward the
Head, were hasty, desperate, and dangerous. This temper of Body could not but
make the face of things look ill to all beholders. I (who am but a Young man)
though not so very timorous of Affairs, yet could not but have, when every one
else had, some more than ordinary apprehensions. The Noises were high, and the
Blusterings great, which could not but at least seem to be the gathering of
some greater Storm: In the apprehensions of which, I could not but judge it
prudence to provide for shelter, supposing the black and pregnant Clouds should
pour down their Tempests in showers as great as were threatened. To fly I
thought mean, and indeed below a Gentleman: To stay at home Neuter, though
sometimes prudent, yet would now be not only pitiful, but difficult. My only
refuge then I supposed would be, by adhering stoutly to one side or other in a
manly resolution. Which that I might do fixedly, and without wavering, I
purposed with a sober and deliberate enquiry to look into the great
Controversy, and having found the justest side, there to fix or fall for ever.
I went about it presently, only staid to follow the Philosopher's advice to
his Novices, of laying aside all Prejudices. My circumstances are not such, as
that they should give me many; wherefore with some ease, stripping my self of
all the prejudices of Opinion, Persuasion, and the mighty Interest, I set about
searching into the truth of things, with some hopes of finding the inestimable
Jewel. My design is to know. The true Notion of Government, (which has of late
made so great disturbances in the world); which that I may do, I consider these
things: 1. The Original of Government. 2. The several Forms of Government. And
3. The Obligations betwixt Governors and Governed.

The Original of Government.
FIrst, for the Original of Government, I shall not trouble my self or others
with a Philosophical enquiry into the state of Nature, whether it was Love,
Convenience, or Fear, that* first brought men into Society and Communion. We
must raise our thoughts somewhat bigher, to find out the great Truth. Which if
we do, we shall find God himself the sole Creator (as of all things else, so)
both of Society and Government. God made Man at first indeed but one; who when
he was but one, yet received from God the best and only manner of Civil
Regiment, in that Constitution and Ordinance whereby he ordained Man should
propagate and multiply, investing some with a natural Right and Dominion over
others; as the Man over the Woman, and Parents over Children; from whence it is
ready and easy to approach to a Communion, and that with a Subordination. This
Assertion seems to me reasonable from the necessity of the thing, and the
wisdom of God himself. To what purpose was Man created, and endowed with
Principle, of Self-preservation if he must always live alone, whereby indeed he
could not be naturally long preserved? But to what purpose has he company, or
is joined in Society with others, if without a Supreme Ruler, where every one
must be their own Governor? For by those means his Self-preservation would be
as equally destroyed, as if he had lived alone. The continual Jars and
perpetual Animosities which must necessarily arise among men of different
Minds, would quickly have brought the beautiful Frame of the new-created World
into a Chaos as dismal as the dark Confusion it but now came out from.
Wherefore the Divine Providence instilled into man, together with his Nature,
an Inclination to Society, the only help proper for his designed end; and at
the same time ordained a Supremacy and Government, the only way proper for the
preservation of Society. From whence it is plain to me, that God himself is the
prime Author of Government, and sole Institutor of Governors (as shall farther
appear in the Forms of Government). I cannot then but wonder how it comes in
men's Minds to affirm that the grosser Body of the People did first of all agree
upon and constitute their Ruler; and from thence gather, that it is in the
power of the People to make and unmake Princes as they please; and being it is
somewhere said, Ye are'Gods, they will be sure in this case to challenge the
Prerogative, and dispose of Crowns and Scepters, set up, and pull down Kings,
as if they were all Almighties; which surely is the way, not only to confound
themselves and others, but to invert the whole Order of Nature; which though it
be as strange as unnatural, yet is not more unnatural than is commonly
maintained and practiced. Wherefore I shall take care so to confute it, that my
own Breast (I wish too that of others) may never harbor so foul a Monster. But
that we may do these pretenders to so much Right, Justice, let us hear their
Plea, and how their bold and daring Advocates can maintain their Cause. They
say they are made by God and Nature freeborn Denizons of the World, and can be
subject to none without a voluntary resignation of their Freedom; but which yet
cannot be so resigned, but it may be revoked by them when they please. All
which to me seems extremely false, upon these accounts: That if there be any
such natural Freedom, it must be either partial, and but given to some, or
total and given to all Mankind: Now which of these soever they grant, it will
be manifest there is no such freedom; For if it be but partial, it altogether
destroys their Cause, for whatsoever we have by Nature (especially in such a
case as this) we have in common, and without exception of the thing it self,
though perhaps with some difference in the Degrees and Measures; so that to say
there is such a partial Freedom, opens a way to prove that there is no such
Freedom at all. But if it be granted to be Total, then they take away all
manner of Subjection, even that of Children to Parents. But to make way for
this great Prerogative, they will suppose that men once were all equally of
years of Discretion, and so equally free; which though it be most uncertain and
unreasonable to suppose, yet shall for a while be supposed, and the consequence
too, that men were once all equally free; which will be as soon confuted as
supposed: For supposing this Liberty to be so universal and natural, it must be
as all other of Natures Institutions, immutable, and not to be changed by
humane advices. I would fain know then upon what Authority they disposed of
this Freedom to any other? Who gave them leave to make such a breach of the Law
of Nature as this must be, that is, to part with their Birthright which God
has given them, together with their Lives? And surely it can be no less a
crime to embezle this than to dispose of ones Life, or ruin one part at ones
own pleasure. But they have an Answer ready, that they do not absolutely part
with this their so natural Right, but commit only the Administration of such
Power as is radically in them to others, it being neither convenient or
possible but that it should be so. But yet they retain to themselves so much of
this Right, as upon the Maladministration of the Power so delegated, they may
revoke the Delegation, and take all the Power into their own hands again; but
what is this, but most notoriously to traduce the Divine Providence? and to
make the allwise God act below the Principles of humane Wisdom? For would any
man constitute such a Law which it is impossible to keep, but must necessarily
be broke as soon as made? Shall then Wisdom it self commit such a gross error,
as to make such a Sanction to such ends and purposes which it can never attain?
Such an one is Supreme Power naturally placed in the People, which, according
to them, is so placed by God; but yet must immediately be delivered over by
them to a more capable Subject. Wherefore to reconcile the egregious absurdity
of altering what God has ordained, and the necessity of having power otherwise
posited than in the People, it must be granted that there never was any such
power in the People at all; but that they have it derived to them from another
Power originally. And this may serve to confute the right of Revocation; for if
they have no power to transfer, they have none to take away: For who can justly
take away what he has no power to give? Thus absurd are these men's Opinions;
Thus absurd must be their consequent Actions. But being they are the fond
Sentiments of many, and darling crimes are hardly left, I shall farther
represent the thing in all its colors, and show it is not only absurd, but
sacrilegious and ridiculous, impossible to be done, and most pernicious to the
right governing of Kingdoms if attempted. That it is Sacrilegious, is evident
from what has been already said, That God himself is the sole Constitutor of
Government and Governors. For can the People challenge that to be their right
which is God's peculiar, without an act of the greatest impiety? and what can
it be better than Sacrilege at the the creation of Princes, to mutilate that
power which God has given to supreme Rulers? to pare and pill the Supremacy
like unjust Guardians by Conditions of their own making, as if they were not
Kings, or not to be so, till they had molded them into Majesty, and breathed
into them the Spirit of Ruling; whereas all the people can then pretend to it
under God to apply the person to the place of Governing. Surely then it cannot
be but hugely ridiculous for them to pretend to any thing else; for it is a
sober and sound Maxim, That no one can create a greater than himself. But they
will reply, That though one cannot, yet many may, which I will grant where
their Supposition is true; but that many in such cases as these have more power
than one I wholly deny, it being ridiculous to suppose that those whose only
place it is to serve, should more than command, it being a very true saying,
That it is more to make a King than to be one. But they would take off all this
by supposing a total failure in the Succession, which they enforce by an
illustrating Similitude, That as the Lord of a Manor re-assuming the Estate of
a Tenant, whose legal Heirs are unknown to him, does argue, that the Estate
first of all proceeded from him; for the right of a People to constitute a
Prince over them upon a total cessation of lawful pretenders, does imply an
original Right in the People of founding their Rulers; but this surely infers
no such thing: for it is not Choice but Power that makes Princes, which Power
must be received from God the only Author of it, who being (to answer their
Similitude) the true and proper Lord of the Manor, this Dominion is devolved
on him, and therefore the Prophets, in case of failure in Succession, received
from him altogether whom they should anoint, and the People at best are but
God's Stewards in admitting a new Administrator of Kingly Power. But the
ridiculousness of this Opinion will farther appear, if we consider the
impossibility of its performance; for how is it possible, for the infinite
variety of Humors and Minds of the Multitude, to agree in an unanimous consent
in choice of a Ruler? Nor indeed did they ever agree in the election of any one
Government or Governor. Now they are for a Parliament, and that must be a long
one: Then for an Army, and that must be a great one: and then again for a
Parliament, but that a Rump one. And then, forsooth, they must have some Godly
man to reign over them, till at last, wearied with their excentrical and
irregular choices, they begin to move in their own Sphere regularly, and turn
to the good, the only way which they but now pulled down, but God has set up
for ever. By this we may see (what Experience has showed to all) how
pernicious these Opinions of the peoples having a right to Constitute their
Ruler are to all Civil Governments. For where it is once infused into peoples
minds (and how many are to infuse, how many ready to imbibe the poisonous
infusion!) that Power is radically and revokably in them, there can never be
any Peace or Unity, nothing but Tumult and Confusion. This Opinion is, like
Pandora's Box, full of all manner of Evils, which being opened disperses its
Contagions to all Conditions of men; The Church is afflicted, and her Priests
slain; The Supreme Power driven from his Throne, and the Blood of his Nobles
(and it may be his own) mixed with common Dust: The Laws are ashamed, the
Judges decreeing Judgment according to Avarice and Fear: The whole Government
perverted and confounded, and the Kingdom overthrown and ruined.

Of the Forms of Civil Government.
THese great imaginations of the People, that Governors are so much at their
dispose, are heightened to a belief that Government is so too, that with the one
they can pull down the other, and Metamorphose States into what shapes they
please. Monarchy they hate, it is as loathsome to them as Physickpotions to
Children, being the strength of its Power can purge away the ill-affected
humors, and keep low and in subjection the unruly Heats of distempered Blood.
It Is, they cry, too near Arbitrariness for Freeborn Subjects, and can
presently mount into Tyranny: Wherefore upon the least commotion and
disturbance (which an hundred to one but themselves have made) they must
presently to the Royal Palace, and pull down the supposed Tyrant, and it may be
the Palace too for being the Habitation of their King, and they must
immediately be platform'd into their beloved Commonwealth, where every one may
have at least a Finger in the Government, where every one may be a Governor,
and yet all Subjects.

These things they pretend to justice, by telling us, that though Government in
general might be instituted by Divine Authority, yet the particular Sorts and
Kinds were left by the All-wise Providence, to the Discretion of these so very
wise men. But I would know of them, to what men's discretion this great
Prerogative was given? If to all, I have showed already the great
Inconveniences of such a Proposition; for all or the major part have not the
Discretion or Wisdom for such a Choice, and few or many choosing does manifest
Injustice to the rest, All being free as well as Some. But then moreover it is
contrary to God's Order or Method of Creation; which is, first to make
Particulars, and from the Beings of Individuals to occasion the general nature
of the thing to arise by a necessary consequence; as he first made Adam, and so
man's Nature was made, he first made Sun and Moon, and upon that followed that
he made great Lights; and so he proceeds in his Moral and Civil Institutions:
For how could he, according to humane Apprehensions, make Government before he
had constituted some Governor to administer it? he must first ordain some one
Government in particular before he could be said to be the Author of
Government. But this will not stop the Mouths of the many-headed Beast, they
will still be Barking and Showing their Teeth, and great willingness to Bite;
but if not, otherwise will rail the Monarch from his Throne, or Petition him,
and humbly desire him to lay down his Scepter, to ease himself of the great
trouble he takes in ruling them; whereas they had rather, and could do it
themselves better than his most Serene Majesty. What would be the dismal
consequences of such wicked Opinions as these few can prognosticate? but we may
guess at the evils by the Intentions of this courteous and desiring Multitude,
which is by former Example apparent, and by present Practice to be feared, no
less than the breaking the Throne in pieces, and dividing to each a share, and
then fancying themselves to be the Saints of the Earth, and so to have
Authority from God to perch upon the pieces of the divided Throne, and there
set with Apostolic Jurisdiction judging the Tribes of our Israel. These things
I do not love so much as to think of, but only to root in my mind the quite
contrary opinions, and learn not only the unlawfulness of such intents, but the
absurdity of them, which I shall do by a short comparison of the fundamental
Justice of the several sorts of Government which have been in the world. And
first for the darling Whelp of the Beast Democracy; which, be it never so well
licked, I fear, will prove but an ugly Monster. It is in the proper and genuine
Notion of the thing a comprehension of the people generally without exception
of any; but according to the assertors of it (who can alter any thing as they
please) the meaning of it is, that many of the Inferior and Ignobler sort of
people are taken into the numerous Counsel, and Court of Judicature,
administering the Public. By this are people doubly choused; first, by being
made believe that they have a right in the Government, and then by being forced
to be content to use it only figuratively, and by a large Synecdock alone to
have any share in what they so much pretend to, which in the end will prove to
be none at all, and Democracy come at length to be nothing but a great
contradiction. But they will say for themselves, it cannot be otherwise but
that some must be subject, that there must be some superior Power to bring
things into settlement and order: All which I do readily grant, and from thence
gather, that Democracy is in its genuine sense a thing impossible, in their own
ridiculous. The unfortunate and fatal pretenses of the Greecian and Roman
people to raise themselves to have a share in the Government are manifest
testimonies of the Consequences of such attempts; who having no foundation of
humane or divine right, quickly fell Destruction and Ruin, like the Dragon's
Teeth which Cadmus sowed, they are from their very birth at war one with
another, and can never agree till they have with their Blood manured that
Ground, and are resown in those Furrows they but now came out from. Neither
will Aristocracy find itself to be built upon any more Right, (or any other
sort of Commonwealth) though the flourishing of some States thus governed may
give a show of more reason. For either these persons thus Ruling obtain their
Authority by their powerful Usurpations over the People, who are by nature, and
ought to be continued still, as free as themselves, and so their Authority is
unjust; or else they receive it from the People delivering up their Right into
their hands and constituting them their Rulers but whilst the People have (as I
have already showed) no such power to give, or if they had could not, or ought
not, to part with it, this their Authority must also be unjust and unnatural.
Neither can these Forms be to themselves safe; for if the People can make they
can too unmake both Government and Governors, being they can recall that they
do but lend upon Conditions, whenever those Conditions fail; wherefore we
must seek some better Government and settled upon more unalterable Foundations.
Which we shall find Monarchical Government to be, if we rightly consider its
true Constitutions. That God is the Author of some particular sort of
Government must be granted by them who acknowledge him to be Author of
Government at all; if of any, that he must be the Author of a Government
lawfully unalterable, is plain from the end of all Government, Peace, and
Unity: for if it was left to the People to alter Government as they pleased
upon Inconveniences that might happen, every Discontent would strait'be busy
in inventing new Models, or at least fancy one, so they might be but fingering
the old, and State-making might turn to be a Trade among them, and alter as
Fashions according to the fancy of the Inventor. But Providence, if we would
know it, has better provided for our peace by constituting one particular Form
of Government above the rest. And if we can find any one particular Form of
which he has given any instances and intimations of his choice; and nothing
can be brought to maintain any of the other Forms proceeding from him in a
direct special manner, then may that Form of Government, and that only
challenge the pre-eminence. That Monarchy bears these Characters of its divine
Instition may appear to every unprejudiced mind that considers, first, that the
Original of Government (which I hope is by this time granted to be from God)
was Monarchical: The Paternal Regiment being so, the Regal and Paternal
differing only as Magis and Minus, which one would suppose to be proof enough
that Government in its first Origin was Monarchical; but they say there is a
greater difference than so betwixt them; for the Paternal Regiment was purely
Natural; but the Regal of Civil Institution: that indeed constituted by God
whilst the World was scarce of People, but this by consent of the People
altogether, the beginning of it being to be ascribed to humane reason and
necessity: For when Men and Impiety began to multiply, Ambition and Avarice,
Injustice, and Robbery increased together the World, the soft and gentle bonds
of Paternal persuasions were too weak to oblige Mankind from their inclinations
to evil, altogether ineffectual to restrain the habit; so that to prevent the
Inundation of a flowing confusion, necessity taught to understand, that they
must by a general Obedience submit themselves to Order and Dominion, supposing
that a tolerable Bondage would be far better than the Licentious Disorder.

From this Necessity, say they, arose the beginning of Civil Government; from
which it is plain that people chose then, and may do still, what Government
they please. But surely though these Premises be seemingly true, their
Conclusions are drawn up false: For though (to speak humanely) the beginning of
Empire may be ascribed to Reason and Necessity; yet it was God that kindled
this Light in the Minds of men, they saw they could not be preserved without a
Ruler and Conductor: God himself having by his Eternal Providence ordained
Kings, and that in the institution of Paternal Authority: For though the
Supremacy of its Jurisdiction was deminished by the overgrown Disobedience of
the increasing World, yet was it not altogether abrogated; for from it sprung
Kingly Power, and as it were from the Typical Idae of Family, and oeconomical
Government proceeded the Form of Kingly Regiment: The one, being the Father of
his Family, the other, of his Country. One the indulgent Protector of his
Children, the other of his Subjects; they both having Monarchical Jurisdiction
over both. Moreover, the Law of Nature having thus written in Men's Minds, and
inclined them to this sort of Government only does not a little prove the hand
of God in its Institution, that being always accounted as an Institution of God
and Nature, which all the World have without mutual Combination consented to
practice, which that they did, is evident from all History. And it is no small
argument for Monarchy, that at this day, in the latter discoveries of
Countries, there should be found no other Government but Monarchical, and that
almost Paternal being extended to a very few persons; and though there be found
in these Western parts some Common wealths, yet they are found only here, and
they so few, that they are of no force to evalidate the Divine Institution of
the other, they having nothing but humane policy for their Foundation, and no
more of God's than of a common hand in their Institution, whereby evil as well
as good arises up in the World, they having most commonly by Gods permission
arose by way of Rebellion and Deffection from their lawful Sovereign as a
punishment to their Offenses, and chastisement for their own Iniquities.

But if men's consent will not satisfy their curiosity, the mere inanimate
Creature will tell us that Nature instituted among them a Monarchical Power
even in their Regiment: For in the simple and imperfect Gorvernment which we
find among them, there is a reasonable account of its being so. But if we
consider the State which God made more immediately his Peculiar, surely the
thing will be so evident that it must be granted. For what was the Patriarchal
Government of the Children of Israel but (purely) paternally Monarchical? In
Egypt they were under no other Government that we read of, than that of the
Egyptian Kings. From the time of their going out of Egypt to their more
particular inauguration of their Kings, though their Government has seemed to
be only Republican, yet we shall find that Moses, Joshua, with the Judges were
all in their kind Monarchs, and so in all the progress of their state we shall
never find the Civil Regiment of the Jews to be otherwise; which one would
suppose to be enough to recommend the Government of one above that of many. As
for Elective Governments and suchlike, we may draw a Consequence from what
has been already said; But as for those Monarchies which are Mixed and
Temperated, (it being no Contradiction to call them so) much might be said: But
it will suffice my Enquiry to say, That great is their Happiness, who live
under such Government; But as great is their Unhappiness, who not rightly
understand this their good Fortune. And they would in my mind do well to
consider those great Privileges, they so much boast of and stand upon, were at
first the bountiful Donations of their Princes, granted to their Subjects upon
extraordinary Occasions; Which though by length of Time and continued Custom
are grown into Established Laws; yet surely cannot pretend to that Right or
Privilege, which is due to the Kingly Prerogative: and Princes may be Princes
without them; but they can be no Governors without their Princes, who may act
without any bodies saying, What do Thou? But,

The Obligations betwixt Governors and Governed,

Most People will be ready to say, what! may Princes then Reign without
control? are they so Sovereign that they may do what they list without any
Stop to be put to their Wills when grown Extravagant and Unjust? This is the
great Question. This is that which so much works in the heads of busy bodies,
and froths up in the Minds of the vain Multitude. The Question is indeed great,
but may be answered without any great Difficulty; for that there is a mutual
Obligation of Obedience betwixt Sovereign and Subject, is so undeniably true,
that Kings themselves will grant it as well as the People: But that there is a
vast difference betwixt the Obligations of Princes and that of the People, must
be granted by the People, as well as Princes. That the most Absolute Prince is
subject to the Laws of God, his own Conscience, and the Rules of common
Justice, none will deny. But that the most petty Monarch can forfeit to any of
his Subjects his Authority, upon breach of those Obligations, though it has
frequently been practiced, yet ought by no means to be asserted: For as it does
not at all follow, that because Princes are not subject to their Subjects,
therefore they are free from all Subjection; So neither does it by any means
follow, that because they are not free from all Subjection, therefore they are
subject to their Subjects. For Princes are tied and circumscribed in the
exercise of their Power by Laws; yet it is not to be understood that they are
so restrained by the Efficient and Compulsive part of them, but by the
Exemplary only. For all Laws contain in them two special Causalities; the one
Efficient and Compulsive, whereby a Civil Penalty being denounced, and
impending over the Head of the Infringers thereof; they are liable to loss
either of outward Goods, or Life itself, according to the Merit of the Offense.
The other Causality is Exemplary, whereby a Form and Rule is prescribed,
directing those that are guided thereby, to the observation of Justice and
Equity, as well to Public as Private Good; and to this Kings are no less bound
than Subjects; they ought to observe entirely and religiously these sound and
profitable Laws, and that upon pain of Gods Difpleasure; But surely it cannot
consist with the Laws of God, of natural Justice, or Nations to inflict
Punishments on Princes Sovereign: Not but that the Breach of Laws, Murder,
unjust Spoils, etc. are as great, or greater Crimes in them than others; But
because there can be no just Execution of Punishment upon them. For all
Penalties must be justly inflicted, or else they are mere Injustice, though the
Persons upon whom they are inflicted never so much deserve them. Now there is
none can execute any Malefactor without Authority from the Supreme Power of the
Sword; and there can be butone proper subject of this Power. (at least in
Monarchical Governments). Who then can with any pretense of Justice or Legality
execute any Penal Laws against his Prince? Who can Authorize them for such an
Attempt? Or give them power even to think? I wonder then at the preusmption of
those who dare lift up the least of their Fingers against their Sovereign,
though but to the falling of one Hair from his Head. But though, this be so
great, so necessary, and so convincing a Truth, Yet the Multitude will find a
way to slip the yoke off their own Necks, and put it upon that of their
Leaders; they will say, Princes were made for them, and may too be made by
them; but yet they will bear such Reverence to their King, that they will maintain
Him and his Honors, whilst he maintains them and their Privileges: but it is
unreasonable to suppose they should do it any longer, that they should tamely
laydown their Necks, and let him tread and insult over them, is no Duty of
Subjects. In short, they will be obedient to his Rule, while he is so to their
Humors, which are very apt to rise upon the suspicion of the growth of
Tyranny, or Alteration in Religion; either of which they assert, is an account
warrantable enough to justify the greatest Sedition: But whether it be so or
no, let us examine. And first for Tyranny. And here first let us see, supposing
Tyranny to be a just Plea for Defection, whether they understand it aright, and
do not often mistake the thing, and look upon that to be Tyranny, which is not
so; and so raise infinite Commotions upon no account at all; and this we may
find them very apt to do. For they look upon any sort of Plenipotency, or
Illimited Power (nay and Limited too, when they have a mind to it) immediately
to be Tyranny; affirming, that it is not separable from some sorts of
Government, and that One Man is not capable of such a mass of Power without too
near an approach to that kind. Upon these slender Apprehensions they will begin
to think Treasons, and in little Surmises hatch Seditious Opinions in their
Minds, and then proceed to talk, and in Scandalous supposed Politics diffuse
their Poisons, till at length, having warmed themselves into a Temper fit for
Action, they will not scruple to perpetrate the greatest Rebollions. But that all
this is extremely Unjustifiable will appear from their Misunderstanding of
Tyrannical Government; and moreover that supposing this was manifest Tyranny,
they were yet not to be justified. As to the first, They most egregiously
mistake the Notion of Tyranny; by supposing it to be an inseparable concomitant
of Monarchy: For there is no such thing as Government in it self Tyrannical,
Tyranny being but the Abuse an unjust Exercise of Power, to which any Power is
as obnoxious as Monarchical: And I cannot see, why the Government of One should
not be as far from it, as that of Many; the Laws here being commonly as kind
and benign as there, or at least may be; and we may find the Yoke of Obedience
as heavy where Liberty is most asserted among the credulous Multitude, among
whom a bold Affirmation of Freedom goes for the thing it self. But supposing it
otherwise, that Monarchy is of so near a kin to Tyranny, nay, and that the
Prince were an apparent Tyrant; the People indeed are unhappy who are under his
Rule and to be pitied; but no ways to be remedied by their own Force: the
Nature of Government forbids it, and God himself has nowhere allowed it; but
has always taught his Servants Obedience unto the most enormous of Princes. I
canthen no ways commend that so highly applauded Action of Junius Brutus with
his Accomplices, in Deposing Tarquinius, his Lawful, though Cruel Sovereign;
which though it looked like Heroic, and was agreeable to the discontended
Humors of the People, yet without doubt was unjust and wicked: But much more
was he to be blamed, for not only Deposing the King, but the Government too:
For the Government being abused cannot be in fault, or for any Miscarriages of
the Prince, or any external accident lapse to any other: For any Government may
be so abused, as is apparent in Junius himself; who expelling his Prince who
Reigned by lawful Power and Title, Usurped a Power to which he had no Title;
and then proceeded to an Act of as great Tyranny as the Deposed Prince had ever
done; viz. The thrusting out his Equal and Colleague, because possibly he might
have committed an Offense, not that he had. And this is the Changing Kingly
Government to that of Many: Which, however it may be Disputed, seldom proves
more favorable to the People than the other; and surely then it is better
living under One Tyrant, than ten Thousand; under a Wise Man that is Cruel,
than under the foolish and barbarous Cruelty of the Multitude. The Tyrant is
like a Whirlwind, whose Fury may overthrow some, may destroy here and there a
Tree, a stately Cedar, or single Town; but the Deposing this Tyrant, and the
Anarchy which follows it, destroys whole Cities, unpeoples and lays waste
Countries, makes Confusion every where, and like a general Inundation,
overflows all with sad Destruction. How miserably then do People chouse
themselves, when they are mad for a Change? Little considering, that besides
the Confusion which they make, they commonly change for the worse, and there is
not one in an Hundred, it may be a Thousand, that attains to what he aimed at,
or betters his Condition. So that thus to stab real or supposed Tyranny and
Monarchy at once, is not only against the Law of God, but Intgerest of most
men; which it may be many will grant, and will bear to Extremity, at least upon
force, the Oppression of their Goods, Persons and Fortune: But when their
Religion is in Danger, (and no one but looks upon his own as best) then they
judge that even God himself is not interested for civil Government, but he will
permit them to stir; they can willingly bear the former Tyranny, but to have
their Consciences oppressed, truly is a burden too intolerable for them to bear
or crouch under, and even Christianity it self will afford them liberty here to
cancel all other Obligations. A plausible Plea; but of no more force than the
other, if not indeed less. For that Religion should permit those things to be
done, which its precepts every where forbid, is so absurd an opinion that none
will admit of, without making God himself command contradictions. That Religion
does forbid, and no where allow of such proceedings, is evident from that all
its precepts and commands of Obedience, are delivered in general terms without
any the least exception: from whence I gather, and declare, that were my Prince
a Jew, Turk, Infidel, or Pagan; I would and ought in all things not absolutely
unlawfully obey him. And surely the first Ages of Christianity judged so too,
whilst under the Government of the greatest Enemies to Christianity, (even in
its purity) and most barbarous executions, they did not only not resist their
power, but even embraced their cruelties, kissed those hands that cut them off,
and in the midst of Flames and greatest Tortures continued good Subjects. I
would feign learn then how our Age comes to be so much better, or the Religion
of our days so much wiser: or what Religion it is that is thus extraordinary
pure, and yet teaches such dismal Doctrines? The Romanists we all know do
assert the Opinion, and practice it, but dare not own it; and there are others
(who pretend to hate such Doctrines, and the Abbettours of them) who do not
always assert it, nor own it, but yet have practiced it. But I would fain have
these People speak out, and tell the world plainly their meaning, whether they
do look upon it as lawful to Dethrone their Prince upon the account of
Religion, or not lawful? If they do not account it lawful, why do they suffer
themselves to be transported with prejudiced and mistaken zeal, as to commit
upon such accounts the greatest Villainies? But if they allow it to be lawful,
let them speak out I say. And they give Anabaptists, Independents, etc. to make
War upon them upon their pretenses to Religion, and so make a way for all Sects
and Opinions to be lawfully at Enmity one with another. And I cannot see how,
whilst they depose or decollate their lawful Prince for not being of their
persuasion, they do any thing less than their greatest Enemies, the Papists,
for Dethroning these they judge and call Heretics. Methinks it would be a
greater testimony of their Sincerity and Religion, to obey in all things not
absolutely unlawful; and in the rest, to show their Obedience by submission.
It Is indeed a fine thing to sit in Thrones, and appear in the vacant seats of
deposed Princes; but the purity of the Religion they so much pretend to, might
teach them that there is a greatness which is not gazed at, and he that
subjugates his will to his lawful Sovereign, has a soul commanding that no
Prince can force, nay, and in some measure is as great as his King, whilst he
is as able to obey, as the other to command. In short, to obey in all things
may be highly Crimminal; to resist must be so; but to submit can be nothing but
safety and Peace.

I should here make an end of this, it may be impertinent Harangue; but that
there are another sort of People I cannot pass by, who would assert against
fixed Obedience, That Dominion is founded altogether upon Power, and not
Justice. Which to me seems altogether unreasonable, from the notorious
Mischiefs that would crowd in upon all Societies, where this Tenet is
maintained. For what a powerful Motive would this be to all discontented
persons, to invade and dispossess others, when there lies no other difficulty
before them, but the Means to Attach successfully whom they intend to Destroy?
But having overcome that by whatever Villainies, they shall become as Legal
Owners of what they are become Masters* as the most Innocent and Just. But can
there be ever any hopes of Peace or Security where this is allowed? But some
will say, Power Acquired and Possessed does give Right to Hold, though not
justify the Act of acquiring it; But surely no unjust Cause can produce a just
Effect, nor any Inveterateness of the Evil or Tract of Time wipe away the
Injustice. And moreover then one could never tell how to obey. For the
Obligations of Obedience must of necessity vary according to the measure of the
Power of the Ruler; and Subjects always be perplexed and undermined in their
Resolutions. Many more are the Inconveniences of this Opinion, and many
Arguments brought for it, from God's Omnipotence- and Power over the Creatures,
etc. But I am weary of troubling my Reader, and shall only say, That these are
in my Opinion the real and true Notions of Civil Government; and I hope I shall
never be of any other. Not that of the Peoples having Power to Constitute their
Ruler, of being absurd and ridiculous: Not that of changing Governments, being
Sacrilegious and Impious. Not that of Deposing Princes upon any account, as
being Unnatural, Unjust, Unreasonable, Unchristian.

FINIS.

