A DISCOURSE OF FINES.

SHOWING By what easy (although corrupt and unlawful) method of practice it
may happen, that any person or his Heirs in England, at one time or other, to
be legally defrauded and disinherited by abuses in Fines.

Stabitur presumptione, donec probatur in contrarium. Quod alias bonum and
justum, si per vim vel fraudem petatur, malum and injustum est.

Lit. cap. Remitter. By T. L. of Lincoln's Inn Esquire

Fines at the Common Law, and confirmed by diverse Statutes.
THey were anciently levied before the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in
Court, to the intent the said Justices might be fully satisfied, and judge the
Conusors of such Fines to be the parties themselves, of full age, free from
Dures, Ideocy, and Lunacy: And if they doubted whether it was the party, then
proof was to be made to them of it: And also if a Feme-covert be one, that she
be solely and secretly examined, as to her age, consent, and consideration for
her levying such Fine; and be acquainted with the nature of it, lest that her
Husband should by any threats or fraud, endeavor the obtaining her Estate by
any undue and unlawful practice. And if the Court were unsatisfied as to his or
her age, then they to put him or her to their Oath: And if not satisfied
therewith, then such parties to make proof thereof by the Church-Book, or
otherwise.

The Common Law, as to the manner of it, is confirmed by the said Statute; the
words of which Statute be, that such Fine to be acknowledged by the party
himself who ought to be of full age, Stat. de Finibus, 18 E 3.
of good memory, out of Prison, etc. And if a Feme-covert be one, she must be
examined by four of the said Justices, as to her consent, etc. The reason given
by the said Statute, and reason of the Common Law, why there is used such
solemnity in levying of Fines, is, a Fine being a Record of a high nature, and
will not be presumed to lie, and will admit no Averment against it self. It
being taken for granted in every Case, where a Fine is levied, that there has
been the aforementioned care and examination; and that the Court has been
fully satisfied, that such Conusor was the same party, of full age, free from
Ideocy, Lunacy and Dures. The Statute, 32 H. 8. makes exception of Infants,
Idiots, etc. levying of Fines, and diverse other Statutes; so as it is evident,
that such persons, neither by the Common or Statute-Laws of the Realm, are
intended to make any disposal of their Estates.

The said Statute reciting, Whereas there were many aged and impotent persons
that lived in remote places of this Kingdom, Stat de Carlisle, 15 E. 2.
who by no means could come before the Justices in Court to levy Fines, so as
to settle their Estates; To prevent which inconvenience, the said Statute does
provide two or one of the Justices, by the assent of the residue of the Bench,
to visit the party so diseased: And if one go, he shall take with him an Abbot,
or Prior, or Knight of good fame and credit. And hereof the Writ of Dedimus
Potestatem had its beginning, and intended to be granted in such cases only
where the parties were not able to come to the Court; and accordingly was
framed: Ae praefatus A, adeo impotens existit, quod absque maximo sui corporis
periculo usque ad Westminster. ad diem in brevi praed. content. ad recognitionem,
quod in hac part requiritur faciend. etc. Which form albeit continues to this
day, yet sometimes the Conusans is taken of them which are in health, and able
to travel; and sometimes when the Conusors are in health and in Town, to the
apparent abuses of the power given by the Dedimus, and to the ruin of Families.

A Dedimus Potestatem is sometimes given to a Sergeant at Law or Knight, with
other persons joined with them: Any two of which may return the Caption: All
which persons are to inspect the persons, and examine them, and be satisfied
that they be the same persons, of full age, not Idiots or Lunaticks, and free
from Dures. But in case there be no Knight at the Caption, then is one of the
Justices of the Court to give an Allocatur or allowance for passing the same.

The Chief Justice can, ex Officio, take a Fine.

The common abuses used in levying of Fines are, where one person does
represent another: in Case of Infants: in Case of Non compos mentis: in Case of
Dures or compulsion; and in Case where a Feme-covert is cheated in the uses of
such Fines, or not examined.

The common way as these abuses are hatched and framed in deceit of the Law and
Court of Common Pleas, are either by Dedimus Potestatem, directed to Mercenary
persons, who value not their reputation; or such as connive at, or contrive the
doing of it; ignorant persons in such affairs. And in some Cases where such
Commissioners and Courts themselves are deceived: of all which I shall give an
account, and thew what remedy has been formerly used to recompense the parties
abused by such practices: And what are the remedies at this day: As also, how
just the Law is in Cases of the like nature in lesser concerns.

The Case was, that Hubert being convicted in Star Chamber, by Bill exhibited
against him for procuring one Webster to counterfeit himself to be one
Gellibrand, 39 Eliz in the Star chamber, Huberts case. Crokes Report.
and to acknowledge a Fine in his name before Commissioners procured for that
purpose, of Gellibrands land: The sentence in that case was, that he should
make Fine to the Queen, and should be imprisoned; and that the Fine should be
void, if it could be done, by entering a Vaeate; if it could not, then Hubert,
by Fine, or otherways, as the said Gellebrand should devise, should reconvey
the Land to him and his Heirs, in the same manner as it was before, at the time
of the Fine levied. My Lord Coke in his 12 Rep. in Hu^gates Case, says, that
this Fine could not be vacated; so that Gellibrand was otherways relieved.

The Earl of Exeter bought a Lordship in Lei^^ne^shire, of a Gentleman who had
formerly made his Wife a Jointure of it, T^^. ^re (...) the S^^^^ch (...).
who covenanted with his Lordship that he and his Wife would levy a Fine of it;
but could not get his Wife thereto: but he and another woman, whom he suborned
and hired to come in his Wifes place and name to join with him to levy a Fine,
which accordingly passed at the Bar of the Court of Common Pleas; and shortly
after the Gentleman dies, and his true Wife entered and claimed her Jointure.
The business being brought into the Star Chamber, and there proved, the said
Earl was glad to allow her her Jointure, or that which was equivalent; but the
said Fine stood good against her. The Statute of 21 Jac. 26. does provide, that
any person acknowledging any matter of Record in another persons name, the said
person not being party or privy thereunto, that it shall be Felony in such
person. But if (as in the cases beforementioned) one person should acknowledge
a Fine in another persons name, and this person as should so acknowledge the
same, should be convicted thereof, according to the Statute; yet such Fines
shall stand good, because it is a Record of a high nature, and will admit of no
Averment against it self.

Where Lands were demised to one Bushley, in tail remainder over, Bushley
proved an Idiot and deformed Creature: Tempore Jac. Bushleys case in Common
Pleas.
one Nicols and others does get him into their custody, and carries him to a
place unknown, and there kept him in secret, until he had acknowledged a Fine
to one Bothom before Justice Southcot, to the use of the said Bothom: which
business being examined by my Lord Dyer, and the rest of the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas, they declared this Fine to be good, and not reversable,
notwithstanding the practices and Ideocy; but declared that the Judge that took
the same, was not worthy to sit to take another: which Case was, as I have
heard, examined in the Star Chamber, and the parties judged to pay fine to the
King, and imprisoned until recompense: But what was done to the Judge I know
not; there are several presidents, where Judges, Commissioners, and other
Offenders have been fined, where there has been any apparent neglect or
contrivance proved against them.

Butcher having married a Wife, who had 20 l per annum Inheritance, and an
Infant of nineteen years of age, Butchers case, tempore Iacobi in Star Chamber.
gets a Dedimus Potestatem directed to two Gentlemen, who examined her, and
took her to be of age; so as the Caption was returned, and the Fine become a
Fine of Record: his Wife not long after dyed without inspection; her Heir
brings his Bill of Complaint in the Star Chamber against Butcher and his
Commissioners, and there proves that Butcher knew her to be an Infant, and did
notwithstanding practice the procuring of this Fine in deceit of the Court. The
sentence was, That he should make Fine to the King, and recovery by Fine, or
otherways, to his Wives Heir, or pay 400 l which was the value of the Land; but
the Fine could not be avoided.

One Carrel marries Johan Heir of Waincomb, an Infant about nineteen, who by
Dedimus Potestatem acknowledged a Fine of her Lands, and dies without
inspection: Waincomb and Carrels case, tempore Eliz. in Star Chamber, 18 Rep.
The uses of which Fine being to the said Carrel for his life; and after his
decease, to her Heirs. Waincomb Heir of Johan, brings his Bill in the
Star Chamber; where the business being examined, and it not appearing that
Carrel knew his Wife to be an Infant, nor any practice or neglect in him or the
Commissioners; and the settlement to be but reasonable, being but for life,
which he would have had, in case he had a Child, as Tenant by Courtesy; and
the Estate being not fully taken out of her blood, the Court gave no sentence
therein.

Note, That the laudable Custom of Tenancy by the Courtesy, is allowable no
where but in England, the next Heir in all other places entering immediately.

This Parliament has been pleased to examine the undue procuring a Fine levied
by Sir Edward Powell Knight and Baronet, and his Wife; the same being procured
by fraud on his Wife; which Fine was by them made void, which could not have
been otherways done.

The relief of Heirs and other persons prejudiced by Fines deceitfully levied
in the Common Pleas, in the Star Chamber, and their sentences for such
misdemeanors, was a terror which prevented many attempts, which possibly would
have been practiced on Fines and Recoveries, in case that had not been. The
want of which Star Chamber to punish and rectify such abuses in Fines, is at
this day the daily ruin of many a Family: for how easy is it to get qualified
Commissioners in this corrupt age, to return the Caption of Fine of an Infant
of five years of age, or of a person they never saw nor examined; by which
means they may do and dispose of any Estate as they please? And if such Infant
shall dye, and not reverse the same, it shall bind him and his Heirs. And how
easy is it to get one person to represent another to Commissioners, and they
to return the Caption, and this person to go beyond Sea, and it is possible may
never be discovered? being an easier way to get money then on the Highway (the
one way of getting money, being as just and reasonable as the other) And how
many persons may by this means get his Wives Inheritance or Jointure from her?
and when she shall examine the business, there must be admitted no averment
against a Record.

How reasonable the Law is in Cases of smaller concerns, where men are not
concluded by a presumption of solemnity, so easily avoided by corrupt persons.
IF any Infant bind himself in any Bond or Deed, or alien any Lands, Goods or
Chattels, he may avoid the same at any time whatsoever, Coke sur Litt. Sect.
259.
either by Plea or Writ, or his Heir may avoid the same. Infancy being a good
Plea in bar to all Actions, except for necessaries, as Diet, Clothes, etc.

If any Idiot, or Non compos mentis, make any Feoffment, Gift, Lease or
Release, etc. it may be avoided during his life, by Office at the Kings Suit,
which shall have relation from the time of his Nativity, to avoid all acts done
by him; and after his death, the King shall deliver his Lands to the right
Heirs. Fitz-Herbert in his Natura Brevium says, Berverlys case, 4 Rep.
he may avoid such act done by himself, either by Plea or Writ; and that his
Heir may avoid the same by Entry, Plea or Writ, is the opinion of all the Books.

If one person does represent another, and borrows money, and gives Bond, or
any other assurance in any others name, he may avoid the same, by pleading
Nonest factum, or such like Plea; and so puts the other to prove that he was
the person that borrowed the same; or his Heirs, Executors or Administrators
may have the same Plea.

If any person be imprisoned, or forced to enter into Bond, or promise, or any
other assurance of the like nature, he has his Plea per Minas or per Dures,
which is a Bar in any such case; But if any of these abuses happen in the
levying a Fine, none of these just Pleas can be admitted, for the reason before
mentioned, it being a Record of a high nature, and will admit of no Averment
against it self; and presumed to be done with such solemnity, as aforesaid:
Whereas, persons that practice such deceits, do for the purpose get a Dedimus
Potestatem, directed either to such that contrive their designs, or ignorant
persons, or such as they are sure will take and pass the same: And this when
the Conusor might well come to the Court to acknowledge the same.

What acts Feme-Coverts are capable of doing, not being of Record.
WIthout doubt our Ancestors, if they had thought it reasonable or convenient,
that a man having married a Wife, should dispose of her Estate as he pleased,
would not have tied him up so strictly as they have by the Statute of 32 H. 8.
cap. 28. where they have provided, That no Husband shall make any Lease of his
Wifes Inheritance, without her joining in it: And although she do, it must be
thus qualified, That the Rent be reserved to the Husband and Wife, and to the
Heirs of the Wife: And also must be reserved the Rent it has yielded within
twenty years; and such Lease not to exceed 21 years, or three Lives. It does
also provide (notwithstanding all this regular caution) That the Wife be of
full age: And every Lease made by the Husband and Wife that is not thus
qualified, is voidable. Before the Statute, no Feme-covert could make a Lease
but for her own life.

The Statute and Common Law, in all Cases, does give great respect to persons
that claim by Inheritance; insomuch, that my Lord Coke says, That if it were
possible that two persons could have an equal title to any one Estate, the one
claiming by Inheritance, the Law would prefer his title before the other: And
nothing is more sacred to any person, then his birthright; nor any thing a
greater spur to any persons honest industry, then the thought and moral
certainty of his Relations reaping the fruits of it.

The Star Chamber being put down, there is now left no remedy to any person
that is injured by the undue procuring of Fines, but by the Justice of
Parliament, which are uncertain as to their sitting, and so the proceeding
therein tedious and chargeable, which makes many an injury to the rain of
several persons pass unexamined, esteeming the remedy as bad as the disease, if
it happen in a small concern.

The want of relief, and severe punishing of offenses of this nature, makes the
same seem justifiable. There is hardly any Countrey-Sollicitor or Attorney, but
is able to advise how a fine may be levied and procured, in any of the Cases
beforementioned, and it being good, being done, they matter not how they get it.

It Is certain, there has been more abuses in Fines, since the putting down the
Star Chamber, then ever was before; there being no Case in the Year-books, and
other ancient Law Books, where any persons incapacited by Law ever levied any
Fines. The solemnity beforementioned being so duly observed by the Court of
Common Pleas, as 'twas almost impossible to get any such thing done; which
solemnity is at this day observed by the Court; so that every person that acts
any such thing, does it by Dedimus Potestatem directed to such Commissioners as
are before mentioned.

In Michaelmas Term 1667, there was examined in the Common Pleas a dangerous
president, but remarkable Case of an Infants levying a Fine; which was, that a
Gentleman within ten miles of London, in Michaelmas Term, 1664, procured
marriage with an Heir, who lived about the same distance, against her Mothers
and Guardians consent: Her Mother and next Heir apparent, do the same Term
repair to the Court of Common Pleas, where her Mother does make Oath, That her
Daughter was an Infant of eighteen, married against her consent, and Heir to
Lands of 500 l per annum value. And upon this, prayed the Court to take notice
thereof; and that if such persons should attempt to procure any Fine of the
Infants Lands, that they would not permit it. The Court do accordingly take
notice thereof; and for further security, do make a positive Rule, prohibiting
any Fine to be levied, during the minority of this Infant; and do order the
same to be left with the Clerk of the Kingsilver, which was accordingly done:
Notwithstanding all which, and her Husband knowing his Wife to be an Infant,
and of the Rule of Court prohibiting the same, he does in Trinity Term
following procure a Dedimus Potestatem directed unto two Soldiers (procured
for that purpose) who did the same Term in a Counselors Chamber in the Temple,
the Court of Common Pleas sitting at Westminster, take the acknowledgement of a
Fine from the Infant (she being in health) never examining her as to her age,
pretending themselves ignorant in such affairs, and what they did, was by the
advice of the Councellor there present, who knew her to be an Infant; and do
there make a Deed, leading the uses of this Fine, settling the Estate to the
Husband and his Heirs. Afterward they came to one of the Justices of the said
Court, who not remembering the Rule, does unawares give an allowance for passing
the same; and do no long after, in the Sickness-time, come to the
Kingsilver-Office, and do there prevail with a Clerk of that Office to pass the
same. The Wife dies in August 1667, without any Issue of her body, Her Heir
next Term complains to the Court, and shows these practices; as also that the
Wife (notwithstanding her incapacity of Infancy) was manifestly surprised and
cheated in the uses of the said Fine, she being informed it was for one use,
and it made to another. Notwithstanding all undue procuring of the said Fine in
deceit and contempt of the Court, their own Order against it, and the Infancy
of the woman confessed on all hands; yet could not the Court vacate the said
Fine, and declared that the same could not be vacated, but by Parliament: But
because the Husband knew of the Rule of Court, and did practice the procuring
the said Fine in contempt and deceit of the Law and Court, the Court committed
him to the Fleet, and fined him.

Note, that almost every Estate in England, either has, are, or may be enjoyed
by Infants, or persons not qualified by the Law to dispose of their Estates; if
so, what security has, or may have any person that shall or may claim any
Estate after them? It may be answered, that if any such person make any Deed of
Gift, Lease, Release, or such like act, it not being of Record, shall not bind
him nor his Heirs. And further, that he cannot dispose of the same by any Act
of Record. The Court of Common Pleas taking such care to prevent unqualified
persons levying of Fines, as they will not suffer any such Records to pass in
their Court, being against the Statute and Common Law.

But we find by experience, that unqualified persons have disposed of their
Estates by tricks devised in deceit of the Court; and that the parties, and
their Heirs, are remediless, because the Court cannot help them: And this
become a common practice.

The best way is, if the Heir or other Relation suspect any such trick to be
put on the Court, to give notice thereof to the Court, who will take particular
care to prevent it. This also may prove as ineffectual, as in the last Case,
and as remediless, if once done; for it is the act of the Court, and presumed to
be done with such solemnity, and the Court fully satisfied the party to be no
Idiot, Lunatic, Infant, the same person; and if Feme-covert, to be secretly
examined, and informed of the nature and quality of the settlement, to prevent
their Husbands overreaching them by any fraud or practice; although it be done
by a Commission directed (as it was in a late Case examined in that Court) to
Cleavers of Wood, Soldiers, or any other inferior ignorant persons whatsoever,
and against the rule of the whole Court.

The Nature of an Inspection.
THe formality of which is, that the parties must voluntarily come into Court,
that the Court may see them, and take proof of their Infancy (the Court taking
themselves to be sole Judges in this point) which they enter on the Record, and
the same is avoided by Writ of Error: and this to be done before they come to
the age of one and twenty. In several Cases I meet this Maxim, Vbi eadem ratio,
ibi eadem lex; which if I fail not, does not follow in this particular. The
intent of an Inspection is only to satisfy the Court as to the parties
Infancy, and so to make it void: If the Court can be otherways satisfied as to
the Infancy, there is eadem ratio that it should be void, but not eadem Lex, as
in the Case last mentioned, where the Court was fully satisfied, both before
the Fine levied, and afterward upon the examination of the practice.

Deceits which happen by Inspections.
There is very seldom any of these Inspections, but there is some deceit
intended by them, either where an Infant has levied a Fine, and some one has
upon the reputation thereof lent moneys, and taken the Lands for security, or
purchased the same to deceive such person, either of the Land or Money, they
then come to be inspected, and so avoids the security or purchase, and gets
both the Land and money; as it was in one Sherlocks Case, cited in Styles
Reports, and diverse other Cases of like nature: The Maxim such a Purchasor
has for his Money, is Caveat Emptor.

The reason why there are so few Inspections, is;

1. Because such Infants must be inspected before they come to age, so as they
often come of age before they understand the nature of it: and when they
understand it, they cannot be permitted, it being to be done in the Minority.

If a Feme-covert-Infant levy a Fine with her Husband, she cannot be admitted
to bring a Writ of Error in her own name, but her Husband must join with her;
who will not suffer it, unless it be for his benefit: As it was in Trinity
Term, 1669, declared in the Court of Common Pleas, when a Husband had unduly
procured his Wife an Infant under twenty, to levy a Fine of her Land. The Heir
apparent injured by the same, does the same Term complain to the Court. The
Husband and Wife are ordered to come into Court. The Wife informs the Court,
that it was her desire what she had done, and that she did freely acknowledge
the same. The Court told her that she was incapable of consenting and doing
what she desired: And then made an Order, that her Husband and she should join
in a Writ of Error to vacate the said Fine. Which Order the Husband disobeying,
the Court committed him to the Fleet, but could not by any means vacate the
said Fine, or otherwise compel the Husband to join: So that if the Husband dye
not before she attain her age, although she should never so much desire the
reversing of the same; yet this inconsiderate and unlawful act of hers, shall
be conclusive to her Heirs and Self.

3. Because such Infant does often dye under age without inspection, and so
cannot be brought to be inspected.

4. In some Cases where such Infants are deceived in declaring the uses of such
Fines, such Fines and Deeds leading the uses thereof being commonly done after
a Clandestine manner, without the advice, privity or knowledge of any of the
Infants friends, who should advise them; and they telling them that it is for
one use, and they make it o another: of all which abuses there are Cases too
plentiful.

I am uncertain whether the Dedimus Potestatem be granted upon a bare
suggestion of infumity and inability, or upon an Affidavit. It is all one
whether, if it be false: An Oath being only a more solemn manner of lying; and
he that will suggest a lie to a Court, will scarce stick to swear one. The
Judge who allows the Fine, does give the Commissioner or Solicitor (who are
to be present at the acknowledgement) their Oath; who are to satisfy the Judge
as to the manner of the acknowledging the same, and that the same was according
to Law (which is) that they were not Infants, Idiots, etc. If the Judge be
satisfied with such Oath, he allows the Fine. Not withstanding which, persons
incapacitated by Law do levy the same; such Practicers procuring a Knight to
take the Caption, and so it passes without Oath, or an Affdavit-man for that
purpose. Practicers of unlawful things, seldom stumole at a false Oath, if that
may effectually forward their practices. From the validity or such practices,
there is raised a corrupt Maxim,

Factum valet quod sieri non debet.
There is very little difference in honesty and justice, between a Fine
obtained by such fraud and practices as aforesaid, and a Deed that is forged,
rased or forced. The difference which is, is this, That a man has liberty to
defend himself against the one, but is concluded by the other.

How unreasonable is it that a Fine being good, being levied upon the presumed
solemnity, and care taken before it was levied; which solemnity and care is
avoided; so that the solemnity and care in these cases is the equity and reason
why such Fines are good; which solemnity and care being wanting, the Law is
wanting of its equity and reason; and where that happens to be, it is Summum
jus, which is accounted Summa injuria.

Since it is evident, that it is provided by the Laws of this Realm, that no
one person shall represent another to acknowledge, any thing on Record to the
prejudice of that other; nor any Madman or Idiot, persons under age, persons
forced against their wills, to make any settlement or disposal of their
Inheritances, to the prejudice of themselves or Heirs; and that there has been
tricks and devices found in Law, whereby such practices are done in deceit
thereof (and against the particular care of the Court, they having notice, and
making Orders to prevent such abuses) to the ruin of Families; and if not
prevented, will be to the ruin of many more: And that there has been formerly
a remedy, by which many a wronged person by such practices had relief; and that
such remedy is taken away, and the abuse become almost remediless: It may well
consist with the honor and interest of a Parliament to provide a remedy,
whereby such offenses should be severely punished; and the persons wronged by
such practices, relieved against them, as they formerly were.

That these abuses by Fines may be remedied, is the wishes of T. L.

FINIS.

