PLAIN DEALING: OR, NEVVES FROM New England.

(Vivat Rex Angliae Carolus,
Vivat Anglia,
Vivantque eorum Amici omnes.)
A short view of NEW-ENGLANDS present Government, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, compared with the anciently-received and established Government of
ENGLAND, in some material points; fit for the gravest consideration in these
times.

By THOMAS LECHFORD of Clements Inn, in the County of Middlesex, Gent.

Levis est dolor, qui capere consilium potest,
Et clepere sese; Magna non latitant mala.
Sen. LONDON, Printed by W. E. and I. G. for Nath: Butter, at the sign of the
pyde Bull near S. Austins gate. 1642.

TO THE READER.
EVery man is to approve himself, and answer to God for his actions his
conscience leads him to; and next, to good men, as much as in him lies. I have
thus presumed to enter into public, for these reasons:

First, because it is well known unto many, that heretofore I suffered
imprisonment, and a kind of banishment out of this good Land, for some acts
construed to oppose, and as tending to subvert Episcopacie, and the settled
Ecclesiastical government of England: therefore now I desired to purge my self
of so great a scandal; and wherein I have offended, to entreat all my
Superiors, and others, to impute it rather to my ignorance, for the time, then
any wilful stubbornness.

Secondly, seeing that since my coming home, I find that multitudes are
corrupted with an opinion of the unlawfulness of the Church Government by
Diocesan Bishops, which opinion I believe is the root of much mischief; having
now had experience of diverse governments, I see not how I could with
faithfulness to God, my King and Country, be any longer silent, especially
considering some of these late troubles occasioned, among other sins, I fear,
much through this evil opinion. Happy shall I be, if any be made wiser by my
harms; I wish all men to take heed, how they shake hands with the Church of
God, upon any such heedlesse grounds as I almost had done.

Thirdly, that I might (though unworthy) in a fit season, acquaint the learned
and pious Divines of England with these my slender observations, quaeres, and
experiments, to the end they may come the better prepared, upon any public
occasion, for the consideration of such matters, and so at length, those good
things that are shaken among us may be established, and truth confirmed.

It is enough for me, being a Student or Practiser at Law, faithfully to put a
Case, which will be this: Whether the Episcopal Government by Provincial and
Diocesan Bishops, in number about 26. in England, being, if not of absolute
Divine authority, yet nearest, and most like thereunto, and most anciently here
embraced, is still safest to be continued?

Or a Presbyterian government, being (as is humbly conceived) but of humane
authority, bringing in a numerous company of above 40000. Presbyters to have
chief rule in the keys, in England, be fit to be newly set up here, a thing
whereof we have had no experience, and which moderate wise men think to be
less consonant to the Divine pattern, and may prove more intolerable then the
said Episcopacie?

Or an independent government of every congregationall Church ruling it self,
which introduces not only one absolute Bishop in every Parish, but in effect
so many men, so many Bishops, according to New-Englands rule, which in England
would be Anarchie and confusion?

I would entreat those that stand for this last mentioned manner of government,
to be pleased to consider, 1. That the very term of leading, or ruling in the
Church, attributed to Elders, forbids it; for if all are Rulers, who shall be
ruled? 2. The maine acts of Rule consist of receiving into the Church by
Baptism, or otherwise, and ejection out of the Church by censure, binding and
loosing; now these are committed to the Apostles, and their successors, and not
to all the members of the Church. 3. All have not power to baptize, therefore
not to receive into the Church, nor to cast out of the Church. My brethren, be
not many masters, says S. James, 3.1. The words of the wise are as goads, and
as nails, fastened by the masters of assemblies, which are given from one
Shepherd, Eccles. 12.11.


And whereas some may say, that this power of ruling is but ministerially in
the Officers, and initiatively, conclusively, and virtually in the people: If
so, what power ordinarily have the people to contradict the ministerial works
and acts of their Officers? Must the whole Church try all those whom their
Ministers convert abroad, suppose among Indians, before they may baptize them?
How can all the Church examine and try such? All have not power, warrant,
leisure, pleasure, ability, for, and in such works, nor can all speak Indian
language.

Doubtless the acts of rule by the Officers is the rule of the whole Church,
and so to be taken ordinarily without contradiction, else there would be no end
of jangling: And thus taken, the whole Church of Corinth, by S. Paul's command,
( sc. by their Ministers) were to put away that wicked person, and deliver him
up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.13. and restore him, and forgive him, 2 Cor. 2. and so
all the doubt on that Text is (near I think) resolved.

Now that the government at New England seems to make so many Church Members
so many Bishops, will be plain by this ensuing Discourse: for you shall here
find, that the Churches in the Bay govern each by all their members
unanimously, or else by the major part, wherein every one has equal vote and
superspection with their Ministers: and that in their Covenant it is expressed
to be the duty of all the members, to watch over one another. And in time their
Churches will be more corrupted then now they are; they cannot (as there is
reason to fear) avoid it possibly. How can any now deny this to be Anarchie
and confusion?

Nay, say some, we will keep out those that have not true grace. But how can
they certainly discern that true grace, and what measure God requires?
Besides, by this course, they will (it is to be feared) in stead of propagating
the Gospel, spread heathenisme; in stead of gaining to the Church, lose from
the Church: for when the major part are unbaptized, as in twenty years
undoubtedly they will be, by such a course continued, what is like to become of
it, but that either they may go among their fellow-heathens the Indians, or
rise up against the Church, and break forth into many grievous distempers among
themselves? which God, and the King forbid, I pray.

And that you (courteous Reader) may perceive I have from time to time dealt
cordially in these things, by declaring them impartially to my friends, as I
received light, I shall add in the last place certain passages out Letters,
sent by me into England to that purpose, and conclude.

And I do not this, God knows, as delighting to lay open the infirmities of
these well-affected men, many of them my friends, but that it is necessary, at
this time, for the whole Church of God, and themselves, as I take it: Besides,
many of the things are not infirmities, but such as I am bound to protest
against; yet I acknowledge there are some wise men among them, who would help
to mend things, if they were able, and I hope will do their endeavors. And I
think that wiser men then they, going into a wilderness to set up another
strange government differing from the settled government here, might have fallen
into greater errors then they have done.

Neither have I the least aim to retard or hinder an happy and desired
reformation of things amiss either in Church or Commonwealth, but daily and
earnestly pray to God Almighty, the God of Wisdom and Counsel, that he please
so to direct his Royal Majesty, and his wise and honorable Counsel, the high
Court of Parliament, that they may fall upon so due and fair a moderation, as
may be for the glory of God, and the peace and safety of his Royal Majesty,
and all his Majesty's dominions, and good Subjects. Vale.

Clements Inn, Jan. 17. 1641. Thomas Lechford.

A TABLE of the chief Heads of this DISCOURSE.
1. THe Church Government and administrations in the Bay of the Mattachusets.
Page 2. 2. Their public worship. 16 3. Touching the government of the
Commonwealth there. 23 4. Certain Propositions to the general Court,
concerning recording of Civil Causes. 29 5. A Paper of the Church her
liberties. 31 6. A Paper intended for the Worshipful John Winthrop, Esquire,
late Governor, touching baptizing of those they term without, and propagation
of the Gospel to the Infidel Natives. 34 7. The Ministers and Magistrates their
names. 37 8. The state of the Country in the Bay and thereabouts. 47 9. A
relation concerning the Natives or Indians. 49 10. Some late occurrences
touching Episcopacie. 53 11. Three Questions to the Elders of Boston, and their
Answers. 55 12. A Paper of exceptions to their government. 56 13. Forty quaeres
about planting and governing of Churches, and other experiments. 58 14. An
abstract of certain Letters. 68 15. The Conclusion. 78
Plain dealing: OR, NEWS FROM NEW ENGLAND.
HAving been forth of my native Country, almost for the space of four years
last past, and now through the goodness of Almighty God returned, many of my
friends desiring to know of me the manner of governments, and state of things,
in the place from whence I came, New England; I think good to declare my
knowledge in such things, as briefly as I may. I conceive, and hope, it may be
profitable in these times of disquisition.

For the Church government, and administrations, in the Bay of the Mattachusets.
How Churches are gathered there.
A Church is gathered there after this manner: A convenient, or competent number
of Christians, allowed by the general Court to plant together, at a day
prefixed, come together, in public manner, in some fit place, and there
confess their sins and profess their faith, one unto another, and being
satisfied of one another faith and repentance, they solemlny enter into a
Covenant with God, and one an other (which is called their Church Covenant, and
held by them to constitute a Church) to this effect: viz.

Their Church Covenant.
To forsake the Devil, and all his works, and the vanities of the sinful
world, and all their former lusts, and corruptions, they have lived and walked
in, and to cleave unto, and obey the Lord Jesus Christ, as their only King and
Lawgiver, their only Priest and Prophet, and to walk together with that
Church, in the unity of the faith, and brotherly love, and to submit themselves
one unto an other, in all the ordinances of Christ, to mutual edification, and
comfort, to watch over, and support one another

Whereby they are called the Chruch of such a place, which before they say were
no Church, nor of any Church except the invisible: After this, Election of
their Church Officers.
they do at the same time, or some other, all being together, elect their own
Officers, as Pastor, Teacher, Elders, Deacons, if they have fit men enough to
supply those places; else, as many of them as they can be provided of.

Then they set another day for the ordination of their said officers, Their
ordinations.
and appoint some of themselves to impose hands upon their officers, which is
done in a public day of fasting and prayer. Where there are Ministers, or
Elders, before, they impose their hands upon the new Officers: But where there
is none, there some of their chiefest men, two or three, of good report amongst
them, though not of the Ministry, do, by appointment of the said Church, lay
hands upon them. And after the said ordination, if there are any Elders of
other Churches present, (as of late I have known diverse have been present,
under the names of the Messengers of the Churches) they give the new Officers
the right hand of fellowship, The right hand of fellowship by messengers of
Churches.
taking them by the right hand, every one severally, or else, sometimes, one
foreign Elder, in the name of all the rest, gives the right hand of
fellowship, with a set speech unto them. Notice is given in diverse Churches or
other places, beforehand, of the gathering of every Church, diverse weeks
before; and so also of every ordination. And some Ministers, or others, as
Messengers from other Churches, are usually present at such gatherings of
Churches, and ordinations: For sometimes, Magistrates, Captains, Gentlemen, and
other meaner Brethren, are made messengers of Churches, for those and other
purposes, never having had imposition of hands: And at planting of a Church, or
gathering, as they term it, one of the Church messengers of foreign
Churches, examines and tries the men to be molded into a Church, discerns
their faith and repentance, and their Covenant being before ready made,
written, subscribed, and here read and acknowledged, he decerns and
pronounces them to be a true Church of Christ, and gives them the right hand
of fellowship, and all this in the name of Christ, and of all the
Church-messengers present, and their Churches: so did Master Weld at the
founding of Weymouth Church, or to this effect.

And the general Court will not allow of any Church otherwise gathered.

Some differ.
Some Ministers have there heretofore, as I have heard, disclaimed the power of
their Ministry received in England, but others among them have not. Generally,
for the most part, they hold the Pastors and Teachers offices to be distinct;
the Teacher to minister a word of knowledge, the Pastor a word of wisdom, but
some hold them all one; as in the Church of Watertowne, there are two Pastors,
neither will that Church send any messengers to any other Church-gathering or
ordination.

How members are received, or added to the Church there.
When a man or woman comes to join unto the Church so gathered, he or she
comes to the Elders in private, at one of their houses, or some other place
appointed, upon the week days, and make known their desire, to enter into
Church Fellowship with that Church, and then the ruling Elders, or one of them,
require, or ask him or her, if he be willing to make known unto them the
work of grace upon their souls, or how God has been dealing with them about
their conversion: which (at Boston) the man declares usually standing, the
woman sitting. And if they satisfy the Elders, and the private assembly, (for
diverse of the Church, both men and women, meet there usually) that they are
true believers, The usual terms whereupon.
that they have been wounded in their hearts for their original sin, and
actual transgressions, and can pitch upon some promise of free grace in the
Scripture, for the ground of their faith, and that they find their hearts
drawn to believe in Christ Jesus, for their justification and salvation, and
these in the ministry of the Word, reading or conference: and that they know
competently the sum of Christian faith. And sometimes, though they be not
come to a full assurance of their good estate in Christ. Then afterward, in
covenient time, in the public assembly of the Church, notice is given by one
of the ruling Elders, that such a man, or woman, by name, desires to enter
into Church Fellowship with them, and therefore if any know any thing, or
matter of offense against them, for their unfitness to join with them, such
are required to bring notice thereof to the Elders; else, that any who know
them, or can say any thing for their fitness, be ready to give testimony
thereof, when they shall be called forth before the whole Church.

If there be matter of offense, it is first heard before the Elders, Matters of
offense how heard in private.
and if the party satisfy them, and the offended, in private, for private
offenses, and promise to satisfy in public, for public offenses; then,
upon another day, one of the ruling Elders calls forth the party, by name, in
the public assembly of the Church, and before strangers, and whomsoever
present, most commonly upon the Lords day, after evening exercises, and
sometimes upon a week day, when all the Church have notice to be present.

Dilatorie proceedings in admitting members.
The party appearing in the midst of the Assembly, or some convenient place, the
ruling Elder speaks in this manner: Brethren of this congregation, this man,
or woman A. B. has been heretofore propounded to you, desiring to enter into
Church Fellowship with us, and we have not, since that, heard any thing from
any of you to the contrary, of the parties admittance, but that we may go on
to receive him: Therefore now, if any of you know any thing against him, why he
may not be admitted, you may yet speak. Then after some silence he proceeds,
Seeing no man speaks to the contrary of his admission, if any of you know any
thing, to speak for his receiving, we desire you, give testimony thereof to the
Church, as you were also formerly desired to be ready therewith, and express
your selves as briefly as you may, and to as good hearing. Whereupon,
sometimes, men do speak to the contrary, in case they have not heard of the
propounding, and so stay the party for that time also, till this new offense be
heard before the Elders, so that sometimes there is a space of diverse months
between a parties first propounding and receiving; and some are so bashful, as
that they choose rather to go without the Communion, then undergo such
Whether Popish Auricular confession, and these public confessions be not
extremes, and whether some private Pastoral or Presbyteriall collation, left
at liberty, upon cause, and in case of trouble of conscience, as in the Church
of England is approved, be not better then those extremes, I leave to he wise
and learned to judge.
public confessions and trials, but that is held their fault.

But when none speaks to the contrary, Testimonials and Recommendations.
then some one, two, or three, or more of the Brethren speak their opinions of
the party, giving instances in some godliness and good conversation of his, or
some other recommendation is made, and that they are willing (if the Church
thereto consent) for their part, to give him the right hand of fellowship.

Which done, the Elder turns his speech to the party to be admitted, and
requires him, or sometimes asks him, if he be willing to make known to the
congregation the work of grace upon his soul; and bids him, as briefly, and
audibly, to as good hearing as he can, to do the same.

Thereupon the party, Public confessions of parties to be received.
if it be a man, speaks himself; but if it be a woman, her confession made
before the Elders, in private, is most usually (in Boston Church) read by the
Pastor, who registered the same. At Salem the women speak themselves, for the
most part, in the Church; but of late it is said, they do this upon the week
days there, and nothing is done on Sunday, but their entrance into Covenant.
The man in a solemn speech, sometimes a quarter of an hour long, shorter or
longer, declares the work of grace in his soul, to the same purpose, as that
before the Elders formerly mentioned.

Their profession of faith.
Then the Elder requires the party to make profession of his faith; which also
is done either by questions and answers, if the party be weak, or else in a
solemn speech according to the sum and tenor of the Christian faith laid
down in the Scriptures, defining faith, and showing how it is wrought by the
Word, and Spirit of God, defining a Church to be a company of believers
gathered out of the world, by the Word preached, and holy Spirit, and knit
together by an holy Covenant, that there are in the Church remaining such and
such officers, and members, Officers in the Church.
as aforesaid: That is to say, Pastors and Teachers, ruling Elders, Deacons and
Deaconesses, or Widows; and such and such are their offices and duties in
particular, Their duties or offices.
viz. the Pastor to exhort, and besides to rule; the Teacher to instruct in
knowledge, and likewise to rule; the ruling Elder to assist Pastor and Teacher
in ruling, as the Levites were given to the Priests for helps, and to see to
whomsoever coming into, or to go forth of the Church, by admonition, or
excommunication; the Deacon to receive the contributions of the Church, and
faithfully to dispose the same; the Deaconesses to show mercy with
cheerfulness, and to minister to the sick and poor brethren; Members duties.
the members all, to watch over and support one an other in brotherly love.

Notwithstanding, A Sermon of
there was a Sermon lately made by Master Cotton in October, Anno 1640. upon 1
Cor. 11.19. touching heresies, which was since commonly there called the Sermon
of the twelve Articles, wherein was declared, that there are twelve Articles of
Religion, which maintained by any, the Church may receive them, and keep
fellowship with them; but the ignorant of them after instruction and scandalous
sins unrepented, exclude from the fellowship of the Church. twelve Articles of
Religion.
The said Articles were to this effect: First, that there are three Persons in
one God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit. Secondly, that this God
made, and governs all the World, and that he is a rewarder of the good, and
punisher of the evil. Thirdly, that this God alone is to be worshipped.
Fourthly, this worship of God is instituted in his written Word, not the
precepts of men. Fifthly, that from the fall of Adam, we have not so worshipped
God, but have all sinned, and deprived our selves of the reward promised, and
therefore are under the curse by nature. Sixthly, that we are by nature utterly
unable to rescue our selves from this curse. Seventhly, that Jesus Christ the
eternal Son of God, in fullness of time took upon him our nature, and was
made flesh for us, and by his death and sufferings, redeemed his elect from
sin, and death. Eighthly, that Christ Jesus, and salvation by him, is offered,
and given in the Gospel, unto every one that believes in his name, and only
by such received. Ninthly, that no man can come unto Christ, nor believe on
him, except the Father draw him by his Word and Spirit. Tenthly, whom the Lord
draws to him by his Word and Spirit, them he justifies freely by his grace, and
according to his truth, not by works. Eleventhly, where the soul is justified,
it is also regenerate and sanctified. Twelfthly, this regeneration and
sanctification is still imperfect in this life. And unto all is added this
general Article, That such as walk after this rule, shall arise to
everlasting life; and those that walk otherwise, shall arise to everlasting
condemnation, in the day of Judgment: That the knowledge and belief of these
are of the foundation of Religion: But things touching the foundation of
Churches, as Baptism, Imposition of hands; ignorance in these may hinder the
measure of our reward in heaven, not communion with the Church on earth.
Exceptions against the Apostles Creed were these: That it is not of necessity
to believe Christ's descent into hell in any sense; That it is not in that Creed
contained, that the Scripture is the only rule of Gods worship; nor does it so
directly set forth the point of Justification.

Master Knolls how admitted.
And also I remember Master Knolles, now one of the Pastors at Watertowne, when
he first came to be admitted at Boston, never made any mention in his
profession of faith, of any Officers of the Church in particular, or their
duties, and yet was received.

The party having finished his Discourses of his confession, Right hand of
fellowship given to brethren.
and profession of his faith, the Elder again speaks to the congregation:
Brethren of the congregation, if what you have heard of, from this party, do
not satisfy you, as to move you to give him the right hand of fellowship, use
your liberty, and declare your minds therein: And then, after some silence, if
none except against the parties expressions, The whole Church rules.
(as often some members do) then the Elder proceeds, saying, But if you are
satisfied with that you have heard of, and from him, express your
willingness, and consent to receive him, by your usual sign, which is
erection and extention of the right hand.

This done, sometimes they proceed to admit more members, all after the same
manner, for the most part, two, three, four, or five, or more together, as
they have time, spending sometimes almost a whole afternoon therein. Their
entrance into Covenant.
And then the Elder calls all them, that are to be admitted, by name, and
rehearses the covenant, on their parts, to them, which they publicly say,
they do promise, by the help of God, to perform: And then the Elder, in the
name of the Church, promises the Churches part of the covenant, to the new
admitted members. So they are received, or admitted.

Then they may receive the Sacrament of the Lords supper with them, and their
children be baptized, but not before: also till then they may not be free men
of the Commonwealth, but being received in the Church they may.

Severing in the family.
Sometimes the Master is admitted, and not the servant, and e contra: the
husband is received, and not the wife; and on the contrary, the child, and not
the parent.

Offenses, how heard in public.
Also all matters of public offense are heard and determined in public,
before all the Church, (and strangers too in Boston, not so in other places)
The party is called forth, and the matter declared and testified by two
witnesses; The whole Church ruling and usurping the keys.
then he is put to answer: Which finished, one of the ruling Elders asks the
Whether a grave and judicious consistory of the Bishop well assisted be not a
great deal better, I leave to our superiors to determin^.
congregation if they are satisfied with the parties expressions? If they are,
he requires them to use their liberty, and declare their satisfiednesse; If
not, and that they hold the party worthy of admonition or excommunication, that
they witness their assent thereto by their silence. If they be silent, the
sentence is denounced. If it be for defaults in erroneous opinions only, the
Teacher, they say, is to denounce the sentence; If for matter of ill manners,
the Pastor denounces it; Who denounce Church censures.
the ruling Elders do not usually denounce any sentence: But I have heard, a
Captain delivered one to Satan, in the Church at Dorchester, in the absence of
their Minister.

Dic Ecclesiae.
Ordinarily, matter of offense is to be brought to the Elders in private, they
may not otherwise tell the This agrees with the rule in England.
Church in ordinary matters, and so it has been declared in public, by the
Pastors of Boston.

Admonition.
The admonished must, in good manners, abstain from the Communion, and must go
on to satisfy the Church, else Excommunication follows.

The excommunicate is held as an Heathen and Publican: Excommunication.
Yet it has been declared at Boston in diverse cases, that children may eat
with their parents excommunicate; that an elected Magistrate excommunicate may
hold his place, but better another were chosen; that an hereditary Magistrate,
though excommunicate, is to be obeyed still in civil things; that the
excommunicate person may come and hear the Word, and be present at Prayer, so
that he give not public offense, by taking up an eminent place in the
Assembly: But at New Haven, alias Quinapeag, where Master Davenport is Pastor,
the excommunicate is held out of the meeting, at the door, if he will hear,
in frost, snow, and rain. Most an-end, in the Bay, they use good moderation,
and forbearance in their censures: Yet I have known a Gentlewoman
excommunicate, for some indiscreet words, with some stiffness maintained,
saying, A brother, and others, she feared, did conspire to arbitrate the price
of Joyners work of a chamber too high, and endeavoring to bring the same into
civil cognizance, not proceeding to take two or three to convince the party,
and so to tell the Church, (though she first told the party of it) and this
without her husband. I fear she is not yet absolved; I am sure she was not
upon the third of August last, when we loosed from Boston.

There has been some difference about jurisdictions, Cognizance of causes.
or cognizance of causes: Some have held, that in causes between brethren of
the Church, the matter should be first told the Church, before they go to the
civil Magistrate, because all causes in difference do amount, one way or
other, to a matter of offense; and that all criminal matters concerning Church
members, should be first heard by the Church. But these opinionists are held,
by the wiser sort, not to know the dangerous issues and consequences of such
tenets. The Magistrates, and Church-leaders, labor for a just and equal
correspondence in jurisdictions, not to entrench one on the other, neither the
civil Magistrates to be exempt from Ecclesiastical censure, nor the Ministers
from Civil: and whether Ecclesiastical, or Civillpower first begin to lay
hold of a man, the same to proceed, not barring the other to intermeddle.

Churches independent.
Every Church has power of government in, and by it self; and no Church, or
Officers, have power over one another but by way of advice or counsel,
voluntarily given or besought, saving that the general Court, now and then,
overruled some Church matters: and of late, diverse of the Ministry have had
set meetings to order Church matters; whereby it is conceived they bend toward
Presbyterian rule.

^^fference of rule in Churches.
In Boston; they rule, most an-end, by unanimous consent, if they can, both in
admissions, and censures, and other things. In Salem, they rule by the major
part of the Church: You that are so minded hold up your hands; Consistory. A
better Consistory is, and may be constituted in England.
you that are otherwise minded, hold up yours.

In Boston, when they cannot agree in a matter, they will sometime refer it
to some select brethren to hear and end, or to certify the Church, and any
brethren, that will, to be present at the discuss in private.

Some Churches have no ruling Elders, Difference in number of Officers.
some but one, some but one teaching Elder, some have two ruling, and two
teaching Elders; some one, some two or three Deacons; some hold that one
Minister is enough for a small number of people; No Church there has a
Deaconesse, as far as I know.

Where farms or villages are, Chapels of ease.
as at Rumneymarsh and Marblehead, there a Minister, or a brother of one of the
congregations of Boston for the Marsh, These, you see, are necessary in England
in some places.
and of Salem for Marblehead, preaches and exercises prayer every Lords day,
which is called prophesying in such a place. Prophesying.
And so it was heretofore at Mountwoollaston within Boston precincts, though
since it became a Church now called of Braintree, but before they of the mount
did, and those of the Marsh and Marblehead still come and receive the Sacrament
at Boston, and Salem respectively, and some of Braintree still receive at
Boston.

Also when a Minister preaches abroad, Prophesying, or Preaching by License.
in another congregation, the ruling Elder of the place, after the Psalm sung,
saying publicly; If this present brother has any word of exhortation for the
people, It ought not to be otherways in England.
at this time, in the name of God let him say on; this is held prophesying.
Also the confessions or speeches made by members to be admitted, have been by
some held prophesying, and when a brother exercises in his own congregation
(as at Salem they do sometimes) taking a text of Scripture, and handling the
same according to his ability. Notwithstanding, it is generally held in the
Bay, by some of the most grave and learned men amongst them, that none should
undertake to prophecy in public, unless he intend the work of the
Ministry, and so in some places, as in schools Universities, Cathedrals, and
Collegiat Churches.
, and not abroad, without they have both imposition of hands, and mission, or
permission, because prophecy properly has its denomination from 1 Cor. 13.2.
understanding prophetical Scriptures, which to know discreetly to handle,
requires good learning, skill in tongues, great fidelity, and good conscience.

The public worship.
The public worship. Every Sunday morning.
THE public worship is in as fair a meeting house as they can provide,
wherein, in most places, they have been at great charges. Every Sabbath or
Lords day, they come together at Boston, by wringing of a bell, about nine of
the clock or before. The Pastor begins with solemn prayer continuing about a
quarter of an hour. The Teacher then reads and expounds a Chapter; Then a
Psalm is sung, which ever one of the ruling Elders dictates. After that the
Pastor preaches a Sermon, and sometimes ex tempore exhorts. Then the Teacher
concludes with prayer, and a blessing.

Lords Supper.
Once a month is a Sacrament of the Lords Supper, whereof notice is given
usually a fortnight before, and then all others departing save the Church,
which is a great deal less in number then those that go away, they receive
the Sacrament, the Ministers and ruling Elders sitting at the Table, the rest
in their seats, or upon forms: All cannot see the Minister consecrating,
unless they stand up, and make a narrow shift. The one of the teaching Elders
prays before, and blesses, and consecrates the Bread and Wine, according to
the words of Institution; the other prays after the receiving of all the
members: and next Communion, they change turns; he that began at that, ends at
this: and the Ministers deliver the Bread in a Charger to some of the chief,
and peradventure gives to a few the Bread into their hands, and they deliver
the Charger from one to another, till all have eaten; in like manner the cup,
till all have drank, goes from one to another. Then a Psalm is sung, and with
a short blessing the congregation is dismissed. Any one, though not of the
Church, may, in Boston, come in, and Once I stood without one of the doors,
and looked in, and saw the administration: Besides, I have had credible
relation of all the particulars from some of the members.
see the Sacrament administered, if he will: But none of any Church in the
Country may receive the Sacrament there, without leave of the congregation, for
which purpose he comes to one of the ruling Elders, who propounds his name to
the congregation, before they go to the Sacrament.

About two in the afternoon, Afternoon.
they repair to the meeting house again; and then the Pastor begins, as
before noone, and a Psalm being sung, the Teacher makes a Sermon. He was wont,
when I came first, to read and expound a Chapter also before his Sermon in the
afternoon. After and before his Sermon, he prays.

Baptism.
After that ensues Baptism, if there be any, which is done, by either Pastor or
Teacher, in the Deacons seat, the most eminent place in the Church, next under
the Elders seat. The Pastor most commonly makes a speech or exhortation to the
Church, and parents concerning Baptism, and then prays before and after. It
is done by washing or sprinkling. One of the parents being of the Church, the
child may be baptized, and the Baptism is into the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. No sureties are required.

Contribution.
Which ended, follows the contribution, one of the Deacons saying, Brethren of
the congregation, now there is time left for contribution, wherefore as God
has prospered you, so freely offer. Upon some extraordinary occasions, as
building and repairing of Churches or meeting houses, or other necessities, the
Ministers press a liberal contribution, with effectual exhortations out of
Scripture. The Magistrates and chief Gentlemen first, and then the Elders, and
all the congregation of men, and most of them that are not of the Church, all
single persons, widows, and women in absence of their husbands, come up one
after another one way, and bring their offerings to the Deacon at his seat,
and put it into a box of wood for the purpose, if it be money or papers; if it
be any other chattle, they set it or lay it down before the Deacons, and so
pass another way to their seats again. This contribution is of money, or
papers, promising so much money: I have seen a fair gilt cup with a cover,
offered there by one, which is still used at the Communion. Which moneys, and
goods the Deacons dispose toward the maintenance of the Ministers, and the
poor of the Church, and the Churches occasions, without making account,
ordinarily.

But in Salem Church, Differences in contributions.
those only that are of the Church, offer in public; the rest are required
to give to the Ministry, by collection, at their houses. At some other places
they make a rate upon every man, as well within, as not of the Church, residing
with them, toward the Churches occasions; and others are beholding, now and
then, to the general Court, to study ways to enforce the maintenance of the
Ministry.

This done, Admissions. Offenses.
then follows admission of members, or hearing matters of offense, or other
things, sometimes till it be very late. If they have time, after this, is sung
a Psalm, and then the Pastor concludes with a Prayer and a blessing.

Upon the week days, Lectures. Fasts and feasts.
there are Lectures in diverse towns, and in Boston, upon Thursdayes, when
Master Cotton teaches out of the Revelation. There are days of fasting,
thanksgiving, and prayers upon And why not set fasting days and times, and set
feasts, as well as set Synods in the Reformed Churches?
occasions, but no And why not holy days as well as the fifth of November, and
the days of Purim among the Jews* Besides, the commemoration of the blessed
and heavenly mysteries of our ever blessed Savior, and the good examples and
piety of the Saints? What time is there for the moderate recreation of youth
and servants, but after divine services on most of those days, seeing that
upon the Sunday it is justly held unlawful? And sure enough, at New England,
the Masters will and must hold their servants to their labor more then in
other Countries well planted is needful; therefore I think even they should
do well to admit of some Holy days too, as not a few of the wiser sort among
them hold necessary and expedient.
holy days, except the Sunday.

Little reading, catechizing.
In some Churches, nothing is Whereas in England every Sunday are read in
public, Chapters and Psalms in every Church, besides the (...)
Commandments, Epistle and Gospel, the Creed and other good forms and
catechizings, and besides what is read upon Holy days and other days both in
the parish, and Cathedral and Collegiat Churches, and in the Universities, and
other Chapels, the benefit whereof, doubtless, all wise men will acknowledge
to be exceeding great, as well as public preaching and expounding.
read on the first day of the week, or Lords day, but a Psalm dictated before
or after the Sermon, as at Hingham; there is no catechizing of children or
others in any Church, (except in Concord Church, and in other places, of those
admitted, in their receiving:) the reason given by some is, because when people
come to be admitted, the Church has trial of their knowledge, faith, and
repentance, and they want a direct Scripture for Ministers catechizing; As if,
Go teach all Nations, and Train up a child in the way he should go, did not
reach to Ministers catechizings. But, God be thanked, the general Court was so
wise, in June last, as to enjoin, or take some course for such catechizing, as
I am informed, but know not the way laid down in particular, how it should be
done.

They call the days of the week, Days and months how called.
beginning at the first, second, third, forth, fifth, sixth, and seventh, which
is Saturday: the months begin at March, by the names of the first, second, and
so forth to the twelfth, which is February* because they would avoid all memory
of heathenish and idols names: And surely it is good to overthrow heathenisme
by all good ways and means. Neglect of instructing the Indians.
But there has not been any sent forth by any Church to learn the Natives
language, or to instruct them in the Religion; First, because they say they
have not to do with them being without, unless they come to hear and learn
English. Secondly, some say out of Rev. 15. last, it is not probable that
anynation more can be converted, til the calling of the Jews; till the seven
plagues finished none was able to enter into the Temple, that is, the Christian
Church, and the seventh Vial is not yet poured forth, and God knows when it
will be. Thirdly, because all Churches among them are equal, and all Officers
equal, and so between many, nothing is done that way. They must all therefore
equally bear the blame; for indeed I humbly conceive that by their
principles, no Nation can or could ever be converted. Therefore, if so, by
their principles how can any Nation be governed? They have nothing to excuse
themselves in this point of not laboring with the Indians to instruct them,
but their want of a staple trade, and other businesses taking them up. And it
is true, this may excuse a tanto.

Of late some Churches are of opinion, Charity.
that any may be admitted to Church Fellowship, that are not extremely ignorant
or scandalous: but this they are not very forward to practice, except at
Newberry. Besides, many good people scruple their Church Covenant, so highly
termed by the most of them, a part of the The Covenant of Grace of the New
Testament, it is true, makes the whole universal Church of Christ, and every
part thereof, or at least belongs thereunto: but allowing Churches a Covenant
of Reformation tending to the bett^r ordering and well-being of themselves, and
for other politic respects, this is as much as they at New England can justly
make of their Covenant, and some that are judicious among themselves have
ackn^wledged it: And yet, even this, unless it be made and guided by good
counsel, and held with dependence and concatenation upon some chief Church or
Churches, may tend to much division and confusion, as is obvious to the
understanding of those that are but a little versed in study of these points.
Covenant of grace; and particularly, one Master Martin for saying in
argumentation, that their Church Covenant was an humane invention, and that
they will not leave till it came to the swords point, was fined ten pounds, his
cow taken and sold for the money. A Minister standing upon his Ministry, as of
the Church of England, and arguing against their Covenant, and being elected
by some of Weymouth to be their Minister, was compelled to recant some words;
one that made the election, and got hands to the paper, was fined 10. pounds,
and thereupon speaking a few cross words, 5. pound more, and paid it down
presently; Another of them for saying one of the Ministers of the Bay was a
Brownist, or had a Brownisticall head, and for a supposed lie, was whipped: and
all these by the general or quarter civil Courts.

Touching the government of the Commonweal there.
NOne may now be a Freeman of that Commonwealth, Ecclesia regnans.
being a Society or Corporation, named by the name of the Governor, Deputy
Governor, and Assistants of the Society of the Mattachusets Bay in
New England, unless he be a Church member amongst them. None have voice in
elections of Governors, Deputy, and Assistants; none are to be Magistrates,
Officers, or Jurymen, grand or petite, but Freemen. The Ministers give their
votes in all elections of Magistrates. Now the most of the persons at
New England are not admitted of their Church, and therefore are not Freemen,
and when they come to be tried there, be it for life or limb, name or estate,
or whatsoever, they must be tried and judged too by those of the Church, who
are in a sort their adversaries: how equal that has been, or may be, some by
experience do know, others may judge.

The manner of the elections is this: Elections of the Governor and chief
Magistrates.
At first, the chief Governor and Magistrates were chosen in London, by
erection of hands, by all the Freemen of this Society. Since the transmitting
of the Patent into New England, the election is not by voices, nor erection of
hands, but by papers, thus:

The general Court-electory sitting, where are present in the Church, or
meeting house at Boston, the old Governor, Deputy, and all the Magistrates,
and two Deputies or Burgesses for every town, or at least one, all the Freemen
are bidden to come in at one door, and bring their votes in paper, for the new
Governor, and deliver them down upon the table, before the Court, and so to
pass forth at another door. Those that are absent, send their votes by
proxies. All being delivered in, the votes are counted, and according to the
major part, the old Governor pronounces, that such an one is chosen Governor
for the year ensuing. Then the Freemen, in like manner, bring their votes for
the Deputy Governor, who being also chosen, the Governor propounds the
Assistants one after the other. New Assistants are, of late, put in nomination,
by an order of general Court, beforehand to be considered of: If a Freeman
give in a blanck, that rejects the man named; if the Freeman makes any mark
with a pen upon the paper which he brings, that elects the man named; then the
blancks and marked papers are numbered, and according to the major part of
either, the man in nomination stands elected or rejected. And so for all the
Assistants. And after every new election, which is, by their Patent, to be upon
the last Wednesday in every Easter Term, the new Governor and Officers are
all new sworn. The Governor and Assistants choose the Secretary. And all the
Court consisting of Governor, Deputy, Assistants, and Deputies of towns, give
their votes as well as the rest; and the Ministers, and Elders, and all
Church Officers, have their votes also in all these elections of chief
Magistrates. Constables, and all other inferior Officers, are sworn in the
general, quarter, or other Courts, or before any Assistant.

Every Freeman, Freemen their oath.
when he is admitted, takes a strict oath, to be true to the Society, or
jurisdiction: In which oath, I do not remember expressed that ordinary saving,
which is and ought to be in all oaths to other Lords, Saving the faith and
truth which I bear to our Sovereign Lord the King, though, I hope, it may be
employed.

There are two general Courts, Courts and Laws.
one every half year, wherein they make Laws or Ordinances: The Ministers
advise in making of Laws, especially Ecclesiastical, and are present in
Courts, and advise in some special causes criminal, and in framing of
Fundamental Laws: But not many Fundamental Laws are yet established: which,
when they do, they must, by the words of their Charter, make according to the
Laws of England, or not contrary thereunto. Here they make taxes and levies.

There are besides four quarter Courts for the whole Jurisdiction, besides
other petie Courts, one every quarter, at Boston, Salem, and Ipswich, with
their several jurisdictions, besides every town, almost, has a petie Court
for small debts, and trespasses under twenty shillings.

In the general Court, Actions and causes.
or great quarter Courts, before the Civil Magistrates, are tried all actions
and causes civil and criminal, and also Ecclesiastical, especially touching
non-members: And they themselves say, that in the general and quarter Courts,
they have the power of Parliament, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Chancery, High
Commission, and Star Chamber, and all other Courts of England, and in diverse
cases have exercised that power upon the Kings Subjects there, as is not
difficult to prove. They have put to death, banished, fined men, cut off men's
ears, whipped, imprisoned men, and (...) these for Ecclesiastical and Civil
offenses, and without sufficient record. In the lesser quarter Courts are
tried, in some, actions under ten pound, in Boston, under twenty, and all
criminal causes not touching life or member. From the petie quarter Courts, or
other Court, the parties may appeal to the great quarter Courts, from thence
to the general Court, from which there is no appeal, they say:
Notwithstanding, I presume their Patent does reserve and provide for Appeals,
in some cases, to the Kings Majesty.

Grand Juries.
The general and great quarter Courts are kept in the Church meeting house at
Boston. Twice a year, in the said great quarter Courts held before the
general Courts, are two grand Juries sworn for the Jurisdiction, one for one
Court, and the other for the other, and they are charged to enquire and present
offenses reduced, by the Governor, who gives the charge, most anend, under the
Heads of the ten Commandments: And a draught of a body of fundamental laws,
according to the judicial Laws of the Jews, has been contrived by the
Ministers and Magistrates, and offered to the general Court to be established
and published to the people to be considered of, and this since his Majesty's
command came to them to send over their Patent: Among which Laws, that was one
I excepted against, as you may see in the paper following, entitled, Of the
Church her liberties, presented to the Governor and ^agistrates of the Bay, 4.
Martii, 1639. Notwithstanding, a by-law, to that or the like effect, has been
made, and was held of force there when I came thence: yet I confess I have
heard one of their wisest speak of an intention to repeal the same Law.

Matters of debt, Trials.
trespass, and upon the case, and equity, yea and of heresy also, are tried
by a Jury. Which although it may seem to be indifferent, and the Magistrates
may judge what is Law, and what is equal, and some of the chief Ministers
inform what is heresy, yet the Jury may find a general verdict, if they
please; and seldom is there any special verdict found by them, with
deliberate arguments made thereupon, which breeds many inconveniences.

The parties are warned to challenge any Juryman before he be sworn; but
because there is but one Jury in a Court for trial of causes, and all parties
not present at their swearing, the liberty of challenge is much hindered, and
some inconveniences do happen thereby. Jurors are returned by the Marshall,
he was at first called the Bedle of the Society. Seldom is there any matter
of record, saving the verdict many times at random taken and entered, which is
also called the judgment. And for want of proceeding duly upon record, the
government is clearly arbitrary, according to the discretions of the Judges
and Magistrates for the time being. And humbly I appeal to his royal Majesty,
and his honorable and great Counsel, whether or no the proceedings in such
matters as come to be heard before Ecclesiastical Judges, be not fit to be
upon Record; and whether Registers, Advocates, and Procurators, be not
necessary to assist the poor and unlearned in their causes, and that according
to the warrant and intendment of holy Writ, and of right reason. I have known
by experience, and heard diverse have suffered wrong by default of such in
New England. I fear it is not a little degree of pride and dangerous
improvidence to slight all former laws of the Church or State, cases of
experience and precedents, to go hammer out new, according to several
exigencies; upon pretense that the Word of God is sufficient to rule us: It is
true, it is sufficient, if well understood. But take heed my brethren, despise
not learning, nor the worthy Lawyers of either gown, lest you repent too late.

The parties in all causes, speak themselves for the most part, and some of
the Magistrates where they think cause requires, do the part of Advocates
without fee or reward. Most matters are presently heard, and ended the same
Court, the party defendant having four days warning before; but some causes
come to be heard again, and new suits grow upon the old.

Profane swearing, Profaneness beaten down.
drunkenness, and beggars, are but rare in the compass of this Patent,
through the circumspection of the Magistrates, and the providence of God
hitherto, the poor there living by their labors, and great wages,
proportionably, better then the rich, by their stocks, which without exceeding
great care, quickly waste.

A Paper of certain Propositions to the general Court, made upon request, 8.
Iunii, 1639.
1. IT were good, that all actions between parties, were entered in the Court
book, by the Secretary, before the Court sits. 2. That every action be declared
in writing, and the defendants answer, general or special, as the case shall
require, be put in writing, by a public Notarie, before the cause be heard.
3. The Secretary to take the verdicts, and make forth the judicial Commands or
Writs. 4. The public Notarie to record all the proceedings in a fair book,
and to enter executions of commands done, and satisfactions acknowledged. 5.
The fees, in all these, to be no more then in an inferior Court of Record in
England, and to be allowed by the general Court, or Court of Assistants.
The benefit hereof to the public good.
1. IT will give an easy and quick dispatch to all Causes: For thereby the
Court and Jury will quickly see the point in hand, and accordingly give their
verdict and judgment. 2. The Court shall the better know, constantly, how to
judge the same things; and it is not possible, that Judges should, always,
from time to time, remember clearly, or know to proceed certainly, without a
faithful Record. 3. The parties may hereby more surely, and clearly obtain
their right; for through ignorance and passion, men may quickly wrong one
another, in their bare words, without a Record. 4. Hereby shall the Law of God
and Justice be duly administered to the people, according to more certain and
unchangeable rules, so that they might know what is the Law, and what right
they may look for at the mouths of all their Judges. 5. Hereby the Subjects
have a great part of their evidences and assurances for their proprieties, both
of lands and goods.
A Paper touching the Church her liberties, delivered at Boston, 4. Martii,
1639.
To the Right Worshipful the Governor, Deputy Governor, Councellers, and
Assistants, for this Jurisdiction.
WHereas you have been pleased to cause me to transcribe certain Breviats of
Propositions, delivered to the last general Court, for the establishing a body
of Laws, as is intended, for the glory of God, and the welfare of this People
and Country; and published the same, to the intent that any man may acquaint
you, or the Deputies for the next Court, with what he conceives fit to be
altered or added, in or unto the said laws; I conceive it my duty to give you
timely notice of some things of great moment, about the same Laws, in
discharge of my conscience, which I shall, as Amicus curiae, pray you to
present with all faithfulness, as is proposed, to the next general Court, by
it, and the reverend Elders, to be further considered of, as follows:

1. It is propounded to be one chief part of the charge, or office of the
Council intended, to take care, that the conversion of the Natives be
endeavored.

2. It is proposed, as a liberty, that a convenient Although some have held
that three or two may make a Church, yet I have heard Master Cotton say, that a
Church could not be without the number of six or seven at least, and so was
their practice while I was th^^e, at Weymouth, and New Taunton, and at Lin, for
Long Island; Because if there are but three, one that is offended with another,
cannot upon cause tell the Church, but one man.
number of Orthodoxe Christians, allowed to plant together in this
Jurisdiction, may gather themselves into a Church, and elect and ordain their
Officers, men fit for their places, giving notice to seven of the next
Churches, one month before thereof, and of their names, and that they may
exercise all the ordinances of God according to his Word, and so they proceed
according to the rule of God, and shall not be hindered by any Civil power;
nor will this Court allow of any Church otherwise gathered.

This clause (nor will the Court allow of any Church otherwise gathered) does
as I conceive contradict the first proposition.

My reasons are these.

1. If the conversion of the Natives must be endeavored, then some wise and
godly men (they should be of your gravest and best men) must be sent forth to
teach them to know God. 2. When such are sent, they must be either sent
immediately by the Lord, or mediately by his Churches. 3. If the Churches send
men, they that are sent must be sent by imposition of hands of the Presbytery.
Now when Churches are thus gathered or planted, they are gathered by
Ministers, doing the works of Apostles and Evangelists, which has ever been,
and is the ordinary and regular way of gathering or planting Churches, (and not
as is proposed, a convenient number of Orthodoxe Christians, gathering
themselves into a Church) and yet when such a Church is gathered by
Church-messengers and Ministers, this Court is advised not to allow the same;
which, I conceive, is to say, The conversion of the Natives shall not be
endeavored, orderly, according to the rule of God.

Again, it would be considered, that when men are sent forth, whether they
should not be sent forth two, and by two at least, as the Scriptures bear, and
for diverse good reasons, which lie not hid to your wisdoms.

That you would be pleased to show unto the Elders these things to be
considered, and that they would well weigh, whether or no those Ministers and
Messengers sent by-Churches, should not visit the Churches which they plant*

Other things there are, wherein, I think, I could also, to good purpose, move
somewhat to your Worships, which lies more directly in the way, and calling, I
have been educated, if I were required, but this thing lying upon my
conscience, I could not well pass by: Wherefore I shall request it may be
considered. 1. Whether it be not fit to leave out, at least, that contradictory
clause, viz. Nor will this Court allow of any Church otherwise gathered? 2.
Whether it be not better to let the liberty run thus, in general, The holy
Church of God shall enjoy all her just liberties?


A Paper intended for the honored John Winthrop, Esquire, late Governor.
Boston, Maii 2. 1640.
IF you see a necessity of baptizing them without, If an engagement of
Propagation of the truth to the Infidel Natives:

Then consider, whether by the Kings leave, some Churches may not be appointed
to send their chief Pastors, and other Ministers, to do such works.

Also with some kind of subjection, or acknowledgement of authority of the
Ministry in England, if it be but by way of advice, which is clear to me you
may do:

I make no doubt but in all things requisite for the state of the Country, they
will yield you all fair liberties.

Nay, I am persuaded, the Kings Majesty will not send any unexperienced
Governor to afflict, but make you Patentees again, or at least, after the
manner of other Plantations, restoring not only favor, but other benefits,
whereof, under God, to us Englishmen, he is the Fountain. The Kings Attorney
did offer some of you this in my hearing, I mean, the renewall of your Patent.

Nay further, if you would invent, and devise what the King may do for the
Country, you might obtain.

The very conversion of these poor naked people, which is very hopeful, and
much prepared for per accidens, or Gods own providence, bringing good out of
evil, will rejoice the hearts of all Christians in our dear native Country,
and here: and of it self (if there were no other desirable things here, as
blessed be God there are many) would cause a continued confluence of more
people then you can tell well where to bestow for the present.

The Fishing trade would be promoted with authority.

Hereby would you give the greater testimony to the cause of Reformation.

Hereby will you, under God and the King, make Church-work, and Commonwealth
work indeed, and examples to all Countries.

You will enrich your Countries both, in short time. The Heathens in time, I am
persuaded, will become zealous Christians, then will they labor, get clothes,
and substance about them. In vain do some think of civillizing them, either
by the sword, or otherwise, till (withal) the Word of God has spoken to their
hearts: wherein I conceive great advice is to be taken.

For which purpose a Press is necessary, and may be obtained, I hope, so that
wise men watch over it.

Consider how poorly your Schools go on, you must depend upon England for
help of learned men and Scholars, books, commodities infinite almost.

No doubt but the King, this way, will make your authority reach even to the
Dutch Southward, and to the French Northward. New England indeed without
fraction. A facile way, taking out the core of malice.

The conversion and subduing of a Nation, and so great a tract of ground, is a
work too weighty for subjects any much longer to labor under without Royal
assistance, as I apprehend, I think, in religious reason.

If any shall suggest, that your Churches may send forth men of their own
authority;

Consider, if it may be done warrantably by the Word of God, as peradventure it
may be so.

Yet you will be in danger, rebus sic stantibus, of great imputations.

That you infringe Regal power,

And Ecclesiastical.

Whereon adversaries will sure enough make fearful work.

And besides, some reformations (under favor) have been too deep, at least for
others to follow.

They were also unexperienced of mission to convert Infidels.

Is Geneva without her faults? or Holland, Rotterdam, Amsterdam, without
theirs? what experience they of mission, or ever had?

Now I beseeech you grave Sir, do you think it good, honorable, safe, for us
poor men here, or for the Religion and Professors thereof in general, in the
whole world, that such as have the name of the most zealous, should be the
first example of almost utmost provocation to our own Sovereign?

For my part, I disclaim Parker,

And incline to Hooker, Jewel, as to government.

Greatmen have great burdens, therefore they have their counsels cross, and
sometimes they use them both.

You hear enough on the other side,

Hear now this, on this, and the Lord guide your spirit.

Odere Reges dicta, quae dici jubent.

These are the Ministers of the Bay.
AT Boston, Ministers names.
master Cotton Teacher, master Wilson Pastor: At Roxbury, master Weld Pastor,
master Eliott Teacher: At Dorchester, master Mather Pastor or Teacher, and
Master Burgh out of office: At Braintree, Master Thomson Pastor, Master Flint
Teacher: At Weymouth, Master Newman Pastor, Master Parker out of office: At
Hingham, master Hubbard Pastor, master Peck Teacher: They refuse to baptize old
Ottis grandchildren, an ancient member of their own Church. At Charlestowne,
Master Symms Pastor, master Allen Teacher: At Cambridge, master Sheppard
Pastor, master Dunster Schoolmaster; diverse young Scholars are there under
him to the number of almost twenty: At Watertowne, master Phillips Pastor,
master Knolls Pastor: At Dedham, another master Phillips out of office, and
master Allen Pastor or Teacher: At Sudbury, master Brown in office, master
Fordham out of office: At Lynne, master Whiting Pastor, master Cobbet Teacher:
At Salem, master Peter Pastor, master Norris Teacher, and his Son a
Schoolmasters: At Ipswich, master Rogers Pastor, master Norton Teacher, and
master Nathaniel Ward, and his son, and one Master Knight, out of employment:
At Rowley, Master Ezekiel. Rogers Pastor, Master Miller: At Newberry, Master Noise
Pastor, Master Parker Teacher: He is son of Master Robert Parker, sometime of
Wilton, in the County of Wiltes, deceased, who in his life time writ that
mis-learned and mistaken Book De Politeia Ecclesiastica. At Salisbury, Master
Worster Pastor: At Hampton, Master Bachellor Pastor, Master Dalton Teacher:
There are other Schoolmasters which I know not, in some of these towns.

The Magistrates in the Bay are these:
Magistrates nam^s.
Master Bellingham the present Governor, master Endecot the present Deputy
Governor, master Winthrop, master Dudley, master Humfrey, master Saltonstall,
master Bradstreat, master Stoughton, master Winthrop junior, master Nowell,
Assistants. Master Nowell is also Secretary. Master Stephen Winthrop is
Recorder, whose office is to record all Judgments, Marriages, Births, Deaths,
Wills and Testaments, Bargains and Sales, Gifts, Grants, and Mortgages. There
is a Marshall, who is as a Sheriff or Bailiffe, and his Deputy is the Jailer
and executioner.

Marriages are solemnized and done by the Magistrates, Marriages. Testaments.
Administrar. Burials.
and not by the Ministers. Causes touching Matrimony, and Testaments, and
other Ecclesiastical causes, have been anciently by the good laws of England,
committed to the Clergy, upon better grounds then many are aware of. Brethren,
I pray consider well that the Apostle does allow judgments of controversies to
the Church, 1 Cor. 6. And so they did anciently in other Countries, as well as
in England, as appears by S. Augustines profession thereof, cited by one
lately, viz. That he (the said Father, and other holy men of the Church)
suffered the tumultuous perplexities of other men's causes touching secular
affairs, either by determining them by judging, or in cutting them off by
entreaties: which labor (says he) we endure with consolation in the Lord, for
the hope of eternal life. To which molestations, the Apostle tied us, not by
his own judgment, but by his judgment who spoke in him. Besides, should they
judge these things, and labor for, and watch over us in the Lord, and not be
recompensed as long as they do well? I speak not to countenance undue
exactions, bribes, or other corruptions. I intend brevity, and therefore make
bold to refer my Reader to the many learned arguments both in Law Books and
Divinity of this subject.
Probats of Testaments, and granting of Letters of Administration, are made and
granted in the general or great quarter Courts. At Burials, nothing is read,
nor any Funeral Sermon made, but all the neighborhood, or a good company of
them, come together by tolling of the bell, and carry the dead solemnly to his
grave, and there stand by him while he is buried. The Ministers are most
commonly present.

They are very diligent in traynings of their soldiers and military exercises,
Trainings or Musters.
and all except Magistrates, and Ministers bear arms, or pay for to be
excused, or for special reasons are exempted by order of Court. The Captains,
and Officers are such as are admitted of the Church.

But the people begin to complain, Grievances.
they are ruled like slaves, and in short time shall have their children for
the most part remain unbaptized: and so have little more privilege then
Heathens, unless the discipline be amended and moderated.

Danger.
It is feared, that Elections cannot be safe there long, either in Church or
Commonwealth. So that some melancholy men think it a great deal safer to be
in the midst of troubles in a settled Commonwealth, or in hope easily to be
settled, then in mutinies there, so far off from succors.

New Plymouth Patent. M. Raymer. M. Smith. M. Chancey his controversy.
At New Plymouth they have but one Eccles. 12.11. One shepherd: James 3.1. Not
many masters. Whether this be their ground, I know not; but what ever there be
in others to advise and assist, the deciding, determining voice, I mean also
the negative, in some cases, ought, as I think, to be in the Pastor: Be there
never so many Ministers in the Church, Do nothing without your Pastor or
Bishop, says Irenaeus: for whatsoever is faulty in the Church, the Bishop is
first and principally blamed, Rev. 2. and 3.
Minister, master Rayner; yet master Chancey lives there, and one master Smith,
both Ministers, they are not in any office there; master Chancey stands for
dipping in baptism only necessary, and some other things, concerning which
there has been much dispute, and master Chancey put to the worst by the
opinion of the Churches advised withal.

Taunton. M. Hook, M. Streate, their ordination.
Cohannet, alias Taunton, is in Plymouth Patent. There is a Church gathered of
late, and some ten or twenty of the Church, the rest excluded. Master Hook
Pastor, master Streate Teacher. Master Hook received ordination from the hands
of one master Bishop a Schoolmaster, and one Parker an Husbandman, and then
master Hook joined in ordaining master Streate. M. Doughty his controversy.
One master Doughty, a Minister, opposed the gathering of the Church there,
alleging that according to the Covenant of Abraham, all men's children that
were of baptized parents, and so Abraham's children, ought to be baptized; and
spoke so in public, or to that effect, which was held a disturbance, and the
Ministers spoke to the Magistrate to order him: The Magistrate commanded the
Constable, who dragged master Doughty out of the Assembly. He was forced to go
away from thence, with his wife and children.

There are also in this Patent diverse other Plantations, Diverse other Towns and
Ministers.
as Sandwich, Situate, Duxbury, Greenes-harbour, and Yarmouth. Ministers there
are, master Leveridge, master Blackwood, master Mathews, and master Andrew
Hallet a Schoolmaster. Master Saxton also, who was coming away when we did.

At the Island called Aquedney, Island Aquedney.
are about two hundred families. There was a Church, where one master Clark was
Elder: The place where the Church was, is called Newport, but that Church, I
hear, is now dissolved; as also diverse Churches in the Country have been
broken up and dissolved through dissension. At the other end of the Island
there is another town called Portsmouth, but no Church: there is a meeting of
some men, who there teach one another, and call it Prophecy. These of the
Island have a pretended civil government of their own erection, without the
Kings Patent. There lately they whipped one master Gorton, Master Gorton whipped
and banished.
a grave man, for denying their power, and abusing some of their Magistrates
with uncivil terms; the Governor, master Coddington, saying in Court, You
that are for the King, lay hold on Gorton; and he again, on the other side,
called forth, All you that are for the King, lay hold on Coddington; whereupon
Gorton was banished the Island: so with his wife and children he went to
Providence. They began about a small trespass of swine, but it is thought some
other matter was ingredient.

New Providence.
At Providence, which is twenty miles from the said Island, lives master
Williams, and his company, of diverse opinions; most are Anabaptists; they hold
there is no true visible Church in the Bay, nor in the world, nor any true
Ministry. This is within no Patent, as they say; but they have of late a kind
of government also of their own erection.

M. Blakeston.
One master Blakeston, a Minister, went from Boston, having lived there nine or
ten years, because he would not join with the Church; he lives near master
Williams, but is far from his opinions.

Connecticot.
There are five or six towns, and Churches upon the River Connecticot, where
are worthy master Hooker, master Warham, master Hewet, and diverse others, and
master Fenwike with the Lady Boteler, Lady Boteler.
at the rivers mouth in a fair house, and well fortified, and one master
Higgison, a young man, their Chaplain. These plantations have a Patent; the
Lady was lately admitted of master Hookers Church, and thereupon her child was
baptized.

The Lady Moody lives at Lynne, Lady Moody.
but is of Salem Church, she is (good Lady) almost undone by buying master
Humphries farm, Swampscot, which cost her nine, or eleven hundred pounds.

Beyond Connecticott are diverse plantations, New Haven.
as New Haven, alias Quinapeag, where master Davenport is Pastor, and one
master James a Schoolmasters; and another where master Whitfield is: and
another where master Pridgeon is, and some others, almost reaching to the Dutch
plantation southward. Among these are my old acquaintance, master Roger Ludlow,
master Frost, sometime of Nottingham, and his sons, John Gray and Henry Gray;
the Lord in his goodness provide for them; they have a Minister, whose name I
have forgotten, if it be not master Blackwell. I do not know what Patent these
have.

Long Island is begun to be planted, Long Island.
and some two Ministers are gone thither, or to go, as one master Peirson, and
master Knowles, that was at Dover, alias Northam. A Church was gathered for
that Island at Lynne, in the Bay, whence some, by reason of straitness, did
remove to the said Island; and one master Simonds, heretofore a servant unto a
good gentlewoman whom I know, was one of the first Founders. Master Peter of
Salem was at the gathering, and told me the said master Henry Simonds made a
very clear confession. Notwithstanding he yet dwells at Boston, and they
proceed on but slowly. The Patent is granted to the Lord Starling; but the
Dutch claim part of the Island, or the whole: for their plantation is right
over against, and not far from the South end of the said Isle. And one
Lieutenant How pulling down the Dutch Arms on the Isle, there was like to be
a great stir, what ever may become of it. The Dutch also claim Quinapeag, and
other parts.

Pascattaqua.
At Northam, alias Pascattaqua, is master Larkham Pastor. One master H. K. was
also lately Minister there, with master Larkham. They two fell out about
baptizing children, receiving of members, burial of the dead; and the
contention was so sharp, that master K. and his party rose up, M. Larkham
excommunicated.
and excommunicated master Larkham, and some that held with him: And further,
master Larkham flying to the Magistrates, master K. and a Captain raised
Arms, A broyle or riot.
and expected help from the Bay; master K. going before the troop with a Bible
upon a poles top, and he, or some of his party giving forth, that their side
were Scots, and the other English: Whereupon the Gentlemen of Sir Ferdinando
Gorges plantation came in, and kept Court with the Magistrates of Pascattaqua,
(who have also a Patent) being weak of themselves. And they fined all those
that were in Arms, for a Riot, by Indictment, Jury, and Verdict, formally.
Nine of them were censured to be whipped, but that was spared. Master K. and the
Captain their leaders, were fined 100. l. a piece, which they are not able to
pay. To this broyle came master Peter of Salem, Episcopacie.
and there gave his opinion, at Northam, that the said excommunication was a
nullity.

Master Thomas Gorgs son of Captain Gorgs of Batcombe, Province of Maigne.
by Chedder in Somersetshire, is principal Commissioner for the Province of
Maigne, under Sir Ferdinando, but he was not at that Court at Northham
himself. Master Wards son is desired to come into the Province of Maigne.
There is one master Ienner gone thither of late. There is want of good
Ministers there; the place has had an ill report by some, but of late some
good acts of Justice have been done there, and diverse Gentlemen there are, and
it is a Country very plentiful for fish, foul, and venison.

Not far from Northam is a place called Exeter, Exeter.
where master Wheelwright has a small Church.

And at Cape Anne, Cape Anne* Fishing.
where fishing is set forward, and some stages builded, there one master
Rashley is Chaplain: for it is far off from any Church: Rashley is admitted
of Boston Church, but the place lies next Salem, and not very far further from
Ipswich.

The Isle of Shoales and Richmonds Isle, Isles of Shoales and Richmond.
which lie near Pasquattaqua, and good fishing places.

About one hundred and fifty leagues from Boston Eastward is the Isle of
Sables, Isle of Sables.
whither one John Webb, alias Evered, an active man, with his company are gone
with commission from the Bay, to get Seahorse teeth and oil.

Eastward off Cape Codd lies an Island called Martins Vineyard, Martins
Vineyard.
uninhabited by any English, but Indians, which are very savage.

French and Datch.
Northward from the Bay, or Northeast, lies the French plantation, who take up
bever there, and keep strict government, boarding all vessels that come near
them, and binding the masters till the governor, who is a Nobleman, know what
they are; and south of New England the Dutch take up the bever.

Virginia.
Three hundred Leagues south from the Bay along the coasts, lies Virginia;
near to that is Maryland, Maryland.
where they are Roman Catholics, they say.

Swedes.
There was a speech of some Swedes which came to inhabit near Delawar Bay, but
the number or certainty I know not.

New Foundland.
Three hundred leagues from the Bay, Eastward, lies New Foundland, where is a
maine trade for fishing. Here we touched coming homeward.

Florida.
Florida lies between Virginia and the Bay of Mexico, and had been a better
Country for the English to have planted in, according to the opinion of some,
but it is so near the Spaniard, that none must undertake to plant there,
without good Forces.

For the state of the Country in the Bay and thereabouts.
THe Land is reasonable fruitful, State of the Country of New England.
as I think; they have cattle, and goats, and swine good store, and some
horses, store of fish and foul, venison, and Wheat and Barley are thought not
to be so good as those grains in England; but the Rye and Pease are as good as
the English: the Pease have no worms at all. Beans also there are very good.
corn, both English and Indian. They are indifferently well able to subsist
for victual. They are setting on the manufacture of linen and cotton cloth,
and the fishing trade, and they are building of ships, and have good store of
barks, catches, lighters, shallops, and other vessels. They have builded and
planted to admiration for the time. There are good masts and timber for
shipping, planks, and boards, clapboard, pipe-staves, bever, and furs, and
hope of some mines. There are Bears, Wolves, and Foxes, and many other wild
beasts, as the Moose, a kind of Dear, as big as some Oxen, and Lions, as I
have heard. The Wolves and Foxes are a great annoyance. There are Rattlesnakes,
which sometimes do some harm, not much; He that is stung with any of them, or
bitten, he turns of the color of the Snake, all over his body, blew, white,
and green spotted; and swelling, dies, unless he timely get some Snake-weed;
which if he eat, and rub on the wound, he may happily recover, but feel it a
long while in his bones and body. Money is wanting, by reason of the failing of
passengers these two last years, in a manner. They want help to go forward,
for their subsistence in regard of clothing: And great pity it would be, but
men of estates should help them forward. It may be, I hope, a charitable
work. The price of their cattle, and other things being fallen, they are not
at present able to make such returns to England, as were to be wished for them:
God above direct and provide for them. There are multitudes of godly men among
them, and many poor ignorant souls. Of late some thirty persons went in two
small Barks for the Lords Isle of Providence, and for the Maine thereabout,
which is held to be a beter country and climate by some: For this being in
about 46. degrees of northern latitude, yet is very cold in winter, so that
some are frozen to death, or lose their fingers or toes every year, sometimes
by carlesnes, sometimes by accidents, and are lost in snowes, which there are
very deep sometimes, and lie long: Winter begins in October, and lasts till
April. Sixty leagues Northerly it is held not habitable, yet again in Summer
it is exceeding hot. If shipping for conveyance were sent thither, they might
spare diverse hundreds of men for any good design. The jurisdiction of the Bay
Patent reaches from Pascattaqua Patent Northeast to Plymouth Patent Southward.
And in my travailes there, I have seen the towns of Newberry, Ipswich, Salem,
Lynne, Boston, Charlestowne, Cambridge, Watertowne, Concord, Roxbury,
Dorchester, and Braintree in the Bay Patent, New Taunton in Plymouth Patent,
the Island Aquedney, and the two towns therein, Newport and Portsmouth, and
New Providence within the Bay of Narhiggansets. This for the satisfaction of
some that have reported I was no Travailer in New England.

Concerning the Indians, or Natives.
THey are of body tall, Of the Indians.
proper, and straight; they go naked, saving about their middle, somewhat to
cover shame. Seldom they are abroad in extremity of Winter, but keep in their
wigwams, till necessity drives them forth; and then they wrap themselves in
skins, or some of our English coorse cloth: and for the Winter they have boots,
or a kind of laced tawed-leather stockins. They are naturally proud, and idle,
given much to singing, dancing, and plays; they are governed by Sachems,
Kings; and Saggamores, petie Lords; by an absolute tyranny. Their women are of
comely feature, industrious, and do most of the labor in planting, and
carrying of burdens; their husbands hold them in great slavery, yet never
knowing other, it is the less grievous to them. They say, Englishman much
fool, for spoiling goodworking creatures, meaning women: And when they see any
of our English women sewing with their needles, or working coifes, or such
things, they will cry out, Lazy squaes! but they are much the kinder to their
wives, by the example of the English. Their children, they will not part with,
upon any terms, to be taught. They are of complexion swarthy and tawny; their
children are borne white, but they bedawbe them with oil, and colors,
presently. They have all black hair, that I saw.

In times of mourning, they paint their faces with black lead, black, all about
the eyebrows, and part of their cheeks. In time of rejoicing, they paint red,
with a kind of vermilion. They cut their hair of diverse forms, according to
their Nation or people, so that you may know a people by their cut; and ever
they have a long lock on one side of their heads, and wear feathers of
Peacocks, and such like, and red cloth, or ribbands at their locks; beads of
wampompeag about their necks, and a girdle of the same, wrought with blew and
white wampom, after the manner of chequer work, two fingers broad, about their
loins: Some of their chief men go so, and pendants of wampom, and such toys
in their ears. And their women, some of the chief, have fair bracelets, and
chains of wampom. Men and women, of them, come confidently among the English.
Since the Pequid war, they are kept in very good subjection, and held to strict
points of Justice, so that the English may travail safely among them. But the
French in the East, and the Dutch in the South, sell them guns, powder and
shot. They have Powahes, or Priests, which are Witches, and a kind of
Chirurgions, but some of them, notwithstanding, are feign to be beholding to
the English Chirurgions. They will have their times of powaheing, which they
will, of late, have called Prayers, according to the English word. The Powahe
labors himself in his incantations, to extreme sweating and weariness, even
to ecstasy. The Powahes cannot work their witchcrafts, if any of the English be
by; neither can any of their incantations lay hold on, or do any harm to the
English, as I have been credibly informed. The Powahe is next the King, or
Sachem, and commonly when he dies, the Powahe marryes the Squa Sachem, that is,
the queen. They have marriages among them; they have many wives; they say,
they commit much filthiness among themselves. But for every marriage, the
Saggamore has a fadome of wampom, which is about seven or eight shillings
value. Some of them will diligently attend to any thing they can understand by
any of our Religion, and are very willing to teach their language to any
English. They live much the better, and peaceably, for the English; and
themselves know it, or at least their Sachems, and Saggamores know so much, for
before they did nothing but spoil and destroy one another. They live in
Wigwams, or houses made of mats like little hutts, the fire in the midst of the
house. They cut down a tree with axes and hatchets, bought of the English,
Dutch, or French, and bring in the butt-end into the wigwam, upon the hearth,
and so burn it by degrees. They live upon parched corn, (of late, they grind
at our English mills.) Venison, Bevers, Otters, Oysters, Clammes, Lobsters, and
other fish, Groundnuts, Akornes, they boil all together in a kettle. Their
riches are their wampom, bolles, trayes, kettles, and spoones, bever, furs,
and canoos. He is a Sachem, whose wife has her clean spoons in a chest, for
some chief English men, when they come on guest wise to the wigwam. They lie
upon a mat, with a stone, or a piece of wood under their heads; they will give
the best entertainment they can make to any English coming amongst them. They
will not taste sweet things, nor alter their habit willingly; only they are
taken with tobacco, wine, and strong waters; and I have seen some of them in
English, or French clothes. Their ordinary weapons are bows and arrows, and
long staves, or half pykes, with pieces of swords, daggers, or knives in the
ends of them: They have Captains, and are very good at a short mark, and
nimble of foot to run away. Their manner of fighting is, most commonly, all in
one fyle. They are many in number, and worship Kitan, their good god, or
Hobbamocco, their evil god; but more fear Hobbamocco, because he does them
most harm. Some of their Kings names are Canonicus, Meantinomy, Owshamequin,
Cushamequin, Webbacowitts, and Squa Sachem his wife: She is the Queen, and he
is Powahe, and King, in right of his wife. Among some of these Nations, their
policy is to have two Kings at a time; but, I think, of one family; the one
aged for counsel, the other younger for action. Their Kings succeed by
inheritance.

M. (...) a hopeful Schoolmaster.
Master Henry Dunster, Schoolmaster of Cambridge, deserves commendations above
many; he has the plat-forme and way of conversion of the Natives, indifferent
right, and much studies the same, wherein yet he wants not opposition, as some
other also have met with: He will, without doubt, prove an instrument of much
good in the Country, being a good Scholar, and having skill in the Tongues; He
will make it good, that the way to instruct the Indians, must be in their own
language, not English; and that their language may be perfected.

A Note of some late occurrences touching Episcopacie.
SOme of the learned, Some late occurrences concerning Episcopacie.
and godliest in the Bay, begin to understand Governments; that it is
necessary, when Ministers or People fall out, to send other Ministers, or they
voluntarily to go among them, to seek by all good ways and means to appease
them.

And particularly, Master Peter went from Salem on foot to New Dover, alias
Pascattaqua, alias Northam, to appease the difference between Master Larkham
and Master K. when they had been up in Arms this last Winter time. He went by
the sending of the Governor, Counsel, and Assistants of the Bay, and of the
Church of Salem; and was in much danger of being lost, returning, by losing his
way in the woods, and some with him, but God be blessed they returned.

Again he went a second time, for appeasing the same difference, and had a
Commission to diverse Gentlemen, master Humfrey, master Bradstreate, Captain
Wiggon, and master Simons, to assist, and to hear and determine all causes
civil and criminal, from the Governor of the Bay, under his hand, and the
public seal, and then master K. went by the worst.

Master Wilson did lately ride to Greens harbor, in Plymouth Patent, to
appease a broyle between one master Thomas, as I take it, his name is, and
master Blindman, where master Blindman went by the worst, and Captain Keayne
and others went with master Wilson on horseback.

Also at another time, master Wilson, master Mather, and some others, going to
the ordination of master Hook and master Streate, to give them the right hand
of fellowship, at New Taunton, there heard the difference between master Hook
and master Doughty, where master Doughty was overruled, and the matter carried
somewhat partially, as is reported.

It may be, it will be said, they did these things by way of love, and friendly
advise: Grant that; But were not the counseled bound to receive good counsel?
If they would not receive it, was not the Magistrate ready to assist, and in a
manner ready, according to duty, to enforce peace and obedience? did not the
Magistrates assist? and was not master K. sent away, or compounded with, to
seek a new place at Long Island, master Doughty forced to the Island Aquedney,
and master Blindman to Connecticot?

Questions to the Elders of Boston, delivered 9. September. 1640.
1. WHether a people may gather themselves into a Church, without a Minister
sent of God? 2. Whether any People, or Congregation, may ordain their own
Officers? 3. Whether the Ordination, by the hands of such as are not Ministers,
be good?
To the which I received an Answer the same day:

TO the first, the Answer is affirmative; for though the people in this
Country are not wont to gather themselves into a Church, but (as you would
have it) with the presence and advice of sundry Ministers; yet it were lawful
for them to gather into a Church without them. For if it be the privilege of
every Church to choose their own Ministers, then there may be a Church, before
they have Ministers of their own; for Ministers of another Church have no
power but in their own Church.

To the second and third; The second and third Questions are coincident, and
one Answer may serve for both: The Children of Israel did impose hands upon the
Levites, Number. 8.10. and if the people have power to elect their own officers,
they have power also to ordain them; for Ordination is but an Installment of a
man into that office, whereto election gives him right, nevertheless such a
Church as has a Presbytery, ought to ordain their Officers by a Presbytery,
according to 1 Timothy 4.14.

This Answer was brought me by Master Oliver, one of the Elders, and Master
Pierce, a Brother of Boston.

When I was to come away, one of the chiefest in the Country wished me to
deliver him a note of what things I misliked in the Country, which I did, thus:

I doubt,

1. WHether so much time should be spent in the public Ordinances, on the
Sabbath day, because that thereby some necessary duties of the Sabbath must
needs be hindered, as visitation of the sick, and poor, and family.

2. Whether matters of offense should be publicly handled, either before the
whole Church, or strangers.

3. Whether so much time should be spent in particular catechizing those that
are admitted to the communion of the Church, either men or women; or that they
should make long speeches; or when they come publicly to be admitted, any
should speak contradictorily, or in recommendation of any, unless before the
Elders, upon just occasion.

4. Whether the censures of the Church should be ordered, in public, before
all the Church, or strangers, other then the denunciation of the censures, and
pronunciation of the solutions.

5. Whether any of our Nation that is not extremely ignorant or scandalous,
should be kept from the Communion, or his children from Baptism.

6. That many thousands in this Country have forgotten the very principles of
Religion, which they were daily taught in England, by set forms and Scriptures
read, as the Psalms, first and second Lesson, the ten Commandments, the
Creeds, and public catechizings. And although conceived Prayer be good and
holy, and so public explications and applications of the Word, and also
necessary both in and out of season: yet for the most part it may be feared
they dull, amaze, confound, discourage the weak and ignorant, (which are the
most of men) when they are in ordinary performed too tediously, or with the
neglect of the Word read, and other premeditated forms inculcated, and may
tend to more ignorance and inconvenience, then many good men are aware of.

7. I doubt there has been, and is much neglect of endeavors, to teach,
civilize, and convert the Indian Nation, that are about the Plantations.

8. Whether by the received principles, it be possible to teach, civilize, or
convert them, or when they are converted, to maintain Gods worship among them.

9. That electorie courses will not long be safe here, either in Church or
Commonwealth.

10. That the civil government is not so equally administered, nor can be,
diverse orders or bylaws considered.

11. That unless these things be wisely and in time prevented, many of your
usefullest men will remove and scatter from you.

At Boston July 5. 1641.

Certain Quaeres about Church government, planting Churches, and some other
Experiments.
1. WHether the people should call the Minister, or the Minister Mat. 10.1. Mar.
3.13. Act. 1.4 and 2.47. and 8.5.6. and 9.32, 35. and 11.19.20.21.26.
gather the people?

2. When a Church is gathered or planted; should they not have care in Acts
8.14. and 9.31. and 11.22.27. and 13 2.3. and 14.21.10 28.
propagating other Churches, in other places next them?

3. Whether should not the first Church Col. 2.5. Act. 11.27. and 15.36. and
16.4.
visit the later Churches planted by them, to see they keep the faith and
order, as long as she remains her self in purity of Doctrine and worship?

4. How shall a Church propagate, and visit other Churches? shall they do it by
their members, ordinary Christians, or by their Ministers, Acts 8.5.14. and
11.22, 27. and 13.2, 3.
or Pastors? shall they Mat. 28.19. Acts 13.1, 2, 3. and 8.1.
intend such propagation, or stay, till by their numbers increasing, they are
necessitated to swarm, or are persecuted abroad?

5. If by their Pastors, must there not be more Acts 1.2, 3, 4. and 2.47 and
13.1
Ministers then one in the first Church? how else can any be spared to go
abroad about such works upon occasion?

6. When they have planted other Churches, must not the Act. 1.25, 26.
first Church take care for the providing of Elders or Ministers for these new
planted Churches, and Act. 6 6. and 14.23.
ordain them, and sometimes go Act. 8.14. and 11.22.
or send some to teach them, and uphold the worship of God among them?

7. How can any preach, unless he be Romans 10.15.
sent? and how can he be sent, unless by imposition of Act. 6.6. and 13 3. 1 Timothy 4.14.
hands of the Presbytery of the first Church?

8. If so, has not the first Church and the Ministers thereof, Apostlolical
Ephesians. 4.11. Act. 1 25. and 8.14. and 11.22.27
power in these things?

9. But have all Romans 16.1.
Churches and Ministers this power? are they able? have they learned men
enough, to 1 Cor. 3.6.
water where they have planted? If some should not be of the 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy
4 14. compared.
Quorum, as it were, in ordinations, and the like, what order, peace, or unity
can be expected?

10. Again, if all Churches and Ministers have this power, equally, to
exercise the work Apostolical; must they not all then go, or send abroad, to
convert the Indians, and plant Churches? and how can all be spared abroad? Are
all 1 Cor. 12.19, 29.
Apostles? all Evangelists? where were the body, if so?

11. Will they not interfiere one upon another, and trespass upon one another
2 Cor. 10.12. to the end.
line, rule, or portion, which blessed S. Paul condemned in those that entered
into his labors?

12. When any other Act. 13.1, 2, 3
Church, besides the Act. 1.4. and 2.47.
first, has power and ability to propagate and bring forth other Churches, may
she not do well so to do? must she not? in her fitting line, observing peace,
and holding communion with the first, as long as they remain in purity both of
them? and if a second, why not a third, and a fourth, and so forth to a
competent number?

13. Whether the first and other Churches also having power and ability thus to
propagate the Gospel and plant Churches, may not be fitly called, prime,
chief, or principal seats of the Church, or As Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus,
Acts 11.26.
chief Churches?

14. Whether those Churches so gathered, in one Kingdom, City, or
Principality, holding communion together, may not be fitly, in regard of their
unity in Doctrine and worship, called the Church of such a Nation, or Province,
Acts 11.22.
City, or Country?

15. Whether is it probable, that the first Church Christian, that we read of
to be, at Acts 1.4, 15, 26. and 2.41.
Jerusalem, was only one congregation, or but as many as could meet in one
place? had they not among them twelve Apostles, besides Elders, three thousand,
at once added, what ever number there was besides? and had they such a large
Temple or meeting houses at their command in those days?

16. Whether the word Church be not diversely taken in holy Scripture, and
sometimes for a civil or uncivil assembly or congression? Act. 19.40.
Acts 19.40. (...), and when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly or
Church?

Fitzherb. N.B.
17. Whether anciently in England, some small assemblyes were not called
Churches, as every presentative Rectory or Parsonage is called Ecclesia, when
others that were greater were not so called, as no Vicaridge, Donative or
Chapel is called Ecclesia in our Law?

18. Whether the Rector, or Parson that is a Presbyter in a Church, should,
being alone, rule absolutely by himself, without the concurrence, advise, or
superior power of the Evangelisticall 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.
Pastor of the Church, who had care in the plantation or erection of the
Parsons Church?

19. If not; should the Vicar, Donative, Minister or Chaplain?

20. But where they have used to rule more absolutely, (as in some peculiar
jurisdictions in England) why may they not with the peace and unity of the
Church, and by good advise, still do the same always, with subordination to the
Evangelisticall leaders, and fit Christian, and National Synods?

21. If the Parson should not rule alone ordinarily, why should the principal
leaders rule ordinarily alone without the advice and assistance of a competent
number of their Presbyters, who may afford them counsel? Did not the holy
Apostles advise with the Elders Acts 15.6.
sometimes? is it safe for them or the whole?

22. But were there any Bishops superintendent, Objection.
over other Bishops, or Presbyters, in the first hundred years after Christ's
birth? Did not Saint James write his General Epistle to the twelve Tribes,
which were then scattered abroad, no doubt, in many places, and therein mention
for Rulers, only James 5.14.
Elders? and S. Peter write his general Epistle, and therein direct or command
the 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3
Elders, not to overruled the flock, the Lords inheritance? where was the Order
of Bishops? had not the Elders the rule? might they not else have returned
answer, that the command concerned not them, but a certain Order of men,
called Bishops, above us?

Answer.
23. Were not the Apostles and Evangelists then living, Acts 1.20.
Bishops, and superintendent overseers? had they not the 2 Cor. 11.28. and
Chap. 10.12 to the end.
care of all the Churches, in their lines? did not these holy Apostles, S.
James and S. Peter, mention their own names, in their Epistles? is it not
plain, that Peter had oversight upon those to whom he wrote, to see that they
did not overruled, and take account of them, if they did? And did the Lord
ordain there should be such a superintendencie, only for an 80. years, and
not some equal correspondent superspection also in after-ages, when those
extraordinary men should cease? If some had then the care of all the Churches,
should there not be some, in aftertimes, to have the care of some, to a
competent number of Churches, in their fitting lines, and as they are 2 Cor.
8.12.
able? And though this Divine right be broken through the many gross
corruptions of successions, and the like, yet is it not equal to observe the
first Institution, as near as may be, as we say the equity of some Laws and
Statutes among us is sometimes to be observed, though not in the Letter? And
why may not a chief Pastor be called a Bishop, as well as an Elder, or any
other officer heretofore superior?

24. If Ephesians. 5.19. 1 Cor. 14.26 40
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs are to be sung in the Church, and to
sing melodiously, and with good harmony, is the gift of God, and uncomely
singing a kind of sin in the holy Assemblies; why should not the chief
leaders, and rulers of the Church, appoint some, in their stead, to take care
of the singings of the Church? and may not some be fitter to lead in singing,
then others? and lest they may fall out of their tunes to jarring, why may they
not use the help of some musical instruments? and lest they should want able
men this way, why should they not take care, that some children be trained up
in Music?

25. Whether or no Christ did not allow of a Mat. 6.9. Sic ergo adirate vos.
(...). Luke 11.2.
form of Prayer, and a short one too? will not the Romans 15.1.
strong allow the weak helps in Prayer? are not the best Christians often
distracted in long Prayers? is it not easier for the strong to pray, then for
as strong men to hear Prayer well? should those that are strong Proficients in
grace not be satisfied, without all their weak brethren come to the same pitch
of high sanctification with themselves? should they not rather Romans 12.16.
Idipsum in invi^em sentientes; non alta sapientes, sed humilibus cons^^^ientes.
(...), but condescending to the humble.
condescend to the weaker? And although it be rare to tell of any actually
converted by forms of Prayer, and Scriptures read; yet who can justly deny,
but that much good has been, is, and may for ever be done by such things that
way, Sicut ultimus ictus quercum non caedit, extrema arena clepsydram non
exhaurit, as the last stroke fells not the oak, nor the last sand exhausts the
houre-glasse?

26. Whether may not a man Act. 10.24, 44 47, 48. and 16.30, 31, 32, 33. verse.
14, 15.
and his household, a woman and her household, a whole Acts 8.8, 12, 14.
City, or Country, a King and his people, a whole Nation, be baptized, after
they are competently instructed in the Religion of God?

17. Is it certain, that all that were baptized in Acts 10.
Cornelius his house, in the Acts 16.
Gaolers house, in Lydia's, in Acts 8.
Samaria, in Acts 18.
Corinth, were such true believers, as now good men require all those that
join with them, to be, before they will receive them to the Communion of their
Church? Were not Acts 8.13. Act. 2.41. and 5.1. compared.
hypocrites admitted and baptized in the Primitive Church, by the Apostles and
Evangelists themselves, being deceived by them? Were not children circumcised
in the old Testament, and baptized all along in the times of the New, so
received into the bosom of the Church?

28. Could, or can ever any Nation, probably, be brought into the obedience of
the Gospel, poll by poll, in such manner as is imagined by the leaders of
separations?

29. If it be possible, let them make experience, and try whether the Indians,
or any other Heathen people, can be so converted, before the Greek Kalends.

30. Whether there be any direct Scripture for the peoples choice of their
chief Pastor? Can there, ordinarily, be a better election, then when the
supreme Magistrate (who has, at most times, the power of all the people, and
sometimes their counsel in a regular way) joins with a select and competent
number and company of Presbyters in the same?

31. Whether any that have not skill, grace, and learning, to judge of the
parties to be ordained, whether they be fit, and able to what they are to be
ordained, may 1 Timothy 5.22. Titus 2.2.
ordain them?

32. Whether or no to maintain a desired purity or perfection in the
Magistracy, by election of the people, these good men of New England, are not
forced to be too strict in receiving the brethren, and to run a course tending
to heathenisme?

33. Whether have not popular elections of chief Magistrates been, and are
they not very dangerous to States and Kingdoms? Are there not some great
mysteries of State and government? Is it possible, convenient, or necessary,
for all men to attain to the knowledge of those mysteries, or to have the like
measure of knowledge, faith, mercifulness, wisdom, courage, magnanimity,
patience? Whence are Kings denominated, but from their skill and knowledge to
rule? whereto they are even born and educated, and by long experience, and
faithful Counselors enabled, and the grace and blessing of God upon all? Do
not the wise, good, ancient, and renowned Laws of England attribute much, yea,
very much trust and confidence to the King, as to the head and supreme
Governor, though much be also in the rest of the great body, heart and hands,
and feet, to counsel, maintain, and preserve the whole, but especially the
Head?

34. Hence what government for an Englishman but an hereditary, successive,
King, Pro. 25.3. Eccles. 8.4. and 10.16, 17.
the son of Nobles, well counseled and assisted?

35. Whether we the posterity of the Church, and people of God, who now see the
tops of things only, may safely condemn the foundations, which we have not
seen?

36. Whether is there not a difference between bare speculation, and knowledge
joined with sound experience, and between the experience of Divines and people
reforming from out of some deep corruptions in Churches called Christian, and
the experience of those that have conversed in and about planting, and building
Churches, where there was none before, or among Heathens? what is art many
times without experience?

37. Whether those Authors from Hierome, to Archbishop Adamson, that allege
all Presbyters to be equal, and should always have equal power and
authority, had any great skill, or will, or experience, in the propagation of
Churches among heathens, or barbarous Nations?

38. If not, whether their Testimony be of that validity as is thought by
some? If they had, whether they might not err?

39. Whether messengers sent by Churches, or Ministers taking upon them to go
to gather or plant Churches, and to ordain, or give the right hand of
fellowship to Ministers in those Churches, and to appease differences in Church
affairs, are not Episcopal acts?

40. Is Episcopacie, or a superintendencie necessary at New England, and is it
not necessary in more populous places? Are there not some, nay many depths and
1 Cor. 4.1. and ^.10.
mysteries in Gods holy Word, the Scriptures, and certain Catholic
interpretations, which transgressed, the faith is hurt? Is it possible,
convenient, or necessary for all men, nay all Ministers, to attain the
knowledge of those mysteries, or to have the like measure of knowledge, faith,
mercifulness, wisdom, patience, long suffering, courage, whereby to be
enabled to rule in the Church of God, whereto they are educated, tried, chosen,
and ordained? and do not the sacred rules and Laws of God, of holy Church and
of this Kingdom attribute much, yea very much trust and confidence to the
chief Pastors, Leaders, and Rulers, the Fathers of the Church, especially to
the Bishops of the prime and Metropoliticall Churches, by the assistance of,
and with, and under the supreme Magistrate, the chief, the best cement of
government, though much be also in other members of the great body, the Church,
to counsel, maintain and preserve the whole in the faith, soundness, peace
and unity, especially the chief leaders, when need requires? Hence what
government for Christians in chief, but by pious, learned, Provincial and
Diocesan Bishops, especialy in England and Ireland?

By the just examination of the whole, those that are pious and learned, may
easily gather, what good reasons I had, and have, to return, as now humbly I
do, to the Church of England, for whose peace, purity, and prosperity, is the
daily prayer of one of her most unworthy sons,

Clements Inn, November. 16. 1641. Thomas Lechford.

To a friend.
Sir,
HEre is a good Land, and yielding many good commodities, especially fish, and
furs, corn, and other richer things, if well followed, and if that popular
elections destroy us not. It is a good Land, I say, that instructs us to
repentance, when we consider what a good Land we came from, what good laws and
government we have left, to make experiments of governing our selves here by
new ways, wherein (like young Physicians) of necessity we must hurt and spoil
one another a great while, before we come to such a settled Commonwealth, or
Church Government, as is in England.

I thank God, now I understand by experience, that there is no such government
for English men, or any Nation, as a Monarchy; nor for Christians, as by a
lawful Ministry, under godly Diocesan Bishops, deducing their station and
calling from Christ and his Apostles, in descent or succession; a thing of
greater consequence then ceremonies, (would to God I had known it sooner) which
while I have in my place stood for here these two years, and not agreeing to
this new discipline, impossible to be executed, or long continued, what I have
suffered, many here can tell; I am kept from the Sacrament, and all place of
preferment in the Commonwealth, and forced to get my living by writing petty
things, which scarce finds me bread; and therefore sometimes I look to planting
of corn, but have not yet here an house of my own to put my head in, or any
stock going: Whereupon I was determined to come back, but by the over-entreaty
of some friends, I here think to stay a while longer, hoping that the Lord will
shortly give a good issue to things both in our native Country, and Scotland,
and here, as well as in all other his Majesty's dominions.

I was very glad to see my Lord Bishop of Exeters Book; it gave me much
satisfaction. If the people may make Ministers, or any Ministers make others
without an Apostolical Bishop, what confusion will there be? If the whole
Church, or every congregation, as our good men think, have the power of the
keys, how many Bishops then shall we have? If every Parish or congregation be
so free and independent, as they term it, what unity can we expect?

Glad also was I to see Master Balls Book of the trial of the grounds of
Separation, both which are newly come over, and I hope will work much good
among us here.

And whereas I was sometimes misled by those of opinion that Bishops, and
Presbyters, and all Ministers, are of the same authority; When I came to
consider the necessary propagation of the truth, and government of the Church,
by experimental footsteps here, I quickly saw my error: For besides, if the
congregations be not united under one Diocesan in fit compass, they are in a
confusion, notwithstanding all their classical pretendments, how can the
Gospel be propagated to the Indians without an Apostolical Bishop? If any
Church, or people, by the Kings leave, send forth Ministers to teach and
instruct the poor Indians in the Christian Religion, they must have at least
Apostolical power to ordain Ministers or Elders in every congregation among
them; and when they have so done, they have power of Visitation where they
plant: Nor can they without just cause be thrust out from government without
great impiety; and where they have planted, that is their line or Diocese. Thus
I came to see, that of necessity a Diocese, and Bishop Diocesan, is very near,
if not altogether of Divine authority.

I am also of opinion, that it were good for our Ministers to learn how to do
this work from some of our reverend Bishops in England, for I fear our
Ministers know not how to go about it. Whether must not some Ministers learn
their language? It is a copious language, as I am informed, and they have as
many words to express one thing as we have. And when they teach Indians to
pray, will they not teach them by a form? and how can Gods worship be
maintained among ignorant persons without a form? I am firm of opinion, that
the best of us have been much beholding to the Word read, and forms of Prayer.

From Boston in N.E. Iulii 28. 1640.

This Gentleman to whom I wrote, kindly returned me a wise answer, wherein is
this passage:

TO speak in brief, I think now that New England is a perfect model and
sampler of the state of us here at this time; for all is out of joint both in
Church and Commonwealth, and when it will be better, God knows: To him we
must pray for the amendment of it, and that he will not lay on us the merits of
our national and particular sins, the true cause of all these evils.

Dated out of Somersetshire, Aprilis 27. 1641.

To another, thus:
IN a word or two, we hear of great disturbances in our dear native Country;
I am heartily sorry, etc. I beseech you take my brief opinion; We here are
quite out of the way of right government both in Church and Commonwealth, as I
verily think, and as far as I can judge upon better consideration, and some
pains taken in searching after the bottom of some things. Some electorie ways
tend to the overthrow of Kingdoms: No such way for government of Englishmen,
as a Monarchy; of Christians, as by Diocesan Bishops in their line: Better
yield to many pressures in a Monarchy, then for subjects to destroy, and
spoil one another. If I were worthy to advise a word, I should desire you to
have a care, and so all your friends, you prejudice not your estate, or
posterity, by too much opposing the Regal power: For I verily believe the
Kings Majesty has in general a good cause touching Episcopacie: My reasons I
could better deliver in presence, if happily God give opportunity to see you, or
if you require it hereafter, I will be ready to present my thoughts unto you.
All this, as I shall answer before the Lord, without any by-respects. If you
were here, I presume you would see more then I can, but I think you would be
much of my mind.

From Boston in N. E. September. 4. 1640.

To another of no mean rank.
COmplaining of my sufferings, and showing the reasons, desiring him to send
for me, that I might declare them to his person more effectually.

From Boston in N. E. March, 1640.

To another.
YOu knew my condition and employment, and how ill it went with me in England,
by reason of the trouble of our friends, and my own danger thereby. For my
outward subsistence here, at this time, God knows it is but mean; some say it
is my own fault, and that I stand in my own light, and you, and others may so
conceive; but the God of heaven is my witness, I have endeavored in all
things to keep a good conscience, though sometimes I have failed; I have
endeavored, laying all by-respects aside, to join with the Church here, but
cannot yet be satisfied in diverse particulars, whereby I am kept from all place
of employment or preferment, as I have had overtures made unto me of, if I
would or could yield, but hitherto I have not dared to do it, for good reasons
best known to our heavenly Witness. I must give you a taste.

They hold their Covenant constitutes their Church, and that implies, we that
come to join with them, were not members of any true Church whence we came,
and that I dare not profess. Again, here is required such confessions, and
professions, both in private and public, both by men and women, before they
be admitted, that three parts of the people of the Country remain out of the
Church, so that in short time most of the people will remain unbaptized, if
this course hold, and is (we fear) of dangerous consequence, a thing not
tending to the propagation of the Gospel in peace: Which, though it have a
color of sanctimony and strictness, whereby many well-affected or
affectionate people, but weak in sound experience and judgment, are the rather
drawn thereunto, and they are in a manner necessitated to it, to maintain
their election of Magistrates and Ministers in their own way of popular or
Aristocraticall government; I dare not (for my part) yield unto neither in my
own conscience, nor for the credit of those persons with whom I have been
educated, and in whose causes I have been seen. A Monarchy is the best
government for Englishmen; better to suffer some pressures under that kind of
government, then to spoil one another with popular elections. Again, I cannot
yield to Lay Elders, nor that Laymen should impose hands upon any to the
Ministry, nor that any Minister should renounce his calling to the Ministry
which he received in England, as Antichristian: It is a gross error, and
palpable schism; then our Baptism is not right, and so there will be no end
of separations. Also I believe there cannot be a Church, without a true
Minister; nor can any gather themselves together into a Church without a true
Minister; nor can they ordain their own Ministers; ordinarily, I mean; what
may be done in an extraorninary case, pro prima vice, is another question; I
hold there ought to be an Apostolical Bishop, by succession from Christ and
his Apostles, superior in order or degree to his brethren; which Bishop ought
to ordain, and rule with other Presbyters, or alone, but Presbyters cannot
without him. And if so be any thing in word or act passed from me to the
contrary hereof, I do profess it was in my ignorance. Their calling is of
Divine authority, or nearest thereunto, else the Church of God could not have
subsisted in any tolerable way of peace, through all this bypast time of 1600.
years. I fear they know not what they say, that say the contrary: let them
come here, they will quickly change their mind, if they study the point, and
follow it home; for, besides the keeping of peace and unity, and a pure and
able learned Ministry, how can the Gospel be propagated without some special
Ministers, having the power Apostolical, to go forth to convert Indians or
Pagans? If a Pastor, or Minister, or Christian, of any Church shall do so,
what has he to do with Infidels? as he is a Pastor, he is no Pastor to them.
Therefore if any are sent to convert, and establish Churches among Infidels,
such as are sent are Apostolic messengers, Bishops or Ministers to them, and
ought to be sent with fasting and Prayer, and by imposition of hands of the
Presbytery, and having converted Infidels, may plant Churches, and ordain
Ministers among them, and afterward visit them; and is not this Episcopacie,
and their line wherein they have gone their Diocese? These things naturally
flow from, and are grounded in the Word, or equity thereof, and mere
necessity. Now if all Ministers should ordinarily have this authority, to go
forth to these works, without mission, what quarelling there would be for
division of Lines or Dioceses, let the experience of former ages tell, yea of
the Apostolic times, wherein were not wanting those that quarelled with Saint
Paul himself, about his Line or rule, 2 Cor. 10. Now unto this confusion,
tends the opinion, that says, a Bishop and Presbyter is all one and equal; it
is of Acrius, it is false, and it is confusion. The reformed Churches and
Writers that held so, had little experience of mission to convert and plant
Churches among Infidels. That reformation goes too deep that tends to pulling
down of Cathedral Churches, and Bishops houses: Should not Apostolic
Bishops, and the chiefest Ministers have houses to dwell in, and Churches to
recide and officiate in, whither all the Churches of their Line may send and
come together in Council, or Synod, and so do nothing of great moment without
their Bishop, a Timothy, or a Titus? Again, Baptism is admission and
initiation into the Church; to whom Baptism is committed, viz. Apostles and
Apostolic Ministers, they have power of admission, that is, of loosing, and
consequently of binding, excommunication or expulsion. Where is now the peoples
power in the keys? are they all Apostles, and Apostolic Ministers? what
confusion is this? who can yield to it knowingly? I beseech you pardon my
zeal, and when you have considered all, pity my condition, and pray for me
still. Well I am assured, that master Prynne and master Burton would never
yield to these things, especially, if they had experience of them. It is good
for us to see our errors, and acknowledge them, that we may obtain peace in
the day of account.

Boston, 13. Oct. 1640.

To another.
SOrry and grieved we are at the heart, to hear of the troublous estate and
condition of our native country; we here also meet with our troubles and
distresses in outward things, and some in spiritual matters also. Here wants a
staple commodity to maintain clothing to the Colony. And for my own
particular, hitherto I have been much distressed here by reason I cannot yet
so clearly understand the Church proceedings, as to yield to them, there are
therein so many difficult considerations, that they have sometimes bred great
confusion in my thoughts. Never since I saw you have I received the Sacrament
of the Lords supper. I have disputed in writing, though to my great hinderance,
in regard of outward things, yet blessed be the Lord, to my better satisfaction
at the last. I never intended openly to oppose the godlyhere in any thing I
thought they mistook, but I was lately taken at advantage, and brought before
the Magistrates, before whom, giving a quiet and peaceable answer, I was
dismissed with favor, and respect promised me by some of the chief for the
future. Our chief difference was about the foundation of the Church and
Ministry, and what rigid separations may tend unto, what is to be feared, in
case the most of the people here should remain unbaptized; considerations
which may trouble the wisest among us. Rigid separations never did, nor can
propagate the Gospel of Christ, they can do no good, they have done hurt. It
is dangerous to found Church government on dark and uncertain interpretations
of Prophetical, or other Scriptures; foundations ought to be full of evidence,
and demonstration. Blessed be the Lord, now some of the chief leaders of the
Churches here hold the Churches in England true Churches, and your Ministry
lawful, though diverse corruptions there may be among you; yea some there be
of the chief among us that conceive the government by godly Bishops
superintendent over others to be lawful. Churches are not perfect in this
world. We may not for every disagreement in opinion, or for slender pretended
corruptions, separate from the Church: separate so once, and no end of
separation.

From Boston in N. E. December. 19. 1640.

To conclude.
SUppose there are four sorts of Government, which are used in Church, as in
Commonwealth; Monarchical absolute without Laws, which is tyranny;
Monarchical bounded by Laws; Aristocraticall, and Democraticall: Episcopal
absolute, which is Popish tyranny; Episcopal regulated by just Laws;
Presbyterian, and Congregationall: Which of these will all men like, and how
long? Some have well compared the humor of the people in this kind, to a merry
relation of an old man and his son, passing through the streets of a City,
with one horse between them: First, the old man rode, then the people found
fault with his unkindnesse, in that he did not cause his son to ride with him:
then the young man gets up too, now the people say they are both unmercifull to
the beast: down comes the old man, then the young man is unmannerly to ride,
and his father walk on foot: at last down goes the young man also, and leads
the horse, then they were both unwise to lead the horse, and neither of them to
ride. Well, but alter the inconstant vulgar will; if so, God grant it be for
the better. But then consider stories, one alteration follows another; some
have altered six times, before they were settled again, and ever the people
have paid for it both money and blood.

Concerning Church Government, what the Presbyterian way is, and how suitable
for Englands Monarchy, I leave to the pious experienced Divines to set forth,
and the Church and State thereof to judge.

And for the Congregationall independent government, whereof I have had some
experience, give me leave instead of a better intelligencer thus to present to
my dear country, now in a time of need, my impartial opinion in these
confused papers: And in brief-thus: Although it had some small color in
Scripture, and a great pretense of holiness, yet no sound ground in the
Scripture; Again, if it be neither fit nor possible long to be continued in
New England, as not I alone, but many more eye and ear witnesses do know, and
the learned can and will judge undoubtedly, it must needs be much more unfit
and impossible to be brought into England, or Ireland, or any other populous
Nation.

All which upon the whole I humbly submit unto the sacred judgment and
determination of holy Church, his royal Majesty, and his Highnesses great and
honorable Council, the high Court of PARLIAMENT.

Imprimatur,

Ioh: Hansley.

FINIS.

