THE Rambling Justice, OR THE JEALOUS HUSBANDS.

With the Humors of Sir John Twiford. As it is acted at the THEATER ROYAL.

By JOHN LEANERD.

Licensed March 13. 1678. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by E. F. for Thomas Orrell and James Vade, at the Hand and
Scepter, and Cock and Sugar-Loafe, near St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleetstreet.
1678.

PROLOGUE, spoken by Flora.
WILL nothing take in these Ill-natured times?
Neither low Farce nor great Heroic Rhimes?
It Is strange you should such Sectaries be grown,
Thus to allow no Doctrine but your Own;
And in the Pit as they in Pulpits rage,
Preach up Rebellion to undo the Stage.
Like angry Fate you Damn without Control,
Ruin your Own, but not the Poets Soul.
If Wit should be the Substance of a Spark,
Why is your Talk so Dull? your Sense so Dark?
Things much admired by Fops both great and small,
Are to be Drunk, keep Miss, and visit Ball;
But the great Essence, Wit, few have at all.
Wit does in Plays to some Gay Fops appear,
Like a New Mistress in their full Carear;
All Air and Charming, till the Minute's past,
And then you kick her out with all your have,
Taxed with the Crime, Damme she is False you cry,
Another Lord keeps her as well as I.
This makes the Trade of Miss and Poet Dull,
They care not how Debauched to please a Fool.
But what is all this to me? I Have yet been true,
But 'twas for want of Wit, like some of you.
'Sdeath who would be so singularly kind,
Toblige but One? Faith they' re not of my mind.
It Is Wit in Women to accept of All,
The Knight, the Squire, but Gold in General.
The more they swarm, the greater store comes in,
And 'twill be pleasure then to pay for Sin.
But to be left in this unruly sort
By you the Great Pretenders of the Court,
Would make a Saint, a Mistress never so true,
Forget her Vows, and prove as False as you;
Turning her House, since you are grown so Fickle,
As we must ours, into a Conventicle.
There Is no Redemption, thank our daily Iars,
The Men are all resolved go to Wars;
The Women thus grown out of Favor too,
Must in Remotes begin and trade a new.
Then if you chance to have the least Desire,
And come though overchang'd with Love and Fire,
Perhaps we will take your Guinnies and Retire.
Cheat you as n^w with a Dull Lenten Play,
And being Stocked and Brisk sneak quite away.
Laugh at these Huffing Critics of the Pit,
Who come in Droves to seize this Monster Wit.
The Actors Names.
Mr. Powell, Sir Arthur Twilight, A Lascivious old Knight. Mr. Wilshire, Sir
General Amorous, A Gentleman of a free Nature, a General Lover. Mr. Disney,
Contentious Surly, Of a morose Jealous Humor. Mr. Perrin, Sir Geoffry Iolt, A
Country Justice, fond of all Women. Mr. Power, John Twiford, A Gentleman of no
Fortune, sometimes Lunatic. Mr. Q. Spywell, Sir Generals Man. Mr. Coysh,
Bramble, An Old man. Sir Arthurs Man. Captain of the Gypsies, and other Gypsies
Men and Women. A Drawer, and two Sedan-men. Women.
Mrs. Farlee, Eudoria, Wife to Sir Arthur. Mrs. Merchant, Petulant Easy, Wife
to Surly. Mrs. Bates, Emelta, Daughters to Sir Arthur by a former Wife. Mrs.
Cook, Flora,

SCENE LONDON.

Time Twenty four hours

THE RAMBLING JUSTICE, OR THE Jealous Husbands.
ACT the First.
SCENE London.
Enter as in discourse Arthur and Spywell. Arth. URGE me no more, I like it not.


Spyw. Take Reason with you Sir, and let that guide your Passion; Sir Amorous
is too much a Gentleman to injure you in the least, he is all Air, all
Freeness, all Conversation.


Arth. Yes, and all Love too, that I have heard and fear; I like his all Air,
all Freeness and all Conversation very well, but I hate his all Love. Sir, I
must beg your Masters pardon, my house has no room for such all Loving
Gentlemen.


Spyw. Then he is all Generosity, all Honor, and parts with his Money, Plate
and Jewels. --


Arth. Ha! what said you there? is he all Money too?


Spyw. Made up with Gold and Silver, and values it as lightly. --


Arth. Ha! does he so? let him come in, I love a Gentleman that is all Money
with my Heart, I do indeed. Exit Spyw. I smell, I smell a Design, but let him
work on, I have two pair of Eyes, and can as soon discover the Intrigues of
love, as the Youngest Hector of 'em all, he has Money, and he has Writings
for Land, two Excellent properties to come under an Aldermans Roof. Bramble.


Enter Bramble. Bramb. Sir.


Arth. Bid your Mistress, alas what did I say, bid your Lady keep her Chamber,
let her not come so much as to the Window, upon her Peril and yours; for if I
spy her though Ten score Yards distance from my new Lodger, I Will put you into
the Briars, look to it do you hear. [ Ex. Bramble. Enter Sir General and Spywell.
Sir General Amorous, your Servant, Methinks I hunger and thirst to do you
service, you were to blame, indeed you were, not to make use of my poor House
before.


Genesis I am happy in having so great a Blessing laid upon me, to be under the
Roof of such a worthy Friend.


Arth. You are pleased to Complement, I know you are, I could have done it once
too, but that time is past, my dancing Days are done.


Genesis Yet you are Fresh and Gay Sir as the Morning, and have the same Desires
you had in Youth: but where is your Wife? Methinks I long to see my Charming
Landlady.


Arth. Pox on him, does he begin so soon? he has scarce breathed since he came
in, and ask for her already; [Aside. Alas Sir, my Wife is gone to take the
Air, She and my Girls just now took Coach together.


Spyw. As we were coming in I saw her in her Balcone.


Arth. A Rogue Bramble, -- 'Sounds in a Balcone. [Aside. You are mistaken Sir,
indeed you are, she went to Epsom yesterday.


Genesis Ha, ha, ha, nay now I find you jest, come, come Sir you are a merry man,
and I know Love to be jocost: what say you shall I see Eudoria?


Arth. Not in her time of sickness, she never permits any man to visit her
then, Sir, she has such strange fits, a kind of idle Frenzy.


Genesis I long to see her then, for nothing in the world can more delight me than
to see Beauty in as fit of madness, oh how they Charm! but is she often
troubled?


Arth. Once a Month, and then she looks so strangely.


Genesis Alas poor Soul, I fain would trespass Sir upon your Goodness, but the
arguments you give me are so many I dare not plead against 'em.


[Laughing within. Enter Bramble running. Bramb. Sir, Sir.


Arth. The News with you?


Bramb. My Lady Eudoria, and your Daughter Emilia are in such a fit of
Laughter, that unless you come in to her assistance, and turn the source of
their prodigious Mirth, I fear 'twill overcome 'em.


Arth. My Wife Laughing? out you lying Varlet.


Strikes him. Bramb. As I hope to be saved I saw her Sir, she laughed extremely.


Arth. Peace Hell-hound or -- Pox of the babbling [Aside. Dog, all is spoiled now
-- Alas Sir Amorous, my Man is Frantic, as mad as a March Hare: my Wife
Laughing? she is the most melancholy Creature in Europe, she never Smiles nor
Laughs, unless at Prayers, or at Church.


Genesis Be not so angry Sir, he might mistake.


Arth. A Pox of his Mistakes, I hate 'em Sir.


Frets up and down. Genesis Come hither Bramble, -- is thy Mistress sick?


Bramb. O law Sir. --


Genesis Nay tell me, Sir Arthur shall be pleased, how does thy Lady?


Bramb. Well Sir, well. --


Arth. Is she so Rascal? [ Strikes Bramble. Pardon me Sir Amorous. A man may
have leave to jest with his Friend, intruth he may, she is within, indeed she
is, I did not intend to hinder her your Company, only to raise your
Expectations to a pitch. Call in your Mistress, Rascal. Now shall I be made a
Cuckold before my face, [ Ex. Bramble. I know I shall, if I prevent it not --
[Aside.] I believe Mr. Amorous you take me for a Jealous man, a very Jealous
fool I Will warrant you, such another as Contentious Surly is. But in faith you
are mistaken, for my Pigsny is too Virtuous to have the least mistrust upon
her, she is indeed.


Genesis I must confess Contentious Surly Rules more like a Madman than a Husband,
and looks upon his Wife not with the Eyes of Reason but of Rage, who is all
Innocence and Goodness, and I dare swear would not wrong her Husband.


Arth. Not for a World, I know she would not. Alas poor Lady, this it is to
have Chastity and Goodness lodged under a Jealous Roof, I thank my Stars I am
free from it.


Genesis You are the Happier Man, Sir Arthur. Enter Eudoria, Emilia and Bramble.
But yonder comes the Comfort of my Soul, who like a Glittering Star points all
its Beams this way, whilst I the only Wretched of Mankind, dare but admire and
gaze.


Arth. Sir Amorous be Complaisant, I prithee be, I am not Jealous, fack I am
not, what! look upon a Lady and not dare salute her?


Genesis Indeed I dare not, my Oath has bound me from so great a Blessing.


Arth. Nay if you have Sworn, I have done.


Genesis However to oblige so good a Friend I will be perjured once. [ Goes to
Eudoria. Madam I hope my strangeness will not appear Rude or Unmannerly, for in
your Eyes I read a Happy Fate, and Glorious Blessings wait on every smile, but
when they are Checked by the malign Aspect of such a dogged Planet, I must only
with this Retire.


[Kisses her Hand. Eud. It Is my Ill fortune Sir, to live a Stranger from the
Blessed society of man, and only Eat, and Drink and Sleep with an all-seeing
Argus, who is -- I know not what.


Genesis I can but pity for a time, then strive to get your Freedom.


[Kisses her Hand again. Arth. Why that is well said, to her again Boy, to her
again. Intruth she has as good a -- Hand as any she in Europe.


Enter Twiford. Twif. Good Morrow Cousin Arthur, and you Cousin Eudoria, and
you Cousin Emilia. I protest my Lady Cousins at Court are extremely Well,
Extraordinarily Jocost and Pleasant, and my Lord had the Mighty Fortune just
now to win a hundred Guinnies of the Earl my Cousin, and how fares my Lord
Amorous? What, Dogged?


Genesis No Mr. Twiford, so far from that, I never was better pleased.


Twif. I Will tell you my Lord the effects of this day's Hunting. The Duke my
Uncle, and my Lord my Extraordinary good Friend and Cousin, would needs take me
in their Coach to go a Hunting.


Arth. How! in their Coach Mr. Twiford?


Twif. Yes, in their Coach Cousin Arthur. Alas it is the fashion now, all a Mode
indeed; and being come to Hide Park, we unbrac'd the Horses, put our Hats
underneath for Saddles, and run the four mile Course so pleasantly: but by my
Honor I beat 'em a whole Coach length, Poal and all.


Arth. I do believe you. Mr. Amorous my new Friend and Lodger, welcome once
more, come let us retire, the Morning Air is bleak.


Twyf. It is indeed, my Cousin Arthur advises well, and truly I am something
weary, for I just now came from Hampton Court. And upon my word my Cousin is
very well, and all the rest of the Lords and Ladies at Court, they are indeed.


Arth. I am glad to hear it, come Sir General.


Twif. Indeed Cousin you are very obliging, nay without Ceremony my Lord.


[Exeunt. Spywell calls Bramble back. Spyw. Hark. How long have you lived here?


Bramb. Too long by a fortnight, sixteen days.


Spyw. What, and weary of thy Service already?


Bramb. The Devil cannot live Contentedly under my Masters Roof, we are all
Prisoners, and he the head Jaylour. Sometimes but very seldom I have the
Keeping of my Lady.


Spyw. What, under Lock and Key?


Bramb. Yes, and Bolts, and Bars too; he is as Jealous as he is Old, as Old as
he is Crafty, and as Crafty as the Devil. Nothing can Cozen him.


Spyw. Nor Cuckold him neither?


Bramb. I believe not, for all my Lady has a mind to it. She smiled upon me the
other day, and the Jealous Coxcomb brake my Head for it.


Spyw. 'Twas ill done indeed. Here, can thou be secret?

[Gives him Money.
Bramb. As a Churchwarden, let all the poors Money slip into my Pocket, and not
declare it.


Spyw. You are fit for my Masters turn then: know, that Sir General Amorous
was sent hither by Contentious Surley to Cuckold your Master, but he knowing no
design could be brought about without the help of some Servant or other in the
house, ordered me to make Choice of one, whom I should think Convenient.


Bram. I shall be glad to serve you Sir.


Spyw. I am not Unsensible your Lady every Afternoon walks into the Garden,
where over the purling Fountain she mourns for the Loss she sustains in having
only the Ruins of a Man.


Bramb. True Sir.


Spyw. She being entered, I would have you oblige me with the Key of the Garden
Gate, that my Master may go in and out at pleasure.


Bramb. It shall be done Sir.


Spyw. That Is all at present, but fail not.


Bramb. I will not Sir, I will not. This shall to my Master, perhaps he will
reward me nobly for saving his honor, and keeping his Horns from Budding.

[Exit.
Spyw. With this first Plot I Will try the hasty Servant, which if he spoil I
value not, for nothing shall be acted I have told him, but every Wheel move in
another Frame. I Have helped Contentious to his Horns already, and it shall be
hard if Twilight escape my Policy.

[Exit.
Enter Contentious Surly and Petulant Easy. Easy. What have I done to merit
your Disgrace!


Surly. Enough.


Easy. Have I in ought transgressed the Laws of Wedlock?


Surly. Yes.


Easy. With whom?


Surly. One whom I to day removed, Sir General Amorous, have I not seen him
gaze upon your Face, bask in the Sunshine of your Early favors, whilst you as
wantonly as common Sinners exchanged both Smiles and Glances?


Easy. Can you blame her for Civil Courtesies, who smiles upon a man that
brings you profit, heaps up those Coffers which before were empty, and all if I
but smile?


Surly. By Heaven the Ambassador for greater Sins, him and his profits I Have
removed from hence, and will do from the world if you but name him more.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir Geoffry Iolt just arrived, desires you would oblige
him with your Presence.


Surly. I Will wait upon him, and do you hear, be Wise and Circumspect, with him
I dare to trust you.


[Exit cum Servant. Easy. Yes, Wise enough to leave your surly Humor: did I
for this take you to my Embraces, did with that Holy (Curse on the fatal hour,
and Curse on me for yielding thus to an Eternal Bondage) Tie of Matrimony?
Knit both our Souls together? What shall I do? I must be free again. Sir
Generals Charms have won so much upon me that now I dare, (prompted by the Ill
usage of a Cruel Husband) act all he has desired. This very hour I will
disguise my self, and with that stock of Jewels I have left, fly to my Amorous
Lover, and in his Arms repeat our stolen Delights. But here comes that cruel
Clog of Matrimony, Husband.


Enter Contentious Surly and Sir Geoffry Jolthead. Surley. Sir Geoffry Welcome,
you know I am one of as few Ceremonies as Words, which both I think are
needless to a Friend.


Geoff. They are indeed Mr. Surly, for my part I hate 'em, I love nothing in
the World but brisk Wine, Complete French Fashions, and Aerie young Women, is
that your Wife Sir?


Surly. One I am forced to call so.


Geoff. She is very handsome, by my Honor I must salute her. Lady accept this
kiss from a Country Magistrate, one who admires any thing that belongs to my
Dear and Respective Friend Surly.


[ Kisses Easy. Easy. I am happy then in being his Sir.


Geoff. You are indeed, that word of Humility sounds so pleasantly and sweetly,
that by Jove I must [Kisses her again. have another. I love a Lady that pays
Obedience and Respect to her Lord and Master: a Husband is the Head, the very
top Branch of the Family.


Easy. I look upon him so indeed.


Geoff. Again, again, Lord how this Duty Charms me! let me Embrace you for an
hour together.


[Kisses her again. Surly. How now! why I shall foster up another Snake to
sting my Bosom, and one who through simplicity will do it before my Face.


Easy. I hope my Wisdom and Circumspection as he calls it, will make the top
Branch of the Family a Buck of the first Head.

[Aside.
Geoff. As I was going to say, Mr. Surly, your Wife is a very Dutiful,
Religious, and by my Honor, a very obliging Lady, your London Women kiss with
such Art, and so much Magnificence, that they almost Ravish us Country
Gentlemen: did you teach her that turn, and that thrust of the Lip ha? by Jove
it is most Delicious.


Surly. No Sir.


Geoff. Then she is Witty too, Lord how I admire a Witty Lady! learn that touch
your self! let me be ravished quite.


[Embraces her again. Surly. Death and Confusion, this is worse than the other,
this is a mere Stallion, I shall be the Branch I find it, he tops upon her
still, and she Receives it, Sir Geoffry.


Geoff. I beg your Pardon Mr. Surly. I vow your Wife has such a Charming way of
Kissing, and presses it so close, I had forgot my self.


Surly. And so She has -- I think, have you no shame, thou Impudent'st of Women?


Easy. Shame Sir!


Surly. Yes shame.


Easy. For what?


Surly. To let the World behold your loose desires, you kiss with Art and
Pleasure.


Easy. You bid me use him kindly, bid me be Wise and Circumspect, and said that
you durst trust him with me, and truly if you dare venture that, I dare trust
my self with him.


Surly. Oh Impudence!


Easy. You would have me turn the Cheek and blush when he comes near me, as if
I were afraid his Beard would hurt me. No Mr. Surly, I used him kindly out of
respect to you: and a thing once well done, is better than twice ill.


Surly. Distraction seize her! get you to your Chamber.


Easy. I Am gone Sir, and from you for ever.

[ Exit Easy.
Geoff. What, send your Wife away and not give your Friend notice? 'twas
unkindly done.


Surly. Her business called her.


Geoff. In Faith She kisses smartly.


Surly. I am glad to hear it.


Geoff. And is all Air too, and for her breath --


Surly. No more of that Sir Geoffry, I am glad I have any thing to pleasure you
-- Pox on him, I cannot forbid him the house for shame, nor must he stay to
plague me. --

[Aside.
Geoff. Come, come, come, I find you are melancholy, let us to a Tavern, a glass
or two of Champain will make us kiss and caper, and get us a stomach to our
Dinners.


[Exeunt. Enter Sir Arthur and Bramble. Arth. My Wife made an Assignation to
meet Amorous in the Garden?


Bramb. It is nothing but truth I Will promise you, for his man Spywell gave me
money not only to be a Confederate, but to steal the Key of the Garden gate,
that he as well as my Lady might enter in and out at pleasure.


Arth. Did he so, did he so? Nay, then there is Treason plotting against my
honor, I find there is, and did you get the Key for him Bramble?


Bramb. Yes Sir.


Arth. Did you so Rogue? out upon thee for a Villain, a Traitor, a mere foot
Pad, a Setter, Devil; you gave him the Key did you? I Will key you with a Pox.


[ Beats Bramble. Bramb. Hold Sir, hold, you will make Mummy of me else.


Arth. I will make a Devil of thee, what, my own Servant be a Traitor?


Bramb. I thought no harm in it, as I hope to be --


Arth. Beaten did you not? what, give the Key of your Masters Cabinet, his
Jewels, his all he has, and yet think no harm? However come along, conduct me
to the place where I may see 'em both, or I will beat you swindgingly, nay,
when I have seen 'em, I will make you beat the villain, and then beat you for
not beating him enough, come along Rascal.


[Exeunt. SCENE A Bedchamber.
Sir General Amorous, and Eudoria sitting as in Discourse, they rise and come
upon the Stage. Genesis How shall I make amends for this great blessing? if all
the Services of Life, (which I Will devote to you) can make the least, I vow to
use 'em all; and spend no time but in the company of you, or your Idea which
cannot be absent from a Lovers mind, when his Mistress is so kind, so Charming,
and so --


Eud. Nay, do not flatter me, I am but as you see, my Face may pass, and those
which love it not, let 'em seek out a better; I am no whining Lover, I hate
those puling Fops, I love a man that gains me by Intrigue, a minute stolen is
all the happiness of our mortality.


Genesis We will have many then, revell in Joys, and steal a thousand pleasures, I
have a Brain was never barren yet, especially in any Love Projection.


Eud. Thanks to your subtle Man, your vigilant Spywell, his Name was not given
him for nothing.


Genesis True Madam, I confess he has a ready Wit, but never yet durst undertake
an Action, before the Mass was cast by me: he only works and thus divides the
whole as our Occasions happen, the drift of which is to obtain your Love.


Eud. Which Purchased, will perhaps be answered with a scorn.


Genesis Never, O never Madam; it is impossible such glorious Charms should meet
the least neglect, you are all Goodness, and Entrance at every look my Soul.


Enter Spywell. Spyw. Haste, or you're lost for ever, your Jealous Husband
prompted by his Rage, comes first to search the Chamber, he is all fire and
nothing can allay him.


Eud. What shall we do?


Genesis Stand here and meet his Fury.


Spyw. O by no means, is there no secret Chamber, no place of safety for you?


Eud. Only one, this door leads to a Gallery which is as dark as night, from
whence sometimes he fancies are groans heard, which he declares for Truth, and
now and then relates what dreadful Monsters, Ghosts and Devils he in his Bed
has seen, all being only Fancies, idle Dreams; thither we will enter, and as
we go I Will give you a Disguise which I have always ready, and if he chance to
enter with a Light tumble both down together.


Spyw. It shall be done, fear not, haste, haste, I hear him coming.


[Exeunt. Enter Sir Arthur and Bramble, Bramble with a Light. Arth. On, on, you
villain on, -- [Looks about the Room. not here by Heaven, nor here, -- [Breaks
open one Door. nor here. -- [Breaks open another. She is in the Garden that is
certain, stay, stay, hold, hold, here is a Gallery, a Teneberian Gullet, which
I dare not enter, but Bramble shall, in, in, in there Rascal, search every
place, nay every Corner, or meet my high displeasure.


Bramble Enters, is Tumbled down by Spywell, rowls out and is followed by
Spywell as a Ghost, Arthur seeing him, runs off crying the Devil, the Devil,
etc. and Bramble crawls off. Spyw. Come, come, you may venture to come out now.


Enter Eudoria and Sir General Amorous. Genesis He Is gone, as full of fear as
Jelousy, Eudoria this plot was yours, and henceforth to you I Will own my
Preservation.


Spyw. This is no time to talk, Madam haste to your Bed, and there pretend a
sleep, I know you want not fitting words t'excuse so small an absence if he
should chance to search and find you. And you Sir, haste to your Chamber, I
know that is the next Randezvous after the Garden.


Genesis Farewell, my Prayers and Love attend you.


[Exeunt severally. SCENE The Garden.
Enter Twiford, Emelia and Flora. Twif. Nay, nay, come, come, come, my pretty
Cousins, upon my honor and all that, you are both Beauties, but especially
Lady Cousin, you as the Eldest ought to have most praise, and in faith you
deserve it nobly, and when saw you my Lord John, and his Lady Mary, ha?


Emel. I know 'em not.


Twif. What, not my very good Friend and Honorable Cousin my Lord John? that is
strange indeed; why, he was my Fathers Cobbler, but afterward by Care and
Prudence, good Custom and so forth, he became an Alderman, and then -- Enter
Sir Arthur and Bramble. what, my Honorable Cousin Sir Arthur, I vow I am glad
to see you: my Lady Mary is very considerably well, and truly I believe we
shall have Affairs put into a very good order, and Cousin Arthur your two
Daughters and I have been entertaining Discourse upon a very considerable
subject.


Arth. Pox of your subjects. Emelia, where is Eudoria?


Emel. In her Chamber Sir.


Arth. It Is false, all, all are Traitors, every one conspires my Ruin and
Disgrace, but you shall pay for it Villain you shall, I Will firk you in faith,
you must tell Lies with a Pox, get you from my sight you Varlet.


[ Beats Bramb. Bramb. So I will, and from your Service too; the Devil shall
live with such a Master for me, farewell Sir, may the Pox and your own Horns
choke you.

[ Exit Bramble.
Arth. Is he gone, is the Villain gone?


Flor. Yes Sir.


Arth. What did he say?


Twif. Something about Horns and Pox, but by my Honor Coz I believe he is
Frantic, for what has a Clown to do either with Pox or Horns? they are
Ornaments only for Court and City.


Arth. But Emelia, Flora, nay good Girls tell me where, where, where is
Eudoria, where is my new Lodger?


Emel. As for Sir Amorous I know not, but for Eudoria I saw her in her Chamber.


Flor. And so did I Sir Amorous.


Arth. Nay then it is pretty well, it is pretty well: I am almost mad dear
Girls, this Rogue Bramble has Cashiered my Wits, Pox of the Garden key, but
it is no matter Emelia I have a Husband for you, a Rich and Understanding
Husband.


Emel. Nay, if he be but Rich I Will bate his Understanding, that is too
troublesome a Companion for a Woman.


Arth. All, all of the same Brood be Heaven, not one Chaste Woman in a Kingdom,
if there be one it is a Miracle.


[Ex. all but Emelia. Emel. This is the Curse of Wedlock, hourly Jealousies and
daily Troubles, if ever I marry it shall be one both Deaf, Dumb, Lame and Blind.

They Are all but Complements for hourly Strife,
And with new Troubles daily fill the Life
Of her who is such a sot to be a Wife.
[Exit.
The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE St. James's.
Enter Sir General Amorous. Genesis MY Thoughts are all on fire, my Pulse beats
swift, and every Motion ushers a new thought, I Am all Desire and Love, and fain
would reap those pleasures are in View, oh Jelousy how do thou wrong that
Love might be enjoyed without the least Suspect, how many various ways do we
Conspire to blind his greedy Eyes! I wonder Bramble stays so long, our hasty
separation hindered a new Appointment, which I was forced to send by one I would
not trust, did he not hate Sir Arthur. Enter Bramble. Bramble the News?


Bramb. The News Sir!


Genesis Yes, how does Eudoria?


Bramb. Soft, soft Sir, you think it is nothing to get News out of a Ladies
Chamber where her Husband is the Jailer, I was there Sir.


Genesis Well.


Bramb. As you know a merry fellow may pass any where.


Genesis So Sir, but what is this to the purpose?


Bramb. Nay, it was nothing to the purpose that is certain.


Genesis How wretched this slave makes me, did you not see her?


Bramb. I saw her.


Genesis Well, and what said she then?


Bramb. Not a word Sir.


Genesis How! not a Word?


Bramb. Proves her the better tempered, for Women should be seen more than they
are heard. She was asleep Sir.


Genesis You should have waked her then; such another oppornuity lost would be
enough to ruin half a Kingdom.


Bramb. I durst not venture that Sir, for fear Sir Arthur should have heard me,
and then you know what follows: but I stood still awhile, and presently I might
perceive Eudoria yawn, and stir, and rub her Eyes and then --


Genesis She spoke the kindest words, oh let me hear 'em.


Bramb. Not one indeed Sir, and yet I know her mind as well as if I were in her
Belly.


Genesis You said but now she did not speak a word.


Bramb. But she gave certain Signs, and that is as good.


Genesis Can you conceive by Signs?


Bramb. Yes very well Sir, even from an Infant, did you never know that? I was
the happiest Child in all our Country, I was born of a Dumb woman.


Genesis How!


Bramb. Stark Dumb Sir: my Father had a Rare bargain of her, a Rich penniworth,
there would have been but too much money given for her, a Justice of Peace was
about her, but my Father being then Constable carried her before him.


Genesis What were the Signs she gave?


Bramb. Many and good Sir. Imprimis, she first gaped, but that I guessed was
done for want of Air; then she cast up her Eyes and winked, as who should say
bid Sir Amorous come at twilight: then looked upon her Watch and twice she
nodded, as who should say, the hour will come, that I shall make two Noddies of
my Keepers.


Genesis A Third of thee, is this your Mother Tongue? my hopes are much the wiser
for this Language, there is no such Curse in Love as an Arrant Ass.


Bramb. O yes Sir, yes, an Arrant Whore's far worse.


Genesis Begone, is this the good you do me? his Love is wretched and most
distressed that must make use of Fools.

[Exit.
Bramb. Fool to my Face from this, and be beaten by the other? that is
unreasonable; I will be a Knave one day for this trick, or it shall cost me a
Fall, though it be from a Gibbet. I Will be out of the Precincts of Fools if I
live but two days to an end, I will turn Rascal presently, the best sort of
which are Gipseys; for that is the high way to the daintiest Knave that ever
Mothers son took journey to. O those dear Gipseys they live the merriest Lives,
eat sweet stolen Hens, plucked over Pales and Hedges by a Twitch. They are never
without a plump and lovely Goose, or dainty Sow pig, those things I saw with my
own Eyes to day, they call 'em Vanities and trifling Pilfries, oh they are the
Wittiest Thieves, I Will stay no longer, but go and steal something presently,
and so bring my self acquainted with them.

[ Exit Bramble.
Enter Sir General Amorous. Genesis Nothing I fear so much as in the time of my
dull absence, and the idle Frenzy of my Messenger, her Husband will come to
know our Loves, and by secret threats and promises regain her Affection, there
is the Mischief, I have no Enemy like him, and though his Policy dissemble me a
welcome, no man's hate can be greater than his to me.


Enter Spywell. Spyw. Now is your only time to enjoy the freedom Sir of
Conversation. After Eudoria parted to her Bed, I watched the Jealous Husband
and dogged him from the Garden to her Chamber, where when he found her he leapt
for very Joy, then wept, and leaped again, at last he timerously strove to wake
her, which being done he fell upon his Knees and begged her to forgive him; hung
on her Neck and seemed to be Transported.


Genesis How can this quench those Flames of Love I feel, or help me to Enjoyment?


Spyw. No sooner was his Pardon signed with Kisses, but from her sight he flung
to seek you out, that you might make it perfect.


Genesis All this but ushers Torment, not Relief.


Spyw. He gone, I entered toward the fair Eudoria, and with such moving words
as I could utter, painted the Flame Sir of your vigorous Love; she lent a
gentle Ear to what I said, and sighing bid you meet her in the Grove behind the
Garden gate.


Genesis Oh Happiness!


Spyw. Where Masked Sir, and disguised like a Town Gipsy she would attend your
Pleasure.


Genesis O let me hug you close, I could (methinks) squeeze you into my Soul, the
News you have brought has made me all a Flame, raised my desires to such a mighty
pitch, that as I Am falling toward my Sea of pleasure. I shall taste on the way
all, all the bliss of Life.


Enter Sir Arthur. Arth. Sir General Amorous well met, well met in faith, I vow
I am glad to see you; my Wife poor -- Amorous stands melancholy. What, angry
man? come, come, I know the reason, I was a little Jealous, Fack I was, but it
is off again; nay, now you are no true Friend, what, angry for a Continuando?


Genesis I am not Sir, especially with you, yet who can shun the Crosses of the
World, or help --


Arth. Help, what Crosses? I am the best at helping of Crosses of any man in
Europe; come tell me your Grievances, you shall, you shall.


Genesis Sir, they are in my Power to tell, but not in your Will to effect.


Arth. Not in my Will to effect? by Eudoria's honesty but it shall be in my
Will, What is it?


Genesis By my frequent disappointments, and my many urgent occasions for money, I
am at this time necessitated for a hundred pound.


Arth. Hum, hum, a hundred pound? it is a swindging sum indeed, and out of my
power not will to lend you; however here is a Ring, a diamond Ring it is, and
will go near to pawn for fifty Guinneys, take that, before you have spent it
all, I shall be furnished doubt not.


Genesis Sir I accept your proffer, and for your security the Deeds of all my
Lands shall be delivered, till then farewell.


[Exit cum Spywell. Arth. Shall be delivered? ay but when? I have done bravely
now, lent fifty pound upon a shall be delivered; yet of my conscience he is an
honest Gentleman; he has honesty and civility writ on his face, he has indeed;
he is not like our whoring, swearing Sparks of the times, who make it their
practice to dub Cuckolds, and then out of civility be the Child's Godfather.


Enter Sir Jeoffrey Jolthead and Contentious Surly. Geoff. Why, now Mr. Surly
we look like men, methinks I could caper and leap, and kiss and play, and do
every thing with a Lady: oh this wine, this wine is a very pleasant element.


Surly. It is indeed.


Geoff. What Sir Arthur Twilight, and how does my pretty little flearing Misses
ha? can they kiss smartly and turn up the lip ha?


[ Surly pulls him by the Coat. Surly. Pox of this Fool, he will proclaim my
shame to all the World.

[Aside.
Geoff. Can they Boy, can they?


Arth. They can do every thing belongs to the Sex no doubt Sir Geoffrey.


Geoff. I vow they are pretty Wags, I love 'em dearly; shall I see 'em?


Arth. Yes when you please Sir Geoffrey. Mr. Surly you look clouded: pox of
sorrow I say, it is enough for superannuated Cuckolds to be melancholy, not
such as you and I, we are free from it.


Surly. I would I were. [Aside.] Sure he knows nothing to the contrary.


Arth. It Is a great torment to be jealous sure, to think a very shadow at
Noonday can do the act we dream of: to frown on all, even our best of friends;
turn off our Lodgers, cashier our Servants, swear at our Maids, slander our
Children.


As Sir Arthur talks, Contentious Surly walks, Sir Arthur following him. Surly.
Curse on this Ribaldry, what is this to me, am I the man you aim at?


Arth. No, no Sir, no.


Surly. Am I the mark you level all these arrows at?


Arth. No Sir, no.


Surly. Why do you bellow in my ears the name of Cuckold then?


Arth. Because there is pleasure in it, methinks they are the prettiest old
decrepit Creatures in Europe: but Mr. Surly I have done, come shall's drink a
glass of Wine together? let us be brisk and merry, shall we ha?


Geoff. Well said Mr. Arthur, you are the same man still, the merry man
in faith, and could I warrant you -- but it is no matter, come Mr. Surly.


Surly. I care Sir for no more, my business lies at home.


Geoff. A pox of home, thou have a Wife at home, that can I Will warrant you
manage affairs without the help of Husband, come, come, you shall go.


Arth. Do do, i'fack, Mr. Surly you are good company, and I love good company
with all my heart, come come, let us to the Tavern, and there talk of our Wives.


Surly. If I go, I bar that discourse.


Arth. It shall, it shall, come, come, we will not name 'em, we will not name
'em.


[Exeunt. SCENE The Fields.
Enter Petulant Easy disguised like a Gypsy. Easy. I Am happily escaped, not
one pursues me, this shape's too cunning for 'em, and if I can but find Sir
General, then all my hopes are crowned. This is the Gypsies place of meeting, I
wonder they are not come yet, what will become of me in this shape without my
strange Companions? if I know where to go I Am no dissembler, and I Would not lose
that part of woman for such a trifle.


Enter Bramble. Bramb. Oh excellent! by this light here is one of 'em, by your
leave Gypsy, pray how far off is your Company?


Easy. Oh happiness, this is the merry fellow Sir Arthur Twilight keeps, I Will
send him speedily to Sir General with the news of my so strange and fortunate
escape, and he will provide my safety at an instant. [Aside.] Do you not serve
Sir Arthur Twilight?


Bram. Who, I serve, Gypsy? I scorn your motion, and if the rest of your
company give me no better words, I will hinder them the stealing of more Pullen
then fifty Poulterers were ever worth, and prove a heavier enemy to all their
Pig-Booties; they shall travail like Jews, and never get a Sow by the ear. I
serve? I scorn to serve any body, I am more Gypsie-minded then so, though my
face look of a Christian color, if my belly were ripp'd up, you should find my
heart as black as any patch about ye: the truth is, I am as errand a thief as
the proudest in the company, I will except none, I am run away from my Master
in the state of a fool, and till I am a perfect knave I never mean to return
again.


Easy. I am never the happier for this fortune now, it did but mock me.


Enter General Amorous. Bram. But here comes my last Master, I must not be seen.

[ Exit Bramble.
Easy. Yonder Is Sir Amorous, O happy hour, my blushes come apace to shroud my
shame, thus let me hide 'em from him.


[Puts on her Mask. Genesis This is certainly she. Madam I am glad I have the
happiness of this occasion to meet you here alone, far from the eyes of any
Jealous Husband.


Easy. I have long wished it, and now I fear some strange mischance will cross
us.


Genesis Fear nothing Madam, but let us retire, the hasty Sun will soon withdraw
its luster, and leave us Lovers in a bed of darkness, where we shall be wrapped
in pleasures.


[Exeunt. Enter Bramble. Bram. Ha is he gone? what, and the Gypsy too? then am
I lost again.


Enter Eudoria disguised like a Gypsy. Eudo. Who Is that, Bramble? then on my
shroud and hide me from his sight.


[Puts on her Mask. Enter a company of Gypsies, men and women with booties of
Hens, etc. dancing and singing ridiculously, Bramble seems overjoyed. Bram. O
sweet, they deserve to be hanged for so ravishing of me.


Eudo. What will become of me? if I seem fearful now, or offer sudden flight,
I shall betray my self, I must do neither.


C. Gip. Ousabell, Camcheteroon, Puscatelion, Howsdrows.


2. Gip. Rumbos Stragadelion, alla Piskitch in sows Clows.


Bram. Piskitch in sows Clows! I shall never keep a good tongue in my head till
I get this Language.


C. Gip. Umbra Fill, Kevoliden, Magropie.


[ To Eudoria. Eud. I love your Language well but understand it not.


C. Gip. Ha!


Eud. I am but lately turned to your profession, yet from my youth I ever loved
it dearly; steal I can, it was a thing I ever was brought up to; my Father was
a Miller, my Mother a Tayler's Widow.


Bram. She is a thief on both sides.


C. Gip. Give me thy hand, we have not a more true bred thief among us.


Bram. Pray take me into some grace amongst you, for though I claim no goodness
from my Parents to help me into your society, I had two Uncles that were both
hanged for Robberies, and a brave Cutpurse to my Cosen German: if Kindred will
be taken, I am as near of kin to a thief as any of you that had Fathers and
Mothers.


C. Gip. What is it thou requirest noble Cousin?


Bram. Cousin? nay if we are so near of kin already now we are sober, we shall
be sworn brothers when we are drunk: the naked truth is, I would be made a
Gypsy as fast as you could devise.


C. Gip. A Gypsy?


Bram. Yes with all the speed you can sir, the very sight of those stolen Hens,
eggs me forward notably.


C. Gip. Stretch forth thy hand Cuz, art thou fortunate?


Bram. Nay I cannot tell that my self, I have sometimes found money in old
shoes, but if I had not stolen more then I found, I had had but a scurvy thin
cheek'd fortune of it.


C. Gip. Here Is a fair table.


Bram. So has many a man that has given over housekeeping, a fair table when
there is neither cloth nor meat upon it.


C. Gip. What a brave line of life is here! look Gypsies.


Whilst they discourse, the Gypsies pick his pocket. Bram. I have known as
brave a life end in an halter.


C. Gip. But thou art born to precious fortune.


Bram. Ha! am I so?


C. Gip. Bette Buckettos.


Bram. How! to beat bucks?


C. Gip. Stealee Bacons.


Bram. Oh to steal bacon, that is the better fortune of the two indeed.


C. Gip. Thou will be shortly Captain of the Gypsies.


Bram. I would you would make me Corporal in the mean time, or Standard Bearer to
the women's Regiment.


C. Gip. Much may be done for love.


Bram. Nay here is some money, I know an Office comes not all for love.
[Searches his pockets but finds none. A pox of your lime-twigs you have it
already.


C. Gip. It lies but here in cash for thy own use boy.


Bram. Nay if it lie there once, I shall hardly come to the fingering on it in
have, yet make me an apt scholar, and I care not, teach me but so much Gypsy
to steal as much from another, and Old Nick do you good with that.


C. Gip. Thou shall have all thy heart requires.
First here is a Girl for thy desires. [Gives him a woman Gypsy.
Look you prove industrious dealers,
To serve the Commonwealth with stealers,
That th'unhous'd Race of Fortune Tellers,
May never fail to cheat Town-dwellers:
Or to our universal grief,
Leave Country Fairs without a thief.
This is all you have to do,
Save every hour a filch or two:
Which hoping you will observe, to try thee,
With Rusty Bacon thus I Gipsie-fie thee.

[Blacks his face. Bram. Do you use to do it with Bacon?


C. Gip. Evermore.


Bram. By this light the Rats will take me now for some Hogscheek, and eat up
my face when I am asleep: I shall have never a bit left by to morrow morning,
and lying open mouthed as I used to do, I shall look for all the world like a
mouse-trap baited with bacon.


C. Gip. Why here is a face like thine so done,
Only grained in by the Sun.
And this, and these.

Bram. Faith then there is a company of Bacon-faces of us; we are a kind of
conscionable people, and it was well thought upon to steal bacon and black our
faces with it; it is like one that commits sin, and writes his faults in his
forehead.


C. Gip. Wit whither will thou?


Bram. Marry to the next pocket I can come at, and if it be a Landlords, I wish
a whole years rent in it: is this my In Dock out Nettle? what is Gypsy for her?


C. Gip. Your Doxie she.


Bram. Oh right, are you my Doxie, sirrah?


Woe. Gip. I Will be thy Doxie and thy Dell,
With thee I Will live, for thee I Will steal.
From Fair to Fair, from Wake to Wake,
I Will ramble still for thy sweet sake.

Bram. Oh dainty fine Doxie, she speaks the Language as familiarly as if she
were begot of a Canter.


Woman Gypsy sings. Thus hand in hand let us hem him round,
And dance a measure on the ground.
We'll frolic first, then part from hence,
Each with his stock of impudence:
To Towns, to Cities, Fairs, and Fields,
And see what profit each one yields.
Then to our Rendezvous we will fly.
Be brisk, be drunk, be kind and die.
Here they dance. At the end of the dance, Enter Contentious Surly, Sir Arthur
Twilight, and Sir Jeoffrey Jolthead, the Gypsies seeing them, run off all but
Eudoria and Bramble. Arth. Hey day, hey day, what a surprise is this! [ Eudoria
offers to go, is hindered by Sir Arthur. Nay, nay, Gypsy you shall not go,
i'fack you shall not, I long to kiss a Gypsy, I do indeed; I am not so old yet
but I can shake my leg under a hedge I Will warrant you, come, come, Gypsy, pull
off your false face, and tell me my fortune.


[Takes her aside and shows his hand. Geoff. And can you tell fortunes sirrah?


Bram. Culvario, legamuttanio.


Geoff. What a pox is that?


Bram. Shouldramaton, Katathumpton, Rob, bob, a Tumbrell.


Geoff. That Tumbrell I understand being a Magistrate, on, fellow, on, what say
you to my hand?


Bram. Chitteroon High Gulleroon, Filcheroon, purse Fulleroon, Ousabell
Camcheteroon, Puscatelion Howsdrows.


Geoff. What a devil is this?


Bram. Rumbos Straggadelion, alla piskitch in sows clows umbra fill Kevolliden
Magropie.


Geoff. Pox on ye, speak English, or I Will make you, tell me of Magropies?


Bram. You are --


Stares in his face, and all this while pretends to pick his pocket, but is
discovered. Geoff. Ha Rogue, ha, is this your Piskitch in sows clows, and your
Magropies? I Will Magropie you with a pox.


[Beats him. Bram. As I hope to be saved this is the first time, I am but a
young Gypsy yet; alas I was Sir Arthur's Bramble till he beat me, and then I
ran away, and entered my self amongst 'em.


Geoff. I Will enter you as I am a Magistrate.


[Beats him again, Arth. I'fack thou art a pretty Rogue, tells me all true by
heaven: Oh I could eat your eyes out! On, on.


Eudo. You Are an insufficient decrepit whoremaster, and deserve were I your wife
to be --


Arth. Chronicled, Ido indeed: but women may say what they please, they may
indeed. Come, come, let you and I retire, yonder is a delicate hedge, where we
will communicate all our good Parts together, we will indeed.


Eudo. What before you see my face?


Arth. No matter, no matter, you have good signs, good hands, good hips, and I
believe good every thing; come, come, come, let us lose no time, here is money
beforehand, I'gad methinks I am a very vigorous Lover.


Eud. But I hope, to see my face, now you have so generously exposed your gold,
would be no trouble.


Arth. None in the world: in troth it would raise, it would elevate my spirits
to a height, it would indeed, and then I shall --


Eud. What, Sir Arthur [Discovers her self, all are amazed. Be a perjured false
dissembling Hypocrite! are these your daily actions, these your haunts? could
nothing but a Gypsy serve your turn? is age so hot, so fierce in his desires?
have I with tears wept if you were but absent, mourned like a turtle when my
mate was from me, and all for this return?


Surly. This is some trick, some trick upon my life, and ten to one my honor
is concerned in it; I Will after the Gypsies, perhaps my wife is amongst 'em, I Will
see, and search every man and woman in the company but I will find her out.

[ Exit Surly.
Bram. My Mistress a Gypsy? nay then there is hopes for me.


Eud. Keep off, now I abhor you.


[Arthur seems to entreat. Arth. Nay dear Spouse, 'twas but a freak, a little
freak indeed.


Geoff. Come, come, forgive him Madam, 'troth I have done as much my self.


Bram. Pray Madam forgive him that Sir Geoff. may forgive me.


Arth. Nay, nay, dear Chuck, what, be your Husband's mortal enemy? why, who
would have taken you for a Gypsy? Nay, nay, come, you shall forgive me.


[Gives her a Ring. Eud. I do Sir, but have a care for the future.


Arth. I will never look upon a woman besides thy self again, indeed I will
not. Sir Geoffrey, you must forgive Bramble too, then all are friends.


Geoff. With all my heart, but have a care hereafter.


Bram. I Will warrant you Sir.


Arth. Come Sir Geoff. you shall along with me and see Emelia.

How more then happy is the marriage life,
When man is blessed with such a virtuous Wife.

[Exeunt. Finis Act us Secundi.
ACT III.
SCENE A Grove.
Enter as out of it, Sir General Amorous, and Easy masked. Genesis THIS is the
greatest blessing Heaven (and you) could give me. How many minutes have we had
of precious sweet delight! Oh let me dwell upon these hands a while, and breath
my soul into each trilling Pore: thy melting lips have made me all a charm, and
when I cast my arms about thy neck, I thought I grasped a God; the darkness of
the Covert could not shade thy piercing beauty from me, for through those thick
and darksome Clouds of Night, I could behold the glances of thy Eyes, which
shot fresh joys into my panting heart.


Easy. You're pleased to jest.


Genesis Not I by Heaven, all, all I say is earnest; pull back that Cloud, and let
me view your glories: let me behold you in the height of blushes, that I may
say you charm at every Action. [Easy pulls off her mask, Generous starts. Ha!
have I embraced a stale, a cast off Amoret, is this the hopes I had of fair
Eudoria, have I bestowed a Ring of fifty pound upon I know not what?


Easy. What ayle you Sir?


Genesis Nothing Madam, nothing, only the apprehension of the danger, and the
mistrust your Husband will have of you when he shall find you absent, I must
confess did something start my spirits, but now it is off again. But oh! the
Ring!


Easy. Name not that senseless thing again, a Husband is e'ne a clog of life,
I Am of a humor free, and unconfined, and court for pleasure in the man I love.


Genesis True Madam, it is most sweet; when love and freedom meet, a Husband is a
kind of dull Animal, created to bear the name of Father, whilst we happy men
enjoy with freedom what he fondly thinks himself monopolizeth.


Easy. Then they are so jealous too.


Genesis They are indeed, and that first prompts their wives to new desires: I
never yet knew a man jealous, but he had the just rewards his madness merited.
Enter Contentious Surly. Heavens! here is your Husband coming, on, on with the
mask, and haste home with all the speed you can before morning, expect me to
give you freedom. Exit Easy, Surly going after her, is stopped by General
Amorous. Mr. Surly your servant. I vow I am happy in finding you in this
solitary place, my thoughts wanted companions.


Surly. And so they are like still, I cannot stay.


Genesis Were your haste requisite I would not stop you, but with your friend you
might dispense some time.


Surly. I cannot, nor I will not.


Genesis Indeed you must sir.


Surly. Must?


Genesis Yes sir you must: I have not forgot how in your last frantic fit you
pleased to stain my honor, and with such words.


Surly. I have no leisure now.


Genesis To fight I know you have not, nor never had; you wear a sword indeed, but
for what use I know not, unless to frighten fools, bully with cowards, or draw
on every Linkboy.


Surly. Prithee, I can stay no longer.


Forces from him and Exit. Genesis He Is gone as full of rage as jealousy, pray
Heaven he overtake her not, but sure she has more wit then to go the direct
path, which he I Am sure will follow. Was ever man so cheated? how came I to
mistake Eudoria, and light upon this Easy? it must needs be the treachery of
Spywell.


Enter Spywell. Spy. Was ever man so unfortunate?


Genesis Was ever man so treacherous?


Spy. To have an Assignation from a Lady, and shun the blessing of it.


Genesis I am plain and do not speak in Hieroglyphics, did not you send Petulant
Easy disguised, as you told me Eudoria designed to be, to the place appointed
for our meeting.


Spy. Not I by Heaven.


Genesis Then the Devil did, that is certain; for I no sooner came to the
Rendezvous, but Easy habited and masked as you described Eudoria, with open
Arms received me, and led me to this Grove; where after a few common
ceremonies, love-toys, and the like, I presented her with a Ring I borrowed of
Sir Arthur Twilight, still taking her for Eudoria, but coming to the light, and
the dark Cloud withdrawn, I found my strange mistake.


Spy. The same happened to Eudoria, who full of love came to the place appointed,
and there unfortunately met with Sir Arthur.


Genesis Confusion!


Spy. He mistaking her for a Gypsy, made a deal of ridiculous Love to her,
which she accepted, but coming to the height of all his passion, and filled
with a licentious kind of Dotage, she discovered her self to the old Lecher,
who was glad to make his peace on any terms.


Genesis Oh I could grasp her now into my soul! she is the most deserving of
womenkind, but how to let her know the strange mistake, is past my power to
imagine.


Spy. Leave that to me, haste to Sir Arthur Twilight, and there pretend (as you
may very well) a Journey out of Town, and by the way declare your love to Easy,
and hatred to Contentious Surly, tell him you long to be revenged, and know no
way but one, which is to take his Wife with you.


Genesis Make him a Pander?


Spy. We Will do it never fear, he loves to view a Cuckold, but hates to see
himself; Come, let us be gone, I Will tell you as we walk, with what you must
possess him: as for Eudoria, leave her to me, if I prepare her not may I never
design again.


Genesis Thou art a real servant, and love thy Master's pleasure.

How many various Charms round Women move!
Each has some strange Intreague to make us Love.

[Exeunt. SCENE Sir Arthur's House.
Enter Sir Geoffry Jolthead, Emelia and Flora. Geoff. But what say you Ladies,
how could you affect my person? am I not all Air, ha? why, we Country
Magistrates are such taking things, that you Londoners run almost stark mad of
us. I am as sprightly as any bawdy Citizen of you all; I can drink, I can
swear, I can roar, I can serenade, and besides all that, I can -- but it is no
matter.


Flor. Nay there is no doubt Sir, but you are are all vigor, and methinks I
could love a Country Gentleman with all my heart.


Eme. And so could I, especially a Country Magistrate, they look with so much
Grace, and sit at the Bench just like --


Geoff. We do so, we do so indeed, -- just like what, my Dear?


Eme. A Baboon looking an Alderman's head.


Geoff. Out upon thee wag, a Baboon is a beastly lascivious Creature: but go
on, go on, you have leave to jest.


Flor. I am not of your mind Sister, I love a Magistrate, especially when he is
asleep, he nods so prettily, and then he is so quiet, unless now and then he
snore out a learned Sentence.


Geoff. Still, still you are wags, mere wags in faith; but go on, go on,
methinks I love to hear you.


Eme. I Have done jeasting Sir, alas my fit lasts but a little while, and then I
am so melancholy; and yet methinks I could love you, would you forbear that
hard hearted trick of seeing women whipped at the House of Correction.


Geoff. I never use it, indeed I do not, but I know some of your London
Justices do, it is a kind of pleasure to 'em, and I dare say saves 'em many a
crown in the year.


Emel. Oh now I love you strangely, could you -- but I dare not speak before my
Sister -- Could you love me Sir?


Geoff. Beyond the world, why I could eat you Madam.


Emel. What and keep me like a Lady?


Geoff. Oh like a Countess, you shall have all, all that your heart desires,
and live so pleasantly.


Emel. But would you never turn me off?


Geoff. Never, never by this hand.


Emel. Nor keep another?


Geoff. Sooner a Devil, believe me Madam --
This is the yieldingest little Female I ever saw.
[Aside.
Emel. I Am loath to try you though, you men are so deceitful.


Geoff. Courtiers and Shopkeepers, I grant you, they seldom or never keep
their words, but we Countrymen are as true as steel.


Emel. How shall we come together?


Geoff. How! as man and woman should.


Emel. But by what means?


Geoff. Ay by what means, -- I think some disguise --


Emel. You Have thought upon it, habit your self like a Quaker, and come at
twelve this night, you will see a candle in my window, hem twice, and I Will come
down and let you in, the habit's grave and will keep off suspicion.


Geoff. It will indeed, oh let me kiss your hand.


Emel. Anon you shall enough, farewell.
You shall be Missed Sir Geoffry, or I Will lose my aim.
[ Exit Emelia.
Geoff. Was ever Country Magistrate so fortunate? sure never. I am an Adonis,
that is certain.


Flor. My Sister and you have had a long discourse Sir.


Geoff. Something we did talk of, but not much.
This Chicken has a mind to be doing too I find it. [Aside.
Alas she is all anger, and looks upon me as the Devil looked over Lincoln.

Flor. I should have been kinder had you made your addresses to me; but her
Charms are so great, so many, and so powerful, it was not in the power of man
to stand against 'em.


Geoff. Your Sister is so, so, but in faith you have twenty beauties to one of
hers: methinks your Eyes are -- but it is no matter, I dare not look upon 'em,
if you prove hard hearted like your Sister.


Flor. Try me Sir, I hope you will find me other wise. --


Geoff. Then a woman I would not, for it is their glory to frown on all; but
could I be so happy, to gain a place within you soft affection, how would I
strive to make me worthy of you.


Flor. You are already, -- heigh ho --


[Sighs. Geoff. Come sigh no more, I find you love me dearly.


Flor. But will you not betray me? tell my Sister, and lay me open to her Scorn
and Laughter?


Geoff. Not I by Heaven, Pox I Will be hanged and damned first.


Flor. Nor forsake me?


Geoff. Never.


Flor. Give me your hand, I am yours then; to morrow I will pretend a sickness,
and send for you as a most learned Physician: but be secret.


Geoff. As a Physician ought, I Will warrant you.


Flor. That done -- but tell no body.


Geoff. Pox take me if I do.


Flor. And the Room cleared -- but be silent as you respect my Honor.


Geoff. Fear not, I have more respect to a Ladies honor than so.


Flor. I Will leave the rest to you: you are wise enough to manage Love affairs.
Farewell.

[ Ex. Flora.
Geoff. If I fail, may I never have such fair Assignations again: a Quaker and
a Doctor? two excellent disguises to get Maiden-heads in; I am Ravished, that is
certain; a Quaker and a Doctor? oh excellent!

[ Ex. Geoffry Jolthead.
Enter Eudoria, reading a Letter. Eud. The Excuse is fair, and sounds like
real Truth; but what he prompts me to's so full of dangerous hazards, I fear
to undertake it. -- Wait in the Garden Masked [Reads. and in your Nightgown,
and there expect the event. -- What should it mean? What Plot's in action now?
Why should I ask that question, or doubt the firmness of it, when Love is chief
Conductor? I will venture it, attend the hour, and wish to see the Event: Love
cannot injure Love, nor dare it think on any cruel thought; or if it dare, I
will be armed against it.

[ Ex. Eudoria.
Enter as in discourse Sir Arthur Twilight and Sir General Amorous. Arth.
Contentious Surlys Wife?


Genesis The same Sir.


Arth. In my Garden?


Genesis Yes Sir, for Love has made her look for such a shift to free her from his
Tyrannous Jealousy, and I chose this course before any other, not only to make
us sport, but to reap my wished for Ends.


Arth. A pretty and most pleasant project! who would not strain a point of
Neighborhood for such a quaint device? I Will go fetch her presently.


Genesis How the Old villain joys in Villainy.


[Ex. Sir Arth. Enter Sir Arthur. Arth. Sir General, Sir General, a rare
Device.


Genesis What yet again? what Strategem have you now?


Arth. The best that ever was, I Will fetch my Wife's Gown which you may put upon
Petulant Easy, that if he chance to meet her, he may not have the least suspect
but take her for Eudoria.


Genesis That I have done already, and so disguised and masked she waits you in
the Garden.


Arth. I Will fetch her presently, Lord, Lord, how it pleases me to think upon
Contentious, poor man ha, ha, ha, I laugh to think how he will rave, when he
shall miss his Wife, a Cuckold, o law a Cuckold! ha, ha, ha.

[Ex. Laughing.
Genesis Now nothing sure can cross me, this night I shall enjoy Eudoria and
revell in the pleasures of her Love, what will Sir Arthur say when he shall
miss his Wife? he can but vex or perhaps hang himself, let him do either, all is
one to me so I but enjoy his Wife.


Enter Arthur, bringing in Eudoria in a Nightgown Masked. Arth. I have her, I
fack Sir General I have; poor soul how she shakes, come, come Madam fear
nothing, Sir General is a pleasant Wag, he is indeed a very pleasant Wag; and
I dare say loves you with his heart, truly he does, Lord lord, how she
transports me! I am in love with her too, and methinks I could -- but let that
alone, -- let that alone.


Genesis Pardon me Madam, the great desire I had to see you before I went from
London, made me so importunate.


Arth. You are not, indeed you are not, what importunate? no, no, no, Sir
General loves to Complement, he does indeed, but come let us go, I fack we
must drink before we part.


Genesis Nay, now the Rascall's troublesome.


Arth. Come Mr. Amorous, what at a stand? come follow me, I Will lead you to a
Glass of the best Tent in London, I will indeed, a glass of that, and half a
dozen Eggs will make me as vigorous as a Lover of Eighteen, it will indeed.


[Exeunt. Enter Emelia and Flora. Eme. Where is Sir Arthur?


Flor. Gone out, but where, I know not.


Eme. If he stay abroad but long enough it is well.


Flor. Pray Sister what do you intend to do with Sir Geoffry?


Emel. What? make an Ass of him. I Will help his zeal to a Mistress, and fit him
to a hair I Will warrant him.


Flor. Why, will you let him in?


Emel. Yes, and conduct him to our Masking Room, where by the help of the
Trap-doors I doubt not to effect what I desire: I have already prepared our
Scullion, who when the Candle is out, shall enter for a woman and perform my
part, he is shaved on purpose, and I do not fear but he will banter him bravely.


Flor. He comes to me to morrow, if the affront you put upon him dash not all
his hopes.


Emel. That you must salve again, by railing at me for the injury I did to Sir
Geoffry; for his part he is so good natured he will soon believe you.


Flor. I would not lose the Opportunity for all my hopes of marriage.


Emel. Sister it grows late, within this half hour I expect him.


Flor. Let us part then. Pray Heaven the Lecher comes.


Emel. Nothing more sure, be near to see the event.


Flor. I Will warrant you.


[Exeunt. SCENE A Tavern.
Enter Sir General Amorous, and Sir Arthur Twilight, Leading Eudoria masked.
Arth. Come, come, Madam, you are so melancholy, so all a mort: Sir General,
pray come and comfort the Lady.


Genesis Sir Arthur, I must beg you to officiate my place for a minute, whilst I
go down and dispatch a little business.

[ Exit General Amorous.
Arth. Blessed Opportunity! she is right I Will warrant her, or else she would not
leave her Husband to run away with a Gallant, but it is common i'fack, very
common. Come Lady let us sitdown together, you look so like my Wife that I
could eat you, nay come, this coyness not becomes you. -- [ Eudoria sits at a
distance. Nearer a little, nearer yet, let me, let me feel your hand; a
delicate soft moist palm upon my word; very good symptoms indeed, let me see,
good breasts too, Lord, Lord, how she charms me! nearer yet dear Lady, she is a
delicate Creature, and has all the symptoms of a Miss about her. Pray Madam off
with your mask, that base injurious thing -- [ Eudoria points to the Candle.]
Ha! put out the Candle? I understand her meaning, i'fack I do. [Puts out the
Candle. Eudoria steals out. Now Madam I have performed your orders, I hope you
will allow me the honor of your Lip, your cherry Lip, your rosy Cheeks, your
dainty Teeth, your soft moist Palm, but here is enough of that; come dear Lady
let us hug one another; nay you shall not deny me, you know I know you, come
little Wag, you know I do; what, keep from your friend and servant? nay, nay,
if you are run into a corner I Will after you, in faith I will.


[Gropes to find her out, and falls over the stools. Enter Petulant Easy.
Easy. Thus far I have dogged Sir General, and was informed below, he and a Lady
were above together, which if I find, and see apparent falsehood in the man I
love, I Will study for revenge, and in his death blot out my shame for ever.


Arth. Madam, dear Madam, nay now you are unkind, indeed you are Lady, dear
Lady. Gropes about, at length seizes Petulant Easy. Ha, have I caught you Wag,
ha? come, come, let us solace our selves, let us enjoy one another, come, come,
I am ready again, I am indeed, the fall did not hinder much.


Easy. What are you Sir?


Arth. A man, a man, a vigourous old man i'fack, come, come, --


Easy. You are mistaken in the woman sure.


Arth. No but I am not, these soft moist hands are a good sign, in faith they
are.


Easy. A sign of what Sir?


Arth. A stirring, brisk, airy, lively, sprightly woman; one that will kiss and
hug, and hug and kiss, and kiss and hug to a miracle in faith.


Easy. Nay if you are rude I Will leave you.


Arth. But you shall not, come, come, be pliant, Sir Amorous will be here
presently, and then our sport is spoiled, come, come, dear Lady.


[Embraces her close. Enter Drawer with a Light. Draw. Shift for your self, or
you're undone for ever, Contentious Surly is below, in such a rage, as if the
Spanish Devil Jealousy were dancing in his eyes; he swears he dogged you hither,
and nothing can satisfy him but search the house he must.


Arth. Surly below? O law, what is to be done now?


Draw. Here, here, into this Closet, if he should chance to take you twill be
but as a jest.


Arth. Make have, make have, would it were over once.


Easy and Sir Arthur enter into the Closet, the Drawer locks the door and Exit.
Enter Contentious Surly with a Light. Surly. O damned Creature! can nothing
keep her honest? [Looks about the Stage. Not here, the jilting Queen has
tricks, and shifts her shape as often as a Witch, she is here for certain, and
must not escape my Inquisition. [Breaks open the Closet. Ha! have I found you
Madam? and you lecherous Sir? come out ye pair ofsinners, and let the world be
witness of my shame.


[Sir Arthur and Easy come out. Easy. What shame, to be in a Closet with an old
man alone? is that your wonder Sir? nay with such an old man as has nothing but
desire about him.


Arth. Not I by Heaven, I am an Eunuch Sir.


Surly. You are a Devil Sir, a Goatish Devil; and were it not for the respect I
have to your black souls, which I would not take so unprepared, I Would send you
both to Hell immediately.


Easy. Do hasty Husband, I dare you do your utmost; strike, it is a woman bids
you, where is your fury now? if you have any I Will raise it to a pitch, and
leave you in the height on it. Know I hate thee, and all thy surly humors, and
will never be slave to a Jealous Husband more. Farewell, if you dare see the
Monster, I will make you home to your Glass and view your self.

[ Exit Easy.
Surly. Brave, I am a Beast all over, a public noted Beast, and she a Devil,
however she shall not 'scape me.

[ Exit Surly.
Arthur. If this be the effects of whoring, I have done with it: pray Heaven
Eudoria hear not of it. Enter Drawer. Where is Sir General Amorous?


Draw. He and the Lady you brought in just now took Coach together.


Arth. The Lady, what Lady? --


Draw. The Lady in the Nightgown.


Arth. Was there a Lady besides Easy then?


Draw. Yes, a delicate sweet Creature, much like your Wife.


Arth. How? my Wife, my Wife? by Heaven it may be so indeed! I have a strong
suspicion for it, I shall run mad, mad, stark mad; my Wife, my Wife, my Wife, I
am a Cuckold, I am, I am, I am indeed, a damned procuring Cuckold.


[Exeunt. SCENE Sir Arthur's House.
Enter Sir Geoffry Jolthead, like a Quaker. Geoff. I am transformed, I am
another Creature, and have the tone of the Brethren, pray Heaven I may have the
success too, but not to be tossed out of a Balcony: that is Emelia's Chamber, I
find it by the Light, now to my sign, Hum, hum.


Enter Emelia above. Emel. Who Is there?


Geoff. Thy Brother Zachariah, who desires to meet thee in the way of the
Faithful.


Emel. I will descend, thy prefence is most grateful.

[Exit Above.
Geoff. Now for a night of pleasure, in faith it will taste the sweeter, because
we act like Brethren: Oh those dear debauched Brethren! how many merry nights
they spend with a Go in, Increase, and Multiply.


Enter Emelia. Emel. Enter Zachariah, thou have a Sister's leave.


Geoff. And I will perform the part of a Holy Brother.


[Exeunt. Enter Sir Arthur Twilight. Arth. Eudoria, Wife Endoria I say, what
out of doors at this time? where shall I seek this Gad-fly? why Wife I say:
she is gone, she is gone, a pox of the Salutation Tavern, she is gone with Sir
Amorous, I find she is, a Coach, a Coach, a Coach, a hundred pound for a Coach.


Enter Spywell. Spy. That was Sir Arthur's voice, now to my posture. Confusion
take me if e're I serve again.


[Runs against Sir Arthur. Arth. Who Is there?


Spy. One that resolves never to serve a Rambling man again.


Arth. This is Spymell, I may learn something from him. [Aside. Did you serve a
Rambling Master then?


Spy. Yes a common Whoremaster? no longer ago than this Evening he run away
with a very Worthy Gentleman's Wife.


Arth. Ha! did he so, did he so, what Gentleman, friend?


Spy. A very Worthy man indeed, one Sir Arthur Twilight.


Arth. Confusion! I am the Cuckold then --

[Aside.
Spy. But were I he, I would --


Arth. What?


Spy. In some disguise search out the Lecherous goat, and damn 'em both
together.


Arth. Ay, ay, but what disguise?


Spy. They now are at the Rose, drinking, carrowsing, and in a height of
Jollity; but would he go guis'd like an old Fiddler, and take his man in a
strange habit with him, he might perhaps revenge, and keep himself from being
made a Cuckold.


Arth. He might indeed, he shall about it straight; thanks honest Friend, he
shall about it presently.

[Ex. Sir Arthur.
Spy. This will be Mirth to Admiration: I could even hug my self to think upon
the Credulous fool, I must not lose him though.

The bliss of Life whilst Mars and Venus rules
Is to project for Wisemen, Cuckold Fools.
[Exit.
SCENE A Chamber.
Sir Geoffry Jolthead and Emelia are discovered embracing. Eme. Nay, you are
too vigorous, Brother.


Geoff. My Zeal is hot, I am inflamed, my Spirits are on fire.


Eme. After our Ceremonies are performed, we will like holy Brethren meet and
love together.

First with this Powder I Will perfume your Face,
Then with this Band your tender Wrists Embrace.
Well scented thus with all your Vigor move,
Turn three times round, and then enjoy your Love.

Blacks his Face, and ties his Hands behind him, then puts out the Candle and
Exit. Enter an Old man dressed about the head like a Woman. Geoff. I come, I
come, I come, this is one of the prettiest devices in the whole Creation.
Madam, Lady Emelia, what not answer me? Nay then in faith have at you, I am old
Dog at Buff; I could play at Blind-mans Buff naturally, ha, that was a shroad
Mistake. Runs against something and breaks the string that bound his Hands. Why
Lady, dear little Rogue; where are you, ha? there I touched you; faith have I
got you, have I, have I? nay now I will make you kiss me, and hug me, and
embrace me, and O my dear little Rogue. Having caught the Old man, he Kisses
and Embraces him till a Table with two Candles upon it rises. Bless me! what
have I got here?


Old man. Nothing but an Old man indeed Sir.


Geoff. An Old Devil are you not? begone Wizard or I Will make you Kicks the Old
man off, returns again, and is let down under the Stage. O Devil, Devil, Devil!
Whither am I going now? help, help, help. --


SCENE Covent Garden.
Enter Sir Arthur Twilight with a Cymball, and Bramble with a Violin, both
disguised. Arth. Come Bramble, we shall find her anon I am sure on it.


Bramb. Would we could Master, for I am half afraid to walk abroad so late.


Arth. No danger, no danger Bramble: O that we could but find 'em, I would
Roguefy my Amorous Gentleman, i'fack I would.


[Musick and a Noise of Singing as in the Streets. Bramb. Ha, the Roaring Boys
are abroad Master, and if we stay here any longer we shall be killed for
certain.


[Musick and Singing again as nearer. Arth. They are coming indeed, they are
near us now, what shall we do Bramble? O here is honest Spywell.


Enter Spywell with a Light. Spy. So so you're well disguised. Now, now Sir is
your time; Sir General Amorous and your Wife are enteredthere, there in that
public Tavern, they have sent to see for Music: now if you dare venture to pass
amongst the Gang, I will conduct you to 'em.


Arth. With all my heart, Oh I long to see 'em.


Spy. Where taken for Musicians, you may stand unsuspected, and behold all
their Transactions.


Arth. Make have, make have, O how I long to see 'em!


[Exeunt. Manet Spywell. Spy. Which you shall do, doubt not, and suffer for
your Curiosity.

Raised to a height, he from the top shall fly
To perish by his Rage and Iealousy.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE The Streets.
Enter Sir Geoffry Jolthead. Geoff. I Am out again, thanks to my good fortune:
if this be Love and Enjoyment, the Devil take it for me; 'twas twenty to one I
had not broke my Neck when I fell into the Cellar, my Mistress Emelia was a
little civil I confess to leave a Light below, otherwise I might have slept
amongst the hogsheads: I have lost all my stomach to Woman's flesh, and shall
never have a good opinion of the Sex as long as I live again.


Enter Twiford. Twif. My Lord your servant, I vow I am extreme glad to see you,
your Honorable Cousins are all in good health, and every thing goes
extraordinarily well indeed. I just now came from France, and truly every
thing there is in a very good posture: his most Christian Majesty would fain
have laid his Commands upon me to have been his Generalissimo, but I hearing
the English Drums beat up for Volunteers, came to pay my Respects to my very
good Friend and Cousin, and to serve under the noble Banner of England.


Geoff. What a Pox is the meaning of this?


Twif. My Lord I cannot but commend your mien and garb, upon my honor you are
all over very charming, and look like one of the honorable family of the
Soft-heads, I hope my Cousin Richard, and his extraordinary obliging friend
Thomas are in perfect health.


Geoff. Yea Sir. What a pox ails he?

[Aside.
Twif. And my Lady Grace, and Madam Pru, and that extreme obliging Lady Madam
Text, I vow I long to see them, but my extraordinary business in Town, has
hindered me from their Society. Why I Will tell you Cousin, I am just now going to
serenade Madam Emelia, upon my honor she is fort obleigant.


Geoff. She is all abomination, and music is the windpipe of Lucifer.


Twif. But mark you Cousin, mine is no wind music, first, here is a Tin Pot,
which besides its excellent virtues of making a delicious, sweet, charming,
melodious sound, serves at a shift to drink out of; then here is an
Extinguisher, and here a Drumstick, all which meeting together, make an
excellent harmony; you shall hear it Cousin.


[Plays upon his Pot, and sings ridiculously. Geoff. Avaunt Satan, these are not
the Devices of the Brethren, be-gone with your Galemofry of Noises, or I shall
rebuke thee, mark you?


Twif. How do you like the music, my Lord?


Geoff. Be gone I say, you disturb the ears of the faithful.


Twif. But Cousin.


Geoff. I will not hear thee, vanish thou Hocus Pelabrius, or look you, thus I
will force you.


[Pushes him off. Twif. But my Lord, nay Cousin, my Lord, I say --

[Exit.
Enter Contentious Surly. Surly. She has escaped my rage again, and unless she
be at home I know not where to seek her.

[Knocks.
Geoff. What lewd disturber is that?


Surly. 'Sdeath hold thy tongue.

[Knocks again.
Geoff. I say thou have evil intentions, and designest to rob the house of my
friend.


Surly. Thy friend! who art thou?


Geoff. A faithful Brother, by Name Geoffrius, Zacharias Iolt.


Surly. Strange! I should know that voice, are you Sir Geoffry?


Geoff. Yea, I am the man, now tell me, who art thou?


Surly. My name's Contentious Surly.


Geoff. The Devil it is? what my good Friend and Landlord? in faith I have been
frolicking of it to night, I have in faith: and how goes squares with thee, ha
boy?


Surly. Faith cross, extremely cross, my Wife has given me two slips for a
Teaster, and is run the Devil knows whither.


Geoff. That Is fine in faith; would I could meet her, she kisses smartly, and
has the Town ways to a hair in faith. [Aside. Is she not at home?


Surly. That Is all the hope remains.


Geoff. Let Us knock and enter, if they refuse break open the doors.


Surly. Agreed.


Surly knocks a good while, at length breaks open the doors. Geoff. That Is well
said ^^^^h enter and search, we shall find her in a corner.


[Exeunt. SCENE A Tavern.
Enter Sir General Amorous, Eudoria and Spywell. Genesis Is all prepared?


Spy. All Is in a readiness to entertain Sir Arthur.


Genesis Then let in the Masquerading Ladies, and bid the Fiddlers approach. [ Exit
Spywell. Come Madam, on with your Mask, to night we will enjoy our loves
without disturbance, and smile upon the Jealous Fool thy Husband, whose
curiosity shall lead him to his ruin.


Eud. I fear he will know me.


Genesis Let him, he shall not dare to touch you, nor gaze upon you with the eyes
of anger: to animate his rage choose him out to Dance with you, I have ordered
another to make choice of Bramble, who will also at the appointed time leave
him with his Credulous Master, and both shall be conveyed so great a distance
from us, that scarce his cries shall enter to disturb our joys.


Eud. I Am too hard hearted to a Jealous Husband.


Genesis Would you be kind to him and ruin me? would you destroy me on the virge
of bliss, or kill what you have made? I should not urge had you content at
home, but being robbed of such a weighty blessing, and made a starveling to the
joys of Wedlock, I come with real and hearty zeals, to give you those pleasures
his Age and Impotence denied.


Eud. I Am too far entered now to make retreat without the loss of Honor, I must
be yours for ever; but use me kindly, lest the strange surprise should kill my
blooming hopes.


Enter Spywell with Fiddlers and Ladies, amongst whom are Sir Arthur, Bramble
and Petulant Easy disguised, all the men and women are masked but the Fiddlers.
Spy. Come, Come Gentlemen, strike up, and let the music of the Spears speak
loud, whilst they employ their feet in Dancing Measures.


Eudoria and a Lady go to take out Sir Arthur and Bramble, who deny a great
while, but at length yield and join with them. A Dance. All Dance off but Sir
Arthur, Spywell, Bramble, and Easy, who all continue dancing but Easy. Easy.
It Is she, I know it; perfidious man you shall not 'scape my fury, must I be
thus rewarded for my Favors, and not study a requital? rise up black revenge,
and teach me to be cruel; teach me to act as bloody Nero did, that in my height
of love and vengeance I may damn both, both their black souls together.


[Exit Easy. They cease Dancing. Arth. Ha! gone?


Spy. Yes, yes Sir, come hither, both direct your eyes that way, and there
behold what would confound a man not armed with so much reason -- What see you
Sir?


Arth. Nothing.


Spy. Nor you?


Bram. Not I by Jove.


Spy. Look, look, I see 'em kissing, there, there, like wanton Turtles they are
billing both together.


Arth. Where, where?


Spy. There, there. Stamps, Sir Arthur and Bramble are let down under the
Stage, they cry help. Now you are safe enough, and secured from all
disturbance; and Sir General Amorous may now in peace enjoy the fair Eudoriae;
all the reward I hope for is success. Projecting is my genuine Mistress, and in
my brain I lodge the soft Beloved, and treat her minutely with pleasing
Embryo's, which by the moderate heat of smooth desires, are lulled into
perfections, which at once create and give me pleasures.

These harmless plots perhaps may seem unjust,
But when such loads you add to one man's trust,
Blame not projections if they only prove
A Servants care t'obtain a Masters love.
[Exit.
SCENE A Bedchamber.
Sir General Amorous and Eudoria are discovered sitting by the Bed side. Genesis
Come blush no more, I am thy Husband now, and with a Passion more innate then
his, I will exhilirate thy soul, and lead thy senses in a Sea of pleasures,
where, arm in arm, we will wanton 'twixt the Waves, and every minute find new
pastimes out, revel in joys of uncontrolled delights, and dwell for ever in
this bright Elyzium.


Eud. You Have named a word-which bates me of my hopes, and dashes all those
thoughts I just now dreamed of.


Genesis It shall be banished quite, or like a foil stand still to heighten
pleasure, what was it Eudoria?


Eud. Nothing but Husband Sir: that very word curbs all my joys, and prompts me
to a sense, that all is imaginary.


Genesis What frown of fate can take you from my bosom, or rob me of the treasure
I embrace?


Enter Spywell. Spy. Sir I have done the work.


Genesis Is he safe?


Spy. As a thief in a mill, never fear it; but here is one danger yet
unconquered, the jealous Easy, who (it seems mistrusting you were here) came as
a Masquerader, and after the dance, followed you and Eudoria, and had doubtless
surpised you here, but that the Drawer by mere force kept her back.


Genesis What, must I be prevented then?


Spy. Sir you had best go and appease her rage, perhaps she will hear your reasons.


Genesis I will, but with a curse able enough to damn her.


[Exeunt. Manet Eudoria. Enter Petulant Easy. Easy. Where Is this unconstant
man, and this false treacherous woman? Oh let my anger meet 'em both, and in
one breath confound 'em.


Eud. What Is this?


Easy. Nothing lascivious Lady but the force of love, and you if you had any
grace might think it so, how durst you look upon that faithless man, or
entertain the least thoughts of such a loose desire, and not tremble? I am all
fury, and could shoot such killing glances on you, which would (but you're so
practiced in the art already) reduce you to a heap of earth again. Base
treacherous woman!


Eud. I understand you not.


Easy. Then I^ll be plainer, you are a --


Eud. Woman, and so are you, both married women too, and love Sir General both.


Easy. Your Husband shall know all.


Eud. So shall Contentious too: but talk is frivolous, and may perhaps hinder a
new appointment. Farewell.

[ Exit Eudoria.
Easy. Brave! she has impudence enough to stock the Sex in general. How shall I
be revenged? I Will haste to find Sir Arthur, tell him her crimes, and urge him
to revenge.

Thus to be slighted, now I all have given,
Calls for confusion, and revenge from Heaven.
[Exit.
SCENE The Streets.
Enter Contentious Surly, and Sir Geoffry Jolt. Geoff. Nay, nay, be patient
man, what! fret for the loss of a woman? one that loves pleasure? pox on her
let her go, let her go, you and I will to a Bawdy house, and there solace our
selves, ha? shall we boy, ha?


Surly. No Sir.


Geoff. What not to a Bawdy house? let us to a Tavern then, drink and be drunk,
and kiss every woman we meet.


Surly. I am not given to the Flesh so much Sir.


Geoff. Nor I neither, but I do it in revenge, I will lie with twenty women
successively, and all to be revenged of one; but thou have a Wife.


Surly. Damnation seize her, why should I of all the world be made so wretched?
why should my fate be so severe, so cruel? No one can see I am a Cuckold, but I
know I am, there, there is the plague on it.


Enter Flora masked. Flo. I cannot sleep to night for thinking on Sir Geoffry,
oh how I long to see him! the great affront my Sister put upon him, I fear will
keep him from me, which makes me venture at this unseasonable hour to find him
out, and wheedle him into a strange belief of my affection: ha! -- yonder he
is, now to be taken notice of.


[Puts on her mask, and passes over the Stage. Geoff. Ha! are you there, are
you there in faith? blessed Moonshine! I have discovered a Lady, a Night-walker
upon my life. I Will after her.

[ Exit Geoffry.
Surly. How shall I find her out? which way contrive to revel in revenge? Sir
General Amorous is the man that wrongs me, and on him I Will pour my indignation:
but how the Devil came Sir Arthur and she locked up in the Closet together?
how? why she is common and fond of all the world: he, he shall suffer too, but
in a different way, the one shall die, and the other be made as monstrous as I
am.

[Exit.
Enter Flora masked, Sir Geoffry following, seizes her. Geoff. Nay little
Rogue, in faith you shall not 'scape me; 'twould be unkindly done to let you go
alone, so early in the morning too, come, come, let me see you home to your
lodging little Wag.


Flor. I beg your pardon Sir, I do not use it.


Geoff. What! not your lodging Rogue? let us to a Tavern then, where we will drink
and be so merry, so jocost and pleasant, and kiss and hug, and love one another.


Flo. Who are you Sir?


Geoff. A Country Magistrate, Lady, one that doats upon woman's Flesh, a very
Cully, believe me Madam.


Flo. You Will pawn me Sir.


Geoff. Not I by Jove, what, pawn a pretty Lady? that were unkind indeed; I may
be frolicksome or so, but in faith I will not pawn you.


Flo. I dare not venture to a Tavern Sir.


Geoff. Let Us to thy Lodging then, all is one to me; here, here is the tempting
Angels, all this for a nights lodging I Gad: now I am all vigor, and shall I,
hah? little Rogue shall I?


Flo. If you will be kind.


Geoff. As a Lover can be, thou shall have Gloves, and Fans, and Muffs, and
Ribbands, and --


Flo. A Monky too.


Geoff. Yes, yes, a great Baboon, come, come, let us go.


Flo. You have such taking ways.


Geoff. And so have you in faith. Here Is one of my twenty that is certain.


[Exeunt. SCENE Covent Garden.
Enter two Sedan-men bringing Sir Arthur Twilight in Bramble's clothes, and
Bramble in Sir Arthur's clothes, bound and gagged in a Sedan. 1. Sed. Pox on
'em, they are cursed heavy.


2. Sed. Full of sin, full of sin Brother; but let us set 'em down here in the
Piazza's, and go and take a cherishing cup this morning.


1. Sed. Agreed, but I am afraid it is too early.


2. Sed. No, no, no, they are up at the King's-head I Will warrant you.


[ Exeunt Sedan-men. Sir Arthur and Bramble come out of the Sedan. Enter
Contentious Surly. Surly. Gone from thence too? She is a Necromancer that is
certain, and has a Legion of Devils to attend her. What have we here, Sir
Arthur Twilight, and his Honorable servant Bramble? they are in a pretty
Posture too, and stand seasonably for a beating, which that old Lecher shall
not want; this for Bellowing the name Cuckold in my Ears, -- and all these for
being locked up with my Wife. And so farewell Sir.


[Beats Bramble and Exit. Enter Petulant Easy. Easy. O that I could but find
Sir Arthur now to tell him all the story of his Wife, and pour into his Ears
the strongest Venom that ever Poisoned man; and here he is, most happy
opportunity. I Am sorry Sir, that I should be the Messenger of such ill news, as
I am forced to tell you; but when a man is Married to a Wife, false and
unconstant, one all desires, and greedy after Pleasures, one that shall force a
man to her Embraces, and hug him with a Zeal -- what, not answer me? [ Bramble
makes a Noise. Alas Poor man, this was Eudorias Plot, her loose Contrivance,
is it not enough to wrong her Husbands Bed, but she must serve him so, make him
the Scoff, and Scorn of all the World? --


[Unbinds Bramble, he ungags himself. Bramb. Thank you Madam, this is the first
kindness I ever received of a Woman in my life.


Easy. Are you not Sir Arthur then?


Bramb. No, but I am his Man, and that is as good.


Easy. Where is your Master?


Bramb. There stands the Worshipful Gentleman, you may be kind and release him
if you please: Easy goes and unbinds Sir Arthur. this is the fruits of Fidling
and Horn-hunting with a Pox, but if ever you take me in a Disguise again, I Will
give you leave to hang me. Pox of Surlys blows, they were very unwelcome to me
because they were meant to my Master.


Arth. Madam, I can but thank you for my liberty: it was a severe Torment, it
was indeed.


Easy. But who transformed you thus?


Arth. In Faith I know not.


Bramb. Two Devils I think, they were disguised I Am sure.


Easy. Were I so injured, nothing should keep me from Revenge.


Arth. Ha! what said you there, Revenge? I'fack I long to be revenged, but how?


Easy. The Cure must needs be dangerous, when the Disease rages with so much
violence; you are not unsensible you are a Cuckold?


Arth. Ha?


Easy. Wonder not at it, for you're so that is certain, I saw 'em both folded
like Twins together, destilling Kisses, intermixing Glances, and with a Rapture
unexpressible, dissolve into a shower.


Arth. A Cuckold?


Easy. I heard her boast, and glory in his Love, repeat the numbers of his
Obligations, count over his Charms in such a wanton Dialect, as would almost
entice a Saint to sin.


Arth. A Cuckold, O Confusion!


Easy. Then being tired and glutted with Excess, repeat the pleasures of her
stolen Delights, whilst her Lascivious Ears sucked in the sound, that every
Sense might have an equal share.


Arth. No more, no more, no more. Death no more.


Easy. Sometimes she would with a scornful smile call on your name, and say Alas
poor Sir Arthur, poor decrepit Cuckold.


Arth. Cuckold again! no more, no more, sweet Lady have you done?


Easy. If it offend I have.


Arth. Why, do you think it pleases, a Cuckold, a horrid, nay a known Cuckold
too? I will be revenged that is certain, nay swindginly revenged, a Cuckold? O
horrid! come along Bramble.


[Exeunt, manet Easy. Easy. He Is fired, and nothing sure can quench him, but
the removal of his Wife Eudoria; then I shall enjoy his Love in Peace, and
fear no other Rival; yet there is one danger still, a Jealous Husband, he shall
be removed too, they are not fit to live who hourly strive to curb a Woman's
Joys, I will about it presently.

[Exit.
Enter Twiford talking to two Link-boys. Twif. Truly every thing is very
considerably well, and my Honorable Lord is in a delicate pleasing humor, and
my Lady is -- but as I was telling you my Lords, about the Play. I just now
came from the Kings house, and truly every thing is very considerably well: and
truly I doubt not but to make a considerable advantage of the Comedy; for I
have very considerably insinuated my self into the opinion of the Leading Wits,
-- and I have their -- [The Link-boys sneak off. promise for applause, for
indeed my Lord they know me for a Wit, and were extraordinarily pleased with my
Heroic Poem called The Man of New Market, and so forth; but let that pass, my
Lords I see you do not regard me, and sleep is very necessary for a Poet, and
so good night my Lords.


Enters into the Sedan. Enter Petulant Easy. Easy. I am hemmed about on all
sides, and cannot escape the Watch, what shall I do for shelter till the Day
breaks or the Clutches of the Parish are retired, ha! what is there, a Sedan,
and no body near it? [A Noise as of the Watch. Hark! the Watch are coming, I Will
enter there and secure my self, -- [Noise again. There Is a man in it, what
shall I do now. -- [Noise again. I must enter were he a Devil, till the Watch
is past.


[Enters into the Sedan and shuts the door. Enter the two Sedan-men. 2. Sed.
Pox on it, there is no Drink to be got, I think it is scarce two.


1. Sed. Let it be scarce one an't will, I care not, for I am devilish dry.


2. Sed. So am I too, but come, let us up with our load, by that time we have
dropped them in the Fields it will be day.


[They take up the Sedan. Enter Contentious Surly, Constable and Watchmen.
Constable. Stand, who goes there?


1. Sed. Friends.


Constable. Who have you in your Sedan?


1. Sed. No body, Mr. Constable.


Surly. Search, search the Sedan, Mr. Constable, it is twenty to one but some
Night-walking Lady or other is in it.


Sed. in. With all our hearts, there it is, search your Eyes out.


Whilst they are opening the Sedan, the men sneak away. The Sedan being opened
discovers Twiford embracing Easy. Constable. What so close together? come out, come
out I pray.


[They come out. Surly. Death my Wife! and with a Madman too, this is
insufferable; I am glad I have found your Ladyship, would your Honor be
conducted home in a Sedan? you shall be Sedan'd with a pox. Mr. Constable pray
give me leave to secure this Lady, upon my word she shall appear at the first
summons.


Constable. Do you know her Sir?


Surly. Too well, I wish I did not, she is my Wife.


Constable. You have Liberty.


Surly. Come Minion will you walk? I Will secure you for gadding I Will warrant you.


[Pushes her out before him. Constable. Stay, stay, what are you?


[ Twiford offers to go. Twif. Truly my Honorable Lord is very well, and as I
told you the Play will take.


Constable. What Is all this to me? Who are you I say?


Twif. As I was saying, Lewis the 14th. is a brave Prince, and a very
considerable Soldier; why look you Coz, this Ring was given me by Madam Buly,
she is a very Honorable Lady, and takes much pains for the Public.


Constable. Tell not me of Publicks, but give me an account, what are you?


Twif. Very considerably well indeed, and every thing is in a very good method,
and --


[Sings and Plays upon his Pots. Constable. Watchmen away with him, he is a
suspicious Person.


Twif. Truly Cousin I know nothing of the matter.


Constable. What matter?


Twif. The very great Affairs of State, and Matters now in Question are that
the People of Stetin are a very Honorable People, and deserve to be a --


Constable. I care not what they deserve to be, who are you? whence came you? and
whither are you going?


Twif. Truly my Lord you are very obliging, but I know nothing of the matter,
but my Lord I Will tell you, his Honor -- I must beg your pardon Cousin, the
good Lord John is just now come to town, and it will be accounted a great piece
of rudeness to be absent, and be so considerably well, your Servant Cousin.


[Runs off. Constable. After him there and seize upon him, I will know what he is
before he get his liberty.


[Exeunt. SCENE A Bedchamber.
A Table with two Candles and some Books upon it set upon the Stage. Enter Sir
Geoffry Jolt and Flora Masked. Geoff. Now you are kind indeed, In Faith you are;
come Lady let us prepare, let us undress, O how I long to be in Bed dear Lady!


Flor. Do you begin Sir, I Will but go in and dress my Head, and wait upon you
presently.

[ Ex Flora.
Geoff. Pretty Rogue, an excellent Lodging this, this is no Mercenary Mistress.
Lord, Lord, the Town Gallants are such conceited Animals, such Fops Alamode,
they think no body has the happiness of Enjoying their Ladies but themselves.
What Is here, a Study? Aristotle's Problems, excellent, and here Leschole de
Files, a pretty French book; and here Annotations upon Aretines Postures, three
Excellent Books for a Ladies Chamber; but I am tardy, I stay too long, I should
have been in bed half an hour ago; O for a week of Nights in One, that I might
reap a Hecatoomb of Pleasures; who the Devil would marry and run the danger of
being made a Cuckold, when he may live so freely? Come Lady, I am almost
unready now, I am almost prepared, and could methinks --


Enter Emelia and Flora. Emel. Good Morrow sweet Sir Geoffry.


Flor. Good Morrow credulous Sir Geoffry.


Emel. How did you like the Lady in the Mask?


Flor. Was she not very charming, all Air and Conversation?


Emel. Had she not a sprightly way of Courtship? did she not work you to a
height with Art?


Flor. Did she not sigh, and swear she doated on you? longed to betray her
Honor to your Worship?


Geoff. Hold Sirens hold, you have said enough already.


Emel. Not to a man of Learning, a Country Magistrate, one that would keep his
Mistress like a Lady, present her daily with some Toy or other, as Muffs.


Flor. Fans.


Emel. Gloves.


Flor. Ribbands.


Emel. Neck-laces.


Flor. Dogs.


Emel. Monkeys.


Flor. And above all, an Overgrown Baboon, just such another as your hasty
self.


[ Geoffry speaks loud. Geoff. Peace I say, or by my Authority I will disturb
the House, raise all the Servants, fright the Watch, amaze the Neighbors, and
bring a Scandal on you both for ever.


Emel. Do, and we'll declare your Actions.


Flor. Relate your Course of life.


Geoffry stops his Ears. Emel. Defame your Honor.


Flor. Scandal your Learning.


Emel. And make your Name an Antidote, against the pleasingest Thoughts, the
best desires that ever Woman had.


Geoff. Have you done? have you done now? ye Pair of she Devils.


Flor. Yes, will you be pleased to walk Sir?


Geoff. Any where out of your Companies Ladies: may desire and the want of what
you slight so now pursue you ever.

[ Ex. Sir Geoffry Jolt.
Emel. Is he gone?


Flor. Yes, with an intent never to come again I^ll warrant him.


Emel. Then let us to Bed.

Imperfect Pleasures whilst in View they move,
Are the Ingenious Toyls of hasty Love.

[Exeunt. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE The Streets.
Enter Sir General Amorous, Eudoria and Spywell. Eud. PRay Heaven we reach the
House before Sir Arthur, or else my Shame will kill me.


Genesis This is the most dangerous Adventure Love e're thought on, and will I
fear end in our ruins; for it is impossible to anticipate his have.


Eud. Fancy not storms before you see 'em rising: I am resolved either to save
my Honor by this means, or meet my ruin quickly. [Goes to the Door and unlocks
it.] Thus far I Am safe, and make no question now but to succeed, farewell. Some
two hours hence I shall be glad to see you.


Enters and locks the Door. Genesis What dogged Planet Reigned at my Nativity!
Saturn sure was Lord of the Ascendant; I could not else be crossed as I have
been: twice most willingly she gave Consent I should enjoy her Love, and still
that Devil Jealousy frustrated all my hopes; which like a man drove by one wave
ashore, is by another hurried back again. To love, and not enjoy is but to gaze
upon Delicious meat, and have no power to touch it; I must go on. Within this
two hours I shall be glad to see you? that, that alone, had I not had
sufficient Proof before, would have confirmed an Angel.

On then to Bliss which we'll in private meet,
Where troubles past shall make it taste more sweet.

[Exeunt. Enter Sir Arthur Twilight and Bramble. Arth. I am out of Breath with
running, a pox of Matrimony if this be the fruits on it, was ever Gentleman made
a Cuckold before?


Bramb. Yes, Sir, especially Citizens; it is an Hereditary possession belonging
to the Court of Aldermen, and scarce one scapes it, if their. Wives are either
Young or Handsome.


Arth. I would mine had been neither, I would she had not been a Woman, rather
than I should thus be made a Cuckold; but it is done, it is done, I am all over
Horns that is certain, and shall be counted a greater Monster than the Elephant.


Bramb. It Is something severe indeed, but the best is, you are not the first
Citizen that has had his Wife run away with a Courtier.


Arth. Am I not Sirrah ha? you make a mock of it, do you?


Bramb. No Sir no, I am in earnest.


Arth. Are you so Villain, are you so? but on, on, knock at the Door, I long to
be fully satisfied.


Bramble knocks at the Door. Enter Eudoria above in her Nightgown. Eud. Who Is
there?


Bramb. What Is that to you?


Eud. Who are you?


Arth. A Friend, a Friend, one that should be Master of this House.


Eud. Who, my Dear Husband? my kind Sir Arthur? where have you been to Night?


Arth. Ha! where have I been to Night? rather Lady where have you been to Night?


Eud. Here, here in my Chamber, robbed of the Blessing of your sweet society, it
was unkindly done. --


Arth. It was indeed to run away from your Husband: but come, come, no more of
that, open the Door Lady.


Eud. I Will fly to do it, I am overjoyed to see you.

[ Ex. Eud.
Arth. What is the meaning of this? In Faith I know not what to think on it.


Bramb. Nor I neither, I am sure she was at the Tavern.


Arth. But how came she home then? how in her Chamber undrest, ha?


Bramb. Nay the Devil knows, and he is the best Counselor a Woman has, but
this is some trick, some trick upon my life; and ten to one Sir General
Amorous is with her.


Arth. It is impossible, he went to the Salutation Tavern I am sure, I saw him,
spoak to him, and drank with him there.


Bramb. All this may be, and yet he be in Bed with your Wife; to know which
I Will go into the Street, some two or three doors from the House, and cry, fire,
fire, then go to your Back door and watch that, whilst you your self watch this.


Arth. This will do, this will do, i'fack haste and about it straight.


[ Ex. Bramble. Enter Eudoria. Eud. O my dear Husband! where have you been to
Night? all night abroad at Taverns? rob me of my Garments and then run away
from me? Alas is this seemly, for a man of your Credit? your Age? and Affection
to your Wife?


Arth. This is fine in faith, miraculously fine. [Aside.] Was not I at home?
called you like a Porter? stood under your Window unregarded, was almost mad
with fury, and all this but last night, ha?


Eud. Yes Sir, the harmless sleep you broke, and my answer to you would have
witnessed it, if you had had the Patience to have stayed one minute longer: but
your so sudden retreat made me imagine you were gone with Sir General Amorous
that common Debauche: keep him not company Dear, he is enough to ruin twenty
Aldermen.


Arth. Hey day! this is fine indeed: it is impossible she should be honest; and
yet she has not the looks of a Sinner neither.


[Bramble within, fire, fire, etc. Eud. Ha Fire! I am undone for ever then.


Arth. Ha Fire! I Will watch this Door for that trick.


Stands with his back against the door, Bramble within, fire, fire, etc. Eud.
Dear Husband let us go in and remove the Goods, we shall be lost for ever else.


Arth. Not I by Heaven, I Will stand here till to Morrow first.


Enter Sir General Amorous and Spywell. Genesis From whence this Dismal noise?


Spyw. I know not Sir.


Genesis See it has raised my Worthy Landlord and his Wife. Where is the Fire Sir?


Arth. Nay I know not. -- Hey day, hey day, stranger and stranger still. --

[Aside.
Enter Contentious Surly in a Nightgown. Surly. Good morrow Sir Arthur, you
are Alarmed by the Noise I see.


Arth. Not much Mr. Surly, I am proof against fire, I am a mere Salamander, and
can live as well in the Flame as a Duck in the Water, -- 'sfoot I know not what
to think of this -- [Aside. Sir General, Sir General, you are a Wag, i'fack
you are: what stay abroad all Night? come, tell me where were you, indeed you
shall.


Genesis Troth Sir at a Tavern about a Mile from hence, where after the pleasures
of Wine and Music, I hoped to enjoy the Charming Easy, but was hindered by that
Jealous Devil Surly.


Arth. Did he hinder you i'fack, did he come and take you?


Genesis Just in the nick by Heaven.


Arth. It was ten thousand pities, it was indeed, you lost a delicate Night
on it, i'fack I am sorry for it: what, hindered of a Night?


Genesis 'Twas my ill fortune Sir, but we shall meet again.


Arth. I Will do my best to help you, I will indeed, where is your Man?


Genesis There Sir.


Arth. He looks clouded methinks.


Genesis A little Sir, for want of Rest, he is a most faithful Servant.


Arth. A brave contriver I Will warrant him.


Genesis How to get Drunk that is all: he roul'd last night just like a Bowl ill
byas'd, and slept in every Corner.


Arth. This is miraculous! I find I have abused my Wife all this while, and
been Jealous for nothing; I am glad it is no worse though. O Villain! Monster
that I was! how have I abused my self! He with Easy? and his man asleep in
every Corner? this is strange indeed. [Aside. Pardon me Eudoria for leaving the
Window so hastily, for my sudden Jealousy transferred me; I will say no more
but this, I will not indeed, Dear Wife I suspected thee.


Eud. How, did you suspect me?


Arth. Talk no more of it, I did indeed, and am ashamed to own it; come, come,
we will in, and every morning on my knees I Will beg a pardon from thee.


Enter Bramble. Bram. He is not come out Sir.


Arth. No matter, no matter, all is well again, I am Sir Arthur again, the
brisk, bonny, and the merry Sir Arthur again, ha?


Surly. Where Is the Fire Bramble?


Bram. Fire? what Fire? was there any Fire?


Genesis I heard 'em cry Fire.


Surly. And so did I.


Eud. And I.


Bram. Mere fancy, mere fancy, there is not a spark of fire in the whole City.


Surly. Then I Will to Bed again, good morrow Sir Arthur.


Arth. Nay Mr. Surly we will not part so, what, part with dry lips? out upon it,
come, come, we will go into my House, and drink a Glass or two, and then part to
our Beds; come Sir General.


[Exeunt. Enter Sir Geoffry Jolt Drunk. Geoff. Let it burn on, I have nothing
to say to fire or women, they are both out of my Element, Wine, precious Wine I
am for, the blood of the Grape shall be my Mistress: I have been damnably
affronted by a couple of Jilting Queans already, and it will be hard to bring
me into a third Praemunire. Where am I? O pretty near home, I find it, this
it is to have good store of Wine in one's Head; a man reels to his Lodging so
decently.


[Exit Reeling. SCENE A Bedchamber.
Enter Petulant Easy. Easy. Now I am lost, and hope is fled for ever, there is
no way left to accomplish my desire, nor how to bring about my wished for
vengeance; I am a Prisoner now, confined to one I hate above the World, and
forced to love what I have cause to hate, the treacherous Amorous, but he is
gone, fled to Eudoria's Bosom, and there is lodged a happy loving Guest.


Enter Sir Geoffry Jolt. Geoff. Still, still in the reeling posture; what never
leave me? ha, where am I? what, in my Landladies Chamber? now if I had not made
an Oath to the contrary, I would venture to salute her: pox 'twas a foolish
Oath, and ought not to be kept by a person of Honor, she kisses smartly,
that is my comfort. By your leave Lady, I must have a touch with you.


[Takes hold of Easy. Easy. What mean you Sir?


Geoff. Nothing but honesty by my Sobriety, you have such a taking way with
you, such a delicious turn of the lip, and so charming a breath, that I am
almost ravished. [Offers to kiss Easy, she refuses. Nay believe me Lady it is a
favor, and ought to be taken so, nay come, come Lady.


[ Pulls Easy. Easy. Whither Sir?


Geoff. To your Bed, it is a very convenient Utensil, and ought not to stand
for a Cipher in a Ladies Chamber, these melting lips -- Nay by my Honor, if
you are coy I shall be a Devil, come, come, be as you should be, a delightful
yielding Female, I am sound I Will promise you, you may venture, dear Rogue --


Easy. Venture what Sir?


Geoff. To add one horn more to your Husband's Forehead, come, come, I know you
love to make him a Cuckold.


Easy. A Cuckold Sir?


Geoff. Yes, yes a Cuckold, I have made him one my self.


Easy. How?


Geoff. In my sleep Lady, and there I thought you were so brisk, so airy, and
so charming; and if you seemed to be so then, I am sure you cannot choose but be
all pleasure now; come, dispatch.


Easy. I shall be forced to cry a Rape if you provoke me thus.


Geoff. With all my heart, who would not venture on a Woman for such a trifle?
come along Lady, whilst you cry I Will act, and then see who will have the best
on it.


Offers to force her. Easy. Help, help, a Rape, a Rape.


Enter Surly. Geoff. Pox what need you baule so loud, we shall disturb the
Neighbors.


[Forcing Easy still. Surly. What means this Rudeness Sir?


Geoff. Nothing but Civility by my Honor: mere Passion by Jove, and who can be
angry at a Passion?


Surly. It ill becomes you, especially in my House, Sir Geoffry.


Geoff. Nay if you are angry I have done, Good morrow Landlord, I Will go to bed
and sleep, and Dream, and so forth.

[ Exit Geoffry.
Easy. Can you see this and not revenge the Injury? can you behold the honor
of your Wife at stake, and not protect her; or at least, not offer to destroy
the foul Abuser?


Surly. He Is drunk, he is drunk, and knows not what he does.


Easy. Were it Sir General, or any other but this Goatish Geoffry, you would
have entertained a strange Suspicion, and with a Jealousy as unrestrained as
ever fury could invent, have hunted both to ruin, but now --


Surly. Enough, enough, let this content you, that I never before did entertain
so fair a thought of Woman as now I do of thee: my foolish Jealousy still
prompted me to think it was impossible you could be honest, or stand the Trial
of the least Temptation; but now I find thou have a secret Virtue, which I will
cherish ever: come let us retire.

All Jealous Pangs you by this Act remove,
And now I shall renew Decaying Love.

[Exeunt. SCENE Sir Arthur's House.
Enter as in a Passion Sir General Amorous, followed by Sir Arthur Twilight
and Eudoria. Arth. Nay Sir General, in faith I am sorry, I am indeed; what,
leave your Friends house for a Trifle? nay sweet Sir General, I am not Jealous
now, i'fack I am not; dear Wife go to him, persuade the Gentleman, win him
again, I shall be distracted if he leave me, to him Dear --


Eud. I know it is but in vain.


Arth. Nay, nay try him, 'twas but a small affront to say I doubted him, or to
be Jealous, was it? nay dear sweet Wife persuade him.


Eud. I Will try my power Sir, but I fear the event.


Arth. That Is well said, kiss him into friendship, hug him, do any thing to win
him, (but lie with him) and I am satisfied.


Eud. Prepare a Banquet then to entertain him, and to it invite your Worthy
friends; let it appear as costly as you can for such a little Warning, and I Will
try if I can court him to it.


Arth. Do, do my little Rogue, and see how I will love you, the Night will come
and then, -- but it is no matter, thou know my meaning --

[Ex. Sir Arthur.
Genesis Is he gone?


Eud. Safe for an hour, I Will warrant him.


Genesis How greedily he hunts his own Destruction, and with a Zeal as eager as
our Loves, he strives to haste our Pleasures!


Eud. Let us not lose that time by our neglect Heaven has so kindly given.


Genesis 'Twere sin to slip the opportunity. Fortune now courts us to a World of
Pleasure, and should we slight the Blessing she has given, we might for ever
starve and long for Joys, but never more approach 'em.


Eud. Where shall we go?


Genesis My Chamber is most safe; nay any where as you have changed his humor, he
would mistrust his Eyes I Am sure before you.


Eud. Then let us go, for fear we are prevented.


[Exeunt. Enter Emelia and Flora. Eme. This is a strange alteration, but
yesterday my Father was as Jealous as a Husband without Eyes, and as Waspish as
an ill pleased Bride; and now he is all Mirth and Jollity. Pray Heaven it last.


Flor. So say I, for he just now proffered me a Husband: and if his Jealous
Fit should come again, I might chance to lead Apes in Hell; and that is a
Curse too insufferable for me to bear.


Eme. A Husband Flora! who was it?


Flor. My degraded Magistrate, he tells me he is a man of Vigor, and loves me
with an unspeakable flame.


Eme. And can you fancy him?


Flor. Best of all, for he is not a Wit I can tell you, and those soft headed
Husbands are the easiest Creatures to work upon; a Woman may do what she
pleases, keep a Gallant in Town, or maintain a comely Servant in the Country;
who shall be as proud to effect my Will, as I desirous to command him.


Eme. There Is danger in 'em though, besides restraint of Liberty and Freedom,
I hate to be mewed up in a Country Castle, give me the Mall, or Gray's Inn
Walks; and now and then a Play, where a Woman may receive as much Pleasure by
gazing on the Gallants of the Town, as you in the Arms of your Country
Magistrate: were I to choose, I Would have a General Lover, one that Courts all,
Doats little, and Enjoys every where.


Flor. They are so common, Sister.


Eme. Not as Country Squires: Alas there is a great difference in the men I
speak of, One shall pretend he loves you monstrously, and behind your back cry
dam you. A Second court you with Letters, protest he doats upon you, and had
rather gaze upon your Eyes, then any she in the whole World beside; and yet the
next minute run to a Bawdihouse. A Third comes with that taking Toy called
Matrimony or Honorable Love, when his whole design is but to Enjoy you, spend
your Portion, and then leave you a Miserable Woman.


Flor. You are well versed in the distinctions of Men, Sister.


Eme. But above all, were I to choose, give me Sir General Amorous, his
Business is writ here, here in his Face; and they are much deceived who think
he comes to marry 'em.


Enter Sir Arthur Twilight and Bramble. Arth. Are all invited?


Bramb. Yes Sir, all you gave order are.


Arth. And will they come?


Bramb. Doubtless, Sir, they are most there already: here is a Note of their
Names.


[Gives Sir Arthur a Note. Arth. Let me see it, let me see it, -- [Reads. Sir
John Twiford? what have I to do with him? I want no Madmen Sirrah.


Bramb. He will not come I Will warrant you, for I told him unless he could
produce a new suite of Clothes, and leave those greasy ones behind him, he
could not enter here.


Arth. That Is pretty well, it is indeed, i'fack I like the Jest: Come
Daughters let us go in, my Wife and Guests will stay for me, they will indeed,
I long to be amongst 'em, for I shall be so merry, so Jocost and pleasant, come
dear Girls.


[Exeunt. Scene draws and discovers seated as at a Banquet, Sir General
Amorous, Eudoria, Contentious Surly, Petulant Easy, and Sir Geoffry Jolt. Enter
Sir Arthur Twilight, Emelia, Flora, and Bramble, all rise. Arth. Nay, nay sit
down, sit down my Worthy Friends, I'fack I joy to see you, why this was kindly
done to visit me upon so small a Warning.


[All sit down. Surly. You see we love you Sir.


Arth. I hope you do so all, I should be loath to have the hate of any man,
I'fack I should, come Gentlemen be merry, let us sing, and dance, and drink, and
be jocost, ha?


Geoff. Still the Old man by Jupiter, come here is a Health, it is but a frolic,
to the most Superannuated Cuckold in Europe.


Arth. Let it go round I'fack.


Eud. Fie Sir, there is a Health? I blush to hear it.


Arth. But you shall not: what, blush for a trifle? a Cuckold is a Christian,
and so we are all I hope: Mr. Surly you are sullen, dogged, moody, alamort
I'fack, come here is a Health to the Lord Mayor of London, ha, that was well
thought upon ha, was it not, ha?


Geoff. You are the same man still, you are indeed Sir Arthur, I love a man
that has no sense of his own Miseries: look, look, my Landlord's dogged, at
that name Cuckold, down in the mouth by Jove, but you bear up briskly still ha,
let me embrace thee dear Rogue.


[Embraces Sir Arthur. Arth. Look Sir Geoffry, mind that Girl, that little Wag
Flora, would she not make a brisk she Magistrate ha, would she not ha?


Geoff. Yes Sir, yes, a delicate Magistrate.


Arth. You shall see her Dance Sir Geoffry, believe me she has Excellent Parts,
come Flora, I'fack she shall be yours all over.


Flora Dances a Iig. Arth. Excellent Girl i'fack, take her Sir Geoffry, take
her, I say she shall be yours, i'fack she shall.


Entertains Eudoria in Dumb show. Geoff. The little Rogue has Charmed me, she
has won my heart again, come little Wag, what say you to a Country Magistrate
now ha, -- nay nay -- I have forgot all the Abuses, all the Affronts you and
your Sister put upon me, I have upon my Honor.


Flor. You are too hasty Sir Geoffry, you have my Fathers Consent I must
confess, but mine is yet to get; and if you have me you must expect to be made
a --


Geoff. Cuckold every day, I know it very well, it is Hereditary to the Family,
but I Will venture that: come little Rogue.


Enter Twiford dressed Ridiculously, with Stockins of two several Colors,
Breeches altogether out of Fashion, and a Coat quite different from all; and
over this a Carpet cut so, that his Head and Arms may come through, and the
rest hang like a Senators Gown. Twif. -- Save you, -- save you Ladies, and you
my Honorable Lords and very good Cousins, you see I keep my word, but upon my
Honor it was something hard to put my self thus into the Fashion, I was at
least with a score Lords and Ladies, all very considerable People, who were
very considerably pleased with my new Play, and truly I believe, it may do
very honorably well, but my Lord [ To Bramble,] You are a man of Wit, and I
know understand in a very Extraordinary manner, I Will show you my Comedy; in the
mean time pray Coz oblige me with a Bottle of Wine, and a considerable quantity
of Meat; for mark you Coz I am a Wit, and a very hungry Wit, and between you
and I those are the best sort of Wits.


Bramb. A Hungry Wit? I believe you: here Sir John, here is what Sir Arthur's
Table affords.


Gives Twiford Meat, and Wine, both sit down and Eat and Drink very greedily.
Arth. Will he not yield yet, will he not be friends ha? The Devil is in the man
I think. --

[Aside.
Eud. He yet Sir is strangely averse to it, but I doubt not at another meeting
to complete the Work, and make you both friends again: and that is a very hard
task, but for your sake I Will venture it.


Arth. Dear Love, Night is a coming and then, -- I say no more, get Sir
General to your Chamber, work him, work him to a height of Good nature, and
then bring me the happy tidings, the joyful news.


Eud. Where shall I find you Sir?


Arth. In my Study, in my Study Dear, I will make an excuse to the Company for
my absence, and expect your Answer. Gentlemen, pardon me for leaving you so
soon, a little business unthought of before our meeting, just now came into my
Head, and wants to be dispatched; be merry, drink and be merry, I Will wait upon
you presently.


Surly. You know your time Sir.


Arth. Now will I steal into Eudorias's Chamber, and obscure my self that I may
hear how my Wife works him; She has a notable Tongue, and can wheedle a man
Delicately, she has indeed.

[Aside.] [Ex. Sir Arth.
Twif. This is Delicate Food my Lord, have you any more?


[ To Bramble. Bramb. Truly Sir John no. Alas we live here amongst Canniballs,
within a short time after Dinner they will devour one another.


Twif. Truly your Cousins at York are very Considerably well, and every thing
is in a very decent Order, and they are all Extremely brave and Gallant; why
look you Cousin, I am going to get a Commission, I have already a Scarf, Sword
and Belt, and such Appurtenances; indeed they are the same I had at the Campain
at Black Heath, but still they are very Genteele and Modish. --


All this while Sir Geoffry Entertains Flora in Dumb show. Geoff. What say you
now little Rogue ha?


Flor. I say I shall be the same I ever was, the same jeasting, jearing,
designing Woman.


Geoff. With all my heart.


Flor. I must must not be Curbed.


Geoff. You shall not.


Flor. Nor be hindered of my Pleasure.


Geoff. You shall not.


Flor. Nor be locked up in my Chamber.


Geoff. Neither.


Flor. Then give me your Hand -- I Am Yours.


Geoff. Not as you was before, to Cousen me, I hope.


Flor. The Minister shall confute you: but we shall stay too long from the
Company.


They go into the Scene and sit down, the Scene closes. Twif. My Lord you are
very obliging, and Madam Flora is very considerably in a good posture, as
affairs stand now, and truly by the next month, at the opening of the Campain,
she will be much bigger, and fit for a Considerable command.


Bramb. Shall we not have your Company, my Lord?


Twif. Cousin, I will wait upon you, and be, my Lord, your most considerably
Obliging Faithful servant to command.


[Exeunt. SCENE Eudoria's Chamber.
Enter Sir Arthur Twilight. Arth. Now I shall be made the happiest Citizen in
London, I shall indeed; let me see, where shall I hide my self to overhear 'em,
I'fack under that Table, it is a Delicate privacy, and very fit for the purpose.


[Creeps under the Table. Enter Sir General Amorous and Eudoria. Genesis Now Joy
comes on apace, and every minute produces new Delights. We love without
control, and tread those paths are pointed out by your late Jealous Husband,
and what before we studied for with care, is by Sir Arthur flung into our Arms.


Arth. Ha! what means this?

[Aside.
Eud. Nothing's more sweet than often repeated Bliss, especially to one whose
Appetite has been so often dulled by the Embracings of Old Age and Folly.


Arth. Ha! is this the Effects? they are reconciled, in faith they are.

[Aside.
Genesis Poor Senceless man! that has the impudence to think a Woman can be mewed
up alone, or feed upon a Sapless Tree: by Heaven a Nunnery is Paradise to such
a Ladies Chamber.


Arth. I can endure no longer, and yet I dare not stir.

[Aside.
Eud. Now we are all desires, and reap each minute a World of Newborn
Pleasures, whilst in that sordid thing a Feeble Husband, we feed upon a wish,
and only live by the imaginary parts of Bliss, Phantasms and Idle Dreams.


Arth. O Devil, Devil, Devil, I shall be made a Cuckold, I find I shall, and
dare not offer to prevent it neither.

[Aside.
Genesis Let us be real Lovers, and meet our Flames with vigor, I Am talked into
an Exstasy, -- and shall expire by gazing on your Charms.


Eud. We talk away that time which should be spent in Pleasure.


Arth. A Whore, a Whore, by Heaven a common whore, and I an Arrand Cuckold.

[Aside.
Genesis I Have been too tardy my Eudoria, and will be so no more.

[Speak and move toward the Bed. Shoot down ye Gods, all, all your Plagues
above,
When I neglect the Critic hour of Love.

Arth. Confusion! a Pimp, a Pimp, a Pimp.


[Falls into a fit of Coughing, they start. Genesis Ha! from whence that Noise?


Eud. Under the Table I think.


Genesis What Slave durst interrupt us?


Eud. We are betrayed I fear. [Looks under the Table. My Husband! I am lost for
ever.


Genesis Ha! your Husband? then Impudence assist me. [Draws. Come forth thou scorn
of Mankind, and take your Death with patience; look on your Fate, and with a
Brow serene, smile whilst I send thy Soul into another World: come out I say.


Arth. Not I by Jove, if you will kill me do it in private, for I shall never
endure to see it done.


Genesis Then --


[Offers to kill him. Arth. Nay sweet Sir General hold, it is plague enough to
be a Cuckold, but I Will forget I am one, if you will save my Life; Alas, I am not
prepared to dye.


Genesis So much the greater my Revenge. --


[Offers to kill him again, Eudoria hindering him. Eud. Nay let me beg his
Pardon Sir, alas the fault was mine, I ought to suffer, shed not the Blood of
such a harmless man, but if you must be cruel, sheath here your Sword, and let
my Life and shame end both together.


Genesis Come out I say.


Arth. Not till you give me Life, In Faith I am sorry, very sorry I interrupted
you, I am indeed.


Genesis Come out, and I Will consider on it. [Comes from under the Table and
kneels.] How durst ye, thou base Jealous Dotard, presume to think an evil
thought of us, much more disturb our Pleasures, skulk in our known Recesses,
and all to make you mad, horn mad? but to prevent your Lunacy thus I Will --


Offers to kill him again, Eudoria Kneels and seems to Weep. Eud. Hold, on my
Knees I beg you to forbear, look on his Age, his Innocence and Goodness, look
how submissively he bends for Pardon, and also look upon Eudoria's Tears: can
they not win you yet, not bate your Fury? then on his Neck I Will hang and perish
there, perish and Dye with my dear Loving Husband.


[Falls on his Neck and Weeps. Arth. Can you, can you strike now? can you kill
Sir Arthur? your best Friend Sir Arthur? can you for all these Tears? for all
the Tears of such a loving Wife? --


[Falls on Eudoria's Neck and Weeps. Genesis Rise, she has gained your Pardon: but
on Condition that you never talk, nay not so much as think of what has
happened, if you do --


Arth. Never, alas I will take it for a Dream, a mere Dream, and when I am
awake, put it out of my Memory.


Genesis Forgive Eudoria then, and with a Zeal as hasty, as you went to Church
together.


Arth. I do, I'fack I do, with all my Heart I do.


Genesis Consider Sir, it is but a Venial sin, and not so great as it is Common;
for but few Women inviolably observe the Faith they owe their Husbands.


Arth. I Am of your mind Sir General, I'fack I am, this it is to be Old and
fearful; but it is no matter, I Am not the first Cuckold, that is my comfort.


Eud. Now all my hopes are lost, quite lost for ever, and I must still be bound
to one I hate.


Enter Twiford Singing and Dancing. Twif. Why, look you Cousins, every thing is
Considerably well, and the Affair has been managed with a great deal of
Prudence, and my Cousin Geoffry and his Wife Emelia, are mighty jocost and
pleasant; and every thing is in an extraordinary Good manner and Posture, and
the way is mighty obliging I assure you, they did me the honor to employ me in
this great Affair, which is to advertise you that all my good Lords and Ladies
are in very Good health, and are -- Enter Sir Geoffry, Emelia, Contentious
Surly, Petulant Easy, Flora, Spywell and Bramble. Why look you Cousins, here
are all my very good Lords and Ladies, and pray pardon me my Lords, if I leave
your Companies so soon, for my very Honorable Friend and Cousin, my Lord --
has sent for me, and I am to win a hundred Guinnies to night, which is very
considerable, my very good Lords, Ladies and Cousins, Adieu.

[ Ex. Twiford.
Geoff. What, Alamort Sir Arthur? Come, come be merry and sing, I have got your
Daughter, I'fack Boy.


Arth. It Is Well, it is very well, she is a smart Rogue, and will make a good
Wife I Will warrant her. -- She is my Daughter, and I hope will make you a
Cuckold too; that I may have a Son in law of the Family of the Wittalls. --

[Aside.
All this time Sir General Entertains Flora in Dumb show. Genesis Sir Arthur
Twilight all anger being past and quite forgotten, to bind my self for ever to
you, and by a Bond that knits Entire Affections, with your Consent and to
secure your peace, here will I plant my Love.


Arth. With all my Heart, I care not what you do, Marry whom you please, I can
be but a Cuckold still.

[Aside.
Genesis What says Emelia?


Emel. I would say nothing Sir to Matrimony, if you men were not so deceitful,
and yet methinks I long to know what it is.


Genesis O it is a Pleasing Pain, a Heavenly Bliss. --


Emel. Nay, tell me not on it before hand, I hate to have my Pleasures pal'd by
talking of 'em, give me your hand, for once I Will venture Marriage, but believe
me, if it prove contrary to my Expectation, I Will run for it, go to Law for
alimony, and be Mistress to an Alderman.


Arth. He shall be a Cuckold too, I Will persuade my Daughter to be a Whore, and
so be revenged on him.

[Aside.
Easy. Still he is False, and in the highest nature; I Will study for Revenge now
I have lost him, and ruin both together.

[Aside.
Surly. Sir General Amorous, I beg your Pardon for those foul suspicions I had
of you and Easy, and hereafter I Will strive to show my Love.


Genesis My thanks shall not be wanting, nor my Rewards, to Spywell and to
Bramble, both which have played the Parts of Faithful Servants.

Licentious Youth, taught by unruly Fires,
Each moment leads us to Unjust Desires.
The Joy once past, and the great Blessing taken;
We grieve to think it cannot come again.
But here that Bliss we do in safety meet,
And lay our Glories at the Victors Feet.
Where uncontrolled we in our Chains enjoy
Those Pleasures which our Freedom would destroy.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE, Spoken by Sir ARTHVR.
THE fate of Writing is like Wedlock dark,
The Wife's Debauched by every Modish Spark.
And though a Man Monopolizeth Wit,
He Is sure to have but little share of it.
We City Cullies buy our Wive's so Dear
And with such Pains indulge each Wantons Ear
Till they break out, and you Debauch 'em here.
There Is scarce a Gallant but has fresh supplies
Of Love and Glances, from her Wanton Eyes.
The fate of Citt and Poet then are even,
For sure both Fools and Cuckolds go to Heaven:
How happy then is the Author of this Play,
Who although Young's as great a Fool as they?
He swore he did not Write to show his Sense
But his Vnequal'd stock of Impudence.
For though you Rail and Dam, he laughs to see
You more mistaken in his Play then he.

