THE LAY-MANS ANSWER TO THE LAY-MANS OPINION.

In a Letter to a Friend.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1687.

THE Lay-Man's ANSWER TO THE Lay-Man's OPINION.
SIR,
SInce you desire to know my Opinion of the Lay-Mans Advice, etc. I will give
it you with all the freedom in the world; and let you know first, that there is
greater reason for your curiosity than you imagined; for this Paper is a
Court-Favourite, and handed from one to another with all the gayety and
scornful triumph imaginable. One is of opinion, that it is Unanswerable by way
of Argument; Another, that all the Wits in the Land can have nothing to say to
it; a third, defies all our Critics from discovering the Author by its style;
and a fourth (a great Divine, and very considerable upon several accounts)
confirms all they say, with this bold assurance, that the Author is a most
worthy Gentleman, and an incomparable Scholar, and thus it went round Nemine
contradicente. To you, who are no Stranger there, I shall not need to observe,
that judgments commonly pass about like Healths, not because we really love the
Persons, but because we would be civil to the company, and complaisant to him
who began. But this is not what you must expect from Me, who judge with my own
judgment, be it good or bad; and such as it is, you shall have it.

I tell you then, the design of this, and a great many other Pamphlets
scattered of late, is, to expose the Church of England to the Royal
Indignation, and to tempt and provoke her Sons to such measures, as might
justly draw it down upon her. It is plain, the Authors and Abettors themselves
of these insolent and villainous Papers, are not so well satisfied that the
Church of England either has been, or is Disloyal, as they would be, to have
her so indeed. For, concluding the gracious Promise of the King, at his first
coming to the Crown, and his frequently repeated Assurances of his Royal
Protection since, to be purely conditional, the general endeavor now is, to
demonstrate the failures of the Church on her part, and to acquit the other
from any farther obligation: And because these failures cannot possibly be
proved, they are by all possible means to be provoked. But God is Just, and
will not forget these things; the King is Wise, and will not be imposed on by
them; the Church is Loyal, and will always be so, in despite of them. I shall
say no more in general, than that it is certainly a sad and fatal token of
confusion and disorder to succeed, when the only lawfully established
Church Government in the Nation, is by public allowance made the Mark for
every foolish and malicious Villain to discharge their bolts at.

Your Author in his first period, would fain pass for a Modest Man, and very
sensible of his own inabilities; but he shall not pass for the first with me,
who has so well convinced me of the later, and yet would venture.

He says next, the Considerable Divine desires to know his opinion of the
Church of England's Proceedings in this extraordinary conjuncture, and what he
intended to do himself, as well as advise the Divine to do on this Occasion.
Whoever this Considerabe Divine be, he shall know of this Lay-Oracle only one
of the three things be desires, and that is, his Opinion of the Church of
England, which is scurvy enough, and therefore this modest Man is very loath to
deliver it. He is still an unworthy Member of the Church of England, and
consequently loves it with all its faults, What a sweet, good-natured Gentleman
is this! troth, I believe he is extremely sorry that she has no more faults,
that he might show his affection more abundantly toward her. But because he
loves her so, It Is not to be imagined how concerned he is for the thousand
indiscretions she commits, which her Enemies will find another Name for, if
persisted in. Oh for some powerful drops, to relieve this Gentleman, who
otherwise will die of Concern, and prove a Martyr for the Church of England's
Indiscretion. But what trifling Cant is this! how ridiculous is this
affectation of kindness and concern for the Church of England, when he is
intending all the mischief for her, that his impotent malice can suggest? The
Church of England is not careful, whether such Authors be treacherous Mungrels,
or open and avowed Adversaries. She looks for all the ill treatment, that the
damnable hypocrisy, and the raging fury of the one and the other, can afford
her.

And now we are come to her Faults and Indiscretions. Did we not in both Houses
of Parliament oppose the King's giving Employments to his Friends and
Fellow Sufferers, and not only so, but highly reflected on his Honor and
Justice in doing it? It is very well, when the insolence of every licentious
Scribler shall prescribe to, and call in question the Proceedings of the most
August and Noble Council in the Kingdom, for following the Dictates of their
Conscience, and their best reason! How long have the Debates in Parliament been
called, Opposing the King, when his Desires do not meet with present
compliance? Is the Representing to His Majesty the Inconveniences of what he
asks, (which multiplicity of Affairs may cause a Wise Prince sometimes to
overlook) to be called Reflecting on his Honor and Justice? I am sure, it
would highly reflect on his Wisdom and Goodness, to think so of His Majesty,
and therefore every good Subject will be far from it.

After this magisterial Sentence passed upon the High Court of Parliament, the
Venerable Body of the Clergy are to have their share. Have not a great many of
our Considerable Clergymen been declaiming once a Week against the Roman
Catholics? They have, as it happened. Preached up the Worship of One God, the
Sufficiency of Christ's Satisfaction, and Intercession for us, the Necessity of
Adhering to our Savior's Institutions, and some other the like Points, and
sure it is no great compliment to their Persuasion, to call this declaiming
against Roman Catholics.

But the Roman Catholics are all this while either very modest, or forbid to
follow so indiscreet an Example, though they have the advantage of bearing the
King before them as a Buckler. Not so very modest neither, as some of their
Audience can testify; but granting them to have been somewhat reserved there,
they have made us ample amends in other places; and have not neglected to
oppose to us, on several Occasions, this Royal Buckler, here mentioned; which,
upon my word, in these Paper-Combates, has guarded them from many a fell and
furious Stroke, and served them for a safe Retreat: So profound a Veneration
has our Church for any thing that bears the Royal Stamp.

Next to the Parliament and Clergy, come the Universities themselves, those
Mere Creatures of Power and Favor, and fly in the Face of Authority, and, like
the Snake in the Fable, sting that Bosom that warms them.

The Universities are proud of the Royal Favor, and daily study to be thought
deserving of it. They have their Charters, as other Corporations of the Kingdom
have; and several Privileges and Immunities granted them by Acts of
Parliaments. And it is at present, their Misfortune, I dare say, to find
themselves obliged by all those Ties that are common to them, with the rest of
the King's Subjects, and some peculiar to themselves too, not to be able to
answer the King's Expectations, in the Matter before them, whose Grace they
would gladly purchase, with the Price of all they have, that is dear to them in
this World. And they are in hopes, that it will not be in the Power of any
their Malevolent Adversaries to interpose betwixt the Royal Clemency and them.

After the Parliament, Clergy, and Universities are confounded on this manner,
he has nothing to do, but return to his Considerable Divine, and make him
confess the truth of the whole Charge, in a very lamentable manner truly, with
a fad wipe to the Church of England, for not pretending to Infallibility; for
matters are now come to that pass, that a man will hardly venture to call a
Hackney-Coach, before he be infallibly assured, it will bring him to his
Journey's end; and a Coachman will hardly come, unless he be infallibly sure
not to be bilk'd; to so great certainties are we arrived in Matters of
Practice. Well, but does this Considerable Divine give no reason for all this
Obstinate Rebellious Opposition? Yes he does, and it is this: By serving the
King, we only ensnare ourselves in assisting the Church of Rome, which is
endeavoring our ruin. A very considering Divine certainly! I hope there are
not many such in England, that think they cannot serve the King, without
ruining themselves, or that would not serve him, were their ruin unavoidable;
but, God be thanked, things are not come to that yet; there always was, and
always will be, a great difference betwixt Serving the King, and Betraying ones
Trust; it is a scandalous kind of Blasphemy, to affix that Sacred Name, to a
restless and ambitious Faction: Matters may easily be thus accommodated; The
King's Intentions are always Honorable and Just, and we will always serve him,
as in Duty bound, with most Unparalled Fidelity. If the Roman Catholics are
endeavoring our Ruin, we will meet with them too, in all the Lawful Methods
of Peaceable and Just Defense. Let them grow wanton in these days of Sunshine,
if they please, but let them not, amidst their Gaiety, forget they have to deal
with neither Slaves nor Fools. If you are not convinced by what is past, you
will be by what is to come, that the Author of this Pamphlet made this
Considerable Divine himself, and his Reason too, for certainly the Church of
England owns none such; for thus it goes on: For if to the Zeal, Magnanimity,
and Indefatigable Industry of the King, we add the heightning his Prerogative,
and the firmness of all his Protestant Subjects both in his Armies and
Parliament, what imaginable Hopes is there to put the least delay to an
Universal Change of Religion?

Did ever any Mortal Man hear such a weighty Reason as this? Take it in other
words thus: The Church of England apprehends it is utterly impossible, but that
her Establishment must be overthrown, and Popery set up, if a Protestant Army,
and a Protestant Parliament be firm to the King, especially since he is so
excellently qualified.

Now, as I am an honest Man, I think this Church argues like a great Fool, and
ought to have concluded just the contrary. And now, after all, the Pamphleteer
has the ridiculous Impudence to tell us, he has put the Objection fairly, and
as strongly as the Case will hear: whereas you see there is no Objection at
all, and indeed the Case of the Church of England requires and needs none; but
if this had not been put here, the Author would not have had one word to say,
and then he could not have told us, that supposing the King had a design to
resettle Popery, he is sure we are bound in Conscience to be entirely passive,
in all things so designed by him. The Church of England will never think
herself at liberty to suppose any such thing, as a design to resettle Popery,
till the King is pleased to tell her so: and both then, and till then, she will
behave herself as she ought to do. If ever such a thing (as it is an impious
thought to think) should happen, she knows how to practice upon those
Principles she has formerly and all along so advantageously promoted for the
Royal Interest.

In the next place, the Author fancies the Clergy compounding the Matter, thus,
that in Secular things they will assist the State all they can, but where their
Church is concerned, they must beg the State's pardon, and oppose a little, or
so: and, as if it were agreed on, he desires to know how far this Opposition
may proceed. Not to Arms? no, by no means: how far then? why thus far, in
Pulpits to exclaim against the Religion of our Sovereign, and brand it with
Idolatry itself, a Mark, like that of Cain to invite every body to do him a
mischief. I wish this Author were obliged to bring the Man, that in his Pulpit
has, in so many words, asserted the Religion of the King to be Idolatry, and
left any such Insinuation in his Audience, as though the Mark of Cain were set
upon him; or were obliged to answer for so villainous a Calumny on so great a
Body, when so many Millions of Protestants, as are throughout the World, are
damned to Everlasting Perdition, for they know not what, by every little Roman
Emissary; we can pity their Uncharitableness, but I know of no privates person,
that thinks himself affronted, or abused thereby; and yet damnation is the
utmost that the Idolatry of the Heathens themselves can suffer: and as for any
danger in, this World, it is not the Church of England, that threatens it to
Kings, but it is another Church, and she has often set her Marks with a
vengeance.

The next Period, is another fling at the Universities, which would make one
think, the Butler, or the Beadle, did not very well agree with him there.

But now for the Gentlemen that would not take away the Test and Penal Laws.

With some of whom, it is a point of Conscience, on that account, to quit those
Places, to which they had no other pretense of Merit, but their having opposed
those Laws formerly, which yet, out of a fatal stubbornness, they refuse now to
Repeal.

Did yon ever hear such a grievous Accusation in your whole Life? Don't you
think these Gentlemen are the greatest Knaves and Villains on the Earth? You
will certainly think so, when you have more closely attended to the force of
this reason. And thus it runs:

There were, some Years ago, a great many well-meaning Men, that could by no
means assent to some certain Laws then making against Papists, and they opposed
their Passing as vigorously as they could, and this their Zeal, though
unsuccessful, was yet thought sit to be rewarded with some considerable
Offices. Matters changing, some time after, it was proposed to these same
Gentlemen, to take away these Laws, they had before opposed; but they, having
in the mean time been convinced, that these Laws were not only serviceable to
the Public then, but were since become necessary, refuse to repeal them, and
are content to resign their Places, both Honorable and Benesicial, rather than
comply with what they judged incommodious to the State, freely sacrificing the
Rewards of their former Virtue, to preserve their present one. And these are
the Men so loudly exclaimed against. But, good God! in what dregs of time do we
live? when that Probity and Courage, which in any other Age would have deserved
a Statue, does in this furnish Matter for a Libel! Non and olim sic erit.

Well then, if Men cannot part with their Places, without giving offense, sure
they may keep them innocently; for to an ordinary understanding, there seems to
be no Medium; No, but you must not do this neither, if you chance to squint,
whisper, or look slily, for then it will be construed as done with contempt of
all your Master does or designs.

It Is very strange, that a Man cannot squint, or look a little slily at Court,
and be all the while a very good Subject! But this is too malicious a
Reflection on the present Courtiers, to make merry withal. Those worthy
Gentlemen are wise enough to see this is only one of the many sly Insinuations,
of some malicious Viper, that wants a Place himself; 'twere much beneath the
meanest of them, to slacken either in their Service to the King, or Duty to the
Church, for any thing that can be said, by such bold Defamers as this.

But who are they who think themselves so dextrous as to convince the King they
are his Friends, though it never appeared so, before they were his Subjects? I
could guess, as well as other folks, if I might, but I dare not; I will only
venture to say, they were not Church-of-England-Men, and some of them at
present are not such.

Ay, but these very men, whose Consciences are complaisant enough on other
occasions, yet dare not venture any farther than the Threshold of the King's
Chapel, to hear Sefache sing? What then? is it so very strange for a Man's
Conscience to permit him quietly to pursue one evil course, and to disturb him
in another? Would this Author's Conscience permit him to kill his Father, and
ravish his Sister, because it permits him to slander and defame a Whole Church
and Nation? I hope not.

Nay, but he does not say this so much to censure them, as to vindicate our
Church, which condemns no Man for staying at Divine Service, in any Christian
Congregation, but rather blames so nauseous an Affectation of Zeal and Faction.

Here he is in one of his loving fits again, and will needs be vindicating the
Church of England, though it be at the expense of his own Truth and Honesty;
for he had before told us, that our Clergy exclaimed against the Religion of
our Sovereign, and branded it with the Mark of Idolatry; and he knows it is one
part (and that a principal one too) of that Divine Service, which we can find
no civiller name for. And within ten lines of this very Passage, he says the
same again, and yet this is the Church that condemns no Man, etc. These things
look like Contradictions.

And now let our Author sum up all. May we not oppose the Government, and yet
do all these things? That is, in plain English, thus: May we not oppose the
Government, and yet our Parliaments debate Matters before them? and yet our
Clergy Preach up the 39 Articles? and yet our Universities humbly Remonstrate
to the King, the Inconveniences of a Mandamus? May we not oppose the
Government, and yet some Old Courtiers resign their Places? and yet some Others
keep theirs still, though perhaps they look somewhat slily? and yet some Faces
constantly appear at the Protestant Chapel, which were great strangers there
before? and yet some others venture to the Threshold to hear Sefache sing, but
dare no farther? had we not as good be downright Rebels, as do these horrid
and unheard of things? It may be you may think I jest, when I put this sense
upon our Author's Queries: but, by the Faith of an Honest Man, there is nothing
else in them of substance, he has only put them into spiteful and invidious
Terms, for want of true Matter to furnish out an Accusation.

Here follow some more of them: Did we pull down a Pope, to set up a King? The
Parliament, all the Bishops but one, and the whole Convocation, pulled down the
Pope, though all of them Papists themselves, and restored the King to his just
Authority. And this Author would have a Protestant Parliament and Clergy set
him up again. And are we tugging with the King, to pull him down, and set up
ourselves? No, not We of the Church of England, but let Others acquit
themselves as well. What Pretense have We, of all the World, for doing this?
None, for they who do Nothing, want no Pretense. We have no Private Spirit to
guide Us, in such Dark Paths; And therefore we keep out of them, walking in the
Light, as Children of the Light. We have no Infallible Council, to secure us
against any Doubts of Conscience; And we have no Doubts or Objections, and
therefore need no Infallible Council, but we have the Word of God our
Infallible Rule. We have listed ourselves under a King ever since Henry the
Eigth's time, [and about a Thousand Years before] and, like Aesop's Horse, are
obliged to bear him for a Rider ever after.

We like our King so well, that we wish with all our hearts and souls there may
never want of his Race to Govern us to the worlds end. We never strove to throw
off our Rider, as the malice of the Author may seem to suggest, by the Fable he
has chosen; but reckon ourselves securest, when our Royal Rider sits the
fastest. Whom God long preserve.

And now because our Author has set me an Example out of Esop, and because
Fabling is very much in fashion, I will take the liberty of presenting one,
which this and other the Enemies of our Church may apply as they see good. And
to recommend it the more, it is of a Panther.

It chanced a Panther heedless of her feet,
Slipped unawares, and fell into a Pit;
(Whether the Pit were dug with that design
Or not, our Authors leave us to divine.)
Which when some Churles, laboring at distance, knew,
Thither they with united fury flew;
Snatching such Arms a^s haste or made or found,
Stakes from the hedge, and Stones from off the ground.
These, most of them bestowed upon the Beast,
Laboring for life, and almost quite oppressed.
Whilst Others mild, and more compassionate,
Pitted the wretched Creatures lost estate,
And kindly threw her scraps of Bread to eat.
Concluding, as at Night they homewards made,
To find her, early in the Morning, dead.
But she recov'ring strength, made an essay,
And by a vigorous bound, escaped away.
Homewards she fled; nor many days were past,
Before she laid the Neighboring Country waste:
Shepherds and Flocks were undistinguished slain,
And raging Vengence foamed around the Plain.
Then they who had in pity spared the Beast,
With fear and trembling to her now addressed;
Their Goods and Fortunes they no more regard,
But only ask to live, for their Reward.
To whom the generous Panther; Friends no fear,
Rest you secure, there is no danger near:
Well I distinguish 'twixt my Friends and Foes,
And well remember who gave Bread, who Blows.
FINIS.

