The famous Trauellour Vincent le Blanc of Marseilles.


THE WORLD SURVEYED: Or, The FAMOUS VOYAGES and TRAVAILES OF Vincent le Blanc,
or WHITE, of Marseilles: Who from the Age of Fourteen years, to Threescore and
Eighteen, Traveled through most parts of the World.

Viz. The East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco,
Guinny, and through all Africa. From the Cape of good Hope into Alexandria, by
the Territories of Monomotapa, of Priest John and Egypt, into the
Mediterranean Isles, and through the principal Provinces of EVROPE.

Containing a more exact Description of several parts of the World, then has
hitherto been done by any other Author.

The whole work enriched, with many Authentic Histories.

Originally written in French, and faithfully rendered into English by F. B.
Gent.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter, near the Middle Temple Gate in
Fleet Street, 1660.

TO THE Most worthy of all Honor, PETER BROOK OF MEIRE, In the County of
CHESTER, Esquire.
MY Name being to appear in public with this Translation in an age that
flourishes with Pens, and Critics; conscious of my disadvantage, I apprehended
a Patron necessary; whose Name in the Front, like a Princes stamp upon Lead,
might give authority and make it current coin. In my low condition I have
often heard your Name glorious for worth and goodness, which made me hope
though far transplanted, and obscure, you would grant me privilege to claim a
Title in your favor, and let the Reader opening this Book, see it is something
belongs to you; it will I am confident keep him modest, and prevent his
discharges at my defects. The Author I dare say will, for gravity, novelty,
and variety be acceptable to your conversation: for though diverse have set
forth accounts of this nature, I have not met with any, in my opinion, of such
credit as this.

Le Blanc was a traveller from his infancy to his grave, 64. years surveying
the Masterpiece of his maker: was a person of capacity, judgment, and
integrity; one seems as it were framed and designed to be sent forth, and to
bring home a perfect discovery, and the truth of things fables and vanity have
so much abused. You will find him a person of moral and religious principles;
one who kept select company; one, who in all parts he arrived at, took not his
information at the shore or Suburbs, but either for occasion or curiosity,
visited the intestines and supreme, whence he might the better look below, and
round about him. I do ingeniously acknowledge I have injured him in the
rudeness of translation; which, next to my want of faculty, I beseech you
attribute to the haste was pressed upon me, for I had no more days allowed to
translate it, then would sufficiently have served to transcribe it: and it was
the first piece I ever attempted. As it is, I petition you would afford our
aged Traveller to take up a resting room at last in your study, and me the
honor to be owned.

Your most humble, and most respectfull Servant, FRANCIS BROOK.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE.
I Cannot look but with admiration, upon the stupidity of such as are not
confirmed in a due belief of divine Providence, since all mundane effects show
daily such sensible testimonies, and especially humane Actions, wherein this
wise guide directing all things to their end, is sufficiently apparent, though
silently, yet forcibly compelling all things. There appears testimony enough in
my particular, that from my first entrance into the world, have been assisted
by this divine wisdom and goodness to my 78. year, my instant age, so as I
can give most real assurance. I have been sensible of supernatural effects in
my continual peregrinations through such diverse parts, and so remote from
inhabitable Land for above sixty four years, in such several dangers, both by
Sea and Land, amongst people so discrepant in Religion, Laws, Manners,
Language, and course of living, through all by divine providence preserved
healthful, and secure, with the blessing at last to produce something that may
be beneficial to my country and posterity. For having ever had an obstinate
Propension to travail, when I was scarce advanced out of my Infancy, and of
judgment, neither for discourse, nor election; I felt though secret, such
vigorous motions, that I had not power to resist them: So as without
considering why, or for what end, like a man forlorn, I threw my self into
this course of pererration; which afterward, invited by affairs, and
unspeakable content, I embraced with design and resolution: Nor needs it be
much admired, since well considered, our life is but a continual voyage,
without rest or assured home, till we arrive at the end, where in a
sempiternall state, our Sovereign felicity inhabits.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHap. 1. The Authors imbarking for Alexandria, and his shipwreck. page 1.
Chap. 2. Of the Towns of Tripoli, and Damas, with the relation of a Murder. p.
4. Chap. 3. Of the deserts of Arabia, of Spirits, or Apparitions there, of the
Sea of Sodom, of the Hills of Sina and Oreb, and the three Arabia's. p. 7.
Chap. 4. Of the town of Medina, and the false Prophet. Mahomets successors. p.
12. Chap. 5. How Mahomet composed his Alcoran, his victories, and of the
rarities and ceremonies of Meka. p. 14. Chap. 6. Of Arabia Felix, of Prince
Sequemir, Governor of Cassia, and other commodities of Sabaea. p. 17. Chap. 7.
Of the state of Sequemir, Prince of the Happy. Arabia. Of his Salsidas, and of
the Califf of Bagdet. p. 20. Chap. 8. Of Babylon, the Red Sea, Homerites, Aden,
a strong Town, and famous Haven, Cameran, and other places in the Red Sea. p.
22. Chap. 9. Of Dalasci, a Town belonging to the grand Neguz, of the Isle of
Socotora, with a description of a prodigious tempest. p. 25. Chap. 10. Of the
Island and Kingdom of Ormus, of the King and his Government, of the trade
there, and of his several Conquests. p. 29. Chap. 11. Of Persia, her Confines
and Provinces. Of Babylon, and the Lake of pitch. p. 31. Chap. 12. Of the Town
of Tauris, Sumachia, Bachat, Casbin, and some of the chiefest places of Persia.
p. 34. Chap. 13, Of the Kings of Persia, their power, pleasures. Of the Sophi,
Hali, and some Sects of Religious Persians, of the ancient Mages, and other
Officers of the kingdom. p. 37. Chap. 14. Of the East Indies, the conquest of
them, Sects and Religion of the East, and other particulars of the country. p.
41. Chap. 15. Of Diu, her State and Forts, and the neighboring countries of
Cambayette, of the fidelity of the Indian Censals, and of the mavelous ebbing
and flowing of the Sea* p. 43. Chap. 16. Of Deli, Malabar, of Goa, the Capital
town of India. p. 49. Chap. 17. Of Baticola, Decan, Amadiva, and of the kingdom
of Cananor. p. 54. Chap. 18. Of the kingdom, and Samorin of Calicut, of the
Natives of that country, and of their horrible superstitions. p. 57. Chap. 19.
Of the kingdom of Cochin, the goodness of the soil, customs of the
Inhabitants, with a strange history of certain French Pirates. p. 89. Chap. 20.
Of the Isle of Zeilan where they fish for pearls, and charm certain great
fishes; an Idol of a Monkeys tooth, An Isle deserted for the infestation of
Spirits, and of the Isles Maldives. p. 67. Chap. 21. Of the kingdom of
Bisnegar, or Narsingue, of the King, his Bramins or Priests, of Meliapar, where
(they say) reposes the body of Saint Thomas the Apostle, with a strange History
of a Bear. p. 72. Chap. 22. Of the kingdom of Bengala, and Ternassery, of Musk,
some rare remarks of the River Ganges. Of the Torrid Zone, and the conversion
of a young Prince, Idolater to Christianisme. p. 80. Chap. 23. Of the Isles of
Archipelagus, of Saint Lawrence, of the Island of Sumatra, of Elephants, and
other particulars. p. 90. Chap. 24. Of the Isle of Java, of the Inhabitants,
their conditions, and of the riches of the Country. p. 96. Chap. 25. Of the
kingdoms of Malaca and Syam, with a prodigious History of Serpents. p. 102.
Chap. 26. Of the kingdom of Martaban, mavelous strength of Macaraou, or the
flowing of the sea; particularities of Pegu. p. 106. Chap. 27. Of the kingdom
of Pegu, of a bloody war for a white Elephant, of Crocodiles, and the nature of
Elephants. p. 112. Chap. 28. Continuation of Pegu, of the Government and
Policy, of superstitions and Magicians. p. 120. Chap. 29. Of the Idols in Pegu,
bloody sacrifices, Exorcismes, strange Communions. p. 125. Chap. 30. The
Peguans diet, their military exercises, their medicinable drugges, their
Summer. p. 131. Chap. 31. The election of the King of Pegu, their Officers, the
Homages and presents of the subjects to their new Prince. p. 133. Chap. 32. Of
the Justice and Policy with the Peguans, their sacrifices, and horrible dances;
A lamentable History of two young Princes. p. 139. Chap. 33. Of Abdiare and
Vilep, Towns of Pegu, Fismans, Apes, Unicorns, and other Animals. Fotoque an
Idol with three heads. p. 148. Chap. 34. Of the kingdom of Casubi, their
Religion. p. 154. Chap. 35. Of Macharana, the hunting of Tygars, and other wild
beasts, a history of the Rhinocerot, of the Escurial. The esteem they have for
the French there. p. 158. Chap. 36. Of Transiana, the valor of their women. p.
163. Chap. 37. Of the kingdom of Tazatay, and the philosophy of the Indians. p.
169. Chap. 38. Of Tartary, frightful deserts, fierce dogs, a strange history of
two lovers, the Empire of the Tartars, and their Religion. p. 163. Chap. 39.
The Authors return with a summary of Asia. p. 182.
The Contents of the Second Part.
CHap. 1. A general Description of Africa. p. 177. Chap. 2. A Description of
the Isle of Saint Lawrence, with the conditions of the people. p. 182. Chap. 3.
The customs of the Inhabitants of Belugara, or Monopotapa. Salubrious winds
venting from a (...). p. 186. Chap. 4. The country of Monbaze, Melinde, and
Quiloa, the nature of the Inhabitants, and the respect they bear their Prince.
p. 188. Chap. 5. Of Mozambique, the nature of the Inhabitants. Cefala. Mines of
gold in Ophir. Belugara. p. 191. Chap. 6. Of Monopotapa, the Princes estates,
and Government, his way of living, and the singularity of his country. p. 193.
Chap. 7. The History and strange adventure of Prince Alfondie. Another of the
Amors of Princess Abederame. p. 204. Chap. 8. The Authors voyage into
Ethiope: A Description of Priest John's Dominions, with the quality of his
people. p. 211. Chap. 9. Of the town of Bagamidri, and the coronation of their
Kings. p. 218. Chap. 10. Of the Mansion of Priest John, and his Justice. A
History upon this subject. p. 220. Chap. 11. Magnificence of the Negus and his
military Officers. p. 223. Chap. 12. The victory of the Negus over the
Goragues. His entrance into Barua. 227. Chap. 13. The manner of service at the
Negus's table, the receipt of the Portuguese Ambassador. p. 229. Chap. 14. Of
the kingdom and policy of Mongibir, of the mountain Amara, where the Abyssin
Princes are, p. 233. Chap. 15. Of the town of Barua, Bagamidri, and other
stories of Sorcerers. p. 247. Chap. 16. Of the Queen of Saba, and the kingdom
of Caraman. p. 251. Chap. 17. Gf some particular towns in Ethiope, visited by
the Author in his peregrination. p. 256. Chap. 18. A prodigious History of a
young Abissin Prince, by name Joel, by enchantment transformed into an Ape. p.
261. Chap. 19. Of the Desert Beniermi, and the Towns, Dangala, Machida,
Georgia, etc. p. 271. Chap. 20. Of Grand Caire, of Balm of Egypt, of Nile, of
Crocodiles, and the particulars of Egypt. p. 274. Chap. 21. Of the town of
Alexandria, the Isle of Malta, and the Authors return to Marseils. p. 281.
Chap. 22. The Authors voyage to the kingdom of Morocca, he is taken by the
Spaniards, an accident befell the Author at Arache, the battle of Sebastian
King of Portugal. p. 286. Chap. 23. Of the kingdoms of Marocca and Fez. p.
297.
The Contents of the third Part.
THe Authors voyage to Constantinople. p. 305. The Authors voyage into Italy.
p. 313. The Authors voyage to Guinea. p. 320. Chap. 1. The Authors voyage in
the West Indies, the description, length, and distances of America. p. 327.
Chap. 2. The Authors Departure, particulars of Demingo. p. 331. Chap. 3. A
violent tempest, the Isle of Cuba and Hispaniola, the customs of the
Inhabitants, and their Kings. p. 334. Chap. 4. Of the coasts of New- Spain, of
the torrid Zone, and winds which blow there. p. 340. Chap. 5. Of South and
North America, the Qualities, and Discovery. p. 344. Chap. 6. Of Canada or New-
France. p. 349. Chap. 7. Of Virginia, and Florida, Fountains of youth,
dangerous love. p. 352. Chap. 8. Of Mexico: the nature of the Inhabitants,
their Kings, sacrifices, etc. p. 356. Chap. 9. The Mexican year, their
Paradise, Infernal, and their Dances. p. 362. Chap. 10. Burning mountains, the
conquest of Mexico, and some particular trees. p. 365. Chap. 11. Of New- Spain,
the Provinces thereof, and of Peru. p. 370. Chap. 12. Of certain Fountains,
Lakes, Rivers, etc. in this country. p. 377. Chap. 13. The Mines of the new
world. p. 382. Chap. 14. Of Peru, of the Kings or Incas, and of the country of
Chila. p. 387. Chap. 15. Of the straight of Magellan. p. 392. Chap. 16. Of
Brasil, the Conquest of it, and of the Brasilians, etc. p. 395. Chap. 17. The
Isle of S. Thomas, according to a Description made to the Athour, by Sieur de
la Courbe, and Cassis. p. 404.
Books Printed for John Starkey at the sign of the Miter, near the
Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street.
Books in Divinity.
MAster Thomas Hall's Practical and Polemical Commentary, or, Exposition upon
the third and fourth Chapters of the latter Epistle of Saint Paul to Timothy,
wherein the Text is explained, some controversies discussed, sundry cases of
Conscience are cleared, many common Places are succinctly handled, and diverse
useful, and seasonable observations raised. Fol.

Mr. Thomas Halls Homesus Enervatus, or a Confutation of the Millenarian
opinion, plainly showing that Christ will not Reign with the Saints for 1000.
years on Earth, with a Word to our fifth Monarchy men, in Octavo.

Mr. Thomas Halls Apologia pro Ministerio Evangelico, in qua plane and plene
ostenditur ejus necessitas, dignitas, Efficacia and Vtilitas; in Octavo.

Mr. Richard Baxters Directions, and Persuasions to a sound Conversion, for
prevention of that deceit and Damnation of Souls; and of those scandals,
heresies, and desperate Apostasies, that are the consequents of a counterfeit
or superficial Change, this being the second Part of the Call to the
Unconverted, in Oct.

Mr. Richard Baxter of saving Faith, that it is not only Gradually, but
Specifically dictinct from all common Faith, being a Treatise in answer to Mr.
Barlow of Oxford, in Quarto.

Dr. Thomas Goodwin, Opuscula Theologica, in Octavo.

Mr. Thomas Gataker, Gods Eye on his Israel; being an Exposition on Numbers
23.21. in Quarto.

Mr. Thomas Gataker, de Justificatione, and de Dipthongis, in 120.

Mr. William Cartwright of Oxford, his Sermon of the Passion of Christ, in
Octavo.

Mr. Thomas Warrens Justification justified, or a Treatise of Justification by
Faith, in Octavo.

Mr. Thomas Coopers Art of Giving, or a Guide to Charity, in Octavo.

Mr. John Philips Christian Alphabet, Containing Grounds of Knowledge unto
Salvation, in twelves.

Mr. Adam Harsnets Gods Summons into a general Repentance, in twelves.

Mr. Thomas Hooker of New England, his Miscelanies, containing five excellent
Treatises in Divinity, in twelves.

Mr. Richard Sedgwick. The Synopsis of Christianity, in an Exposition of the
Commandments, Lords Prayer, and the Creed, in Octavo.

Books of History and Humanity.
LEtters of Affairs, Love, and Courtship, written to several Persons of Honor
and Quality, by the Exquisite Pen of Monsieur de Voiture, Englished by J. D. in
Octavo.

Mr. Walter Montague, his Shepherds Paradise, a Comedy privately acted before
the late King Charles, by the Queens Majesty, and her Ladies of Honor, whose
names are prefixed, in Octavo.

Mr. Thomas Halls Phaetons Folly, being a Translation of the second Book of
Ovids Metamorphosis, Paraphrastically and Grammatically; with an Essay on Ovid
de Tristibus, in Octavo.

Mr. Agricola Carpentars Magical Description of the soul, in Oct.

M. John Hayes Complete Tradesman, or a Guide for the true Stating of Interest,
at Six per Cent. per. Annum, with other useful Tables, in twelves.

A Relation of the Life of the Famous Christina, Queen of Sweden, whereunto is
added her Genius, Translated out of French, by J. H. in Quarto.

France no friend to England, or the Resentments of the French, upon the
success of the English, as it is expressed in a Remonstrance to the King of
France, upon the surrendering of Dunkirke into the hands of the English, wherein
much of the private Transactions between Cardinal Mazarine, and the late
Protector, Oliver, are discovered; Translated out of French, in Quarto.

Mr. Henry Peachams Truth of Time, Revealed, in twelves.

Aminta, the Famous Pastoral, written in Italian, by Signior Torquato Tasso,
and translated into English Verse by John Dancer; together with diverse
Ingenious Poems, in Octavo.

Guillims Display of Heraldry, the fourth Edition, unto which is added three
hundred new Coats, in Folio.

The History of the English and Scotch Presbytery, wherein is discovered their
Designs and Practices for the subversion and government in Church and State,
the second Edition, in Octavo.

Law Books.
JUdge Owens Reports, in Folio.

Juge Hattons Reports, in Folio.

Judge Bridgmans Reports, in Folio.

Sir James Leys Reports, in Folio.

Grounds of the Laws of England, in Octavo.

The Terms of the Law, in Octavo.

Hernes Law of Conveyances, in Octavo.

Abridgement of Doctor and Student, in Octavo.

Perkins Treatise of the Law of England, in Octavo.

Shepherd of Corporations, in Octavo.

The Lay-mans Lawer, in Octavo. Cum multis aliis.

THE FIRST PART OF THE TRAVAILES OF VINCENT le BLANC.
CHAP. I. The Authors embarking for Alexandria, and his shipwreck.
I Was not fully arrived at my fourteenth year of age, when seeing a vessel
making ready for Alexandria, and the Grand Caire, impulsed by that noble
ambition to view the world, I resolved to embark with the Company, though
secretly, and without the privity of my dearest parents. Of this vessel, called
our Lady of Victory, one Robert Pontoine a Merchant, and my Father Raphael le
Blanc were owners, which so delightfully took the affections of my infancy,
that I spent the better part of my time aboard her. I often begged my Fathers
consent for the voyage; but he, as a person experienced in such affairs,
foreseeing the hardship and dangers my tender age was to encounter, still
denied me. Notwithstanding I persisted in my resolution to go in what sort
soever; and though I received some severities from my mother on this occasion,
yet with a suit of apparel and some linnens I had provided, I took my way one
morning toward Civitad about five leagues distant from Marseills. But my
mother reflecting on some words I had let fall (that they should never see me
more) sent some to overtake me, who with fair words persuaded me home again. At
last she perceiving my resolution peremptory, and that I watched all
opportunities to escape; without acquainting my Father, who would never have
consented, she gave me leave: so as delivering me some moneys, and recommending
me to one Baptist Cote a Merchant of integrity, she acquainted not the Captain,
who was my Godfather, because she would not have him know she was privy to my
voyage. Then I privately went aboard in the Victory, and dealt with the Pilot
Augustine Battaillon to conceal me; which for the affection I had to travail,
and the respect he had to my Father he performed.

Alexandria. Caire.
Thus leaving Marseilles, we set sail for Alexandria, where with favorable
winds in few days we safely arrived: and from thence at the Grand Caire, of
which place I shall say little, until my return from my great Oriental
voyage, when I travailed thorough Africa; because by reason of my green years,
I was not then able to make those remarks, I shall hereafter discourse of: but
shall satisfy my self for the present to tell you, that having staid there by
the space of eight whole months, and then our Master having laden his ship in
Alexandria, with drugs of all sorts, spices, His return and shipwreck in Candia.
and other Indian commodities, was bound homewards: we sailed happily for some
few days toward the coast of the Isle of Candia; where we first felt the
miseries, for the most part, accompany sea voyages: we unfortunately lost our
rudder, which being a principal member of the vessel was a most dangerous
accident, and forced us to shore to mend it. Both our Merchants and Seamen on a
festival day coming ashore to make merry, they were so surprised with the
beauties and subtleties of the Island Curtizans, that they not only exhausted
all their money but sold their commodities to undervalews to satisfy their
pleasures, which some of them were glutted with to the loss of their lives:
and having thus spent near two months, we put to sea for France, and two or
three days had a prosperous wind, which on a sudden turned to the North-East,
and immediately to a furious violent North Wind, that drove us upon the coast
of Turluru, Turluru Isle Canee.
an Island near Canee, which is a Haven, and Town in Candia, where we cast
anchor to ride out the tempestuous weather.

Here another sad accident befell us, by the malice of some of our Merchants,
and Seamen, who reduced to great necessitie^ by reason of their immoderate and
vain expenses in Candia, resolved upon a desperate course, by sinking the ship
to satisfy all their Creditors at a cast, A ma^icious shipwreck.
and sliding the Anchor on one side betwixt two waters, in less than a quarter
of an hour our ship struck on ground; and they having prepared the cockboat for
their refuge, about eleven at night got into it, leaving some thirty of us
behind them to the mercy of the waters, of which our ship was already full;
thus we were reduced to the very brink of despair, nothing but confused cries
and groans amongst us, accompanied with prayers to God, Just punishment of the
persidious.
whose just Judgment left not unpunished the Authors of their own, and of our
unexpected shipwreck, for their boat being overturned within a hundred paces of
the ship, they were all drowned in an instant.

And it is worth observation that the greatest part of our company were
reprobate persons, and absolute Atheists, for some of our Mariners seeing
themselves in this imminent danger, their vessel being filled with water,
secured some cans of wine which they pour down their throats, amongst the rest
one Honoratus a Marseillian, put on his best apparel, and with some French
coin threw himself into the Sea: those rascals endeavored to prevent him,
inviting him to drink, saying 'twas better to dye full than empty, but the poor
creature not able to swim sunk immediately, his body was within few days cast
upon the shore, the Clark of the ship stripped him, took his clothes and money,
and buried him, since being sent into France to be empowered, by the Merchants
to receive four or five thousand Zequines, which the goods and commodities
saved from shipwreck were sold for, he carried the news to Honoratus widow, but
I doubt whether he restored her his goods as he told us he did. This while the
greatest part of us perished on the shallowes; for of sixty five persons that
we were in all, but five escaped, whereof (praised be God) I was one; and every
man shifting for himself; The Author preserved.
by the help of a planck I got to shore, after I had been fifteen hours in the
water, and thus I saved my self, together with the Clerk of the vessel.

After rest and victuals had a little recovered us, and our Secretary returned
to the sea side, to view the remains of the wrack: the Consul of the French
Nation, residing in a Town in Canee, eight leagues distant, upon notice
repaired with speed to us with twenty Soldiers, to preserve what was saved,
who took good order to see the commodities dried, and restored to the right
owners: having taken his due fees, and leaving our Secretary with the Soldiers
in charge with the goods, he took me home to his house, and provided me clothes
after the Greek fashion and other necessaries that I wanted: I stayed six or
seven months with the Consul, who gave me noble and free entertainment for my
Fathers sake, whose friend and acquaintance he was expecting some ship bound
for Jerusalem, for I had vowed a pilgrimage to the holy Sepulcher to give God
thanks for my preservation in the last great danger.

At the seven months end, here arrived a Venetian ship bound for Jerusalem,
the Master of the ship a Marseillian, by name Guillem de Cassis, who stood
amazed at sight of me, saying he had attended at my Funeral at Marseilles, and
that my Parents heard I was cast away with the rest of the company, and that
they bore my loss heavier then that of the ship, wherein my Father had half
share, (as I showed before that) which loss broak my fathers partner, Robert
Pontoine, and forced him to live privately at home, then I agreed with William
Cassis, who was to bring me to Jerusalem, and the Consul advanced me a hundred
Zequines toward my journey, advising me to keep my money private.

CHAP. II. Of the Towns of Tripoli and Damas, with the relation of a Murder.
LEaving Canee in the month of August, we steered out course toward Syria, a
famous and renowned country, by the Hebrews called Aram, since Halad, and
Sabal, formerly of great extent, and contained the Provinces of Comagene,
Caelesyria, Phenicia, Palestina or Judea, Mesopotamia, and one part of Arabia,
and others.

In the time of our Holy Wars, it reached from the Tigris, unto Egypt, from
Cilicia or Caramania, unto the red sea, formerly Antioche, Antioche.
was the chief town in Caelesyria. The first place we landed at was Tripoli in
Syria, where Monsieur Toureau a Marseillian, most generously entertained us.

Libanus.
Upon the Mount Libanus two leagues distant from Tripoli, you may see snow all
seasons of the year, you may find the Manna, or Celestial dew, Manna.
which I often walking the fields, took for snow, until tasting it, I found it
sweet as sugar, and undeceived my self: when the natives perceived me gather
any, they would say, Nazarini coul sacor va la Tayhon which signifies,
Christian eat of the Manna, for it is good.

Chrysorrhoas.
The river Chrysorrhoas, famous for her waters rises out of Libanus, and runs
through Damas, there rises also another river called Magora, and loses her self
in Tripoli: In this mount is the Prophet Josua's tomb visited by Christian
pilgrims, and by Turks; I have heard from the Inhabitants and laborers of the
Mountain, that Vines bear there twice a year, to which I give little credit.

From Tripoli we traveled to Aman, three days journey thence: Aman.
this Town was formerly called Emitus, by the Arabians Camahale, by the Turks
Amcus, and by the Indians Amsa, it is a Country of Mulberries, and silk worms,
full of Gardens, and most excellent fruits. The Town is peopled with Grecians,
Turks, Mores, Armenians and Jews; it is very ruinous, nothing left entire,
save the Market, and exchange for Indian, Arabian, Egyptian, French, Italian,
English, Dutch Merchants; they trade there in Cottons, Silks, Linnens,
Carpits, Woollens, and Potashes; the land is very fruitful in all sort of
fruit, Corn, wines and Oils.

From thence 3. days journey to Aleppo, some time Hierapolis, Aleppo.
a Town of the same, and greater trade then Tripoli, amongst others in jewels,
spices, and perfumes; my Camarade having learnt here what he looked for, we
went to Damas, Damas.
the Capital Town of all Syria. She is one of the fairest, and greatest
Traders in the Country, remarkable cheifely for delightful situation,
healthful air, fruitful Soil, abundance of waters, fruits, and of all
sorts of commodities necessary to livelihood; her vast treasures, trade, and
number of soldiers, her fair Structures, many sword and knife-cuttlers, and
other expert Artists in steel, who give a delicate temper with musk and
Amber-greese. There I saw a Marseillian Cutler who spent near a hundred Zequins
in forging one blade, A F^ench Cutler.
which was by many admired: I met him ten years after at Paris, he told me he
sold the same blade to Collo Dornano for three hundred crowns. Damas is
situate in a fair plain, her soil well watered and fruitful, with plenty
of Gardens, and Orchards round about her, she is surrounded with two mountains,
Amon and Sahanir, Mounains:
the one called Amon, the other Sahanir; There are many grots and caves, (as
it is said) formerly inhabited by the Christians in time of persecution, there
is one can contain 4000. persons, Grots of persecuted Christians.
and without doubt are fairer and larger than those at present to be seen at
Saragosa in Sicily: toward the East there is a lake 7. or 8. leagues about,
through which run two sweet streams, the one called Aman or Amma, Aman and
Pharphar Rivers.
which runs by the foot of the wall, toward the South, the other Farfar, and
threads through the middle of the Town; she is also adorned with many fountains,
the water being brought by pipes from Chrysoran. The houses are built of the
Moresco model, with galleries, do almost cover the whole streets, as at
Aleppo. The Town is strong, and begirt with good ditches, well flanked and
manned in time of war. A Bassa, or Governor, keeps it for the Turk, who has a
strong lifeguard of horse: The Suburbs are greater, and more populous than the
Town. Silks.
There are twenty thousand Mulberry planters for the trade of silk, and an
infinite number of cutlers and other Artists in steel and iron. On the East
there stands a Tower where you may yet see the Flour de luces, the arms of
France; which must have been set there, when the French were Lords of the Holy
land: there in a little enclosure is to be seen Zacharies tomb, Zacharies Tomb
Father to St. John Baptist: a place of great veneration, the Mahometans
themselves celebrating the feast day with solemn rejoycings, St. Paul's
Imprisonment.
they yet show the place where S. Paul persecuting Christians fell from his
horse, and the place of his imprisonment, and where he was let down in a
basket. They show you the place, where it is said Cain killed his Brother Abel.
There is an Alablaster mine affords them great store of fair vessels, and other
pieces. From thence commonly are set forth the Caravans, or land convoys for
Medina and Meca, and to many other places of Arabia, and the east.

The Town is far fairer without then within, by reason of the commodious
situation and beautiful aspect, but the streets are not so well contrived;
the Market place, or Baiar is ample, and fair built with Piatzza's, as at
Bolonia, most of the houses in Town are served with fountains, derived from
Chrysorrhoas, the graffs are planted with Mulbery trees.

There is a Citadell said to be built by a Florentine Renegado, who then
commanded it. While we staid at Damas, one day walking the Market place, we saw
an Executioner (surrounded with a great crowd of people) upon a tall horse, A
fatal Execution.
and dragging a Malefactor (tied with a rope) by the legs to the place of
Execution; and enquiring the reason of this Justice, we were told he was a
Christian, and had killed a judge of the Country: This poor sufferer, as we
since understood, by attestations, and letters, he carried about him in a box,
was a Frenchman, and born in Saintonge, his name was Roubie, returning from
Jerusalem, where he received the Cross from the hands of the Patriarch; and
passing thorough this Town, met a judge, who according to the insolent custom
of the sworn enemies to Christians with one blow struck Roubie at his feet;
which for the present he seemed to take very patiently, dissembling the
affront, with resolution nevertheless when opportunity should serve, cruelly to
revenge it, he absented himself for three whole years, and in that time having
perfected himself in the Turkish Language, disguised in the habit of a Dervis,
A Dervis.
a sort of Religious, in great esteem amongst them, he wears a Cimitere by
his side, and a dagger hanging at his girdle, to see the commands of their
Prophet Nabi, strictly observed this supposed Dervis begirt with his hanger,
returned to Damas, and assisted daily (in Court) the judge his enemy, whose
diligence to justice was held a good Omen; this he practiced for three whole
years and more, not omitting one audience in all that time, daily expecting an
opportunity to revenge himself. Upon a time hearing the judge give Sentence
against an Orphan, who was sued for some inheritance, suddenly stepped up to him,
and with a mortal wound on the forehead laid him dead at his feet, took his
place, and said that the judgment newly pronounced against the Orphan was
unjust, and that it was fit to repeat the Evidence which without the least
interruption, in respect to the suppose^ Dervis, was immediately done by
Council on both sides, Armin.
and a Herald openly declared, that he thought it Justice the Orphan should
enjoy one moity of the land in question; this was spoken to the satisfaction of
the Auditory, but especially of the Dervis, who gave his opinion and
approbation in few words, and at the same instant, judgment was pronounced to
the great content of those were cast by the former sentence: his body was
carried home to his house, and the Murderer highly commended for his great act
of Justice.

Reubie satisfied in his revenge, by degrees retired himself to Tripoli, where
by misfortune being reproached by a certain countryman of his, who had seen
him in the habit; he inconsiderately confessed it, and the reason that moved him
so to do: and some Turks hearing of it, they presently caused him to be
apprehended; and upon search found uncircumcised, he was brought back to Dama,
where he was thus arraigned, and executed, and his body cast to the dogs, to be
devoured.

Not far from Damas, and the Jordan springs is the town of Philippa, whence
the woman was, Dan Caesarea.
that our Savior cured of the flux, Belinas, sometime Dan, Paneas, or
Caesarea, it lies not far from Libanus, and between her and Gallilean, or
Tiberiade Sea is a great vale, where is a Lake swelled with the snow, that
falls from the Mount Libanus, through this Lake runs the Jordan, and is called
Es-mal-maron, formerly the waters of Merac; there did Joshuah overthrow the
Kings of Chananee, the Lake is in Summer almost dry, and from thence unto
Jope, is a very fruitful country called Charon.

Toward the Tiberiade Sea there is another vale very hollow, between two
hills, where the Sun is hardly ever seen. This hill rises not far from the Sea
side, and reaches to Sidon or Sayette, and of the other side they both reach
the Arabian hills, near Damas, and there lies the Country formerly called
Palmyrena.

CHAP. III. Of the Deserts of Arabia, of Spirits, or Apparitions there, of the
Sea of Sodom, of the Hills of Sina and Oreb, and the three Arabia's.
AFter some few days stay we left Damas, Benin Macharib for Misor.
and passed through Benin, from thence we came to Macharaib, or Macherib, and
Masarib three days journey from Damas: it is a small town of Palestina,, not
very pleasant, formerly called Misor, one of the Levies Cities, sometime
belonging to King Balsan, near the torrent of Arnon in the tribe of Reuben. The
Torrent Arnor.
At our arrival there, having discharged our Chioas, or guide, which cost us
six Ducats a man; my companion Cassis took a little boy for his guide, and
brought me first to a fair house in the Turkish quarter, and inhabited by a
Turk; instead of going to the place inhabited by Christians; which I not a
little wondered at, because the difference in Religion breeds a discrepance
between them and us; as I was entering the house, a Turkish Dame, well
fashioned, with a child in her arms, briskly asked me in the Syriack tongue,
Achibi, Nazarini che senti achelect, Christian what do you here, I straight
made answer, Mnaar Jenesay ana cardas amisi antina, that my Camarade was within
to speak with some body, but she with indignation thrust me out of the Porch;
young as I was, I had the wit to present her with a pair of coral pendants,
which she liked well, and said in her language, Thou art a good lad, but the
other is a knave that gave me nothing; and as I was retiring my self, she
courteously invited me in, where I saw my companion take some small things out
of his bag, which he presented to several women who had every one of them a
sucking child at their breast, they wore rings in their ears of twice hand
compass, richly set with Diamonds and Pearls, every one of them made choice of
some Venetian curiosity, which though of small value, they set great esteem
upon: as we were thus entertaining these Ladies, in came a grave Moore,
Counpayniors brother, who upon notice that two strangers were entered his
house, came presently home, fired with jealousy, a passion most of them are
infected with, as was easily seen in the rage and distraction of his
countenance: but after he perceived his brother, he ran to his embraces, with
many caresses took me by the hand, Morets entertainment.
in French said we were most welcome; and told us he was the Renegado Murat
called Silvester, compelled thereto by force, but resolved to leave Turkisme,
and become a Christian again, as we were: after many complements, invited us to
eat: then a cloth of leather delicately dressed, being spread upon the ground,
they brought in boiled mutton, rice, and their melted butter called Manteque,
we made a good dinner, drinking Ragui their common drink, composed of water,
figs, and Dates, and is a sort of strong water, for wine they have not any.
At dinner I seriously observed the Renegado Murat, a man of graceful personage,
well proportioned, and taller by the head then my fellow-traveller, and nothing
like him; and I observed women with what content they listened to our manner of
discourse.

At dinner the two brothers discoursed of their affairs, and design in
Arabic, conceiving I understood them not, but during my eight months
residence at the Grand Caire, I had learnt enough to understand their
discourse; and heard my fellow relate this shipwreck, and the manner thereof;
and that he came to crave his assistance to recover his losses; the Renegado
told him, that in few days he should take a journey for Meka, and that he
could procure him so many Cherafs, or Ducats by the month, and at his return
from that voyage he would give him a sum of money, if he returned not
himself home with him: to this my camarade made answar, he had undertaken to
conduct me to Jerusalem, and that it would be a shame to him to leave me so
young; the Renegado replied, that I should go along with them, and that he
would furnish me with a Camel for the journey, and that coming back we should
see Jerusalem. All this I understood, Wine sold by Apothecaries.
and though not pleased to see my intention crossed, yet I durst not take the
least notice, for fear they should put some trick upon me, considering they
might leave me behind, or sell me, or exchange me for some pieces of wine,
which in those Countries is both rare and dear, sold only by the Apothecaries
for the sick, or by Christian Merchants. Thus I heard them advise how to be rid
of me; but at last pitying my tender age, they resolved to know my will, and
then my Camarade freely spoke his brothers intention, and that in that journey
we should see the great Desert, the Mount Sinai and Oreb, the Towns of Medina,
La Meyur, and many other remarkable places, and that returning we should see
Jerusalem; I showed my self most willing to what they should resolve, finding
no other way to save my self, and upon my fellows promise coming back to show
me the place I so much desired.

Thus resolved, they provided six fat sheep, prize two ducats, Provisions for
the deserts.
together with other meat, which they boiled in a great chaldron, till the
flesh came from the bones, then put flesh only, with a good proportion of salt
butter in the same Chaldron, and fried it well, and potted it up for our
journey. This we loaded upon two Cammells, with store of onyons, biscuit, three
large bottells of strong water, with others full of fresh water, and other
necessaries, and my camarade and self had a camel betwixt us. Having staid
eight days at Macherib, we set forth with the Caravane, Caravane.
composed of great numbers of Merchants, and of above twenty thousand camells,
laden with all sorts of wares and commodities, reaching two leagues in length.
The Captain of the Town accompanied us with five hundred horse unto the
desert, but further he could not go, by reason of the heat of the sands,
Burning sands. Want of water.
that burn their horses hoofes, and founder them: and besides in the desert
there is extreme scarcity of water, which we carried along with us in leather
vessels, to make use of in the desert of Arabia, where very scarcely any fresh
is found. We crossed a part of the Holy Land, leaving Jerusalem on the right
hand, with a very sensible regret, to be within a days journey of that place,
and not to see the City. The nights we rested in our Tents, which we pitched
with ease, fastening wooden poles thorough the middle with ropes, which by the
help of pegs struck into the ground sustained the rest; drawing toward the
south, into some vales in search of fresh water, we perceived upon an eminent
piece of land the ruins of some Towns, and a little lower a Lake, called Sodom
and Gomorra, Dead sea of Sodom.
or the Dead Sea, anciently called the Lake Asphaltite, which to this day does
witness the just judgment of God, we tasted some of this water, which,
although very brackish, yet refresht us for the present.

From thence, after seven or eight hours rest, we took our way thorough the
Desert, marching in rank and file, following a Jurabi, Jurabi a Guide uses the
Compass.
who undertook to guide the Caravane, making use of the Seamans compass.

Upon our March we were from hand to hand advertised, that some one of our
company was missing, that strayed from the rest, 'twas the companion of an
Arabian Merchant, very sad for the loss of his friend; Sad accidents in the
deserts.
part of the Caravane made an halt, and four Moors were sent in quest of him,
and a reward of a hundred ducats was in hand paid them, but they brought back
no tidings of him; and it is uncertain whether he was swallowed up in the sands,
or whether he met his death by any other misfortune, as it often happens, by
the relation of a Merchant then in our company, who told us that two years
before (traveling the same journey) a camarade of his going a little aside
from the company about his necessary occasions, Apparitions in the deserts.
saw three men, who called him by his name, and one of them to his thinking
favored very much his companion, and as he was about to follow them, his real
companion called him to come back to his company, and the strength of his
voice, found himself deceived by the others, and thus was saved.

And all Travailers in these parts hold that in the Deserts there are many such
fantasms and goblins seen, that strive to seduce the Travelers, and cause them
to perish with hunger and despair: having traveled fifteen days thorough the
Desert, drawing still toward Medina, we were seized with a great drowth,
whereupon the word was given for hand to hand through the company, that some
whose Camells were not hard laden, should go seek out fresh water, amongst
others I and my companion offered our selves, three score of us then drew out,
who waited for us not far off, ready to assist us upon the least notice or
signal given; we were guarded by a strong Troop, assigned us by the Captain,
Arabian Robbers.
to defend us against the Arabian thieves, who have no other livelihoods then
the robberies they commit upon the Caravannes; we came unto the side of a
little sandy hill, where we found great store of little trees, called Salicor,
of which they make their pot ashes for glasses: a little further we discovered
an Indian cane with a flagge at the end of it, which is the sign they put upon
a spring in those parts; and groaping with our hands in the sand, we found a
great piece of Camels leather, that stopped the mouth of a well: we drew up some
water to drink our selves, and some to carry back to our Camarades, which we
thought pretty good, though very salt and brackish: a piece of money was given
to him that first found out the well, and having stayed there, some ten hours
at least, we went back toward our company, with whom we joined, and
distributed our water among them: That night we rested near a hill, and left
our lodging an hour before day, entering into very white sands, and so small,
that the dust troubled us very much. We had then entered the stony Arabia, and
the desert, and proceeding in our way, we came to the foot of Mount Sina,
Montsina called Lurle or Tur.
called by the Arabians, Lurle, or Tur, so famous in the Holy Scripture, Exodus
19. being the place where God gave the law to Moses, and is therefore to this
day called Gods Mountain, and joined to Oreb, now called Saint Catherines
Mount, because it is believed that Saint Catherines shryne reposes there, The
Arabians pay, Oreb called Saint Cather-mount.
great reverence to Mount Sina, and do not suffer beasts to feed thereon: They
yet remark the Rock Moses miraculously drew water out of, Exodus 17. but there
is none there for the present, although there be plenty in several other places
of the Hill, for both the Priests Caloires, and Mahometans, that inhabit the
hill, have several good springs.

Some hold Sina and Oreb to be two Hills, others hold them to be but one,
divided only in two Copps, Sina on the East, and Oreb on the West, and is not
so eminent as the former; at the foot of this Hill Justinian the Emperor
founded a Monastery called Saint Catherines, possessed by the Caloires, Monks
of the order of Saint Basil, as those are at Mount Athos, or Mount Santo in
Greece; this Mountain abounds in herbage and pasture.

The three Arabia's are commonly called Petrea, Deserta, The three Arabia's,
the desert, the stony, and the happy.
and Faelix, this is properly Petrea, or the stony Arabia, through which the
children of Israel went into the land of Promise: thus called, not from the
stones or rocks, but from Petra, a very ancient town, since called Herac, or
Arach, which was the chief town of that division of Arabia, also called by some
Nabathea; in this Arabia were the several countries or Provinces of Amalec,
Edom, Moab, and Madian, containing several deserts, as that of Sin, Sur, Cedat,
and Cadez, and others, it begins near the Jordan, and ends Southward toward
the desert Arabia, with great hills interposed, and the desert of Benascali, of
great extent; where for the benefit of passengers, are wells built with bones
of dead men and beasts, for want of stones. The desert Arabia has great want
of water, and is called by some Estreiemin, by others Soball, the Sarasens call
it Barraab, it contains Meka and Medina.

The happy Arabia toward Ader is called Ayman; The stony has been peopled
with Sarasens or Aragenes, the spring of Mahometanisme: The desert is chiefly
possessed by robbers, cutthroats, and rogues; The happy called Sabea, part of
it is subject to the Turk, part of it to the Sophy of Persia, the rest has
Kings, and particular Lords, and Masters.

The stony is surrounded with great hills, and is well stored with water,
having Westward Egypt, and the other two Arabia's, Northward, Judaea and
Syria, and from Syria, through the stony the chiefest part of the desert, is
least on the left hand. This desert has vast wildernesses utterly uninhabited,
except in few places where there are small rivers; M^ka Medina. Metar. Alcoran.
and has only the towns of Medina and Meka, and the Castle of Metar where
some say Mahomet writ his Alcoran, the great desert of Benhali, or Benaseali,
of which I late spoke of runs quite through her, is twelve days journey
over, covered with white sand, and small as dust: The happy called by the
Arabians Rahahac, is divided from the desert at the Haven Ziden, Zidem, a Haven.
and has very fair Provinces, as Aden, Agias, and others, unto the Isles of
Maera, and Mazira, toward the Cape Rosolgate.

CHAP. IV. Of the town of Medina, and the false Prophet, Mahomets successors.
FRom Mount Sina, we came in few days to a little hill, where there stands a
Village called Jusoreh, inhabited almost by Jews only, J^soreh.
and a well of the best water can be drunk: those Jews hide their secret parts,
with a linen cloth, and are naked for the rest of their bodies: they are
naturally crafty and malicious, Jews ^hieves.
much given to stealing, which is esteemed a virtue amongst them. They once
cunningly stole my Camarades Cassock which he wore; one amongst them feigning
himself mad, begged an alms of him, and seeing he had a Cassock of good fine
cloth, maliciously threw abundance of vermin which he had in a basket upon his
clothes, and forced my companion to strip himself of Cassock, A cheat.
Doublet, and all, to shake off the vermin; the rest of the Jews gave their
seeming assistance, correcting the pretended madman, or cheat, whilst he run
away with coat, and doublet; which my fellow never after heard of; but it made
us merry in the rest of our journey.

At length having traveled five and forty days travail from Macharib, without
much rest, but on Frydaies, which is the Mahometans Sabbath: we approached near
Medinat al Nabi, or the Prophets City, Medinat. al. Nabi.
and there stopped the Caravane, every one pitching his tent: 'twas a delight to
behold our company, that seemed a numerous Army rank't in order round about a
well, in the midst of diverse Date trees. We arrived at Medina, formerly Jesrab,
Jesrab.
a Town of the desert Arabia, where Mahomet died and was buried; he was born at
Jetrib, or Meka; in this town there are very good waters, for which cause it is
well peopled: There my Camarade put a base cheat upon his brother; telling him
that if he would entrust him with certain commodities, he would go trade with
them at Ziden (a Haven in the red sea, near to Meka) where were arrived some
ships from the India's, as he understood by some Abyssins he met in pilgrimage
at Mount Sina, Cassis deceived his brother.
the Renegado Murat believed him, and bought six Camels at Medina, and loaded
them with several commodities, which he committed to his brother Cassis, and to
account for them at his return: but instead of going to the place, he pretended
to his brother, he turned his course toward the happy Arabia, Zibit, Aden,
Ormus, Zibit, Aden, Ormus.
from thence through Persia, to the East India's and to the Priest John's
country, and to other places as you shall hear.

Some have said, that either at Medina or Meka, Description of Medina.
was Mahomets tomb all of iron, suspended in the air with a loadstone; but I
have heard for certain, that the false Prophet died at Medina, and is there
buried, where to this day his tomb is frequently visited by Mohammedan
pilgrims, Mahomets tomb.
from all parts of the world; as the holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, is visited by
Christians: thither go the Caravanes, from Aleppo, Damas, Caravan of Aleppo.
Dumas and Grand-Cair.
and the grand Cair, and from other places: there meet sometimes, above forty
or fifty thousand persons, and as many Camels, with some guards of soldiers.
This tomb is built of white marble, with the tombs of Ebubeker, Ali, Omar, and
Ottman, Califfs, and Mahomets successors, and every one a book lying by them of
their lives, Books of the lives and Sects of Mahomets successors.
and their Sect or opinion, which are very discrepant: there are also a great
number of Lamps always lighted; we were desirous to be informed by Murats
means, whether the monument had ever been held up in the air, we were answered
by an Alfaquis, or Turkish Priest, that formerly Mahomets body had there
reposed; but that since the Angels had translated his body before God, to
assist him at his great Judgment; and told us many other fopperies, that
occasioned Murat to ask why that tomb was built, to which we received some
frivolous answer: the tomb is three steps or thereabouts in ground, the steps
are white marble; and the Turks believe to this day, that the Tomb hangs in
the air, and wonder very much, when we tell them we have seen the contrary.

CHAP. V. How Mahomet composed his Alcoran, his victories, and of the rarities
and ceremonies of Meka.
Surazins: Saraca, or Elfarabk.
THe people of this Country were called Saracenes, since Sarazins from a town
called Saraco, or rather from Elfarack, which in their language signifies, to
live by robbery; as all the inhabitants there have ever been great thieves and
robbers, as well as the chiefest part of the desert, Arabians, and Africanian
Arabians are at present. Mahomets birth.
The Impostor-Prophet Mahomet was born amongst them at Itrarib, or Jetrib; a
small village now called Meka, or near unto it. He derived his Pedigree from
Ismael, from his youth inventing his false law; being a subtle, crafty,
undertaking person; he took advantage of the discontents of some Sarazins, that
were not paid their pay by the Grecian Emperor Heraclius his officers, and
made use of them to run over that Empire, with such success from the beginning,
that he undertook greater things; which the easier to compass, Mahomets law.
he gave them a newer Law, compiled with a mixture of their old one, making
them believe 'twas revealed and inspired into him from above: but which in
truth he had forged and composed himself, by the help of some Christian
Apostates, among others of two Christians, sword-cutlers, and slaves then in
Meka, Alcoran.
and very ignorant fellows, and thus filled his Alcoran full of fopperies and
Impertinencies, which he published by the sword; and by force of of arms,
forced all persons he could to receive it. Three principal means he made use
of, to establish his Sect: First of all Sorceries, impostures, and deceits;
Secondly, of a liberty of conscience, sensuality, and licentiousness. Thirdly,
and lastly, of the force of arms. Medina taken by Mahomet.
Medina was the first town he reduced, and there was proclaimed King by his
Captains and Officers. Ebubeker, Ali, Omar, Ottman: and the others that
succeeded him, were called Califfs, afterward he sent them to conquer Asia and
Africa, and in few years they reduced both those parts wholly to their
obedience, setting up their law which has there continued ever since; for they
and their successors have founded the greatest Empires in the world, and so
continue at this day, as the Turk, the Persian, the great Mogull, the Tartar,
the Jerez, and Moracko, and infinite more Kings in Africa and Asia, the East
India's, and the adjacent Isles: from this cursed Doctrine are sprouted forth
many diverse Sects.

We left Medina and came to Meka another town of the desert Arabia, in the two
and twentieth degree, and by reason of the impurity of the air, there is scarce
any more then these two towns in the whole country: it is two days journey
from Medina, pretty large, of the quantity of Roan, or twice as big as
Marseils, it is surrounded with great and steep hills, which serves her for
defense, and makes the access difficult, there are abundance of Merchants, and
very rich, having upon the 23. of May yearly, a famous Fair which they call
their Jubilee. To facilitate the passage from the plain there are four avenues
cut through the Mountain, easy to be maintained; near unto the Town is the
Hill called Jubara, Iubara Abraham's Mountains, Marabouts sacrificators.
where it is believed Abraham would have sacrificed his Son Isaac, and in a
certain place there, the Marabouts immolate at this time; there the pilgrims
offer sheep, and distribute the flesh and offalls to the poor, who are very
numerous, and give them water to drink, they devour those entrails half raw,
impatient to stay the dressing of them; they make holes in the sand and bake
them therein; this Abraham's Mountain is a league and a half distant from the
Town, and near it is situate a village of a hundred and fifty houses or
thereabouts, with a Mosquee or Temple, frequently called Meka stately, high,
and built upon pillars; those days they sacrifice, they let water run through
pipes at the portall, wherewith they wash their feet, there are no springs in
those parts, water being brought from other places, and is extreme scarce and
dear, and the least quantity you can drink will cost you an estere, and
sometimes a crown. The Turks ascending this Hill throw stones in three places,
where are great heaps; and this (they say) they do to spite the Devil, because
he endeavored in those three places to divert Abraham from his sacrifice; for
(they say) that the Devil appeared to Isaac ascending the hill, and said to
him, that his Father would sacrifice him; Isaac made no reply, and the Devil
tempting Isaac the second time, he threw a stone at him; and from hence begun
this custom of the pilgrims, from thence by a little descent the pilgrims come
to the Mosquee or Temple, a league distant, or thereabouts, from the top of the
Hill, their heads bowed down, and their arms acrosse, Mohammedan ceremonies.
the Cherifs deputy casts a paile of water upon their heads, wetting them from
top to toe, which they hold a purification or expiation of their sins,
pronouncing these words, Ala rahmani Ala ila, which signifies, God purify
thee, next they proceed to prayers in the Mosquee or Temple, which are only
made at the time (they call) Zilaite, which is upon the three and twentieth of
May; and at the same time without changing their clothes they pray standing,
with a great modesty; and when they keep their fasts they neither eat nor drink
by day, but they eat all the next night.

The Mosca or Temple of Meka is a mass of stones built round, and much like
St. Sophya at Constantinople, you ascend unto it fifteen or sixteen steps,
without and round about it are built fair piazza's, or galleries, where the
Merchants keep their Exchange, and expose to sale their drugs, perfumes,
jewels, and several other sorts of commodities; in this Town is vented the
richness of the India's, and Merchants flock hither from all parts of the
world; they come to unlade at Ziden a Haven in the red Sea, twelve leagues
distant from Meka: the road between Ziden and Meka is very full of Merchants,
they carry their merchandises upon Camels, some bound for Syria, others for
Egypt, and from thence for Europe.

The Christians are not admitted into the Mosque, they view it only through
the gate in disguise, you are not sooner entered but you see Mahomets Tomb upon
your left hand in the middle of his two Sons in law; to visit it you descend
three or four steps, yet it is generally believed the Tomb is empty, for their
Marabouts say that the Angels translated his body into heaven: at the end of
that side there is as 'twere a little turret richly adorned, where the treasure
belonging to the Soudan or Governor of the Town is kept.

A little further within stands an altar without any figure, and at each side
are twelve books sumptuously bound, all the pillars are hung with rich
tapestry, very fair, and of lively colors, but without the figure or image of
any animal. the Town is Governed by a Sultan, or Cherif, he is their Head both
in Temporal and Spiritual Affairs, and held in great esteem amongst them,
for he gives absolution to all that visit the Mosque, the sacrifice ended, he
uses a certain washing, in lieu of Baptism: The Mosque is most gorgeously
adorned, and hung with tapistry without any Imagary work, you descend unto it
eighteen or twenty steps, and it is larger in compass then the Colisee at Rome;
Mahometans esteem the Town Sacred, as well in respect of the excellent things
(they say) were there revealed unto their impostor Prophet, as for the
magnificent Temple dedicated to his name; which they imagine built by the
Angels, visited by Adam, translated into the sixth Heaven during the deluge,
to preserve it from the waters, and since reedified by Abraham, by the Model
of the former sent from Heaven; they give great reverence thereunto, and also
to a stone called Alkible, or Aliete, which they adore, and relate a thousand
fables of it. The Cherif, or Sultan, Governor of Meka styles himself Alaman
Alhascemi, which signifies the Prince, descended from Hascem, Great Great
Grandfather to Mahomet; formerly he was subject to the Soudan of Egypt, and
now to the Turk, but in such manner as he retains a great Authority; nor does
the Turk style himself King, or Lord of Meka, but her humble Subject, he is
called also Emir, that is, Prince.

The Cherif is said to be of Mahomets race, he presented, and acknowledged
Selinus to be the Turkish Emperor, when he had conquered Egypt, and abolished
the Empire of Mamelus, and Selinus, returned him a great respect, and made him
the same present, of a silken sheet large enough to spread over the Prophets
house; a present the Soldans used yearly to make: they are there much vexed with
the continual rovings and robberies of the Arabians.

Among the greatest rarities we saw in this Town, were two pearls the Sultane
wore in her ears; the three I since saw at Lisboe, which paid off sixteen
thousand ducates of the Gabelle, were not like them, for these go beyond them
both in bigness and beauty. I saw also in the Sultans Seraglio an Unicorn, as
since I have seen others in the India's, and at the Escuriall: I know many
miscreants, that doubt whether the world has such a beast, but besides those,
I have read many grave Authors that witness the same, and Bartheme says he
has seen one in the very same Town of Meka, I shall say something more of it
in my treaty of Pegu and Canarane.

CHAP. VI. Of Arabia Felix, of Prince Sequemir Governor, of Cassia, and other
commodities of Sabaea.
WE left Meka after a short stay there, and as I thought my companion would
have struck into the road for Ziden toward the red Sea, as he pretended to his
Brother Murat, and my self, I wondered he left the chiefest part of his company
bound for Ziden, and that with the other part he took his way toward Zibit, in
the happy Arabia; I asked him why he altered his resolution, and laughing, he
made me this answer, Cassis his treachery.
that the commodities he carried along with him were not his brothers, as I
imagined, but his own, and that since his brother had denied Jesus Christ he
deserved them not, and thought it fitter to make them his own, and resolved to
see the world at his charge and expenses.

From thence I gathered my companions inclinations, since thus perfidiously he
used his Brother who had trusted him; yet for fear he should play me some
trick, I dissembled, in hopes, that by the grace of God I should be delivered
from him, and safely accomplish my intended journey.

Thus we took our way for Zibit, accompanied with several Christians, and
other Merchants, we Inn'd the first night at a little village called Ferragous,
where we were but ill accommodated: the next day we came to Outor a Castle,
Ferragous. Outor.
noted by some travelers, not far remote from the red Sea.

A draw well at Outor.
There is a deep well whence they draw water, with a wheel turned round by a
yoke of Bulls, the water was sharp and hard, but nothing brackish, necessity
made us like it: at two leagues from Outor we left the most part of our
company, they took the right hand the ready way to Ziden, and we followed our
tract for the Happy Arabia, and reached a Town called Gaza, and thence to Zibit.

Arabia the happy.
Thus we left the desert to enter the Happy Arabia, which is a Peninsula between
the red and the Persick Sea, situate under the Tropic Cancer; her length is
from the Soltania of Sanna toward the red Sea, unto Agior toward the Persick
gulf, or the Elcatif Sea, so called by the Arabians, I have often traveled
there for trade sake, and have visited most of her Towns; this Arabia is of
large extent, divided into fair Provinces and Kingdoms.

Zibit. Alibenali.
We arrived at Zibit, a Town of Soltania, in the Company of a Jewish Merchant,
native of Alibenali, a great Province of Arabia, and married at Zibit, he
lodged us in his own house, finding he could make a gain of us, accompanying us
where ever we would go, carrying with him on horseback things to refresh us,
being a man versed in the customs of the Country: and some reason he had to be
kind to us, for I am sure my camarade was so to his wife; she advised her
husband to be thus familiarly assistant to us, and he offered me a Daughter of
his in marriage, believing my Camarade to be my Father.

Zibit is five leagues from the red sea, there is a Haven where ships are laden
and unladen, and from this place commodities are transported from the India's,
to Ziden, Suez, and other places. From Ziden we went to Aden, from thence
thorough all the Provinces of Arabia, trading, and visiting the chiefest and
fairest Towns and Kingdoms.

Although there be but one great Prince (named Sequemir or Sechemir) chief
Commander of the fairest Provinces of the Happy Arabia, yet there are several
Lords that acknowledge, some the Persian, others the Turk. The King of
Bacharin, or Bescharin, the nearest to Persia, was not many years since
subdued by the Sophy; and was likely to have given Laws unto Elcatif, had not
the Inhabitants of Erit, and other Neighbors opposed him, with a considerable
Army composed of the people of Massa or Maffa, Fartac, Mascalat, Amazarit,
Jurmalamam, Gubelaemam, Machyra, or Macyra, Suza, and others.

This army had for their General the Sultan of Sanna, that commanded the Van,
the Sultan of Elcatif the rear, and gave a notable blow to the Persian, with
whom since they have made a peace, and have thus preserved themselves. The
Soltania of Tabubari, is not now governed by the Sechemir, Black sand.
but by the Turk that subdued it, in the last war against the Persian; this
countries sand is very different from that I have seen in other places, being
as black as a coal, and not so troublesome to travelers, being something
heavier and firmer; upon this countries hills you find great store of
Frankincense, of Storax, Frankincense. Storax Benjamin.
and Benjamin, growing upon trees, and other sweet gummes, and persons are
purposely appointed to gather them: all this country is properly called Sabaea,
Sabea.
so famous in ancient times.

There grows great store of Olive trees, Myrrh, Aloes, Aloes. Ladanum.
Cinnamon: Cassia.
Cinnamon, and Cassia trees in abundance, Falcons, Sparhawkes, and other birds
feed thereupon; and an innumerable company of flies bred out of the corruption
of the Cassia, causes so great an inconvenience, as the Arabians are forced to
burn part of it, and in some other places they gather it not, because being
remote from the sea, the Portage would stand them in more then the value of the
Commodity, though in many great Towns they use much of it; where by reason of
their great heats they distill, or melt the juice out of the canes, and drink
it. I observed that the inhabitants of Arcora, Ara, Teza, Samacara, and of
other Towns and places, delighted much in this kind of drink, which not only
refreshed them, but loosened them also; and in the Towns of Andrivara, Lagi
and Dante, it is the ordinary drink used the summer time; The fruit of this
tree being ripe, has an unsavory sweet taste, Apes and Squirells flock to it to
feed; Mazari. Chicali.
and another beast called Masari (those of Fez call it Chicali) not much unlike
a Fox, a beast that unburies the dead, to feed upon their carcasses; they
creep up the trees, shake down the fruit, and make a great spoil, it is that
sweetness that engenders those flies we have already mentioned, which were no
small trouble to us passing by.

This Arabia is full of fair great Towns, whether by reason of Traffic,
Merchants come from all parts, as are Taesa, Cana, Asigni, and Kada, where is
kept the Sequemirs principal Magazine, or store house. The chiefest haven,
Pecher, a Haven.
and the nearest to this side of the Country is Pecher, in the Soltania of
Fartac, whither those of Bangale, Baticala, Dabul, Cambaye and Malabar, bring
their commodities to Bartar, for Aromatic Drugges, which in that Country are
most excellent; but the Jews that inhabit those places are such cheates, they
sophisticate all that comes thorough their hands: it is a particular trade to
gather the Frankincense, Storax, Benjamin and Mastick; that harvest is got in
July, during the dog-dayes. for then the trees are in their perfect ripeness;
they gather some in other seasons, but by a different manner, making an
incision in the tree toward spring; from those holes runs forth a licquor, or
gum, which thickens of it self, and is of a reddish color, but not so
strong nor good as the other, nor of so great a value; the gum that issues
from the young trees is whiter then that is gathered from the old ones, they
have Myrrh trees too, but what of that is brought in to our parts, Myrrh.
is compounded and falsified: all the Myrrh that the Kingdom of Ciussimi or
Elcatif affords, is for the Sequemirs own use, being the most perfect, and the
purest; what the Prince uses not, he sells, and is therefore called Sequemir
Pure, and is sold at Naban, Quesibi, Naziri, Carmon, Liva-Orba, Lanua-Orba,
Costague, Manabon, Batan, Caybir, Jague, Aloron, and in other places in the
furthest parts of Arabia, in the kingdom of Anna, through which runs the river,
Cosan, or Cosara River.
Cosan, or Cosara, very swift, and loses her self in the Persick sea, near the
mouth of Euphrates.

CHAP. VII. Of the state of Sequemir Prince of the Happy Arabia, of his
Salsidas, and of the Califf of Bagdet.
His state*
SEquemir whom we have spoken of, is supreme Lord of almost the whole Arabia
Felix, and is called Sequemir, as you may say, Holy Lord, for his goodness and
clemency, because he puts none to death, except prisoners of war: but when a
person has committed a crime, he keeps him fettered in prison during life,
without debarring him from the sight of the Sun, saying that God has
liberally distributed that light to all persons without exception; there have
been twenty thousand prisoners in irons at one and the same time. His Court is
stately and magnificent, he has a great number of men devoted to his service,
who freely offer up their lives for him at his command, believing they go
straight to heaven, dying for their Prince.

They relate of a Turkish Emperor returning home from the Persick war through
this country, desired the sight of the Prince Sequemir, and of his Salsidas,
Salsidas devotes:
or Saldridas, for so his devotes were called; having visited him in his town
of Samacara, capital of that country; after many Caresses, and a Princely
entertainment, he desired the sight of his Salsidas, and a proof of that great
love and fidelity they bore unto their Prince: Sequemir called some of them in,
and only spoke these words Amissi Barou, and instantly four of them threw
themselves out of the window, and more of them attempting it, were hindered by
the Grand Seignior, satisfied with the proof he had already made, which he held
so admirable, that he demanded twelve of them to take back into his Country,
which the Sequemir willingly granted; and being asked whether they would have
as great an affection for a new Master, and if they would as willingly dye for
him, as for their old Lord; one of them made answer to the Turk: if our Prince
commands us to dye for thee, we are from this very instant ready to obey him:
The Turk told them, in time he should have need of them, and that he would
preserve them, and esteem them his best friends; and taking them away with him,
he maintained them handsomely, and near his person; but after the death of the
Turkish Emperor, they all returned back to their old Master, esteeming it the
greatest happiness and safety to be near unto that Prince. They accompany him
yearly to Meka, Romadan.
upon the three and twentieth of May, to celebrate their great feast of
Romadan. Sequemir wears always a sheeps-skin before and behind, in imitation
of Saint John Baptist, who is there in great respect and honor; he travels a
foot with his whole Court, S. John Baptist*
yet his Courtiers go as they please, carrying their wives and other trains,
upon able and good horses.

This King is Lord of the Soltania's of Fertac, Siligni, D^efar, and other
places, he was once Master of the entire happy Arabia; but the Turk, and the
Persian, have got several Provinces from him; his chief residence is at
Almacarama, or, Samacara, a town very strong and impregnable, situate upon the
top of a high hill, but two ways leading unto it, and those craggy, and easily
maintained against the foe; the town is big, and well peopled, and full of
Nobility and Gentry: there he keeps his treasure, and his women; this Prince
cannot be made King, but by the consent of the Califf of Bagdet, likewise as
the Prince of Mefra, in pursuance of an ancient Law, for that Califf, though at
present, retains nothing but the bare name, yet keeps his ancient and
undoubted right, to elect and confirm the Kings of Assyria, Arabia, and others;
and Soliman himself passing through Babylon, for form-sake was installed by his
hand. Next unto the Sequemir, are several Officers, as the Gouvera, Armicahir,
Almiracher, the Cayet, the Sidibir, the Admimia, the Bosoldar, Amiseriech, the
Tababait, and several others; the Tacay Pacou is Master of the house.

CHAP. VIII. Of Babylon, the red sea, Homerites, Aden, a strong Town, and
famous Haven, Cameran, and other places in the red sea.
WE traveled still through Arabia, from town to town, venting and trucking our
commodities, with an earnest desire to reach Persia; all the towns of Arabia
are fair ones and yield a great revenue to the Sequemir; between Zidem and
Zibit there are several, and well peopled, and from thence to Aden many more;
Zibit is not so near Aden, as by some she is said to be, as they relate
Dalatia in Aethiopia, Dalata.
to be opposite to Meka, and they stand three hundred leagues asunder.

This Arabia joins to Persia Northward, and the way thither lies through Taeza
Sanna, Soufar, Erit, Almacara, and other towns, Almacara stands upon a hill but
Eastward upon Gaza, a big town, and well inhabited where there is weekly a
Fair or Market kept by night, by reason of the heats, and there all sorts of
Merchandises are exposed to sale, perfumes especially.

The Nobility of the Country affect much to eat Ambar, Musk, and other sweets:
the Soudan of Aden, subject to Sequemir, spends yearly six thousand Duccats
therein, for his self, wife, and family, their kitchins may be taken for
perfumers shops so sweet and odoriferous.

The Red Seas coast toward Aden, is thick of good towns, and well traded; and
among the Merchants are many thieves, which you must have a care on; you see
the towns called Ahra, Damican, Coubita, Erit, Aridan, Magora, Rabon, Salta,
and others; with many villages subjects to the Sequemir, who commands six
Soltania's, or kingdoms, all filled with good towns: upon the Sea side grow
store of reeds or Canes, which in time make little Islands, rendering the
landing difficult; and from thence the Hebrews call that Sea Souf, which
signifies a reed.

Debir.
Caravanes come to a town called Albir or Debir, and there load their wares
they carry unto Babylon; as we found several traveling thither; I entreated
one of them to furnish me with as many Maps of the chiefest cities he could
conveniently; for I was very desirous of them, and amongst the rest he procured
me the Map of Babylon, or Bagdet, printed upon a Cotton, which Map is made
in a kind of ceremony, when the Sequemir receives his Crown and blessing from
the Califf of Bagdet, as the most ancient of Meka, and to instruct him in his
way; they delineate Samacara, from whence he sets forth for Babylon, he goes
through Byr, then in twelve days reaches Falouchia, in a flat boat, from
thence to Babylon, in one day more.

As we were making sale of our commodities with intention to visit the East
India's, amongst other things we got some pieces of Velvet, which we had in
exchange for our wares: I shall by the way advise those who intend to make the
voyage of Arabia, Trade in Arabia.
to store themselves with great horse bits; for that is a commodity goes off
there at a good rate, you may make your own price, not exceeding ten Duccats a
piece.

Thus we traveled through Sanna, passing through many fine towns, as Adimar,
one of the fairest of all Arabia, with intention to pass over into the Isle of
Cameran, where were three Portugais vessels bound for Calicut; but we had so
ill a passage, Cameran Isle.
that we altered our resolutions, and sailed the coast of Avisa, then to Mount
Bacour, where we sold our Camels, upon condition they should carry our goods in
to Aden, within two leagues of that place.

The Red Sea from Suez to the Cape Cardafu, is in the eighteenth degree, in
length four hundred leagues, and in breadth fifty; Red sea.
is navigable, but not without great danger, especially by night; because it is
full of shelvy rocks, reeds, and Isles; and by day (besides the common Pilot)
they have a man placed upon the Mast to discover, and direct the ship: from
Cameran, it is not so dangerous; but we were forced to make this voyage by land,
to escape the dangers at Sea: the water to my thinking, was of the color of
other Seawater, both in her Superficies and bottom; the name of red only
excepted, which was given her by allusion to the name of King Erithreus, who
named it so; King Erithreus.
or because of the sands, which in some places are of a reddish color: The
Moors call it Babar Corzum, which signifies an enclosed sea, the havens upon it
are at Babel-Mandel, which is in the twelfth degree, it is called by some the
sea of Meka; Arabia upon the red sea side, was formerly inhabited by several
people, Sabeans, Homerites.
principally the Sabaeans, since called the Homerites; they received the
Christian Faith in the days of the Emperor Constantius; and some will have
it, that rather from thence then Aethiopia, came Queen Saba, and since Queen
Candaces Eunuch.

At the end of this Sea in the Streights of Babel-Mandel, is the town and Haven
of Aden, Aden.
called by those of that country Adedoun, a town of the greatest fame in all
the East, and one of the strongest of Arabia, and of greatest importance* by
reason of the trade and concourse of all the Nations of the Indies, Persia,
Tartary, Arabia, Aethiopia, and the Levant: she was formerly subject to
Sequemir, since conquered by the Portugais, and now in the possession of the
Turk; on the land side stands that famous Mountain Albacoure, or Dartzira;
Abacoure or Bacoure.
which must be traveled over to reach hither; the passage is straight, and
difficult, defended by two strong Castles on each side of the way one; from the
top of the hill you discover Aden, standing in a large plain; her Haven is
great and good, butting upon the Cape Gardafu; the Town is grown famous since
the Portugais set footing in the East Indies. for the Merchants leaving the red
sea, for fear of the Portugais rest here in their journey to the Indies,
whereas before they went throughout, without landing here.

Here are unladen, from the Indies and other places, the Spices, The trade of
Aden.
Aloes, Brasil, Pearls, and precious stones, Myrobolan, Safron, Wax, Steel,
Sugars, Rice, Purcelaines, Linnens, Quicksilver, Vermillions, Cottons, Silks,
Scarlets, Chamlets, Musk, Amber, Benjamin, Storax, Azure, and other Commodities
vented in several places.

Spices, and the trade from time to time.
Here time out of mind, were the Spices landed, and from hence by the red sea,
and the Nile, transported into Alexandria: formerly (they say) that the Soudan
Governor of this place, was so puissant, as to send an Army of thirty thousand
horse, and forty thousand Cammels to assist the Soudan of Egypt against the
Christians; and waged ordinary war, besides against the Abyssins: Aden how
fortified.
Aden is well walled, and fortified with several Castles on the East side; on
the North stands Bacoure, which divides her from the Happy Arabia, and on all
other sides she is incompast with the sea; Westward the sea, enters the land so
far through a gulf, that you would think the Mountaigne were an Island; the
Haven is Eastward, and large, situate under the foot of the Hill; coming from
Arabia, you would take the town to stand upon the top of the hill, whereas it
stands in a plain almost surrounded with the Sea, guarded by a strong
Block-house in a little Isle adjacent, that defends the Town and the mouth of
the Haven, as by the side of the Hill there are several Forts, that command
those passages; The opposite to Aden of this side of the Isle, and straight of
Babel-Mandel is in Aethiopia, subject (most of it) to the grand Neguz, with a
creek of Sea, and a fair Haven, and the Cape called Foubical, or Guardufu,
anciently the Promontory called Aromata: from one side to the other, the
straight is forty thousand paces over, and in the midst stands this little
Island, in length some two leagues; the mouth is very dangerous to enter at low
water, by reason of Shelves, Rocks, and Reeds, and a number of Isles, of
different bigness, some of them inhabited, some not; we traveled most of
them, and the chiefest I saw was Cameran, Cameran.
near the coast of Arabia, in the fifteenth degree of Elevation, fifteen miles
round, or thereabouts; she has plenty of fresh water, and her Haven is of the
continent side but two leagues off, or thereabouts; the Town is small, but
increases daily, subject to the Sequemir, and inhabited by Moors.

On the other side, in Aethiopia, is Dalascia, or Dalaca, Dalascia.
a fair Town, inhabited by an Idolatrous King, tributary to the King of the
Abyssins, since the conquest that Alexander the Priest John made of it, which
has ever since obeyed his Laws, together with Rocca, or Eroca, where there is
a fair Haven, inhabited by Christians, Abyssins; very good people, they weep
for joy, to see any Christians of these parts, they call them Romatas, or
Room, make very much of them, and distribute what they have amongst them,
according to the charitable practice of the Primitive Church: They have a
little higher, another fair Isle, called Mesua, or Mezuan, peopled with
Christians, where there is a good Haven, Mezua.
that saves many good ships from shipwreck, sailing in this dangerous sea: a
little above Mesua is another Isle called Ibrani on Aethiopia side, where there
is a good Haven, and most of the Inhabitants fishermen: Ibrani. Camera.
beyond that is the Isle of Camera, subject to the Priest John, she has two
Havens, one southward, the other eastward, has good water, and a good well,
two hundred paces from the Sea, in an orchard, called Magodu, or Magot,
containing twenty or thirty houses, and every house a boat, ready to take the
water to fish, which is their only livelihood.

CHAP. IX. Of Dalascia Town, belonging to the Grand Neguz, of the Isle of
Socotora, with a description of a prodigious tempest.
THe Caravans that come from the Abyssins Country, Suachan.
are embarked at Dalascia, or Dalaca, or at the Isle of Suachen belonging to
the Grand Neguz, and bound from thence for the Holy Land; most of these places
are inhabited by Christians.

Suachen is an Island in the eighteenth degree of latitude, drawing from east
to south; within a bow shoot off the Continent. Dalascia belongs to the Neguz,
governed by a Mohammedan, tributary to him, and allows liberty of conscience.
They have fair Churches, their Priests marrying as the Grecians do, who are
subordinate to the Abuma, or Patriark of Ethiopia.

The air is exceeding benign, and productive of all excellent fruits, as
oranges, citrons, melons, figs, raisins, there are good store of cattle,
Camelots.
especially those great goats, of whose hair Camelots fine as any silk are
made, which hair is very long, white, soft, and delicate, whereof they make
stuffs so fine they look like white linen, which they traffic in, and sell at
dear rates. They have here likewise the finest and best Lacca of the world,
produced from minute insects like Bees, which feed on a red gum that issues out
of a tree like a cherry tree, which the more purgative it is, the finer and
more delicate they render the Lacca. Lacca.
There are some who practice no other trade than to take it immediately upon
the production, and laying it upon little Tables cleanse it, then put it up in
small pots of various colors, not above half an ounce in a pot, which by
reason of the excellency they sell dear, and call it Laca d' Alaca, whereof the
most excellent colors are made for Limners. Of this is likewise made Spanish
hard wax. Spanish wax.
The Island abounds in cattle, pasturage, fish of all sorts, pure spring
waters, which make their gardens flourish. They have also of the best ginger,
notwithstanding not much esteemed, Ginger.
by reason that for the too much moisture 'twill not last long. Here is
likewise great store of the wood called Santall, red, Santall.
white, and citron color, store of Ebony, and the most exquisite Rose wood,
also another sort of wood called Sorba, much like Brasill, but makes a very
deep dye: also an herb called Lagarozo, that in perfect ripeness makes a most
excellent crimson, and being put in cotton cloth, the more it is washed the more
lively it becomes.

The Inhabitants of this Island are great Libertines, partly Moors, partly
Christians, each living according to his custom, without either confusion or
disorder. The Mohammedan Prince is gracious, obliges much his Subjects, wears
the Turkish fashions, with many rich jewels, and is honorably attended.

Dalascia Asses.
Those of the Continent speak of this Town by way of proverb, Sarbayt Dalca,
which signifies, Dalascian Asses, because of those beasts they have the best in
the world, which do them mavelous good service, and are better to travel the
deserts than any other beasts they have: In Persia I have known them sold at a
hundred ducats a piece, and more, because they are good travelers, and of
little expense, they will go thirty miles a day without any weariness.

Caymans or Crocodile.
The King's Father that ruled this Country in the time of my travels there, had
a fish of a mavelous bigness, which he called Caymans, (Caymans is a kind of
Lezard, or Crocodile, in the Indies) he kept this fish in a Pond near the Sea
side, and delighted much to feed him with his own hand, the fish being very
mansuete, he bred it of a young one, but 'twas grown so large 'twould come out
of the water alone, three hundred paces on land.

As we were sailing in the Arabic Sea, A strange dispute and a tempest ensuing.
in company of many Merchants of several Nations, and Religions, there arose a
dispute touching the diversity of Religions, one holding (as our Deists and
Atheists this day do) that all Religions were indifferent and sufficient, and
that all persons acknowledging a God should infallibly be saved: mis-calling
the Christians, and blaming them, for having good opinions of themselves, and
bad of others, to whom a Christian discreetly and learnedly replied, showing
the purity of our religion, and that a Christian dying in mortal sin would be
damned as well as Turk or Infidel; at this the Masters mate offered
presumptuously to persuade us that we were all abused, and that Duma governed
the Universe, Duma the Peguans false. god. Lucifer.
another acknowledged no other divinity but nature, to this our Abyssin
presently replied that Duma had been a servant to the great and only God, but
thorough pride, from an angel of light was cast into the depth of hell, where
he remains a fiend, and has no power but by Gods permission: after many other
discourses as we were sailing toward Guardufu the weather grew very cloudy,
and we perceived far enough from us a thing like unto a thick black smoke dropped
into the Sea: Strange tempest.
one of our company, a Grecian of the Isle of Chio, drew his sword, and having
said a Prayer or two, and made the sign of the cross, left not hacking and
hewing upon the hatches, until he had cut out three or four pieces, which
action set the company a laughing, yet we perceived it to dissipate, and remove
that smoke from the ship: the horrible thunder and lightning which presently
followed, struck us all with terror; for my part I prayed heartily, and the
tempest so hugely increased, that nothing but lamentations and groans were
heard among us; bidding adieu to this world: some were maimed; for this Monster
or whirling smoke, run in the shape of a baloon from rope to rope, and up the
masts of the ship, exceeding swiftly, surrounded with a sparkling fire, making
a most hideous noise that astonished us all, and tore and mangled the sails
into a thousand pieces: some Indian Gentlemen defended themselves from this
terrible thing, with their cimeters, running up and down, and bearing one
another down; many were killed and hurt, some hid themselves under hatches;
others like madmen threw themselves into the water: our poor Christian received
a great blow upon the head, and all in a gore of blood, and upon his knees read
St. John's Gospel, and immediately the Spirit vanished, having haunted us an
hour and a half: we were all ready to yield up the Ghost, my companion was so
bruised, that he wore his arm in a scarf for two months after, with a bruise
black as pitch, we all testified our astonishment by our silence, gazing upon
one another, struck with amazement to see so many dead corpse lie of all sides
of us: at length by Gods permission we landed, for which mercy we yielded our
humble thanks; we could not find the man that held there was neither God nor
Devil, our Masters mate was stricken lame of a leg and thigh, which remained
black many days after, yet without sense of the least pain: amongst the rest a
young man of our company told me, he was in great fear during the tempest,
because of his guilty conscience: that venting his commodities in a certain
Town we had made some short stay in, a Moorish dame under pretense of buying
musk, and pretending she would show it her husband, left a pearl of
extraordinary bigness with him in pawn, she immediately returned asking the
price of the whole parcel; which was five ducats at the lowest, she took him
at his word, and bade him follow her home for his money, which he did, and
there she detained, and treated him for three days together: Amorous dames.
Thus those Country Ladies seek their servants, and especially strangers, of
whom they are very amorous.

Socotora.
Near the Cape Guardufu is the Isle Socotora, famous for ambergris, and gum
called Dragons blood, and for the plant that produces aloes, which is there the
best of the world.

This Island was discovered by Fernand Bereyta, a Portuguese, and Aristotle
says that Alexander conquered this Isle, in his return from the India's, and
peopled it with Grecians, purposely to plant aloes.

Before Portugal had here any Interest, the Indians trade both of spices and
other precious commodities, came from Malaca by Ormus, and Aden, and from
thence by Caravanes to the Leuante, some by the Persick Sea, Balsera, and the
mouth of Euphrates, thence through Armenia into Trebisonde, by the Majorka sea
into Tartaria, or by Damas, Barut, or Aleppo, where the Venetians, the
Genovais, and the Catalonians fetched them, others by the red Sea, the Grand
Caire, and Alexandria, as we have already said, others by the rivers Indus and
Oxus, from thence thorough Caspia into our Western regions, but they have taken
another road round Africa, which is kept to this very day.

CHAP. X. Of the Island and Kingdom of Ormus, of the King, and his Government,
of the trade there, and of his several Conquests.
HAving sailed thorough the Arabic Gulf, and those Coasts, we returned to
Aden, where we spent some days, trading and exchanging our commodies, then we
embarked our selves for Ormus, Ormus.
to pay custom for some Persian horses we had shipped with us, because they pay
no tax thorough the chiefest part of the Indies, taking a Cartaco, or pass,
which the several Governors upon demand, are bound to give. Thus sailing from
Aden, by the Coast of Arabia, and the Cape Taratque, Rosolgate and Moncadon, or
Moalandaon, unto the mouth of the Persick Gulf, or the Straight of Bazora, at
length we arrived at Ormus, The name of a Town, an Island, and Kingdom,
winding to and fro into the Continent of Persia and Arabia: In Ormus we lodged
with a Portuguais, who took state upon him, his man still carrying after him a
guilt sword, and a dagger, with a silver cup to drink in, scorning to touch
another, yet nevertheless he kept an Inn common to all passengers. The Town of
Ormus is situate in an Isle, in the 26 or 27th. degree, 9 miles distant from
Persia, thirty from Arabia, the Isle is between 35 and 40 miles compass, wholly
barren; the Town is fair, and has a strong Fort, begirt with high walls, and
eight turrets, in the form of Castles, one half of the Town is incompast with
the sea, and has four large cisterns, or conduits of fresh water, brought in
pipes from the Continent. The Inhabitants are some Christians, some Mahometans,
and others Idolaters: There Reigned a Potent King here for 300 years, since
this state was established. 'Twas in the Reign of Ceyfadin, Ceyfadin.
Albuquerque.
that Alphonsus Albuquerque, reduced both the King and Country to the obedience
of the King of Portugal, and ever since the Kings of Ormus, were tributary to
that King, who yet meddles not with his Laws and Rights: the native King has
vast Revenues, both in the Island, and in the Continent of Persia and Arabia.
He is only sworn to keep league and fidelity with Portugal, and the
Viceroy acknowledges him, honors him, King of Ormus.
and visits him frequently in his Palace: The Isle only at this day pays
tribute to the Portugais. The King lives most splendidly and magnificently
amongst his Subjects.

The confines of his State toward the north, are the Kingdom of Dori, toward
Persia, and reaches unto the Cape of Rosolgate, at the very Gulf, from thence
unto the Cape Moncadon, containing the Isles called Gedri, Gedri.
from a great river, that runs into another named Dale, that separates Persia
from Carmania, or Chirmania. In the Gulf, is Baharen, Baharen.
an Isle famous for the fishing of the rarest and most precious Oriental
pearls, where the Portugais have a Factor: the Inhabitants of Ormus are very
voluptuous, walking the streets, they have carried after them a Cup or Box
full of Araca, a dainty, very delicious, and much used amongst the Indians.
Areca.


They have little Cabans in the Sea covered with boughs and leaves, where they
refresh, and shelter themselves against the wind, Abrazador, Abrazador.
so named by the Portugais, which blows in the afternoon. This wind is so
subtle, and stirs up so small a dust, that it choaks people; and if a
stranger be ignorant of the custom of the country, he is in very great danger;
the people are courteous, and ready to advertize strangers. Their greatest
inconvenience is the scarcity of fresh water, which they fetch nine or ten mile
out of the firm land: They have two or three wells nearer at hand, five or six
miles from the town, in a place called Terrabaguen. The Isle has two good
Havens, one in the East, the other in the West, the others are not secure.
There is near the Town a sulpher Mine, and a little salt-hill, of the like
goodness to that of Cardonne in Catalonia, from which they draw great profit;
it is used in many places, and the Prince receives a Gabel out of it; in the
town of Ormus there is a Mart of all commodities, from the Indies, Persia,
Arabia, and Aethiopia, in which places the Indians trade, as well as Persians,
Levantins, Turks, Abyssins, Venetians, Portugais, and others; the Caravane or
Casile, arrives here twice a year by land from Aleppo, Alep.
the first in April, the second in September.

Trade from O^mus.
From Aleppo they travel through Babylon to Balsora, guarded by the
Janissaries, from thence to Ormus. They travel seven or eight thousand in a
company, at Aleppo there are English, French, and Venetian Consuls.

From hence they trade in spices, perfumes, pearls, precious stones, Carpets,
Silks, Chamlets, horses, conserves, and several sorts of sweet meats.

King of Ormus.
We came hither opportunely, to see the Creation or Election of their new King,
which is performed with many ceremonies, to which the Viceroy of Portugal
contributes great sums, for the Honor and State of his Master. A Prince of
the Royal Mohammedan Blood is elected and sworn to maintain his kingdom, under
the King of Portugals obedience; and although all his Lands and Lordships are
situate in the Continent of Persia and Arabia, where no Christian can reach
them, yet nevertheless the King is sworn to this Fealty and obedience by the
Viceroy, that delivers him his Scepter in the Fort, and accompanies him with a
great train, and magnificence into his Royal Palace, where having made his
submission and obeisance, takes his leave, and returns unto his Citadell. This
King amongst other things, is sworn never to hold a great Assembly, without
giving notice to the Viceroy, and thus they live peacefully, and keep a good
correspondence; Ormus regained by the Persian.
some years since the King of Persia, by the help of the English and
Hollander, has regained Ormus, and reduced it to his obedience as formerly.

CHAP. XI. Of Persia, her confines, and provinces: Of Babylon, and the Lake of
Pitch.
LEaving Ormus we resolved to travel through all Persia, Persia, and her bounds.
before we begun our East-Indian voyage, as we first had designed. 'Twas
occasioned by a Merchant I have already spoken of: having traveled to and fro,
through very many towns and countries of Persia; I could not so exactly remark
the days journies, nor the distances, order, or proceed of the voyage, by
reason of my youth; I will content my self to discover a view of the country,
as faithfully, and exactly as my memory will serve. And first I will affirm,
that Persia, called Azemia, Azimir, and Farsi, is a vast Empire extending from
the confines of Turkey toward Armenia betwixt the River Tigris, and the Persick
or Elcatiff Sea. The Caspien, or the Bachu, the Indian, Cymits of Persia.
and the river Chesel anciently Jaxartes. Westward it is bounded by the Turkish
Empire, Eastward it lies upon the kingdom of Samarcant, the Empire of the
Grand Mogul, and Cambaye, Northward upon the Caspian Sea, Southward upon the
great Indian Sea, toward the desert Carmania, and Guzarate. This Empire
contains many great Provinces, or rather kingdoms; and a great number of
fair, and flourishing Towns and Cities, having ever continued famous since the
first settlement under the Grand Cyrus two thousand two hundred years since,
until it was possessed by the Grecians and Parthians; and since she returned
unto the natural Persians, about the year of Grace two hundred, they kept it
many ages, until about four hundred years since, the Sarasins and Mahometans
obtained it, and have kept it ever since, by many changes, and diverse races of
Kings, and Lords, Arabians Sarasins, Parthians, Turks, and natural Persians,
and by the last settlement of the Sophyes not many years since.

The chiefest Provinces are Sequel pech, formerly Susiania, The Provinces of
Persia.
Chirmania, or Carmania, Struan, or Media, Corozan, Zagathay, or Hircania, and
the Bactriane, Jex, or Parthia, Guzerat, or Gedrosia. then Arac, Podel,
Iselbas, Sigestan, Sablestan, Chabul, Candahar, and others.

Rivers
The chiefest rivers are the Euphrates or Aforat, the Tigris, Araxes, or Arasse,
Oxus, and others.

Euphrates has upon her banks many fair towns, as Babylon, where inhabit a
great number of Christians, as likewise at Mazestan, Astmosia, Artasara,
Tunisse perbent, and elsewhere, who freely exercise their religion being
tributary to the Prince. Northward are the famous town of Giett, six days
journey from Solstania, Saban, Comer, Cozan, Egex, Jelli, Sengan, Maluchia,
Scio, Mesen, Ere.

Towns of Persia.
Then toward the Persick gulf stands Guerdi upon the river Bindinimar, or
Bindamach, and going up the river, you discover Marous, Viegan, Maain, Sana; in
Media, are Tauris, Rip, Sidan, Estrana, Barbariben; Bacchat, Madranelli,
Samachi, and others; then the Royal towns of Soltania, Espahan, Casbin, Siras,
without reckoning many other towns upon the river Benmir, Benmir.
called by the Russes Bragadet, where they trade much in cloth of gold, silver,
and silk. Thither they repair from all parts of the world for that trade, as
from the Indies, Aethiopia, Arabia, Egypt, Turkey, Tartary, and other
countries which yields a great profit to the Sophy of Persia.

Babylon.
We ran through most of these towns, making but short stays, but better profit
of our small commodities. Babylon, or Bagdet, so famous, and formerly the eye
and marvail of all the Eastern towns, situate upon the great Euphrates, Erat,
and Aforat, which was fifty miles about; there is nothing remaining at this day
of that ancient town but the ruins, since a total destruction given her by the
Sarazens about 900. years since, and instead of her, upon the other side of the
Euphrates, some four leagues distant, upon the current of the Tigris and
Euphrates, is built the town of Bagded, Bagded.
or at this day the new Babylon, whither the remains of the ancient were
transported into a town formerly named Seleucia by the Califf Almanzor, or
Elmantzur; It lies Northward upon Armenia, Westward upon the desert Arabia,
upon the happy Southward, and Eastward upon Persia, the Tigris washes her
walls; upon the other side is a pleasant village, with a bridge of boats rising
and falling, with the flow, and ebb; in this Borough is the Fair kept, and
here inhabit most of the Merchants, who trade freely; The town is large, and
full of Merchants, well rounded both with walls, and gardens and Arable land.
There was a strong Castle well provided with Artillery; where a Bassa then
Lieutenant General for the Turk lived, but since the Persian regained it of the
Turk, having ever been subject to the Persian, until it was reduced by Soliman
the magnicent, who caused himself to be crowned King by the Califf, (living
there at this present day) but without any power, retaining the name only, and
some rights to receive, and crown the Emperors of Assyria; There goes from
this town monthly, Caravane^, to all parts of the world: In lieu of floats,
they transport their commodities down the river upon goat skins blown, then
they load the skins upon Camels, for service again at need: They say that the
tower of Babel so much spoken of, stood in a plain, some two leagues off that
she was three thousand paces about, and that her foundation is only at this
day seen upon a hill covered with her ruins: a Merchant that had seen the
place related unto me, that the Tower was built with a clay or earth, so
strongly cimented, that endeavoring to take up a piece, he could not; and that
there was a bed or course of that earth first laid, then another of reeds
platted like a matte, not at all decayed, but strong, beyond imagination. He
told me he had passed over the lake of pitch, proceeding from a great
precipice, Pitch or Bitume.
which they trade withal into diverse places; and that the great town of
Nineve, and the walls of Babylon were built with this Bitumen, they burn of it
in Holland instead of Turf, for it casts a great light: this lake or river of
pitch is between Babylon, and another town called Nane; whence springs this
pitch distilling out of a rock in several clefts, and so plentifully,
especially at the full of the Moon, that it is both strange and terrible; from
thence those springs disgorge themselves into this lake of their own composing,
Mariners thereabouts make use of it to calk their ships. The inhabitants
believe it to be Hels mouth. It Is the Bitumen, or soft sulphurous mould so much
spoken of by the ancients: which they made use of, and do to this very day,
instead of chalk. I remember I have seen the like in Albema, a Region in the
Indies, which the Inhabitants and neighbors thereunto burn in Torches, which
yields so black, thick, and ill-sented a smoke, that the very birds flying
over, are giddyed therewith, and fall down dead. In Cuba, an Isle in the
West Indies, is such pitch, toward the Cape Magdalen, in the country of Aute,
and Province of Apalihen, which Bituminous liquor flows upon the water with
such a stink, that often ships lost in their road, by means of the sent,
retrive their way.

Euphrates and Tigris incorporate near Babylon, and both run into the Persick
sea near Balsora, Balsora.
a town of great trade, fifteen miles distant from the main sea.

The Town of Bagded or Babylon, is divided into four quarters, Bagded.
Precincts, or Wards, and in time of war or troubles the four States or
Councels, withdraw themselves into their respective limits; and call their
Councels, and he that has best advised, makes it out to the Council, that his
advice is most necessary and useful, injoyes royal liberty of freedom, without
paying tax, assessement, or imposition, what lands soever he be possessed of.
He is much esteemed and respected by the Prince, being ever after freely
admitted unto the general Council, which is held annually for the kingdoms
good and welfare. This is also an observation as in many towns in Persia,
which inclines the people very much to the study of Astronomy, divination, and
all sorts or kinds of Philosophy that may make them wise, and prudent, and
understanding; they are much given to virtues, chastity only excepted; being a
large and lascivious people, the women in these countries are the fairest, and
the sweetest in the whole world, which verifies the Proverb, a Persian woman,
and horse.

CHAP. XII. Of the Town of Tauris, Sumachia, Bachat, Casbin, and some of the
chiefest places of Persia,
FRom Babylon we passed through all the other towns of Persia, the chiefest
whereof I will only mention, Tauris or Tabris, formerly Terva, or Gerva.
as Tauris in Media, a great town, and full of Merchants; some take her for the
ancient Ecbatanes, a Royal town belonging to the primitive Kings of Media; it
has been several times taken, and retaken by the Turks and Persians; until
'twas strongly maintained by the Persian, since the last battles given by the
Persian to the Turk, she was lost when the King of Persia assisted Prince
Zagathay; Zagathy.
which occasioned the revolt of a good part of his country contrived by his
eldest son. This King to recover his country, Xabas, or Abas and Mirza.
and to ensnare his son, devised a stratagem, which was to report himself dead,
and caused his obsequies publicly to be celebrated; concealing himself in the
place his treasure was kept in, hither his abused Son straight repaired, was
seized on, and ended his days in prison; after this, the King with a great
Army went to regain what he had lost of his dominions, as Sequetpee, Aremnia,
the towns of Siras, and diverse others upon the Euphrates, Tigris, and Araxes.
The town of Tauris has been several times burnt and plundered, in the several
conquests she yielded unto: she may be very near as great as London: The Prince
receives yearly great revenues, by trade, as well as from the Inhabitants, for
they are all tributary, as also all artificers are acccording to their
faculties and callings: The Merchants that only pass through the town without
making any stay, pay for their commodities at the rate of five per centum for
toll or custom, or the rights of passage; and if they are minded to stay in
town, they pay ten per centum: but notwithstanding the height of the custom,
thither resort very many Merchants, with all sorts of wares, from all places,
as it were in spite; they come from the Indies, Africa, Trade of Tauris.
Aethiopia, Baldec, Mosul, Cremesol, Cambalec, Melusia, Vaouta, Decherin,
Saltamach, Chelmodate, Cotestan, and from other parts of the world, which
brings an inestimable treasure to the Sophy. Besides, the many other towns that
pay the like gabels and customs, as Giac, Soltania, Jaban, Comer, Casera,
Erget, all very rich Towns: Principal Towns of Persia.
Then toward Cusistan, the great City of Guerd upon the River Bindamar,
Virgan, Marout, Asana, with Nain, all iunumerably peopled, Sidan, Reib,
Estrana, Barbarihen, Samachir, and in other parts Maluchia, Sengan, Sio, Meson,
Ere, and many more, the Country being five hundred leagues over from Babylon,
to Corozan, and from the Persick to the Caspian Sea, all inhabited by people
civilized, yet most of them Mahometans of the Sect of Hali.

A little above Tauris drawing toward the North, Derbent.
and the bounds of Media stands Arbena, or Derbent, which they say was built
and so named by Alexander the Great, formerly called the Port of Caucase, or
Iberia, because it is a strait of land, or narrow passage, between the Caspian
Sea and the hills, which hindered the Scythians entry upon Media, since she is
called Temircapi, or Iron gate, and Derbent, which signifies a Strait and there
be many Iron gates, with a strong garrison, to stop the Northern peoples
passage, as the Circassians, Albanians, Tartars, and others.

Beneath Derbent stands Sumachia, Sumachia. Bacchat.
a rich Town and full of gentry; then Bachat, or Bacha, another Town of great
commerce upon the Caspian Sea, and a most famous one being the nursery of the
fairest women of all Persia, and the Persian dames do far excel in beauty,
sweetness, graces, and are more taking than any Ladies in that part of the
world; and they have a proverb in Persia, that he that has a mind to see a
fair and handsome woman must go to Bachat.

They are visited from all parts, for they are of amiable complexions, and
there is a certain place in the Town called Gezempee, Gezempee.
whither most of the Curtizans do retire, and are frequently visited by
strangers. The Jews that inhabit this Town, do carefully take up all the poor
girls that have in any measure received natures favor, they cloth them
richly, and lodge them in a large street near to that quarter called Machif:
Machif.
which signifies a stews, and make a great benefit of them, they are all
sumptuously lodged, apparelled like Princesses: and although they are poor yet
they find friends that provide for them, you spy them at the windows as at
Rome, their keeping open houses gives a free access unto all persons to trade
with them, yet for the most part they are married to rogues, or mean
conditioned people, as Porters, Car-men, Butchers, or Hangmen, who often
interrupt your entertainments or conversation with their rudeness; showing
themselves to be masters: Marseilian Curtizan.
there I saw a Marseillian dame named Louysa Campane, brought hither by her
husband to keep a house, she became so haughty and proud of her gallantry, that
a certain Merchant desirous to buy her favor at ten crowns price, she threw it
him out at the window very scornfully, and yet was not of the ablest to live
amongst them; nevertheless she maintained her husband in silks and satins, who
was but a poor Seaman ugly and ill behaved, but it is rare if this sort of
women become not most miserable at last, by reason of their vaste and
continual expenses, they will thorough vanity give a crown or two at a time,
to a beggar in the street: This Marseillian had lived five or six years, in a
great height in Tauris, where by her trade she had got above a thousand
crowns, which through her pride and vanity she wholly consumed, being banished
the Town for braving and giving a box on the ear to a Lord that kept her for a
time since she retired to Bachat.

Bezap or Bezouart.
There are many more fair Towns in Persia, as Spahan, Casbin, Siras, Royal
Towns; at Spahan is kept one of the Sophy's Courts, well peopled and rich,
there are made many silk stuffs, and is plenty of a certain stone called
Besouart, (which they say) goats breed in their stomachs: The Turky-stone mine
is not far from thence, it is a very amorous Town, both men and women thinking
of nothing but their pleasures, and coolness during the heats: fruit is there
very plentiful, and most excellent of all sorts.

casbin and Siras.
Casbin is another big and Royal Town, well inhabited; then there is Siras the
most delicious, and most pleasing of all Persia, which affords you fair
gardens, fountains, and other refreshments during the great heats, there are
many stately and good horses, some imagine this Town to be built upon the
ruins of old Persepolis, the City-royal of the ancient Persian Monarchs,
situate near the Araxes, now called Bradamir, and not far from thence are to
this day seen the admirable ruins of that famous palace of the Persian Kings,
which Alexander caused to be burnt to please his Thais, Thais Alexanders
Cu^tizan.
of Siras more hereafter.

Going on our Journey we went from place to place without keeping a straight
rode, to put off our commodities at a better rate, drawing right upon the
Cusistan; of that side we found all the keys or passages of Persia, bad and
difficult, for which reason the Turk effected not his design in those parts, we
found it a strange Country, and all that part of Persia but a vaste solitude
unpeopled, and very dangerous traveling: The Mountains were inhabited by
harbarous or insolent persons, then we met with great fens or bogs very deep,
and forests impenetrable, which renders the passages so uncertain and arduous,
that the merchants have much ado to find them, although they are well guided,
and have often traveled them; when you have met with the guide that undertakes
to conduct from one kingdom to another, he must give account to the Belierbeit,
or Governor, what persons he carries out of his dominions, for you may not
return into the same country, without producing good license and discharge,
with a certificate or note of the places you have traveled; which is a
laudable order of the Princes, for having such a care both of strangers and of
his own Subjects, that he wills and endeavors their free and secure trading in
all his Territories. We went toward Vacharin to enter upon Tartary, and raught
unto the Province of Samarcant, Samarcant.
where is a Town bears the same name, famous, for having been the seat of
Tamberland the Great, so much mentioned in our Histories these two or three
hundred years.

We being sensible of the hardship and inconveniences in traveling further
this way, besides the best experienced Merchants dissuaded us from it; for we
discovered that that Country coin was not of any value, being neither gold
nor silver, but of some other base metal, and some of the bark of trees, as
Mark Pole remarkes of Tartarye, Li. 2. Cap. 18. we turned back again into
Persia, from thence by great days journey to the happy Arabia and Ormus; we
now had associated our selves to a jolly company of Merchants, and my companion
privately acquainted me he had resolved to see the east Indies, and that if I
were unwilling to take so long a journey, he would recommend me to some French
Merchant at Ormus, that should safely reconduct me into Europe. I willingly
resolved to go along with him, or whither else he would, but not to leave him:
this resolution taken, we came back thorough many Towns of Persia, as
Sorismell, Sorismell Sinderate.
twelve leagues thence Sinderate, upon the river Adalout, where we were lodged
at a Renegades, that gave us good entertainment, his house was built half upon
the water: the Armenian Merchant that desired to go thorough Pegu to buy
rubies, resolved Cassis to pass thorough Indostan, we advised together to
regain our way, and to escape the excises, or payments, are paid toward
Samarcant, and Corozan; we had much recreation in this voyage.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Kings of Persia, their Power, pleasures, of the Sophy,
Hali, and of some Sects of Religious Pericans, of the ancient Mages, and other
Officers of the Kingdom.
THe King of Persia is one of the greatest, and most Powerful Princes of the
World, as well in the extent of Territory, The Powerful state of the Kings of
Persia.
treasure and riches, as in number of men of war; he can ordinarily set forth
a hundred thousand Cavalry, and of infantry four score thousand. The state of
his Court is most ample and Magnificant: his people warlike, with a great
number of generous Nobility; the King is served, and attended by the greatest
Lords of the Land. Delicacies.
He is Chief, or Head of the Religion, or his Church, throughout his whole
Empire, and leads a very lascivious and voluptuous life, keeps many women
Royally clad; he uses the most exquisite perfumes, not in his apparel and
furniture only, but also in his meat; he wears Jewels, of an inestimable
value; and he has leave to marry as many wives as he pleases, as the Grand
Seignior has; He keeps Seleris, Seleris.
persons well qualified, whose duties are to travel thorough the whole Empire,
to see and choose the fairest and rarest women, having leave to enter all
places, Women chosen.
nay their very bed-chambers, to view them, in what postures they please, but
chiefly to know whether they snore, or stir much in their sleep, or whether
they sleep quietly, and having made choice of them, as they ought to be
qualified, they carry them in a littar to the Princes service, and their
parents are much honored and esteemed. When the King has seen them, and has
chosen which please him most, he presents the others to the greatest Lords and
favorites of his Court; which are much happier then those remain with the
Prince, for so great store he has of them, that few of them have the Honor to
enjoy his Person; they are kept, or guarded by Eunuchs, as they are in Turkey:
Those are most in his favor the King takes often a hunting with him: Hunting.
they are not seen of any, although they can see others; he goes a hunting, as
to the Wars, his men carry several sorts of Arms, as bows and arrows,
cymiters, axes, marching in rank, carefully guarding their Kings Person, whom
they adore as a God.

Their Military discipline is very exact, and they suffer much in their
exercises, they eat nothing until their chase be ended, then they drive
herds of savage beasts before the Concubines litters, to recreate, and delight
them, killing those the Ladies have most mind unto, sometimes they cause of
them to be taken alive, and restore liberty to the rest; this Country is
fuller of great and pleasant Forests, Forests.
then all the rest of the east.

Sophy signifies wise.
The Prince is called Sophy, rather for his Religion then for any other reason,
he maintains the Law of Hali, son in Law to Mahomet, and therefore wears a
woolen cap, and a red turban flock't with white, from whence he is called
Sophy, which signifies a red flock't cap, and Caselbas signifies read head,
although some would have it an Arabic word, and to signify a man purer in
Religion then the rest.

They differ in Religion from the Turks: that follow the feast of Hamar,
another of Mahomets disciples, and successor, which occasions mortal hatred,
and continual War betwixt them.

Hali.
The Persians Hali was by Mahomet chosen Calife, and hi^ successor after his
death: but was supplanted by Ebubeker, Homar, Hamar.
and Otman, from whence this Sect was divided. Hali was buried at Cufa, Cufa.
not far from Bagded, this place is much esteemed by the Mahometans, and the
Turkish Emperors are crowned by the Calife, near unto his tomb called
Massadali or rather house of Ali; The Turks hold the Persians heretics, and
the Persians have the same opinion of the Turks, the one following their
Prophet Hali's interpretation upon the Alcoran, the other following Hamars.

The Persians since the destruction of their Kings and Califes, were governed
by the Sophy's of the race of Ismael: Ismael. Sophy.
This Ismael pretends himself descended from Hali, by a prophet named Sophy,
and since they retain the title of Sophy.

In their Sect they have many orders, Sorts of religious orders amongst the
Turks. Sacar.
among others one called Sacar, people using great austerities, and
abstinencies, and are exceeding indigent: they carry about the barren places,
and the Forest vessels of water, which in charity they distribute unto the
passengers, in the name of Hali, without exacting any thing therefore, only
taking what is freely given them.

There is another order called Jcorma, Icorma.
consisting of pilgrims, they are clothed in a long Cassock, barefoot, and
bare-legged, begirt with rich girdles, hung round with silver bells, and are
called Jonabam, which means, Religion of love.

There are others called Calenden as among the Turks, those vow chastity, and
have places appointed for their prayers called Tachie, Calender:
or Tachiat, upon their gate these words are written, Caeda, Normac, Dilersin
Cousionge Al cachercuir, which signifies, who ever enters here, must preserve
virginity, and for this purpose they are rung with silver rings to prevent
carnal copulation: Next are the Deruis, Deruis cutthroats.
they wear rich rings in their ears, are clothed in sheep skins; and wear
hangers, with which they cut and mangle themselves, when they feel the emotions
of the flesh, having eaten of a certain herb, that renders them frantic and
furious; then they cure themselves with Nicotiane. Some of them dye of those
wounds, Nicotiane.
which they place in the number of their Saints. These Deruis are rogues and
thieves, kill all they meet upon the road, that are not of their religion,
thinking they do their Prophet good service; they ask an alms in the name of
Hali, saying Ferdaxtiay, Malday Chinaila, Some say that Amurath was killed by a
Tribullian soldier, guised inhabit of a Deruis.
Eli, this order has not been in so great esteem amongst the Turks, since
Amurath was killed by one of them, and that they endeavored to murder Bajazeth
the second, and in Persia the Sophy.

One of them killed a Bassa at Babylon in the void place called Sambacarayma
which signifies a place of liberty, and was not prosecuted because he was
esteemed the Minister of God; one of them disguised, killed a Judge at Damas,
as I have before related.

There is another Sect called Durmisar, Durmisar.
and they are soothsayers, and casters of nativities, they are called
Durmisarnari which signifies Prophets, and Fortune Tellers, they deal with the
devil, and the eldest of them are esteemed Saints, the younger obey them as
their Charif, or high Priest. They are abominable Hypocrites, and make strange
faces: some of them are very skilful in Astronomy, others learned in the
countries laws; and others great Preachers; they talk extravagantly in their
Sermons, and speak predictions, which sometimes come to pass: much credit is
given to them by the vulgar, as also of those of the best note; nay if the
Sophy himself happens to pass by the place they are preaching in, he steps
with all his house to hear him; they have a house in Bagdet, near the Royal
Palace: they seem to be remainder of the ancient Chaldeans, or Persian Mages so
famous. Amongst the Persians there is a sort of people called Erade, Erade.
which are wrestlers, they are often exposed to wild beasts, armed with shining
leather, liquored, and very slippy, hard to be taken hold of: there are others
called Pluviander, Pluviander.
armed in another fashion, these people are welcome to the King from what place
soever they come, be they but strong and valiant; they are exercised in public
Schools, and great use made of them in war, the strongest amongst them commands
the rest, Barcas.
and is called Barcas: and some of them will carry ten men upon their arms like
kids, and they will strangle a man with grasping, their strength is such:
others are like the Arabian Salsidas that will obey their King to death it
self, Salsidas.
hold their King a God, and think their chiefest happiness and salvation
depends upon the execution of his command; and hold it unlawful (the King only
excepted, and their General) to be subjected to the power of any man: There are
Aussares persons still attending upon the King; like unto Xerxes his immortals.

Amicabir.
In the Sophy's Court there are many places or offices as Amicabir, or Captain
General, who keeps a great Court, leads on, and draws the Army into battalia,
appoints the Governors to towns and places, and fills up several offices, using
the public treasure as he needs. There is next the Naibessan, or Nabassan, as
Lord Treasurer of the Kings Exchequer, Nabassan.
his place is next unto the Amicabir, and has a good number of Cavalry under
his command. Next there is the Estodar or Ostader, Ostader.
who guards the Palace, and finds persons capable for the Royal Army. There is
likewise L' Amirachor, or Amiracher, Amirachor.
who is Master of the horse, has charge of all the horse, and other cattle of
carriage belonging to the Army. The Caidsidibir or Field-Master, Caidsidibir.
and he manages or orders the battle.

Cassander^
The Cassandera Play Master general, receives the Kings revenues to pay off the
Army. The Amiseralif, takes a care of the Sophyes arms: the Testacane or
Master of the Wardrobe: then the Zebedare Farassin, Tabucaina, and other
Commanders, they march in great pomp and order. There are four sorts of troops,
severally paid, viz. the Cachias persons slightly armed, all gentry, and very
active, the Athesia's that wear a Cymeter only, the Caraniza or Archers armed
with bows and arrows, and Cymeters, the Ageleps, Ageleps Archilep in Pegu.
or renegats, which are slaves, Armenians, Russians, Guserates, and of other
nations; all warlike and stout men, keeping good order, never breaking their
ranks.

CHAP. XIV. Of the East Indies, the conquest of them, Sects, and Religion of
the East, and other particulars of the country.
HAving traveled the chiefest part of Persia and Arabia backward and forward,
we returned to Aden, from thence to Ormus, to fall into the East India road,
according to our first intention. At Aden we agreed upon it, and embarked our
selves with our commodities, and sailed along the coast of the Indian Sea, as
far as Carmania, Deserta Rasigut, and Guzerate, passing through the Cape
Jacobo, Guadel, and others, we landed at Cambay at Diu, near the mouth of the
great Indus. But before I treat of that country, for a clearer intelligence of
the worthiest remarkes we made in that great journey, I say that the
East Indies have bin discovered time out of mind, since Alexanders conquests,
and of his successors, the several Kings of Syria, Assyria, and Egypt, and by
the Romans; and in these latter ages, by the Mahometans means, Inhabitants of
Genua.
trading in our Western parts, amongst the Venetians and Genoeses, and others:
but they have been further discovered and inhabited by the Portuguais, since
they found out a new way thither through Africa, in the time of Prince Henry of
Portugal, brother to King Edward, who through his rare insight into the
Mathematics, first caused a Navigation to be made, unto the Capes of Non, and
Boyador; where the French having conquered the Canaries, had already been,
since that Alfonsus the fifth his Nephew continued his discovery unto the Cape
Verd and Guinny, and other Kings since have reached to Conge, Maniconge,
Angolal, unto the Cape of good hope, discovered by the Grand Vasque of Gama
1497. few years after the new world in the West, had been found out by
Christopher Columbus: from hence the way is open into the whole East Indies, by
Cephala, Mozambick, Quiloa, Monbase, Places in the Indies.
the coasts of Aben, Arabia, Carmania, Cambaye, Malabar, Coromandel, Harsnique,
Bengal, Aracan, Pegu, Sian, Malaca, Camboye, Champa, Cochinchine, and China,
the furthest part of the East, together with the innumerable Islands, opposite
to these coasts, as S. Helena, S. Laurence, Socotora, Maldives, Quilan,
Sumatre, Jave, Bandan, Moluques, the Phillippines, and the rest of the
Antchidel sea, or Archipelago, of S. Lazarus, unto Japan.

The Portugais conquests in the East.
The Portugais made themselves Masters of it, under the famous Albukerke of Goa,
1510. and since of Matacha, Diu, Ormus, and other places where they established
their Empire, trade, and the Christian faith, finding the ways easy and
short, by their knowledge of several currants of the seas, and annual or
constant winds that sit for six or seven months together in one point, and as
long in another, when they change, as in the West Indies; the Eastern winds
predominate, through the torrid Zone, between the Tropicks: and notwithstanding
this exact knowledge and practice of the Eastern, and Southern Seas, these two
ages past, many shipwracks have happened; many ships, men, and great treasures
cast away, all which the earth stripped off, the sea solely inherits;
nevertheless it is a miracle of providence, that a handful of men with small
means, have bin able to establish themselves, in those vast Indies, to resist
and overcome the oppositions of the richest, and the most puissant Kings of the
world, and that their example has since drawn to their mitution the English,
Dutch, and French; who trade therein great numbers. In a word, the Portugais,
in matter of commerce, dealt not only with the Indians, Idolaters, and
Sarasins, but also with the Mameluckes and Turks, from whom they got their
richest trade; they have got the superiority likewise in the spiritual, against
all Sects, long since broached by the Gentiles, Mahometans, Jews, and the
Nestorians, Christians, and do daily root out and extirpate those Sects and
false religions, not without much danger, and trouble; but they take the
greatest pains with the least success against the Mahometans for their
liberty, and sensuality, hinders much the progress of our religion; although
they find great difficulty in the obstinacy of the Jews, and little less in
the foolish, horrible, and senseless superstitions of the Idolaters, backed by
long custom, and more by the ambition, covetousness, and presumption of their
Bramins, Jogues, Talipoyes, Manigrepes, Bonses, and other of their Priests, and
religious of their belief, from hence is gathered a plentiful and glorious
harvest, by the travels and labors of many regulars, and seminaries of Goa,
Malaco, Machat, and other places: The Franciscans were the first laborers in
this vineyard, Christianis^e in the Indies.
in the year 1500. or rather sooner, and the first Bishop settled at Goa, was of
that order, in the year 1541. S. Francis Xaverius was since there, who preached
through all those countries, and Isles, unto Japan, and China, where he died in
the year 1552. and therefore was called the Apostle of the Indies, his order
continues their mission thither still, where they gain an infinite number to
Christianisme. At Magor, Pegu, Sian, China, Japan, Jaso, and other places, the
College of S. Paul at Goa, being their chiefest Seminary, where the
Archbishop inhabits; who is Primate and Patriarch of the Indies, having under
him the Bishops of Cochin, Malaca, and Macao. The Viceroy rules the temporal
affairs, and all Governors, Captains, and Governments of Africa, and the
East- Indies, are at his disposal.

CHAP. XV. Of Diu, her state and Forts, and the neighboring Countries of
Cambayette, of the fidelity of the Indian Sensalls, and of the marvelous ebbing
and flowing of the Sea.
LEt us return to our voyage, and arrival at Diu, which I shall treat more
fully of here, as of Cambaye, Goa, Cochin, Calicut, and others, having seen
them often since. Diu is a little neat Town, situate in an Isle joining unto
the Continent of the Kingdom of Cambaye, whereof it is a part; there have the
Portuguais a Fort, or Castle inexpugnable, no man being permitted entrance
there, without a Cartaco, or pass from the Viceroy, and the ships pay Custom,
if they are small vessels they may enter into Cambayette, which is the Haven
of the Town. The Isle of Diu is by the Indians, called Marmayrdina, 60. miles
from the mouth of the Gulf of Cambaye, and 100. from the Royal Town of
Cambaye, she joins almost to the Continent, in the 23th. degree and a half of
elevation, it abounds in cattle, vast trade, used by all the Indian Nations:
for the abundance of all sorts of Commodities, which are there to be bought and
sold, as Gold, Silver, Spices, Medicinal drugs, Brasil, Jewels, Pearls,
Perfumes, Amber, Musk, Mastick, Cloves, Safron, Corrall, Brass, Lead, Mercury,
Vermillion, and Lacca; the Town is as big as Marseills, little less then Goa;
there are many fair Churches. The Hospital is large, rich, and very well
provided. The West Indians traffic here, come in a shorter time, and with more
surety, thorough the sea of Sur, then by the Cape of Good Hope a very dangerous
passage, occasioned by the great winds, and frequent tempests, as you shall
hear hereafter. The Portuguais having taken this Town out of the hand of
Badurius, King of Cambaye, at their first settlemen there.

The Town of Diu was built by a King of Guzerate, and Cambaye, constituted
Governor there of a Melique, As or Tas, that made the Haven, made himself
Sovereign, and was guarded by Turks; since, in the year 1508. the Natives,
assisted by Campson, Sultan of Egypt, fell upon the Portuguais, defeated them,
and stormed Diu several times so fiercely, that it occasioned, Nonio Acugna
the Viceroy, in the year 1535, to build a strong Fort, with the consent of
King Badurius, which they maintained against the Tartars and Mogors; the
strength and importance of the place, drawing both hatred and envy from the
Indians, The King of Cambaye, and other neighboring Kings, endeavored to
recover it by mere strength, but all in vain; for the gallant opposition and
defense of the Portugal, has kept them masters of it to this day.

The Indians had some reason for what they did, for from thence depended the
whole Trade of the Kingdom, and adjacent Countries; and the Portuguais keep
all that Country in subjection; from Diu to Goa, and the Cape Comarin, 270.
leagues in length. The chiefest part of the East is furnished with commodities
from hence, a place very rich, well peopled, and full of good Towns, and of
great trade. In the adjacent parts, to Diu, upon the Continent, are the
Kingdoms of Circan, and Reytenbura, where stands the Royal Town of Ardanat,
then Campanell, capital Town of Cambaye stands beyond the River Indus, and the
Towns of Albiran, Casdar, Masura, Sudustan, Abedit; all great Towns rich, and
well traded, and inhabited by many Merchants, Gentills, Mores, Jews, and
Christians, in this Town Malefactors are put to death by poison only, and not
by the sword.

Beyond the River Araba stand many fair Towns, viz. Savadir, Barca, Bermen,
Patenisir, a fair haven, where diverse of the rarest, Batinisir and her Carpets.
and richest Carpets of the World are made in silk, and figured, which are
transported to Bengale, Malaco, and Pegu, and other places; there are also made
Calicoes, stained of diverse colors, which is the chiefest and ordinary
clothing the Natives use, and there is brought of it into all parts of the
world.

Half a days journey from Batenisir stands Diu, upon a creek of land,
separate by a river from the Continent; there are paid great Customs upon all
sorts of commodities, which brings in a great profit to the Inhabitants, the
King of Spain having the least share in it, and what he has employed to the
maintenance of the Garrisons, most of those payments fall to the Officers and
receivers shares, who agree very well with the Viceroy: The King is often of a
mind to quit the Country, but his Council is not of the same opinion, the
Country being too considerable to their Prince, for strength and reputation;
and besides 'twould endanger the loss of Christianity, that is so hopefully
rooted in those parts, for the Turks assault them often, and took and sacked
the Castle of Diu twice, and had reduced the rest of the Town, Diu assaulted by
the Tu^k.
but for the help of three ships that came into their assistance from Cochin,
that preserved the rest, and beat the Turks out of what they had already got.

The Portuguais, in defense of them and the Nations, have built two strong
Forts, the one in the sea, the other that commands all passages by Land; but
the Natives having often fallen upon them, to their own loss, are now the
Spaniards good friends, according unto Articles and Agreements made between
them.

The Inhabitants of Cambaye are strict observers of many superstitious customs,
they will not eat with a Christian although they visit them often; if you touch
their meat they think themselves polluted, and this they have from the
Guzerates, in which they are more rigidly superstitious than the Jews
themselves.

Those of any quality eat upon silken carpets diversely colored, and to
preserve their silks serve the dishes upon green leaves, they are temperate in
their diet, and drink of several sorts of liquors, and they mingle some Areca
to them all, Areca a fruit common in the Indies.
a fruit very common in the India's, it is also held very wholesome, preserves
them and cures them of several diseases: it preserves the teeth strangely, for
the Inhabitants are never troubled with any pains or aches in them; women are
there in very great esteem, especially the great Ladies, who never stir out of
their houses: some delight themselves never to see day light, and are served
all by candle light.

The whole Country is inhabited by Gentills, and Guzerates; The justest, the
most reasonable and religious of the East, according to the ancient Pythagorean
rule, they never feed upon any living Creature whatever: their chiefest food is
rice, white and black, milk, cheese, garden stuff, and the like; they do wrong
to no persons, nay they spare the blood and lives of their mortallest enemies;
the Country toward Rasigut produces great store of Turkey stones, of Storax,
Cornelians red and white. This Kingdom extends it self toward South-east, and
the Sea Southward, Westward it buts upon Guzerate, Eastward are the lands of
Mandao, and Paleucate, and Northward it reaches unto Sangan, Dulcinde, and the
Territories of the Grand Mogull: Through this kingdom runs the famous River of
Indus, called Indus Inder, or Schind, and has given her name to the whole
Country, and chiefly to Indostan, and other neighboring Countries; which make
up the India citerior, her head springs forth of the Mountain Caucasus
Paropamisus, called at this day Naugracot and Vssonte, and taking her course
thorough many great Kingdoms, is swelled by many great Rivers, that lose
themselves in her, and at last discharges her self into the Indian Sea at two
several mouths near unto the Town of Cambaye.

Cambaye is a large and flourishing Town, Cambaye Town.
seated upon a River called by the Inhabitants Amondoua, and separates the
Provinces of Guzerate and Cambaye, both making one Kingdom: This Town stands a
league from the Sea, and about the same distance from the River Indus, which
affords her a haven in two places, the chiefest is in a corner of the Town
Northward, and is so narrow that in case of necessity the ships may be chained
in the harbor, the ships come and go with the ebb and flow, and are often
very numerous, and it is to be noted that the tides are weakest at the full of
the Moon, which is wonderful, A miraculous tide;
and contrary to ours, the reason thereof is not yet found out by any
Naturalist. The same happens in Pegu, as we shall speak of hereafter.

This Town is one of the richest of the Orient, built very stately at the
Italian model, and the passages leading to her strengthened by many forts. The
Portuguais have often endeavored to possess themselves of it, being
plentifully furnished with all things necessary to mankind; and here are most
excellent fruits: Here Diu provides her self with what she wants at home,
Cambaye and she being Confederates: she produces the best Turbith, Galanga,
Nardus, Assa foetida, and other drugs, is rich in silks, cottons, rice, and all
sorts of seeds, and abounds in precious stones and Jewels; The King at this
time is tributary to the Grand Mogull.
The Prince that governs is a Mohammedan, gives liberty of conscience to all his
Subjects, to the Christians, Jews, Idolaters, his guard consists of 2000.
horse, and 3000 foot, armed with bows and cimeters.

He keeps fifty Elephants taught to reverence him daily, and are sumptuously
trapped and caparisoned, upon days of public shows or festivals, their stable
well and neatly furnished, painted, and well set forth, and are fed in silver
vessels, and their grooms or Governors dress them with great respect and
humility, without ever offering any rudeness; they are animals approaching
very near to reason, and want speech only to express themselves; Prodigious
food.
they understand the language of the Country, and do very readily conceive what
is taught them: The Prince feeds upon venomous Creatures, which he has ever so
used himself to, that he is become venomous himself, and a fly stinging of him
immediately dies: he presently killed all the women that ever lay with him,
infecting them with his breath, so that he had change daily.

The furniture within their houses is rich, which they have from the
Portuguais, they ride in littars, and are great Lovers of Music; their houses
are sumptuously dressed at Diu, and Ormus, many of them beautified and
enriched, with Calcedonians, Turkey-stones, Amarists, Topases, and other
jewels. At Lymadura a village within three miles of the Town there is a mine of
Calcedonians, whence they have of three sorts of them, white, red, and mingled,
called Bazayora, Merchants from diverse places furnish themselves with many of
them, they sail with their ships into Nogar, a Port not far from the Mine, the
commodities laded from this Town are transported into diverse parts of the
world, to Ormus, Ziden, Meka; others are transported through the mouth of
Euphrates unto Bazora, Babylon, Byr, Aleppo, and Damas.

The imported commodities from Meka, are scarlets, velvets, fine woollen
clothes Iron ware, Amsian which is a drug like unto Opium, which the Indians
frequently take, chiefly in their Armies, it makes the Soldiers valiant and
furious, fighting to the last drop of blood: and is therefore a rich commodity,
the Assa foetida, Turbith, Agathes, and other jewels are brought from Diu,
where there are many Goldsmiths and Jewellers, thither the Merchants bring them
to have them cut into several figures.

Silks, purslanes, sendals, velvets, ivory, brasile, mirabolans, confections,
and preserves, of all sorts, spices, and all sorts of grocery come from China,
and from other places of the Levant: The Town affords you of the best Borrax in
the world: Trade is very faithfully carried on there, for the Factors and
Retalers are persons of quality, and good reputation; and are as careful in
venting and preserving other persons wares, as if they were their own proper
goods; they are also obliged to furnish the Merchants with dwelling houses, and
warehouses, diet, Women bought and sold.
and oftentimes with diverse sorts of commodities: the houses are large and
pleasant, where you are provided with women of all ages for your use, you buy
them at certain rates, and sell them again when you have made use of them, if
you like them not, you may choose the wholsomest and the most agreeable to your
humor: all things necessary to livelihood maybe made your own at cheap rates,
and you live there with much liberty, without great incoveniences; if you
discharge the customs rated upon merchandises, nothing more is exacted, and all
strangers live with the same freedom and liberty as the Natives, do, making
open profession of their own Religions.

Ivory is in very great esteem in this place, Ivory:
and the neighboring Countries, and very much is consumed; Ladies of the best
note wear bracelets of several fashions made thereof, and at the death of any
friend or alliance they break them in many pieces, which is the greatest
expression of sadness among their sex; as the shaving of beard close is to the
men, and when their time of mourning is over, they make themselves new
bracelets.

The Town of Cambaye is much of the bigness of Roan, or rather bigger, besides
the Suburbs, and not much unlike unto the Grand Caire, only that she is much
less, Children sold by Parents.
the inhabitants call her Byr, Armadouar, Parents that are overcharged with
children sell those they have supernumerary.

Here I will relate you an accident that happened to my Camarade at Cambaye;
Having spent some days there trading, An accident.
he met a Countreyman of his born at Xaintonge, who feigned himself a Merchant,
and a great dealer, but proved at last an impostor. This counterfeit, under the
pretense of trading, stole from my Camarade a pack of wares worth 300. crowns,
which by the opportunity of a Caravane bound for Ormus, there he embarked
himself to preserve his theft, timely notice being given my Companion, he
pursued him in another ship, together with another Merchant, who had formerly
been the like served in a greater consequence.

This diligence was a little rash, for I was immediately advised by our host, a
rich broker or merchant, that my camarade had taken his journey in vain, having
not with him a roll of his goods stolen, nor the Viceroy's Cartaco; I straight
resolved to follow him with the papers and passe-port he stood in need of:
Cassis overtook this venturer at Ormus, where he debauched at his charge, and
for want of the list of wares nothing could be proved against him. The cheat
put my companion to his wits, denying whatever was alleged against him, with
an injurious insolence. The Judge or Alcade, to whom my friend had addressed
himself for justice and satisfaction, weighing the others confidence with the
slender evidence my friend could bring against him, and having received a
feeling in the case, was ready to commit our friends to prison for barrettors,
and impostors, had I not come to town three days after with comfortable news,
I showed my self in Court, and giving information of the whole truth, my
testimony and evidence was taken in the presence of the Alcade, and a Portugais
Gentleman, named Seignior Jacomo de Mendez, purposely sent by the Viceroy; he
gave me charge to take great care of my self, telling me that if I were found a
liar it concerned my life, being sworn, imposing my hand upon a Cross held out
to me upon the end of a Vare, or wand; I gave up my evidence at large, and
informed the Judicature, that in the stolen pack there was a memorial of what
was therein contained, besides I particularly named the chiefest goods therein,
which Cassis had wholly forgotten.

Then I produced the Cartaco, and other notes, that witnessed the discharging
of the excises and customs, as by advice received from our host Josepho
Groyna, who witnessed the same: The cheat being examined in my sight whether he
knew me or no, he begun his own defense injuring and abusing me, striving to
break my evidence by multiplicity of words, with a strange boldness, or rather
impudence practiced by such persons, saying he had taken no exact account of
his commodities, pretending himself a Gentleman and not used thereunto; his
many words availed him little, for I pressing the pack might be opened, my
evidence proved true, and the roll compared to my book of accounts, found
answerable all was verified, and the miserable man having not a word left in
his own excuse, was convicted, and condemned to the Galleys during life. Thus
we found justice, and recovered our commodities with little loss, and
returning thanks to Seignior Mendez we came back to Cambaye: This I have
related to the faithfulness and integrity of our Landlord; and really their
sincerity and integrity is such, that the Justices esteem their words and
writings to equal sacred things; and when a Merchant happens to die, leaving
his goods in one of these persons hands, they are very faithfully restored to
his heir, or next of kindred.

From Diu and Cambaye, unto the Cape Comorin, by the Coast of Malabar, it is
some 300 leagues sail: and near to Cambaye is the Kingdom of Jogues.

CHAP. XVI. Of Deli, Malabar, of Goa, the capital Town of India.
Near to Cambaye we fell into the Kingdom of Deli, and Decan; Deli-Decan.
they say that 300. years since, Sanosaradin King of Deli, conquered Decan,
Canary, Bellagatte, Concam, Goa, Sano sararadin.
and all the Countries reaching unto Comori, but since, under his several
Successors, those Countries were divided, and allotted to several Captains,
that have possessed themselves thereof, acknowledging (for form sake only) the
King of Deli; Idalcan was at Goa, since Nysamaluco, and the Negatana, and many
neighboring Countries are subjected to the Great Mogull; who this last age
has conquered the chiefest part of the east Indies, and threatens hard to the
rest.

Malabar lies upon the Western Coaste, from Goa to Comori, as eastward on the
other side lies Coromandell, where are the Kingdoms of Bisnagar, or Narsingue,
Orixa, Menduo, and several others, from Ormus to Goa it is 500. leagues, or
thereabouts.

We sailed all along this Coaste, and we arrived at Goa, an Isle and Town of
Malabar, as fair, rich, and stately a Town, as is this day in the east, being
as a key to the India's, in the sixteenth degree of elevation, divided from the
Continent by a large River, Malabar Mandova. Goa Guari, Rivers.
called Mandova, as big as the Euphrates, and by another little River named
Guari, from whence the Town took her name, formerly belonging to the Kingdom
of Narsingue, since unto Decan, or Dealcan, and since 'twas conquered by the
Portugal, under Alphonsus Albukerke, of the Moore Sabaco, General unto the
King of Decan, in the year 1500. she has eastward, and northward, the
Country of Decan, westward the great sea, and southward the Kingdom of
Mangalor, subject to the King of Narsingue.

The Insularies, or Inhabitants, having ever been well addicted to trading,
they are people stout and haughty. There is a great concourse of all the
Indians, a Haven at the village called Bonastariu, B^nactaru.
with a block house, that commands the entrance of it, though it be strong of
it self: They have several other good Ports, as at Danda, Alinga, Banda,
Amolapole, and Puntadasall, then old Goa, Rama, Guisantole, and Amadina, each
having her particular river: on the continent side, there are many Towns and
Plantations, most of them Mahometans and Idolaters, kept in by the Portugais,
they have stately ship-timber. They are pretty well awed for the present, since
they were punished for a treacherous conspiracy, which by the assistance of some
neighboring Countries, they intended to have put in execution, but was by Gods
permission discovered by the Barbarians, inhabitants of Paleacate, and although
they were 100 Gentills for one Christian, and had almost gained the Fort, yet
they were gallantly repulsed by Don Garcias Acugna, Governor of the Fort, he
very liberally rewarded those that gave him so timely advice, distributing the
Kings Treasure amongst them; and since those freindly neighbors of Paleacate,
enjoyed the same freedoms and Privileges with the Portugais, they were made
subsidy and customes-free; and so strict an alliance and unity contracted
between them that many of them since are baptized, turned Christians, and do
frequently enter-marry: the Plotters were most of them put to death, the rest
banished, and their goods confiscated.

Isle of Goa.
The Isle of Goa is some 15 or 16 miles about, the Inhabitants are strong, and
able bodyed, almost of an olive color: The Town is infinitely rich, and the
great street very full of goldsmiths, that have their shops well stored with
gold, silver, and Jewels.

Idolatry. Dinary.
The Gentills had a most magnificent Temple built of stone, in a little Island
near to Goa, called Dinary, where they adored the Devil that appeared to them
in diverse most terrible and horrid shapes.

The Portugais seeing this diabolical profanation, demolish't the Temple and
the Idols, without leaving the least mark behind them, and with the stones
they fortified the Town, and built many fair houses, which bred a great malice
and hatred amongst the Idolaters. The Temple was built of a black stone, and
their Pagodes, or Idols, were most horribly shaped. When the Portugais managed
that great War against Samorin of Calicut, it was then in their power to
demolish this Temple.

But the respect they bore to an Image of our blessed Lady, Mother of God, The
Virgin Mary Honored by the Indians.
made them spare it for that time: They call the Blessed Virgin Sannacarin,
which signifies a bird, and hold she is the spirit of God; they give great
honor to the holy Cross, and say that at the founding of the Town, a perfect
one was found in the ground.

The Inhabitants live very deliciously, feed much upon Areca, and are carried
in rich Sedans by their slaves, and the inhabitants have liberty of conscience.

Having been often at Goa, amongst other things I admired the great commerce,
the richest good order and administration of Justice, and above all, a most
admirable government in an Hospital, which is very rich, where notwithstanding
are great number of sick, and maimed, from the Armies: The Viceroy and
Archbishop contribute liberally thereunto; the Portugais prove themselves, of
an affable, and compassionate nature, although the Indians hold them rough and
uncharitable, because they possess much of their land.

This Hospital is the fairest, and the most accomplished, in all necessaries I
know in the world; and I dare affirm that neither that of the Holy Ghost at
Rome, nor the infirmary of Malta, although they are served in plate in both
those places, do equal her in riches, good orders, and services: that are
far better observed and tended, then you can expect to be in your own house,
as I often was a witness of, visiting the French that were there sick: the
Fathers of the society have the keeping of it, and are very charitable therein;
It is built upon a River, founded by the Kings of Portugal; besides the charity
and gifts of the Nobility, which are great; they have for the most part a
Factor at Cambaye; a Country plentiful in all sorts of grain, who makes their
provision at the cheapest rates: there a great number of slaves, that are
employed in all inferior offices; and are also made use of in the other Indian
Hospitals, and other Monasteries. Perfumes are daily burnt, to prevent
infection, and to lessen the unwholesome sents that would otherwise very much
offend: they use very fine linen, and wine of Dates is their only drink, and
is full as delicious as that of Grapes: the Portugais are very voluptuous; and
great sensualists and are served in Purcelain, Purcelains
which will not hold poison. This Country is much infected with the great pox,
and with another infection called Mordesin, Mordesin. diseases Scorbus.
that begins with vomiting, and pains in the head, and is infectious. There is
another disease very common amongst the natives called Scorbus, and other
diseases proceed from the enchantments of bad women; They are no sooner sick,
but are carried to the Hospital, where remedies are presently used for their
recovery: they are lodged in well-furnished and pleasant chambers, and have
very fine gardens.

The Churches of Goa are fair and well adorned, the Windores of Mother of
pearl, very curiously carved. At Pegu they are made of Tortoise shells of
diverse colors, and are the fairest of the world; the Lanthornes belonging to
the Hospital, are made of the shell of a fish, a kind of Mother of pearl.

They burn nothing but wax in the Churches, nor little else in the town, it is
so well provided therewith.

This town being some eight thousand paces about, may be of the bigness of
Roan or Avignon, built, and tyled, as the fashion is in Europe; Goa is an
Archbishops See, and has four Bishoprics depending to her, and her
jurisdiction reaches unto Mosambick.

Churches at Goa.
There are many magnificent Churches, and Monasteries, of Jesuits, Franciscans,
Austin Friars discalceate, and many Nunneries of Virgins, and penitents.

There is great commerce of all wares and merchandise, of slaves especially,
both males and females; it is but a peccadillie, for a Master to lie with his
slave, but if she proves with child, the law enfranchises her, and she may go
whither she pleases.

The waters are good and well tasted, and although the tide goes up beyond the
town, yet there remains not the least brackishnesse in the water, the best is
fetched half a mile from the town, from a place called Banquenin, which is
sold. The Portugais are richly clad, with breeches like Seamen, very rich
buttons, coats, and Cassocks, pretty short, and broad hats; they have their
Parasols carried by them, with bottles full of Colos, and other pleasing
drinks, and they wear very rich swords; and in a word, they are very vain and
proud, as the Prophet speaks them, Pocos y Locos.

The Haven is very good, only there is a shelf of sand, as at Larack in Fez,
they have an inquisition, or Court of Parliament, which is their Judicature;
The Viceroy is removed every third year. The profit there accrues to the
Governors and officers, and little comes to the King, that depends much upon
his Armies; besides the pay of three thousand officers.

The Isle is mountainous, sandy, and reddish, yet very fertile, being well
watered with many springs, and rivers: of this red earth or clay, are made many
sorts of cups and vases white, some gray, others red, and as clear and fine as
glass, as Bolarmeni.

They have two crops a year, of Rice and French Wheat, and it is green all the
year long: this land is situate under the Tropic Cancer, near to the
Equinoctial.

There grow many Date-trees, and ships come daily into the Haven, laden with
Cocos, and other commodities vented in the town.

The ships stay at the bar or mouth of the Haven wanting water to bring them
up: They hold it two miles from the town to the mouth of the river, where are
two strong Block-houses or Forts, to defend the ships that sail in the middle.
Then a league higher there is another called Pangari, where dwells the Captain
Major, that grants the Cartacoes to trade, both within, and with out: but since
many have written of the Judicature, Government, Nobility, soldiers; the
manner of life of both the Sexes of this town, as well Portugais, as Indians, I
will say no more; I will only relate a sad accident happened to some poor
Frenchmen, that had stolen a ship laden with pepper, but having suffered
shipwreck some twelve leagues from Goa upon a shelve of sand, the ship was
taken and saved, A sad fate of Pirates.
belonging to a Portugal Merchant of Goa, the poor men arraigned, and condemned
to be hanged, for the Pyracy committed, as well as for their murdering the
Captain; the chief of these Malefactors was called Raymondin; they were
assisted at the time of their suffering by some good Fathers of the Church of
the five wounds of our Savior, near to the public place of execution; and the
fathers of our Ladies of Mercy clothed them all in white according to their
custom with white caps, and a cross in their hands; they died very
courageously and penitently, fully contrite and sorry for their sin and shame;
some were hanged at Saint Katherines key, others in the Corne-Market. Six of
them were hanged there, whereof the youngest broak two ropes, and fell down
from the Gibbet; the good father that assisted at his death, obtained his
pardon, and caused him to be taken back to the prison, he turned Franciscan, to
the great contentment of the whole order, and was visited by all the Nobility
of the town: he was born at Diepe, his name Ratelin, and fell into Raymondins
company with no intention to Pyracy, but to see the world; and thus God gave
him grace miraculously to escape.

I remember that being in Provence, a young man borne at Aubayne, was upon
suspicion of a certain crime cast in prison, Provence a Province in France.
Aubaynea town in France.
and arraigned at Aubayne, and being convicted thereof, was condemned to be
hanged; he broak two new halters, and fell without the least harm from the
Gallows to the ground; which accident caused the multitude to cry out for
pardon, for the poor man, which was immediately granted him, but miserable, as
he was ignorant of his own happiness, he ended his life by the Gibbet for some
detestable crime by him committed in another place.

A Sicilian Gentleman was accused by thirty false witnesses to have intended
the sale of Messina to the Turk, A miraculous discovery of innocence.
and sentenced for that offense to be hanged, and his children to be decapited,
protesting his own innocence upon the ladder, the Rope breaking, they tied
another to him newer and stronger, which broak also, the people saved him, and
his process was reviewed, the false witnesses examined, condemned, and executed,
the wronged Innocent with his children undertook a pilgrimage to our Lady of
Loretto, where I saw him.

At Goa as also at the other towns in the Portugais possession, the Merchants
may trade with great security, with leave from the Viceroy or Deputy, and
paying the rights and customs, otherwise their goods are confiscated.

CHAP. XVII. Of Baticola, Decan, Amadiva, and of the Kingdom of Cananor.
Barcelor.
FRom Goa unto Comorin, which is properly the Coast of Malabar, are many Forts
belonging to the Portugais, as at Onor, which is distant 14. degrees, at
Barcelor, 13. degrees, called by the Indians Barcelan, at Mangalor 12. at
Mosiri or Cananor, 2. at Cranganor 10. the natives call it Cagnanora, then at
Cochin 8. degrees distant, and at Coulan which is called Cosmans, and at other
places.

Baticola.
From Goa we came to Baticola which is a kingdom, the town is large, rich, and
plenteous in all commodities, situate upon a pleasant and deep river, which
yields her access easy; the haven is a quarter of a league distant, for the
most part full of vessels, that yield great commerce. The Inhabitants are
partly Gentiles, partly Mahometans, but much civilized; of complexion between
fair and brown, of good statures, and dispositions, both Sexes. The town is
environed with many good Barroughs, that reach unto Decan, some five leagues
off; the town is strongly walled, and frequented by Jews, who drive a great
trade, and inhabited by all nations: she is tributary to the King of Marsingue,
they are carried in littars by Cammels, of horses they have very few, we served
our selves sometimes with oxen, which they harnise, and ride, they eat bread
made of Rice, which is more savory then wheaten, there grows no grain, but the
Country bears most excellent fruit, their drink is wine of dates.

About 3. Musket shot from the town, there is an Isle named Amadiva, which has
a large haven, on the continent side, inhabited by Moors, and abounding in
pastures, and cattle. The inhabitants are the Portugaises mortal, and
irreconcilable enemies, but their Island being small, not above 8. leagues
about; they are not capable to trouble them. The town is rich, and is called
Centacola, subject to the King of Baticola: there are some Jews amongst them
that may easily be distinguished by the complexion, the Moors be tawny, the
Jews clearer: women use waters and other washes that make them very beautiful,
and they are held the prettiest of all the East, the fairest are Jews, and they
very chaste, and strangers can only obtain to visit them, in certain assemblies
of fair girls; but they go meanly clad, contrary to the customs of all other
towns: they sing certain songs like K. David's Psalms, gracefully pronouncing
their words, and mingling instrumental music with their vocal; and thus they
entertain their gallants. They refuse no present is made them, but if you offer
none, they are never a whit displeased: The doors of those places of
Assemblies are always open, there they keep their Synagogues, every one
professes his Religion at liberty; in the middle of this Isle is a Lake, called
Vecharin, which breeds good store of fish of several sorts, but causes the
air to be a little unwholesome to those are not accustomed to the Clymate;
from thence fish is transported into diverse places, for a sort of good lasting
fish. They have great store of poultry, which they feed with gross rice,
called Jeracoly.

Baticola has lost much of her trade since the Portuguais took Goa: for
according to the Chafa's, or the Clark of the Customs account the Revenew is
half diminished, which keeps the Princes far in the Continent, for fear of
being surprised by the Portugais, who wage open war with them, exacting great
ransomes for the liberty of the prisoners they take; nevertheless the
Portugais trade much amongst them, endeavoring to draw them to an alliance;
but they are not so soon driven out of their fears and jealousies; those of
Baticola say they formerly inhabited Sian; in this Kingdom is the Town of
Onor, that furnishes all the Country with rice.

From Baticola we came to Cananor Mosiri, a great Town unwalled, under the
subjection of a particular King, where the Portugais have two Forts, and is
inhabited by many new Christians, who observe the rules and precepts of our
Religion stricter then the old ones: the Portugais have built about their Fort
many dwellings for Merchants and others, which make up a Borough, called
Cananon, where they trade securely, and when the Indians have a mind to trade
with them, they must have the Viceroy of Goa's Cartaco; yet the Portuguais
never kept so good intelligence with the Natives, as to prevent many
dissentions and disorders, as is often seen in other places, as at Pegu and
Calicut, which occasioned the ruin of the Castle, and the death of many
Christians, which the Portugais have since sufficiently revenged; for they are
of a very cruel nature, and revengefull, for which reason they maintain a
fleet well armed at sea, to resist those of Portugal, who wage a war against
the Indians, not always to their success. It happened on a time to Don Alanso
De Comera, to pursue with two men of war a Mohammedan Frigate, richly laden,
and bound from some part of the India's, for Gaza, a sea Town in Arabia.

There were many families, with the goods they had gathered in many years abode
there, making homewards, accidentally falling into the hands of this Portugais,
they hoised sail, and thinking themselves too weak, offered a composition, to
the value of two hundred ducats; Don Alonso eager and covetous of the prey,
which he held himself sure of, gave her a broad side, with many great shots,
Presumption of the Portugais.
and boarded her, she, reduced to desperation, put her self in a posture of
defense, and resolved to sell both life and liberty at a dear rate, and the
very women spared them not, so their Alonso got nothing but blows, but lost an
eye, and many of his men, and thus was forced to retreat, and the Frigate by a
favorable wind got away without any loss: this shows the damage presumption
brings with it, and that the Portugais are not unjustly accused of vanity and
folly, which often costs them dear, and makes them hated by the Indians, as it
happened to them at Calicut, where the peoples rage was so raised against them,
that in an instant they demolished them a fair Castle, not leaving one stone
upon another, and whoever could present the King with any of the ruins, was
rewarded, which has caused the spilling of much blood amongst them: The King
of Coulan has often besieged their Forts, but after long Wars they now enjoy
a peace.

The strength of Cananor.
The King of Cananor is very potent, and elected out of the Princes of the
blood, as at Ormus: He can send 100000. men into the field, armed with targets
and swords, they wear red bonnets turned up on one side, and go almost naked,
the third part of them are Naires, Naires are Gentlemen.
or Gentlemen, very resolute and valiant; they wear red hats, and are not
niggards of their lives in their Princes service.

The Portugais have a strong Castle on the side of the Town, and another on the
sea side, both well provided with Ammunition and Artillery, and have done them
good service, having often been assaulted by the Naires, very gallant Persons;
Many of them are since Baptized, and grown so devout, that if they hear the Ave
Maria bell, though they are in their Coaches, or Litters, they are set on
ground, and say certain prayers on both their knees.

At Cananor they have a quarry of a stone, called Azazimit which is much
esteemed amongst the Indians, and has many virtues, A most admirable medicine.
it cures fevers, stops fluxes, and causes digestion, and is a preservative
against poison: they use it in their cures against the pox, and it is very
near as Sovereign, as that famous Eastern wine, that if a man be so rotten as
to fall in pieces, yet bathed therein for one month, he will infallibly be
cured.

This Country produces Myraboian-Citterns,, a most excellent fruit, and very
common amongst them: their leaves are like unto our prune leaves, they preserve
of them, and use them often; Ebony.
there grows the tree of Ebony, which grows to the bigness of an olive tree,
the leaves like unto sage, but as smooth as Mastick leaves, and the blossoms
like white roses; the wood is black, and very hard when it is dry and seasoned:
Areca.
they have great store of trees that bear Areca, those of Malaca, call it
Faoufell, the Portugais Araguerou, in other places it is called Pinan, the leaf
is of the bigness of a palm leaf, the stalk is full of strings, which are
very useful, the nut or fruit is huskt up, when the husk pills off, the nut
hangs upon the tree of an orange color, and is very juycy and savoury, and the
virtue of Succory, cold and dry; and has another quality astringent, the shell
or nut is not of the bigness of the other palm fruit; but less, as the peach,
and ovale, nothing like a nutmeg, being mingled with white and red streaks, and
of this fruit the Areca is made, excellent against the toothache, they have
abundance of other palm trees that bear Dates.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Kingdom, and Samorin of Calicut, of the Natives of that
Country, and of their horrible superstitions.
FRom Cananor to Calicut, in the 9. degree, although the ancients hold it in
the 2. Before our arrival three upon a Sunday morning, drawing toward the
East, before Sun rising, we heard a Mariner cry out, Jasan, Jasan, Malabar,
but we were not so near it as he thought, for they were the mountains of
Calicut, which are discovered afar off, for we put into the haven not till
night.

Calicut is a great Town, one of the fairest, richest, Calicut.
and of the greatest commerce of all the India's: some will have it anciently
called Barygaze, yet the Mores hold she has been built many years since, and
that six hundred years agone, Asarama Perimel, was Emperor of Malabar, and the
Natives reckon upon the years since his reign, which is their most famous
Callander: He kept his Court at Coulan, where was the chiefest trade of spices,
Samorin.
and gave the Country of Calicut to the Arabians, who frequented it very much
for commerce; they made this King a Mohammedan, who went through devotion to end
his days at Meka, distributing his estate to diverse Lords, leaving them the
Title of Kings, as of Cananor, Coulan, and others. Calicut fell unto a Nephew
of his named Samorin, which signifies sovereign Emperor over all the rest, in
temporal affairs, as he of Coulan was chief in Spiritualls, surnamed Cobritin,
viz. high Pontife of the Bramins. Samorin built this Town, the Metropolitan of
Calicut, inhabited by the Meres, where was the greatest trade of groceries,
since removed by the Portugais to Cochin.

The Prince is an Idolater at this present, although the Town be peopled by all
Religions, Gentiles, Mahometans, Jews, and Christians. The building is very
good, though the houses are very low, because they stand upon an ill
foundation, the Sea water appearing if you dig but a little depth, yet they
have by art and industry raised the Temples, and Palaces, whereof there are
four Royal ones, inhabited by the Kings wives, and concubines; there stands one
of them without the Town, fair to the sight, and high. Their Temples are so
too, and built round, the first of that form I saw in those parts; they adore
the Devil, and put his picture upon their coin, in most horrid postures: They
put two Demons embracing, with cloven or cocks feet at one side, on the other a
certain Character, which signifies, think upon this people.

The King is impiously devout, and every Wednesday performs a most strange
adoration of Satan; he is pictured sitting in a chair, with a Crown upon his
head, in the middle of many little Devils, most strangely and terribly
represented; after the King has offered him incenses, he prostrates himself on
the ground in sign of submission, then begins his profane prayers, then he
stretches himself at length upon a rich carpet, leaning his head upon his left
arm, thus he dines, inviting the Devil to his repast; four Bramins assist him
in this impious sacrifice, and hearken very attentively to the discourse, or
Sermon, the King makes during his dinner; representing to them the service they
owe to their Idol, they answer him not in words at that time, but give him
Betel and Areca mingled together, which he drinks without touching the cup,
according to their superstitious custom: because that day his mouth is sacred,
and filled with the praises of Satan; when he has ended his repast, the meat
he leaves is carried into a garden near at hand to be devoured by Crows, that
there expect it, in so great numbers, that they hardly get two bits a piece.

Calicut I conceive is as big as Millan, but not so well built nor ordered. The
Strangers and Merchants are upon their arrival put (to a great inconvenience)
to buy houses to dwell in, which troubled us very much, being forced at our
departure to leave it for half it cost us: you buy women for your service, and
put them off again, but not without some loss. The Port is a pretty way
distant from the Town; there is but one channel; which the ships cannot reach
by a mile and a half, by reason of the shelves of sand, and therefore they use
flat bottoms, which do great services upon the River: The King keeps a frigate
or pinnace called Jonques, Jonque.
for his pleasure, which he treats the Ladies in, as the Venetians do in their
Gondola's, Gondola.
all the houses in the Town are covered with palm-leaves, the Kings only
excepted that are tyled; because no private person may have means to fortify
himself. the town is very subject to fires; and therefore the houses are built
far asunder. It Is surrounded with pleasant fields and pastures, but they
never eat beef; they are so superstitious, esteeming them holy and sacred
cattle, that their Dume has appointed them to cultivate the land only, which
makes them hard to be bought and sold; this superstition is only publicly
observed, for some of the Bramins treated us with beef, who borrowed a
christian Cook, and entertained us with a whole calf, the head and intrals
stewed, and the rest roasted as we use: He feasted us because one of the company
had cured him of a certain disease, and refused any reward, and thus they do
like the Turks, who abstain from wine in public, but drink it privately:
nevertheless these Bramins have the devil pictured open mouthed, red, and
flaming, ready to devour, the law-breaker, and when they have offended, the
sacrifice to him a white cock: which is derived from a very ancient and
superstitious Idolotry of the Pagan, who offered a white cock to Hercules, to
the night, to Aesculapius, and to Annubis: thus the devil renews these old
superstitions, and appears visibly unto them, some believing him to be God,
some a creature of Gods, some hold him good, others bad, these serve and adore
him, for fear he should do them harm.

Not far from Calicut, is an ancient Temple or Bagode, which they call Dumana,
where there is a general pardon to be gained, certain days of the year, they
have fifteen days of liberty, and freedom, which time the thieves, and banished
persons, may appear with safety to sacrifice; the Temple is built in a Marsh,
held up by great pillars, with many trees of diverse sorts growing about it,
each pilgrim chooses himself one for his rest, and to hang his clothes in.

There are many burning lamps which the pilgrims offer up to be purified of
their sins: The Bramins say prayers aloud, and sprinkle them with water, in
expiation of their crimes; and after this ablution, they present themselves to
the Idol, and adore it: from thence they return to their trees, having provided
their lamps with oil and wick to burn at night; It Is pleasant to see so much
light. The next morning they bathe themselves all together in a Lake, men,
women, boys, and girls, without the least shame of their nakedness; then
dress themselves in their best clothes, and return to the sacrifices, which
ended, the Bramin makes them a short Sermon clothed in a white surplice,
reaching down to the kneees, and barefoot, the legs rounded with bands
wrought, and hung round with silver bells, and standing thus before the picture
of the devil, represented gaping, ready to swallow the spectators crowned, and
with sparkling eyes; Thus the Bramin begins his sacrifice, casting himself upon
the ground murmuring something, and beats himself so furiously, that he seems
enraged; then he turns himself to the people (who are very attentive, showing
them the Devil, at which sight they begin to howl and cry for mercy with so
furious and horrid a noise, as Gods thunder could scarce be heard. Next he
takes a white cock, and wrings off his head, and mingles his blood with water,
which he sprinkles upon the multitude, who retire as contented as if they had
gained an Empire. In the midway they meet a man of good presence, but
distracted, with the devils picture about his neck, and clothed in a white
Tunick or Albe. At the head of the people, the devils picture is carried by
eight devotes clothed in cotton robes, followed by four Bramins, and many
others, frantick-like, running, leaping, singing, and dancing before the devil:
stabbing themselves into the faces and arms; and he is esteemed the holiest,
that has given himself the deepest wounds, of which many dye, when they come
before the distracted person who is exposed upon theater; they stand still to
fulfill the ceremony of the sacrifice; and having burnt some perfumes, the
Choourt or Bramin sprinkles him, with the blood and water, the people offer him
their charities, and dedicating their clothes and lamps to him, they enter the
Temple at another gate, leave their Idol in the place they found him, and thus
they end their Idolatrous procession. From thence they go to dinner, which they
sprinkle with the same water; and feeding upon the Vyands, they sacrificed, and
of others they brought thither, the sacrifice is ended.

These Bramins, and other religious, never eat any thing that has received
life in public; although we eat flesh with them in private, they keep company
with none but their fellows.

They wear white Turbants, Cotton gowns that reach to their heels, red
shoes; under this they wear a long linen cloth or towel, that goes twice or
thrice round about them, a fine girdle, long hair, their ears bored, and
pearls hanging at them: they wear next to their flesh certain strings, the
badge of their order, which are given them with great ceremony; there are of
them of several sorts, some of them go to the wars with the Naires, others
trade, and are rich Merchants, and they are generally peaceable, and meek
natured. The King himself is of the order, wearing the string in a scarf, they
are much esteemed throughout the Indies, and some of them are very able
Physicians. When they affirm any thing to be a truth, they lay their hand upon
their string, or upon their Cabaye, or gown. The Portugais did live pretty
peaceably amongst them, but the Moors have set them together by the ears.
Some of the Moors are permitted to wear the Aspagates, or habit of of the
Bramins, but it is to favorites only, that such leave is given. When they eat
they strip themselves stark naked, they tie a cloth only to hide their privy
members; the women affect to have their noses bored wirh wyars, either silver
or gold.

There is another sort of Bramins in Surate, Guzerate and Cambayes, not so
austere, and are under the obedience of the Grand Mogull.

Those delight to eat flower of Mandel that comes from Brasil, and live very
abstemiously.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Kingdom of Cochin, the goodness of the soil, customs of
the Inhabitants, with a strange History of certain French Pirates.
FRom Calicut we went to Cochin, about the eighth degree, Cochin.
and twelve leagues from Calicut. This kingdom is confederate with Calicut,
professing the same religion, the town is situate in a sweet and temperate
air, the country abounds in cattle and fruit, Pepper of all sorts.
grain is scarce but is plentifully supplied from Cambaye. Pepper grows there
of three sorts, of the long excellent conserves are made: throughout the coast
of Malabar, which reaches from Goa to Comori, grows the white and black pepper.
The Ginger whereof much is confected for their use in all seasons, is called
Aliah, in the Malaicke tongue.

The Portugueses are in good esteem at Cochin, the King being their friend and
allye, Since Triumpara showed himself constantto them, against Calicut; since,
when the Kings of Cochin have never broken their promises, whatever made to
them; but have inviolably kept their Articles, viz. to give unto the King of
Portugal a tribute of twelve pearls, Miticale weight of a crown and a half.
of the weight of a Miticale a piece, which is about a crown and a half.

The Portugais do chiefly trade in pepper, which they transport to all parts of
the world; that which they transport into Arabia, Suria, Persia, Babylon, and
other places along those coasts, is far better then that they carry into
Portugal, because much of its strength and virtue is lost, in the long
navigation; and the price falling, they put off the worst, and often most of it
green, which nevertheless the Portuguese carry into Spain.

Besides, they load their vessels with refuse, and never bag any of it;
whereas the Mores, that are bound for the red sea, the Persick Gulf, and other
parts of the Levant, give a good price for it, and therefore deserve the best.

The Pepper tree does not resemble any tree I ever saw growing in Europe: It Is
a fair and great tree, the leaf pretty long, and large, full of strings, she
bears her fruit as our vines do grapes, or rather like the Provence wild
grape, in abundance. I have seen of several sorts, one which the West Indians,
at Carthagene, and Caramel, call Jerac, which signifies white, and laid in the
sun becomes as black as the other, and though a little different, yet has
great virtue, and is like a young bean, but something longer: the grain is
enclosed in a little cod, as the bean: This sort of tree bears no leaves, the
others, which are the ordinary sort, bear many both long and large. They use
it much to heat them, and put it in their pottage; resting my self one day
over a storehouse which was full, I never felt the like heat.

The other druggs, made in the Territories of Cochin, are sold to the Portugais
only. But to save their pay they pass merchandises in exchanga; It Is true that
every buyer pays some small earnest, for if their dealing were discovered,
their goods would be wholly confiscated to the King, and sometime the very
ships themselves. When the Portugais have bought at certain rates, if the Mores
offer more, the former bargain is void: which to prevent, the King orders
certain punishments to keep them in awe. The Prince, though not very potent,
yet can draw threescore thousand men into the field.

Cochins situation:
The Town of Cochin is built upon a fair river, a mile remote from the sea.
There is another place called Cochin, joining to the sea, which belonging to
the Portugueses, there are many Christians, who to enjoy the privileges of the
City, and to be exempted from payments, are married there, all other Christians
pay four Per Cent. at both the Cochins, which are a mile distant one from the
other.

several Christians at Cochin.
There are many Christians married, of several Nations and Sects, as Italians,
English, French, Germans, Christians of the Girdle of St. Thomas, who pass for
Portuguesses, and are all Merchants. The commodities pay several customs, as
for the sugars brought from Bengalo, the strangers pay eight Per Cent. those
married upon the place are freed. There are many Amuchies Gentlemen, wearing
swords and bucklers, who upon all occasions expose themselves gallantly to
death, for the safety of their Prince. Women are common.
Their wives are in common, and the Natives lend them one another; when they
enter any house they leave their swords and bucklers at the door, and no man
dare enter while another is within.

All ships bound for Portugal are prepared for Sea in the months of December
and January, from thence they sail to Coulan, 72 miles from Colchin, where
they have a noble Fort in the Territories of the King of Coulan, from thence to
the Cape Comori, unto the lower part of Chiloa, or Chilao, about 200. miles.
near wholly converted by the Fathers of the society of St. Paul at Goa, who
have built many fair Churches; they had made a greater progress in Calicut,
had they not been hindered by the malice of the Moors, mortal enemies to the
Christians, since they caused the Cittadell built by the Portuguais to be
demolished.

The Harbor at new Cochin is very large, but very rocky. The Town is full of
fair Churches, Monasteries, Hospitalls, and Colleges. The River that waters
the soil is pleasant and large, and helps to make up a good haven, where ships
ride safe. On the North is a pretty Isle where the Bishops palace is of most
stately edifice; and although many Gentiles inhabit there, yet nothing but
Christianity is practiced amongst them, and who ever will idolatrize must
remove to old Cochin, which stands upon the River, joined with a long row of
houses like a Suburb. There is great commerce from all parts of the Indies.

The greatest inconvenience to the vessels is, that sometimes they must lie
three or four months or more, at the mouth of the River, because the entrance
is filled with sand, that choakes her passage, which happens from May to
September, when fall great raines, which raise a Sea wind called by the
West-Indians Toumacaut, Toumacaui a western wind in force toward Potereau and
Peru. Jenibaron^.
which by the help of the floods, blows and bears down those shelves of sand,
which do dissipate, and are spent in the sea. Thus it is almost with all Towns
that stand upon Rivers, as I observed at Jenibaron, in the harbor of the Isle
of St. Laurence, which carries after this manner all the sand into the Sea, and
then has one of the surest havens in the world.

But before I leave the coast of Cochin and Malabar, Portuguais go from Cohin
into Portugal.
you must know that the fleet of Portugal once laden at Cochin, does not
return to Goa, but sails strait for Portugal, passing through Maldiue; and
all the Armado's, Fleets, and other vessels whatsoever, that come from the
South and the Western parts of Goa, at 36. leagues from thence, are at their
journeys end; having reached the Cape of Ramos, where in sign of joy they pitch
their flags and standarts, and draw forth their whole artillery, as being safe
and free from Pirates, because in that nook is divided the coast of Malabar,
from the kingdom of Tacara or Dealcan. The like rejoycements make the Fleets
that come from the North-side, when they reach an Isle thirty six miles from
Goa, called Quemada.

Don Sancho Sapatero, A^ strange History of a Portuguais Captain, and certain
French Pirates.
a Portuguese Captain met not with the like success; who as I have since
heard, being arrived at the Isle, fired some guns in sign of joy, and set a
plume of feathers upon his mast: a certain Captain and Pirate born at Rochelle,
named Boudard, having cast Anchor at Cananor, laid wait for a hulk laden with
pepper, then at Cochin, expecting fair weather to put out to Sea for Portugal,
meeting with another ship bound for Achez for lading, was advertized of Don
Sancho's passing here, which occasioned the Rocheller to expect him with all
security, pretending to be a Merchant of that Country, and at his first
meeting with Sapatero he gave him a broadside, killed five of his mariners,
and burnt his plume, which so terrified the Captain that his courage being
lost, he took down his colors, and craving his life offered the Rocheller what
he had in his ship. An unheard of courtesy from the hand of a Pyrate.
Here the Rocheller came off magnanimously, for having power to enslave him and
his, and to seize his ship, he contented himself seeing the list of goods, to
take one of the ships laden with certain pieces of cannon and ammunition out of
the other ships, releasing Capt. Sancho, with the rest of his company, which
much revived him, and the more, because the prize of those commodities belonged
to certain Jewish Portuguese Merchants, he thought to bear no loss himself,
since Boudart took nothing out of his ship but two pieces of cannon, and some
ammunition, with a present of some of the Country rarities. But he was much
deceived, for arrived at Goa he was called in question, and the loss appearing
to have proceeded through his slender forecast and small courage, he being far
stronger than his enemies; it was ordered that the three ships should equally
partake in the loss, since they were all preserved from Lisboe, and he for the
fault he had carelessly committed was forbidden ever to wear feather, under pain
of forfeiting a 1000. Croysades, which struck the poor man with such regret,
that he fell desperately sick, and cast himself into the Hospital, Punishment
of the wicked.
yielding willingly to death for the shameful loss he had sustained: he was
sufficiently revenged by the unhappy end miserable Boudart at length met
withal, who swollen with prosperities and with abundance of ill gotten wealth,
partly of those three Portuguais ships, and of another vessel bound from
Cambaye to Malaca, laden with gold, silver, and precious stones, and other rich
commodities, as he returned toward the Cape of Good Hope, with intention to
spend the remainder of his life in his own Country in pleasure and content, he
met with so terrible a tempest, that although he was a most expert Seaman he
could not long resist, receiving small assistance from his Company, most of
them being lost in former sights, and many lying sick of the Scorbus, a cruel
Sea distemper, and finding himself too weak to make any longer resistance,
having for three days withstood the tempest, and wearied with lading the water
that almost sunk his ship, he was forced at last to save himself in another
bark, with those few half-dead Camarades, leaving his other ship with all his
pirac'd riches to the mercy of the water, which in a moment sunk before his
face. Nor was this the worst, his bark meeting with as bad success, for having
discovered the coast of Brasile toward the Cape St. Austen, and Fernamboue, he
was forced to leave this last vessel, that sprung a leak 15. miles from
Fernamboue, make use of skill and strength to save himself in the cock-boat,
and come ashore, with some 20. persons, to a sugar plantation belonging to some
Portuguese, who beholding the arrival of these miserable shipwracks, and moved
to compassion, with the natural affection they bear unto the French, helped
them to drag their boat on shore, where they kindly entertained them, and
furnished them with victuals and clothes, and the poor men after a while helped
them in the Sugar-works, which is there made up in great abundance, and also be
sold at so cheap a rate that a quartern is worth but a Crusado, which does not
amount to two pence a pound, and all the Sugar that comes into these parts from
Madera, is made in America. Thus our Captain having refresht himself and his
company by a quarters residence in this place, with many boards and planks the
Sea had cast upon the shore, he resolved to build himself a little boat for his
return into France, wherein he was assisted by the Master of the Sugar-work and
his servants, and having finished and perfected it, and stored it with all
necessaries; especially with meal of Mandoe, sugars, flesh, and salt-fish, with
fruit and Potato's, a great dainty in those parts, which have the taste of a
chestnut, and with roots of Casha and other refreshments; Cassia.
They embarked themselves aboard this small vessel, with millions of thanks,
for the courtesies received, with many promises and protestations to requite
their charities; for these honest men gave their very sheets to make them
sails, for which they were but ill rewarded. They left the Cape St. Austen,
otherwise called Lieneo, because all that coast is white, and sailed happily
within the sight of Fernamboue, where riding the French road they met with a
small ship returning from Spain, laden with apparel, linen, and woollen,
oils, and wines bearing toward Brasile; amongst the rest were five Portug^ese
women, The Pir^ts perfidiousnesse.
who with their whole fortunes were returning unto their husbands at the
Sugar-work in the Cape St. Austen, the same that had so kindly entertained
these Pirates. Here the most unfortunate Captain committed one of the most
horrid acts can be imagined, for drawing near to the ship, under pretense of
giving the women an account of their husbands, he seized the vessel, and
forced most of the passengers to leap into the Sea, where they perished: The
rest together with the five women he retained prisoners: three whereof they
immediately exchanged with the Salvages for certain refreshing Commodities,
Antropophayes.
and those barbarous people killed one of them before their faces, to feed on,
the other two were since ransomed by their husbands, not above six leagues from
thence, wondering at the cruel ingratitude of this Pirate and his followers
they had so much obliged.

Meanwhile the perfidious Captain drew toward the two other women, he saved
for his unlawful and sensual uses, they begged mercy for nine more
Portugueses, who otherwise had shared in the general fate, but at length God
showed his just indignation against this savage Monster, casting him with a
sudden tempest toward the Cape of Good Hope, and Dargagullas, and forced him
to run a shore against his will at Mozambick, an Isle and Fort belonging to
Portugal, on the Coast of Africa, and whereas his ship was ready to enter the
Harbor, a Frigate of War demanded what she was, The women courageously from
the Hatches replied they came from Spain, and seeing two ships of War more
make up to them, they grew more confident, giving them notice to board them
boldly, which they did accordingly, and requiring the Captain to come before
the Governor, he went, though trembling for fear, with three of his Camarades.
This while the Merchants that remained in the ship animated with this
assistance of their friends, cried out, that the Vessel, and all the
Merchandise therein belonged to them; The Captains Accomplices made answer, they
claimed no share therein, upon condition they might be set on shore, which was
immediately promised them: and being landed, the women and all, they began
their just complaints, and required justice of the Governor for the wrong they
had sustained; the Governor immediately seized them, and was sending them to
Goa, that the Viceroy might understand their Crimes.

But the women pleaded their own cause so well, that the Governor with his
Counsel having well examined the matter, condemned the Captain, and three of
his chiefest men to be hanged, and their bodies burnt: The sentence was
suddenly executed, and at their death they confessed, not this crime alone, but
many, more enormous, they had committed. After this, the women wel^ satisfied,
reembarked themselves with their goods, and returned happily to their husbands
at Brasil.

The rest of these Pirates were sent to Goa to be executed, but arriving there
sick, by hard usage and grief, at the entreaty of the Fathers of the Society,
they were put into the Hospital, where they staid three months before they
recovered their healths; Then they were sent to prison, from whence they were
carried in a boat to the place they had robbed, Don Sancho Sapatero, where
their right hands were cut off, and brought back to Goa, hanged, and burnt:
behold the shameful and just end of those miserable Pirates, which may serve
for example to all those that take such unjust, and dangerous course of life.

Now returning to Malabar and Coromandell, I will relate amongst others the
Wonder of those two Coasts, so different, that being divided by the long
Mountains of Gates, one to the West, the other to the East, they have contrary
seasons, for in that that reaches from Cambaye to Comori, they have their
winter from April to September, with rains, tempests, thunders and winds,
Mavelous seasons in the same parallells.
and the same time in the other appears a summer, most pleasant and benign,
and in the other months the contrary, and this contrariety in the same degree
and elevation, which is a wonder puzles all Astronomers and natural
Philosophers.

CHAP. XX. Of the Isle of Zeilan, where they fish for pearls, and charm
certain great fishes, an Idol of a Monkeyes tooth, an Isle deserted for the
intestation of spirits, and of the Isles Maldives.
LEaving the Coast of Malabar, and the Cape Comori, that discover the Isle
Malaberi, or Zeilan, and Geilan, one of the best in all India, extending from
North to South. Southward lies the Cape Berebeli, or Berbert, opposite to
Comori; on an other side lies the Coast of Coromandell, divided from the other
by a Gulf: South-west lie the Maldives, Northward the Gulf Bengala, and the
Indian and Sumatian sea Eastward, The Inhabitants call her Tenarisin, well
peopled, has many great Towns, fair and navigable rivers, large and safe
harbors; this Isle yields such plenty both of riches and pleasures, that the
Inhabitants grow very gross and corpulent, and as if their bellies were blown
up.

The air is temperate, the soil fruitful in all things, and chiefly in wood,
cinnamon, Cinnamon.
called Esquisde, the best and finest of the East: it abounds also in pepper,
ginger, and nutmeggs; they gather the cinnamon in March and April, which
cleaves with much ease, then lay it a fortnight a sunning, which increases it is
strength and virtue; They gather it but every second year, because the bark of
one years growth is little worth, yet they distill it with certain juices, and
Ladies use them with the water to make them smell sweet, mingled with orange
flowers, and other perfumes.

This tree is of the height and shape of a laurel tree, bearing kernells, or
berries, the trunk or body is longer and streighter, the leaf larger, and
fuller of strings, has no smell at all, and full ripe, and ready to pill, the
leaves fall, which taste and smell like the bark, but without any virtue. This
cinnamon, or bark, newly pilled, has no taste, more then any other common
wood, but laid in the Sun fifteen days, gets so great a a strength, that it is
impossible to eat above the bigness of a good pea, such is the heat and
vigor. I have seen of this spice at Zeilan only, and in another country of
the West Indies, 26. degrees off this side the line, called Cheit, where the
Inhabitants burn more, then eat of it; they use it in their sacrifices, and to
burn their treasure in. The Arabians call the Cinnamon Quirsa, the Persians
Darchini, the Zeilaners Cardo, in Malabar it is called Camea, and by the
Malayans Caysmon.

That country abounds in most excellent fruits, pasture, and all sorts of
beasts, in Elephants, and all sorts of fowl, which are very cheap. Oil of
Cinnamon.
Most of the Inhabitants plant Cinnamon, and make great esteem of the oil they
draw from it, which is very odoriferous, and useful for many things.

There are gold and silver mines, but they have great want of workmen. For the
Islanders are slothful, and vicious. The country is well stored with butter and
honey, Butter and Honey.
but not in sugar, which is brought them from their neighboring countries:
There are many mines and precious stones and jewels, whereof the most in
esteem is one of Rubies, Rubyes.
which is at one end of the Isle toward the East; and although they are not of
the best in the world, yet they are passable. There are Chrysolites, Topazes,
Jacinthes, and Granatts. At one side of the Isle called Betala, Batecalon,
Betale a pearle-fishing. A fish charmed.
there is a fishing of pearls, dangerous, for the Turbets a fish that devoures,
both fishermen and nets; yet they have an art to charm them, and make them
incapable of doing harm. They fish for pearl only in April, in other places in
May, and in some others in June. The King receives great profit from this
fishing, taking the tenths of the fairest for his share. It Is said that the
King has the fairest, and largest Ruby in the world called Matouca, Matouca a
Ruby.
and that a Prince of Tartarge offered him a fair and rich Province in exchange.

In a word; this Isle is one of the richest of the world, and of great commerce
in all commodities, which renders the King both wealthy and potent; for from
the Ruby mine alone, he deduces a vast treasure, though he has sold a corner
of it which is of great value, yet all those that surpass four or five Abir or
Carrats, belong unto him.

The Rubies of Pegu are something high colored, and the finest of the East.
The Master workmen can add to their color, and make them finer, in which they
show much experience. In this Isle the Portuguese have a Fort on India side
without the town of Columbo, by which means they keep the town in subjection.

All this Isle for the most part is governed by a King, elected like him of
Ormus, King of Zeilan.
but this King is not tributary to Portugal, as the other is; so that he stands
but in a voluntary subjection, having permitted that Fort for commerce sake,
esteeming the Portuguese valiant and faithful to their allies.

This King has formerly possessed great territories and kingdoms in the
continent. He is a Gentill in religion, magnanimous and liberal, Governs his
subjects in peace, and quietness, and keeps good correspondence with his
neighbor Princes: The Isle is held to be 500. miles about. The people are
rather fair then Brown, there dwell no Jews, but many Mahometans. Both men and
women are richly apparelled, begirt with girdles of jewels of value. Women do
but overcharge their ears with pearls, Rubies, and Diamonds; The country
language is the same as is spoken at Malabar. There grow great store of Oranges
in this Isle, and the Inhabitants delight in eating the rind, which is as good
as those of Lemmons. They drink Areca, and other delicious drinks, mingled with
sugar and cinnamon. They make some drinks will inebriate like wine, both men
and women drink of it; and when they are intoxicated, they go to sleep. They
have five sorts of Date trees, which augments their trade; there grows a herb
called Nabuc, whereof they make oil, as well tasted as that of Palms; the
cinnamon oil is too strong.

The Inhabitants of Bengale, and Coromandel, trade much in this Isle, whither
they come to truck Indian rarities, but they go as much to make merry, and
carrouze with them, as for commerce; they eat Rice-bread, as they do throughout
the Indies. Bread made of Rice.
Trees are green throughout the year, and one fruit extrudes another, the soil
is so fertile; the trade of Cinnamon belongs to the King only, as do the
mines, gemmes, gold, and silver; the best haven of the Isle is Camouch, or
Cosmuche, at the mouth of the River, the town is ill built. The air is good on
Coromandel side, Camouch Haven. Straight of Zeilan.
and is divided, but by a little straight, not much longer then Gibraltar, but
more dangerous, because the waves raise banks of sand which make it the more
dangerous for vessels of great burden, forced to enter the Isle on the other
side called Betala, or the pearl-fishing.

Zeilan is held to be the ancient Taprobane, and others with more reason say
she was anciently called Sumatra, however this Isle has ever been potent,
formerly governed by one King, of the race of the Sun, or at least from thence
he pretended himself descended.

This King was dethroned by one of Jafanapatan, Jafanapatan.
and since the country has been divided into several kingdoms. The Portuguais
warred with the King of Jafanapatan, who overthrown, was constrained to deliver
up the Isle of Manar, Manar an Island.
which they fortified, and inhabit to this day: the Christians were grievously
oppressed, by the Badages their neighbors, barbarous people, and great
thieves, Badages.
but the Portuguese subdued them at last. In this invasion the Portuguese
amongst other things took that famous Idol made of the tooth of a Monkey,
adored by all the Indians of those parts, Idol of a Monkeys tooth.
and enriched with Jewels. The King of Pegu so highly esteemed it, that he sent
yearly Ambassadors thither, to take the print of it upon Amber, Musk, and
other perfumes which he had great reverence unto: Hanimam a Monkey.
and since it was taken, he offered to redeem it at a great rate, but they
christian-like, chose rather to destroy that Idolatry, then to reap a profit
thereby, and so they burnt it; and from it, there came a most stinking and
black smoke. They relate many fables of that white Monky named Hanimam, that he
had been a God, expelled heaven, for some fault committed, and Metamorphosed
into a Monkey, coming from the land of Badages, or -- thence into Ceitan where
after his death he was adored, and his tooth kept as a relic. The sea between
the Cape Comori, the lower Chilao, Pescaria.
and the Isle Zelan was called Pescaria Delle Perse, a place of pearl-fishing,
which lasts about 50. days, and at the point where they begin to fish, upon a
sudden many Cabbins and Booths are erected, The manner of fishing for pearl.
to last during the fishing only; then they that can, dyne, and fill their
bags with oysters, and by a rope tied about their middle, are pulled up
again, and every fisher makes his own heap. The seasons are not always
favorable alike, some more, some less, and some seasons very dangerous, by
reason of several fishes that devour the fishers, and other fishes will crop
off a thigh or arm of a man, as close and even as a hangar, and those the
Portugais call Poccaspada, this fish has two rows of teeth, very sharp and
long: and therefore to prevent the danger, they have Magicians that charm the
fishes: upon a time a fisherman ready to be devoured by a fish had his mouth
open, and within two fingers of reaching him, Fish charmed.
suddenly the Wisard (who was present) cried out Veruas, which signifies, come
out or charm, and the fish left him; and the man having a sword in his hand,
struck a blow or two, and the fish swam away, leaving the Sea died with his
blood. At night when they go to rest, they dissolve their charms, Chitmi are
Commissioners.
because no one should venture to fish; There are certain Commissioners to set
a rate upon the pearl, according to the season: and there are of fine sorts of
pearls, some like stars, others half stars, others called Pedrati, which are
much esteemed, and divided into five parts; The Merchants stand in order to buy
them.

The Portugese have those of greatest price, which they call Quercos, the
Bengalians the seconds, the Canaranians the thirds; the Cambayans have the
smallest: and the last which are of little worth, fall to the Jews there,
which they polish for deceit.

It is a gallant sight to see so many Merchants together, and so many heaps of
pearls, before every Cabin, which within few days are all pulled down. The
best pearl is fished in the Channel of Setin, Setin.
near to Zeilan, where they use flat-bottome boats, called Tune, because they
have little bottom: some are gotten at the other side of Chilao between Manar,
and the Continent. There is no pearl to be found in all the East, except in
this place, and at Baharem, Baharem.
in the Persick gulf, and the Isle Aynan near China; those taken at Baharem
are bigger, but they are taken here in greater number. The whole Coast of
Malabar, from Comori fifty leagues in length, or thereabouts, inhabited by
people called Paravians, is much frequented for this fishing, Paraves.
where fifty or three score thousand Merchants resort to that purpose.

The Paravians are Christians, and were instructed by St. Francis Ilaverius,
and live under the protection of the Portuguesse, who have protected them from
the Tyranny of the Mahometans, their neighbors.

South-west of the Isle of Zeilan, are the Maldives, many in number, dangerous
to Sailors, for the shelves of sand and rocks: Maldives Isles.
I will say no more of them, because my knowledge is but small, besides, they
have amply and exactly been described by others; but I will say something of a
wonderful Isle, on the Coast of Malduce, Southward, some ten degrees remote
from the Line, and called Patovi, or Polovis, now deserte, though formerly
inhabited and flourishing; which (as I learnt since at Pegu,) was Governed by a
Prince, called Argiac, a Potent King of many Islands and Kingdoms, he having
many children by several wives, gave this Island to one of the gallantest
amongst them, Polovis the devils Isle.
called Abdenac, for his portion, with several Treasures: this Abdenac was
possessed of it peaceably for five years space; his elder brother called Argiac,
after their Father, and King of Achez, in Sumatra, refused him the share of
Treasure his father had left him, the other enraged, craved the assistance of
the King of Bengala, who furnished him with ships, with which he invaded his
brother, burnt his Towns, and put to death most part of his followers, but
received a mortal wound himself, and returning into his Island with the
Treasures he had regained of his brother, and finding himself near death*
distributed his wealth, and bequeathed his Island to be inherited by his Duma,
or evil spirit, entreating him to preserve it till the day of Judgment, and
that he then hoped to return into the World.

This Will made, he dyed, and had no other sepulcher then the bowels of his
Alliance and Friends, according to the Custom of that Country, where in many
places they eat the dead flesh of their Kindered, and near Relations;
persuading themselves, the Soul to be sooner at rest, then if they permitted
the corpse to putrify, and to be consumed by the worms, and that there could
be no Sepulcher so Honorable, as the bowels of a dear friend.

This Island falling to the devils share, he became so turbulent, that from the
very time he took possession, the Island was not habitable, and all the
Inhabitants forced to retire into the adjacent Isles: ever since this place
remained desert, yet there are great store of birds and beasts* sometimes the
Maldivians have landed there by chance, but have been forced immediately to
retreat, History of the Magitian of Pegu.
the evil spirits do so perplex them, they raise great tempests on that sea.
Being at Pegu, I heard a Magitian had promised the King to bring him some
birds, and the Treasures of Abdena out of the Country, but the Demons did so
perturb him, he could not effect his promise; for as he was taking footing in
the Isle, and beginning his conjurations, he had writ upon a leaf, and put
into the hands of one of his boldest disciples, they were by the illusions of
the devil so suddenly terrified, that the miserable disciple fell dead upon
the place, and the Master Magician was so horridly beaten, and dragged by the
devils to the ship side, that his companions had only time to reembarke him,
and hoist sails for Pegu. All the rest were strangely tormented and beaten,
except the Masters Mate, and the Seamen, that were wiser, for knowing the
condition of the place, they would not put foot on land, which afterward they
were very glad of.

Thus was the Magitian soundly beaten, and 'twas almost past his skill to
recover himself, but more of him another time.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Kingdom of Bisnegar, or Narsingue, of the King, his Bramins,
or Priests, of Meliapar, where (they say) reposes the body of St. Thomas the
Apostle, with a strange History of a Bear.
Bisnegar or Marsingue,
UPon the Coast of Coromandell, in the East of Malabar are the Kingdoms of
Bisnegar, Orixa, Mandao, and others. Besnaga, or Marsingue, has a King,
formerly the most puissant of the India's, amongst the Gentills, and was
esteemed their Emperor, and gave his Laws from Gemora, to Orixa and Bengale,
to Goa, Onoe, and Baticola, and many other places were under his Dominion, but
at this time he is much weakened, yet he esteems himself very potent, and
assumes very superbous and high Titles, as God of the great Provinces, King of
Kings, and Lord of the whole Universe.

A vast Army.
It Is reported that in an expedition against Italca, he Mustered seven hundred
thousand of Infantry, forty thousand Cavalry, horse-armed, and seven hundred
Elephants; Bisnegar is the name of the Kingdom, and chief Town, Negapatan her
Haven, the Town of Bisnegar is fair and large, lying in the 17. degree 10.
days journey from Narsingue, and eight from Goa: we came for trade, and to put
off our commodities, that paid 4. per cent. viz. those that came from the West,
as clothes, scarlets, paper, saffron, all sorts of Iron and Lary ware, except
horse-bits, that pay but two per cent. in the India's: Horsebits
Horses are very small here as in Swethland, but very high prized; the Persian
horses are the dearest, because they are the biggest and strongest: The Prince
of Bisnegar, is styled Benganera, or Vente cupati, which signifies great King,
and most magnificent in his State, potent in Elephants and Horses, which he
maintains with the Gabells of the Country; and the easier to procure horse to
strengthen himself against his enemies the toles are abated.

Some few years before we came to this Town of Bisnegar, History of the King of
Bisnegar.
it was assaulted and sacked by four Kings of the Mores, all very potent and
united to ruin this Prince: These Kings were Idalcan, Nisamulaco, Cotamulaco,
and a Brother-in-law of his called Sultan Jordas, Prince of the Kingdom of
Viridi or Var: Var or Viridi.
Their hatred was that this King of Bisnegar was an Idolater, and they
Mahometans.

Two Moorish Captains were corrupted to betray their Masters, and the day the
battle was fought they turned about, and proved the destruction of the Town,
that was that day sacked, and taken by the confederate Kings, and the King
thereof put to flight into another strong Town called Panigont, Pagont.
or Panicota, where there stood a strong Castle surrounded with a great River,
and deep trenches, ten days journey off Bisnegar. The enemies pursued him
thither, and gave him a second battle, where this Prince met with better
success, and defeated them, and had utterly dispersed them, without the
auxiliaries lent them by the King of Transiane, a mortal enemy of this Prince:
Transiane.
There he took prisoner one of the perfidious Captains, made him an example,
Treason punished.
causing him to be nailed on a Cross, and to be shot to death with arrows,
having rallied a puissant Army to recover his Town of Besnegar, he boldly
resolved to fall upon Transiane, Timeragi.
and to seize of Timeragi's Country, who had given his enemies their greatest
assistance; there he made great spoil, sacking, and burning all before him,
before Timeragi could resist him.

He destroyed 22. Towns, being advanced unto Gondariane Capital of that
Kingdom, he put all to fire and sword, Gondariane.
and burnt Timeragi's sumptuous palace, his wife and children, before Timeragi
could stop his cruelties, passing thorough Lazaray, leaving all places desolate
where ever he past, until he returned to Panigoni, having spent but three
months in this expedition.

He returned not soon enough to recover Bisnegar, for his enemies had strongly
fortified it, and every one had their post assigned them, Dealcan, on Panigont
side, the others at other places: the mean time these four Kings enjoyed this
Country which they plundered, and to strengthen themselves against the
Inhabitants, most affectionate and faithful to their Prince, they commanded
all Merchants and other persons of estate in that Isle to bring in horse, and
Elephants promising payment: They were brought in in great numbers, Merchant
deceived.
but when they had possession of them they turned back the right owners without
any satisfaction, which was no small loss to them.

Chandegry:
The Town of Bisnegar, otherwise called Chandegry, is eight leagues about, and
is so populous and powerful, that she finds her Prince a hundred thousand
horse.

Narsingue.
Narsingue the Capital of the Country is of the compass of Florence, stately
built, but their covering takes much from their beauty, being not permitted to
use tyle, which otherwise they have great store of. This Town is partly
situate upon a hill pretty eminent 3. leagues round: There is a most sumptuous
palace, covered with tyle, where symmetry and uniformity is exactly observed;
Thatched houses.
the Town is bounded on one side with the Sea, the other side with a great
River, the Town is well peopled, and thatched, with a course straw reed or rush.

The King maintains a numerous Militia, that makes him formidable to all the
East. No man can inhabit there without express leave from the King: and no
person is admitted that appears not an honest and candid person, Merchants,
strangers, and passengers, have commodious habitations allotted them, paying
the ordinary duties. Laws observed at Narsingue.
They live quietly, for justice is impartially dispensed, and the laws are so
well observed, that none breaks them for fear of punishment. The Citizens are
obliged by oath to serve the king when ere he commands upon pain of life, or
amputation of hands and feet, to keep his army more full he entertains the
fairest women in the world, Coutry Dames.
most gallantly dressed, and are only courted by the great ones, and the
gallantest persons: many strange Lords and Princes flock hither, to fight under
Mars and Venus, but they are not admitted to the Ladies, until they have
showed some Trophies of their valor, in some gallant exploit for the Princes
service; then they are courted by the Ladies, honored and respected by the
King, who by frequent presents and obligations, hurry them on to greater
actions. Some of them abstain from women to keep their strength and vigor,
boasting to feed upon Lions, Bears, and Tigars, and drink the blood of the
cruellest and wildest beasts, such is their Gallantry, and thus they decline
effeminacy. They use themselves to very violent exercises, to war, wrestling,
hunting, feeding on strengthening foods only. They anoint their bodies with
certain unxious commixtions or oils to harden their skin. They seldom fight
in battle-ray, their Highpriests or Bramins, lead on their Armies, who dare
not stir, Bramins Highpriests.
if the Bramins are not in the head of them, and when two Parties or Armies
cannot agree, several persons are called out to decide the quarrel: and when
they have fought sufficiently, a retreat is sounded, and judgment is given of
the victory, sometimes they are commanded to fall on again. Those Bramins are
wise, Thus did the Bardes amongst the ancient Gauls.
and well-composed persons, they never permit their Kings to engage their whole
Armies, at the great expense of their Subjects blood, and therefore few pitched
battles are fought, between those Indian Kings; at least the Idolaters; for the
Mahometans they are otherwise governed.

When this King intends war to any neighboring Prince, A manner of declaring
war:
or Stranger, he marches forth of his capital Town, accompanied with all his
Nobility, in battle-ray, with all his horse and foot, and Elephants in good
order, as if he were ready to march, Then the King mounted on a stately
courser, marches toward the Country he declares war unto, and lets fly an
arrow: immediately many persons ride their circuits with flaming torches in
their hands, to give notice of the day they are to attend their King, at the
capital Town; and the field Marshals, keep the passages, and let none pass
but who are fit for war; if war be carried far off, their houses are commanded
to be burnt, that the whole families may go to war, they only uncover their
houses, for their household stuff, and goods are preserved in a public place
built for that purpose. The people thus disposed follow their Prince with
resolution, and most freely expose themselves to all danger.

They load their Elephants, and Horses, Poisoned circles of Iron.
with iron and steel hoops three fingers broad, keen as rasors, which they use
in fight; they dart them with so strange and dextrous a strength, and
fleetnesse, that an arrow shot from a good arm flies not swifter, with these
instruments they make large wounds, most of them mortal and incurable,
poisoning the instruments, besides these Arms they carry swords and bucklers
of several fashions, javelines, bows, and crosse-bowes, and some fire-pikes,
they go so furiously to fight, little regarding their lives to serve their
Prince. Paleacate is another noble Town and haven in Bisnegar, Palecate.
upon the gulf Bengale; The Inhabitants are Gentiles, and profess the same law
as at Malabar and Calicut, never eating beef; they war perpetually with
Ternassari, only for Religion sake, and are friends with Calicut; so are most
of the Town upon the same gulf, as Aremogan, Bigara, Caricola, Putifama, and
other fair harbors belonging to the King of Bisnegar.

The inhabitants of Paleacate are courteous, and civil, yet you must be
cautious of them, they wear neither breeches nor drawers but a loose long
cassock, and cloak over it, of silk, or some fine stuf, with a cap of the same,
and pumps very neatly made, and go bareleg'd, their cassocks reach to their
ankles. The women wear Turkish coats loose, silk stockings, and buskins richly
faced: this town has great commerce, and hither are brought from Pegu and
other places all their rich commodities and jewels.

Between Paleacate and Narsingue, is a great vale, overgrown with stately trees
like Sicamores, yielding a continual moisture, like unto those in the Isle of
Fer in the Canaries; this vale is continually covered with clouds, and very
deep, it resembles a perpetual night, the Sun never appearing, the roads are
hard to hit, this vale is a good mile in length, and discovering the great and
adjacent plains, you are in another world; there runs a little River out of the
vale, one end of the plain is planted with Sugarcanes: there are three Sugar
works that furnish the Inhabitants with work all the year long; They have not
the art to refine it, but make it up in powder, with these canes they feed
their cattle; as horses, bufflers, and swine, which makes their flesh very
sweet and delicious, and Doctors prescribe swines flesh to sick persons, and
indeed it is sweeter and wholsomer than mutton, because of the clean feeding.

S. Thomas his shrine.
Near Paleacate stands Meliapur, or St. Thomas, a pretty fair Town, where the
Portuguese have a Fort; here it is said St. Thomas the Apostle preached, and is
interred; for the province of Parthia falling to his lot, he came into the
Indies, and to Coulan: others say he was first at Socotora, toward the Arabic
gulf, from thence to Granganor, then to Coulan, where being persecuted by the
King of that place, he came to Coromandell, and to this Town of Meliapur, where
he suffered martyrdom. Many are of opinion he came into Pegu, Christian faith
preached in the Indies and by whom.
and to China, for there are many monuments of Christianism all over the
Indies; yet it is likelier that the Indies were since converted by one Panthenus
a Grecian Philosopher, about the year 200. and rather since by Aedesius, and
Frumentius, who planted there the Christian faith; the latter whereof was the
first Bishop, in the time of S. Athanasius, as hereafter we shall say more at
large, since this they sent into Armenia, for sit instructers, and the Patriark
sent them some itinerant ones, and have continued thus ever since. The
Armenians had the holy Bible in the Chaldean tongue; Chaldean tongue. Meliapur
signifies a pea-bird.
however it is generally believed St. Thomas was buried here, where he was
martyred by the Bracmanes, and the King of Sagamo: others say he dyed in the
Town of Calamine, and was buried at Meliapur, which are one and the same Town;
St. Thomas entombed.
and indeed to this day the memory and name of him is much esteemed, and
reverenced by the Natives, by the Gentiles, and Moors themselves. Many other
places of these Indies pretend to have the shrine of this glorious Saint: from
thence it is said he was translated to Edesse, and from thence into Europe to
Otoa: There are many more Churches dedicated to St. Thomas, Albuna in Aethiopia.
five leagues from Cochin there is a fair one, but abused by the Gentiles, who
have got it by force, and the Christians revenues; many miracles are wrought at
the shrine of this great Saint, and amongst the Panaims, many are devout unto
him.

It was revealed to one, he was not in the true way, and that he should go into
Aethiopia toward Albana, to be instructed in the true faith, which he did
accordingly, and was baptized, and by his piety and holy life, succeeded in the
charge of Albuna.

The Christians of this place do yet retain some of the instructions left them
by Saint Thomas, but are very ignorant of the principle Articles of faith; they
do not understand prayer, and there is great difficulty to reduce them to the
right way: they have left the Idolatries, they yearly practiced, sacrificing
yearly to this S. (at Coulan) a youth, either slave, or Freeman, voluntarily
offering himself.

When a person of quality desires to dye in honor of this Saint, he makes it
his request to the King; he instantly referres it to his Council: They
considering of the importance of the person, and the service he may do his
country, present another request, that he may not be permitted to dye, for the
use, the State can make of him: the last being granted; four of the chief of
the Council are deputed to apprehend him, and bring him before the King, who
embraced him, and shows him that both the State and himself, stand in need of
him, and that 'twas necessary to preserve him, and promise him in marriage; one
of his favorites, making him many rich presents, he is easily altered by the
Kings persuasions, acknowledges many thanks for those great favors, and
returns with his new bride very well pleased and contented. I have heard of
many more ridiculous superstitions, which are at present totally abolished.

The Town of Calamine or Meliapur, since Santhome, is a good haven town, on the
coast of Coromandel, 53. degrees from the Gulf Bengale, subjected to the King
of Bisnegar or Narsingue.

They relate many miracles wrought by the intercession of this Saint, a certain
Princess of Narsingue, daughter to King Zamaluco, or Nizamaluco, was shut up
by her husband King of Narsingue, in a fair and rich Seraglio; she was fair,
virtuous, and discreet, and reputed a Christian; before her marriage she was
sought for by another Prince her neighbor; after three years imprisonment in
this stately Palace; upon a time the guards through some illusion, saw at a
window the lively image of the Prince her first lover, the place being
extremely well fenced, begirt with double ditches, almost impossible for any
person to make surreptitious entrance, the guard was much astonished; the King
her husband being made acquainted, moved with anger and jealousy, accused the
Princess of adultery, and condemned her to drink off a glass of poison; no
excuses her modest innocence could make, prevailing, she begged of her husband
she might dye near unto Saint Thomas his shryne; 'twas granted, and she
immediately led to the place of execution, where a fire was kindled to consume
her body: she clothed all in white, her hair hanging over her ears, covered
almost all her body; took the golden bowl, and made her prayer to God, and
Saint Thomas, to vouchsafe to grant her mercy; and to discover her innocence;
which done, she drunk the poison, and threw her self into the fire, where
without the least harm either to her person, or clothes, she remained upon
her knees, continuing her prayers to almighty God, until all the wood was
consumed; she safely came out of it to the great astonishment, and admiration
of all the admiring spectators; and being helped into her litter, was carried
to Narsingue, brought into her chamber, and was never since in the power of the
King her husband: she spent the remainder of her days, recluse, in great
abstinence and austerity.

There are many Christians in Meliapur, and some Churches, as Saint Paul
belonging to the society Saint Bartholomew, Saint Thomas, the most honored,
and reverenced in the Indies: The ships arriving here, of the Christians,
Idolaters, and Mahometans too, give great charities in honor of this Saint.
From Paleacate, Indian earthen ware.
and other places they come hither on pilgrimage. The Portuguese that inhabit
here, are employed in making Indian or earthen vessels, diversely, and prettily
painted, they do it with the juice of a root called Saya, and the more you wash
them, the livelyer the colors appear. There is a good harbor, Nutmegs.
and great trading, they resort hither from all parts of the Indies. The people
of Sandanes exchange their Nutmegs for that earthen ware, Calanfour a
Clovegilliflowr.
and other commodities are brought from Malaca and Goa, They trade much in
Clove-Gilliflowers, which are cheap.

But before I leave Bisnegar, you shall hear what I learnt at a town called
Sigistan, or Sagistan, near that country, being upon a time in one of the
Inhabitants houses, who are very civil, and courteous, A story of a Bear.
and much taken with our conversation: By chance I spyed the picture of a Bear
playing with a young girl, and inquiring the meaning thereof, a most
prodigious story (if true, which I question much) was related me. A Prince
named Ismahan, Ismahan.
that reigned many Moons, (for so they reckon their years) in the Province of
Bozari, B^zari.
since Sigistan, going a hunting, took a female Bear, and her cub that
followed her, which he preserved, till on a time one of the Lords servants,
bitten by the Dam, killed her, then the cub was kept alone, run up and down the
house, and in time grew tame.

This Prince had a daughter about eight years of age, that delighted much to
play with the Cub, and fed him with her own hands; the young Bear was
continually at her heels. The young Lady ( Agarida was her name) fell sick,
Agarida.
the Bear lay under her bed and refused all food that came not from her own
hand; she recovering continued her care, in keeping of him sweet and clean,
teaching him many tricks, which he readily learnt, and most dexterously
performed. The Lady-Mother one day perceiving the Bear to pull up her daughters
coats, to lick her feet; angry to see such familiarities and carresses;
commanded a servant to beat Sagistan, (for so was the Bear named) the beast of
an immense growth, though but 15. months old, flew upon the man (armed with a
cudgel only) very furiously, and strangled him, and another servant came to
help him, upon the place: this set a strange Alarm through the house, all
running headlong to kill the beast, that made a most strange slaughter, and got
into the wood, and of three years there was no tidings of him. The unfortunate
Lady Agarida took a walk by a little Rivers side, accompanied with many Ladies
more: The Bear suddenly appeared, soon scattered the company, snatched up
Agarida in his paws, and made away with her so swiftly, 'twas impossible to
rescue her; nor could she be found, for any search they made: The Bear carried
her to a remote and obscure cave, where he kept her many years, and stole
another girl to attend her: These two women made a shift to get food, and
other commodities, and have since related strange stories of the beast, and
actions worthier a rational, then an irrational creature; I was told most
strange things of the animal; That Agarida had five sons by him, all gallant
men, without the least shape or resemblance of the beast. That they left the
woods at ten years of age, and built themselves a Cabin or house to dwell in.
But one of Agarida's Brothers hunting in the woods, killed Sagistan with a dart.
She enraged with disdain, sent her sons to her fathers Palace to revenge him,
and accordingly they killed their two Uncles: Ismahan their Grandfather,
endeavoring to have them seized on, and ignorant who they were, was slain also
with two of the five brothers; The other three escaping, made themselves so
Formidable, that none durst meddle with them; and hearing of the King of
Bisnagar's wars, they offered him their service, bearing for arms, the figure
of Sagistan their father. The King informed of their strange birth, and
adventures; gave them great commands in his Army, their behavior showed their
desert, for they exploited so high and unconceivable actions, that one of them
married the Sultane of Bisnegar, Sagistan Town.
the other the Sultanes daughter, from whence sprung that illustrious family of
the Sagistans, that has given the name to that town: whereof those two
brothers were the first founders.

This was related me of this history, or fable rather, held for a verity in
those parts to this day: all Peoples, States, Towns, History of a Spanish
woman and a Monkey.
and illustrious families have their springs, and beginnings, fabulous, and
Romantic. I have heard a story affirmed of a Spanish Captains wife, caught in
adultery with another by her husband; for punishment he was satisfied to expose
them both into a desert Island; the man presently dying, the woman was accosted
by a great Monkey or Drill, by which she had two children, and at the three
years end a ship sailing by, discovered this miserable creature, liker a
phantasme then a human creature, she naked with tears in her eyes begged to be
released from this horrid and cruel captivity, which they did, and
reembarking, the Monkey perceiving, full of rage, in her sight tore his whelps
in pieces, and threw them at her; she was carried to Lisbon, where the
Inquisitors informed of her case, caused her to be apprehended; and had been
proceeded against, had not Cardinal Cayetan, the then Popes Nuntio, taken her
cause in hand, and setting forth the violent necessity she was forced to, to
yield to that beast, that had found her sustenance for three whole years;
saved her from the execution, and she ended her days in all holiness and
sanctity of life and repentance. There are many ancient and modern histories to
this purpose; all which I refer to Naturalists, and Divines.

CHAP. XXII. Of the kingdom of Bengala, and Ternassery, of musk, some rare
remarks of the River Ganges, of the Torrid Zone, and the conversion of a young
Prince Idolater, to Christianisme.
Maginus and Bartheme say this town stands between Bengale and Narsingue,
Modern Authors between Malalaca and Nateabam, unless there are two towns of
the same name.
FOllowing the coast of Coromandel, and the gulf Bengale you come to
Ternassery, which is held to be between the Cosamba of Ptolome, a kingdom lying
between Bengal, Narsingue, Orixa, and the sea; the Capital town, bearing the
same name, is situate upon the side of the sea, and a fair River called Zayta,
making a little Island where stands another town of the same name. She has
plenty of all things, necessary to life. Their cowes are low, and their horns
grow only skin deep. The sheep have neither horns nor wool, their skin as
smooth as a calves, there grows great store of long Pepper called Casay, they
preserve of it, and eat it all the year long with sugar and vinegar, which
gives it a pleasant taste; in the middle of the Isle is a Lake that breeds good
fish, better then any the River affords, it is called Ademas. It affords you
Trouts (the most savory fish of the East) Pykes and Shads taken in March only,
and are Seafish. They never eat the head, because there is a worm found in it,
which makes that fish choose the rapid waters, and swim aloft, by the streams
affording him much refreshment.

The Town of Ternassery is large and pleasant, well built, Ternassery.
not walled on the River side, but strengthened by some Forts well fortified and
provided: she is situate in a plain, with a Castle on the North, with an
enclosure or Park, fenced with a great ditch, where the Queen keeps a breed
of stately Mares, given her by her Father, who recovered them of an Indian
Prince that owed him money, which he could no otherwise recover, for in that
Country horses bear a great value.

The King of Ternassery is provided with good Cavalry, which renders him potent
and formidable, he is of Person strong, and Robuste, and wars continually with
the King of Narsingue, and Bengale. The Narsinguer would indamage him much, did
he join with the other, but he is so generous he scorns it.

This King is a Gentill, and has above a thousand Elephants trained up to
War, and of the largest size of the East; covered to the very ground with
beefes hides, and severally trapped; those hides are fastened underneath the
belly, with iron chains, and are hardly got off, four men may fight on their
backs at a time, without the least encumbrance to one another, bearing broad
bucklers, made of Tortoyse shells, taken in that River; he that rides the trunk
to guide the beast, is the best Armed of the five, because he lies open to the
enemy; their darts have three very sharp points, or heads, with a ball of iron
upon the middle, which serves for counterpoise. It Is a warr-like Nation, yet
courteous, civil, and voluptuous; they have fair women, which they Court and
Treat in gardens full of rare fruits. They have Cattle, Poultry, and foul of
all sorts, they delight much in perfumes in their meats and dresses, and
chiefly in Musk, called Sagay. Musk, and from whence.
The best Musk is not drawn from the codd, nor blood of the beast, but from a
certain swelling, or rising upon the lower part of his belly, at the full of
the Moon, and that is the sweetest of all: for there gather the humors mixed
with the blood, and Impostumelike rise and break, which dried cast so lively
and searching sent, that it draws blood from the very nose. The codds and
skin, with some of the flesh are tied fast together, from which they draw their
ordinary Musk, mingling therewith a little of the better sort.

I quartered at a Jews, who confessed to me he had drawn thirteen or foureteen
codds or bunches from one beast; They are of the bigness of a Goat, and have
four teeth bigger then the rest, two ascending straight upward, and the other
two oppositely descending. Their childrenweare of those teeth about their
necks, set in silver and gold, as in some places of France they wear wolve's;
Persons of Quality set them in a wood, called Betell, that has a strange
virtue against poison, called by the Aethiopians, Euate, Euate. Bettell wood.
whereof they make dishes, and trenchers of several sorts, much esteemed, and
sought for by the Great Ones, studded and garnished with gold and silver,
jewels, ivory, and hart's-horn, which they hold to be an antidote against
poison: which I have experienced in many other diseases, as the green sickness
in women, taken in the juice of a reddish cich pea boiled, with hartshorn
poudred, mingled with steel, the weight of half a Crown, with the double
quantity of sugar, taken every morning for twelve or fifteen days together:
This is an approved and infallible remedy against the green sickness, and
jaundize, yellow or black; they have a beastly custom, to betray the virginity
of their young daughters to any strangers that are not tawny, be they
Christians, or Mahometans, but not to Gentiles nor Idolaters, the women burn
themselves after the decease of their husbands.

From Fernassery we passed to Ausly, a Town upon the North of Narsingue, on the
east of Bengale, and lies southward, to the main sea, Governed by a Mohammedan
Prince, Potent by sea and Land, and sworn enemy to the Portuguese, with whom
they make War. The Town is provided with all necessaries for War, and has a
large Harbor, of capacity to contain a good Fleet, the mouth thereof Southward,
which is chained in, in case of necessity. He is Master of another Town, called
Quelba, Quelba Maturane. Diamond mines.
since Maturane, strong, and well furnished with shipping, and small Frigates,
wherewith they scowr that sea, to the damage of the Portuguese, they often
fight on both sides, reduced to streights. This Kings Treasure chiefly consists
in three, Diamond, Rubies, and Jacynth mines, besides all sorts of Groceries
and Spices, Their frigates, or Busses, are caulked with a certain herb, and
Mastick is used in stead of Pitch; They are built in such a manner they can
hardly sink, and sail with much security, The Viceroy of Indies being upon a
time informed of that Kings intentions, to send his fleet to the Grand Jave, to
wait for the Spice fleet; he set forth two great men of war, with two more,
St. Maloes men, who drawing toward that Haven, feigned an escape from
shipwreck, and the better to play their game, tore all their sails in pieces,
hiding their Canon and Soldiers under Deck.

They met with those Busses laden, and returning home, desired their
assistance, to hale, and tow them along unto Maturane, that there they might
mend their sails, and they promised a reward for their service, the
Mahometans, enemies to the Christians, resolved to conduct them thither, and
there to use them at will, and having towed them two nights and a day to that
Haven, suddenly the others played with their Canon, and seizing unawares of the
place, made great slaughter amongst those miserable creatures, burnt their
fleet, sacked the Town, and full fraught with rich plunder, they retired. The
two French ships not satisfied with the pillage, let the Town all on fire,
which was easy to effect, (as I have said of other places) the houses were all
thatched with palm; returning homeward, not victualled sufficiently for so
much company, their thoughts having been wholly taken up with Treasure, they
cast the men over Decks, and landed the women in an Isle. The mean time two
Portuguais ships sailing by, and seeing the Town a fire, the Inhabitants fled,
seized of the Haven, plundered the rest of the Town at leisure, and laden with
rich prises they found in a Magazine untouched, They retired with their booty,
ignorant of the cause and manner of the destruction of the Town; such are the
good, and bad fortunes of seafaring men.

Leaving the Coast of Coromandell, we came to the Kingdom of Bengale, Bengale,
or Batacouta.
the chief Town whereof bears the name, or at least so called by the
Portuguese, and other Nations, and by the Natives Batacouta, one of the
greatest antiquity in the Indies. Some would have it to be old Ganges, a Royal
Town upon the River Ganges. This Kingdom of Bengale was 300 years since subdued
by the great Cham of Tartary, freed her self since, and after that conquerred
by the Parthians, or Patates, and is at last, and remains still subjected to the
great Mogull, Prince of Tartary, and Supreme Lord of all Indostan: and yet
there remain some Lords in that Country, that are Sovereigns, and obey the
Mogull in a Noble manner: This Kingdom reaches 200. leagues upon the sea side,
and contains the Kingdoms of Sirapu, Chandecan, Bacal, Aracan, or Mogor, and
others. The Inhabitants of Bengale are Idolaters, Mahometans, and some
Christians, for there are Portuguaises, and Fathers of the Society.

The Town is situate upon one of the mouths of Ganges, Ganges River.
whereof there are two Principal, in regard that river (as some persons
believe, with what reason judge ye) is one of the four rivers of the
Terrestrial Paradise, called Whiton, or Giho.

The opinions of the Ancient and modern Authors do not agree, whether it is the
true Ganges of the Ancients, or whether old Ganges be not rather a Canton in
China, or some more Eastern then this is; I leave to be decided by the most
curious, and shall only say that the Portuguese take this for the true one,
relying chiefly upon the name Guenga, or Gangen, which she retains to this
day; and it is confirmed by many relations from the great Kingdom of Tebet, or
Tibet, and Cathay, and the Fathers of the Society say, they have followed that
River a great way since their leaving of Lahir.

The Moors and Gentills hold there is much holiness and virtue in that
River-water, and wash themselves therein thorough Ceremony and Superstition, as
you shall hear hereafter. They say it is the best and the wholesomest water in
the World, and sent for 500. leagues off.

Forty or fifty thousand persons bathe themselves therein at a time, and many
Kings come disguised thither, her head springs out of the great hill Inde, not
far from Indus, the Natives think she springs out of the Terrestrial Paradise;
at the mouth of the River is the Gulf Gangetick, The Gulf Bengale.
or Bengale, 500. leagues in circumference, containing the Coasts of the
Kingdoms of Narsingue, Orixa, Ternessari, Bengale, Pegu, Sian, and others,
unto Malaca. I have been told that a Frenchman, named Malherbe Breton, a great
traveller, had taken a particular view of this River, and had gone 400. leagues
up the River, and that she has three Mouths, or places, she disgorges her self
into the sea; the one toward Pegu, the second in the middle, that makes some
Islands, and the third in the Country of Chingara, and each eight or ten
leagues over. That at Labas (a Royal Town of Mogor) and forty days journey
from Bengale, toward the North, This River is a league over, her mouth toward
Bengale is in the three and twentieth degree.

The Kingdom of Bengale borders Northward upon Tartary, or Mogor, and is
bounded by the River Hieropec, sometime Hyphasis, that looses her self in the
Indus, the bounds of Alexander the great's Conquest's in the East. Eastward is
the Province Edaspa, that joins to the Kingdom of Aracan; on an other side is
the Province of Mien, and Tapacura, under the obedience of Bengale; Westward is
Orixae, where is the Diamond mine, and the deserts of the Kingdom of Deli,
Southward the maine Indian sea.

The Kings of Bengale were able to conquer the Kingdom of Deli, were not the
great deserts of Damida, and the Inpenetrable Forests of Sacara interposed the
two limits Southward, on the one side is the Cape Sogora, or Sagagora, and of
the other, that of Castigan, or Catigan, at the third mouth of the Ganges, over
against the Kingdom of Verma, where are the mines of Chrysolites, Sardonix, and
Topases.

Verma has formerly belonged unto the Kingdom of Bengale, the people are very
civil, and given to trade. And all Nations have free traffic, as Persians,
Greeks, Abyssins, Chinese, Guserates, Malabares, Turks, Moors, Jews,
Ruffes, or Georgians, and many others.

There is great commerce of Jewels, and other Merchandises, brought by the
Mouth of Ganges straight to Bengale, going up six miles by land, but above
twenty by water, by reason of the ebb and flow, which (as I have already said)
is different from other seas, the smallest tides falling out at the full of the
Moon, but when the water is at the lowest it is three fadome deep round the
Walls of the Town, so that ships safely enter the Haven, and are there very
numerous. It Is thought there are forty thousand families in the Town, and the
King dwells in a stately Palace built of brick, with fair gardens unto it.
The Town is pleasantly seated.

The King keeps a great Court, followed by a gallant Nobility, and his
chiefest guard consists of women, as the custom is in Jave, Sumatra and
Fransiane, they put more trust in them then in men, they march very gravely,
are very valiant, and expert horseriders and vaulters, use the Cimitere and
buckler, and battle axes very dexterously: you must take a care to come near
them in their March, for they will abuse you, calling you Gueriaer, which
signifies bold villain, the King maintains a great many of them in his Palace,
and the handsommest are richly attired.

The Sun once set, it is forbidden to any man to come near the quarter, the
Seraglio is kept in, it looks upon a fair garden, Seraglio guarded.
on the side of a pleasant river, where the Ladies walk at night, and it is
death for any man to be found there. The Captain of the guard carries in his
hand a poisoned nosegay, which (as it were by chance) he puts to the nose of
any person he has a mind to kill, and he dies within two hours, or
thereabouts, Subtle poison.
or else he causes his hands and feet to be cut off. This customary law is with
more rigor executed upon the inhabitants, then upon strangers.

If the women are surprised in their amors, they run no danger, and men are
very seldom exempt from punishments. One of those women being caught with a
slave, was brought before the King, weeping, to excuse her fault, she said,
that had she not consented to that act, the strangling of her matrix had killed
her, which the King took for an excuse, and sentenced the slave to death, who
was a Knight of Malta, and married his wife richly to a Lord of his Court.

The King of Bengale is an Idolater, as generally all the Eastern are, he is
valiant of Person, and can draw into the field a great Army, both of horse and
foot, wanting not wherewithal to maintain them, for his Country is rich in
gold, silver, and jewels, he can draw forth two thousand Elephants caparison'd,
their teeth are shodd with steel, and they will carry as many men as those of
Narsingue, they use hand-guns, muskets, swords, javelins, hallebards, and pikes.

The Bengalians are the gallantest Persons of the East, both men and women,
both sexes go richly apparel'd and perfumed. All other Nations of the Indies
flock thither to spend their money, and chiefly to buy young slaves to attend
and guard their women, and manage their business; they are bought and sold as
horses are here: they buy them young the safer to geld them; the Parents being
poor, do not scruple to sell their children to strangers for three score, four
score, and a hundred Ducates, more or less, Children sold in market.
for they are sure their children run no hazardous fortune, they being
instructed in all manner of Virtues. The Law is, that if a slave return to his
father, they are both enslaved to the master, until redemption.

Apura.
The King of Bengale has many Kings tributary to him, as the King of Apura, who
pays him fifty Elephants yearly, twelve pearls of the weight of a Miticale, he
yields this for the ransom of six Towns this King had taken of him in open
war; he made the King of Dimali tributary to him also, for assisting his enemy
King Apura, and makes him pay 50. horses with 50000. cherats or crowns yearly.
The King of Orixa pays him tribute too, and many more Gentiles and Mahometans,
although he himself in some manner acknowledges the great Mogull: he has an
Army ever ready to draw into the field upon an instant, the Nobility being
generally tributary, and released from that duty, are obliged to serve their
Prince upon his first summons, with a certain number of horse, and other
necessaries.

And when they are engaged and obliged to it, the war once ended, the King
rewards them with money and favor, embracing them as his children, and after a
solemn feast prepared for them, dismisses them home to repose. The Kings benign
and grateful entertninment so highly obliges them, that they spare nothing for
their Princes service.

A prodigious age.
The Climate is very temperate, and well air'd, that makes them live long,
witness the Moor of Bangale, aged three hundred and thirty years, in 1537. the
oldest of the Country never knew him but old, and of the same growth, and
remembered Cambaye without a Mohammedan, his hair changed color four times, from
black to white, and he lost his teeth as often, and still they came again, he
had about 700. wives in his life time, he was an Idolater for a 100. years
together, and was the rest of his time a Mohammedan, he was maintained by the
Sultan of Cambaye, since by the Governor of Diu, although the Bengaliens lie
under the Torrid Zone, they are cooled with much rain, that falls from May to
mid- August, it rains from midday to midnight, the other twelve hours there
falls none, and that is the time they have to travel and trade in.

Such is the disposition of the air under the Torrid Zone, otherwise she would
be dis-inhabitable for the great heats, as the Ancients believed, being not
acquainted with the Country, nor the rains, besides many other reasons, as the
nights being of the same length with the days, the winds, and other causes
daily observed.

The Bengalians are curious, and delicious in their diet, they feed much upon
preserves, and sweetmeats, for having all sorts of spices green, they confect
of all sorts: the husk of the nutmegs makes an excellent conserve, so does the
long pepper and ginger bruised together. They compound an admirable drink with
Areca, mingled with the confection of the leaves of Bettel; they preserve
Tamur, which is a sort of palm called Tamarindi, myrabolans or plums, the roots
of a certain Bul-rush, Clove Gillyflower tops or buds, another root called
Cucuma, and many others. They are of complexion more fair than black, their
cloathings are stuffs of cotton, silk, damask, satin and velvet.

Their breeches, cassocks, or coats, are almost of the Italian mode, especially
when they visit Ladies, as at Ormus. Their chiefest drink is milk, with Sugar
and Cinnamon; they make it of three sorts, Sugar and Cinnamon are still added,
and sometimes pepper, Durions, Mancoustan, and Bananes.

The Banane tree is fifteen handful high, the trunk juycy, Bonane is an ^ndian
fig.
and covered with a bark, and leaves growing like the scales of fish, two foot
large and five foot long, of a light green: her root growing in the ground
casts out sprouts, that in time grow up to trees: when this tree is come to
full growth, she puts forth from the middle of her stock, a flower of a reddish
color, about the bigness and shape of an artichoke, whence springs a bough
hung with fruit, to the number of a hundred, each a handful in length, and
four fingers large, and bears but once a year, which is held a wonder. From
incisions made into the tree, there flows good store of juice or water, very
pleasant and gustfull, in some places of the Indies they are called Masa, in
others Pican, and say it is the tree that bears the fruit of life. In that
Country Partridges are all white, and bigger than ours; there is plenty of all
other foul.

We went from Bengale in the company of many Merchants, to trade at Castigan,
where were arrived some Portuguese ships, and in those meetings much is got, by
the trade of gold and silver, and in the exchange of our own commodities,
Castigan or Catigan belongs to the kingdom of Bengale, which reaches over 400.
leagues of land, and the Lordship of Aracan, a Kingdom between Bengale and
Pegu, stronger by Sea than land, and wages often war with Pegu, and some years
since (they say) has swallowed up Pegu, but ruined by neighbors, and
therefore the King is called King of Aracan, Tiparat, Chacomas, Bengale, and
Pegu.

This King has entertained the Fathers of the society at Chandecan, his Royal
Town; and his whole state is strangely altered on a sudden, as all the East is
subject to innovations and changes: the strongest still overcomming the weaker.

Catigan is a good Haven Town, in the Mogor, or Mogull's Country, a great
Kingdom, and rich in all sorts of cattle, in fish, rice white and black,
spices, especially pepper, myrabolans, and ginger, which they candy and
preserve, and is better than any grows at Cananor; the Prince of this Town
called Banastarin, his Son Achamu was converted by the Fathers of the society,
and obtained leave of the King his father, to have a Church built for them, he
married the Princess Cassubi a Christian Lady newly baptized, A kingdom left
for heaven
he followed herein the advice of those holy Fathers, for otherwise he intended
to have ended his days in Celibat. They relate many miracles of him, amongst
others, that (the first night they were bedded, offering both their prayers to
God upon their knees) they were suddenly enlightened by a glorious light, and
smelt many sweet perfumes, whereupon they mutually resolved to abstain from
enjoyment, and dedicate the remainder of their lives to chastity and sanctity.

He left his kingdom to his Brother Agazima, desiring justice might be
preserved in his Kingdom, and that he would follow the advice of Father Philip
of the society. Agazima promised a performance: but those Princes are all so
jealous of our religion, holding that the Christians adore one God, great above
the rest, that will not suffer any others, The Idolaters fear of Christianisme.
disdaining to communicate himself to any, and that he sets a greater esteem
and value, upon innocent poor and simple people, then upon the rich Kings and
Princes; and that Princes had need to preserve to themselves the affections and
obedience of their subjects, to reign with more ease: these were the seeming
reasons Agazima offered his Brother, and it is those poor abused creatures
ordinary discourse and opinion, and the difficulty they find in our religion,
ignorant of the true and pure grounds thereof, that teach subjects their
obedience, and subjection to their temporal Kings and Princes above all
others. Of Cassubi, or Chasubi, subject to Aracan, I will hereafter speak.

Sartagan.
In the kingdom of Bengale is the Town of Sartagan, or Sartogan, situate upon a
River, that runs and loses her self in Ganges, where the Portuguese have a
fort. There are great plenty of rice, fine linen clothes, sugar, myrabolans,
and many other drugs. The people are Gentiles, and in their Temples adore many
Idols strangely and horridly shaped, others adore the first they meet, my
Camarade and I being lodged at a Brokers house, who was happy in a sweet
disposition'd, and a modest wife, as we accompanied her one day from the
market: Idolaters superstitions.
some of those Idolaters prostrated themselves at our feet, and begun to make
their prayers to us: and were extremely incensed, when they saw we only
endeavored to disabuse them, and to laugh them out of their fopperies and
idolatries, they answered, they were thus instructed by their parents, and
therefore thought it just and equitable. They told me they were not of the
Guzerates religion, but were absolutely opposite to Mahometanism. They esteem
it a happiness to be near the Ganges, believing that water purifies them from
all filth and sin, and therefore are carried thither both in health and
sickness; some leave orders, that after their deaths their bodies may be burnt,
and their ashes cast therein, that so they may go strait to heaven, The river
Ganges how esteemed.
others hold the same of Euphrates; and for this reason the Portuguese and
other Christians abominate these rivers, and never make anyuse of the water but
of force and necessity, which is a little superstitious, on the other side, the
water of Ganges, being the sweetest and the wholsomest in the world, and many
drinking of it have been cured of great pains of the stomach which hardly
afforded them any rest before; Strange ceremonies.
it is sovereign against many other pains, aches, and diseases. The Indian
Priests sing in their Temples from break of day to noon, and after dinner they
have other prayers, which last till night; when they hear this service, they
wash their hands, feet, and faces, then walk barefoot upon stone laid on
purpose to the Temple, which is matted, and there they stand upright without
the least motion, and after awhile they sit crosse-legged like Tailors.

There are two Altars, one for the rising, the other for the setting Sun, and
so they turn their faces ever to the Sun. They bury their dead in their
Churches as we do, and maintain women to lament and weep over the dead,
according to the ancient Roman fashion. These women are clothed in mantles of
the Spanish fashion, which reach lower then their girdles, and of a purple
color; and beneath that have skirts of blew cotton, that trayle upon the
ground, and ten or twelve of them are dressed after this manner. The corpse this
while is laid forth in some great room, covered with a rich cloth or pall,
according to the quality of the person with four of those women waiting, whilst
the rest of them are sent abroad the town, to deplore and lament the dead
person, the last whereof a little separate from her fellow-sisters, declares
the name, quality, and life of the defunct, that all persons may prepare
themselves to assist at the funerals.

They ejulate, weep, and lament with exotic gestures, and tortions, and in
these postures having walked round the town, they return to the corpse with
numbers of people, and when the body is borne to the Temple, then they raise
yet louder cries and ejulations.

One of these women makes a Panegyric of the dead, setting forth the great
loss he is to his wife, children, friends, and kindred: then the multitude
express their sadness, acknowledging the loss; they howl and cry out so
hideously all together, that you would think them distracted, or at least at
the brink of despair; when the body is carried out of the house. Flutes,
Kettles; and other Instruments play to the Church, whither the Parents,
Kindred, and Friends follow; a most pitiful and sad sight.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Isles of Archi-Pelagus, of S. Laurance, of the Island of
Sumatra, of Elephants, and other particulars.
AT the opening of the Gulf Bengale, are many Isles great and small, which
make the Archi-pelagus, called S. Lazarey, and near 80. leagues in length, and
end about the Philippines, and the Japon; the chiefest thereof are, Sumatra,
Javes, Boraco, Banda, the Molukes, the Philippines, and others. Toward
Sumatra, are the Isles of Andreman, or Andemaon, which signifies golden mines,
inhabited by Antropophayes; who war with one another, Andemaon.
and eat their prisoners: They make the like provision of humane flesh, as we
do of beef or bacon; each of those Isles have their Kings.

It happened once to a Portuguese vessel, (having passed the Canall of Micobar,
Sad accident.
and Sombrero, called by the Indians, Jenibra, lying between Sumatra and the
Continent, the Portuguais call it; Call or Canall of Sombrero, because the
place is covered by the winding and shade of the Isle, as it were with a great
brimmed hat.) One night by a sudden storm she was cast upon the Isles of
Andreman, otherwise Maduca, within two leagues, whereof is a shelf or bottom
of white rock, very dangerous, hardly possible to sail by, without shipwreck.
The Portuguais call the place Pedra bianca.

Those in the ship foreseeing the danger they were in, threw overboard all
their Artilery, and all other things of weight they had therein, and threw away
their main Mast; and by this means, they escaped the shelve and rock, being
suddenly thrown out of that narrow passage, by a great wave; but behold their
greatest misfortune, escaping one danger, they fell into another; for seeing
their ship begin to fill with water, having sprung a leake, they were forced to
commit themselves to the mercy of their fiercest enemy.

The Captain Don sano Mendo advised them to prepare for land, and to resolve to
sell their lives dear, since there was no hopes for a handful of people to
escape the cruelties of so many barbarous villains, they suddenly cut and
broak the ship to flitters, every one snatching a planck, endeavoring to reach
the shore, which was about half a league off, and having put themselves in the
best order, could be expected in the like disorder or confusion, with such arms
they could carry as swords and axes; as they were ready to land, these
barbarous insularies met them with their bows and arrows, and truncks and
killed some 20. at the first onset; the remainder of them about sixty, having
got footing on land by force, made a great slaughter amongst the Infidels, and
seized of two Merchants houses, where they fortified themselves, the best they
could; until their bloody irritated enemy fell upon them, and besieged their
sconce. The Portugais reduced to this sad extremity, resolved to sally forth,
with firebrands in their hands, and to fire the adjacent town or village, which
being built with reeds, and covered with palm, was presently consumed; then
they thought to have escaped in boats belonging to the Isle; but knowing not
how to use them; they returned back again, and fortified themselves in the
Caselba or Temple; where with certain provisions they brought thither, and
others they found, Caselba.
they maintained the place eleven or twelve days; at the end of which time,
seeing there was no hope of a composition to be made with that furious people,
they resolved to dye gallantly with their weapons in hand, and after a mutual
and unanimous preparation, and resignation of themselves, Resolution in
extremity.
they threw themselves amongst those barbarous infidels, killed double or
trebble their number, but at last yielded all to the same doom, and were
eaten, and salted by those sanguinary Barbarians. Sumatra is one of the fairest
Isles in the world, sometime Taprobane, and Palesimonde, some would have it to
be, that which in old time was the Chersonese of gold, and Ophir, most renowned
for Solomon. It is called by some Tasan, which signifies a great Isle, because
she has 800. leagues compass. The Inhabitants of Malaca say it was formerly
joined to their continent, but divided by an earthquake; lies directly under
the Equinoctial line, in the first climate, her days and nights are all of a
length: is divided into many Provinces, which make three kingdoms, the
chiefest whereof is Sougar, commonly called Pedir, and have all mines of gold,
silver, and other metals, and of the best sorts of Drugges and Spices: the
Pepper that grows there is larger, and more biting then any other, growing
under the Torrid zone, which causes the country to be the most temperate, and
best inhabited in the world, for the reasons I have already spoken of. The air
is very wholesome, and people live there very long, and with good health;
Sumatrans Insularies false people.
the natives are very tractable, but of little truth; so it is not safe trading
with them, for they will falsify their word for their profit. The kingdom of
Assy is the richest in gold, which is the finest of the world, and Achen is the
most potent. The Isle is inhabited by Gentiles, Moors, and Jews, Many Turks
have of late planted there for the goodness of the country, and purity of the
air. The Idolaters only are natives, all others come from other parts.
Continual rains.
The earth is strangely fruitful in all products: the only inconvenience is
the great floods from rain, which incessantly falls from Mid- May, until Mid-
August; and from midday, to midnight; only, as at Bengale, and as it
happens, in most of the countries under that Zone. The King of the country
discovering his subjects falsehood, (which causes him no small contempt and
prejudice) he forbids trading, and takes notice of what quantity of pepper or
other Drugge or commodities each subject has, and sets such a rate upon them,
as they may gain thereby; then he sends one of his chief officers with them to
the Magazine, to trade and vent these commodities to strange Merchants; and
they usually exchange or put off their commodities for half the rate in ready
money, the other half in other sorts of commodities. The Bahar of pepper which
is 360. pound weight, Bahar Peper.
is worth three crowns and a half, or four at the dearest, which amounts to
about a Ducatoon, or 55. pence. Notwithstanding this order, many are privately
licensed, to trade freely, and by help of the Portuguais interpreters, much is
to be got. They have many sorts of jewels, aromatic drugs, and most excellent
balms; there is great plenty of all sorts of fowl and fruit; they feed much
upon Buffle, which they esteem an excellent meat; their beefs have a swelling
upon the top of their necks (like their Cammels) which is only fat: sheep of no
wool. There are many tame Elephants, and great store of wild ones in the woods.
Hunting of Elephants.
Those of Malaca who live upon the Continent with the Kings leave, come hither
to hunt the Elephant, with their huntsmen and engines, with many trumpets,
hoboyes, and drums, with fire, to fright and to drive them up into a straight,
and when they have taken them, they almost famish them; then they bring them
amongst the tame ones; and by degrees make them so, feeding them gently, and
otherwise instructing them, and in time they become very ready to learn, and
serviceable in all things.

The King himself takes much content to feed them, and at such times,
Hermophrodites.
their allowance is doubled. This Isle breeds many Hermophrodites (which is
very remarkable) and proceeds from an overflowing of imperfect seed in both
sexes, caused by the drugges, and hot spices of the Country.

I have been assured by some, they have found of Bezar stones in the bowels of
swine, which have been of great virtue. They would have given me some in
exchange for Cimeters. I believe this sort of Bezar is that the Portuguese call
Pedra de Porco, so as I will not charge my self with what I know not.

That chain of Isles from Nicuba to Pegu, is called the Archipelagus of
Andemaon, where the inhabitants war amongst themselves, with burkes, and eat
one another. They cannot read at all, nor have coin: They make stuffes of the
bark of a tree, to cover their nakedness.

They have plenty of cattle, of wool, and poultry, which they feed at home, and
of all necessaries to life. We have their best commodities in exchang for some
trifles of ours; for what we esteem least, are of greatest value there, and
they give us in exchange Pepper, Ginger, Benjamin, and other drugs which they
abound in.

And indeed we trade not with them without some danger, by reason of their
cruelty, and brutishness, since some ships coming from Malaca, to Sumatra,
killed some of their people passing by, ever since they stood upon their
guards, and have surprised as many as they could, and have struck such a
terror into those parts, that whoever passes there, must be strong and well
advised, otherwise they are sure to be robbed, murdered and eaten.

They have none but foreign coin, English and Hollanders in this Island.
which they break into many pieces, as the Abussins do, because they cannot
otherwise put it off. The King keeps long boats to pillage in, and the easier
to escape if pursued, as they have often been by the English, and Dutch, and
surprised in their habitations, where they load themselves with their pepper
and other spices, on free-cost, and so retreat: they have built some Forts in
that Isle, and by that means force many tributes from the people, who
otherwise pay at will; and whoever should assault them but with four men of
war, resolutely manned, would make it a good business, for they have many
mines of gold and silver.

Besides the kingdoms of Pedir and Pacem, there are those of Campa, and Manan,
all watered with pleasant Rivers; There is found Gold refined, and Corral
branches, forced from the mines by the strength of the water; There is also the
Kingdom of Zabas, plentiful in Pepper, Sugar, Brasil, and Mastick, Camphire,
Mines of Gold and Silver.

At Pacem there is plenty of Pepper, and the best silver of the East. The Town
of Pacem has a strong Fort, and three Avenues, where you pass by a creek of
land Northward.

From this Town you discover the Pole-Artick, and the Crasero; There the Sea
ebbes and flows every sixth hour.

The Town of Achen is well built, well walled, the houses stand upon piles or
pillars, and covered with Palms, and only two stories high. It Is very good
living there, for you have your own wishes, with most excellent fruit,
different from ours, viz. the Macoudou like unto the Lemmon, Names of fruits.
Durions, Ananes, Mangues, Jacas, Mangostan, Bananes, and Cocos, Oranges, and
Lemmons in abundance.

The Merchants wear the Turkish dress: you must recede and keep at distance,
when you meet women, who otherwise will abuse you, and spit upon the ground to
show your indiscretion.

Many Nations of the Indies trade here. Golden coin.
They have Gold-coyne, called Man, nine of them make a crown, and are stamped
with two Lyon-cells. They have Lead also, called Casse, and two thousand of
them go to a piece of gold; all the rest of their coin is called Dran, and
Tale. Here are many slaves sold and bartered, and prove very faithful servants.

The Kings of Achen are Mahometans, and war continually with Idolaters; as
formerly a King of Achen did with him of Butos, because he would not be
Mohammedan, nor repudiate his wife to marry another, sister of the King of
Achens, and having subdued him, Bars of gold.
made him pay the yearly tribute of five bars of Gold, worth two hundred
thousand Crowns; and since endeavoring further to enslave him, and take all
from him, he implored the aid of the portuguais of Malaca, by whose assistance
he freed himself.

The accesses to this Isle are very difficult and dangerous, for the shelves
and rocks in two places.

Two Arms of the sea, Nicobar, Catarana, called Sombrero.
Southward and Northward are two Arms of the Sea navigable, but not without
much care and caution.

One of those Arms is called the Canall of Nicobar, and the other Catarana,
and the Portuguais as they sail along the coast, name it Sombrero.

Most of the Insularies are Idolaters, and call their chief Idol Pagode, a
general name among the Indians; Their Bramins or Priests encourage the women to
burn themselves after the decease of their husbands, unless they will be
esteemed unchaste: yet notwithstanding those Bramins freely frequent the
company of women of all ages, and of their nearest relations: they have little
esteem of Christians, and if they give a cup of drink, they presently break
the cup, although it be rich Porcelaine, because they hold it polluted.

Metempsycoses.
The inhabitants of Polloue an Island, assured us those Insularies eat the dead
bodies, but we have found the contrary, for we have seen them buried; they
believe that the souls of the deceased enter into other bodies, as Pythagoras
held, and therefore they welcome strangers; they raise them brave monuments and
tombs of stone; and in honor to their bodies, accompany them with
winde-musick to their graves. Parents exceedingly lament, and abstain for a
time from Areca, and Betell.

They use a pretty recreative manner of fowling. Their country abounding in
many sorts of fruit, which near unto their full ripeness, are easily corrupted
by the raines; they gather such as are rotten, (as they may not spoil the
rest) and cast them into rivers, or into the Sea.

These fruits being of many sorts, as Melons, Pumpions, Pomegranates, and
others; they are not sooner thrown into the water, but great number of birds
flock to them, and feed upon the fruit, the fowler stripping himself, and
hidden behind a tree with his head in a hollow Pumpion, that covers his very
shoulders, they throw themselves thus into the water, with a bag under their
arm, the silly birds not discovering the men, perch upon those fruits, and come
so near to them, that with ease they catch them by the legs, and ring off
their necks, and put them in their bag, in this manner they take great store;
which makes fowl little worth. There are birds sometimes too big and strong
for a man to master, and they get away, not without a hideous noise, tha^
alarms the rest for that day, that they are hard to be caught: but the next day
hunger banishes their fear, and thus they are taken again.

The Kings of this Isle live in a most miserable condition, being daily in
danger of being slain by the first person, shall have courage and resolution
to undertake it: for such a person shall be esteemed a God; and by all
acknowledged their King; crying, God save our lawful prince, and natural Lord.

He that reigned at Pedir, during our travels, was called Arioufar, and had
been a poor fisherman, overcharged with children, who used to carry fish to the
Kings Palace, and being known, had free entrance.

He having on a time lost his nets, came straight to the Palace toward the
King, (who had reigned many years, and was very good to his people) and
finding him alone, the guards not mistrusting him, because he was beloved of
the King, and finding free egresse, murdered the King, and assisted by one of
his sons, he seized of all the treasure, and the people received him for their
King, saying 'twas the will of God.

The Assassin, by force of money having raised a potent Army, conquered the
whole kingdom of Pedir, and most of the other States of this Isle. Thus the
Kings establish themselves then, and to such misfortunes are subject. From
Sumatra we went to Java the great.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Isle of Java, of the Inhabitants, their conditions, and of
the riches of the Country.
JAva the Great lies Eastward from Sumatra, and is distant from her five and
forty miles only, and the straight between them is called Sunde, whence all
those Isles in general take name; the Isle is of good compass, and unknown,
containing many Dominions, or Kingdoms, whereof the chiefest is Bentan, or
Bantan, the Clymate sweet and temperate.

They say it is 150 l. long, the breadth is undiscovered, and some think it
reaches the Continent Southward, runs from East to West, and South, Several
Kingdoms.
the Inhabitants are Idolaters, gross and brutish, and some are
Anthropophager, it contains several Kingdoms, as Drasima, Dragoyan, Lembri,
Falec, Sumara, Balambua, Bavarucam, Passeruan, Andrageda, Auri, Sandacanda,
Bacani, Javara, and others.

The Javanians say they came from China, being oppressed with slavery, they
left that place, and planted here, they were for a time Tributary to the great
Cham of Tartarye, the Kingdom of Falec abounds in gold, silver, spices, and all
sorts of cattle: the capital Town is Bismari, two days journey from an
Island called Cambahar, where is Basma, a Town situate upon the Sea, toward
the East, where are bred Elephants, Monkeys, and Unicorns. Dragoyen produces
the Camphire, as Borneo the Brasill, and all Groceries; near this place are the
Isles of Bombe, Bacheli, and Java the less.

The King of Passeruan is a Mohammedan, he demanded the daughter of the King of
Balambua in Marriage, and obtained her, and having enjoyed her, murdered her
and all her train, because she was not of his Religion. Sandacanda and Bacani
afford good store of spices, their Kings are Mahometans, they were infected
with that imposture by a famous Pyrate, named Mahomet Chap, who left them two
of his ships full of men to instruct them; there are still some Idolaters
amongst them, The infirm eaten.
who have not left their old error, of strangling their nearest kindred, when
they think them taken with incurable diseases. I was told of one named Basaram,
being sick, A fortunate escape.
and ready to be thus dispatched, desired a slave of his to bear him company to
death, which he durst not deny, and being tied together, were both cast into
the Sea; and the slave (a lusty strong fellow) striving for his own life,
dragged his Master to shore, untied him, and put him to bed, and conspired with
another slave to save themselves from the Alerir, or Magicians, when they
should come (as the custom was) to devour them, and indeed as they came to
strangle the poor men, they cudgelled them so lustily that they left the
sport, and the man recovering his health, lived many years after; and thus was
discovered the roguerie of those Magitians, who thorough an insatiate thirst of
blood, when a man was the least indisposed, made him believe he could not live,
advising him to have to their fathers God. Then the poor patient with tears
in his eyes, desired them to cleanse their bones, when they should have
consumed their flesh, believing that their souls would not be at rest, til
their flesh were wholly consumed, and that then they would reunite to the body,
and to remain in peace for all eternity.

Meanwhile the King understanding what had happened to Basaram and his slave,
caused him to be brought before him, and laughing told him, that (if he would
not devour the Magitian) he would put him to death. The other most willing,
replied, he was ready to obey his Prince, and that if the Magitian were brought
him, he would eat him up raw in his very sight. The Judges had already
condemned him, and others for their deceipts and villainies to be banished, and
he and others were fled into the I Will of Camorre for safety, but was taken, and
brought to Basaram, Camorre.
who with his slaves made a plenteous feast of him. Thus, for the most part,
live those brutish Islanders; and although they have Rubarbe, Scammone, Agric,
and many other very Sovereign Medicinal druggs at command, yet they seldom
use them, for when they are sick, they wholly pin themselves upon the advice of
those Magitians, who tyrannize over them, and by their enchantments reduce them
to such miserable conditions, and make many a dainty bit of them, being possessed
of that notorious imposture of the immortality of the soul, Metympsphy^as^s.
and that she transmigrates from one body into another, and often into
strangers, and therefore they make very much of them, and when one of them
dies, they either bury him privately, or cast him into the sea, that he may not
be devoured.

These Canniballs say, we are very ignorant to suffer man's flesh, (that is so
sweet and delicious) to rot under ground. The King keeps his Court in Gazima,
guarded by women, which he trusts, rather then such unnatural and sanguinary
men: he maintains three or four score of the handsomest he can pick out, armed
with Bows and Arrows, and Cimiteres. They are expert Archers, he trains them
up, and sends them to other Maritime Towns, as Japatra, and others.

Though these Islanders have many gold and silver mines, yet they dare not digg
them, for going almost naked, the stones fall so sharp, and keen upon them,
they are not able to endure it, neither do they value that treasure at all,
being very well stored with flesh, fish, herbs and fruits, all in great
abundance; but as I have said, they are very likorous of man's flesh, and of
their nearest kin, pretending they do it thorough charity, as they may not be
consumed by the worms.

I was informed by a Merchant of an accident happened to two Fathers of the
order of S. Francis, pushed on with a fervent zeal to endeavor the conversion
of that Country, by the help of the language they had learnt, but they got
nothing in requital but scorns and jeers, of those Barbarians who let them
live, Two Franciscans eaten.
believing their Idols would revenge them, but some of them beginning to taste
and digest their rational discourses, it bred some differences amongst them;
of which the King being informed, and fearing that their instructions might
bring prejudice unto his State, commanded the good Fathers to be thrown into
the Sea, those villains unwilling to lose their flesh, drained their blood dry,
and fed upon it, then brought them to the public place of execution, dead and
disfigured.

All those that had tasted of their blood dyed suddenly, by the permission or
vengeance of God, which the King hearing of, asked why they were not drowned
according to his commands, and their false Priests replied, it was not in their
power to kill them: but the King satisfied of the manner of their death, all
astonished, went to his Temple to ask his Idols forgiveness: some forty
Dutchmen having lost their ship upon a shelve, saved themselves upon this
coast, but taken by these Islanders were cruelly murdered, Japara.
and eaten. The Inhabitants of Japara, (a Sea Town) adore the Sun, and are all
flat-nosed, have great eyes, and are thin bearded like the Chyneses. They eat
bread made of a root they call Igname or Gouera, Igname. Gouera.
their complexions (the women's especially) are rather fair than black: they
wear nothing on their heads but their natural hair platted, like the Italian
Curtizans, and if any person offers to cover them with any thing, they are in
danger of being abused to death.

Their houses are low, being but one story high, for they will suffer nothing
over their heads, they are all Pirates, Thieves, and Magicians, they are
skillful in Astrology. They obey and reverence (an old Magician called Manguin)
as their lawful Prince: when any Pirates land upon their coast, to rob them of
their cattle, Pirates how taken.
or other commodities, the Wizard makes a round hole in the ground; and causes
some young virgin voted, to be sacrificed in their feast of Fotoque) to urine
therein, and at the same time there rises a storm, so that the thieves have
only time to save themselves, flying to their boats, and if any are left
behind, they are devoured, nor do they kill them outright, but prolong their
dying pains, they pinnacle them, and deliver them up to the fury of the
children, who put them to tedious torments, walking them about the Town, and
expose them to the scoffs and abuses of the multitude: some will clap a pompion
on their heads hung round with plumes of feathers, Cruelty of the Javans.
and every woman and child runs out with their bodkins and aules, to prick and
torment them: then having walked them warm, (as they do the Bulls in Spain, to
make their flesh tender) they cut them in pieces, and divide their flesh, if
there be not enough for them all, they play at ball for it, and the gainers
treat their friends therewith. This is the sad fortune travailers are subject
to, who according to the Spanish proverb, Buscan la vida y topan la muerte,
searching for life they find death.

It Is very pretty sport to see them play at that sort of ball, A sort of
ball-play or Tennis, the like at Mexico.
or tennis, which they call Masiris, without ever striking with their arms or
hands; but with their feet, knees, head, elbows, heels, and other parts of the
body, with great dexterity.

Bantan is the chief Town of the Isle with a good and commodious haven, where
the Hollanders have a Magazine or Storehouse, Bantan.
and whither many other people for commerce do resort, as Chyneses, Guzerates,
Portuguais, Persians, Peguans, Milacans, Turks, Arabians, and others. This Town
is of the size of Roan, peopled with diverse nations, the Chinese have a Temple
wherein they adore a triple-crown'd Demon, offer fruit and other things to him,
The devil adored.
and they say because he is malicious he must be appeased, and that the great
and good God has no need of such offerings or adorations.

They bring into this Town their silks, jewels, and other rarities: here their
King resides, a Mohammedan, who governs his own subjects and strangers with
great justice, allowing all persons free liberty of traffic. He is a great
Politician, well beloved and honored by his subjects, and observes good orders
in commerce, wherein consists the glory of his greatness: of late the English
and Dutch have traded there with good success, and very few years since some
French have traveled thither, and have been courteously received; French at
Bantan.
they have a great esteem of the King of France, and have permitted Dominicans
(sent out of France) to inhabit there, and promise them favor and assistance.
The commodities that go off best there are iron and steel, lead, paper, and
sulphur.

At Fedeyda (a Town in Java) is got the best ambergris of the East,
Ambergris.
that which is found in Aniane (an Isle adjacent) is equal unto the former in
goodness.

Not long since the greatest part of Java, and the adjacent Countries, as Bali,
Madura, and others, obeyed a potent Prince or Emperor, who kept his court in
the great town of Demaa, and sometimes at Japara; he was a Mohammedan, the
Portuguese relate how he had a mind to propagate his law, and observing the
King of Pasaruan (an Idolater) to slight it; he resolved to invade him with a
strong Army made up of his own subjects, and the Portuguese of Malaca: his
greatest strength consisted in certain Soldiers called Anoco, which signifies
resolute, and despisers of their lives, persons who used to anoint themselves
with certain oils, to show their forwardness to dye, with these men he besieged
the King of Pasaruan, who stood gallantly upon his defense, but probably had in
time bin overcome, To be impaled is to have a stake thrust thorough the
fundament and to come out of the mouth.
had a favorable accident to him, and a most unfortunate one happened to the
Emperor, who during the Siege, was stabbed by one of his young pages, incensed
with a blow given him by his Master upon his head in jest, which is one of the
greatest affronts can be given there. The boy taken, and put upon the rack,
confessed no other reason, was staked through with his father, brothers, and
60. of his kindred, and his whole generation according to their laws: and thus
by this strange accident the King of Pasaruan was freed, and the Empire of
Demaa reduced to confusion.

The most signal thing in Java is the bone of a fish (found no where else)
called Caball, that stops bleeding, as 'twas experienced upon a Captain of
Malabar, called Neoboada Beguea, who killed in a fight against the Portuguais,
in the time of Albukerke, his blood never issued at his wounds until that bone
was taken away, which he wore about him. That rarity was lost by shipwreck, as
it was carried to King Emanuel.

The Isles of Sumatra, Java and others more remote, are very temperate, rich,
and fruitful in most of them, they live very long without any infirmity, the
air is so healthful in other places, if any person fall sick he is left by
kindred and friends, as defiled with sin, and visited by God for expiation,
whereupon many hide themselves when they are sick, and die in holes without any
help, some live to seven-score years active and jolly, and for that reason many
strangers come thither to inhabit.

Others resort thither, for the trade of spices, which are extreme cheap there.

As in other parts there is such plenty of Cattle, that they will give you four
Cowes for an old shirt, a dozen of sheep for a pewter spoon, a Seaman once
showed an old brazen dish to a Shepherd, who asked the price, the Seaman said
his whole flock, the other wondered not much at it; only replied 'twas
something too dear; I remember that in the Isle of S. Laurence I saw a sheep
given for a counter, and as much for a sheet of paper; this shows the goodness
of those Countries, and the Inhabitants simplicity: most of them are civilized,
living in the fear of one only God, and believe, that in the next world the
good will be rewarded, and the bad punished; some have no religion, yet they
hold naturally the immortality of the soul, and one providence.

Nutmegs of Banda.
As touching the spices that grow in these Isles. The nutmegs grow chiefly in
the Isle of Banda, the tree that bears them is like a peach tree, the leaves
only bigger, the nut is enclosed in a slender shell, like an almond, (or as
when a peach opens it self, and shows the stone) the nut is enclosed with a red
husk, which they preserve at Malaca: when this fruit comes to ripeness the
shell opens, and the nut drops out, if it is left upon the tree beyond the time
of maturity. Touman.
They sell these nutmegs by a measure called Touman, about a pint, they are
called Cani, by those of Banda, Palla, the places they grow in are unwholesom:
These trees grow naturally in the deserts, and who ever please may gather them,
some are planted and kept by particular persons.

The Calenfour, or carnation Clove-tree, growing in the Melukes is a shrub
leafed like to the almond, but is larger and longer, and bears Gillyflowers
like wild grapes, it needs a prop to bear it up, for it is weak; they grow
naturally, and from every flower that falls a tree or plant springs up in a
short time, and they suffer no other trees to grow about them.

In Sumatra the stalk is bigger, and can subsist alone, having the collar and
trunk like a quince tree, but very upright, and casts forth great store of
white blossoms, that become yellow, then red, and thickning they become of a
blackish color as they do here, they preserve them green, and are excellent
for the stomach, they are gathered from September to January.

The Cocuma that grows in Java, is a root like to Ginger, Cocuma.
her blossoms like Lillies broken off green, draws near to the yellow, and
dried is easily broken, is sharp and quick, and is used thoroughout the Indies,
to season meats, thought better than other spices; what they have left of their
store, they preserve or pickle, and vent thoroughout the East, where it is much
in request.

There grows great store of ginger in the East Indies, Ginger.
and chiefly in Nova Hispaniola, whence they transport yearly for Seville a
hundred thousand weight, this root is best if removed every third year, and
best of all if removed yearly, when they gather it, they take away the earth,
and cull the young root: from the old ones, which they replant and do easily
take root in the west it is little worth, for in the Isles of Barlovento a
Spaniard may have seven hundred weight for a crown.

The Betell which we have so often spoken of, Betel.
is a tree very common in all the Eastern parts, and also in the West Indies,
where are many, as at Caramell, and called Escarucou.

There are some also growing at Souac in Aethiopia, it is the only tree (I
know) bears a leaf better than the fruit, she is almost of the height and shape
of a pear tree, the leaf is thicker, and not so full of strings. The Arabians
and Syrians call it Bamboni, this leaf has an excellent taste, but makes the
teeth black.

There are of them in the Preste-Johns Country, and are kept for the Kings own
use where er'e they grow; and it is death for any tradesman or Merchant to eat
of it, and he that watches the tree may kill any such person, and not be
questioned: for those trees belong to the King, and none dare touch them, but
the Siramis, who are Lords and gentry. Those that feed of it have very black
teeth, a thing held honorable, because they are occasioned by a Royal food.

There are several sorts of fruit in the East, Malaca produces Durions in
great plenty, Durions:
and few of them grow in the West Indies, it is a fruit like a Melon, but
whiter, and covered with a very tender rind or skin. It Is firm, and tastes
rather better than the Melon, within are many little holes wherein lie their
seed, and is very carefully kept: the leaf is of an exceeding bigness, as that
of the vine or fig; The tree is pretty high, her boughs like those of the
cherry, the wood is well sented, they provide it against their women's lying in,
and then sacrifice it to their Idols. I have seen much of it at the Grand
Caire, and in Alexandria.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Kingdoms of Malaca and Siam, with a prodigious History of
Serpents.
LEaving all those Isles, to return into the Continent, over against Sumatra
Northward, stands the Town and Kingdom of Malaca, Malaca: Ophir.
where is that so famous a spot of land, with her Cape and Straight called
Sicapura, at one degree northward. Malaca is a potent kingdom, formerly the
golden Chersonese, (as some yet hold) and the Ophir of Solomon, because much
gold is found in many places of Sumatra, contiguous to the other: the Ancients
believed her joined to the Continent, as you have heard already. This Country
obeyed the King of Siam, until a Lord of Java subjected her, and by the
assistance of some fishermen, and Pirates built the Town of Malaca. Since the
Malacans became Mahometans, trading with the Persians, and Guzerates, and at
last Alphonsus Albukerke, surprised the Town for the King of Portugal; it is
the center of the East for trade, The traffic of Malaca.
and the mart for all Merchandises of the East Indies, which improves her in
grandeur, treasure, and power. The language is esteemed the smoothest, most
elegant, and copious of the Indies, as the mother of all their other tongues,
which they diligently study: they are much addicted to Poetry, Amors, and
other Gallantries. Malaca is situate upon a pleasant river called Crisorant,
alluding to Chrise, or land of gold, which others rather believe to be China
and Japan: this river is not altogether so big as the Thames, and divides the
Town in two parts, coupled by fair bridges stately built, as is the rest of the
Town. The people are very civil, of a good stature, but a little tanned; the
Country abounds in fruit, subject to the King Siam, though the Town belongs to
the Portuguese, where they have a strong Fort, and a Haven that brings in great
Revenues, by reason of the customs imposed upon the infinite number of
Merchandises, are imported from foreign parts. Those imposts or customs were
formerly paid to the King of Siam. The Captain has two good ships, well
rigged, and manned, with which he scowres those seas, and sails into China,
laden with wedges of gold and silver, cloves, pepper, cinnamon, linen and
woollen cloth, scarlets, saffron, corrall, mercury, vermillion, and all other
exquisite commodities of the Indies, and brings back from thence silks,
purcelaines, satins, damask, hartshorn, musk, rubarbe, pearls, saltpeter,
iron, ivory, boxes, and fanns; These two places are eight hundred l. distant,
Quinsay.
and a great river, upon which (they say) ships are drawn by Elephants to
Quinsay, capital of Tabin, or China, where the ships arriving, salute the King
with three pieces of Canon, and the Town with one, if they think good; then the
Captain setting foot on land, is sworn upon the Kings Picture, that he comes
Bona Fide, to negotiate, and then he is admitted. The air of Malaca is not
very wholesome to strangers, nor natives.

From Malaca we went to the Kingdom of Siam, very potent formerly, containing
many Kingdoms. Their neighbor, Siam.
the King of Pegu, got many of them in a War, he maintained against Siam for a
white Elephant, which the Peguans adore; War for a white Elephant.
and ever since the Kingdom of Siam has been weak, and divided into many
Provinces, or Dominions, where the King is hardly acknowledged: formerly it
contained sixteen or seventeen Kingdoms, or Principalityes, and did reach from
Tanansterin, or Tarnatsery, unto Champaa, above 700. leagues from Coast to
Coast, between Malaca, The Empire of Sornao.
the Isles Pacanes, Passiloco, Capimper, Chiammay; the Lahos and Gutt^s: It Is
called the Empire of Sornao; the King Prechau Saleu, who kept his Court at the
great Town of Odiva, whither the Kings were tied to come yearly, to acknowledge
the Princes, Odiva.
and pay their tribute, kissing the Cimiter at his side. Then by reason of the
great distance, and the many Rivers, which lengthen their journeys, and render
them difficult, he remitted this kind of acknowledgment to be made to a
Lieutenant, or Viceroy, Lugor.
in the Town of Lugor, nearer, and more commodious.

This Country confines upon Pegu westward, northward upon Chiammay, southward
toward the Province of Caburi, and the main sea, and eastward upon the Gulf
of Cambaye, it is one of the plentifullest, and best Isles in the world,
abounding in all fruits, victuals, silver mines, iron, lead, pewter,
saltpeter, sulphur, silks, honey, wax, sugars, sweet-woods, benjamin,
cottons, rubies, sapphires, ivory, and great plenty of all spices, and other
commodities imported from other parts.

The inhabitants are not warlike; The women are very lovely, and well disposed,
Pretty women.
they are richly adorned with Jewels, their coats tuck't up to their knees,
their feet and legs bare, to show how they are decked, and loaded with gemms;
they wear jewels upon their arms, also their hair is platted, and covered
therewith, in imitation of the Peguans. They are carried in chariots, richly
covered, their gowns open before, discover their naked breasts (their smocks
being likewise slit,) when they walk they hold both their hands before them,
to hide their nakedness, and yet so as it is plainly seen. They say that custom
was first brought up by Queen Tirada, the wisest of her time, and her bones are
to this day kept, Tirada, Queen.
with great reverence: perceiving her Subjects to be besotted, or violently
addicted to Sodomie; she thought by such charming allurements, to withdraw them
from that bestiality, as indeed they are since wholly taken off from that
abominahle sensuality: and in truth that Country women are very fair, and
well shaped, they play upon certain Musical instruments, which they are
diligently instructed in from their infancy; the men may marry two wives, but
they pay double customs for the second, and most of them therefore are
contented with one, the women are very tractable, humble, and discreet, their
greatest care is to be beloved of their husbands. Strange Funerals.
They cruelly sacrifice Virgins, and their manner of burying the dead is as
inhumane; for as soon as one of their alliance is deceased, they erect him a
Monument in the fields, according to their conditions and abilities: then they
shave their whole body, in sign of mourning: Women cast off their jewels, and
are clothed in white, the doleful color there; all the deceased's friends and
alliance are invited, solemnly to attend the Corpse to the Interment. The Corpse
is clothed in a rich habit, exposed upon a Chariot, in a bed of state, and
drawn by six of his nearest kindred, of the best of his family, and six more of
his best friends, covered with an ash color canopy, and of the same color,
his Relations are clothed; before the Corpse go six flutes, who with two
kettle drums, Doleful Instruments.
or tabors, make so lamentable a noise, that it draws tears from the
Assistants: The slutes are hired, and discharged by the Public; drawing near
to the burial place, they throw perfumes upon the Chariot. This done, they all
retire, the parents and kindred only excepted, who strip the body, and make it
clean, multiplying their cries and lamentations; then roast it with their sweet
woods, gather round about it, and with many sad groans, Dead body eaten.
they make of it a most mournful repast: This done, they scrape the bones
clean, and perfume them with much ceremony, and lap them up in linen clothes
(made of Arbeste) which will never consume by fire, but grow whiter, and
cleaner, nor rot under ground, but will keep for ever. I have got of the cloth
in my Travels, which I have shown to curious persons. These Ceremonies ended,
and the bones laid in the Tomb, every one draws homeward. Such is their
strange manner of sepulture.

The Town of Siam stands upon the fair and large river of Mecan, that springs
from the famous Lake of Chiamay; Sian is stately walled, and conteines thirty
thousand houses, with a Castle strongly fortified, built upon the water, as
Penivitan, and Venice. Gigraff a beast, got by a Camel, and a female Panther.
The Country breeds Elephants, Rinocerots, Giraffs, Tigers, Lions, Leopards,
and all sorts of savage beasts, the fairest Hermines of the East, Camels,
Dromodaries, and some say Unicornes, which being very timorous beasts, seldom
appear in sight.

Some of them are found about Chyamay lake, I will speak of them in another
place. This Lake is 200. miles about, Unicornes
whence many great and famous rivers arise, as Ava, Caypumo, Menan, Chiamay
Lake.
Cosmin, and others, they overflow like the Nilus. This Lake is bounded
Eastward, with vast forests, and impassible Marshes and Fens, and very
dangerous, prodigious Serpents are bread there, with wings like bats, which
bear them from the ground, and carry them with a strange swiftness; flying,
they rest themselves upon the end of their tails, which are sharp, they did
once so swarm, A story of serpents.
that they made a whole Province desert, and desolate, and without the juice of
fig leaves, (which was an antidote against their poison) not one had escaped.
The Prince of those parts having armed his subjects, made vast trenches and
ditches in that Province, and with the help of dogs, tigers, lions, and other
savage beasts, trained up to hunting young, and disguised in other skins; he
armed many other beasts against them, he destroyed an innumerable number of
those Serpents, that cast themselves headlong into those ditches: then he set a
prize (to be given to those that should kill any of them) and by these means
that breed was soon destroyed: Notwithstanding there are some seen still in the
forest, and I have seen of them of incredible length; they prey upon sheep,
and other cattle. There is another beast in the same Country faced like a man,
but all wricnkled, which appears by night only, and is called Espaulouco.
Espaluco.


This beast gets up upon the top of trees, and makes a bewailing noise, a
purpose to catch something: when she lights of no prey, she feeds upon earth.
It Is a very slow beast, and there are of that kind in many places.

The Kingdom of Siam has formerly suffered many changes some few years before
we were there. The King a most renowned and victorious Prince, was by his own
Queen poisoned, who after married one of the stewards of her household, with
whom she had lived in adultery, and made him King, having likewise put to death
her own son, that succeeded his father: since they were (by conjurations) both
murdered at a feast, and the Kingdom subject to continual revolutions, till
Bramaa, King of Pegu, took occasion to besiege Odiaa, but leaving his life in
the siege, her successor utterly demolished the Town, and obtained the white
Elephant I spoke of, since that Siam has revenged her self upon Pegu. Thus the
Kingdoms of the Indies are very various, never remaining long under the same
condition, or Government.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Kingdom of Martaban, mavelous strength of Macaraou, or
the flowing of the sea. Particularities of Pegu.
Martaban.
FRom Siam we came to the Kingdom and Town of Martaban, sometime subject to
Pegu, but since to the King of Syam. It buts Westward upon the Gulf of
Bengale, Northward upon Pegu, Eastward upon Siam, and Southward upon Tanasserim
and Jangome. The Fathers of St. Francis, and those of the Society have built
them Churches there. The soil is very fertile, yielding ordinarily three
crops, the year; there is plenty of Rice, and other sorts of grain, fruit,
trees, sweet and medicinal herbs of all sorts, mines of all mettalls, rubies
and other stones, and the air is very wholesome.

Gaypoumo.
The Capital Town is Martaban, sixteen degrees toward the North, has a good
harbor, and situate upon the river Gaypoumo, or rather upon an arm of the
sea, where the tide runs strangely toward Pegu; for whereas ordinarily it
flows by degrees, with an easy motion, without violence, here it fills that
arm of the Sea, or River, on a sudden, and flows with such fury and
impetuosity, as it were mountains rolled up in water, and the most rapid
torrent in the world does not parallel this in swiftness; and by three
passages fills the harbor, and other receptacles, with a most fearful force
and rapidity. This arm is by the Indians called Macaroou (which signifies)
beware the Tiger, for the vehemence of the waves, which I will more amply speak
of in another place.

Dougon.
Martaban joins to the Territories of Dougon, the remotest Town of Pegu. The
Inhabitants are given very much to trading, Laque.
and especially in Lacca, a kind of gumm they draw out of trees, very fine, and
better then that is made in Dalascia, in Aethiopia, which I have already spoken
of. They have many more Droggues, as Galingall, Turbith, or Camomell, Rubarb,
Rubarbe.
found upon the mountains of Pegu, and is called Jubara: The leaf is broad,
and bitter as gall, they gather it in May, which is the latter end of their
winter, the root is of a tan'd color, some is yellow, purple, and red,
according to the land that bears it. Some season their meat therewith, and it is
a preservative against many infirmities; it is sold very cheap, and is mingled
with perfumes: there grows wood of Aloes, red Sendal, Aloes^
and Cittern upon the hills. Women burn of all these to make concoctions, and
use them in their labors, and delivered, they seek for a black-headed lamb,
and carry the child to the Temple, covered with flowers, drugges, and perfumes.

Then they begin their sacrifice, Banean and Satalico sacrificators. Castigay
an Idol.
delivering their child and lamb into the hands of the Banean, or Priest called
Satalico, the skin, head, feet, and entrals, falls to his share, this is done in
honor of Castigay their Idol. All those Flamins are great Magicians; They cast
the childrens nativities newborn, and set down, what shall befall them during
their lives. This writing is carefully kept by the parents, for to prevent the
bad accidents. For they esteem whatever those Baneans say infallible, and when
any person is sick, they are consulted whether the party will dye or recover,
and when they have given their opinion, it is believed as Gospel. One being once
(as I may say) condemned or sentenced to death by a Wizard, and left off; was
undertaken by one of our company, and recovered in nine days, which made them
believe the Christians were more knowing then their Magicians: the like
happened to another, whose wife was by a Christian persuaded, to shut out the
Magician that had given his opinion of her husband; he recovering, was
satisfied of the abuses and falsehoods of their Magicians, Pagodes, and
Castigais, and of their false Priests, and was also instructed in the truth,
and purity of our Religion, that he might leave his own Idolatries: but Alas,
the poor creatures heart being hardened, replied: I believe (said he) that thy
God is great, and more powerful then ours, and that being so great and
Majestical, he will not vouchsafe to make himself known to such miserable
simple creatures, as we are; and it would be very unfit to believe a God were
not willing to command us. Ours (said he) makes his will known to us, which we
all submit unto, and obey, but I shall never more trust the Baneans, for they
are false Prophets: and upon these accidents, many of them remove their
habitations. It were easy to persuade them to the truth, they being simple,
and very credulous; and besides, they bear a great respect to the memory of
Saint Thomas: but opportunities to destroy their Idols are wanting, that they
might see, they have neither force nor motion. 'Twere dangerous to attempt it,
without a considerable strength. Those deceitful Baneans, do so enslave the
people, that they believe things strange, and absurd, beyond relation.

In their festivals, when their Idols are carried in state upon chariots, some
of them (through zeal) throw themselves under the wheels, and are broken in
pieces. Others thrust their heads into steel hoops, keen as razers, and cut
their own throats, putting their feet in a rope fastened thereunto: and such
are afterward esteemed Saints, and registered in their Temples; others cut a
hole in their sides, and fasten a rope thereto, and are dragged by the Chariot
after their Idol, then their friends say to them (remember that I have ever
been thy friend) and believe he has power to save them.

Parents are reverenced, and if poor, they are assisted upon the public
account.

They have a solemn feast wherein they reckon up the twelve moons or months,
with the twelve signs, and make great jollity; when they draw their Idols upon
Chariots, another of Virgins is drawn off one hand, to incense and perfume it.

At Martaban there grows a fruit, which opened, represents the perfect figure
of a Cross. At Martaban some years before, we made our travels there; a rich
and potent King (as the Portuguais relate) named Chaubaina was besieged by
Bramaa of Pegu, Chaubaina's disaster.
and reduced to extremity, he implored the assistance of Portugal, offering
great treasures, which for some considerations was denied; and the distressed
Prince forced to deliver up himself, wife, and children, to that inhumane
Tyrant of Pegu, who contrary to his promise, put them all to cruel deaths, and
sacked that flourishing town; and the Portuguais were much blamed for refusing
their assistance. There was a vast treasure, and (they say) six and thirty
thousand Merchants all strangers, that repaired thither from forty several
nations of the Indies, and other remoter places; as Portuguais, Greeks,
Venetians, French, English, Abyssins, Turks, Jews, Arabians, Armenians,
Tartars, Mogors, Corozans, Persians, Malabarians, Javans, and many others. This
Town had 24. gates.

Pegu.
We went from Martaban to Pegu, four small days journey distant by land, and no
more by sea, although it is much further; but their Frigates fleet sailing,
bring all to one; and putting forth with the tide; if your ship strikes upon a
Rock, and is able to bear the shock, it glides over, like a Balon, for no arrow
flies fleeter. I have shot seven or eight times through the straight of
Gibraltar against tide, but with full sails, and so you may stop in those
seas, without casting Anchor, in expectation of better weather, but in
Macaraou, the road to Pegu, it is impossible with the strongest winds against
tide, to make a stand, for the waves there over-powre the winds, I have not
seen the like fury of the seas in any place of the world as in Martaban and
Pegu, for there is a gulf of water, and the tide taking her course, meets with
those waters, the one roling against the main body of the sea, there is a
terrible conflict, they withstand each other for a time, at length the weakest
must yield, the two bodies separate with such swiftness and vehemence, that it
seems a great hill overturned; nor is there a courage so great it daunts not,
and where before a hollow was seen empty and dry, covered over with ships; on a
sudden, the Surges are so violent, you would believe, the infernal powers were
all united, to toss those ships. I never yet heard a reason given for it, a
search worthy the labor of the greatest wits in the world. I remember that
some years after, meeting with a most famous Sea-Captain at Calis or Cales, I
related him this wonder of Macaraou (saying that I should not be credited, if I
made any such relation in print) he answered me that the words, or little faith
of ignorant persons, could not prejudice the experience of knowing men, and
that he himself (had he not seen) could not have believed the impetuous, Seas
from North and South meet in the strait of Magellan.
and most violent encounter of two seas, from the North and South, in the
straight of Magellan, from the North the water entered 60. leagues within the
straight, from the South forty, where meeting with an unconceivable fury, they
strike horror and amazement into all beholders; which made him believe the
discourses, and opinions of all natural Philosophers to be uncertain, since his
own experience so often contradicted them.

He told me he was very desirous to go witness what I related of Macaraou, at
Cambay, and Pegu, but since I have discovered, that there is nothing liker to
what I have said of Macaraou, Maskaret of Bourdeaux.
then the Mascaret of Bourdeaux. That is well known to be a mountain of water
gathered together (in the River of Dourdonne) while the waters are all quiet;
that mountain is framed on a sudden, and rolls down the river, overturning
what boats soever are in the way, which every man endeavors to avoid, making
with all haste to the shore.

I have asked the reason of the Inhabitants, who have told me it proceeded from
the height of the Seas, meeting with the ebb of the River, and by that
encounter this water gathers together, but others agree not to this, for (if
so) the like would happen in the Garonne, and in other places, which I never
heard of: Garonnne River.
so that with more reason they attribute the cause to some air enclosed in
some channel or spring under ground, running from Garonne to Dourdonne, which
raises this mountain of water when the Sea flows: but I know not whether the
same reason might be given for Macaraou.

The Kingdom of Pegu, is one of the largest, richest, Kingdom of Pegu.
and most potent of the Indies, next to Mogor, and China, but to the two last
are lately happened strange revolutions, they are extremely fallen off from
their state, and have been dismembered by the Kings of Tangu, and Aracan, who
had in my time the possession of the white Elephant, that bred so much
contention in Siam. Empire of Pegu's length. Town of Pegu.
This kingdom in my days contained many others, viz. two Empires containing 26.
crowned States; Southward, Pegu confines upon Martaban and Siam, Eastward upon
Brama, Cambay, and Cochin, China, Northward upon Ava Tazatay, and Aracan,
Westward upon Bengale and the gulf.

The Town of Pegu is very large and square, 5. gates at every square or side,
encompassed with a deep work or trench full of Water-Crocodils, and other
dangerous Serpents. The walls are built of wood, with Watch-towers of rich
work, and gilt, repaired every tenth year. The houses are stately edifice. At
new Pegu the King keeps his Court, the streets are exactly straight, and large;
about the heart of the town you discover almost all the streets, which is a
gallant curiosity; old Pegu is built after the same model, and there the
Merchants inhabit: In new Pegu the streets are set with Palm Trees, and Cocos
laden with fruit; the new was framed and built by the line near a forest of
Palms toward the North in a large field: in the trenches (filled with water
by the river that washes that coast) there are certain baths accommodated
purposely; and very safe from Crocodils, otherwise swimming were very
dangerous. The Town is as big as Fez, whereof there is the old and new, as
Pegu.

The King of Pegu is so potent that he never goes to war without a million and
a half of men, well armed, with Arquebuses and other Guns: they are the best
Gunners in the world, but not many of them, and their Guns are far better then
ours, being made of better iron, better tempered, and better wrought. They have
a 100000. good soldiers. Iron Guns:
they live of little, and for need upon leaves and roots, and are gallant and
resolute men. His guard consists of 30000. horse, Good horses, and from whence.
either Turk or Persian: and to have them plenty at a pinch, there is an edict
or law, that what Merchant soever brings 20. horses to be sold, shall have the
rest of his commodities free, which make them furnished from all parts of the
Indies, Persia, and Soltania in Arabia, where are the best of the world; the
soldiers exercise themselves much at marks, and often, the King gives rewards
to the best marks-men. He may have 5000. Elephants, and many other beasts.
Merchants follow the Armies upon bulls and oxen.

The country is rich in Mines of Gold and Silver, Rubies, Saphyrs, Garnets, and
other stones: These daily augment the Kings treasures: his Magazines may pass
for the treasure of the East. In one Court of his Palace at new Pegu, there is
such store, that it is little esteemed, Statues of beaten gold.
not one man to guard it, nor the doors kept shut: There stands the figure or
statue of a proper tall man, all of beaten gold, a crown upon his head of the
same, enriched with rubies of inestimable value; and round it four statues more
of youths all of gold, which seem to be Idols, (yet they say) they were made
for delight. Other of silver.
In another Court is represented a Giant sitting, of silver, with a Crown of
the same, but far richer set with Jewels: in ^ther Courts stand statues made of
Ganze, Ganze a mixed mettle.
a mixture of many metals, whereof their Byzes are made, a sort of coin, but
not royal. Byze a coin.
The Crowns of these latter are richer then the others, with rubies and
Saphyrs, the biggest I ever saw.

The Peguans go all clothed alike, in Cottons, linnens, and silks the best,
and all are barefoot ever, whether walking or riding; the country abounds in
Sugars, which they make great and many uses of, they cover their houses with
it, and mingle it with ciment, Their buildings are costly carved and wrought,
sparing neither Gold nor Azure. When the King or any Nobleman builds a
Palace, he provides himself with the purest gold to guild it. For there, as in
many other places of the Indies Gold is not coined, but is merchandise: at
Tahaba, or old Pegu, Tahaba.
are many refyners, and gold and silver beaters, they work it into leaves (as
we do) for the ease and benefit of the Gilders, without committing much waste,
for they gild, (as I have said) the very walls and towers, and their houses
after the Persian fashion. New Pegu is almost all so built, and nothing spared
to make up a sumptuous splendid structure, they cover them with tortoise shell,
which they place and join very neatly. There is a certain place, where Coaches,
Litters, Trunks, Boxes, Saddles, Harness for Elephants and horses, are only
made, covered with gold and silver; I saw there a saddle and furniture for an
Elephant, bought at a very high rate, for their King.

What is most remarkable of their buldings is, that those that live of their
own rents or estates are contented with the meanest and poorest houses: they
are convenient, but like country houses, and thatched with straw, and only able
to preserve them from the injuries of the weather. The Merchants and other
tradesmen, Goudons or Merchants houses.
and shopkeepers, who have something to lose out of their shops, or
warehouses, they live in strong houses well built, of stone and brick, close
shut with strong gates and locks, and call those houses Godons.

Throughout all the Towns of Pegu, there are the Taregha, Taregha.
or persons sworn, to see good measure and weight made of commodities, to the
Merchants they have charge of: and if a bad bargain be made, the fault is laid
on them, Faithful trading.
with discredit and reproaches, which they escape sometimes very narrowly: so
you take much pleasure to trade with them, they are so faithful and sincere,
and a most excellent order is observed both in buying and selling: and whatever
is either bought or sold, is put in a lump into the Sensals, who gives notice
of the number, and sets a price upon them; and sets a rate of what they ought
freely to get over and above all charges whatever: if the price be liked, the
money is paid, and the Sensal keeps an exact account; for they are able chosen
men. There is no danger of any deceit; besides, Sensals true.
they do all to the advantage of those that refer themselves unto them: and in
case the price does not please buyer and seller, they have the whole day to
confirm or avoid it, although it is to the Sensals discredit and infamy.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Kingdom of Pegu, of a bloody war for a white Elephant, of
Crocodiles, and the nature of Elephants,
THe Empire of Pegu is provided with all things necessary and commodious to
life, and vyes with others as rich, and good as her self, as Cochinchine, Siam,
Tangu, Marsin, Jangoma, Bengale, Ava, Aragan, and others. It is cut through in
many places by that great river, called (by the higher Indies) Amoucherat, and
(the natives the river of Pegu or Caipumo, River Cappum^.
or Martaban, that runs (by several branches) through the level, and fertilizes
the soil. This River abounds in Fish and Crocodiles, which they feed on in the
Indies: Geographers deceived.
mean while our Geographers are mistaken, who say that the river that runs
through Tangus, is the same that waters Pegu, although they be different
countries, and remote. This River rises at the Lake Chiammay, passes through
Brema, or Brama, washing in with her waves refined gold, which she draws from
several mines the country is full of.

She runs through the kingdom of Prom, where are the famous towns of Milintay,
Calamba, and Amirandou. Those territories join to Alva, then to Boldia, called
by the high Indians Siami, where they are very courteous, Siami or Siammon.
and it passes for a Proverb, (courteous as a Siamite) Siami is a vast kingdom
called the Empire of Siammon. Then to Berma, or Verma, whereof the capital is
Carpa, and butts upon Tazatay, and the kingdoms of Pandior, and Muantay. The
King of Pegu subjugated the kingdom of Berma, two years after he conquered
Siam; then there are Vilet, Abdiar, and Caypuma, Canarane.
whereof the chief is Canarane, of which more hereafter.

Talcada.
The King by his Talcada or Lieutenant, has conquered many other countries, who
subdued all the Provinces of Siam, Berma, Javay, Kingdoms conquered by Pegu.
Manar, and others unto the kingdom of Perperi, Tarnasseri, Maragoura,
Guertale, Langoura, Nigrane, and Joncolan, that touches Malaca. Winning Siam he
got Ban, Ploan, Odian, Macaon, and others conquered before by the King of Siam.

This Prince is a great lover of strange beasts, and has of diverse sorts
brought him from all parts of the world, and land at several places, as at
Dagon two days journey from Pegu, Martaban, which is four; at Guzan two days
journey from Caponin, where begins the great Gulf of Saharic, at the mouth
of Caypumo. This River, with that of Ava, and Siam, overflows like the Nile,
from Mid- May, to Mid- August, which improves the Country very much, she draws
refined gold by wyres, wherewith the King enriches his Temples and Idols, for
gold and silver in those parts, are but merchandises, their coin of brass,
lead, and pewter, called Ganze or Ganza, and any man coins with the Lieutenants
leave, who is General. That coin is current thorough the kingdom of Tauay, the
last of the territories of Pegu, in the middle of the Province of Manar,
watered by that famous River of Marsina or Menan.

Pegu is so temperate that it is green all the year long, Air at Pegu is
temperate Hermaphrodites:
the people are rather whites than blacks, and well shaped women, amiable, gay,
and neatly dressed. There are many hermaphrodites, as at Sumatra. There is
plenty of pepper, vermillion, mercury, cloves. They make Chamlets, hangings of
feathers, silk stuffs, have store of rice, and beasts for chase. They want
nothing but good horses, which the Prince is curious to procure from other
parts bating merchants their imposts to bring of them in.)

The Kings Palace stands at the farther end of new Pegu, sheltered from the
Northwind by a little hill: there grow all sorts of trees, five sorts of palm
trees, enclosed with a wall like a park, where they keep all sorts of beasts
you can meet with in any part of the world, which the King carefully seeks
after, War for a white Elephant.
never regarding each price, as it appeared, by that long war made by him, and
the King of Siam, who refused him the white Elephant, to put into his Calachar,
or park. 'Twas Aleager or Chaumigrem King of Pegu, begun this cruel war with
an Army of a million of martial men, two hundred thousand horse, five thousand
Elephants, and three thousand Camels. The Vaunt-guard was composed but of
50000. horse: he sacked, and ruined his principal Town Lagi or Siam, which was
reputed to be twice as big as Paris, Lagi.
and thrice as Fez. The siege lasted 22. months. From Pegu to Siam it is sixty
five days journey, by camels; he took all his treasure, wife, and children,
and brought them prisoners into Pegu with the white Elephant: This deplorable
King reduced to extremities, cast himself down from the highest turret in his
Palace, and broke himself in pieces, some of his daughters and Princesses made
themselves away, with a hoop or circle of iron, edged about, that closed it
self when they thrust their necks therein, with their feet in a noose hung
thereunto, which strangles them immediately: and if Adigola and the other
Ladies had had time, they would never have been brought away alive: there was
but one Lady saved, wife to the Grand Mogull's Son, This Prince followed the
Peguan Army, to recover his wife, was taken prisoner, and by his frequent
prayers, and desires, he obtained leave to visit his wife, and mother-in-law:
The King himself gives them much comfort by his visits, representing unro them
the change and revolution of affairs, he gave them freedom, and remitted them
ransomlesse, sent them all back again, with many and rich presents, and married
the young Prince to his Lady, who were before but affianced, conducted them to
his confines, with great honor and magnificence, whence grew the greatness of
the Mogor, Mogoz, or Mogull, tributary to the King of Pegu, who has since
broke his faith, making himself a Sovereign.

You hear for what reasons the King of Pegu waged this war, that bred so much
ruin and desolation, for a white Elephant only, a fatal and unhappy beast, as
Sejans horse has proved to all that ever possessed him, and has cost five
Kings their lives, and whole Estates, as it happened to the last King of Pegu,
who had it lately taken from him by the King of Aracan, by the treachery of the
King of Tangus his Brother-in-law. White Elephants are very rare, yet they are
so besotted as to adore them; at Siam festivals were kept in his honor, called
Quinday Pileu, (which is to say) honest men's delight. White Elephants adored.
The King of Pegu drew four in his coach, and I believe that in the rest of the
East there were not more to be found. The Kings Palace called Chalousbemba, was
built square, with a Dosme, at every corner stands the statue of a Giant, of
polisht marble, who Atlas-like upheld this goodly fabric; and are represented
with such tortions of face, you would think they complain of their load. The
stone it is built with is smooth and resplendent as glass, for the adjacent
forests, and gardens, are therein perfectly discovered.

It Is environed in with a deep trench, you enter over a draw bridge, thorough a
gate of excessive height and strength, where are the figures of a Giant and
his wife, each of a piece, and of a mixed colored marble, the pavement is of
the same, and represents (like the Sea) this massy structure.

They spare neither gold nor azure, and in Galleries you shall see carved the
Histories of all the wars those Kings have made against their enemies.

From thence you descend some steps of marble into a lower Court, encompassed
with ballisters or railes, where there is a pleasant fountain, whence the water
is conducted into several gardens by pipes; the gardens fenced with strong
walls, one of them is three miles long, where grow various sorts of trees, of a
mavelous height, that cast most pleasant and delicious shades. The River
Caypomo runs thorough one end of the garden, westward: and at the other end
there is a large and long walk, whence you discover, fair pastures for Cattle,
that are very numerous, under the shade of those trees that bear variety of
fruit, and great plenty; There are many Monkeys, Pea-birds both wild and tame,
pa^rats, white partridges, and other birds. There are many other gardens and
Palaces nearer hand, built of marble, and Porphyry, and a lake a mile about.

One of thee Palaces is allotted the Queen and her Court, (not far unlike the
Escurial) which joins to a Park stored with exquisite and rare beasts, as
Agouari, that give the musk, civets, Aguari the musk. car. Sindero.
girafs, the Sindero, (like the Stags are bred in Swedeland, and are put to the
same use as Horses, and are called Arsinga:) Abada, or Rhinocerot. There is an
Unicorn called Drougala, Unicorn.
and the head of another, with the horn in the midst of the upper part of the
forehead, set fast upon a fountain side, with many more curious rarities. In
the Sultanes garden there is a cage of birds, we call birds of Paradise, the
Portuguais Saxaror Dell Sol, and the Indians Manucodiata: some of our Europeans
believe those birds have no feet, but certain nerves or strings only, but it is
a falsehood, for I am certain they have feet which they use as other birds: They
hold to that they never light upon the ground, but that they build their nests
upon their males backs; but it is apparent by those that are brought into our
parts, that their feet are dexterously cut, that they may seem more strange and
admirable. I saw one at Goa, which a Portuguais fed with the sweetest flowers,
as Jasemin, Gilly-flowers and others, which the bird delighted in. In those
parks or gardens are Besouarts, and swine, Besouarts:
that breed the same stone within them.

In that cage there are other birds of strange shapes, one has the bill long
and sharp, and is ravenous, feeds on flesh, and is called Tanarif. Another
called Tiscan, white all over the body, Tanarif. Tiscan.
and upon the breast, has a bunch of feather, like a dried Rose, his bill
strong and thick like an Eagles, but bigger and blacker, can break a sheeps
bone in two. I think it is the Griffin, though it has but two legs: Griffin.
for I never could hear of any four legged, as they are represented unto us.
This bird is an enemy to the Tanarif, and are therefore separated. There are
many more strange birds, brought from Molukes, Maldives, Java, Sumatra, and
other Isles in the Indian Sea, there are Ostriches which they call Zangir, from
the name of the Isle whence they come, of a prodigious bigness. Ostriches.


In the Lake belonging to the Sultan's Palace, Water foul.
are seen all sorts of water-fowle, of many different colors, they feed on
fish, and a slime bred therein, that is very sweet, and when once they have
tasted it, they never leave it, but breed often; There are Connills or
water-Rats, without tails, they feed about this lake under the shades, they
delight to dive into the slime or mud: There live little Apes, their hair or
down softer than silk, of a violet color admirable pretty. There was in this
lake a Crocodile brought from the river of Pegu, but because ^e committed great
spoil upon these birds and beasts, the King commanded him to be killed, and
with much ado they took him, although wounded in many places under the belly.

We happened to be there at his death, a month after the King had given order
for it, he gave many loud groans, and sighs at his death: it was flead, and
the flesh distributed amongst the Courtiers, and is as sweet as musk, which
occasioned one of our gang to say, he thought Ambergris proceeded from those
creatures, as he was informed in Portugal, for my part I am not of that
opinion, for in the Isles Ambergris is gathered, there was never known any
Crocodiles: and as I have learned in my travells, it rather appears to be bred
in the bottom of the seas (as some Islanders (that have gathered it) have
remarked) like a bitume, or thick mud: I much less believe it proceeds from a
whale, having often both seen, and helped to take of them, we have made
diligent searches into their bowels, but could never find out any such thing.
A Portuguais, Don Jamo, informed us that he had seen many taken at Malaca, or
Tacola, where five or six were taken in two years, of an immense bigness, their
entrails were all searched into, nothing near Ambergreece was discovered.

Francolin. a red leyd foul, bigger then a Godwit.
Near this Palace there is another Park, stored with tame beasts and birds, as
Francolins, Pea-birds, Turkeys, their ordinary Poultry for the use of the
Court, kept and looked to by young slaves, to gather their eggs, etc.

There are many white, red, and gray Partidges, which are fed once a day with a
small grain, called Naver, like unto buck wheat, but much blacker.

There is a park for Lions, Tigers, and other fierce beasts, called Siparo, and
it is a sad and daily sight to see criminalls devoured by them. There was a
Church founded there, in memory of a miracle that happened to a Christian in
the year 1572. who was exposed to the Lions, Miracle of a Christian, exposed to
beasts to be devoured.
next to the Elephants, and thirdly to the Tigars, the siercest of the three,
and came off from them all safe and entire, none of the beasts would touch him,
he was presented to the King, (who gave him a pension during his life,) and
inquiring who he was (he replied) he was a poor Christian pilgrim, come out of
France, with intention to visit the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem; that since he
had traveled unto Mount Sinay with the Caravane, whence he thorough devotion
came to the Town of St. Thomas, to visit the shrine of that glorious Saint;
there he was bidden go to Caranganor, where that St. suffered Martyrdom; and
that then he had a curiosity to see the Court of that great Monarch, so famous
throughout the Indies, and was not permitted to cross the river of Pegu
without money (which he was but slightly stored withal) but cast himself into
the water, to swim it over, and being re-taken, was condemned to the beasts.

After this worthy miracle, some French Jesuits at San-Thomas, obtained leave
of the King of Pegu to build a Church in remembrance of the miracle. Those
Fathers go on cheerfully and successfully in the conversion of those parts.

There are in those Parkes ponds of clear water, where they feed Tortoyses of a
middle size, Their shells are a mixture of many colors, as black, red, tawny,
yellow, and others, and there are none fairer in the world.

They work up many things therewith, as Cabinets, Trunks, Boxes, and other
furniture, it is very neat work, for the shells are polished, like diamonds, and
are transparent, which make a fine show, and would be much valued here, but he
hazards his life that adventures for them. This Prince makes it his only
pastime every January, when their summer draws near (for at Pegu, and all
other places under the Tropic, and the Torrid Zone; winter begins in May,
because of the disordinate raines which fall from that Month to the end of
August, that is their winter, their Summer begins with our Autumn, and lasts
all our winter months for other reasons, and it is the same in Cochin-China,
where they have three months winter, and nine summer) to visit his Tortoyses,
which he calls Elisar, he draws out of the ponds those of the highest colors,
and he keeps fishermen to that purpose only, and which case them so gently of
their shells, that they do not die, and within three years their shells are as
well grown, and as bright as before: and thus they last 15 or 20 years, at
that age they turned red, and their shells are of a good color for three
years: when the King has a mind to eat of them, they cut off their heads, and
five days after they are prepared, and yet after those five days they are
alive, as we have often experienced.

In those ponds there is a certain male animal, whose skin is gray, Asoufar^
and silver colored, wherewith they cover their furniture. This animal is a
great multiplyer, and is called Asoufa, like our sea Calfe, and as bigg as a
small mule, and much esteemed amongst them. They have another kind, whereof
they make bucklars, and coats of Armor, no steel will pierce them, they are so
strong and hardened: The King himself and his four white Elephants in war time
are Armed with those skins, but covered over with slight silk stuffes. Those
Elephants are exceeding strong, Telansin.
the King takes great content to be drawn upon a Telanzin, which is a kind of
litter, but with four wheels: One day I heard him command his Nangin, or
chief Coachman, to make his Telanzin ready, desirous to take the air. Two of
the Elephants being brought forth to be shown the Prince Souac, he praised
them to be two of the strongest in the World, he let one of them loose out of
his hand, that took up the litter, (with all belonging thereunto, as wheels
and draughts) in his teeth, and carried it before the Prince, and set it softly
down, as if it had been a small weight, and yet it was 500. weight. This action
so highly pleased pleased the King, that he commanded that ten pound of sugar
should be added to his daily allowance. Their chiefest food is rice boiled in
milk, made up in balls: and they have daily fifty pounds to their portions,
besides they are turned into the fields, and feed upon sycamore leaves, and
other pleasing leaves, they love cooleness, and bathe in those ponds: they are
subject to the bloody flux, and heat is very troublesome to them. When the
waters are not high enough to cover them, they lie down and tumble, their
natural discretion is such, that they never mingle with females before
company, they go two years with their young, and live two hundred.

It Is a beast highly valued by all Eastern Princes, and are very serviceable;
They are taken thorough the whole Empire of Pegu, and beyond the river Savara,
at Bremu, Ava, Bengala, and Malaca.

The King of Pegu, because he has such a number of Elephants, is surnamed
Quiber Sencal Jasel; that is, the grand Monarch of Elephants. In the palm
Forest, near to new Pegu, they set their snares to catch those beasts. It Is a
very pretty sight to see a tame female lead a wild male thorough the streets,
when he sees himself fast, and caught, he condoles himself with many fearful
cries and emulations, and sometimes striking furiously upon pillars, wherewith
the houses are sustained, breaks his teeth, and having sufficiently tormented
himself all in water, and being sensible of the heat of that water which lies
in his belly, he thrusts his trunk into his mouth, or throat, and draws up all
the water, that smells extremely, and is boiling hot: Then with goades and
pricks they force him into a dungeon, where in five or six days he is tamed
with the female.

When they are tame they are lodged in a Princely room, painted over, with
imagary and forest work, and are fed in silver, the King esteems them the
strength of his Army, they are richly attired, and eat bread, they are fed with
several sorts of corn, or grain boiled, as barley, rice, lupins, and others,
they love fruit, but care neither for flesh, nor sish.

The King delights himself to see them monthly exercised in Battalia, richly
harnessed, marching ten of breast, the Captain marches in the head, armed with
a Crocodile skin, covered over with a cloth of gold: his forehead piece of the
same, the riders clothed in cloth of gold upon a green ground, with a lance,
and a lions skin hanging thereat; even with the Captain march twelve Negroes
women, young, and clothed in Indian gowns of many colors, with drums
handsomely painted, they leap and dance before the Elephants, making many
grimoces, and ridiculous gesticulations, their faces painted red and violet;
when the Elephants go to war they wear the skin only, with bars of steel
over their trunks, and are richly trapped upon their festivalls, a squadron of
a thousand Elephants well managed follow the Captain, next the Kings Throne, or
State, with his children thereon, high and exalted, like a Ganopy drawn by
those famous white ones, followed by many Nobles mounted on others, with silken
bridles, all this is accompanied with Trumpets, flutes, and other instruments,
at which sound they leap and dance, and seem to take great content, and
between times they march with a gravity, becoming a rational creature.

I remember that in this solemnity a base fellow crossed the street before the
Royal Throne, the beasts stopped suddenly, and could not be driven on till the
Criminal was brought unto them, who expected death, a toss or two at the
least. They gazing upon one another scorned to touch him, one of the riders
beat the fellow sorely with his bridle; Their Governor told them with fair
words, that they had done an act worthy themselves; the beasts satisfied,
continued their march.

I saw a mighty big one presented to the King of Pegu, by him of Siam his
Tributary. The King immediately commanded meat to be brought him, to know his
breeding, for the best bred eat with great modesty; but he that brought him
said, that if he had drink, he could live without food: he that had the charge
of the rest, either for scorn, or to disparage the beast's nature, brought him
water in a foul vessel, the Elephant gave him a disdainful look, and putting
his tronk into his mouth, spouted a great quantity of stinking and hot water
upon the Masters head, who returned him a blow with a staff upon the head, the
Elephant immediately killed him with his tronk.

The King admired his prudence, and caused him water to be brought in a clean
silver vessel, and bought him harness, most rich and magnificent; they are
sometimes served in golden vessels, and with great respect, otherwise they
will kill their Keeper for the least offense.

They are capable both of hearing and understanding, and learn whatever is
taught them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Continuation of Pegu, of the Government and Policy, of
Superstitions, and Magicians.
PEgu is innumerably peopled with very good subjects, ready upon the least
command to give obedience, and execute, (and they say) that to serve their
Prince, is to serve God: and hold their companions most happy, who dye in the
Kings service; when the King will raise an Army, he enrolls, the number he
requires, with their names, their qualities, by certain itinerant Heralds, or
Calfenes who publish the war abroad, with flaming Torches in their hands, How
they raise an Army.
as I have already said. They ride on Dromadaries, and change often: and they
are kept in most towns for the Princes service, as are our Posthorses. When
the people are acquainted with the Kings will, they generally leave home, wife,
and children, and follow the King; every town and village has a treasurer, who
duly pay the pensions allotted by the King, and every one is sure of a
livelihood, according to his merit in the Kings service, which is faithfully
discharged.

Triennial Governors.
The Governors of all towns have triennial commissions, and are promoted
according to their birth to the kings favor, and the peoples free consent.
They behave themselves with great integrity, and discretion; and take care the
Kings treasure should be distributed to them that serve best, to their wives
and children, and implore them in honorable occupations, according to quality,
capacity, and the occasion of service, there being public workhouses
purposely maintained; where the third part of the people are continually
employed: as Mines, Paper-mils, Silk-works, Sugar engines, and other trades,
and works belonging to the King. If a soldier returned from war complains to
the King, that his General had not distributed to his family, what the King had
commanded: The General is presently sent for, laid flat upon the ground or
table, where some Courtier takes a cudgel (with three whip-cords at the end,
and a ball of ciment fastened thereto) striking upon the ground without touching
the man, and the King asks why he had not paid the Zimbou, or allowance to the
soldiers family: Zimbou.
the other must confess the truth, and if he does allege any reasonable
excuse, he has not so many stripes, but he has three at least given him
however. The executioner strikes upon the ground, until the King commands
otherwise.

The criminal is next helped up by his friends, and makes the King a low
reverence, giving thanks for the mercy he had showed in not stripping him. Then
the King either invites him to dinner himself, or some other Nobleman, and the
punishment he suffered, is not held disgraceful, nor ignominious. The trumpets
sound gives the King notice of his coming, and at his going it sounds twice,
and the multitude cry out, that the General or Governor of such a place was
retiring. The General casts himself at the Kings feet, and kisses the ground,
the King embraces him, and presents him with some rich Carcanet, Admirable
obedience.
or chain of Gold, or Jewels: so dismisses him, as content, as if he had got a
kingdom, and this is a credit to them.

Suits in Law are soon decided, for if a man be at difference with his
neighbor, the first Danubir, or Justice, Differences quickly decided;
they appeal to, decides it upon the place.

The King once a week, sits in his seat of Justice and decides differences of
the greatest importance, by, and with the assistance of a Naire or Gentleman,
that holds him a golden cup to spit in: It Is held shameful to spit on the
ground in the Kings sight, but they spit in handkerchers.

The King before he rises, drinks Areca and Betel, Areca. Betel.
brought him by one of his women, and another of his favorites annoints his
body with a certain oil, or sweet balsome, to preserve his health. Most of
those nations eat on the ground, and use leaves, instead of clothes, they eat
in curious wooden vessels, artificially painted, in various manners; others
are served in Purcelain, which will not endure poison, no more then the wood
Avate. At his rising from his seat of justice, a Merchant presents him with
some delicate drink; he has a guard of a hundred Naires, armed with short
swords hanging by their sides, in scarses richly embroydered with gold and
jewels: There are many Goldsmiths, as are in most parts of the East. He has
other Gentlemen of his guard armed with steel bows gilt, and neatly enameled:
Peguans Arms.
they are expert bowmen, and are trained up from their infancy; the guard of
100. Naires, besides their swords bear quivers and arrows gilt, The Kings march.
with a mavelous strong Cane that never breaks with a Pike or Fork at one
end; azured at both ends like a walking staff: They march in order. A
Nobleman bears the Kings sword before him, another his buckler, made of
Tortoise shells, garnished with Diamonds, and Rubies, as bright as the Sun.

The King wears the Tiara richly adorned with gemmes: at one side of him a
Lord carries a Parasoll, before him walk two jesters, with ridiculous motions
and gestures, relating how they had like to have killed one another: the King
is very much pleased with such Fictions and Drolleries.

One of these Bouffoones, known in many languages, frequented very much Father
Joseph of the societies company, by whom, A jester baptized.
he was instructed, and satisfied of the truth of our religon, and resolved to
be baptized.

The Father advertised the King, he consented, and the man was presently
baptized, and entertained for a time amongst those good fathers: mean while,
his wife not willing to follow her husbands example, assembled her friends and
celebrated her husbands funeral, as for a dead man, and built him a tomb,
where they made pitiful moanes, with many seperstitions, bringing the women
thither to weep and lament, and they all dined together upon his Tomb. They do
this, that the wife of a newly baptized Christian, may marry; otherwise they
hold her consenting to her husbands Christianity.

This new Convert was named James, he came forty days after his Baptism, to
salute the King, who desired to know whether he would perform his office as
before, and that his pension should be still continued (he replied) Sir, I
served you in the stead of a dead man, but now I will serve you alive, and
retyring with the Fathers, he was not seen of two months, in which time his
wife married another of meaner quality. But as I have heard, she would have
returned to her first husband, and become a Christian, being satisfied and
persuaded thereunto by a Portuguais, but her husband would not consent
thereunto; knowing it could not avail him much. Big canes.
Then she married a Rope-maker, which is a great trade there, for they have
great need of Lines, Ropes, Reeds, and Canes, which they cleave, besides the
Cables, and other tackling for ships. The biggest of those Canes they make
Pikes or Lances of for Horsemen, as the Mores use, and of the strongest they
make, Chests or boxes; for they never break; of others they make hoops,
barrels, and half barrels, to keep their drink or water in. There are of them,
of an incredible size.

In this country (as well as throughout the Indies) they bear a great respect
to the Image of the blessed Virgin, and to the memory of Saint Thomas, who has
wrought many miracles in the country. He raised from death to life a brother of
the King of Granganor, who became christian thereupon, and built a Church upon
the side of a little hill near the Sea, dedicated to that Saint, and left great
revenues thereunto, which are continued to this day, but are very ill deserved.
They say that the same King of Granganor, and another brother named
Abanachacon, and that the King of Pegu desired S. Thomas to vouchsafe him a
visit, who promised to become a Christian, upon condition he might enjoy all
his women, which (as he alleged) he could not live without, by the frequent
prayers and intercession of this Saint, his concupiscence was wholly allayed
and assuaged; and in a vision this King thought himself dipped in a pond by
three celestial virtues, A Vision. A heathen King converted.
to cleanse him of all filth and sensuality, from thence lifted up into heaven,
and made partaker of the heavenly glory, and received knowledge of his
salvation, and was baptized by St. Thomas, and by his good prayers obtained of
God Almighty, that his tomb (built of transparent marble) should be ever full
of that water wherein he was purified, that shortly after this King ended his
days wounded in a battle he fought, to assist a Brother of his against King
Sangiscan.

The Bramins who at present have the possession of this Church, where stands
this Tomb, say that his body is covered over with water to this very day, which
is seen through the transparency of the marble, at the light of three
bright-burning lamps, and that this Tomb is four fathom height raised from the
ground. This they relate of it. And I remember I have seen at Arles (in Rolands
Chapel, in the Church of St. Honoretus,) an ancient Marble monument replete
with water, which increases and diminishes according to the motions of the
Moon; and let the air be never so hot or dry, yet at full Moon the Tomb is full
of water. They relate as much of another in the Church of St. Severinus, in the
Suburbs of Bourdeaux, a German Lord visiting this wonder, assured me he had
seen the like in Austria, as at Verona in St. Zeno's Church, the sepulture of
Pepin, King of Italy, Son of Carolus Magnus, is seen full of water: many things
are naturally known to rise and fall according to the course of the Moon, as
the ebb and flow of the Sea, stones, plants, and animals. They hold that St.
Thomas (as I have already said) was martyred at Granganor, S. Thomas mar^yred.
Oysima.
by a Huntsman, making his offerings to Oysima, their three-headed Idol, who
shot the Saint with an arrow, aiming at some wild beast, much more they relate
of this glorious Saint, which they hold by tradition, although the ancient
testimonies have left us little of his memory.

The Ecclesiastical History says that his body was translated from Meliapur,
or Calamina, to Edesse, from thence to Ortuna in Pouilla. The Christians (that
are in the Indies, who style themselves of St. Thomas, and say they are
instructed from Father to Son, by that Saint, are Nestorians, Nestorians.
and infected with many more heresies, for to this day they are instructed by
the Syrian heretics.

Those Indian Kings rely much upon Magicians and Conjurers: the King of Pegu
maintains one in his Court, to foretell what he desires to know; he was called
Bongi or Bonze, (as their sacrificators are called) a brutish man addicted to
all sorts of vices and abominations, yet he is the Kings minion. He carries
ever in his hand a very keen hanger, like a Turkish Cymeter, only more bowed,
dressed in two Monkeys skins, which he wears, the one before the other behind,
hung all over with bells, to the weight of fifty pounds, which make a hideous
noise: upon a time the King taking the air in a chariot, spied one of his
choicest Ladies at a window, he sent for her to take the air upon the lake in a
barge, or Gondola, covered and richly adorned, they were no sooner both in,
Tempest.
but a sudden and dangerous storm arose from the west; that overcast and
clouded the skies. The King presently called to his Bongi, to clear the air;
the Conjurer immediately made a hole in the ground, wherein he urined, and
using strange Conjurations, many Devils came forth of the earth, making a most
horrid and fearful din, and howling, scattered the clouds, and tempest; the
King made with all speed to his Palace, putting no great confidence in his
Duma, for fear of being overturned.

Charms against the tempest.
The Enchanter full of mirth and vanity threatened with his Cymiter the
tempestuous winds, jumping and leaping incessantly, he made a confused noise
with his bells, and madman like ran to the Kings Palace-gate, where he skipped
and leaped, until he frightened, and scared away all the birds and tame beasts
that were kept in the Park. 'Twas the same Magician, (who as I have already
said, treating of the Maldives) undertook to bring birds and beasts out of the
enchanted Isle of Pallouis, and was soundly beaten for his rash undertaking,
and brought back only with life enough to witness his shame.

The great Cham of Tartary entertaines of those Magicians, and puts great
confidence in them; but more of them hereafter.

As throughout Arabia they obey the Seque, or Sequemir, in spirituals, so do
they in the Kingdom of Pegu their Abedale, of a Sect called Abedali, and there
are of them at Malabar. They are Santons, Confession amongst Idolaters.
or Hermites, otherwise called Jogues, and by the Mahometans Marabouts. A
people that observe a religious poverty, holding property in nothing, of
austere life, and as the Guzarates, never feed on any animated creature. Though
ready to perish with hunger they ask nothing, but the people furnish them
abundantly with all necessaries. If any one have robbed, murdered, or committed
other crime, he presently repairs to his Charif, who supplies the place of
principal Abedale, confesses entirely what he has done, and the other enjoins
a punishment and penance according to discretion. Though he perpetrated all the
iniquities on earth, if his Superior give him absolution, no man can further
question him, or call him to account. Sometimes they punish with death, Vldarin:
as it happened to one Vldarin, a Native, who in a savage quarrel having killed
and privately buried his Brother under a tree, confessed it to his Charif, who
caused him to take up the dead body, Punishments for crimes.
and seeing it so cruelly dealt with, condemned him living to be buried,
together with the dead. Another time he caused another to be cast into a pond,
for that he had denied their Duma. These people have abundance of zealous
followers, who provide them whatsoever they want. Likewise are they virtuous
people did they not want our true Religion. There were some who instructed by
the Jesuits, Idolatrous and Mohammedan Martyrs.
yet continuing their belief, embraced burning from the Mahometans, for holding
Mahomet was damned, and Jesus Christ was God, and born of the Virgin Mary. One
Ali a Merchant of Guzerate, inhabitant of Amiadiva, told me he saw at Bagdet
fifteen Religious, called the Deruis of the Sect of Ali, burned for the like
confession. Some of this order I have seen wear rich girdles, Deruis Martyrs.
others with diamond pendants in their ears; one at Pegu, with two curious and
costly Cassocks, one of a Munkeys skin of diverse colors, the hair fine as
silk, the other given him by the King, covered with a Tortoise shell, but of a
most splendid delicacy. These Santons, Joguies, or Indian Anchorites, lodge in
the field, in hollow trees, seldom speak, have some Disciples exceeding
obedient to the least notice given them, addict themselves to Magic, and to
recompense their austerities, the Devil persuades them either to the precipice,
or to take a death from their disciples hands, who afterward interre them, and
build a Chapel over them as to a God. Besides these the general name of
Religious in Pegu and Siam is Talapoyes. Talapoyes.


CHAP. XXIX. Of the Idols in Pegu, bloody Sacrifices, Exorcisms, strange
Communions.
WE have mentioned before how the Rivers of the Country yield the King of Pegu
a grand revenue in fine gold, Idols of Pegu.
which he designs for embellishment of his Temples and Idols, whereof they have
abundance of such extravagant effigies, as the Devil presents to their fancies.
They have excellent casters and sculptors, that draw these apparitions to the
life, which generally are exceeding hideous and formidable: for the Devil
becomes visibly conversant with these poor wretches, showing them any thing
they desire, the more firmly to engage them to his service. At the Princes
Palace in the back Court, there are abundance of these Idols, all of pure gold,
with Crowns, enriched with gems, as I said before; one amongst the rest of a
prodigious height, they call Apalita, who assists pilgrims and travelers,
through the world, whose Temple no man visits but with some present, which is
converted to the use of the Priests, who ordinarily have wives and children.
Such as enter these Tambous and Gouias, or places of adoration would think to
have some miserable end before they returned home, if they brought not some
offering with them, so as he that has but a leather to cover his pudenda, will
take it off to offer to the Idol: others will present little bells of silver and
gold which they hang at their genitories, in little rings drawn through the
flesh, which they do to be the better esteemed of women, testifying herein that
they delight in no other sex but theirs. Some there are so superstitiously
devout, Bleeding sacrifices.
that they will cut themselves to immolate the blood to their Idol. It Is
something probable that the Turks who so scarifie their bodies for devotion,
learnt it of the Indians, because the Alcoran contains no such precept.

The Priests confirm them vigorously in this Idolatry, and some there have been
who meeting poor Portuguese Merchants and travelers, ignorant of their custom
passing by their Temple, have cruelly cut their throats, and sacrificed them to
their Apalita. But the Jesuits complaining to the King, and showing him the
horror and indignity of such an execration, he sentenced to death 70. of these
abominable Priests, and the sentence had passed further even to their wives and
children, but for the mediation of the Fathers. Notwithstanding their devotion,
the people looked upon this execution patiently, and without the least
commotion, for the affection they bear their Prince. Likewise through the
supplications of those Fathers, they were freed from a pestilentiall disease
then reigned amongst rhem.

Some amongst these Priests use holy ashes and holy water also. They are the
ashes of things sacrificed to the Idols, and amongst the rest of such as have
made themselves voluntary sacrifices. There is another Idol of silver, in the
proportion of a Giant, Holy ashes and holy water. An oraculous Idol.
who as an Oracle makes answer to demands, foretells things to come, but with a
thousand lies and abuses. They believe this Pagode, assists them in their wars,
and as their Mars renders them victorious: They coin money in honor of him,
and stamp his name upon it: But he is not always effectual in his assistance,
for at the time they sacrificed the poor Portuguese I told you of, the
Inhabitants of Goa and Malacca for revenge manned eight Gallions and some
Carvells, put in at one of their Towns, which they took possession of, Idols
destroyed by the Portuguese.
thence advanced to another which they pillaged, burnt the Temples and Idols,
with all the Priests, their wives and children.

'Twas at the time the King of Pegu was gone to the Conquest of Siam, so as the
Portuguese alarmed the whole Country, and had Don Alouse d' Aquila, who
commanded the Foot, arrived in time, they had easily carried the Town of Pegu
it self, taken the Kings treasure, with the Idols rich in gold, silver, and
precious stones, which had been a wealth inestimable. They put abundance to the
sword, and carried away numbers of prisoners: But at the Kings return the
Jesuits reconciled the difference betwixt them; at which time 'twas accorded
that at new Pegu, in honor of the Conception of the blessed Virgin, a Church
should be built at the Kings charges, which in these parts is no novelty, where
from time out of memory, as I said, they have had an image in honor of the
Virgin with her infant, illustrated with three lamps, and the Temple of God
where this image was reverenced, was served with diverse sorts of Priests.

The King of Pegu this while was much incensed for the affront, the violence
and indiscretion of these Priests had brought upon him, and conceived a hope
that the very Idols would take some revenge for the injuries they had suffered
from the Franques Ramatas, so they call the Portuguese, but he was perplexed,
when instead thereof, The tooth of an ape.
he observed them persever prosperous, daily overturning more Idols, as they
had amongst others burnt the famous Apes tooth adored in Zelan, which he would
have purchased at the rate of so many thousand crowns, as I said before.

Another Idol they have, called Fotoque, (as likewise in Japan and China) of
the same stature as the other, Fotoque an Idol.
but of different matter, of lead and brass mixed, such as their money is made
of. They tell us this Idol with his intercession inclines their Duma, and
obtains grace for all, in particular, for souls condemned to black and dark
places. The Palpas are obliged to sacrifice to him every Saturday a black
swine, and three pullets of the same color. Poultry in this Country contrary
to the ordinary, have their flesh black, which they call Fare, The flesh of
hens black.
and makes the pottage black, nevertheless very savoury. All the Sacrifices
pass into the Priests bellies, for they burn nothing but the liver with
aromatic odours, and pulverizing the bones, mix it with their holy waters.

When they would have any sacrifices brought to their Idol, they go about the
Town, ringing a Bell made like a Still, Sacrifices for the dead.
and say this is to supplicate for some of their friends, who are tormented in
the black shades; for as to those which immitted into other bodies, as of oxen
or cows there to be kept till the day of judgment, they hold them well
quartered, M^tempsycose.
and to have no need of prayers.

For this cause the Peguans had a custom to eat none of these sorts of flesh,
as in Malabar and other places; but since such time as their Duma in a vision
gave precept to one of their Chaouris, to use all living beasts indifferently,
and that a soul condemned to the body of one beast, when that dyed, passed
into the body of another, they have made no further difficulty to eat it. For
such beasts they have a reverence, Superstitious salutations. Asses for chase.
and bow to them as they would salute a friend.

They have a sort of small Asses that come from the Province of Beluacarin,
almost all red and black, or black and white, which they hunt and take with
hayes like Conies, and being brought to hand serve for many uses, but are of
low price, by reason they hold souls never enter them, their flesh is so faint
and disagreeable: we met with herds of them in the Champian, which appeared to
be tame, suffering one to come so near as to lay hand on their neck; when on a
sudden they sprung away like Munkeys, and returned about a quarter of an hour
after. They are not so courtly to them as to other beasts, for the opinion the
Priests have put in them: and as we in derision would salute them, they would
reprove us, and tell us, their great Duma had commanded Fotoque to curse the
generation of Asses, and the souls that should take up habitation in them.

They have likewise many other Gods, as that they call the god of atoms in the
Sun, and others. Hell, they call the dark cavern of the house of smoke, where a
horrible Serpent devoures souls, and whence one of their gods frees them by
his power.

In a word, it is stupendous to consider the number of gods and Idols in their
several temples; their Monasteries, Priests, Monks, Hermits, Sects,
Sacrifices, etc. Their belief likewise of the Creation of the world is strange,
and of the sin of the first man, all disfigured with a thousand fables. For in
the year 1557. a Cordelier, one Bonfer a Frenchman, being at Goa, moved with a
pious vocation, went to preach the Gospel in these parts, and going to San
Thomas, and thence by Sea to Port Cosmin, and Pegu, did what could be done by
Sermon to impresse the faith in these people, but with small effect they were
so hardened, Peguans whence derived.
so as after some sufferings, he was constrained to return from whence he went.
He learnt, that it is held the Peguans descended originally from certain Jews,
sometimes banished, The Peguans creed.
and by Solomon condemned to work in the mines of Ophir: that they believed an
infinity of successive worlds to all eternity, innumerable gods receding
respectively to the diverse worlds, and liable to death at last. That men
having passed thorough all sorts of animalls at last became Gods, and that
these Souls after many ages being purified in certain appointed places, and
having returned diverse times into these new worlds at last, were placed some
in Paradise, others in Hell, and some reduced to Niban, that is, nothing, and a
thousand other dreams. After this Cordelier, came the Jesuits with better
success, by means of some signal services they did them, Jesuits in Pegu.
in certain popular maladies they were infected with. As amongst others, Father
Andrew of the society, at the time that an epidemical pestilence destroyed
innumerable people in Pegu, a Christian Townsman came and besought his
intercession for his family, that was wholly infected; and the Father demanding
wherefore he had not caused his wife and children to be baptized, he answered,
he had such a real intention, but that their Pagode had prohibited him,
Conversion and truth.
and that his wife would not permit it, but threatened, if he forced Baptism
upon her or hers, she would publish his obsequies according to custom, and
marry another: which excuse the Father took for some satisfaction, and at his
supplications the people were cured. Whereupon many more repaired to him for
the same cause, but he would not grant them any such assistances but upon
engagement to receive Baptism; which their Priests vigorously sought to
hinder, telling them 'twere better to die of that malady then be damned by the
cure of Baptism.

These Indians,, amongst other superstitions, Extravagant communions.
which they have derived by corruption from Christianisme, they have one
exceeding remarkable, which is, that once a year they make a solemn communion.
Having immolated a white sheep, and mingled the blood with meal, they call
Agricar; on the day of the great feast of Duma, they give it to the whole
congregation in form of a heart, with exhortations and remonstrance, that this
which they take, is the blood of their God, and upon that day strangers are not
admitted to celebrate the solemnity: but on the morrow they are received, and
before they communicate, a Sermon is made to excite them to devotion, telling
them their God receives them into his alliance, embraces them as his children,
to whom he gives his grace by means of the blood they have taken. Behold how
they transform and profane what they have been heretofore taught of the
Mystery of the Paschal lamb, and the Eucharist. In Mexica and Peru they have
likewise confession and Communion after their manner. But they have another
sort of sacrifice yet more strange, that is, they buy a slave of a high price,
of thirty years age, beautiful, sound, and jolly, and having washed him in a
lake, or other water three mornings by the rising of the Sun, they cloth him
in a white gown, keep him forty days, and show him to the people, telling
them, this is the innocent that must be sacrificed for the sins of the people.
Then every one brings presents to him, and with humility beseeches him to
remember them when he shall come before the great God. All this while they take
a heedful care he escape not, giving him good cheer, and Areca. Every morning
for the forty days when they show him, they beat a kind of Pan, and
melodiously play on flutes doleful, and pathetical strains, to excite
devotion, in which conset every one bears a part that he may be mindful of
them. Thirty days expired, the ten Priests called Gaica, persons of veneration
and antiquity, habited like the Victim, come to advertise him, that within ten
days he goes to inhabit with the great God, and observe diligently if his
countenance change at the sound of death; and take it for an ominous augury, if
he show the least fear: For which cause on the day appointed, they give him a
certain potion that renders him as 'twere frantic, and takes all apprehension
from him. After diverse other ceremonies on the fortith, they sacrifice him,
and after eat him.

They lead him to the very top of their Temple, stretch him as it were into an
oval upon a stone of the same figure, rip up his belly alive, tear out his
heart which they burn, and sacrifice to their Idol, besmearing their cheeks
with the blood. This flesh they eat as a sanctified and sacred Viand.

During this space, they religiously abstain from all inordinate pleasures. See
but to what deformities they have changed the mysteries of our faith, as Father
Andrew often made appear to them, though few made profit of it: we must attend
till God of his mercy open their understanding.

Zibi demons.
But amongst the abuses and Idolatry of these wretched people, it is most
lamentable to see how they are tormented by these Demons, Possessed.
where there are some called Zibi, which at their grand Festivals, enter into
them while they dance, counterfeiting the deaf and dumb, contemning all sort of
conjurations: so as to eject them, they must make new suffumigations and
sacrifices; call in the Magicians to implore the favor of their Duma for
deliverance of these miserable possessed creatures, Exorcisms.
who all this while neither eat, drink, nor sleep, become mere skelitons, so
lean, and disfigured, that they are the horror and pity of all that see them.
Now does the Magician repair to the Devil to know the quality of this Demon
usurper, and what is to be done to enfranchise the possessed, whom they carry
by night into a field, and put him in a cave or tent without light: Then
instructed by the devil, they seek out an herb called Sacathy, which gives
light by night, containing a splendor that may be perceived at a large
distance, but as they say so pestiferous, that he who gathers it dies
immediately; Sacathy.
for prevention whereof, they tie a dog with a line to it, and so pull it up,
then they burn it in the room with the Demoniacle; and the Demon in the
instant, leaves him, as not able to endure the sent of this herb. It Is not
unlike to the root of Bachaza mentioned by Josesephus, which grows near the
town Machera in Judea. They never have their Festival the Corouita, Coranita
and the Sacrifice.
but some one is unfortunate in this kind. For as they carry along their Idol
upon a six-wheel chariot drawn by Oxen, or Bufflers covered with flowers, and
attended by the multitude, along the town, there are ever two or three pitiful
wretches on a Scaffold in long gowns of gray cloth, who declare to the people
how they are ready to sacrifice themselves for the sanctification of the rest;
Then down they come with a countenance pale and disfigured with apprehension of
death, and cast themselves under the wheels of the chariot, where they are
crushed to death. One there was who after he had been well fed by the Palpas or
Priests for five days together, as a thing sacred, when the hour of sacrifice
was come, his nose bled, and he would not dye upon any terms, for whatsoever
the Priests could say so to encourage him, but at the same instant there was
another, who voluntarily offered to take his place, and was broken under the
wheels: afterward his corpse was laid in the chariot by the Idol on the side of
felicity. For the Idol bears in one hand a number of Serpents, to punish such
as obey not his commands, and in the other a cup of some exquisite liquor, to
recompense his good servants.

They have special honor for these miserable Votaries, and all their Alliance.
The sacrifice ended, they take the murdered bodies, and give them honorable
burial wrapped in a sear-cloath, and entombe them with solemn ceremonies, and
instrumental music, all their alliances coming for certain days to rejoice
over the Sepulcher. When, any one being sick, the Magician shall declare him
irrecoverable, he is put apart in a garden, one of his family being appointed
to attend him. But if he chances to recover, he is held as a reprobate, and no
man will visit or converse with him; saying, that had he been any thing of
good, their God had not disdained his company. And if he desires to be admitted
in society, the Chaouri or Sorcerer must make a sacrifice of Purification for
him: then being purified, he makes his friends a feast of the flesh of black
cattle only, especially a goat, which is eaten with a grand ceremony.

CHAP. XXX. The Peguans diet, their Military exercises, their medicinable
drugges, their Summer.
AS to the ordinary diet of the Peguans, with their lawful wives they feed
soberly; but with their friends, their slaves, The Peguans diet.
or others they regard not to drink excessively, and be drunk with their sort
of drink: notwithstanding they have a commendable custom not to stir out of
doors upon what terms soever, till they are sober, liars are detestable to
them, and they decline their company.

Salutations.
They use diverse manners of salutations, according to the diversity of
Countries: the most ordinary with Persons of Quality, and equals is to kiss;
first the cheek, then the hands: the meaner sort bow the knee to their betters,
who are such as keep more slaves, and Concubines to bring them children to
serve the King in his Wars. So are they likewise of more honor, and the King
gives them allowance for the learning of Military Exercises, as to ride, to
vault, and others, for which they have Masters; but their method is different
from that of our Cavaliers. For this reason the King keeps a good number of
horses, of purpose for his subjects exercise; Gentlemen themselves unfurnished,
sometimes taking them for a year, or more, and then employ them on other
occasions.

They have likewise Masters for shooting in a bow, backward upon retreat,
Military exercises.
as it were upon a charge, like the Parthians heretofore, and the Arabians at
this day. They use it to draw on the enemy, and learn it of the Tartars their
neighbors: likewise they practice to toss the pike, and push with it on
horseback without loosing it, sliding it dexterously in their hand; they
likewise use the Azagaye, or javelin, and the Tamaca, which is a staff, with a
stone at one end, sharp as a razour; then they throw the ring, and three or
four sorts of balls, very dangerous, sword and bucklars they use, and other
arms much differing from ours. They have had the use of Cannon, Cannons.
and other guns from all antiquity, like the Chinese, as they say. In a word,
they hold Military discipline in great esteem, and every one lives happily,
according to his vocation, the greater part at the Kings charges, who in time
of peace employes them in mills of several sorts, and sugar-workes; for you
must know they spend more sugar here, then in any part of the world; for that
as I told you, they make the very plaster of it that covers the Tarasses of
their houses, mingling it with pounded shells, whereof they make a mortar, that
being dried becomes firm, as marble.

They are a numerous people, but were they more they could find means to
employ them, for every man labors, and you see no man in want; and if they see
one in poverty, their charity is such, that if he be able, he is immediately
employed, or his necessities relieved.

Medicinable drugs Cocos.
For account of the Medicinal Drugs of this Country, the river Pegu with the
inundation brings in the fruit of Cocos, of great esteem amongst the Indians,
of great virtue to purge all humors, and proper for all diseases. For my part
I never used it; for we used a method of Physic, approved of by Persons of
Quality in those parts: Summer in Pegu.
That is about the entrance of summer, which there begins early with the going
out of January, whence Debla or Scammony thrusts forth it is buds, and a sort of
little birds feed upon them; when we would purge, we got of these birds that go
in flights like our Snipes, and eating three or four, we find the same effect,
as if we had taken a physical medicine; another sort they have, likewise easy
enough, that is, to take the husk of a certain chich pease, a grain like Palma
Christi, of wonderful operation. Likewise Scammony water, which they draw like
rose water, to make it more operative: at the same time they take the root of
Rubarb, when the leaves are on, which are large as the great Lunary, and bitter
as gall; when it is first pulled up it is full of juice, near orange color, though
the root new gotten be violent. Rubarbe.
you need but break it, and the water within distills by little and little.
Others pound it, and distill it with Scammony, and take the quantity of half a
spoonful. For purging they use likewise the water of Jelac and Mechouacan, and
other drugs, the substance whereof they know how to draw very exquisitly; as
they can the quintessenece of cinnamon and cloves, which they put up in
Borrachoes and skins, and with other drugs, load them for the red sea, so to
Meca, thence to Suria, where the Venetians fetch them, who know sufficiently
how to choose them, How drugs are brought into Europe.
leaving the worst to the Sensall, who distributes them to Provence, and thence
to the other parts of France, where in stead of good drugs, they have nothing
oft-times but pieces of wood, and things of small value.

CHAP. XXXI. The Election of the King of Pegu, their Officers, the Homages, and
presents of the Subjects to their new Prince.
FOr account of this Great King of Pegu, his creation, Royal Officers.
and Militia, I will say in few words what I there learnt. A Prince of high
Quality in the Empire, called the Califerech, is as it were Constable, and
grand Master, who by prescription assists at the Election and Coronation of the
Prince, which cannot be done without him. His Residence is in the Town of
Mandranelle, Coronation of the King.
toward Tazatay. When a new King is to be Crowned, this Caleferech comes to
Pegu in barks of war, and at his arrival the Prince goes to receive, and
entertain him, kissing his shoulder; the other bows to the very ground, and
kisses his leg; then the people cry out, Este lansar, that is, God be praised;
then they both ascend into the Princes Chariot, no one presuming to approach
near them; and returning in graceful order to the Town, a thousand sorts of
fireworks play, the Fortress Cannon is fired, and all in good order to receive
them. Being arrived at the Palace, abundance of Clarions and Trumpets sound,
and a Noble man says with a loud voice. The Califerech commands you all to
join in prayers, that if our Prince be not worthy, he may die before his
inauguration, and the people cry out aloud, God grant it. Immediately after a
repast they create Officers, being necessary they should be chosen with the
good liking of the Prince. The better part of the Officers have Arabian names,
in imitation of Sechemir of Arabia, and the Court of Persia, to which almost
all the Princes of the East conform themselves, as the most magnificent. The
first that is made is the Gadalaro, Gadalaro.
who disposes and rules all that belongs to the Empire, and keeps a
magnificent Court. The second is the Amicassen, Amicassen.
or General of the Army, who commands all that have conduct of any Soldiers,
commissioning Governors, and disposing the Kings Treasure in all things
necessary to war. Then there is the Libaganir, and Libasan, joint officers, one
whereof administers the Revenewes of the Provinces, the other the tributes,
imposts, gabells, and rents Royal: they have both a good strength of Soldiers
to assist them, and these attend the Prince every where, never leaving him.
There is the Ostades, or Captain of the Palace, who takes order for the
Provision.

The Amiracho, or Master of horse, that disposes of the Kings horses, mules,
elephants, camels, dromedaries. The Amural that governs the Elephants. The
Cansidibir Master of the Pages and Eunuchs. The Madrecon that draws forth the
Army, and ranges it in battalia. The Amiraf, Agitant General. The Armermirac
that bears the Kings Poleax. The Casandera, who gives order to the Captains,
and distributes the troops where he thinks necessary. The Ostender, the
Treasurer of the Army. The Bicassen, Master of the Wardrobe. The Testacavir,
Master of the Robes, and diverse others; all Noble Men belonging to the Palace
Royal, Persons of Honor, and well attended.

Besides these there are abundance of inferior Officers, and Honorable
Persons of War, who receive pay by the month, according to the occurrence of
Affairs, to which the Merchants many times contribute for convoy of their free
Commodities. Strangers are there exceedingly respected and honored, Respect
given to strangers. Amirsent.
and if one have use of an Amersent, who are as the Chaoux in Turki, or the
French Exempts, they will bear him company every whither with the Kings
provision, whereof they have the weekly disposal, and a reasonable matter is
satisfaction to them. Then there are the Cachi, men of war, armed with
Cassocks, quilted with agglet holes, expert horsemen, and dextrous at their
bow, or the Zanfart or Zagaye, Zanfart.
with three pikes, which in full speed they will most actively cast and catch
again, These I take for the Captains of Forts and Sconces, and Governors of
holds. There is another sort of soldiers called Atefiar, Atefiar.
who are paid by Country rents, not of the Kings Demesus, but things left by
Heroes, and Persons of Arms, the Soldiers right after their decease.

They wear no other Arms then the Alfange, or Cimeterre, with the steel ring,
and are skillful wrastlers. Caranizi.
The Caranizi leads the soldiers, who have nothing but meat and clothes, being
a Conquered people, and obliged to serve the King: Archilet.
When one dies another succeeds, from father to son. The Archilet is a conflux
of people of all qualities, and religions, like the Grand-Seniors, Spai: These
have no pay till they have done some signal service; as also they are placed
in the wings of the battle, most commonly; prepared with Afarca, a compounded
drink, that renders them so furious, they apprehend not death; they are armed
with the Cimitterre, Cris, or Poniard, and a Target. The Chesonana, who
conducts the Elephants to battle, their teeth armed with steel: He that sits
upon the beasts neck to guide him, is called Dramont, Dramont.
and for this purpose is chosen with a strong and loud voice, by reason of the
great noise in fight. Their armor is the skin of Crocodills, fastened with
strong iron buckels, and have double pay, when they are expert in the conduct
of these beasts, who once heated grow furious. They put twelve of the largest,
with abundance of feathers before the rest, to guide them. These beasts once
stirred to fury, Number of Elephants in Pegu.
make strange slaughter in an Army, whereof no Indian Prince is so stored as
the Peguan, where I saw four thousand five hundred belonging to him; and for
this cause is he styled the Prince of the Elephants, as I said before. They are
exceeding chargeable, being kept with boiled rice, fifty pounds a day a piece:
the females have not their teeth so long and big, who, if they are governed by
young youths, out of sense and civility will lift them gently to their
shoulders.

It has sometimes happened that the enemy has turned the Elephants upon their
own men, with firebrarnds, which they extremely dread.

But to come back to the creation of the Prince, Creation of the Prince, and
the Ceremonies.
all the Princes and Nobles of the Kingdom must be there present, and if any
one has exceptions against him for injury or indignity received, before
Coronation he may bring his complaint before the Caleferech. Then is the Prince
brought by him into the middle of a field, where there is built a Theater of
extraordinary height, with a bridge, or ascent to it, covered with a colored
cloth: then the first Prince, whose office it is, pronounces with a loud voice,
that it is but necessary they should have a Prince to Govern and Rule them, to
Protect the Commonwealth, and administer Justice* then takes a ball of gold,
with three points, exceeding refulgent, and lifts it very high, all the people
observing a profound silence: then he declares to them what the Council has
decreed, and names the Prince to be Elected, whom he causes to stand stark
naked upon a stone, with his face toward the Congregation, and tells them, this
is he whose Ancestors governed the Empire, and that he hopes by Gods grace he
will not degenerate from their virtue.

At the instant one makes an Oration of his Endowments, his Benignity, Valor,
and Magnanimity, and in brief, all of Galantry he has ever done; and that if
there be any one who has cause of complaint, he should speak, and order shall
be taken before his Creation: then all the people cry out, God has blessed and
ordained him for our Prince. After this they keep silence for a good quarter of
an hour, to see if any complainant appear. This done, the Hoboys sound, and
the Principal Castle discharges the whole Artillery. A Crown of lead.
Proceeding, they set a Crown of lead upon his head, and put an axe in his
hand, apparel him in a sheet of white silk, with a short cassock of the same
color, but embroydered with silk of various other colors. Wholesome documents
for Princes.
One then presents to him how he ought to Govern with Presidents of his
Predecessors. That the Crown of lead signified, that in all things he should
use both weight and measure: and the axe, that he ought to Administer Justice,
and maintain peace and concord in his Dominions; and that the Principal
strength of a Prince is the hearts of his Subjects.

After these words they bring him in a Vessel of Emerald the ashes of the
first King of Pegu, upon which he takes his oath to observe and keep all that
his Predecessors have observed and kept, at the cost of his very life. Then
they take off his Crown and Robe, which are laid up as things Sacred; and they
put on him a Cap of Crimson Tissu, with a Chapplet of gold, that has a peake
before, not unlike the Flower-Deluces, set with very resplendent stones. They
invest him in a Turkish Robe, furred with the skins of white hares, to denote
the innocence of his life. They say these hares change their coat twice in a
year, winter and summer.

Presently the music sounds, and the three Princes that assisted him, support
him in his descent from the stone he was Crowned on, which emblem'd the
stability of his life. The ash color he treads on, The Ashes what.
and the ashes in the cup represents to him death, and the incertainty of life,
that therefore he must employ himself in goodness, to gain immortality, that
his people may pray for him. Then being conducted to the Palace, they present
to the 3 Princes three golden censors, hung in leaden chains, with odorous
perfumes, and the Falcada in a white Robe with the golden axe pronounces a loud
De Cysimar Caradacy, that is God has created him, not the people.

As he passes by, all prostrate on the ground, in reverence, Shoulders kissed.
and reciprocally kissing shoulders, congratulate with one another for their
new Prince.

In the field where the Ceremony is performed are abundance of Tents of
several colors, belonging to the Princes and Nobility, and under Coco and
other trees are tables covered with clothes of Cocos, and reeds, Feasts for the
people
the wood or leaves painted the China way, set with meat to feast the people.

The King being come to the Palace, sits down to eat with the three Princes,
and round about for the subject Kings and Princes are many tables sumptuously
set forth and furnished, with a device on each of them, that is, a crown of
gold, with the arms of the King that eats at it.

The King of Siam as Emperor has three Crowns, and eats with the Princes: Of
Tazatay has two Crowns, and eats likewise with the Princes. The Caleferech
has a single Crown, and eats alone. Mandranele has two. Gilolo but one: as
likewise Verma, Salaca, Aua, Martaban, Subject Princes.
Paleacute, Capouin, Campa, Tauay. These are all in the first room.

In the second are the Princes, Nobles, and Governors of Provinces, as
Ternassary, Manugaron, Pepery, Micoan, Malaca; and Bengala, all heretofore
Subjects, but now for the greater part are infranchiz'd: Odiata since did the
like, but is returned again to subjection. The Tables orderly ranked, covered
and served royally, and what multitude soever there be, all is done with order
and wonderful silence.

The three Princes that bear the Censers walk thrice about the Chamber
incensing the King, then sit down and dine with him at distance,
notwithstanding when the King calls for drink, four Princes who have charge of
the Talcadifs, or his Cup-bearers, every one with his cup of Purcelain, hoop'd
with horn of Unicorne, taste the drink and present it to him, while the hoboys
and the rest of the music sounds. These four Talcadifs who are of the Princes
blood, cry aloud, Talcadifs.
The Prince whom God has newly ordained us, drinks to all the Princes and
loyal Subjects: then every one drinks his health, the three assistants stand
up and salute him, then sit down again, and the King continually presents
plates of meat, sometimes to one, sometimes to another, so that for the feast
time there is business enough.

The meat is seasoned with musk and amber. At the Feast there are Buffons to
delight the King and Company, Viands perfumed:
who have a thousand anticks and devices. The King having done at Table, the
Emperor of Siam kissing his buskin, as an homage, presents him a rich Crown of
gold, Presents to the King.
which the King receives with embraces, and kisses his cheek in testimony of
perpetual amity: Then the rest kissing his buskin, lay every one their
presents at his feet. The Kings bring Crowns, the Princes chains and collars;
the rest present according to their quality, all in graceful order: for the
kingdoms and provinces, march all according to their rank, without confusion:
Then the rest of the people present other things both rare and curious. These
presents are brought in such quantity, that every four hours they are forced to
remove them: at the coronation, which was in my time, the presents lasted five
days from morning till night, with unparalled wealth and magnificence;
during this time the people are all provided for at the Kings charge, and take
up fifteen leagues of land, with wonderful regularity. The Presents delivered,
they stay five days for dismission to return.

Besistan Cockfight.
Amongst other things the King delights much in Cockfights, for which he has
Cocks from Besistan, with beards, which beard is properly but a carnosity
hanging under the throat, very brown, growing of a burnt blood, the bird being
exceeding hot: for sport they match them with the Cocks of Pegu, that are not
altogether so fiery, but more heavy, and mortal enemies.

The King and his Court have this recreation once a week. Their pens are close
together, with mats of palm that cover the windows, at which they are fed. At
the creation which was in my time, they had this game, and lifting up the mats,
the Cocks immediately fell to fighting with their bills, through the spaces of
the lattice, but the keepers parted them with switches, till they had taken
their portions, which is of a small black grain, they call Versin, as big as a
grape stone, of quality exceeding hot. The mats taken away, then is the sport,
to see how they will range themselves in Battalions for the assault, frowning
with rage, and the window once open they fall on in good earnest; till they
most cruelly tear one another, and fill the place with blood, for a good hour
together: then they part them, many lying dead in the place, which they eat,
the flesh being reddish like beef, but exceeding tender and tastefull.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Justice and Policy with the Peguans, their Sacrifices and
horrible dances. A lamentable History of two young Princes.
AS to the revenues of the King of Pegu, Revenues of the King of Pegu.
when peoples ordinary payments are brought in, there is Proclamation through
the Dominions, that no Subject is obliged to pay any Royal right, gabell,
subsidy, or impost, for a whole year. What Handicraftsmen alone pay him amounts
to three millions, or as they reckon so many Baselins, a sort of weight. Every
housekeeper pays him so much by the year. When a new King is elected, all
Towns and Villages send Deputies to make their acknowledgement, with presents
of rarities, and things extraordinary: As to the elect in our time, were sent
three white Cowes, with tails differing from others, like swine, horns
growing in their skins only, not on the top of the head, which they could move
as their ears, decked bard bridles, covered with clothes of crimson silk, and
hung over with bells of gold, silver, and Calin, a metal like silver, much
used in the Indies.

This present was very acceptable to him, notwithstanding 'twas done in
derision of another people, his Subjects, Calin a mettle.
who wear the like bells at their genitories, to content their Mistresses, with
little hooks, and rings to take them off when they go to visit them, and
testify to them they have satisfaction in nothing but themselves; for amongst
them there are that are addicted to the unnatural sin, no more prohibited
there than amongst the Turks, except there be violence used, for which there is
severe punishment. Sodomie.
When the first Prince of the kingdom comes to take his leave, he embraces him
and kisses his cheek, then presents him with ten fair white Persian coursers,
barded with cloth of gold, of diverse colors, Bells for beasts only.
their feet hanged round with bells of gold, to show the people they are proper
only for beasts to wear.

These bells so disquieted the horses, four or five men could but hold them, so
unruly they were: likewise to the Prince of Siam at his departure he gave a
collar of rubies of inestimable value, in brief there was neither Prince nor
Nobleman, that parted without satisfaction. 'Twas thought the King distributed
the best part of the horses in his stable, where he had above thirty thousand,
which are the most magnificent present can be made in that country. Honor and
service to the King.
He gave besides many pieces of scarlet cloth, silks of diverse colors, and
other stuffes sufficient to load twenty thousand cammels. An Elephant he never
bestows, but on the contrary, all Princes diligently endeavor to get them for
him. All the horses he gives, arise to the advantage of the State; for when he
has occasion for them in war, the subjects upon the least orders are all
ready, so well they affect him, esteeming them amongst the blessed that dye in
his service, and for such the Priests never make prayers, as being already in
the number of the Saints, and happy.

Justice and officers.
For their justice it is equally administered to all offices and estates,
depending on the Kings will, who gives them gratis, and pays all officers out
of his own Coffers; which keeps them from doing any thing against Law and
Justice; for their punishments are very severe.

Debtors sold.
Creditours may by right take their Debtors for slaves when they have not
wherewithal to pay them, and if they will, may sell them at the price of their
debt, and sometimes sell their wives and children by Port-sale, till they are
fully satisfied. The charge of suit amounts to little or nothing. They all live
in good awe, and all apply themselves to labor: who has no means of his own,
betakes himself to Mills, Buildings, and Mines, Hospitals.
where the King entertains them, so as no one wants a way to live. Poor orphans
are brought up at the Kings charge. All employed in Pegu.
There are diverse enclosed places for girls, where they are employed in
working silk, and many other ingenuous arts. A stranger passing through the
country, may be employed if he will, or they will give him a pass to another
town. The King has four hundred slaves, but they are only for the service of
the household, without regard to either Nation or Religion, so they are honest
and serviceable: They have no wages, yet never want money, for all that have
occasion at Court, still give them something. Two hundred slaves more there
are, who have no other office then to hunt the Woods and Marshes for
triple-coloured tortoises for the Kings Vivary: likewise they gather the silk
Cottons which the trees bear naturally, Silk upon trees.
whereof they gather sufficient, and leave enough for the year following.

They have another sort of silk called Fongi, gotten in December, it proceeds
from the great Erpo, which we call Alove, whence there comes a silk More short,
but stronger and better then the rest. I made trial if the like could be
produced here by drawing threads out of the leaves, and found it might be done,
there being no defect but want of experience; For though the Climats differ,
nevertheless nature is every where assisted by art and labor. All these silks
come to the benefit of the people, though the King takes a good share by reason
of his slaves employed in it, besides abundance of Orphans and poor girls
brought up at his cost, under the tuition of matrons and ancient women, to
govern and correct them for their neglects: and the same for men, all with
great order and policy. A great policy.
When one has committed a heinous crime, it is best if he communicate it to
some friend that may acquaint the King before the Justice is informed of it:
for the King is most clement and supremely absolute: then the King being
informed the quality of the crime, person, and matter; it may be, that without
hearing the parties, he may grant his pardon. The custom of the country is,
that as soon as one has perpetrated a crime, he lays by his apparel, puts on
a white shirt that draws on the ground, like persons doing penance with us,
goes bare-head, and barefoot, lies stretched out upon the ground, and so
attends his sentence.

Some there are sit down, others stand upright, according to the nature of the
offense. Many that presume upon the Princes grace, are deceived, and meet their
death.

They who are condemned, are immediately given to the Elephants, who with their
trunks lift them on high, Adultery punished.
then let them fall, and so they are broken in pieces; then the bodies are
given to the Lions, and Tigars, whereof there is a great number. Adulterers are
severely punished, as well men as women, and especially, if they are of a good
family. One was taken on a time with his slave, who were both bound together,
and buried alive.

For account of their marriages, Marriage.
when persons of quality will marry, they consult their Divines, and Magies, to
know the success: when children are born, they have their nativity cast to
know if good or ill shall befall them, whereof I shall rehearse a remarkable
example hereafter.

When these Grandees, lose their affection to their first wives, Repudiation.
they are allowed to espouse another, without any injustice to the first, who
must suffer till her husband pleases to call her back, this happening most
commonly for dislike and change of diet. Where the husband and wife preserve a
perfect amity all their life, when the husband dies, if the wife will do
according to the custom of the country, the obsequies ended, she remains with
her friends for a certain time to bewail his death, then makes them a great
feast, in token of rejoicing, distributes her jewels and chiefest goods to
them, who are dearest to her; and having embraced and kissed her Parents,
Kindred, and Friends, they conduct her with Flute and Hoboys, to her husbands
monument under a Tent, adorned with Folliage, and covered with flowers, where
they drink, eat, dance, and make merry, and the poor woman takes a potion, that
makes her as it were frantic: then dancing, and carowsing, she sacrifices her
self to her husbands ghost, throwing her self into a fire, having distributed
to her friends the rest of her rings and jewels. Their Priests and Magicians
confirm them in these abominable customs, which they observe in diverse other
parts of India, as at Narsinga, Cambaya, Coromandel, and other places. But they
take diligent care in these marriages of the great ones, that the women have
free choice with the consent of their kindred, to the end it may be the
vehemence of affection that obliges them to so cruel a testimony. Likewise men
to assure their affection to their Mistresses, Testimonies of love.
use strange testimonies: some with a Torch will burn their Arms before them,
others will cut and stab themselves with poniards: others taking a cloth dipped
in oil, will light it, and have the patience to let it burn out and extinguish
upon their arm: which obliges a woman to the like love, and to render the like
proof at his death.

But that truculent sacrifice they immolate to their Gods of their poor and
wretched daughters, is no less strange and truculent: for in a part of this
vast Empire to celebrate the feast of their great Crocouatas, Sacrifice of
their own children.
they bring up their daughters in the Temple, Virgins devoted to prayer and
fasting, who are consecrated and preserved for the solemn sacrifice in such
sort, as when Father, Mother, or kindred visits them, they do it with reverence
and adoration, as to Saints and celestial persons, and entreat they would be
mindful of them, when they have the honor to come before their great God: for
this consideration they bring them for an offering all sorts of dainties. Every
year they sacrifice one of these poor girls. In the front of the altar stands
a marble stone very radiant, and of various colors, where they imagine they
behold the figure of that furious Demon they adore. The maid divested of her
rich attire, Palpes, or Priests.
beholds her God, and observes if he yet call her, for they say the Demon calls
her by name, and invites her to union: then their Palpes or Priests vested in
their garments sacerdotal, take her, and setting her stark naked upon this
stone; after diverse incensings both to the Demon and the maid, they strangle
her in the presence of father and mother, who observe well if she be dead, that
she may not suffer a second martyrdom; and having with a stone sharp as a razor
ripped up her body, they tear out her heart, which they throw in their Demons
face, burn it, and sprinkle the ashes mingled with water upon their Idols: the
rest of the body they burn at leisure with aromatic woods, for the use of the
Temples. In other places the Priests eat the Victim. The sacrifice ended, they
go to dinner, the congregation assists at the service, and prayers made by the
Priests with many incensings: the Priests then change their vestments, and take
others of a horrible form, and mounting upon a Scaffold, as soon as the Music
plays, begin to dance. They begin in a low key, then they rise, with prayers
and imprecations mingled, til healed with keeping time to the cadence of the
music they become franick, some falling to the ground, others continue
dancing, holding bells which accord with the instruments: So soon as any one
falls to the ground, none but would think the devil enters into him, they
change the tune, and dance with more violence and fury, without missing the
least point of the cadence.

But what is most strange of all, they say at the same time they see the the
devils dance with them, The devils dance.
and that they easily know them by the agility of their motion, for otherwise
they are attired like the Priests. They observe visibly that they must needs be
Demons; because only a certain number of Priests mounting the Scaffold; when
any of them fall, you still see the same number dancing, without diminution. By
reason whereof, the beholders suffer strange distempers, and their hair
standing an end. Strange accidents to the author.
I remember that being present on a time for curiosity, on the sudden I felt
my self seized with a swimming in my head, that so inflamed me, I was almost
suffocated, not able to speak a word, nor draw my breath, and striving to cry
out and call for help to my company that was not far off; I could not possibly
bring forth a word: so as being all in a lavour with agony and distress, that
held me a quarter of an hour, in my heart I made my prayers to Almighty God,
by whose grace I was delivered, having never known the like torment in my
lifetime; for I felt I know not what pass betwixt my legs, then leapt upon
my shoulders, the phantasm continually grasping me fast. I was so dejected, as
nothing could be more, but my companions reassured me the best they could; and
as soon as I was gotten away, I went to tell it to Father Hipolita of Saint
Francis order, who assured me 'twas a diabolical illusion to have destroyed me,
had not God with his grace secured me. He counseled me to be thankful to
Almighty God, and come no more where such abominations were, the curiosity
whereof had cost me so dear; for I was a glad man to see it end in a mockery;
but thenceforward I had a care how I came within their Temples, and
congregations to see their accursed Idolatries.

But to end the feast, when the ceremonies and dances have lasted four days,
the Nobility makes a feast in some Palace of account, Feasts and ceremonies.
where the principal of the city, men and women, are invited, and come most
richly apparelled, and covered with jewels, and rubies sometimes as big as a
nut, blazing like burning coals: then after a sacrifice, these Nobles command
the Music play some pleasant air, and one of them takes a dame, whom he likes
best forth to dance, not touching her hand nevertheless, but holding by a
handcherchief of silk, and all the rest do the like till the ball be ended.
They dance round, and it is pretty to see this humble dance, Laudative songs.
artificial for the many changes are in it. This ended, the music changes to
a very solemn base, as 'twere for repose, with certain stanzoes sung in praise
of their deceased Ancestors, celebrating their valors with a thousand
encomiums for the most part false. Then they sit round, discoursing still of
the valor of these deceased, and the women more tender of heart fall a
weeping, and amidst their lamentations all cry out, they shall never be like
their Fathers, who did such and such high feats: after having invited each
other jointly to complaints, at last being tired, they take a collation
together, and so the ceremony ends.

By what is said it is plainly seen, how strangely superstitious these people
are, and how serious an honor they bear their gods or demons, to which their
Priests cease not daily to excite them more and more, and omit not the least
diminutive Ceremony for their honor or profit. These Priests bear a wonderful
authority over them, which as I said before, is more remarkable in their wars,
than in any other thing.

How the Priests dispose of wars.
For these Eastern Princes in raising war differ much from us, insomuch as
having a considerable war to be commenced with their neighbor Princes or
others, the Priests take upon them authority to arbitrate the matter, having
such privilege, as freely to remonstrate to their Prince his duty to the
people: whereupon two Bramins or Priests for both sides, without passion,
confer together of their Princes complaint, to find a means to accommodate the
matter: when they cannot effect it, they draw a hundred of the prime horse, and
as many foot out o^ their Armies, ranked in battalia, consisting many times of
three or four hundred thousand men, rarely ever making war but with equality,
the stronger still giving law to the weaker. And though one Bramin find his
party stronger by a hundred thousand, he yet makes a conscience to use his
advantage as much as may be, to prevent combat, and if of necessity it must be,
he uses a thousand protestations to his Prince to hinder it; but not effecting
it, they order the two small parties to join, giving their benediction to them,
and exhorting every one to do his best, the Victor giving conditions to the
other, who is compelled to yield, and so their wars are concluded for the most
part. To them who in this action shall have done any thing signal, the Prince
gives a favor which they keep as sacred, though many times it is but a scarf or
silly taffeta ribbon, Reward of valor.
with a certain character or figure in the middle, that denotes he has behaved
himself well in fight for his Princes cause, A deplorable History of two
Princes.
which they wear on festivals in hats or palm bonnets, and some there are who
have diverse of them respective to the occasions they served in.

For the example I touched upon in the predictions at the marriages of great
ones, and the fortune of their children, it is thus. In the land of Transiane
there was a Prince tributary to the King of Pegu, and his near Kinsman, who
married a sister of the Prince Tazatay, one of the greatest beauties in the
Eastern parts. The nuptials were kept with great joy and solemnity, amongst
other things the Divines were consulted of the success of the marriage, and
'twas found that never two persons had loved, and should love so well as these
two; the Prince and Princess Alfonge and Abelara, this hariolation doubled the
joy and celebrity; and in effect they lived a sweet and a happy life, with
entire affection, and for their greater felicity they had two twin-sons, who in
their under-growth discovered something of great and lofty, and appeared
singularly hopeful for the future: These Infants having attained their ten
years age, loved so cordially they could not live asunder, Fraternal amity.
and the ones desire, still met with the others consent in all things; but the
Devil, that enemy of concord, inspires a curiosity into the minds of the Father
and Mother to know their fates, and to their grief were told, the time should
come when these two brothers that now loved so fondly, should cut one another
throats; Curiosity and predictions dangerous.
which much astonished the poor Princes, and filled them with fearful
apprehensions.

The two Princes being come to their fifteen years, one said to the other,
Brother it must be you that must murder me, for I will sooner dye a hundred
deaths, then do you the lest harm imaginable: the other replied, believe it not
good Brother; I desire you, for you are as dear, and dearer to me than my self.
But the Father to prevent the misfortune, resolved to separate them, whereupon
they grew so troubled and melancholy, he was constrained to protract his
design, till an occasion happened that invited all three, the Father and two
Sons, to a war betwixt the Kings of Narsinga and Pegu, upon Title of
Territories, one detained from the other: but by mediation of the Bramins a
peace was concluded, upon condition these two young Princes should espouse the
two daughters of the King of Narsinga, and the King of Baticalas Sister, two
Princesses of transcendent beauty, and that the King of Pegu on him that should
marry the elder, should confer all the Countries he took in the last war,
with the Kingdom of Martaban, and the other Brother, besides the Kingdom of
Tazatay, should have that of Verma, which contains the Seniory of Zait, that
pays yearly for tribute twelve pearls, weighing two Serafs of Gold, and of
entire perfection. These contracts agreed upon, were signified to the two
Princesses of Narsinga, who, though then very young, A reasonable condition.
told their Father they consented to the marriages, but on this condition, that
their husbands happening to die before them, if they made not voluntary
sacrifice of themselves, it should not be imputed an infamy to them, because
they were unacquainted with them.

This was agreed to, and the Nuptials consummated to the general joy of all
men for the common peace accompanied them, and great feasting there was every
where. The one of these Princes stayed with his Lady in Narsinga, the other
went to possess the Province of Verma, lands spaciously divided: so as a long
time they were without inter-view, visiting each other only by missius and
presents of value or curiosity. Now it fell out the King of Tazatay was engaged
in a sharp war with the King of Mandranella, and sent to the two
Brother-Princes his Sons, for aid: who both hastening with a good strength of
Soldiers, one knowing nothing of the other, the one declining his direct way,
marched up to the enemy, and in a bloody fight defeated him: thence went to
present himself to his Father, but by sad destiny on the morrow, his Brother
arriving from Verma with his Lady, in the evening came secretly into the Town
to visit a Lady, once their ancient Mistress: An unfortunate meeting.
the other Brother being on the same design they met at the Ladies gate by
night, not knowing one another, where furious with jealousy, after some words
they drew and killed each other. One of them dying, amongst many other things
said he, gave humble thanks to God that he had prevented the direful destiny
of his Horoscope, in not making him the assassine of his Brother, as 'twas
prejudicated: Hereupon the other finding him by his voice and discourse,
drawing near his end himself, crept to him, and embraced him with tears and
lamentations, and so both dolefully ended their days together.

The Father being advertized of it, seeing his white hairs led by his own
fault to so hard a fortune, overborn with grief and despair, came and slew
himself upon the bodies of his Sons, and with the grief and tears of all the
people, were buried all three in the same monument: which shows us the danger
of too great curiosity, nor is it an easy question how this can be found by
knowledge of the stars, or if they are things inevitable, which I leave to be
decided by the more learned.

But before I end this Chapter I shall observe, that amongst such a diversity
of Idols, as well of the great Corcouitas, who is the principal and most
ancient, on whom all the others depend, as of the Oysima, the promotor of all
things, and diverse other strange and horrible shapes, every one with Temples
and Sacrifices peculiar, amongst all this they have, as I said, the image of
the blessed Virgin with her infant, which with lighted lamps they honor
reverently. These lamps are not of glass, but Talc stone, of which they have
abundance, Talc instead of glass.
whole mountains at one point of the Country, eastward. They work it very
artificially, and make of it several sorts of Utensills, compounding the
mettle Calin, so much esteemed through the Indies, from Persia, as far as
China, like silver; but as easily melted as tin. Of this they likewise make
their windows, and lantorns: lantorns they likewise make of the triple
colored tortoise shell I spoke of before.

I omitted to tell you that for their dances they use a sort of pans, which
being well handled, yield an elegant melody, Musical Instruments.
but to play well requires long practice. They have other Musical instruments,
not of use in Europe, amongst the rest a sort of pans, flat and double, the
cover whereof stands two fingers distant, set with wyar strings, they call it a
Hydrac, it is tedious, Hydrac.
and difficult to learn. For the quality of their years, I could not well
understand their manner of account, but in general I find they reckon by
Moons, as the greater part of the east, The Peguan years.
and their days by the sun; out of these Moons they raise five days,
allowing thirteen Moons to the year; and the fifth day being come, about
midnight they make a solemn sacrifice in their Temples, where they universally
meet. I conferd with some about this matter, who told me, the Peguan year was
like that they use in China, which is Lunary, and that they compare it as near
as may be to the Solary; for their year consisting of twelve months, twice in
five years they gain a Lunary month, making that year of thirteen Moons, so as
they have no knowledge of the golden number, nor the nineteen years circle, and
the anticipation of one hour and twenty eight minutes, which remits the new
Moons to the golden number, with them is accommoded by the annual
supputation: for they neither have, nor will have a perpetual Calander, but at
great charge print every year a new one, which they send through all the
Provinces of China.

It may be our Peguans would imitate this after their fashion, and according to
their understanding, which is very weak for such matters, which the best wits
amongst us find task hard enough.

Of the Philosophy of the Indians, and their opinions in Astronomy and
Geography, I shall say something hereafter.

Before I leave the state of Pegu, I will not omit what some of the Peguans
told me, and have mentioned in writing in their Travailes. That some years
before we arrived, there was in the Country a King of the ancient Royal Race,
who had many Deputies in the Country of Bramaa, toward the Lake Chiamay,
amongst the rest, one in the Kingdom of Tangu that rebelled against him,
defeated and slew him, and made himself King of Pegu, Alterations in Pegu.
they called him the Bramaa of Tangu, a great Tyrant, and a Potent Prince, who
by force of Arms joined many Kingdoms to his Empire, as Pram, Melintay,
Calani, Bacam, Mirandu, Aua, Martaban, and others; He afterward was put to
death by a Peguan Lord, called Xemin, of Zatan, who made himself King, but was
defeated, and slain by another, called Xemindoo, who likewise being made King,
was not long after defeated, and put to death by Chaumigren, of near aliance to
Bramaa, who became one of the most Powerful Kings has reigned in Pegu, who
brought totally under the Empire of the Kingdom of Syan, with twelve great
Kingdoms more. Vast Armies in the East.
They report that in the War of Syan, he led into the field seventeen hundred
thousand Combatants, and seventeen thousand Elephants, whereof nine thousand
were for fight, the rest for carriage. To which the immense Armies brought
heretofore by the Persian Kings against the Grecians, may induce us to give
credit; the cause is, that in all these Eastern Countries, the greater part of
the people go to the wars, and that there are not amongst them so many
Ecclesiastics, Lawyers, Clarks, Bookmen, and idle Persons as are with us.

The King that reigned in Pegu in our time, called the Brama, was as I think,
the son of this Chaumigren, afterward hard enough dealt with by the Kings of
Tangu, Aracan, and Syan, as I said before.

But it is time to advance to the Provinces and Towns of high India, subject,
or confining, and neighbors to Pegu, as Abdiare, Vilep, Canarane, Cassubi,
Transiane, Tasata, Mandranella, Tartary, and others.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Abdiare and Vilep, Towns of Pegu Fismans, Apes, Unicornes,
and other animalls. Fotoque, an Idol with three Heads.
PErsevering constantly in our trafick, thorough the Towns and Provinces of
this great Empire of Pegu, and the Countries adjacent; amongst others, in the
Town of Abdiare and Vilep, a Kingdom in high India, subject to the Peguan; and
having traded with certain Merchants (whom we found open and real) treating
with the Sensall, or factor, not by words, but by fingers, and joints of the
hand, the practice of all the Indies, to conceal the price of Merchandises. We
parted from Vilep with good company, and within three hours came to the
descent of a hill, exceeding shady; upon the hanging whereof was a pleasant
fountain, where the whole company stayed for refreshment, but we had not been
long there when there came about us an extraordinary number of Apes, the
greater part black as jet, some small ones black and white, very lepid: one of
them addressed himself to me, as it had been to crave something of that I was
eating, and thinking to fright him away, he was not scared at all, as if he
were accustomed to passengers: I cast a piece of bread to him, which he took
very modestly, and divided with his company and two young ones he had with him;
Apes.
presently there came three more, which seemed to crave their share, I gave
them something and they eat very quietly: but on a sudden part of our company
arose and took their Arms, by reason of a heard of Fismans, Fismans.
or wild dogs they discovered, making toward us, which with one musket shot
were all scared away: in our sight they fed on grass like sheep.

Proceeding on our way we met with abundance of other sorts of strange
animalls, as likewise of fruits, some whereof of growth much to be admired:
some that bore rosin, Fruit^.
that smell like Mastick; others a red berry, wherewith they dye carnation,
which never fades, but daily becomes more lively. Having thus traveled ten or
twelve days through diversity of soyles, meeting with many rivers, animalls,
trees, and other things unknown to us, amongst others abundance of civit Cats,
whereof they have some domestical, which you may buy four for one Pardai,
Civit cats.
but they are stinking, and their dung smells like Man's. At length we took to
the River Jiame, and in three days came to the Village called Tanza, on the
morrow to Canarane, a fair Town, rich and flourishing as any Town in India,
the Capital of a Kingdom, bearing the same name, confining eastward, on the
Country of Tazatay, south on Carpa, and northward on Moantay, another great
Kingdom. The Town is seated betwixt two great rivers, Jiame and Pegu, it is in
circuit about four leagues, magnificently built: in customs and conditions
the people differ much from those of Pegu, for they never go barefoot as the
others do. Princes and Noble Men wear rich buskins, and sandalls set with gold.

The King of Canarane is Potent and Wealthy in Mines of gold and silver. He
has also one of Emerald, the finest in the east, Mines.
whence he draws great profit. This Prince was never known to diminish, but
augment his Treasure. Likewise they have Mines of Turkesses.

When a King dies, they interr all his Treasure with him, and swear his
Successor not to meddle with it. For the first year he and his Court are
maintained at the Subjects charge, and all the Nobility by obligation come to
make their acknowledgment with rich presents, and sue to be established in their
Estates, Offices, Seniories; for the King has right to sell estates of all
sorts then vacant; and hereupon all his people high and low, are tied with
petition in hand, and with presents, to sue for their offices and vacancies,
which raises him in this year a mavelous treasure. No one can wear shoes,
rings, nor girdles of gold, without the Kings license, which brings him in a
great gabel, a share whereof belongs to the King of Pegu as sovereign, who
granted him the grace, because the Country is colder than Pegu, and I have
heard it of Merchants, that in the winter here rage certain in winds, Mounsons
winds cold in extremity. Debtors slayes.
or Mounsons which come from the North, so cold that travelers lose their toes
the cold is so sharp and rigorous. Their custom is, if a Merchant will oblige
himself, he obliges likewise all his goods, wife, and children, and failing at
the day promised, the Creditor may seize on all for slaves.

The usual money is called Canza, and all the Peguan is current there, which
the King stamps in gold or silver, through the Indies called Jamis, besides
what every particular Prince coins of his own. They have another sort of silver
money called Pardain and Tazifo. They make some likewise of tin mixed with
copper, which being no coin royal is lawful for any man to stamp; as also
another sort called Bise, wherewith they may buy any thing: one must be
careful in taking it, or he may be deceived. The King keeps abundance of
slaves for his Elephants and stables. In their structures they use ciment mixed
with sugar, as in Pegu, which mixed with calcined shells becomes very firm, Sugar
used in buildings.
the shells are dear and sold by measure. They have many plantations of sugar,
the canes whereof they give their Elephants, who love them exceedingly, so as
when they commit any fault they deprive them of that food, and so easily
chastize and instruct them; Elephants instructed.
when their keeper speaks to them they will moove their great ears to
understand what he says. They are decently lodged, and, as at Pegu, fed in
silver vessels. The better sort of people live after the Persian way, their
houses ennobled with gold and azure. They have only one lawful wife, Women.
but diverse concubines who go richly apparelled, their face veiled in the
streets, as in Spain and Italy, but within door their faces are uncovered, and
are very sociable. They are Gentiles and Idolaters, and easy to be dealt
withal. If a Merchant make stay in Town, he shall have a couple of young women
will furnish him with a house, and all necessaries, and serve him like slaves;
nay it is lawful to beat and chastize them if they do not what they are
commanded, having once submitted to it. They go well apparelled and decent as
may be, are very affable, dance, and sing well; preserve a Merchants goods with
great care, Larceny amongst them being held a notorious ignominy. Almost all
the women are clothed in white, as all the Inhabitants, men and women in Arabia
Felix.

We lay in the Town of Canarena, at one Chamuts, a Brokers house, Unicorns
horns.
who had two Unicorns horns, one whereof had half the head remaining to it.

We put the end in water to see if 'twould make it boil as the horn does, but
I thought it boiled more vivaciously, and it came out like pearl. I asked him
if he ever saw of these creatures alive, he told me he never saw but two, which
were very young; and not come to have horns. That the King going a hunting,
took one of them, but they could not take the damme, whatsoever they could do,
because as they say, they shun and fly from the aspect and presence of a man,
and the places where the Serpents haunt, whereof we spoke before, who make a
cruel war upon them for greediness of their blood, which is said to be of
excellent scent, as it has been diverse times proved; particularly, when one
was sent by their Prince to the King of Pegu: which stung by a fly, the blood
which issued out, was put in a bottle and brought to the King, who made no
great esteem of it, not finding the scent agreeable, though notwithstanding he
found it more odorous then Civet, This the Sensal or Broker told us. I my self
saw a perfect Unicorn in the King of Regues Seraglio, who had the tongue
differing from other beasts, very long, and jagged; the head more like a horse
then a heart, and there are of several hairs. The Keeper said, it is but an
uncleanly beast, delights in his own soil, and that having often seen him
drink, he never observed him to put his horn in the water.

The Indians report many other things of them, but so strange and various,
there is no great assurance, as that they breed but once in their lifetime,
and like Elephants, go two years with their young, and the like. A Bramin (an
order Kings themselves hold it an honor to be of) told me once with a
protestation, laying his hand on the wreath of his order, that he was present
with the King of Casubi at the taking of one of these Unicorns, which was all
white, and very old, the chops so hanging down, all her teeth were seen, that
she was so fierce in her own defense, she broke her horn amongst the boughs,
that being taken, they brought her bound to the Kings Palace, but being so
bruised with blows, for having hurt the Kings Nephew, she would not eat, and
so died within five days, which shows she is a choleric and sullen beast,

The Queens had bracelets made of the bones, as Indian Ladies have a curiosity
in wearing bracelets of Ivory, and the like.

The King of Casubi reserved the horn of this beast to himself: about five
months after being at this Princes Court, who was both courteous and curious,
I desired the Sieur de la Courb, one of our own company, to request the favor
we might see this horn, which he did; and the King immediately sent for it,
and gave it him, and the Sieur in requital, gave him a delicate watch.

This horn was of different color to those I had seen in the Sultan of Mecaes
Serallio, and other places, for this drew near a white gray, whereas the other
were of a black gray.

I have been told that Lewis de Bartheme in his travailes, recounts how he saw
at the Seldans of Meca in Arabia, two of these Unicornes, which were sent him
by the King of Aethiopia, high, as a two year old colt, of a dark color, the
head like a Heart, the horn three fathom long, a little Mane, small legs,
cloven feet, and a Goats cley; likewise the English and the Hollanders report,
that in their last voyage toward Spiteberg, in a place called Horendsond, they
found Unicornes horns, not knowing of what beast they were.

The Prince of Casubi moreover showed us his Ladies bracelets, made of the
other piece of this horn, which had a very sweet scent.

He showed us likewise the bones of an entire head, which one of his Princes
kept in a Cabinet, and diverse other curiosities; amongst the rest an Estrif,
that which we call a Griffin, but the head was wanting, because at the time it
was killed, Estriffe or a G^iffon.
it fell amongst brakes, so thick and thorney, they could not find it till the
morrow; by which time the Marmosets had eaten the whole head; the feet were of
strange length, and the Tallons would well have seized a bushel, his plume was
white, and reddish upon the breast; they have but two feet, and a Tallon is a
good half ell long, from one end to the other: I have seen of them of
prodigious strength, and furiously ravenous, that would have carried away a
calfe of six months old, and eaten him. There are abundance of them about the
lake Chiammay, whereof we spoke before.

Mandranel
From Canarana we made some days to Mandranella, a fair Town, fifty leagues
from Tasatay upon Zingis, a large and deep river, that bears great vessels.

They traffic with the Tabins, or Chinese; and the people of Bugazan come
thither for all necessaries.

Califerech.
This is the residence of the grand Caleferech of Pegu, whereof we spoke before:
All persons of quality that pass this way, go kiss the Princes buskin, who is
as affable and courteous as may be. There is another Town of the same name in
Indostan toward Persia, above six hundred leagues from this. In this country
there is a sort of domestical foul, they call Bouiagui, which live for the
greater part in the water, and feed on what is thrown them: such as have house
and lands upon the river, keep abundance of them, being of little charge, and
great profit; he who can get two hundred of them, thinks himself wealthy; for
he needs no more then one little lad to drive them a field, with a basket to
gather up the eggs, whereof he will not loose one; for they sit down to lay,
and are very fruitful. They have a custom every evening to stay an hour in
the water, then to call them out to seat; they have an usual sign, which they
readily observe. They are very good meat, and delicious. The nature of them is,
that turn them into a ground sowed with Mil, or Rice, they will most strangely
pull up all the weeds by the root, without touching the grain.

The grain they call Taffin, is like our Millet, and has a leaf like a reed,
which these birds will in no sort meddle with, whether for aversion, or other
cause. They are very cheap, we had two for a half fanon, which is no more then
two pence with us, Fanon money.
and are as big as a hen, and very fat. We found them to be excellent meat, we
bought more of them, my Companion and I, for our recreation, walking by the
river side, to turn them into such grounds to see them cull, and pluck up the
no cent herbs. We were considering how to transport of the eggs into France,
and specially to Arlids, a corn Country, where they are at so great charge in
weeding, but making trial of them in a ground sowed with Chiza, which in other
places is called Moussa, a sort of round beans, Chiza.
but twice as big as ours, and of the same taste, only the skin more thick and
hard, of chestnut color, the leaf flat; but we found they eat the corn, and let
the weeds stand, so we learnt of the Indians these birds are not weeders for
all grains. For two Fanons, which in our money amounts not to eight pence; one
may sometimes buy a hundred: they take pains from morning till night, without
intermission, and cost little the keeping.

In other parts of India we saw another sort, of a different color, drawing
toward green and gray, Artipan.
called Artipan, serving for that use, and others; For in November they Mue,
and cast all their feathers, with which the Inhabitants stuff cushions and
pillowes of Coco mats, to sit and sleep upon, to cover their Country houses,
for lattices, and diverse other things: they are so large, they eat all sorts
of vermin, flesh, and fish.

In this Town of Mandranella, an Indian of good quality frequented our company,
and often eat with us, bringing of his Country fruits with him; of whom I
demanded one day, if he made no scruple, we being Ramata, so they call the
Portugues, Ramata.
and all Christians on this side, to eat with us, since the greater part of the
Indians esteem themselves polluted by it. But he told us no, and that their
three headed God, Fotoco, was esteemed a friend to the Franques Ramata, and
that one of them had brought a Sanacarin, Sanacarin, or virgin.
or image of the Virgin, as they term it, which their great Oysima had
honored with such high virtues and attributes, that it had the privilege to
make the third head of their Fotoco, for which reason this God has ever since
been the most accomplished, the greatest and highest of all, to whose
excelsitude none can attain, and that the day will come when he shall judge all
the other Gods for abusing his faithful people, but for being cruel to the
wicked, that they shall be quit of.

The Indians faith.
In Cambaya likewise they adore a triple headed God, and say the God the first
cause of all things, had three children, on whom he conferred his Divinity, and
that they had all but one will. In Tazatay likewise they have the same God,
with three heads, which they say is three Gods united in one. In other places
they adore a foul, which they hold to be the Holy Spirit of God, and many
things of like sort, by which may be seen these poor Indians have heretofore
had some Doctrine of the blessed Trinity, and other Mysteries of our Religion,
but they have confounded all with fables and imaginations. The Bramins
themselves, to signify this, wear three cords tied on one knot, and a cross on
others.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Kingdom of Casubi: their Religion.
FRom Mandranella we went to Casubi, both a Kingdom and a Town (sometime
subject to the King of Bengala) where we first discovered a most high mountain,
and then the Town, and drawing nearer we perceived abundance of lighted
torches, and a multitude of people: We stayed to observe the matter, and saw
some bring the body of a Tree, which immediately was laid in the ground, with
lime and ciment, attended with women clothed in red jackets as low as the
girdle, and a cotton ski^t thence to the foot, Interment and Ceremonies.
in which color they likewise were clothed that carried the Tree, in which
was enclosed a Corpse wrapped in linen, and aromatically imbalmed with mastick
and other drugs, that prevent corruption, then laid in this Coffin, and covered
with the same timber, and fastened with pins of the same, all pargetted over,
within and without with mastick, frankincense, and bitumen. Forty days they
spend in feasting over the sepulcher, near to which there is a booth built, of
purpose to dress and season the Viands, with Aromaticks, that, they say, the
soul of the deceased may sent the prefume.

They go then before their Pagode, or Idol, without weeping, because they think
the dead all go straight to heaven. These forty days terminated, they employ
forty more in erecting a Piramis, made sillily enough of earth and water, but
as high as a Tower, proportionable to the elevation of the person. This done,
the wife of the deceased all alone, retires to her house for forty days more,
incessantly weeping for her husband; her kindred mean while supplying her with
all necessaries, for she would sooner be her own death, then go forth to
demand any thing.

During these six score days there is continual treaty of a new marriage for
the widow, Widows, how remarried.
who is led forth in a delicate virgin garment, accompanied with other delicate
young dames, that make a set to play at tennis, or ball, made of a spungy
Ciment, Ball play
that bounds higher then one filled with wind. The women affect it much more
then men, and use this game to get them husbands, by their agility and address.

While we were in this Country, there was one, who after she had ended her
widow Ceremonies, was found dead in her bed, Sapony, a mo^tiberous herb.
by having slept upon an herb, called Sapony, absolutely mortal to such as
lie on it.

The Town of Casubi is fair, great, and of good traffic. Casubi, and the air.
The men are of good stature, something tawny, the women very beautiful, and
kind, well apparelled, of blithe and jolly humor, Women.
their garments are something lascivious, for being cut, and open their skin is
seen, and discovered; the air there is likewise temperare enough.

The Town is environed with high mountains, garnished with pure fountains, and
fruit of all sorts, chiefly quinces of the largest size, and the most kindly of
any other part of the east, they call them Goncha: here grew likewise excellent
grapes, Goncha grapes.
the same as at Aleppo, which they bag up in sacks, made of Coco cloth, and
load, and unload upon the ground, as they were nuts, without hurting the least
grain, upon the trees there is abundance of Manna, which they gather diligently
before sun rising, for it dissipates, and vanishes so soon, Manna.
as the sun rays come upon it. They sell it very cheap, though it is very
purgative; I remember that gathering some once of a tree that resembles our
salleyes, I thought I had taken Scammony.

In these parts people live long, Long life.
sometimes above a hundred and fifty years, and they who retire beyond the
Mountain live yet longer.

The Town is crossed with the great river Paroget, stored with Merchandises of
all sorts, and a good company of Merchants.

There is a vast space incircled with walls, as at Goa, in the middle whereof
stands the Palace Royal, where there is kept a great market, and where every
Saturday all sorts of Marchandizes are brought, chiefly ermyn skins, Furs.
and Martins of three kinds, very exquisite. The mountains round about are
stocked with cattle and venison, the inhabitants being great hunters, and given
to nothing but to husband their land, and make profit of their commodity; women
when they work, wear buskins, and the Otoyac shoes. They make in their houses
great store of cloth for their use, Cocos the benefit of the tree.
and decent living. Likewise they make a thousand delicates, and artificers of
Cocos, as flaskets, baskets, boxes, mats of diverse colors, singularly
wrought, this fruit serving them for meat, drink, and all other humane
necessities.

They are exceedingly addicted to Idolatry, and fond superstitions, testifying
much religion and devotion in their ceremonies, and affectionate to their
Priests, who are married: they have a sort of remarkable confession, which
holds something of Christianism.

Before the great day of jubily, which they make at their Oyzima, Confession in
Casubi.
they go to a lake to wash themselves, where they stay some part of the night,
then wrap themselves in sheets of cotton, they call Bambou, and retire under
trees, where there hangs abundance of lights.

The day of confession being come, they go to their Catibe, or Priest, and
falling on their knees, throw off their mantle, which they wear on the bare
shirt, then presenting some small matter to the Priest, confess their sins,
and the Priest with a small ball made of a root, beats them, often repeating
Gazay, that is, speak, speak.

Confession ended, he enjoins them a penance, and again they go to wash in the
lake, and after all they go in procession, Procession
together with their Idols, which they bear along likewise in procession: when
they have gone quite round the Town, the Priests cry out, Go eat in the name of
our God, and his peace be upon you all, then kissing in sign of peace, and such
as have had any difference, or animosity betwixt them, embrace and kiss,
weeping as heartily as for the greatest matter that could befall them.

Reconcilements.
Whereupon their friends and kindred come to comfort them, telling them they
must forget all; so as thus reconciled, they go dine together, and continue
ever after perfect friends.

They take not easily offense one of another, never using bad language one of
another.

These Priests esteem us polluted people, and I remember that some of them once
conferring with us, washed their garments, and would not eat of the meat we had
touched.

All the people are much addicted to sciences and manual arts. The soil is
good and fertile, and their land bears twice a year as their sheep do likewise.

Being there we came acquainted with a Christian Merchant born at Aracan,
expert in Greek, in the Abissine, Syriack, and the Spanish language, who was
converted at Diu. He took much satisfaction in our company, and told us how his
mother was an Abissine, and that his Father dying young she bred him up to
Greek and Abissine, and showed me a Greek Author he ever carried with him,
where he met with many worthy Histories, amongst others, how the Christian
faith was brought into the Indies, and particularly into this Country of
Casubi.

That St. Thomas was to preach to the Parthians, and at Bengala, St. Matthew in
Ethiope, and St. Bartholomew in the further India, toward the Kingdom of
Verma, Aua, Pegu, and other places.

Since that, about three hundred years after, This is partly taken out of the
Ecclesiastical History out of Socrates Sedomenes. Theodoret and Ruffinus.
Ardesius and Frumentius.
a Christian Philosopher Native of Tire in Phenicia, by name Meropius, came
into the Indies with two young Children, his Nephews, called Edesius and
Frumentius, out of curiosity only to see the Country, at the example of
another Philosopher called Metrodorus, some years before, and that having well
viewed and considered those Countries, about to return, his vessel was
assaulted by the barbarous Idolaters, and he and all his slain, except the two
young youths, who were brought to the King of Casubi, and he taken with their
Gentilesses, caused them to be brought up carefully, afterward made Aedesius
his Cup Bearer, and the other Frumentius Steward of his household, whereof they
did both acquit themselves very worthily, and to the Kings content, who loved
them exceedingly, as also the Queen Arsinda and her only son.

The King dying, the Queen became Regent with her only son, who had a special
favor for the two Christians, to whose charge the King had committed his Son
for instruction, till he came to age; wherefore the Queen had a special regard
of them, and they behaved themselves laudably in their office, all this while
continuing in the right Religion, reaping still some benefit amongst such
Christians as came into those parts, who were Merchants, or Roman negotiators,
whom they ever confirmed in their faith, and by permission royal they built a
kind of Church, or Oratory, to meet and make their prayers in. Notwithstanding
wanting such freedom as they desired, and inclining to their natural
Country, the young King being now of age to reign, they requested his license,
and whatsoever the King or his Mother could say to dissuade them, they could
not prevail, they aiming to carry neither gold, silver, nor other wealth with
them. So they both came back into the Roman Empire, and the Aedesius retired to
Tire, his native Country, where he became Priest.

We staid some time at Casubi, to sell and truch our Marchandises, where we
made good profit; and amongst other things of some safron we had, of which they
make no other use then to die their nails, mingling it with brasill, whereby
they make a dainty color.

There are men and women that make incisions in their Arms, with a pointed
piece of wood, out of which wood they get fire, Wood to strike fire.
putting the end of one of these sticks in the cleft of another, and turning it
hard about till smoke and fire come. In these incisions they then paint what
they list in several colors, and ordinarily cover it with a pole-cat skin
newly flawed, which makes the colors more lively, without ever fading.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Macharana, the hunting of Tigars, and other wild beasts, a
History of a Rhinocerot of the Escuriall. The esteem they have for the French
there.
Macharana.
FRom Casubi we took our way toward Macharana, a days journey and a half from
thence, which I may reckon about fifteen leagues, and came to a Village
entirely surrounded with Palisadoes, close by a pleasant river, wherein we saw
diverse women and girls bathing and smimming, as it is the general custom of
the Indies, Women swimers.
where the women are as expert in swimming as the men, and some take great
delight in it, so as to be more proper they shave all their hair, except a
lock on the fore part of their head. The women of this Country have all very
black hair, which they hold for a great beauty, with a white plump body.

Quinsin.
They use an oil called Quinzin, which dies their hair, and makes it shine like
ebony. We were at a brothers house, who had four beautiful daughters shaved in
this manner, only a lock on the fore part of their head, as it is the fashion
throughout the Indies, though in some parts they shave only the girls of eight
or ten years old. These maids brought us certain coros to eat with them,
Pudomel.
called Budomel, in shape like a quince, with a thin skin upon it, which
bruised betwixt two stones yields a kind of musty flower; but laid it the Sun,
or before the fire becomes like wheaten starch, boiling it with Cocoes of Palm
mingled with yolks of eggs and sugar, they make the most delicate dish India
affords.

Of Poultry and Turkies they have abundance, Poultry.
as of white and gray Partridges, and Pheasants, which are there as domestical
as Turkies: Peacocks both wild and tame of no great price: their money except
the royal coin is all tin or brass. Money.
They have for another dainty a grain in the Islands called Bindi, Bindi.
very small and black, they boil it with milk and sugar, or honey drawn from
Palm, and eat it upon broad leaves, which serve but for once: they invited us
to this as a great dainty.

Still as we traveled through these parts, Apes importunate.
we were every where troubled with Apes and Monkeys, which haunted us
continually, and whenever we rested, they were importunate to get something
of us. 'Twas our custom in the fields to erect a little tent of cotton cloth
with a pole in the middle, and cords to hold it; and having made our repast, we
went to rest, while two stood Sentinel to see that our horses, or beasts of
carriage strayed not away.

There is a kind of beast called Azoufa, Azoufa.
which haunts most commonly Churchyards, to scrape up dead bodies, and feed on
the flesh, whereof they are very ravenous.

I have seen many of them at Fez, Morocca, and other places in Africa, where
they call them Chicali; Chicali.
I my self saw them one day pull up one of our company that died suddenly.
There is another beast called an Ira, exceeding greedy of man's flesh, Ira's, A
beast of the same nature as the Chicali, but red.
they go in herds, and if they meet with any straying, they will devour him:
these likewise unbury the dead for food; but the skins of these have an odor
so excellent, that nature seems to have given it them, that men may be incited
to hunt and take them for the repose of the living and dead.

Really the importunity of the Apes is great and troublesome, but they take
good order for them by shutting them out of the high ways, as every one has
notice to do carefully, but the Azoufa and Iras are both troublesome and
dangerous. Throughout these countries there are abundance of other wild and
sanguinary beasts, as Tygars extremely fierce, Tygars*
and are not daunted with men, though never so troop'd and armed. They are as
big as small Asses, and go night and day in great herds, their heads are like
the Cats of Suria, but more furious, a Lions paws, and their color white, red,
and black, and very shining. Tygar skins.
The skins are very precious with them, because from Persia, Indostan,
Samarcant and China, they come to be furnished here.

The King and and the whole Court make a great business of this chase, and
take a strong number along for it, Tygar hunting.
though notwithstanding some still come to misfortune; at narrow passages no
man dare assault them, for they will fly most furiously at men on horseback,
strangle and tear them to pieces in an instant, and in another instant leap
away to flight so swift, it is impossible to reach them: the Kings make this
chase their delight and glory, and the people pray for him for destroying this
pernicious race.

Elephants.
They likewise chase the Elephant and Rhinocerot, beasts so huge and robustious,
there needs both art and craft to take them; for the Elephant which they call
Cheses and Gusier, is so forcible and impetuous, they could never gain him, but
by means of a female, as I said before.

A story of the Rhinocerot of Escurial.
As to the Rhinocerot, there must be good heed taken of him, because he is armed
from head to foot, with his dark gray horn on his nose, exceeding sharp, of two
foot long, his scales not penetrable by any thing whatsoever, of Chestnut
color: if they can lay hold on man and horse, they will fling them six paces
from them. At the Escurial in Spain I saw one that was brought from the Indies;
but because he had overturned a Chariot full of Nobility, though fortunately no
harm was done, the King commanded his eyes should be put out, and his horn cut
off.

The difficulty was in the execution; for they were constrained to put him in a
close place to bind him, which was done with so much trouble and danger, that
nothing more; for he wounded and maimed diverse: there was one Casabuena, a bold
resolute man, who to prevent danger, put an armor of proof under his Cassock,
the beast came upon him with such force, that he threw him against the wall
with such violence, he was carried forth for dead, bleeding both at mouth and
nose. The Duke of Medina advised the King to kill him with a Musket, because he
had maimed a Gentleman of his, one Cavalier Mortel, but the King would not, and
at last they compassed their ends; and his eyes were put out, and his horn cut
off. By this we may see how dangerous the chase is. They are chiefly found in
Bengala, Patana, and Macharana.

Very dangerous Wolfes.
There is another kind of beast like to our Wolf, but black, and so fierce, they
will venture on a man armed with sword and buckler, and he must quit himself
well to escape; the skin is hard as a Bufflers. The Indian Kings delight much
to see the fury of this beast, exercised upon some unfortunate criminal, and
it is lamentable to see how they will tear their throats out. An armed Monkey.
For this purpose I remember the King of Casubi had a great black Monkey
chained, who armed with his staff, the King would set to fight against a man;
such as came without arms he strangled: but he met at last with an Indian so
valiant and resolute, he subdued him, and ordered him so handsomely, the King
gave him to him for his trophy.

He made him cleanse the streets, and carry the filth out of town, and when he
muttered or grumbled he gave him the cudgel soundly; so as he got his Master a
livelihood, who was a poor man newly come out of slavery. We often met upon the
way with several of these savage beasts, but we never met with any so safe as
are the Lions, who will not rise at the approach of men, be they never so few.

They seem to look for nothing from passengers, but if they are sought for, and
assaulted, they defend themselves in a furious manner, and are light and strong
runners.

One day as we went from Casubi, to Transiana, with a numerous convoy of all
nations, Moors, Gentiles, Malabates and others, because there is no other
travailing through these forests, repleat with such beasts, and every water and
river swimming with Crocodiles or Caymans, a youth who waited on de la Courb in
his chamber, a Frenchman one of our company, of a daring spirit, had a desire
to shoot at a Lion he had spied, for which purpose he left the way some twenty
paces, and had with him an Indian called Talmassac a person of courage
likewise: a Bramin advised them as soon as they had given fire to make all
haste with the best speed of their horses for fear of mischief.

The Lion lay along under a tree, and though he received two shots at the same
instant one in the head, the other in the left shoulder, notwithstanding
finding himself wounded, he sprung so vigorously after them, that though they
made good haste, he overtook one of them in going two hundred paces, and caught
his horse by the Crouper, which he killed like lightning, though his strength
was spent. Poor Talmassac was so astonished with a blow he gave with his head on
the side, that he fell sick, and we were fain to send him back to Casubi in a
Palanquin or Litter with four Camalous or Porters, yet for a further mischief
he was stripped by the way. The Naires, with leave of the hunters took the Lion,
and presented it to the King of Transiana, who admired his growth, having teeth
great and thick, as a pullets egg.

The King recompensed Talmassac with another horse in lieu of that he had lost,
The King of Transiana his curiosity, and affability.
which was looked upon as a great liberality for the esteem they make of horses
in that country, and our Frenchman had a gown of razed cloth of gold, and the
King caused us all to be treated and entertained in his Palace, enquiring
diverse things of Sieur de la Courbe, amongst others the state of our King; and
because I understood something of the country language, I was called to the
conference, and I know not if he were pleased with my discourse, but he called
one of his grooms of his chamber to bring him a handful of gold, which he gave
me, telling me, if I would stay with him, he would give me every Moon as much,
and that I should have care of his person, for the Sieur de la Courbe had
intimated to him that I applied my self to Physic. I made him an humble
reverence and acknowledgement, saying: I was of such a humor, I should never
serve Princes for their money, but I should be sufficiently satisfied with the
honor to be near his Majesty: Esteem of the French on the East.
he was exceedingly pleased with my answer, saying the French are the flower of
the world, and I am delighted with your conversation.

Afterward he showed us two Culverins given him by a Captain of Diepe, well
wrought, and upon either of them a Dragon for Arms.

The Sieur de la Courb's present.
The Sieur de la Courbe presented him with a steel sword of Damis, which he had
gotten in the Indies, a thing the Prince highly prized, and instantly taking a
ring off his finger, with three rich Rubies, would have given it him, but the
Sieur would not receive it, rendering thanks; and saying, 'twere a great
indiscretion in him to acccept of such a rarity, that was worth a thousand
times more then his present; and that it was a full satisfaction, and ample
recompense, that his Majesty would vouchsafe to accept so poor a thing; with
many more respects and compliments, which gained the Kings esteem much more;
saying, 'twas apparent there was something of great amongst the Christians,
because their discourse was more elegant and polite then the ordinary language
of other Merchants; and if he would stay at Court, he would confer upon him
any office in his Palace, he should like of, and would tender him as his
brother; the Sieur rendering his acknowledgement with reverence and submission.
In brief, we were obligingly treated by this Prince, on whom we waited to
chases, which is a thing truly royal and magnificent.

In this country there is another kind of savage beast, exceeding fierce, that
indifferently falls on all things come before her. She has four teeth that cut
like a razor. About the size of a midling ox, a head like a Bear, and a tail
like a hog.

These beasts are naturally black, they hunt them for their hydes which are of
admirable strength to resist blows: the flesh is good and spends like Pork,
though it be something red.

This chase is exceeding dangerous, and some always perish, for she flies most
furiously on the first that attempts her, and fails not to strangle him,
though a hundred should come to his rescue, if they kill her not at the first
stroke. She is exceeding licorous of a fruit they call Coeoma, which is of
excellent taste, and great refreshment, so as in Summer it is much sought after:
for one shall no sooner eat of it, but he perceives an entire refreshment, nay
a chilness if he eat a quantity. The Indians make hollowes in great trees, near
this fruit, and hide themselves within to wait for this beast, and kill her,
when she comes to feed: but when she finds her self surprised, She enters
into such rage, that she tears up the tree for spite. There are so many other
sorts of savage beasts, that it were too troublesome to rehearse them all. They
have diverse birds of delicate plumage, whereof they make diverse works, the most
quaint and lively in the world; and birds so great, they will take a calf up
into the air. They have Griffins, which in my opinion, are, no other then that
they call a Tofon, of white plumage, and reddish under the belly; but they have
not four feet, as our Painters draw them; but two only long and great, as
likewise Tallons like a Falcon, but large, and exceeding strong; the beak like
an Eagle, but much thicker; they are cruel creatures.

They have here likewise those we call the birds of Paradise, Birds of Paradise.
the Irico: they cut the feet off, and sell them so to Merchants; as I said in
another place.

They have abundance of Turkies; and wild ones, that go in flocks, as Peacocks,
white Partridges, and other birds and fowls of diverse kinds.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Transiana, the valor of their women.
THe Town of Transiana, Transiana.
which is likewise the name of the kingdom, lying between the Towns of Sian
and Tinco, is the last in subjection to the Empire of Pegu, toward the North,
having Westward the Province or kingdom of Tazatay, Northward the kingdom of
Carforan, South Pegu, and Eastward Cauchinchine, situate upon a pleasant river,
that comes from the lake Daracan.

The country is temperate enough, except in the extreme heats of Summer, when
they must of necessity travel by night.

Here they have a Mine of Diamonds, which they call Geay, besides those of Gold
and Silver in abundance, and of the purest in the East, abundance of grain and
fruits of all sorts, and Palm-wine, which they call Serolle.

The people are insolent and proud; of make, and fashion like the Persians: the
women exceeding beautiful, Women,
more then in other parts; but something lascivious, and affecting the
coversation of strangers.

They love to dance to the music of their Pan, and delight much in melody and
banquets: they wear their hair at length in knots, and platted with silk
ribbands very quaintly in diverse manners, with rings and jewels according to
their quality. For none but Princesses and Ladies of the better rank may wear
Diamonds set in gold; Jewels, and to whom.
rubies and other stones are for the rest of the nobility whom they call
Canubi; amongst whom are comprehended the whole Militia of the King. For the
vulgar they wear bracelets and rings, of silver, tin, brass, and Ivory, neatly
made and enameled with all colors, and they hold the same custom I have
observed in other places to break them all in token of mourning at the death of
their kindred. If any one will wear jewels above his degree, he must agree with
the Kings Officers, to be ranked in the Nobility, for there as in other places
all is carried by money. The women affect to be courted, wear their gowns
slashed like the French, and go habited like our Europeans, quite different
from the other Indians.

Adultery punished.
Women of what degree or condition soever are obliged to nurse and suckle their
own children. Adultery is there punished with death, for which cause there are
diverse will never marry, that they may live with more liberty: for maids and
widows are subject to no law, without any dishonor nevertheless, Maids free.
and having taken their pleasure, they may marry without any mark of infamy;
and if she have had children by any others, each Father is bound to take his
own and breed it.

A female guard for the King.
When the King goes into the field, whether to chase or war, he has a Vanguard
of a hundred women, who carry Crosse-bowes, wherein they will shoot so
directly, they will hit the breadth of a penny, they call them Memeytas, and
succeed one another for their portion Royal, which is great and honorable;
which they gained for a signal service they performed for King Bugunda, great
Grandfather to Amaous, who reigned in our time. They have this place for their
valor and fidelity, and are excellent in all things: they keep slaves, and may
wear jewels as the nobility of the first rank. They attend the Prince in his
wars, as well as the gallantest Cavaliers of his Court, and they are more
welcome to the Prince at his Table, then any other; A dance in arms.
esteeming them for their magnanimity. Sometimes for his recreation armed with
skins of beasts covered with scales, they will enter the Palace four and four,
and present the King with a civil combat, with sword, buckler, and cask of
wood, and all with such grace, that the King will leave both meat and drink, to
judge of the blows and address: for they combat in order and measure, without
missing a single step to the purpose; like a dance well consorted. And they
have their Masters to instruct them in the use of all sorts of arms, which they
practice diligently.

When they have performed any noble act of dexterity, or feat of arms, they are
assured of a chain of gold from the King: they are all lodged in the Kings
Palace. There was one that performed a combat once with such grace, boldness,
and dexterity, that the King could not forbear, but taking off her cask upon
the field, he kissed her before all the Court, and put about her neck a chain
he wore himself, of rubies, pierced in form of pearls, and garnished at the
ends with fauset diamonds of inestimable value: opinion was, that after the
King had so blandished her, and given her such a gift, without doubt he would
marry her.

She was indeed one of the most amiable Ladies of the Indies, of twenty years
age, her skin admirably white, her hair dis-shevel'd, black as jet, her name
was Langir, and I asking mine host who the maid was, and if 'twere probable the
King would marry her? smiling he told me in my ear, 'twas surmis'd she was
sister to the Prince himself, so passionately his Father Amaycan loved her
Mother Acosrias, who was so gallant and valiant, that at wrestling she had not
her match, and that she threw all the strangers she wrastled with: and if they
took it with disdain she would strangle them in the place: she was a Lady of
perfect beauty, and was unfortunately slain by a Lion: whereupon the King her
lover was violently grieved, he buried her with royal obsequies, and mourned
with solemnity a long time, abstaining some days from eating Areca or Betel,
being shaved, in sign of grief and sorrow. In his huntings the King takes great
pleasure to see these women shoot in their crosbows, whence they will discharge
three arrows at a time, with such celerity and vigor, that lighting upon a
tree they strike themselves so deep, that they are not to be drawn out. They
use also firelocks, and other arms, wherein they are well exercised. These
women are not at liberty to marry without the Princes license, who allows them
not but to Favorites, who at the same time have charge or office at Court, or
some other place, for they never displace any. There are other guards called
the Viluaires, Viluaires.
who bear no more before the King than the bow made of Indian cane, or
Palm-wood which never breaks. The servitors and domestic Officers of the
Palace are called the Lambri, Lambri.
who are for carriage of all necessaries to the Palace, and serve likewise in
war, being honorably habited, and armed with great Indian canes, which they
know how to manage very well, and these take orders from the King.

The Prince is very powerful both in Foot and Horse, The militia of the King
of Transiana.
being provided always of a thousand Elephants, and fifty thousand Horse,
which are less, but stronger than the Persian, whereof he keeps diverse races;
for the Country has the fairest and most fertile herbage of the world, and
abounds in all sorts of commodities. This King is tributary to the great
Emperor, to whom he pays yearly so many horses, the best in the Indies, being
indefatigable in travail, Horses and their breeding.
he is likewise exceeding careful, and breeds them of an extraordinary
manner, getting Mares from Persia: when there is a number of foles, of four or
five months old, they are put to certain wild cowes, that are expressly for
this purpose kept in the race: so as the little cowes, the mares, and the colts
are all together; then taking the calves from their dams, they put the colts to
suck them: This course continued for some time, makes them more strong and
lasting then can be imagined, and it is observable their hoofes are more
durable then any others. All their fault is, they are not so sleet as the
Persian, which horses are most esteemed of all in the Indies, and next to them
those of Transiana. This King has so great a number of them, they render him
formidable throughout the Indies; he is exceeding peaceful, and beloved of his
people. In the Country, though it be very fertile, and well tilled, there are
notwithstanding vast and profound forests, stocked with wild beasts, who
often intercept the passengers, and devour them; as Ounces, Lions, Tigars,
bears, Wolves, and dangerous Boares of an incredible size. The King has
huntsmen for the purpose, well skilled in the woods, with little dogs proper
for finding out the beasts. They have also tame Lions, and Hart-Wolves brought
up to hunt their own kind, and so animated against their own Species, that
there are not in the world more cruel enemies, as man has not a more mortal
foe then man himself, Beasts brought up to hunt.
and amongst men Renegado Christians more cruel to true Christians then the
other Infidels. These Lions, wolves, and other beasts of chase are taught to
it, when they are young, and trained in parkes to hunt others, till they are at
growth; and then they take them abroad to the grand chase, armed with caps and
pointed collars, which with the assistance of the hunters makes them more
dangerous, so as they make a great slaughter amongst the other beasts. There
are likewise abundance of hearts, large as heifers, which lie in the fields, and
will not stir for a passinger. When the King goes into the Country, he is
attended with a thousand horse at least, and when he goes to the grand chase,
he takes along abundance of Pioneers, to stop up the Avenues with walls of
clay, and turf, to secure himself and his Court. There will be sometimes
twelve or fifteen thousand hunters, the greater part Lords, Persons of Quality,
and the Kings domestics, who frequently engage themselves; there being
pleasure without danger. Sometimes these beasts come in such herds, they are
forced to open for their passage, and fall upon the last; and notwithstanding
the walls are strong and high, being made of palms, and earth mixed with brakes,
there are beasts so light and nimble, Chase of recreation.
they will leap over them; and before the soldiers, (who lie concealed) can
take them, they will do incredible things, making such strange assaults, and
such havoc with teeth and nails; but the whole Court, with the female guard,
stands in order upon the curtain and parapet of the walls, to attend them at
the passage, where there is a great slaughter. But after this tragical danger,
comes a comedy of the Marmosets, Apes, and Monkeys, and others of that kind,
for the greater part unknown to us: The young ones will be there so fastened to
the necks of their dams, Apes.
you would think they grew there: all together makes a very pleasant prize. The
hair of these Apes is soft as silk, and their genitories violet color, or pale
red. There are huge Munkeyes white as snow, that make a thousand ridiculous
faces, seeming to crave liberty, and they of the guard that know their humor,
give them a sign to climb upon a tree, and save themselves, where of she
fail not, but then the sport is to see the trees covered over with them, with
the confused chattering they make one at another.

For wild swine, wild goats, hearts, hindes, fallow-Deer, and Aloroc, with
beasts of Beasar there are abundance; as also of porcupines, the Country
yiedling such plenty of grain, and wild fruits for their sustenance. The boares
are very dangerous, panching all they meet with their tushes: Elephants they
hunt but seldom, being forfeit of life to kill one. They go with such
vehemence, they break all before them; and when by subtlety they are once
enclosed, they make most horrible cries and roarings, for rage breaking all
that is near them: being tired, they lie along, and thrusting their trunk down
their throat, they fetch up a loathsome water, as hot as if it came out of a
furnace.

When all the dangerous beasts are either killed or escaped, the King for his
pleasure kills the boares, the goats, and others with the Ront, the most
assured arms, and makes the widest wound. Then the hunters all choose their
mark, Ront. Arms.
taking pleasure in darting their lances, taking what serves for provision of
the Palace, leaving the rest for another time. The skins of bears, Beasts skins.
ounces, lions, leopards, serve to Arm the foot and horse, and to bard the
horses, Elephants, and other beasts for use in hunting, whereof they make them
caps, that cover so well the head and neck, it is not easy for the savage
beasts to endanger them, there being steel piques that make them loose their
hold; nor is there great or small, who has not his horse capped with these
skins. Towns and Villages circumiacent to the hunting, come with a thousand
presents and rejoycings to the King, esteeming themselves much honored to have
any share of the prize, wherewith they make a publik feast, as of a thing
sacred and solemn. For their falconry and hawks, the King has eagles and
ravens, so well trained both for furr and feather, that nothing more. Fishing
is there likewise much practiced. As we travailed through the Country, we came
one day to a mountain of extraordinary height, they call the Culma, or Columa,
grown over with all sorts of trees, as Sendal, Danum, Ebony, Palms of all
sorts, and others. All the ground we passed over was full of Rhubarbe, Rhubarb.
with leaves large, and very bitter, and round the skirt of the mountain Tombs
orderly ranged, cut in the rock, Remarkable Mountains.
ingenuously carved. Maritime winds are frequent there which the Indians call
Sourou, and other winds exceeding drying, which they call the Mounsons, and
the Portuguese Abrazador, which consume even iron.

These mountains have a reasemblance of the Cordilleras of Peru of a long
extent. Amongst the rest there is one mountain that rain never falls upon, by
reason the southern winds which continually blow there, force back the
clouds, so as the mountain is exceeding barren.

The mountain of Columa being fanned with the maritime winds on one side,
preserves and keeps incorruptible all the bodies brought thither. The other
side toward the North, being defended by the heads of trees, enjoyes rains in
abundance: but both the one and the other side are fertilized with large
streams, that nourish these trees of excellent odor.

Interments
When they will bury a body, they wash it, and taking out the heart and bowels,
they burn them with Aromatic woods, sacrifising them to their Duma, then put
the ashes within the Corpse again, that nothing, as they say, may be wanting at
the day of Resurrection. For this purpose there are six men engaged, who buy
their offices of the King, and whosoever will cut a Tomb there, must pay great
rates to the King: Their burialls are so considerable to them, that so soon as
they are marrried they provide for it.

Divorces.
By the way I shall tell you they are much inclined to divorces, which they may
make three several times, and accept again, but not the fourth time; for he
must stay till the wife be married to another, and after divorce she may marry
with her first husband, and the children stay with the father.

As to the dead bodies, they who order them, cleanse them exceeding carefully,
putting within them a perfume like Mastick, then the ashes put in again, as I
told you; the Nubis, Nubis Priests.
or Priests in their Ceremonies recommends them to their God, with several
prayers, and having dined with their kindered, six women approach the corpse,
with loud cries and lamentations, which last till evening, meanwhile six sworn
men put the body in a sheet of Chantli, or cotton, the better sort have
Taffeta, with cotton under or over, so disposing the hands, that one lies on
the ear, the other stretched down by the thigh.

Then having watched by it all night, they restore it to the kindred, to be
laid in a coffin, and thence to be borne to a Tomb at the foot of the mountain,
where they remain incorruptible, as well by reason of these drying winds, as a
composition they apply. There are abundance of them in this place, and if any
through fatness, which causes humidity, and by consequence putrefaction,
chance to be consumed by worms, they hold the soul that left this body lost,
and condemned to darkness amongst the Devils. When they bear the body to the
Tomb they go all bare-headed, and the women their hair dischevelled, weeping
and lamenting, but wear no sort of mourning, only their nearest kindred will
be shaved, and abstain from eating Betel. In this Mountain there are entire
dried bodies, which they say are of seven or eight hundred years, Mummy.
and this is the right Mummy brought into several parts of the world; For that
Mummy that is taken out of the sands is a mere fable, since there is nothing
but bones to be found there, the rest being eaten by the worms.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Kingdom of Tazatay, and the Philosophy of the Indians.
WEst of Transiana lies the kingdom of Tazatay, or Tasatail, otherwise called
the red kingdom, or the land of Liarrean, or Hiarcan, and the Kingdom of the
Sun, for the several apparitions the Sun makes there during his twenty four
hours course, as they say. While we were in Transiana, a Country appertaining
to the Empire of Pegu, hearing speech of Tazatay, and the wonders of a Mountain
there, I prevailed with my companion to go thither, so with an Interpreter two
small Elephants, and two Hacambals or Camels, we parted thence, leaving all our
goods and Merchandises with our Host, having registered them in the Casa de la
contration, Fidelity for the Merchants in India.
in the Indies thoroughout there being such order that a Merchant can loose
nothing, though he should dye, all being faithfully kept and restored to his
heirs, paying only the dues of custom and impost.

After three days travail we came on the top of a mountain, where there was a
small Town called Brasifir, here we had convenient accommodation that night; in
the morning going down we crossed a River, and came to the other great Mountain
we so much desired to see, The mountain of the sun.
that appeared exceeding high and arduous: nevertheless having ascended about
two good leagues we met a man mounted on a Dromedary coming down the Mountain,
and asking him if we had far to the next habitation, he answered we had but the
tenth part of one Sun, as through the Indies they count Suns, that is, by days
journies. Then travailing about an hour, we came to Tambo, and alighting from
our beasts that were all in a water for the difficult travail, we found there
plenty of provision for our refreshment. There was a good old man and his wife
that gave us freely what they had, Tambo an Inn.
and amongst other things Areca, the best methought I ever drunk.

At the same time there arrived a man we took by his carriage to be a fool, he
sat down with us at table, nevertheless would eat nothing but what we
entreated him to, and while we were at meat he told us several stories
answerable to the opinion we had of him. Our Host asked us if we would not go
see the Lord of the place at his Chabacaran, or Palace: to which we agreed, and
went this visit on foot, for 'twas on the top of the next mountain, not far off.

Ridiculous opinions of the surrising.
Being arrived we went to make our respects to him, and he returned us great
civilities, and discoursing of our voyage, he told us 'twas truth, that at the
top of the Mountain the Sun rose three several times in four and twenty hours,
as we might easily perceive if we ascended: whereupon out of curiosity I
requested my companion we might go thither early in the morning, and hereupon I
asked the Lord being there two hours before day, if I should see the rays of
the Sun; he told me for this purpose I must be on the top of the Mountain upon
a structure we saw some two leagues and a half above us in a bending of the
Mountain, and that below, where his Castle stood, it was not seen but twice a
year, that is, once three hours before day, and another time an hour and a
quarter before Sun rising: and seeking to be informed by the most ancient
Inhabitants, they all told me the same thing.

But I found my companion so incredulous of this matter, as he had reason, that
we desisted, and on the morrow took the way to return whence we came: and
since, meeting with a Gentleman of great curiosity, he told me he had been in
a Country beyond Swedeland, where for four months together the Sun
continually appeared, which must needs be in Lapland, Lapland.
in seventy eight degrees, from May to August. And a Merchant of Sabooram
assured me that in his Country the longest days were one and twenty hours of
Sun, Sabooram Liberia in high Tartary.
with little or no night, which is in about sixty four or sixty five degrees.

Hereupon I will say something of the Astronomy used amongst these East
Indians; their opinion is, the earth is not round but flat, The Indians strange
opinions in Astronomy.
and that there are not, nor can be Antipodes, else say they, there must be two
suns, one to lighten us, the other them; that there is but one Hemisphere for
the Sun and Moon to move in; that the sun is not of the bigness we make it,
nor so great as the earth, whereof it is but the sixtieth part, that the Sun
never leaves our Hemisphere, no not by night; but then conceales himself
behind certain Mountains. That 'twere a great folly to say the earth were
higher then the heavens, which notwithstanding must needs be, if we allow
Antipodes. That the Poles held immovable are not so, but that these two stars
turn within two degrees round the Pole. That it is an error the Sun should by
night go hide himself under us: that the two Poles are not diametrically
opposite, since, as they say, they may be seen at the same time, upon sea and
land, though very low nevertheless. That if there were Antipodes, that must be
the bottom of the earth, and all rivers would naturally run thither, contrary
to experience, and a thousand other opinions as strange, as absurd, for want of
knowledge in the sphere and Astronomy:

So they laugh as at a thing childish and fabulous, at the opinion of the
Ancients and Moderns on this side, of the rotundity of the earth in the middle
of the world, and the Ubiquitary habitation, and that the Sun turns quite round
from East to West. They hold for certain, that the Sun rises in all other
points, as they observe in Tazatay where they imagine it to rise as 'twere
North, and North-West. They think to prove their fantastical imaginations,
when they describe the Iliaca, a bright star in the West, The Indians Iliaca
and Piliaca.
and opposite to that Biliaca, which appears beyond the Line; and is, that the
shepherds fear so much, This must be the dog or Medusa's head.
by the Persians called Zobona, so mortiferous to cattle; for which cause they
house them while that star reigns, and the better to preserve them, they
make them turn tail to the star, for if they face it, it makes them
languish, and dye in the end.

They say that these two opposite stars may be seen in a Line at the same
time through a trunck, and that each moves about his Pole in twenty four
hours, but that these are not the same, as the North, and the Crusero.

The North being no more distant from the Pole then two degrees and a quarter,
and one of the other two, a degree and a half only.

And whereas the ancients observed only two Poles, each in his Hemisphere,
they make six Poles in the same Hemispheare, which are Casara, Six Poles with
the Indians.
the pole of the World, that of the Zodiac, the Artick, and Antartick, and
these two stars, and a thousand other fancies as incomprehensible, as they are
far from the sense of reason and experience, And that which confirms them in
their errors, is, that they can discern the two polar stars from the same
place, as in Japaca, seven degrees beyond the Line in Java, and the like in
Sumatra, and other parts, and accordingly in travel, they make a strange
calculation of the distances of places.

They jeer likewise at the frame of our sphere, and the division of the
Zodiac into twelve signs; some to the North, some to the South, and
understand not this but after their own way.

The Zodiac.
They call the Zodiac Cazatoni, that is, Significator. The signs they call
Ant, Ronia, Amiessem, Emisen, Courpsa, Cheoser, Irat, Metrias, Escorgat,
Tamasee, Besir, Bizihir, Azourac, Persan, the highest sphere Birquen, Emine,
the Ecliptic Zoberna, that is obscurity, because Ecclipses proceed thence.
That the Zodiac is an oblike circle, and that from thence and the Region of
fire, the Sun takes his course, and thence makes generation of all inferior
things. Like some of the ancients, likewise they hold that the Heaven stands
like a vault over the earth, and floates, and swimmes upon the waters.

St. Basil in Exameron.
In breife, I showed them the work of Paul Rao the Italian, who speaks of all
this Astronomy of the Ancients, which supposes the Equinoctial divides the
Zodiac in two parts, South and North, at which they scoffed, and grew
choleric, saying, so base a book was fit for the fire, that held nothing but
errors, and wondered our Prince would suffer such frauds and impostures, as
they called them, to be published in his Dominions; they believing as well the
lands inhabited from East to West, as from South to North, are in view of the
pole Artick, and that it is false there should be any part of India under the
Antartick, since, as they think, they have the North as much elevated as we in
Europe, and many extravagancies hereupon, which I leave to be argued, and
confuted by the learned in Astronomy and Cosmography.

Harkening to these Indian opinions, I have been told, that the Chinese, The
Earth square with the Chinesses.
that speculative Nation, hold the Heavens to be round, but the Earth square,
and the Empire of China stands punctually in the middle, as being the
excellence and Principality of the World, other parts being but as the skirts
and accessaries, so as they were a little choleric when they saw our cards
design their Country in the extremity of the East, as an indignity to the
Grandeur, and Majesty of their Country and King, whom they call the son of
the sun.

And truly these poor Indians wanting the knowledge of sciences and experience,
The opinion of the G^eek Philosophy, of the form of the Earth.
are not so much to be blamed for their opinions, since in the middle of sage
and learned Greece, there were of the ancient Philosophers that maintained
almost the same; that the earth was not round, but some as Lucipus, that it was
like a drum, others, that it was hollow like a bark, as Heraelitus, others
like a Cilinder, or Roler, as Anaximandrus, and Democritus; others that it was
absolutely flat, as Empodocles and Anaximines: some have wandered as far as
this Paradox, to release it from the center, Antripodes, by whom not believed.
and make it run in the heavens, about the immovable sun, which with no less
extravagancy has been renewed in our times. But for the Antipodes, they who
held the rotundity of the earth, allowed them not for all that, holding those
parts inhabitable, either for being covered with innavigable seas, or for the
insupportable heats of the Torrid Zone: even some of the ancient fathers have
for other considerations been taken with this opinion, as Lactantius, St.
Augustine, and others, Virgill, Bishop of Strasbourg.
and they say a learned Germane Bishop was accused of Heresy, for maintaining
there was Antipodes.

But besides the reasons of science, experience of Navigation, and modern
voyages shows sufficiently the truth of this matter, whereof I leave the large
discourse to the more learned.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Tartary, Frightfull deserts, fierce dogs, a strange History
of two lovers, the Empire of the Tartars, and their Religion.
OF Grand Tartary, which lies on the North of all the Provinces I have spoken
of, I know nothing but by the relation I received in these parts, and by the
Memorialls of a certain Hollander, who was at Pegu. The Inhabitants of these
Countries then told me, that beyond the Kingdom of Tazatay, Mandranella,
Transiana, and Casubi, toward the North, are vast solitudes, and sandy
deserts, Sinabo.
which you must travel for many days, before you can arrive at a Kingdom
called Sinabo, which at one end, toward the East confines with Cochinchina,
subject to the great King of Tabin or China.

To pass these vast sands, there must be made good provision of victuals,
water, and beast; for as a Merchant of Drogomania told me, Drogomania may be
Dragoian, or Turcomania. Deserts of Tartary.
a Country confining Eastward upon these Kingdoms, the deserts of Arabia are
little in comparison to them: and when I told him the forty tedious days it
cost us, betwixt Suria and Medina, through the deserts of Arabia, he answered,
this was nothing in respect, since by the help of guides they might here and
there find a well, whereas in the deserts of Asia, in two and twenty days
journey together, nothing was to be found but sand, and that one day as he
travailed along with the convoy, by misfortune one of the jarrs of water broke,
which was a great mischief to them, and a very important loss, being forced
for want of it to kill one of their Camells, to drink the loathsome water
within him, and eat his flesh.

He told me then for more commodious passage, above all things it was necessary
to provide good beasts, and chiefly Persian Asses, Persian Asses.
the best beast the world affords for carriage, and the most proper for those
ways, and are worth as much as a good horse.

That after these sands they came to huge Mountains, absolutely barren, which
in my opinion must needs be mineralls, but they try them not, they are so far
distant, and the way so troublesome.

I observed in my East and Western voyages, that where the Mines of gold,
silver, and precious stones, where the Mountains were ordinarily barren, having
nothing growing about them, as they observe of the Calanfour, or clove, which
suffers no plant near it.

The Merchant observed likewise, that in these Mountains, which must be those
the Ancients called Juac, dividing high and low Asia; there are abundance of
serpents of prodigious bigness, Serpents good meat.
but are more advantage then damage to them; for being free from venom, and of
an excellent substance and nourishment, they eat there nothing else. As I
remember I saw in the Mountains of Sir, in Africa.

For, passing these Mountains, and lodging with the Arabians under their tents,
'twas our admiration to see huge serpents play with children, who would give
them morsells of bread.

But to return to our Tartarian Merchant, he told me, that having passed this
Mountainous Country, they came to another desert, of twenty days over, void of
all food, where he was constrained to stray a good days journey to hunt for
water, and other commodities, and this too with weapon in hand, because there
lives a certain Horde or nation of Shepherds or Tartars Nomades, who keep huge
Mastifes, fier^e dogs
the most fierce and bloody in the world, which indeed have more of the wolf
then the dog: they keep these dogs to destroy passengers on the way, to which
they train them for diet for themselves.

He told me that about three years before this breed of Rascals were almost
all devoured by their own dogs, after their cruel usage of certain Merchants
who passed that way, these to revenge themselves made an Ambush, and having
taken them, served them as they had done others.

He told me many other curiosities of this country, and amongst others, that
about twenty years before, he passed by the Isle of Volmous or Ayman, near to
Cauchinchina, and the country of the Meores, that the people are haughty, great
soldiers, Volmous.
well clothed, and very civil, lovers of honor and virtue, and of complexion
rather white then black: that the land is full of impenitrable Forests, but
well stored with Venison, and betwixt the Mountains good pasturadge; that they
had there a potent King by the title of Emperor, on the day of his birth,
wearing on his head three Crowns, in form of a Tiara, for the three kingdoms
he possessed: that this Prince was King of Sinabo, the Magers, and Patanes.

Amongst other particulars of this country, This must be the great Mogor.
he related to me a strange History, if it be true: Thus, that in a mountanous
country vulgarly called Ismanca, very fertile, where there are clownes very
wealthy in cattle, whereof they drive a great trade; as also in skins of
diverse beasts: there was a rich shepherd called Ismahan, who amongst other
children, had a daughter of excellent beauty, who according to the custom of
the country, A History of an Incubus.
kept her fathers flocks.

This maid of twenty years of age, loved a young shepherd her neighbor and
kinsman, but poor, and to whose Father the rich shepherd had sent some corn,
who seeing he could not be paid, and being aware of his daughters affection, he
told his debtor, that on condition he would send his son to live in some remote
parts, he would forgive the debt, which the other did; the young man being thus
banished by force, the maid was extremely afflicted, and as one day she walked
alone in the fields, lamenting the absence of her beloved Liza, so he was
called; a Fiend in the same shape appeared to her, and demanded for whom she
was so much tormented, since she had him assuredly present, and that he loved
her more then the world besides.

Some say this poor young man being banished the presence of his dear
Mistress, sought out a Magician, who promised he should see and enjoy her; but
bringing into a room to him a spirit in the form of the maid, as the spirits of
joy and love made him fly to embrace her, the Demon strangled him afterward,
taking the shape, or rather the body of the dead youth, continued his visits a
long time to the maid, whereof her Father and Brothers having notice, resolved
to surprise him; and in effect breaking up her chamber door, they found a
stinking carcass in bed by her, at which both she and the rest were extremely
frighted; and the King of the country having notice of it, sent for the maid to
know the truth, which she related as it was. The King sent her to live with an
Aunt of his, where they say the Devil still frequented her, and would visit her
publicly in the shape of her friend, wherein she took extreme content, nor
could she be dissuaded from his conversation. How I know not, but they say she
conceived, and was delivered of two children; who grown up, became the most
valiant and strong in the country: so as since spirits are incapable of
generation, as the best Divines conclude; we may suppose this was the youth
himself, who by the Magicians means enjoyed the maid, and was afterward killed
by the devil that abused him; and indeed some authentic authors mention such
another History of one Phillinnion, and Machetus, and others. Phlegon
Trallianus.


The adventures of Amador a Painter.
But let us come back to Tartary, where I learnt many other things of one Amador
Baliora a Limner, with whom I met coming back from Pegu, and saw good part of
his Memorials. He had been in the Indies twelve or thirteen years, and had
drawn the plots of several Towns excellently well, insomuch as having escaped
shipwreck, and arrived in health at Diu, when all his company was hanged; for
his qualification the Governor saved his life, and he drew him many exquisite
pictures, for which he gave him five hundred Croysades.

He had about fifty draughts of the principal towns in the Indies, Persia, and
Tartary; and had leave of the Viceroy to draw the plots of as many more as he
would; his design being to compile them in a large volume, and present it to
the King of Spain; but I understood afterward, that returning for Europe, he
died upon the sea of Scarbut, and for that his Comerade had disgusted him, he
would not give him his memorials and draughts, but by Testament bequeathed them
to the Captain of the ship he was in, Joseph Grogne a Portuguese, esteemed a
Jew though he dissembled the Christian. The Memorials was a great loss; for
besides the draughts, there was abundance of remarkable singularities he had
noted in his travailes, whereof the Captain made small account, for that he had
written them in French, which he understood not, and withal in an imperfect
and bad character: But the plots and draughts were excellently done, and
besides the deliniation of the towns, he had drawn the inhabitants and their
garments to the life.

I drew some my self though rudely, which is not hard to compass,

THE SECOND PART OF THE TRAVAILES OF VINCENT le BLANC IN AFRICA.
CHAP. I. A general Description of AFRICA.
HAving left the East Indies, as I said in the former part of this work toward
the end, and having taken the road of Africa Westward, the first land we came
on was the Isle of S. Laurence. Before I relate the particulars either of this
Isle, or other places I have seen in Africa, I conceive it not improper to draw
a general Description of this third part of the Universe, as well for that I
have traversed it from one end to the other in three several voyages, as to
show the error of modern Geographers, who in their Maps of Africa, have left
out more then fifty kingdoms or Provinces of note, Maps of Africa defective.
as I sometime made appear to the late Mr. du Vair, then chief President of the
Province, and afterward Keeper of the Great Seal of France.

And first to take it from the straight of Gibraltar, or rather from Porto
Farina toward Tunes to the Cape Bona Esperanza, the greatest extent from North
to South, The extent of Africa.
there, is found to be seventy degrees, which are above two thousand leagues:
And from Cape-Verd to Cape de Guardafu or Guardafy, from East to West there is
near upon eighty Degrees, which are about two thousand five hundred leagues of
Teritory, comprehending a space most prodigious, such as our Europe is a very
small matter in comparison of; the greatest part lying betwixt the two
Tropicks, the rest on this side and beyond.

For from the kingdom of Budonell passing through the Negres, lies Eastward the
Empire of Tombut, or Tombotu; by the Arabians called Iza, containing thirteen
large kingdoms watered by the famous River Nigrite or Niger, with Senega, a
part of Guinee, Melli, See Pliny l. 5. c. 1. of the Cavarian^ of Afric.
and many other Countries, as far as the Cape Verdi. The people here so
savage, they scarce know how to speak; so sordid, they eat beast-entrailes
uncleansed, and so brutish, they are more like ravenous dogs, then men of
reason.

The people toward the Western Coast are better civilized, in the Provinces of
Gavaga, Azemay, Galata, by the Arabians called Abugazai, or Zenaga and Azanaga,
and on the Coast of Cape-blanc, where they drive a great trade in white salt.
Senega, where the River Niger waters large territories, abounds in Crocodills
and fish, with which it furnishes Budonel, Meli, Gago, Guber, Agades, Cano
Gazena or Cassena, Zegzog, Zanfara, Burneo, or Borno, Gangara, Gaoga, and
others where it reaches. The kingdom of Gangara contains seven others, as that
of Borneo nine, who to gain a single dominion, have often come to Battle, but
in the end satiated with blood, were constrained to agree again. Then have you
the kingdoms or Temian, Daouma, Medra, Benin, Gorbani, Giafiar, or Biafar,
Amas or Amasen, which toward the South fronts Damula and Vangue, lying toward
the Zaire.

From Senega toward the North, we find Scombaya, Musmuda, Zenera or Havia,
Gumea, Guzula, Hea, Sus, with others called the Whites of Africa, who speak not
Arabian, but use the tongue of Songay, Leon of Africa, lib. 1. cap. 11.
as they term it; Likewise the usual Language in Nue^edia through the
kingdoms of Terga, Gaziga, Lemta, and Berdoa. These people have a black or
gray cloth hanging from their Turbith over their face, that while they eat
their mouth may not be seen, which were a great incivility. There are moreover,
the Countries of Guzulan, Belu, Benin, Belbee, Toga, Afar, Alates, Crin, Beni,
Gumi, Muzali, Abubenam, Zuir, Cazai, Dura, Zinzaler, and others. The vast
kingdom of Fezor Morocco, contains Agar or Agal, Elebat, Eris, Geres, Elcanus,
Elegazar, or Elgezair, with the kingdoms of T^nes, Bugie, Constantine, ^ipoli,
Telensin, Tremesen, Telche, Te^es^e, etc. There is here a River which issuing
from the bowels of Africa, passes through many countries, and threads Fesse
where it se^ three hundred and threescore mill-wheels of extraordinary compass
at work, and gliding from thence under Miquin^ and Elcassour, throws it self
in sea at Mamocre, under Arache, little distant from Arzille. Toward Tombut
and Meli on the other side Senega lies the wide-stretcht kingdom of Gago, the
King whereof is highly potent, Majesty of the King of Tombut.
compelling in a manner adoration from his people, who how great soever speak
not to him but on knees, holding in their hand a cup of sand, which they cast
on their head while they prostrate before him, and retire without
tergiversation.

He affords not audience to his subjects, but at certain hours, morning and
evening, and when they are found guilty in any crime, he chastises them with
confiscation of goods, and sale of their wives and children, for slaves to
strangers.

The two great Rivers Niger or Gambra, and Senega, Wash a very great part of
the country, overflowing in the same sort and times as Nile does. Budomel which
is in like manner a River of the same denomination, as the country it travailes
through, unites it self with Gambra, and the kingdom of Melli is upon a branch
of Senega, environed with dismal deserts, and impenetrable Forests. This river
on the North and South, is banked with the Deserts of Gilolef and Jalofel, on
the West it has the vast Forest of Abacara, and Gago on the West. Next you
come to Guber, Mount Chigi, or Gigi, or Sierra de Meleguete, then Guinga or
Guinee, or Guinoy. These people are all black like quenched coals. Salt in the
kingdom of Gago is more precious then gold, which there abounds; as likewise
Fruit and Cattle.

Guber abutts Northward on Cano, Eastward on Zeger or Zegzeg, a woody and
desert country, peopled with an infinite heard of beasts. In these Deserts you
meet with Cassena, then drawing toward the Cape of bona Esperonza; You enter
upon the kingdoms of Benin and Zanfara, under the Equatour, well inhabited,
containing in length two hundred and forty leagues, where from mid- May to the
middle of August, it rains for the most part, and almost constantly from noon
till midnight, as I have observed it to do in other countries under the same
line. In fine, so fertile are these countries, that like those watered by the
river Nile, they yield two harvests annually, and each harvest of sufficiency
to furnish the people with provision for five years. Whence it comes, that
storing up their corn in Cavernes under ground, which the Moors call
Mattamorres, calked against moisture with a cement made of Sea-shels, -- where
being first dried in the Sun, they keep it what time they please; they never
think of sowing more while they have any thing to live on, so as the land being
thus laid up at rest, becomes more fertile. Their sheep breed twice a year, and
often two or three lambs at a time.

The Cape of Palms is in the territory of Isma toward Guinnee, with the
Castle of Mina which the Portugues built upon this coast, drawing toward the
Cape de bona Esperanza, the kingdom of Manicongo extends it self from the River
Val de Biraco, or da Borca, as far as the River of S. Paul. This River da
Borca, otherwise called Rio de Los Reyes, is a quarter of a days journey from
that of Agina or Asicera.

True it is, there are Maps which place it near to Biafar, though it be distant
thence more then five hundred leagues; Biafar lying near to Amasan and Medra;
the cause of this error is, that they take it for the River called the Infanta
of Portugal, which on the East has the River Angra which waters the Town of
Masire, or Maciera, directly over against the Isle of S. Thomas, and fronts the
great kingdom of Damute, through the middle whereof passes the River of
Bancara, Vibris and Vamta, with a branch of Noir, all which conjoyne in Zaire.
Zaire overflowes like Nilus, and runs through many countries, Africans who
adore the Sun.
some Mohammedan, some Pagan, who adore the Sun, and about the break of day
compose themselves on some eminent place, to make their Salema, that is, their
prayer; at his Rising, casting themselves covered with a large cloth a hundred
times to the ground, and kissing it most devoutly. Some say that these two
great kingdoms Damute and Monicongo bound upon Goyame or Guiame, which by
reason of their great distance is most incredible. It is rather on one side,
for on the South and West side, Monicongo is divided by the River Bancara,
which lies three degrees on the other side the line, and two from Cape de Lopo,
or Loubo, at his disgorging near the river Gouan, or Gabam, not far from the
Cape Gonzal, and the Cape St Catherine directly opposite to Cape Primaco,
something near the Torrent of Fremo, which the Natives call Gouira. The last
Cape of Damute is Almada or Almadias, into the Gulf whereof one branch of
Zaire, and the River of Saint Helen issuing forth at the same place do cast
themselves, having on the North Abidara, which joins it self to the Cataracts;
On the West the land of Jair and Gubara, on the East Cogira, where begins the
Cape de Corrientes, twenty four degrees from the South.

The Empire of the Abissins.
Next we come to the great Empire of the Abissins, containing more then thirty
five kingdoms, insomuch as some would have it equal with all Europe. The
people for the greatest part are gross and brutish, clothed with beasts
skins; though the country abound with gold, which the Rivers wash in with their
streams. The women carry their Infants at their back in Goat skins, and never
go into the field without their staff, and victuals, and cast their hanging
breasts over their shoulders for their children to suck. For the generality,
they are a very wretched people, subjects to the great Neguz, who Commissions
certain Deputies for administration of Justice amongst them.

But these Deputies finding them so void of reason retire themselves to Towns
twenty or thirty leagues distant, and the others will not afford the pains to
go so far; so as when any difference happens, they entreat the next Passenger
to decide it, and in case he refuses, they way-lay him with bow and arrows, and
by force oblige him to give sentence, which be it good or bad is observed most
religiously, for recompense presenting him with some beast to carry his
baggadge, most commonly with a Dent which is much like to a little Mule, only
it has a hogs tail, and little horns, which grow only skin deep, which it
moves as the ears, and is much more swift: traveling on the sands his hoof
will burn and cleave, so as it is impossible to get him wag a foot: then their
only way is to make meat of him, his flesh being exceeding delicate, though
without salt not long to be kept from corrupting to worms.

The greatness of this part of the world is particularly seen in that we find
within it a hundred and fifty large kingdoms, The prodigious greatness of
Africa.
without reckoning many more of less quantity; which people this vast
Peninsula of above two thousand leagues in length and latitude. It is watered
with many fair rivers, some whereof have their overflowes like the River Nile,
and as beneficial; others role before them sands of gold, besides Lakes,
Marshes, and impenetrable Forests, rich gold mines, numerous herds of cattle,
double harvests, the horrible monsters, the diversity of people; some
civilized, others so brutish, they know neither religion nor articulate
language: some christians of various Sects, others Mahometans, and a great part
Gentiles and Idolaters, under the dominion of several Princes, of which the
chiefest are the Grand Seigniour, who possesses Egypt wholly, with great part
of the Coast of Barbary. The great King of the Abissins, who holds almost all
the intestine Africa, with both the strands of Nile. The great Monomotapa Lord
of almost all the Southern Verges, even to the Cape de bona Esperanza. The
potent King of Fez, and Marocco, and a multitude of other Kings and particular
Princes, as those of Tombut, Ganga, Borno, who possess many kingdoms. The
division of Africa.
Of this so spacious and populous Africa, the Ancients had discovered but some
few countries under the name of Egypt, Cirenaica, Numidia, Libia, Mauritania,
Ethiopia, Nigrites, Garamantes, Atlantes, and very few more.

The Arabians at this day make a quadrupart division of it, notwithstanding
that it is not entirely known by reason of the dismal deserts which shut up
passages, and deprive us of discovery. The first begins at the Cape of Babouchi
or Guardafuni, where they insert many countries out of Africa, taken in by a
Prince named Tramurat, who subdued Arabia Felix, and went in Arms as far as
Carmanio, to which they call Erac, and amongst these are the kingdoms of
Macran and Guadel, which are contained herein. The second called Biledugerid,
heretofore Numidia terminates Egypt at the Town Eleocat. The third is a vast
and horrid wilderness, which stretches it self to the bounds of Lible by them
called Saria, or the Desert, because it takes beginning at Nile, and ends at
the Desert of Saria. The fourth begins at the kingdom of Gonaga, and ends at
the kingdom of Galata.

Some make another division likewise into four parts, which are Barbary,
Numidia, Libia, and Nigres. Barbary extends it self by the side of Mount Atlas
upon the Mediterranean, from Egypt to Messa upon the Ocean, and comprehends the
kingdoms of Morocca, Fez, Telessin, Tunes, etc. Numidia or Biledugerid has in
it Segelmesse, Bugie, Zeb, etc. Libia is Saira. And the land of Negres
contains Galata, Tombut, Melli, Gaigo, Guber, Guinee, and others, as far as
the Cape of bona Esperanza.

CHAP. II. A Description of the Isle S. Laurence, with the conditions of the
People.
Read Andrew Corsals letter of this Island.
WE came then on shore in the Isle of S. Laurence, or Madagascar one of the
largest in the world, situate under the Tropic Capricorn between fourteen and
twenty six degrees of Latitude, in circumference about eight hundred leagues,
double the quantity of Candia. Upon one point thereof toward the Meridian
line, stands a reasonable good Town called Sancta Maria, under it is the Coast
of Saint Sebastian, which compacts a Gulf full of small Islands, inhabited
only by an excessive number of foul.

That point which looks toward the Cape de Corientes in Africa contains six
hundred leagues or thereabouts, betwixt the river Monica, and Mount Monica, and
is called Gouara or S. Augustins, almost under the Tropic. Here is a very
pleasant being, the Inhabitants civil, and well clothed, yet the heat is
extreme, where a River stuff't with fish frames a good harbor, and the soil
is fertile in fruits.

A Topography of the Island S. Laurence
In progress upon this coast of Sancta Maria, we meet with a gallant Town
called Antipara, between two Rivers, one of which forms the Cape Salido, so
called from the saltness of the water, and is precisely the point of one end
of the Island. Going on we fall upon the Bay of S. Rochon de Machara near the
Cape of S. Roch, which gives it name; then winding about eight miles from
thence, we arrive at the Cape of Turmey, four miles downwards from the Bay
Sancta Maria, directly underneath the Tropic. The country abounds in
fleecelesse sheep, cattle, and fruits of all sorts. Forty leagues from hence,
ascending toward the Indies, you shall see Manalba a gentile Town, then
Moropata a good Port, Manazero, Arco, Pescado de S. Antonio, and about a
hundred paces from thence, the Point of Soulatar, by Mariners called the Cape
of Amtar, and between them lie two Islands called the Irmanos, by the Islanders
Bema.

Passing on from the Cape of Natall in Africa, the Coast is well peopled, there
the Point of S. Anthony is, and the fair river Omzel with fertile Plains all
along from the Cape of S. Vincent, to that of S. Anthony. Here it is that
Christianity was first embraced: likewise have you there many Towns, and many
Villages, as Acousia, Nabrada, Monalega, Dolaganza, Zanabi, Zarcara,
Franonzara, Manatape, Babonda, Mancaua; with very good Havens almost
throughout, with rivers and shallows, where the Sea flows and ebbes, as in
Europe. Mancauia abounds in all sorts of necessaries for livelihood, and the
Inhabitants of a kind disposition, because that part is much frequented: On the
contrary, they of Alocanza or Aleganza, where the coast abounds with fish, are
fierce, and proud. The more Southern Coast toward the Cape of Ambar is not so
populous, though throughout the Island there are sufficient, and some are
savage, others civil, and some of them as well men as women, richly clad and
adorned with jewels and precious stones.

The Inhabitants of Secora and Ambia, are handsomely housed, Chreumain or
Indian Safron. Garcias l. 1. c. 39.
and well accommodated, they reach as far as Cape Salido, from whence to Cape
Dental is taken the breadth of the Island. In general, this Island abounds in
all sorts of good fruits, as Oranges, Lemons, and Spices, which the Inhabitants
eat confectioned, but Ginger especially; Cecuma, or Corcuma, and long Peper.
They likewise boast of Clove-Gilli^lowers, which I dare not affirm, because I
know it not. Of woods they have Ebony, Sendall, red, white, and Citron color,
Brasil whereof they make their bows and arrows, Sicamores, and Mastick.

They have moreover, Mines of excellent silver, but such is their sloth, they
had rather live from hand to mouth, then work; here is gotten the best Indian
Safron, and very excellent Sugar, which they order but very grossly, because
they have not the perfect art to refine it; though nevertheless they make a
great Trade of it. They have Melons of incredible bigness, yellow, red, and
white, much more delicate then Provence or Spain has. Throughout the whole
Island there grows a root they call Igname, or Patata, Igname or Inhame a root.
from whence the invention was brought to Spain, of taste like a Chestnut, but
more dainty, particularly when it is boiled, rather then roasted. This root is
of great use to the poorer sort, which though it be produced from seed sown,
yet it multiplies in a prodigious manner, being cut in gobbits.

They have Dates of five several kinds, and other trees which yield them
excellent drinks, besides fruits to eat, and strings which they pull out to
make Akpargates, or thread shoes after the Spanish manner, which they call
Pargas or Otayas: they have also thread from another tree called Langir, or
Coatir in another language, whereof they make cloth as fine as silk.

Then from one certain nut they draw oil sundry ways, pressing what is
within, and pouring thereon hot water, which makes an oil like that of
Almunds, or else pressing a little kernel which grows within the nut, when
it is ripe like that of a Pastique, or Pumpion; Likewise from a grain or nut
which is in common Dates, they draw a very good oil, and the strong prickles
which grow about the leaves serve them for needles to few their sails, and the
apparel of the poorer sort; which needle they call Cambiza.

As for the drinks they make of these trees, being drawn by distillation they
are incorruptible, otherwise they grow sour and dead in four and twenty
hours; they make a certain compound of the juice of Igname or Joucas, which in
taste is like good Aqua vitae, and mixed with sugar and cinnamon, is a good and
kindly nourishment.

The Inhabitants of this Island take thought for nothing but how to live
jovially, and which is admirable, in so great a number of people, you see
neither beggars nor vagabonds, as in Europe. The occupations of the Inhabitants
of Madagascar.
They all live happily without injuring others; some content with little,
others will have more, and no man wants employment, if he will take pains.
Here some give themselves to gardening, others there labor in the Mines, some
apply themselves to Merchandises, others to fishing, with their boats made of
neats leather, so well joined and liquored, that water cannot pierce them.

They live in perfect amity, such as if one man take fish, he parts freely with
it to him that asks him. Some there are who addict themselves to hunt wild
beasts, whereby they get skins of price, as Ermins, the Girafe striped with
white and red, which breed in this Isle, with all sorts of wild creatures, as
Elephants, Rhinoceros, which they call Couzan, and a certain sort of Asses,
which are like the usual Asses, being almost all dapled gray, and white or
black, and bay; they will suffer you to come close to them, but if you touch
them, though never so gently, they spring away with most stupendous leaps.

Birds of Paradise.
There are in this Island six kingdoms, the Kings whereof delight much in
field-sports, as Hawks, for the Hare, and for the Partridge, which with them
are called Gits, and others for fishing. Here are likewise the birds of
Paradise, which live on Muschroms, and fragrant flowers; some call them Lapi,
others Mie: The Rivers feed Tortoises to a wonderful bigness, excellent meat,
and very fat, but are so laxative, they cause even Disenterias, as it happened
to the Sieur Amador and his company, of whom we made mention in the first part.

We find there likewise Crocodils, Crocodils, and the manner how to take them.
in the world again none so cruel and bloody, which come sometimes above a
mile on land to feed on beasts, which they devour at a morsel. They are
tataken with hooks fastened to a strong twisted cord made of canes, by them
called Restant, laying some raschal sheep or goat for a bait, which the
Crocodile swallows at a bit, and so is caught.

It Is almost incredible, what hideous cries, groans, and tears, this creature
sends forth, finding himself taken; as if foreseeing, he were now to be the
fishers diet, who feast it merrily, the flesh being white, in taste like Capon,
and of an excellent favor, but in Lent it is not to be eaten.

For which reason some have thought Amber gris to come from this creature,
though there is more likelihood that it comes from the bottom of the Sea, and
not from a fish as we said elsewhere.

To conclude, the Island is so plentiful of cattle, that they have often given
a fat sheep for a Counter, or a leaf of paper; and a Mariner told me for
truth, that being at the point of Cape Salido, to take in fresh water; an
inhabitant of the Town of Antipara, gave him four Cowes for a scurvie piece of
leather, he was about to throw into the Sea with his dead Master.

I remember Sieur Amador told me, how that passing through this Island,
Alitadir King of Janiharou sent for him to have a piece of Scarlet, and that
being upon a River embarked with a Mohammedan, they sailed two days complete
from the mouth of the River; then landed, where were ready for them two
Chariots drawn by four bufflers a piece, which brought them to the King.

This River is called Janiharou from the name of the chief Town, where they
have extreme heats in the month of February, Janiharou a Town and River.
which is their Summer. It takes name from a fair fountain called Maraca
Jenehar, that is, the fountain of Janiharon, then joining with another called
Marouca, it divides into two large streams, the one whereof presents it self
directly face to face with Natal on the Ethiopian Coast; the other swelled with
that of Macarahou, falls down to twenty two degrees near the coast -- of S.
Augustine, which is in twenty three. There we suffered such violent heat, that
each moment we were forced to go into the river or sea for refreshment.

These people are of Olive hue, their humor docile enough, The women are kind
and courteous; handsomely clad in Mantles; of amiable complexion, and take much
delight in dancing to the music of certain Cimbals, which as they say they
learnt from the Isles of Comore, or the Isles of Theives, not far from thence,
Ethiopia lying betwixt them in twelve degrees and a half, and 200. miles from
Mozombique. Isles of Theives.
Of these Isles of Cemore there are five principal, which are of reasonable
greatness, besides many small ones; almost all inhabited, whereof the most
considerable is Malaquil.

As for the Edifice in the Isles of S. Laurence, their houses are covered with
the leaves of Coco tree, The Coco tree.
whence they produce their principal sustenance; as the people of the Maladines
do, and have great store, because this tree furnishes them with all
necessaries, though here they are not so good, as with the Maladines.

They have moreover another root called Joguia, which being dried yields
flower, whereof they make a very delicate pudding, mingling it with milk, with
sugar, or honey, and with the yelks of eggs. The root Joguia.
They eat also, as likewise throughout all India, bats of extraordinary
greatness, and very good taste. They who dwell along the Sea coast, apply
themselves chiefly to fishing, making their houses of turfs -- dried at the
Sun, or of Date leaves, aptly tempered with stone and mortar, and some again
for coverings, use the shells of large Tortoises, which live both on land and
water like Crocodiles.

CHAP. III. The Customs of the Inhabitants of Belugara, or Monopotapa.
Salubrious winds venting from a Cave.
AT our departure from the Isle of S. Laurence, we steered our course toward
the Cape of bona Esperanza, and in a short space arrived at the Arm del
Spiritu Sancto, a renowned river which descends from high Ethiopia, and thence
in two days we reached to Belugara, Belugara.
a Town situated upon the river of S. Lucie in the kingdom of Monopotapa,
below Cephala in five degrees beyond the Tropic Capricorn, upon the side of
the Mountain Bezula which stands in the middle. Winter is there in the months
of June, July, August. The country is fertile, and abounding with game for
Chase. As we stayed by the way to refresh our selves at a fountain, and make
some repast, The Sieur de la Courbe, of whom I made mention in the first part,
went on hunting, where he took some Hares, and many white Partridges, which did
us much courtesy. A league or thereabouts from the Town is a Cave, where during
the violence of the heat the winds are very frequent, as in the Monsons of the
East, and the Tournacaui of Potozzi, or Peron. And to make free passage for
this anniversary gale, the inhabitants have slit the Mountain, Winds which
preserve bodies incorruptible.
through which it blows to the very Town, refreshing it exceedingly, and
purifies bodies in such sort, that it renders them in a manner incorruptible.
For which reason the Belugarians and they of Zenzana, and Albigara burying
their dead in this Cavern, the wind dries them and preserves them from
corruption, as I noted in another place of another Mountain, Lib. 11. c. 2.
and like winds blowing in the East Indies.

The People are either Idolaters or Mahometans. The greatest part at the rising
of the Sun, prostrate themselves many times on the ground, muttering between
their teeth I know not what prayers; and all, as well Moors as Gentiles,
Christians in B^lugara.
are given to these ceremonies. You have there men both white and black, well
civilized and courteous, of handsome carriage and address; there are amongst
them some who have received documents of Christianity; for one of them
observing one of ours reading in a Primmer, had a curiosity to see what it was,
where perceiving a Cross, he kissed it with tears, requiring of Captain Inart
if there were a Priest in our company, and being brought to one called
Chaousandre, who afterward became a Capchin, he confessed to him, and told us
that he had formerly travailed three hundred leagues to find one to confess
to, but at that time he was not in capacity for voyages of that length being
guide of a family; that he had but one single wife, though fully as perverse as
she was fair, and deprived of the light of Religion, as the rest of his
household were.

He feasted us at his home with great kindness, and we presented him with a
Roman Primmer, which he held in high esteem, for the pictures only; for our
characters were unknown to him, nor did he understand our language. He bestowed
upon us a Girafe and a sheep all white, but the head, which was black, as they
are all in that country. For Girafes, they are docile beasts, white and
spotted with red, their fore-feet very short in proportion to the hinder, with
a Deers head, and very short horns, there is great store of them in the land of
Cefala.

CHAP. IV. The Country of Monbaze, Melinde, and Quiloa: the nature of the
Inhabitants, and the respect they bear their PRINCE.
HAving left Bulgara, we run all along that stretched forth coast of Ethiope,
where we visited Melindo, Monbaze, Quiloa, Mozambique, Cefala, and other
Towns, for truck of our commodities.

The country of Monbaze takes name from a Town and Island so called, which on
the East has the vast Indian sea, on the North Melinde, on the South Quiloa,
and Westward the spacious lake of Zaflan, and the kingdom of Xoa belonging to
the King of Abyssins. Heretofore this kingdom was subject to a great Prince
styled the King of Monemuge, neighboring to Ethiope, Monatapa, The town of
Monbaze.
and Mozambique. As for Monbaze it is a Town about the rate of Monpellier, built
almost after the Italian model: the people are of Olive color, affable,
courteous, and well apparelled, specially the women, who delight in rich
apparel.

There is a good Seaport, strong, and much frequented by the Indians, who
drive a great trade in spices, drugges, and precious stones, which much
enriches the place, and brings a great conflux of people from Zanzbar, Penda,
Agair, and other parts of Africa. There is gold, silver, precious stones, and
Ivory in great quantity. The country abounds in good fruit of all sorts,
particularly in Citrons and Oranges of prodigious bigness, and of excellent
taste, whereof the rind is sweet, and good to eat. There are likewise Peaches
without stones, but of little savor, Pomegranates exceeding large; and above
all, excellent waters, fresh and light, herein surpassing Quiloa, which is
defective.

The People are of a sweet disposition, contrary to other Maritime places,
where the natives are ordinarily mutinous, and litigious. We had there an Host
called Francesco Cosmel, of complexion between black and white, as he were born
of a Father black, and a Mother white, he gave us testimonies of a generous
soul, and seemed to be of good extraction. He lodged us in the chief chamber
of the house hanged with Matte, both walls and floor, with abundance of
well-wrought cushions, with an artificial fountain on one side which watered
little trees, where was a whole flight of birds of Paradise male and female,
which contrary to the common opinion had feet, as I said elsewhere; whereupon I
shall relate a pleasant passage which befell us. My companion resolving to go
to a jolly town not far thence to put off some Safron which he had, was taken
with an extreme cholick, which made him go to stool oftener then he would, in
our chamber there was a little Cistern full of pure water, he finding himself
pressed, and conceiving this Cistern to be a place of purpose for discharge,
seats himself on it. A merry passage, see the like story in the first part.


By misfortune there was a young maid washing clothes, who finding this nasty
shower fall upon her, began to cry out, and I that knew what the matter was,
immediately went out; pretending I had something to buy; so as my companion,
who suspected nothing, was amazed, when he saw two slaves fall upon him with
cudgels, who cured his disease with a new sort of Cataplasme.

Returning up again I saw this lucky adventure, and my companion as well as he
could defending himself. In fine, after many excuses, the matter was taken up,
by mediation of twenty seven Miticales, each being in value four French Livers;
which my companion was forced to pay for mundifying the Cistern. True it is he
was cured of his cholick, but so ashamed of the accident, he had not confidence
to suppe with us.

The Territory of Monbaze is of no great extent, confining on one side on the
Town of Orgaba, or Orgabea seated on the river Onchir, which runs to power it
self into Nile near Mount Amara, where the kingdom of Melinde begins, having
Amara on the North, and Monbaze on the East. The common diet of the country is
honey and rice, their drink Areta, Fatigar, and Belinganze, which they keep in
great Ox horns, cut in several figures, that they may be the more useful.

This sort of vessel is much used in the Ethiopian Court, as well for their
capacity, as their not being liable to break, especially with the Monbazians,
who nevertheless will make no use of any but of a beast that had his throat
cut, deriving this custom from the Jews.

In their traffic with Merchants they apply charms to force them to their
intent, a thing I never observed in any other nation. The manner how they
receive Ambassadors.
When notice comes that some neighbor Prince has sent Ambassadors to their
King upon affairs of importance, they do then much more. They take a wild
goat by them called Machorati, and having laid some charms upon it, mounted
upon his Elephant, the Prince passes three times over him with most horrible
cries and imprecations, which their Labis or Priests pronounce against their
Singiscan or Demon: Then having made three cries more in manner of prayer, they
require to know if this Ambassador comes for Peace or War, if it be answered
for Peace, they march before him with abundance of perfumes, and signs of joy;
and being arrived at the Town, the perfumes are cast into the water, to show
that all this was only to do him honor, and to endear him. But if it be for
War, they testify the plain contrary.

I have heard since my return, that the town and Port of Monbaze is by the
Portugals taken and demolished.

Melinde Town and Kingdom.
For a draught of Melinde, which is a kingdom lying above Monbaze, and subject
to the same King, the Capital Town of the same name is situate on the sea in
two degrees and a half beyond the Line, the Port is at some distance, by
reason that on the water side it is pestered with many craggy rocks, which
render the landing dangerous. Melons of excellency,
The country abounds in all sorts of Fruits and Viands, bread excepted; instead
whereof they make use of Parates, which are both good and wholesome. They have
likewise variety of flesh which they roast and dress in several manners, the
fruits excel, and chiefly the Melons, called there Dormous, admirable in
taste, which they eat not but in Summer, because they are excessive cooling,
and as it were freeze the stomach, being nevertheless not ill of digestion, or
causing chollicks; what quantity soever one eats. They are for the most part
Idolaters, except some Mahometans, who dissemble their Religion; for which
cause, the Prince has but a sinister look for them. This Prince has a high
veneration from his people, who subjugate their shoulders for his support, burn
perfumes to him when he appears in public, as they do likewise for all
Princes or Potentates who come to visit them. But indeed this Prince is most
laudable in this particular, that he himself will take cognizance of whatsoever
is acted by his Governors and Magistrates, and if any one impleads other
before him, it behooves him on the price of his head, to be assured of the fact.

When a complaint is made to him, immediately he sends for the party accused:
If he be a Noble man, when he arrives at the Palace gate, The Prince of M^linde
a g^ave Justiciar.
he gives notice to the Officers of his presencce, by the sound of a Cornet,
who cause him to ascend single before the Prince, who with great patience hears
hoth parties in presence of his Council. If ^oth are found culpable, the
inferior is remitted to the ordinary Justice, who punishes him with stripes
of cudgel, the Grandee is punished by fine: But if the Nobleman prove only
guilty, the King leads him to his chamber, where being disrobed, prostrate on
the ground, craving pardon, he receives from the Kings own hand certain stripes
with a cudgel, more or fewer, in proportion to the crime and services he has
done. Which done he revests, kisses the Kings feet, and with all humility
thanks him for the favor received. Then without further show of any thing
attends the King to his Hall, who in presence of all the Court, gives him a
dismission, and recommends ^o him administration of Justice to his people,
causes him to be accompanied out of town with ordinary ceremony, so as what
has passed, is not perceived by any, and this Grandee returns as well content,
as if he had received a rich treasure. The charges of suit are defrayed out of
the Kings Coffers, or if he please by the criminal, without the knowledge of
any one.

When as this King who by his subjects is esteemed a Saint, makes a progress
into the Country, he is mounted on a horse richly trapp'd, and going out of his
Palace passes over a new killed heifer, where the people raise a loud outcry,
and instantly go view the entrails of the beast, to judge by sorcery if this
voyage shall be successeful, or no. When he makes entrance into any town, all
the fairest Ladies walk before him with censers of perfumes burning in their
hands, some singing his encomiums, others melodiously playing on Basins, with
fine nods, endeavoring to render themselves as complaisant as possibly they
can.

To conclude, their territories confine upon the country of Zangueliac and
Ethiopia. Aquiloa is a Kingdom with an Isle and a Town of the same
appellation, where the Portugals have a Fort, the Governor whereof drives a
main trade by means of the vessels he sends for the Indies. The King of Quiloa
was Lord heretofore of Mozambique.

All these are countries of Zanguebar, or Zanzibar, which comprehends that
large extent of ground which lies between the Oriental and Occidental seas, of
the people called Cafres. Zanzibar, properly speaking, is an Island which faces
directly Monbaze, but the country I intend to speak of is Zanguebar, named so
by the Arabians, because in their language, this word Zangue signifies black,
and this country for the greatest part is inhabited by Blacks. Mark Pol esteems
it an Island of above a thousand leagues in circuit, being watered with many
rivers, making as it were an Island.

Concerning the Town of Quiloa 'twas built, Quiloa, Zanguefar, Zanzebar.
as Tradition says, above six hundred years past by one Hali son of Hocen King
of Siras in Persia, who came to live there. Women here go exceeding well
arrayed, richly adorned with Jewels and Ivory bracelets quaintly wrought, which
upon death of husband and allies, they break in sign of sorrow, as the men
forbear to eat and shave their hair, as I before recounted of the East Indies.

CHAP. V. Of Mozambique, the nature of the Inhabitants. Cefala. Mines of gold
in Ophir. Belugara.
HAving passed by Viada, where the people for the best part dwell upon the
river Dumes or Humes, The river Humes.
since the vast inundation of this and other rivers in the country, upon the
day of Saint Abiblicane, we entered the kingdom of Mozambique; this River runs
toward the East, passing by the foot of the Mountain Zet, out of which issues
one of the heads of Nile, the other from the Mount Betzoan, which ancients
called the Mountains of the Moon streaming toward the points Maestro and
Tramontanus. The branch which runs Southward, is divided not far from the head
by a rock into two streams, the one watering the land of Sefala, the other
running to disgorge it self in the sea right over against the Isle of Saint
Laurence.

Mozambique.
Mozambique is a small Island hard upon the firm land, with a Haven and a Fort
of the Portugals within fifteen degrees of the Line. 'Twas subject to the King
of Quiloa, till the Portugals became Masters, where now in their voyages from
Portugal to the Indies is one of their securest harbors to rest and refresh
themselves. The greatest part of the Inhabitants, who are all Blacks, profess
Mahometisme, the rest Idolatry.

They upon the firm land are absolute brutes, going stark naked, their
privities only covered with a cotton cloth. Adorers of the Sun, like them of
Sephala speaking the same language as they; their traffic is Gold, Ivory, and
Ebony; their chief food the flesh of Elephants. They delight much to parget
their bodies with a reddish earth, persuading themselves that so daubed, the
world shows not finer men. The better sort paint themselves with a certain
Folliage, which to make azure, they use Indico and other compounds. There are
amongst them who bore their lips like the Americans, enchasing some delicate
stone.

Salomons gold.
Some say this count^y in times past depended upon Ethiopia, and and 'twas
hither Solomon sent his Fleets for gold, and that the Queen of Saba styled her
self likewise Queen of Mozambique and Melindo; moreover that their speech
resembles in some sort that of Senega. Though to speak truth, it is more
likelihood Solomon fetched his gold from the mines of Sefala, which are not
far thence, or may be from the East Indies.

Zinguebar.
Touching the country of Cefala, or Sefala and Zinguebar, which takes up in a
sort the whole breadth of that end of Africa, even to the Cape of Bona
Esperanza, which coast is inhabited with Blacks, called Cafares, or Cafres,
they appertain to the great Empire of Monomotapa, of which we are to speak
presently.

In particular for what concerns Zinguebar, or Zanzibar, which ancients called
Agezymba, and which they placed above the high and interior Ethiopia, it is as
it were an Island environed with seas, and rivers, it is a plentiful country of
all kinds of commodities for livelihood.

The town of the same appellation in twenty four degrees and a half, has a
good Port well frequented upon a lake, excellently well built, of stone, lime
and sand, after the manner of the Italian Towns, embellished with pleasant
gardens, entirely beguirt with water, as Meroc is, but there is no drink but
the draw-well. The Princes Palace seems very lofty, which defends the mouth of
the haven, before which there is a convenient place for calking vessels. It Is
situate in the best part of Monomotapa, and fronts Eastward with the Province
of Simen or Simis, which joins with the land of Melinde. The Inhabitants are
well civilized, and it is thought this is the same Monomotapa which lies upon
the river of the Holy Ghost, where all the houses are flat roofed -- as they
are at Naples, and the Palace royal like that at Calicut, there is not one but
has his Alfongi, which is a boat of one piece. The Presterian or Natahachi,
Abassins.
and Abassi has often attempted to take in this country, but failed, only he
plundered it, taking away a number of slaves to make Christians of his kind.
Amongst his other wars he took the Region of Canfild, which Geographers place
where they should not.

This country stretches very far even to the lake of Zaflan, The Isle Zunan.
which makes the fair Island of Zunan or Zanan, near which is Garga, or Gorga,
the capital town of the country, beautified with pleasant gardens, and
abounding in foul and cattle, rice, and other commodities for livelihood. This
lake of Zaftan is as 'twere a wide and vast sea of sweet water; The lake Zaflan.
lying close upon the great Province of Gazasele, which confines upon Cafates,
Cara, Esaui, Noua, Ambian, all which meet at Agag, situate between the two
Cataracts called by the Inhabitants Zembra, with the entire kingdom of
Aygamar. As to Cofala, it is likewise a reasonable large country, rich and
fertile at least from the lake Gourantes to the Cuama: for the rest of the
Coast, Magnice a river.
from the River Magnice to the Cape, is but barren. This Magnice, or the River
de Espiritu Sancto, as the Portugalls call it, rises from one of the lakes
whence Nile takes its Origin, called Zembra; or as others will have it more
probably from Zachaf, and crossing the mountains of the Moon, and the great
Empire of Monomotapa, deliver themselves in the Meridian Sea, in twenty three
degrees and a half forth of the same lake Cuama or Couesme takes his birth,
which disgorges it self at seven mouths, a little above the Cape of
Courantes, in sort that this kingdom of Sefala is environed with two great
Rivers, which toward Mid- August make exceeding inundations, and fatten the
soil, as Nile, by its overflowes, fertilizes the countries of Egypt, Beniermi;
Nubie, Tamatas, Soba, Bugamidei, Goyame, and others.

These two rivers then launch out of the lake Zaire and Zembre or Goyame as
some think, and modern writers say, Zaire and Zembre.
from a lake called Zuman, or Zuama, or Sachaf, as two great branches, one
whereof which is Magnice, runs into the sea, as at a place by the Portugalls
called Punca, or Labras del Spiritu sancto. The other is called Fuama, that is,
faint, because it fails at threescore and fifteen miles from Cefala, and is
lost in the sand, whence it rises again afterward. The large lake of Zembre
bears great vessels, and some report they have sailed upon it above two hundred
and fifty leagues. It receives other rivers, as the Paname sixty leagues
beneath Cefala, others about twenty leagues, as the Libia Mariancia, called by
the Abissins Eshusula and Sancola, both great inundations, laying the whole
country under water, and in Marshes of difficult passage.

Rivers in Suama.
The soil of Cefala is exceeding rich in gold, and the river Cuama brings it
ready fn'd in small threads which are found in the sand, so as this river
passes through mines of gold, for which reason the Portugals by permission of a
Mohammedan Prince who rules the Country, have here built a Fort to facilitate
their negotiation with the Inhabitants. Before they arrived here, some
Mahometans of Quiloa and Magadoxo built the town of Sefala in one of the
Islands made by Geuesme, Diverse rivers in Couama.
this river augmented by Paname which takes birth near the town Amara, and
swelled by Laanga, who leads with it the Arrouia, and joins with Monoua at the
Ruenia, and the Inedita called Iradi by the Ethiopians, which together water
many countries, making vast inundations and Marshes, which render the land so
dangerous to pass, that there needs well experienced guides, and to make Mount
Masima, by the natives called Manica, the way to Ethiopia, there are many fair
Provinces, Goldmines.
rich in ore of gold and silver. They term the gold mine Manica, the country
Matuca or Mataca, and those which get the gold Bothones. There is another an
exceeding rich one in the Province of Torta or Toroa, and in that of Gag or
Agag one of silver, as there is also at Bocaua or Batua, Boror, Tacouir, and
other places, and the soil is universally very fertile; as likewise at Potozzy
and Perou. To avoid these immense Marshes, as I said, one is forced to take the
way of Mount Manica, bending toward Ambea, and Sabaim, where at this day are
seen huge ruins of ancient structures, which resemble the greatness and
magnificence of those of the ancient Romans, chiefly in the kingdoms Batua
and Toroa, where are the most ancient mines of gold in Africa. Alvarez
testifies, that in the mines of Chaxumo, there are stones of 64 fathoms, six in
breadth, and three height.
There you find likewise store of stones of excessive bulk so excellently
pollished, they never lose their luster, fixed together without Cement, so
fine, it is not perceivable.

In like manner we find there Remainders of walls of above twenty five
handfulls thick, with certain hieroglyphick characters engraved, not to be
read, as the like is observed in Persia among the ruins of the town
Persepolis. Many do conceive 'twas from hence Solomon fetched his gold, as I
said elsewhere; and these great ruins to have been of that Ages building, and
by the same King.

Howsoever we took not this road by the Mountain, for being come from the Cape
Gourantes, with a Portugal Captain called Baccheo, a fiery and insolent
person, with whom we had contracted for our passage, with design to come for
Spain, by the Cape of Bona Esperanza, and along the coast of Africa, we were
constrained to go on shore at Agoas de san Biasio, by some called the coast of
S. Rafuel, to avoid the tyranny of this Captain. The author changes the design
of his first voyage.
It Is scarce credible what discommodities one suffers in these Portugal
vessels; for though he shift his clothes and linen a hundred times the day, he
is eaten up with lice; have you need but of a glass of water, you must make
insupportable submissions to a very boy, contest every evening for your
lodging, run every hour to the drudgery of the ship, and depend on a Captain
more cruel then a Comet; finding my self in this distress, I resolved to
disbark at what rate soever, and I took my time when I saw them putting some
Hogs-heads in boat, to put in a little chest of mine also covered with red
leather, and locked, pretending I went to fell some commodities. Being now on
land, I followed a path toward a village called Git Bulgara with my mantle on
my shoulders where meeting by the way with a countryman, who understood me
not, because I spoke Indian, he only apprehended some Arabian words, and made
signs to me, that at the next village I should be understood, and helped me
himself to carry my Baggadge. Being come to a Fishers house we found him
mending his nets, who at first accost cried to me, Afartas, as to bid me I
should not be afraid. I took him by his countenance to be an honest man, he had
many children, and amongst the rest two tall girls, who gazed upon me with
wonder at the strangeness of my habit, which was Persian, with long Bases, a
Cassock, and a vest like a Honger-line over all of a neat stuff: I opened my
chest, and took out some bracelets made of Venetian Beads of several colors,
wherewith I presented them, The courtesy of savages.
which they accepted with much content, even ravished with the prettiness of
these little toys of glass: but the Father restored them to me again, and
rebuked them sharply for having taken them, conceiving them to be precious
stones, till with entreaties I prevailed with him to take them, and gave them
back to his daughters, who had never before seen themselves so richly decked.
This good man having hidden my chest, and given me notice by signs that I
should not speak a word of it to any one, lest it should be enquired after,
caused a Moor to be brought to me, who had on his arm a Cross, by whom I
understood he had been at Tunis, and, what was more content to me, told me I
might travel throughout Africa as far as Cair and Alexandria, going from town
to town, and from dwelling to dwelling, with security.

The Abifsins imprint a Cross on their flesh.
I had a curiosity to know why he bore that cross upon his arm, he replied,
his Father lived at Magadeli, and was a Mohammedan, but that he and the rest to
exempt themselves from paying tribute to the N^gus, imprinted this mark, that
they might be known for Christians. In the mean while my courteous Host killed
a kid, and made ready plenty of fish to entertain me, adding that, though I
should stay a twelve month entire in his house, he could not make satisfaction
for the present I had given his daughters, who would get husbands much the
sooner. And really all the neighbors near at hand flocked to behold and admire
them with these splendid bracelets, and crystal pendants red and garnisht
with guilt, which I hung at their ears when we rose from table, notwithstanding
their fathers opposition, who was ashamed and confounded at my prodigality.
Some three hours after, or thereabout, the boat belonging to our ship came to
shore, where I presently saw my Comrades arrive, who had been at sharp words
with the Captain, for that he permitted me to leave the ship, and importunely
entreated me to return, rather then to expose my self single to the hazard of
being devoured by wild beasts, till being satisfied by the Moore, that we might
securely travel through the midst of Africa, they took my design themselves,
and resolved to go strait to Alexandria by the River Cuame, which is a branch
of Zaire as I said before; which falls very gently; and the sea at full tide
comes in, and goes above twenty five leagues upward; upon this design we bought
two Almadies, wherein we stowed our carriage, Sieur de la Courbe, Cassis my
companion and I, with our Moore, and one Ismaro who came aboard with us at the
Cape of Courantes to go for Lisbon, we took our leave of our Host, whose name
was Adilau, and going along up the River, we arrived the first evening at a
Town called Alzizir, the Lord whereof, whom we presented with a pair of
knives, treated us with much humanity, and having feasted us with good cheer,
lodged us upon cotton quilts.

On the morrow we took the tide, and in our Almadies going up the river, he met
two men, one of which spoke Arabian to us, which was much comfort to us, he
embarked with us, promising to wait on us three Moons, that is, three months
for a Capos which I gave him. At night we landed at Aiasita, a convenient town,
but meanly built, whose situation my companion took with his Astrolabe, and
found it distant from the Line twenty four degrees. Being arrived, although
there were no danger for the rest of our journey, we thought best to go
together to Belugara, to visit the Lord of the place, and get a pass from him.
He was very glad to see us, and much the more for a present we made him of a
little neat basket, a diverse colored glass, and a pair of knives, which he
so highly esteemed, that he caused us to dine at his own table, and gave us a
piece of Parchment of Azure color, about the bigness of a card for play, with
a writing for our passage; gave us a favor two Gazells, and two Pea-Birds, and
caused four small Elephants be made ready to carry us to our Barks, which lay
some two leagues from thence, and he himself bore us company for a quarter of a
league, mounted on a another little Elephant decently trapped with cotton cloth
of several colors. The rest of the day we traveld not far by reason the tide
was spent, as also for that we went a shooting in the woods with our Guns,
where we found such abundance of white rabbets, that they were troublesome, and
great store of tame Partridges, and went through no other then only the town
called Langada, belonging to the Prince of Atasinga. The Candi came himself to
visit us, inviting us to stay that night there, but in respect the day was far
spent, we held on our way, and arrived something late at a town called
Suguelane, subject to the Subacchi, Suguelane.
whither we sent one of our men before to take a lodging for us. On a sudden
behold a company of young girls, who came to us with Pipes, and Tabors, made
of the bark of a tree of one entire piece, drawn over with certain fruit, which
sound much like Cimballs, danceing and tripping to the music of these
instruments. Sieur de la Courbe gave them a piece of money, which on one side
had certain characters, on the other a crowned head, with a kind of Nosegay in
the form of a Pyramid, with a great many flowers round about. They beheld this
piece with much curiosity, and one of them holding it aloft to the view of the
party, the rest fell to dancing after their fashion, till such time as
perceiving a troop of about fifty men, wrapped in woollen cloth, which covered
their whole bodies, we made a soft retreat to our Barks. Then we saw in the
middle of the company one raised above the rest, borne on a Palanquin, having
on his head a Miter, enriched with stones, who being come near our boats,
descended, and having said Afrares, which signifies come nigh, entered affably
into one of our Barks, and saluted us with the word Erga^i, which is, welcome.
The Sieur de la Courbe understanding this to be the Lord of Suguelane, kissed
his hand, and by an Interpreter delivered him the occasion and design of our
voyage. This whole night was divided into good cheer, and dancing with the
wives of this Potentate, the Principal of whom, The Sieur de la Courbe
presented with a chain of various colored glass beads, which caused as much
wonder and envy in the other Ladies, as contentment in the Prince, who
reciprocally gave him a cup of Euate, filled with Pepitaian gold, which he
forced upon our countryman by the strength of entreaties, but in retribution,
out of the civility natural to his country, he presented a guilt Cimeterre
with hangers of China work. I likewise presented the Ladies with some rare
pendants of red Pausell crystal, and very glittering, who immediately cast
off their upper garments, and fell to dancing.

To conclude, having seen Jerma, and Simbada, a great and huge Town erected in
the water, where is the right country of Agisimba, agisimba.
staid fifteen days at Rifa, where we became known to the Chanubi or
Governor, who gave us good instructions for our journey, and brought us better
then half the way to Cheticoura in a boat of his; The Sieur de Courbe, and I,
who had a particular curiosity to see the country, resolved there to go render
a deference to the great Taboqui or Monomotapa, who was at his capital Town of
Zanguebar or Monopotapa, who bestowed many indulgements on us while we staid,
our boats being left with the rest of our company, who had no such curiosity,
with order to meet all together at a certain place called Calboute, without
parting any more thenceforward. I cannot give a particular account of the
distance of places, I may be excused by reason of the deviations and turnings
we were forced to make, returning sometimes the same way we came:
notwithstanding I shall speak precisely enough of what concerns Monopotapa.

CHAP. VI. Of Monopotapa, the Princes estates, and Government, his way of
living, and the singularity of his Country.
Monopotapa.
THis Prince is by some called the Benemotapa or Benemataxa, and by the native
people the Grand Tahaqui, he possesses so large an Empire, that it is given for
a thousand leagues in circuit, environed with seas and great Rivers, which
render it inaccessable and inexpugnable; for on the North it has the vast lake
Zembre or Zembare, on the South the Cape of Bona Esperanza, and on the other
sides the Eastern and Western seas. Toward the Siroch it stretches it self as
far as the Mountains of Manice where the kingdom of Toroca or Toroa takes
beginning, whereof the principal town is Zenebra, next is Tatuca rich in gold,
silver, and ivory.

Then there are the kingdoms of Agag and Boro, which on the Blacks side face
toward the Beche, on the West toward Tacui, which goes as far as Mozambique.
Likewise within this Empire the Province of Butua lies, as also that of Simbage
or Simbatni, plentiful in Ivory, Mines of salt.
by reason of the great multitude of Elephants, in salt of the rock whence good
part of Africa is furnished, though at dear rates in some places; by reason of
the great distance and difficulty of the roads.

These people for the greatest part are Idolaters, stiling their chief God
Maziri, the maker of all things; others call him Atuno. In great reverence they
have likewise a Virgin by name Peru, and have Monasteries where live recluse
maids; moreover, they are grand magicians, as they are through the whole
country of Guynee. There came a certain one who reported he had passed the
kingdoms of Candabar, Couzani, Transiani, Vsbeque, and many other countries of
the East, as China, San, Pegu, Bengale, Besnagari, Calicut, and the wide sea of
Alondon, to have run through all the dominions of Priest John, to have been
in the floods of the Torrid without wetting himself, clothed with a mere
Satin, walking upon the clouds, to have passed the Zember upon the back of a
devil, and to have arrived in the kingdom of Sahama, to find the Monopotapa
to declare his Religion to him, having in few days gone thirteen thousand
leagues. He added far more, the particular satisfaction he received after so
long a travel, in that the Prince caused four Christians their hateful enemies
to be massacred, and engaged in honor of their God to pray at the Temple five
times the day, under pain of the scourge.

The King building a faith in this sorcerer, made an ordinance that all should
yield obedience to this Mulila and his associates, whom they named the
Jubacumba.

For the first time the people presented themselves at their ceremonies, but
being absent the second time, these impostor Priests, coming forth, fell upon
them with scourges made of Elephants hyde, and beat them most rudely,
persevering in this harsh way of treatment, till on a day a young Portugues,
called Francisco Sanche, who lived in the Fort of Safala, being come to the
town for trade, and to visit a Mistress he had, a Merchants daughter, received
some lashes in the street from these magicians, whereupon being sensible of his
injury, lets fly his cimeterre at one of them, and lays him dead on the
ground, without much trouble, confiding in the Kings favor, to whom he had
brought a present from the Governor of the Fort Henrique Mendez, and they
joining in their defense, he killed four, and wounded four more, then mounted
on horse, and went safe off.

The King being told of it fell into laughter, and praised the Portugues for
his courage, which ingratiated him with his Mistress; so as she after married
him.

True it is, this Prince had not long before put some Jesuits to death, but he
made them ample satisfaction, by putting to death all the Mahometans, who gave
him such council, whereupon the Fathers of Cochin being advertised of it, sent
others presently, who declared to the King the benefit they were to all
mankind, in instruction and salvation of souls, and gained so highly upon his
grace, that besides other particular favors which he did them, he granted free
liberty to his people to be converted, and embrace the Christian faith. So it
is that Christian faith was introduced by the fathers of the society, where to
this day it is preserved and practiced by them and the Dominicans, and though
the Prince be an Idolater, he is a well-wisher to the Christians. He holds a
stately gravity, allowing audience to none but on the knee, nor tergiversation
in retiring. No man has access but upon extreme submissions, and prostrating
himself on the ground on six paces distance, the Princes answers are brief. He
delights at be decked with chains and stones as women are, bestows little, and
loves to be presented with all curiosities possible. He keeps a great Pack or
Seraglio of wives, and some say he has a guard of armed Ladies, like Amazons,
and a number of fierce great dogs.

Madrogan the chief town of Monopotapa.
The capital town where he keeps his Court is called Madrogan, where he has a
stately Palace; the houses are good building, the materials are wood and
loome, which being well tempered and whitened over, are sufficiently graceful
and inhabitable.

The King must not go robed, but after the manner of his Ancestors; that is, a
Cassock of his own country silk, for stuffes brought from foreign parts he
wears not for fear of poison, over this a large and long scarf, like a woman's
mantle, which comes betwixt his legs, and is brought up to be tucked under his
girdle, with a rich handcherchief over his shoulders, he has buskins
embroydered with gold, and rich carkanets on his neck, with a band about his
hat interwoven with big pearls, rubies, and emeralds. He makes great use of
Elephants, and of a beast called an Alsinge, seldom ridden on, which resembles
a heart, never using horses, for that rhere are so few.

What is most remarkable in this place is, that there is no sort of prison, the
reason, because all matters of justice are finally concluded upon the place.
Here as in other parts it is a crime capital, to deflowre a maid before her
years of maturity, because she ought to be capable of bearing children.

The Kings wives are most richly and artificially attired, who live separate in
several apartements, without any knowledge of one another, unless when through
special grace he convokes them. It Is pain of death for him that but goes about
the lodgeings of these Ladies.

Many Colleges likewise where youth is instructed in virtue. The Ladies of
quality held it an honor to dress the Princes meat, and wait by turns,
taking charge of his diet at meals, at which time he has Musicians for his
alacrity, but they are hoodblinded, that they may not view his face, and when
he drinks, a great person calls out aloud, Pray for the Kings health.

His drink is wine of distilled Dates, with Manna, Ambar, and Musk. His odours
and perfumes for each day, come to two pound weight of gold, provided him by
certain Merchants. The Tapers for his service are compounded with odours. When
he goes forth in a morning, if the Sun with his rays have not refined the
air, he has four great perfumed torches borne before him, himself being
carried by four Gentlemen, in a Chair Richly adorned, with a Curtain, or
Canopy over it: an Umbrella, enriched with jewels, and a numerous Attendance
of Nobility; Before him goes a Guard of two hundred Mastiffs, each lead by his
keeper; and amongst these (for his desport) a Buffon. Upon the way he never
gives audience to any one, and goes not out of his Palace, whether on foot, or
mounted either on Horse, Elephant, or Alsigne, but he bestrides some new-killed
beast (as I related of Monbase,) and being pas'd, they raise a loud cry, making
inspection on the intralls, to know, if there be good or bad toward the
Prince, whereof their Flamins make report. His Chaire-bearers are daubed all
over with a red earth, wherein they work folliage of diverse sorts, after the
manner of the Mozambiques.

The Royal Palace is very commodious, flanked with Towers without, within
furnished with cotton cloth of diverse colors, gold tissue: the floor costly
paved with plates of gold cut in figures, with great Candlesticks of ivory hung
in chains of silver; Seats enriched with gold Folliage, properly beautified
with colors, and Transparent Ennamell, and four Principal Gates, sumptuously
wrought; and Guarded by those they call Sequender. His Family is by a number of
Officers, very orderly governed, who observe him with a most profound silence.
While he sits at Table, you hear not a whisper, nor the least noise. His
Vessel is Purcelan, garnished and set round with sprigs of gold, fashioned
like Coral. The Captain of the Gate is called Cadira. The Captain of the Guard
Acar. The Treasurer, or he who disposes the Revennues, Cabacada. The Seniglaren
is as 'twere Constable, or Lieutenant General, who are all in array of Honor,
of cotton cloth, or silk of diverse colors, girdles enriched with stones,
guilt falchions, or swords, with hilts of Massy gold carved and enammell'd,
which is for ordinary; on high days, of Diamonds, Rubies, and other stones of
inestimable price. I saw there the pommell of an Alfange, or cimeterre, made of
one fausell Ruby of extraordinary bigness, of one piece entire, which was
given for the Ransom of a Province.

For, the Father of Tabachi, who reigned at the time we were there, having
disburs'd a Mass of gold-ingotts, to relieve the King Vidarati, the other gave
him a Province for security, and when he came to redeem it, Tabachi chose
rather this gorgious sword, then all the gold they would restore him, which was
a great quantity.

When this King Marches to the War in Magnificence, he wears a Robe of silk,
with hanging sleeves, a girdle enchas'd with stones of peculiar virtues, as the
Magicians make him believe; a Poniard at his girdle, and his sword borne before
him by a Prince, with a small casket of jewels; Himself in a Littar, born by
Gentlemen, called Singaro, one Page marches before him, with his Umbrella,
another with a fan of Austrich feathers, which are here in abundance, some as
large as oxen. The Princes and Gentry habited in the Turkish dress, saving that
for a Turban, they wear little round bonnets, all bravely mounted on
Elephants, or Horses, which are bred and suckled by Cowes, and trained by
Jaloses, so expert at it, that running at high speed, they will throw a dart,
and riding catch it again, so dexterously, and with such agility, that without
stop, they will (stooping) take a stone off the ground. He has with him a
hundred Elephants, caparison'd with the skins of Sea-oxen, unpeirceable by any
dart, each carrying four Eunukes, with cross-bowes, of farther reach then
long-bowes. Upon the neck sits the Bes^gu, who guides and commandes him; and
during the clamor and confusion, lays his mouth to his ear, hollowing to
him, that he may understand him; and so docile is this creature, that he will
turn back his long ear, to hearken, and obey what he bids him. This Besigu
bears a bow and quiver, a short sword, and a coat of Sea-oxe. In the Van of
the Elephants march great Mastiffs, cap'd in the same manner, to each a keeper,
who has him linked to his girdle with an iron chain. In sum, it is of Faith
with all of them, Subjects zealous to their Prince.
that he who dies for his King, gains salvation, though in other points they
embrace all sorts of Religions, telling you they cannot be damned, for that
they are friends with all the Gods in Heaven, and cheifely with Runia, Adula,
Isaten, those are the Christian Gods.

In the Head of this Mastiffe-Regiment, Marches a body of Musketteirs, who do
good service with their fire-clubs: before them above two thousand chariots,
covered with leather, drawn with six oxen, which carry each fifteen men, of
those called Arbesrait, with short guns, like Carabins. One part of the Army
may shade by day under these Charrets, which again will shelter them by night,
while the Mastiffs with their keepers lie in the Head, under Tents, who by
turns stand centinell abroad. The whole Army Marches divided in three Squadrons.

The Eunuques go clothed like women, and do all sorts of service, dress their
Masters diet, made of Rice, Mill, or the Root Igname, whereof they make cakes,
which are heavy, and offensive to the stomach, and soon hurt it. Their ordinary
fare is powdered beef, milk a little turned their drink; The King, and Great
ones drink honnyed-wine, which they keep in oxe-hornes, as they do in Ethiopia.

The Vulgar are clothed only from the girdle downwards, casing up their
privities in little purses, or pumpions, made hollow like sheaths, when they go
into the field, by reason of certain venomous creatures, which sting cruelly,
wherewith some have been sore handled.

All that belong to the Court, are known by the privilege they have, to wear
upon the shoulder the Talmassaca, or Mantle of several stuffs, according to
quality, and of the sort the King wears it, which is very costly, and it is a
high Honor to wear the Mantle of the Kings make.

Poison is very common throughout the Empire, and at dear rates, there being
some that is sold at a hundred Miticales, or Sequins the ounce; The reason so
much is used, is, the rigor of the King, and his Ministers of Justice, who
inflict such cruel punishments upon Offenders.

For, no sooner has a person committed a Crime, but he is punished in the
instant, and if the Crime requires the Offender should be suspended some days,
to render his punishment more long and grievous, he is tied to a tree, with
strong guards, there being no Prisons, as I said before; so, as the Criminal
seeing no possible escape, the best remedy is to poison himself, by a speedy
death to cut off the rigor of a long pain.

Nor will the Prince be clothed with any thing but what is made within his own
Palace, for fear of poison. There are certain trees called Coscoma, which bear
fruit like the golden apple, of violet sent, which tastes well, but, being
eaten in any quantity, purges so violently, that it voids blood, and at last is
mortal. There are those that ingross the poison by Patent, for which they pay
a high excise to the Prince, by reason there are so many who use it for there
death, to free themselves from the Torments of Justice, for there is no pardon
to be expected for offenses. If one injures another without cause, he is
cruelly bastinado'd, as they are in Turkey, where I have seen Judges themselves,
for that they have failed in Justice, punished in that manner.

They are laid naked upon the ground, and the Officer, or Executioner, is to
beat them with a cord knotted, and buttond at the end, and when the President
gives the word, then he does his Office: having done, he gets up, puts on his
clothes again, and gives thanks to the Judges, and Executioner, for their
Justice, without any disgrace for the matter, and returns to his function, as
if no such thing had happened. This makes the Judges candid in their sentences.
The greatest Lords and Magistrates find the like from the King, as I observed
before, speaking of Melnida. For, he has them castigated in his presence
privately, and then with instructions dismisses to their charge. Justice thus
severely executed, without exception of persons, preserves the Nation in firm
Peace and Tranquillity, and gets the King as 'twere a Divine Adoration, so
really, that as he passes thorough the streets, the people praying for him,
cast themselves to the ground on their face, not presuming so much as to look
upon him.

There are some Princes and particular Lords, fancy much to hang bells at their
neck or leg, conceiving it well becomes them.

At Court every man goes habited as pleases him best, so, Lions skins
as there are Courtiers: but they are of the highest rank, who, over all, wear
a large cassock, of a Lions skin, made up unshapely enough, as they use in
Priest John's Court; but no man can wear this Lions garment, but a Prince of
the blood. Others go to the wars in coats of sea-oxe covered with ivory, to
defend the thrust of a sword, for it is not their custom to cut. They also use
Swords and Bucklers faced with ivory, or skins of sea-oxe, or Crocodiles, with
which all their Rivers abound, the flesh whereof they eat throughout all Africa
and India, as an excellent meat.

CHAP. VII. The History and strange adventure of Prince Alfondie. Another of
the Amors of Princess Abederane.
Being here, we further came to understand that Alfumigarbachi, one of the
last who reigned in this Empire, dying suddenly at the age of 47. years,
without leisure to call a prudent council, or settle the succession in the
child, that of all the rest, he most desired, amongst the sixty four sons and
eleven daughters, which he had by several wives, whose name was Abditsinda, his
minion, a gallant and generous Prince.

This change bred great tumults and dissentions at Court, each of these wives
striving to thrust her child's head under the crown, so as to attain more easily
to it, and to gain the Peers and Officers of the Crown, to purchase the
Scepter, they spared not whatsoever was dearest to them, a cause of much blood
and murder. Of these sons there were four principal, whose names were Abgarou,
Adala, Corcut, and Gulman, who having seap'd some enterprises upon their
persons, united themselves against their other brothers, of whom they put to
death as many as they could lay hold on, the rest saved themselves in several
places, flying the cruelty of those who proclaimed Offices and places of trust
to whosoever brought in their heads. During this state of things, here raged
great wars, and many bloody encounters passed, wherein two of the four
brothers paid their lives, and there remained only Corgut and Gulman, who at
last reconciled with a general peace, and lived in great amity, copartners in
the royalty, so as after the model of Eteocles and Polinice, those ancient
Kings of Thebes, each governed six months by turns. This lasted for a time,
till Corcut took to wife the Princess Dafila, an ambitious Lady, who six
months after her nuptials, persuaded her consort to murder his brother, and
reign without a partner, which was done accordingly, calling him to Court under
pretense of communicating some affairs of consequence, and so he became sole
King, and reigned thirteen years, till an Uncle of his called Nahi, in revenge,
put both him, his wife, children, and all his allies to death, to the great
content of the people, for the hatred he bore to this unfortunate Fratricide.
Then they imagined an ancient Prophecy which they kept amongst them, was
accomplished: That the Lamb should kill both the Wolf and his wife: She was
called Gildada, and was drowned. But the King of Dafila incensed with the death
of his daughter and Son-in-law, brought a most cruel war upon the new King
Nahi, wherein fell numbers on both sides. In the mean while, amongst the
Princes who had escaped the truculent hands of their brothers, one there was who
strayed far off, and got into the kingdom of Deli, where contenting himself to
live meanly as an unknown private person, he purchased a small possession for
his livelihood, and betook himself to labor: where taking a wife, she brought
him a son they called Alfondi; who at seven or eight years of age, gave the
world great hopes of his person, for the excellent parts which began to bud in
him, and which made him amiable to all men; in so much that addicting himself
to the words, as years increased his vigor, he did wonders in the slaying of
Lions, Bears, Tigars, and other furious beasts, and in all his actions
appeared nothing but what was great and noble; insomuch as hearing spoken on
day how strenuous a war there raged betwixt Tahachi his unknown great Uncle,
and the King of Dafila, he was transported with emulation to be a Party, and
being furnished with a good horse and Arms, with the society of a Troop of
brave young men, he hasted to those parts, where, in the service of Tahachi, he
soon gave proof of his Courage, and abilities in war; but, amongst others, on
one signal occasion which presented it self, where, with a small party of
Soldiers, he defeated the much more numerous Enemy; and the King of Dafila
admiring his Valor, endeavored underhand to win him to his side, by offering
a Daughter of his in Marriage, with a Province, which he had taken from
Tahachi. To which Afondi seeming to give ear, dexterously made use of the
opportunity, to seize upon the Town of Amazen, a most considerable place,
which exceedingly pleased Tahachi, and heightened his affection to him, feeling,
I know not what secret motion in his soul, which pushed him on to this
Dearnesse, without any apprehension that he was his Nephew; but, Good blood, as
they say, cannot dissemble. At length, Alfondi, assisted with his Uncles
Forces, did such Atcheivements and Exploits, that within six Months, he
delivered the Empire Zanzibar from the oppression of the Enemy, which obliged
Tahachi for recompense, to give him one of his Daughters in Marriage, without
any deeper knowledge of him, then his Heroic Actions, and Noble Aspect; forall
the Oriental and Meridionall Princes, regard more the Mind, and Physiognomy of
a Man, then they do the extraction, or Nobility of Blood.

Alfondi raised to so high a degree, reflects upon his father the honest
labourer, whom he omitted not to send for, who being arrived, and having
declared who he was, begat an unparalleld joy in Tabochi and his whole
kingdom, every one shedding tears for his discovery, rendering praise to God,
and his just providence for reducing things to so unhoped for a point, and
after so many years reposing the inheritance on him, to whom of right it
appertained. For this Prince was immediately acknowledged by all, even Tahachi
himself, who voluntarily released the Empire, which he surrendered into the
hands of his Daughter, his Son-in-law, and Nephew Alfondi, who with the consent
of the good man his Father, to the general joy of all was received and crowned
King, and governed with so much equity and justice, that he gained the hearts
and suffrage of his people, who adored him as a God: nor failed he in rendering
to his Father and Uncle while they lived, a due honor and respect. This Prince
had reigned forty seven years, when he arrived in the country.

Before I conclude my discourse of Tahachi, and his condition, I shall not omit
another story, which testifies the singular justice he dispenses with
indifferency to all his subjects. He had constituted in the Province of Quame
one Abdalami, a person of high quality, his confident, a gallant Cavalier, and
one who had done most signal services in the war with the King of Dafila; but
being inclined to avarice, and hord up wealth, he played the Tyrant, and sacked
the country to satiate his own humor, and the desires of some women he gave
entertainment to: When Tahachi was informed thereof, he was much displeased,
for 'twas his rule to maintain equal justice, peace and freedom amongst his
subjects: Notwithstanding he concealed his resentments for a while, giving way
to his proceedings as well for his great services, as for that he had bestowed
on him a kinswoman to wife, called Abiasinda, by whom he had children. He
admonished him often by letter, to bear himself more temperately, but
perceiving his small regard, by the constant intrusion of complaints that came
to him, he sent express command that he should repair immediately to Court to
give account of his actions upon pain of death, and being proclaimed rebel,
and guilty of his treason. Abdalami understanding his own wealth and power,
slighted this summons, and fortified himself in the holds of his Government.
Whereupon the King caused his wife and children to be apprehended and brought
prisoners to his city royal. This Princess with her best art excused her
husband, beseeching his Majesty's mercy toward him, for his former services,
adding withal that these complaints, were but a calumny raised by the malice
of his enemies. The King covering his resentments, mildely answered her, that
she should only procure her husband to come to Court, but she fearing to bring
his person in danger, thought best only to advise him to send a certain Casket
of rings, and all sorts of rich jewels for a present to the Queen, and by that
means work his peace: This he did, and she having presented it, the Queen
showed them to the King, who wondered at so great a treasure, where amongst
others were five hundred pearls, each being a Miticale or Crown and half in
weight, besides many other jewels of value, sufficient to buy a kingdom. 'Twas
much affliction to the Prince to see such treasures gotten at the price of his
peoples blood, and then he commanded the Princess his kinswoman to bring her
husband to Court by a day appointed, or he would make feel the weight of his
displeasure. Poor Abdalami was amazed at the news, and fearing not without
cause, the Kings incensement, failed not to come accordingly; and without
calling on his wife and children, went strait to the Palace, where having
sounded the Trumpet according to the custom, as I observed before; he
unclothed himself, and sitting on the ground stark naked, only a linen cloth
before his concealed parts, he attended in this manner the mercy of the King:
whereof notice being brought to his Lady, she with her children disrobed in
like manner, went to the Palace gate, and there seated themselves on the ground
by him, with each a great stone on their head.

The Queen espying them from her window, in this deplorable condition, moved
with compassion, showed them to the King, who gave order they should be bidden
to revest themselves, go back to their lodgings, and there attend his further
pleasure; so they did, trembling with expectation of the consequence.

Many advised Abdalami to make escape, and his wife her self was of that
opinion; but he would not be persuaded, his services raising him a confidence
of the Kings clemency. Now moreover to complete his calamity, when the King
began to relent, the suits and supplications which came on all sides in his
behalf, one of the principal persons in the Court called Isman, charges him
with a new crime, complaining to the King that he had seduced and debauched a
daughter of his, for which he craves justice, which suspended the Kings
clemency, resolving to examine the truth of the matter, which proved, in fine,
to be but a mere supposall.

For it was most true, that Abdalami being a Prince of an amiable form and
beauty, and of high esteem for his valor, this Lords daughter had so impetuous
a Love-passion for him, that she fell sick to death, and Abdalamies Lady
visiting her as a friend, observed she fell on weeping as often as she beheld
her, whereupon one day she importuned to know the reason, conjuring her to
speak freely if she had in any thing offended her, protesting she was ready to
make her as ample satisfaction, as she could desire. The poor Lady confounded
with shame, was sometime before she could form her answer, but at length love
taking place of Virgin-modesty, she ingenuously confessed the eause of her
distemper, with such abundance of tears, sighs, and supplications of pardon for
the affront she offered her, that the other was moved to such tenderness, she
promised her notwithanding one so near and dear to her as a husband was aimed
at; nevertheless in pity of her violent passion, which deserved some pardon,
she would contribute what was possible to her relief; hereupon the young Lady
told her, how she had presented by her bond-maid a chain of pearl and rubies to
her husband, with request that he would wear them for her sake, which he
accepted as well for the value of the thing, as for that the slave was a gay
and pretty girl, to whom he gave a pair of pendants of Fauser diamonds, of an
Olive figure; but for the Mistress, he returned her a bare meagar thanks,
without further acknowledgement, which the slave notwithstanding dissembled,
making her Mistress believe he had a strong affection for her, and for love of
her, wore her favor: and so this slave treated her with these fictions, in
hope to give some remission to the violence of her passion, and it was she who
first embarked her in these amorous follies.

The Lady was amazed at these passages, and remembered the chain, because her
husband had given it to her self, without acquainting her where he had it.

Now being desirous to invert some cure for her malady, though a most perfect
reciprocal affection animated both her husband and self, notwithstanding
compassion forced her inclinations to offer her a nights concubitation with her
husband; which so revived this Damsells heart, that immediately she arose from
her bed, and in few days was perfectly recovered. To compass this without her
husbands discovery, she consulted both with the daughter, and the Lady her
Mother, who was likewise of the Party; so, as returning home, she told her
husband she found some unusual distemper in the state of health, and entreated
him he would forbear her enjoyments for some nights, which expired Abdalami
passionate for her commpany: she, to heighten his flame, showed some
unwillingness, till pressing her with importunity, she consented for the
ensuing night, upon condition that for that night he should not speak a word to
her. Being thus agreed, she gives the Lady notice to be ready at the hour
appointed, so being conveyed into the wives room, she conceived with child,
without the husbands knowledge of the juggle. Meanwhile, time making the Father
perceive the growth of his daughter, and understanding by her acknowledgment,
whose act it was, fired with rage, accompanied with his Allies and Relations,
without delay he repaires to the King, with a violent complaint of this injury,
as I said before. Hereupon Tahachi enters into a deep consideration of these
two Persons, whereof the one was his Kinsman, and of high deserts for his
services, the other was Lord of the Province of Essen, between Dafila and
Ganfilira, below Barnagasso, heretofore tributary to the great Negus, but being
not inclined to be a Christian himself, nor be subject to a Christian King, had
put himself voluntarily under the dominion of Tahachi an Infidel. In conclusion
the King resolved to have the matter examined, and to pronounce Justice as the
cause merited. And hereupon notice was given to Abdalami of the accusation,
wherein being conscious of his own innocence, he was much satisfied that the
Kings anger lay on that side, and conferring with his Lady, told her he admired
the impudence of that Lord, to accuse him of a a thing he was so ignorant of,
and much more at the insolency of his daughter, that laid two bastards to his
charge: The Lady smiled, as who should say it may be true, whereupon as he was
about to make oaths and protestations to the contrary she acknowledged and
related the whole to him, and how the business was brought to pass by her
invention, whereat he was strangely amazed, admiring his Ladies goodness, that
was so charitable to her own injury. In this conjuncture, the King gave license
to Lord Isman to take revenge of Abdalami in what sort he could, under his
assured grace; so he now lays wait for all occasions to effect it, and to
surprise him on the water as he went to take the Air, for the town of
Zanzibar, or Zanguebar, is completely encircled with water, which runs both
within and without, and almost every inhabitant has his Almady or flat boat,
wherein they recreate upon the Lake. But Abdalami, whether advertised, or
suspecting it, stood upon his constant guard, so as passing one day upon the
water, before the windows of the Palace-royall, that the King might have the
prospect, if any one attacked him, Isman comes up with his boats to assault his
enemy, who was not unprovided: then there succeeded a fierce combat between
them, where Abdalami did miracles in his own defense; so effectually, that he
put the adverse barks to flight, to the extraordinary delight of the King. In
the mean while Princess Abasinda waits upon the Queen, and recounts to her the
plain truth of the mystery, which being told the King, he sent to Isman to let
him know, that if the case were found such as he apprehended, he would lay the
head of Abdalami in his hands, to carry into his own country; whereof, though
spite and shame of his defeat had made him their Bedfellow, and he had not
stirred forth of twenty days; he was so satisised, he came immediately to the
King, who remitting the matter to Council, 'twas concluded that the Mother and
daughter should be brought to Court, to answer what should be demanded of them.
At the same time the King made a personal visit to Abdalami, who upon this
vouchsafed descent to come thus alone to his house, conceived some hopes of his
business, and casting himself at his feet, said he held himself over happy in
the favor his Prince had done him, and for ever after he should esteem it an
honor to lay down his life for his service. The King causing him to rise,
embraced him, assuring him of pardon for what was passed, for which he and his
Lady rendering humble thanks, attended him to his Palace. Three days after,
the Mother and her daughter arrived in their Pelanquins, born on their slaves
shoulders, then the Council being sat, three Calsena or Officers were sent
for Abdalami, as who understood not the matter looking on him as a lost person,
and Isman for his part conceiving he durst not appear, but rather trust to
flight, had laid soldiers to wait and intercept him on the way. But they were
strangely amazed when they saw him appear at the Palace in his Talia Massara,
or Persian mantle down to the foot, under a Cassock, a figured cloth of gold,
covered with a white Cipresse in testimony of his innocence, and about his head
a cord made of small reeds according to custom, in testimony of
self-punishment, if he were found guilty. The Judges then examined both
parties, and finding they could produce no sufficient evidence, they took the
Mother and daughter apart, and learning from their mouths the pure and real
truth, they thought fit to have Princess Abiasinda to be brought, and since
'twas through her charity this affair was consented to and contrived, 'twas but
reason she should speak her opinion: Then placing her on the Bench with the
Judges, Abdalami was called forth, who being asked if he would stand to what
sentence his Lady should pronounce, answered, Yea most willingly: then raising
her voice, she pronounced, that since Alberane had so firm an affection to her
husband, and had born for him two lovely children, by the good favor and
permission of his Majesty, she condemned him to espouse her presently, and she
would receive her for her faithful companion. The judgment was admired by the
whole Assembly, and the Father being asked if he held this Award sufficient
reparation of his honor, was so confounded with the unfolding of what he was
before kept ignorant, he knew not what to say, but the King pressing his
resolution, in testimony of submission, he cast himself on the earth, saying,
If Abdalami would honor him with marrying his daughter, he would give with her
the Province of Assen, with the mines, and threescore carriages of fine gold,
which he had gotten that present year. The business so well accommomodated,
the King gave order for great rejoycings, with solemn feastings, and open court
for fifteen days, for all Princes and Lords of his Train. The Council would
have had the moity of this treasure dispensed, for satisfaction to the
complaining province of Zuamin, but the King opposed, content only to abridge
him of the Crown rights for five years, which amounted to much more then all
that treasure: which was done accordingly, to the content of all, and these two
Ladies with sincere affection, lived dear companions in peace and unity.

CHAP. VIII. The Authors voyage into Ethiope: A description of Priest John's
Dominions, with the Quality of his People.
HAving staid some days in the Court of Tahachi, and learnt what is here
before rehearsed, we took our way back to our company, whom we left at
Chesicoure, who were something troubled for us having spent two and twenty
days in this short voyage: for passing by Aruama a beautiful town, the Sieur
de la Courbe for some occasion would needs stay; then upon a stream from Zuama
we came to Gazira, Sequesma, Boagiara, Salera, Aimaca, or Armeta, and many
other Towns and Villages. At length being come to Gustigoari we understood
there had happened a difference in our company whereby some were wounded, and
being come to Sigara, three days journey thence, we took the other part of the
River, which bears name with the Town of Zuama, crossing the Province of
Almadrega, which with the countrymen is called Calhouras, because the capital
Town bears the same name; it is but small, governed by the King of Tigrai,
Vassail to the grand Zeguz, facing Westward the Province of Bagamidri: we made
it four days from Calhouras to the town of Bagamidri, and it happened well we
covered our Almadies, for the rain much inconvenienced us traveling these four
days through a waste country, Land Tortoises.
where land-Tortoises abound of exceeding bigness, which were very commodious
for our diet, and within them there were great numbers of eggs which purged us
strangely, this being very laxative meat.

Our fellows lying at Chasicours had intelligence that we were on the other
side the River, and enquiring, found us at Carboran, a Village three leagues
distant from Bagamidri, where you may imagine the joy this review diffused
through all of us. In the first place we considered and reconciled their
discord, on the morrow together went we all to dine at Bagamidri, where we
rested some days to truck and put off our commodities, as well in Town, as the
adjacent Villages. We had all the same desire to behold the Court, and person
of the grand Negus, who ever resides in field under Tents and Pavillions,
ranged about like a formal City. To which we were rather induced for the
meeting with a Portugal Lord who came from the Indies expressly to visit the
grand Negus in the name of the Spanish King his Master, who went aboard on the
coast of the red Sea, and landed on the territories of Barnabas, who
accompanied him to the place we found him at, and brought us together as far as
Barra upon Moraba, where we expected to find the Prince. To be short, I set
not down the ways and distances betwixt Bagamidri and Barra, another town of
Ethiope, because for our negotiation we made diversions to both hands, as we
did through Arabia, Persia, and India. But from Barra to our complete return,
we observed as near as might be. Before we discourse of Bagamidri, it seems not
improper to tell you that it is the beginning of the vast Empire of Ethiope, or
the grand Negus, The extent of the Abissins country.
whom commonly we style the Priest John of Ethiopia, in distinction from
another who was sometimes in high India. He is also titled Kibir Negus and
Senab, and King of the Abissins. They report him to have in possession above
thirty five kingdoms or Provinces, which contains a strange scope of a
populous country, of more then three months travel. True it is, he is not at
instant of such power as heretofore by reason the neighboring Mahometans, and
amongst others the King of Adel, with the Zeilan, by a continual war have
deprived him of many territories, even of the best part of the towns and havens
he held about the red Sea, the chief whereof are Zuachim Manzua, Manzua.
an^ Ercoco. So as at present this Empire is much diminished, both in extent,
strength, and dominion, only that by the assistance of the Portugues of the
East, he has regained some places of late years. And though at this day he is
very ample, so must we not give credit to many things of Grandeur and
Magnificence we find in Spanish Authors tasting somewhat of the fable,
C^dignus and others.
published in a Romantic way: which are sufficiently refuted by the Fathers of
the society, in their more authentic works, extracted from the very notes of
those who were, and are constantly in person there, from whom we have exact
information both for the spiritual, and for the temporal.

The country of the Abissins was known to our Ancestors by the name of
Ethiope under Egypt, afterward the lesser India. This Ethiopia is divided into
the Eastern, the Western, and the middle. The bounds at this day are the red
Sea on the East, Egypt on the North, the Mountains along Nile, Maniconge, the
Black River and Nubia on the West, and Southward the Mountains of the Moon,
and the Lakes where the Nile rises, or rather the borders of the Empire of
Monopotapa. Some afford it fifty kingdoms and more, others are satisfied with
five and thirty or less. For absurdly some would make this Empire greater then
all our Europe, and that it should hold out from Egypt to the Promontory of
Guardasu, and to Babelmandel and Mogadoxo, and of another side to the Southern
or Ethiopian Ocean, the Cape of Good Hope, allowing for Tributaries many
Moorish Kings, to Monomotapa it self, with the S. Laurence Islanders: though
at this day he has his hands full to defend himself against the Mahometans,
the Gales or Galois, and the Agays, a people that are Blacks, by whom for these
threescore years he has been rudely jostled; till the Prince was constrained
to supplicate the aid of the Portugals who brought effectual assistance, and
by degrees have restored him to a recovering condition.

As you go from the red Sea Westward lie these Kingdoms, Kingdoms.
Tigrai, Dancaly, Angote, Xoa, Amara, Leca, Baga, Midai, Dambea, Datali,
Fatigar, Ambra, Anogotera, Bernagas, Belinganza, Damure, Edear, Guiame, there
are the Cataracts of Nile, Vangui, Masmude, Cafates, Gilama, and others; some
whereof Christians inhabit, the rest Mahometans and Gentiles.

The people of these kingdoms when they bring their Gibre or tribute to the
Prince, They have wound a rope about their head, and proclaim with a loud
voice, The Revenue of such a Province, My Lord I am here present. Then does the
Negar distribute this Gibre or revenue to three uses, the first to relieve the
poor of the Nation, and support the Church, a second for pay and maintenance of
his army, and the third to his Coffers for the exhibition of his household. Now
is the Revenue small, for they have trees, of which we find many growing upon
the high ways loaded with silk, not by the work of art but nature, whereof the
gatherers pay a fifth to the Prince, as they do of their gold and silver mines,
where they employ their slaves, as sometimes they do the children of them who
have not paid the King dues for their harvest of silk. Of Benjamin, Storax, and
other Aromaticks, it is the same thing, for the gathering whereof they make
choice of young lads, as concerning their smell to be more exquisit, and more
firm, and indeed the Merchants have a special regard for these gatherers, and
the younger, the more they give them. They who get Safron, pay the same rates,
but they observe not the like niceness in the gathering. The Farmers of these
customs have a set day to bring it in to the Prince himself, who receives it
in person, who so much delights in odours, that whatsoever used in Court even
to the Flambeaus is perfumed. But when these are brought in, they are attended
with Drums, Hoboyes, Tributes paid to Priest John.
with other instruments and consorts of music, which the towns are by duty to
provide. The same Prince has likewise his fifth out of the soldiers booty in
time of war, as the Spanish King has out of the Merchants mines, but that he
exacts an impost from thieves or Curtizans, is a mistake.

This State was known to all Antiquity, but upon uncertainty enough, till about
120. years since, the Portuguese gave us a better information of it, and
specially since these last threescore years that the Fathers of the society
came thither.

The soil in some part is exceeding fertile, in others not, It abounds in
mines of gold, silver, brass, lead, sulphur, fruits of all sorts, as citrons,
oranges, but vines are scarce: The air is temperate enough, though under the
torrid Zone, the people there are black for the greater part, and of long life.
Their principal traffic is salt, which they carry very deep into the
Provinces, and sell dear, making it serve as 'twere for their money, trucking
it for all sorts of commodities, whereof they have square pieces of several
proper weights, as we have gold and silver. In the sacred History, the land of
Ethiope is called Chuz, or Phut, from the two sons of Cham. who lived there.

It Is said the name of Abassie, or Abissine, came from the Arabians, who called
them Elbabassi, and Abex. Others say 'twas given by the Egyptians, who by this
name understand all such as inhabit a Country encircled with deserts, as we
find this is.

But the Ancients made ordinarily two Ethiopes, the one East on the other side
the red sea, in Sabia, or Arabia the happy, the other west, on this side, or
under Egypt. And indeed the Homerists, a people of Arabia, along the coast of
the red sea are called Ethiopians, and there is some evidence, that heretofore
Kings of Ethiopia reigned on both sides the Gulf; also some do opinion the
Queen of Saba came from Arabia, others from the true Ethiopia. The west
Ethiopia was either the lower from Egypt to Meroe, Ethiopia double.
or the high from Meroe to the Mountains of the Moon. Some there are again, who
confound the Eastern with the Abissins, place the Western toward the
Atlantique sea, then will have tho interior toward Zanzibar.

Some hold the Ethiopians to have been the first Idolaters, as descending from
Chus the son of Cham, and that they first received Judaisme, and circumcision
upon the Queen of Saba's voyage to Solomon; and after Chritianisme, by the
Queen Candace's Ennuch. Times past the Ethiopian Kings were very potent, and
brought under yoke Egypt it self, and being by Semiramis and Cambyses
assaulted, defeated their armies, nor durst Hercules and Bacchus, those famous
Victors, invade them: The Poets had this land in such esteem, were it for the
goodness, or for Religion, that here they would celebrate their Deities
festivals, and inthrone Alemnon, Cephee and Perset, mighty and illustrious
Kings of this Country. There was one Melilec, who holds the chief renown
amongst them, who they report to have been the son of Solomon, and Mecheda
Queen of Saba, and of whose race by lineal descent, from Father to Son, all
their Kings to this day report themselves descended: I know not how justly it
can be proved. Howsoever it be, the most ancient Histories attest, that about
the year 521. in the time of Justin the Emperor, there was one Elesbaan King
of Ethiopia, a Christian, who subdued Dunaam a Jew, King of Arabia the happy,
who infesting the Homerites being Christians, Elesbaan he freed them, and being
returned into his Country, became Hermit. Afterward there was another King
named Hellisteus, a Christian also, who entered confidence with Justinian the
Emperor, and brought famous victories from the Infidels in Arabia.

These kings made the royal town of Cachumo, sometimes called Aucumo, their
mansion, which still holds the name since those times, by reason of the length
and difficulty of roads, we have had little or no intelligence of the Ethiopian
Kings, the Turks and Saracins having constant possession of the passages, til
the voyages of the Portuguese, who have given us some light since this latter
age. As to spiritualty this Country has ever submitted to the direction of
the Patriarch of Alexandria, who for the danger of coming thither by reason of
the Saracins who ruled in Egypt, The Abissins religion.
sent them a Prelate called Abuma, for Governor; as the Patriarch of Antioch
sends one into the East, called Catholica. Some say that in the year 1439. the
Abissins came to render obedience, and to acknowledge Pope Clement 5. at
Auignon, that they sent since to the Council of Florence, in the year 1439. But
it is more certain that since the Portuguese conversed with them, the Kings have
made a fuller acknowledgement of the Roman Church. As to their Religion,
though it be Christian, yet they retain diverse Jewish ceremonies, and other
heresies, received as well from Pagans, as from the heretical Eutiches and
Dioscorus, sent to them by schismatical Patriarchs from Alexandria, whereof at
present they begin to be purged, and better instructed by the Jesuit Fathers,
and the Patriarks sent to them from Rome, as we find in modern relations.

For a long time there have regular Religious been in the Country, and
Anchorites of the order of St. Anthony, St. Macharius, and St. Basile, but no
Dominicans, as some would have us believe.

From St. Anthonies order is proceeded another, they call Estefarrus, which
must be St. Stephen.

For the nature of the people, they have a strong propensity to virtue, and
orthodox religion, render exact obedience to their Prince, and most high
veneration to Church and Clergy, are severely chaste, and addicted to penance,
and austerity of life, very charitable and very hospitable. See Aluarez chapter 41.
Priests while they celebrate mass are covered with a vail, after the Greek
manner, and the men divided a part from the women in the Church.

The whole Court lodges always under pavilions in the field, ranged in the
form of a Town, for places and streets drawn to a direct line, where there is
assigned for every one a Captain, or Justiciar to prevent tumults. it is of
great circuit, sometimes containing two leagues of land, with twelve ports in
honor of the Apostles: within this circuit there are two Churches, one for the
Emperor and Nobility, of seven or eight hundred paces in circumference, the
other for the vulgar.

The reverence they bear to sacred places.
Within there is one Altar only, and upon it the figure of a Cross of a gray
color, shadowed with a vail of white silk, on the middle of the Altar stands a
picture of the blessed Virgin in colors, betwixt two more of the Apostles, St.
Peter, and St. Paul: upon solemn Feasts the Emperors white tent is changed for
a red: through all the Churches there is said but one Mass a day, where there
is observed such reverence, that it is not lawful to spit, speak, or sit down,
upon any occasion whatsoever; the Temple of our Lord, as they say, being a
place neither for uncleanness nor discourse: If one be constrained to pass by
on horseback, he alights, and walks with hat in hand. When the Sacrament is
elevated, one rings a bell of stone, the clapper of wood, (as are all the bells
in Ethiope) and immediately all fall upon their knees. The Emperor himself if
he be on horseback, alights in haste, and continues on his knees till another
sign be given. The Priest is never seen while he consummates, because he is
covered and surrounded with a white vail, as likewise the people never behold
the blessed Sacrament, but they bow their face to the ground, jogging their
bodies in a dancing manner, and standing on their toes. The Offertory is made
at the end of Mass. They give the Sacrament to little children as well as
others, causing them to abstain before.

The Negus never eats in gold or silver, but in vessels of Euate only, which
endures no poison, but breaks immediately. For wine there is none made but in
his Palace, or in the Abuma's house. As for the Abissine, or Nubian language,
it is a distinct tongue, but much compounded as they say, with Hebrew, Chaldean,
Syriack, and Arabic words, which reaches to the very East, by reason of the
soft and sweet pronunciation, and because it is plain and easy to learn. So the
Abissins when they travel, as I have often marked, make themselves easily
understood, with the Guinoii themselves. They use the Chaldaick for sacred
matters and sciences, in which all their books are written, and Mass
celebrated, as the Abissins do in their Church of St. Stephen of India at Rome,
in like manner as the Maronites and other Syrians. Now for the Rivers in this
Country there are many very great ones, but the principal is the so famous
Nile, which cuts it from one end to the other, sallying, as some say, out of an
unsoundable lake in the Country of Guyame, others will have it from the
Mountains of the Moon, or Cafartes, and from Befsi or Zech, whence likewise
issues the Zaire and the Aquilonde, which run Westward, and the Zuama
southward. But the Nile toward the West, falls into the lake of Zambra or
Zaire, and from thence passing betwixt the Kingdoms of Damus and Ambea,
inclining toward the East, then on the other side the Equinoctial enters
Beleguanza, corporates with another River flowing from the lake Zanflan,
likewise called the Nile, and thence betwixt Bagamidri, Vangue, and
Abiancantiva, it visits Tigremabon; and having swallowed the Tagazzi, or
Tecassin, and other Rivers, swelled with so many floods, it creates the famous
Isle of Meroe, with two arms, by the Ancients called Astapus and Astaboras, at
this time Tecassin and Ahambi; afterward re-uniting, passes the Tropic
Cancer, and at Siena or Asma, makes the renowned Cataracts, or falls amongst
the Mountains, which so compresse it, that it seems a shot or lightning in
quickness, and thunder in horrid noise; till having crossed Egypt, and
entertained some Rivers of Nubia, branching it self into many streams, which
compose the so much celebrated, fair and fertile Country of Delta, comes to
render it self into the Mediterranean at mouths and sluices, which our
Ancestors took for seven, others nine; at this day the most known and
remarkable, are those of Damiete Rosete, heretofore called Heracleotique and
Pelusiaque, which compose the two sides of the triangle.

As to the surfluxes and inundations which fertilize all Egypt, Causes of the
flowing of Nile.
and serve instead of fructiferous rains from June to September, laying the
Country like an Archipelagus, covered with innumerable little Islands, wherein
stand their habitations more excelse then the rest, which is a piece of water,
I leave to Philosophers to search the causes, who in all ages were much
perplexed and much divided, some attributing it to the dissolving of snows from
the Ethiopian mountains, where snow never fell: others to anniversary winds
forcing the waters to remount, and so overflow: others with more probability to
the continual rains of the torrid Zone in this season, as I my self have seen
it happen all along this Zone to the Indies, both East and West. Yea there are
some who go further for a cause, and will have it proceed from winds and
furious tempests, which at this season rage about the Cape of good Hope;
swelling the Sea, which by certain secret Subterranian channels, communicates
it self with the Ethiopian Lakes, which makes Nile and other Rivers taking
birth from thence, to surfeit. But howsoever it is, and whencesoever it
proceeds, certainly the effect is altogether admirable, the increase lasting
forty days, as likewise the decrease, and some say the River Noir, or Cambra,
or Senega do the same. The course of this River from birth to dissolution, is
esteemed to be nine hundred leagues in right line, and windings and bosoms
considered to be above two thousand, which is the longest course of any River
in the Universe, except the Plate and Maragnon in Brasile.

CHAP. IX. Of the Town of Bagamidri, and the coronation of their Kings.
TO return to our voyage, I shall tell you that Bagamidri is a Town in Ethiopia,
in three degrees of altitude beyond the line, in a fair champion upon the River
Zuama, which disbanks as Nile does. For the kingdom of Bagamidri it reaches to
the Tropic, watered by Zuama, called by the inhabitants Zimbada, which crosses
the deserts of Manica, where are dismal Mountains, and goes til it ingulphs it
self in the Oriental and Meridian sea, composing a most commodious shore, where
vessels take in fresh water and fuel. Here are abundance of wild goats, and
small Bulls and Cows so fierce, that he must be very skillful that takes them,
they have little horns which grow but skin-deep, mooving them as their ears, as
I observed in another place. This River of Zuama is by the Portugalls called,
Rio del Spiritu sancto, for the content they receive who sail upon it.

Moreover, in passing or bathing in this River, there ought great caution to be
had, and to be well armed against the Crocodiles, which are here in great
numbers: nor is the danger on land much less, for the Tigars, of which there
are great Troops, and will very sawcily dismount you, either from Horse or
Mule.

Toward the West the Country borders on Mancigonge, Eastward on Cafates, to
the North it lies on Gidada, which some call the Country of Amazons,
Southward on Monopotapa.

The Town of Bagamidri is called Imperial, by reason the King of Tigrai, or
Tigremahon, having received his first Crown at the place of his election,
receives the second here.

Abba Licanus who some say baptized Candace the Queen Aluarez. chapter 14,
This Ceremony was first instituted in the time of St. Abiblicanus, who lived
in a cave near the Town, in so high repute, that the King who then reigned
would have the honor to be crowned by so great a Saint, since which time there
is an Ordinance, that all the Kings of Tigray shall be crowned here, (as the
several Crowns of our Emperors were received at Aix, Milan, and Rome) and the
third he receives from the hand of the Grand Negus, his Sovereign, who has
only a crown of silver, whereas the King of Tigray has his of inestimable
value.

Here I shall tell you by the way, that in Tigramahon I saw a Church of one
entire piece, wrought in a Rock near to Tecassin, which they call the Church of
Creatures, for that it is dedicated to the four Evangelists. In the lower
Ethiopia, there is the like which they call the Maiant Calassen, that is, the
Seat of Eternity.

For the Kingdom of the Amazons they report it to be betwixt the country of
Damut and Gorage, or Goraga and Gongara where they recount many things, not
unlike the stories of our Ancestors; as that the women have the authority, are
exceeding valiant, and excellent Archers, that they cut off their right breast
to draw a how the better, with other things of that kind.

There is mention made of the like women in many other parts of the world. Some
say the word Amazon is derived from a country belonging to the Negus, or
Monopotapa, near Mancinconge, where the women are of great courage, Amazons.
though the men are Masters, and Priest John makes use of them in his wars.
In this country stands the fair city Felucia, or Falacia, where they say is a
sumptuous Tomb of a Princess called Agagina, built all of a black marble,
clear and transparent as glass. The people of these countries, People black
and white.
are of several complexions, according to the place that gives them breath:
For under the line they are neither white nor black, but of a swart tawny
color, though the world affords not a more temperate climate then they are
under.

They who live Westward from the country of Agagne to Ambian are entirely
black, and four degrees from the Line, troubled with excessive raines for three
months together. But they of the Province of Zembre, are more white and very
docile, especially the women who are passably beautiful and graceful, and
good Christians, though they were the last that received the faith, since the
Eunuch baptized by Saint Philip planted it in the better part of the Provinces
of Ethiope, and as some will have in Arabia the happy it self, and as far as
Tuprobane*

CHAP. X. Of the Mansion of Priest John, and his Justice. A History upon this
subject.
BEing at Bagamidri, some of us more curious then the rest of our company,
agreed to go see the Court of the Grand Negus, or King of the Abissins; and to
this purpose leaving them that had no such desire we took a side-way toward
the towns Barra, and Barua, where we were told the Prince most commonly
resided: Following on this road, and having crossed many Provinces and
Kingdoms, at length we arrived at Barra the chief town of the Country, where
we found a numerous multitude of people living under Tents, to the number of
ten thousand, or more. Amongst these there was one covered with white cloth
conspicuous above the rest, with twelve gates of mavelous largeness
belonging to it. We Inn'd in an Abyssins tent, who obliged us with courtesies,
and while meat was making ready, they brought us in an ox horn honied wine,
whereof we drunk. Not long after, we perceived upon the way, a troop diversely
armed with twelve Vgandes or Trumpets before them; then came a Prince mounted
on a black and white Elephant, which is a great rarity, accompanied with four
Noblemen, who bore over him a Canopy of gray damask. Being advanced near the
Kings tent, he dismounted and presently was attended with a numerous and
honorable train. Next with great submission he suffered his garments to be
taken off; they were of silk, interwoven with gold, and embroydered with
pearls of exceeding greatness: He was a potent Prince, who having received
injury from another King, came to seek justice at his Majesty's hands. 'Twas
not for want of power to take revenge himself, but he would show this deference
to the King, who inflicts most severely on all transgressors. Aranuhi.
Now this Prince, called Aranuhi, stripped off his gorgious habilliments, cast
over him a Lions skin, which in the Sovereigns presence all are obliged to
wear, with a large shirt of silk trailing on the ground. Being come before the
Palace, the Trumpets began in a doleful sound, and the King having notice,
gave order he should enter; for this Prince in times past had done famous
military services, then casting himself on the ground, framed his complaint,
that the other King his enemy had violently carried away his wife, with a
daughter which he had heretofore refused him, intending to marry her to another
a greater Prince then he, and had taken besides 40. Quintalls of gold. A
hundred weight.
Upon this complaint the Negus immediately dispatched a Calscena to summon the
Prince offender, whom he met upon the road, Calscenas, P^este J^hns messengers.
Aluaca. 141.
hasting to Court to clear himself of the accusation.

Then instantly the Prince complaynant was called aside, revested with a rich
habit given him by the Negus, with a hat of more then usual largeness,
according to the custom. When the latter was arrived and disrobed as the
former, and mantled with a Lions skin, he took a stone, carried for him by a
Gentleman to the Palace gate, and having caused the Trumpets sound, he could
not be admitted; but for above two hours waited in this posture, taken for a
bad omen amongst them, till a slave brought orders he should repair to his
lodgings, and attend there till he were called for. Some days passed in this
manner, before any commands came from the Negus, then having laid down his
apparel, and put on the Lions skin, he seated himself on the ground with a
heavy stone upon his head, as a criminal, till the Alicassin or Steward of
household came, who caused him to reassume his apparel, which put him in some
hope of grace. This Officer conducting him by the hand, brought him before his
Majesty in state, under a rich Canopy, with a Curtain of silk of the same
color as the Canopy, screening his face, then cried aloud; Most mighty
Emperor, I bring thee here this Prince thy servant, and tributary according to
thy command. At that time the King was complementing a Princess wife to the
Tigraian King, arrived lately at Court in a very plain habit of frized Cottons.
The Prince no sooner entered, but he cast himself on the ground, the
complainant who was summoned being present, of whom the Negus demanded what he
had to object against this person; the other answered, that this Prince of
Jauas had stolen away his daughter, and a great quantity of fined gold. To
which the Negus commanded the Defendant to make answer, and deliver the very
truth; who first putting his hand to the ground, then laying it on his head,
with eyes lifted to heaven, a sad pale countenance, fell on his knees, not
presuming to turn an eye toward the Kings face, who is always screen'd, and
answered.

Most excelse and redoubted Sir, most true it is, I sent to request this Prince
for his daughter Adila in marriage, and being denied without further instance I
desisted, content to seek another of my own degree. But not long after, the
Queen her mother accompanied with many of her Alliance brought her to me,
together with gold, which she told me was of her own proper treasury, and not
her husbands, and thereupon gave me both reason and license to marry her, and
that with her own free mind and consent, without the least violence imposed
upon her, whom I love and honor more then the whole world besides.

The Negus having then taken the matter into consideration, told Prince
Aranuhi, he found not the other so guilty as was pretended; that his sentence
was, he for his part should repay the gold doubled, that the Princesses, his
wife, and daughter should be bored through the lips, and confined during
pleasure, to what place he should appoint. The Prince of Jauas to this sentence
durst make no reply further, then to desire time for payment: two months was
allowed him, and immediately Commissioners were dispatched to see the Arrest of
the Court executed, nor did either of the Princes quit the Court till the King
bad them retire. But in this conjuncture, the Princess of Tigremahon, moved
with compassion for the condemned young Lady, casting her self at the Negus
feet, besought him, that for a singular grace and favor to her, he would
vouchsafe the young Lady might continue with her husband; and the Queen having
applied her prevalency to Aranubi for his consent, by the mediation of these
two Ladies, all was ended in peace, and the two Princes embraced as friends and
Allies. Mean while the Commissaries ignorant of what had passed, had already
done execution upon the mother, and had likewise on the daughter, but that she
made a seasonable escape, to the joy of the whole Court, and the Negus causing
them to come to Court, would have the Nuptials solemnized there with all sorts
of rejoicing, feasts, and combats of savage beasts.

Then certain Lords of the Court with the Kings Sister were sent to the
Seaside to bring the Ladies, who being arrived, covered with a white linen
cloth, and barefooted, cast themselves on the ground before the King and the
Father. At that time the King wore a Crown of silver for some mystery which I
could not learn by any enquiry I could make, and the treasure and jewels being
brought, were distributed by the Father to his two children, and the King in
token of his favor and indulgement released to Prince Aranubi all rights of
Signeurie, with letters Patents of free and absolute Principality.

Amongst the Combats at this solemnity, one was of a white shaggie Ape put
within an enclosed list, with a Serpent that had six wings, and was 14. foot in
length. The Ape was armed with a wooden helmet, having a pike on the top
exceeding sharp, and his body mailed with leather, liquored, and made fit, so
as he could use his teeth at pleasure, the lists were rounded with painted
cloth, with pieces of timber, and cords hard straind, under which the Ape might
shift when he was hard pressed upon, he made most horrible faces when the
Serpent came to assault him, who raised himself upon little feet like a Gooses.
Next was brought in an Ape of extraordinary size, armed with silvered
Paste-board, mounted upon a great sheep, with a small lance, against a beast
they call a Chilacou, like a wolf, whose design was to attack the Palfrey, not
the Cavalier, who during the conflict, fretted, and made mouths in a strange
manner; at length they were parted.

After them was brought in a small Lion of a brave courage, who finding nothing
to combat, laid him down along, but he no sooner saw a Creature called a
Bachuro enter, armed with scales, but with a loud roar, he nimbly flew upon
him; for a good hour the fight lasted, with terrible assaults on both sides,
till at last the Lion had the day, strangled his foe and eat him, for the flesh
is exceeding good.

Then the Cheger, or Elephant with the Rhinocerot, which was a most furious
combat, but of little delight, because for their bulk and weight, they could
show but little agility or motion. Then was brought in play another sort of
Elephant, called by the Indians a Gachias, and against him four dogs of
exceeding greatness, of which at the very first bout he killed one: The
fierceness of the beasts made this fight of much recreation. Next was a
Crocodile and a Tigar, who treated each other very rudely. After them two great
Dogs against a Targout, a kind of wolf, but much different from ours, 'twas a
bloody combat, where one of the dogs was killed, and the Targout hurt.

So this day was concluded with the combats, for other days there were other
Triumphs, which I omit, to avoid prolixitie.

This is all of remark which happened at Court, while we staid at Barra, which
I thought fit to recount, for information of the nature and manners of the
people.

We stayed something the longer at Barra, in expectation to see his Majesty the
Negus who was suddenly to come thither, and because he had not been there of a
long time, a magnificent entrance was prepared for him.

CHAP. XI. Magnificence of the Negus and his military Officers.
THey have a custom that whenever the Prince visits their Towns, he makes
each to observe, whatsoever his Predecessors, and himself at his coronation
engaged for, as to worship one only God, to have but one Faith, and one Law,
to uphold the Christian and Apostolic Church, some say of late years they have
added Roman, acknowledging now obedience to the Pope, then to administer
Justice, love the poor, observe continency, to impugn with all his power the
Moors, Jews, and Idolaters, in sum all who believe not in Jesus Christ, to
innovate no new laws, nor coin other money than the Ordinary, not to stay above
three days in any one Town, not to admit any Prince of the blood, or next in
succession to be at large, but to keep them immured in the Mountain of Amara,
with other things of like sort. To be brief, The Negus was received into the
Town, with a sumptuous state and magnificence, and we had the satisfaction to
see his whole Court march.

Here the Portuguese Ambassador arrived, of whom I spoke, with a train of
twenty men, all mounted upon Mules; having staid, as they told us, three
months, at the famous monastery of the Vision in the Country of Bamazaz toward
the red sea, where report goes are 2000. religious gray-Friers, who live in
great austerity without want either of victuals or habit. He addressed himself
to receive audience of the Negus, but was deferred to another time; by reason
his Majesty having staid some days at Barra, was constrained to depart that
night to go toward Sacouon three leagues from thence, two days march for the
Army, which moves not above three or four miles a day: and here we saw the
order of the Armies march.

Aua. c 8.
About break of day the Vaunt-guard marched first, consisting of some twenty
thousand Horse without shoes, which in those mountainous and stony ways, is a
great inconvenience to them. They ride as the Arabians do with a bill, their
stirrups very short, wearing certain cimeters, and generally a certain
two-edged arms they call Perdagalzes: This troop was led by a great Prince
called Lychano, Betudete a grear officer. Al. c. 69.
which in vulgar Greek signifies Light, but his proper name in Abissine speech,
is Betudete. This troop being passed in very regular order, came the baggage of
the court, amongst whom were a multitude for removal and ordering of the Tents.
Then the officers and servants of the kitchen, about three thousand, who
carried the kings fare in baskets, and his drink in small barrels marked and
sealed: next followed a great number of horses, mules, elephants, Alsinges, and
other kinds of beasts with carriage. Amongst others there were four Lions, as
tall as mules, under one man's charge, who never ceased raving and rating after
them, to keep them from straying from their company: They were gentle and tame
as sheep; and by the way, it is a strange thing to see these beasts feed; their
keeper to show us a rarity, hung up a joint of mutton, upon the wall of the
stable or den, all the four gazed upon it, and then lay down, as knowing their
share was in it: afterward the first that was hungry came, and at two or three
mounts and active leaps spear-high, fetches down the piece of meat. But after
this train of seven or eight thousand head was past, came 12. or 1500. Foot,
with bows, quivers, and short swords, led by one they called Abagarindas: after
them followed another part of the Cavalry, and the body of the Army in handsome
order, with trumpets and hoboys before them, to cheer and recreate them. Lastly
came twelve or fifteen thousand Musketeers upon the wings, as 'twere in the
form of a half moon, carrying their guns strait upright; cimeters they had, and
wore a very large cap or hood, which they folded up, and let hang upon their
shoulders, because they are troublesome and inconvenient.

The Army which consisted of fourscore or a hundred thousand men, being past
the Negus, his Majesty followed, of whom we could not then have a sight:
Afterward he came to Church with Standart borne before him by the Berenega
upon an Elephant; 'twas the figure of a plain cross in a piece of silk. And
it is remarkable, that you find not the figure of our Savior nailed to the
Cross in any Church of the Abissins, and their reason is, because we are not
worthy to behold him in his passion.

Before this Ensign march about fifty Priests singing Psalms, and Hymns, and
four in Pontifical robes, who carry a hollowed stone large and square, which
they call the Tabuco, which they use when they celebrate Mass before the
Negus: before it vested as the four are, marches another who going backward,
Tabuto the altar stone.
incences the stone: then follows the Standart, and some five hundred
gentlemen of quality, all on horseback, and clad in large white shirts of
silk, and plaited like a Chanons Surplice. One part of this company they call
Calsena, who are exempt Officers in readiness to execute the Kings commands.
After this attended with Music and Hoboyes, appears a Canopy high exalted, and
before it one whom they call Licadona mounted on an Elephant, bearing in his
hand a lump of gold or silver guilt, who seemed to be the chief of this music.
Four Princes, upon four of the highest Elephants can be gotten, bear the Queens
Canopy, plainly habited with Lions skins over their shirts, and broad hats on
their heads: the Queen her self's in a Littar, and with her commonly a little
child for her recreation, accompanied with a numerous train of Littars,
Chariots, and other attendance in great magnificence. Next comes a man mounted
on a great horse, trapped with Aiofar, a sort of stuff which the tree Areca
bears, and he often cries aloud, Tacar and Etefra, which is the same; as take
heed, and make room. Then three hundred Elephants follow richly mail'd with
Sea-wolf skins, lined with skins of Crocodile, of four or five hundred pound
weight, and of such firmness, that they are Musket proof. One clothed in
Velvet, embroydered with gold, sits for-most upon the head; the principal rider
bears a banner of a Lions skin at the end of an Indian Cane: upon the neck
sits one who guides the beast with two bars of steel fastened to his jaws,
hanging downwards, not turning up, as our Printers represent them; the Saddles
are girt with chains of iron, four men besides the guides may conveniently
mount them. They call the guide the Digali, who is armed with a most hard
skin, and in time of battle has a Trumpet or Cornet to put in the beasts
ear, to make him know his meaning, who otherwise could not for the confused
noise: after follow many chariots, some of four, some of six wheels, bound with
massy bonds of iron drawn by horses, mules, and other beasts, wherein the
baggage of the Army is carried. They also use these chariots against the
Elephants, who at first onset falling into fury by the instigation of the
riders, make bloody havoc. Against which the enemy sometime provides
fireworks, which thrown into their eyes before their feet, terrifies them, and
makes them turn and rush over their own men; but being backed with these
strong chariots, and managed by soldiers skillful in the art of war, they
maintain battle. Two thousand foot next with bows arrows, Ariates.
and broad short well tempered hangers. In the middle of them twelve men march,
termed the Ariates, that is, the Apostles: after them came a Prince mounted on
a white Elephant, bearing upon his lance a banner of a Lions skin, who marched
with solemn gravity before 2000. horse, richly caparisson'd with a certain
stuff, down as low as the Cambrell, a forehead-piece of a hard skin doubled,
which arm's the whole head, except the ears. The Prince that led these, they
called the Betudete or General, who had to wait on him a company of the
Neguses pages, whom they called Legameneos. Next to these marched another great
Lord they called the Alicassin, upon a gallant horse in the head of two
thousand horse more, armed with swords; and wooden bucklers, who are Gentlemen
of Guard to the Prince, with them called Cumali. Then another great Lord
mounted on an Elephant, and two horsemen advanceing something before others,
who often cry out Imbrane, room, room: next two thousand barded Cammels, each
mounted, with two men armed with halfe-pikes, and strong bucklers of leather:
then another on horseback with a banner of a Lions skin, the like as I saw
before the King of Angotera, with a company of four thousand horse; this Prince
bore a ball of silver, with four pages riding bare, excellently mounted, called
Laga Menegus. The Audrugez, or high Steward, with a thousand horse in rich
equipage: at the heels of these came twenty venerable old men in gowns so
large, they almost covered the horse, then as many on foot, who seemed to be of
the family of those they call Snachagora, who are Physicians, Philosophers, and
Counselors. Then appears a most rich Canopy, with Valence of gold and silver,
borne by four Noblemen, with a numerous cavalry, no body under it, and four
Beteneguz, who carry lumps of silver gilt, all accompanied with music of
Hoboys, and other Instruments.

Then comes the King of Tigrai with his standart and a numerous company; and
not far after the Abuna, or grand Patriarck, with four Lycanates, or
Prelates, who bear a Tabutt, with the Logatera, and march reversed, giving
incense, facing the Catamar, or body of the Army.

Lastly, the Baldaguin or Canopy of State of the grand Negus, appears,
accompanied by the rest of the Princes, himself mounted on a horse richly
trapped, with excellent music. Two Kings on foot hold his bridle, two more at
his stirrups, and two at the crupper; all in white silk shirts, which they call
Aotila, the Princes wearing over all a Lions skin, a thing allowed to none but
those of the blood, except some few upon special favor. The Negus goes under
the State with a veil over his face, nor does he appear unvailed to his people
more then four times in the year, and some years only at New Years tide, and
Easter, when he keeps open Court. But since the death of Negus Nahut was
concealed so many months after his decease, this custom is changed, and 'twas
enacted by the Council general, or States assembled, that he should show
himself four times the year at solemn feasts.

When these times come, the people express extraordinary joy, as if the Deity
it self descended to them, by reason this Prince is exceeding just,
compassionate and merciful, dividing his revenue in three parts, one for his
family, a second for the Church, and a third for Orphans, widows, and others
in want, for which purpose he builds abundance of well-founded Hospitalls.

CHAP. XII. The victory of the Negus over the Goragues. His entrance into Barua.
LEaving Barra we went to the town of Barua out of desire to see more of the
Negus, and the triumphant entrance provided for him, for a victory lately had
over the Sultan of Gorago, a people so wild and savage, that of how many
soever are taken in war, it is impossible to preserve one alive; by reason they
are no sooner prisoners, but by the sent of a certain poison they have in
readiness, they die in the very instant, or suddenly after. In this war the
King of Tigray brought him very effectual auxiliations, else he had had a bad
match of the Goragues, a mortal enemy to the Abissine, whom they call
Israelites.

In conclusion, after he had put them to the rout, he pursued and besieged them
in Tamar, a town surrounded with strong walls, and good ditches, where they
were provided of Engines, made of great timber-pieces so drawn and bent by
cordage and wheels, fixed opposite, that the reverse was so vigorous, they
would founder or break a ship in pieces. For which reason the Negus, after the
trench was filled forbore to storm, nor indeed, but for the help of a Genoese
had he accomplished his design without extreme loss. This Genoese by mine
blew up a Tower, which opened a marvelous breach. Then the people, mad with
despair, choosing rather to dye, then be reduced to servitude, exposed their
wives and children in the face of the assault. In the end, the town was taken
and demolished, and the inhabitants to a man put to the sword, not one amongst
them yielding to accept of mercy. The Negus took prisoners the Kings wife and
daughters, and while he was using persuasions to gain them to come live with
his Queen, and that he would wealthily bestow the daughters, the mother and one
of the daughters had dispatched themselves with poison: The other who was fair
in perfection had no ambition of death. The Negus gave her to his wife, who
richly clothed her, and used all sorts of blandishments to comfort her.

After this victory in Gorago, against the Negus was to visit Barra, the
inhabitants amongst other magnificences had erected to him a stately Pyramid of
timber, covered with Fausell garnets, either cut by the hand of Lapidaries, or
coming so from the mine, supported by four Gyansts: with a spacious Palace of
diverse works and Niches, furnished with statues of Ladies, gloriously adorned
with gold and silver, and laid with colors to the life, many Trophies of
victories. Upon the town River, called Morabo, was erected a sumptuous Pageant,
with the figures of an Elephant, and a Rhinocerot. The Elephant was filled with
fire, and the Rhinocerot was so contrived with springs that sucked in water,
and spouted it against the Elephant; the whole supported upon piles, by which
the fire was conveyed with a singular slight: for from the bank to the
Elephant there ^ere secretly lines drawn, whereon were hanged cartridges filled
with powder, which being sired with a cane, The triumphall entrance of the
Negus into Barra.
the blazing cartridge flew like lightening upon the Rhinocerot; and at the
same instant the springs being set on work, the Rhinocerot encountered the
Elephant with such a stream of water, that the cartridges (the fire not being
wilde-fire) lost their effect. It could not but be delightful to see these
flaming squibs of such velocity, and in such a multitude in the middle of a
bulk of water which opposed, and vanquished their fury.

The Negus and all the Court were much delighted therewith, and the
Divertisement discharged a good part of those griefs, which oppressed the
captive Princess, to whom the combat of the artificial beasts was very
pleasant, it continued above two hours, till at last the conflict grew so
robustious, they overturned the Fabric under them; and all fell at once, and
vanished in the River together, to the exceeding pleasure of all the Beholders,
and thus was this day spent. The Negus on the morrow went to Mass, and as he
passed, the Militia of the town saluted him with fireworks of ingenious
invention. Being returned from Mass, and going to Dinner, unexpected came in a
strange Prince, who falling to his feet, petitioned him he would bestow upon
him the captive Princess, or vouchsafe to impose a ransom on her, The King
looked upon him as admiring how he passed the guards, a thing extraordinary,
and unusual amongst them; nevertheless admitting his passion for an excuse, he
demanded who he was; the other answered that his Country bordered upon the
dominions of the Barnaguz, that is high-Admiral, northward toward Ganfrila
and Drafrila, Ganfrila and Drafrila.
and that the late Zambaze Prince of Gorago had given him this Princess his
daughter for wife: whereupon the Negus caused her to be called, and after a
mutual acknowledgment, weeping she told the Negus and Queen, that but for hope
of meeting again with her husband, she would not have preserved her life, but
had in death waited on her mother and sister.

The Queen had gotten a promise from her that she would become Christian, and
being moved anew, she said she was most ready; then turning to the affianc'd
Prince, she declared to him that being a Christian she could not match with an
Infidel, and therefore requested him they might together receive their
baptization: this at first seemed very harsh to him, yet at length by
persuasions and manifestations, they so prevailed, that he condescended, and
both of them with diverse Lords of his train were baptized together. The Negus
released him of a certain tribute due, which, as likewise other Princely
presents, he gave his Lady.

CHAP. XIII. The manner of service at the Negus's table, the receipt of the
Portuguese Ambassador.
AS to the service at the Negus's table, it is as magnificent as with any Prince
on earth, for the multitude of Officers: our curiosity found so much favor as
to see it, and amongst other things remarkable, there were three pages in razed
tissue, suitable with a bed in a corner of the room, as we perceived coming in,
the Negus's lodging as I supposed. These Pages brought to the Table three
dishes made of a black wood they call Euate, Al. calls it Gauete.
like to our Ebony, of precious esteem with them, for the property it has to
burst in pieces as soon as poison comes within it. These dishes were half full,
one you must know with a sort of pear, which cut in middle presents the perfect
figure of a Cross, a strange rarity in a fruit, the second half full of
burning coals, and the third of ashes. This to represent Christ's Passion,
Death, and Hell.

The rest of the service was most splendid, as well for state as delicacy of
meats, ingeniously dressed and perfumed, with an odor so sweet and pleasant,
as it is impossible any could be more. The canopy of state over the Princes head
was of the same as the bed and the Pages apparel were. There were others
diversely habited, but all rich, and every one two distinct vestures, one that
had but a half-sleeve, with bases falling over their buskins, and hiding some
part of their shoe. But I will relate the rest of the service, when I deliver
the reception of the Spanish Kings Ambassador, Don Francisco di Lopes, sent to
the grand Neguz for leave to build Forts upon his coasts, as well for the
advance of commerce, as the propagation of Religion. He came on land in Africa,
toward the river Souac, near the Monastery of the Holy Ghost, of the religious
Observantines I spoke of before. We met with him before that in our travels,
and he came along with us as far as the head of that River, where we set him on
shore near the Church or the Monastery of the Holy Ghost, which is one of the
chiefest Fortifications the King of Ethiopia has, and it is there it is said
300. religious are, where he staid some days to refresh himself, then took his
journey toward the Court, whither from that place he had 4. or 500. leagues of
land to cross, and yet 'twas a fortune to him that the Court was no further
removed, for as it might have happened, he might have had above 700. leagues
before he reached thither. Being furnished with horses at this Monastery for
himself and his company, (who were some fourteen or fifteen in number, he came,
as he since told us, to another Church or Monastery some seven or eight leagues
from thence, but with extreme trouble, his horses so tiring, that the servants
were fain to carry the baggage themselves for two leagues together. At length
he got to the Monastery of St. Dominick, as he called it, where he found good
entertainment, and changed his horses, which were for no further service, being
so extremely beaten out with travailing unshod, as they use in those parts,
because they have not the art of shooing. As he was upon the point to depart
thence, there fell such an excess of rains, that the Rivers were so broken
out, that he was constrained to stay near a month longer, and expect till they
retired within their banks. Then he continued his journey, and having crossed a
vast Country came to Mongibir, where he made a visit to the King, who was then
sick, but used him with great civilities. The Ambassador offered him the
advice of his Physician, but he told him our Lord who had sent his grief should
cure it. He furnished him with horses, and appointed his own Son to conduct him
even to the Court. By the way he met with many other Monasteries, and
mountainous and unpleasant Countries: thence he came to the Province of
Tigremahon, subject to the Negus, who has five kingdoms under his dominion:
here 'twas he first drunk the honied wine kept in great oxhorns. From thence he
travailed to Culusen, and many other Countries, till he arrived near Barra,
where the Court lay. As soon as we had notice of it, we failed not to present
our respects to him, and he returned many civilities to the Sieur de lu Courb,
as the principal amongst us, but nevertheless with a Sossiego and Spanish
gravity, of which the Sieur seemed to take no notice, for that we designed by
his mediation to see the Negus at table, which as yet we had not compassed;
though for his own part out of the gravity or vanity of his Country, he
disdained to see it, yet by reason of his quality he might have done it without
difficulty. This being observed by the Sieur de la Courb, he so well feasted a
Master of household to the Abuma, that he promised us we should see him at
supper, as we did two days after: but I believe he first demanded his Masters
license, then he brought us to the Monastery of Atania, for the Negus seldom
lodges in tents, where he finds Monasteries or Churches, as there are plenty in
this Country. 'Twas there we saw the Prince sup, in the manner I spoke of.

As concerning the Ambassador, the Negus having intelligence of his coming,
sent a handsome company of Cavaliers to receive him, and some eight days before
had sent a grand Serami to conduct him, which Serami was not sparing of his
cudgel to any upon the way, that gave not the Ambassador honor, who being
met by these Cavaliers many salutes and complements were interchanged. Being
arrived at the Camp they presented him a tent of Canvas, which was something
disliked by the Ambassador, as being unsuitable to his quality, nevertheless
he seemed to take no notice of it; but the Serami perceiving something, told
him for excuse, they used him no courser than the Prince himself who had no
better: which gave satisfaction to the Ambassador: then they brought him in
provision of victuals, for him and his retinue. 'Twas three days before he had
audience, then some principal Gentlemen and Officers came for him by night,
and conducted him to the Court, which was then at a goodly Monastery; and being
brought into the chamber of presence, he found the Negus sitting on a bed of
razed gold, and silver tissue, four pages in the same stuff standing bare at
the bed^ feet with lighted Flambeaus in their hands. The Ambassador made him a
most respectfull reverence at seven or eight paces distance, bowing exceeding
low, whereas others kiss the ground; and the Negus unvailing a little one side
of his face, demanded the Presents the King of Spain had sent him, where the
other being ready to answer, supposing he should have a complete audience, the
person that brought him in told him at present it might not be, and that the
King had seen him was sufficient for the first time, and so without further
ceremonies he delivered his letters, which were read by an Interpreter. On the
morrow about midnight the Ambassador was sent for again in the same sort and
ceremony; then the Ambassador carried the Present, which was in pieces of
silk, spices, and some rich and well-wrought arms. The Negus received them,
then dismis'd him, causing one to tell him he should shortly be dispatched.

The next day he was sent for again to Court, where he dined with the King and
Queen, the King a little removed at some distance from them. The first service
was three gold dishes, the first full of fire, the second of ashes, and the
third of the miraculous pears I spoke of, in which, being cut, there appears a
perfect natural cross, representing our Redemption, as the other eternal
pains and death.

Afterward came all sorts of exquisite and delicate meats. The Ambassador
having staid some months in the Court, the Negus sent him a letter for his
Master, though letters are not in use with them, content only to send their
messengers, who deliver their missives by vocal relation: but this letter was
at the proper instance of the Ambassador himself, as he told me a good while
after, when I met him at Grenada in Spain.

When I mentioned the Army of the Negus, I forgot to tell you it is ranged in
such sort, that the Lanciers are quartered outmost round the Camp, lined with
the Cavalry, and musketeers within them, all quartered in order, and streets,
as in a Town: the Soldiers apart by themselves, Merchants on one side, and
Artificers on the other; six or seven thousand tents will serve for fourscore
thousand men. The Cavalry most commonly consists of thirty thousand horse, all
unshod, for they have not the art to shoe them, stout and indefatigable, being
brought up by Cowes from which they take the calves and put colts in their
places.

To conclude, the Emperor ordinarily depends not upon his proprietary
possessions: for bedes the gold and silver his people pay as tribute, they pay
him amber, musk, civet, stones, and all sorts of victuals and sustenance; so as
he has not much use of money more then to pay his Officers and servants, who
are paid their stipend in gold or silver uncoin'd in gobbets exactly weighed,
besides such a proportion of diet every day for their livelihood, as in Italy,
Cardinals, Princes, and the Nobility use to do.

CHAP. XIV. Of the kingdom and policy of Mongibir, of the Mountain Amara, where
the Abissin Princes are.
BEcause I have made mention of Mongibir, Mongibir.
I shall inform you that this Country, the capital Town whereof is called
Scanfourin, is subject to the Negus, and neighbor to the Province of Calasen.
The Natives are of a middle size and olive color, which makes them affect
strangers exceedingly, esteeming them more beautiful than themselves; though
very few come amongst them: for they are wretched, base, and timorous beyond
imagination, trembling at the report of a gun, which they say is the Devils
handycraft, and call him Hocalsic, that is a good man, who carries none of
these fire cudgels. Nevertheless they maintain a continual war upon the
Calasens, who are Christians, and they Idolaters, worshipping the sun, the
Negus never being able to reconcile them, nor introduce Christian religion
amongst them.

Amongst other heresies they believe, that after death the soul enters into
another body, which makes them indulge strangers so highly, upon opinion they
may be of their alliance; yet they hold they cannot enter into the Calasenians,
nor the Suecans, because they are Romarins, that is Christians: Romarins
Christians
nor delight to inhabit a body of a contrary Religion, and so ceremonious and
austere as ours is.

The earth, say they, was made for our sustenance, and 'twere indignity to the
Maker not to make use of all which it produces. When one speaks to them of the
kingdom of Heaven, they say it is the mansion of the Gods and Lights, and not of
men, and that God will have no communication with sinners, who are unworthy to
approach a thing so holy, which shows they once had better knowledge of our
mysteries, Strange prostitution of wives.
though in the whole time of our travail there, we saw not any book or the
least record of the true religion. They will invite Passengers to lodge with
them, and command their wives to keep them company; while they go to the wood
or river for entertainment for their guests, their wives caresse them, and
esteem it a happiness if they prove with child by a stranger, which when they
bring into the world, they call it Gilchaquillan, that is a child of the sun,
who being grown up, the Prince takes him to his service, saying, this is the
way to multiply his Nation with virtuous people. And what is more, the wife is
the better esteemed of her husband; and the Prince, if it be a male child,
sends him a little snake of gold or silver, in form of an ear-pendant, which
renders him so qualified, that the time may come he may be capable of the
charge of Benchaye, who is the person next to the King: if it be a girl she
shall be married to a person of high degree. Though they want not mines of
baleys, rubies, and of silver, besides other metals, as tin and copper, whence
they get an earth which makes the most pure violet color in the world,
wherewith they make their houses very graceful to the eye, nevertheless their
fancy is to paint their arms and legs, specially the nails, and hang pieces of
old iron in their ears. A Portuguese one day showed them a piece of gold
against the sun, which charmed them so, that they immediately made it known to
their king, who resolved to have it at any price to hang in his ear, as a thing
miraculous and sacred, and gave for it half a tun-weight of cinnamon.

As concerning the Articles of their Faith, they have no Idols in their
Temples, but on solemn feasts being assembled they dance round, and sing hymns
in honor of the sun, abstaining from sustenance till his setting. They
acknowledge a place where sinners are tormented after death, and some more
grievously than others, proportionably to their offenses.

Further they have no speculation, being Masters neither of literature nor
characters, a simple people easy to deceive, content with a bare sufficiency
for livelihood, not studying how to make use of their national commodities to
the best advantage: besides so kind, they give freely to one another whatsoever
they are possessed of, and so gross, there are many things amongst them they
know no name for, and are absolute forrainers at a mile distance. Their only
traffic is for honied wine, which is brought them from Suechan and Calasen, in
truck for wild beef-hides, and Elephants, which they sell to Biguen. They are
of such fidelity in their commerce, that they are really ignorant what it is to
lie, and keep their promise with religious observation. It Is true the Ingresses
to the Country are very dangerous, by reason of robbers of diverse nations who
rendezvous there, but the King executes most severe justice on them that are
apprehended, condemning them to the jaws of wild beasts, which he keeps in
Parks.

This Princes court is governed with good policy, and is most commonly attended
with four hundred tall men at arms, drawn out of his Provinces called Marac,
which on the South confine on the kingdom of Couran, small Countries, but the
Inhabitants have a particular renown for their fidelity: Besides he has
constantly near him 400. horsemen well mounted, and in his stable a thousand
able horses at rest, because being generally barefoot, they are apt to batter
their hoofs. To march before him he has 50. Cavaliers whom they call the
Joarmamir, that is the chief Guard, clothed in cotton cloth, with bow and arrow
in hand: then follow fifty Cavaliers more in cotton Cassocks variously painted,
with a short silk Cloak, not unlike Meca Tapistry, wearing on their head a cap
in fashion like a Miter, at their girdles hang little balls of steel with three
pikes, wherewith they seldom miss when they strike, and at their Saddle bow a
sharp'ned iron like the head of a lance. These they call the Kings Champions.

These two troops march in the field about a bow-shoot before the Prince,
having between them fifty Elephants richly trapp'd with Tapistry of silk, each
bearing three or four men with strong bows, and arrows three else long,
Ethiopian bonnets on their head, and Alparyates, or open shoes on their feet:
them they call Jourles, that is Archers. Then 50. Cavaliers mounted on white
horses, bearing balls of silver richly wrought, in white short cloaks with
silver buckles, on their head a red bonnet hanging over their shoulders, like a
Chapperoon, they term these Gouaique Soumimara, that is, the Princes Council
of strangers. Then a hundred more well mounted, stuck with abundance of
feathers, their horses covered with cases of Bears, Lions, or other beasts
skins fringed with little colored feathers, a bow in a scarf, and a club in
their hand of a sufficient length. In the last place comes up the troop which
is called Mameiteque Ebaulbic, or the Guard of the Body armed with long lances
pointed with certain stones keen as any razor, which next fire-pikes is the
most dangerous arms I ere beheld. One amongst them bears the Standart, which is
the figure of a Sun, and the King marches next after, habited much after the
sort as the Gouaique Soumimara, a bonnet on his head, banded with a white
Taffety hanging over the horse cruppers, with many devices representing the
high achievements of his Predecessors, to satisfy the humor of the people,
who glory in generous Princes, whose fame may live with posterity.

Amongst other the fundamental laws of this Nation, there is one whereby the
King is obliged to marry three wives all of his own quality, without regard to
their being forrainers, or of a contrary religion, holding that a good wife
ought to make her husbands will her rule in all things. If they conform not
precisely to this law, they render their children incapable of succession, and
must be content with a bare pension, and become subject to an elected King, who
possibly he might have reigned over himself. But this difference seldom
happens amongst them, and Tradition makes mention only of one Cbapoularin son
of Jazalga, whom his mother had instructed to adore the infernal spirit, which
was ground of much combustion in the State, so as the mother and nine of her
sons were massacred in a sedition, and they elected for King a son of the last
wife, from whom the people received so prudent a Government, that being dead,
they erected a statue to his memory in the middle of the Marketplace, in the
town of Biguen, where it stands at this day. This is a town of exceeding
strength, mantled with good Bastions, every street provided of chains for case
of necessity, girt with good ditches, situate upon the fair River Gambir,
abounding in fish, which they fish for in little boats made of reeds, capable
only of two men. The King hawks at river in those boats, as it is the ordinary
way of the country. They use bridges of straw to cross the rivers, as they do
in the kingdom of Garamel, which straw they call Ingar, as in the West Indies
they call it Tortora. The women appear freely in the streets, their garments
are a short gown after the Arabian cut, sleeves to the elbow only, linen
hose, hanging on the left side a rich girdle colored in devices, to
distinguish maids from married women, upon their head a linen veil curiously
wrought, hanging down their shoulders.

Three times the year they admit commerce with the Suecheuians, for their
civility at Memite, when they took away all their women, and by express
command of their King, restored them without the least injury to their honor,
a most heroic action of a barbarous Prince. From this country of Suechen they
receive very considerable commodities, as likewise from Couran and Marat,
countries where they have plenty of honied wines, corn, cattle, fish, and
excellent fruits, which they transport to Biguen without the least tribute for
any thing whatsoever. When the Kings wives go abroad, they are seated on
Chariots, in such manner as the Chinese or the Geneses are, all three
together, in the same dress like three sisters, and with like affection. The
Prince keeps a perfect amity amongst all the three, a thing much to be admired.
Three principal noblemen called Genelcoulbre ever aecompany them, walking
seven or eight paces before them, with staves in their hands. The Ladies wear
crowns of flowers and stones wonderful refulgent, their face open, with
pendants in their ears of rich pearls, and bracelets of the same.

If they meet the King, they descend from their Chariots, and immediately
ascend again without further complement, as if they had never seen him. He
makes a turn toward them, then passes on; and three of the chief of his train
alight from horse, and come kiss the Queens Chariots, who deliver some certain
words to them, and so the Gentlemen remount. I often enquired what it might be
they spoke, but I could never be satisfied for the several relations told me.
The Princes royal are educated in the Province of Marat, with prudent persons
well warned to instruct them in obedience to the King, whom they visit once in
the year, which they divide into four seasons as we do. The Daughters remain
near their Mothers, where for their exercise they are taught to work the short
coats, which resemble the Tapistry of Meca, which the King bestows as presents
on the Principal of his Court, to whom he marries his daughters: these Persons
by privilege may have two wives more, but of inferior degree to his
Lady-Royall, and so may be elected Bene-Chayc, an honorable office next his
Majesty.

The Court is well governed, and very polite, but the vulgar are exceeding
gross and ignorant. Daughters of the Nobility marry not but with husbands of
virtue and valor. The King uses all endeavor to civilize the People, but to
no effect. Upon a time the King met a clown carrying fish, and asking him what
he was, received but a slight answer; but being told 'twas the King spoke to
him, he was so overjoyed, he would needs give him all his fish, which the King
refused, but out of love he would needs force it upon him, and kindly threw it
all in his lap, whereat the King laughed heartily, and caused one to give him a
thanks of a better price, and made him come to Court, whence he would part no
more.

Some days journey from Bilguca toward the Province of Marat, Westward there
is a mountain to imagination surpassing the highest step of the Ceuares in
altitude, which never wants snow, no not in July when we surmounted it, which
is the end of Winter there. At the foot of the Mountain there is a gentile
town called Moulgas, the inhabitants whereof are Jews, tributary to the King
of Mongibir: one of these Jews was our Host, who gave us good entertainment,
and falling into discourse upon the Old Testament, he took us for Jews, and
presently we had a whole Synagogue about us to congratulate, but they were soon
scared away, when we assured them we were Christians. Our Host presented us for
a dainty with the flesh of Crocodile, but not being used to it, for my part I
could not taste it, for the apprehension I had of that furious creature, though
I were sufficiently satisfied the meat was wholesome, white, and sipid. He
showed us two Ducarfs, the least I ever saw, who for pastime he had horsed upon
a sheep. Having gotten an Elephant for the remove of our baggage and
commodities, we left Moulgas, and came to Suarin, the first Town in Marat, a
place of strength situate upon a little Mountain, whence there sallies a
stream of water that turns three Mills. The people are kind and courteous, but
Idolaters, believing the Sun to be the maker of all things, and like them of
Mongibir, that Heaven is only for the Gods, and not for men.

Thence we came to Moucal, an uniform Town, having eight ports, which are all
perspicable from the middle station of the Town: Before the Palace-Royall
stands a Pyramid, upon which there is the statue of a King named Soualin, who
once rescued this Town out of an enemies hands, by the aid of the Towneswomen,
who in the action attested an un-heard of Magnanimity, for a monument whereof,
he enacted a Law in their favor, that they may have three husbands, but the
men for their baseness, only one Wife.

Some few days journey from thence, we entered the kingdom of Couran, a good
and fertile country, but full of Forests, infested with very dangerous wild
beasts, and amongst others with a sort of fierce and ravenous dogs, by which
many Passengers are devoured; as by the way we met with sufficient evidence in
bones, apparel, and bags of Pearls and Emeraulds.

Afterward we passed through diverse countries, as Souchalbi, Choucay, and
others. In all these parts we fared at a cheap rate, for it cost us not in two
days the value of a farthing; the good people bringing us share of what prey
they had in hunting, came themselves to eat with us: for our exhilaration, they
used certain strange instruments which they played on. The women are reasonable
fair, very chaste, but ill apparelled. The maids at twenty years of age, may
marry whom they will, without hinderance of either Father or Mother.

When they solemnize matrimony, they go to the Temple, where the Father says
to the young man, I give thee my daughter for thy spouse, and the other Father
says the like to the maid. Then they take two sheeps hearts, male and female,
and present them to the Priests; who saying certain prayers, burn them on the
Altar, then kiss the married couple, and join them in mutual embraces: then
they feast with music, and deprive the maid of a lock of hair growing on the
hindpart of her head, as is the custom for all maids and widows, they
religiously observe marriage all their lives, in perfect peace and concord.

See Al. cap. 58. and 59.
To give account of the Mountain Amara, whereof I made mention before, which is
in four degrees and a half of the Meridian, where all the Princes of the blood
are enclosed, and carefully guarded, it is a large Province, adjacent to
Belequanze, Zoa, and Ambian, containing a good number of Towns, Villages, and
Castles, and is above 150. leagues in circuit. Much about the middle, there is
a high risen mountain of the same name, directly under the Equinoctial line,
which is the proper Mansion of the Princes. There are some who relate wonders
of the height, extent, beauty, and richness of it, making it a terrestrial
Paradise, but there is more probability in what I learnt of some inhabitants
beyond it, who say the Mount is round, of but few leagues compass at the top,
exceeding high, constituted of a rock cut like a wall, of difficult ascent, but
only by one certain way. There are Palaces and Gardens for accommodation of
the Princes and their People, besides a Monastry of S. Anthonies Order, with
corn, fruit, and cattle for their sustenance, without any other water then
rain, which they preserve in Cesterns.

Franciscus Aluarez nevertheless says, this mountain is not to be rounded in
less than fifteen days, but I suppose he means at the very bottom: and that
upon this huge mountain where it is exceeding cold, there stand lesser which
compose valleys, where there are both Rivers and Fountains, with some hamlets
and habitations; but having not been an eyewitness, I report but what I have
heard, for it is death to a stranger to come there, and the natives to have
their hands and feet cut off.

The Monastery is called Zio marina Christos, This is Domine miserere nobis
the religious whereof employ themselves wholly in the service of their order,
which some report to be of huge number, others less. All of them betake
themselves to labor, every one having his little cell apart for his devotions,
not entering the Church but on Festivals, when they celebrate but one Mass
only. Their fasts are stupendous and incredible. The women receive the
Communion in the porch or entrance, not within the Church it self, except on
the feast of the Visitation, when they have privilege to enter. Aluarez calls
them Debiteres. The cannons of Ethiopia. Of this Abraham See Al. ca. 54.
The chief of the Monastery is called the Barnagaz, and by another name the
Lebetera, which means a Devote or Sage, as it is called also the Church of
Sages. Here the Princes of the blood are kept secured, since the days of a
king called Abraham, who having many children received a vision in his sleep,
to this purpose, for prevention of civil wars in the State. It Is forfeit of
life for these Princes to come out of their enclosure, except him who is
immediately to succeed when time falls: then he comes forth and takes with him
one who is most in his favor, presenting gifts to all the rest, to whom he
sends a rich Crown set with stones, which is given to him, whom by unanimous
consent they acknowledge chief, and next to succession, who is honored next to
the Negus himself: for there the succession goes by proximity of blood,
Israelites is as much as Princes of the blood royal, or officers descended from
those Jews who came thither in the days of Solomon. Al. c. 61. and 138.
except power carry it as it has often happened. Some say they call all of the
blood royal by the name of Israel. For the rest of the Province of Amara, it is
very mountainous and very fruitful, the air good and temperate enough, without
discommodity, but excess of rains from mid- May to the middle of August,
according as other Countries all along the line. We had most of this relation
from the Spanish Ambassador I mentioned, who had great familiarity with Prince
Gabriel, who came out of the Mountain when David the last of that name
deceased, at the election of Nabur his confident friend, who freed him from
that Princely confinement, and admitted him to live in his presence, so long as
in no sort he meddled not in affairs of the State. Many other particulars of the
Mountain we learnt of one of the Religious of the Monastery there, who amongst
other things told us, how he once attended the Negus against the King of Geret,
assisted with the Kings of Abat and Eri, who denied the customary tribute, whom
this Prince invaded as far as the Countries of Ganfrila and Drafrila, who
otherwise the Negus had absolutely lost, for the Barnagaz who was Governor,
was then come to Court, to do homage to the new Prince, who understanding that
his Country was seized on, with all possible expedition, repaired thither with
fifteen or sixteen thousand men, and brought a seasonable relief, assisted by a
Prince called Lulibella Abelicano esteemed a Saint, and in effect with a
handful of men in comparison of the Enemy, they got but little less then a
miraculous victory. This religious man told us many more very remarkable things
of the death of the late Negus, father to him who reigned when we were there; a
Prince so virtuous, and so beloved of his people, that after his death many of
his chiefest Noblemen left their Fortunes and stately mansions, and becoming
recluse religious spent the remainder of their days in penance. Amongst
others a Prince who had espoused a sister to the deceased, mourned with such
passion, that he fired his Palace, and got himself to so uncouth and solitary a
place, that no man knew where to find him.

'Twas in a Cave in the wild of the woods, where he concealed himself, and this
by the consent of his Lady, who on her part with two of her daughters became a
recluse Nun, in a Monastery of women called Aranatingil, to whom after decease
of the Mother, the Negus sent to persuade to become secular again, and
prevailed with the one who was married to the Prince of Dafila, but the other
called Agaria, persisted in her devotion, and proceeded to such sanctity, that,
as they say, by revelation, she understood the Place where her father was
retired, and sent her Confessor to visit him, whom he found in the hollow of a
rock, to which one must ascend by many steps, and in one corner of the rock he
had a little garden with a fountain, and some Coco Dates, which the Abissins
call Miguel, and other trees set round. There the Prince spent his days with
one only servant, living on the fruits of these trees. He was exceedingly
beloved and lamented by the whole Court, as well for his valor and virtue, as
for that he was of the blood of Tigray, being descended from the Emperor of
Tigray: and the Negus himself, holding wars with the King of Deli, felt special
want of him; and coming to understand where he was concealed, took the pains to
go in person with his whole Army thither, to entreat his assistance in a
business of so main importance, to the preservation of the Faith, promising
him that the wars ended, he should return to his hermitage; whereto the other
would not be refractory, but leaving his grotte, and appearing to the Army,
they conceived so great a confidence of good success in the war, that with a
general shout they cried out victory. 'Twas a noble pleasure to see the
kindnesses wherewith the whole Court welcomed the Prince, some embracing his
knees, other casting themselves at his feet, so great is the devotion of these
people. Then arming him with arms of the skin of Coscuma, back and breast, and
mounting him on a gallant horse with an azure Cross in a white standart before
them, as on the day of battle, they have a red Cross of the color of the
Emperors tent, they marched into the field, and the war was prosperously ended
to the wishes of the Negus: whether this Prince returned to his grotte or
continued at Court I cannot tell. But to proceed, the Province of Amara
confines upon Angote, divided by the River Ancona, it is true that Olabi lies
betwixt, through which the River Cabella passes, rising out of the lake of
Amara, abounding with Sea-horses, by them called Gomaraes, and by the Arabians
Garmaran, and another like to a Lamprey, which being boiled in water, makes
pottage white as milk, but red being boiled in milk. The Negus is esteemed one
of the richest and most potent Princes in the Universe. His ordinary Army
consists of thirty thousand horse and fifty thousand foot, partly of tawny,
partly of entirely black people, by reason of the heat of the Country, though
notwithstanding they have both winter and summer. The Prince never stays in
Town above three days, and ever has a well ordered Army in the field, amply
provided of all sorts of military ammunition, and his Court walled with a
strong and magnificent Guard.

When any one sues for access to the Prince, there is a Nobleman whose office
is to question him, what he is, whence he comes, and what he desires of his
Majesty, and holding him constantly by the hand at the gate of the Tent-Royal,
he speaks in a loud tone after a manner of singing, and so gives the King
notice of this persons arrival, who immediately receives a dispatch of his
business in few words and short time.

When the King marches into the field, which is never without his Court and
Army, of above fourscore or a hundred thousand men, he removes not above four
or five miles a day, ever lodging at Churches or Monasteries. The Army marches
foremost, with all the baggage packed up in baskets instead of coffers. This
Court is not hung upon by such a rascallity as ours is, nor is the Country
harried and eaten up by such a rabble, the villages contribute nothing, but the
whole is discharged out of the treasure and revenue of the Prince. After the
Army is passed, comes about three thousand Officers, who carry the provisions
for the Kings table, wine in Barrels, and meat in Panniers, every one carrying
his proportion on his head, those who conduct them are called the Seraif: Then
the Lords called the Serami follow afoot, a javeline in their hand, and a guilt
falchion like a short sword by their side, and the Priests bare-headed, whereof
four, who serve by the Quarter, carry the sacred stone for celebration.

The Prince marches under a Canopy, in an Apostolic habit of white silk, with
wide sleeves, and a broad large hat.

When the Court marches they are all well mounted, but ill-armed, for their
Arms are neither so neat nor so well wrought as ours: The Prince has one
complete suite of Arms which he puts on but seldom: The King of Spain
presented him with a suit by his Ambassador, which was musket proof.

Their ordinary Arms are half-pikes, and battle-axes, of which they know how to
make good use. Their tents of thick strong cloth: the Prince's of white linen
lined with leather, so spacious, it is capable to comprehend twelve thousand
persons, domestic Officers, and Servants, as I said before, and the Ladies of
Honor to the Queen, besides the Cavalry who serve by Quarter, and are those
who wear the Lions skin. In the middle of the Tent there stands a Church of
vast circumference, near to which the King and Queen only inhabit, for upon
occasion of any conference, they come into other apartements. His Tent alone is
like a little Town, containing within it his very stables, all regularly
composed, and well governed. He has his music singing day and night, the
Musicians discharging their duties by turns; though he be not in his Tent, the
same reverence and respect is observed as if he were present. He who has the
office to expostulate and induct those who make addresses to the Prince, after
he understands the business; if he cannot of himself give satisfaction, he
repairs to the Prince, to whom he relates the whole upon his knees, without
presuming to behold his face, or rise up while the King speaks, then returns
and exacts the like reverence from others to himself.

As touching Justice there, it is equally and speedily administered, without any
tedious process. If any man either in court or Army be found guilty of a
crime, he is immediately punished with bastinadoes, the ordinary chastisement,
but they use also buffeting as the Turks do.

For the tributary kingdoms and dominions under the Negus, the Law is such,
that no one can confer the succession on his Children without express license,
and it is seldom that the Son succeeds the Father, but where he has done
some signal service for the State: insomuch as they are as it were Governments
for life, nor have they assurance to continue so long; for sometimes the Prince
to reward their services will deprive them of their Crown or Government to
advance them to a higher. If he be displeased with any one, he sends but a mere
Serami or Lord, with a verbal command only, for letters they have no use of,
and the subject Prince having notice of his arrival, puts on his Lions skin,
in token of obedience, and meets him with all submission and civilities: whom
the Serami having told that the King commands his presence, without reply he
immediately prepares for his journey, with his treasure, wife and children. The
King afterward disposes of him at his pleasure, either detaining him at Court,
or sending him to the wars, till he shall think to bestow on him some other
government or dominion on better or worse according to his desert; for this
King is a benign and equitable Prince, exceedingly beloved of his subjects,
which supports the state in happy justice, peace, and tranquillity, every one
observing his duty: whence it proceeds that they regard not to erect any State
by buildings, having no assurance they stall descend to their heirs.

The Crown revenues consist in corn, wine, cloth, linen, silk, silver, not
coin; but counted by weight, for here there is no mint, no more then in China.
He has also an impost upon salt, which is a deer commodity here, and in some
places is used as money. The Prince has these payments out of the necessaries
to livelihood, and has his receivers in every town. His revenue is
extraordinary great, which he dispenses part in payment of his Army, part in
support of his family, and the rest to the Church and Poor.

The country abounds in all commodities, except spice and salt, which comes
from very foreign parts, and are exceeding deer, insomuch that for a little bag
of salt, you shall have what you desire, weight for weight; for what salt they
have comes either from Egypt, betwixt whom and them there are immense deserts,
or from other places seven or eight hundred leagues remote, which sets such
price upon it: As again they have their spices by the red Sea from Cochin
Narsingue, and elsewhere, and as far as the West Indies.

All the Towns of the country are ill built and little, and the reason is,
because the Prince resides so little in them, and the Court is continually upon
march and change of station. The principal are Barra, Tiena, and Barua,
whereof the greatest is not by a third part so big as Florence: They are all
strongly walled, and some well moated, but Bastions with them are not used. The
Fort or Citadel is commonly upon the gates of the Towns, where they keep their
Artillery, whereof they have great store, and say as well as the Chinese; it is
two thousand years since they first had the invention. I saw a piece upon a
Chinese vessel of 800. years cast, and it is no small question, if they had the
invention from us, or we from them, as it is more likely, if it be of such
antiquity with them as they say, or whether we happened upon it upon the like
accident as they, I transfer to more curious inspections.

Amongst other things I observe it as most singular and laudable in these
people, that they bear a passionate affection to their Princes, and so firm a
fidelity that they submit to all sorts of torments, yea to death, rather then
fail in their duties; and will consent sooner to the destruction of their
proper Parents, then of their Princes: It being unheard of, that any one ever
conspired against his Prince, and if it should ever happen, they would
extirpate him and his, even to the child in the cradle, saying; there can be no
lawful or valuable excuse for the subject that conspires against the King. A
Tenent strange enough to the perversity of nearer nations, and in particular to
our unfortunate France, who out of I know not what furious enraged and
diabolical zeal, has too often dipped her paricide ^ands in the Royal blood.
God grant her grace to imitate these loyal Abissins, better Christians in this
then she. In all crimes they use a most severe and exemplar Justice; and a man
once observed to be nefarious, is hated and avoided by all men: so as if for
any fact he once fall under the hands of Justice, he shall be so bastinadoed,
he shall feel it all days of his life. And on the contrary, men of good lives
are beloved and favored by all men, and if any misfortune befall him, he shall
find every where assistance. The Prisons commonly are full of prisoners,
maintained at the Princes charge, and it is but rarely that any suffer death in
public, but commonly within the Prison where they fell the condemned with a
club. They have likewise a most remarkable Rule for Creditors and Debtors: for
if one sell, or lend to another any thing, upon condition of payment at a
certain day, and after the day past, the Debtor has not paid it, the Creditor
goes to the President or Judge, to whom he opens his case: The Judge gives him
a fair hearing, and having given sufficient testimony, the Judge delivers him
a wand, wherewith he goes to seek the Creditor, and having found him, with the
end of that wand draws a circle round about him, with command in the name of
Justice not to stir thence, till he be satisfied; then he must either
discharge the debt, or to prison without excuse or delay: and if he endeavor
to escape, it is death. Being in prison, they assign him a day of payment, on
which if he perform not, he must endure the cudgel; then they assign him
another day, and so forward, till he either pay the debt, or dye with stripes;
or render his person slave to his Creditor, till his service has made
satisfaction: Sometimes they have the favor to go get their bread abroad. So
severely is Justice executed, without respect of persons, or bribery; for in
such case the Judge is both degraded, and punished: but it happens very rarely
because they have but few suits amongst them. If one be found to have accused
another wrongfully, he shall suffer the bastinado: again if one deny a fact
whereof there is evident proof brought against him, they put him to rack, by
screwing his fingers between two planks, and in case he confess not then, they
break his arms and legs. Their prisons are very large, and capable to hold
many, where every prisoner labors for his living. The offenders by day have
freedom of the house, but at night are shut up in a room so close, they can
scarce stir.

In Ethiopia there are many Churches, but of mean architecture, though
something after the Roman way, with bells with wooden clappers, which yield a
very sweet sound. They have very little iron and very few fountains; I remember
not I saw above five or six throughout the country where I was. Their pictures
are very course, Statues ill proportioned, without any figures of relief. Alu.
says the Priests and Cannons are single, Monks married.
There are Monasteries of all sorts, more or less austere, yea they have
Religious that marry, but no more then once. In the Church they never sit down,
but stand upright, leaning at certain times on a kind of Crosiar, or Crutch.
They consecrate the Sacrament in a piece of bread according to the Greek rites,
and then in imitation of David before the Ark, they use a motion in a manner of
dancing in time of prayer, then bow themselves very low: When they go forth of
the Church, they hang those Crutches out of the Gate in a place covered for
that purpose, and every one knows his own again. Their Priests live very
exemplarly, and in great austerity: In the Church they never demand any thing,
every man gives to whom he pleases. Instituted since Al. time, who speaks not
of them.
They have some amongst them who never eat flesh nor drink wine, living on
nothing but fruits, hemp seed, such as we feed birds with here, and other seeds
unknown to us, and on certain roots.

Others there are of an order not so austere, but every one, upon pain of most
rigorous correction, observes the rule he has made choice of. There are
Icronimites who ever go barefoot and bare-headed, sleep upon the boards, wear
hair-cloth, never taste wine nor flesh, and are as 'twere continually in
prayer; Their Convents are in woods, where with leave of superiors, they walk
at liberty, without any communication, but at confession. Their office holds
from Midnight till an hour before day, then it rings to prayer, then they
repose an hour, and return to sing the office of the Church; which done, they
say Mass with extraordinary devotion, then take their Sandals, and sit down to
a very innocent meal. They confess not at all, have commonly their eyes fixed
on the ground, and are much in solitude.

A man when his wife is departed, loses the repute of honesty, if he become not
religious. They rebaptize as often as they please, and ever after confessions
they go to a Priest in a corner of the Church to be baptized, and you shall see
those of the greatest age go to the Font like little infants.

Some have said that they baptize in fire, but it is nothing so, for they use
water only as we do, though their words are something discrepant.

They have long precept-fasts, and keep lent very strictly, dispensation being
allowed neither to Soldier nor Infant, therefore this is the time the enemy
chooses to invade them, supposing they shall find them weak. At Easter they
communicate after the Greek rites, and force the sucking infants to receive it,
giving them the Teat after it, so that the Church is filled with the cries and
bawling of children.

Obstinate Heretics they condemn to the fire, but this has not often
occurred, but with Moors who dissembled Christians. In sum, the Ethiopians,
though Christians, retain many ceremonies, superstitions, and heresies, both of
the Jews and Grecians, as Circumcision, Purification, the Sabbath, abstinence
from Swines flesh, from Hare, from blood, from all things strangled, and from
certain fish. With the Grecians they deny the Procession of the Holy Ghost, the
twofold will of Christ, repeat Baptism, condemn the Council of Calcedon in
favor of Eutiches and Dioscorus, hold that the soul freed from the body,
enters not into heaven till the dissolution of the world, and many other
errors attributed to them, denied by some of them: but of this the Modern
relations of the Jesuits, afford better information; who live amongst them,
and bring in a plentiful harvest to the Church, by the conversion of these
people to the Catholic and Roman Faith.

Concerning the Prince he has diverse appellations, as Senap and Negus which
signify Emperor and King, Belulgian or Beldigian, that is, excellent or
precious Lord, and with the vulgar, the Presteian, whether the name came from
an ancient Persian word which signifies Apostolical, or whether in imitation of
a King, who sometime reigned in Tartary, called the Presteian of India a
Nestorian Christian, who was vanquished, and cast out by the Tartars, and had
this name from having a Cross borne before him, when he appeared in public.

Afterward the Portuguese by the same name called the King of the Abissins,
either for a parity, or because they apprehended him the Presteian of Asia and
India, so high in history for these three or four last Ages. But of all I have
said, and of all other particulars of the Empire of the Abissins; their
Manners, Look Al. G^es, Godagne, and the modern relations of the Jesuits.
Religion, Speech, and Power, I refer my self to the more ample discourses
of such as have written expressly, whose residence and observation was of
higher growth then mine, content only to have touched upon that little I
observed passing through the Country, and now I will revert to the Town of
Barua, which I left for this short digression.

CHAP. XV. Of the Town of Barua, Bagamidri, and others. Stories of Sorcerers.
BArua is a Town, that for bulk and situation may stand in Parallel with
Samacara in Arabia the happy, whereof I spoke in the first part. It is raised
upon a Mountain, at the Foot whereof slides a lovely River called the Arabic
Arat, by the Abissins Morato, which yields abundance of fish, but chiefly store
of Crocodiles, which are excellent meat, and they eat them chiefly in lent, at
which season there comes more plenty then at any time of the year besides. They
come up from Nile, and so disperse themselves through all the Rivers of
Ethiope, that fall upon it. This creature lives both on land and water, is a
great destruction of cattle, chiefly of sheep, whereof he is very licourous,
and will devour one at a morsel, for want of them will break into gardens, and
eat the fruits. This creature is so subtle, that he will hide himself near to
houses, and vent most heavy sighs, to entice people to him and devour them,
as it had fortuned to a poor woman at Barua, who had been so taken and
devoured, but for the timely rescue of her husband, howsoever was mutilated.

The like happened to us going by night from Alexandria to Roussete, for we saw
one, which we took for a block, and as a servant belonging to the Consul of
Alexandria, stepped before to take it up, he was caught by this beast, who with
his tail drew him under water, and was never seen more.

In fine having wandered to and fro amongst these towns of Ethiopia, selling
or trucking our Merchandises, we resolved to fall again upon our way to our
country. In the company there were some Nubian Merchants of the town of Casas
civil persons and good Christians. We consulted together of our way, if we
should take toward the River Falucia, or make to Gayuelle, along the River
Morabon, which runs to Barua. But our company being composed of persons of
diverse interests, according to their affairs, there arose some dispute; but at
last 'twas determined we should go by Gayuelle, whither we had seven long days
journey, to avoid the danger of robbers, who are very infestuous to those
parts; as also the Tigars, whereof there is store throughout all Ethiopia, and
so at length gain Zuama, or Bagamidri, where we left our vessels, and part of
our goods. Then we travailed along the river through diverse wild and
disinhabited places, being ever ready upon our guard for robbers that might
way-lay us to ransack what we had, and so crossing Areal and Chaussabir two
Provinces, we met with Heardsmen of exceeding bigness, who kept tame goats,
which furnished us with milk and cheese, and venison as much as we would have,
for a small quantity of salt in exchange, being of opinion we had given them
something of high price. Not long after we beheld Gazuelle, and other small
Towns, where the greater part are Christians, though they hold something of
Judaism, as I said before.

As we thought to go take our dinner at Moradar, about a league from Almina, a
stormy wind under a cloak of thick black clouds pursued us at the heels, which
made us keep near our boats, that if the rain should surprise us we might have
shelter at hand.

At the instant, two men and a Priest in a gray habit accosted us, the Priest
with his hat in his hand, saluted us in Italian, saying he was of Cagliari in
Sardaignia, and that 'twas his desire to return for his Country, whence he
came into Ethiopia with a Roman Bishop, who passed to the other world at
Magadeli: and understanding of some Italians that were travailing through
Ethiopia for Egypt, he had sought us out to be admitted into our company,
intending to take ship at Alexandria, and steer the course for Italy, and so
for Rome. The two men that were with him gave us high commendations of him,
assuring us he would pay well for his passage, for that the Bishop had left him
threescore Doublons for his voyage. We made little answer, but at the same
time, two Noblemen overtaking us in Palanquins, or Littars born by slaves on
their shoulders, this Priest made to them and asked an alms, and one of them
gave him a piece of silver, then presently returned to us, and as familiarly as
we had been acquainted all days of our life, told us, by asking one could
loose nothing but the denial.

At length we came to Moradar, where we stayed our boats, as we had often done,
since the loss of Monsieur de la Courbs man, in hope to find the body, for he
had rich things about him.

Being at our Inn we smelt a strong sent, and found 'twas some musk cats this
Priest carried with him, which he would have trucked with us for other
commodities, but we were loath to be troubled with such unwholesome things. There
they brought us to table a dish of raw flesh, well seasoned with salt and
spices, which was of delicate taste and an excellent meat. After dinner we
observed certain people, looking steadfastly in a bright shining basin, and
asking the reason, they told us they were looking to see a troop of Devils that
were going to a battle, that was presently to be fought. We replied if it
might be without danger we should be very glad to participate with them, and
would content them with a piece of money, which they accepted of, and the Sieur
de la Courb gave them what we promised. Hereupon one of them cast a kind of
grease upon a chafing dish of burning coals, which flamed and went out again,
and there arose a thick smoke, then they perfumed the basin, and oyled it with
a sort of oil, and in an instant a formidable darkness involved us, and we saw
passing in the air, as it were great swarms of knats, not being able to discern
directly what likeness they were of, we desired the Magician he would stay
them, and ask these Demons or hags whither they went with such celerity; then
renewing the fumigations and muttering I know not what incantations betwixt the
teeth, we saw as 'twere swarms of Ants, which removing on his command, in
imagination we saw the form of a body covered with linen, without being able
to distinguish more: but this Phantasme drawing near us, such horror seized
us, that for my part the hair of my head so started up, that it threw my cap on
the ground, and strait a most loathsome stink, as 'twere of carrion, filled the
room: this thing gabbled something which the Magician understood, and told us
he learnt by these demons there was a battle at hand, to be fought by the
king of Barma, and thither they were traveling, to receive the souls of the
slaughtered, that they had crossed a Sea of darkness and horror, and the
confines of a land where the Sun never shone, nor Creature lived, and things of
the like kind which this man related.

At last all vanished, leaving a scene of such lovely trees, that from
thence-forward we were bewitched with no such unlucky ambition to see
Diabolical delusions: But to our business, after many days travail we
arrived at Bagamidri, where we learnt the rest of our Company, who would not
come along with us, stayed for us at Zambera, or Zambre, a gentile Town upon
the lake of Zuame. We were thirteen days traveling this shore, where we found
many villages or hamlets, but few good dwellings: Abiblicains.
from Zets to Casera which are the best Towns, it is three days journey, and
from Abiari, which is the Bishopric of St. Abiblicano, three more, and to
Cafata four: we had extraordinary rains all this way, which nevertheless
hindered not our journey.

We made five days from Cafate to Girat, Bilibranos the name of a Monastery.
Dragoyan or Doragila in sum. See Mark Pol. l. 3.^.17.
and two to Gisara in the Province of Ambian: from thence in six days we
reached to Samodera a very neat Town betwixt two Rivers, and in two and a half
to Cosiana, where we found the Princess of Bilibranos, with eight Almadies, in
whose Company we reached in three days to Cabestane, in two more to Cabesera,
and in a day and a half to Ambadara, or Ambadora.

From thence we went to Albias or Albian, a small Town, but full stocked with
people, here we lodged at a Dragoyan merchants house, who was married there,
and he let us want for nothing. At this Town, in the River were abundance of
tame ducks, and a number of displumed geese, as likewise most part of the ducks
were, the rest frizeled, which caused a laughter amongst us; to see these poor
birds so ill apparelled, which some of the Town observing, and amongst them
some of the Consuls or Magistrates themselves called the Abiari, they told us,
when these should come to our table, they would bring us a double pleasure both
in eating and sleeping, and at last we understood 'twas usual to pull their
foul alive to stuff their beds with the feathers, making little cases of
tender Osiers, which stuffed with feathers, compose a very easy lodging, then
for the meat it is both wholesome and delicate: for this purpose they fleece them
twice a year: Sheep they have in abundance, which are of admirable increase,
bringing young ones two or three times a year, and very often two at a fall.
They constantly coat them under covert by night, holding for certain that the
two stars which predominate in these parts in June and July, which the Indians
call Zobana, Or Zabano as the Persians call them. See the first part, c. 37.
which must be Medusa's head, or the dog, or one of Orion.
rising in the East, are mortiferous to their cattle: they have a custom they
teach their herds to feed so as they turn their heads from them as they pass
by.

In this Town of Abbiar we had good entertainment for nothing, all upon the
Princes account; But wheresoever we came we distributed some grains of salt,
which is very acceptable in those Countries, as indeed throughout the whole
Empire of Priest John, being in effect their most current money, for that is
ready truck for any thing.

In this place we staid two days, at the instance of the Magistrates and
others of Quality, and left our Almadies and goods in charge with some of our
company, to take the way to Amina, and so upon a branch of the Tecassin, visit
the Town of Saba or Soba. We made it about nine miles before we arrived at
Amina, by a road carassed with the sweetest folliage in the world, that is of
dates, citrons and oranges, which grow there to a very great harvest. The
fields are full stocked with cattle of all kinds, and wild poultrey, leaving
their eggs upon the earth, which the shepherds and others will not stoop for:
we had good sport to catch these fowls wherein no one has propriety; amongst
them some have combs like cocks, and many other kinds there are.

At Amena, which is a pleasant Town, there we agreed with a man to furnish us
with two Bungi, or barks, to carry us to Saba and back again. The Bungi are
little close boats like the Gondolaes of Venice, toed by two Bibaries which are
small bulls trained to it, who go a constant trot. We went off in the morning
and breakfasted above ten leagues off, by reason of the swiftness of our
Bibari.

This branch of Tacassin is much about the rate of the ditch or channel of Pisa
at Liuorne; but toward Amina it runs soberly enough, where fish is plenty and
cheap, as all other necessaries, by reason of the fertility of the Country in
all things. The whole Island or Country of Saba, called by the Natives
Maguedan, or Soba, is environed with two large Rivers, Sabalete and Morabo,
washed with the Tecassin, who runs thither to join with Nile, of large extent,
very populous and fertile. The Inhabitants are Christians, except some
strangers of several Religions, there being liberty of conscience, and freedom
to enjoy their own Temples. There came in our company a man and his wife in a
boat of his own, both decently habited, he wore a large two-corner'd cap of
Chamlett: many discourses passed betwixt us, his wife being very reserved and
discreet in her husbands presence, but in his absence more free and jolly.

The evening brought us to a fair Town called Salete or Caleta, a different
from that which is 'twixt Barra and Barua, Al. says they call it Berenegus c
46. Sabalete a river. Al. ca. 52.
being 300. leagues distant from one another: we landed in a spacious place,
much resembling the Tambou of Peru, one house being reserved for entertainment
of strangers, where we beheld many gardens of pleasure, and amongst the rest
one appertaining to the Prince of Sabalete, who is as 'twere Viceroy, or
Governor of the Country. This garden in my judgment was the most pleasant I
ever saw in any place, full of all sorts of trees, fruit trees and others, with
Bird-cages, and trees bearing berries for the birds. Saba called Sabin by All.
c. 41.
Thence we went to dine at Saba, where we staid some time, as well to view the
Town, as for our small commerce and traffic.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Queen of Saba, and the kingdom of Caraman.
THe Town of Saba or Soua, and Soba and Sabin, is not the same which is in the
Isle of Meroe, near the 15. or 16. degree beyond the line, whereas this is
only in the 7. or 8. Some will have it the Queen of Saba came from hence,
others from the Saba in Meroe, others from that in Arabia. This Queen, by name
Macheda, or Nictoeris and Nicaula, and with the Arabians, Belchis, they have it
that she went from Saba to Mazua, a port upon the red Sea, that she went from
thence to Mount Sina, and thence in eight days to Jerusalem, that she
presented Solomon with gold, silver, aromaticks, precious woods, and the true
natural Balsome so much ever since esteemed, growing only in the gardens of
Jericho. That she had one Son by Solomon, whose name was Melilec, from whom the
Kings of Ethiopia are derived to this very age; That Judaisme was at that time
planted in Ethiopia, whence 'twas afterward driven in Candaces time, when the
Christian faith was established: but till then it is probable it kept footing
there, in that the Eunuch belonging to Queen Candace or Judith, was traveling
to Jerusalem, to adore, when he was converted by Saint Philip; and indeed they
retain still many Jewish ceremonies, as I said before.

There are those who recount several things of the Queen Saba, which savor of
the Talmud fables, and the ragings of the Rabbis, as her having intelligence
how Solomon was building the Temple, she made a visit to him with a numerous
train, a multitude of Cammels, Elephants, Mules, and other beasts of burden,
carrying great treasures. That she traversed Nubia, Cansila, Dala, and Tamatas,
and arriving in the lower Egypt, she dismissed her Cavalry, as incapable to
travail the Deserts, and crossing the red sea, landed at Ziden a Port in Meca,
came to Medina, and thence to Sina, and in forty five days journey upon the
Deserts to Palestine, that being to pass over a river, upon a piece of timber,
being informed by the prophetic spirit what it was, she chose rather to wade
through the water in her clothes, then set her foot upon that wood, wherein the
Maker of the Universe for us, should consummate his death and Passion, and how
of this beam then buried in the ground, was afterward framed the Cross on
which our Savior suffered; and many other things of like mettle they relate;
which they say come to them by tradition.

Of Candace they say more, she built the first Church in Ethiopia, by the Title
of S. Mary of Sion, and that the sacred Table of the Altar was brought from
thence. But reverting to Saba, the air is temperate, and the soil exceeding
fruitful, loaded with Oranges and Lemons, and covered with birds of game. They
are a good natured people, kind and civil, of long life, and not subject to
many maladies; and it is not improbable these are the Ethiopian Macrobees so
much celebrated by the Ancients for Longaevity. They delight in good horses,
and chiefly in those brought from Persia and Arabia, which they esteem the best
of the world. They affect to go handsomely apparelled, wearing two cornered
hats of Chamlet lined with cloth of cotton or silk, their garments long, their
doublets and hose of the Mariners cut, like them of Goa. The women are decently
dressed in silk, their face open, with little round bonnets exquisitely
wrought; at the crown whereof, which is slit, comes out a lock of their hair,
decked with gemmes; of pearls they wear abundance, especially the Nobility;
others wear a veil of linen over their face. They have an herb they call
Amatura, which makes the best Carnation and Nacar dye in the world, and being
washed, becomes an excellent crimson which never loses color. The town in
prospect may be aptly said like Tauris. Directly over against it on the other
side the river, stand two other towns and a spacious Village. The kingdom of
Saba is stored with many other good towns, as Madrara, Ambadarae or Ambadora,
Mathida or Machada, Betmaria, Madraneli or Manadelli, and others of great
trade, the people Christians, of devotion enough, but with some mixture of
Judaisme. They worship Saints, but above all the blessed Virgin, and when the
Angelical salutation, or Ave Maria is rung, the Prince, if he be on horseback
descends to say the prayer on his knees, otherwise he should be mulcted. They
have a Legend of a Paralitick, who being on horseback, and hearing the Bell
ring, without excuse presently alighted, and was cured; whereupon he became a
Monk of S. Abiblicanus giving all his wealth to the poor. It Is death to
blaspheme the name of God or the blessed Virgin, and all both men and women, as
they are generally addicted to labor, while they work sing pious songs to
cheer them. Curtesans and public Harlots are there expressly prohibited, and
severely punished. A Shoemaker seeing one who was very beautiful, (for
lewdness) led to punishment, took her to wife, and saved her, for which he had
a general applause of all men, and she ever after lived virtuously and modestly
during her matrimony. They bear great honor to the Cross, and salute it on
their knees, as often as they find one on the high way, insomuch as one shall
scarce see a Cross without diverse kneeling about it: When a Church, Chapel,
or Oratory is to be erected, they ring the Gadapi, which means the bell of
charity, the bell made of baked clay, and the clapper of wood, which calls them
together; and a Calsena declares the necessity of the structure, to which they
make a general voluntary contribution. I have seen the very principal Ladies
along the river, carry, two and two, the necessaries to it, as Stones, Lime,
Sand, and other materials, which some will carry on their heads. The Princess
her self leads the way on such occasions, and all the other Ladies follow her
example. The men likewise do their parts, and in certain stations stand
religious persons, with musical instruments to recreate the Lady-taskers; on
the other side it is the Princes part to provide fruits and other refreshments
for them, with tables set here and there, furnished with all sorts of diet, and
wine of honey in large horns, for they seldom use other wine, except some of
Dates; wine of the vine being forbidden by Law to all whatsoever. In this town
is the Church of S. Mary of Sion, of which I spoke before, which they will have
to be the first in Christendom, built by the Queen of Saba, wherein they
deceive themselves; there being more probability, 'twas the Queen Candace, or
some other after her: for in the days of Solomon, and long after, there was no
Temple but that of Jerusalem, whither they resorted from all parts, to the
services and sacrifices at certain solemn feasts. There are 300. Debeteres or
Cannons belonging to this Church: There is likewise a stately Palace for the
Tribunal Justice called the Macabate, where they judge the Process, and Appeal
to Tigray, whereon they depend; the Province being tributary to the kingdom of
Tigray. The Town of Saba or Soba is properly upon that Nile which comes from
Zaire, for the other branch called Tecassin, or Tagazzi, descends from the Lake
Baretna in high Ethiopia, and they join about Ermita. From Saba, before we went
aboard, we had a desire to go see the Town of Caraman, the Seigniory whereof
confines upon Gianamora, or Gianamara toward the East and North, toward the
South upon the Kingdom of Cauas, and on the West upon the Province of Sieto,
which touches upon Nubia.

Here is a Church dedicated to the sacred Virgin, which is one of the most
famous in the country, for that by exquisite artifice it is cut out of the
natural rock. Candaces Eunuch is said to be the Founder of it. Within we saw
thirteen Domes or Niches excellently wrought with fine columns, and drawing
near the Altar in one of the Niches, the picture of the Virgin with her infant
Jesus crowned, and a crescent at his feet, then in the middle of the Church the
figure of a Bird, signifying the Holy Ghost, without any either image or figure
in the whole Church: The Niches made Seats for the Priests, in representation
of the thirteen Apostles. They have many Sects amongst them. The chief Prelate
wore a long garment close girt to him, at which is fastened a picket capouch.
The man showed much gravity and Majesty, and stood amazed when he saw us on our
knees before the image of the Virgin, whereof he desired to know the reason.
But as there were but few amongst them of the ancient religion, so omit they
not to sing the Prime, the third, the sixth, and other Canonical hours, singing
the Psalms standing, Interjecting many sentences, and profane ceremonies.
They much rejoiced at our devotion to the blessed Virgin, and began to cry out
with great joy, Anderi, behold people of the farthest point of the world of our
religion, then showing them our Primmers with some pictures in them, they could
not contain from kissing our garments, welcoming us with such profound
humility, that in tenderness we melted tears.

May be the Monastery of Abba Gariman.
The Prince of the place having heard of us, and that we were entertained by
these Priests, conceived well of us, and imagined we were Priests, travailing
toward Saba in Meroe, to visit the chair of a holy Prophet of the great God
Magoura, which they hold to be the Chair Saint John Baptist preached in, by
them called Nabi Asista, and the Robe King David danced in before the Ark,
preserved as a venerable Relick, with a ring presented, as they say, by Solomon
to the Queen of Saba, a very splendid one, and seems like a burning coal.

Now being lodged in the Priests apartment, he entertained us with excellent
fare, variety, and well-dressed, but the first dish seemed strange to us, for
'twas flesh raw, seasoned with spices; 'twas of no ill taste, but rather
procuring appetite; then we were served with all sorts of good meat. At this
feast many came to accompany us, and I suppose every one brought in a share,
for the people understanding us to be of their religion, used us with great
kindness, and as we came out of the Church, kissed our garments, and presented
us with birds of diverse kinds, for which we showed a gratitude, but accepted
nothing.

While we were at Supper, we had every one an Inhabitant sitting by him with a
cup of Date wine in his hand, others waiting to fill again when occasion was,
and not one of those who sat with us eat a bit, but sat only to entertain
us. More we observed, that in all the meats, there was not one bone, but so
neatly ordered, one could not perceive how they were taken out. There was no
fruit for the last, though they have great abundance; but Plates full of little
fried cakes, like fritters, to which none of us had any great stomach, yet to
comply with them, every one took one for a taste only, but for my part I liked
them so well, that two dousins scarce served my turn. After supper a great
concourse came in to look upon us, and some amongst them modestly desired me to
show them my Primmer, for a picture of the blessed Virgin which was in it,
which I did, and they took it, and shrunk away so in the throng, I could never
hear more of it.

After this they brought us to our lodging, our beds were mats, Bernusse a sort
of African cloth.
and Bernusse instead of sheets.

That night we slept very well, and on the morrow we went to hear their
Church Service: where there was an extraordinary congregation. We sung a Salve
before the Image of the Virgin, and interpreted the signification to them,
wherewith they were extremely edified, weeping for joy to see and hear us, and
learnt by heart what we had taught them, for they are a very docile people, and
proclive to Religion.

CHAP. XVII. Of some particular Towns in Ethiope, visited by the Author in his
Peregrination.
HAving stayed there some few days we returned back to Albiar, where we found
our company, with our Almadies and goods, then together we held our course upon
the Nile for three days journey, meeting neither with Town nor Village of any
importance, but we saw abundance of Cattle, Bufflers, Cammels, and a sort of
Goats, which have hair soft and delicate, as white silk, then steecelesse
sheep; others all white but the head: Swine of extraordinary greatness, which
quietly carry boys who guide them, and travel them like horses; but for Apes
and Monkies, it is incredible what number and variety there is in those parts,
besides many other Specieses of beasts unknown to us.

The third day we passed by a corner of a wood, which is in the famous desert
of Goran, whereof we had the prospect fifteen days before. There we found
Tortoises of such prodigious greatness, they will travel with a man upon them.
The fourth day we came to a gentile town called Camissan, where amongst other
singularities; their women are of extraordinary beauty, who entertained us with
many kindnesses, and the more freely, because there were but few men in town,
the greatest part being in the Princes attendance, who at that time made a new
entrance into Casila, another Province upon the Nile. Then we came to Cassoudra
three leagues from thence, where there is a College, and a School of the
Syriack language, which the Mahometans of Dalascia, as subjects to the Negus,
are obliged to maintain for their tribute; at night we went to bed at Baza, and
were exceedingly molested with knats or cousins, by reason of a little coppice
of Cassia, by which we came, and after that by another of Orange trees, which
kept us company as far as Baza. These knats breed in the fruit of the Cassia
trees, which is sweet, and falling upon the ground soon corrupts, as I said in
another place, speaking of Arabia.

From Baza we made three days to Hermita, a pretty town, only one mile distant
from Nile, which comes not to it, because the Channel is choked up.

The situation is very pleasant, standing in a thicket of Orange and Lemon
trees: there again we saw those huge Tortoises, which men ride on, and it is a
wonderful thing of those creatures, they, their heads cut off, will live four
or five days, retaining their blood, as we several times experienced.

On the morrow, holding on our journey, we came to lodge at Fougira, which
stands in a wood of Orange trees, that perfumes the air with a sweet odor.
There we saw Archers so excellent they will shoot as directly as a Gunner: and
they told of one that set an apple upon his sons head, and shot it off with an
arrow: we went to see the Governor of the Town, who was lately married to a
wealthy Lady; and having made our respects to him, he had little regard of us,
wherewith we were no more satisfied, than we were with his Physiognomy, which
was very ill-favored, but well matched with his Ladies. We spent most part of
the night to see the devices and sports the people made, in honor of their
Governors nuptials to delight his spouse. Leaving Fougira we went to Fougiara
to bed, a small but a pleasant Town, having all the day had a violent storm at
our back, and happy it was our Almadies were well covered; but here befell us a
sad misfortune through the fault of the steers-man, for holding too close to
shore, a torrent of water from this deluge of rain falls upon the open part of
the vessel, with such weight and force, that in an instant we were all under
water, and all our gold, silver, and merchandise lost, with our Interpreter,
and two servants. 'Twas a most deplorable thing to see a shipwreck so near the
land. Yet I had notwithstanding the good fortune to save a woman, who with her
husband came aboard with us for Casiane, but with this I had the hard fate,
that by preserving her I lost a little pannier of the chiefest curiosities I
had, which was a loss of importance to me, and much grieved the good woman,
since it happened upon her occasion, so as she begged of her husband to take it
into consideration, and to give me something in recompense when we came to
Carsiane; but he who was a subtle companion gave me good words, which produced
nothing. The truth, is in this mischance, if we had not been relieved by
another Almadie, we had all been cast away, besides that the shore is infested
with robbers, and beasts of prey, as Lions, Tigars and others.

It Is true the Lions here are not altogether so dangerous, for they will not
meddle with a man except they be first assaulted: but the Tigars are bloody and
ravenous of man's flesh, so as if they once compass a man he is lost, venturing
upon horsemen themselves, giving most stupendous leaps and assaults, yea they
will fearlesse break into the midst of a troop of horse. By night we got to
Fougiara, where we had a good supper provided, but we could eat nothing for the
terror our late danger had left in us, and the affliction for our great loss,
but for the men above all: For the Sieur de la Courb lost a servant that had
served him twenty years, besides a thousand Spanish doublons, and a pound of
pearls, by estimation of great value, with great store of other rich
commodities and curiosities. Notwithstanding 'twas our duty to embrace all with
patience, with praises to God that preserved our persons, and in this
misfortune the Sieur de la Courb had a basin full of gold, of Pepitas, (as the
Spaniard calls them) or seeds given him by one of the Lords in our travail,
which was in another Almadie with the rest of his people, and now stood us in
good stead. On the morrow we went to Carsiane, and lodged at her house who was
saved when our bark was lost, she made us a free entertainment, and upon her
account we were visited by all the principal of the Town. There we rested our
selves two days, and the good woman in acknowledgement of her obligation,
thought no treaty sufficient for me, taking so much care for me that next
morning she brought me a clean shirt, and gave me other presents as she was
able, amongst the rest, a piece of very sine cloth of Calicut to make me
shirts. Thence we went to Saraboma or Saraboesun, that so famous Island, which
the Ancients called Meroe, and now Caeguere, between the line and the Tropic.

Some say 'twas originally called Saba, and took the name of Meroe from a
sister of Cambyses king of Persia. This Island is embraced by the two arms of
Nile, the one anciently called Astaboras the other Astupus, or Astusapes, which
is on the west side. Saraboma standing betwixt two rivers like Saba, is quite
hidden in trees very pleasantly. There we saw not so much as one Tradesman, or
public shop, but every man in his own house works by himself. The greatest
part spin wool or silk, and dames of the best quality make stuffs of silk. In
brief, they all work except those of base repute. They are a people of honest
and religious life, where there is not a Malefactor, nor a person in the hands
of justice, no Lawyers, nor no Pettyfoggers. They celebrate Mass after the
Georgian rites, with some ceremonies of the Jew or Abissine. Through all the
churches they say but one Mass a day, as through the rest of all Ethiopia, and
all, men, women, girls and infants, must hear every day one: there cannot be a
people better, nor more devout.

They generally observe lent, and the greater part fast it entirely. They give
the Communion to sucking infants, use extreme austerities, are of very reserved
life, timorous to offend God in the least, grounding themselves on the words of
the Evangelist, who says, Hardly shall the just man be saved.

From thence we passed by many habitations of tents, composed in the form of
Tremisen, or Ducalia, where throughout, the people were very large of person,
and stoutly armed, and waited on with fierce dogs. Then we travailed five
days, not meeting with any Town but Guelba, a place inconsiderable: nor durst
we lodge there for fear of some injury, but lay in our barks. As we passed
along, we enquired still of the Countrymen if they saw by the banks the bodies
of any drowned men, but in vain, for we could learn no tidings. The fifth day
we came to a fair Town called Essere, in the same Isle of Meroe, seated on a
soil covered with dates, oranges, and other fruit trees. They have likewise
Coloquintida, but make no account of it. We had sight of a wild Rhinocerot,
that was crossing a thick wood, that with breaking the boughs as he went made
the woods ring, afterward we saw the female follow him. The people of the
Country venture not to destroy them, for that he is so dangerous, and his
natural armor impenetrable.

From Essere we made toward Bigan, having taken in provision because we had
four days journey thither. The way is something dangerous by reason of certain
Cafies, assassines who murder the passengers, and live only upon pillage.
Tamatan.
There they call them Tammatans, because they are of the kingdom of Tamatas:
They can subsist three or four days together, without eating any more then a
little butter, and two dates a day: They are of a large size by a good span
taller than the ordinary, but very megre and lean, and they never lie down.

As we passed we saw vaste Countries but few inhabitants, except some
shepherds. But before we arrived at Bigan, we came to a great hamlet, called
Carfouran, where we went on shore to refresh and recreate a little: There we
bought a barrel of wine of honey, which barrel was made of a cane of one piece,
all but the ends. They have of these barrels that are wonderful large; toward
the West we saw a great field covered over with capers, of which they make
little account: we boiled a young calf, which they gave us, I think, for fear
we should do them some harm, seeing us go in company, and well appointed, and
every where we took passes of the Princes and Lords.

Nevertheless, when we came away we gave them some few dragmes, which are
little square pieces of silver, current all along Nile up into high- Egypt, and
are taken by weight. Thence we came at night to Bigan, and we neglected not as
soon as we landed, to go visit the Governor, whom they call the Basira; we
showed him the Negus's pasports, which with great ceremony in token of
reverence he laid upon his head, showed us great kindnesses, and invited us to
supper.

He sent us to our lodging four great horns of date-wine, exceeding strong and
searching; for drinking it without water one would think himself on fire, and I
believe it passes through some distillatory: We kept it to take in mornings in
the manner of strong-water. We returned the Governor some sweetmeats in
exchange, which were very acceptable, and he gave us besides certain birds
which are good meat, in Province we call them Fransons, with six turkeys, and
four white partridges. Departing from Bigan we came in one day as far as
Casima, directly over against the desert of Goran, which lies on the East and
South of it.

This was a day of great pleasure to us, passing still by Laurels and other
sorts of lovely and wholesome fruit trees, and meeting with many Towns and
hamlets, where they have horses in abundance: We saw there a great troop of
Munkies passing by a lake in the middle of a Plain, and a Gentleman fishing
with Hawks, which took great store of good fish, and carried them to their
Master. The sight of this fishing retarded us above an hour, though we had
seen the like in several places in India. When the people saw we were delighted
with their sport, they brought us a good part of their fish, as Eels, Trouts,
Carps, and Barbels, and we returned them two fine horns excellently wrought,
full of Date wine. They walked by us upon the River Bank, and desired us we
would stay and drink with them, mean while one of them wrote a note to the Lord
of Casima, whereupon when we were arrived, he ordered us very noble
accommodation, sent us diverse sorts of fruits, and a dozen of rabbets black and
white; exceeding small, but of excellent taste. With great courtesy, he
offered us any thing we had use of, and on the morrow, he invited us to dinner
in his garden called the Motochon, which word is vulgar Greek, though used in
Nubia. This garden was made at the Princes charge with great art, full of
abundance of trees, graffed with several kinds one above another, which to the
eye is delightful to see several variety upon the same stock, as amongst others
two several sorts of figs. The like I have seen in the Isle of Chio, and at
Zaure, at the Convent of S. Francis, for there on the one side I have seen
fruit ripening, on the other side fruit decayed and rotten, out of which
corruption, certain knats take life, which immediately go and peck the others,
which makes them presently perish, which otherwise would endure for ever, an
admirable thing in nature, nevertheless most true. There were besides certain
trees which bear nuts as big as Estridge eggs, full of cotton, as fine as
silk.

There were other sorts of fruit which I never saw but there, and one amongst
the rest, leaved like the Siccamore, with fruit like the golden apple, but no
gall more bitter, and within five kernels as big as Almonds, the juice whereof
is sweet as sugar, betwixt the shell and the nut there grows a thick skin of
Carnation color, which taken before it be thoroughly ripe, they preserve with
Date-vinegar, Lacque sanguine color for Painters.
and makes an excellent sweet meat, which they present to the King as a great
curiosity. Another tree bears of the finest sort of Lacque for Painters. Also
they sow here Orient Auil or Indico, an herb that makes a dye of great price;
whereof they make great traffic, and profit.

Besides, they have another grain from which they draw an excellent oil,
beyond that of Cinnamon, which they use for restoration of the spirits. Then
they have a tree like a Pomegarnat, which bears a most sovereign balm, as I
have had the experience: for I brought one of these nuts from thence, which I
had of this Governor in truck for a Turquese, wherewith I did great cures
amongst my friends.

I should never conclude if I should write but half the curiosities of this
garden, where there is a collection of all the Oriental singularities: But that
which seemed of all most rare and artificial, was two hands of transparent
Marble at the Fortal, which held a bow bent; when any one knocked at the gate,
the hands discharged arrows upon them, but the arrows had no piles, and the
danger was not great: all this done by springs dexterously set on work. The
beauty and excellence of this garden stayed us two whole days here in
contemplation of the rarities.

In fine, we took our leave of this worthy Lord, whom they called Lebetera, and
bent our course for Misan, through which we were to enter Nubia, a kingdom
which confronts the Deserts of Goran, Egypt, Ganga, and Borno, the bounds of
Priest John's Empire, which confines on that side on Nubia and Egypt.

We crossed many countries in a short space, because Nile is more rapid and
swift here then in any other part, for having reunited all his waters, and
meeting sometimes with open plain countries, where he spreads himself at
length and breadth, sometimes with rocks and mountains, which gird and
straighten him, he cannot so properly be said to glide or run, as to
precipitate himself headlong, with falls that make such noise, it deafens the
people round about. There are the Cataracts so celebrated in antiquities, the
great and the less, not far above the ancient Towns, Elephantina, and Siena,
or Asna.

CHAP. XVIII. A prodigious History of a young Abissin Prince, by name Joel, by
enchantment transformed into an Ape.
AS we passed along Nile in our Bark, entertaining the day with various
discourses, one showed me a book of many prodigious histories, and amongst
others, this of Prince Joel, of whom I had heretofore heard at Pegu, where the
story is represented in a Tapistry of the Kings, after this manner. In Janamira
a Province of Ethiopia, there lived a Prince called Rostan Sofar, otherwise
Fafarin, who by a first wife had a son named Alarin Sofar, but usually called
Joel; and by a second wife two, Aman Sofar and another whose name I know not.
Not long before his death, he made his will, and left to Joel his eldest son,
his principial dominion, and all his treasure; betwixt the other two, he
divided the rest of his dominions. The guardian-ship of young Joel, he
committed to a friend, to whom he discovered the place where the greatest part
of his treasure lay hid, which he had enclosed in a stone that was laid in the
bowels of a wall. Three days after his decease, this friend dies with grief,
so as the treasure, together with Joels person, were left in the power of
Rostans widow, Joels stepmother: who, ambitious the succession should come to
her own children, out of a frantic malice, resolved to send Joel upon a
specious pretense, far enough from his Palace, to a sister of hers, a most
powerful Magician, who to raze out all remembrance of him, should by virtue of
charms, transform him to an Ape, giving out that he was lost, and could by no
means be heard of. The same we read in the History of Ganfredi.
They say the work was executed after this manner. This Sorceresse was blind,
but on the Sabbath that darkness left her, and she could see as others do: a:
On a Sabbath day she took Joel with her to sacrifice to Satan, and do him such
homage, as his professed servants use to do. But he refusing to perpetrate such
abominable duties to the Prince of darkness, she resolved to dispatch him by
murder; but again moved to compassion by the gracious sweetness in his face,
she changed her design. She composed a Bath wherein she put him, and by power
of her inchantmens, transformed him to an exceeding pretty, and tractable Ape,
superinducing an Apes skin over his humane shape, so abstracting his reason and
sense, that little more remained in him then was proportionable to a mere
sensual creature, notwithstanding which a knowledge was something more perfect,
though he had not the use of articulate speech, and with a mavelous address
to render those little services to them of the family, who cherished him, and
fancied him exceedingly.

The deplorable Prince lived diverse years in this condition, at length he made
his escape into the woods, where he suffered great acerbities, and often
perplexed with illusions of the devil, but was still assisted by an
extraordinary flame of grace, and the vigilance of his guardian Angel, who for
his consolation appeared to him sometimes in the form of a dove, sometimes in
some other shapes of like quality. Mean while, it being generally believed Joel
was dead, Aman Sofar his younger brother had possession of his fathers estate,
and enjoyed those wide dominions without contradiction. Upon a time as he
progressed with a magnificent train toward the Province of Dafila; he sat
down to refresh himself under a shade, and caused the green bank of a cool
fountain to be covered for his table, the pretty Ape being at hand, presented
himself before his brother, and addressing himself upright upon his feet, by
mute expressions seemed to beg some bread. Aman observing the quaintness of
his dapper guest, with a neat white flaxen beard, soft as silk, and his-body
powdered with Orange colored tufts, bad some bread and meat should be given
him on a Plate, which before he would touch, he went and washed his hands at
the waste of the well. Aman was so taken with these Mimick civilities, that
he gave him drink in his own cup of gold, and entertained him as one of his
train, taking him along upon one of his Elephants, It Is scarce imaginable how
diligent and officious this poor creature was in their voyage, hunting for
water for them, and climbing trees to get them fruits; but 'tvvas observed he
would be Cup Bearer to none but his brother.

Aman had married a Lady of high Descent, and besides had a Concubine whose
name was Amer, and by both had many children. Joel being arrived at Court,
failed not to go kiss the hands of all his little nephews, and Neices, and of
his brothers lawful consort, which he did with so courtly a grace, that Aman
laughing, said, you are very imperfect in your courtship to Ladies, if you
complement the children, and forget the mother, upon which hint he immediately
tendered the like respects to the Concubine, he had before performed to the
wife. In a word, there was not the least offense of bruitishnesse to be
observed in the pretty Alsinge, for so they named this little Ape, insomuch
that he himself in imitation of people would pare his nails; would still his
Nephews when they cried with plums, and fruit he would have in a corner, did
all kind of offices for his brother and sister, except such as were sordid and
inferior, which he left for inferior Officers.

In Court there lived a Lady of Quality, widow to the aforementioned Tutor of
Joel, with a most beautiful daughter of thirteen or fourteen years of Age
called Eugenia, or as others say Ozania, who falling sick, entreated her mother
she would desire the Ape of Prince Aman, to be some exhilaration to her with
his blandishments he used to show her when she came to Court to visit the
Princess, which was easily granted. The Ape being brought, as he had been some
learned Physician, immediately found the nature of her disease, and presently
applied himself to make her merry: which divertisement betrayed her into the
hands of sleep, then he stepped back to the Palace to communicate himself, and
play with his little kinsmen, and returned not long after to visit the sick
Lady newly waked, stroaking her with his little hands, which had something I
know not what of finer make then other creatures of the same Species, as I my
self observed in the figure I saw at Pegu. By little and little, so firm a
friendship grew betwixt Joel and Eugenia, that they could not be asunder,
especially the Lady who was astonished to reflect, she should have so strong a
passion for an Ape, without knowledge of any cause or ground: That caused her
greatest admiration was, that one day paring her nayls, she would needs pare
the Alsinges also, and viewing them attentively, she observed some part of them
to be covered with a thin skin like that of his arms, which were better
shaped, and more solid then his fellows. This put her often into musings, till
sleeping on a night in a vision, she be held a venerable Matron covered with a
white veil, who spoke thus. Ozania my daughter, wherefore protract ye to
relieve my son Joel, who is the selfsame Ape you so tenderly cherish,
reduced to the deplorable estate you see him, by the infernal cruelty of a
Stepmother.

But as it pleased the Creator of all things to suffer this transformation,
and in this form to preserve him to this hour; since it is Heavens Decree he
shall one day be your husband, I recommend him to you. Fail not to soak him in
a bath of those herbs I have properly collected for him, and laid them in such
a place (she told her where) and you shall see his natural humane form restored
him, and he shall be your Spouse, as I have already commanded him, having
appeared to him in the same posture and habit you now behold me. And that you
may have no suspect of these my words, as soon as you awake, go to such a place
of your garden, where you shall find a stone, which you shall break, and within
you shall find a key of Treasure, my husband put into your Fathers hands to
keep for Joel. In unity may you both live long: And with these words she
embraced and vanished. The Lady affrighted wakes, and with a sudden shreek
wakes her mother, who suddenly ran to know the matter, to whom Eugenia
relating her apparition, the Mother soon called Prince Joel to remembrance, how
about his nine or ten years of age, by the malice of his Mother-in-law, he was
lost, no one knew how. Hereupon they both embraced the Ape Joel, who had
received the same vision, and was as 'twere out of countenance to be so
indulged by these Ladies, to whose hands he paid his kisses, but chiefly to his
dear and best affected Eugenia.

Together they went then to council what was to be done in this conjuncture,
that they might not be liable to the indignation of Prince Aman Sophar. The
Mother thought best, before he reassumed his shape by virtue of the intended
Bath, that he should return to his brother, and after some days of himself get
away, and then they would advise of what was to follow; But in the first place
they fetched the stone in the garden, and putting it in a strong fire, as they
were directed by the vision, it burst, and they found a key, and descending
three steps in a little Arch, they found a door, which they opened with the
key, and found a great iron chest, with a Mass of Jewels, and Treasure, with
some notes of what Joels Father desired after his decease. This done, Ozania's
mother led back the Ape to Aman, acknowledging her obligation, for that the Ape
had recovered her daughter. Joel then stayed some days at Court performing his
wonted offices, and application, and as he went one day to gather some fruit
for the children, the peevish Gardener threw a stone at his face, which fetched
some little blood: upon this hurt he presently run away, and was seen no more
at Court, for which all were much troubled; Aman caused him to be sought for,
but they could find him no where, not with Ozania her self. This while the Ape
lay close in a bush, til at night he stole secretly to the Ladies house to his
fair Mistress, who suffered torments for him. There he found the bath in
readiness, and being in it 'twas an admiration to behold how the skin which
masked him over, no sooner felt the heat of the water and virtue of the herbs,
but it dissolved to nothing like a mist, chased by the wind, or dissipated by
the Sun.

They then clothed the Prince in splendid and rich apparel, and the Ladies
entertained and feasted him with an excess of joy, which he embraced with an
affectionate tenderness, all three weeping for joy of so sudden and unhop'd
for a blessing.

The joy was generally through the house, they to whom the secret was
undiscovered, supposed him to be some young Lord, kinsman to the Lady who
called him Nephew. Then they entered into consultation what course was best, but
Prince Joel in the first place, would assure his faith to fair Ozania, to whom
he promised solemn Matrimony in fit time and place. After this they perused
seriously the Testament of Prince Rostan Sofar, father to Joel, who in
preference of Joel, had disposed him all his treasure, and the dominion of
Chasubir. To his second Son he had given the Seniory of Sanat, and other
Territories, with other subsequent disposals.

All this they found signed and ratified by their Sovereign Lord and Emperor,
the Grand Negus, for they found diverse letters, many rich presents, amongst
which a cimeter with curious hangers. Now Christians of the Ethiopian rites,
they celebrate the marriage 'twixt Joel and Eugenia in the open Church. And
after some days of felicity, they were of advice, that before he discovered
himself to Aman Sofar his best way would be to make his address to the
Emperor of the Abissins, that by his authority he might have restitution made
him of the estate and treasure left him by the last will and disposition of his
Father, possessed for so long time by his Brother.

In prosecution of this resolve, he took his voyage in an ample and magnificent
equipage, and came to Barra, where the Court then lay, then having erected his
Pavillions he advanced to the Palace gate, and having caused the trumpets sound
according to custom, two principal Noblemen conducted him to the Princes
presence, where placed on his knees, in few words he delivered the story of his
fortunes.

The Emperor with extreme wonder called him to remembrance, how he was lost in
his youth, and that rumor went, his Mother-in-law had caused him to be
strangled and cast into a River; how she had been called to Court, to answer
these accusations, and could hardly justify her self.

Prince Joel brought most rich Presents to his Majesty, in a vessel of gold,
amongst the rest, a delicate Clock with weights to it, a most rich collar with
a stone inchased, of admirable virtue to stanch blood, as was experienced upon
a goat, which they wounded in three several places, and not a drop of blood
issued. The Emperor received Joel and his Presents with indulgements, and
desired his Lady who was come in company with him should visit the Queen, who
received her with exceeding kindnesses. The Emperor was seated on a Throne,
under a Canopy, with large curtains, called there a Mandilate.

Princess Ozania presented the Queen with chains of corrall, a cross of rich
Rubies, a Crystal looking-glass, set in a fine Emerald, and other beautiful
presents out of the Treasury of Joels father.

The customary Ceremonies of the presents performed, the Emperor at the
request of Joel, dispatched a Calsena, to summon Aman Sofar to come answer the
matter at Court, which strangely amazed him, both for the demand and
re-appearance of his brother Joel, whom he thought dead long before.

Notwithstanding to Court he came with all diligence, and found the Negus
removed many days journey from the place, where Joel found him at first, for
the Court resides not above three days in one place, by reason of the numerous
train which follows the Prince, and at that time was in the Province of
Gianamora, a Country of Mahometans, who were in rebellion for their imposts or
customs. As Soon as Aman arrived, he pitched his Tents, and before he presented
himself to the Emperor, enquired for Joels quarter, who having intelligence of
his arrival, though the elder Brother prevented him with a visit, and knew him
exactly, whereas the other had not of him the least knowledge: Nevertheless at
first sight, as right blood cannot dissemble, he saw his Fathers face in
Joel's, and his heart melting, he fell at his knees, and wept. Joel raised him
up, kissed him, and with mutual embraces gave demonstration of joy and
affection, then supped together.

Supper ended, Aman with exemplar deference assured his Brother he ambitioned
not to detain any thing from him that appertained to him, but preferring his
love before all worldly wealth, since by divine providence he was returned,
after so long an absence, wherein all gave him lost, with a free heart he
surrendered all he possessed into his hands, beseeching he would have
consideration on him and his children.

Joel embraced him upon the same, and told him he would share so with him, that
he should rest content, and he desired to live with him in peace and amity:
Then showed him his Fathers Testament, which was to regulate them both,
wherewith Aman was exceedingly satisfied, only he had a little regret for his
Brothers matching with Ozania as inferior to his quality, beside that he had
an opinion she used some surprizall or art to gain his brother; for the present
nevertheless he dissembled it, especially upon Joels relating the history of
his life and transformation, and recovery of his form, manifesting the
obligation he had to this good Lady was so great, he could do no less than
marry her daughter.

Hereupon they resolved to go together to the Palace, through the middle of the
Army or Court, which is ranked in Pavillions, as a fair strong Town in streets
and public places.

Then with accustomed ceremony they tendered their reverence to the Emperor,
to whom they signified the agreement and amicable accommodation betwixt them,
wherewith he was exceedingly pleased; and looking on the sword by Joels side,
he told him he knew it to be the sword he heretofore sent his Father, and if he
would employ it in his service, he should lose neither time nor labor. Then he
called for two battle-axes for horsemen of an excellent temper, and perfection,
enriched with precious stones, in scabbards of silver guilt, then drawing them
out, told them he desired they would both keep them in remembrance of him, and
that at the Palace gate stood two horses ready sadled, which he gave them, and
exhorted them to live in peace and fraternall love. The Negus gave moreover to
Joel, in requital of his Presents, two Elephants loaded with Matirals, a kind
of silver money not stamped in Ethiopia, for there they make no sort of coin:
one of which Joel gave to his brother, together with the burden. Likewise the
Empress when Ozania or Eugenia came to receive her dismission, presented her a
chain of fair pearls, of an exceeding size, and a pair of ear-pendants, of
rubies which to the eye were two coals of fire.

Having parted with the Court they sent all their baggage by land, to return
the same way they came, and went themselves to Vangot, and thence upon Zambre,
cut their voyage shorter by the half.

At their arrival Joel was welcomed with the joy and acclamations of all the
Country, and Aman surrendered into his hands all that he possessed of his till
that time, and retired to those Seniories that were allotted him: And Joel had
by Ozania two sons, Gabriel and Aman, who succeeded after his death.

Here ye have the Tragie-Comedie, I mean the deplorable and afterward happy
adventures of Prince Joel, who during his Apes life suffered all sorts of
miseries, seeking his Victuals with a thousand hazards and troubles, often
brought to events the last, with hunger, thirst, cold and heat, wandering
through forests and deserts, often exposed to the malice of weather, but more
to the malice of men, who proclaim a most mortal war against these creatures,
for spoiling gardens, pillaging their trees before the fruit be ripe, and
committing many outrages on their poultry, connies, and domestic fowl, for
which cause they pursue them with stones, bows, and guns: So as he was forced
to use his best providence and dexterity to evade these inconveniences: and
told his Mother-in-law Isania, he was often constrained to live on rats, moles,
mice, snakes, worms, and other vermin, to prevent dying for hunger.

Isania enjoying now a perfect tranquillity, took great delight to hear the
particulars of the afflicted life her Son led during his transformation, and
captivity. This life being properly a most cruel slavery, when Magicians shall
have power to transform a humane body, contrary to his consent and will. And
indeed he affirmed, it often brought him into strange despairs, even to cast
himself from some precipice. So as one day being in this furious resolution,
another huge black Ape came to him, and leading him to a dark deep well,
persuaded him to leap into it, but terrified with the vacuity and darkness, he
retired; then a pure white bird came to him, who freed him from this
temptation, and led him to a place where he found a pocket full of bread to
satisfy his hunger. Again he related, how following on a time a beast he saw
at some distance, it brought him at length to an assembly of people of all
sexes and ages, dancing to music with their faces outward: amongst the rest
he saw a nurse of his, who bestowed a garment on him, for then he conceived he
was returned to his pristine shape of man. That in the midst of all this he saw
a Bear to whom all these people made adoration, and that the nurse persuaded
him to do the like, assuring him this Lord was infinitely powerful, and could
restore him to his estate and dominions, and give him all sorts of content and
pleasure, upon condition he would do him homage as others did. But as a
Christian, he had a horror of it.

In apprehension he saw Tables brought in, and covered with all sorts of
dainties, whereof they all eat, and he amongst the rest, but thought the meat
very ill dressed, and of an unsavory taste. In the end all vanished, and he
staid behind like an Ape as before, and in a vast solitude, whence he had much
difficulty to get forth.

Telling this story, dame Isania much admired to hear that Joels nurse who was
her kinswoman should frequent Magicians Sabbaths, and resolved to search the
truth. Whereupon they went to visit her, for she lived not far off, and found
'twas truth, as the poor wretch confessed her self; and Joel was of such
abilities, that by argument and eloquence, he reduced her to the right way,
leaving that life of abomination, and went to S. Mary of Sion, one of the most
celebrated Churches of Ethiopia, the chief residence of their Abuma or
Patriarch, of whom with penance and contrition, she received absolution, and
was exorcised together with a son of hers, whom she had seduced to this
accursed sodality.

Her neighbors add, that there were about her certain marks where her flesh
was insensible of pinching or piercing, as we report of our witches here, which
shows the devil is every where the same. In sum, their memorials in
particular relate this story of Joel for a truth, which I had also by relation
from the people.

It Is no small difficulty, how these transformations can be made by the work of
the devil; for though sacred history mention the like of the Babylonian
Emperor, that was done by the plenipotentiary power of the Almighty, and if
the devil do the like, See if this may be, in S Aug. l. 18. c. 18. De civitate
Dei.
it is but by mere illusion, or by applying Actives to Passives, and this no
further then he has permission from his sovereign Master, who executes his
just and secret judgments, how, and when he pleases.

We have plenty of examples both ancient and modern of Anthropolychi, or men
turned to Wolves, whether really, or in appearance only by distracted fancies,
which doubtless is the ordinary way Magicians transform themselves into
several sorts of beasts: and these Anthropolychi have been known to come into
Villages, and diverse women and children have been murdered by them, and that
their teeth were short like a man's. I my self was present, when my associate
Cassis apprehended himself transformed to an horse at Transiana.

In reference to what I have said, I remember at the great Caire, I saw a
Jugler or Magician rather, by name Harafit, who had an Ass would do strange
and supernatural feats, and many opinion'd 'twas a young man so changed to get
money, which they call Carabit, and the beast understood both the word and the
matter very well.

For my part I thought him to be some reasonable creature, or at least some
beast possessed and agitated by a Demon; for amongst other things he had
judgment to distinguish the fairest woman in the company, though they go all
as 'twere masked and covered with an Huke that hides their face, and a thousand
other tricks, far beyond what I saw of the famous horse Morace at Paris, long
ago.

Some would go further, and have it to be the Magicians own proper son: so as
the Clark of our ship, another, and my self, out of curiosity would needs go
see this Mountebank at his station at Brillac, on the other side Nile; where
having wound him up with good cheer, and given him a handsome piece of money to
unlock his secret, the Clark told him if he would transform a young Grecian
they had redeemed out of slavery, they would give him an hundred Sequins, for
they had a design to make a benefit by selling him to the King of France,
whereto he consented, and promised to effect it, so that he who was to own the
Ass and the Grecian both, would renounce their Faith: and hereupon showed him
seven Figures for that purpose, in every of which, there was one name of these
seven principal Demons, and a book wherein there were most funestous and
execrable things. But with horror we were satisfied with the discovery of so
much wickedness, and left him.

As concerning the Androlychi, I have not heard of any thing so strange, as
that the Governor of Bagaris related one day to me. He told me, that going
with some of his company from Lionac to Montpelier, they overtook an old man
with a sack on his shoulders, going a great pace toward the same town, a
Gentleman of the company out of charity told him, if he would, one of his
servants to ease him, should carry his burden for him, at first he seemed
unwilling to be troublesome, but at length accepted the offer, and a servant of
the Commanders chamber called Nicholas took the burden, and being late, every
one doubled his pace, that they might get in in good time, telling the good old
man, they would go before, and he should find them at the White-horse. The
servant of the Chamber coming in with the first, had a curiosity to see what
was in the sack, where he found a Wolfs skin, so properly accommodated for the
purpose, that he had a strong fancy to disguise himself in it: whereupon he
got it on his back, and put his head within the headpiece of the skin, as
'twere to show his Master a Maskarade, but immediately a fury seized him, that
in the Hall where they supped, he made strait to the company at table, and
falling on them with teeth and nails, made a dangerous rude havoc, and hurt
two or three of them, so as the servants and others fled to their swords, and
so plied the Wolf with wounds, that they laid him on the ground, and hurt in
several places. But as they looked upon him, they were amazed when they saw
under the skin a poor youth wallowing in blood. They were fain to lay him
presently on a bed, taking order for his wounds and hurts, whereof he was
covered; and was long before he could be cured: but this cured him of the like
curiosity against another time. The company by this means had but a bad
seasoned supper, and many of them were sick either of hurt or apprehension. For
the old man Wolf, 'twas not known what became of him, but it is probable, that
hearing of this tydie accident, he was cautious to appear.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Desert Beniermi, and the Towns Dangala, Machida, Georgia,
etc.
IN this Navigation, which I have interrupted for this prodigigious story, we
met with a countryman upon a Mare, who went aboard a Bark, to cross the river
to the Province of Dafila: but the man never observed a Colt that followed him,
and leapt into the water to come after his damme, which the man seeing, he
besought the Pilot to turn back and take him in, but the Pilot would not be
persuaded, so as he was constrained to leap into the water himself to save the
Colt: But had not we by good fortune been at hand to help him, the poor man and
his Colt had perished together, the violence of the water carrying them both
away. Being in safety, he was so amazed and out of breath, that he was not able
to speak us thanks: But he told us afterward his Master made him pay for the
Colt, because he had not tied him fast.

After this, for four long hours we cut through a Desert, they call Beniermi,
where we saw several kinds of wild beasts; amongst the rest two Lions lying in
a shade, with their muzzles all bloody; they stirred not at all at the sight of
us, though some were afraid, they would have leapt into the Bark upon us. But
others better experienced, assured us no, except they were disturbed; for the
noble and generous nature of the beast, who are only dangerous to those that
hurt them. Joining upon these deserts, we saw fair tilled fields, some sowed
with Lupines and Beans, others with sugar Canes.

Being come to Misen we rested there one day, then about two miles further we
had sight of Cafa a gentile town, and passing further into the country, we went
on shore at a gallant town on the coast of Nubia, they call Hami, to take in
Melons and Potatoes, the best of the world.

And from thence steered toward Dangala a very good town; but bearing so much
upon the land, our Almadie was so fast gravelled, we were forced to unload our
goods, which hindered us at least two hours, and made us lie at Bisen, four
leagues short of Dangala, whither we went on the morrow in the company of
continual rain, thunder, and lightenings: which was the cause we could not go
on the other side of Nile, to see Dafila the chief town of the Province of the
same denomination, where one of the gallantest, and most valiant Princes of the
Negusian Empire reigns.

Touching Dangala, it is subject to Barnagus, who at first had it in exchange
for Cassina, and since has both by help of money. It Is in Nubia the opposite
of the Province of Dafila, which extends as far as Danfila. Thence in five
days we came to Mara, a neat town, opposite to the Province of Ganfila, on the
other side of Nile. The country is well peopled, and plentiful of all
commodities; amongst the rest there is a mine of the finest silver. Thence in
two days to Bergan, and in one more to Tiruti, a town abounding in all things,
but very dirty. On the other side of Nile is Gourage in the kingdom of Tamatas.
Then in two days seventeen leagues to Daerue, where there is a mine of Lead
and Antimony, whereof they make great profit, sending their metals every
where, they mix brass in their money and call it Cazec.

We had the pleasure there to see a moral representation of the Magdabens
conversion, which was full of delight and contemplation. Thence we had a desire
to walk under the shades to Machida, a town they will have to be built by the
Queen of Saba, who was so called; and they told us we should see in the Church
a very antique statue of this Queen; but being arrived, we saw nothing but the
ruins of a town, which nevertheless showed, that in times past they had been
something of noble. For there we saw the ruins of a Castle, which we must
needs judge to have been a place of great strength, for that all the avenues
were of difficult access. The day following we went to Fuingi or Fungi, and
thence in four days to Rifa, then to Sania, Asmona, Canan, Asna, where there
is a Castle called Asiar. Some will have it, that the ancient, and so much
renowned town of Siena, was there situated directly under the Tropic on this
side. Thence in four days to Banaa; and on the other sidetowards the red sea
is Georgian, a town inhabited by Georgian Christians, who have license with
flying banners from the Turk, to visit the Sepulcher at Jerusalem, without
paying Toles, or Imposts, as others do. They recount a miracle upon these
people, when they were once persecuted by an Infidel King, Almighty God
covered the enemies with a continual darkness, whereby they were delivered:
upon which subject the Arabian great Poet and Historian, wrote some verses. But
I have heard others say, it is the same that happened to the country of
Georgiane or Albania in Asia the greater, in a part thereof called Bonhainson,
where the Christians were pursued by Saure King of Persia a Mohammedan, and
being reduced to save themselves by flight, he environed them with his forces,
in which extremities they had recourse to their prayers, and an obscurity came
over the King and all his, whereby the Christians had means to save themselves.
Some say that a darkness ever since continued in that part of the country,
and that no man dare come upon the ground, and that the cries of men, and
neighing of horses are continually to be heard, without knowing any ground for
it.

Having staid one day in the Town of Georgian, or Georgia, on the other side,
we passed in two days to the town of Erir, thence to Cosia, then repassing
Nile we came to Pemin, the first Town of high- Egypt: Here they are all Moors,
but yet people of conscience, and very courteous to us. Thence we went to
complement the Sultan, or Governor of the Town of Almona, and to have his
pass, because we were to enter into a Country all Infidels, and subject to
the Grand Sinior. The Sultan favored us with many testimonies of affection,
and sent by a Frigot to the other side of Nile, to a garden in the Town of Tima
for fruit for us, amongst others Peaches of extraordinary size without stones,
but not so sweet nor good as ours in Europe.

Thence in two days we came to Grandole, a very Mercantile Town, and in two
days more to Manucat, a great Town of about a thousand fires; but about a
league from thence there is one more large and fair, called Bazuelle, or
Bazielle, which was heretofore esteemed the Suburbs of Caire. Here are the most
sumptuous Mosquees of all Egypt, which they call Gemit Azore, See Leon. Afr. l.
8.
or Hamore, where the Mahometans go to render their vows, with diverse
offerings, and hold this Mosquee was erected in the honor of a holy woman,
called Nacisse, kinswoman to the false Prophet Mahomet, people of a most
austere life: within they give entertainment to diverse sorts of Marabuts, or
hermites, who are there to do penance. They recount many fabulous miracles,
amongst others, one of the resurrection of a dead person, pretended in the time
of Soudan Saladin, who had a servant called Aliaze, married to a fair and rich
young maid, but she behaved her self so ill toward him, that her love was
fixed on another object, wherefore in despair he complained to the Cherif, or
Priest of the Mosquee. This Cherif bade him be of comfort, and advised him for
some days to conceal himself, to see how his wife would take it.

In the mean while the Cherif visited his wife, and enquired most earnestly of
her husband, telling her if he were dead or lost, through her occasion, she was
damned without hope: being troubled hereat, she told him she had not seen him
of fifteen or sixteen days, and that she was much afflicted for his absence,
but that she would make a vow to God and the Prophet, if she could have him
again she would be more dutiful to him. At the same time, by fortune, there
was taken up the body of a young man who was drowned in Nile, so disfigured
that he could not be known. The Cherif taking this opportunity, and having
conferred with her husband, they concluded to take his body, and clothing it
in a suit of his, and putting his ring on his finger, lay him in the Mosquee,
covered with a cloth, and say 'twas the corpse of this woman's husband, which was
done, and the woman hearing the news went presently, and knowing the clothes
and the ring, fell into a most passionate lamentation, whereupon the Priest to
comfort her told her, that on condition she would make a 9. days visit in the
Mosquee, the most blessed Prophet would restore her husband to life, and told
her something of a certain vision he had, while he said the office of the dead.
In brief, with subtlety and authority he so prevailed with her, that in the
morning she went to the Mosquee to make her prayers and sacrifice, to this
purpose, upon the Tomb where the Cherif the night before had hidden her
husband; and then the egregious Priest pronounced his conjurations over the
dead, that in the name of the great God, their Prophet and Saint, he should
rise and comfort his disconsolate relict: which was no sooner said, but the
good fellow began to stir, and cried out, behold I am here: then the Cherif
rejoicing opened the monument, and out marches the husband, who embraced his
wife, overcome with joy for so great a miracle, which was blown immediately
through the world, and ever since this Mosquee has been devoutly frequented
where every one makes their vows, to obtain their wishes: and these are the
goodly miracles of Mahomet.

CHAP. XX. Of Grand Caire, of Balm of Egypt, of Nile, of Crocodiles, and the
particulars of Egypt.
HAving had a view of Bazuelle, and the stately Mosquee, which in perfection of
architecture is not notwithstanding to be compared with our Churches of the
better structure, we came in four hours to the great Caire. First we arrived at
Bebelot, or Bebelloch, which is but a Borough or Suburbs of 20000. fires; then
one league further, to another called James Talon, or Gemeth Tailon; thence to
another called Garafa, or Charafa, joining upon the Grand Caire, and at length
to the people of Bebzuailac, or Bulac.

This great Town treads upon the ruins of the ancient Babylon and Memphis, the
residence first of the Pharoes kings of Egypt, then of the first Saracine
Emperors, and the last Soudans and Califes of Babylon of Caire, distinct from
the Babylon of Chaldea, who in our histories are called the Soudans, and
Califes of Balda, or of Baudas, or Bandas, the same as Bagded.

The Town of Caire, or Alcayr, writes six hundred years erection, the first
stone laid by a slave of Calife Elcaine, by name Gehoar, or Chetiq, where the
Califes of Egypt fixed their siege, whilst they maintained another at Bagded,
and one at Cairoan, a hundred miles from Thunis. This Town having been long
under the Soudans, was as at last, in the year 1517. taken by the Turks, who
extirpated the Empire of the Mamelues. It Is seated upon a good place of the
Nile, and known by four principal divisions. One stands upon a rising or
eminent place, the other along the Nile more low, where some say Memphis was
heretofore, and there Nile composes a sweet Isle full of lovely gardens. This
part may be of eighty or ninety thousand fires, inhabited by the wealthiest
merchants. About two miles from thence there is another part, of little less
extent, by the Inhabitants called Mubacar. Next is the ancient Town, which the
Inhabitants call Bezuela, whereof we spoke before, where there is magnificent
and stately edifices, and Mosquees, and amongst others one very fair hospital.
This part consists of about twenty thousand fires, stretching it self about
half a league toward the West, toward the South touches the Palace of the
Sultan, or Bascha, and toward the North a little Suburb which they call
Bebesor, which runs bending toward the East, to another of like greatness,
Jemet Taulon, the name of the Soudan who founded it.

In this part there is a spacious Palace, and a sumptuous College well
founded, whither they resort from all parts to study the sciences. About two
miles from thence, there is another well built part Carafa. The ancient Town
Bezuela, or Bazieles, otherwise called Mifuletif, or Mifruletif, is that where
the famous Sepulcher of their pretended St. Nassisse, the neice of Mahomet by
his son in law Haly, stands.

On this side lies the garden which bears the plant of the true Balm, so much
renowned there, which they call Almatria, Truebalm Pe Mar. in his Lega. babil.
l. 3. who says it is in the year 1502 this plant was lost.
and Christians Materea. This plant has a leaf like Lentisk, or Mastick tree,
which they prune every year as a vine, as a Gardener told me, who kept it, it is
but small, and there is but little of it.

Ethiopians say the Queen of Saba carried this plant to Solomon who caused it
to be set in the gardens of Jericho, and afterward was transplanted to this
place by the Sarazins; but others say that 'twas first brought from Arabia the
happy, where all the balm that grows there at this day, is of like virtue and
quality.

About the end of May they slit the bark, not with iron, but something else,
and the liquor distills out, which they receive in a glass. They add that
this plant will prosper with none but Christians, and that it dies in the hands
of Infidels.

In some places of the West Indies, in Nova Hispania, See Monardes.
and Carthagenia, there is some of no less esteem than this of Egypt; it grows
in the middle of a fountain, which is like a draw-well. The Mahometans say when
the blessed virgin was in Egypt, she rested at this fountain, and here washed
the linnens of her child Jesus. A little on one side is an Island, with a fair
Palace, where the Bascha goes sometimes for recreation, it is called Michial.
Here lies the head of the Channel, or Aqueduct, on which there stands a
Column, to foreknow the fertility or sterility of the year, according to the
height of the inundation of Nile.

The Part of Caire which lies upon Nile is very large, called Boubacon, or
Bebesoe, and Boulac, here land the vessels which come from Rosete, or
Alexandria, and other parts.

In sum, this Town consists of many more Towns, or Buroughs, or Suburbs, full
of people, and I believe in this Town there are as many souls, as in all the
rest of Egypt throughout; and he had need of a good horse that would survey all
these habitations, in two, nay in three days.

The Basha's Palace is the same where the Soudans was, and that while the
Empire was in glory, was one of the most rich and magnificent in the Universe,
as a French Author describes it who was there in those times: There being many
Courts, every one with a guard, Porches, Galleries, and Columns of Martle,
guilt vaults, various-coloured pavements of Mosaic work, frets, carvings and
sculptures, pleasant large gardens, fountains, viviaries, bird-cages, and other
singularities: All sorts of rich movables, stones, gold and silver. The Calife
or Soudan had a throne of massy gold, and rarely was seen to any except
Ambassadors.

The Ladies for the greatest part are attired in white, with coats, and a mask
of the same color, a silk smock of diverse colors, a little bonnet on their
head, of some rich stuff, with a band or wreath about it, and over all a large
vest or huke, which covers the whole body.

Touching the Inundation of the River Nile, it advances moderately, not doing
any damage: and when it comes they make a general triumph; then they run at
the vest, a certain game of prize amongst them, and prepare ditches expressly to
receive the water, certain persons being substituted of purpose, who ascend
four or five days journey toward the Channel, to see if the waters flow with
vigor and violence, and thence return with poste-haste, and acquaint the Basha
to what degree; and when there is notice that it is arrived within half a days
journey, the Bascha with the whole Nobility mounts on horseback, clothed in
their apparel, with the robe of Mahomet, born by a Marabou, in great triumph
before them; and by the way, running the Mass, shooting with a Bow at a golden
apple upon the end of a Pike. First they ride three or four rings, then running
at high speed in a full career, they let fly at the apple, and he who does best
bears away the prize.

And so they solemnize the arrival of the flood, every one cleanses and
prepares their cesterns, to store up water for the whole year; for they have
neither draw-wells nor fountains, that ever I saw: and it never rains there,
only every evening there falls a dew, such as if one should sleep abroad, he
should be as wet, as if he came out of the River. The like is in Peru, where
they never have rain. But instead thereof, they are visited with a wind that
fannes and moystens.

The Paraguary, or the River de la Plata at Brazill, has the like inundations
as Nile, but with more violence and rapidity, and lodges full three months
upon the land it waters, whereas Nile comes quietly, and retires with the same
civility, not staying before any town above 15. or 20. days. They contrive to
build their houses upon hills, and rising grounds, to secure themselves from
waters and humidity: In the country, the houses for the greater part are built
of loom, of beast-dung, and earth, and there are some which have no other then
tents of strong cloth of a reddish color; but they who live near the silver
River by reason of the impetuous stream of the water which overturns, and
carries all before it, are constrained to forsake their houses, and for a time
betake themselves to their Canoes, where they lead the Ducks life, till the
flood retiring within its bounds, leaves their dwellings to their possession
again: But I am not certain if this happen by a constant annual course as in
Egypt. The custom of triumphs at the arrival of the inundation of Nile, we
find to have been amongst the ancient Egyptians, amongst others they
celebrated the great feast of Niloa toward the Summer-Solstice, holding the
River for a God, whom they worshipped under the names of Osiris and Orus,
giving him the appellations of the Savior of high Egypt, Father and Creator
of the lower, who watered and manured their soil. Now for the Crocodile, there
are great store in this River, as there are in many other places of the East
and West Indies, as I observed before.

The Indians call them Caymans, they have so lustful a greediness to
Mans-flesh, that they will venture for it with unspeakable outrage and vigor.
A man walking by the River side with a little child in his hand, a Crocodile
leaps suddenly upon him, and tore the boy out of his arms, not being able to
save him. If any one by chance fall in the water, there is an end of him,
therefore it is exceeding dangerous to refresh or bathe there without good
caution; the very boats loaded with people have often perished by them. These
creatures generally make clear work, their assaults being so forcible, that
from some they crop arms and legs, others they devour entirely: They hold a
fierce and rude war with the Tigars, it is a creature without tongue, moving
only the other chop, contrary to the nature of all other creatures; the
Egyptians made him a part of their Idolatry. Some observe that they were not
pernicious to the country hertofore, as they have been particularly since the
Mahometans usurped it. Again, some say the ^ountrey has been much the more
infested with these creatures, since a Governor of Egypt deprived them of a
leaden Crocodile placed by enchantment, like a Talisman, in a certain place.

From Caire down toward the sea, they are not so dangerous, as in the higher
Egypt. Besides Crocodiles, this River breeds Hipopotumes, or Sea-horser, with
diverse other Monsters and Fishes.

About four leagues from Caire, and one and a half off Nile, stand the famous
Pyramids of so prodigious a height, and admirable structure, erected heretofore
by the ancient Kings of Egypt, either for ostentation and monument of their
greatness and magnificence, or for custody of their treasure, or for sepulture
of their bodies. This structure is by so much the more stupendous, for that
the stones of such immensity and hardness were trasported so far with such
cost and pains, as some say from Arabia and Ethiopia: and these bulks not
reared to that height, with Cranes, Scaffolds, or other Engines as then not
known, but by Cavaliers, and Platforms of earth, by strength of arms, and
extremity of labor, as it is related of the wonderful edifice of Jugas, of
Perou at Cusio and other places. It Is not without wonder to be considered, that
the greatest of the three which, as they say, was erected by Chemmis King of
Egypt, with the employment of 360. thousand men's labor for twenty years
together, is at this day perfect and entire, though three thousand years since
the raising of it. They say on every side of the square near the Basis, it is
200. fathomes over, and 800. foot high; it is hollow, and within there are
walks, and a fair room where the Sepulcher may be. The other two are less and
Massy, one built by King Cophus, the other by Mycerine, or the Curtisan
Bhodope.

The bulk of these structures has put them in the number of the seven wonders
of the world, and some say the children of Israel were employed at the building
of these enormious Fabrics. There is yet to be seen some remainder of a
monster, wonderful both in form and quantity, which they call a Sphinx wrought
in Numidian or Serpentine marble extraordinary hard, with humane face, and the
body of a Lion, as the ancients represented this monster. There is yet left a
kind of Obeliske or Needle, the work likewise of the Ancients, which some
attribute to King Pheron, others to Philadelphe; Howsoever those great Obelisks
which are at this day at Rome, Hieroglyphics.
were brought from thence; as the Hieroglyphick letters engraved upon them
testify; for 'twas the holy and sacred Scripture of the ancient Egyptians.

A side off those Pyramids beyond Nile Eastward toward the red Sea, lies the
famous country called Ehebaida, and her deserts, where so many Christian
Hermits and Anchorites lead their lives, as S. Paul, S. Anthony, and others,
adorned heretofore with so many Towns, filled with religious communities, where
there were more Monasteries and Churches, then other houses, and no corner
where one might not hear day and night the Almighties praises. Amongst the rest
it is said of Oxininchus, that at the same time had in it ten thousand religious
men, and as many women, who with emulation kept a mavelous hospitality for
poor travelers and strangers. Here in Thebaida flourished heretofore the
famous town of Thebes, with a hundred Ports, nothing whereof remains but
ruins.

On the other side Westward lie the Deserts of Barea, toward Barbary and
Lybia, where was the celebrated Temple and Oracle of Ammon, visited by
Alexander the great. In brief, all Egypt is surrounded with Deserts, and Sands,
except on the Sea coast. For on the West they had deserts of fifteen days
over, on the East the Thebaidan deserts for three or four days up to the
Arabian Gulf: Then on the other side the red sea, the great desert as far as
Palestine, where the Israelites were forty years, of many days travail over.

From Caire to Delbequi, it is all Desert, where Mummy is found, Mummie.
or bodies dried in the Sand. Of it there is another sort, which is of embalmed
bodies found in ancient Sepulchers.

These Deserts are above 18. or 20. days over, and they who travail them, ride
upon Cammels in Wainscot cabbins for the great dust and heat, with small holes
for air and light, where they both eat and sleep. For there is no greater
danger then the winds in that place, bearing and removing mountains of sand
from one side to the other, under which Passengers are often overwhelmed, and
lost (as heretofore whole Armies have been) without the least possibility of
assistance to one another in the convoy, which sometimes consists of ten or
twelve thousand persons and more, every one striving to save himself, and go
with the greatest speed they can without stay night or day, there being no
possibility to know a track, though one should have passed a thousand times, by
reason of the continual variation of the sand, which lies to day in one manner,
to morrow in another; so as through this sea of sand they must use their Pilot
and compass, without hope of refreshment during the journey, only about
fifteen leagues from Delbegut, where a fair fountain proceeds from a
neighboring river, which is thought to be an arm of Nile, the water whereof is
warm like Niles, but something better. Afterward they must again pass over
Deserts and dangerous moveable mountains of sand, which put me in mind of the
gray Tents or Adonars; with the Moors of Fez and Morocca, which you shall see
in a numerous heap upon a field, and on the morrow no such thing, but removed
to another station: for so it is with these walking mountains day by day still
in motion, differing from a mountain of sand of excessive height; I saw since
near the Town of Lima or of Rois in Poru, which exalting to an extraordinary
height amongst many other hills, never alters or diminishes for any wind or
storm that can assault it; a thing much admired by all men, and for this the
Indians adore it as divine; but of this we shall with Gods leave speak in
another tract of a voyage to the West Indies. But returning to the sands of
Egypt, it is thence the greatest part of Mummy or flesh buried and roasted in the
sand is gotten, which the wind uncovering, the next passenger brings to town
for trade, it being very medicinable. Here you see a dead man is often more
serviceable to the living, then the living themselves; yet some approve not of
the physic: But howsoever embalmed flesh is preferred before it, for the
Aromatic drugs the Egyptians used for preservation of dead bodies, wherein
they were at great charge and study, whether for their hope of resurrection, or
for the opinion of some Philosophers, that souls should so long live after
departure, as the bodies remain entire and incorrupt: for which cause they
seasoned and embalmed them with Bitumen, Salt, Frankincense, Myrrh, and other
Aromaticks; and bodies thus embalmed and preserved for many ages, by the
Arabians are called Mummies. To proceed, the land of Egypt is highly renowned
for a very potent and wealthy kingdom, where some say heretofore have been
reckoned 20. thousand walled towns, to entertain the infinite multitude of
Inhabitants she had in those days: but now there remains but little of all
this. The first Kings of the world were their Rulers, from whom they derive
their lines of so many thousand fabulous years. Their first and kings were
called in the Scripture by the general name of Pharoes, then the Persians
became their Masters, afterward the Greeks, then at last the Romans, till the
Saracins got them under their Califes and Soudans, and the Turks for this last
age. The air is good and temperate, the soil fertile, and abounding in all
commodities, but so plentiful of corn, that 'twas held the Granary of Rome in
her chiefest glory: in medals of antiquity, Egypt was still figured with ears
of corn.

The country about Caire they call Sabida, heretofore Sais, and Egypt, taken
together Chibib, in Heibrew Mitfraim by the name of the son of Chus who first
possessed it, thence the Arabians at this day call it Mesre.

The region called Delta from the triangular form, is the fertile part of it,
because it is watered, and cut through by seven branches or arms of Nile; This
country is exceeding fertile throughout; but the rest from Caire to Ethiopia is
not so, but only along the Nile for three or four leagues on each side, where
the river flows, the rest is sandy, parched and waste, except some places where
the river comes in channels, which they say were heretofore the work of Joseph,
son of Jacob.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Town of Alexandria, the Isle of Malta, and the Authors
return to Marseils.
WE staid some days at Grand Caire, where in the advance of my voyage I staid
many months; but before I go away, I will tell you how we met there with a
brother of my companion Guillen Cassis, whom he had so basely abused at our
coming from Meca, as I said in another place, when he cheated him of seven
Cammels, under color to go to traffic in the red sea and Ethiopia, and we
passed into Arabia the happy, to Persia, the East Indies and Africa, where in
all we were forth in our travailes six years and a half. But as soon as he
perceived at a distance his brother Marat, he got slily into a company, that
his brother might not take notice of him; at length he passed by us, with a
fixed eye, but said nothing, no one thinking of him; for my part I knew him
not, yet me thought I had seen him before, till at last I called him to mind,
and told the whole story to our company, who condemned it for an unworthy
action. In fine, the good fellow by this means escaped a bad encounter.

Being departed from Grand Caire we went to embarke in our Almadies which staid
for us at Boulac, which is the Rendezvous of all Merchants, Christians, and
others, who are bound for Alexandria. Thence we came in a day and a half to
Auas, where we met with my friend who had made all speed for fear of his
brother. From Auas we came in a day and a half to Rousette, called by the
natives Raschill, a town by the ancients called Metilis, or Canapus, upon an
arm of Nile called Heraclettick, which Historians call Rexi. At Roussetta we
sold our Almadies, and embarked by night in a Germe, and the next day were in
Alexandria.

Alexandria is a town half ruinate, of little pleasure, Alexandria*
a most remarkable example of the inconstancy of worldly things; that this town
should now be brought to so lacerate a condition, that was for many ages one of
the most ample, fair, populous, rich, and flourishing towns of the world,
chiefly renowned for excellent and commodious situation, for her Founder
Alexander the great, for having been the Seat-royall of the Ptolomi^s, for her
so famous and frequented Haven, for her proud buildings; amongst the rest,
Pharoes tower, one of the wonders of the world, for her Academy renowned for
all Sciences, for being the mother of so many famous Philosophers, great
Doctors, and holy Patriarcks who kept the christian faith so long flourishing
in those parts, briefly for so many ornaments of art and nature, from which
glory she fell after she was taken with the rest of the country by the
Sarasins, and their third Calife Homar, so as after this consternation she
never recovered any thing of her pristine splendor. But she remains a good
Haven, and a good landing place for all Merchandises of the Levant and Indies,
where all Levantine Merchants, Africans, and Europians come to traffic.
Heretofore the Romans, afterward the Ptolemies made it the greatest Mart in
the world, by the means of the sea and Nile, drawing thither all sorts of
drugs, spices, and other Arabian commodities from India by the red sea, then by
land to Nile, and so to Alexandria. Since again under the Soudans this course
was continued, where the Venetians, and all Europians fetched their spices,
till the Portuguese found out another way as we said in another place.

I will say no more either of this town or Caire as places sufficiently
understood in these parts by the ample relations of diverse accurate travailers:
only I shall observe, that in this town when the Nile flows, they preserve
sweet water in their Cesterns, and make Channels to water their gardens. There
is resident a Consul for the French Nation, Le sieur de Rhode, was then the
person who showed us much kindness, and much admired our tedious and painful
peregrination. He had his wife there with him, by whom he had two twin
daughters, which for devotion he sent to take baptization at Jerusalem, and
twenty years after my own natural brother married one of these daughters called
Lucretia, by whom he had many children at Marsels. We traveled all Africa to
Alexandria, in eight months.

Having stayed some days in Alxandria, we departed for Tripoli in Suria,
without accomplishing my vow to go to Jerusalem, for which I had gone so much
ground, and there we went aboard the Christina of Marsels, and were five
months entire before we could arrive there, for that having touched upon
Malta, we stayed some time to see the sports of their Carnavalle, which stayed
us awhile. By the way it happened that the Sailors having rifled a little
vessel of Greek wine, drunk so freely, that one of them amongst the rest,
climbing the Mast to do his office, knowing his own condition tied himself for
fear of falling, and lay down in the scuttle, where he slept two days before
he waked. In the mean time, the others calling for him to come to dinner, and
not hearing any answer, they apprehended they had heard something fall into the
sea the night before, which made a great noise, and that 'twas the poor
Mariner, who was drowned in his drink, whereupon the Steward of the ship rung
the bell thrice; then, as the custom is, threw a firebrand into the sea, and
said aloud, Gentlemen Mariners, pray to God for the soul of poor Veran (that
was his name) because through Gods mercy, he rests with the souls of the
faithful. Then every one kneeling down prayed for him, then presently what
goods he had were inventoried, and prized. But the day following, the Master of
the ship, whose name was Pier de Soulier for discovery of the land; like a
careful Mariner, climbed the Maste himself, but he was amazed, when he found
there the supposed dead man fast tied, and yet in a profound sleep; but upon
the Masters call, he awaked suddenly, which made the company very merry. That
night we lay upon a dangerous sea, and feared we were upon the Asquequi, or
Seques, which toward the land is a bad bottom, Seques Sbelus heretofore
Syrtes.
that which made us judge of it, was certain Moss swimming upon the water,
which hangs to the rocks, which made us very apprehensive. In the evening a
huge Whale followed us as the Pilot told us, who had discovered him, and at
last minding to leave us, as he turned, brushed so rudely upon the ship, that
it shook all over, as it had dashed against a rock. At the instant every man
affrighted, cried out for mercy, supposing we were lost, for we were in the
middle of a vast sea, where there was no possibility of safety. The Master
presently ran to the Hold, to see if the ship were foundered; on the other side
the Pilot from the Poupe discovered the monstrous fish had left us, and was
gone with a hideous noise, so as we were safe, and by Gods goodness freed of a
desperate fear.

After some days sailing on, we came to touch at Malta, and being Shrovetide,
we resolved to stay awhile to see the celebration of this feast, and there we
put off some pieces of fine cloth, which they call Calicut, but the mischief
was, that the Courtizans, of which they have there very subtle ones, had good
share of them, cheating us of some crowns under color of treating us at our
own cost.

Of this Island I will say no more, then that at this day it is the Residence of
the Knights Hospitallers of S. John of Jerusalem instituted in the year 1134.
in the time of Baldouin of Bourgos the third French King of Jerusalem, for the
security of them who went to the Holy Land, and in the year 1309. their great
Master Villaret took by force of Arms the Isle of Rhodes from the Sarasins,
who usurpt it from the Greek Empire, and there established the Residence of his
Order, and maintained it stoutly against the many attempts of the Soldans of
Egypt; but in the year 1522. Turk Soliman carried it from the great Master
Philip Villers, and by the license of Pope Leo the tenth, this great Master
with his order retired to Viterbo till better times; and diverse places being
propounded for their Residence, as Sasda in Candia, Serigo, Elba, and others:
in conclusion they resolved to petition Charles the fifth for Malta, to whom it
belonged, as dependant on the kingdom of Sicily; against the French, English,
and Italians, who would have had no such obligation to the Emperor, but at
length they consented, because it had good Havens, and was near to Barbary; so
they got Malta and Goza, in the year 1529. without other tribute or condition,
then a solemn Mass annually, and a Falcon every year to the Viceroy of
Naples, but withal that they should have free transport of corn from Sicily.
This in effect was more advantage to the King of Spain then the other Nations
of Christendom, the Isle of Malta being a guard to all the Spanish and Italian
Coasts under his dominion.

The Order at first was divided by seven Languages, three of France, which were
France, Avernia, and Provence, then of Italy, Germany, England, and Spain.
Afterward an eighth was added, Spain being divided into Castile and Portugal,
and England being left out, they took in Aragon.

Of these eight Languages, every one had two Electours for election of the
Grand Master. These Grand Masters have for the greater part been French, and
the greatest part of the Order consists of our French Nobility, but I shall
speak no more of it, being a matter so generally known.

Having left Malta, we set sail for Marsells, where we landed within few
days, setting a period to that long voyage, which had cost us so much time,
pains and danger; God be glorified who guided us to so safe a Port, at the
time of the great Commet, whose extent was thirty degrees, the tail pointing
to the West, embracing Sagittarius and Capricorn, and appeared not in the
Sublunary Region, but the Celestial, so as 'twas seen throughout the Indies
both East and West. But I cannot omit to relate how, when I came to my Fathers
house, who was then sixty five years of age he knew me not, but thought me
dead, and had made my funeral six years before: so as seeing me in the Greek
habit, he took me for some stranger, and asking me who I was, I answered him in
language barbarous enough, I was a Grecian, and 'twas but truth, I had almost
forgot my native language, being very young when I left my country, and for
that I had discontinued it so long time. Some vulgar Greek I understood, which
I learnt at Canea in Candia, where I staid six or seven months after our first
shipw^ack.

Then my Father who spoke good Greek, having traffick'd a long time in that
country, asked me what was my business, and telling him I came to dine with
him, he told me I was welcome, and bad me draw near the fire, as I did. Then he
demanded who, and of whence I was, and telling him I was a Marsellian, the
son of one Raphael Blanc, he was amazed, and troubled, and calling my mother,
told her a son of his was come from Sicily to visit him, my father having had a
former wife in Sicily, by whom he had two children, who lived there upon their
mothers means: whereupon they both afforded me great indulgements; but at
length I declared my self to them, and then there was amongst us such a tide of
tendernesses, there was not room for words, nor could we contain our tears of
joy. Afterward I related to them at leisure the strange and various adventures
of my voyage, showing them diverse curiosities I had brought along with me,
amongst others, Asbeste linen, which is made clean with firing, being
incombustible linen, used by Indian Princes, and Lords, and are wrapped in it
when their bodies are committed to the pile, as the bodies of Roman Emperors
were in ancient time. I have often showed the experience of it to persons of
quality in Provence. I showed them the herb Falacit, having this property, that
laying it under a bed all those loathsome Chemisses worms stock to it, and so
are killed. I brought it in a box, but I was ill advised, I brought not the
seed to plant in these parts. I showed them diverse other things of singularity,
admired by many both of knowledge and quality. But before I conclude I shall
tell you in order, to this re-acknowledgement of my Father and Mother, Brothers
and Sisters, what long after happened to me at Palerma in Sicily, after my
Father was dead.

For calling to mind he had often told me he had a Son and Daughter there, I
made diligent enquiry for them: at first no one could tell any thing of them,
for that they were called by their Mothers name, whose heirs they were; and my
Brother who was called Nazaro Bianco, was called only de Nazara; but at length
I enquired by so many tokens that I found out his house, and going thither I
was told he was sick, which hindered me not, but I went confidently up into the
Chamber, meeting a young maid upon the stairs, blood which cannot lie, told me
that must needs be my Sister: nevertheless without further notice, desiring to
see her Brother, she led me to his Chamber, and seating me near the bed where
he lay, I observed in him the very pattern of my Father, and asking if he had
not Brothers at Marseills, he told me yea, and asked if I knew them: whereupon
many discourse^ passed, telling him diverse news and recommendations.

During our discourse, this Sister of mine looked steadfastly upon me, as she
were ravished to see and hear me, and I presenting my hand to her, she kissed
hers, and took mine, a thing not usual in Italy, and less in Sicily.

Hereupon my Brother having caused a little daughter of his to be brought in, I
kissed her hand as I did my Sisters, and taking a ring off my finger of an
oriental fauset emerald, one of the best I ever saw, I presented it to her,
wherewith she was quite confounded, and in doubt whether she should take it or
no; but telling her her Uncle sent it her by me, with leave of her Mother who
was present, she accepted it; and at the same instant I gave a fair table Rubie
to my Sister. But as we were in the middle of these complements and discourse
of our friends, who should come into the chamber with a French garb and
alacrity, but the Governor of the Bastide, nephew to the grand Prior of St.
Giles, and other Cavaliers my friends, who knowing I was there came to seek me,
and by their calling upon my name my Brother and Sister knew me, and confessed
they had some suspicion of me when I gave the rings: my Sister told me at the
instant she met me on the stairs, she felt something extraordinary, which made
the color rise in her face. Then we fell to embraces and rejoices, like the
American women, who when they will bid their friends welcome, sit on the ground
and weep, and entertain them, embrace, and feast them weeping. So I staid there
some six weeks in jollity and congratulation with my friends. I was willing to
relate this passage, as well to show the various encounters of man's life, as
the instinct of blood which will discover it self be it never so concealed and
unknown.

CHAP. XXII. The Authors voyage to the kingdom of Morocca, he is taken by the
Spaniards, an accident befell the Author at Arache, The battle of Sebastian
King of Portugal.
BUt let us come back to my return to Marseills, where I felt the custom of
change to be of no small force, which was so prevalent with me, that I had
scarce rested six months there, but I grew weary, finding neither the air,
customs, nor manner of living agreeable, I was so molded to change and variety.

As this inquietude possessed me, it happened fortunately that one Don Guillerm
passed by Marseills, sent by Henry the 3. Ambassador or Agent to Fez and
Marocco, and being very much a friend to my Father, dining one day at our
house, he heard me speaking of my travails, and was pleased with my
conversation; he asked me if I would go along in his company: And I was in a
humor so well disposed that I accepted very willingly, so he entertained me.
This Don Guillerm was a Surgeon born at Nice, who travailing to Marocca, was
so happy as to cure the King of a pestilence, with which he was visited at
Constantinople, which brought him in great esteem with the Prince; Insomuch
that he sent him to treat of an alliance with King Henry the third, who
returned him with presents to Molouco and Abdelmelech.

Being thus agreed, we parted from Marseills about sixty in company, and
embarked upon a well-arm'd vessel, within six days we came by night near upon
the straight of Gibraltar, but the stream was so violent it held us back till
day, and well-nigh cast us on shore near the Tower called the Devils mansion,
where no body ever lives: for they have a tradition that the master Mason which
built it, being not paid his price by him that set him on work, gave it to
fiends who have kept it ever since.

Being thus driven on shore, against the mount of Gibraltar, as we endeavored
with strength to shove her off, the vessel overturned, and the mast and sails
lay in the water, which much amazed us; but by happy fortune a Pilot of
Marseills, John Saffoulo, being aboard with us for his private affairs, seeing
our danger, and that every one was fled to the other side the deck, fell to
work and with an ax opening the side of the ship let in the water, so as the
weight set her upright, and by Gods assistance we escaped this imminent danger,
being driven by a gentle gale to a point where we cast anchor.

But notice hereof coming to the Spanish Galleys, which lay at anchor not far
thence, they sent out presently to take us and bring us to the Town of
Gibraltar; while they were towing us along, we cast into the Sea above two
thousand cannon bullets, and a great quantity of powder. The Spaniards hereupon
accused us of treason, for carrying ammunition to their enemies, for they had
found some barrels of powder which were left behind. Then coming aboard us,
like right ravenous wolves they ransacked every where, seizing all the
merchandises, and opening the chests eat all that was good: amongst the rest
searching a Physicians chest they found some purging lozanges, whereof some of
them eat in great quantity, and found so sudden an effect, they had scarce time
to untie their breeches, whereof two or three died, saying, we had poisoned
them.

Mean while they put Irons on our legs, and removed us into the Galley, with
rude treatment and rough menaces, till at last sentence passed upon us, by
which the Ambassador, and ten of the chief Gentlemen were to loose their
heads, all the rest to the Galleys for ever.

The Ambassador hearing this sad sentence, appealed to the King of Spain, who
confirmed the sentence, saying no more than Loque es hecho es hecho. But by
good fortune the Marseillian Pilot that was with us, when he first saw the
Galleys coming upon us, cast himself privately into the Sea with some moneys,
and so gaining the land went to Madrid, and this in consideration of one
amongst us, to whom he had promised his daughter in marriage. Being there, and
understanding the King had ratified this sentence of death; he addressed
himself presently to the most Serene Infanta Donna Isabella, and so handsomely
laid before her the inconveniences would ensue upon this execution, which was
sufficient to break the peace between the two kings; that she moved with these
reasons, went immediately to the King her Father, to petition for grace, which
was granted, and we released, to the discontent of them who thought to make a
good booty of us and our goods.

Being now again Masters of our lives, goods, and vessel, after two months
time, which was spent in these proceedings, we put to sea again upon our course
to Arache, a fort of importance in the kingdom of Fez, about 70. or 80. miles
from Gibraltar, where there is a Port made by a River, as at Goa in the Indies,
which is crossed with a bar of sand, so as there is no coming in but at high
water, which is here every day, but at Goa you may expect a month. Coming on
shore there we were very well entertained, and the Ambassador provided of
horses, and other necessaries to go to the King of Fez Abdelmelech, who was
then in great vexation for that Mahomet his nephew, who disputed with him for
the kingdom, and whom he had defeated in many battails by the assistance of the
Turk, was newly escaped toward Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, to crave his
aid. Being come from Arache to Miguine ten leagues from Fez, seeing the
Ambassador was to hold on his way to Morocca to the King, we resolved four or
five of us to go see Fez, the capital Town of the Country. Having walked
through Meguine, beyond the Town we came to a Churchyard of the Mahometans,
where two of us making water, it happened to be near the Sepulcher of one of
their Marabons, or Santons, and being perceived by some of the Moors, they
would have stopped us, but we defending our selves stoutly with fists and feet, I
got out of their hands; but my heart failed when I saw fifty Archers of the
Townguard about us, who paid me well for the blows I had given their fellows,
for they beat me most outrageously, as they did the rest of us, the very
Children crying after me, Tarasti Nazarani, that is kill him, at every word
calling me Quichequet, dog. At last I was brought before the Cadi, or Judge, to
whom I kneeled, but he made me lie along on the ground, and gave me thirty
lashes on the back, with a whip of o^-sinews, and as many bangs on the belly
with an Indian cane, so that I was almost dead, with the blows which had quite
benumbed me; yet again for these threescore bangs I must pay as many miticales
in gold, which are worth four franks a piece, after all they laid me in prison,
with another bathed in blood at the same time.

Then they used all art possible to persuade me to renounce my faith. Amongst
others came in one in scarlet, and under pretense of some compassion on my
youth, spoke softly in the Spanish tongue, I should be advised and have a care
how I lost my soul.

Not content with this they sent a young Spanish damsel to me clothed in
white, with a Huke which covered her all over, who after salutation, expressed
her resentment of my misfortune, and with some words of consolation, told me
she was come to instruct me how to save my self from death, and to set her at
liberty immediately. I bent my thoughts upon the woman, not as yet
comprehending what she meant, till she explained further that I should marry
her, and renounce my faith for a time, and when the King of Portugal who was
upon point to give battle to the Marocco should be victorious, we should have
means to escape amongst the Christians.

I must confess ingenuously, the words of this young maid made a strong
assault upon me, and made me take the matter into consideration, but God gave
me the grace to hold firm to my self, and at last to satisfy her that neither
for her beauty nor enjoyment of all the world, would I ever renounce the faith
of Jesus Christ my God, so she took her leave. But after this the Judges
themselves attended with the Executioner, with his heading-knife at his side,
came to me, and speaking to me, told me I had committed a heinous crime, but
that there might be some remedy found, that we had all one God the Creator of
all things, and the benign common Father of all men, who had sent diverse
Prophets for our instruction, and to show us the way of salvation; but they
having one more excellent than the rest, they were obliged in all they could to
augment the number of his Disciples; so as to save my life there was no other
way then by denial of Jesus Christ: not that they esteemed his law nefarious,
for they knew he was likewise a great Prophet, the breath of the Almighty, and
a great friend of Mahomet; but because their law was the best and the most
perfect.

To this, God assisting me with his extraordinary grace, I with courage
answered, that rather then deviate voluntarily in the least from my Religion, I
would sacrifice a thousand lives if I were master of so many.

Perceiving my constancy, they told me I was ill advised, nevertheless to
testify their affection and consideration of my youth, they would make me
another offer which might conduce to the securing of my life: whereupon there
was a sumptuous tapestry spread upon the floor, with rich bracelets and
pendants of value, all this stirred me not; so as seeing they gained nothing
upon me, the principal of them, the Ermin, Ermin a Judge.
pronounced sentence of death, and at the instant the Executioner seizing on me
made me lay my head on a block of wood, and without further Ceremony with his
weapon naked in his hand prepared to give the blow: but as he was hastening me
to pull my doublet off that the collar might not hinder the blow; God inspired
one amongst the rest, that told them they committed an error to cut me off
being so young, for that 'twas against their Law to execute any one for that
crime being under 17. years of age, and that they ought to inform themselves
precisely of it: For in the Alcoran the severe law is, that whosoever shall
commit Formicat, that is, pollute a holy place, he ought not to be put to
death, only chastized with bastinadoes, and absolved.

But this punishment was exceeding cruelly and fully inflicted upon me, for I
stood the fury of a multitude, who in the instant came in, and asking, Chate
quei feuti houat Romi, that is, what has this Christian done, and being
related, they said, haley, that is, make room, then they all fell upon me, and
laid on till they were weary, so much as a decrepid, horrid, squalid old man,
who while he bestowed his labor on me, told me, that as I had presumed to
piss upon the head of one that waited on their great Prophet, so after death
the Saints should shit upon my soul, which should feed upon that ordure till
the Judgement-day, and then be cast into flames amongst her fellows. His
opinion was approved of, but the execution suspended.

Mean while my Companions were escaped several ways, and crept into caves,
where one of them lived three days upon snailes, so as they could no ways
help me. But my misfortune coming to the ears of some Christian merchants, who
lived in Town, they went immediately to supplicate the Judicature to have
consideration of my youth, that I was a Gentleman belonging to the Ambassador
of France, who would resent the affront, and acquaint their Prince with it,
whence inconveniences might accrue.

They were not so moved with these reasons, but some bribes must be given, so
as the Merchants entering caution of a vast sum with me, and obliging themselves
for my re-appearance when time should be, I was set at liberty: Of all those
there was not one of my Country nor acquaintance.

Being at large, I was quartered in a noble house, with a rich Portuguese
Merchant, who spared nothing for my recovery, out of this sad estate.

This Merchant, by name Andrieto Gasparo, born in the Island of Corsa, had two
Brothers at Marseills, and knew my Father very well, to whom he gave speedy
intelligence of my misfortune, and received an answer with express order, to
work my delivery at what rate soever. Hereupon these worthy people advised
together, and resolved to send two men to court on dromedaries, there called
Bacambal, which are beasts of extraordinary velocity, that will go their
hundred miles a day, with the principal Rider, and one to guide him, with
their baggage and necessary provisions for their journey.

But by the way, the Riders had need be well swathed back and head for the
extreme shakings they give the body, as likewise to have their ears well stopped,
for being deafened with the hideous noise they make by the way. They dispatched
these two Courriers, one strait to Marocca, whither 'twas reported the King was
gone, the other Francisco Maria a Portuguese, toward the Sea Coast to
Alcasseur, where he met with Muley Moluco, to whom he was well known, and
laying himself at his feet, related the proceedings to him. Whereupon the King
caused the Ambassador of France who was there, to be called; in the end he
resolved to return this Messenger with all speed, with order and command to the
Ermin of Mequine, to discharge me without further caution. Upon Estradiors
return, he presented these letters to Ermin, and the rest of the Judicature who
received it with great ceremony and humilty, laying it upon their head, and so
I had my freedom, and my life saved, with sufficient marks to remember, and
for the future be better advised at my cost; for I felt the stripes longer
after: and indeed this is the greatest danger we ran amongst the Infidells.
Besides, it cost me dear, for I was fain to present the Gentlemen of the
Judicature, with a barrel of Safron, and some Tapistry hangings for their
courtesy, who afterward in testimony of their Amity, sent me to Fez a
magnificent present of a fat sheep, and some other comestible things, as
bisquet, sugar, cheese, and abundance of dates, and that was all I got.

At my departure with these worthy Merchants, one of their wives called
Causabonna, in return for a bladder of Musk I presented her, gave me six fine
shirts, with caps, and handkerchers. At my return from Africa, going back for
Arache this way, I failed not to visit my good friends these Merchants, and was
likewise to see the Ermin Mahomet Mustapha, who by reason of my change of habit
and countenance, at first knew me not; but afterward gave me noble
entertainment, for his heart was Christian* and made us taste his good wine,
and eat with him, offering me gold, but I refused it, notwithstanding I must
needs take them, saying they belonged to me; being some Ducats given him for
the Mutton, and other things that were sent to me, so as he made the account
but even: which shows how just this man was.

And he it was that in my suffering came to advise me to stand firm, and not
renounce my faith, and religion. He had two wives of most perfect beauty, and
he told me if any occasion should occur to draw him out of Barbary, he would
embrace baptization, there being throughout these parts, no means to exercise
Christian Religion, for I heard not one Mass so long as I was here, neither at
Fez, nor other towns where there are abundance of Christians. They will not
allow of Priests, which is otherwise at Constantinople, where there are above
twenty Churches, where they celebrate divine service, both in Greek, Latin,
and Abissinian, and is free exercise of Religion for all Christians: and if the
body of a Christian be to be interred at any distance from thence, the Priests
with the cross go publicly for it, and carry it whither they please, without
the least injury from any one, upon pain of being well punished.

During this progress of affairs, King Mahomet had agitated so with Sebastian
King of Portugal, that he was upon the march with a potent Army, and that many
vessels were already arrived at Arzille, Oran, Tanger, and Cerote, forts on the
African coast in the Christians hands: whereof Muley Malouco being advertized,
made diligent preparation, and first takes a march into the mountains against
the Arabians, whom he distrusted to be of his nephews party. He took course to
dis-arm them totally, and disabled them of sixteen thousand good horses, for
which he promised good payment, and mounted on them so many musketeers with
red caps; thus securing the Arabians, and blocking up all avenues that they
might not come upon his back. By this means having raised an Army of sixty
thousand horse, he advanced to Alcassour, or Alcasquinir, about fifteen leagues
from Arache, with his Brother Muley Hamet. Don Sebastian on the other side
appeared there with about sixteen or eighteen thousand horse and foot,
Portuguese, Castillians, Italians, and Germans.

On the 4. of August the battle was given, wherein the King of Portugal was
slain, and his Army wholly defeated: Mahomet flying to Arzille to save himself,
was drowned, fording the River of Mucazen, which runs by Arache, though bravely
mounted. Above twelve thousand Christians fell there, besides many prisoners,
amongst whom were ^00. women, and 200. sucking infants. I was my self at this
fight, with about threescore Marseillians more, whereof few came off. Malouco
dyed of sickness in his time of triumph, and his young Brother Muly Hamet
succeeded, whose race continues to this day. I saw the body of the King of
Portugal carried away in a chest, filled with unslack'd lime to preserve it,
begged of King Muley Hamet, by Andrietto Gasparo Corse, his great favorite,
who sent it to Lisbone, for which the King of Spain sent him a rich present in
recompense, and interred it in the Church of Belen. It Is true, I understood
since by some Portuguese slaves, that this was the body of a Swisse, and that
the King being beaten from his Horse escaped: and indeed some years after one
appeared, who said he was the King of Portugal, and showed several
testimonies, but howsoever he was executed in Spain as an Impostor, after so
many who described this battle at large, and faithfully, I will content my self
to say only what I saw. Thus then, the whole Portuguese Cavalry being landed,
drew up in two squadrons. Don John of Cordoua, Commander in chief of the one
advanced toward Alcassar, where the Moors attacked them several times, and
standing obstinately to their pikes broke their ranks, but the Christians
falling on with their pistols, Azimut their Commander in chief was slain, then
the rest made no great resistance, so as the Moors not used to this sort of
arms, fell into disorder and fled, which put such vanity in the Christians,
that they lay in the field, in hope to take Alcassar, five leagues from Arache,
being both between two Rivers, a league distant one from another. Don Sebastian
to prevent surprizall by night, surrounded his Army with wagons, carts,
baggage, utensils barrels, and all the train of Artillery.

Don Aluaro Perez led the Van, with five hundred horse, and twelve hundred
Landsquenets, guarded on the right with the River, on the left with pikes,
barely armed with a corslet, and a thousand Musketeers in the head, who
marched the faster to get at some distance from the Army, to provoke the Moors
to fall upon them with hope of being releived by ten thousand Arabians under
the command of Armabachi then with the Portuguese who suspended to declare
themselves for hazarding their fortunes, wives, and children they knew not how,
for they had intelligence how the King of Fez had drained their Country, and
blocked up the avenues to hinder relief coming to his Nephew. Hereupon they
made a stand, resolving not to declare themselves, advertising Soliman the son
of Armabachi, that they would stand Neuters, till time should advise them what
to do, under the conduct of Amet Sarran, a prudent Commander, who had engaged
to Malouco, that he would be ready at his command.

But Courco Abrahin who led five thousand Moorish horse being young and
gallant, ambitious to do something of noble, sent to Sarran, that if he would
second him he would give battle, but Sarran answered 'twas no policy to
attack an Army well ranged and defended with Artillery, without more
possibility: so that day he did nothing, only four Moors well mounted made a
bravado.

I went along with one Hercules, a Cannoneer, and John Sassello a Marseillian,
to view the Portuguese Army, which was a noble prospect, all we disliked was
the burdensome number of women and children.

The 13. of July, Aluarez about day break spied Courco Abrahin with his five
thousand Moors: and with a grand stratagem drew them under shot of all his
Musketeers, and five fieldpieces, that made a great slaughter. These Moors
were all defeated, and their Leader slain, to the great glory of Don Aluarez,
and Captain Balliotin, Commander of the Lansquenets, Don Sebastian viewed all
the combat with exceeding delight, embraced Aluarez returning with victory, and
gave him a rich Rubie in a Jewel, set round with diamonds, which he tied
himself in his hat, and to Banastarin and to Baliotin Captains of the
Lansquenets, and Arquebusiers, to each a rich Diamond. The Moorish King gave
likewise to Alvarez his Cimeterre of an excellent temper, and a scabbard of
great price. Of these five thousand horse, not above three hundred escaped; of
Christians, there dyed not above twenty, and fifty wounded.

Malouco hearing of this defeat was exceedingly troubled, and blamed Sarran,
that he came not in with relief. Hereupon he draws his Army toward the Sea
side; but the French Ambassador advised him rather to take course with the
Arabians, who had engaged to bring in to Mahomet fifty thousand horse, and to
fall upon them before they got into a body. He accepted the Council and
marched against them, and put the country of Loyassan and others to fire and
sword: The Arabians submitted, and promised him all obedience, but he being
cautious, and fearing their perfidiousnesse, took all their horses, and left
the men for the next harvest, so with dexterity he prevented that danger.

Thence he returned toward the Seacoast, and began already to be ill
disposed, which proceeded from excessive constipation or Melancholy: from the
beginning of his sickness he never came on horseback, but went ever in his
Littar. He was a benign and courteous Prince, affectionate to his friends,
without state or distance, speaking affably to them, and rendering salutes with
great civility. But on the other side he was cruel to his enemies, in justice
rigorous, but chiefly to such as injured the Sutlers, as to a boy who putting
his hand into a pannier, stole three dates, the Sutler complaining, he caused
three of his fingers to be cut off. Some who had intention to turn to Mahomet,
he made them be rammed into a Cannon, and fire set to it.

The fourth of August, at that time when the prodigious Planet menaced Portugal
and Marocca, the King of Portugal having made his prayers, and received a
benediction from the Bishop of Conimbria, mounted on a white horse caparison'd
with gold and green, of about five and twenty years of age, with something a
rising nose, a good stature, his lip a little hanging, went through all the
Army, to animate and encourage the soldiers. Some say the Bishop of Conimbria
dreamed the night before, that the battle was lost, and that they were all
slaves, as it came to pass; and that upon this alone he sent his treasure, and
all things he had of value to Arzille, which served for his ransom afterward.

Malouco the same day about eleven in the fore-noon, left his Littar and
mounted on horseback, vested in a rich robe of cloth of gold, wrought with a
folliage, a Cimeterre at his side, his saddle set over with precious stones,
and thus went from rank to rank, encouraging his men to combat. His Army
marched in good order like a half-cressent, drums of the Morisco very small,
beat, and the Fifes founded a shriller sound then the Trumpet. 'Twas thought
the battles should have been given on Sunday the third, but 'twas deferred to
the fourth, and Sebastian and Mahomet were advised to stay battle till the
approach of night, because the Arabians promised to come over to them, and
leave Malouco, which proved false, and they were so disappointed. King
Sebastian was armed, as the day before, in green Arms, upon a white horse one
of the best in Portugal.

The Moors Army was rampar'd on the left hand with the River. Sebastian
thought himself sure of the Arabians assistance, and specially of Melouco's
Vanguard, which was all of Arabians, and for this reason stayed till night,
that they might not be perceived. 'Twas in a field of above two large leagues
every way, without either tree or stone. Before the Vanguard marched, the
Light-horse-men mounted on the Arabians horses, composing the point of the
Cressent, and were wholly cut off with the Cannon. The Arabians seeing this
rout, thought good to do the like; but not perceiving a man of the other
Battalia's fall, they set a good face on it, by force Muley Hammet being at
hand to instigate them. The battle at length grew hot, and the Arabians
performed nothing of what they had promised: Molouco employed the remaining
hours of his life in giving order for victory: The King of Portugal and the
Moor remained on the ground as well as Molouco, the one slain, the other
drowned, and the third dead of infirmity in his Littar, Hamet remaining only
victorious, and heir of all.

Don Sebastian did wonders in his own person, but overpowred with number, he
hung his handkercher on the point of a lance in token of yiedling, but the
rascally Moors ignorant of this practice, run upon him, and those that stood
with him, and put them all to the Sword. The slaughter was great, but chiefly
of those who went along with the baggage, who were as many or more then all the
Army.

There were some mingled themselves amongst the dead, to save their lives.
'Twas sad to see 200. sucking children, and above 800. women, boys, and
girls, who followed father and mother, thinking to inhabit this country, who
had loaded chains and cords to fetter the Moors, and served for the Christians
themselves, of whom there are 17. thousand prisoners, the two hundred infants,
and the eight hundred women not reckoned. As to the kingdom of Fez or Marocca,
heretofore Mauritania, or Tingitania, it is of vast extent, and amongst others
has the two potent towns of Fez and Marocca.

Fez is the Capital of the kingdom, strong in site and people, seated on two
great hills, being able upon occasion to raise sixty thousand horse: of
sumptuous edifice, of the Persian building, embellished with Folliages of gold
and azure, their walls strong, streets cleanly kept, being a Captain for every
one, with strong gates at the ends for their security, and crossed with
chains; a fair river called also Fez passes through the middle.

This River is divided into two channels, one toward the South, which waters
Fez the new, the other toward the West, watering Fez the old, besides diverse
fountains which creep through Subterranean channels.

The houses for the greatest part are of brick, with Towers and Tarrasses,
where the women prune themselves in the evening, for they seldom stir abroad.
There are Mosquees of fair building with their Marabouts for their service; the
Principal called Cairimen is of as large circumference as the Town of Arles,
with 31. principal gates, sustained by 38. large Arches in length, and 20. in
breadth, every night 900. lamps are lighted, and on festival days, as in
their Romadan, the feast of S. John, the Nativity of our Lord, more Lamps
without number upon brass candlesticks, where after Midnight they sing
Mattens. Sixty leagues from hence is Marocca chief of all other kingdoms under
that Empire, as Hea, Ducalea, Gusula, Hascora and Trelle: as Fez has under it,
Tesmenia, Asgar, Flabat, Errif, Garet, Escaus, etc.

This Town was built, or rather augmented by a Prince, called Mansor in the
year 1024. situate in a Plain environed with Date-trees. He built there a
Magnificent Mosquee; there is the high tower with three Spires, on which stand
three balls of gold, of twenty thousand Miticales, or two hundred and twenty
five pounds weight a piece, Muley Malouco would have had them for his wars,
but the Inhabitants would not permit him, whereupon the Janissaries that came
from Constantinople to assist Malouco, made some Musket shot, and pierced them
in diverse places. He promised them that after a time he would set the like
there again, but the others answered, if he should dye, all was lost; as his
great Grandfather who sold the foundation rents of the Hospital of Fez, and
dyed before he could restore them, so as 'twas lost to the poor.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Kingdom of Marocca and Fez.
MArocca stretches it self very far, and the parts Northward join upon the
country of Asgar, crossing the Mountains of Gouraigoura, thirty leagues from
Fez, whence there flows a lovely River which runs Westward, and joins with
the River Bar, where there are vast Plains and Pastures without stone, like
the Camargue of Arles.

The Arabians call this country Suambiz, a country abounding in Cattle, and
fronts upon another Nation of the Arabians called Aluzar, and betwixt these two
people, there is ever a mortal war and hatred.

The People of Asgar confine Northward on the Ocean, Westward on the River
Buragray, which cuts through Forests full of Celoquintida, and Oranges,
rendering a most pleasant odor, Southward on the River Bonazar, inhabited by
those wealthy Arabians called Alalur, whence come a brave company of Cavaliers.

Here there are many fair Towns, as Argac, Larais, and Casar, Alcahir, or
Elcabir, that is the Grand Palace built by the great Mansor, upon an encounter
he had, being lost a hunting, and Northward the country of Habar.

The Region of Habat, or Elbabat, ends also on this side the Ocean, beginning
from the South to the River Gonarga, or Orga, and Suerga, and from the East to
the Straight. The Principal City is Azaget or Ezageu, which stands upon the
hanging of a Hill, near to the River Gourga, and has many other good Towns,
as Agla, Tonser, Merga, Omar, and others upon the Straight, conquered by the
Portuguese, as Arzile, and others; and joins to the Province of Errif, which
begins at the Straight; and Eastward stretches as far as the River Necor,
Northward to the Mediterranean. The principal town of it is Targa, or Terga,
upon the said sea, who traffic with the People of Tunnis, and Bisette.

There are besides the Towns of Jelles, Gebba, and others. Garet joins to
this Province, which reaches as far as the Deserts of Numidia, and the Cities
there are Mazelle, Megger and others, where there are many Mines of Iron.

This Country joins upon the Region of Chaus, which Westward runs to the
River Barnagara, that goes to the borders of Lybia, with her towns of Teurere,
Besornin, etc. It extends as far as the Kingdom of Telesin, exceeding rich,
which on the West bounds upon the Rivers Moluia and La, South upon the deserts
of Numidia, comprehending from West to East near four hundred miles, environed
with many great deserts, confining on the blacks, and has two remarkable
Havens, Marzalquibir, and Oran, besides the towns of Gualdida, Hauan, the
great City of Nodroma, and Telesin the capital, where the King resides, who
keeps a magnificent Court.

There is also Constantina, the Walls whereof are black stone polished,
situate upon a Mountain at the foot whereof the River Sufamar runs. About it
are other Provinces, whereof some join to the desert of Barqua, which borders
upon Tenez, a City of Numidia, and on the North embraces the Province of Daro,
which joins upon Sequelme or Segelmesse, taking name from the capital town,
and extends to the River of Zez, which confines on the Deserts of Lybia.

All these countries are inhabited by several barbarous people, as Zonetes,
Azonagia, Zabara, Egilefe, and runs to the Province of Chenega, which joins
to the Mountain of Atlas. This Mountain reaches to the Deserts of Numidia,
amongst which there is one country terminates upon the kingdom of Bugia,
called Zeb, on the North having Biledulgerib, or Numidia.

Lybia is of great extent, and Numidia larger. In Lybia are the vast Deserts of
Zonzaga and Zuenziga, almost all inhabited on the skirts, with Arabians, who
have the blacks on the West and South called Galata, confining upon Tombur. In
the middle is the Desert of Zarat, which is two hundred miles over, without any
habitation: but the desert of Aroboan affords some comfort, and it joins upon
Tombur. Then next are the deserts of Hair, over which lies the passage from
Tombur to Telensin.

We leave the Desert of Gosde on the right hand for the numbers of fierce
beasts that resort thither: then to the desert of Gir, which on the North
confines on Tuas, Tegerin and Damesab, which has the kingdom of Agades on the
South, a country plentiful of Herbage, Fountains, and Manna, which they use
much in their Diet, and Pottages; they have such abundance of it, it renders
them exceeding strong and agile, they likewise, boiled with water, make drink
of it. They are subjects to the King of Tombur, and border upon Cano another
kingdom tributary to Tombur. The people are all black as pitch. Near the Town
of of Masar in Arabia Salban, there was once a Gulf of the Sea. There was
formerly a Temple dedicated to Venus, where maids did prostitute themselves for
pleasure or profit, they report: but a famous Courtisan, beautiful and rich, by
name Ameliga, being courted by diverse Princes and great persons, would accept
of nothing from them, only obliging them to give something to the poor, using
these words, Honor the Goddess Ameliza to whom you offer this; which made her
famous through all Africa, so as they came from very foreign parts to see her,
and the King of Bodumal sued to have her to wife, which she refused: amongst
others there was a Maraban who visiting her, erected a magnificent Temple to
her, which was immediately frequented with a concourse of people, and everyone
repaired thither to obtain their desire, provided they were able of member,
otherwise 'twas not to be looked for. The People of Guiner, Tombur, and others
were of this devotion. The Priests of the Temple received the word, and
rendered them at certain hours.

For the kingdom of Melli it is very wealthy, by reason it is cut through with
the black river or Senega, or a branch of it, or rather a channel made by
hand, so as it is very fruitful in Dates, Raisins, Cotton, and other
commodities; for it is said this River flows as Nile does, and at the same
hours: They have abundance of Canoes, or boats of one piece, in which they
travail upon their little negotiations, passing from kingdom to kingdom,
moved out of the History of Jonas, who they say came on shore there. They make
great benefit of Whales, and believe no Whale can pass that way without
bursting.

An ancient Gentleman of Siban told me, that in the year one thousand five
hundred seventy one, walking on the shore, he saw three great Whales, which
being entered the Gulf, made a most horrid noise, and on the morrow one of
them was cast up with his belly slit, as it had been done with a knife, the
other two were carried away with the stream of the water. Whether this be a
miracle or magic, I will not judge.

Melli borders upon Gago; and Gago is the better country of the two, and
though Melli have the better towns, yet the other is of much more esteem for
many things, but chiefly for the quantity of gold, brought thither by the
Moors from all parts, and this gold is very exquisite, whereof they make most
part of their pieces of a crown and half, which they call Miticales. But Melly
has the glory from all her neighbors for a fair College of their Prophet
Haly, where all the other kingdoms come to study the Sciences: there being
many learned Doctors of their kind. Thither for this purpose repaires the youth
of Cambre, the chief town of Tambur, as also from Gago and other place. Gago is
a Town of great traffic where there is a great Mart for pepper, and slaves of
all parts of Christendom, whom they employ in Mines, there being some who for
avarice bring their own children for this purpose. Gago borders Eastward on
Cober, and the capital towns of these two countries are 200. leagues distant.
They are also under the inundation of Niger, which manures the country, and
makes it plentiful in cattle, and provisions: the reason the people apply
themselves more to husbandry then study, and so are gross and rustic.
Westward from thence lies the great Cape Serrelyonne, on the East the kingdom
of Agades, then Cano, Zegeg, which breeds such store of horse, then Zanfara and
Guangara Northward, whose King has a Guard of 7000. men, foot and horse, with
bows and Cimeterres. Then comes Borro which runs above five hundred miles
Eastward, having on the South the Deserts of Get, and on the North those of
Barea. They are a brutish people, and entertain their wives in common. Toward
the Piroc are the Deserts of Goran, toward Ethiopia: there are people in
abundance, and a party of Giloses, who come thither by reason of a sedition,
and a party from Zenega who came thither by reason that a daughter of the king
of Azangues being married to the King of Gambra, finding she was no maid,
repudiated her, whereof arose great wars amongst them.

The people of Temesne say they were the Founders of Marocca, they use a finer
language then others, which they call Aquela Marig, that is, the noble
language, the other kingdoms of Africa speaking but a rude language in
comparison. Another called Sigay, which goes in the kingdoms of Galatas,
Tombut, and Guinee, Meli, Gago different from the rest: another at Juber, which
cannot be written, because of the gutturall pronunciation, and goes as far as
Cana and Casena: Again at Hea, Gangara, Borne, they use other languages. At
Sena, Terga, Gueziga, and Lenta, they express themselves well, something like
the African, and pronounce in the throat, but distinctly. They are much
contented to see a stranger learn their language.

I was acquainted with a Physician learned in all these Languages, as likewise
in Latin, Greek, and Italian, and French, reasonable well. One night being in
bed in the same Chamber with him, and Captain Thomas Martin, on a sudden
enters a Moor, mine Host having brought him in, with a slave carrying a Torch,
covered from head to foot with woollen cloth, who saluted us in French: seeing
him so black I blessed my self, taking him for a devil, whereat he laughed,
bidding me I should not be afraid, for there was no danger. He kissed his hand,
and took mine with many kindnesses and expressions, that he could not have
slept if he had not seen me, entreating me to come to him on the morrow, to
communicate to me a matter of importance. Asking how he came so perfect in our
tongue, he told me he was once servant to one Charbi at Marseills, that he had
had business with my father, whom he named, and my brother: that he had been a
slave 9 years, then redeemed himself. On the morrow he was with us at our first
stirring, and we took a walk together, and then he invited us to dinner to his
house, which was very noble. I demanded of him how a person of such quality had
remained so long in slavery: he told me that for five years his ransom being a
thousand ducats was lost. He had four horses in his stable, his lodging
chamber was gilt, and had many other very fair rooms. He had one wife only, and
he would never marry other, but would live like a Christian. His wife was fair
in perfection. He gave me high commendations to his wife that she might be
courteous to me, and she was therefore very civil to us: He showed us all his
house, and a fair Library of well-bound books, and showed me how the Africans
had been Lords of a great part of the world, showing me a Book titled Albazer
full of curiosities, and histories of the renowned Africans, as Hannibal,
Massinissa, Septimus Severus Emperor, and many other Kings, Princes, and
Bishops, as St. Augustine and others.

I asked him why he followed not the Law of so many holy Bishops. He told me he
was not so far divided, and that in their Alcoran Mahomet confesses that Jesus
Christ was greater than he: that he met him in the sixth heaven and humbled
himself to him, beseeching him to pray to God for him, which he never did to
other Prophets, who all beg of Mahomet to pray to God for them. So as this man
wanted nothing of a Christian but Baptism; and told us that having paid his
ransom, if his Master Churbi the Consul had not pressed him to marry a young
widow whom he dearly loved, he had willingly become Christian. He was a man
very upright, wise, and virtuous, and if he would marry other wives, of the
chiefest in Town he might have plenty. He told me as a secret that the
Governor of Arzille, who was in heart of the Spanish opinion, would have given
his daughter in marriage, if he would have become Christian, he had likewise a
particular affection for Christians. This is that Arzille which in the year
1421. was conquered by Cordoue the Moor, which Don Alphonso, King of Portugal
regained from him.

But to return to Marocca, I shall speak of what I have often seen in Mountains
of Ziz, that is, how the people have a familiarity with serpents, and very
infants will play with them. The Mahometans having it by precept of Law, to
kill none of these pernicious creatures, insomuch as I was once reproved by one
of them for throwing a stone at a toad.

Being departed from Sequeline, we crossed the Mountains of Ziz, which takes
beginning at the skirts of Mezetazu, toward the West, and terminates at Telde,
toward Numidia. The Arabians call it Segelmesse, which are fifteen Mountains
where these Serpentine people inhabit, which the people call Zanaga, who keep
company with serpents, and have their gardens full of toads. It Is true there
are amongst them Magicians of diverse kinds, whereof some can charm these
reptile Creatures, as in the Indies they charm the Caymanes and Tiburons, Leon.
Abr. l. 3.
that these fish-monsters devour not them who fish for pearls, they call these
Magicians Malurman. In these Mountains of Ziz there are other Magicians, who
boast they can cure all diseases, Mahazin. Zaira.
them they call Mahazin, and are in great esteem. Another sort called Zairan
conjure tempests, lightenings, hails, and other Meteors, which are hurtful to
fruits. I remember I there saw a Magician, who perceiving a horrid tempest
approaching in a thick black cloud, which would quite destroy their Seytume, or
olives then in flower, he made a hole in the ground, and with certain words
urined in it, which diverted the storm to another part: yet they have another
sort they call Machabell, who say they can cure all diseases in cattle. Others
called Sadahachar, who have power over devils, and can compel them to any
place they command them: They have always one amongst them, and they call them
white devils. Others very skillful in Geomancy, who can show spirits in a
bright basin like a looking-glass, which represents what is desired: Others
they have that cause beasts or men to languish and die; but this last sort is
not only amongst Infidels, I have seen them likewise amongst Christians. For
being once at Seville in Spain, I knew a Flemish Limner excellent in his art,
who languisht by this means, betwitch'd by a famous strumpet called Segnora
Maria de Villara, who would have served a Comrade of his in like sort, with
certain biskets wherewith she entertained him, whereof one was charmed and the
other not; but he suspecting some villainy, cunningly conveyed it to her own
plate, and took another. Afterward she doubting nothing gave him one to
present to his wife, with a curious purse. But he returning home made trial on
a dog, who immediately fell to howling, and dyed. Mean while the Biscuit which
the Curtizan had taken unawares, began to work, whereupon perceiving her self
lost, she sent for her friend, who acknowledged he had given her the morsel,
ignorant what it was. Hereupon she desired him for a last service, he would go
to a certain place in a garden out of Town, and cut a cord which he should find
tied to a tree; which taking some friends with him he did, and found a toad
tied by the leg at the end of the cord, and he had no sooner cut it but the
Curtizan died. I was in Sevill when this happened, and seeing the body of this
woman going to burial, he who was the principal actor told me the story, for
we lodged in the same house. And his wife upon this strange effect durst no
longer wear the purse she sent her.

In order to this I will relate you two other examples of Sorcerers, which
happened in our Country of Provence, one of a Shoemaker at Aix. On the day he
was married a witch tied a knot upon a point, with certain words, and laid it
on the Altar in time of Mass, and afterward put it in a hole. For five or six
years these people could never live together, till the witch being apprehended
before her death, confessed where the point was, which was found together with
crosses, caracters, and sacred words: The witch was burned alive, and the
shoemakers wife afterward became with child.

The other of a Marsellian, who being in love with a maid, whom her friends
would not consent should marry him, was advised to go to Bail de Luc, a grand
Sorcerer, who made him make an offering to Satan, then drawing a circle on the
ground, he divided it in seven parts, and in each placed a character,
signifying the name of a Devil, who should appear to him in what form he would,
and carry him whithersoever he desired. But the other not being over confident
named the form of man, but the Sorcerer would have the form of a beast. In
fine, the other for money procured him to let him have the caracter of a Demon
with him to his own home, to make trial of, and made choice of the name
Leviathan, and about midnight went to do this work at his Mistresses door, the
Magician having told him 'twould work the more forcibly. He then laid the
Caracter upon a stone and on his knees made his prayers to Leviathan to assist
him in his enterprise.

He said this prayer five times, then on a sudden the devil appeared in a
hideous and horrible form, which the poor man having not courage to endure,
fell in a trance on the ground for three hours together. Afterward returning
to himself, he got up, took his ticket, and returned home sad and vexed at his
want of courage. He cast the Caracter in the fire, whence broke three such
claps of thunder, as if the house should have sunk to hell. The Father, Mother,
and Sisters ran to see what the matter was, but he seemed to know nothing. The
poor man being in this distress, came to me, for he was my friend, and telling
me the proceedings asked my advice, with most desperate speeches, saying, that
to gain his love he did not care to be damned. Whereupon I advised him in the
best sort I could, telling him that this way though he should gain his
Mistress, nothing but misery could befall him; then I made him promise me to
go together to a Capucin of my acquaintance to reconcile him, and receive his
diabolical renunciation; but this miserable man came not according to
appointment, persisting in his accursed resolution.

Mean while the maid having knowledge of all, married honorably with another,
and left the wretched man infamous and disgraced, to a Tragic death. Now to
conclude this discourse of Africa, I saw there certain beasts, the like whereof
I never saw in India East or West, they call them Pachacou, like foxes, and are
of so strange and ravenous a nature, that if they wind a dead corpse before it
be interred, they will scrape and mine till they get to it, and eat it to the
bones, some call them Chicali, they live only on flesh. And I remember that a
poor boy, servant to one of our company, being dead, we buried him in a sandy
ground, and as deep as we could, but the day following we found him drawn out
of the earth, and knawed to the bones. Not imagining how this came to pass, we
went next evening to watch, and found 'twas those beasts, who came in a troop
to hunt after such booty: We hit one of them so with a stone, that he lay for
dead, and as we were viewing him, as a strange thing, on a sudden he leapt up
and ran away, which made us think this Creature is exceeding crafty, that can
dissemble death so naturally. The Arabians call him Duburh, the Africans, Ilef.

A while after this battle, I went aboard at Lareche, and came to Calis, a
hundred miles from thence, so to San Loucas, then to Seuille, 16. leag. from
Calis, going thither by the Gadalquivir: and received some money I had a letter
of exchange for from Fez, I went to Grenado, two days journey from Seuille, so
down to Cordoua, and Guadix, and meeting with a wagon loaded with wool, I came
to Cartagena, then following the coast to Malaga, Valencia, Barcelona, and at
last to Marseills.

THE THIRD PART Of the Famous TRAVAILS OF VINCENT le BLANC His Voyage to
CONSTANTINOPLE.
REturning from Africa, I embarked in a Scette at Arache, and together with
John Safolt, the Navigator that preserved us from wrack at Gibraltar came to
Cadiz, and thence to Marseills, where after three or four months rest, with
the same Master I went to sea again in a vessel fraught for Constantinople. We
set sail at Marseills the twenty fourth of January, and arrived at this great
town, the capital of the Western Empire, on the twenty second of February
following, having crossed the Archipelagus, and touched in at the Isle and Town
of Seio, or Asion, where we heard a sad disaster, of a Lover, that in despair
killed himself, and bequeathed his whole substance to his Mistress, the ground
of his destruction: There at a Convent of Franciscans, we saw the Fig Trees;
the fruit whereof never ripens, till certain knats ingendered of the corruption
of another, they call the Sicamore Fig, bites it; and then it ripens
immediately, and is exceeding delicate. Constantinople has been the subject of
so many ingenious pens, who have and daily do pourtray both the Town, and the
Empire, the Court and State of the Grand Senior, his Officers, Religion,
Customs, and other particulars of the Turks, that I shall enlarge my self no
further, then to say it is admirable for pleasant situation, and beautiful
aspect at distance, though the intrinsic corresponds not; for the streets lie
extremely sordid, out of the negligence or rusticity of the Inhabitants, who
think of nothing but gain, and avarice, without regard to decency either in
their houses, or streets. The Grand Senior, Bashaws, and such, have magnificent
Palaces painted with gold and azure, after the Persian. Her Founder Constantine
the Great dismantled Rome and all the Province of the Empire to adorn this his
new City, which in imitation of ancient Rome he seated on seven hills:
afterward Justinian erected the magnificent Church of our Savior, or S.
Sophia, of circular Model, by which pattern the Sarasins built their Temple,
or Mosque at Meca, though there be much difference betwixt them, that at Meca,
being only brick building, supported with abundance of Pillars.

Constantinople has within nothing graceful, but the Princes Seraglioes, the
Mosques, Hospitalls, and the Bashaws Palaces built by the art and industry of
their slaves, as heretofore at Rome: likewise these Bashaws for the greatest
part are Renegado-Christians, or Christians children, of more elegancy then the
natural Turk, the most avaricious people of the world, who without money,
afford not the least civility imaginable.

Constantinople is situate on a Promotory environed on all sides, except the
West, with the Sea, with a Gulf or Channel on the North, and Port Pera, or
Galata secured with a chain as Malta is. Pera is as 'twere a Suburbs beguirt
with Walls, raised in Anastasius the Emperors time, who fortified it. Within
the circumference there are four good Ports besides this. On the Land side it is
double walled, with good ditches equaled, slankard and rampar'd, no work of
the Turks notwithstanding, but the ancient Christians, who possessed it, and
since repaired by them. It Is of triangular form, one point toward the West,
the other two declining with falls and windings toward the sea on the South
side. From some houses in Pera, one may take a view of the site and precinct
of it, and perceive how it opens it self into three Angles, the one toward the
Port of the Islands, a second to the River Port, and the third points upon the
Grand Siniors Seraglio, which takes up the side of the hill, that embosoms the
Gulf toward Pera, the height whereof is a shelter to the vessels that ride on
that side, and here the Sultans, and Sultanesses Gardens are. The Seraglio is
of a noble and delightful Fabric, for it has both land and sea for prospect,
which from the Mount surveyes the champain. There are long ridings adjacent,
enclosed with high walls, and beautifyed with columns of discolored marble,
and tall trees ranked in walks. Within the Seraglio is the Temple of S.
Sophia, since the demolishment of a number of goodly Churches, made their
Mosque: having left none for the Greek Christian service, but those of S.
Peter, S. Thomas, S. Theodoret, Saint Luke, S. Lazarus, Saint John, and S.
Sebastian; now in the Patriarcks hands where Christians celebrate with
permission.

The Turks practice a Religion in Part and countenance merely, without regard
to law either divine or humane: The Turks Religion.
relying for their faith upon others, without further indagation, and
conditionally that their Prophet were not mistaken: Their principal care is the
manage of their affairs, to be esteemed wise, and enjoy the pleasures of the
world. They esteem Christians far short of them, yet notwithstanding they allow
Christ to be born of a Virgin, that he was a great Prophet, and the Breath of
the mighty God. There have risen amongst them some Sectaries, who held him a
greater Prophet then Mahomet: but some being so bold as to publish it, were
dragged by the heels, had their brains beaten out, and were made food for dogs.
The prohibition to dispute of their law they observe exactly, for manifesting
the impertinence and absurdity of it, and for the diverse interpretations of
their Alcaron, which would entangle them in a thousand confusions. They place
their Paradise entirely in sensual pleasure, as in gustfull and delicate meat
and drink, in fair women, and the like; and doubt not salvation, if they
abstain from wine and swines flesh. Their Talismansat and Cadileschers, their
Doctors preach them this wholesome doctrine: telling them the Paradise promised
to Christians where there is neither meat nor drink, is for poor and wretched
creatures; in theirs they make good cheer, so carnal, and below spirit are
these people. The Priests must be a little learned in the course of the Sun and
Moon, for the knowledge of their Feasts and New Mons: they go daily upon the
steeple of their Mosque, and proclaim the hours of prayer to God and their
Prophet.

They have Religious of several orders, some like men in desperation,
counterfeiting the idiot, others dissembling simplicity, others that most
frantickly torment themselves to death, women who ring themselves with wire, as
we do Mares, but of this I have said sufficiently in my Treatise of Persia. The
Mufti is their Grand Patriarck, who decides all differences in Religion and
disputes amongst the Priests, and the Grand Sinior himself cannot wave his
sentence, who owes him such respect, that he rises from his seat to receive him
when he makes a visit to him, and seats him by him. The determination of civil
and criminal causes is committed to the Soubassi or Gadilescher Basha, Armin,
or Arcair. This Mufti as of the line of Mahomet, wears a green Turbith, the
Emir wears it also; not for holiness, but for authority. These Emir are
egregious Hypocrites, as are the Deruis, who wear the Cimeterre, and under
color of executing divine Justice, commit a thousand murders in the country.
There are others who go in troops, and coming to a Village beg alms upon their
knees, which Turks give them liberally, and they eat it in the place,
neverthesse having done, for all this charity, all they can meet alone, they
omit not to pillage and murder.

During my stay at Constantinople, there died Basha Zabahim, a person of worthy
repute according to his law: Being departed, his death was notified to all the
people, who came in a multitude and wept for him, and according to custom he
was interred without the town. Persons of such quality at their decease ever
bequeath to pious uses, as to the foundation of an Hospital, or Mosque, or the
like; officers clad in duskish course rugs, give notice to the people to pray
for the soul of this pious Lord: His nearest kindred covered with fine white
linen from head to foot, go to the house and attend at the gate, no man
entering in but the Master. Such as are more remote, are only veiled over the
face with a fine cloth, which hangs down to the girdle. They are known by their
wailings and lamentations, which they duplicate when they come together. Then
come forth all the Domestics in gray Ash-colored cloth, next come twelve
horses, with clothes of the like drawing on the ground, the leaders clothed
with the same. These horses seem to weep, and by intermissions to sigh and
sobbe, which they are brought to by rubbing their nostrils with a certain
drugge, while the people thinking them to weep really, accompany them with
tears and lamentations.

Then follow four in gray with four banners trailing on the ground, then four
more trailing Arms, Pikes, Javelins, Cimeters, Bows, and Arrows, all with like
lamentation; next comes the Corpse contrary to us with the head foremost,
clothed in a rich garment, born by six men well habited, six more holding up
the Pall of the same color; with the robes, with a black Turbant, upon which
there is a green ribband of a finger breadth, signifying the heaven promised by
their Prophet, and upon the Turbant a bundle of feathers of great value.

All his Allies and Friends follow after weeping covered with white, by the
head of the Corpse walk four Talimassans, reading prayers for the dead, these
assisted at his departure, and are obliged for some charity bestowed on them to
pray for him all the year; when they come to the crossing of a street, the
Corpse stays, and a Talimassan with a loud voice cries, Ala Ramani arban Muhis
la ala ila ala ale Huma ala. Which means, God is merciful, pray to God for
him; and with that the Priests, with Tallow Tapers walk round the Corpse,
repeating the same words, and thus conduct him to his Sepulcher, lined with
thin boards and roof'd over: for nine days all his kindred visit the tomb with
lamentations, whither they bring provision for the Priests and poor; for whom
there is alms assigned, and this, they say, maintains them till the
resurrection; when the breath of God will judge in favor of the Prophet, who
gives testimony of their good works before the divine Tribunal.

Meanwhile the widow of the deceased lays out for birds kept in cages, which
she buys and sets at liberty, that the merciful God may so free the soul of
the departed, as she has showed mercy to the birds, and poor: With the Turks
Process is decided, Turk^sh justice.
according to the letter of the Alcoran. Near the Seraglio gate is the Diuan,
where the Principals sit in scarlet robes. The second Tribunal or Diuan, is
within the Seraglio hard by the other, where sit the four Bachats, with the
grand Seniors Secretary, three Cadeleschers and the Beglierbeg, who is as
high-Constable. Here are criminal causes determined, and all that concerns the
Militia, and pay of Janissaries and Soldiers, attended by the Dragoman, one
skilled in all languages, for the benefit of strangers; for people of all sorts
come to these trials, and it is allowed to any one to see Justice executed. The
Dragoman takes perfect information, that no man may be surprised in his cause,
and then makes report to the Diuan. The Judges are ever of a graceful presence,
holding for a principle, that a fair mind was never covered with a foul face,
or very rarely. They afford a fair attention, and as diligent to a child as to
the grand Senior. In the Diuan there is a private window where sometimes the
Grand Senior, stands to hear the Justice of the Court, which keeps him in awe
and remembrance.

They have an equal and speedy Justice administered by the States gratis, nor
can they admit either of presents or mediations. Bad causes are rewarded with
good bangs, all done with weight and measure, for to the Judges it is death to
proceed otherwise. In affairs of importance where the grand Senior ought to
take cognizance, the Cadileschir makes the report to him, and he sentences as
he pleases. There are other Courts and Judicatories in several places of the
Town, for multitude of the Inhabitants, who for the most frivolous things
appeal to Justice. The Cadis, Armis, and Soubassi, are the Judges, who for
transgression are discharged of their office. The high Court of the Seraglio
sits all day, from morning to night, where they are provided of three meals a
day; before they enter, at nine, and in the evening, no man being allowed to
stir out, but the Vizier, keeper of the seal, who before he can seal any
dispatch, must acquaint the grand Senior. Three days a week these grand
Sessions are held, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday, and sometimes Tuesday, in
occurrence of great affairs, or of strangers: the other four days are assigned
to the Courts of the four Bachats, who dispatch the rest, and sit in places
appointed, whence on the Saturday they fail not to be at the grand Sessions,
where all attend, seated with crossed arms, and their feet close together, till
the grand Basha appear; to whom they address themselves with great reverence,
then to their seats with rigorous silence. The Basha with a list of papers in
hand, looking round, observes him who prepares to plead, then with his hand
gives him a sign to speak, and having heard the complaint, then hears the
adverse party, and with great prudence judges and gives sentence.

In case of murder they make particular inquiry of all accessaries, and they
escape not without a good fine that could, and hindered not the murder: For all
that are present are bound under fine and penal punishments to apprehend the
murderer, and bring him to the Soubassi, the Cadi's Lieutenant, who having
heard the matter gives judgment. I was at Constantinople in the time of
Amurath grand Son to the Sultan Soliman, where by one Bernard Nadal a
Marseillian, I learnt many particulars of the Court: He was taken by the Turks
in his youth, and presented to the Soliman, who made him renegado, and his
page. He made me an exact relation of the whole Court and Seraglio, out of
which I collected some memorials that I lost. I can humbly say, God made me an
instrument to regain this man, who came back to Marseills, while his Father and
Mother were yet alive, where he was reconciled to the Church, but sometime
after going to sea, was by the Turks retaken, and put to death. Of the Seraglio
I remember he told me that within the second gate upon the left hand is the
Princes kitchen, not comparable to those in our Royal Palaces; he reckoned all
the Officers to me, which I set not down. Beyond that is the great hall, or
chamber of the Agas Capigis, or Cadun, the door-guards, a different office from
the Chaous, who are exempt from guarding. Of this guard there are a great
number, divided by thirty to a Company. The third gate opens into gardens, set
with dates, and trees of other sorts; at the bottom whereof is a fair
Subterranean apartment, sumptuously stored with riches, on the top stands a
golden Mund, and on that a Cressant. Here the Prince bathes in hot seasons, and
sometimes eats; here he gives audience to Ambassadors, conducted through
diverse gates and Courts, for ostentation of the State and magnificence of the
Palace, the rich columns, Mosaic Tapestries, etc. He gives audience to
Ambassadors only twice; when they arrive, and when they depart, and then for
a special favor reaches them his right hand to kiss. In the middle of the
chamber stands a great globe of Crystal, A descripti^n of the Seraglio.
exceeding delightful to the eye, for the diversity of colors it presents,
enriched round with fair diamonds, rubies, and emeralds. At one end of the
Chamber is a door where the grand Senior goes to visit the Sultanaes, while the
Basha's entertain the Ambassadors; for the second room is for his wives and
Ladies, where none enters but Eunuchs. Nadal that I spoke of as a Favorite,
went in often with the Prince, and was fortunate in this that the Sultan
excused him from castration, for fear of loosing of him, many loosing their
lives by it, though when it is done they are cast in a sleep, by virtue of a
stupifying water. He told me the Ladies would blandish him exceedingly, and
that there was one who daily said the rosary of the blessed virgin, and was
daughter to the Prince of Natolia. The Sultan keeps ten pages, as grooms of his
chamber to dress and undresse him, who serve not by quarter, but attend the
Prince continually, as Pages of honor: They are cul'd out of many more, and
ordinarily are chosen by their Physnomy, or good face. It Is the office of one
of these to go every morning to the Chasna, or Treasurer for forty ducats to
put in the Grand Seniors pocket for his charity, and bounty; at night when he
goes to bed, all the money left in his pockets the Pages of honor divide
amongst them, where they often find the sum complete, the grand Seniors affairs
not allowing him leisure to think of it. They fetch every day the like sum for
his sports. These Pages watch all night by the Prince, two and two by turns,
and have Flambeaus burning, till Sun rising that the Prince rises: for then
from a high steeple the Dalliman calls every one to prayers. The Prince as soon
as he is ready goes to the Mosquee, and if he please, takes his Pages of honor
to attend him; sometimes to take the air he goes on horse to a Mosquee more
remote, and then is attended in handsome order. Furthermore the Porter or
Capaigis, Bashaw Abrahor the master of horse.
has authority to punish any that shall raise any broiles in the Palace, and
suffers no man to go in with arms. The Querriship comprehends 300. goodly
horses, twelve whereof are reserved for the Princes saddle alone, on which
only the pages of honor may ride: there are other stables for above six
thousand horse, as 3000. palfreys, called there Deuagilar. There are a number
of horses besides, and the Master of horse they call Bashaw Abrahor.

In my time 'twas thus, perhaps things are altered since, I only touch upon
this Court passing by, with reference to more ample relations extant of this
subject.

I was not forth in this voyage to Constantinople above eight months, but I
returned the same year to Marseills, where I found the Town in much inquietude,
for apparition of certain spirits in the house of one George Trian, who had had
two wives both deceased. These Goblins made strange noyses, and presented
strange illusions, as Tiran reported, in effect it much disturbed the
neighbors, at last all was set at rest by a neighbor that discovered there
remained some things unsatisfied, by one of the wives, which she appeared to
reveal.

Going one day to visit Monsieur, the Count of Carsa, living then at Marseills,
discoursing of this accident, he related to me several things of this kind;
amongst others, that being on a time with two friends at Susa in ^eemont, they
were told at their lodging how there was a Chamber haunted with spirits, and
strangely molested with horrible rumblings: hereupon they were taken with a
curiosity to lie in this chamber, whatsoever their host could say to dissuade
them; their evenings discourse was only of apparitions, which one amongst them
absolutely denied, saying 'twas all but fables, and fantastical imaginations:
But lying all together in the same bed, about midnight the Count wakes, and by
the light of a Flambeau they had left burning, he saw some Monks both black and
white, reading their Breviaries by the blew light of a Taper, that made the
whole chamber of the same color: he could not understand a word they said,
though he observed them diligently: he was seized with such horror he could
not speak to his bed-fellowes, only jogged the next with his elbow, who slept
as he were charmed; and when he saw the Monks with grave steps draw nearer the
bed, his fear redoubled, and though their swords lay hard by him, terror only
possessed him. He thought the Monks muttering some words, turned off the
clothes, took one of his companions out of the bed, and burnt him to ashes in a
great fire; and in effect one of them was gone and never heard off more, and
none but himself and one more left in the bed.

I remember also that being at St. Bauma, while Godfrey the accursed sorcerer
was there, as they carved him fish, being Lent, and laid it on his trencher, he
seemed still to eat, yet there was nothing less on his trencher; and Father
Michaelis exorcizing Magdalen de la Palu, asked her what it meant? who answered
he could not eat of all things; and that the Devils brought him human flesh, of
which he fed and left the rest, And diverse Sorcerers executed at Aix, have
confessed that in their Sabbaths, most commonly they feed on such fare.

This makes me doubt whether those Goblins or Sorcerers, seen by the Count,
carried not the poor Gentleman away for the like provision; for he was never
seen more, and the other two remained frighted and astonished almost to death.
Notwithstanding de Carsis, so he was called, was a prudent and valiant person;
and the third that escaped with the Count, was called Vieramont. I made the same
year a journey into Italy, and coming to Pecholi to visit some friends, being
in bed at an Inn, I heard a strange noise, and a voice that called me by my
name, which I took to be the voice of my mother, who told me she was dead:
frighted wherewith I fell into lamentations, till my Brother-in-law overheard
me, and came with a candle, who understanding the matter reassured me. But
continuing in sadness, about six days after going from Pecholi, I fortuned
luckily on a Marseillian Merchant, my acquaintance, who came but four days
before from thence, and assured me he left my mother in health, so I found
'twas but a mere illusion. Afterward in the same voyage going from Rome to
Naples, betwixt Aquila and Abruzza, we lodged in a village called Chelana,
where mine host having seen us well accommodated in bed, retired to another
room, for fear of spirits that haunted that: and in good earnest we had a very
troublesome night of it, not able to rest for ratlings and jinglings, both upon
the stairs and in the Chamber, without perceiving any thing, much ado to
comfort one another, and 'twas to no purpose, we called mine host; who in the
morning excused himself the best he could, and all passed in laughter; but
coming back that way we found the house pulled down, and a Church building in
the place.

Then returning into France, we passed by Beaucaire, where we supped with the
Sieur de St. Andre, Governor of Montpelier, and telling him of these spirits,
being a Protestant, he made a scoff at it; but the best was, that in the night
as he lay in bed, he was waked with such a noise, that leaping to his sword, he
cried out, and raised us all; supposing thieves were robbing the house, but
finding doors and windows all fast, he was amazed, and made an oath he would
never jest at spirits again.

The Authors voyage into Italy.
REturning to Marseills in a time of sickness, I went to sea again, in a
vessel bound for Brasile, under the command of Captain James Varin. Our
sufferings in this voyage were great, specially in our return, when we were
glad for food to eat all manner of leather, Munkeys, Parrots, and Rats, which
passed for plovers. I was the most troubled with a young Marsellian I brought
along with me, one William Vias, a neighbor, a most malicious untoward fellow,
who did me not the least service, though I laid in provision for him, and paid
his passage. He quarrelled with every one, and was beaten by every one, without
any amendment, growing worse and worse.

Once he was soundly banged for saying he would kill the Captain, and had my
advice been followed, they should have made a Fricassee of him, as I saw one
served at Brasile, as I shall relate in my second voyage to the West Indies.

At our return, we came a shore at Haure, where I dismissed him, and came alone
to Marseilles, where I married the most perverse woman in the world, so as when
I thought to have spent the remainder of my life in repose, I was constrained
to wander again for quietness, and in effect made a voyage to Portugal, to
barter some pearls.

I laid in Merchandises proper for Cadiz, as Camlots of the East, cloth,
coral, and two hundred crowns in gold, upon letters of exchange to Hierome
Viguer of Chativa, and an hundred pistols, I deposited with Noe Menestier,
which I lost; yet he an honest man; for this Viguier a Spaniard, used such
sleights and delays, that I was constrained to quit all, by a misfortune which
befell me. For waiting for my money at his Brothers house one Emanuele, one
evening coming out of a Church, there stood discoursing a company of Cannons,
who seeing me in a French dress, according to that degenerous custom of the
Spaniard, began to affront me, which I waved with patience; and telling them
how injurious 'twas to abuse a stranger thus merely passing by them, they
wanted not much to come from words to blows with me and my man: Hereupon I
complained to the Duke of Gandia, who gave me no other satisfaction than to
refer me to the Bishop, from whom I returned with as little satisfaction.

Thus discontented I left the Town, and removed to Cadiz, by the way I lighted
upon one of these venerable Cannons travailing for Valencia, well mounted, and
glasses before his eyes to preserve them from the wind; now I having this
opportunity for my revenge, gave him such a buffet that I broke his glass, and
sent him senseless to the ground: then upon the spur doubled my pace to
Guadix, where 'twas my hard fortune to loose a bill of exchange I had for cloth
I sold at Valence. thence by Granado I went to Cadiz, where some small
negotiations being dispatched, I returned for Provence: But having some prick
in conscience for my treaty of the Cannon of Gandia, I went to a Priest to
confess my self, who considering the species of my fault, turned me over to
the Bishop, who absolved me, and for penance obliged me to make a pilgrimage to
Rome: I performed it, and coming to Saint Peter's Church, to confess me to one
of the Penitentiaries, with long slaves, by ill luck he prooved a Spaniard, and
understanding I had beaten a Cannon of Gandia, was much concerned, howsoever
gave me absolution.

A History.
At this time there was an Almner of the Popes, who had the disposing of ten or
twelve thousand ducats to the poor yearly, and as they say, reserved a good
share for himself; so as in few years he became exceeding rich, but very
avaritious: Whereupon some good fellows there, were resolved to show him a
trick, and partake with him; for this purpose one of them opens a shop of small
commodities, with some curiosities and antic medals of gold and silver.

This Almner as he came from Church, went every day to converse with this new
Merchant, who still showed him rarities, whereof sometimes he bought, sometimes
not. At last when their familiarity was confirmed, behold another of the pack,
disguised like a slave, an iron plate about his neck, and a red cap, stands to
beg at St. Peter's porch, and as the Almner came by, besought a charity of him:
the other seeing him of a good aspect, asked him what he was? who answered he
was a poor Gentleman newly come out of slavery, and having his conscience
burdened, desired he would hear his confession. So entering the Church, this
Gallant told him a long story, how he had been diverse years captive to Dragut
Raise that famous Pirate, that at length he made him groom of his Chamber, and
trusted him with all his money and jewels, and that his Master being slain at
the siege of Malta, he took a jewel of extraordinary value, and a sum of
ducats, and came with the Fleet to Constantinople, where he met with means to
get into Christendom, and return to his Country with his wealthy prize.

The Almner was on fire, to have a sight of the rich piece, and told him if it
were a thing of that value, he would procure his holiness to buy it: The slave
then conjuring him to secrecy by the name of God, showed him a fawcet
Crystal, artificially colored with Dragons blood, which made it of an
admirable luster; wherewith the Almner dazzled, desired him he might show it to
a Merchant a friend of his, of knowledge in such things, so they went together
to the Merchant, who viewing the jewel, made unusual admirations, as at an
excessive treasure, telling him 'twas worth many thousand ducats; whereby his
longing growing stronger, after many offers and refusals betwixt the slave and
him, they at length bargained for two and twenty thousand crowns, which he paid
upon the nail: Whereupon the Merchant shuts up shop, packs away, and vanishes
with the slave, never to be heard of.

Meanwhile the Almner was so swelled with his purchase, that he could not
contain himself, imagining by this means he might arrive at any office or
dignity whatsoever, and fancied himself Pope already, with this Carbuncle in
his Tiara: For some days he concealed it, not discovering the least to his
very nearest friends. At length meeting with two Goldsmiths of his old
acquaintance, he showed it them, and would know their opinion of the value, or
near the matter; who perceiving it a counterfeit carbuncle, laughed heartily,
and said 'twas a pretty Crystal, and might be worth some few realls, which so
stroke the good man, that overcome with grief and vexation, he betook himself
to his bed, whence he never rose again. Thus was the good man abused by the
knavish cheats.

To second this, I shall tell you of an exploite was put upon me in this very
voyage. I intended for Naples, to buy some horses, for which purpose I had a
good handsome sum of money I had taken for pearls I brought from Lisbone, and
sold to the Marquess of Oraison, which I had put in two bags, whereof one I
ever carried about me. One day passing through the market Colonna, I observed a
Goldsmith well furnished with jewels, and having cheapned a good diamond of
about four or five carrats weight, and a good luster, by reason the Bishop of
Marseills desired me to buy him one if I met with a good bargain; we agreed for
threescore and odd pistols, which I laid down; but he recanting and demanding
more, I withdrew my money. Upon this comes in a man in good fashion, his beard
white, and a black velvet cap, and told me in private if I would buy a good
diamond, or other jewels, he would show me those were good, and at a reasonable
rate. I took the man for some Senator, or person of quality, and followed him,
though the Goldsmith pulled me by the sleeve, to come into his shop again. As
we went along, my Gentleman entertained me with discourse of several jewels he
had at his Chamber, without Port Popolo, at last he had brought me to a place
out of all ways, near the Palle Malle, by the wall side; I began to suspect
some mischief when I heard a Faquin by the way bid farewell, such a one calling
him by his name; and as I was thinking to take my leave of him, and go back
again, I was seized upon by four or five Ruffians, who set a dagger to my
breast, and made me deliver my purse, and the bag I had about me, and my guide
vanished so as I could see him no more.

In this miserable condition I came back to Rome, full of shame and sadness,
and though I spoke not a word of it, yet my misfortune was immediately divulged
through all Rome, how I had been cheated by one in such clothes, who was known
and famous for such a one, he was not long after apprehended and meeting me I
knew him not at all, having cut his hair and changed his clothes, and stoutly
denied the fact. They showed me some pieces of gold, which I claimed as my own,
but that was all I could get.

Notwithstanding he was within few days after, with two of his Comrades
hanged, convicted of diverse other robberies.

Being upon return to Marseills I made a digression toward the river Genes,
and Malta, and by reason the plague was at Martigues, I could not without
difficulty be admitted into Ville Franche, to take a bill of health to cross
the River Genes, where they are exceeding severe upon such occasions.

The day after I arrived, coming abroad two hours before day to take fresh
air, I heard a doleful voice coming, as I thought, from Capo Ferino, that
cried, Alas, kill me not, and take all I have; and after some profound groans
cease. The day brought the matter to light, and it appears a poor man was
murdered by some of Nice, persons of quality, and free from suspicion.

For these people with the Castle-Frigot went aboard a Bark, and having put all
to the sword, and pilladged, sunk it: but God for his just judgment permitted
him, who sat at helm to leap into the water, and being ignorant of swimming,
they say a Dolphin came betwixt his legs and carried him to shore, then
knocking at the Castle Gate, he was brought wet as he was, before the
Governor, to whom he related, that some with the Castle Frigot had boarded
their vessel, and used them as I told you. The Governor amazed at the matter,
called for him who had charge of the Frigot, to know to whom he had delivered
it, who told him that such and such had taken it without asking, because he had
ever allowed them the privilege.

The Governor put on his clothes and went to the shore, where he found his
Frigot drawn on land, and a boy washing away some blood which was in it; for it
seems one of the Bark endeavoring to escape, they took him, killed him, and
threw him into the sea. The Governor quietly asked what he was doing, he
cunningly answered, they had in the night taken a great Fish, and that he was
washing away the blood. In the instant came he who had taken away the Frigot,
to give good morrow to the Governor, whom the Mariner immediately knew, and
cried out, that was he who had done the fact; whereupon the Gentleman, with two
others, were brought to the Castle, and upon trial executed; two more escaped,
but being taken afterward, paid the same rates, confessing many more murders,
and vessels sunk; amongst others, one wherein were 22. Religious, Jesuits, and
Capucins, whom they wrapped all in a sail, and cast into the sea, having
pilladged what they had.

Thence we went to the Town of Genes in company of one Alari, who had brought
Hawks to the King, and was going toward the Duchy of Vrbina, and being at
Vay about three or four miles from Savona, they would not suffer us on any
conditions to pass further, and of necessity we must turn our course to the
mountains of Mountferrat a country pestered with Bandits, and such other; in
which passage we were robbed, and poor Alari lost above two thousand franks
which he had in his Valice.

We met with many difficulties in this passage, crossing through narrow
passages, filled up with snow by Alcare to Casoanta, Alexandria, Placenta,
Parma, Bolonia, Florence and Rome, where we arrived against the canonization of
some Saints.

I got Letters from Sieur Guileo Falio Ambassador of Malta for some of the
money owing me by the Grand Master. Thence we came to Naples where such a
famine reigned, that the women in mutiny threw stones at the Governor in his
Coach, the Cardinal and Sapata, whose heels saved his life.

Then we took a Frigot for Messina, and by edict we were to take no more bread
aboard then for half a day; I brought half a crowns worth, which I hid under
the Planks: we had been undone if it had been found, and the soldiers were
exact searchers; we suffered some hardship when we had no bread to our meat,
yet so we passed two days entire: and putting in at the Pouilla, we could not
amongst all the Fishermen for any money buy a morsel, nor could have any thing
amongst them but fish, which we afterward trucked with a youth for bread, he
had in reserve; coming to Asilla, there we got bread; thence to Messina through
the Straight, so dangerous for three or four leagues, where violence of the
wind cast us on the Rocks. I got as well as I could to land, but seeing some
women left in the Bark, and ready to perish, I persuaded a young shoemaker to
assist me, nnd in effect, carrying them on our backs through the boisterous
waves, we got them safe to shore, for which afterward they vouchsafed us not
so much as thanks.

At Messina I understood the Sieur de Mantis was with his Gallion at Saragossa,
being dispersed from his Admiral, and seven or eight more that put to sea
together at Marseills, and lighting upon Sanson the famous Pirat, with his six
ships they maintained a long fight, at length the S. Katharine torn with the
Cannon sunk, and had it not been for Monsieur de l'Isle Captain of the Admiral,
things had gone worse, but night parted them. De Mantis, his ship repaired,
intended to put to sea to seek his company, but there was news brought that
Sanson with six tall ships waited his coming forth within Cannon shot of the
Haven mouth. Notwithstanding the odds, de Mantis resolved to fight him single.
'Twas the admiration of all that saw him hoyse sail, looking on him as a
frantic man, leading two or three hundred men to the Butchery, but this
censure was changed into applause, when they beheld him environed with six
Turkish ships, whose Cannons made the sea seem on fire* of which engagement he
cleared himself, and restored them a bloody requital.

His vessel endured seven hundred Cannon shot, he lost twelve men, and the
Turks above three hundred, besides what wounded. Thus victorious he returned to
Saragossa, where he was saluted with Cannon from all the Forts, and received
into the town with an eminent honor and endearments, for his boldness to
attack these six men of war well manned and commanded by an English Renegado,
the most daring and desperate Pirate on the sea, who on the other side incensed
with his disgrace, new manned his vessels, and reinforced them with two
Galleys, and three hundred Musketeers: The Grand Master de Vignacourt had
intelligence of it, and de Mantis arriving at Malta, with his torn vessel, he
repaired it; and at the same time the ships of Marseills coming from Suria, put
in there. Sanson having put to sea, rode in sight of Cape Passaro, whereof the
Grand Master gave notice to the Marsellian vessels laden with Merchandises.
Mantis with his Admiral designed to fall upon the Pirates, whereupon I had some
doubt if I were best go from Malta to Sicily, for 'twas ten days since I had
my dispatches from the grand Master, who amongst other things had given me
order to procure him three Galleys, built with all possible expedition: I was
loath to imbark with de Mantis, for the hazard he was engaged in, though of
favor he promised me civil usage, and I employed my best art, with the Master
of a ship, to carry me to Ligorne, and thence to Marseilles, promising to load
him with Gally timber for Sicily, so as he resolved accordingly, and that we
might pass unperceived of the Turks, we set not sail till toward the
approach of night. The grand Master being advertised of our intention, sent the
Galley de la Religion, to call us in again, to my extreme vexation, having
attended so long for a passage; But after I with my goods was set a ashore, the
Master had liberty to go whither he pleased: The grand Master blamed me
exceedingly, for that the Turks lay then in the Channel, which was true, and
in effect the vessel was taken next day, so as I had the better luck to escape.
Mean while the Gallion of Malta was making ready to execute the Kings command,
and within fifteen days 'twas ready to be brought to the key, where de Mantis,
with the Marseillian vessels staid for it, to put out together for the coast of
France* at the same time the Galleys of Malta were departing for Sicily, and de
Mantis, being in the Kings ship, where he commanded for his Majesty, saluted
them not as they passed by, whereat the Knights were much incensed, looking
upon it as a point of honor, advertising the grand Master that he ought to
fire all the Fort artillery upon him, and sink him: But the prudent Lord
managed the affair with more moderation; and three days after the Galley
being made ready to launch, and being brought to the key, they asked de Montis
who lay before the Palace, if he would salute the Galley of Malta, when it came
to the key; and answering resolutely no, there passed tart words from both
sides, with menaces they would make him do it per-force; but he persisted, that
he would lose his life first, and that he had no such Commission; and when they
demanded to see his Commission, he refused it in plain terms.

But the grand Master desirous to accommodate all this, found out this
expedient: It Is an order of Malta, when the grand Master comes upon the shore,
all the vessels in the Haven salute him, with three volleyes of Cannon: now he
gave order that about seven next morning the Gallion should fall down to the
key, at which time he exactly contrived to appear upon the shore, under
pretense of going that way to Mass at a sumptuous Church he had built with a
fair fountain before it, that cast up waters a Pike high.

His coming was no sooner discovered, but all the vessels prepared with haste
to salute him, and de Mantis the foremost, as a thing not to be denied gave him
all his Cannon as well of his own vessel as of the Admiralls commanded by the
Sieur d'Isle, and at the instant, all the other vessels did the like, so as
nothing was to be seen but smoke and fire. At that very point the Gallion with
her blazing Standart, a S. John upon her poop, entered the mouth of the Haven,
and thought this discharge of Ordnance was a salute for her, who returned them
the like with her roaring Ordnance, and thus by the prudence of the great
Master, the difference was composed.

All this while Sanson lay at sea waiting for de Mantis, but having
intelligence that the Gallion was of the company, he was better advised, and
knowing himself too weak to close with us, hoysed sail and went his way,
leaving a Galley to round us, and view our equipage, which came one morn before
the Gallion, and made a turn in the head of the whole Fleet, the Gallion gave
him two culverins, and de Mantis one, and with this salute they parted, and we
came safe to Marseills.

The Authors Voyage to Guinea.
BEing at Sevill for traffic of stones and pearls, I met with some
Marseillians, who had bought of the English a vessel at a good pennyworth,
they had taken at sea; they invited me into their company, and from Sevill
being bound for Cadiz, by that we got some sixteen leagues at sea, they had so
prevailed with me, that for trade I was resolved to join with them, whose
design was for the white Cape, by others called the Cape of fishing, to load
themselves with fish, which there they have for taking, there being such
abundance, that but for salting they might lade many vessels in a days space:
within ten days we came to Cape Nona, where we took in fresh water, and seven
days after we arrived at the white Cape, a main shelter in the winter season,
where the fish lie so thick, the ship brushes, and rubbes upon them as 'twere
sailing through a shelf of sand.

There we found two vessels, a Fleming and a Marseillian; the Master whereof
was John Baptista le vust called Servat, who for his Merchant employed
Aurigues: the 15. of November we were upon a River of Guinea called Senega.

I ever carried with me a little memorial or diurnall, where I set down all the
curiosities I met with, for which purpose I informed my self of the situation
of the country, the quality of the Prince and government, of which I will make
a brief relation.

Guinea on the West is bounded with the River Senega, which ingulfs into the
Ocean at sixteen degrees to the North, and the borders of Angela are at
thirteen. Guinea is divided into the high and the low; the high Guinea inclines
to the North, the lower lies along the Senega, which they call Jeni, and
reaches to the kingdom Manicongo, that begins at the first degree of the Line.
Upon the coast of Cape Verde, are many Islands of one appellation, the
principal is of S. James, in the hands of the Portuguese, since the year 1446.
where they have a well-fortified town, and a Bishopric styled Civitad: an
Island of 60. miles in length, and 36. in breadth, a mountanous country, where
they have never rain but in September and October, which comprehend their
winter. The valleys are fertile, and afford excellent Melons the year round,
Dates and Sugarcanes in abundance, flesh of all sorts, Foul and Venison, with
beards of horses and special good. It Is inhabited as that of S. Thomas, by a
conflux of all nations, and the air being unwholesome, they transport their
infirm to an Island two leagues distant called Praya, under a fine climate; the
air healthful, and a commodious Haven betwixt two fair Rivers, which compose
two gulphs for harbors, one whereof is capable to contain many vessels in
security, having before the mouth of it a little Island, which guards it from
the Maritime gusts, and the land lying high, defends it from winds by shore.
The other Islanders affect to land at this Port, for that the rest are pestered
with sands; and chiefly, Borlouento and S. Thomas, where there is ever some
vessel cast away. This Isle lies close upon the Isle of Mago, otherwise called
Barlouento, and near to Bona Vista, Saint Nicholas, Saint Anthony, Saint
Vincent, Saint Lucie, and Fell, Islands plentiful of Cattle, and Venison, the
inhabitants applying themselves only to the chase, powdering the flesh to sell
to strangers, as the skins likewise.

A little Eastward lies the Isle del Fuego where they get as good wine as in
the Canaries: next is the Isle of Braua, full of Venison, and wild Beeves,
whereof the Hydes are much sought after, as being thick and tough. But to
Guinea, the kingdom of the Jalofes is the first, which begins Northward at
the River Senega, has the Ocean on the West, the Jalofes called Fonlogageias,
on the East, and the kingdom of Barbessin on the South: it is above a hundred
and fifty leagues in length, of several commodities there is abundance; as gold
and silver, which the natives conceal with all care from strangeers, though in
dealing with them it is plain they have store, for that by whiles they produce
some unfined. Taboucaton is their chief town. They are Blacks, but of good
shape, the women comely, round-faced, with eyes lively and attractive. The men
are martial, dextrous in throwing a Javelin, which they will throw with as
exact arm as we shoot with our Gunnes. They ride on good horses, clothe as the
African, in short breeches; a large Harnus, like a sheet of woollen covers them
from head to foot, shod with Date-tree Sandals. Upon the coast they have the
good and well-fortified Haven Beziguche, whose entrance is skreen'd with a fair
Island, much frequented with strangers trading for the Indies. Here are many
Portuguese settled amongst them, some married, others who think of nothing but
to heap up gold, living something after the Barbarian. Many of the Blacks go
naked, painted with dissolved gold, their bodies carved, and drawn with a
various tincture, as azure, red and yellow, which hold their lifetime. There
are amongst them maids adorned in the same manner, with great pendants in their
ears, and their lips pierced like the Brasilians, they are generally
libidinous, and given over to luxury. They who are thus engraved and inlay'd
with paints, or juice of herbs, most commonly do it for want, and this
curiosiry is their attire.

Throughout the coast we find abundance of leather; wax, gold, silver ivory,
and Amber-gris, which is the reason the English, Hollanders, and Flemings,
visit them so often.

The Jalofes are easy of belief, and inclined to Christianity; when they
behold the Moon, they make strong ejulations, with sorts of adoration: They
adore yet some other Idols, which nevertheless fix not their faith, the
Mahometans on one side who impugn them with their law, on the other the
Portuguese preaching ours, and their own Priests charming them with their
delusions, and Idolatries. They make their sacrifices in the woods, making
large hollow trees their Temples, where they keep many Idols to which they
sacrifice pulse, Mill, Rice; and the blood of beasts, whose flesh they eat.

The country of Bracala confines upon the rapide River of Gambra, which in the
mouth is five good leagues over, ships cannot enter it without a direct wind,
with which they may advance three hundred leagues within the Country. This
River cuts the great kingdom of Mandinga in the middle, peopled with Blacks,
Idolaters, and abundance of Sorcerers, wicked, treacherous, and base people.
When they hold a counsel,it is in a cavern under ground to secure them from the
prying of strangers. They have store of Brasil wood, as good as they of
America, and upon the river many towns and villages where they mantain many
vessels of War to encounter with any whatsoever, but upon advantage. This
country ends Southward at the Cape of S. Mary 30. leagues from the river
Chougala, by the Portuguese called S. Dominick. There are two nations of the
same quality, the Barbachins called Ariates, and Falupes who trade in nothing
but fish and cattle. They have an excellent way to take the sea-oxe, the skins
whereof they make great use of. They apply themselves to till the soil, and
get Mill, Rice, Pulse, and other grain.

Out of this country comes the River Casamanca, bounded Northward with the
Jabundos, on the South, with the people of Bemum, who on the East have the
Casangas. Of late years the Portuguese have discovered a way by an Arm of the
Sea to Casangas, and for this purpose have erected a good Fort upon the cheek
of it called S. Philips. This kingdom reaches Northward to Jaren, and together
do homage to the Sultanship of Mandinga, rich in gold and silver, having
excellent mines.

The Prince keeps his Court in the Town of Senrigo, more Eastward by a hundred
leagues, then the Cape of Palms; all the Blacks, as well of high as low
Guinea, acknowledge this King, whereas the inhabitants along the Rivers,
Faraca, Nigrate, and Budomel obey the King of Tombut, Lord of three kingdoms
of Blacks.

This country is called by the Protuguese Mandimanca, where they adore the
Moon, called by them the Bariamari, that is, the God of night or darkness, and
offer sacrifices to it in the most obscure woods, in hollow trees, at midnight;
as they do likewise at Cassanga, who have one China for their principal Idol,
in whose honor they go on procession the twenty ninth of November, about
Midnight. One of their Priests or Magicians with them called Acacani, bearing a
banner of silk, with a faggot of Vine branches, and diverse bones of dead men. I
believe they are bones of such as have made voluntary sacrifice of themselves
to this Demon, who appears to them after diverse manners; this Ensign wears a
garment of woven twigges, at which there hang diverse heads of little dogs,
Munkeys, and other small creatures. Procession ended, they repose the Idols
within the same tree, and burn most sweet perfumes to it, sacrificing Mill;
then make their prayers and depart.

In their dealings these people are lawless, trading in slaves with the
Portuguese and others, which they rapine from all parts, and make their Market
of them, to a miserable slavery. The Cassangarians neighbor upon another
Nation called Lebouramos, who live along the River Saint Domingo, by the
natives called Jarin, full of fish, but a dangerous Haven, for the Sands and
Rocks which lie before it.

Toward the North is Guinalla, another River; in the mouth whereof, the
Portuguese have built a Fort they call Sancta Cruz, and the Haven Guinalla.

They are Negroes, which they term Beafares, abominable thieves, making prey of
one another, to sell to the Portuguese. The King of Guinalla keeps a great
State, has a numerous guard of Archers, besides fifty huge strong dogs, all
armed with skin of sea-oxe dressed for the purpose, and made of proof, to every
one a keeper. In Towns by night they have no other guards then such dogs,
who once turned loose, spare no man, so as there is no stirring out of doors,
without danger of being worried. This they do to defend themselves from such as
by night come to break their houses, which are only turfe covered with leaves,
to carry away Negroes for the Market. The King has a mutiplicity of wives, and
believes that such wives as dye with him for company, meet him in the other
world, and become his wives again; but since they heard the true doctrine by
some Fathers of S. Francis, who showed them their folly, they have not been so
extravagant. Some of them were baptized, and went along with the Portuguese.

At the side of Guinala comes out a branch which runs to Port Begama, and a
few leagues higher divides again in two, and upwards, delivers it self to the
Sea. The Portuguese hold this Port, which they call Balola, and the people on
this branch are called Lansados. Both these are good Havens jointly inhabited
by the Portuguese and the Natives. For from the Meridionall point of this River
to Cape Vergas, there are three nations mingled with the Portuguese, the Malus,
Ebagas, and Cosolins.

Now from the South of that Cape begins a fair well-peopled Province they call
Gatulia, and the Portuguese Serellionna, that is a point throwing it self into
the sea by the side of a great river of the same appellation, by reason of a
hollow concavity roaring like a Lion. This is a very pleasant country, full of
Groves of Brasill trees, and Vines which they have not knowledge to dress,
abundance of Midian Figs which they call Bancanes, Sugarcanes grow without
planting; Besides, they have good conveniences, as Mills and Engines to make
their Sugar; for they have Mines in all parts. There is Rice, Cotton, Cattle
innumerable, Fish, Pepper in abundance, and more keen and pure then other; but
there is prohibition upon life to carry any to Spain or Portugal, for spoiling
the sale of that which comes from India.

Likewise there are Mines of Gold and Silver, Ivory, Amber-gris white and
black; in brief, it is absolutely a land of promise and delights. This Pepper
the Portuguese call Dimienta de cola, one would take it for a Chestnut, it
grows in a shell, though without prickles. Other strangers who come to
traffic for it, lade with it, but the Spaniard dares not take a grain.

In this country there is variety, and abundance of Birds; a sort of Ape they
call a Baris, he is great and strong, the inhabitants take them with nets,
traps and other engines, entrapping the sire and dam, with the young ones set
in cages. They use them but rudely, and beat them till they cry like children;
make them walk upon two feet, tying the foremost in their pole to a stick:
besides make them do many offices, as fetch water in a pitcher, wash dishes,
blow the fire, draw wine, fetch meat from the Butcher, and any other
domestical charre: But amongst all they will still be committing their
petitlarcenies for meat and drink, but are well corrected for it. The sport is,
when they turn the spit, to see how he will smell the meat, and turning his
great shaggy head with hanging hair, flyly watch if any body see him, and they
must be very vigilant, or he shows them a trick for the roast. As it happened
to a Portuguese, who had invited certain Merchants; but when they came to take
up dinner, Mr. Jack-turn-spit, had made use of one of the legs of a Turky-cock.
His Master for the present beat him not, for the necessary use they had of him;
who filled them wine and washed their glasses, and still at last took his cup
when it came to his turn, and with his rogueries made them very merry.

To proceed, the Portuguese make a good time with these Negroes, who bring them
unrefined gold for things inconsiderable, and to facilitate their traffic upon
a point of the Sea called Corco, five degrees North, they have built a Fort
near a Town, inhabited by the Natives and Portuguese together. The whole
Country of Serri Lionna is exceeding populous, and watered with fair Rivers,
bounded with tall dates, and great orange trees. The first River from Capo
Verga, the Countrymen call Piterones, the Spaniards di Pietro, dividing into
many branches, which interweave the land, and compose many Islands, by the
Negroes called Cagasian; where at an ebbing tide they find Amber-gris: for
which cause the Portuguese built a good Town there, co-inhabited by Portugueses
and Negroes; where they live so strangely, it is hard to know a Christian from a
Pagan, nor is it easy to judge who lives the better; there are at least two
thousand, Christians only by name, living and dying like Pagans.

After this River there are two more, Capor and Tanabasira, descending from a
high Mountain, called Machamala, where stands a great rock of Crystal, with
diverse Pyramids of the same, hanging from the top downwards; almost entirely in
the air, two or three spans distant from the ground, which seems a great
wonder, for touching it with the least fillip, it sounds like a bell. They say
it is a congelation, made so by the heat of the Sun, which melting the foot of
the Rock, left these points hanging in the air. It Is for a truth that certain
Magicians on a feast, carried their Idols thither, whither they ran from all
sides to the sacrifice, two thousand notwithstanding lost their lives, and the
Priests in the first place; for making their sacrifice and suffumigation at the
foot of the Crystal rock, the roof at which these Pyramids hung, shook, so as
they broke and crushed to pieces the greater part of them. The Devil having not
power to hinder the extraordinary heat of the Sacrifices from dissolving the
congelations, since which time no one comes near this Crystal grotte.

Something farther North there are other great Rivers, which render this
Province of Serrilyonna as a pack of Islands* particularly over against the
mouth of one of them, there are two very pleasant and good, the one called
Toro, where are rocks called St. Anne, which bear pearl oysters, yet they go
not to fish for them, by reason of Sea Monsters, which have swallowed some who
ventured.

In one degree to the South, lie the Islands Dolos and Tansente, inhabited with
Dates, Sugarcanes, Citrons, and abundance of Cattle, covered with Rice,
Millet, and long Pepper.

To conclude, these Blacks are governed by a King, and have Judges who
administer justice to them, whom they call Foncos. At certain times the King in
a various colored robe, comes into a room hanged with mat, set round with
seats for Counselors, whom they call Seitequi, and Advocates to plead for
both parties. The Counselors speak their opinion, and the King gives sentence,
which is immediately executed.

When the King of Guinalla dies, who governs many kingdoms, there go twelve
Seitequi, in long gowns of diverse colors, made of feathers, with twelve
trumpetters before them, sounding the more dolefully, by reason of a certain
skin they make use of, for rendering the note more sharp, and proclaim his
death: whereupon every one comes out of his house; mussled in a white cloth:
while the allies of the deceased assemble to elect another. They take the corpse
and wash it, burn the bowels before their Idol, and preserve the ashes to be
embalmed with his body. His Funerals are not celebrated till the next moon,
when the people assemble from all parts of his dominion, bringing balm,
incense, ambergris, white and black, musk, and other aromaticks, to burn and
perfume his body; which then six principal persons, in robes of white silk,
bear to his Sepulcher, flutes and hoboyes sounding mournfully, and attended
with a concourse of people clothed in white cloth, sadly singing and
lamenting. The Princes who are in election are mounted on horses caparisoned
with white, and themselves clothed with the like. The corpse laid in the
monument well closed and cimented, they return to the Palace to feast and make
good cheer. On the morrow is the election of a new King, and as they say, it is
made according to divine inspiration, without favor or affection. Then four
Bacharin, or twelve Seitequi go to his house, bind him and lay him upon a
Palanquin, four carry him to the Palace, where the chief Bachir unbinds him,
gives him three rude lashes with a whip, he being on his knees makes a speech
of remonstrance to him; then takes him by the beard or ear, and says to him,
If I deliver you this Scepter will you bring such a shame upon me, as to be a
Tyrant to your people? whereto he answers nec Bachir, that is, no my Lord. The
other then striking harder says, do you promise this by the living God, he
answers Nec Bachis Ameleichina, which is, before the Almighty God, I promise
it. Then they vest him in Royal robes, put a triple Scepter in his right hand,
a lance in his left; then that person casts himself at his feet, and craves his
pardon; this done, he goes in triumph through the Town, where all rejoice and
bring him presents.

CHAP. I. The Authors voyage in the West- Indies, The description, length, and
distances of America.
THe coast of America taken entirely as it lies on the North Sea, from end to
end, contains near upon six thousand leagues, as I have found it in two
several voyages: the first when I went from Marseilles in the Salamander,
laded by one Boudar, under the command of James Varin, and the other with John
Andes, who carried me from Marseilles to Cadiz. This new world is a continent
from the Northern Sea to the Southern, and Northward extends to Groneland,
Island, etc. from Island they esteem it 200. leagues to Ronevado, thence 110.
leagues to Cape Maluas, the Country of Labrador, opposite to the Isles of
Devils: from Maluas to the cape of Marcos 60. to cape Belgado 50. This coast is
of 200. leagues in right line, lying on the same bound, and buts upon the River
St. Laurence, where Captain Velasco a Spaniard landed, who found it to be a
good air, the Country well peopled, and full stocked with cattle: in the
middle of the River he went upon an Island so covered with pigeons, they could
not pass for treading on them. He says the people called Piperons were giants
of ten foot high, but kind and affable. This Captain Velasco thought this gulf
had been an arm of the Sea, and sailed upwards above 200. leagues, meeting with
diverse habitations, where they live merely upon venison and fish, butter and
cheese. They presented him diverse sheep, goats and kids, and in lieu Velasco
presented Cacique a rich sword and poniard, and a watchet-Tassata coat.

The people wear short cloaks of skins, neatly made up, and instead of bread
have another substance which is very tastefull, it is a root whereof being dried
they make meal, then taking odoriferous flowers, they boil them together in
earthen pots, scum them, and put thereto a good quantity of milk and salt,
then binding this close in goat skins, they lay it for two or three days in
the sun, and it becomes firm as Parmasan cheese, which they eat for excellent
bread.

The disclosure of this River frames a square harbor, extending as far as
Bacalaos: From this harbor or gulf to Florida, is 6000. leagues, from thence
to Baya del Rio 60. leagues; thence to the Islands 70. l. in 40. d. to Rio
fendo 75. l. in the River of Gama 70. l. 43. d. Cape St. Maria 50. l. Cape de
Baco 50. l. Rio di Sancto Antonio 100. l. Cape di Arenos 80. l. passing by the
harbor called in those parts Ariousa, the Cape whereof is in 23. degrees,
thence to Cape Alegano, or of the Princes, 75. leagues, to the River Cambinga
or Jordan, and 70. to the Cape St. Helen in 32. degrees, to Rio secco 40. to La
Croix 20. ( Berugon in the Indies) thence to Cagnoval or Cannaveral 40.
leagues, People of Cano or Cagnoval, the point of Cagnoval in 28. degrees, and
to Florida 40. leagues, the tongue of Land extending it self 100. leagues by
Sea, over against Caba; on the East Behame or Lucaros, the point of Florida in
15. degrees, thence to the Angle di Baccho, 100. leagues, Ancon du Baxos, and
to Rio Nives, and Rio di Flores, 20. leagues, and 20. to the harbor of Spirito
Sancto, by the Indians called Caulatan, 70. leagues in 28. degrees, and from
thence 200. leagues to the River di Palmo, 30. leagues over, thence to the
River of Pescadoros, (Ind. Sotassi) under the Tropic, thence to Panonco 35.
leagues, to villa ricca 70. to San Jouan de Loua, a famous port, 5. leagues,
from the Shallous of Vega to the river Aluarado 40. leagues ( Ind. Papa
Jouapan) to Cauacalo, fl. 50. and to Guisalua fl. 50. 18. degrees, thence to
Cape Rotundo 80. leagues, by the way stand Chagraton and Lazaro, thence to Cape
Catuco 90. leagues, ( Jacatan) 21. degrees, thence to Florida 900. leagues,
from the gulf of Mexico 60. leagues, where there are strange currents and falls
of water; from the edg of the gulf to Rio grande 120. leagues, passing by
Punto di Mugeres, and the harbor di la Ascension: Rio grande bosoms it self
in the Sea in 17. degrees, thence to Cape Cameroze 150. leagues, thus 30. to
Queras, 30. to Caualles, thirty to Trionfada, 30. to Honduma, and 20. to
Camzone, thence to Agata, or Gratia dios 70. leagues in 14. degrees, Cartago is
in the middle of the coast of Gratia a dios, to di San Guadero 60. leagues,
which is a great waste out of the Lake Nicaraga, thence to Zanbara 40. leagues,
and to Nombre di dios 60. Vetagua is the midway.

From Nombre de dios to Sucatan is good 500. leagues, the Isthmus is but 5.
leagues, but from Escarpoucos it is 17. from Nombre de dios to Faralones 70.
leagues, 8. degrees, there was a design to cut this Isthmus, but some were of
opinion that the South Sea lying higher would fall in and drown all. By the way
we meet with Aola and the Porto de Missa, so called, for that the Prince that
discovered it, caused Mass to be said there in thanks for the success. The
harbor of Ordea, thence to Carthagena 70. thence to St. Martha 50. leagues, by
the Port of Zembra, and Rio grande: thence to Cape de vello 50. leagues, and
thence to Sancto Domingo 100. leagues, from Cape de vello to Guiboucas 40.
leagues, then the Gulf of Venusuela, extending it self 80. leagues, to Cape
St. Romano: thence to Gulf Tuste 50. leagues, in the middle of the Gulf is
Curiana: thence to the Gulf Cariari 100. leagues, the coast is in 10. degrees:
There is Porto di Cassia Tistula Chiribichi, and Cumana fl. the point of Areya,
Cubaga, or the Isle of Pearl, or the Margarite: from this point to the Salines
is 60. leagues, thence to Cape Anegades 8. degrees, 80. leagues, where in a
bosom lies the harbor of Paria, from Anegades to Ric dolee 50. leagues, six
degrees: thence to Oreglane, or di Amazonas fl. 110. leagues, from Nombre di
dios to Oreglane 800. leagues, a river that in the mouth is 50. leagues over,
there the first that arrived to traffic were massacred by the women.

Douglane and Onaragnen, which is 15. leagues broad in 4. degrees, are held
100. leagues distant, thence it is 100. leagues to the Angla di S. Luca, and a
hundred to Cape Promero: thence to Cape St. Augustine, in 8 degrees, 70
leagues, the next land to Vfo, for from thence to Cape Verde, is 500 leagues,
thence to the Gulf di 'Todos Sanctos 100 leagues, in 13 degrees; by the way is
the river St. Francesco, and the river Reali: thence to Cape Abralosoios 100
leagues, a Coast full of shelves, concealed rocks, and bars of sands, very
dangerous, wherefore they must hold 20 miles off to sea, in 13 and 18 degrees,
from de Fue to the point bono Abrigo, thence to the Point St. Michael 50
leagues, and 60 to the river St. Francisco, six and twenty degrees, thence to
Tibiquiri one hundred leagues, in the road the Port Patos, Port Fariol,
Sigaro, Toubanaco, etc. Thence to Plata fifty leagues, five and thirty degrees;
from St. Augustino there is six hundred and sixty leagues; from the Mouth of
it to the Point St. Helen sixty five leagues; thence to Arenas Gordas thirty
leagues; to low Anegado forty; to Tierrabaxa fifty; to Baya sin fondo sixty; a
Gulf in one and forty; to Arifices de Loubos forty, to Cape Saint Domingo
five and forty; to Chiquera, or Cape Bianco twenty; to the river Saint John
Serran twenty; called Agova de Trabaios nine and forty degrees; thence to the
Promont, at the thousand Virgins, the Straight ends. The sum is twelve
hundred leagues, from Venosuela to Desrado, a Cape in the Mouth of the
Straight from North to South. From Cape Desrado to the mouth of the Straight
not far from the Bell, a Rock which seems to cover the mouth of it, to the
South sea 70. leagues; the bounds are first Cape Promero, 49. degrees; thence
to Salmas 44. degrees, and 165. leagues from Salmas to Cape Hermoso, 110.
leagues, and 44. degrees; thence to the River S. Francesco 60. to Rio Sancto
120. leagues, to Chirinaca 100. leagues, 31. d. not far off Gest and Rio de
Plata^ to Chinca or Rio de Plobados 200. leagues, 22. degrees, to Arequippa,
18. degrees, 90. l. to Lima 12. degrees, 140. leagues, to Cape Anguilla 100.
leagues, Truxillo and other Ports are upon this coast: Thence to Cape Bianco
40. leagues, and 60. to Cape Helena, 2. degrees; thence to Guegemir 70.
leagues, the Cape Saint Laurenzo: They find it to be thence to Cape S.
Augustine, 1000. leagues; thence to the River of Peru 100. leagues, the way
lies by the Gulf S. Matthew, the River S. James, and S. John of Peru: to the
gulf S. Michael 70. leagues 6. degrees, extending 50. leagues, from thence to
Panama 8. degrees 155. leagues, the 17. of November. de dios: Perou of 1000. in
breadth, and 1200. in length: Corrcalatron 4065. leagues, from Panama to
Teouentepee 650. leagues, adding 70. leagues from the coast of Panama to the
Point of Aguera: From the Bruche 100. leagues, from thence 100. to the Cape
Bianco, where the Port Heiradura, and 100. to the Port of the possession of
Niqueraga, 12. degrees; thence to the gulf Fonseca 15. to Cortega 20. to Rio
grande 30. to the River of Guali-Mala 45. to Sitoula 50. joining to the Lake of
Cortes, which is twenty five long, and eight broad; from this Lake to Porto
Pourado 100. and 40. to Crantepee, which runs from North to South, with the
River Coasacalco in 13. degrees; and there complete the 650. leagues, from
Tecoantepee to Colima 100. leagues, by the way is Escapulio and Zacatula: from
Colima to Cape Coruentes 100. leagues, 20. degrees; betwixt them is the Porto
de Nativitad, thence to Chiamelan 60. under the Tropic, where are the Havens
Calisto and Vanderas, from Chiamelan to the deep River, or R. de Miraslores
250. leagues, 33. degrees. In this space of 250. leagues, they pass the River
of S. Michael, Logagaual; Porto del Remedio, Cape Vermego, the Port of Ports,
the Pass of Miraflores, to the point of Balenas 200. leagues, or California
going to Porto Escondido: By the way you come to Belen Port del fuego, the
gulf of Canoas; the Isle of Pearls called Tarrarequi: from the point of
Balenas to Cape Courantes, it is 80. leagues, where comes in the sea of Cortez,
like to the Adriatic, being something colored from the point de Valenas 100.
leagues to the point of Abad, and as much to the Cape Lingano 30. degrees, from
thence to the Cape of Bruz, fifty leagues, and one hundred and fifteen to the
Port of Sardinia.

On this coast is the Crick S. Michael and the gulf de los fuegos, and the
white coast resembling the coast of Brasile, so as one would think white linen
hung there: from Sardinia to Terra Nevada 150. l. passing by the Port of Todos
santos Cape Gabeca, Cape Nevado, Golfo, Primero: Sierra Nevada in 40. d. This
is the last country, which runs North to Labrador. Thus we find the South sea
to contain 3375. l. and the Notth 5960. l. together 9300. l. new Mexico, 1000.
l. in circuit: comprehending 15. large inhabited Provinces.

CHAP. II. The Authors Departure, Particulars of Demingo.
FRom the Port of Sancta Maria, in 37. degrees we steered the ordinary course
of the Canaries, whither it is 590. miles, the gulf de las Yegas lying in the
way. The Canaries, heretofore called the Fortunate, had that appellation from
some terrible and sanguinary dogs which were there, going in packs like sheep,
and at this day there is abundance of them exceeding fierce and dangerous. Of
these Islands there is the grand Canari, Tenerif, Palma, Gomora, du Fez,
Fortaventura, and others less, to about 28. degrees.

They afford diverse curiosities, amongst which Mount Pic in Tenerif; which I
esteem to be one of the highest on the earth, Libanus it self is not so high by
half, much less Mount Gibel in Sicily, for it may be discovered at 120. miles
distance, and is the first land the Mariners discover at sea, when they come
from Spain.

This is not to be ascended but two months in the year, July and August, for
the extreme colds, and because it is commonly covered with snow, which cooles
the air to such a degree, that one cannot breath upon it without iminent
danger of life. From the top of this, the rest of the Islands are all
discoverable, and amongst them one which seems rather an illusion then a
reality: For one plainly views the Isle, and go to the place you find nothing.
They have three names for it, the Fortunate, the Enchanted, and the Not to be
found: and there is no more to be learned of it, only the common people say
it is an Island inhabited by Christians, The fortunate Island
and that God prohibits they should be discovered: for my part I have seen it
as I have the others, and I believe it is concealed with clouds which are
exhaled from the abundance of fresh water there, which render it so obscure to
be found out.

In the Isle of Tenerife there is a cave in a firm Rock. where the heardsmen in
bad weather shelter their cattle, it is some 5. leagues from St. Christophers.
They report that heretofore there was an apparition of extraordinary splendor,
with an image of the blessed virgin, which wrought many miracles, and was the
reason of a Church built by the title of Nuestra Sennora de la candelaria,
where there is a monastary of Dominicans.

In the Island of Iron is that miraculous tree, the leaves whereof distill
water, which suffices the inhabitants for drink. The tree is always hooded
with a thin cloud, of color between gray and white, and never extenuates for
wind nor tempest, nor suffers any motion, whence is deduced all the liquor,
which the tree emits so plentifully into cesterns placed for the purpose, that
it waters both the Inhabitants and the herds of the whole Island, there being
no other water at all, so as without this 'twould lie waste and desert, and by
this is rendered inhabitable and fruitful.

Having taken in provisions at the Canaries, we continued our course toward
the Desseada, crossing the great pacifick gulf, which may be said one of the
calmest Seas of the world; for during the forty days we were upon it, we
perceived not the least alteration, but an air or gentle gale blew equally and
constantly without ceasing; so as vessels are there almost always driven by
the Poupe, without scarce ever using sail for above two thousand four hundred
and ninety two miles to Desseada; which takes name from the desire they have to
get thither, there being no other land betwixt that and the Canaries, passing
the gulf, the voyage taking up sometimes thirty two days, sometimes thirty
five, as it happens.

Desseado, one of the Antillaes, was the first Columbus discovered in his
second voyage, where from the Canaries he arrived in twenty days, it is in 15.
degrees toward the North. Thence they come to Domingo, a good and a fertile
Island in eighteen degrees: The inhabitants are sanguinary, and man-eaters,
practicing all sort of guile, to betray strangers to their broach.

They are dextrous archers, and seldom miss their mark, their bow^ ten or
twelve foot long, and their arrows will pierce a corselet good sword proof;
they are made of a hard and strong wood they call Sourgar, whereof they poison
the pile. They live upon venison, grapes, and fruit, both men and women go
absolutely naked, adore the Sun, have little stock more than a few garden
utensils, a bed made of cotton in the manner of netting, hanging from one side
of the house to the other, which is round, made of straw, called Tortora. Their
goods are all in common, and what they have they eat together. They are not
injurious to one another, are very Martial, their arms, clubs of eight foot
long, made like Bel-clappers, which they will manage very effectually; but
they affect their bow more than their club. They have some Priests in their
Gentilism, whom they call Chaouris, who solemnize certain ceremonies and
feasts. There being a necessity of taking in fresh water, some of the ship of
Cape Moulini, would needs go on shore, and but that some of the Company
dissuaded him, the Captain himself had gone with them, howsoever he sent the
Masters mate, with twenty resolute men and twelve Musketeers. Our Captain
Noguena seeing this rash enterprise, knowing the humor of the Country,
immediately sent a shore thirty of his men, whereof twenty were musketeers to
assist them: but they were no sooner at the fountain, but they perceived two
hundred Savages making toward them, and had they not by the persuasions of
some cast up a bulwark, the success had proved worse with them. The
musquetteers playing on them, the Savages with terror began to run, having
lost four or five of their men, whereupon ours thought they had been freed of
them, but were amazed when they perceived them rallyed, and advancing from
another side came on with such fury, that had it not been for good conduct ours
had had the worst of it; for our Musketeers were so amazed they knew not how
to give fire, and for all ours could do, they left seven or eight of our men
behind them; for with main strength they bore down our Barricado, but by Gods
assistance ours repulsed them so vigorously, that some of theirs remained on
the place, and we were relieved very seasonably.

They had a resolution to fetch off their fellows, but seeing they could not,
retreated, and left us in peace; one that we preserved alive was quite amazed,
and made us good laughing, with his mows and monkey faces. He was stark naked,
round visaged, and flat-nosed like a dog. We asked in whom he believed, he
answered in Toquilla and Toupan, that is the Sun and the thunder. He was
instructed in the Faith, and afterward baptized. These people know not what
tillage is, and eat no bread, but of a root they call Taquen, whereof they make
meal, in Brasile they call it Caouin, they dry it, and grind it, and boiling it
with water, make drink of it, it is in taste like sour milk. The root in the
mouth is more sharp than unripe chestnuts.

They have a tree called Sarboul, growing naturally in the woods bears fruit
all the year, it is firm as a Meloun, and looks like those golden apples which
in Spain they call Berengenas. A kind of flower they also make of fish, as they
do in Brasile, drying it against the Sun, it is sharp and grates the throat of
those that are not used to it. Beasts they have abundance of all kinds, which
they call Pascous, that is sheep. They are great Fishers, their boats of that
straw they call Tortora, and have likewise some of timber all of a piece, like
Canoes.

At their nuptials they use some Ceremonies, their Priests put on them a kind
of open shoes, the Spaniard calls Aspargates, the Indians Otrya. They shoe
them both with these shoes, then change them, and afterward restore them to
their Chaouris. While a maid, she is free to her pleasurc, but married she is
liable to death if she transgress. They are neither avaricious nor ambitious,
saying as the earth was sufficient to feed their Fathers, so 'twil them; and
it is a folly to waste our shortened life with care: the meanest is as good as
the best amongst them.

The Spaniards who live in the Town of St. Domingo use them very harshly, for
which cause they call them Salbini, that is Tyrants. Abundance become
Christians, and the rest are most zealous adorers of the Sun and Thunder, and
offer a kind of Sacrifice to them.

CHAP. III. A violent Tempest, The Isle of Cuba, and Hispaniola, The customs
of the Inhabitants, and their Kings.
FRom Domingo about 336. miles, lies Nauasse in 17. degrees, a very small but a
good Island, and neighboring to it another called Jamaica, in length 150.
miles, in breadth 40. These Islands are liable to a wind the Indians call
Vracans, or Foracans, most violent and dangerous to Saylors, who do what is
possible to avoid it, and when they discover it rising, rather then be
surpised at sea, they lie in harbor two or three months together. Betwixt
these two Islands were we overtaken with one of these storms, which assaulted
us with such fury, as if all the Infernals had been broke loose, for it bore
away sails and yards, tore the cordage with other most prodigious effects; it
rose all in an instant, and before we could think of it, cast away a vessel of
our Company laden with Soldiers, going to relieve Truxillo, infested by the
English. We saved diverse of them by a bridge of planks cast into the Sea, and
fastened to the Ship with a strong cable. The first time we saved twenty six
men and a woman, whose coats had kept her floating on the water: But the second
time we cast it forth when there were more upon it, close by the Ship side the
cable broke, and all these poor people so near recovery perished; and we had
not strength to make another we were so num'd and strark, with the cold this
wind brings along with it, so as 'twas lamentable to behold these poor people
perish for want of help; and no assistance could be had from the other vessel,
being in the evening so driven from us that we could hear no more of it. All
the night we heard the sad cries of people, calling for help, which we knew not
how to give them, and when day came, we saw nothing either of ship or person.

Some of them died as soon as they got aboard our ship. Amongst the rest they
had a Capuchin Father worthy of record for his constancy and resolution, A
violent tempest.
who in the very sea exhorted them, and called upon them to dye well, and
recommend themselves into the hands of God, heard their confessions, and gave
them absolution, and at last died amongst them encouraging and giving
consolations to the very last. This tempest consists not of a single wind, but
of all the four together, which so incumber a vessel, that it cannot stir
neither forward nor backward. The day brought us some comfort, but we were
still persecuted with the tempest, and waves that flew upon us with such
violence, that at every blow we thought we should have perished, as I believe
we had, had we not resolved to cast all overboard. Then without further
dispute, or more words, seven or eight of us taking a draught of wine, a little
to reinvigourate us in our extreme feebleness, we betook to cast our fraught
overboard, Cloth, Tapestry, Camlets, Moccadoes, Corrall, Hunney, Wines, etc.
with such celerity, that in an hour we cast more overboard then was laded in
a day; and it was happy we did so, for immediately we perceived the Vessel to be
more lusty; and I and my partners had the happiness to see the goods we laded
to bear our charges, cast into the sea in the first place, which as little
troubled us, as if they had been none of ours, being satisfied with the
fruition of our lives; after all we were constrained to cut down the maine
Mast, one of the sails was unfurled, which made a strange noise, and
exceedingly annoyed the Vessel; wherefore the Captain commanded the sailors to
go up and furle it, but at that time he was ill heard, and worse obeyed;
Aroucane^.
thereupon one who was more obedient and resolute then the rest, undertook it,
as he mounted they called to him to encourage him, but by that time he got to
the middle of the Mast, the wind had seized him, and he cried out Juro a mi
vida Senior que el Viente me despega las manos de las cuerdas; I swear to you
Sirs, the wind tears my hands from the ropes, and with that crying Santiago,
he fell down upon the Deck, he had better have fallen besides it, for he dyed
within three hours after. The Tempest continued, and the Vessel being light,
could not uphold the Mast against the stupendous force of the storm and the
waves, which took some of our men overboard: whereupon we down with the main
Mast, but in the fall the cordage broke, and is tumbled into the sea, and
carried some men along with it, the vessel reeling quite down on one side with
the weight of the mast was immediately filled with water, and recoyling to the
other side, very many were lost, without possibility to relieve them, the rest
of us left desolate to sorrow and distress. The vessel being assaulted by so
many several winds, cannot move any way except some one wind be mightier than
the rest: For these vessels are not by half so able as ours are.

Besides these winds cause so unsufferable a frigidity, that one cannot endure
to look into the air, cut like a razor, and make ones limbs stiff and
immovable as a piece of wood. For my part my face was hard and strark as any
stone. I am of opinion the Devil comes in it, for I believe that naturally no
wind can break a strong cable, as 'twere a thread. At last as it pleased our
good God the tempest ceased, and the ordinary Breezes return. By good fortune
we had one sail left in reserve, which we used to our advantage in the best
manner we could, scarce finding rope sufficient for it, the tempest had so
broken our cordage, so we then sailed on. It Is true the sea was yet so
turbulent and contumacious, that we were as fearful as ever; for this kind of
storm is more dangerous in the end then the beginning; and we might behold the
waves, like two engaged armies plying one another with continual assaults,
without intermission. But in fine, it became a little calmer, and we came in
view of Cape S. Anthony, a point of the Isle of Cuba discoverable a long way
off; till we arrived there the storm left us not: nor do I know that I had so
famous an encounter in all my voyages in Asia and Africa, though in my travail
to Alexandria, three leagues off Candia our ship sunk, in the depth of Winter,
and about midnight: which was nothing compared to these diabolical Vracanes,
for there we contest but with one wind, here we are surrounded with all the
winds at once, whence it comes, that few escape.

Cuba an Island.
Cuba is one of the principal Islands of the Indies in 22. d. in circuit 630.
miles, 120. miles over. It Is the most fruitful in all America, full of fruits
of all sorts, Mines of gold and brass, and has Ravana, one of the fairest and
securest Havens of the world, the coming in being narrow, flanked on both sides
with strong Towers, and a town with an impregnable Citadel. Where the Fleets
of Peru and Nombre de Dios put in for provisions, the Isle abounding in all
commodities, and plentiful of all properties for maritime travail. It Is as
'twere a suburbs to the Indies, having not above 130. leagues off sea to S.
John de Loua on the firm land in Nova Spania.

The Island abounds particularly in fish, and amongst the rest in a sort of sea
Breezes, which Spaniards call Besee Espada who is very sanguinary, and greedy
of man's flesh. So as no man dare bathe himself for fear of these ravenous
creatures, the teeth whereof cut like any rasor, and upon their back have three
Pikes like Partisans. He is so greedy of man's flesh, that he will follow a
vessel three hundred leagues outright without appearing, in hope of a corpse.
They likewise call them Taburintes, or Tiburins, a Captain told me, that coming
from Florida one followed him 500. leagues without appearing, and that arriving
at Por^o Rico, the fish was taken with a sheeps head, and horns in his belly,
which he had brought from Florida, where 'twas cast into the sea. They go
likewise up into the rivers.

As to their Crocodiles, they are covered with skin so firm, it is impossible to
pierce it, except under the belly where he is easily vulnerable. As I said
before, in the East Indies Ethiopia they make meat of them, the flesh being
very good, but here they do not. In like manner here is abundance of all other
sorts of fish, as well such as breed in our seas, as others.

This Island was discovered by Columbus in his second navigation, and called
Juane, afterward Ferdinand and Isabella; from Ferdinand King of Spain, as
before of Juane his daughter. It Is in length 230. leagues, on the East it has
the Isle of Hispaniola or Hairi, on the West Jucatan, and the Gulf of Mexio, on
the South Jamaica or S. James, and Northward the Lucayes, and the channel of
Bahama. There we find many towns, and habitations of Spaniards, who began to
plant, or rather to supplant in the year 1511. For they used such abominable
cruelties, that in a short time they almost extirpated all the Natives:
beginning with the King or Catique Haiuey, whom they burnt alive for publishing
to his subjects the cruelty used by the Spaniards in the Isle of Hairy or
Hispaniola. The Mines destroyed many of them; and Las Cafas says, that being
there, he saw in four months seven thousand children starved to death; for
both their fathers and mothers were held so strictly to their labor in the
Mines, they had not freedom to look after their families.

The Isle Hispaniola was discovered by the same Columbus in his first
navigation in the year 1492. began to be inhabited in 1494. and was otherwise
called Hairy Quisquera, and Cipaugi, Espaniola.
or Cibai, being in circuit about 400. leagues: It abounds in fruit, sugar,
cattle, and Mines of gold and copper. This Island had many Caciques or potent
Kings, amongst them the King of Magna or Magana, that is, Champion, or the
field, was Paramount, who is called Guarionexi. These Kings lived peaceably,
without any great State. Their chiefest expense was in Dancers, Musicians, and
Wrestlers, who were for his Majesty's recreation both in his Palace and
progress. He was carried by men upon a frame set with feathers of diverse fine
colors, and those dancers danced before him. The people held their King for a
God, and the meanest of them could raise an Army of sixteen thousand men armed
with skins of wild beasts, Clubbes of wood with a keen stone at the end, which
they called Courcoumachi; they had likewise bows and arrows pil'd with bone.
Together they were able to raise fourscore thousand men, holding good
correspondence with one another, interchanging visits at 80. or a hundred
leagues distance, without other business then to be merry. They are a
strenuous people, docile, and capable of religion, were it not for the
unsufferable Tyranny of the Spaniard, who of four hundred thousand souls found
on this Island, have left scarce the hundredth part, which is the cause you meet
scarce with any thing but desolation; and dead men's bones.

The first of these kingdoms is called Mangna, a fertile soil with many good
and large rivers, in length 80. leagues, from the South sea to the North
environed with mountains, amongst which are these Cibar, where are gold mines
of 23. Carats and a half, the second kingdom is Sigouaya: the third Magana or
Magnane: the fourth Xantiga: the fifth Hegay.

Magana.
Magana abounds in gold and sugar, and, different from the rest, the King is
created by election. The King dead, four Tabusamin, who are principal Peers,
assemble the people at the Palace of Bibical, a Conqueror, and establisher of
the state.

This Bibical was the miracle of his time for strength, who came hither from
Mecheoarin on the Continent in Mexico to visit his brother, servant to the King
of Mangna, and one of his chief dancers; being here, would needs see the other
dominions of the Island: The History of Bibical.
at Sigouaya, where the exercise of wrestling is much in request, he made some
stay, as indeed in war it self the matter is decided as much or more by vigor
of arm as weapon, and being very perfect, he entered lists with the best
amongst them, and in the Princes presence came off with such advantage, that he
gained the honor of a Lions skin, a matter so considerable with them, that in
war, it is worn by none but persons of quality.

Invited by the King he stayed at Court, but the King of Mangna, with whom his
brother was, having notice, he sent expressly to have him return, and that he
would find an honorable employment for him; withal, sent him an ample
present, not in wealth, but Mexican curiosities as Jewels, to hang in the ears
and lips, and the like; the people not prizing so much gold, as innocent and
simple gaity; and with great reason liberty above all. All the Kings
civilities, nor his brothers entreaties, could draw him from the Prince of
Sigouay, King Biblical.
who had designed him to march with a hundred Indians into the kingdom of
Magana, and take a strong town called Saalan; for that it maintained it self a
free town, and would submit to no Prince. With much joy Bibical received the
Commission, and by his valor reduced the place to his Princes obedience, with
many famous gallantries, putting numbers to the sword, and the rest to flight.
Their Bastion called Courcoumeca barrocadoed with timber twice man's height, he
took by assault.

By this means not the town alone, but the whole country was subjugated to the
King of Sigouaya, who repayed Bibical with collation of honors, and erected
him monumental trophies of stone with this inscription Array jourcoumac Bifical,
that is, a man worthy of principality. Gibbeleca the Kings sister became so
passionate a lover of him, that she resolved to marry him, though her brother
in displeasure secured her in a secret prison: Biblical freed her, married her,
and carried her to Magana, where he made himself King of the Country, which
so incensed the brother, he used all means to destroy him, for which purpose
he suborned an Indian, who from an ambush shot him on the high way with a
poisoned shaft: this so moved Biblical, that he invaded him with a vigorous and
violent war, assisted by his brother Gouayquibal, and at last overthrew him;
but the venom of the wound he had formerly received, by degrees so prevailed
over him that he dyed, swelled and black as a coal, leaving no child behind
him. The people petitioned the Dowager she would marry again, that they might
have a Prince to govern them, whereto, though with difficulty, she at last
condescended, and called a Council, where 'twas ordered that the most strong
and active should succeed and marry the Queen.

Then they proclaimed an Assembly at all exercises of strength, as leaping,
wrestling, and Clubbe-fight, in which amongst them all one Calips proved
eminent, and was made King. For his chief Council he elected the deceased Kings
brother, to whom he gave his sister in marriage; and since that time the Kings
have been elected by strength, which custom continued to Moulsamberc, who died
at the Spaniards invasion.

This Island was heretofore exceedingly vexed with the Canibales of the
Antilles, and other neighbour-Islands, who come to hunt men and women as others
do savage beasts, The Isles of the Antilles. Canibals hunt men and women.
the men to eat them, and the women for procreation.

This Island, though under the torrid Zone enjoyes a temperate air, and almost
a perpetual spring by means of Mountains which shelter it from the North, and
refresh it, as in most parts under the Zone.

The Fecundity of the soil is such, that corn sowed produces most great and
long ears, of above a thousand corns in an ear: Besides, it yields Gold,
Mastick, Aloes, Cotton, Silk, Sugars, Spices, Pepper, and Ginger; with Jucan
and Cassaue, whereof they make their bread. 'Twas from hence the Spaniards
first took and brought into Europe the Morbus, and remedy, Guaicum. Here
chiefly reign the furious winds called Vracans or Foracanes, furies that rend
trees, dash the waves against the sky, destroying Navies, and other prodigies.

But as these people were delivered from the cruelty of the Canibales, they
fell under that of the Spaniards, a hundred times worse, who laid the Island
with the rest of her neighbors desert and depopulate, though the Natives at
their landing used them with all humanity; but they fell presently to bloody
butchery, carrying them slaves to other Countries, and reduced them to such
despair, that the wretches thought better to use violence on themselves and
children, Cruelty of the Spaniards.
then to be led slaves under these Salbins, thieves and tyrants.

Indians aversion to the Spaniard.
As one of these miserable Kings was going to be burnt, a Father of St. Francis,
exhorted him to baptism; he liked well of all he told him of eternal life, and
heaven, but understanding the Spaniards went thither also, he lost his
vocation, saying in his language, Heiti siltiba Salbin, Spaniards in heaven and
I with them, fie, fie: adding he had rather live with the Yares, the Devil, and
so dyed; they destroyed all generally, and being glutted and weary with
slaughter they made markets of the rest, as of Cattle, to toil and carry
burdens, not regarding any countermands of the Spanish King to keep them
slaves. These new guests at first they called children of the Sun, but
afterward they changed their style and called them Solbins and Devils, and
with good reason, when these newcomes would lay insupportable burdens on them,
and when they failed or fainted, cut off their heads to save a labor of
unlocking an iron collar about their neck to put upon another. Notwithstanding
they were a people very capable of religion and doctrine, as appeared in such
as were converted, who proved very pious Christians; but these unfashionable
Doctors had mind on nothing but to satisfy their insatiable avarice and
ambition.

CHAP. IV. Of the coasts of new- Spain, of the torrid Zone, and winds which
blow there.
HAving staid some days in Cuba to recruit, we took ship again to continue our
voyage. Noguera Captain of the vessel we came in, was very sorry to part with
us, and made large profession to one of our Company for the service he had done
him, and gave him three hundred Reals, offering if he would return to Sicily
with him, he would give him the command of a vessel, share equally what was
gained, and ever esteem him as a brother. Our comrade engaged himself at his
return, accepting but the half of his money, and that upon importunity, which
he presented to a Lady the Captain had brought with him from Spain, and she
returned him a Crucifix set with emeralds, and so they parted with much
resentment; the Captain protesting he had perished but for God and the
Levantisks; with particular acknowledgment of what we did in Domingo at their
going for water. He recommended us to a Captain who was very civil to us, and
would accept of nothing for our passage.

We came to the Cape of St. Anthony, and thence with good advice steered the
course toward Foudora or Houduras: it is not the ordinary way for Fleets, when
they go directly to St. John de Loua in new Spain, having seven hundred miles
to cross, sailing in view of fruitful Campeche, in the land of Jacatan. The
Port of St. John is a well-fortified Town, and amply provided of artillery: in
19. degrees from thence to Mexico, they hold it seventy leagues, and fifty to
vera Cruz, a place hot and unhealthfull, Coast of Mexico.
but plentiful in provisions, about two hundred miles from Mexico.

This quarter is called La Vega, a shallow, not a haven; these two places so
near neighbors, differ exceedingly in the air, for at Vera Cruz it is
extraordinary bad; and at St. John's it is excellently good; as indeed thoroughout
all Mexico, a good Country, and well inhabited both by Natives and Spaniards:
temperate enough, and contains sixteen great Provinces. Then there is the new
Mexico, lately discovered, and whereof there is further discovery every day,
and is of wonderful extent, as likewise the Mexican language goes very far.

From St. John de Loua Coasting along by Jucatan Hunduras, and Nicaruga, we
came to Nombre de Dios, in the Northern sea; and on the other side, in the
southern to Parama, and thence to Peru, etc. Now it is necessary to understand
there commonly blows a wind they call Brizes, which carries Vessels by the
Poope, from the east to the Indies, which wind rises in 28 degrees of Artick
altitude, toward the Torrid, following the Minense and rapid motion of the
Heavens in that Hemisphere, more like a gentle blast, or a breathing of the
air, then a wind, so quietly it bears vessels along, without any
alteration, or contrary violence; as in other Parts among the Tropicks, where
the strongest carries it his way, and where diverse Reign according to the
diverse times and seasons.

The other winds are Tramontone, or north, south, east, west, south-east,
north-west, north-east, south-west. The Brizes come eastward, and serve very
well from the Canaries to Cuba: from Spain to the Canaries the voyage is more
difficult, by reason of the diverse winds, which blow in the Gulf de Las
Yequas; and betwixt that and the Continent are other winds, which blow
opposite, and often force to lie along in the Haven in expectation of a fair
gale.

But as these Brize winds in going, afford a delightful accommodation, so in
return they prove our vexation: for we must go without the Tropicks to fetch
the south-west, otherwise we have the Brizes in our teeth, which force us to
bear up higher for others, and be perpetually tacking about to the road of
Terretta: In so much that one may sooner go twice, then return once from the
Indies; the return is so labourous, I mean for them who come from new Spain to
Seuille; for from Peru they have the same Navigation, as the ships that go by
the Brizes from the Canaries to the Indies, and by the south sea. Coming from
Peru, they have the wind in the Poope as far as Lima, in twelve degrees,
which carries them to 17, to the Port Guatulio in new Spain. Then they must go
fetch the south-west in the elevation of 27 degrees above: nor is there any
certainty of it, for sometimes these winds reign there; sometimes the
north-west, and Tramontane invade the Regions: They call them nevertheless
Brizes, as coming from the motion of the same Hemisphere; sometimes they bring
along with them so exceeding a frigidity, that though the sea ever naturally
yield a certain warmth of it self, I never felt so much cold as in these
parts; and but for the Wines we laid in at our return, we had suffered much
more.

Admirable winds.
It Is then certain, that they who go to the Indies must make use of these
prosperous winds, and to gain them must keep in the lowest elevation
possible, for the nearer they come to the Equinoctial, the more certain and
constant are these Brize winds, as nearer to the motion.

For this reason the sea from the Canaries is called the Ladies sea; from this
benign Wind, as is also the southern sea beyond Peru, and so along westward.
Notwithstanding this rule is not so general, but in the Torrid of the East-
Indies there are two anniversary principal winds, east and west, which by
turns reign six months together, more or less, called the Mousons, or
Mnessons, as I said in another place.

The Torrid Zone.
As to the quality of the Torrid Zone, contrary to what Antiquity delivers, that
it is impenetrable, and absolutely disinhabitable for the excessive hea^e of
the perpendicular rays of the sun, I have spoken sufficiently in another place;
and showed it to be the most temperate place of the world, and best inhabited,
full of large lakes, rivers, and showers at certain seasons and hours, and
winds which refresh and fertilize in an admirable manner.

According to natural Philosophy there was reason to believe these parts
disinhabitable, and scorched with the fervor of the sun, who is vertical to
them; but experience had not acquainted them with the lakes and rivers that lie
almost all along this same Zone, and chiefly in America, so cooling and
moistening, that they allay the heats to a moderate temper; and by a mystery at
the extremity of winter produce dryness, and in summer rains and humidity; so
as in many places they are forced to retire to their Canoes to avoid the
emanations of the rivers, Orlano, Plata, Paraguay, and others which lay the
circumjacent Countries like seas, to which the spacious lakes are a second
means; like as the Egyptians in time of Niles inundations, retire to their
field-houses of dung, loome and straw set upon the highest points. But the
people, upon Portogay and Plata, they quite abandon theirs, and betake
themselves to their Canoes, or Pirago^a, upon the water like Ducks, and return
not till the flood is sunk, so that the extremest heats of the Torrid produce
their rains, and when the heat slackens, it rains not at all: But out of the
Torrid and the Tropic, these qualities change, their rain coming together
with the cold of winter, as here with the heat of summer: For the Sun where
it is most forcible exhales vapors in more abundance, which breaking fall in
plentiful showers. They who live in towns and plantations built on grounds of
advantage, pass these floods and rains with satisfaction, and their fruits of
the earth, no more than in Egypt are not destroyed and lost: But the more
vulgar and savage sort who live in the Country, that can neither sow nor plow,
retreat to their barks with a heap of roots, and such fruit as the earth
affords them naturally: They have abundance of Cattle likewise, which they feed
with the Josni they call Tortora, which they eat also themselves, cover their
houses with it, make their boats and fuel of it.

True, the air throughout the torrid is not of one quality, there being some
places burnt for want of lakes, fountains or rivers, or by reason of the huge
barren mountains, as in other parts of Ethiopia, Guiney, deserts of Africa, the
Andes, mountains of Peru, and other places. And hence it comes, that according
to the diverse constitutions under the same line you have blacks in one place,
and whites in another: and as the extremity of these qualities hot and dry,
render some places dis-inhabitable, so the abundance of water, lakes, marshes,
and great rivers, with their constant inundations, render others as little
habitable: as in the greatest part of America, where this inconvenience is
such, that the rivers swelled with the summer rains, at every turn break out of
their limits, with such impetuosity and violence, they force and carry all
before them, nor can one travail for dirt, and mud of marshes.

CHAP. V. Of South and North America, The Qualities, and Discovery.
AMerica for the greatest part is not inhabited, by reason of the huge barren
and cold mountains, and little plain for a long way, abundance of sandy and
barren forests, as in Egypt and Lybia, where there is neither habitation nor
commodity of living; huge trees bearing nourishment neither for man nor beast;
only in some parts there are trees yield some refreshment to passengers, with
a leaf like the vine and fruit like the Quince, but more soft, and in taste
like the apples of Italy, called Mele Rose, but sweeter. The tree is high and
fair like a mulberry: The fruit never heats upon the tree, and very little
being gathered, but quenches thirst, and refreshes more than any fruit in the
world; A mystical fruit.
wherefore the Indians will go fifteen or twenty leagues to look it: and being
extreme hot, lay pieces of it on their forehead and cheeks, which refreshes as
well as eating it, be the heat never so violent. But it is exceeding dangerous
for strangers; for the Indians are so jealous of this fruit that they will
suffer no others to eat it, but beat their brains out, as they did at
Curaufour, where they killed a number of Spaniards for eating them, which they
after eat themselves. To conclude, the fruit, how long soever it continues in
the sun, looses not its freshness.

Three regions of America.
Of the three Regions America may be divided into, there are the two outmost,
the high and the low, and the interior. The lower is along the Sea coast, hot
and moist, having few or no rains in many places unpeopled, by reason of the
deep sands, marshes, and standing waters, which make the Country unwholesome.
But the plains from Peru to Chila are more temperate, by reason of the fresh
and fruitful vales, whereof there are store.

The second is the land of Hamen, cold and dry, well peopled, plentiful in
herbage, and rich in mines.

The interior is the best, and 'twas the Spaniards kind fortune or rather
Providence, that landed them there at first: for had it been any where else,
they had never or with more difficulty attained their design, for the scarcity
of commodities to live upon after their diet, very different from that of the
Natives. But at the very first they fell upon the best parts, as the Isles of
Hispaniola and Cuba: and on the continent on the one side new Spain, on the
other Peru, and many other, all good Countries, full, and temperate, which
yielded them such plenty of commodities for livelihood, and rich metals. For
this middle division abounds corn, fruit, cattle, pastures, and forests, the
air wholesome, and the Country pleasant and commodious.

They have cattle in great abundance, as sheep, goats, beeves, horses, and
others. They preserve a stock of wild beeves for their hides, wherewith they
lade ships for Europe; and make a good traffic of them to supply our vanity
for coaches boots, and other uses of leather. The soil in some parts is proper
enough for vines, but the Spaniards will admit no plantation of them, for
taking away the profit of the wine brought from Spain, for which they carry
back good gold and silver. But notwithstanding their prohibitions in New-
Spain, they have planted them for ease of their burdensome tributes; for they
made no conscience to impose fifty or sixty crowns upon a tun of Spanish wine;
which they get at a better rate upon the place, where they prosper excellently
well.

Mexico, or New- Spain, where one still ascends unperceivably, is a good and
fruitful Country, rather better than Peru toward Cusco and Gouamanga, and
Aroquipa, which is likewise very fertile; but this is without comparison, and
would be yet better if the Mountains were nearer, to mitigate the excessive
heat. Notwithstanding the Spanish women affect it so much that they will come
two thousand leagues by sea, leaving their Native Country to settle here, and
this in no small number: For in the Fleet that went one thousand five hundred
ninety two, they reckon that in thirty vessels that were cast away, there
perished above 800. women, and many small infants: Some were going with their
husbands, others with their friends, and others of their own inclination; and
not a year but they transport a great number. And it is no wonder they expose
themselves to this danger, living exceeding miserably in Spain, where there are
abundance of single women that work or worse for their living.

America, the new world is divided into two principal parts, North and South,
both as 'twere Peninsula's, fastened to by the straight or neck of land, of
Nombre di dios and Panama, and betwixt them is comprised the great Archipelagus
of all those Islands, Antillias, Luccaes, Barlouente, Sotauente and others,
whereof we spoke already, toward the great Mexican gulf.

The North part might be taken to begin very near the North pole, and according
to some at Groenland, which they will have to be upon the Continent of America:
from thence we come by the streights of Hudscas, Davis Forbisher and others,
which are thought to cross to the Oriental and Tartarian sea; but here they
appear rather gulphs and arms of the Sea then streights: Then we come to the
Lands of Estotiland, Labrador, Cortereal, New- France or Canada, and Bacaleos,
Norembeck, Virginia, New- Nideoland, or the New-Low-Countries, Florida, and
New- Spain, or Mexico, as well the old as new, and the lands above new Granada,
Mar Vermeio, California, Quiuira, or new A^bion, and Anian to the famous
Straight of land, or sea of the same name, which joins, or divides North Asia,
or high Tartarie, from this part of America. And it is probable that this way
for many Ages men and beasts have passed, who have peopled this new World,
whether from China, Tartarie, Moscovia, and other places, or as far as
Scandia, or from elsewhere carried by the winds, cast up by shipwreck, or
coming upon design, or for ease of people, always growing onward: But this
dispute I leave to be decided by better abilities, being out of my reach, and
no part of my design.

South America.
South America from Jucatan, Honduras, and Nicanagua to the Straight of Panama,
proceeds by Vraba, Dariena, Castilia, Dor, Venesusla, Paria, Cabagna, Cumana,
Curibana, and further up into the famous Land of Guinea; then comes the vast
Territory, or Coast of Brasile, of above 1000 leagues; Patagona, and Chica, to
the Streights of Magellan and Maire; and at last ascending toward the
South Sea, by Chila and Peru, to the Isthmus of Mannama.

As for the Parts southward, beyond the Streights, toward the Land of Fou, or
Queinos, to the Isles of Solomon, new Guinea, and others, it is not yet known
what they are.

As to the Discovery of this New World, leaving that common question, If our
Ancestors had any knowledge of it, it was first made by Columbus, in the year
1492. afterward successively, by Americus Vespasius, Cabot, Cortercall,
Cupral, Verazan, Cortez Pisarra, and at last by Sir Francis Drake, Sir Walter
Rawley, Forbisher, Davis, Hudson, and others.

Toward the Lands of Labrador and Canada, one Captain Velasco, a Spaniard,
passing that way, entered the river of Canada, or St. Laurens, and taking it for
an Arm of the Sea, having a fair wind, sailed up about 200 leaugues, where
he found many Towns and Villages inhabited by people called Piperones, of an
extraordinary stature, as ten foot high, or more, people kind enough, and
tractable, spending their time only in hunting and fishing: their ordinary diet
milk and cheese.

Upon a Sunday, coming on shore to celebrate Mass, there came innumerable
Savages to admire our Sevice and Ceremonies, as a thing altogether new to them.
They presented the Spaniards abundance of sheep, Kids and goats, and they might
have taken off the common what Cows and Cattle they would.

A people otherwise not very Military, but exceeding simple, and use Barks,
like the Brasilian Canoes. The Captain, in gratuity, gave to the chief of
them a handsome sword and dagger, who by signs let him understand, he had
nothing to return him but 50 Cows, and 200 sheep, desiring him to accept them
for accommodation for his company.

Part of them he took, and gave him a Coat of Azure Tafeta, which he highly
esteemed and admired, and went confidently abord them with a score of his men;
and at several times came little boats loaded with fruit, which this Lord had
provided to present the Captain with; at his departure he fired some Cannons,
which strangely amazed these poor people, who thought the World at an end; they
go clothed with skins, commodiously sewed together.

In the Land of Labrador, and beyond Northward, are abundance of Mountains and
Forests, where there are numbers of wild beasts, and amongst others huge
bears, and great Griffins all white, which are nothing like those of the East,
or Africa, which are gray, only a little red under the belly, but both of them
have but two feet, and not four as they are painted. They have also
Partridges, and other sorts of birds all white.

A little higher lies the frozen sea, The frozen Sea.
which some say is not a sea frozen, but land covered with ice. An Indian, one
Irica, told me that in his youth he had been in the Land of Labrador, which the
Natives call Vchacara, which borders on a Country called Alfringa, and that
crossing from Province to Province, he saw seas of Vast extent, all frozen, and
the people assured him it was not a Sea, but Land, covered with fresh water-ice,
a thing hard to be credited.

They have not any Towns, but Villages, where on little hills they live in
timber houses, covered with hides of Beifes, and other beasts. The people are
Whites, kind and affable. This Coast extends to the space of 400 leagues,
there is a large river they call de tres Hermanos, which some Spanish were
about to cross, but could not for snows. Some imagine here is a straight, that
goes into the Oriental sea, others that it is an Arm of the sea only.

Some take this for the river Rio Neuado, which on one side coasts this
Country for 200 leagues; on the other side, to the Bay of Maluas, and by the
Gulf Merosco lies the Isle of Devils, so called because they hold it to be
haunted with spirits, as many of the eastern Islands are, as I observed in
another place.

There are Tawnies amongst them, they wear in their ears rings of gold and
silver, their clothes lined with Martins, and other furrs, amongst them there
live some Britains and English men.

Next lies the Country called Bacaleos, or Bacca-Lao, Bacalao Codfish.
so called from our fishing for Codds there, to which the Seamen give that
term. That place is so thronged with this sort of fish, that sometimes they
cumber a Vessel in sailing.

The coast from thence to Florida is about 900 l. The Country is cold like
Flanders, and under almost the same climate. The people are Idolaters, and
brutish, void of civility, except along the shore where the French inhabit;
there they live better, and eat not man's flesh as the rest round about them do.
They live in obedience to one they elect out of the most potent amongst them,
many Islands adjacent are possessed by the French.

Not far from thence lies the Country called Chicora, the people whereof are
of extraordinary size, they wear their hair down to their girdle, the women
much longer: They believe the immortality of the soul, and that after death
they transmigrate to a better Country than their own.

They keep stocks of tame Deer, which they drive to pasture as we do Cows and
Oxen; from them they make excellent cheese which mingled with a sort of clouted
cream, is a very delicate dish.

The English say the land of Bacalaos was first discovered by one Cabor, sent
thither by Henry the 7. King of England; to which the Spaniards consent not,
much less the French, who trafick'd here long before any other Nation.

Chicora lies upon the Continent a little above Bacalaos, and according to some
is part of it, as likewise the Country of Hari. The Spaniards say that
Licenciado Ayllon going from Hispaniola, run along all these coasts, and
amongst others visited Chicora. They feed here on the roots of Jucca, Casabe
and Potataes. They have variety of Idolatries, and Idols, with a thousand
ceremonies, superstitions, and feasts. Their great God they call Mateozunga,
the lesser Quexuga, and fancy a Mohammedan Paradise, of all sorts of pleasures,
music, dancing, feminine embraces, etc.

They believe the rotundity of the earth, and that it is in the middle of the
Universe, and that by consequence there are Antipodes. Their Priests abuse them
with a thousand prodigies and impostures: widows, if their husbands died
naturally, marry not again, but if by Justice or other violence they may. No
man has more than one wife, except the King, who may have two. They compose
their year of 12. moons, all their commerce is in exchange. They have excellent
remedies for all diseases, by means of their patriot herbs, wherein they have
good knowledge, amongst others they have one called Guachi, against choler. The
Spaniard Ayllon recounted many other particulars of Chicora, that 'twas of
great extent, and contained many Provinces.

CHAP. VI. Of Canada, or new France.
CAnada, or new France, was discovered, and frequented by the Britains and
Normans, in the year 1504, and before that also; since again by Verraz^n, who
took possession of the Coast and Continent for King Francis the first, which
has continued from time to time to this day.

The Country has not any Mines of gold, as they know of, but white Coral it
yields, called Esurqui, and some Jasper and cassidone stones, with abundance of
Beavers, wherein consists their traffic.

They have discovered a tree, called Aneda, or Zuaboya, much like our nut-tree,
the decoction whereof is a sovereign, and present remedy for a disease, common
in this Country, which infects them like a plague, from head to foot, with a
violent contraction of the sinews, stinking breath, and mouth running with
purtefication, as at Scurbut, and at last seizes on the vital spirits, and
with extreme torments finishes their lives: but Providence has furnished them
with this remedy Aneda, as Carter in his Voyages observes.

All these Countries of Bacaleos, Caneda, Hochelaga, are comprised under the
name of New-found-Lands, or new France, frequented these many years by the
French for fishing of Cods. For in the exact description, I refer myself to
Histories, and published Relations; only I will repeat what several, who have
travailed it, have told me.

Canada extends it self by a point south-west, within the Country of
Goulmaran, coming up to the River Diquero, where there is a spacious Town of
the same name, otherwise called Sougoubal, where the King keeps his Court;
toward the sea it joins with Baraleol, and the New-found-Lands; the Natives
of extraordinary stature, favored like them of new Mexico, heavy like a gilt
Morian, they are of a cruel nature, warring upon their neighbors, and there
are of them that eat Man's flesh: they inhabit up as far as the great river
Hochelaga, and use boats made of the bark of a tree, at the getting of this
bark, they use particular ceremonies, and prayers to their Idols, to protect
them in war in which they are assisted with Virgins dedicated to the Gods, as
our Religious.

Some amongst them are of more humanity and assasibility, addicting themselves
only to fishing, which they will willingly do for strangers.

The King derives himself from the first stock which peopled world after the
deluge, whereof they have some light.

They bear great reverence to the Sun for the light and benefit they receive.
They feed on bread made of fish, and the like as in Florida; live in common,
and diverse families under a roof. Men have several wives, whom they marry with
little ceremony, and leave them when they please. Their King they call the
great Sagamos or Sahagama, that is the great King, whom they carry upon a
Sindela of cotton, mixed with feathers, very curious and artificial: women wait
at his table, nor will he trust men with any thing of his diet; as he passes
by, all bow with great respect, none is capable of succession but the eldest
Son, all the other Children are subjects; for which cause the other wives,
rather choose abortion, then to live to see it.

After the Kings decease; they live perpetual widows, and in sign of mourning
immediately put on the Singaye, make incisions in their face, then laying gum
on a fire, hold over their faces that smoke may color the scarifications, with
this gum, and oil of date-stones, the meaner sort make their face black and
orange-tawny, their hair hangs loose about their shoulders, having nothing
about their head but the Singaye, which they wear as the Moors do their hair,
appearing both under and over it. This is made of feathers of a bird they call
Tanaps: the Americans esteem this bird ominous, when they meet it. The vulgar
women wear other plumes with cotton, but they neither marry the second time.

The men wear apparel of Deer-skins usefully contrived, one arm uncovered, and
so they wear their garment like a scarf, their breeches like the Egyptians, but
not so long. The Country is exceeding cold, and liable to earthquakes, for
which they sacrifice to their Idols, whereof they have one in figure, half a
man, and half a serpent, which they call Andouagni, and adorn him in a rich
habit, and their Country diamonds, which are not so good as others.

They have mines, but none very good, fruits of many sorts, and amongst others
a tree called Coltan, which yields an excellent liquor that they make drink of,
their King drinking nothing else. Vines grow there in abundance, naturally
without labor, exceedingly loaded with grapes, but they have not the skill to
make wine of them, except they have been lately showed: they have pumpions and
gourds which they eat roasted, oil out of Date-stones, very sweet and
sovereign in diseases. One tree there is which takes away any fever in few
hours. They are great hunters, and wear engines like raquets on their feet,
whereby they go the lighter on the snow in pursuit of their chase. Of late
years the English have changed the appellations the French gave these
Countries, of New- France, and Canada, to New- England, New- Scotland, and New
Brittanny above, before called Labrador, and Estotiland.

Goulmaran is the name of a river and a country, where the savages chief food
is fish, of which they have abundance, and drying it in the sun make flower,
which they eat without other baking: they eat the flesh of their enemies; they
house in caverns or cabbins of straw, without either apparel or household stuff
more then Gourds which the soil produces in abundance: great store of cattle
which fatten themselves without further care; they live in common, and admit no
strangers to inhabit amongst them. Their mortal enemies are the Siniga
neighboring Mountaneers, covered at halfes with beast skins; and these nations
as professed enemies, eat one another. For arms, they have staves, bows, and
slings, wherein they are very effectual, being strong and good wrestlers. They
lead into the field troops of fierce and strong dogs, and fling them the head,
hands, and feet of an enemy for reward; they only spare their wives to whom
they yield all honor, and marry with them. There is not amongst them any sort
of Science, Learning, or Character: they believe the soul immortal, and that
the Sun created the world, whom they call Courcourant* and the Moon Beleida:
live like brothers, without any Law of property, every man has his wife, and
with her is satisfied; no distinction of sin amongst them, vice nor virtue: all
equal, only a particular reverence to one chief as their King, whom they call
Caraybalan: They shave their head and beard with a root called Meite, which
dried at the Sun, they make into powder, and apply it plaister-wise all night.
Maids deflowered before Matrimony, never marry, though the fact is no dishonor
to them.

Their Singay by the advantage of their mountains, often fall upon them; they
have a sort of trunks through which they will blow their poisoned arrows with
strange vigor, and wound incurably. They are of admirable Footmanship, and
will fly like Grayhounds before a pursuing enemy, and on such occasions their
dogs stand them in good stead. They scatter about the fields certain poisoned
paste for the enemies dogs, and lest their own should be taken with it, they
hold them up tied: he that has two with him thinks himself secure. When the
dog winds any thing, if the Master cries Taip, the dog stays till his
Master has viewed his prey: they carry burdens like horses. Their houses are
of straw, and their burrowes are fortified with Timber-Palizadoes, which they
poison against the invading enemy. Of the same straw they cover their houses,
they make bridges, and never make bridge of stone; which straw-bridges are of
good firmness. They have some houses made of earth, mingled with chopped straw.
The Charaybalan or King, walks through the country with no attendance but
dogs, and allows no man to approach him. These dogs are his guard, being
very fierce; Military dogs.
and when they find any thing, they first look on their Masters face, to
understand if they should eat it or not, and stand for good servants: the enemy
has strong apprehension of them. These dogs have great tails like Bulls,
and it has been known that they have assaulted and defeated a good body of
men* so as the race of them is prized at a high rate.

CHAP. VII. Of Virginia and Florida, Fountains of youth, dangerous love.
ON the South and East of all these parts lies Virginia, discovered by Sir
Walter Rawleigh and the English, and Florida, first found by Sebastian Cabot an
English Navigator in the year 1496. as he looked for another matter: and more
perfectly afterward discovered by John Ponce of Lions who so christened it,
because he arrived on Palme-Sunday in French, called Flowre-Sunday, or else
because he found the land fragrant and spread with flowers.

This is a country of wide circuit toward 34. degrees, having on the East the
Channel of Bahama the Lucays and Virginia, on the West Mexico and the gulf
Panuco, on the South it looks upon Cuba or Jucatan, and on that side extends
above 200. leagues to the 24. degree: on the North lies Canada, New France, and
the Auanares, toward this point or tongue of land, in form of an Isthmus, it is
dangerous sailing for the opposite winds and currents of water. The natives are
strong and turbulent, eat their enemies of war, but their friends and
confederates never, not for any extremity. The men eradicate their beards to
appear more lovely and pleasing to the women: pierce their nose and ears, and
hang in rings and jewels: they marry not till 40 years of age, and the woman
25. holding that the children will be more robustious. Women before matrimony
observe not chastity, and without dishonor: but after marriage they will
forfeit life as soon as their fidelity.

North they border on the Aunares, and beyond them the Abardaos, a cruel and
wicked people, continually in war, and use a thousand subtleties to ensnare
their enemies, but especially by night, first laying their Engines or Caltrops,
then give the Alarm, and seem to fly; so the enemies pursuing, are often
taken in these trappes; as they likewise take wild beasts: as they on the
other side make concealed pits for them to fall in.

There are also the Jagares, a people so swift, they boast they can take a
Dear in plain running, and indeed the Dear there are not so wild. For they
feed in fields, in Herds like Cows, whereof they make their ordinary
sustenance. Ponce de Leon says he sent one of these people with a letter, and
some provision to his company, and in few hours he went and came thirty 1.

They are clothed with skins of beasts, but chiefly Dear, which they dress
very artificially.

Then there are the Apalchen and Chahamo, people entirely barbarous and
brutish, who adore and sacrifice to devils, that appear to them in diverse
forms. The whole Country abounds in all Commodities; as flesh of all sorts,
and fish, and they say there are Mines of Gold and Silver, whereof they make no
great account. They have a King, whom four of the Principal amongst them
bear in the skin of a Saliabe, a beast like a Heart: apparrelled with skins,
and set with feathers; they adore the Sun, and believe the immortality of the
soul: and that some go to Heaven, and others to the bowels of the earth.
Toward the Promontory of Baxos, there is a fishing of ordinary pearls,
neither so fine nor great as in the River of Palms, and Margarita; nor do the
Natives much esteem them, and value more a measure of Sperma Caetae, then a
handful of pearls.

The people of Canada ma^^ a greater account of them: for the women wear them
in their ears. In many places they build their houses in form of a Cressant,
in Honor of the Moon, and cover them with barks of trees, or sea reeds.

For Arms they use Bows, and poisoned Arrows, as does the greater part of
America. They are much given to Hunt and Fish. For more of the description of
the Country, and the manners of the people, I refer my self to the French and
Spanish relations.

I will only make mention of one miracle in the Country, attested by the
Licentiados, Ayllon, Figuerra, and other Spaniards of Quality; it is a fountain
of Youth, whereof the water being drunk, not only mitigates all maladies, but
makes the old young again, restoring decayed strength and vigor, whereof they
saw the experience in an old decrepid man, quite worn out, who became vigorous
and lusty, that married and got children.

The Spaniards advanced not into the Country, finding the People Martial,
bloody, and violent enemies to them; which I suppose proceeded rather from
cruelties, they themselves exercised, then the inclinations of the people, whom
the French, who used them mildely, found quite otherwise. And we see that Once
de Leon leaving them by reason of their salvagenesse, one Ferdinand de Sot^, in
the year one thousand five hundred thirty four for booty and discovery of
Mines, made a voyage thither: where he committed a thousand cruelties upon the
people, and the Catiques themselves; so as at last, in revenge he and all his
company were massacred.

Afterward Pamphilio de Naruanez brought a good Colony into the River of
Palms, where either by tempest or want, the greater part perished. Then in the
year one thousand forty nine, some Religious of Saint Benedicts order were sent
thither, who had but little better success, so as the country remaining
unplanted by any forrainers, in the year one thousand five hundred sixty two,
our French went to make a conquest of it.

Lo here the first discovery and taking possession of these territories, by
Verazan in the name of King Francis the first, in the year 1524. For Admiral
Chatillon, ambitious the French should have the honor and Empire of those
parts, had induced Charles the ninth to commission John Ribaut Diepois, to go
plant there at his own cost and charges; advised to the design by a
Frenchman, who under the style of a Levantisk, and Savoyard, not a Frenchman,
had before made a voyage that way to New Spain.

Ribaut with a good party ^f French soldiers, and Mariners, first touch at
the Cape of France, so named by him, in thirty eight degrees, and the fair
River May which he so called, because he arrived there on the first of May.
There the Indians and their King gave him kind entertainment, and many
presents were interchanged: ours gave them bracelets of Tin; Bills,
Looking-glasses, and Knives: They returned Plumes of red feathers, Baskets of
twigges finely platted, and skins of beasts ingeniously figured. On further
they found other Rivers, to which they gave the names of Seine, Sum, Loire,
Charante, Garoma, Gironda, Belle and others within less then sixty leagues off
coast, then upon the River Jordan they cast Anchor, and called that place Port
Royal, where they set up the Arms of France, as they did in the River May,
upon a stone pillar. Ribaut upon his design of planting, built a Fort he
called Charles-Fort, in the mouth of a fair River by the natives called
Toubachire, by Chenonceau; and placing in it Captain Albert with twenty
soldiers, and four pieces of Ordnance, he returned for France, bringing for a
show some pieces of Rock streaked with gold and silver, and abundance of
Munkeys and Paraquitoes, promising to return shortly with a considerable Colony
of men and women.

Here Captain Albert Governor of the Fort falls in love with a daughter of one
of the principal Caoiques, very fair and coming, whom he had procured into the
Fort with her Fathers consent; Unfortunate love.
the maid holding it for a great honor to be affected by strangers. But here
upon a soldier one of the chiefest and gallantest of the company, becomes her
servant also, and by so much the more ardent for some countenance she showed
him though in private: the Captain perceiving it, he fell into such rage, he
would have killed him, but for fear of mutiny amongst the soldiers; so thought
better to set him a shore in a desert Island, three leagues from thence,
promising to send him provision from time to time: but not performing
accordingly, the poor man was brought to such extremity, he had no sustenance
but Oysters, Tortoise eggs, Birds that he took with his hand, and herbs, and
was forced to creep into hollow trees, for security from wild beasts,
especially Crocodiles, whereof there are great store; nor did his sword and
punniard stand him in small stead against them. The very Apes and Munkies were
vexatious to him. Sometimes for better security he climbed into trees, and,
they say, falling asleep one night in a tree, he tumbled down on the back of a
Crocodile, that was come a shore for his prey, 'twas hard to say which was most
frighted, but he pursued the Crocodile to the River side, being but slow of
pace by reason of his short legs, and heavy body.

Certain Indians fishing, saw the miserable condition of this poor man, and
advertised his comerades in the Fort, who incensed against their Captain for
this and other rigours killed him, and fetched back the soldier half dead
with hunger: then chose another Captain, and constrained by necessity to
return into France; by help of the Indians, they built a little Bark, nailed
with wooden pinnes, and fitted with Sails of such linen as they had,
victualled with the round corn of the country, they call Mays, and powdered
flesh but were driven to such exigent by the way, they were fain to cast lots,
who should be so unhappy, as to be food for the rest.

In the year one thousand five hundred sixty four, Captain Landoniere was sent
thither with three vessels, who built Fort Caroline upon the River May, and
thence made some inroads upon the Continent; amongst other things he relates a
flash of lightening the most horrid and prodigious was ever heard of: for it
covered and burnt above five hundred Acres of Meadow, green, and watered,
roasted the Foul, A prodigious lightning.
and continued for three days without ceasing. The year following Captain
Ribaut returned thither with his son, and about four hundred men and women to
compose his colony, and till the soil.

He was upon opening a Mine of Gold, and in the rock was come to fine gold, of
the bigness of needle points, about 30. leagues from the sea: but afterward
being about to go on with the work effectually; he was unexpectedly surprised
by Spaniards who used him and his company with all cruelty, and treachery
imaginable.

Our Histories relate the passage at large, so as our Forts were taken, and all
our countrymen hanged or murdered. Young Ribaut escaped, came back into France
and complained to the King, French hanged in Florida.
who wrote to the King of Spain about it; but he only sent order to the
Viceroy of New Spain, to inform himself of the matter, and accordingly to do
justice: which nevertheless was forgotten, and so the outrage was unsatisfied,
till the year 1567. that Captain Gourgues nobly undertook the revenge at his
own charges, and bravely drove out all the Spaniards, and demolished their
Forts. I shall make no further progress, for that the Histories of Florida,
make large relations.

CHAP. VIII. Of Mexico: the nature of the Inhabitants, their Kings, sacrifices,
etc.
FRom Florida by degrees we arrive at New Spain, or the kingdom of Mexico. A
country extending in length and breadth from the River Tanasco or Grisalue
toward the West, or Jucatan, to the Province of Caliacan, and the river Saint
Michael bounded on the North with new Granada, and the Provinces of new Mexico.
On the South lies the great gulf of the pacifick sea of Mexico. On the East
the River Panuco, and the skirts of Florida.

The kingdom of Mexico is otherwise called Culbuca, and Anauas by the
Inhabitants, it holds dominion from Panuco to Dariene, which divides it from
Peru. The principal Provinces are Guatemala, Xalisco, Chalcos, Taica,
Mechoachan, Tlascalan, Acapulco, Culiacan, Tezuco, Tescuco, Huaca-chalque,
Huacachala, Claortomaca, Maxalcinco, Gistecapan, and others.

New Spain is one of the most excellent Provinces of the New World, fully
inhabited, pure air, abounding in corn, and all sorts of grain, Cattle,
Mines of Gold, and chiefly of Silver, wanting nothing but oil and wine.

The principal and capital town is Temistican or Temoxtitlan, or Temuistican,
upon a Lake of thirty Leagues in circute, is contained threescore thousand
Houses, at the time the Spaniards took it, under the famous Ferdinand Cortez.
The lake is of two waters, salt and fresh, by reason of the rivers that enter
it. There are many other great Towns, but less then Mexico.

Before they received Christianity, they were all great Idolaters, and given to
strange superstitions, many whereof they continue still. Their Sacrifices were
formidable, Fathers not scrupling to make their own children victims.

The Mexicans are an ingenuous people, and of experience in all sorts of
works, particularly in Tapestry of feathers, where they have things
artificially drawn to the life. The Soil abounds in all sorts of fruits, and
commodities for livelihood, as well natural as adventitious: even vines,
whereof they have very good, notwithstanding the prohibition to plant any.

True, in many parts the grapes come not to perfect maturity; by reason of the
abundant rains in June and July, when the grapes begin to ripen, so as they
soake rain, and corrupt, wherefore they are forced to eat them half green.
Some have tried to make wine, but it proves sharp, and more like wine of
quinces, then grapes.

They have planted olive trees, which come to good growth, and full of leaves,
but without fruit. All sorts else grow well and plentifully. The wine they
drink comes all from Spain, and is very dear, for it cost five of us three
crowns a day for our parts, and a good bargain, the plenty of money making all
things dear, for a bed 12 realls a night.

In Peru it is yet dearer, though they get very good wine and figs, as likewise
in the Isles of Barlouento, and Cuba. There are many Forests by the Indians
called Arcaboucos, store of Ebony Gu^acum, or Lignum Sanctum, wide and thick
Forests of Cedars, Laurells, Dates, Pines, Oaks, and herbs of all sorts,
proceeding from the nature of the Climate, being hot and moist. The greater
part of the ground lies notwithstanding uncultivated, The temperature of Mexico.
for want of Laborers, of which they have none, but some Blacks of Maniconga
and Guinea, lazy people, and no good workers.

The Country is not very populous, many more women then men, by reason war and
labor consumes them.

The extent of these Regions is admirable, nay infinite, in respect of the few
Inhabitants, and less agriculture; for this late discovered Mexico contains
above 15 Provinces, of above a thousand leagues in circuit, where there are as
fair Towns and buildings as in Europe.

Good part speak the Mexico Tongue. Farther on there succeed several unknown
Nations, without number: Some Religious went thither to Preach the Faith, but
the Savages devoured them.

It Is not yet found out what Territories border with Cape Mendocino,
California, high Florida, new Mexico, and others toward the North Pole, no
more then what is beyond the Straight of Magellan, higher by 56. or 57. degrees.

The Inhabitants of old Mexico, do entirely apply themselves to the Trades and
ways of the Spaniard, being grown good Weavers, and make all sorts of silk
stuffs: in like manner they are docile and judicious, and such as are become
Christians, follow the Doctrine most religiously.

The Country is of such a situation, that you ascend wherever you go from the
sea Coast, but so easily you perceive it not. So coming from the middle of the
land to the Sea-ward, you descend on which side soever, but so, as afterward
one admires how they ascended mounted so high, or came so low; all the Mexican
Territory is of this quality and situation.

The Ancient Mexicans.
The Mexicans derive themselves originally from other parts, the Ancient
Inhabitants were barbarous, and eat nothing but venison, which they called
Chichimeques, and Otomies; then the Navatalks came from the North, from
Provinces, which since are joined to New Mexica, who peopled, cultivated, and
civilized the soil and Nation: But withal they introduced their strange
Idolatries, and horrible sacrifices of men and infants, whereof they perpetrate
abundance every year: Whereby it is very probable that not only this, but all
the other Countries are inhabited with people derived from the North, whither
the Asians and Europians may have passed by little and little by the Streights,
either of Sea, or Land, as we have already demonstrated.

These Mexicans being well settled, chose a King to Govern them, who was one
Acamipixtsi, a Mexican Lord, who had married a daughter of the King of
Cublivacan, an ancient people of the Country: since which time they have ever
had Kings, not by succession, but Election, continued to the ninth and last
King Montezuma, taken by Cortez: under which Kings they had diverse Wars, and
took in many neighbors, augmenting it to a great state.

The King was not Elected by the Commons, but by 4 Principal of the Court, and
had the Crown from the hands of the Tescaio.

But the King Elect, before he receives his Crown, is obliged to go fight the
Enemy, and bring such a number of Prisoners to their Sanguinary sacrifices. If
he fail in the first expedition, they excuse it, but if the second time, they
poison him, and choose another. If he return victorious, they conduct him with
great ceremony to the Temple, where they make the great sacrifice, with
processions, and music, through the Town. He was crowned with a Crown like a
Miter, and every one made oath to serve him to the last drop of blood; then was
conducted with great magnificence to the Pallace-Royal, the Electors called
Laceocal, marching first, that is, Princes of the Lance, then the Lacaterret,
or Thunderbolts of men, who are the gallantest of the Cavaliers, then
Hazeuocal, that is, bloud-shedders, and the Lilbancalqui, Knights of the black
lance. These four orders were his Majesty's privy Council: in the Town they had
other Councils for administration of Justice. When the King went to the Temple,
an hundred men marched before him with great bows taller than themselves; then
100. more with long staves with a hardbroad keen stone in the end, with which
he will cut off a horse-head; I have seen one cut a sheep in two with it, those
they call a la a tilpeo.

The Kings Palace is sumptuous and magnificent, a Park by it stored with
wild beasts of all sorts, ponds full of fish, with boats of rich work, and
cages for Birds. The Palace is composed of separate apartments, and several
habitations for the Courtiers, every one according to his dignity and degree.

The Mexican Kings had high esteem for men of valor, and rewarded them very
amply, by which means they were so well served in their wars, and got so many
victories. Their weapons were clubs with keen stones, lances, pikes, a sort of
javelins, at the throwing whereof they were exceeding dextrous, bows, arrows,
little targets, and a headpiece with a plume of feathers; coats of Lions,
Bears, Tigers, and other beasts-skins, great runners, and wrastlers.

The King of Montezuma in his Militia had an order of Knights, that from the
Crown had their hair tied with carnation ribbons, rich feathers, and a scarf of
the same color, who for every gallant achievement they have done, have so
many waves fastened, and hanging over their shoulders. This King was of that
order, as he is to be seen represented in his statue at Chapultapes. This habit
was very stately, enriched with plumes of all colors, and makes the Spaniards
deck themselves with feathers in imitation, and adorn their horses with them:
another order of Knights there was called Agourlas, clad in another manner, and
with other differences; then there were the Ataroncos, the Tigers, the Blacks
armed from head to foot in fight, the others half armed: Their clothes of
Combi, cotton and other things, these had license to eat in gold and silver
vessels, a thing not allowed to others; who were apparelled with courser
clothes, called Nequen.

These first Knights lodge in the Kings Palace, and have their apartments amply
accommodated, whom I cannot compare better than to the Mayl'd Knights at Malta,
distinguished in diverse companies, by the Titles of Princes, Eagles, Tigers,
and Blacks. The rest of his Valiant Militia lodged in other divisions apart,
assigned them by the Council, and upon pain of death could not change their
lodging. This Militia was so well ordered and disciplined that they stroke,
terror in the neighboring people. And what was most to be admired, that they
could keep so many different Nations in concord, for the perfection of the
Country drew people from all parts thither. People of Mexica.
There is one sort of people amongst them called Chalcas, that is, men of the
straight, which argues them to be a people come from the straight: others
called Souchimilcos, that is field men; others Tapaneras, men of the bridge;
others Alcapousalcas, Couluas, crookback'd: Tsaluicas, mountain-men. All these
Nations are come to inhabit, and feed on Mexica; to build Towns and Buroughs,
and that as their Characters show above seven or eight hundred years since. The
Tlascaltecaes never agreed with the Mexicans, but assisted the Spaniards
against them, and in compensation are eased of tributes, and have many
privileges; and possess the room the Chichimeras who fled from their homes at
the approach of the Spaniards, so much they were astonished with that new way
of war, esteeming them children of the Sun.

A stratagem.
The Tsalcaltecaes used a stragatem to dispossess the Chichimecaes, who made
good resistance at first, for under color of a feast of amity, while these
were drinking, the others stole away their arms, and so got their ends. The
History whereof stands at this day painted in the Country. The original people
were Giants, as appears by bones of dead men, and teeth as big as pullets eggs.
They who remained by little and little, conformed themselves to the others.

The Mexicans had a most truculent custom, to sacrifice their prisoners of war,
and enemies, to their gods, and in want of them their own natural children. The
Priests or Papas performed the sacrifice opening the breast of the miserable
victim, and with the heart sprinkled the Idol to appease it, and watered the
stairs and the temple with his blood. In Peru they made the like sacrifice of
children, from four to ten years old, with such madness that they would
slaughter 200. at a time, and this for the health and prosperity of their Ingas
or Kings, and the like of maids drawn out of their Monasteries.

The Mexicans sacrifices.
To gain their Childrens consent, they tell them they shall be immediately made
Saints, and go straight to heaven amongst the gods: At Peru at decease of their
Kings they slaughter a number of his servants to attend and wait upon him in
the other world. This custom of bloody sacrifices was common through all the
parts and Islands of the new world.

What is admirable, in Coluacane, as also in Jacatan, Vraba, and Dariena, there
are many circumcised, whence arises a question, whether they came from the ten
Tribes, sent to Tarty and Arsarach.

The Mexicans chief god, or wooden Idol, was Vitzilipatzli, The Mexicans Ido^*
whom the Toucouacans or Te^calhuacans, the first civilizers of Mexico brought
with them in a Tabernacle of Sea-reeds, who promised to make them Lords of this
vaste Country, showed them the way to it, and how to keep it, which at this
day is to be seen in historical paintings, as I have often my self observed. In
prosecution they built lofty Temples, and instituted their Feasts and bloody
Sacrifices, whereof I spoke before.

The Devil, that Ape of the Almighty, would imitate what we read of the Ark in
the old Testament, conducting the children of Israel, and other mysteries; the
style this Seducer uses, to gain credit and adoration from these abused people.
And the Indians in memory of this Ark, to this day place a case of reeds upon
the Altar.

Being in the Kingdom of Tabin, and passing on to the Country of S^iton, we
visited the Lord of the Territories Palace, where amongst diverse figures of
Princes, there was one of a King with an emerald hanging in his nose: whom we
were informed was King of Mexico, and how after the decease of Montezuma, one
Tlacaeler a person of high valor, was elected King, or Lord of the Country,
who nevertheless waved the offer, saying he had charge enough in the ordering
his own dominions.

The Mexicans perceiving his resolution, requested he would name them a King,
and then he elected Ticoci^, son of the King deceased, who being young was
constantly assisted with the counsel of Tlacaeler.

This King had his nose pierced, and an Emerald hanged in it, and hence in
their books and monuments, this King is figured with his nose pierced.

In the Temples of Peru they set the Image of Pachacamas with a Monde under his
Feet, who they said had a Spirit that he sent upon earth to execute his will;
that being a potent crowned King, he went naked, for their example, and that in
his hand he bore a dart to exterminate those of bad lives, and called him
Chinnequil, that is, the Ghost of the Great Creator.

Letters they had none, only a sort of significant Characters, figures and
draughts like Hieroglyphics, which they continue still to express the
mysteries of Christianisme. They will form all their words and discourses in
these figures and paintings, as when they would say, I confess me to Almighty
God: they draw a Priest sitting, a man at his feet upon his knees* and over
them three faces in one, signifying the Trinity, and something lower the image
of the Virgin with her infant, etc. and pictures of Saints and Angels. In this
manner they express all by figure, which asks a long time to signify a matter
of importance, and sometimes a whole day to draw it. Wherefore in all great
Towns there are those that sell papers, with all necessary and ordinary
communications ready delineated.

Their Records, Histories, Calendars, and Annals, were ever expressed in this
manner.

CHAP. IX. The Mexican year, their Paradise, Infernal, and their Dances.
THe Mexican year was divided into eighteen months, of twenty days to a
month, and the five days over they set apart for feasts, sacrifices, and
recreations. The year began in March with the coming of the leaf, each month
having a particular pourtraict.

The Peruians more properly divided their year into 12. months, or moons,
wherein they exquisitely compacted all the days of the year, which they began
in January.

These months they deciphered by 12. columns in order, with names signifying
the feasts contained, and the seasons to sow, reap, The Mexican year and month.
etc. the first was Soucangae, the 2. Rayme, then Hostino^^qui, Aucayqui,
Ar^ucouqui, Caualiarqui, J^urtaqui, Jouapaqui, Cayarayme, Payconeo, Jomarayme,
Ayamara, the twelfth.

They pourtrayed the Sun and Moon, and by certain distinctions, knew the full
and the qualities of it. The Mexicans had a mooving wheel, whereon the months,
feasts, and seasons, were set with distinct ciphers. For the seven days are
not founded upon the solary or lunary course, but with the Hebrews upon the
creation, and our number of Planets with the Pagans.

The years are denoted by several signs, from four to four, of thirteen years
each division, which in 25. years contained the whole period, and concluded the
circle.

Chicora.
So the people of Chicora divided their year into twelve Moons, in Coluacana
they use the Lunary Months, and call the Months Books. The Moon in their
language is T^na, the Sun Tanaric. The Mexican wheel
I have often enquired of the use of this Mexican wheel, but could never
understand it: it moves very slowly, and goes round every Month, noting the
periods, and account of years, as to say: such a thing was done in such a year,
de^yphered by a Temple, a Rose, a Rabbet, a Stone, the four marks of the wheel.
When a little needle in the middle of the wheel comes to point at the period of
fifty years, then are they stricken with a strong apprehension, believing the
world is to be ended, and for three or four days before lament, and make
Sacrifices to appease the angry gods; but when it arrives at the point, they
leave their Sacrifices, break all their utensils, as they were to die at the
instant, lay themselves on the ground with extreme contusion for their bad
lives, and terror of approaching torments: and having spent a day and night
thus dolefully, upon appearance of the next day, which they never thought to
see, they go strait to visit the wheel, which now has entered a new
circulation; then repleat with joy they render a thousand benedictions to the
gods for the grace received, whereof they thought themselves unworthy, with
engagements of reformation for the future. Then prepare for a solemn fast
abstaining till night from all sustenance: for three days they observe these
fasts, without company with their wives.

After this their Priests or Papaes, with 12. men and youths in feather
garments, dancing silently to music, bear the Idol of their God Vriacocha,
followed with a number of boys and girls in white, decked with flowers and
feathers of various colors, then the Religious in their proper habits, next
come 12. sheep for sacrifice, then the principal persons with tapers in their
hands, then follow the whole multitude of men and women, with hymns and
gratifications, up to a Mountain: from whence they observantly return to the
Temple. Amongst them there are some that furiously lash their bare shoulders
with thorns of Mangouay, so as the Temple runs with blood, wherewith the
Priests wash the face of their Idol. After this the sheep with their ears
peirced, and a thousand gayties were dejugulated, and with them some Children
were sacrificed, whilst others dance and sing about them, the Priests
instructing and encouraging them to it.

But before the Feast, they compound a meat of the flesh of certain venomous
Creatures, Mace, Tobacco, and certain roots, which the Priests eating, a Devil
enters their bodies, and they fall into a fury; then they begin their ball. The
feast is called Procrayme. Every year they have the like Sacrifices, beginning
with fasts and lamentations.

They have processions likewise, and with dances and songs carry their Idols
very solemnly, still concluding with bloody sacrifices.

When Lords and Masters dye, their Servants sacrifice themselves in hope to
serve their Masters in the other world, and if through indiscretion or want
they were not paid and well rewarded in this life; suppose it shall be amply
done in the next. They believe the immortality of the soul, felicity for the
good, and the wicked to be tormented by the Devil, whom for this reason they
adore, wearing his counterfeit in their ears, that he may show them some favor
when they come to the Abyss. They believe that after death their actions are
presented and pleaded before the great God, who gives definitive sentence one
way or other to eternity.

They believe no reformation, as the Bretellians* and others believe no hell,
but that all go to live merrily with their forefathers. In some parts they
embalm the Corpse, and together interr their whole treasure. In other parts they
lay victuals and drink by them, in opinion God sometimes confines their souls
to their Sepulchers, so as they may want sustenance.

Ceremonies and Prayers.
The Indians when they fall sick, present their Priests with diverse rarities,
that they would make prayers for their health; But if their disease grow
vigorous, with Brasile they die a shirt vermillion, and send it to be
sacrificed for their recovery; also they send diverse prayers figured in
Characters to be burned with shells, they call vila coronea. Likewise they
sacrifice sheep, and the rarest of birds, nay slaves themselves terming this
hurlauical: as that of the feasts contauical, wherein they mingle odoriferous
woods called Jauli, resembling the Lemon tree, together with ceremonial prayers.

Against their Enemies they have other Sacrifices, as to burn their Effigies,
with the pictures of several venomous and mortiferous Creatures, the Priest
pronouncing, So perish the strength of our enemies, then they sacrifice a black
sheep kept long from food, and the Priest cries, So let the heart of our
enemies be weakened.

To Rivers they sacrifice the shells that come from them, to fountains fruits
and vertual herbs; holding there is nothing on earth which has not his like in
heaven, and that they hold a correspondence: and that any thing of good
operation on earth, is acceptable to their gods in heaven. In what condition
soever, in health or sickness, peace or war, on all occasions they have
recourse to prayers and sacrifice, even to immolation of their slaves and
children. The Mexicans dis-avow all peace with their neighboring enemies, the
Tapacques, Ilascalcans and Mechoachans, that they may be stored with prisoners
of war for sacrifice, and hold these wretches for Saints and celestial, when
they go with consent.

Their dances.
Dancing was very frequent with the Mexicans, mixing many Ceremonies and
superstitions, the Lords themselves the most grave, and of what office soever,
disdained it not, and to use the Mitecos, that is, dancings in stately rooms,
or gardens, with spiritual songs, rather a sort of adoration than a dance. One
Indian hangs about another neck, then he dances to a taber or flute, others
show a thousand postures and agilities of body, like our tumblers. They have
sometimes their Muscurades called Quacones, disguising themselves like Devils,
and glory in this dance. Likewise dancers on the rope, standing with their head
down and feet up, with a thousand Turn-overs, and Gamboles; others dance with
an extraordinary weight on their shoulders, and this they call Tanquil, then
comes another and leaps upon this weight, yet he dances still, though
painfully. Then all weaving Arms, and singing, dance in a ring very prettily
without the least trouble to one another, then in couples by turns they fall
out, and dance about the ring in several manners, at last join all together.
For this they adorn themselves with their best attire, and still sing prayers
and praises to their Gods.

CHAP. X. Burning mountains, the Conquest of Mexico, and some particular trees.
AMongst the Mexican Marvailes are the burning mountains, which vomit forth
flames, and thick smoke, more or less, Burning Mountains.
according to the matter that feeds the fire, shut up in the bowels of the
earth.

The most famous of these Mountains for height and compass are the Guatamala,
discernable at vast distance on the South sea. A Spanish Priest out of avarice
would needs sound this Mountain, supposing the bottom to be full of gold: This
Priest was called Mossen born at Antequera who came to the Indies with Pirarow
at the time of Ferdinand Cortez conquest: he had a sister living with him, who
had a fair daughter, whom the Captain married to Lazart d' Almadia, Clark of
the ship, promising 1000. ducats in marriage: But the Clark being jealous of
his Captain, left his wife in Spain, and the Captain being come on shore with
grief for his Mistress absence dyed, to whom by his last will he ratified the
1000. ducats: Mean while the Clark took command of the vessel, and arrived in
New Hispaniola, where the Priest was very welcome, Priests being there very
acceptable, and was accommodated in the town of Sanda, where he lived in great
esteem for sincerity and devotion, so in few years he grew very wealthy. But
not content with this, upon suggestion that the flaming Mountain, not far
thence was a Mine of gold, he thought to get inestimable riches out of it: A
History of a covetous Priest
for this purpose he caused a strong iron chain to be made, to the measure of
the height of the Mountain, which he had taken by Artizans, then by strength of
men began to cut a way for portage of his necessaries; which could not be done
but at great expense: a man's labor there being worth two crowns a day,
nevertheless avarice made him pass it easily: But this beginning was a mean
matter, for he must continue the laborers, being yet not advanced far by
reason of the height of the Mountain, and firmness of the rock, which he must
cut through: nor though many looked upon the enterprise as extravagant and
inconsiderate, yet the Priest every day got nearer to the mouth of the Furnace,
with expense of time, labor, and difficulty. After four months space; the
ponderous chains and chaldrons, with great cost and pain were drawn up. The
good man boasted, he doubted not now to come shortly to his ends, and that he
had a revelation of it in his sleep: at length all these iron Engines were set
in order, and the workmen to the number of 50. began to let down a Chaldron
well fastened to a strong chain of iron with other Engines secured, and the
Priest himself set his hand to the work: But as they thought to draw up the
Chaldron full of rich melted mettle, the strength of the fire consumed all, and
they hardly escaped without burning their hands and feet, so violent a heat
burst out upon them. The Priest half mad cried out, the Devil had broken his
chain with a thousand curses, ready to throw himself headlong into the
Precipice, covered over with soot and cindars, and frying with heat, fright,
and toil, that he looked like a right fury; running like a madman to and fro;
the rest in little better condition, the greatest part being lamed and consumed
with labor, and the violence of heat which had even melted them. The good man
at last was brought to his lodging in extreme torment, where they laid him to
bed in so much grief and discomfort, that he was the pity of the world. Waking
in the night he was surprised with such a rage, that he gave himself several
stabbes in the throat with his knife, and in the morning his sister coming to
visit him, found him steeped in blood and ghastly, half dead, whereupon she
cried out for help, and friends came immediately in, and a Surgeon applied
the country balsom so fortunately to his wounds, that he was well within few
days; nevertheless for extreme grief and sullenness he could eat nothing,
at last he languished to death, having consumed all he had gotten, besides what
his sister had, and other friends whom he quite ruined.

The poor woman lived a while after, but miserably, her Son-in law making some
voyages betwixt the Indies and Spain, in the best sort he could, who afterward
had other strange misfortunes upon his wives account, esteemed the daughter of
that unfortunate Priest^

The last King of Mexico Montezuma was so potent, that he had three thousand
men for his guard, and could bring three hundred thousand fighting men into the
field. He sacrificed every year above 20000 persons to his Idols. His revenue
in gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, cotton, furs, and fruit was
infinite, he had thirty feudatary Kings under him, Montezama King of Mexica.
each whereof command a hundred thousand vassals. He gained nine battles
against his enemies, and was nine times victorious in close lists: He kept such
State and Majesty, that none durst look in his face. He was slain in an
insurrection of the Mexicans against Cortez, and his Nephew Catamazin chosen in
his place; but he continued not long.

Mexica was conquered by Ferdinand Cortez, born at Medelin, Ferdinand Cortez
conquered Mexica.
in Estremadura, who came to the West Indies in the year 1485. and 1519. went
from Cuba to the conquest of Mexica, discovered before by Fr. Fermandez de
Cordoua, who first found Jucatan in 1517. and by the intelligence he had from
Velasco Governor of Cuba, he sent his Nephew John de Grizalua, who went as far
as San Jouan de Vsua, and took possession of the country for the King of
Spain. Velasco sent afterward one Osio to relieve Grizalua, but he returned
without advancing further. Cortez undertook the invasion with five hundred
soldiers, his Captains, Auilla, Porto Carrecco, Orda, Escalente Salsedo, Olid,
Escouar, Aluarada, and others. He gained the Kingdom with great toil and
industry, defeated, and took the King Montezuma; afterward being driven out by
the Mexicans, with a neighboring people their enemies he returned, and brought
them absolutely under the yoke. The Indians called him Malnixa, as a God
descended from heaven. Amongst the Spaniards themselves he had great enemies,
as Garary, Estrada, Olid, and Navez, whom he routed, and completed his
conquest. The Emperor made him Marquess del Valla. He was endued with all the
qualities of a Spaniard virtuous and vicious. He was bold, valiant, sudden in
execution, clear spirited, subtle, patient, and resolute; but ambitious, out of
measure cruel, and libidinous. He dyed in Spain, at the age of 63. in the year
1546. He conquered in Mexica from 12. to 15. degrees. The town of Mexica is in
19. degrees: about the 8. of May, and the 16. of July the Sun is perpendicular.
The country is temperate, but rather hot then cold, clothes there not being
tedious or troublesome, nor nakedness importune, or broyling.

The Mines are not so wealthy as in Peru: but more profitable by reason of the
less charge and danger. Besides gold, silver, iron, and brass; they bring
from thence sugar, cochenell, cotton, plumage, honey, wax, balm, amber, salt,
medicinable drugges, etc. and few vessels return light, which is not in Peru,
Spain being enriched as well from one as the other. For though there is so much
treasure to be exhausted, yet there is not so much danger. The faith has made
a farther progress, the country is better peopled, the natives better
ordered, more regular, better Markets of cattle, horses, sugars, and meat,
wherein Peru cannot compare, which doubtless would be better if it had more
rain.

The natives wondering why the Spaniards were inquisitive of gold and silver, at
first they made them believe 'twas to cure them of a pain at their heart,
whereto they were subject, but in time they found it did hold them there indeed.

Cortez to bring these people in obedience to his King, told them he was
Emperor of all the Christians, the greatest Lord on earth, who had under him
more Kingdoms and Provinces then other Kings had subjects. Spanish vanity.
That his government was founded on Justice, and proceeded immediately from
God, that he was accomplished with all virtues, and that the Monarchy of the
whole Universe, was by right his inheritance, and other Spanish boasts and
vanities.

Concerning the particulars of this great country, besides what I have said
already. In the Province of Mechoacan, there is an excellent root of the same
name with the country, by others called Jeheurais, of the same virtue to
purge, as Rhubarb, but more light and white, and purges with less violence,
which is a great traffic in Spain, where it is worth three or four realls the
pound, and there almost nothing. It Is taken by the weight of a Crown pulverized
in an egg, wine, or broth. I have seen greater effects of it then Rhubarb. It
may be kept four or five years or longer with care, but there is such
abundance, they matter it not.

By information of the natives, some of the Spaniards were cured of diseases by
this root, and so it became famous. It Is called Indian Rhubarb. Amongst other
trees in Mexico or the land of Caperous, there is the famous tree of Muguey,
whereof they tell as many wonders, and several uses, as of the Eastern Cocos,
for it yields water, wine, vinegar, oil, honey, wax, thread, and needles; A
tree yielding all necessaries.
so as this is sufficient to keep a man. After drawing fresh water, the fruit
will be like sweet small nuts. The water a little boiled becomes good wine;
more boiled, like burnt wine, which coagulate again excellent honey, whereof
they make Syrupes: The first water set in the Sun makes good vinegar: From the
leaves issues sweet milk, and out of the leaves you may draw thread, strong
enough to make cloth. I brought with me two shirts of it, and some of the
fruit, as perfect into Europe, as it grew on the tree, for the rind is very
thick, and that preserves it. cloth made of this yarne, will ever have some
dark gray streaks in it. About the leaves grow little prickles, so strong and
hard, they use them for needles, and sew with no other. There are many who live
on this tree alone, which puts forth leaves upon leaves continually, and in
such abundance, that the tree is covered over from the root to the top, which
makes it unshapely. To make it pregnant, they lay cindars to the root: the wood
is of such quality, it endures twice as long in the fire as any other, and when
they will keep fire a long time, they use a piece of this wood.

Balm comes from a tree something like a Pomegranate tree, and it produces
several sorts of several virtues. The first is Opobalsamo, excellent for wounds
and the plague, of gold color like Ambar: another sort is something white:
another sort is pressed out the leaves and sprigges burnt; of such virtue,
'twill draw any iron out of the flesh.

I brought some into France, wherewith I did most admirable cures of wounds,
and old ulcers which had eaten to the very bone.

In a word, it is most sovereign for wounds, pains in the sides, contagions,
and holding a little in the mouth, preserves from bad ayrs.

They much esteem another tree called Cacao, as the fruit is of great use and
traffic, which passes with them as money to buy all commodities. The fruit is
like an Almond, a little less: They are never without Cacoas in their pockets,
to buy what they want, for alms, or to eat; Fruit used for money.
and 'twill keep a long time. The Province of Guatima produces them in
abundance, where they make a precious drink of it, that accordingly mixed cools,
or heats: it makes good wine. They make Cakes of it good for the stomach, and
ptisick, it is like an Almond tree, the leaves a little broader, and of a
thicker body. To make it prosper, they plant another by the side of it: it is
very tender, and suffers equally by cold and heat.

This latter tree they call Cacaos mother, because it preserves it from the
injuries of the weather. Whosoever has this tree, they esteem him happy and
pious, in opinion, if he were not such, their God would not have sent him this
tree: and when such a tree dies, they believe the Master has committed some
heinous crime.

In like manner they have their Coca in high esteem at Peru, which being chewed
and held in the mouth, marvellously revives the spirit. It Is of very delicate
taste, whereof they make great traffic to Potossi.

Of the Gold and Silver Mines in Mexico, I will speak jointly with those of
Peru.

CHAP. XI. Of new Spain, the Provinces thereof, and of Peru.
NEw Spain is the greatest Dominion in North America, as Peru in the South.
Betwixt both lies Jucatan, Hondura, Nicaragua, Veraga, or Nombre de Dios and
Panama, which chain them together.

Jucataen.
Jucatan is a point of land which extends to the 21. degree, like a peninsula,
being in the streightest place from Xicalanco to Chotemal some hundred leagues
over: the country was first discovered by one Fernandez in one thousand five
hundred and seventeen. afterward by Grisalua, who came from Cuba to the Isle
of Cosumel, or Saint Crois, thence to Campechia, Champatron, and Tauasco.

Hondura was first discovered by Columbus in his last voyage, 1502. last by one
Casan who settled the Plantation of Tucillo in 1515. Pedrarias d' Avila, in
1519. planted the Colonies in Nombre de Dios, and Panama toward the South Sea;
the first discoverer of that sea was Vasco Muntz, coming from Dariana in 1513.
who with great joy rendered thanks to God, and took possession for the King of
Spain.

Betwixt Nombre de Dios and Panama, it is 17. or 18. leagues of Marshes,
Mountains, and craggy asperous rocks, full of fierce wild beasts of all kinds,
and a multitude of Apes that make a very troublesome noise. They transport
their Merchandise from sea to sea, either by land with convoyes, or by the
river Chagra to about five leagues from Panama, Panama.
and then by land with Convoy. They have often thought of cutting this Isthmus
in the streightest place, but the difficulty of the Rocks and Mountains by the
way, besides the doubt if the seas are level, as at the Egyptian Isthmus,
hindered the proceeding.

A Colony at Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariana, displanted for the unsoundnesse
of the air: for but throwing warm water on the ground, toads, and other
venomous creatures would engender.

Advancing toward the East, we came to the Provinces of Vraba, S. Martha,
Cartagena, Popayan, Dorado, new Estramadora, new Granada, Venecuela, Castilia
Doro, Bagota, new Andolousia, Paria, Cahaqua Cumana, etc.

South lies Dariana, then the great kingdom of Peru, then Chila to the
Straight.

Dariana was planted by one Anchisa, there are Cowes with feet, like Mules, and
hornlesse.

Peru according to some extends from Dariana to Chila others clipping it from
Popayan North, to Chila South. It took name from the River Peru in two degrees
Northward; the Provinces thereof are Quito, Quixos, Popayan, Canela, Pacamores,
Gualsonge, then Collao, Carchas, Anedas, Tecuman, to Chila.

Popayan is about two hundred leagues in length, and forty in breadth, lying
upon new Granada toward the East. The Provinces are Antioch, Tataho, Anserma,
Arma, Pacoura, Catapa, Quinhaya, Calix, and Pasto.

Anserma 70. leagues from Antioch is called by the Indians Ombra; but the
Spaniards seeing the Inhabitants hold salt in their hand, and call it Anser,
thought the town had been so called, and continued that name: there is a
passage over the river Saint Martha at that town. Arma is of note for rich
Mines: Parmoura has also silver Mines: the Province of Arbi extends to the
Mountains of Cordilleras, which runs a thousand leagues Southward: on that side
which stretches to the sea, they never have raines by reason the South, and
South-West winds blowing continually, drive the clouds away, whereby this part
is barren without tree, fruit, or grass. but the other side only a league
distant, by reason of the rains, abounds in fruits and all commodities.

In Quinbaya at the end of the Cordilleras over against Andes, there is a
famous burning mountain. In the Province of Pastro there is a large valley
called Arris ever cold, both winter and summer. All these parts are well
peopled, and the Inhabitants not so bloody, nor man-eaters as in other parts;
living under a government and obedience to their Prince, and believe in the
resurrection after death, and that they shall live in fields of peace, with all
sorts of delights.

Peru extends from Pasto to Chila, The extent of Peru.
ends Southward at the River Manto, North at Augar Mayo: here are vast sandy
Plains as far as the Indies, where the heat is extreme, while snow lies on the
Mountains, and the like diversity of the seasons; I remember when I went to
Sicily, walking on the coast of Calabria in the beginning of March, winter was
so sharp, there was not the least sprout of a Vine to be seen, whereas in
Sicily I found them a span high, young beans, good Artichocks, and they mowed
green corn, to give the blades to horses.

In this part between the sea and the Codilleras called Sanaria, for want of
wood, they get a certain earth out of the water, which they dry and make
turfes, like those in the low countries: the Mountains are the most desert and
arduous in the world, of long extent, running from Panama to the straight: they
throw down diverse Rivers, and compose very fertile Valleys.

At the point of Sagotta at the entrance into those vast plains, betwixt the
Mountains and the Sea, lies a wide country, covered with nothing but sand,
like the deserts of Arabia, but not so white: some shrubs there are, or rather
stalks, strong as the Caper sprigges in the deserts of Palestine, the same we
call salt grass, which refreshes the passengers exceedingly, and continues
till May. The seasons differ but little in Quito Cagnales, Santiago, de porto
Vieio Cusco, Cagnata, Collao, Charcas.

Q^ito.
The Province of Quito is called by the Spaniards Poblada de San Francesco, and
the capital town S. Francis of Quito. The length of Peru from Quito to Chila
is some six hundred leagues, the breadth about fifty. The country is divided
into three parts, the Plains upon the sea side, about ten leagues over, the
Mountains and Valleys twenty leagues, the Forests and Lawns twenty leagues,
within which little space of fifty leagues; there is such difference, that it
rains as 'twere always in one part, in another not at all, and in the middle
upon the mountains seldom.

The Cordileras which run from Pole to Pole by the names of Andes and Sierra,
are very different though in the same elevation: one side covered with woods,
where it rains, and is ever hot; the other side bare and cold, winter and
summer. These mountains go for a thousand leagues in view of one another,
dividing at Cusco, where they enclose the Province of Collao, a Champaign
country full of Lakes and Rivers. Next Collao lies Charcas a mountanous
country, rich in Mines. Quito is under the Equinoctial abounding in all sorts
of fruit, whereof they make two harvests in the year.

The spring lasts from April to November, and from October to March their
rains, which they esteem their winter. Here they have of those famous sheep
called Pacos which serve as properly for carriage as horses: of the height of
an ordinary ass, long legs, deep belly, long and risen neck, and the head
like ours in Europe. They draw and do any work, the flesh is wholesome and
savory, fresh or salt: these beasts are tame, and apt to be brought to labor.

Out of the Province of Cognata toward the East comes the great River
Maragnon, and on the West lies the Province of Gouacabilcas, the capital
whereof is Guayaquil, then Porto Veio, where are good Mines, as I shall relate
hereafter.

The Province of Santiago is South under the Equinoctial, containing Porto de
Passao, the River S. Jaques, Tamebamba, point S. Ellen, Valley of Chaga, Mount
Christo, Cheramica, Manta, Sapil and other towns. Their houses are of timber
covered for the best part with Tortota, a fort of reeds, whereof they make many
uses. Then comes the Province of Caxamolca from the town of Traxillo to
Gouancabanca, and it may be fifty leagues over. In this country Pizaro took
King Atabalipa.

Casio.
Then follows the Province of Casio, with a town-royall of the same name fenced
with diverse walls, 13. degrees to the South, the Country is cold and
mountainous, but the valleys fertile. The principal Nobility of the Empire
resided here, who held long ears for a grace and beauty, for the hanging of
many jewels, whence the Spaniards called them Oreiones, the most magnificent in
Peru. East lie the mountains of Andes. There are the Canches and Ayauires,
great Soldiers. The chief Towns are Houtoncana, Chicano, Cachahurara. The
Inhabitants of all these parts go clothed, and neighbor upon the Province of
Collao, the largest of all, having the Andes on the East, on the South
Suchiabo. The principal Towns are, Culy and Chilane, Acos, Pamoura, Pomata,
Cepita, and Tiquanaco, and reaches to Carocoles. It Is a flat Country and has
many rivers: and the great lake of Titicata, that is, the Isle of Lead, because
within it is an Island that yields lead: it is 80. leagues in compass, and in
some places is so many fathoms deep, many rivers fall into it, and it again
discharges into another called the Oulagas.

The last Province of Peru neighboring to Chila is called Charcas, in which as
the Town of Plata, the Capital, Plata.
where the famous mines of Porco and Potossi are. Potossi of four or five
houses, built at first to fine their metal, by degrees is grown a fair Town in
2^. and 22. degrees: where notwithstanding the sterility of the Country, all
commodities abound by reason of the rich mine; of such power and attraction is
wealth. Next to Charcas is the Province of Chila, which they hold to be 500.
leagues over to the Straight.

It Is an admiration to observe the quality of Peru, on this side. For here
there is but one wind, not that which in the Torrid universally blows
Eastward, as we said, but this is South and Southwest; without which 'twere not
to be inhabited for the dryness of the place, but this wind renders it very
healthful: for it is to be observed that in this Country it never rains,
snows, A wind of the use of rain.
or thunders, nor any thing that may refresh it, but this wind alone effects
it. On both sides of the Country are the high Mountains Cordilleras,
productive of fair trees, and there, as in other places they have variety of
weather, hot, cold, rain, snow: and on both sides the mountains are bare and
cold in extremity. This Country is long and narrow, composed of plains,
mountains, and valleys: The plains are by the Seacoast; on the other side the
Mountains are reasonable good, but some hungry enough. The plain may be of
thirty or forty miles broad, from West to East, and holds the length from
North to South. And it is strange that in some parts they never have any rain,
and in others more than they wish for, being but forty or fifty Leagues
distant.

In the plains then it never rains, all they ever have is a dew, which is so
slender it never wets at all. Their houses are covered with straw or reeds. In
the mountains they feed on those wild-goats that have the Besar stone.

They have likewise store of sheep, and cows, which they call Guanacos and
Pacos, abundance of Apes and Munkeys, making most exotic faces upon
passengers, Munkeys.
some you shall see chattering their teeth, others scratching their bellies,
here one running with three or four young ones under her arms, there another
upon a tree that stirs nor at all; but the mischief is, if we carry them out of
their own air they die immediately. Besides there are infinite Parrots upon the
trees that never shun the passengers; but the young ones for fear thrust the
head under the Mothers wing; and if we take one of these without the Mother
they dye immediately.

Some valleys are better than others, as those of Yneay Andagaylas, and those
that run up to Cusco, the Town-Royall, heretofore great and populous, now
ruined by the Spaniards. The Cordilleras, mountains of a thousand leagues long,
where they divide and separate, compose the large Campania of Collao. The
Country toward Titicata is barren, without either bread or wine, but the
inhabitants live upon a root called Papas, which they dry, and make a course
bread of it, called Choignos; the Country nevertheless populous for the
herds of cattle, goats, and sheep it breeds. There is abundance of venison,
partridges, and other sorts of game.

The vales of Charcas yield good ground, and the Mountains are rich in Mines.
The reason they have no rain in some parts, is want of matter for exhalation,
there being nothing but sand, and neither Rivers nor Fountains. There are some
draw-wells of excessive depth, Temper of Peru.
it being impossible to derive water from other parts, for the interposition of
the mountains. Besides there blowing no wind but one, without any other to
oppose it, that can engender no vapors. Where the Mountains are not so very
high, there they have sometimes rains, as at Arica, Arequipa, and some other
places. Notwithstanding, the other parts where it rains not, by means of the
wind are fertilized even to wonder, and grass grows through the sand which
feeds the Cattle exceedingly, as it does near Lima, where grass grows on a
Mountain entirely sand.

In May, when we first begin to feel heats in Europe, in Peru they are extreme
cold, where the Toumacaui reigns, as at Potossi and through all the Country of
Charca, as 'twere the heart of Peru; a wind more cold and piercing than any in
Flanders, and at Potossi is indurable, though the Mountain be higher than
Nostre Dame de la guard, at Marseills, or Mount Martre at Paris: there is a
less Mountain at the side of it, called Guayna Potossi, or young Potossi, both
of a color, red without any verdure. The air is very intemperate, either hot
or cold in extremity, so as an hermit would scarce live there, yet the ambition
of gold and silver makes it pleasant to every one. Mines in Potossi.
The Mines were first discovered by Indians, amongst whom one acquainted his
master Villaroel a Spaniard, who became Lord of it, paying the fifth to his
King, about 1545.

One of the wonders of Peru, nay of the whole earth, is the Mountain Perlaca,
where the air is so cold, thin, and piercing, that it causes passengers to
vomit, to that extremity they bring up blood and kills them with intolerable
gripings: and if the travailers make not all possible speed it is no scaping:
for in this short passage of four or five dangerous leagues, men loose their
senses, and often their horses or what they ride on will stand immovable,
without sense either of spur or whip, so as they are constrained to run on
foot, and drive their beasts before them.

Some cover their eyes, others stop their ears, and their nose, others muffle
and lap their head and whole body. Others put their head in a bag of herbs, and
aromatic drugs, others carry cordials to eat, others eat not of all day, that
they may not have so much matter to vomit; but oftentimes this serves not the
turn, when one is in this pernicious place, where there is nothing to be heard
but laments and vomitings, and notwithstanding that the Sun shine never so
clear, this vapor has still its force: some go other ways a side off, but
they still find the same inconvenience, and the danger sometimes more great:
all the ways are exceeding bad, and the worst by the Sea side.

The whole extent of this quarter is not above five and twenty leagues, without
people, beasts, trees, or grass, so desert is the place, and beyond the
Country extends 500. leagues: At the foot of these Mountains there are some
rascally Innes, they call Tambos, where one finds but wretched entertainment.
This is the high-road from Peru to Chila: At the foot of the Mountain toward
the Sea, one would think the passage more benign, but there reigns a wind
chiefly in May, June, July, and August, which cools and penetrates with
extremity, so as fingers and toes freeze and fall off with cold, the greatest
part perish in passing, and the wind renders them incorruptible.

Of burning mountains we have spoken sufficiently in Mexico, some there are in
Peru toward Arequipa, which throw forth stones; others only smoke, others
flaming pumice stones, some vomiting flames and cinders, others scalding winds.

In Mexico, near a place called la Peubla de los angelos, Earthquakes.
there is a hill five and twenty leagues high, answerable to another on the top
of a Mountain; where when it thunders it makes an Echo that shakes the whole
Country: a formidable thing to those that are not used to it. Near Guatimala
in 1586. for six months this hill casts out flames and cinders, followed with
earthquakes, that they have thought the Country had been ruined. All Mexico
and Peru are subject to these earthquakes, and chiefly on the Seacoasts, from
Chila to Quito, For above 200. leagues, the Seamen with astonishment beheld
flames rising from these mountains, and afterward learnt that the Town of
Guatimala was almost entirely swallowed in the earthquake. In 1587. it reached
200. leagues distance, and at St. Croix, the Refectorian of the Dominicans was
beaten dead, and twenty of the religious killed under the vaults. The
Inhabitants of Guatimala having notice made a timely retreat. There are of
these Mountains near Lima, and another at Arequipa, to which you must ascend
two days in sand.

Most parts of this India are subject to these furnaces, and earthquakes, and
chiefly near the Sea. Near Leon de Nicaragae there is a terrible one, where
sometimes by night the flames may be discerned 25. leagues, in discourse
whereof Benzoni relates the same of a Jacobin, as Acosta of a Priest at
Guatimala.

In the Province of Seiron near the Town of Bousan, is mount Malat, where is
one of the most conspicuous furnaces of the Indies, next that of Guatimala; for
the hill at the bottom has five mouths, and at the top one, which is more
formidable than the other five, for casting out fire, with miraculous fury; but
this is by intervals, sometimes nothing but smoke appearing, at other times
throwing up burning stones, specially when the wind Tourmacaui reigns: during
which time there is heard a most hideous tumult and tempest within. One King
went about to quench it with water, but in vain, the fire increasing the more,
on which design diverse perished, and amongst the rest a near Allie of the
Kings, in whose memory he made a statue, adorned with plumes, mounted on an
Elephant, and armed with skin of Crocodile. All that passed by it, prostrated
before it with great humility, believing the Prince happy, as being deify'd by
their God; this fire which they adore as a Divinity. The Mexicans call these
furnaces Popocatepech, Popoca signifying smoke, and tepech a Mount. The
Neighboring Inhabitants in their Arms, and Ensigns bear a flaming Mountain.

CHAP. XII. Of certain Fountains, Lakes, Rivers, etc. in this Country.
NEar Potossi at the bottom of the vale Tarapaye, there lies a Lake, round as
'twere drawn with a compass, and the water so hot, that but at the brims there
is no enduring it, but thirty paces forward it is impossible, notwithstanding
the Country round about is excessive cold. In the middle it boyles and runs
round, that you would think some tempest were underneath. From this Lake they
draw a Channel that sets certain Leather-Engines at work, useful for the
Mines, without any waste of the water. Titicaca in Collao is famous for
largeness, and bearing vessels of burden: fish abounds in it, whereof the
Inhabitants round about take great quantity, very sweet, good, and commodious
for passengers, to whom they freely give part of their fish, taking them with
certain hand Engines. If a Priest come that way they will present him a
thousand civilities, and he is happy with whom he will lodge. One is in perfect
security amongst them, not understanding what theft means, and you may trust
them with all the treasure of the world, while you live like good Christians.

Throughout the Country there are abundance of other Lakes, as that of Eupama
in Brasile, whence so many Rivers issue; and amongst others the great Paraguay,
or Plata, which make inundations like Nile, but not so moderately, for Nile
comes without any injury, but on the contrary with all commodity: whereas Plata
breaks with fury into the Country for three months together, coursing from the
Cordilleras in Peru to the South Sea. They have a way to pass rivers upon
floats of gourds or pumpions fastened together, which they use for all sort of
carriage, in some places they have bridges of straw. The Spaniards have built
stone bridges, which the Indians much admire, and at first had no confidence to
trust themselves upon bridges in the air.

Now for their Fountains, near the cape St. Helen in Peru, there is a Fountain
of liquor burns like oil: it is a certain Bitumen, or Gum, which they call
Copey, or Copal, that never decreases, how much soever is taken out. Mariners
use to liquor their cordage with it. The like is in the Isle of Lobos, in
Mexico, which the Mariners can smell three miles at Sea, and more, if the wind
^it right.

In Cusco there are Fountains, the water whereof immediately congeals into
white salt, in which Peru abounds. In Guancauesica there are hot springs that
condense to stone, whereof they build their houses; but the water drunk is
mortal: wherefore they stop up all highways to it, for it causes a present
heaviness, and then they die immediately. They have many other fountains hot
and cold close together, some whereof cure the French disease, though never so
confirmed, by reason of the Sassaparilla that grows in them.

In Peru there is a sheam red as blood, for that called Rio Vermeio.

In Caramel they have another Fountain cures all fevers, and purges like
Rhubarb; the water is brackish and salt at the first taste, but afterward one
feels nothing, but may drink his fill without damage: it drives through the
body all that is malignant, then passes clear. I thought I should have vomited
my bowels up, but afterward I found my self sound and cheerful, and cured of
a Rhume in my teeth I had been troubled with for a long time. I drunk three
flagons a day, and still it provoked me to drink more: They come to it from all
parts, and for all diseases, even for wounds. And the place is made so
necessary one may bath in it. It Is only hurtful to hot livers.

Round about it are tents of straw, and beds of cotton, and sheepskins, where
you shall have all accommodation for a small matter, and they will officiously
fetch and furnish you with any thing you want, amongst others they bring us a
foul called Magnota, more delicate than a patridge, another that is white and
black, and eats like a capon, and abundance of turtles. But of Lakes, where is
there any so admirable as that whereon the Town of Mexica is seated? whereof
one part by reason of Saltpeter at the bottom is salt as the Sea, the other
by reason of the Rivers that fall into it fresh as any Fountain, each division
being ten leagues in length, and five in breadth, and three days journey in
circuit, with a delightful Mountain in the middle, and a bath hot as that at
Baleru. In the middle of the Lake is the Charnell of green Tombs, ever covered
with herbs and flowers.

The Spaniards have laid most of the Town dry, being before in the manner of
Venice, and have made conduits that convey water throughout the Town, and
chiefly round the walls. Out of avarice the new Conquerours admit not the
Indians to fish on the Lake without license, who now, contrary to Articles,
enjoy not their ancient liberties, neither in this nor other things.

There are three Causwayes lead to the Town, of half a league long. They
account upon 4000. houses of Spaniards, and thirty thousand Indians: For Rivers
you have there spacious Lakes, or rather Seas, as the Magdala in the Province
of St. Martha called Rio grande, then the Orenoque toward Castilia of gold,
and Venesuela. The silver River in Brasile coming from Mountains far remote
from Peru, above all, the great Ozeilliana, or Maragnon, and Amasones, which
cuts through the South America, from Chachaneyas, and Quito, through infinite
Territories and Dominions, to the Northern Sea.

This River comes from the Province of Araquixo, or de los Quixos, near to
Popayan, and thirty leagues from the South Sea, discovered first by Francisco
Orellano, a Spanish Captain, sent thither by Gonzala Pizarra, who had sought a
long this River for the land of Canela; and missing the wealth he sought for,
and finding the trees few in number, A discovery.
and of small value; not lighting on the Country of the Prince surnamed Dorado,
in 1562. he sent Orellano with fifty men to seek provision, view the Country,
and attend his coming in an appointed place.

The Captain following the stream, which still grew wider by the Rivers that
every where augmented it, going fifty leagues a day; without oar or labor, for
a long while he discovered no habitations: go up again he could not, and by
land there was nothing but woods and bushes, after he had suffered plenty of
hunger, he met with several people, and of several tongues, and conditions,
some mild and courteous, others fierce and savage; pursuing his way without
card, compass, or guide, by many Islands and populous Countries, amongst
others of Amazons the female Archers, of whom there are some Curtisans, Amazon^^
at Brasile, not much discrepant from those Antiquity renowns in Asia, who
co-inhabit not with men, and at certain times have Neighbors come over to them
for procreation, to whom again they transmit the Males, and keep the Girls.

After a tedious Navigation, and many turns and compasses for above seventeen
hundred leagues upon this River, he came to the confusion of it in the North
Sea, forty leagues over, following the Coast he arrived at Cubaga, or the Isle
of Pearls, which is above four hundred leagues, whence Orellano with 14. of
his men being recruited, came to S. Domingo, afterward made an ample relation
to the Emperor, where Ouiede took his instructions, and inserted it in his
History.

Meanwhile Pizarra expected, and having suffered extreme hunger, seeing
Orellanio came not, he returned to Quito much troubled, he found not the sought
for Dorado, a golden Prince indeed, who wore no other garment but pulverized
Gold laid on with gum, with which he goes daily covered. To conclude, this
is one of the greatest and longest rivers on the earth, and washes more lands
and people than any other. Afterward many other Spaniards sailed it, as
Salinas Orhia, and others.

Add hereto the great Lake or Ocean Guiana, Parimi, and Manoa, in Countries
discovered by the English, Sir Walter Rawley in 1595, who equals it with the
Caspian Sea, that contains many Islands. The capital Town is Manoa, a Country
rich in gold, fruit, and cattle. North lies Castile of gold, Paria and
Caribana, West new Andalousia, and Peru, South Omaga, Pegu, Picora, Paguana,
East Tisnado, Brasile, etc.

Concerning beasts in America, there are great numbers as well the natural of
the Country, as Europian transported, which are multiplied exceedingly.
Strange beasts.
Amongst others in Mexico there is one the Spaniards call an Armadillo, armed
with scales like the Rhinocerot, in shape like a little pig, about the size of
a Cat, and lives in Buroughs like a Rabbet. The Pacacou like a fox, that preys
on dead men's carcases, and digs them up how deep soever, I have seen of them in
Asia and Africa, where they call them Chicali.

Birds of prodigious greatness.
There are the Birds called Conderos, which the Chaca poyas of Peru adore; these
will carry away a sheep, tear in pieces and eat him; they are ash-colored like
a Sea-Crow^: others again so minute they seem rather Flies or Gnats.

Tabala.
Another sort that is as 'twere all feathers, and none or little flesh, and as
they say never comes upon the earth. Their feathers are of various colors, in
perfection beautiful, when they rest they hang on a bough by the tail,
clasped round it: their plumes are worn and much esteemed.

In Marseills I saw one sold for 500. crowns, in Portugal they come at 60. The
Indians of these curious feathers make Pourtraicts as artificial as those in
colors, nor can they well be discerned asunder.

Plumes in use.
The Guacamayes have more beautiful and curious feathers than the Paraquito.
They affect plumes throughout all India, but in Mexica above others, for wear,
for adornement of their Temples and Idols, and to make pourtraicts of their
fashion. Feathers are there good chaffer, I saw an Indian truck pearls with a
Leuantian, (so they term us) for feathers he brought with him, which cost him
but five Crowns, and he had above three hundred pearls for them. This was a
poor Mariner who made a fortune by it, A good bargain.
for he made many voyages afterward to the Indies, with a good ship, and
merchandises of his own.

They wear them likewise in their dances. First one called the Tamari dances
single, then makes a sign to a Lady to come dance with him, then others follow
after the same rule; but they never kiss nor touch hands, and use all respect
to their women.

Of fish, there are abundance of Crocodiles and Tiburons, Fish of Mexico.
that are man-eaters. The Manati that suckles her young ones with teats, has
legs to walk by land, and eats fruit and grass: the flesh is good like
veale, there are many about the Isles of Barleuento, the coasts of Peru, Cape
Magdalen, and the Isles of Solomon.

They are very good to salt, and eat like powdered beef. There are abundance of
Whales, but they are ignorant how to take them. The Floridans take them, and
make their chiefest sustenance of them, the flesh dried in the Sun, they make
into flower, and without wetting eat it in powder, and it nourishes
exceedingly. Another fish with wings flies as swift as an arrow, they are like
Mackarels, but not so good meat. The Meri that swim always against stream, and
the Indians say, in August, have a worm in their head, vexing them, and makes
them go upward, that the water entering at a little hole, may refresh them.

Another sort called Perpil streaked with diverse colors, that they eat
roasted, and is meat for sick persons. They have soals of extraordinary growth,
weighing ten or twelve pound, but the flesh is hard.

Vicognes are like Deer without horns, greater then Goats, living on Mountains
without fear of frost or snow, in their bowels they have a stone of the virtue
of the Unicorne, or Besar, against poison: they bear a wool as fine as silk,
whereof they make Summer garments that refresh them. The flesh is good against
diverse diseases, the stone is like a Pullets egg, black, or gray; this beast
they say having eaten some poisonous herbs, eats another called Capas, proper
against poison, and so breeds this stone of the same virtue.

There are little wild swine called Saynes, that go in herds, and are very
dangerous: others that are also very dangerous to take if the hunters have not
good assistance, which are good meat, and the grease of them serves for oil,
for Spanish oil is there very dear.

There is likewise a very heavy beast called Manaquail, covered with Pikes
like the Hedgehog, that will dart them at a distance, a snowt like a hog,
but nothing so big, and a short foot, he is very good meat. There is also
another sort of Crocodile, of which we found one hunting in the Forest of
Caramel, and we judged him to be seven or eight paces long, and after we had
viewed him a while' we raised him, and put him to flight with strange
ejulations.

Of Apes and Munkies there are great numbers of all sors, and sizes. Some as
little as rattes or mice, with a white beard, that will imitate all they see,
and are very serviceable, as I have seen at Sevill, that seem to have a kind of
reason. In Candia I saw another that the Master bidding him go stand Sentinel,
and look if he could discover any sail, would presently climb the Mast, or
get upon the Lantern, and if he discovered any vessel, would make signs, and
cry out, and was ever very certain.

Their sheep called Lamas or Pac^s serve for all carriages, with fine wool,
whereof they make Combi and Auafra for their apparel. One of these sheep will
carry eight heavy jarres, nine or ten leagues a day, but like mules they are
humoursome, and one must have patience to please them, and expect their good
mood before they will travail.

In new Spain they have the Espoulcou about the size of a Hare, with a furre so
fine, it is not for any but persons of quality to wear it; they say the blood of
it drunk breaks the stone in the bladder in few days.

For spices, in the Isle of Barlouento there is abundance of sugars (as also in
Brasile) Ginger, Mastick, Aloes, Cassia, Cinnamon. In Carabana they have
likewise Cinnamon, and in Canela upon Orellana beyond the Quixos where Gonzala
Pizarra went to look it, for he was told in form it was little different from
that in Borneo, Moluccos and Leilan, that the other grew in canes and reeds,
but this on certain fair trees that bore a fruit like an Acorne, and that the
bark was Cinnamon: the fruit is not pleasant, nor the bark so good as the Cane;
nevertheless they make use of both. Pizarra at length, after great toil,
found the trees upon a Mountain, in small number, and of little value.

Other trees of such compass, good dwellings may be made within the bodies of
them which they call Sesbiraich, some in new Hispaniola, eight men cannot
fathom about, and of a flight shot in height, on the top whereof they make
Arbours.

CHAP. XII. The Mines of the New World.
AMongst other rarities and riches, the New World produces Mines of Gold and
Silver, pearls and precious stones in diverse places, and chiefly in new Spain
and Peru, which of all parts of the world, are most indulged with these
advantages of nature, though other parts of Asia and Africa have them in some
abundance, and Europe likewise: but it appears America had the principal and
better portion, as well in these as other Dowries, as I have before mentioned.

In diverse Islands they find most wealthy Mines, as in Hispaniola, Cuba and
the rest upon the great gulf; again, in Carabana, Veragna, Castile of gold,
the country of Dorado, or Es^ramador. In new Spain, there are these of silver
Paxuco, Tasco, Mines of silver.
Zupango, Guanaxato, Tumazlan, and other places in Acapulco.

At the gold and silver mines they coin not, for want of Artists, but they cut
pieces and gobbits, whereon they mark the price from one real to eight, and so
send them to Spain. The Mines belong to Merchants, who give so much to the
King, some four, some five per centum. For want of men that can and will work,
they get the mettle with much difficulty, being the toil wherein the Spaniards
have spent the lives of so many thousands, nay millions of miserable Indians.

The Mines are exceeding deep, where the workmen are much inconvenienced with
water, and with damps that poison them: few freemen will venture themselves,
and the meanest slave has his three crowns a day, who are often buried under
the falls of the Mine, so as by this means by degrees, Mines of gold and silver.
the generation of the Indians will be in short time totally consumed, who are
constrained to undergo the work to get their livelihood, how good Christians
soever they are; and to speak uprightly, looking on the insatiable avarice of
the Spaniard, and the misery these Mines put them to, it is hard to judge who is
the better, the slaves or the natives; for the slaves, for 800. or 1000. crowns
may redeem themselves again; the extreme colds they meet with at the bottom,
often strikes them dead, having little or no wine to relieve them: being a
barren country, and the least glass of wine at the price of a Real, the
smallest money they have amongst them, where they use not to stamp any
Demy-Realls: if a man will live but with moderation, his wine will stand him in
a crown a day, which cuts their gains the shorter: they pay dear for apparel,
and principally for shoes, which rot with continually standing in water: They
have the better of it, that work at the mouth of the Mine, for they hand the
materials from one to another, and so have the benefit to see the day light,
whereas they below see not but by candlelight: the depth is sometimes a
thousand, or two thousand steps, which are faced with boards, or leather, The
manner of their working in the Mine.
or 'twere impossible to endure it: But again, it is much more inconvenient to
one that is not used to it, by reason of the air, that makes one vomit in
extremity, as I experienced going in one day, though I had travailed all the
seas in the Universe, without the least motion. Now the silver Mine contains
four several veins, (or Veta^, as the Spaniard terms them) of different stone,
as they are likewise different mettles, which run all from West to East, of not
above two else broad, and every vain is of several oars, as silver, brass,
tin, and iron. The largest Mine any Merchant may purchase, i^ of 80. else, and
no more; for which he has the Kings Patent: there are some very small Mines,
that are not of above 4. else, but they may sink down to the center if they can
without incroaching on his neighbor: and if it happen that one makes the least
incision beyond the direct line; mining upon another, he loses all he has by
confiscation.

In the Veta or vein of silver there are 78. Mines belonging to several
Masters, except some one has rented several, the tin Mine has 24. Masters,
every one his particular Mine, they go less and less, according to the
quality of the mettle, as that of brass is less, iron less then that. There
is a gate, and goods locks to every Mine, they work by turns, otherwise they
could never endure it, the air is so strong and pernicious.

The silver Mine may be 150. else deep, toylsome to the laborers, especially
the slaves, whose backs are loaded with silver, and their legs with iron.
When a Mine yields five for a hundred, it is sufficient.

Great art is required to direct the Mine, sometimes they can neither find men
nor Mine, being all for want of good direction, overwhelmed: wherefore Geometry
is very necessary.

Silver generally lies betwixt two rocks or mountains, the one very soft, the
other as hard, and ever in the very middle. There are several sorts of it* the
finest is called Casilla by the Spaniards, by the Indians Tacana, of Ambar
color, the other more black; and there is of other colors. I took all to be
the same, perceiving nothing of silver in any stone, but the workmen know it
perfectly. The oar they carry to little furnaces to be fined. When the stone
is good, a hundred weight yields fifty pieces of eight, some not above thirty,
nay five; but the richest of all, two hundred and above. There is not a Mine
but has belonging to it at least four thousand of these little furnaces, some
five or six thousand, as that at Caratecas and Potossi. You would think you saw
an Army of the bellows-blowers.

Quicksilver.
They have one Mine of Quicksilver, the heat whereof emits a most pernicious
vapor that destroys them all; makes them lose their teeth, and often their
senses and understanding. Staying by it but a quarter of an hour, I was almost
stupefied to a stone, and the rest likewise that were with me, and had sped
worse, if notice had not been given us. They get an earth they call Azague,
which melted yields quicksilver, with which they use to purify the silver, and
have it likewise from Spain, where there is a Mine near Sevill, for this at
Cacatera will not suffice. The silver being fined and made money, they carry it
upon sheep to the Seaside, to ship it for Spain. The fining of it is
troublesome, for often it must pass the fire seven or eight times.

They bring to Spain every year 12. or 13. millions more or less, whereof the
fifth comes to the King, the rest to the Masters. There was one in few years
got two hundred thousand crowns and more for his share; and when he dyed, had
not a sheet to bury him in. Of gold there is several sorts, the Popitas, or
gobbets, or grains of gold, absolute gold, pure and neat, without mixture,
wanting neither furnace nor melting, ready for the stamp, being perfect by
nature.

The massiest I ever saw was but of three pounds, yet 'twas presented to the
Spanish King for twenty pounds.

Out of the Mounts of Libani in Cuba, there was one taken weighing 3310.
weighs, each weigh worth fourteen or fifteen realls, which with infinite other
riches was cast away at sea, going for Spain.

There is no silver comes pure from the Mine except some small bit which they
call Capa di plata, pure silver.

Another sort of gold inserted in stone of the Mine, hard to be extracted; in
breaking which stone, one discerns little luster of gold, in some less, in
some none at all.

The most delicate gold I ever saw, was a stone tranfixt as 'twere with
prickles of gold, like a Hedge-hogge, refulgent both within and without, this
gold is the best and finest of all.

Another sort is in sees or powder, found in rivers, it is pure, and needs pass
but one fire.

Such are found in the rivers of the Isles of Barlouento, and in the Pasaguey,
etc.

The best gold is of Chila, Quito, and Granado.

The Mine of Carauana, in Peru, and Vuldiuia in Chila, which is the most
perfect, is of twenty three Carats, and a half, as likewise at Varaquae.

Silver abounds in the rich mines of Potosi, and the Province of Charcas.

Next the Mine of Porto not far off; likewise very rich, but of little
benefit for want of workmen, by reason of the unsound air, and extreme cold,
and water which drownes it, but in Potosi it is not so.

In the time of Jugas King of Peru, the Mine of Porto was open and wrought in,
but not that of Potossi which was not discovered, till the Spaniards time.

This is the richer, and yields most.

At the first they drew forth every week above two thousand Weighs, or
Castillans, whereof the gain came to forty thousand.

They fish for pearl in the South sea, Pearle-fishing*
near Pa^ama, and in the North sea in diverse places, as in the Isle Margareta
toward the coast of Paria, where the Oysters feed upon Cubuca, and surname it
so. There are very large and precious of them, I have seen one no bigger then a
nut sold for three thousand ducats, there are of higher price. The Master of
the South fishing, assured me he saw one as big as an indifferent egg. There
were three brought to Lisbone that paid a duty of sixteen thousand ducats to
the King, as is to be seen in the Register of Contracts.

There is a sort they call stars, another demi-stars, others Cadenetas
Pedreria, etc. Allofat, or minute-pearls, and seed-pearls, and those of greater
price, Quilates, or Carats. For this fishing they choose the best winded men,
and such as can contain longest under water. Men diverse.
At Barlouento, Cula, and Hispaniola, I have seen them stay three quarters of
an hour under water, and I was told they have had some have continued the whole
hour. The General of Margaita keeps many of these men, who are slaves to him
called Bouze, and are ready enough to pilfer the best and sell them, though
it is forbidden upon life to buy them. The Master must use all fair means to get
them out of their hands with something else, otherwise they will sooner return
them to the sea then let him have them, if he give them not wine and good cheer.

The Incas make no use of pearls, unwilling out of benignity to expose their
subjects to so much danger; but the Spaniards are nothing so scrupulous, they
make their poor slaves dive ten or twelve fathom deep, to tear oysters from the
rock: and to fortify their lungs for retention of breath, they keep them
fasting, and hold them to a diet.

One was brought to the King, big as a Pigeons egg, valued at 14000.
ducats; by some at a hundred thousand, and 'twas called a Peregrina. The Negro
that extracted it from the oyster had his liberty for it, and the Master was
made Arguazilmaior of Parama.

For Emeraulds there is a Mine in Mexico, at new Granado in Peru, near Manta
and Porto Vieio. I bought an excellent one of an Abissin Merchant, which
surpassed in hardness and luster, any of Mexico and Peru; Being in company
with a friend, he desired it of me, and I gave it him; but two days after, I
perceived it broken upon his finger, whereat he much admired, and I told him
the reason: which was, he had had familiarity with a woman, but he was ashamed
to acknowledge it, there being none but Idolaters, which is a great baseness.

Another time being in an Indian Town, Inhabited by the Spaniards, Emeralds
enemies of incontinency.
I had an Emerauld, which a Lady, daughter to the Lalcayde or Governor of the
place desired to buy; but on the morrow she sent for me, complaining I had sold
her a broken stone, which I disavowed; at last I asked her if her husband were
in town, and answering no, I whispered to her smiling, she had then been kind
to some friend, whereat she stood amazed, and in the end acknowledged the
truth, taking me to be skilled in divination. The like happened another time to
another friend of mine, who acknowledged the like truth: for such is the virtue
of this stone if it be good and fine, and of the old Mine. There are very fair
ones, and of great price, did not the plenty of them make them less esteemed,
I once saw one weighed four ounces, sold for 6000. realls.

The Emerald incorporated within a rock, is like the mettle contained, and
while it is imperfect, the rock will be vein'd with green and white, and opening
the rock, the Emerauld lies there imperfect, of the color of the rock, green
and white; so as to have it come to maturity, they leave it there till nature
bring it to perfection, and go dig another place for riper: The Mexicans had
a custom to pierce the nose and chin of their Idols, to put Emeraulds in them:
one of their kings himself had his nose so bored and adorned with an Emerauld,
and from thence was surnamed Nose-bor^d.

CHAP. XIV. Of Peru, Of the Kings or Incas; and of the Country of Chila.
PEru was first discovered by Vasco Munes de Balbon, Peru by whom discovered.
in the year 1515. and the first Haven known, was Porto Vieio under the
Equinoctial. The Dominions of Peru under the Incas reached from Quito to
Charcas 700. leagues, then to Chila 500. leagues. By tradition it is about 500.
years since the Natives of Peru living barbarously, without civility, law, or
policy; some amongst them esteemed, descended from heaven, and a generation of
the Sun, civilized the rest, and modelized the government. The first King was
called Ma^ca Capac, all his Progeny and successors Incas, Kings, as Manco Capac
sole King.

This first instituted adoration of the Sun amongst them, with their Temples
and Sacrifices. Their Priests or Sages are called Amantas, who believe the
immortality of the soul, after death rest for the good, and torment for the
wicked, with resurrection of bodies.

These Kings, or Incas, enacted good laws, and by degrees extended the Empire
to the state the Spaniards found it in. And like as the Roman Empire was as the
hand of providence to reunite and sweeten the rude and savage on this side, so
in a manner the Monarchy of the Incas in Peru did the same amongst these gross
and wild Idolaters, living like bruites, to modelize and regulate them, By
whom civilized.
and at last lead them to the knowledge of the true God, as now it has.

Notwithstanding it is to be admired, that in such darkness and ignorance of
all moral and and natural sciences, their Amantas or Sages, should have a sort
of knowledge of the courses of the Sun, and Moon, Calander of Peru.
and other stars, for they knew in some kind the annual motion of he Sun, and
the vulgar counted their years by the harvests. They likewise understood the
Solstices, observing them of eight days in the East at Cusco, and another
number in the West: they reckoned the months by Moons, allowing twelve in the
year, adding though grossly, the eleven days overplus, at the points of
Solstice; observed the Equinoctials, whence in September they made the
principal feast of the Sun.

The Equinoctial they found by the shadow of a pillar, and the Eclipses in like
manner, during which time, they think the Sun angry with them, and the moon
sick. The king took the Rainbow for his Arms and device. They kept all accounts
by knots upon strings of various colors: and they had some harmony of Music
in songs and Instruments of Canes fastened together, four and four, in the
nature of Organs, whereon they could express their passions of love, content,
or sorrow. They had also some Poetry and verse, in measure with Meetre, and
called their Poets Harauee, that is, Inventors.

Their Temples were of stone magnificently built, sumptuous for gold and
silver. The statue of the Sun was massy gold, which a Spaniard took and gam'd
away in a night, whereupon one said by way of je^r, that he had played away the
Sun before he was up. Of precious stones, they have none but Emeraulds, and
Torqueses, the country yields neither Diamonds, nor Rubies.

In their golden garden were all sorts of herbs and plants, trees, flowers,
fruits, animals of massy gold, and silver to the life; In short, the Spaniard
found there unspeakable wealth, yet all was nothing in comparison of that the
Natives concealed, or cast into the Sea or Lakes, which could never be
recovered. There were Monasteries of maids dedicated to the Sun, bound to
perpetual virginity, and never beholding other person, the superiors called
them Mamacunes.

Incas, or Kings of Peru.
The last of these Incas was Atahualpa the 14, from Manco Capac.

Leon the 7. Inca, called Viracocha was a great soldier and Conqueror, who
saw in a vision one of their Gods Viracocha a Phantasm, with long Mustachoes,
and a long gown, of the Spaniards fashion, whom for this cause they call
Viracocha, the Indians having no beard, and wearing short garments. They say
this Phantasme foretold the arrival of the Spaniards, an unknown people, who
should take away their Estates and Religion.

Tapangui the tenth King, achieved great conquests, and extended his Empire to
Chisa, above 1000. leagues, and built the fortification of Cusco, that seems
rather rocks grafted together by enchantment, than an edifice built by industry
and strength of men; for the vastness of the stones of 38. foot long, and 18.
broad, when they had use neither of Iron, Wagons, Oxen, Cranes nor Pullies,
but fetched all from remote parts by humane strength.

The 12. Inca Huaina Capat, by the Spaniards called Guainaecauan, that made the
famous roads, with the monumentall stones and Innes from Quito to Cusco, for
above 500. leagues, the one by the Mountains, the other along the Sea shore
upon the plain, works far surpassing all the Romans boast of, for length, art,
labor, and cost; besides the rich and prodigious chain of gold, every link
wrist thick, made for a sort of dance never found by the Spaniards.

This King was capable of the true Religion, for he would reason that the Sun
could not be the Sovereign God, but that there must be one more powerful that
commanded his perpetual circulation; because were the Sun his own master he
would sometimes rest for his pleasure, not for necessity; whereas the Sovereign
God ought to enjoy the most perfect tranquillity without perturbation, which
was not seen in the Sun.

King Huiana now in peace at his palace of Tamipampa, in 1515. had intelligence
of certain strangers, not altogether unknown, that coasted the shore of his
Dominions: First Nunez Balboa discovered it in 1513. afterward Pizarra and his
Company, who first gained it in 1531.

The news much disturbed the King, Presage of the Spaniards arrival.
calling to mind an ancient oracle amongst them, how a foreign bearded people
should conquer and destroy their Empire: besides in 1512. they had diverse
presages that portended the same. For which reason the King dying advised his
Sons, with the white men with beards that were to be their Masters, and the
Indians in excuse, that they no better defended themselves against such a
handful of Spaniards, say 'twas not for want of courage, but in obedience to
the orders and premonitions of their Prince.

Huiana had by all his wives above 300. children, yet but one legitimate,
called Hilascar, by his wife who was his Sister, and one other by his dear
Concubine, called Acabalipa; to whom he left the kingdom of Quito, and Huascat
reigned sovereign at Cusco: But Acabalipa to throw off his homage to his
Brother, invaded him with a bloody war, defeated him, and took him, and put to
death all the Incas, and Princes of the Blood Royal, Cruelty revenged.
that he might reign sole King, though according to the Sanctions of the State
not capable, his Mother being Daughter neither of Coya, that is, a Queen, nor
of Palla, a Princess of the blood. He gave death to above two hundred of his
Brothers, then to as many of his alliance as he could lay hands on: as well men
as women, with cruel torments; and extended his tyranny upon the very
servants, and officers royal, with fire, violations, and other villainies.

In the Province of Canares alone, he put to death sixty thousand men, because
they had held with his Brother, and covered the land with carcases, and
horrible desolations. In recompense this villain was justly punished by the
Spaniards, more wicked than himself, and they afterward by themselves not
finding any that could exceed them again in villainy.

In the year 1526. Francisco Pizarra, and Diego Almagro, being at Panarma,
having lived a long time in the Indies, and assisted at the conquest of Vraba
Cartagena, and other places, resolved upon the expedition and discovery of
Peru, where they met with ill-favored entertainments at their first landing.
Then Pizarra going to Spain obtained the chief command in the designed
conquest; and with four of his Brothers, Diego, Almagro, and others, made their
invasion in the year 1531. with most fortunate success: Acabalipa they took,
who paid a ransom of gold and silver, nevertheless they gave him an
ignominious death by the hands of the Hangman.

Thus was this mighty and opulent Empire conquered by a handful of Spaniards,
divine providence in inscrutible councels, making the avarice, cruelty, and
other vices of these Victors isntrumental, to bring these people to the
knowledge of the true God.

Now is the time the Spaniards glut their avarice, and cruelty, perpetrate all
insolences and truculencies imaginable, which have been so fully represented,
observed, and exaggerated by their own histories and Authors, I shall not need
to paint them in any other colors: but they all or the greatest part paid dear
for it, when by intestine discord, envy, and amutinies amongst themselves, they
butchered one another, and so revenged the nefarious treatment of the poor
Indians; and those who overstood this self-destruction were justly executed by
the command of Charles the fifth, who commissioned certain Licenciados Vacca de
Gastro, and Gasca, to pronounce severe justice upon these seditious Mutineers:
there the Pizarras, Almagros, and others, all perished.

The fifth Viceroy established in Peru, was Blasius Nuez, 1544. Lima, or the
Town of Kings, was founded at this time, first by Pizarra, in 1533. afterward
the residence of the Viceroys, the seat of Parliament, Inquisition, University,
and the Metropolitan Church of the whole Country.

As to Chila, that wide Country, which the Incas could never subdue, Almagro
first discovered it, then in 1540. o^e Valdi^ia entered, and overrun it, but he
found such opposition of the Araucans, a small people of this great Territory,
that he breathed his last there, was slain and eaten, and from that time for
50. years they held the Spaniards in play, with good order and military
discipline; they had learnt of one Lanearo, an Indian, sometime page to
Valdiuia, and afterward revolted against him. This Arauco is a small division
in Chila, not above ten leagues* in length and seven broad, upon the Seaside,
and breeds the most warlike people of the Indies, upon which account the
Spaniards styled it El estado in domito, wherein are contained the vales of
Ponco, Purto, Tucapol, Angol, Cauten, etc. and the Towns of the Conception, and
the Imperial.

In 1599. the Arucans took and demolished the Town and Fort Valdiuia, and
others, putting all the Spaniards to sword, man woman and child, and sacked and
burnt all, and had repossessed the rest of the Country had they not been
repulsed.

This constant war with the Araucans gave occasion to the famous Poet Alonzo de
Ercilla, to make his Poem the Auracana, where he describes the Country, and
their war with the Spaniard, and begins with this vanity, truly poetical and
Romantic Spaniard-like.

No Las damas, Amor, no gentilezas
Di cavalieros canto enamorados,
Ni las Maestras, regales y ternezas
De amorosos a feijos y cay dados;
Mas el valor, los huecos, las proesas
De aquelles Espagnoles esbercados
Que a la cermi de Arauco no do madae
Pasieron duro y ago, per la espada.
Here I observe a singularity amongst these people, in election of their Chief,
or Captain General, who is the man that can carry longest a great tree like a
date tree upon his shoulders; as one Canpolican who was chosen did for three
days together, without the least rest.

CHAP. XV. Of the straight of Magellan.
The strait of Magellan.
FRom Chila the next is the straight of Magellan, of about 100. leagues in
length, and not much more in breadth, or any ways, which is not to be surveyed
till you are well within the land: The tides are strong and dangerous,
principally from the South sea, by reason of the narrow entrance in the mouth,
and a multitude of rocks and mountains before the mouth of it, which render the
passage hard to find, and being but a little out at sea one can perceive
nothing of it, so as you must go cast about with the cock-boat, though
otherwise you know the way and the true height, which is about 52. degrees.
There is one very high Mountain hard upon the mouth, called la campana, being
in form like a bell. The shallowest place is fifteen or twenty fathoms, and a
very good bottom.

The South sea enters thirty leagues within, amongst very high Mountains
covered with snow, the North sea enters it seventy leagues on the other side,
where they find bottoms in many places, as on the contrary, on the South side
the depth is such no ship can ride at anchor. On the North side there are
expatiate plains and champians upon the firm land, and diverse Rivers that fall
into this straight, shaded with odoriferous trees, which shows the goodness of
the soil. It contains some Islands not to be ventured on without discretion.

The Inhabitants on the South side are exceeding little, on the North of Giants
stature, whom in Magellan they call Paragous, for their great feet: Paragows.
they clothe with skins of sheep and other beasts for the rigidnesse of the
Climate. These are a people without civility, Chica a Country.
law, or policy, wandering up and down without any certain abode, reposing in
Cabins, and no other arms than bow and arrows; when we speak to them and they
understand not the language, they lift their eyes to heaven. They live upon
flesh dried in the Sun, enemies to none, but give themselves wholly to chase
and fishing.

This Straight is vexed with forcible tides from both sides, which like two
Cells encounter with a most obstreperous fragour, where the danger is great,
and chiefly in winter, when the winds rage there with more violence: for the
Straight is never free from winds, no not in summer: diverse vessels perish in
crossing the Rocks, which seem an Archipelagus of Islands, both those on the
South-sea-side, and those which come from Lima.

The immense depth on the South side renders the sea more navigable, and on the
North the length of the fall breaks the force of the waves, so as there is no
great danger but in the narrowest, and in some places of not above a musket
shot.

In the winter the Sea is higher than in Summer, and the passage wider,
notwithstanding the sailing is nothing more secure by reason of the cross
winds and colds. Some are of opinion that the Tides do not meet at the same
time, but as it flows on one side it ebbs on the other, by a local remotion
of the sea: but they are deceived, for it is certain that the flood comes in and
goes out on both sides at the same time, like as the boiling of a pot rising
from the center disperses to all parts, and cooling, ceases all together: this
has been proved by experience, that at the same time the flood came thirty
leagues form the South, and seventy from the North, the Sea swelling from both
parts, as the Pilots observed, following the course of the Moon, the Tides
augmenting or diminishing according to her state, the Tide and Ebb coming
sooner or later by three quarters of an hour daily conformable to the course of
that plannet: The Spaniards call the high-tide at the new mood Cabeza de aguas,
the tide at the full Aguas viuas, the low tides in the wane, Aguas muertas.

This so admirable motion of the Sea seems rather a combat, or like the boiling
of water in a pot over a fire, then a local remotion, which nevertheless I
refer to Naturalists.

The straight begins Northward at the Cape of eleven thousand Virgins, as
Magellan called it, and ends Southward at Cape Victoria: in the middle stood
the Town and Fortress of St. Philip, which afterward, the Inhabitants
perishing with hunger and cold was called the Port of Famine.

The first that passed this straight was Ferdinand Magallanes a Portuguese, who
had both heard and seen something of it in their cards. 'Twas in 1519. when he
went to find a road to the Moluccas that way, for Charles the fifth.

Afterward one Pedro Sarmicates passed the straight from North to South; from
South to North few pass, for the danger and difficulty to find the way. Since
that the famous Argonautes who went round the world by Sea, as Sir Francis
Drake in one thousand five hundred seventy nine, Candish in one thousand five
hundred eighty five, Oliuier de Nort in one thousand five hundred ninety nine,
and of fresher memory Spilberg, le Maire, Hermita, and others. But le Maire in
1618. a little further, in some fifty six or fifty seven degrees, toward the
South, found the new Straight, called by his own name much shorter, and much
easier than the other, not being above eight leagues in length, and the breadth
wide and facile: the Spaniards came thither afterward, and gave it the name
Saint Vincent.

Upon the North-side the straight of Magellan are abundance of winglesse birds,
Wingless birds.
that live in holes in the ground, fat and good meat, they called Pinguins.

Sir Francis Drake found many good Harbors in the Straight, where good fresh
waters came; but they are not easy to enter, for the strong and turbulent
winds that reign there. The Land on both sides lies exceeding high, and
banked with inaccessible Mountains, particularly on the South and East, where
they are ever covered with snow.

The breadth in some places is of two, three, or four leagues, in the
narrowest of one, or of two musket shots. It Is excessive cold, and never
without snow and ice, the trees notwithstanding ever green, and laden with
fruit.

From this Straight by Cape Foendo, and the White Cape, they ascend again into
the silver river, where begins Brasile in 35 degrees beyond the line, reaching
to the River of Amazons, under the Line. This silver river, or Paravai Parana,
and Paraguay, disgorging altogether like Cordillera, de serra, Muada in Peru
and Charcas overflow the whole Country, so as the Inhabitants for that time
live in Canoes, fastened to Trees, till the flood be retired within the banks.
At the mouth it is about 35. leagues over, but further within the Land fifty;
being streightened toward the Mouth by reason of the Mountains, and compassing
a number of Islands: this River rises near the Town of Plata, toward Potossi,
whence it takes name. Others derive it from the great lake called Eupania,
where the other Rivers take birth, as Maragnon, but it should rather be Parana,
which afterward falls into the silver River.

The first that came within the mouth of this River, was Americus Vesputius,
sent by the King of Portugal to discover Brasile, in the year fifteen
hundred and one, and supposing it a passage from the South sea to the
Moluccas, satisfied himself, and returned without looking farther.

After that, in the year fifteen hundred and twelve, the King of Spain sent
one John Solis, who named it Solis. In fifteen hundred twenty five Sebastian
Ganor made a farther advance up the River, and by reason of the silver he found
amongst the people, or rather because the head of it lies near the Town Plata,
toward Potossi, called it the silver River, or Plata.

The Inhabitants along the River are of large stature, long-lived, light, and
nimble of foot, use bows and slings in war, and speak the Patagonick Language,
or the Chicaan: of later times the Spaniards have ascended this River as far
as Charcas and Colao.

The other river I mentioned is above fifty leagues in the mouth, and rises
amongst the Mountains of Cuntisuya, near Cusco, the Indians call it Apurimac,
principal, and Capacmaya, the Prince of Rivers. It runs from South to North
above five hundred leagues from his source at the equinoctial: Then it turns
to the East for 650. leagues in a right line, and goes with windings and turns,
for above a thousand five hundred leagues, two miles to the league.

This is the greatest River upon the earth, The river Orellan^.
which at his infusion keeps the Sea fresh for many leagues: first discovered
by the Pinsons of Siville in the year 1500. then Orellana sailed it from the
source almost to the end in 1543. it is filled with several Islands, and the
Tide mounts above a hundred leagues: They find Meragnon to be seventy leagues
Southward, distant from Orellana, that rises from the great Peruian lakes,
which descend from the Mountains covered with snow: others put them both in
one: it may be falling so close together into the Sea, they may join waters,
and Orellana bear the name of both.

CHAP. XVI. Of Brasile, the Conquest of it, and of the Brasilians, etc.
BRasile is a large Province of America appertaining to the Crown of Portugal,
extending from 25. degrees to the second from North to South, some ten degrees
in breadth from East to West, from fort Para in the mouth of the great River of
Amazons to Plata.

Maragnon bounds it Northward in two degrees, Plata South in thirty five, on
the East the excelse and inaccessible Mountains of Peru, Brasile.
and on the East the Ethiopian or Atalantick Sea, as likewise on the North. For
the Country, the benignity and sweetness of the air, and water, and the
fertility of soil is a miracle in such a Climate and temperature: which
renders the Inhabitants of so healthful and long life: and though the Climate
be under the Torrid, there come freshgales from the Sea that moderate it, so as
it becomes a delicate habitation, having every morning some mists and dews,
which the Sun afterward dissolves into air. Here you meet with nothing but
fair open fields, pleasant hills, fertile mountains, fresh valleys, green
meadows, abundance of woods, rivers, and fountains of excellent waters, with
infinite plenty of all sorts of trees, plants, fruits, grain, cattle, sugar,
balm. In a word it is for necessaries and delights, the fullest Country on the
earth. Of strange Creatures there is the Cerigon, in shape and bigness like a
Fox, betwixt yellow and gray, whose belly is like a purse or pocket, wherein
she saves her young ones when she is hunted: another the Portuguese call
Pereza, for his slow gate, in fifteen days not going a stones cast, nor can
any force drive him faster, he feeds on nothing but leaves of trees, and it is
some days work for him to climb up and come down. There are Camelions whereof
I have spoken in another place.

Betwixt Brasile and the Cape of bona Esperanza, there is a Gulf of 1200.
leagues, formidable and furious for winds and tempests.

The Country is divided into nine Governments, or Captainships, wherein are 7.
Colonies of Portugueses along the coast, that is Tamaraco, Pernanbuco, Todos
santos, or San Saluador, Puerto seguro, espiritu santo, Paraibi, Genero and
others: the Capes of S. Augustine, and St. Vincent, the River St. Francis etc.

Brasile by whom discovered.
The first discoverers were Vespusius, the Pinions Lopez, and Cabral about 1500.

Pedro Aluarez Cabral made the principal discovery in 1500. being sent by King
Emanuel for the East Indies; but a tempest cast him here, and he named it the
country of St. Chrosse, and the place he landed on Porto Seguro.

Cabral for that time contented himself with taking possession, and the Kings
of Portugal being full of concernments in Africa and the East, neglected new
conquests: till Emanuell not long before his death, sent thither one Gonzalo
Cotello, who sailed on along the coast not without trouble and danger, and
returned without any advantage.

Afterward King John the ^. sent Christopher Jago, who discovered about 1100.
leagues upon the coast, amongst others the Bay of Todos Santos, where in the
River Paraguasu he found two French vessels traficking with the Natives; which
shows the French men traded with this Nation before the Portugueses had any
knowledge of it. This Jago barbarously sunk their vessels, and murdered all
the men, done like the Spaniard who though he cannot discover and possess all,
will not suffer others to do it.

In 1533.
From that time the Kings continued sending thither, and divided the Country
into Captainries, and Duarte Coello fortified himself in that of Pernanluco,
assaulted perpetually by the Natives, who like the benign humor of the French
much better. In like manner other Portugueses with their Kings Patents
accommodated themselves in other Captainries, as Pedro Contino, on the River
St. Francis, and the Bay de todos Santos, where they planted sugarcanes, and
built Engines to make it. But the Captain at last was defeated, and had his
brains beaten out by the T^p^^bous, his neighbors and enemies.

The first Governor or Captain General of all Brasile, was one Thomas de Sosa
in one thousand five hundred forty nine, with a Fleet of one thousand
soldiers, and some Jesuits brought thither to convert the Natives, who were
placed in the town of San Saluador: one Fernandez Sardinia was the first Bishop
of Brasill, in the year one thousand five hundred and fifty.

The French under Villegagnon, Villegagnon.
would have planted there in one thousand five hundred fifty five; about the
river Ganabara, in twenty three degrees: but the success is too well known,
which happened through our own error, and the ill usage of the Portuguese: nor
was it better in one thousand five hundred ninety four, one thousand six
hundred and four, and one thousand six hundred and twelve toward Margnon,
where our former error, and the baseness of the Portuguese, shut us quite out
of this country: But the Hollanders afterward with better fortune, better
resolution, and more patience, have since established themselves. The French
notwithstanding had most right for the commerce they had with the Nation from
time to time, who loved them naturally, as they hated the Portuguese, and
indeed all others.

The Brasilians are said originally to have come some ages since from ^eru,
advancing thither by progression from time to time.

The Natives are exceeding barbarous, eaters of humane flesh, but their enemies
only: go totally naked both men and women, of hue betwixt yellow and green,
low and flat nosed; for by custom when a child is born, they crush their
noses, as we do by whelps, but females are not so served. The men are
beardlesse, and with great care keep themselves so with small pincers. They
make holes in their chins so big, they will thrust their tongues through
them, an ugly thing to look upon, enchasing precious stones, and hold this for
a beauty. The women have holes in their ears, and wear glass pendants they get
in truck*

They wear only a small ^u^t of cotton upon their hair, and maids the like;
for the rest stark naked. But I observe their nakedness yields less
provocation to concupiscence, then the apparel and ornaments of ours: For going
naked, they are sordid and nasty, though never so handsome by nature: they are
free for any man's voluptuousness, both maids and widows, but married women are
particular to their husbands* so long as they are alive; ^ut they have variety
of customs, as they have variety of people. They live according to nature upon
such provision as the earth of it self produces: the root whereof they make
their bread and drink, is a good material: another they call Pachouqui, in
taste like a Chestnut, they brought of these into Spain, where they prosper
well; the Spaniard calls them Pacates. Of beasts there are abundance, and all
kinds of Venison, and they are very dexterous in killing it with their bow,
wherein they shoot exactly.

Diverse of ours being taken, have naturalized amongst them, whether for that
they had not means to escape, or voluntarily, having wife and children with
them, of whom ours have learned much of their manners and language: but the
misery is, diverse of them have fallen to frequent their Superstitions and
Idolatries: when we did inculcate to them to leave that unfortunate and
brutish life, they answered us with nothing but sighs and tears, though they
knew us for Frenchmen, nor would have discovered themselves such to us, had
not one of us found it out by observing how attentively they harkened to our
language, and as we told them they were Christians, one amongst them answered
no, which showed they understood us, and in effect one of them was a Rocheler,
the other of Saint Malo, who were taken in one thousand five hundred seventy
one, going toward the Cape of Saint Anthony to look water: Five of them the
Savages eat and preserved three for their youth; they are exceeding greedy of
humane flesh, and hold it the most delicate of all other.

Otherwise these people live in great innocence in little round Cabbins,
without moveable or utensil, except some silly vessel of earth or wood, and a
cotton bed like a fishing-net hanging in the air: they are very credulous, and
understanding their language a small matter might convert them.

Generally they believe the immortality of the soul, and that after death they
go to dance with their Fathers behind the mountains* for all their delight is
in dancing, and dance perpetually, if they have the least leisure; as they eat
at all hours, without observation of any order: Sometimes rise at midnight to
eat, and never drink till they have quite ended: some believe that the souls
of such as have lived well, according to their law of nature, transmigrate into
beautiful bodies, and others on the contrary for punishment into deformed and
squalid ones, which in a manner is the Metempsycosy of Pythagoras, whereof we
spoke in the East Indies.

The Sourons and Carmels who live upon the River of Plata, toward Paraguay
have but one wife, whom they petition her father for, who never denies her to
brave and martial men, all virtue and honor lying in that: at their marriages
the Priests Caraibes or pages, perform some ceremonies, causing them to change
shoes: of household stuff, they have nothing but a couch, a cotton bed, and an
Estere of straw, or sea-reeds. The father gives her in a basket cotton girdles,
and other ribbands to bind her hair, and feathers for her hushand.

All is in common except their wives, who keep a severe fidelity to their
husbands, never transgressing, if otherwise they are punished without
remission, or fly the country, in other crimes they are not so rigorous: maids
and widows use all freedom; and if a husband find his wife a maid, he esteems
himself unhandsomely married, and that she must needs be contemptible, for that
no man has meddled with her.

Contention betwixt man and wife seldom or never happens, and when it does,
they hold it to proceed from the displeasure of their Gods, and make sacrifices
to appease them.

The women being delivered, they swathe the child with a cotton fillet without
other clothes, and when they foul themselves, make them clean with sand, and
lay them on their faces on the ground to sleep, where they lie without further
danger.

They have certain experienced herbs which they lay about them being near
childbed, which are very beneficial to them; and rejoice much at the birth of
a child, especially a Male-child; and the joy is general, all crying out, That
is, the Infant shall take revenge of their enemies.

They eat upon the ground, or else on a sort of reeds, Customs of the
Brasilians,
wherewith they likewise cover their Cabbins; they sleep commonly in the open
air without the least inconvenience, so sweet and temperate is their climate.

Letters nor characters they have none, but are very ignorant, Mandioc a root
is their chiefest diet, whereof they make flower, and eat it without baking,
likewise boiled with water, it makes them drink in taste like turned milk:
they make flower also of fish dried in the Sun, are great hunters, and good
archers.

Brasil or Araboutan is their principal traffic, which both men and women go a
long way for, and bring it on their shoulders to truck for glass toys, little
knives and looking-glasses.

Brasil is a tree of more then ordinary height, with small leaves, and
infructiferous. many kinds of it, yellow, white, and carnation.

They make their chaffer with Merchants, without language, setting their wood
an end on one side, and what they would buy on the other, and so bargaining by
signs, every one takes away his own.

In some places they make drink of a root called Piroua, which has a sent that
flies into the head of those that are not used to it; it refreshes like Tisan,
of Orange color, when it is boiled.

Being at Caramel, they feasted us exceedingly, with the best dainties they
had, and on all occasions invited us to eat with them, admiring our ways, and
highly taken with our civilities: amongst other things it seemed strange to
them, why we so often took off our hats, but informing them it was to do honor,
they were satisfied: they invited us to marry there, and live with them,
offering us their fairest women, and much affected our manners, and apparel.

Brasilians man-eaters.
At Feasts most commonly they make their designs of War upon their enemies
for prisoners; and presently joining all together, do reverence to the Sun,
promising the fairest prisoners for a sacrifice, if he prosper them; then
choosing four of the best experienced amongst them, they obey them without
exception. They march with certain Instruments that make a loud noise like
drums, and are stuck with abundance of feathers: their Arms are Clubbes of
Brasil, which they call Sangal or Araboutan: bows longer then ordinary, and
arrows without piles; of wood so hard, they are as effectual as steeled: Thus
equipag'd, they will march fifteen or twenty leagues into the Mountains, to
surprise their enemies, whom they seldom take unprovided, and there will they
fight with a bloody obstinacy, preferring death before captivity: it being
their satisfaction and glory, to take their enemies alive, and feast with their
flesh. Having taken any they bind them, use them well, marry them with their
sisters, or whom they will, and let them live together till the day of
sacrifice: the evening before, they acquaint them with it in a friendly way,
and the other accepts it with alacrity, feasting and dancing all together: The
day come, they lead him round the town or habitation, and all the people follow
him with joy and triumph, the boys shouting and jeering him; who without
dejection boasts his own feats and prowess; reproaches them that he has done
as much for some of theirs, and that his slaughter shall be revenged at full,
then reckons up all theirs, that he and his party have eaten: the other still
singing and dancing, regardlesse of what he says: coming to the place of
execution, they unbind him, and bid him before his death revenge himself the
best he can; Prisoners of War.
then he with whatsoever comes to his hand, falls on, and lays at any one he
can reach, and sometimes wounds such as make not a timely evasion, then come
two with Clubbes, and at a blow beat him to the ground; presently they rip him,
take out his bowels, and deliver the heart to their Caraibs or Priests, to
sacrifice to their Gods, the Sun, and thunder; then washing the carcass in
warm water, they cut it in pieces, broyle it upon a wooden Gridiron, never
turning till it be fully enough on one side, and then feast all together.

They assault their enemies in their habitations, which are surrounded with a
sort of pointed Palizadoes to gore the assaylants: the others storm it in the
weakest place, and being robustious and strong backed, ever strive to come to
hand-fight.

The miserable wife of the prisoner, makes most sad moan, and specially if she
be with child, foreknowing they will do the like for her infant, when it shall
come to two or three years old, a strange cruelty, and so swallow their own
blood, under pretense it is the child of an enemy.

Savages though they are, there appears something of good natural reason in
them, which by instruction and address might be improved, As when we reproach
them with their nakedness, they retort that we are the stupid and unreasonable
to conceal what God has so liberally given us, and have we nothing to do
with our money, but to cast it away upon clothes, things of no use, being borne
without them.

Another asked me one day why we Christians would hazard our lives in so long
voyages, Savages endued with reason.
if it were to see or possess their country, to which we had no right? and
saying 'twas for neither, but only to fetch some things of gain amongst them:
and what gain, said he, a scurvy piece of wood, and other things as little
worth? And telling him, that wood was of value in our country, and useful to
our livelihood: And how, said he, is your country so wretched, it yields you
not sufficient for life, and sustenance?

I answered, the country had a good sufficiency in it to maintain us; but we
desired to get wealth for the felicity of our selves and posterity.

And what says he, will these riches advance you in Gods favor, will they
preserve from death, or can you carry them with you? and replying, 'twas for
none of all this, but that we took a felicity to leave it to our children:
Well, said he, if the soil were sufficient to maintain you and your Fathers
before you, why should it not do the same for your children and posterity.

They allege the same reason, when we blame them for not cultivating their
land, saying since it kept their fathers, 'twill not fail to maintain them and
their children. So these silly people live free from all passion, avarice,
ambition, envy, and labor of body or spirit.

If they get any thing that is good, they call in their neighbors, and make
merry together, with perfect friendship, candor, and freedom, without quarrels
or calumnies, go freely to one another, and eat what they find, with a good
will.

They have a drink of the root Cavain, which the Carmels call Piroa, made thus,
they boil the root with water, and when they use it, they stir it together
and drink it warm, this tastes like turned milk, but in some places for a
dainty, the maids chew the root, then boil it, and make a most exquisit drink.

In some parts there is a sort of root called Elcout, of the taste of a nut,
which I hold the best amongst them, it is of great virtues, but the excess
dries; infused with another called Monqueil, it purges without violence: they
have an herb that grows low with leaves a hand-broad, that cures all sorts of
soars and wounds, of which I had once a trial. For falling from a rock, I got
seven or eight very troublesome hurts, and an Indian with this leaf, cured me
in three days.

I have seen the same in Egypt, in Italy also, and believe it is in France.

Another root they have called a Jehearit, that purges like Rhubarbe, but more
gently: I believe it is the same that comes from new Spain called Mechouacan.

Another that purges, being laid Emplaister-wise on the stomach: women lay it
on the heads of their daughters, to emit their Mestruits making them stand with
their feet together upon a stone, and a slight incision, to draw that blood
without pain.

Brasilians,, and chiefly the Toupina^ba are kind to strangers, specially the
French, and freely part with their victuals to them.

A woman when she would be kind, or entertain one, she seats her self on the
ground, and weeps as she had been beaten, then on a sudden addresses her self
with a thousand blandishments, inviting him freely to the pleasure of her
daughters. I have known some so base amongst us, that buckled with these
idolatrous girls, a thing most detestable.

They are absolutely without letters or characters, and in pronunciation use
not F. L. R. So as we may thence derive, they are without Faith, without Law,
and without Royalty.

They are addicted to Divinations and superstitions, and their Priests are
sorcerers: by an ancient tradition they have some obscure knowledge of the
deluge: some believe reward and punishment of good and evil after death,
others, not; but all believe the immortality of the soul, and that they shall
remain the same they were in this life, and at the hour of their death: they
interre their dead, and for several days lay meat in the Sepulcher, with a
cotton bed: they have no King, nor superior to command them, every lineage
living apart in a several valley, and change their habitation according to
fancy; many families living under the same roof: great hunters, fishers, and
swimmers, exceeding vindicative: of a turbulent spirit, and inclined to War,
the same in prosperity and adversity, endure hunger with patience, when they
have nothing to eat, and when they have they gourmandize, and drink drunk after
their fashion. The good or evil that befalls them some attribute to destiny,
others to fortune or chance.

They are divided into several nations, and for the most part enemies: as the
Sourons, and the Carmils, and the Tapus, whom they call Savages, who are
enemies to all, as more wild and bloody then the rest.

The Cariges are more soft and humane, who inhabit beyond the Winter Tropic
two leagues from the Sea; they inhabit on high ground, and sow the Mandior:
then there are the Oeuetacas, Margaiars, Toupinanbas, and others: these last
are those our French have had commerce withal, of whom we have ample printed
relations: and there might have had good plantations, had we made use of our
time, and moderated our passions.

CHAP. XVII. The Isle of S. Thomas, according to a description made to the
Author, by Sieur de la Courb, and Cassis.
THis Island is under the Equinoctial between the Isles of Prince and Anchan,
discovered by the Portuguese in their first navigation to the East.

The Isle of Saint Thomas has fifty leagues of sound land, was discovered on
Saint Thomas day, that gave name of it. It bears little more then Sugarcanes,
planted by the Portuguese, but the trees are ever green. The Portuguese built
here the town Pauoazan, The Haven whereof looks toward Ethiopia.

At first all Nations inhabited there, but at present the Portuguese will have
none but themselves, and the French who are exceedingly beloved, for a French
Jesuit who propagated Religion exceedingly in this Isle.

The natives are some white, some black, and marry still in their own color.
The town is pleasant, and the whole land is full of Sugarcanes, which fill the
Island with flies, as Arabia is infested with the same creatures by reason of
the Cassia there: Sugar is so cheap, that for eight Realls you may have a
hundred weight, but it has this fault, 'twill not easily dry; in exchange they
carry thither Wines, Cheese, Leather, Clothes, because neither Vine, nor Corn,
will prosper there.

Upon a Vine there the grape will be green on one side, and ripe on the other;
and blossoms at the same time.

Their Gardens produce all sorts of herbs and fruit, but stone-fruit; but
above all, Figs, and Melons.

The root Igname grows there in abundance, very wholesome boiled, or raw.

Likewise Millet which they call Zaboucou, whereof they make excellent things
with Sugar; the soil is strong, inclining to a yellow, and in some parts
reddish, where the dew of the night tempers it like wax, so as it never comes
to dust: They bend their Sugarcanes to the East, and say they prosper best
then: they may have there some seventy Sugarmills.

These Engines or Mills, resemble the Samaritane at Pontneuf in Paris, easily
rising and falling.

That which displeases is, they pour it into great caldrons, and it is like
honey, then they make it in loaves hardly dry, you never seeing any so solid
from thence as from Madero, nor is it worth so much though they use all
possible art to refine it: They purify it with cindars. At the plantations far
from water the Blacks fetch water to set the mills at work. The sugar being
drawn they give the canes to the swine, which fattens them, and makes the flesh
of excellent taste, and wholesome; from mid-May to mid-August they have Eastern
winds wherewith they dry their Sugars, without which they could never do it;
for all other winds are adversaries to them, because of the raines they stir
up in the other months.

The Island is unhealthfull by reason of the corrupted air: their houses are
good, built and covered with timber, out of the abundance of huge high trees.

All nations heretofore went thither by reason of franck traffic; but now they
must pay tribute, all but the French, who enjoy the same immunities as the
Portuguese.

They have many slaves from Guinea, brought by the Corsairs to be sold.

Captain Ribaut Diepois took a vessel with diverse whole families, men, women,
and children, whom he set free on land, but caused two Blacks to hang the
Master and five Mariners. It Is a cruel inhumanity to carry the Father away by
violence into perpetual slavery, while his poor family is exposed to misery
and starving. They marry the slaves amongst themselves, for breed, like a race
of horses; who continue slaves by inheritance: whereas in the East at ten
years end they are made freemen: they have but one day in the week free to
themselves, which they employ industriously, in making themselves fine to be
acceptable to their Mistresses.

The Portuguese of St. Thomas following the humor of their Nation, have a
vanity to have their slaves grow rich, and walk with gravity like them, and
will give them a hundred or two hundred Crowns, to buy Turks for their gain
and ease. They bring the greater part to be baptized, and marry together,
providing them of a livelihood. They celebrate certain feasts like the Basks,
with drums beaten by hand, and songs to them, and have their meetings under the
shade of trees. The slaves yearly choose one amongst them for their Prince, to
command and govern at their meetings, who seats himself in the middle, and then
they give him one of these drums, and with both hands above his head he makes a
most harmonious music, together with flutes, and other instruments, looking on
their Mistresses with a thousand munkey tricks, while they dance and trip
Moresco Sarabrands to them again. They go together to fetch their Prince at his
Masters, who first makes them a collation, then bringing forth the Prince
decked with flowers, a scepter in one hand, and a nosegay in the other, they
carry him on their shoulders in a Palanquin, to the place of dancing, where
their Mistresses meet them. The Prince first dances with his Mistress, and
then the others follow. The Prince de la' amor, called the Arcadit, salutes
his Lady, and then with gravity presents her the Posie, which she receives, and
dances with amorous smiles and simpers. Afterward they all attend the Prince
to his Masters house, where the nuptials are consummated, provided they become
Christians.

At that time Sieur de la Courb was there, there was a Portuguese Lady, widow
of a Merchant, called Bornauente, rich, fair, and young, to whom the chiefest
of the Island sued for marriage, and she would give ear to none, because she
would not put her self under subjection. She kept diverse slaves, and there
arriving a vessel laden with slaves, she bought some, and one amongst the rest
of so handsome garb and address, she judged him to be of good extraction,
whereupon asked whence he was? he told her he was of Danieta, the Son of a
wealthy Nobleman, who had intelligence of his captivity, and would shortly free
him, that he was taken fishing in a small boat; and enquiring further of his
religion, she perceived he was an Idolater.

But the Lady taken with his graceful behavior, used him with all possible
kindness, and one day her lust bearing her away, she resolved to call him to
her Chamber, and receive a satisfaction from him; for which purpose having sent
for him, in expectation she lay down upon her bed, fell fast asleep, and in a
dream thought something came that rudely pulled the sheet from under her:
waking affrighted, she called her maid, and related the vision to her; the maid
wished her to lay by such troubles, and commend her self cordially to Almighty
God: On the morrow she rose early and went to her Confessor, to whom she
related the whole, and he gave her for penance to sell this slave, and never to
see him more; promising he would be her chapman, and buy him to be his boatman,
when he went to take the air.

The Lady made her advantage of his proffer, and doubting the slave to be some
Demon or Magician sent him to the Priest, who bought him to his sad misfortune;
for rowing along by the shore to take the air, there came a sudden gust from
the land that overturned the boat: Now the Priest swimming well made to shore,
but the slave with a pole dashed his brains out, and himself was never heard of
after.

In this Island the Rats do great mischief, eating their Sugar loaves,
whatsoever they can do to prevent it. Here upon a Mountain there are certain
trees that distill water continually, as in the Isle of Iron in the Canaries;
these trees are ever hooded with a thick cloud, which moystens them in such
sort that they yield sufficient to water all their fields of Sugarcanes,
whereas that in the Isle of Iron distills but at certain hours.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal, and most remarkable things, contained in this Book.
A.
ALexandria. Page 2. Aleppo. Page 30.5. Aman a town. ibid. Aman a river. ibid.
Antioche. Page 4 The Author preserved. Page 3 Amon a mountain. Page 5 Arnon a
torrent Page 8 A sad accident in the deserts. Page 10 Apparitions in the
deserts. ibid. Arabian robbers. ibid. The three Arabia's. Page 11 Aden. Page 13
Arabia the happy. Page 18 Alibenali. Page 18 Albacoure a mountain Page 23 Aden
how fortified. Page 24 Asses of Dalascia. Page 26 Amarous dames. Page 56.30.
Reca. Page 28 Abrazador. ibid. Amurath slain by a Tribullian soldier,
disguised like a Deruis. Page 39 Amicabir. Page 40 Amiracor. ibid. Ageleps.
Page 41 Areca a fruit common in the Indies. Page 45 An accident. Page 47
Anthropophage. Page 65 a vast Army. Page 72 a prodigious age. Page 86
Andreman an Island. Page 90 a sad accident. ibid.
Amber Gris. Page 99 admirable obedience. Page 121
Adultry punished. Page 141 Accidents to the Author. Page 143 Armies in the
East vast. Page 148 Apes. Page 149.159. Adventures of Amador a Limner. Page 176
Asia. Page 182 Africa described. Page 177 Africans that adore the Sun. Page 180
Africa prodigious in greatness. Page 181 Africa as it is divided. ibid. Aquiloa
a Kingdom, Town, and Island: Page 191 Abyssins imprint a cross upon their
flesh. Page 196 Agisimba a country. The history and strange adventure of Prince
Alfondi. Page 204 A history of the amors of Princess Abderane. Page 206 The
Authors voyage into Ethiope. Page 211 The country of the Abyssins known
anciently by the name of Ethiope under Egypt. Page 212 The Abyssins reverence
to sacred places. Page 216 Saint Abiblicanus venerable in Bagamidri. Page 218
Amazons Page 219 Arietes, Apostles: Page 226 Amara a mountain. Page 238 Archers
excellent. Page 257 an unfortunate accident to the Author. ibid.
Attire of the Ladies in Caire. Page 276 Ammon an Oracle. Page 279 Alexandria.
Page 281 The Authors arrival at Marseils. Page 284 The Author taken by the
Spaniards Page 287 The Authors hard usage by the Turks. Page 288 Alcahir a
town in Morocca. Page 297 Asgar a country. ibid. Bashaw Abrahor Master of the
horse to the Sultan. Page 311 The Authors sufferings at Sea. Page 313 The
Authors affront at Gandia. Page 314 The Author cheated. Page 316 The Authors
voyage for Guinea. Page 320 America described; the length and distances. Page
327 The Americans upon Saint Laurenzo, their habit and diet. ibid. Antilles
Isles of Canibals. Page 339 America how divided. Page 344 South-America. Page
346 A corruptive air. Page 370 Arma of ^ote for rich Mines. Page 371 Amazons.
Page 379 A peculiar motion of the Sea, in the strait Magellan. Page 393
B.
BUrning sands. Page 9 Books of the lives and sects of Mahomets successors.
Page 13 Benjamin. Page 19 Biharen. Page 30 Benmir. Page 32 Babylon. ibid.
Bagded. Page 32, 33. Balsora. ibid. Bacchat. Page 35 Besoart stone: Page 36
Barcas. Page 40 Batinisar, and her Carpets. Page 44 Baticola. Page 54 Bisnegar.
Page 72.74. A History of the King of Bisnegar. Page 73 Bramins high Priests.
Page 75 Bars of gold. Page 94 Ball-play. Page 99.155. Betell a tree. Page 101
Birds of Paradise. Page 115 Beasts trained up to hunt. Page 166 A bloody
battle. Page 178 Birds of strange nature. ibid. Belugara, a town in
Monopotapa. Page 186 Butua a Province. Page 198 Bagamidri, a town in Ethiopia.
Page 218. Bagamidri called Imperial, and why? ibid. Bagamidri a kingdom. ibid.
Bagamadri how bounded. ibid. Barua a town. Page 241.227. Biguen a strong town.
Page 235 Bridges of straw. Page 236 Baza, a pleasant town. Page 256 Beniermi a
desert. Page 271 Bazuelle a fair town Page 273 Natural Balsome, and how it
grows. Page 275 Barua an Isle. Page 321 Bracala, a country. Page 322 Baris, an
Ape very serviceable. Page 325 Bread made of fish. Page 333 Besee espada, a
dangerous fish. Page 336 A History of Bibical. Page 338 Breezes winds. Page 341
Bacaltos why so called, a coast annoyed with fish. Page 347 Bacaltos discovered
by an English man. Page 348 Strange beasts. Page 380 Birds of prodigious
greatness. ib. A good bargain. Page 380 Brasile described. Page 395 Brasile a
fruitful, and for pleasure a miraculous country. ibid. Strange beasts in
Brasile. Page 397 Brasile divided. ibid. Brasile by whom discoverrd. ibid.
Brasilians, their nature, their wear, and ornaments. Page 397 Brasilians
Religion. Page 398 Brasilian ceremonies at marriage. ibid. The Brasilian
customs. Page 399 The Brasilian way of traffic. ibid. Brasilians man-eaters.
Page 400 Brasilians their arms and wars. ibid. Brasilian usage of prisoners at
war. ibid. Brasilians kind to strangers. Page 402 Brasilians given to
divinations and superstitions. ibid.
C.
CAire. Page 2 Candia. ibid. Chrysorrhas. Page 4 Carauane. Page 9 A cheat. Page
12
Cassia. Page 19 Cinnamon. ibid. A Cutler. Page 5 Cassis deceived his brother.
Page 13 Carauanes from Aleppo, Damas, and the grand Cair. ibid. Cassis his
treachery. Page 17 Chicali. Page 19 Cosan, or Cosara, a River. Page 20 Camaran
an Island. Page 23 Camara. Page 25 Camelots. Page 26 Caymans or Crocodils.
ibid. Ceyfadin. Page 29 Cimites of Persia. Page 31 A Marseillan Curtisan. Page
35 Casbin. Page 36 Cusa. Page 39 Calander. ibid. Caidsidibir. Page 40
Cassandera. ibid. Christianisme in the Indies. Page 42 Cambaye a town. Page 45,
46. Children sold by Parents. Page 47.85. Calicut. Page 57 Cochins situation.
Page 62 Cinnamon. Page 67 Circles of poisoned iron. Page 75 Christian faith
preached in the Indians, and by whom, Page 76 Ceremonies. Page 89 Cruelty of
the Javans. Page 98 Chiamay a famous Lake. Page 105 Castigay an Idol. Page 107
Chaubanoys disaster. Page 108 Caipomo a River. Page 112 Confession amongst
Idolaters. Page 124 Communions extravagant. Page 129 Cannons in the Indies from
all antiquity. Page 132 Cock-fights. Page 138 Ceremonies. Page 143 Casubi a
kingdom. Page 154 Casubi a town. Page 155 Cocos and the benefit. Page 156 The
Cape of Palms. Page 180 Cape of Natall. Page 183 where Christianity first
planted in Africa. ibid.
Crocodiles, and how taken Page 185 Christians in Belugara. Page 187 Courtesy
of savages. Page 195 Courtesy of the Prince of Belugara. ibid. Suguelane a
town, and the entertainment of that town, with their customs. Page 197 The
Court of Abissina under tents in the field. Page 215 Combats of savage beasts.
Page 222 Couzan a kingdom Page 238 Ceremonies at matrimony. ibid. Crown
revenues of the grand Negus. Page 243 Churches, and Church Service in Ethiopia.
Page 244 Candace Queen. Page 252 Caraman a town. Page 254 A Church cut out of
the natural Rock founded by Candaces Eunuke. ibid. The Chair of Saint John
Babtist. ibid. The celebrated cataracts. Page 261 Christians delivered from
Infidels by miracle. Page 272 Caire built upon the ruins of Babylon, and
Memphis. Page 274 Crocodiles, and their nature. Page 277 Constantina a town in
Morocca. Page 298 Constantinople, the situation and founder. Page 306 A
stupendous rock of Crystal. Page 325 Canaries, why so called. Page 331 A Cave
in a rock once a Church. Page 332
Cuba the most fruitful Island of America. Page 336 Crocodiles good meat. Page
337 Canibals hunt men, and why. Page 339 Cruelty of the Spaniards. Page 340
Coasts of Mexico. Page 341 Canada, or New-France, by whom discovered. Page 349
the King of Canada whence extracted. Page 350 the Canadans nature, religion,
laws, habit, and customs. ibid. An example of covetousness. Page 365
Cordileras vast extended mountains of wonderful situation. Page 372 Cosca a
Province. ibid. Charcas a Province in Peru. Page 373 the Calandar of Peru. Page
388
Cruelty revenged. Page 389 Chica a country. Page 392
D.
DAmas. Page 5 A Deruis. Page 6.39 Dan Caerea. Page 7 Dalatia. Page 22 Dehir.
ibid. Dalascia a town: Page 25 A strange dispute. Page 27
Derbent. Page 35 Delicacies. Page 38 Durmisar. Page 39 Diu assaulted by the
Turk, Page 44 Delidecan. Page 49 Dinari, Page 50 Country dames. Page 74 A
declaring of war. Page 75 Diamond mines. Page 83 the Devil adored. Page 99
Dead bodies eaten. Page 104 How drugges are brought into Europe. Page 133
Documents for Princes. Page 136 The devil's dance. Page 143 A dance in Arms.
Page 164 Deserts frightfull. Page 174
Dumes a river. Page 191 King David's robe. Page 254 Dangala a town. Page 272
Delusion of a Mohammedan Priest. Page 274 Deserts of Caire, and how travailed.
Page 279 a difference ingeniously reconciled. Page 319
Domingo an Island. Page 332 Inhabitants of Domingo, their Nature, Laws,
Customs, and Religion. ibid. Discovery of the new World. Page 346 The Devil
Gods ape. Page 361
Dancers on the rope in Mexico. Page 365 a discovery. Page 379
Diving men. Page 386
F.
A Fatal execution. Page 6 Erithreos a King. Page 23 Ecade. Page 40 Ebony.
Page 56 Euate a precious wood. Page 81 A story of an Elephant. Page 117 The
manner of their keeping. Page 118 Exorcisms. Page 150 Number of Elephants in
Pegu. Page 135 Extent of Africa. Page 178 The Empire of the Abissins. Page 180
Extent of the Abissins country. Page 212 Ethiopians descended from Chus the
son of Cham the first Idolaters. Euate, a precious vessel, that endures no
poison. Page 216 An entertainment. Page 255 Ermin a Judge with the Turks.
Election of the King. Page 327 Increase of corn admirable. Page 339 Election of
the King of Mexico. Page 358 Earthquakes. Page 375 Emerald enemy to
inconstancy. Page 386
F.
FErragous. Page 17 Frankincense. Page 19 Forests. Page 38 Prodigious food.
Page 46 The French pox in Indies. Page 51 Fish charmed. Page 72 A fortunate
escape. Page 96 Two Franciscans eaten. Page 98 Strange funerals. Page 104
Faithful trading. Page 111 Fraternal amity. Page 145 Faith of the Indians. Page
154 French highly esteemed in the East. Page 162 A female guard for a King. The
flowing of Nile whence it proceeds. Page 217 Fidelity in subjects. Page 243
Flesh eaten raw for a dainty. Page 255 Fougira an odoriferous town. Page 257
The fountain where the Virgin Mary rested, when she fled into Egypt. Page 276
Figs of particular quality. Page 305 A gallant fight at Sea. Page 318 Del Fuego
an Isle. Page 321 A mystical fruit. Page 344 Florida discovered, and described.
Page 352 Florida, why so called. ibid. Floridans, their nature, and customs.
ibid. Floridans wealthy. Page 353 The miraculous Fountain of youth. ibid.
French hanged in Florida. Page 356 A fountain of hot oil. Page 377 A fountain
congealing immediately. Page 378 Fountains medicinable with accommodation for
the sick. Page 358 Fish in Mexico both useful and dangerous. Page 381 French
naturalized amongst the Brasilians. Page 398
G.
GRots of persecuted Christians. Page 5 Ginger. Page 26 Gedri. Page 30
Gezempee. Goa Page 50 Ganges a River. Page 83.88. The Gulf Bengala. Page 84
Giraffe a beast. Page 105 Gaypoumo a strange River. Page 106 Gunnes. Page 110
Geographers mistaken. Griffins. Page 115.152 Grages extraordinary. Page 155
Guber how bounded. Page 179 Goragues wild and sanguinary people. Page 227 A
Garden at Casima, most pleasant. Page 261 Guinea how bounded. Page 321 Gambra a
famous River. Page 322 Guinalla a Kingdom, a River, and a Haven. The king of
Guinalla 's State. ibid. Gutulea a pleasant country, the riches thereof. Page
324 Gold for things inconsiderable. Goulmaran, the name of a River and
country. Page 351 Goulmarans their nature, housing, habit, diet, religion,
war, and innocence. ibid. Goulmarans, their armies of dogs.
H.
HUnting. Page 38 Hali. Page 38 Hamar. Page 38 A History of a Bear. Page 78 A
history of a Spanish woman and a Monkey. Page 79 Hunting of Elephants. Page 92
Hermophrodites. Page 92 A history of Serpents. Page 105 Horses. Page 110 Holy
ashes, and holy water. Page 121 Hens black of flesh. Page 127 A deplorable
history of two Princes. Page 144 Horses and their breeding. Page 166 A Royal
hunting. ibid. A history of an Incubus. Page 175 Horses sucked by Cowes. Page
202 Dexterous horsemen. ibid. A history of Prince Aranubi. Page 220 Heretics
condemned to fire with the Ethiopians. Page 246 A prodigious history of Prince
Joel. Page 261 A history of the Popes Almne. Page 314 An accidental destruction
of Idolaters. Page 325 Hispaniola by whom discovered, and when. Page 337 In
Hispaniola, the people how governed, their Laws and Nature. ibid. A history of
a slave. Page 406
I.
Jurabi a guide uses the Compass. Page 10 Jews thieves. Page 12 Jesrab a
town. Page 13 Jubara Abraham's mountain. Page 15 Saint John Baptist. Page 21
Ibram. Page 25 Ismael Sophy. Page 39 Icorma. Page 39 Inhabitans of Genoa. Page
41 Ivory. Page 47 Idolatry. Page 50 A miraculous discovery of innocence. Page
53 Idol of a Monkeys tooth. Page 69 Indian earthen ware. Page 78 Idolaters
fear of Christianisme. Page 88 Idolaters superstitious. ibid. Java an Island.
Page 96 Infirm eaten. ibid. Inhabitants of Sapara. Page 98 Idolatrous, and
Mohammedan Martyrs. Page 125 Idols of Pegu. Page 125 Idols destroyed by the
Portugals. Page 123 The Image of the Virgin Mary in the Indies respected. Page
154 Interrement. ibid. Interrements. Page 168 Igname a delicate root. Page 182
Janiharou, a Town and River. Page 185 Joguia a root. Page 186 Justice betwixt
Creditor and Debtor, severe. Page 244 Joconomites, an austere order. Page 245
Kingdom of the Jalofes. Page 321 Jalofes have person'd and qualified their
ornaments and nature. Page 322 Jalofes in their dealings lawless. Page 323 An
Island seen and not known. Page 331 The Isbane of Iron. Page 332 Jagares famous
for swiftness. Page 353 Jucatan described. Page 370 Incas Kings of Peru. Page
387 The Isle of Saint Thomas described. Page 404
K.
A Kingdom left for heaven. Page 88 Kingdoms conquered by Pegu. Page 112
Kingdoms tributary to the Emperor of the Abyssins. Page 213 Knights of Malta,
and their institution. Page 283
L.
LIbanus. Page 4 Ladamum. Page 19 Lacca. Page 26 Laws in Narsingue. Page 74
Lagi a town. Page 113 Largaray a Kingdom. Page 177 The Isle of Saint Laurence,
or Madagascar. Page 182 In the Isle of Saint Laurence, how they employ the
Inhabitants. Page 184 Lacque for painting. Page 260 Lions their nature. Page
271 Saint Laurence a river in the East Indies. Page 327 An unfortunate love
Page 355 A prodigious lightning. ibid.
M.
MAnna. Page 4 Morets entertainment. Page 8 A description of Medina. Page 13
Mahomets tomb. ibid. Mahomets birth. Page 14 Mahomets law. ibid. Medina taken
by Mahomet. ibid. Marabuts sacrificators. Page 15 Mohammedan ceremonies. Page 15
Mazara a beast. Page 19 Mirrhe. Page 20 Mezua. Page 25 Machif. Page 35 The
Virgin Mary honored by the Indians. Page 50. A most admirable medicine. Page
56 Maladives Isles. Page 72 A history of the Magicians of Pegu. ibid. Merchants
deceived. Page 74 Musk, and from whence. Page 81 Metempsicosis. Page 94.97
Malaca, and the traffic. Page 102 Martaban. Page 106 A miraculous delivery of
a Christian exposed to beasts to be devoured. Page 116 Meat perfumed. Page 137
Mandronella a town. Page 152 A Monkey armed. Page 160 Militia of Transiana.
Page 165 Mountains remarkable. Page 168 Mummy. Page 169
Mountain of the Sun. ibid. Mastiffes for prey. Page 175 Magicians. Page 180
Madrogan the chief towns of Monopotapa. Page 200 The Monopotapian Kings habit.
ibid. The King of Monopotapa's Palace. service, officers, and magnificence.
Page 201 The King of Monopotapa's accoutrement for the war. ibid. The order
of his Militia. Page 202 Military Mastiffes. ibid. The Monopotapian Eunuchs how
clothed, and their office. ibid. The Monopotapian punishments. Page 203
Monopotapian Princes are distinguished by a Lions skin. ibid. Manica a gold
Mine. Page 194 Mount Manica, and the ruins of stupendous structures. ibid.
Magnificence of the Negus. Page 203 Three mystical dishes. Page 226 The
Mongibir Kings resignation. Page 230 Mongibir a Kingdom. Page 233 Mongibirians
low-spirited and timorous. ibid. Mongibirians Idolaters worship the Sun. ibid.
Mongibirians opinion of the Christians. ibid. Magnificence in Mongibir. Page
234 A mountain never free from snow. Page 337 Moucall an uniforme town. ibid. A
passionate mourning. Page 240 The march of the grand Negus. Page 241 Monks
married. Page 245 Men turned into Wolves. Page 269 A man turned into an Ass by
Magic. ibid. A magical relation. Page 270 A famous Mosquee. Page 273 Mummi.
Page 279 Morocca. Page 297 Melli a kingdom very wealthy. Page 299 Magicians of
diverse kinds. Page 302 A cruel murder. Page 317 The Crick S. Michael. Page
331 Marriage in Domingo. Page 334 Mexico and the coasts. Page 341.345 Mexico
how called and described. Page 356 Mexicans ingenious and Idolaters. Page 357
Of the temperature of Mexico. ib. The ancient Mexicans. Page 358 The Mexicans
arms. Page 359 The King Montezuma. ibid. Mexicans divided into several
nations. Page 360 Mexicans Religion. Page 361 The Mexican year and month. Page
362 The Mexican wheel. Page 363 Their superstitions. ibid. Mappes of Africa
defective. Page 178 Monbaze a country. Page 188 Monbaze in extent. Page 189 A
merry passage. ibid. How in Monbaze they receive Ambassadors. ibid. Melinde a
town and kingdom. Page 190 Melons of Excellency. ibid. The Prince of Melinde a
grave Justiciar. ibid. Mozambique a kingdom. Page 191 The Inhabitants of
Mozambique. Page 192 Magnice a River. Monopotapa an Empire. Page 198
Monopotapians Idolaters. ibid. Magicians proceedings in Monopotapa. Page 199
Mexican festivals and dances. Page 363 Mexican sacrifices and ceremonies. ibid.
Mountains burning. Page 365.376 Mexican Mascarades, called Quacones. ibid.
Mexico by whom conquered. Page 367 The King of Mexico 's state and strength.
ibid. Wealth of Mexico. ibid. Monkeys. Page 374 Mines in Potossi. Page 375
Mines of silver and gold the nature and manner of working in them. Page 383
N
NIcotiana. Page 39 Nahassan. Page 40 Nutmegs. Page 100 Nestorians. Page 126
Number of nine amongst the Tartars. Page 177 Niger and Gambra rivers flowing as
Nile. Page 179 The Negus, his triumphant entrance. Page 227 Service at the
Negus table. Page 226 Navasse an Island. Page 334 New-found-lands, what. Page
349
O
OReb. Page 11 Ormus. Page 30, 31.13.29. Outor. Page 17 Ostander. Page 40 Oil
of cinnamon: Page 68 Ostridges. Page 115 An oraculous Idol. Page 123 Ordinance
in China from antiquity. Page 243 Oximinchus famous for multitude of religious
persons. Page 279 Obsequies of the King of Guinalla. Page 326 An order of
knighthood. Page 359 Orellana the greatest of rivers. Page 395
P
A Just punishment of the perfidious. Page 3 St. Paul's imprisonment. Page 6
Provision for the deserts. Page 9 The Prophets City. Page 10 Pecher a Haven.
Page 19 Persia, and the bounds. Page 31 Pitch. Page 33 The Powerful State of
the Kings of Persia. Page 37 Plucciander. Page 40 Places in the Indies. Page 41
The Portuguese conquest in the East. Page 42 Purcelans. Page 51 A sad fate of
Pirates. Page 52 Presumption of the Portugals. Page 55 A strange History of a
Portugais Captain. Page 63 An unheard of courtesy from the hand of a Pirat.
Page 64 Punishment of the wicked. ibid. Perfidiousness of Pirates. Page 65
Pearl fishing. Page 68 The manner of pearl fishing. Page 72 Polouis the
Devils Isles. Page 71 Subtle poison. Page 85 Pirates, how taken. Page 85 Pegu.
Page 112.108, 109 Peguan Armies. Page 121 Punishments for crimes. Page 124
Peguans, whence derived. Page 128 The Peguan Creed. ibid. The Peguans diet.
Page 131 The Peguan salutations. Page 132 The Peguans Military exercises. ibid.
The Peguan Kings Coronation. Page 133 Peguan ceremonies at creation of their
King. Page 135 The King of Pegues Revenues. Page 139 Peguan Justice. Page 140 A
Peguan policy. Page 141 Priests dispose of war. Page 144 The Peguan year. Page
147 Philosophy of the Indians. Page 171 The point of St. Anthony. Page 183
Persipolis, and the ruins of structures. Page 194 A passage Magical. Page 199
No prison in Monopotapa. Page 200 Poison common, and dear in Monopotapa, and
the reason. Page 203 Priest John's Mansion. Page 220 Priest John's Justice.
ibid. Priests singing Psalms in state. Page 225 A Princess prisoner restored
to her lover. Page 229 A figurative pear. ibid. Perfumed meat. Page 230
Prostitution of wives. Page 233 Paraguary has the like inundations as Nile.
Page 277 Piramids of prodigious structure. Page 277 Piperons Giants. Page 327
Pit the highest mount in the world. Page 331 Peru why so called, and the
description. Page 371 Peru in extent. ibid. A passage so cold, it is extremely
dangerous. Page 375 Plumes in use. Page 380 Peru discovered. Page 387 Peru by
whom civilized. Page 388 Peru taken by the Spaniard. Page 390 Paragous people.
Page 392
Q.
QUinsay. Page 103 Queen Tyrada. Page 104 Quiloa a town of antiquity. Page 191
A Queen, and nine sons massacred for worshipping the Devil. Page 235
Quite a Province. Page 372
R.
RImadan. Page 21 Rivers of Persia. Page 32 Religious orders amongst the Turks.
Page 39 Resolution in extremity Page 91 Continual rains. ibid. Rubarbe. Page
106 Respect to strangers. Page 134 Repudiation. Page 141 Reward of valor. Page
144 Reconcilements. Page 156 The Rhinocerot of the Escuriel. Page 260 Rivers in
Suama. Page 194 Manica a gold Mine. ibid. Manica a mount, and the ruins of
structures there of strange thickness. ibid. The Religion of the Abyssins.
Page 215 Religions of several orders in Abissina. ibid. Rivers in Abissina.
Page 216 Reception of the Portugal Ambassador at the Negus 's Court. Page 231
An heroic restoration of captive women Page 236 Religion of the Ethiopians.
Page 245 Religion of Saba. Page 253 A miraculous cure. ibid. Religion and
customs of the Sarabomians^ Page 258 A wild Rhinocerot. Page 259 Religion of
the Jalofes. Page 323 Rauana the securest Haven. Page 336 Religious devoured by
Savages. Page 357 Rivers in Peru. Page 179 Good natural reasons from Savages.
Page 401
S.
Shipwreck of the Author in Candia. Page 2 A malicious shipwreck. Page 3
Sahanir a mountain. Page 5 Silks. Page 5 The Sea of Sodom. Page 10 Mount Sina.
Page 11 Sarazins whence called. Page 14 Black sand. Page 19 Storax. ibid.
Sabea. ibid. Sequemir his state. Page 20 Salsidas devotes. Page 20.40 Read Sea.
Page 23 Sabeans. ibid. Spices. Page 24 Suachan. Page 25 Santal. Page 26
Socotoro famous for Ambargris. Page 28 A Stratagem. Page 34 Sumachia. Page 35
Samarcant. Page 37 Sotismel, Sinbarate. Page 37 Seleres. Page 38 Sophy. Page 38
Sacar. Page 39 Sanosaraden. Page 49 Samorin Page 57 Seraglio. Page 85 Sartagan
a town. Page 88 Siam a kingdom. Page 103 Statues of beaten gold. Page 110
Sacrifices for the dead. Page 127 Superstitious salutations. Page 128 Sacathy a
mortiferous plant. Page 130 Sodomy not prohibited. Page 139 Sacrifices of
proper children. Page 142 Sugar used in building. Page 150 Sinabo a kingdom.
Page 163 Serpents good meat. Page 174 Sonderia an Island. Page 183 Secora.
ibid. A superstitious ceremony. Page 191 The state the Negus is received into
towns with. Page 224 Scanfourin, the capital town of Mongibir. Page 234 Salt
exceeding precious. Page 249 Sorcerers. Page 247 Subtilty of Crocodiles. ibid.
A star in Ethiopia mortiferous. Page 250 Salete a fair town, and a most
pleasant garden there. Page 251 Saba Queen. ibid. Saba, or Soua, a town. Page
252 Swine for carriage like horses. Page 256 Saraboma a famous Island. Page 258
Sebastian king of Portugal defeated and slain by the Moors. Page 292
Familiarity with Serpents. Page 301 Examples of Sorcery. Page 303 Seraglio of
Constantinople. Page 306 Temple of Saint Sophia. Page 307 Seraglio described.
Page 310 Serri Leonna a country Page 325 Sarboul a fruit growing all the year.
Page 333 Frozen sea. Page 347 A Stratagem. Page 360 Spanish vanity. Page 368
Seasons of the year in Peru. Page 372 Sheep for carrige. Page 382 The Strait of
Magellan. Page 392 Sugar exceeding cheap. Page 404
T.
TRade in Arabia. Page 23 A strange tempest. Page 27 Trade from Ormus. Page 30
Tauris a town. Page 34 Trade of Tauris. ibid. Principal towns of Persia. Page
35 Thais, Alexanders Curtisan. Page 36 A miraculous tide. Page 45 Toumacant a
Western wind. Page 63 Treason punished. Page 73 Saint Thomas his shrine. Page
76 Ternassery. Page 80 Tides from North to South, meet in the strait of
Magellan. Page 109 Tahaba. Page 111 Trienniall governments. Page 120 The
martyrdom of S. Thomas. Page 126 A tempest calmed by charms. Page 124
Testimonies of love. Page 142 Tygars hunted. Page 159 The King of Transiana his
curiosity and affability. Page 161 Transiana a town, and the valor of the
women there. Page 163 Tazatay a kingdom. Page 169 Tartary Page 163 The Tartars
conquests. Page 180 The King of Tombut 's majesty. Page 179 Trees that yield
drink and thread. Page 184 The Isle of thieves. Page 186 The Talmassaca a
garment of difference for nobility in Monopotapa. Page 202 Land Tortoyses. Page
211 Tributes to the Emperor of the Abyssins. Page 213 A magnificent triumph.
Page 228 Titles of Priest John. Page 246
Tortoises useful for travel. Page 256 Tamatans pillagers. Page 251 Triumphs at
the inundation of Nile. Thebaida and the deserts. Page 279 Turkish proceedings
against the Author. Page 290 Temesne and the people thereof. Page 300 The
Turks Religion. Page 307 Turks have religious of several orders. Page 307
Turkish Obsequies. Page 308 Turkish Justice. Page 309 Taboucaton the chief town
in the kingdom of the Jalofes. Page 321 A miraculous tree that continually
distills water. Page 332 A terrible tempest called an Aroucane and remarkable
passages in it. Page 335 Temistican the capital town in New-Spain. Page 356 A
tree yielding linen, and all necessaries. Page 368 Balsom from a tree of
sovereign virtue. Page 369 Fruit used for money. ibid. Temper of Peru. Page 374
V.
UNicorns horns. Page 15 The Virgin Peru. Page 199 Virginia by whom discovered.
Page 352 Description of Virginia. ibid. Unknown lands. Page 357 A remarkable
vision foreshewing the arrival of the Spaniards in Peru. Page 389 Vanity of
the Portugals. Page 405
W.
WIne sold by Apothecaries. Page 9 A draw-well at Outor. Page 18 Spanish Wax.
Page 26 Women chosen. Page 38 Women bought and sold. Page 47 Wives in common.
Page 62 A war for a white Elephant. Page 103 113 White Elephants adored. Page
114 Winds called Monsouns cold in extremity. Page 150 Widows married. Page 155
Wood to strike fire. Page 158 Women swimmers. ibid. A furious wind called
Tafon. Page 182 Winds that preserve bodies incorruptible. Page 187 Wine in Ox
horns. Page 230 Walking mountains. Page 280 A Whale. Page 283 A remarkable
accident of Whales. Page 299 Singular winds. Page 342 A wind of the use of
rain. Page 373 Water boiling hot by nature. Page 377 Winglesse Birds. Page 394
Z.
ZAcharies tomb. Page 6 Zibit. Page 13 Zagathy. Page 34 King of Zeilan:
Zinguebar. Page 192 Zunam an Island. Page 293 Zaflan a Lake. ibid. Zaire and
Zambre two rivers. ib. Zuama a river by the Portugals called Rio del spiritu
santo. Page 218 Zio Marina Christos a Monastary. Page 239 The torrid zone, and
the quality of the climat. Page 342
FINIS:

