Dr. Franciscus de le Boe Sylvius OF Childrens Diseases: Given in a familiar
style for weaker capacities. WITH AN APPARATUS OR Introduction explaining the
Authors Principles: As also a TREATISE OF THE RICKETS.

By R. G. Physician.

(...) Hip. Recte curaturum, quem prima origo Causae non fefellerit. Celsus de
Med. London, Printed for George Downs at the Three Flower de Luces in
Fleet Street, over against St. Dunstan's Church. 1682.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Nathaniel Johnson Mayor, Sir Robert Shafto
Recorder, Sir Ralph Carr, Sir Ralph Jennison; Henry Brabant, Timothy Davison,
Robert Roddam, Matthew Jeffreyson, George Norton, Timothy Robson, Nicholas
Fenwick, Esquires, Aldermen; Joseph Bonner Esquire, Sheriff.
SIRS,
YOu need not impute it to any other reason, besides your own virtues, that I
have presumed to shroud these weak labors under the Wings of your Patronage:
For though the smallness of the work may seem to argue too much Ambition in the
Author, yet the greatness of your favors, makes it a duty indispensible to

Your obliged and humble Servant, Richard Gower.
From the Spittle in Newcastle upon Tine.

THE APPARATUS.
1. THAT this Book might be the more beneficial, I have (not as in translating
the Authors first Book) omitted many repetitions In Chap. 5.34 Sections are
left out, in others several.
, as also reflections upon his Antagonists, avoided many terms of Art, giving
them in a plainer dress, not confining my self to a verbal Translation: yet
without any material alteration or omission.

2. And that his First Book of Practice, together with this Treatise of
Childrens Diseases, may be plain to an ordinary capacity, have explained some
of his Terms and set down his Principles, which being well weighed, will lead
you to a true and right understanding of any of his writings.

3. Also, that I may not be shor^ in this my bounty, if any difficulty be found
either in the Theory o^ Practice, I am freely willing by Word or Writing to
clear it unto any, although I have added Marginal notes.

4. Yet if any, as I know many, will snarl at me for this my candor, Envy
moves them, I value it not: For seeing in our Country men generally are
permitted a liberty to practice, and in the words of Hippocrates, have no other
punishment for their Errors than Disgrace: It will appear that I wish well unto
the public, when I would have them well instructed. Nay further, I doubt not
but many will censure me, who yet will be glad of this help. And as I know it
is the best See the Authors Preface to his First Book.
guide a Physician can have; so I am the more bold to venture my credit upon it.

5. Aromatical Plants are such as have a fragrant smell, as Mint, Balm, etc.

6. Fermentation is that change which meat undergoes in the Ventricle (or
Stomach): called of old Digestion or Concoction. Not unlike that of Wheat with
Leaven, its slower having a proportion of Spirits, Salt and Sulphur, which
being moistened, every of those Particles are wrought upon by the Leaven, as
the parts of our food are wrought upon by the Conflux of humors in the
Stomach, thereby losing their toughness; It being an approved Maxim in
Chemistry, that Where Salts of different natures meet, they work upon one
another: as you may see in. 10. below: Our meat thus fermented is called Chyle.
We take it for granted, that the humor (or humors) which cause this
fermentation in the Stomach comes not from the Spleen, seeing no passage from
the Spleen to the Stomach could ever be demonstrated in Anatomy; as Dr. Willis
De Ferment. Cap. 5.
confesses, though to his disadvantage; thence judging it probable, that the
remainder of Chyle in the Stomach being sowred by its abode there, ferments the
meat next eaten; a very unlikely notion, and below a man of his fame; as though
between every it could grow so sour as to ferment the next, as Leaven does the
Dough: Surely he has not used the rule of proportion right, to take hours for
days or weeks.

7. That meat rightly ferment, its parts must first be loose, and ready to be
dis-joyned from one another, thus chewing helps fermentation. Hard, tough and
dried meat digest slowly: Bread and moist food soon: Beer, Broth and any liquid
thing sooner. Wine, Strong drink, etc. especially warmed, soonest; yea, they
are too quick for Fermentation, nourishing the body in an instant.

8. Secondly, It must neither be too raw, nor too ripe. If the first, its
active parts are not freed easily from the thicker, and so move not, without
which Fermentation cannot be: thus green fruits are not fit for eating, or to
make drink of. If the latter, it inclines to putrefaction, the volatile parts
leaving the rest: thus overripe fruits are not fit to make liquors of, because
they soon putrify or rot: and if eaten, breed Worms, as do the green.

9. Thirdly, It must consist of parts different in nature, as it were making a
confusion in the whole: some parts opposing others, which cause motion, each
different part contending with other for dominion. Whereas if it consist all of
one Element, it is quiet and still, and cannot oppose it self. As all our meat
has Spirit, Salt and Sulphur in it, though not so sensible to taste, as
demonstrable by Chemistry: So the humors of our body consisting of different
principles (as you may see below) and being in constant motion to the Stomach,
where it meets with our meat; cause a confused and unexpressible effervescency
both with each other, and also with our food.

10. An Effervescency is an opposition (like unto boiling) of two contrary
liquors, as may be seen by mixing Oil of Vitriol (a sharp sour liquor) and
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac (a Lee Salt) together, which will also heat the Glass
wherein they are. So the juice of the Sweetbread of a Sour, and Choler of a
Lee-Salt; these two I say meeting in the Stomach fight thus together, and raise
an effervescency, by which (with fresh supply) continued, our meat is digested.

11. Choler is bred of the Oily and Lee-Salt parts of the blood, and separated
from it in the Liver; from thence carried into a Bladder, or little bag joined
to the Liver, and whose office is to contain it, sending much of it through one
passage to the small Gut and Stomach; and a little of it through another
passage to the Heart.

12. The juice of the Sweetbread proceeds from the sour part of the Blood,
and is separated from it in the kernels of the Sweetbread, which like a
cushion are placed under the Stomach: This juice is conveyed through many small
passages into a middle (the great) passage, along which it continually moves
into the Gut. It and Choler having but one open into the Gut about three
fingers breadth off the Stomach.

13. Spittle or Lympha (whence the Lymphatick passages) and liquor Nervosus
therein is much of the nature of the juice of the Sweetbread, but not so
sour, yet promotes fermentation in the Stomach, though it be rather insipid in
healthy people. It moves through a small passage at each jaw into the mouth; of
it is bred Phlegm in the Stomach and Guts, daubed and as it were plaistered
about their insides.

14. The Small and upper Guts are Duodenum, twelve fingers breadth long:
Jejunum, that is, hungry, being mostwhat empty: Ileon, whence Iliack Passion,
commonly called, twisting of this Gut.

15. The Thick Guts are Caecum, above an inch long; Colon, a long Gut wherein
is the Cholick; Rectum joins to the fundament; out of which the dregs of Chyle
are sent by Stool.

16. When meat is fermented in the Stomach, which is done by the conflux of
Choler, Spittle, and the juice of the Sweetbread thither, the lower Orifice
(or end) of it opens of it self to admit the Chyle into the Guts, which still
receiving more and more of those Humors is better fermented, and by a Natural,
called Peristaltick Motion in the Stomach and Guts, whereby they carry downward
any thing that is in them: While Chyle moves thus downward, the finest and best
digested parts strain through the pores of the Guts which are unperceivable (so
that you may fill a dead bodies Guts with wind, and it cannot get vent): This
Chyle got through the Guts moves along the Milky veins, which all meet in a
Kernel (called Pancreas Asellii) close to the backbone about the Loins, where
it still moves higher in a small passage called Ductus Thoracicus (or rather
Spinalis) which always having in it a humor like that of the Sweetbread mixes
with it as it goes into the Jugular or Axillar left Vein, and so into the great
Hollow Vein, where it mixes with the Blood, with which it goes into those
cavities of the Heart called, the Right Ear and Belly of the Heart, and the
Vein of the Lungs; out of which being poured through the substance of the Lungs
into the Vein of the Lungs, Vena and Arter. Palmonal.
it goes on unto the left Ear of the Heart, and its left Ventricle.

17. So that Chyle begins to be changed into Blood in the Jugular Vein, but is
perfected in the les^ ventricle of the Heart; where i^ opens its passage more
and more till by that displaying, the provoke^ Heart contracts its Musculous
substance by the help of its Animal Spirits which forces the Blood forward mean
while raising an Effervescen^ between the Oily Volatile Salt i^ Choler, and the
juice of the Sweet^ bread; Whereby the various part of the whole are disunited,
and loosed from their Fetters, and insinuat themselves into the Oily and Fa^^
parts, both of the Blood, and als^ of Chyle, as the proper subject o^ their
Action, rarifying the same and changing the other parts more or less mixed with
them, that our Life may be continued; and Blood moved any whither; repairing
all parts of the Body, a^ they are perpetually more or less con^in'd. And lest
this Efferve^ency should over-heart the Blood, ^e Lungs by Air sucked in;
mildtemper its heat and warmness.

18. Blood thus perfected in both ^ellies or Ventricles of the Heart, carried
at last through the num^rless Branches of the Aorta or ^eat Artery to all parts
of the Bo^^, whereby they are nou^^sht, and out of it, Liquors ^^rther useful
or unuseful for ^^eir dispensing in Man's Body, ^^e separated in several places,
^^d again sent back to the Mass (...) Blood, or are sent out of the ^ody, while
the Blood is in its re^procal and Circular Motion, ^^lled Circulation.

19. The Great Artery sends two ^anches up to the Head, (the Pulse of which may
be felt on each side (...) Windpipe) another to each Arm^ another along the
Backbone; a^^ each Thigh; even into every T^^ and Finger, nay to every part
the body; Still like a Tree, (...) further it goes, the more sm^^ branches it
sends forth to nouri^^ every part of the Body.

20. In the brain, the Ble^^ affords matter for the Animal Spir^^ which are
severed from it in Brain and Cerebellum (or b^der-brain) which is sent all over
their continued Marrow as it were a pipe into the Nerves, whereby not only
exercise the extern^ Senses and animal Motion, but t^^ humors are all
tempered, a^^ Seed primarily generated by in the Testicles.

21. Of the Blood is Spit^^ bred, in the kernels of the Jaws: (...) the other
kernels Lympha; (...) the Sweetbread, its juice: (...) my Authors opinion)
Choler, in (...) Bag: In the Kidneys, its ^heyish parts go into the Ureters,
^^d so into the Bladder.

22. As the Blood is conveyed all ^er the body in Arteries to nourish (...) and
the nourishing blood is thence ^lled arterial blood; so has God ^onderfully
contrived, that it should sent from every remote part in ^all veins, which grow
still big^r and fewer till they come to the ^art, where with fresh Chyle and
that humors it there meets with, a ^^nstant Effervescency is main^ined.

23. If this Effervescency be ^ulty, which it always is, when ^y of the
aforesaid humors are out of temper; it also makes t^ body so. As for Example,
if t^ Oily Salt in Choler abound, it caus^ a Fever; different according to t^^
depravation of the juice of the Swee^ bread, which by a various efferv^scency
produces different effects: that juice be very sour or sharp, causes pains in
any part, afflict^ by it. If much and tough Phleg^ be in the Stomach it dulls
the app^tite, if in the Guts, it will fen^ them against pain, and make Chy^^
Phlegmatic, and the blood also If little be there, the Guts will (...) the
easier griped. The juice of the Sweetbread being very sharp, w^ cause great
Appetite, better dig^stion than nourishment (which more depends on the good
temper of Choler) it will gripe the bowels, and if its sour vapors get to the
heart, it will much ^ate the vital Effervescency there, ^^d cause
Swouning-fits, etc. Get^^ng to the Brain they will breed the ^^lling-Sickness,
by pricking the ^erves.

24. As these Humors are joint^^ or severally more affected, and ^uble one
part of the body more an another; so, various distempers ^se, too tedious to
set down here at ^ge; and which you may see illu^ated in the following
discourse, ^^d also in the Authors first book. I shall conclude with telling
you, ^t I have exposed my Oily Vo^^ile Salt to sale only at my bro^^rs, Mr.
Robert Gower, Apo^^cary, at the Black-spread-Ea^^e in Fleet Street, and at my
^^oksellers shop, and in no other ^^ce in London: with printed directions for
its use. And for satisfaction could be willing to she^ any, that I do actually
incorpora^^ the Oil and Salt together, and (...) not barely Aromatize the Salt,
(...) many pretenders do; which is (...) gross abuse to our Authors Oil
Volatile Salt.

OF Childrens Diseases.
CHAP. I. Of the JAUNDICE.
1. WE purpose to treat in order of Diseases that do frequently happen to
Infants, and especially in these colder Countries; with Gods help, beginning
with the Jaundice, which often appears in Infants soon after their birth, and
continues for some days, and again by little and little departs.

2. That Infants may have the Jaundice in their Mothers Womb, is even manifest
by this, that sometimes they are born with it, and so may have in themselves
its cause before their birth, and be born with it.

That an Obstruction of Choler, cannot cause the Jaundice.
3. But whether an Obstruction of the passage of Choler into the small gut ought
to be the cause of the Jaundice, let them see, who own no other: To me it seems
not probable, because an obstruction must arise from a tough Humor carried to
any Vessel with the Liquor that ordinarily runs through it, and greatly
abounds in the body, being loosened and dissolved in it, and driven thither;
and then growing together there, and so making an obstruction.

1. In Infants unborn.
4. Therefore let us see, if such Causes mutually following each other, may
likely take place in that Passage in unborn Infants, so as to produce the
Jaundice.

5. First, None can well deny that a Tough Humor may be in Infants not as yet
born, that considers, there are many Mothers which do not only abound with
tough Phlegm, and have such like Blood; but do daily use, and that to excess,
such like Food, which breeds viscous and thick Phlegm. From whence what can be
expected, but that Infants born of them, should abound with a Phlegmatic and
tough Blood, and all their Humors be very tough and Phlegmatic? so that in
this condition there wants not matter to breed an obstruction in such Insants.

6. But that secondly, this Phlegmatic and tough Humor may make an obstruction
in the Passage of Choler into the small gut, it is required, that the same be
carried thither, either joined and mixed with Choler, or else confused with it.

7. Where all the blood is more Phlegmatic and tough than is usual: no wonder,
if also the other humor and so Choler, become more Phl^^matic and tough; and
the tough (...) mour mixed with Choler be brough^ to the forenamed Passage.

8. I am fully persuaded from dissection of many dead Bodies that Phlegm is
bred both of Spittle and perhaps of Snot falling down t^ the Jaws; and being
swallowed, go into the Stomach, and small gut and sticks unto its sides, and
by degrees increases there.

9. From what is aforesaid it seem evident that the same Phlegm (...) bred in
the Glandules of the Head but ho^rded up in the small Gut.

10. Now that this tough an^ clammy Phlegm may be loosened or dissolved, and
being only conf^sed with the Blood, and other humors, may be carried any way
and so likewise to the Passage (...) Choler into the small Gut, require a Cause
e^ectual enough, and vi^lent; namely Motion of Body as we vehement as enduring
for some time or a notable heat of the Air, like tha^ of the Sun or of Fire, to
loose^ ^^^legm, and make it fluid; or els^ a plenteous Liquor being brought to
the small Gut, and dissolving the named Phlegm, and carrying it further.

11. No vehement motion of Body, unless the Mothers, can happen to Infants not
yet born, which whether it can dissolve, and make fluid, and send all over the
body not only the humors of her own body (of which I do not doubt) but also of
the Infant in her Womb, I confess, I neither dare deny, nor yet affirm.

12. I cannot be brought to believe that the same may be by an outward heat of
the Sun, of Fire, or of a Bath not only in the Mother, but afterward also in
the child; yet I think, an Abortion may sooner be expected, than such a
loosening of the Humors in the child, and hence a necessary curding, and
lastly the Jaundice: but of that curding anon.

13. Much less will it be granted that any Liquor can be carried in plenty to
the small Gut, and therein dissolve tough Phlegm: because, although the Mother
may drink plenteously, yet no prudent man will so much as Dream of it
concerning an Infant, at least in my opinion.

14. For it seems Fabulous that a Child in the Womb should swill it self with
the water wherein it swims.

15. Moreover it is a fiction to suppose that so much wheyish matter may go
through the Passage of the Sweetbread (for I know no other way) to the small
Gut of an Infant, that the Phlegm should be dissolved by it, and carried to the
Blood, and anon to the Which is the bag wherein Choler is contained.
seat of Choler, and the place of its separation.

16. Yet because the plenty of a tough and Phlegmatic Humor, either in the
whole Body, or at least in the small Gut, and the carriage of it into the
Passage of Choler into that Gut is not sufficient, to make an Obstruction
there; unless, as has been said, the same Humor stick, and grow together, or
curd in the same Passage: Let us see, if it be probable, that the noted Humor
can grow together and be curded in Infants, ere they be born.

17. Its growing together is usually of its own accord, from a cause
intrinsecal to the Humor, namely, when the external cause of its dissolving is
removed; so Broths that have the consistency of a Gelly, as often as they are
dissolved and made liquid, do of their own accord return to their former
consistence, and grow together again, being removed from the fire, whose heat
did make them dissolve.

18. Yet the Humor does not curd of it self, but by an external cause which so
changes it when it is fluid, that having got a solid consistence, it cease to
be fluid: So any water is wont to curd in Winter into Ice, and lose its former
fluidness.

19. In man's body a tough Humor being dissolved by the outward heat of the
Sun, or of Fire, or by motion of the body, and moved all over the body, when
the outward cause of heat, or motion of body cease; it is observed afterward
by little and little to grow together of it self, and breed an Obstruction in
narrow Vessels by reason of its toughness sticking any where.

20. So the same tough Humor being dissolved by much drink taken in, and
carried all the body over, is wont to be curded by outward cold carelessly
received, and separating Phlegm especially tough, by waterish drink confused
with it, and thickning it more, and by this means easily stopping it,
especially in strait passages, and begetting an Obstruction

21. Yet because it can scarce be granted that tough Phlegm should be dissolved
in Infants unborn, and carried all over the body; much less can it be granted
that it should of it self grow together: As which does presuppose that violent
dissolving.

22. Neither can we grant that the same Phlegm loosened or dissolved in Infants
as yet unborn, can be Curded, as presupposing that outward cold does pierce
through the pores of the skin to parts near enough to it, not so easily to
parts a great way in the body, and fenced against the outward Air with several
coverings: As does befall Infants in their Mothers Womb, Note.
for besides all the parts of the Mother which contain the Womb, the substance
of the Womb while it carries the Child is thicker than usual, and swelled with
warm blood; and also the Afterbirth with the water it contains, does defend
the Child against the harms of outward cold.

23. Cold drink, which is often the cause of Curding dissolved Phlegm, cannot
be suspected in Infants unborn, seeing that the Mother alone great bellied can
be supposed to take in cold drink: But I cannot think that any man using reason
can be so mad, as to affirm, that such liquor drunk by the Mothe^ can go to the
Infant, or like outward cold can cause Phlegm di^solved in it to Curd in the
Passag^ of Choler to the small Gut.

24. For although I could yield* that cold liquor drunk in plenty an^ carried
to the Stomach, or also t^ the small Gut, might from thenc^ pierce like cold
Air to the passag^ of Choler into the Gut, and again Curd the Phlegm that was
before dissolved: yet can I not grant, n^ nor apprehend, that it can do the
same in Infants unborn, seeing tha^ it has no way to go to the passag^ of
Choler in them (at least in m^ opinion.)

25. Now if such an obstructio^ of the Passage of Choler into the small Gut,
cannot breed the Jau^dice, nor be supposed to be in Infants unborn, then we
must assig^ another Cause of that Disease, at lea^^ in them.

2. Nor in Infants newly born.
26. Let us now see if such an Obstruction can be in Infants newl^ born.

27. That we may do it in short, ^bserve first that heat increased by ^otion of
Body is not to be expect^d from them, whereby tough Phlegm can be dissolved, if
any a^ound in the small Gut, and be ^arried to every part of the body: ^et
might it be loosened by outward ^eat of the Sun, or of Fire, as also ^y Anguish
troubling Infants even till ^hey sweat; unless any had rather that the Humors
then carried to the ^mall Gut, and especially the juice of ^he sweet bread
being sharper, because of its faulty Effervescency, and vapors raised breeding
the ^oted Angush, should likewise loosen or dissolve tough Phlegm, and ^end it
to every part of the body; which seems not unlikely.

28. Yet when Phlegm is driven unto every part of the body by an ^utward Heat,
or by the above no^ed internal Cause, by reason the Pores are all over open; if
then the ^ody be not well fenced against the ^oldness of outward Air, or be
removed into cold Air, its tender body may very likely get harm, although he
seldom be exposed t^ such cold, even when the Jaundic^ does appear.

29. Seeing therefore such a cold which seldom happens, would rather breed
other Sickness, an^ that the Jaundice daily appears without such a cold, it
seems not probable to me, that an Obstruction ca^ cause the Jaundice in Infants
newl^ born; so that we must seek for another cause.

Of the true Cause of the Jaundice.
30. And if any curious of trut^ should enquire, What can be assigned the Cause
of the Jaundice? To the clearing of it, we must make a deeper search, and so
conclude, wha^ we have to say.

31. We begin this search from that Yellow Color which appears i^ the
Jaundice, not only in the Ski^ but in the very Flesh; so that thi^ disease does
not only affect the outside of the body, but its Habit also and most inward
parts, and does most manifest it self in Urine.

32. Now that this Color proceeds from Choler too plenteously confused with
blood, is proved both by the natural Color of Choler, and by the pale color
of their stools.

33. For there is nothing in man's body, which could die it Yellow but Choler;
We do not then without cause derive that Color of the Jaundice from Choler.

34. Yet because the Stools of people in health are always more or less died,
but not so in the Jaundice; it is but reasonable to think that Choler moves not
at all, or very little into the small Gut, or at least is so changed, that it
cannot die their Stools of the natural Color.

35. Let this be supposed as by Anatomy it is proved, that Choler has a
passage from its bag to the heart through the Liver, which way (some of it goes
always in people in health, and) it may all go, when any have the Jaundice.

36. Choler thus changed in the Jaundice, seems not to be increased in
sharpness; because neither pain, nor pricking is felt in any part of the^ body,
unless when it begins to becured: and therefore is faulty some other way.

37. Which fault that it may be known, we must observe, that Cho^ler naturally
is not only slightly confused, but most entirely mixed with the Humors it
meets with both in the^ small Gut, and in the Blood or right Ventricle of the
heart, and that so as it is impossible to be separated again^ from them; which
is performed by a^ Effervescency with a sour humour^ in both those places.

38. Yet because that mixture o^ Choler with the other humors, seems to be
wanting in the Jaundice, that Effervescency also is a wanting, or at least in
some measure hindered.

39. Now if the Effervescency of Choler with the other Humors be ^ltered and
notably lessend in the ^aundice, we must see, what makes Choler to perfect
that Effervescency, and what can lessen it.

40. And it is known unto all, that an Effervescency is caused by the meeting
of a Sour, and of a lee ^alt humor, or in as much as they partake of these
two contraries.

41. And if any shall examine Choler, and confuse it with Sour liquors, and
Salts, he may discern, that Choler helps on this Effervescency by virtue of its
lee Salt, but very much tempered, to make the Effervescency mild and friendly
to Nature, and not vehement in the ^ody.

42. Wherefore let us see how his lee Salt in Choler may be affect^^ so as to
become unfit for that effervescency.

43. For we find, that the more are and sharp the lee Salt is, it is ^e fitter
for an Effervescency; and the more it is any way made dull, (...) becomes the
more unfit for an Effervescency.

44. Now many things make t^^ sharpness of a lee Salt dull, as first any thing
that is oily and fat; Secon^ly any thing that is volatile a^^ Spirituous;
Thirdly, and eart^thing.

45. And on the contrary F^^^ whets and increases its sharpness; an^ so the
keeping a lee Salt long in the Fire, makes it sharper, and mo^^fit for a strong
Effervescency.

46. Water promotes the Effervescency of a lee Salt, if a small quantity be
joined to it; but if much^^ added, it drowns it.

47. Now to apply this to our p^^pose, who so considers Choler m^^find it has
much Oil and fat ^^turally; by reason of which, ((...) making its saltness
dull,) we ca^ not observe a fierce Effervescen^^ in one in health.

48. Again whosoever shall (...) those Nerves which reach to t^^ liver, and
observe how readily Choler mixeth with any thing, which could not be unless a
volatile spirit were mixed with it; must own that Choler consists much of a
volatile Spirt. For by reason of its Oiliness it could not mix with any thing,
unless it had also a volatile Spirit: By which also the Salt in Choler is more
tempered, and thence there is a more mild Effervescency in one in health.

49. There is also some though not much Earth in Choler, else would it be less
moveable; whereas as it is very moveable, and joins it self to every thing, yea
it makes other things moveable, as Colors to paint withal.

50. Which Earth in it, though but in a small quantity, breaks the violent
Effervescency of Choler in an healthy state.

51. We cannot suppose that such a Fire, as can burn, and sharpen the lee Salt
of Choler, is in man's body, no not in a preternatural state: seeing that if any
rightly examine the matter, he shall find that Choler is the chief Cause of any
flames, or great heat in man's body, whether in a natural, or non-natural, or
preternatural state.

52. Not but that there is an external Heat, which may be caused by the Fire or
Sun; by which it is sufficiently known that all the humors, and so Choler also
becomes more sharp.

53. Wherefore when Choler is more sharp than ordinary in its proper sharpness,
it must proceed from and outward heat, either of the Sun or of Fire.

54. I said in its proper sharpness, distinguish it from an accidental
sharpness, which comes after a preternatural effervescency from a very sharp
Sour Humor. For when a very sharp Sour Humor meets with Choler, and causes
an effervescency with it, it causes a separation, and gets to it the sharpness
of the parts (which make Choler more mild) from its Salt parts, which wanting
those that make it mild, become sharper than before, and by that means increase
a more sharp and more hurtful effervescency.

55. Seeing then that no internal cause can increase the sharpness of Choler,
but a Sour juice, which makes Choler by its mixing with it sometimes Cankered,
sometimes Black; it is evident what can set Choler in a flame.

56. Which being premised, let us consider; what can render Choler (especially
in the Jaundice) more unapt to mix it self with the other Humors: Which that
we may do, observe, that often on a sudden it happens from a bite of a Viper;
which kind of Poison, because it does its work quickly, must be very move^ble,
and subtle; and so is of a volatile, nature, and consists of a volatile spirit.

57. And that much of a volatile spirit can breed the Jaundice, mixed with
Choler, is clear in as much as strong ^odied wine, and especially Brandy does
often beget the Jaundice in such as drink it, and do much neglect solid meats:
For Brandy being plentifully drunk does not only increase a volatile or animal
spirit in the body, but by little and little makes all the Humors; and so
Choler more volatile, and spirituous, and moveable: till at last by long abuse
the Constitution and Or thickness.
Consistence of the Blood and Humors become faulty, and the Blood becomes like
whey, and loses its clammy nature.

58. So that I am fully persuaded that Choler in breeding the Jaundice becomes
too spirituous, and unfit to caus^ a sufficient Effervescency by the piercing
poison of a Viper in a little time or by too spirituous drink long used more
slowly.

59. Now if any should say, Object.
feeing Choler may be so changed, (...) to cause the Jaundice without a stop
page of it into the small Gut: it (...) then cease to move thither, where (...)
shall have at least a weak Efferwoscency with the juice of the Sweetbread, why
then should not the stools be died by the same, as at other times?

60. Whom that I may satisfy; Ans. 1.
I answer, First, that the stools are not always alike white in the Jaundice;
whence I judge, that Choler is sometimes more, sometimes less mixed with the
stools in Jaundice, and so more or less dies them.

61. Secondly, Choler is not always alike affected in the Jaundice, Ans. 2.
whence it is less or more mixed with the stools, and accordingly dies them.

Thirdly, That their stools be duly died by Choler Ans. 3.
its sufficient Effervescency with the Juice of the Sweetbread must proceed,
by which its parts are separated from one another, and those which die are
joined to the stools.

62. Fourthly, If while the Jaundice continues, Ans. 4.
Choler be more spirituous, and volatile, and so more fluid and moveable, it
may the more easily pierce through the smallest vessels where it passes
through the Liver; especially if it be drawn straight, or at any time its
passage into the small Gut be stopped; wherefore moving forcibly to the Liver,
it may persist in the same, not using its proper way to the Gut.

63. For it may so happen that if the Passage of Choler into the small Gut be
not wholly stopped, it may be straightned by the Phlegm (which is in the Guts)
being dawbed about it: Or the same Like those who keep their Urine so long,
till they cannot make water.
Passage may contract it self narrower by being over full with Choler; by
reason of which i^ may be denied passage to the Gut, and therefore must move
upward to the Liver, and through the liver to the Blood, and going with it to
the right Ventricle of the Heart makes a small Effervescency with the
descending and Lymphatic Blood, after which it is more properly confused, than
mixed therewith; and as the Blood goes all over the body, it separates from it
and dies the body, making every part unfit for natural nourishment; whence a
Dropsy often follows the Jaundice, unless it be cured speedily.

64. Although I do not think that a stoppage of Cholers passage into the small
Gut is of necessity required to breed the Jaundice, yet may it sometimes
occasion the Jaundice; for by the stopping Choler in its natural motion to the
Gut, Choler grows more spirituous, by the greater access of spirituous parts
thither, and by further heightening the parts of which Choler is made.

65. Which is evident from this, that many before the Jaundice appears, feel
great Anguish in the right side of the Belly where this aforesaid Passage is, a
great Sorrow, or abuse of Phlegmatic meats having preceeded.

66. Wherefore to sum up our answer in short, we judge, First, The former
answer summed up,
That the stools do not always want the die of Choler, though they be paler.
Secondly, they are least died, when Choler is worst affected. Thirdly, They are
less died, when Choler makes but a little Effervescency. Fourthly, They are
less died, when Choler moves little to the Guts, and almost all of it goes to
the Liver and the Blood, whether it be by reason that the Passage into the Gut
contracts it self narrower; or because that Passage is stopped and filled up by
Phlegm.

67. From what has been said, we have proved that the Jaundice may be bred
(without a stoppage of the Passage of Choler into the small Gut, The over
spirituousness of Choler causes the Jaundice.
and) by Cholers being too Spirituous, and therefore unfit to make an
Effervescency, being not imbodied but confused with the Blood.

68. The cure therefore of the Jaundice must consist in correcting Choler over
volatile and spirituous, Its cure.
which is done by Oily and Fat things, and by such as procure sleep, and
sometimes such as stupify.

69. By Oily and Fat things, as Hemp Seed boiled in milk, and taken a few
times; as also both Venice and common Soap dissolved in warm milk, and taken a
few times, both which will happily cure the Jaunlice.

70. Soap cures the Jaundice, First, By its fixed lee Salt, which being Joined
to Choler, corrects and lessens its volatility, taking into it self part of the
volatile Spirit abounding in Choler.

71. Secondly, By its thick, not ^olatile and Aromatic Fatness and Oil, in as
much as it makes dull the sharpness of the volatile and spirituous Salt which
is in Choler.

72. The same may be said of Hemp Seed, which being Oily and Fat, produces the
same effect.

73. We also commend Saffron in Curing the Jaundice; and seeing the Fat Saffron
is best, Note.
we cannot suppose that overfatness of Choler as well as its
over-spirituousness can preed the Jaundice.

74. For Saffron is easily joined to a volatile Spirit, by reason of which we
readily make its Tincture and Extract.

75. By the same Saffron, and its Extract, the Animal Spirits use to be settled
and become drowsy, a swee^ sleep following.

76. Opium that powerful allayer of the Animal spirits, is Oily and Fat making
the Animal Spirits drowsy, and retarding their motion.

77. Thus volatile Spirits may b^ chained and bound by Fat and Oily things* yea
and be composed to rest: whence it is evident, that if these Spirits be joined
to Choler in too great plenty, or therewith exalted, that is fortified in its
operating, they may breed the Jaundice by making Chole^ too volatile, and
moveable; which volatility and moveableness is cured by medicines that are
Oily, and cause Rest. Which is also apparent from Chemical fixed Sulphurs which
fix the volatile spirits.

78. If the Jaundice be caused by the bite of a Viper, or any other Creature,
we must, (besides the aforesaid correcting of Choler) both amend, and again
expel that Poison.

79. To which purpose sundry Opiats are used, as, Treacle, Mithridate,
Diascordium, etc. Which by the Opium and other things wherewith they abound, do
not only amend the spirituous volatility of Vipers Poison; but moreover by
their many sweating ingredients expel the same through the Pores of the Skin;
and correct the fault in Choler also.

80. Where note, that Treacle having Troches of Vipers in it, does the sooner
mix with Vipers Poison, and expel it forth, seeing they are of a volatile
nature, and provoke Sweat.

81. Hence, Chemists do commend, and not without cause, the Salt of Vipers,
which is volatile.

82. They also commend, diaphoretic Antimony, and any Min^ral Bezoard, by which
Choler over-spirituous is fixed; and any Poison fit to be sweated out, is
expelled.

83. But if Choler be hindered in its motion to the small Gut, by a stoppage
made by tough Phlegm in the Passage of Choler, and so it become more
spirituous, and breed the Jaundice; the same Phlegm must be cut and purged out
both by Aromatical Medicine^ and such as abound with a volati^^ Salt, as also
by such as purge Phlegm after which, the before named Medicines may be used,
sometime moving a gentle sweat by Bezoard.

84. To apply these more closely to Infants newly born, we judge that the
Jaundice arises in Infan^ not yet born, or newly born from Ch^ler too
Spirituous, though never (...) little offending; wherefore als^ it is soon
cured in the most (...) them.

85. For one Grain of Saffron alone given them in their Mothers o^ their
Nurses, or Cows Milk, onc^ or twice a day, often cures them (...) the Jaundice.

86. To the same purpose a grai^ of Mineral Bezoard may be given by the taking
either of which, (...) a sweat do not always break forth yet is there a
breathing forth by insensible transpiration.

87. If the child be costive, it ^ay be loosened by Rhubarb, and specially by
the known Syrrup of ^uccory with Rhubarb, instead of which (...) Simple Syrrup
of Rhubarb in this ^ase may be used.

88. We therefore use Rhuba^^, (...) draw Choler down to the Guts, and carry it
out; because if any of (...) be carried thither, the rest ceases (...) be too
spirituous.

89. Moreover Choler is sent to ^he Guts easily, copiously, and ^owerfuly by
Medicines that purge Choler, but not without them: unless sometimes against
nature it move thither furiously, in the dis^ase Cholera When one purges and
Vomits Choler.
, which is often deadly.

90. Which disease differs much from the Jaundice, not to name other
d^fferences, seeing in the Jaundice Choler moves to the Liver; ^ut in Cholera
it moves to the Gut, and is sent forth upward or downward.

91. Several other Medicines are commended in curing the Jaundice as Radish,
Salendine; Madder which the Dyers use, Shavings of Hearts horn, Ivory, Sage,
Wild Rocket Cumine, Goose dung, filings o^ Steel, Squills, Sulphur, etc. The
most of which may be applied to ou^ purpose, and do good according to our
opinion; which yet are not so safe for Infants as people of age.

And so much for the Jaundice in Infants.

CHAP. II. Of Gripes in the Belly.
THese Gripes do frequently trouble Infants newly born, so that few escape them.

2. Which Gripes in the Belly may ^roceed from a double Cause, either ^^om
Wind, or from Sour and sharp Humors.

3. That Wind swelling the Guts may breed Gripes in the belly, is ^ear;
because, First, when Wind gets ^ent, the gripes are abated: Secondly the Pain
goes away, only when ^^e swelling of the Belly falls: Thirdly ^he Guts are
swelled with wind after ^ath: Fourthly, Medicines which dis^^ss Wind, cure the
Gripes.

4. It is also evident that Gripes may be caused by sour and shar^ Humors,
fretting and biting the i^ner side of the Guts; because, First their stools
then have a sour savou^ Secondly, Medicines that correct su^ sowerness, cure
the Gripes.

5. Wind in Infants, as well as people of years, has for its matte^ Phlegm
more less tough and clamm^ and Choler for its efficient Cause, which the
sharper it is, breeds wind t^^ more powerfully and plentifully.

6. The fault of both which H^mours arises from the bad diet of the Mothers,
for the most part; in whi^^ the most of Women indulge the^ selves too much,
having many Counselors to persuade them, the whatsoever a Woman with ch^^ does
eat or drink, cannot hurt h^^ if she do it with delight: A causion to women
with child
Contra^^ to daily experience.

7. I confess indeed, we must (...) make a sleight of what they gre^^ly desire;
but must endeavor, the then they be not excessive: A stro^^ desire would have
something, (...) not to excess, of what it longs for.

8. Wherefore they are to be advised, that they would pity the children they
bear, and moderate their appetites, lest, if they should too much indulge
themselves, their Infants should suffer much harm by their mothers faults;
although they seldom hearken to Physicians advice, rather following their own
fancy.

9. Tough Phlegm is bred by Meats of a thick juice, and by gluttony; as also
cold Air, thin Clothes, etc.

10. Sharpness in Choler is caused by heat of the Sun, very hot Spices, the
Spirits of Anise, Juniper, Which a^e much used in Holland.
Lovage, etc. used too much.

11. A sour humor is bred chiefly by sour sauces, and sallets, hearty
sorrow, Northern wind, etc. in which while they indulge themselves, they suffer
harm.

12. To the breeding of these three humors untimely Fruits help greatly, which
they greatly affect.

13. Although Mothers may offend, their innocent children shall smart for it,
with shrieking and crying, yea with wresting and moving the whole body; and at
last by the Falling Sickness, that I may pass over the before named signs, which
manifest the Gripes.

The Cure.
14. Now the Cure of those Gripes is partly by discussing the aforesaid Wind;
partly in correcting Phlegm and Choler, and sometimes by purging them out,
partly in allaying and easing the Pain.

15. Wind in Infants is discussed by Fennel, Mint, Parsley waters, etc. also by
Spirit of Nitre; if they be taken inwardly; as also by Oils, and Aromatical See
the first Book, chapter 14.^. 56.
Ointments, the belly being anointed therewith; also by For example, Take Sage,
Marjoram and Mint leaves of each a handful: To emary and Sage flowers, of each
half an handful: Sweet Fennel seeds and Cinnamon, of each two drachms, put them
in a bag, when boiled, and to four ounces of its liquor add a dram of oil of
Rue, and make a Clyster.
powders, put into bags, and laid to the belly, being made of leaves, flowers,
and aromatical seeds. Clysters also may be used of such like ingredients,
especially if the child be costive.

16. Such things as gently make drowsy and stupifie do ease pains arising
thence: Syrup of white Poppies, of Diacodium, and such like, adding (if pain be
very great) a little Laudanum.

17. Medicines that ease pain and discuss wind are best mixed, and taken in
form of a Potion or mixture, always giving Infants what is most grateful As for
example, Take Fen^el and Parsley waters, of each an ounce, Mint water half ^n
ounce, Spirit of Nitre six drops, Syrup of white Poppies ^alf an ounce,
Laudanum one grain, Spirit of Salt ammoniac ^ight drops: Mix them, and observe.
19. for direction. ^f the Spirit of Nitre be dulcified, you may put twelve
drops unto the Mixture.


18. To which Mixtures if you ^dd a few drops of Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, or
any other volatile and ^romatic Salt they will be more effe^tual and better.

19. And if pain be very great, you ^ay safely add one grain of Laudanum to
three or four ounces of the Mixture, and give the child a little ^poonful often
till his pain and crying abate, and he take rest.

20. Mean while, when the pain is abated, such Medicines as cut tough Phlegm
must be used, and those will discuss wind, wherefore they are the more
profitable, as not only discussing Wind, but also preventing its rise.

21. The sharpness of Choler is tempered by mild sour things, as Spirit of
Salt dulcified, and best by Spirit of Nitre, whether pure, or dulcified with
Spirit of Wine; seeing it not only corrects Choler, but also cuts Phlegm, and
does disperse the Wind. And seeing it does strongly fix things, it also
prevents breeding of wind.

22 When Phlegm is cut, it may be commodiously purged by Manna, the solutive
Syrup of Roses with Senna, or that of Senna, that Dracnicum, etc* also by the
aforesaid Clysters.

23. When Choler is corrected and tempered, it may be purged by Syrup of Roses
uncompounded, and especially by that with Succory and Rhubarb, and by Syrup of
Roses with Rhubarb, two, three or more drachms (being mixed with a little of
the aforesaid waters) according to the age of the child: And it is safest to
give purges in a little quantity, because if the first dose do not work, more
may be given; and so the (strength of the I rather think it should have been
the (temper of the body.)
Medicine) be tried without danger.

24. For it may happen to Infants as to people of years, that all are not alike
easily, speedily or largely purged by any Medicine: for which cause, lest they
should get harm by a strong Medicine, it is better to give a gentle Purge at
several times, and but a little at a time, rather than together and at once.
For a Physician cannot be too cautious, seeing children are tender, and may die
upon a small occasion.

25. The humors thus corrected and purged, must be prevented of breeding
again, by using such meat as breeds good blood, and neither increase Phlegm nor
Choler, adding (where choice cannot be had) such Medicines as will correct the
hurtful humors that may probably arise from their meat.

26. It is therefore good, to boil Anise, or sweet Fennel-seeds in the child's
milk; or to put grated Nutmeg into their drink boiled with bread: whereby the
rise of Phlegm will be prevented.

27. If the Child's belly be much swelled with wind, and costive, it is best to
give a Clyster before the Purge; which Clyster must be made of emollients and
such as expel Wind, with some gentle purger in As for example, Take Marshmallow
roots two drachms, Mallow and Rue leaves, of each an handful, which boil in
barley-water, strain four ounces, in which dissolve half an ounce of the
Catholic Electuary, Oil of Roses two drachms, and give it blood warm.
it; whereby their hard excrements will not only be softened, but the Wind it
meets with be expelled, or rather as it were choked, and settle into the
Clyster, and anon be sent forth, as also a fit way prepared for the humors and
wind that will follow from the upper Guts.

28. By this method in a little time the Wind may be cured, which cannot be on
a sudden.

29. But if sour Humors be joined to the foresaid Wind, or be observed alone,
the Cure will be more difficult.

30. This sour humor has its original in the Sweetbread, and is increased in
Infants unborn, by their Mothers abuse of sour sauces and meats, unripe and
sour fruits, enduring cold North winds too long, and by deep sorrow, or a
fright; by which last, although a tart humor be bred, yet is the sour also
increased.

31. The same sour humor may be increased in Infants after birth, when their
Mothers or Nurses use the forenamed sour sauces, and liquors, etc. too much;
the harm of which is greatly conveyed with the milk into sucking Infants: let
none think, that the Infants health wholly depends upon the woman's milk; which
is to be esteemed before all other food, if it be healthy and laudable; which
moreover becomes easily and often very hurtful, when the Mother or Nurse is
unhealthy, or does not use a good diet, whether by their own or others fault:
especially any vehement motion of their Mind hurts the Infants.

32. This sour humor also may increase in Infants already born, and so be
moved, and sent into the small Gut, and cause Gripes, not so much by a cold Air
only, as by sharp and troubled North Winds.

33. Seeing Infants are not subject to commotions of Spirit, nor can readily
get hurtful Food, they seldom err in other circumstances of Diet.

34. Whatever then be the cause of a sour humor increased in them, the Cure
of those Gripes will consist, 1. in removal of all outward Causes. 2. In
correcting the sour humor, whether in the Mother or Nurse. 3. In amending
that sour humor in the Infant.

35. By outward Causes we mean, 1. Sour Meats and Sauces and Medi^ines, too
much used by the Mother or Nurse, which they should take ^eed of, or use less.

36. 2. Great disturbance of Mind, and especially Sorrow and Fear, yea Anger
also; the occasions of which should be avoided, and bystanders should remove.

37. At least they should endea^our that those Passions last not, and while
they are, the Child should not ^uck, but that milk be drawn out, and not given
to the Child.

38. Those Infants which enjoy health without woman's milk, are free from such
^angers; But if the child do languish, ^r pine for want of the breast of its
Mo^her, a healthy and well-disposed Nurse should be got; seeing care is to be
ta^en no less of the Mind, than health of ^ody, in getting a Nurse.

A special Note for Mothers.
39. For it is strange and as true, that Infants not only suck the constituti^n
of body whether good or bad, but also ^he manners of mind whether good or bad
^ith the milk: and do imitate their Nurses more than their Mothers Constitution
of body, and Manners o^ Mind.

40. Which being neglected by many, their Infants are wronged b^ the Nurses
milk unhealthy upon sever^ accounts: Which I now observe, tha^ young Physic^ans
in their practic^ would study to prevent so great evils.

41. By Outward Causes we mean^ 3. cold and sharp air; also cold W^ter
affecting any part of the Mothers Nurses, or the Infants Body, which must be
avoided as much as may be (...) because that cold whether of Air or W^ter
pierces quickly to the inward part^ and in a Woman much changes t^^ Milk; but
in the Infant goes into t^^ inward parts of its belly, and bree^ Gripes.

42. This Sowreness in the Mother^ Nurse ought partly to be mitigated (...)
partly to be destroyed, and if it be i^ much plenty, it must be carried o^ by
Stool, and by Urine, and through the Pores of the Skin.

43. A Sour humor is mitigated ^oth by Spirituous and Oily things, of which
before.

44. A Sour humor is destroyed by ^ced and volatile Salts, both apparent ^^d
lying hid, as in Chalk, Coral, ^earl, Crabs eyes, Boodstone, etc. ^f which
also before.

45. The Sour humor being thus ^empered is purged by medicines that ^urge
water, often named before.

46. The Sour humor is carried ^^rth with the Urine by Aromatical ^edicines
provoking Urine, which do ^lso correct its sharpness.

47. The Sour humor is expelled ^y Sweat, by Aromatical and Rosinous
^edicines that cause Sweat, as Lignum ^itae, Sassafras, Juniper, Box, Oak, and
such like woods, set down also ^lsewhere.

48. This Sour humor in the In^ant may be tempered and corrected by ^he same,
but gently.

49. To this purpose I much com^end Powdered Coral, Pearl, Crabs ^yes, and
sometimes Chalk, which may be given once, twice, and ((...) need be great)
thrice a day; and two (...) three or four grains at a time (...) any Milk, or
which is better in (...) Aromatical mixture As that in. 17. set in the Margin;
or in Fennel or Mint water, sweetened with any Cordial Syrup.
, which al^^^ will correct the Sour humor.

50. At which time you must n^^ neglect things that make drowsy, (...) nor
those that stupifie, in a small quantity, as which temper Sowreness, an^
potently ease Pains.

51. By these or such like med^cines the Gripes are well cured, (...) used a
while: For they are known (...) continue some months, althoug^^ sometimes
abated, until at last the^ be cured.

CHAP. III. Of a Green Purging, with a Sour savor.
WE have already explained the Jaundice and Gripes (...) the Belly; which
because they are ^^ten attended with a green purging, ^^elling sour, we think
fit to consider (...) next.

2. Note that this Purging for the ^ost part has Gripes in the Belly ^onjoined
to it, and is seldom without them, and does not continue long without them.

3. We affirm that this noted green ^urging proceeds from Choler cor^upted by a
sowre-sharp-humour viz. the juice of the Sweetbread.
, and ^urned green; and such like changes of colors are not unknown to Dyers.

4. Where note, that their stool are often white, but after a while tur^ green,
by Choler turned green an^ mixed with them.

5. Which may be; either because that sour humor has not finished its work in
changing the color (...) Choler, or because its color is no^ soon changed,
while it is in the warm body; but presently, in the open Air.

6. Now this Sour humor, which changes the yellow color of Chole^ into a
green, and makes their stook green, is very sharp, and that is clea^ from their
strong smell: upon which account it gripes, of which see the former Chapter.

7. And seeing this Sour humor is very sharp, it is worth enquiry why it does
not always gripe? To which I answer that it may be so, 1. when the Guts are
plaistered in the inside with much tough Phlegm, by which the Sour humor is
hindered from touching or fretting them, which is usual, after that Phlegm (...)
loosened and removed by the said ^^wre humor.

8.2. It may be so when there is ^uch Food taken in, which does so ^^ink up
that Sour humor with ^^oler, that none or little of it re^ains in the Gut,
but all of it is ^ixed with that Food.

9. We spoke at large in the former ^hapter of the Causes breeding a ^^wre
humor, which seeing they ^ay be referred hither, we shall not ^^ain repeat.

10. The Cure.
And shall proceed straightway (...) the Cure of this disease, that is, (...)
correct and temper a Sour humor, which done, no inconvenience can ^^llow, For
there is danger, lest if ^^e Gripes of the Belly be not yet felt, ^^ey may soon
follow, and many ^mes the Falling Sickness, and Death it ^^f.

11. We proposed (in the former ^hapter. 49.) those things that ^^mper and
correct a Sour humor, to which we add Bezoar Stone, the Ori^^tal much better
than the Occidental; and Mineral Bezoard much be^ter than either And in this
case the Authors Diascordium best of all; as described at the end of his first
Book of Practice.
, whether it be ma^^ of Antimony; or Silver, or Gold; (...) so Diaphoretic
Antimony, any Seal^^ Earth, all which may be used as tho^^ in the aforesaid.
49. of the form^^ Chapter.

12. Nor will it be improper (...) give a gentle Clyster, which w^^ dissolve
the excrements, if they (...) too hard, or if a biting sharpness (...) observed
in them, to drink it up, (...) alter its sharpness. To which pu^pose may be
used a Clyster Described in the said first book, chapter 13.. 51.
, (...) Cows Milk, the Yolk of an Egg^^ and Venice Turpentine. Where^^ a Sour
humor will soon join (...) self, as we find that it Curds mil^^ especially if
as warm as a Clyster (...) is given.

And thus we have finished the Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of Belches, the Hicket, Loathing, Pain at the Heart and Vomiting,
curded Milk especially.
1. CHildrens bowels are not only afflicted with Gripes, and green Stools; but
their Stomach is often ill affected by Belches, Hickets, Loathings, Heart
aches, and manifold Vomitings.

2. Belches are bred by Wind, both sharp and sour, and tough, and easily
dissolved; of which in the second Chapter.

3. Their toughness appears from a difficult and painful belching, often coming
forth with a crack.

4. Their sharpness and sowreness is manifest to the Noses of standers by.

The Hicket what.
5. The Hicket is a convulsive motion of the Midriff returning by short spaces,
yet not continually afflicting, as we observe is wont to be in the Falling
sickness, in which the shaking of the limbs, lips, eyelids, eyes, or of other
parts is continual, and endures; which the Hicket does not.

How it differs from the Convulsion.
6. And if any should enquire after the reason of this difference; My answer
shall be, that in the Hicket the motion is commonly in the upper orifice of the
Stomach; but in the Fallingsickness in the beginning of the Nerves: whence as
the motion here is continual, and that by turns, of necessity there follows a
continual Convulsive motion, that is, reciprocal or by turns, upon the opposite
Muscles: But in the Hicket, because the upper orifice of the Stomach is hurt,
the Midriff is likewise affected and hindered in moving upward, and then
constrained to contract it self downward, and that sooner, flower, more
strongly, or gently, as that motion is greater or lesser.

7. The motion is more grievous, when the wind is both sharp and tough; and
less grievous, when the same wind is moderate, or less tough.

8. Therefore this motion of the Stomach, seeing it is helped only by the
motion of the Midriff downward, and the drawing it upward does not follow, no
wonder, if there be not a reciprocal convulsive motion of the Midriff in the
Hicket, but only a contracting motion, if we may so speak.

9. For here is not a Convulsion, otherwise the Midriff would remain in the
same state; but a Convulsive motion, because the Midriff soon cease from its
violent, and forced contraction, although that forced motion be not reciprocal,
as is observed in other convulsive motions.

10. Seeing therefore that the Midriff is affected by the Stomach ill affected,
fretted and moved, it is only so much moved by force, as to serve it, that is,
in moving it self downward; by which motion the Stomach is after a certain
manner pressed down, and is helped in sending up any troublesome thing that is
in it; which is expected in vain by the motion of it upward, as which helps not
to cast forth any thing in the Stomach.

11. What I have newly said, is apparent from the situation of the body, and
especially of the belly to promote a discharge of Belches, or any humors out
of the Stomach; for then we are wont to bend the whole body forward, and to
lift up our legs, thereby to straiten the belly, and press it, the more to
straiten the Stomach; which the motion of the Midriff downward does likewise
promote.

12. The Cause therefore of the Hicket is commonly a sharp Humor, or Vapor,
as also Wind any way, but especially by its sharpness, gnawing and moving the
upper orifice of the Stomach.

13. (I cannot think, that the Hicket can be caused without sharpness in those
vapors, seeing we often belch tough Wind, and have no Hicket, which could not
be, if by its toughness it could vex the upper orifice of the Stomach, and
breed the Hicket.)

14. Now this sharp Humor, Vapor or Wind arises from any thing lately taken
in; although more frequently it proceeds from Humors, already in the body, and
flowing into the small Gut, and there making a wrong effervescency, after which
some part of it gets into the Stomach, or breeds sharp Vapors, or Wind, which
likewise tending thither may cause the Hicket.

15. Oftentimes we find that a Loathing, and pain at the Heart accompanies the
Hicket; and are sometimes without it.

Loathing how it differs from Pain at the Heart.
16. A Loathing depends on the volatility of the Humors or Vapors; A Pain at
the Heart on their Sharpness.

17. Each may be caused by things taken in (as we said of the Hicket) rising
from the small Gut to the Stomach.

Vomiting what.
18. Vomiting is a discharging of what is in the Stomach out at the Mouth.

19. All Vomiting is a preternatural Motion of the Stomach; for none in health
vomits: seeing that the Natural Motion of the Stomach begins at its upper
Orifice, which by a kindly contraction of it self thrusts whatsoever is in it
through the Pylorus, (that is, its lower orifice) to the Guts.

20. For volatile spirituous things need no preparation in the Stomach; which
if they do not meet with any thing in the Stomach to stop them, are straight
carried down to the Guts, and from thence to the Heart; whereby the Sick are so
speedily refreshed, though never so weak before.

21. Again other things have need to stay in the Stomach, to be changed into
Chyle, which is done by Fermentation.

22. By which change our food is prepared to let those parts useful for
nourishment be separated from the excrements in the small Gut.

23. For the parts of mixed Food, as well as Medicines, are so closely mixed in
many, that they cannot be separated from one another without due preparation,
whereby they bring that desired and expected benefit both to healthy and sick
people.

24. When this natural preparation of Food and Medicines is perfected in the
Stomach, the Stomach contracts it self at its upper part, gently forcing
downward what is in it, to the small Gut, which by its peristaltick motion it
still forces lower along the Gut.

25. And while food is thus forced down, both Choler and the juice of the
Sweetbread is mixed with i^, by which rightly making an Effervescency both
among themselves, and with the food, there is promoted a laudable separation of
useful from the unuseful parts; but if the said effervescency be faulty, either
by the fault of Food, Choler, or the Juice of the Sweat-bread, it often falls
out, that thence arise sharp Vapors, Wind, or such like humors, by which the
small gut being potently moved straitens it self more nar^owly, and with speed
drives forward what is in it by straitning it self, but denies passage downward
to what are above: which being sharp, and thereby moving the Gut, give occasion
of changing the peristaltie Motion; which carries them upward which were moving
downward, and being brought into the Stomach, cause it to loath, and to vomit.

26. Vomiting in Children newly born is commonly more caused by bad humors in
the body, and so brought into the small Gut, than by ^ood; because they
commonly have kindly not hurtful meat.

27. These bad humors are Choler and the Juice of the Sweetbread meet^ng in
the small Gut, which by reason of their sharpness and spirituous^ess cause
vomiting.

28. By their Sharpness they make ^o potent an effervescency, and fret ^he
guts, and force them to change their peristaltic Motion.

29. By their Spirituousness they love more freely upward, and ^ore potently
provoke Loathing and ^omiting.

The Cure.
30. The Cure of Belches will be ^he same which we gave of Wind before In Chap.
2.. 17.


31. Tough and sour Phlegm being ^he matter of which they are bred ^ust be
corrected and altered, after which, if there be much in the bo^y, Phlegm must
be purged Of all which see Chap. 2.. 19, etc.


32. Also their Efficient Cause Cho^er, being too sharp must be tempered, and
if it abound, must be purged.

33. Lastly, Wind it self must be ^ischarged.

34. The Hicket having the sam^ cause must be cured by the same remedies.

35. Among other things I have observed that Mint and its Water i^ very good
against the Hicket.

36. A pain at the Heart must als^ be cured by the same Medicines.

37. Only observe this, that such as stupifie must be added, which will not
only allay pains, but more over temper the sharpness of the humors, and
vapors, and wind, and cause rest.

38. the Cure of Loathing and Vomiting will not much differ from th^^ manner of
Curing the former Symptoms; unless that here it is also convenient to add those
things which fix the Spirituousness of the noted humors, especially Spirit of
Nitre, i^ it be dulcified, To all which indications the receipt in Chap. 2. will
serve: but if the vomiting be violent, a grai^ or two of his own Diascordium
(set down at the end of the first book) repeated every hour twice or thrice
till it abate, is excellent.
for then it may more safely be given to Infants, and does ^^op the faulty
effervescency of hu^ours that meet in the small Gut.

Which Opium also promotes, and ^^y medicine made of it, as Lauda^um, Treacle,
Diascordium

CHAP. V. Of the Thrush.
THe Thrush is a common distemper among Infants, being small Ulcers spread all
over the Mouth, sparing no part of it, neither ^he Tongue, Palate, Gums, Lips,
Balls of the Cheeks, Jaws, nor the Mouth of the Stomach, no nor the Stomach it
self, as far as may be con^ectured.

2. The small Ulcers when they appear first, are few, and thin upon the Tongue,
and Jaws next the Palate; afterward they multiply, and grow into one.

3. The Thrush differs from all other Ulcers, in that it is covered with a
Scab, whereas others have only filthy matter.

4. Whether it be because the Spittle in the mouth, being then commonly tough,
cleaves upon the said Ulcers? or because the skin of the inner parts of the
mouth being tough and cleaving more firmly to the parts under it, is not easily
parted, and so growing thicker gets the nature of a^ Scab?

5. The difference of that Scab i^ different in Color, Toughness, Thickness,
and Largeness.

6. The white color is best, turning yellow, and then black.

7. That Scab is best liked, which comes easily off, and is worst liked that
cleaves fast, and of it self is tough and clammy.

8. That Scab is best liked which is thin, and discommended which is thick.

9. That Scab which is least is best liked, the broader being discommended.

10. The thinner they stand the better, the thicker the worse.

11. I judge the Cause of the Thrush to be sharp and sour Humors or Vapors,
brought upward from the small Gut and Stomach by vomit or exhalation, or with
Spittle into the Mouth.

12. That a sour sharpness breeds ^he Thrush is clear, 1. from a sour
belching or vomiting, which often ^s the immediate forerunner of the Thrush.

13. 2. From a sour taste in the mouth, which sowres any thing they ^ake; as I
observed in a Woman, who after she had unloaded her Stomach of sharp humors,
the day after had the Thrush, which sowreness was then troublesome in her
mouth, when she took any Beer, though very sweet, and not stale; perhaps
because the Beer dissolved that sowreness, and so made it affect the taste more
powerfully.

14. Note that the bitterness of Choler, which alters any taste, unless it be
exceeding strong, hinders the taste of sowreness, whether belched or vomited.

15. 3. We are satisfied that a^^ sour humor breeds the Thrush in Infants
especially, both because o^ their sour belches, and stools that smell very
sour, either preceding or accompanying the Thrush, together with Gripes, all
which abundantly testify a sour humor, and so confirm our opinion.

16. 4. As also is proved by Remedies that cure the Thrush, which are excellent
to correct a sour humor.

17. Which humor, by fretting the skin of the mouth, breeds the Thrush, to
wit, small Ulcers: But may some say, how is it that these Ulcers are of
different colors, most times white, oftentimes yellow, sometimes black?

18. Which I answer, comes to pass by the variety of that sour humor, also of
Choler, Phlegm and ^ittle meeting with it.

19. For where the sowreness is spi^^ous, Its various causes distinguished.
and not much in quantity, and ^^e other humors are not much ^^ulty, the
Thrush is thin and soon ^^des, and does but lightly affect the ^alat and
Tongue; soon ripening, ^on fading, and soon healing.

20. Although the corrupted skin ^^nnot well fall off, till the new be ^own
under it.

21. Nor is the skin only once fret^^d and peeled off, but often the new so is
fretted and wasted.

22. The sooner that happens, the ^tter; the slower, the worse.

23. Which slowness happens by ^^son of the toughness of Phlegm ^^d Spittle,
thereby sticking the clo^^, and taking longer time to fall ^^om the parts
affected.

24. When the sour humor is spi^^ous and plenteous, the Thrush is be liked,
soon fading and curable, though the whole mouth be filled ^ith them.

25. For that is chiefly to be noted, that the Scabs that ripen soon, h^ white,
light, and come not again often, or cause pain.

26. The Ulcers are white by reason of a purely sour humor.

27. They are yellow or black, b^ reason of different Choler mixed wit^ a
different sour humor.

28. Choler is mixed with this sow^^ humor, both because each of the^ are very
sharp, and because mu^^ Phlegm is joined to them: by the^^ sharpness they rise
more briskly on^ against another, and so cause a mo^^ potent effervescency; by
which the^ are united more entirely: By which Phlegm joined to them, they lea^^
one another more slowly, and (...) continue longer in their Efferv^scency, and
thereby send the mo^^ vapors up.

29. The natural whiteness att^^buted only to a sour humor (...) changed by
the alteration of Chol^^ mixed with that sour humor.

30. For as Choler changes its natural yellow color into green, or black,
according as a different sour humor is mixed with it: so on the contrary,
changes that chiefly depend on a sour humor, are altered as Choler mixed with
it is altered.

31. I call Choler here altered, not which is altered by a sour humor, but
which is altered by Phlegm mixed with it, being more or less tough, whereby the
joining of a sour humor with Choler is various, which thereby becomes closer
or looser, and so does more or less hurt the parts to which it comes.

32. The more Choler is mixed with the sour humor here chiefly faulty, the
more the color of the Thrush declines from its ordinary whiteness; and the
more of tough Phlegm or Spittle is mixed with the same sour humor, the Thrush
goes the slower away, and takes the more time to cure.

33. Whence it is evident, what kind of Thrush is more, what less dangerous;
seeing that some Physicians account any sort of Thrush for a bad sign in all
diseases; although they often free us of many diseases, The Prognostics.
that is, as they appear, the Disease goes away.

34. We may therefore to good purpose review the Prognostics belonging to the
Thrush, and add their reasons.

35. Seeing that the Thrush has its original from a faulty sour humor, and
that commonly rising up from the lower parts through the Stomach, and its Mouth
seldom brought with the Spittle into the Mouth: We must therefore note it, not
only because of the Thrush troubling the Mouth, but also because of that sour
humor in the body, which does or may breed other harms; from which we may
expect a greater danger of life than from the Thrush, which may shorten life by
straitning the jaws, and hindering our breathing and swallowing any thing.

36. Hence it is clear, that the Thrush is only dangerous, when it is plenteous
and stubborn, yellow or black, and so dry or withered.

37. I say the Thrush is dangerous, which first is plenteous, and spreads all
over the mouth, which never happens, but when there is much of the
sharp-sowre-humour in the body.

38. Secondly, The Thrush is dangerous which is stubborn, that is, which falls
slowly, and straight way grows again; which is caused by a tartness in the
sour humor, making it stick more closely to the parts affected, and so
fretting them the longer.

39. Thirdly, The Thrush is dangerous, which is yellow or black, and dry or
withered, which happens by reason Choler is very faulty, and joined to a sour
humor also faulty; and each humor being faulty together are not so easily
corrected, as a sour humor alone. Now the sign that these Humors are
amending, is much moisture coming into the mouth, like one salivated, with
which the Thrush does not only depart more easily, but also the Tongue, Palate,
and other parts of the mouth affected, are sooner healed and cured.

40. As dryness of Ulcers is always judged a bad and deadly sign, so it holds
good in the Thrush: whose cause I judge to be the same, and that is Choler much
faulty in the Body, which does not so much temper the sour humor, as make an
effervescency with it hurtful to life.

41. For if a man's life do principally depend upon a mild effervescency of
Choler and the sour juice both in the small Gut and Heart, (as we are daily
confirmed by experience) then must Death be expected, when that effervescency
is very wrong.

The Cure.
42. And now having explained the Nature, and given the Prognostics of the
Thrush, it remains, that we give also the Cure, which will consist,

43. First, In amending and correcting the Sour Humors and Vapors, which
will hinder its further spreading.

44. Secondly, If the body be full of humors, in purging them after they are
corrected.

45. Thirdly, In ripening the Scabs, which will cause them to come off.

46. In cleansing and healing the parts freed of these Scabs.

47. And although many heed not the correcting of a sour juice, because the
knowledge of sharp humors was hitherto confused among Physicians, sharpness
alone being known unto them; yet now having by large experience proved that
there is a double and contrary sharpness, many have noted the daily harms of
this different sharpness, and in the Cure have used different remedies.

48. Among those which correct either, yea each sharpness, we commend these in
the Thrush, which destroy any sour spirit, and that gently; to wit, Crabs
eyes, Pearl, Coral, Chalk, Dragons blood, Boodstone, and many others, which
according to the diversity of Humors faulty in the Thrush, may be chosen.

49. As when by reason of great drowth, the Tongue with other parts affected,
is not only ulcerated, but also cloven, out of which comes clear blood, then
Boodstone, and Dragons blood are fittest to use.

50. Where the Thrush is without such drowth of Tongue, Crabs eyes and Pearl,
as mildly destroying sowreness are esteemed best; Chalk also, does most
potently destroy sowreness.

51. Here also may Volatile Salts be used, as which break any sowreness: also
Mineral Bezoard is proper.

52. Which Humors being corrected, may be purged by such things as purge
water, and seeing Choler and Phlegm are joined to them, select medicines are
chosen for that purpose.

53. Hence it is, that in curing the Thrush we do so much use Syrup of Succory
with Rhubarb, or some such like; because Choler is corrupted also by the
sharp-sowre-humour and cankered: Not that I say, every humor is purged by any
Medicine, for I think this or that humor may be purged by one Medicine better
than by another.

54. As these humors are joined together in the body, so should a purge be
artificially mixed, to empty the body of them.

55. As a sour humor is bred by using sour Meats, Sauces, or Medicines, and
by cold Air, a fright, or sorrow of mind, so by avoiding these it may be
prevented, and by using fat, or oily and Spirituous things, living in a clear
and hot Air, by recreating the mind with delightful things.

56. Chalk, Dragons blood, etc. will also prevent the new breeding of a very
sharp-sowre-humour.

57. Fat and Oily things, but especially Opium, and all things that stupifie,
blunt the sharpness of a sour humor; as also any fixed sulphur of metals or
minerals which I have found to allay hurtful effervescencies better, that is,
more mildly, surely, quickly and safely than any other Medicine.

58. The aforesaid Medicines will ripen the Scabs, and heal the parts affected,
for which use I also commend the strained juice of Turnips boiled in water, or
roasted; to which we put a little sugar when it is not sweet or pleasant to
taste, which is scarce needed when they are roasted.

59. With this juice the sick may wash and gargle his Mouth and Throat often,
or swallow it after it has been a while in his mouth; which I the rather
advise, because the mouth alone does not enjoy this benefit, but the Gullet
also and Stomach, which we noted before might have the Thrush, and still it is
better for Infants, because their mouth cannot be washed and gargled.

60. Yea this juice will correct and blunt the sour humor in the small Guts,
and so hinder its ascent upward, and make this evil be the sooner subdued, and
therefore I commend it before any other.

61. Many use several Syrups, of Violets Jujubs, of Licoras, the so^utive Syrup
of Roses, etc. which are beneficial in that they blunt the hurtful sowreness by
the mucilaginous juice of the Plants, whereof ^hey are made; whether it be by
^oiling, or only bruising and strain^ng them.

62. Before many others I commend the Yolk of an Egg, beaten in ^ose-water with
a little Sugar to make it grateful. For the Yolk of ^n Egg draws into it self
the hurtful ^owre humor in the mouth, and ^o by degrees it frees the parts
af^ected with the Thrush of the same, and hastens its Offal. Which should ^e
used as the juice of Turnips, sha^ing it always first.

63. New Wort is also commened, which having had no Yest in (...) contains the
fat and mucilagino^ parts of Barley.

64. Yea, many commend Bee^ with Figs cut in pieces and boil^ in it; which I do
not contemn, b^ing helpful; yet have I observed to be soon loathed by the sick,
s^ its great toughness caused by t^^ Figs: So that they would seldo^ continue
its use.

65. While the Thrush thus (...) pens, that is, by little and little fa^ from
the parts under it, and whi^ are by it ill affected, a new skin the covers the
same parts under it which Scabs again, if a sharp sowrness rise up to them
mouth: but if be fully corrected, the skin contnues and covers those parts of
the mouth which were bare.

66. When they cease to appea^ anew, Physicians observe the cau^ of them is in
great measure rem^ved, because the Ulcers soon he^ after it.

67. When they begin to heal, ^her things may be added, which (...) it more
potently: So instead of ^lutive Syrup of Roses, you may ^e Syrup of Red Roses,
Honey of ^ses, etc. yea, Bole Ammoniac, ^erra Lemnia, and such like fat ^iths,
rubbed with Plantain water ^bbed fine, putting thereto Ho^y or Syrup of Roses
in a small ^antity, and holding some of it (...) the mouth, which will hasten
(...) healing, the last part of the ^ure.

CHAP. VI. Of the Falling Sickness, or Convu^sion.
1. WE now come to the F^ling-Sickness, by whi^^ many Infants are taken away
hen^ and therefore the more worthy o^ enquiry.

2. The Falling Sickness uses to f^low Gripes in the Bowels, and a gre^ and
sowre-smell'd purging. Whence is judged to be the chief Cause (...) all.

3. The Falling Sickness described.
Now the Falling Sickness is reciprocal, and (for some time) co^^tinued shaking
of the Parts moved the Muscles, as the Hands, Feet; Lip^ Tongue, Eyelids,
Eyes; in one wo^ it is a shaking of all the parts whi^ stander-by can touch.

4. This shaking is more vehement, (...) more gentle, of longer or shorter
^ntinuance, upon every part of the body, (...) only upon some: often, or seldom
^turning, and thus it varies.

5. For it returns by fits, which ^^ile it continues, Children can scarce ^^e
any thing: I therefore, the more ^^mired my own daughter, who be^g but eight
months old, the last ^y she lived took the Falling-^kness, her teeth coming
hardly ^^rth, she took any thing that was ^en her in the fit, which continued
me hours, (and the like I do not member in either young or old) ^^t when the
fit left her, she took no^ing for several hours, and at last ^ed quietly.

6. As people of years seem to want ^l outward sense in the Fit, so we ^ay
judge the same in Infants.

7. I said, that in the Fit they seem^to have no outward sense, although ^ey
commonly stir at any strong smell ^plied to the Nostrils, and sometimes at a
loud noise, and especially at their own name, spoken in at their ear.

8. They are also observed often i^ the fit to be burnt to the very bone and
yet not awaken: which signifies that they have no outward sense.

9. I know no other reason of the difference, than that the Cause of the
disease may be changed by a sharp volati^^ Salt; unless perhaps one outward
sen^ may then be more affected than and there; for which if it be, I could never
apprehend a reason.

10. The most that have these fit^ when they come to themselves, know not what
they suffered, and sear^ complain of any other thing, than (...) heavy head
ach; unless perhaps durin^ the Fit some part be bruised by v^hement motion,
which is felt afte^ the fit.

11. For this is to be noted, tha^ the most are more stupid after the fi^ and
if the fits often return violent, the continue after them stupid, and some
times foolish.

12. All which are evident signs at the Falling Sickness affects the^ole Brain;
so that many say, if (...) the Brain be not chiefly affected (...) the
Falling Sickness, then is the ^ot of the Marrow of the Back, and the Beginning
of the Nerves.

13. For the outward Senses and ^imal Motion are manifestly affected; ^d so are
the Inward Senses, when ^ey become stupid; also the Head ^st of necessity be
affected, because (...) its heavy pain after the fit.

14. Seeing therefore that the most, (...) not all the functions of Life are
af^ted in and by the Falling Sickness, ^^e must enquire what it is, and ^at
parts are ill affected?

15. So far as I could observe, I ^dge, that the Animal or vital Spi^s are
affected and changed in the ^lling-sickness, and not only, by moving ordinately
to the opposite Muscles, ^t moreover, by being made unfit to ^form the office
of the outward and ward senses.

Of its Cause.
16. Although I therefore thin^ that the beginning of the Nerves inordinately
moved, whence the An^mal Spirits are moved in greater plent^ and also
inordinately to every part; judge, they are defiled and so chang^ in their
gualities, that then they (...) unfit to do their natural sensation and
therefore, all the Muscles in true Convulsion continue afflicted long after the
fit, as the same Spirit are infected with that faulty quality which I think are
soonest freed of the harm, when the Spirit of Sal Armon^ and such like Spirits
pierce into t^ Brain Being held to the Nose.
, through the Nostrils, a^ join themselves to the Animal Spiri^^ ill affected,
amending their fault, a^^ the sooner, concluding the Fit.

17. Whence I conclude, Tha^ the Cause hereof is contrary to Volati^^ Salts.

18. If any should examine Vol^tile Salts, and search for the contrar^ he shall
find that Sour Spirits lik^ wise Volatile are contrary to them; an^ so may
probably conclude, tha^ Sour Vapors are the Cause that inordinately moves the
beginning of the Nerves, and hurts the Animal Spirits.

19. Which is confirmed by those Diseases already mentioned that precede the
Falling Sickness, as Gripes, Green Purgings with a Sour smell; as also an
unexpected and grievous Fright. For in a Fright the Sour humor in the body
gets greater strength, and often disturbs all the Senses and Motion of Body,
and so raises a Convulsive Shaking.

20. Beside which demonstration, if any without prejudice shall consider every
thing remarkable in the Fit, he must acknowledge, that nothing else can cause
it, but a volatile So ure Spirit or Vapor.

21. For it must be such a thing as can suddenly rise up to the head from the
furthest part of the Body, and there cause a disorderly and forced motion of
the Spirits toward all the Muscles, which can darken and stop all the outward
Senses, and make the party foolish, leaving an heaviness in the Head: But all
these can be done by nothing but a volatile Sour Spirit, or a Sour and Sharp
Vapor.

22. For seeing there are only two sorts of sharp Salts known, a Lee and Sour,
and from hence a mixed (and broken) Salt of both, namely Brine Salt, more
enclining to either, as it partakes of either of those sharp Salts: and that
Sickness is not bred, but cured by Lee Salts, especially if Volatile (although
also fixed may serve, Coral, Pearl, Crabs eyes, and such like, found out by
long experience) it remains, that we derive this Sickness from Sour Spirits,
which being Volatile, do readily turn into Vapors.

23. Which cannot be expected from a Brine Salt, as not raising such sharp
Vapors.

24. Nevertheless we know not all things be longing to this disease, not how
our Spirits can be so depraved and affected by those sour and sharp vapors as
almost to destroy the outward senses, and especially make the party foolish.

25. But although we know not all, yet shall we more distinctly propose what
concerns this disease, and make a notable progress into the knowledge of its
obscurities.

26. This one thing I have attained, Note^
about that stupidness of the outward sense, which happens by the
Falling Sickness, that the Effervescency in the small Gut with Choler, is made
so faulty by a sour Spirit too sharp in the juice of the Sweetbread, that
sharp and sour vapors, having got a stupifying quality from Choler, are
raised and go through the Milky veins to the Blood, and with it to the Brain;
where they do in some measure provoke and hurt, as it were biting, the root of
the Marrow of the Back bone, whence the Spirits are carried more plenteously to
the Muscles, and do there by their inordinate motion first produce Convulsive
Motions, and at length (by a Motion continued on each side the Nerves) a
Convulsion: and partly stupifie the Spirits, whence is that great stupidity,
and insensibleness during the Fit.

27. But whether their Foolishness which happens after the Falling Sickness, be
caused by that stupifying quality, I dare neither a ^^rm nor deny: seeing we
observe that Drunkards being as it were stupi^ed, seem foolish in their
drunkenness; yea, if any take Opium, while its vigor lasts, if they be
raised from sleep, they look like fools, and have gesture and talk foolish
enough.

28. If then the foolishness of those who have this sickness be without doubt
caused from a stupifying quality in Choler, the Spirits of our Body must needs
be harmed by it, or all the Brain, which yet serves to prepare our Spirits,
which being continually after-bred, may keep in them a fit disposition to cause
foolishness. But who will explain the Manner of it? I confess I cannot.

29. Thus the Cause of the Falling Sickness is a sharp Humor (provoking the
beginning of the Nerves) most commonly the juice of the Sweetbread, or any
sour thing taken in making a bad Effervescency with Choler in the small Gut,
by which sharp and sour vapors arise, and go up to the whole Brain, there
provoking the Nerves.

30. It now remains that we subjoyn the Prognostics and Cure of this disease.

The Prognostics.
31. And from what has been said the Prognostics are easy, namely, that it a
most grievous disease; seeing first, many die of it; secondly, seeing it leaves
such lamentable symptoms after it.

32. I cannot pass over, that in mine eleemosynary Practice there was an Infant
of about two years old brought to my door, who about a month before had the
Kink-Cough, which brought upon it the Falling Sickness; and after it the Infant
that walked and spoke before, became dumb, and as it were Palsical, not being
able to walk.

33. I fear also, if it be not speedily cured, it will become foolish. To
prevent which I prescribed both inward and outward Medicines.

34. For that choking Cough in the Infant, seemed to proceed from sour
vapors bred in the small Gut, and by degrees rising up to the Lungs, and there
provoking them to cough.

35. The same sour vapors carried to the Brain seem there by their sharpness
to provoke the very beginning of the Nerves to drive the Animal Spirits more
plenteously every way, and especially to all or most of the Muscles, whence
first arise Convulsive motions, and at last a Convulsion, that is, the
Falling Sickness.

36. Now if these sour vapors be carried further to the Marrow of the Back,
and are there more grown together, it causes an Impotency to Motion, the Nerves
being pressed together or otherwise ill affected, through which the Animal
Spirits are carried to the Muscles.

37. Moreover, by the same cause the Muscles that help speech being ill
affected, the same Infant became dumb, though before it began to speak well.

The Cure.
38. Because it is safer to prevent than be prevented; it were to be wished that
the cause thereof be met with, both in the child not born, and after birth.

39. We have already told you, that the most frequent cause of the
Falling Sickness in Infants is to be found in the Mother while with Child,
Although it be a Proverb among them, Sale and sour hurt nature.
using ill diet, that is, such as will increase a sour humor in the body;
such as Sallets, Citrons, Oranges, unripe and sour fruits, and other Meats
which for their loathsomness are pickled with much sour and sharp liquors;
also sour wines and Beer, Butter-milk, or otherwise curded and sour often
used; Cold Air, Sorrow, Fear, etc.

40. Now saulty Diet does more hurt the Child than its Mother; whether it suck,
or be unborn.

41. Therefore to prevent this evil, it were to be wished, that Mothers who
have such tender affections toward their children, would beware of using the
aforesaid sour things, as frequently causing the Falling Sickness in Infants.

42. Among which we reckon also sweet Cows milk a little after calving, as
which soon corrupts and sowres: We judge the same of giving much Sugar in milk
or pap to the Infants as being hurtful, which as it easily sowres, so it moves
the juice of the Sweet Bread, being more sour and sharp, to raise a bad
Effervescency with Choler.

43. Because Custom is hard to alter, and many think that meat relisheth not
which is not very salt or very sour, by both of which Nature is weakened,
Mothers before they conceive, should disuse themselves from very sour Meats,
and by degrees accustom to more healthy.

44. That this is wholesome counsel does appear from hence, that Infants born of
Mothers not using sour things, seldom get the Falling Sickness; and on the
contrary.

45. But where Mothers are incor^igible, let them use Oily Volatile Salts,
which temper, correct and diminish a sour humor before any thing, by the
daily use of which, I h^ve observed that Women with Child have been very
healthy, and ^fterwards their children, and not ^o liable to the
Falling Sickness.

46. Women with Child may fol^ow this direction, and continue it ^hile they
give suck: Nurses also may ^bserve the same; giving diligent ^eed, as much as
may be, that they do ^^t often put their hands into cold wa^^r; Note.
seeing Infants are often gri^^ed thereby; (especially, if they ^^ck a little
after;) and get the Fal^^ng sickness.

47. As these things may be given (...) Mothers and Nurses, so if the Mo^^ers
diet be faulty, the Infants should ^^ke soon after their birth those Medi^nes
which temper and concentre a ^^wre humor, and such are not ^nly volatile Salts
which may safe^^ be given to Infants in a small quantity, in Mint and Fennel
Waters and Syrups, but also Coral, Pearl, Crab^ eyes, and such like, known and
frequently used in practice, althoug^ the reason of their virtue be know^ to
few.

28. If the Infant be too costive, (...) must be purged gently, by giving on^
or two grains of Diagridium; which safely purges Waterish Humors a^ well as
Choler, although few kno^ it. Or the loosening Syrup of Rose^ the Syrup of
Rhubarb, simple, (...) with Succory.

46. If this opening the Child's bo^^ be neglected, you may commonly o^ serve
that they are griped, and a whi^^ after a Green Purging, and the
F^ling-sickness Follows.

50. These purging and alterin^ Medicines will timely prevent the horrid,
destructive and deadly d^^ease.

51. Which ought the more ca^^ fully to be given, when there is n^^ only danger
of the Falling-sicknes^ by the Mothers bad diet (...) ^ant of S^o^^^^h.
while s^^ was with child, but chiefly when ^ere are manifest signs of that
sour ^^mour doing harm in the small Gut by ^ipes, and especially a costive
body, and ^^en Stools, which forerun the Falling^^kness.

52. I say they must be given often in (...) day; such as Powders Not
Magisteries, for they are like a Chip in Pottage.
of Pearl, Red ^oral, Crabs eyes, Chalk, Mineral ^^d Animal Bezoard, Hearts
horn, Ivo^^, the Bone of a Deers heart, Elks ^aws, and such like, abounding
^^th volatile Salt.

53. Also mild volatile Salts may (...) added to Aromatical Mixtures Of which
see Chap. 2.
, ^^d be often used in a day.

54. Moreover, Clysters of Which is set down in the first Book, chapter 13.. 51. of
the Anthor.
Cows ^^ilk, Venice Turpentine, the Yolk (...) an Egg and such like, may be
gi^^n, which will soften the excre^ents, the Milk will devour the ^^wre humor,
wind and vapors ^ill be vented, or choked and ^owned, and the hurtful humors
^awn down by stool; and so hin^ed from ascending.

55. The humors may be purg^^ as directed in. 48. when they a^^ corrected,
which cannot be without using Medicines a pretty while.

56. While these things are giv^^ the Child, care must be taken, l^^ the Mother
or Nurse use sour Me^^ or Sauces, lest she be affrighted grieved; or endure
cold Air, or (...) her hands into cold Water, or get c^^ in her feet; by any of
which, th^^ noted evils are often bred.

57. Now if by this method t^^ Fits he removed, they must still (...) the same
medicines, and contin^^ using them for some tim^, especia^^ such things as
break and temper a so^^ humor, after which it must be g^^tly purged So
Hippocrates teaches that the humor should first be made fluid and then
purged. Aph. 70.. 7.
and that seldom, ex^^ the child be costive, which is ve^^ dangerous: Let
Nurses and oth^^ say what they please to this, a^^ ke^p that fancy, that
Physicians a^^ never or very seldom, unless in des^^ rate cases to be sent for.

58. If Vapors be observed by (...) light Fit to stupifie the senses, and
(...) (...) the Head, the aforesaid Medicines ^^e to be used often; thereby to
pre^nt the Falling Sickness; in which ^^se that Cl^ster will help, by draw^^g
out those humors.

When a child may be called healthy.
59. When the body is enough soble, sleep refreshes, the mind ^eerful, its
excrements yellow, its petite to meat moderate, its face ^ell colored, its
flesh firm; in a lord, when every thing does its ^^ce right, its stools are
answerable (...) its food, and come away with ^^se, and the outward qualities
of (...) body testify vigor; then are In^^ts to be accounted healthy.

60. All which are promoted by ^^latile Salts daily used in a small ^^antity.
At which if any carp, (...) them bring better, and not idle ^^eir time in
refuting others, for that advantageth it to say, that ^^ch a one wrote
falsities? which ^as my inducement to write my ^wn observations (not meddling
with ^hers) and show how they are agree^ble to experience.

61. As for that stupifying qual^^ causing a stupidness of all the outwa^^ and
inward Senses; and proceedi^^ from Choler; I judge it may be co^rected by
volatile (but somewh^^ sharp) Salts, and fixed earthy Sal^^ Coral, Chalk,
Pearl, Crabs ey^^ Diaphoretick Antimony, etc.

62. For as these latter drink up (...) oily part of Choler in the small Gut,
(...) the former volatile Salts do dispe^^ with power those hurtful vapors
wh^^ are or might ascend to the Head, (...) purify their Spirits from that
harm.

63. If Foolishness beginning m^^ be cured Which if ever, may be expected about
the 13th year of their age, which Hippocrates seems to hint in Aph. 45.. 2. and
Aph. 28.. 3. and most plainly in Aph. 7.. 5.
, I judge those volatile Sa^^ will do it, but somewhat sharper: s^^ing I have
often observed, that pe^^ple of years as well as Infants (...) using them a
pretty while have g^^ all their Senses more vigorous, so th^^ their Mind works
in them more free^^ and subtly than before.

CHAP. VII. Of Childrens getting Teeth.
THe difficult getting of Teeth deserves not the last place ^^ong those
Diseases that frequent^^ and grievously afflict Infants, see^^g that they often
endure an exceed^^g pain in the Gums, and a trouble^^e heat in the mouth, and
also an ^^flamation of the Gums, yea the Fal^^g-sickness, and sometimes death
^^ereby.

2. Teeth commonly appear in ^^fants after the sixth month, in some ^^oner,
that is, in the third or fourth ^^nth, in many later, after they are ^^ght or
nine months old, yea, some ^^nes only after a year.

3. Some get them without much trouble; many with trouble, especial^^ if many
teeth come together, or t^^ Eye-teeth.

4. Commonly the fore teeth co^^ first, both upper and under, wheth^^ they come
together, or apart; th^^ the outer teeth; eight in all.

5. The Cause of difficult toothin^^ is sometimes in the Teeth, The Cause.
wh^^ they grow slowly, and are blunt, a^^ so cut the Gums more difficultly.

6. Sometimes in the Gums, wh^^ their substance is more solid and ha^^ not
being easily cut by the Teeth.

7. Which difficult cutting comi^^ slowly, causes pain in them, ^^ing sensible
parts, and because t^^ substance of the Gums is wor^^ and as it were bruised,
Blo^^ runs out of their vessels, and is st^^ped in their substance, whence com^
an Inflammation there, with great p^^ and heat, accompanied with waki^^ whence
arises a continual Fever, d^^ferent according to the various (...) pravation of
Humors in the bo^^ often raising sour vapors, whi^^ coming to the beginning
of the Nerves, and provoking them bring the Falling Sickness.

The Cure.
8. To prevent all these evils, and if they be present, to cure them; we must
endeavor, if the teeth come slowly, or the Gums be hot and pained, to soften
and mitigate them, and so promote their cutting the Gums.

9. To soften the Gums we commend unsalted Butter, alone or with Honey; if with
ones finger they be often smeared therewith; as also with Cream.

10. To this end we commend Hares Brains used the same way.

11. Yea some commend the blood that drops from a Cocks Comb cut off, and
rubbed likewise on the Gum.

12. It is usual to make an Instrument of Ivory, Crystal, Silver Also of Coral.
, or any other solid and hard thing, and put it between the Gums, whereby the
Teeth cut through them the easier, being pressed by Infants biting.

13. To this end many commend Wolfs Teeth, as better than other hard things;
which if so, we may ascribe it to the volatile Salt in them.

14. And indeed the Teeth of some fierce wild Beasts, as they are very hard, so
they send forth a volatile salt fume, very piercing, upon which accounts they
help to cut the Gums.

15. As those Teeth, and other things now mentioned, may be held in the mouth,
to be bitten; so should they be moved all along the Gums, which is pleasant to
Infants, and helps to let out the Teeth.

16. The foregoing Treatise will afford the Cure of what sickness usually
attends Infants toothing.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Scurf and Scab.
1. WE come now to the Worm and Scab, often troublesome diseases to Infants.

2. The Scab goes over all parts of the body, most commonly the Face and
Breast, seldom the arms or other parts, as though the Skin were eaten with
small Worms, from which a tough Humor like Dew comes forth, making scabs of
sundry colors.

3. The Scurf troubles the Head, especially where Hair grows, so that the hair
often falls off, and slowly or never grows* again, leaving watery prints in the
head without hair.

4. Seeing the Causes and Cure of these two differ not much, we intend to
discourse of them together.

5. In this Scab little blisters are wont first to break out, in any part of
the Skin, but especially the face, ^^rs, or arms, sometimes almost over (...)
whole body; with a great itching* by reason of which Infants, if they can, do
scratch the parts affected and if they cannot, they rub their face at any thing
they meet with nor do they leave off, although after rubbing the parts be red,
and the outer skin opened, and both a sharp and biting Liquor, and also Blood
runs out by all which the evil is not lessened but rather increased, by
spreading more, and breeding new trouble else where.

6. The humor proceeding by tha^ rubbing is either watery, or yellow, o^^ of a
darker color.

The Cause.
7. The same humor is sharp, an^ if tasted, found Sour, and inclining to a
brinish Saltness.

8. The same humor is tough an^ clammy, sticking to the parts, and growing in
a lump, and breeding a Scab, which, if the part be not bare, as is the face, it
cleaves to their shirts, so as not to be removed, unless the clothes be warily
moistened before, whereby the Scab may be left on ^he part, which must be done,
if the Scab be soon cured.

9. Beside the Itching a great heat ^s felt in the part affected, manifest ^o
seeling: which I judge is stirred ^p by a bad effervescency there, which Shot.

10. And he who knows, that ^here are only two sorts of sharp Salts ^f contrary
natures, a Lee and sour ^alt; and as they meet, more or ^^ss pure do make an
effervescency or ^^position, often accompanied with ^at, seldom with cold; may
easily ^onjecture, that one or both of these ^^lts are amiss in the Infants
body in ^^is disease: which being driven by ^^e blood to the outside of the
Body, ^^ps there, and breeds this trouble^^me distemper.

11. From the aforesaid Symptoms of this Scab we may conclude, that it is
caused by a sharp and also tough humor; but sour.

12. And why sour? Because any sour thing soon joins it self to a tough and
phlegmatic humor, and is carried with it all about the body; to which if a
Lee Salt be joined, it readily turns into wind, or at least does more blunt
that Salt.

13. Upon this principle confirmed by my practical and chemical observations, I
thought, that Lee Salts, mild and fixed, such as is in unslaked Lime, or any
kind of volatile Salt were helpful both by reason of it sour sharpness, and
tough Phlegm nor did my hope deceive me, for shave cured many by both these
Salts.

14. These sour and sharp humor slick in the outside of the body, some times
because of the toughness o^ Phlegm mixed with them, sometime by some fault in
diet; as cold got during Sweat, which stopping the pores hinders the outlet of
those humors; and so makes an imperfect Crisis, as being separated from the
blood, but stopped in the pores of the Skin, which may be got also by cold shirts.

15. These humors sticking in the outside of the body grow worse, and corrupt
the Blood that comes near, and cause an itching and pain in the parts near
them, which being opened by violent rubbing the bad humor comes out, and gets
sharpness by the air, like a load stone attracting parts like it self in the
air unto it.

16. Note also, that this sharp humor coming through the skin, infects and
likewise affects the parts near it, to which (by reason of its toughness) it
cleaves, and creeps further: Upon this account also it becomes contagious,
whilst that humor touches others, especially Infants, whose tough humors are
sooner infected than theirs that are of age, and longer in curing, as if the
Infants face be touched by any thing of his who is infected.

17. Such evils seldom arise in the outside of the body by humors diversely
sharp and abounding in the blood continually sent to the outside of the skin:
but for the most part by the same, though but in small quantity, carried
thither by sweat, and staying there corrupt wors^, and corrupt the Blood that
comes to those parts, and so continue the distemper longer.

18. Which is evident, because that Scab is contagious, and infects others by
its touch, some of the sharp and more or less tough humor cleaving to the
others skin, through which it goes, and corrupts the blood that moves to that
place, and sticking in the skin, often makes a^long continued distemper.

The Cure.
19. This is confirmed by the Cure often performed by outward, and without
inward medicines, unless there be also observed other faults in the humors,
because of which inward Medicines are needed, and not because of this Scab,
unless perhaps it be bred (...) sweat any way stopped; in which case (...) will
be good, again to open the way ^^r the humors sticking in the outside (...)
such sweating.

20. But take heed, lest you use ^^ch medicines as any way stop the pores (...)
the skin, and drive in the bad hu^our, whence many inconveniences ^^se, as
Fevers and sometimes the ^alling-sickness, and death.

Many use flowers of Sulphur inwardly and outwardly, which our Author
commended, as which destroys the humor of the Scab.
21. Wherefore in a rational Cure (...) this disease, such things must be ^sed,
as keep the pores of the skin open, (...) and open them; and such as tem^^ a
sour, and cut and cleanse the ^^ugh humor, and so restore the part ^^icted,
and help to heal.

22. All which is done by Volatile ^^lts, and by them alone, by the help (...)
which I have cured many for^nately, soon enough, and with ^se.

23. Mean while pull not off the ^abs, for that hinders the Cure.

24. I mention not many appro^^d Medicines for these diseases, ^eing they are
to be had in other Authors; I use only these which d^ the Cure with speed,
safety an^ ease, and have liberally laid open the noble way of curing manny As
the Leprosy, etc.
other evils, and different Scab^ on the outside of the body, which was never
done by any. Go^ grant, that, as I have given i^ with a good mind, so it may b^
for the good of the afflicted.

CHAP. IX. Of the Small Pox and Measles.
1. THe Measles and Small Pox happen to all ages, and especially to Infancy and
Childhood, they are commonly explained together, perhaps, because they first
appear after the same manner, and sometimes follow one another; many have them
twice or thrice, and sometimes in one year.

2. The Small Pox and Measles are thought unavoidable, although I have known
many live to old age, and die without them.

3. And because the most of Men are l^able to them, it is commonly thought,
that those pushes arise from the menstruous blood corrupted about the Womb,
while it is therein, some part of it having got into the Child, and sooner, or
later separated from the blood is driven to the outer part of the body.

4. As I know no urgent reason against it, so neither can I bring any for it.

5. This I know, that few escape the Small Pox, but at certain times and years
they are Epidemical, and sometimes afflict worse than at other times.

6. And this also, that a Fever more or less accompanies them.

7. Moreover, the Small Pox and Measles appear after the same manner with small
red spots or swellings, so that the best Physicians may be deceived at first in
their judgment; wherefore I use to suspend mine till the third day.

8. Yet most commonly about the 3 day the noted swellings are wont to fade in
the Measles, which are more raised and extended in the Small Pox, a pit often
appearing in the middle of them: which many account a bad sign, although I have
often observed the contrary.

9. Yet I account it a bad sign that those pits should be upon white Pox raised
high, it is good that they wither by degrees, but not that they fall, and grow
hollon.

10. As soon as the Spots or Swellings appear, the Fever that goes before them
is eased.

11. Yet in the Small Pox they are more raised and extended, which swellings
breed an hot pain; and after a while are more tolerable: till beginning to
ripen they cause fresh pain, which goes away again, matter appearing in them,
and drying, whether of themselves or by art; and so they fall, prints deeper or
more supersicial, remaining in the skin according as the humor has more or
less sharpness, and in young ones they often go quite away.

12. Yet sometimes by reason of the sharpness of humors and a great ^itching,
many being torn, run into one, and afterward leave unhandsome scar^, not a
little deforming the face.

Of the Cause of the Small Pox.
13. It is then worth enquiry to know the true Cause especially of the Small
Pox, and its Cure, which leaves after it the fewest marks.

14. First then consider, what is the true cause that sends forth those Spots?
Secondly, Why in the Small Pox rather than in the Measles and other Spotted
Fevers those spots have a swelling, (which is sometimes also in the Meastes,)
but those swellings do by degrees ripen under the skin, and do more or less
fret or eat the skin under them, wh^^ce pits and other scars and unhandsome
spots often continue after the Cure.

15. And first, because these spots break forth with a continual Fever, more or
less burning, sometimes more or less dangerous (being either red or wan, purple
or black; greater or lesser) I judge, something during that Fever mixed with
the Blood, is carried to the outer parts of the body, to be sent out, which yet
tarries under the skin, and makes it of several colors, and ill affects the
skin, and parts under it.

16. So that that appearance of Spots ^s Critical, but imperfect, a very
sub^ile humor sticking under the skin, ^ut driven forth when the Fever ^bates.

17. As pain is more or less with those Spots, so the humor is more ^r less
sharp.

18. If that humor be sharp, it ^ay the easier stick to the skin, especi^lly,
when the body sweating is laid ^are, or the sweat not coming forth ea^ly is not
helped; which may be by ^he fault of the Patient, of By-stan^ers, or Physicians.

19. Of the Patient, when he is ^^patient to bear sufficient clothes, ^r take a
convenient sweat.

20. Of Standers-by: when they ^ait not on the sick who perhaps ^ay be raving,
and in a sweat lay their bodies naked, not knowing; or if ^^ey cover them not
enough, or ac^ording to their wit, dissuade the sick ^^om using Medicines, whom
they ^e readier to observe than the Physi^an.

21. Of Physicians, when they a^ little skilled in the art, though never so
well versed in the readin^ Authors, and neglect to prescri^ sweating Medicines,
that are only to (...) used when the Patient sweats little, (...) is not eased
thereby, in which case (...) sweat should be renewed, as well (...) Clothes or
a Bath, as by inward Me^^cines.

22. When the Spots are not a^ tended with Pain, and so have (...) itch or
heat, and if the Fever abat^^ they will soon fade.

23. But when there is much shar^ness, which appears by an itch, (...) small
heat, they also will soon fa^^ as is usual in the Measels.

24. But when there is much shar^ness, which is known by a troub^^ some itch,
great heat and pain, th^^ there is danger, lest some corrup^^ on breed within
the skin, or in t^^ parts under it.

25. If the sharpness be of the nature of a Lee Salt it mortifies, as ha^pens
in a Gangrene and Cankred Spo^^ frequent in the Plague, and is black or wan.

26. If the sharpness be of a sour nature the Part is likewise corrupted, but
not so mortified, nor black, but rather white, being first red, like Blood
turning into Matter, as is common in the Small Pox.

27. If the sharpness partake both of a Lee-Salt and Sowreness mixed, and much
of them, then the swellings are red, and burning, but have a white and
sometimes wan pimple in the midst, discharging a filthy and wan matter,
corrupting the parts after a mixed manner, as happens in a Carbuncle.

28. Yet because in the Small Pox, of which now, the Blood turns by degrees
into matter, which is different according to the difference of the Blood and
Humor, more or less impure, we judge it proceeds from a Sour Sharpness.

29. When the Sour humor in the Pimples is blunted, and as it were conquered,
whether by the corrupted Blood alone, or by Medicines inward or outward, the
Matter drys up.

30. The greatest difficulty now lies in determining the rise of that sharp
humor causing the Small Pox, seeing many think it arises from the Mothers
Blood (while she bears the Child) staying about the Womb, and as it were
corrupted, and conveyed into the Child, where it lies, till it be sooner or
later brought out, and so after a ^ever breed these Pox.

31. That blood for the first three months does thus stay in the Womb is clear,
from Abortion often thereby caused.

32. And that Blood staid there, is changed and corrupted it is not improbable.

33. Nor is it absurd to say that this blood thus corrupted may be mixed with
that Blood which goes into the Child.

34. Many conjecture, but do not prove that that Blood mixed with the other,
keeping its infection may be carried about the body for many years without any
harm, for the blood cannot be mixed with it, and get no harm: which assertion I
incline to believe, though I can neither prove nor disprove it.

35. This I think however, if such a thing be, the corruption of the Mothers
blood in the Child is not such as would render it unfit to nourish the body,
and do its other offices; but such, as can lie long in the body and do it no
harm, until it be stirred up, and put upon its work, accompanied by a continual
Fever.

36. That which stirs it up is the air most commonly, peculiarly ill affected;
Whence the Small Pox are so often Epidemical, even in all seasons of the year.

37. The Small Pox may also be stirred up by peculiar Food, which many Infants
using in the same house fall sick upon, although elsewhere they come not;
unless any had rather think, that then this danger is in the Air or Chamber of
any house.

38. A Fright also often causes the Small Pox, as it does the Plague, and other
dangerous diseases.

39. Yet still we have as great a puzzle to extricate from, in determining the
place or part where this corrupted Blood can lie hid.

40. Which I take to be in the Glandules of the Kidneys, not knowing the true
use of them.

41. Although I conclude that a Sour Humor causes the Small Pox, and have
already given my reasons for it, yet I am not satisfied, what the faultiness of
that Sowreness is; it will then be the more difficult to determine the place
where it is kept.

42. If that Sour Humor were very sharp, it could not be hid in the Blood,
but would more and more corrupt it; but it is brought to rest and made dull so,
as with facility to gain its former sharpness, and then to corrupt the Blood.

43. My reason is, because the blood is not corrupted, when that sour humor
begins to work, while the former Fever continues, when it is sent to the
outside of the Body, and the Swellings appear; but then, it has stuck some
days in the Swellings, when they increase gradually, when Heat, Redness and
Pain are in those Swellings.

44. For then, that Sour Humor being loosed of its Fetters, corrupts the
nourishing Blood which comes toward the surface of the skin, raises a bad
effervescency with it in every Pox, which inclines to an Inflammation, and
imparts its harm to all the Blood, which being transmitted to the Heart, causes
a Fever till by degrees, partly by the Blood, corrupted in every Swelling or
Pox, partly by outward and inward Medicines, prudently and diligently used,
that Sour Humor is made weaker and subdued, and the Pox full of matter fall
off.

45. So then this Sour but dull Humor causing the Small Pox, gets its
Sharpness, when being sent every way, it sticks in the surface or outside of
the Body, and by sticking there is made sharper, and corrupts the nourishing
Blood that comes near it, and breeds many Inflammations, and after them Ulcers;
which being either opened, matter runs out, or by little and little dried, the
Scabs fall off, both the spots remaining, and sometimes their hollow places
more or less deep.

46. If the Small Pox come forth in or about the Spring, the spots disappear in
the same Summer; But if they be in Autumn, they continue all that winter, and
fade the next Summer.

47. Also lesser Pits commonly fill in young people, but blemish the faces of
years, especially if they be deep, and have made scars.

48. The Small Pox are sometimes dangerous, so that not only many die of them,
but lose sight or hearing, and motion of many parts, sometimes casting them
into a Consumption, or troublesome Cough and Leanness.

49. The more need then to be exact in their Cure. Of their Cure.


50. If they be Epidemical, and have dangerous Symptoms, remove Infants or
others of tender years, who have not had them, into a wholesome air, where the
Small Pox are not come, and continue them there till they be gone, or become
not so dangerous.

51. If on the contrary, the Small Pox be gentle, and few, ripen soon, fall,
not much deforming the face, then I think it prudent that Infants in health
should live in the same chamber with the sick, and have them when they are most
gentle.

52. Moreover if any bad humors ^e in them, either as to quality or ^uantity,
they must be altered, correct^d, or carried forth, and if the Pox ^ome
afterward, they will the less effect them, and be sooner cured.

53. At such times as soon as Infants ^ave any Fever, or pain in the Head,
^ough, Loathing, or Purging, or any thing else wrong, whether others have the
Pox in the same house, or if they be observed Epidemical elsewhere, the prudent
Physician should carefully observe, what humors especially are faulty, and
what way they incline, whether to Vomiting, or Stool, or Sweating, and
accordingly prescribe things convenient.

54. If Blood abound in any, who may bear Blood-letting, they should do it
speedily, and take a convenient quantity.

55. If the disaffection of the Patient, and especially the Fever permit, a
Vomit or Purge or Sweat may be given not only the same day, but an hour after
bleeding, according as Loathing, or a desire to go to Stool, or a disturbance
in the Belly, or Moisture, shall persuade what should be done, whereby part of
the bad humor, which might come to the surface of the Body, and breed the
Small Pox, is wholly sent out of the body; and so they of necessity must be
fewer, and more gentle.

56. I commend Medicines made of Antimony before any other in this disease,
both because they have great efficacy and virtue of purifying the Blood from
any humor, and because they are more universal than others, and expel the
humors by more ways than others.

57. Nor is it enough to give them once, but sometimes they should be given
many days together, till both the Fever, and other Symptoms be removed, or at
least lessened: whereby the Pox use to be few, and gentle; yea, my Patients
have seen them in their Stools, and felt great ease thereupon.

58. When the former Fever declines, and they appear more or less, and the
Symptoms that accompany their breaking forth are almost removed, then it is
good to use Diaphoretick Antimony, Mineral Bezoard, or any Medicine of Antimony
that sweats, by which whatever is mixed with the Blood, will be sent forth
through the pores of the Body.

59. By these also the Ripening, Drying and Falling of the Small Pox will be
helped on.

60. These are the best Medicines that can be used inwardly, next to which are
Sealed Earths, Bole Ammoniac, Earth of Lemnia, Oriental and Occidental Bezoar
Stone, any Unicorns horn, Ivory, Hearts born, and especially any Volatile Salt.

61. Among outward things we commend those which temper heat in the Small Pox
(inclining to ripen) and the sharpness of the humors that breed them; such as
are in daily use, pretty fat Mutton-broths, Swines Lard, whether new or old, by
which the Small Pox in the face, and hands may be anointed or covered, often
doing it afresh. Also as the Swellings break forth, I would have volatile Salts
mixed with Spirit o^ Wine and Camphire, and simple waters be applied by a
Linne^ Cloth, in time to overcome the sour humor, and prevent any no^ table
harm.

62. Some boil Figs in water or ^eer, which although I blame not because it
does good) yet I commend ^ot, because it sticks too much to ^he parts, and
makes a stiff scab, which is troublesome.

63. Some also to keep many Pox ^om the face, and draw them to the ^et, put the
Infants feet in warm Cows ^ilk, at their first appearance, which as success,
but harm the Feet, filling them with Pox, which cause great ^ain, and daily
weaken the feet, yet (...) they do for beauty sake.

64. If what we have said have ^een neglected, or they have got ^old when they
should sweat, and ^^y of the humor remain in the Blood, (...) be sent back to
it, and so there be ^^nger that it breed an Inflammation, or ^lcer; above all
the sick should use ^ntimonial Medicines often and ^^ng; in which case also
Balsam of ^ulphur is good, made with oil of^nise-seeds, or oil of Amber or
Juni^er, if not too unpleasant; which oils ^ere better if made into Balsam with
^e flowers of Antimony.

65. If there be Ulcers before these Medicines be used, they will soon cure
them. In which case I also refer you to the fortieth Chapter of my first book
Which is in English.


66. If the Symptoms accompanying the Small Pox be various, the Cure must be
peculiar accordingly.

67. The Eyelids endure much pain and trouble, sometimes by the Pox blinding
them, and by crying which swells them, and opens many Pox before they be ripe,
the sharp humor coming out and fretting the eye, hurts the sight.

68. In such cases Women use only their own Milk, or put a little Saffron to
it; which others dissolve only in Rose Water, and lay clothes we^ therewith to
the eyes, and not badly done.

69. Yet the juice of Chervil bruise^ is better, putting thereto Fenel or
Rose Water, laid warm by wet clothes upon the eyes, often changing them, by
which help many fore cited evils may be removed.

70. The evil is worse, when part of the humor that breeds the Small Pox gets
within the bollow of the Eyes, by which all the humors of the eye are
confused, and so Sight is lost.

71. The evil is yet worse, when the hurtful humor is got into the Muscles of
the Eyes, and breeds a dangerous Inflammation, not only taking away sight, but
sometimes casting out the Eye.

72. Although a complete Cure can seldom be in this case, yet we must
endeavor, that none of those things be neglected, which may as well preserve
the sight as the eye, using outwardly Pultisses that finely allay an
Inflammation, and disperse the humor there, as much as may be: of which consult
Surgeons writings: Apples a little sour are good in the Poultis.

73. If there be an Inflammation in the Ears, what we speak of elsewhere, may
also here be used: the soft of warm white bread, having a little Spirit of Wine
and Spirit of Sal Ammoniac mixed with it, and laid ho^ into and upon the ear: a
Decoction of Wormwood, of Centaury the less Southernwood, or of any other
Aromatical plants poured warm into the ear; any Balsam of Sulphur, a few drops
at a time.

74. If a difficult breathing, or (...) Cough trouble the sick with the Small
Pox, Antimonial Medicines are best, and especially such as sweat^ also Volatile
Salts.

75. If there be other Symptoms Physicians need not be at a loss for Medicines,
if they understand Anatomy, and the structure of man's body, the nature and
virtue of the humors, and especially be well stored with good and truly made
Medicines.

76. Those things which dispers^ the Spots, and take away unseeml^scars, must
be sought in the Ornamental part of Physic.

CHAP. X. Of Worms.
WOrms are deservedly reckoned among those Disases which frequently afflict
In^ants and Children, seldom, though sometimes, troubling people of ^ears.

2. I will not here recite all the ^^rts of Worms, but long and smooth Worms,
which afflict us all our Childhood.

3. They are altogether against Nature, seeing they ought not to be (...) us,
and do us harm; biting, boring and consuming the body, and often causing
Fevers, the Falling Sickness, and sometimes Death.

4. They are most commonly in the Small Gut, and often come into the Stomach,
Gullet and Mouth, and are often that way vomited they also go downward to the
thick or (lower) Guts, and come out at the Fundament, often by Stool.

5. They are sometimes in the Kidneys (commonly in Dogs) and there waste their
substance.

6. They are commonly bred by too much meat, especially Flesh, and green Fruit:
which not fermenting enough, turn into crudities in the small Gut, and by
degrees corrup^ and breed Worms.

7. In which corruption of Crude Meat sharp vapors are bred, which flying up
and down prick the Guts then the Stomach, and coming u^ the Gullet prick the
Nostrils also (which makes them rub the Nostri^ often, and gripe the Stomach,
ca^sing suspicion of Worms,) now these vapors go through the Mill^veins to the
Heart, they breed a Fever, and going to the roots of the Brain, and working
upon them bring the Falling Sickness and Convulsion, and after them Death.

8. For the sharpness of Putrid Humors and Vapors extinguisheth the lively
Effervescency, as Anatomical experience confirms; for squirt any sharp Liquor
in at a Vein as soon as it comes to the heart, the Creature dies.

9. Seeing then that Worms cause such evils, we must endeavor to prevent their
breeding by a convenient and moderate diet; and where bad diet has been,
contrary should be given; and such medicines as correct those crudities, and if
they be much Which is to be known by the bodies great disorder.
, then purge them; if there be Worms already bred, they must be killed, and
sent forth.

10. Seeing Children are commonly great eaters, especially of flesh; they
should by little and little be accustomed to less food, and that taken in
season, and eat much Bread with the Flesh, which will sooner fill them, and so
less endanger Worms.

11. They must forbear often using much sweet Milk, and Cheese, and Green
Fruits, especially Plumbs, which are noted to breed Worms.

12. Seeing much eating makes Crude Humors, especially Phlegmatic; bitter
aromatical things are best, which correct and amend Phlegm, and help
fermentation, and turn meat into good nourishment, and so prevent many evils.

13. To this end Volatile Salts are good, as promoting Fermentation, and
correcting Phlegm, and dispersing Wind, its common companion, and which swell
the belly, taking them as directed before.

14. Stubborn and tough Phlegm, and therefore the worse to be amended may be
purged out by Senna, Agarick, but especially dulcified Mercury, contrary as
well to Worms as to that which breeds them.

15. The forecited bitter things kill Worms, especially worm-seed about ten
grains taken at a time or more, according to the child's age, being powdered and
mixed with Sugar, or infused in a bag in Mead, one or two of it being daily
taken.

16. Dulcified Mercury best of all expels Worms, a few grains of it being taken
in solutive Syrup of Roses, or of Senna, or any other Syrup.

17. The Sour Spirits of Vitriol and Sulphur are in common use to kill Worms;
which I confess cut Phlegm, and kill Worms, a few drops of them being given in
daily drink, used a pretty while: But they are not alike profitable to all,
seeing they sharpen the appetite and increase a sour humor, both often
hurtful to little ones: Wherefore, unless they be also thirsty, I had rather
Volatile Salts were used, and bitter plants.

CHAP. XI Of the Rickets.
1. THe Rickets seems to take its name from (...), a disease in the Spine or
Backbone, and may be defined an irregular and unequal nourishment of the parts
of the Body: The Head being greater than naturally it should be, and often the
Forehead growing out before: All the Limbs and Muscles of the body loose,
limber, soft, and pined as it were with a Consumption, so that the skin hangs
loose: The bones about the joints, especially the wrists and ends of the Ribs
big, and that with solid bone: The body is observed not to be so stiff as
others are after death: The breast le^n, and very strait, sharp forwards, not
unlike a Cocks: The Belly lean, but swelled by a great Liver; and Wind in the
Stomach and Guts, which also swells the other intrals. The Lungs often grow to
the sides, and h^ve clods of blood, or Ulcers sometimes in them, often water in
the breast, and ventricles of the Brain, all which are not bred on a sudden but
by degrees, and first begin with a mo^^slorid habit of body.

(...) nourishment of the parts is caused by an unequal distribution of blood
in the arteries; those which go into the head called Carotides being very
large, as also the jugular veins; but those arteries and veins which convey
nourishment to the rest of the body are very small, and the parts insensible by
sluggishness and want of Spirits, which also hinder the arteries in their
office, whence follows a general weakness, and aversness to motion, the blood
being unequally dispersed to the parts which are less nourished.

3. Several parts of the bones are over-nourished, which so often makes Limbs
crooked, for if bones grow out on one side more than on the other, they must
needs be crooked there, for larger veins and arteries run into those parts of
the bones which grow big, whilst the other parts of the bones by the
straitness of those arteries which convey blood to nourish them, are not enough
moistened by it, (there being also a peculiar indisposition of blood) hence
Infants are seldom born with it, because all parts are alike equally nourished
in the womb by heat dispersed alike to every part.

4. The disease may be hereditary, if the parents be Cachectick, Of the Cause
if hereditary.
etc. or abound with phlegmatic or watery humors, which are conveyed in
conception to the Infant; also great hunger, much vomiting, purging or
bleeding, or sweating, yea any disease that wastes the body, will cause an
inbred disposition to the Rickets.

5. The Child is less vigorous and active, more dull and insensible when the
parents one or both are soft of life and effeminate, and do not stir much; when
they use a moist and full diet, are given to pleasure, idleness and much sleep,
especially after meat. a sedentary life and without care: The parts being thus
dull the blood in its circulation is changed accordingly, and seed bred of such
blood must needs be such, and also make the Infant of that temper.

6. To which the mothers unwholesome diet while with child contributes not a
little, also too free bleeding, too much venery, too long suckling another
child, which hinders nourishment from coming to the conception; also daily
hunger, want of appetite or of digestion, too much sleeping, and aversness to
exercise, not but that their exercise and waking should be very moderate (lest
they offer violence to the womb and cause miscarriage) which make the Mother
more healthly and the conception more vigorous, active, and less drowsy.

7. Whether the disease be hereditary, or creep in by degrees upon the Infant,
If breeding in the Child.
where the sore-cited symptoms are, they make the humors faulty, which do the
like to the blood and spirits, whereby all offices of the body are performed
accordingly.

8. A redundancy of Phlegm even in the Stomach makes the Chyle phlegmatic,
which Chyle changes the Blood accordingly, of which Blood, seeing the Humors
are bred, they must needs be of the same hue, which will cause a flower
circulation of them all, and so by consequence much toughness in Spittle, and
Sowr^ness in the juice of the Sweetbread, which Dr. Glisson D^ Rach^tide, p.
197, 201, ^16.
seems to hint but very obscurely, as not knowing what way it comes into the
Stomach, in which place when they Of which see my Apparatus.
are returned, as they constantly do, they raise a faulty effervescency, and
still more and more, yea, anew increase Phlegm in the habit of body.

9. Choler also may justly be supposed, as it abounds with Phlegm, so to have a
narcotick quality, which will cause the Spirits to be drowsy and sluggish, as
Phlegm and sowreness make the Limbs loose and soft, weak and languid: For
seeing good nourishment is ascribed to a Lee-Salt in Choler, and a sour humor
destroys it as Phlegm dulls it, leanness must needs. follow where these are. I
confess a sour humor does make Chyle in the Stomach, but that Lee Salt must
separate the excrements in the small Guts from Chyle, and this perhaps is done
by precipitation.

The six things called Non* naturales.
10. The abuse of those six things ^alled non-naturales will deprave the
humors: and First, Air, if it be cloudy, Northern and sharp, etc.

Meat and Drink, as Seafish, raw meats, full diet causing crudities, dried and
salt flesh and fish, milk sweetened with Sugar, old milk, stale or tart wine or
beer, all which lessen or destroy the natural heat.

Motion and Rest. Want of exercise dulls the natural heat, by which the body
should be nourished, in dispersing the Blood and Spirits.

Grief and other Passions, children are not liable to them.

Sleep and Waking Sleep may be more allowed children than men, yet if it be
above measure, it does the same harm that want of exercise does; if too little
it hinders digestion, makes the blood sharp, and weakens the Spirits, which
things are inlets to a phlegmatic and sour humor, the cause of this disease.

Voiding and retaining excrements, as Sweat, Urine Stool, etc. as any of which
are stopped, so they cause a peculiar hurt unto the blood. Too much Sweat, etc.
waste the Spirits, and dispose the body to this disease.

15. The child that is born with the Rickets (which rarely happens ere it be
seven or nine months old) is seldom cured, also the elder he is and the more
stirring, the sooner he is cured; Children of strong constitutions have been
cured by exercise and rubbing alone, which stirring up heat, breeds new
Spirits, and shakes off their drowsiness, and nourishes the limbs.

16. If the child have other diseases complicated with it, it is the worse to
cure: The stronger the disease is, the worse to cure: With an Hydrocephalus (or
water opening the head) as also the Pox, etc. it is commonly deadly.

17. Softness of life and idleness will bring it into great men's Cradles: If it
come upon the striking in of a Scurf or Scab, when they break forth again, it
may be easil^ cured.

The Cure.
18. I. The coldness of the Limbs require to be warmed. II. The want of Spirits
to be repaired, and their drownness shaken off. III. The looseness of the flesh
to be filled, and the unequalness of nourishment to b^ replenished.

19. I. The coldness of the limb must be warmed by such things a dry and heat
the parts: Daily rubbing and swinging the body more o^ less as they are used to
it, (which must be forborne when a little redness appears) much contribute t^
the Cure, while Medicines are used inwardly to purify the blood, and ointments
outwardly to strengthen the limbs, (of which anon.) Mean while let the six
non-natural thing be used contrary to what is set down in. 11. to. 15. coarse
shirts should be worn, which by rubbing the parts increase natural heat: Meat
and drink should be of easy digestion (...) No sweet things, unless mixed with
that is spirituous. Stool and Urine could be proportionable to their ^eat and
drink or sucking.

20. Amongst such things as heat ^he body, we may reckon all aroma^cal spirits,
as uncompounded Trea^e water of our describing, Tincture of Cinnamon, Aqua
mirabilis, the ^^rminative Spirit of Sylvius, etc. also Chemical Oils of Mace,
Rosemary, Orange-peel, Carua's, etc. and which is strongest of all, Oil of
^loves, and yet of much more ver^^e, if imbodied with a volatile Salt, and the
most proper remedy in this ^se, a drop or two being a dose, and ^epeated two or
three times a day, ^^ill the disease decline) in any plea^nt liquor, or in a
little balm, or ^ennel water. Where note, that if ^^e Mother take of these
drops while ^^e is with child, I have observed ^^e enjoys better health, and
also ^^ings forth a more vigorous child.

21. II. The same Aromaticks, if ^^ined to volatile Salts, will repair ^he
Spirits, as being most homogegeneous to them of any medicine (...) and will
also remove and correct the^ drowsiness of the Spirits, by giving them new
matter and strength, and making them active and quick in their motion, as it
were forcing them; such are Spirit of Urine, o^ Soot rectified upon Salt of
Tartar* which will make it more gratefu^^ and operative; Spirit of Harts-hor^^
exalted, by mixing it with highl^ rectified Spirit of Sal Ammoniac; also that
Spirit it self which likewis^ may be heightened by incorporatin^ a very little
of any Chemical oil wit^ it: In this case it were not amiss t^ fume all the
child's clothes, some times with Amber, Mastick, etc.

22. Admit what has been said and it will be most evident, tha^ warmness of
the blood contribute^ much to its vigorous motion, seein^ we daily observe,
that coldness cause weak and slow motion of body (...) which I take to be an
effect of the slow motion of Blood, retarded b^ its stupifying enemy, Cold: And
a^ ^ubbing the limbs makes the joints ^imble; so spirituous Medicines ^bounding
with only volatile Salt, ^dd vigor afresh, and make the ^irculation of Blood
much more ^peedy, and indeed without any danger: after, and by which,

III. The flesh soon fills the skin, and the parts of the body are all equal^y
nourished. I forbear to recite ^arge Catalogues of Simples which ^ight be
proper to these purposes, ^s knowing that children are nice, and can scarce be
prevailed with to ^ake even the smallest, much less, ^reat doses: and seeing
these may ^^e given in their milk or drink, they ^ay be the better beguiled;
scarce ^iscerning them.

23. Where children do abound with humors, they may be carried ^ut by Sweat,
by Stool or Vomit; ^holer and the Juice of the Sweetbread through their own
passages into the Guts ^y Stool; into the Stomach by Vomit. Aromaticks and
Volatile Salts if ^hey sweat not the child, will make way by insensible
transpiration, or Urine, and so clear the blood o^ those dregs, and the better
if a few grains of Helmont's Diaphoretick Antimony, or Mineral Bezoard be given
with them: as for Example,

Take Balm and Burrage Waters, of each an ounce; Tincture of Cinnamon a dram;
Mineral Bezoard ten grains; Oily Volatil^ Salt three drops; Syrup of th^^ five
opening Roots, or of Parsle^ half an ounce: Mix them, an^ give the Child a
little at a time A spoonful or two when you desir^ it should sweat.

24. As for Vomits, I prefer M^nerals before Vegetables, and sha^^ say nothing
of the latter, havin^ ever found an infusion of Glass o^ Antimony safe,
pleasant to take, benign, and effectual, being exact i^ its dose. For Example,
Infuse tw^ drachms of Glass of Antimony in (...) Gill of White wine or Sack,
sometimes giving the Bottle a shake, after two days, you may give almost a
dram to a child a year old. Six drachms or an ounce is an ordinary dose for a
man or woman.

I know Vomits are dreaded, and good reason, because they move the body 40, 50
or 60 times, whereas mine vomit but 6, 8 or 10 times, and have done their work
in about two hours. I confess Vomits must be cautiously used, and where purges
will do, are not needed.

25. To purge the foresaid Humors half a quarter of a grain of Elaterium, or
two drachms of L^nitive Electuary, or of that called Benedictum Laxativum, or
Catholicon dissolved in warm Posset Drink, will ^e very proper; Or two or three
grains of Rosin of Jalap, and as much of Mercurius dulcis, which use not ^o
gripe, especially if the aforesaid altering Medicines have been used a while,
to prepare the humors for a quiet departure. It is much safer to purge often,
and by little and little, rather than strongly though but once, which may
endanger the child's life. Three or five grains of faetid pills may be taken,
and if they purge not, two or three days after, more may be taken; for if they
work not, they prepare the humors: Mean while continue using Volatile Salts.

26. If any look upon Volatile Salts with a prejudice, which yet are more
universal than others, and in no disease more than in this, Which will make the
Blood circulate more vigorously, and rid^^ of phlegmatic humors, ^^^^^d (...).
Anti-venereals and Antiscorbutics may be used in Decoctions, as China,
Sasaparilla, Sassaphras, Agrimony, Liverwort, Maidens hair, Cresses, also
Lavander slowers, etc. It is not safe to purge or vomit while the child is
griped: If it have a looseness Rhubarb is the fittest, purging choler and
water, after that it binds the body, about 10 or 12 grains may be a dose,
taking in Syrup of Coral, or any binding Syrup. If the looseness be violent 2
or 3 grains of Sylvius Diascordium may be given sometimes; which will also be
effectual against sweating, if the child be much troubled therewith; for else
it will waste his strength, and delay the cure.

27. An Issue in the Neck is good if there be an Hydrocephalus, where the bones
are crooked; as much as may be, they should be set straight by Laced Boots, and
the hollow side of the bended bones rubbed, which will bring the nourishing
juice of the Blood thither: Also to strengthen the body, many wear Bodice with
Whalebone, and lay a little Pillow under the crook of their back at night.

28. Let them not try to walk till they have well recovered strength. Rock them
much till they be asleep, and let the Cradle feet be much ^owed: Some thrust
their fingers under the short Ribs to loosen the ^iver from the Peritonaeum.

29. The Child may be bathed in little Sage or Bay, Rosemary, Agri^ony leaves;
Elder Flowers, Briony and Spanish Angelica Roots, Goose^ng, etc. boiled in
water, putting a little Wine to it after boiling.

30. Of Oils I commend those of Swallows, Earthworms, Camomile, etc.
especially Man's fat alone, or mixed with a little Nerve Ointment, or that
called Martiatum, Aregon, etc. which will allay a swelled Belly, if anointed
therewith. Also a Plaster of that called Stomach plaster and Sylvius's
Carminative plaster, in equal quantities spread on Leather, and laid upon the
Belly where it is hard.

And thus much concerning Infants Diseases, which I hope will be profitable to
Practitioners, and especially to sick Infants.

FINIS.
THE INDEX. An Apparatus or Introduction to the following Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of the Jaundice. 1 CHAP. II. Of Gripes in the Belly. 31 CHAP. III. Of
a Green Purging, with a Sour smell. 45 CHAP. IV. Of Belches, the Hicket,
Loathing, Pain at the Heart, and Vomiting, Curded Milk especially. 49 CHAP. V.
Of the Thrush. 59 CHAP. VI. Of the Falling Sickness. 76 CHAP. VII. Of getting
Teeth. 95 CHAP. VIII. Of the Scurf and Scab. 99 CHAP. IX. Of the Small Pox and
Measles. 107 CHAP. X. Of Worms. 127 CHAP. XI. Of the Rickets. 132
FINIS.

