A True and faithful Copy of a real LETTER, Written by a Friend in UTRECHT, To
a Friend in LONDON.
Giving an Account of some remarkable Passages, relating to his Grace JAMES,
Duke of MONMOUTH.
SIR,
YOurs bearing date the 2 d. Instant, came safe to my hands, whereby you were
pleased to desire me to give you a particular Account of the Reception of his
Grace, James, Duke of Monmouth, together with a particular Relation of such
other Accidents as might occasionally happen since his Arrival You know at all
times your requests with me have the power of Commands and in compliance to the
same, I shall with all possible Care and sincerity, give you both an ample and
real account of all such passages as I dare affirm to be true, which though but
few yet I hope may satisfy your curiosity at present, until such times as any
Observations permit me to inform you more particularly.

On the tenth instant, the Duke arrived at the Hague, where he took up his
residence at the English Agents House, being resolved with withal expedition
to come hither, the next day he dined with the Prince and Princess of Orange;
and so with what expedition he could came hither, and resided at the house of
one of our principal Burghers, until such time his own house could be decently
fitted up beautified and repaired, being at Rhenen in this Province not far
distant from this place; he was transported in one of his Majesty's Yachts,
with a Train of about twenty persons, which he has now increased to about
thirty: this house Prince Rupert was pleased to accommodate him withal he has
bestowed, no such cost in beautifiing the same, but what may rather suit with
the Quality of a Banished peer, then a Prince of his extraction, this day being
the 10 instant (having before took a progress into the Country of
North-Holland) he entered his said house the next day, being complemented by the
Magjestrates, and other persons of quality here resident, with this assurance,
that he should not only be as safe, but as welcome to them as if he were at
home, and to speak the truth, such has been his Noble deportment, since his
arrival, that he has obtained the hearts of all, as well Gentry, as
Commonalty, before his settelment, in his present place of abode, he was much
indisposed in his health, occasioned as some conceive by a great cold, by what
I can inform my self, from some of the most eminent of his retinue, it was no
other then a real Quotidian Ague, though (thanks be to God) we hope it has
wholly left him, he having not been lately troubled with the same. I have had
the Honor to kiss his hand since his Arrival, and although I dare not presume
to say I have been Conversant with him, yet by what I have both heard and been
a Spectator of (not only I, but many others besides my self, esteem him to be
one of the most accomplished Peers in Christendom. You would admire to see how
not only our Gentry, but Commonalty respect and honor him: with a sorrow
compounded of Love and pity; had he been their own Native Prince, and spent
his Heart Blood in their Defense, on my Conscience, they could not set a
greater Vallue or esteem upon him than they have done, and still do. Sir, in a
word, I need say no more in his Commendation than only this, I am confident he
cannot be more honored, or better beloved at home, than he is here; such is
his noble obliging Carriage, who neither carries himself Lofty nor low, but
with such a becoming Grace, that Commands the very Affections of all.

In my next I shall inform you of some other considerable passages, which at
present I am forced to wave, until I am more fully satisfied of their Truth,
what I have now written is a reallity in all circumstances, which to confirm
your Belief, shall be attested under the hand of

SIR, Your humble Servant, B. L.
VTRECHT, October. 19. 1679.
FINIS.

